THE First general EPISTLE OF St. JOHN The APOSTLE, Unfolded and Applied.

The First PART In two and twenty Lectures on the First Chapter: and two Verses
of the Second: Delivered in St. Dyonis. Back-Church. AN. DOM. 1654.

By NATH. HARDY Minister of the Gospel, and Preacher to that Parish.

Orig. hom. 2. in diverse. O Beat Johannes, non immerito vocaris Johannes, id
est, cui donatum est: cui enim Theologorum donatum est, quod tibi donatum est?
abdita videlicet summi boni penetrare mysteria and ea quae tibi revelata and
declarata sunt humanis mentibus ac sensibus intimare.

London, Printed by E. Tyler, for Nathanael Webb and William Grantham, and are
to be sold at the Black Bear in Paul's Church yard, 1656.

AQuilae, Theologi no Episcopo Roffensi.

In primam Epistolam has Commentatiorum primitias D.D.N.H. In perpetuum grati
animi Testimonium.

Obnixe rogans (...), ut and illi res omne genus prosperas, and Ecclesiae
Anglicanae aerumnis and erroribus (heu!) pene obrutae antiquam veritatem and
splendorem pristinum, pro summa sua misericordia largiri velit.

THE Epistle to the Reader.
THE Mahumetans say, that the first thing God created was a pen: Chronicon. de
vitis, Mahum. and successor.
Sure I am, the best thing which ever was conveyed to us by a pen is the Bible;
nor can the one be better exercised then about the other. I have often wished
that every one of St. Paul's Epistles, yea every Book of holy Writ might have a
Davenant to draw forth its lineaments; nor do I know any work that would be of
more general and singular use, then a practical Commentary upon the whole Bible.

Upon a small, yet choice piece of this sacred Volume, I have made an essay,
wherein if any thing be well done, let it be ascribed to divine assistance, and
whatsoever is amiss, to my ignorance. The chief design of this work is
explication of the Text; yet I have still annexed a brief application of the
doctrine, that I might not only enlighten thy mind, but enliven thy affections.
In the prosecution of this design, I am sometimes engaged in controversies,
which are calmely debated, and (according to my measure of knowledge) hope
truly stated; if thou have a Starre-light, yet contemn not my Candle.

The prefixing of the prayer is that to which I am necessitated for my own
vindication, having met with my name affixed (in print) to a broken prayer,
made up of some scraps, which a scribbling pen has taken from my mouth, and
phrases which another fancy has added.

In omnibus meis scriptis, non solum pi^m lectorem, sed and liberum correctorem
desidero. Aug. pro^em. l 3. de (...).
What mistakes, misplacings, omissions, or additions of words thou may
observe in perusing these discourses, pardon and correct, those especially,
which are taken notice of to thy hand.

If these labors find any acceptance with the pious, orthodox, and judicious,
I shall be encouraged to a progress, and the remaining parts may in due time
see the light. Thy candid censure, of, and devout prayer for, is earnestly
desired by him, who is

Thine in the common Savior, NATH. HARDY.

The Prayer commonly used before Sermon.
Eternal Jehovah, in whose presence the glorious Angels veil their faces, as
being not able to behold thy brightness; How shall we who are men and not
Angels; worms and no men, yea, dust and ashes rather then worms, dare to
appear before the, Oh Lord, we acknowledge there is an infinite distance
between thee and us by our Creation, as far as is between the high Heavens, and
the low Earth. Thou art Infinite, and we finite, Thou art immutable, and we
changable, Thou art the Potter, and we the Clay: Thou our Maker: and we all the
work of thy hands. But far, oh far greater is that distance which we our
selves have made between thee and us by our corruption; even as far as is
between the highest Heavens, and the lowest hell: Thou art Purity, add we
Filthiness, Thou ^rt Majesty; and we Misery: Thou a God of purer eyes then to
behold iniquity without fury, and we such in whom dwells nothing but sin and
iniquity. We were at first (Oh God) concluded in sin, and in iniquity did our
Mother bring us forth, and ever since we have conceived nothing but sin, and
that iniquity has been a fruitful Mother of all uncleanesse: we are by nature
deprived of all good, and depraved with all evil, and throughout the whole
course of our life we have neglected much good, and committed more evil. Which
of thy righteous laws (Oh God) have not we often violated by impiety against
thee, and iniquity against man, in our thoughts and affections, in our words
and actions? Before we knew thee, we knew how to offend thee, and ever since
thou have set up a light of knowledge in our minds, we have not ceased to act
the works of darkness in our lives. Thy patience has spared us, and our
wickedness has provoked thee; thou have forborne to punish, and we have
therefore gone on to R^^ell. The rain of thy Word has not fructified our
barren lives, The beams of thy love has not melted our frozen hearts, The
thunder of thy wrath have not awakened our sleepy consciences, but we still
continue to add sin unto sin, and thereby treasure up wrath against the day of
wrath.

We confess (O God) our just deservings of thy fury, yet are we bold to
implore thy free bestowings of mercy, We have abundantly sinned, but thou can
abundantly pardon: with us there have been numerous Rebellions, but with thy
Son Christ Jesus is plenteous redemption. According to the freeness of thy
mercy, and the fullness of his merits, the greatness of thy compassions, and
the meritoriousnesse of his passion, have mercy upon us, be reconciled to us,
that all our sins may be blotted out of the book of thy remembrance. Do thou
(Oh God) forget our sins, but let us remember them; do thou cast them behind
thy back, but let us set them before our faces; open our eyes that we may see,
open our hearts that we may consider, how glorious a Name we have dishonored,
how gracious a Father we have provoked, how dear a Jesus we have crucified,
how Holy a Spirit we have grieved, how just a law we have transgressed, how
great salvation we have despised, what long suffering patience we have abused,
what precious opportunities of grace we have misspended, what Heinous sins we
have committed; that by all these considerations we may be melted into tears of
godly sorrow for our sins, that so mourning, we may loath, loathing, we may
leave, leaving, we may strive against, and striving against, we may obtain
power and victory over them. Be it enough (O God) for it is enough, nay, too
too much, that we have played away so great a part of the candle of our lives
in the pleasures of sin, oh give us grace for that little inch of our candle
which is yet to burn, so to let our light shine before men, that they seeing
our good works, may glorify thee our Father which art in heaven. To this end we
pray thee, enlighten our blind minds, incline our crooked wills, soften our
hard hearts, compose our distempered passions, mortify our earthly members,
sanctify our whole man, Spirit, Soul, and Body, and preserve us blameless to
the coming of our Lord Jesus. Implant (oh God) and increase all the graces of
thy holy Spirit in us, confirm our faith, stablish our hope, strengthen our
patience, enlarge our love, inflame our zeal, quicken our obedience, put thy
fear into our hearts, that we may never depart from thee, and do thou never
leave nor forsake us, but be our God, our Guard, our Guide even to the death;
and after death receive us to thy self, in that glory which is everlasting.

Not to us, (oh Lord) not to us alone, but to thy holy Catholic Church, be
thou propitious; she is the Vine which thine own right hand has planted, let
her be for ever preserved, and suffer not (Good God) suffer not either the wild
Boar out of the Forest to pluck up her root, or the many pestilent Foxes that
are within her to pluck off her grapes. Plant thy Gospel where yet it is not,
restore it where it is lost, continue and enlarge it where it is, especially in
these Realms. Remit our crying sins, Remove thy heavy judgments, Restore our
wonted blessings, Settle all things once again amongst us, upon their right and
ancient Foundations that Glory may dwell in our Land.

Let the cry of the Fatherless and the Widow ascend into the ears of the Lord
God of Hosts, that he may give them beauty for ashes, and the oil of gladness
for the spirit of heaviness. Bless all sorts and degrees of men among us. Let
the Gold of our Nobility excel in Grace, as they do in Honor, purify the
Silver of our Gentry from the dross of vice, Engrave upon the brass of our
Commonalty, the fear of thy holy Name; and preserve thine earthen vessels, in
whom is laid up, and by whom is dispensed thy heavenly Treasure, the Pastors
and Ministers of thy Church. Comfort all the sons and daughters of sorrow,
pour oil into wounded consciences, succor tempted souls, settle distracted
minds, heal diseased bodies, releeve impoverished families, release imprisoned
persons, those especially who suffer for the Testimony of a good conscience. Oh
thou that have a Salve for every sore, a Cure for every cross, a Remedy for
every malady; apply thy self suitably to all the necessities of thy children.
And now in Blessing, Bless that Word of all thy Grace, which goes forth
throughout all Congregations, lawfully and duly assembled in thy fear this day;
this in particular. Oh thou that stand at the door and knockest, be pleased
to open; Open the Preachers lips, that his mouth may show forth thy praise, and
declare thy message with power and plainness; open the peoples ears, that they
may hear thy Word with reverence and diligence: open all our hearts, that with
faith and love we may receive, with care and conscience we may obey thy sacred
truth, so as it may become the power of thee our God, to the illumination of
our judgments, the renovation of our natures, the reformation of our lives,
and the salvation of our souls, through Jesus Christ our only Mediator and
Redeemer; for whom we bless thee: To whom with thy self and blessed Spirit of
Grace, we give all praise and glory; and in whose most absolute Form of Prayer,
we further call upon thee, saying, Our Father which in Heaven, etc.

THE FIRST Epistle General OF St. JOHN. SERMON. 1.

HISTORY, PROPHECY, and DOCTRINE, Junil. in Bibl. pat. T. 1.
are the three Channels in which run the Streams of Sacred Writ, from whence
arises the division of its BOOKS into Historical, Prophetical, and Doctrinal:
Not, but that all the Books of Scripture are Doctrinal, in which respect the
Apostle says, it is profitable for Doctrine; but, 2 Timothy 3.16.
because some Books are chiefly concerned in narrations of things past, others
in the predictions of things to come; and some are chiefly, if not only,
conversant about Dogmatical Truths, and Practical Precepts, they are not
unfitly thus distinguished. Of this latter sort are the Epistolary Writings,
and therefore in this regard the fittest to be discussed among the people; The
Prophetical Books are most congruous to the Schools, but the Doctrinal most
suitable to the Pulpit; those for exercising the Learned, these for feeding the
Vulgar. Upon this account I have made choice of an Epistle, and in particular,
(not without serious and mature deliberation, nor yet (I hope) without the
blessed Spirits instigation) of this First Epistle General of S. JOHN to be the
subject of my Postmeridian discourses.

If any shall be inquisitive to know why among all the Epistles of the Holy
Apostles I have pitched my thoughts upon this, I shall return this threefold
answer, which as a threefold cord, (and that says Solomon is not easily
broken, Eccles. 4.12.
) enduced me to this Work.

One, (though indeed the least) is that I find not any English Expositor upon
it, nor yet many among the Latin, except those who have undertaken Comments
upon all the Epistles, whereas either in Latin or English, or both, I find
several excellent Interpreters upon each of the rest: and truly, I shall esteem
it an high honor conferred upon me by my God, if, through his gracious
enablement by a (though imperfect) dilucidation of this Epistle, I may cast a
Mite into the Churches-Treasury.

second and more persuading reason is the congruency of it to the age wherein
we now live, since there is the same occasion (as to general, if not particular
considerations) now given to Ministers of handling, which St. John had then of
writing this Epistle.

To clear this you may be pleased to know, that there were two sorts of men in
St. John's days, to wit, Antichristian-Hereticks, and Carnal-Gospellers, those
expressly denied the fundamentalls of Christian Religion, these whilst they
had Divine phrases, seraphical expressions flowing from their lips, were
sensual and diabolical in their lives, talking of Communion with God, dwelling
in God, knowing the truth, and what not? and yet practicing envy, malice,
hatred, and all uncharitableness in their actions, against both these this
Boanerges (for so he with his brother James are called by Christ, Mark 3.17.
) thundereth, and accordingly (as appears by the several Chapters,) his Scope
is double in this Epistle.

1. To warn the Orthodox that they were not withdrawn from their Christian
profession by the wiles of Heretics, this our Apostle himself expresses to be
one special end of his writing, where he says, 1 John 2.26.
These things have I written unto you concerning them which seduce you. Indeed
wherein can the shepherd more express the care of his flock, then in keeping
off the wolves; a Minister of his charge, then in arming them against
Heretics: Nemo non and lectu dignam and scitu necessariam hanc Epistolam
judicare possit maxim hisce temporibus quae haereses and schismata cum magno
Ecclesiae detrimento invexerunt. Fer. proaem. in Epist. Joh.
And is there not as great need in this age as ever of such a caution, wherein
such a multitude of deceivers swarm to the endangering of ignorant and
unstable Christians.

2. To persuade in general a practice agreeable to Christian profession, in
reference to which he says, Cap. 2.1.3.11.
These things I write to you, that you sin not, Sanctus Judas totus est in fide
Orthodoxa, Jacobus in oratione and patientia, Petrus in sanctitate, and
Johannes in charitate fidelibus commendanda. Lap. proaem. in Ep. Cathol.

Succendi cor nostrum in igne charitatis quaerimus Johannis verba pensemus
cujus omne quod loquitur charitatis igne vaporatur. Greg. Hom. 13. in Ezekiel.

In ipsa Epistola satis dulci and satis memorabili maxim charitas commenda^ur.
Aug. Expos. in hanc Epist.


and in special the practice of that most truly Christian-grace, Love, which
therefore he calls the message from the beginning. It is observed of precious
stones, that each of them has a several and peculiar excellency, the like is
taken notice of in sacred Books, and the splendor of this is, that it is much
conversant in describing and prescribing the grace of charity. For this reason
St. Gregory advises those who would be enflamed with this heavenly sire to
read St. John. whose words are altogether as it were colored with love. And
St. Augustine taking notice of this, affirms that Charity is the chief thing
commended by Saint John in this Epistle. And can any admonition be more
seasonable to this licentious and malicious Generation? That prediction of our
Savior, The love of many shall wax cold, Matthew. 24.1, 2. id. ibid.
was never more verified then in these days. The best of us need this advice,
as oleum in flamma, oil to nourish and increase the flame, and the most as
flamma ad fomitem, a coal fetched from the Altar to kindle, or recover this
fire in us. Indeed canting-language, affected forms of Religious-speech were
never more in use, but the reality of a Christian and charitable conversation
was never less in fashion. And if as without doubt that of Solomon be true, a
word spoken in due season, Pro. 15.23.
how good is it, The discussing of this Epistle which was written for these
ends so nearly concerning us, cannot but be profitable for, and so acceptable
to us. But,

3. Lastly, the chief argument (which incited me to this undertaking) is the
comprehensive excellency and utility of the matter contained in this Epistle.
Hieron. Epistol. ad Paulin.
St. Hierome speaking of all the Catholic Epistles, calls them breves pariter
and longas, breves verbis, long as sententiis; Short, and yet long, short in
phrase, but long in sense. This is singularly true of this Epistle, which as in
situation it is the middle, so for matter the fullest of them all, at once
enriched with weight of matter and elegancy of words, Mediam tenet in septem
quasi honoratiorem catholicis locum. Lor. in loc.
in which respect Lorinus is bold to say, no other Epistle is more divine then
this of him who is by the Church called the Divine.

The truth is, a world of heavenly matter is contained in this little Map,
which that it may the better appear, Ausim ipse dicere nullam hac Epistola
magis theologicam. id. ibid.
give me leave in few words to delineate it before you.

The Globe of Divinity parts it self into two hemispheres, to wit, credenda and
agenda, the things we are to know and believe, and the things we are to do and
perform; both which are here described, and therefore those two words (...)
and (...) at the second ver. of the first Chap. are by Justinian considered as
referring to those two heads, Videtur Apostolus du^bus hisce verbis dupraecipua
Christianae Religio^is capita indica^e voluisse etc. (...). in (...). Joh.
Epi^^. 1.
the bearing witness to matters of faith, and the showing, or declaring to
matters of practice.

Out of this Epistle we may gather an abstract of the things to be known, and
that concerning God, our selves, and Christ.

1. Concerning God we may hence be instructed in his nature, attributes and
persons, as to his Nature, that he is light, and in him no darkness; his
Attributes, that he is faithful, just, holy, righteous, pure, invisible, Chap.
1.5, 9.2.20, 29.3.3, and 20.4.8, 12.5.7.
knowing all things, and love it self; The Persons, that there are three which
bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, the Holy Ghost, and these three
are one.

2. Concerning our selves we may here learn what we are by nature, namely lying
in wickedness, what we are by grace, to wit, borne of God, Chap. 5.19.3.9, and
3.
and what we shall be in glory, like to him seeing him as he is.

3. Concerning Christ, we have him here characterized in his natures, offices,
acts, and benefits.

1. In respect of his natures, he is as to his Deity called true God, Chap.
5.20.4 9.1.1.
and yet more distinctly with reference to his personallity, the only begotten
Son of God; as to his humanity, he is said to be sent into the world, and so
truly man, that he was seen, heard, and handled by the Apostles.

2. As to his offices, he is here asserted in general to be the Christ, and so
anointed to those offices, Chap. 5.1.3.5, 8.2.2, 27.
and in particular as Priest, to take away sin, to be the propitiation for our
sins, and our Advocate with the Father; as Prophet by his Spirit to teach us
all things, and as a King, to destroy the works of the devil.

3. Most of his Mediatorial acts are here specified, his Incarnation, where he
is said to come in the flesh, Passion, Chap. 4.3.3.16.5.11.2.2.2.28.4.17.
in that he lays down his life for us, his Resurrection, in as much as
eternal life is said to be in him, and his Ascension, and Intercession, because
he is affirmed to be an Advocate with the Father, and his coming again in the
day of judgment to appear as Judge of the world.

4. Lastly, we need not go further then this Epistle to meet with those
benefits we obtain by him, Chap. 3.24.4.15.1.3.2.12.3.1.5.6.2.25.
in that he gives his Spirit to us, whereby we dwelling in him, and he in us,
have fellowship with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ; and by virtue of this
forgiveness of our sins for his Names sake adoption, whereby we are called the
sons of God. Finally, Justification by blood, Sanctification by water and
eternal life.

2. Nor are only doctrines of faith, but rules of practice deducible from this
Epistle.

1. Would we know what to avoid, this Book teaches us in general to eschew all
sin, Chap. 3.4, 8.2.15* 3.12, 15.5.16, 20.
both describing what it is, a transgression of the Law, and dehorting us from
the commission of it, in particular to expel the love of the world, to abandon
hatred, malice and envy, to keep our selves from Idols, and especially to
beware of the sin unto death.

2. Would we be instructed what we are to put in practice in this Epistle? we
are called upon to believe in the Name of Jesus Christ, Chap. 3.22, 23.3.17,
7.5.1, 3.14.2.1.1.9* 15.2.4, 16.6.28 4.6.
to love God who has begotten us, and to love those who are begotten of him,
to have the hope of glory fixed in us, to declare our repentance by confessing
our sins, and purifying our selves, to overcome the wicked one and the world,
to conquer the lusts of the flesh, to walk as Christ walked, by imitation of
him, and to abide in him by perseverance, to hear the Word preached by the
Ministers of Christ, to ask the things we want according to his will, to open
bowels of compassion, and distribute our worldly goods to our needy brethren,
finally to do righteousness, keep Gods commandments, and do those things which
are pleasing in his sight.

In few words, there are many golden Threes in Theology, which I find
scattered up and down in this Epistle, and being put together, must needs much
ennoble it in our estimation.

The three persons in the sacred Deity, God the Father, the Son and the Holy
Ghost, their Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity.

The threefold state of man, to wit, deformed, reformed, and transformed,
corrupt, regenerate, and glorified.

The threefold coming of Christ, in the flesh, by his Spirit, and at the day
of judgment.

Those three grand enemies of man's salvation, the flesh, world, and the devil.

The three Theological graces, Faith, Hope and Charity.

The three principal duties of Religion, Prayer, Hearing and Alms, are plainly
set before us in this parcel of Holy Writ.

Nay, yet once more, Those three things which every Christian man ought to be
acquainted with for his souls health, to wit, the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and
the Ten Commandments, are here at least summarily comprised.

Our blessed Savior tells us the whole Law is reducible to these two great
Commandments, the love of God, and our neighbor, both which are here amply
taught us.

The Lords Prayer is intimated, in that we must ask according to Gods will,
which cannot be unless according to that pattern; yea, in that we are called
sons of God, it teaches us to cry Our Father, and that chief Petition in it,
Forgive us our sins is once and again inculcated.

Finally, if you please, we may out of this Epistle, compile a Creed not much
unlike that of the Apostles, (no less justly then commonly heretofore received
amongst us, though now almost forgotten by us,) in these or the like words. I
believe in God the Father, invisible, just, holy, pure and faithful, who
knows all things, (and is no less Almighty to do all things,) who is love it
self, whereby he vouchsafed to make the heaven and earth. And in Jesus Christ
his only begotten Son, who came in the flesh, (to wit, by being conceived of
the Holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary,) and laid down his life for us,
(being crucified, dead, and buried,) and having life in himself, (rose from
the dead, and ascended to heaven, where he sits at Gods right hand,) is our
Advocate with the Father, and at that day of judgment shall come and appear
again, (to wit, to judge the quick and dead.) I believe in the Holy Ghost, the
fellowship or communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, and eternal life.

By this time you cannot but see ( beloved,) what a body of divinity, what a
treasury of spiritual knowledge this Epistle is, Fer. proaem.
well might F^rus say, Ipsam Evangelicae Doctrinae summam brevissimam
complectitur, the sum of Evangelical Doctrine, is succinctly and yet
distinctly comprehended in it; and now me thinks every one is ready to say
with that Father, Tertul. adver. Hermog. cap. 22.
Adoro plenitudinem sacrae Scriptura: I adore and admire the fullness of Holy
Scripture, wherein every drop is as it were a rivulet, every rivulet a great
river, and river an Ocean: every branch a tree, every tree an orchard, an
orchard a field: I mean every Verse as it were a Chapter, every Chapter an
Epistle, every Epistle a Volumne, for the abundance of precious truths
contained in them; and yet more particularly by these considerations sufficient
reason cannot but appear, as for my discussion so your attention, and thus this
discourse serves to make way for the following.

But before I begin, I have one request to make to you, and that from my very
soul, that as (I hope) you have not, are not, so you will not be wanting in
your requests to God for me, and what you should ask for me, I shall not go
out of this Epistle to tell you, even that unction from the Holy One, whereby
we may know all things, that anointing which teaches us all things, and is
truth and no lie, Chap. 2.20, 26.
Let this be the matter of your prayer, both for me, and for your selves, that
it may teach me how to expound, and apply, you how to hear and receive, both
you and me how to understand and obey the sacred saving truths which are
delivered to us in this First General Epistle of St JOHN.

I shall not at this time enter upon the Epistle it self, only in a few words
take notice of the Title which is prefixed, wherein we have two things
considerable: Namely,

The p^nman John, and the writing which is set down: for the nature of it, to
be an Epistle: for the order, the first: and for the extent of it, a general
Epistle.

First, The Epistle is asserted to be St. JOHN'S.

Indeed we do not find him setting down his Name in any part of the Epistle,
the other Apostles are express in this particular. James and Peter, and Jude,
and Paul in all Epistles, except that to the Hebrews; but Saint JOHN in this
Epistle is altogether silent, in the other two he only gives himself the
common title of an Elder: when he has any occasion to mention himself in his
Gospel, and that in things much tending to his dignity, it is done in a third
person by way of circumlocution, only in his Apocalypse he specifieth his Name,
Rev. 1.4.
but that without any addition of honor or dignity.

It lets us see in general the humility of this holy Apostle, who thought so
meanly of himself, that he accounts himself not worth the naming. Indeed on the
one hand, (though its often too true of many, who arrogantly affect to blazon
their own names and titles,) we are not to imagine that when the other Apostles
prefixe their nam^s, and most of them their high calling, that it is done out
of vain glory; But on the other hand, (...) idem quod (...) nomen compositum ex
(...) et (...) gratia Pass. Lex.
we may justly conclude it a testimony of great humility in this Apostle, that
he suppresseth his Name, his Office by silence. Thus whilst he was high in
Christ's, he became lowly in his own eyes* whilst he was rich in grace (his
very Name carrying as it were grace, as Benjamines sack did money in its
mou^h,) he was poor in spirit, scarce thinking himself worthy of a name. Oh let
us learn by his pattern not to affect our own praises, nor speak high things of
our selves, ever remembering, that as artis est celare artem, it is an art to
conceal our art, so to neglect our own names and honor, is the best way to
true honor and a good name.

Besides this notion of humility, it may further be conceived, and not
improbably, that this concealment of his Name was an act of prudence,
especially considering the time when it is most rationally conjectured to be
written, to wit, (as the learned English Annotatour has observed to my hand,
Dr. Ham.
) not long before the destruction of Jerusalem, when as the Church was under a
sharp persecution, (occasioned no doubt by those many Antichrists then
arising,) in which S. JOHN was peculiarly involved; yea, of which he warns
those to whom he writes, and therefore wisely forbeareth to publish his Name,
which might have been prejudicial to him. There is no doubt a policy consistent
with piety; which as all Christians, so Ministers may use in persecuting times.
It was that our Savior at least allowed his Disciples, Matthew. 10.16.
to be wise as serpents, with this caution, that they were innocent as Doves;
and sure it is no injury to truth and innocence, if a man, a Minister in
prudence, withold the publication of his name, to prevent his enemies malice.
Aug. de doctr. Christ. l. 2. c. 8* Eusebius. Eccles. hist. l 7. c. 20.


But whether these or any other were the reasons of S. John's silencing his
Name, yet it is without controversy, that he was the Penman; and indeed as
Dionysius Alexandrinus has not unfitly observed The Gospel and the Epistle are
so concordant, often using the same phrases, that he who penned the one, must
be acknowledged as the writer of the other.

But I shall not need to prove what all Christians grant, only it will not be
amiss in a few words to give you a character concerning this sacred Amanuensis.

Though in one Greek Copy I find only (...), The Epistle of St. JOHN, yet the
most read the title (...), The Epistle of JOHN the Apostle, whereby it
appears, that the Penman of the Epistle was not an ordinary Saint, and so a
member of, but an officer, yea, dignified with the highest office in the
Christian Church: for so we find S. Paul in his enumeration, beginning with
Apostles as the most divine order; and yet more then so, Ephesians. 4.11.
this Apostle JOHN was not only one of the twelve, but one of the three whom
Christ honored so far, Luke 8.57. Math. 17.12.26.37. Gal. 2.9.
as to be witnesses of his miracle in raising the Rulers daughter, Spectatours
of his glorious transfiguration on the mount, and his associates in the garden
when he labored under that sore agony, and whom S. Paul mentions as pillars
of the Church; yea, one of the two whom Christ sent to prepare the Passover
for him and his Disciples to eat: Luke 22.8. Joh. 19.26.13.23.24.
And yet to go one step higher, there were some prerogatives with which this
Apostle was invested above any of the rest. To him it was above all the other,
Christ at his death upon the Cross commended the care of his mother; Him it
was whom Christ admitted so near, as to lean on his bosom, Aug. in. Joh. tr.
61. Joannes cum caput suum supra pectus Jesu domini reclinaret, hauriebat
profunda* secreta sapientiae. Ambros. in Ps. 118. octo^. 2. Joannes et
Apostolus et Evangelista et propheta etc. Hier. contr. Jovin. l. 1. Math. 3.17.
being therefore called the Disciple whom Jesus loved, and to whom even Peter
beckoned that he should ask Christ concerning him that should betray him. quod
majus dare potuit Majoris dilectionis indicium? Christ could not give a higher
testimony of his affection toward him, then by taking him into his bosom; no
wonder if lying at such breasts, he did thence suck spiritual wisdom, and
drink the nectar of Divine Mysteries, whereof he became at once an Evangelist
in his Gospel, a Prophet in his Revelation, an Apostle in his Epistles.

And surely the consideration of the person should make us so much the more in
love with the Epistle, me thinks as God says to us concerning Christ, who
was in his bosom, This is my well beloved Son, hear him, that Christ says to
us concerning St. John, who lay in his bosom; This is my well beloved Apostle,
hear him, though yet let me add one caution, with which I shall close up this
branch, that we rest not in the Writer, but look up to the enditer, remembering
that St. John, and all Holy men of God, both spoke and wrote as moved by the
Holy Ghost; they were only the Amanuenses, but the Spirit is the Author; they
were the Instrumental, but the Spirit is the Principal efficient; and therefore
though we ought to honor them, yet we must look beyond, 2 Pet. 1 23.
above them, receiving what was written by them, as inspired by God, and
accordingly to yield audience, credence and obedience to it, and so much for
the Penman.

Pass we on to the writing it self, and therein consider we,

I. The nature of it, expressed in that denomination of an Epistle: indeed in a
large sense the whole Bible is called by St. Gregory, Epistola Omnipotentis Dei
ad creaturam suam in qua verba Dei sonan^, Greg. l. 4. ep 40.
and cor Dei dicitur; Gods Epistle to his Creature, wherein his mind is
revealed; but in a strict sense it is only used of, and applied to this and
other holy Writings of the like nature: For, an Epistle properly so called, is
a familiar colloquie between absent friends, Epistolarum eiusmodi usus est ut
disjuncti locorum intervallis affectu adhaerea^ mus in quibus inter absentes
imago refulget praesentiae etc Ambros. l. 8. ep. 65.
whereby they impart counsel and comfort to, and so after a sort become present
each with other. To this purpose the Father excellently, where he says, The
use of Epistles is to unite them that are separated, to make present those that
are absent, by which we communicate our thoughts and minds to our distant
friends; thus it was with the Apostles, they could not be always present with
those Churches they had planted, and therefore (...) vice fungebatur (...),
they endeavored to advise, and strengthen, and build them up by Epistles.

It lets us see the care of godly Ministers over their people, not only whilst
present by speaking, but when absent by writing to them, egebant vexali
haeresibus and persecutionibus Epistolarum consolatione, St. JOHN well knew
what need the Christians (being as sheep in the midst of wolves) had of
direction and consolation, Lorin in epist.
and therefore he sends this comfortable Epistle to them, desiring that
though his tongue could not, yet his pen might reach them.

And yet further we may here take notice of Gods mercy, Pulchra est piorum
veter^m observatio, Quod in novo d^mum Testam^nto in quo deus familiariter per
filium suum n^bis locu^us est mysteria regni caelestis per epist^lus cons^ribi
coeperint cum epist^la nihil aliud sit quam familiare cum amico colloquium.
Gerard. in epist. petr. 2. Hos. 12.10.
as well as the Apostles care who is pleased so familiarly to converse with his
Church by way of Epistle: he dealt with the Jewish Church as with Servants by
way of Mandate, but with the Christian as with Friends by way of Epistle, far
be it from us that his Familiarity should beget Contempt, but rather the lower
he is pleased to condescend in this way of making known his will to us, let us
so much the more Highly advance his goodness, and readily follow his dictates.
God seems to set it down as an Aggravation of Jsraels disobedience, that he
used similitudes by the Ministry of his Prophets, it will be no less of ours,
that God has used Epistles by the Ministry of his Apostles in a most friendly
way, advising us for our good, and yet these love tokens are slighted and
contemned by us.

II. The order of this Epistle is next to be briefly taken notice of, it is the
first, and it is so in a double consideration; the one of time; the other of
dignity: it is the first, not the only Epistle he wrote; first implies at
least a second; and here we find not only a second, but a third: this holy
Apostle was not idle or negligent, but in several kinds, and in the same kind
once and again renews his pains: nor yet is there only a priority in respect
of order, but of honor: the first, because the largest, the fullest, the
sublimest of all the Epistles, for the extent of it, not only equalizing, but
exceeding the other two; and that not severally, but jointly, for the matter of
it more divine and heavenly then either of the rest. All portions of Holy Writ
are alike excellent as to the Author from whom they are sent, and end for
which they are written; but yet some of them may be moreful and useful then
others; such is this, if compared with St. JOHN'S other Epistles, and therefore
called first.

III. The last thing to be discussed in the Title, is the Extent of the
Epistle, signified in that term Catholic. It is the appellation which is
given to the seven Epistles of James, Par. in Jac.
Peter, John and Jude, an Epithet affixed to them, (as Pareus thinks) rather
through inconsiderateness then any just ground, but I think him too rash in
that censure. Others have sought the reason of it in the number which being
septenary, is a number of perfection, intimating the universal perfection of
the Doctrine contained in them, in which respect these Epistles have been
resembled to wisdoms seven pillars, Pro 9.1. Rev. 1.13.5, 6. Math. 15.34.
by which her house is supported: The Lambs seven horns by which Heretics
are pushed at: the seven Golden Candlesticks, by which the light of Evangelical
Doctrine is set up, and the seven loaves by which multitudes are nourished, but
this I conceave to be a fancy rather then a verity. There are two reasons given
of this Appellation, which carry in them most probability, especially the
latter.

1. This Epistle may be called General according to Oecumenius his notion,
(...) etc. Oecumen. in Epist, Cathol. Serrar prolog in Ep. Cath. Aug. in Ep.
because it is not directed to one particular person, as those to Timothy and
Titus, nor yet to particular Churches, as those to the Romans, Corinthians,
Galatians, etc. but to the converted Jews in several parts, and in this sense
denominatio a majori part petita, the denomination is not from every Epistle
(since two, at least one, of St. John's Epistles is manifestly directed to a
particular person, but the greater part, as for this first Epistle, St. Austin
indeed seems to assert it as directed to the Parthians, but if with Iunius,
we understand that as an Hebrew word, it signifies as much as the scattered,
banished; or if we take it in the vulgar notion, we must know, that Parthia was
then a potent Kingdom, containing under it many oriental Nations, through
which, as Josephus testifies, Jun. in Bellarm. l. 2. de. verb. dei. c. 15.
Joseph. Antiq. l. 14. c. 12.164.
abundance of the Jews were scattered, to whom it is not improbable this
Epistle might be directed, and so this reason of Catholic fitly applied to it.

2. But that which (at least to me) seems most rational, is that this Title
was given them upon their general reception in the Church, in which respect
they were called Canonical as well as Catholic.

To clear this you must know, that at the first besides those Epistles which
carry St. Paul's name in the front of them, only the first Epistle of Peter, and
this of John, were universally received; Aug. in Ep.
Indeed concerning this Epistle of St. John, St. Austin says, Per omnes gentes
recitatur, orbis terrae authoritate retinetur; It was received by the whole
Christian world from the beginning, and to distinguish these from the rest,
they were then called Catholic, and afterward the other sive being received
into the Canon, had this name affixed to them for the distinguishing of them
from those Epistles of Barnabas, Ignatius, and Policarpus, which though
ancient, Non ut aliis quippian adimat sed has illis adjungerent. Jun. in Jud.
Epist. Hoc nomen hic impositum est epistolis quod a diversis authoribus sine
conscripta et commune eis nomen tribuendum. Carthus. proaem in Epist. Call.
were not taken into the rule of our faith: nor was this any diminution to the
authority of St. Paul's Epistles, but only an intimation that these were now
added to those, and whereas the other Epistles being written by one man, might
very well receive a single denomination from him, and be called St. Paul's
Epistles; These being penned by several, could not be mentioned jointly without
some such fit and venerable Title annexed to them.

The useful meditations we may hence take up are, that since this Epistle is
written generally to the Christians in several places, we are to remember it is
as well Catholic in respect of several ages. Indeed there is no age of man,
but is herein instructed; so he says himself, that he writes to children,
young men, fathers; nor is there any age of man since it was written to whom it
does not extend; and therefore no less concerns us then those who were then
alive; And surely as the epistle is general, Ideo videtur dici (...) quod non
certis per^sonis dedicetur, sed ad omnem aetatem et sexum pertineat Art. in loc.
so our application of it must be particular: Every one bringing the lessons of
it home to our own hearts; and yet once again, since it was so generally at
first received, therefore we to be the more confirmed in the verity of it, and
so induced the more strongly to believe the assertions, and carefully to obey
the directions contained in it.

And thus with what brevity I could I have unfolded the Title page; time will
not now give me leave to enter upon the Book it self. But I hope what has
been already said will prove a good preparative to my ensuing discourses, both
to give some light for the knowledge of, and cause some heat of love toward
this parcel of holy writ: And my desire to you (with which I shall conclude)
is, that though I cannot begin to handle, you would begin to read it, and as in
it self it is a familiar kind of writing, so by frequent perusing make it
familiar to you; and as the penman of it lay in Christ's bosom, so it may lie
in your bosom to be both your comforter and counselor till you come to rest
in Abraham's bosom to all eternity Amen.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN. SERMON. 2.

I. CHAP. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1. That which we from the beginning, which we have
heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our
hands have handled of the word of life.

2. (For the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and
show unto you that eternal life which was with the Father, and was manifested
unto us.)

3. That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may
have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ.

4. And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full.


THese words are as an head to the body, a gate to the field, a porch to the
building of this epistle, An introduction which very much speaks the writer
to be St. John, because it is as it were antistrophe evangelii a resounding to
the proaeme of his Gospel. Lapid. in loc.
The gospel begins with, In the beginning was the word, and this with that
which was from the beginning concerning the word of life, there a little after,
The word was made flesh, and we saw his glory, here the life was manifested and
we have seen it, Aug. ibid.
vide si non attestatur Epistola sua Evangelio suo says the Father justly. See
how the one as it were ecchoeth and answers to the other, so that at the very
threshold we may read the builder of this excellent fabric.

And as this exordium speaks the writer; so it manifests him an Orator,
since it fitly agrees to those rules which Oratory gives to be observed in
praeambles. There are three properties in every good exordium, convenient
length, lest if excessive, the Oration be like the little City of Mindas, with
a great gate; suitable aptness fetched from the very bowels of the matter in
hand, Exordia ex ipsis causae viscerebus sumenda Cic. de orat. l. 2.
and a profitable efficacy to render the auditory attentive, docible, and
benevolous, all of these meet in this preface. The length you see consists but
of 4. verses, whereas the Epistle spreads it self into 5. Chapters, in
respect of its fitness, it is taken from the matter it self, about which he
intended to write, Munus exordii est comparare benevolentiam, si causa sit
invidiosa and dubia, attentionem* si causa videatur levis, and parvi momenti;
docilitatem, si difficultas aut prolixitas offendat Alsted. Orat in Encyclop.

Exordium sine exordio nullis prorsus ambagibus auditorem suspendens Fer. in
loc.


not staying the Reader in any needless circumlocutions, yea (which is almost
peculiar to this Apostle) not so much as in a salutation of those to whom he
writes; Finally it is so fully and exactly composed that it cannot but attain
with rational men the ends of a preface, since the importance of what he was to
speak of, being no less than that of life, and that life eternal, it could not
but gain attention, the perspicuity of it, by reason of the manifestation of
this life, could not but render them docible, and the end of the Apostle being
their joy, and profit, and comfort, might well command benevolence to him, who
declares so much good will toward them. And I hope this proaeme being so
ample, I shall need no other Preface to obtain the like from you, than the
rehearsing and unfolding this, That which was, etc.

The manner of composing these verses by reason of that figure which
Rhetoritians call hyperbaton, the transposition of words, and likewise the
interposition of a parenthesis, is somewhat dark and obscure: And the Greek
Scholiast undertaketh to give several reasons of it, Justin in loc. Occum. in
loc.
such as are to let us know that our salvation consists not in words, but
things; to prevent the casting of pearls before swine, to avoid Heathenish
loquacity, to express much in a little, and to exercise our diligence in
finding out the sense and meaning of it: And how involved a Labyrinth soever
this period may seem (I doubt not) but by the clue of the spirit we shall
extricate our selves out of it. The Syriack version has contributed some light
to this dark sentence by placing the principal verb in the front, we publish to
you that which was from the beginning, etc. but the sense of these verses will,
I conceive, appear the plainliest by digesting them into those several
propositions, by which as so many steps we shall orderly ascend to their
genuine meaning.

1. The word of eternal life which was with the Father was manifested to us.

2. This word of life being manifested, we have heard and seen with our eyes,
and looked upon, and our hands have handled.

3. That which we have thus seen, heard, and handled concerning this word of
life, was from the beginning:

4. That which was from the beginning* and which we have heard, seen, and
handled, concerning the word of life, we bear witness, show, declare, and write
to you.

5. The end of our declaring and writing these things to you is, that your joy
may be full, by having fellowship with us.

6. That fellowship which we have, and we would you should have, together with
us, is with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ.

That I may proceed both more distinctly and succinctly in discussing these
words, be pleased to observe in them these two Generals: to wit, Apostolicum
praedicationis studium, and sublime Evangelii preconium here is,

The Apostles care of their duty in publishing the Gospel, and this according
to the English Translation, in four, but according to the Greek original, in
three expressions, one of them being twice repeated, we bear witness, we show,
we declare, and unto you.

The Gospels excellency which they did publish, and this delineated in four
characters; namely,

1. The dignity of its object, and that no other than the word of life, even
that eternal life which was with the Father, and was manifested to them.

2. The certainty of its tradition, in as much as it was that which they had
heard, seen with their eyes, looked upon, and their hands handled.

3. The Antiquity of its origination, as being that which was from the
beginning.

4. The utility of the end, which is the peoples communion with the Apostles,
yea with God and Christ, in those words, that you may have fellowship with us,
and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ; and by
this means the completion of their comfort in those words, that your joy may be
full.

These are the several branches of this tree of life, through each of which by
Divine enablement, I shall pass according to the proposed method, gathering and
distributing those sweet and wholesome fruits which grow upon them, Genesis 1.
Pluralis nominativus primae* personae non semper magnitudinis sed saepe
modestiae habet significationem ^^bi nostra decora cum aliis partimur. Grot. in
loc.


The Apostles care of publishing the Gospel is the first considerable, and it
is that which St. John does here assert in the behalf not only of himself, but
his fellow Apostles, for it is not the singular I, but the plural number We;
nor is this a term of State, as sometimes Princes write in a magnificent style,
but intended to comprehend the other Apostles, together with himself, that they
might be accounted as faithful as he in this sacred work: The expressions by
which our Apostle sets forth the exercise of their care, are very significant,
and such indeed as do superadde somewhat at least by way of explication to the
other: Take them briefly in their order as they lie in the verses.

1. The first we meet with is (...) bear witness; This was indeed the chief
office to which the Apostles were designed by Christ to bear witness of him,
and that they might be enabled to the faithful discharge of it, he promised he
would, V. 2. Ioh. 15 26, 27. Acts 1.8.
and accordingly did after his ascension, cause them to receive the power of
the Holy Ghost coming upon them.

Not ( Beloved) that Christ stood in need of any human testimony, he says
himself, I receive no witness from man; Ioh. 5.34. v. 36 37.
to wit, as wanting it, or not having greater: his own miraculous works which
were done by him did testify of him, the Devils of Hell, the Angels in heaven,
those out of envy, these in duty gave witness to him: Nay, his Father by a
wonderful voice from Heaven, attested him to be his well-beloved Son, it was
not then in regard of himself that he ordained the Apostles to be his
witnesses, but in regard of them, and the people, of them, that he might put
this high honor upon them of being, as it were Christ's Jury. Look as Gods
making use of instruments in his providential works, is not ex defectu
potestatis, but abundantia bonitatis, want of power, but abundance of love
whereby he would advance his creatures to that great dignity of being his
Servants: So Christ's appointing his Apostles to be witnesses, was not because
he stood in need of testimony from them, but that he might confer the honor
upon them of giving testimony to him, and as of them, so of the people, who
having men like themselves to bear testimony to Christ, might with the
confidence, and cheerfulnes, received it, in this respect, what Christ said
concerning those words he uttered at the raising of Lazarus, Jo. 11.42.12.30.
because of the people that stand by I said it, and concerning that voice from
heaven, it came not for me but for your sakes, the same may be asserted
concerning the Apostolical Testimony, it was not, as if Christ needed it, but
because we need it for our confirmation and consolation. I end this, with a
double Item.

To the Ministers of the Gospel that we remember this is our duty as well as it
was the Apostles, to bear witness to Christ, to be an eye witness of Christ
risen was indeed peculiar to the Apostles, and therefore that St. Paul might be
an Apostle, Christ was pleased to manifest himself visibly to him, but to bear
witness to Christ is that which all Ministers are obliged to, and therefore to
labor that we approve our selves true and faithful witnesses, asserting only
and wholly the truth of the Gospel, It is required in a steward (says the
Apostle) that he be found faithful, no less in a witness, Ministers are both
Gods stewards and Christ's witnesses; oh let them discharge their duty with
fidelity.

To the people, that they receive with faith what the Apostles and Ministers of
Christ attest with truth; that as there is fidelitas in test, Hoc se
protestari dicit sim^l scilicet et exequens officium fidei and ingerens
terrorem incredulitati etc. Cass. de Incarn. l. 5. c. 6. Sacerdotis praedicatio
salvandis est correctio, contestatio judicandis etc. Ambros. Sermon. 83.
so there may be fides in auditore, these faithful witnesses may find
believing cares. What great reason there is of believing these witnesses will
afterward appear, let it suffice us to know for the present, that he who has
appointed them to bear witness, expects we should embrace it. And so much the
rather ought this duty to be performed by the people, because as we do testari,
so likewise obtestari, protestari (for that sometimes is the notion of this
word, and is so construed here by Cassian) we so bear witness to the truth as
that we protest against all those who receive not our Testimony, we testify
not only for the strengthening of faith in the weak, but for the affrighting of
them who are obstinate in their infidelity, since as we now bear witness to
you, so we shall one day bear witness against such, and that Testimony which
cannot now prevail for your conversion, shall at last come in as an evidence
to your condemnation; and so much for the first term.

2. The next expression (...) is twice repeated but Englished by two several
words we show and we declare, V. 2, 3.
it is that which intimates what kind of bearing witness the Apostle here
intended.

There are indeed several ways of bearing witness to Christ, to wit, by
suffering, especial^y death it self (for to such the name of (...) is (...)
applied) for Christ's cause, and the Gospels, by leading lives answerable to the
Christian profession, and by openly publishing the truth of Christ, and all of
these ways the Apostles did bear witness to Christ, the most of them suffering
death actually, except this Apostle, who yet was banished, and no doubt was
ready to have dyed (had he been called to it) for the name of Jesus, nor were
any of them wanting by the Holiness and uprightness of their conversations to
attest and credi their doctrins, but that way of bearing witness which here is
meant appears by the subjoyning of this phrase to be the promulging of the
Evangelicall truths concerning the Messiah, Cum displiceret Testimonium etc Aug
ep. 26.
to which those other ways are necessary appendixes, that as we preach, we
should live and be ready to justify the truth of what we preach, with the
loss even of our lives, if the providence of God, and malice of men put us
upon it.

That then which we have here to take notice of, is the readiness of these
Apostles to show and declare the mysteries of salvation to the people; indeed
this was the chief part of their work, being therefore compared to lights and
Ambassadors, the nature of light is to discover, the business of an
Ambassador is to impart his message, and accordingly, the work of an Apostle
is to reveal the Gospel. Indeed for this very end the life was manifested to
them, that they might manifest it to others, Christ made known himself to
them that they might make him known to others: and it is that which is Gods
aim: in what soever knowledge he bestows upon any of us. He has given light
to the Sun that it should be communicated to the World, water to the ocean,
that it should feed the rivers, and talents to Ministers, Christians, not that
they should hide them in a napkin, but employ them for the enriching of their
breth^en, and therefore if we hear a veni et vide, come and see, we must
expect to hear another voice abi et narra go and tell and declare it, The
truth is, this is the temper of a religious heart, Jeremy says of himself I
was weary with forbearing, Jer. 20.9. Ps. 40.10. Act. 4.20.
and David, I have not hid thy righteousness, nor concealed thy truth from the
great congregation, and the Apostles, we cannot but speak. Spiritual
knowledge in the Christian soul: is like new wine in the vessel which must have
a vent, or the ointment in the right hand, which cannot but bewray it self. The
zeal that is in a faithful ministers, Pro. 27.16.
nay in every godly man, for the advancing of Gods glory, edifying others,
propagating religion burns so strongly, that it cannot but flame forth in
showing what he knows to others: oh let every one of us, to whom any divine
illumination is imparted, fulfill Gods design, and testify the truth of grace
in our hearts, by endeavoring to teach and instruct our brethren.

But this is not all we are to consider in this expression the Greek word is a
compound of (...) which signifies to bring a message and (...), which is as
much as from another, Bez. in loc.
so Beza glosseth upon the word here, we declare, as being sent by God to
publish this erran and that, which hereby is intimated to us, is, that these
holy Apostles did not run before they were sent: but had a mission and
commission to show and declare the things of the Gospel. Indeed St. Paul puts
the question, and by it no doubt intends a negation; how shall they preach
except they be sent? and the Author to the Hebrews is express, Romans 10.15. Heb.
5.4.
no man takes this honor upon him, except he be called of God, as was Aaron.
These Apostles were in an immediate and extraordinary way, sent by Christ
himself, the successors of the Apostles were separated and sent by them, and
all the true Ministers of Christ have been, are, and shall be sent by their
successors until the end of the world, to declare this message. I would to God
this were more seriously pondered on in this licentious age, wherein so many
presumptuously undertake to preach the Gospel without a call: Gregory Nazianzen
speaking in his own defense, says, he came to this work (...) not of himself
but being called, Greg. Naz. orat. 25.
but a great number in our days send themselves into the vineyard, as if our
Savior had said, not the Kingdom of heaven, but the preaching of the Kingdom
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force, having no right at all to
it; these men tread in the steps, and it is Gods wonderful Patience they come
not to the dismal end of Corah, and his accomplices; It is true beloved, all
Christians, as I have already hinted, ought as they are able to declare the
things of God to others, teaching and exhorting one another; but it is as true
that this they are to do within the compass of their place and calling, as
Masters, as Parents, as Governors in a private charitative way, but still this
declaring here understood, which is in a public authoritative way, belongs
only to them who are sent, either immediately or mediately from God. I end
this, to show and declare that is our part, who are the Ministers, to hear and
attend, that is yours, who are the people; and surely as we are bound to do the
one, you are no less obliged to perform the other, we after St. Paul's pattern,
Act. 20.27.
must not shun to declare the whole counsel of God to you, and you must not
neglect to receive the counsel we declare, and so much the rather considering
that as we do annuntiare, so we do denuntiare, declare the truth to you, so we
denounce Judgment against the stiffnecked, and hard hearted auditors, yea as
we do now annuntiare, so we must at the last day renuntiare (and all these
things the word in the Text signifies) return an account to our Lord and
Master, what entertainment our message has found with those to whom we are
sent: and then as truly it will be woe to us, if we have not declared: so woe
will be to you, if you have not regarded this message which we show and declare
unto you; and so much be spoken of the second Particular.

V. 4.
3. There is yet one term more behind, and that is, (...) we write unto you,
and as declaring shows what kind of bearing witness the Apostle chiefly
relates to; so this writing, what kind of declaring he especially speaks of;
Modi praedicandi Evangelium omni creaturae sunt duo etc. Iun. animadv. in Bell.
l. 4. c. 3.
for whereas there are but two ways of declaring the Gospel, to wit, sermo and
scriptio, word and writing by the tongue and the pen; this latter is that which
the Apostle principally intends when he says, we declare, we write, that is,
we declare by writing.

And indeed there are several advantages in writing above speaking, which might
very well induce the Apostles to take this course. My tongue says David, is
the pen of a ready writer; Ps. 45.1.
the pen no less truly is as the tongue of a ready speaker.

1. By this it is we speak to many, very many, even those that are absent and
far distant from us, in which respect, writing is wittily styled an invention
to deceive absence; and therefore St. Paul made use of it for this very end,
when he says to the Corinthians, being absent I write unto you: whereas by the
voice we only speak to those who are present, and in a little compass of
ground distant from us; so that, be they never so many, they are but a very few
in comparison of those to whom we communicate our thoughts by the pen.

2. Again, by this it is we speak, not only whilst alive, but when we are
dead, and so declare the truth, not only to them who are coaetaneous with us,
but shall in future ages succeed after us; in which regard, that of the Psalmist
is very suitable, Psa. 102.18. Scripserunt Apostoli ut no^ solum hominibus qui
tunc erant sed omnibus qui f^turi erant, ipsi non solum vivi sed etiam mortui
Evangelium annuntiarunt Maldon^t praefat in Evang.
This shall be written for the generations to come: words pass away, and are
buried in Oblivion, whilst writing remains and becomes an image of eternity.

Upon these considerations it is more than probable that St. John and others of
the Apostles did show by writing, since the Christians of those times were
scattered up and down by persecution, so that the Apostles could not reach them
all in person, nor had they regard only to the present age, but to the
propagation of Christianity in succeeding, and therefore they made use of this
way, to declare by writing.

That which we are from hence to take notice of is double.

1. In special, the industry of the Apostle is to be meditated on by Ministers
for their imitation; these men of God, neglect no means whereby they may bear
witness to Christ, and declare the Gospel: hence it was that where ever they
came they did teach both publicly and privately, and where they could not
come, they sent by writing, for the edification of the Church. St. Jude says
of himself, that he gave diligence, nay, Jude 3.
all diligence, and that not only to speak, but write of the common salvation,
and by this means whereas the slothful man is dead whilst he lives, he (with
the rest of the Laborious penmen of holy writ) lives though dead. This
practice should be Ministers pattern, who must make the salvation of the people
their business, and do all the good they can, and that by all ways in promoting
the knowledge of Christ; if we had as many tongues or hands as Argus had eyes,
we should think them all little enough to employ in this sacred work of the
Gospel.

2. In General, the benignity of God is to be contemplated by us all for our
gratu^ation, in that he was pleased to put his Apostles upon writing the
mysteries of salvation. Indeed as the Greek Fathers expression is (...), it was
Gods singular good pleasure which moved him to move these holy men to the
penning of his word for our learning, Theoph. in Matthew.
that we may have a sure guide, a clear light, an infallible rule to walk by;
and therefore however some among the Romanists, yea (which is more dolful) even
among our selves cast contempt upon Scripture, Coster. Enchirid.
stiling it attramentariam Theologiam, an inky Divinity, a dead letter, let us
highly esteem it, steadfastly cleave to it, and acknowledge the mercy of God in
affording it.

I am not ignorant how the Romanists that they may deny the written word to be
an adaequate Rule of faith, Bellarm. de verb. dei. l. 4. c. 4.
and infer a necessity of their un-written traditions, assert that the Apostles
did not write (by virtue of any command from Christ, but only upon emergent
occasions: but beloved, as to some parcels of holy writ, we read of an express
Precept; Duodecies Ioanni mandatum ut scrihat in libro Apocalypseos. Iun.
animadv. in Bell. 1 l. 4. c* 13. 2 Timothy 3.16. Sufficiebat gen^rale mandatum ut
docerent* praedicarent, etiam ut traderent nam illa omnia fiunt duobus modis
vel viva voce vel scripto. Cham. de can. l. 9. c. 6.
so often in the Apocalips, no less than twelve several times, besides, (as the
learned Chamier and Iunius well observe against Bellarmine) the general command
of teaching all Nations, and preaching the Gospel to every creature, vertually
requires the use of all means, among which, writing is not the least for the
publication of it; and yet further, when as we read in St. Paul's Epistle to
Timothy, that (...) all and every parcel of Scripture is (...) of divine
inspiration, we may very well conclude that the penmen had an internal command
putting them on, as well as an internal assistance enabling them to this holy
work. In this respect it is that St. Augustine says expressly, whatsoever God
would have us know concerning his word, and his works he gave in charge to
those sacred amanuenses to write; and therefore let none of us be wise above
what is written, but humbly and meekly confine our selves to that which his
goodness and wisdom has allotted for us, Quicquid ille de suis d^ctis and
factis nos legere voluit hoc scribendu^ illis tanquam suis manibus imperavit.
to walk by the writings of his Prophets and Apostles, beseeching him that as
he has caused his truths to be written, that they may be read with our eyes,
so he would write them in our hearts, and thereby we may have a comfortable
evidence, that our names are written in the book of life.

And thus I have given a dispatch to the first general part, to wit, the
Apostles care of their duty, pass now on to the other General, which is the
Gospels excellency, Genesis 2. A^g. de consens Evang. part. 1. l. 1 c. 35.
and therein to the

Eminency of its object, in the close of the first, and part of the second
verses, in those words ( the word of life, the life that was manifested, that
eternal life which was with the Father, and was manifested to us, all which is
spoken concerning Christ.

But before I enter on the handling of these words in this (which I conceive to
be the most genuine) interpretation, there is another exposition, which being
neither improbable, nor unprofitable, I shall not pass by, and it will be all I
can discuss at this time.

It is of those who understand these words concerning the Gospel it self, as if
that were here called the word of life, wherein this eternal l^fe is
manifested, Bifariam potest exponi vel de Christo, vel de Evangelio Calu. in
lo^. Vera Evangelii doctrina Grot. ibid. Videtur omnino intelligere Evangelium
Vorst. ibid.
though even according to this construction the encomium is of the Gospel, with
reference to its matter, where about it is conversant: This Exposition is that
which is alleged by Calvin, asserted by Grotius, and assevered by Vorstius,
nor is it dissonant to the analogy of faith, and according to it, here are two
things to be considered, namely, the appellation given to the Gospel, it is the
word of life: and the reason of that appellation, because in it the life,
eternal life is manifested to us.

1. The appellation here affixed to the Gospel, is choice and comfortable, it
is the word of life; a title which is made use of by St. Paul, when he required
of the Philippians, that they should shine as lights in the world, Phil. 2.15,
16.
holding forth the word of life, and by the Angel, when he commands the
Apostles to speak in the ears of the people, Act. 5.20, 13.26* 20* 31. Ephesians. 13.
Tit. 2.11. Iam. 1.21.
all the words of this life: suitably hereunto, it is that it is called else
where the word of salvation, and the Gospel of salvation, and the Grace of God
that brings salvation, and the ingrafted word, which is able to save our
souls; and yet once more, that word of Gods Grace, which is able to build us
up, and to give us an inheritance among them which are sanctified.

2. The reason of this appellation is fit and pregnant, because those words,
eternal life is manifested to us, are such a confirmation, that they ate
withal an explication of the Title in both the branches of it. For

1. Would we know what this life is, whereof the Gospel is the word? the answer
is, it is eternal life, in which respect St. Peter says to Christ, Ioh. 6.68.
thou have the words of eternal life. In these two expressions is contained a
short description of felicity, it is a life, for since life is the highest of
all created excellencies, it is aptly used to set forth a state of happiness:
Cum beatitudo sit perfectum bonum and sufficiens oportet quod desiderium
hominis quietet and omne malu^ excludat naturaliter autem homo desiderat
retinere bonum quod habet. Aquin. prim. 2. quest. 5. Artic 4.
especially if we take vivere as comprehending in it valere, and so denoting an
hayle, vigorous, and prosperous life. But that which crowns life it self, and
makes it an happiness, is its eternity, since (as the Schools well;) true
bliss must be able to give satisfaction to the appetite, which it cannot do, if
there be any fear of losing or expiring; the truth is, neither of these two can
be severed in an happy condition, were it eternal, if it were not life, there
could be no bliss, since it is true of the damned that they shall exist
eternally; and were it life, if it were not eternal, it could not be happy,
since a transitory fading life is rather a death than a life, and therefore
that the Gospel may appear a means of happiness, it is said to reveal to us
eternal life. And

2. Would we know in what respect the Gospel is the word of this life? the
answer is, because this eternal life which was with the Father, is by it
manifested to us; indeed we must here distinguish between data and manifestata,
the giving and the manifesting of this life, nor is it mine, but St. Paul's own
distinction, where he informs us. that salvation or life eternal was given us
in Christ Jesus before the world began, but is now made manifest by Christ, 2 Timothy 1.9, 10.
who has brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel.

The truth is, eternal life, before the time of the Gospel, was with the
Father, that is, did latere quod^mmodo apud patrem, lie hid in the Fathers
bosom, unrevealed to the world: As to the Gentiles, it was altogether unknown,
who therefore are said to sit in darkness, Daven in ^oloss.
and the shadow of death, as being wholly strangers to this life: and as to the
Jews, it was hid (as Learned Davenant has observed) ex part and comparative:
the greatest part of the Jews looked no higher than an earthly Canaan, and
dreamt only of a temporal happiness to be accomplished by the Messiah, the
discoveries of life were so dark, that few could spell them, and that
manifestation which any of them had, was very obscure, in comparison of what is
by the Gospel. It is true, eternal life was so far revealed in the old
Testament, that the believing Jews attained to some knowledge of it, so as that
they looked for it, and no doubt are in their souls possessed of it; upon this
account St. Paul tells Timothy, that the holy Scriptures (to wit; 2 Timothy 3.15.
Ioh. 5.39.
of Moses and the Prophets, were able to make him wise to salvation, and Christ
bids the Jews to search the Scriptures, because they thought (which yet Christ
reproves not as a bare surmize) in them to have eternal life: but still those
discoveries were very imperfect, Vide Rive^. Isag. Scriptur. Non Patriarchis
non prophetis etc. Grot. in loc.
in comparison of that knowledge which the Gospel imparts, and therefore one
observes an Emphasis in the (...) to us, not to the Patriarchs, not to the
Prophets was this life, to wit, so clearly manifested as to us, the Apostles of
Christ, and by us to the Sa^nts throughout the world, in which respect St. Paul
writing both to the Ephesians and the Colossians, Ephesians. 3.5. Col. 1.26. Primario
sanctis Apostolis, secundario aliis sanctis* immediate Apostolis, mediate
deiservis. Davon. in coloss.
styles not only the calling of the Gentiles (which is as much spoken of by
the Prophets, as any other evangelical truth) but the whole doctrine of life in
the Gospel, a mystery which has been hid from ages and generations, nor was
in other ages made known to the sons of men, but is now revealed unto his holy
Apostles, and made manifest to his Saints by his Spirit.

To sum it up in few words, Eternal life is that mystery which could not have
been found out by reason, neither the thing it self, nor the way to it could by
any humane wit or industry have been at all discovered, and therefore it must
be manifested, to wit, by a divine Revelation, a spiritual illumination, and
only the Gospel is the word wherein God has been pleased to vouchsafe the
clear distinct, and full manifestation of it, for which reason it is deservedly
called the word of life.

To apply this briefly, what should the consideration hereof teach us? But

1. Thankfully to acknowledge what a rich treasure a precious pearl God has
vouchsafed to us, in bestowing the Gospel on us; life is the most precious
treasure in nature, eternal is the best of life's: Oh then, how singular is the
worth of the Gospel, which manifests this life unto us; and surely, as the
water of life it self, so the vessels that convey it to us, should be highly
esteemed by us; we may truly say of all the Ministers of the Gospel, what that
possessed Damosel said concerning St. Paul, and the rest: These men are the
servants of the most high God, Act. 16.17.
which show unto us the way of salvation, and what St. John here says of
himself, and fellow Apostles, we may no less justly say of our selves, we show
to you that eternal life which was with the father. Shall the Lawyer be valued
who shows you that way of preserving your temporal estate? shall the
Physician be honored, who shows you the way of prolonging your corporal
life: and shall not the feet of them be beautiful, who bring the glad tidings
of peace, and show the way of obtaining eternal life? But however, if we must
be neglected, yet let the treasure we bring, be gratefully esteemed by you, as
you love your life, as you value eternity, prize the Gospel.

That I may the more enhaunce the worth of the Gospel, consider it not only
absolutely and positively, but oppositively and comparatively.

1. In opposition to the Law strictly taken, which (though there was a time
when life might have been obtained by it, yet) now to us who are guilty of the
breach of it, it threatens nothing bu^ death. Oh how sweet is the Gospel to
the transgressor of the Law, in the Law there is nothing but matter of fear, in
the Gospel of love, in the Law, God is against us, in the Gospel, he is
Emanu^l, God with us. The Law curses, the Gospel blesses: the office of the
Law is to accuse and terrify; of the Gospel, to heal and comfort; finally, the
Law is a killing Letter, but the Gospel a quickening Spirit.

2. In comparison with the state of the Old Testament; How much more obliged
are we to God, who live in the times of the New, in respect of the clear
Revelation of this life unto us? God spoke with Moses at the door of the
Tabernacle, but now he leads his Spouse into the presence Chamber: The Old
Testament Christians saw through a veil, but now the Curtain is drawn; with
them it was the dawning of the day, with us it is full noon; oh that we would
praise the Lord, for his inestimable goodness to us, upon whom the glorious
light of the Gospel shines.

2. To endeavor, that what this word of life is in it self, it may be to every
one of us; and as it is the word of life by way of manifestation, so it may be
also by way of operation, effectual, to bring us to that life which it
reveals to us, the more to quicken us in this endeavor, it would be
seriously considered by us, that though the Gospel be intentionally the word of
life, yet accidentally it proves to many the savor of death: namely, those
who receive with the left hand of infidelity, what God offers with the right
hand of grace and mercy; the same Sun both softneth the wax, and hardneth the
clay; the same earth is sweet in the grape, and bitter in the wormwood; the
same odor is a refreshment to the Dove, and poison to the Beetle; the same
herb called Rhododaphne, is a cure to men, bit with serpents, and venomous to
beasts; and the same Gospel, is both to believers a word of life, and to
unbelievers a means of condemnation, whilst they love darkness rather than
light, and choose death before life: Oh therefore, let it be our prayer, among
whom this word of life has been so long preached, that it may come to us, as
it did to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 1.5.
not in word only, but also in power, so as it may become to every one of us
the power of God to salvation, and life eternal;

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN. SERMON. 3.

CHAP. I. Ver. 1, 2. 1. That which was from the beginning, which we have heard,
which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled of the word of life.

2. (For the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and
show unto you that eternal life which was with the father, and was manifested
to us.)


A Scripture to which I need no beginning, since it begins with the beginning,
and that such a beginning as has no beginning; a Text to which a Preface will
be needless, because it self is a Preface, and yet such a Preface, as may
withal be called a book. In reference to the Epistle, it is a proaeme, in it
self it is a volume well worth our most serious study and perusal. The
Apostles duty, and the Gospels excellency, are the two Sections which divide
it, the first of which consisting only of one leaf, though that having three
columes I read over the last time. The second expatiateth it self into four
large leaves, the first of which is written as it were on both sides, having a
double exposition annexed to it, the one side was then dispatched, and now we
are to turn over the other, and according to the most genuine sense to handle
these words as spoken concerning Christ, the word of life, that eternal life,
which was with the Father, and was manifest to us.

Nor is it without strong reason (as I conceive) that we should incline to this
latter, as the most congruous interpretation. For

1. This phrase the word of life primarily agrees to Christ since when it is
attributed to the Gopsel it is in reference to Christ, and therefore eternal
life is manifested in the Gospel, because Christ by whom we obtain that life,
is revealed in it.

2. The things that are here asserted concerning this word of life, are such as
most properly belong to the person, Vt rei certam scientiam declararet hiscae
metaphoris videndi, and contractandi oculis ipsis and manubus usus est Socin.
in Apoc.

Non animadvertunt hoc a Ioanne socili. ut test etc. Est. ibid.


rather than the doctrine of Christ; the word of life is said to be manifested,
and that such a manifestation as was visible; nay, so as they not only heard
and saw, but handled, which cannot literally be referred but to a corporeal
substance; and to understand those expressions with Socinas metaphorically, is
here very unsuitable, because the strength of the argument, by which St. John
would confirm what he delivered concerning Christ, lies in the litteral
acception, that sensible experience they had of him, by hearing, seeing, and
handling.

3. Those phrases of Word and Life, are most frequently, when used by this
Apostle in all his writings applied to Christ; Ioh. 1.^.5.7.11.20.
so in the beginning of his Gospel, when he says, in the beginning was the
word, and in him was life, it is without controversy spoken of Christ; so in
the last Chapter of this Epistle, the term Word, in the enumeration of the
Trinity, is plainly meant of Christ, and this Life is said to be ^n him: and
again, of him no doubt those words are spoken, This is the true God, and
eternal life.

4. Add to all this,

That which (where there is an equal probability of reason on both sides) shall
ever with me praeponderate the scales, is that almost all Expositors, as well
ancient as modern go this way* and interpret this concering the person of
Christ.

And now following this construction, you may observe the person of Christ
generally denominated, and particularly exempl^, (...) the former in the end of
the first, and the latter in the greatest part of the second verse, of each in
their order.

1. The General denomination here given to Christ is, that he is called the
Word of Life; and here are two substantives, that singly deserve our
consideration.

1. Christ is called the Word. An expression not altogether unknown to those
Heathens, Trismagistus and Plato, which made Amelius swear when he read the
beginning of St. John's Gospel, Dr. Hammond. Annot. in Luc. c. 1.
per Iovem barbarus iste cum nostro Platone sensit verbum esse in ordine
principii. This Barbarian (for so he was in his esteem) agrees with our Plato,
asserting the word to be in the order of a principle. But they being ignorant
both of the Trinity, and of the Messiah, though they had the word, could not
rightly understand the thing; as for the Jews, it is very likely it was known
to them as the name of the Messiah, at that time when St. John wrote, because
it was often used in the Chaldee language, which was then common among them. It
were easy to multiply places in the Old Testament, where when the Hebrew reads
Lord, the Chaldee paraphrase renders it the Word of the Lord; thus where the
Prophet says, Israel is saved by the Lord, Isa. 45.17. Ps. 110*1*
the Chaldee read it, the word of the Lord; and when in the Psalms it is said,
the Lord said to my Lord, the Chaldee read to my word; and these may suffice to
let us see that the Jews being no strangers to this language, could not but be
acquainted with this term. A Title which St. John, of all the Evangelical
penmen seems most to delight in, and therefore it is most frequent in his
writings; (...) etc Cyr. These An^t. 19.
nay, indeed only used by him in the New Testament, who is therefore called
(...); and no wonder if he who was a seraphical writer, made so much use of
this sublime expression. That I may fully and distinctly represent the several
notions of this term Word among interpreters, be pleased to look upon it as
capable of a double trope, to wit, a metaphor, and a metonymi^.

(...) and sermonem and rationem significaet. lact. Instituti l. 4. c. 9.
1. This phrase may not unfitly be looked upon as metaphorical. Christ
resembled to a word, which that I may the better explicate, take notice of that
known distinction of Word, into (...) and (...), conceptus mentis, and sermo
oris, the inward conceit of the mind, and outward speech of the lips, to both
which, the Messiah is not unfitly compared. (...). Bas. hom. 15.


1. The conceit of the mind is called a word, the heart having its language as
well as the mouth, and speech being nothing else but as it were the echo of
that voice which is in the mind; now to this it is which the ancients generally
refer this title Word, (...) etc. Ignat ep. 3* ad magn. verbum h^eres est non
^^nus etc. Hila^. l. 2 de T^init (...). (...) 2. de (...) vide Bas loc.
praedict.
when spoken of Christ* nor is it without good reason, that they conceive the
Messiah compared to the internal Word, and that in a double respect.

1. Primarily, (...), in regard of his Father, for as the internal word is that
offspring of the mind, so is Christ the Son of God, as the mind forms its
conceit, by understanding the object proposed, so the Father generateth his
Son, by understand^ng his own essence; as the conceit issues from the mind,
without any passion or trouble; so is the Son begotten of the Father; as the
generation of the word, in the mind is immaterial and spiritual, without any
carnal conjunction, so is the generation of the Son of God; finally, as the
word which is framed in, remains with the mind, so the Son being begotten of,
Men's cogit ando verbum intra se generat and sic generat verbum de se ^t genitum
habeat apud se sic verbum divinum in ipso patre manet a quo gignitur. Fulg. ad
M^^rim l. 3. c* 7. Vide Aug. de Trinit. l 9 c. 10
abides in the Father, though withal notwithstanding those analogies, there
want not many discrepancyes; for whereas the internal word is an accident to the
mind, different from it in essence, and after it in time, so as though the word
could not be without the mind, the mind may be without the word; Christ is the
consubstantial, coeternal Son of the Father, and as there was no time when the
word was without the Father, so neither when the Father without his word.

I cannot let this go without taking notice how graciously God is pleased to
condescend to us in his language, that though we cannot comprehend, we may
apprehend something of those divine mysteries: This age has brought forth a
Generation of Preachers, who wrap up plain notions in cloudy expressions,
(...)* Cyr. These. assert. 19. Bas. Chrysostom. Aug. cum aliis.
but they are very unlike the Spirit of God, who cloatheth sublime verities in
plain similitudes; what mystery in all Divinity more abstruct than that of the
generation of the Son of God? the Prophet Isaiah is at his quis enarrabit, who
shall declare it; for of this many Father^ understand that question, and yet
much of it is manifested to us, by this common metaphor of a word.

2. Secondarily, (...) in regard of the creatures, A^g. quaest* 63.83. Apoc. 3
15. Ioh. 1.1, 2. Aug. de Trn. l. 15. c. 11.
for as the internal word is that according to which a man effects all his
actions, so is this word, principium omnia peragendi, the beginning of the
creation of God, as he calls himself, and by this word it is that all things
were made, as this Apostle says in his Gospe: And as the internal word may
exist in the mind, and yet the external work not presently be; but the work
cannot be unless the word pr^e-exist in the mind: So Christ was from eternity
with God, before the world was made, but the world could not be made without
this word. It is a consideration which should teach us, when we contemplate the
worlds goodly fabric, to reflect on Christ the former of it, even the Creation
(if considered by a knowing Christian) leads not only to God but Christ, nor
can we think seriously upon the making of the world, except we remember how it
was made by a word, which word is Christ.

2. But further, the speech of the lips is that to which most properly this
term word belongs, Vide damasc. de orthod. fide* l. 1. c. 6. and Cyr. Catech. 11
(...) coming from (...) dico to speak, and truly there wants not a fit analogy
in this metaphor; it is true, there are many things wherein this external word
is unlike to Christ, as its extrinsicalness to the person, its temporary
continuance, and the like; but there is one thing wherein it seems aptly to
shadow forth Christ to us, for as a man makes known himself to others by his
word, so is the Father by Christ revealed unto the world; some observing the
various acceptance of this word (...), have taken hold of the signification of
definitio, Filius dicitur verbum quia agnitionem patris facit Iren. l. 4. c.
14. Quia per ipsum innotescit pater Aug. de fid* and symb. c. 3. Heb. 1.3. 2
Cor. 4.4. Slat* in Corinth.
and applied it to this present purpose* for as the definition does explicate
the thing defined, so does Christ make known the Father, but the common
signification of the word, seems sufficiently to illustrate the same truth,
and so accordingly is taken notice of by the Fathers, Irenaeus and Augustine,
who tell us, he is therefore called the Word, because by him the Father is made
known, and through him we come to the saving knowledge of God, in this respect
it is that Christ is called by the Author to the Hebrews, the brightness of his
Fathers glory, and express character of his person; and again, by St. Paul, the
image of God, quia patrem suum nobis conspiciendum praebet, because he
manifests his Father to us.

And yet more particularly, as that which a man makes known of himself by his
word, is his will, intent and purpose, so has the Father by Christ imparted to
the world his eternal purpose and counsel concerning man's salvation. It is
observable, that Christ is called the power of God, and the wisdom of God, 1
Cor. 1.^4. Apoc. 19.13.
and the word of God in Scripture, and all fitly: he is the wisdom of God,
because Gods decrees and counsels, are, as it were, made by him; the power of
God, because they are made good, and accomplished by him, and the word of God,
because they are made known and promulged by him: (...) Epiph (...) 7^
this is Epiphanius his notion of word: he is called (says he) the word,
because he is the interpreter of his Fathers counsels and mind to men, and
that we may expound Scripture by Scripture, me thinks that of the Author to
the Hebrews is a Comment upon this title, when he says, God in these last
days has spoken to us by his Son, who therefore is the word, because God by
him has spoken, and that most clearly to us. It is a distinction not unusual,
nor irrational, which is made between sonus, vox, H^b. 1.^.
and verbum, a sound, a voice, a word, a sound, being any kind of noise, a
voice, an arti^ulate sound, and a word, a significant voice; The application of
it, to this present business, is very fit; the Prophets of the Old Testament,
they were as a sound, John Baptist, Christ's immediate forerunner, Mat. 3.3.
was as a voice: he is called so, the voice of one crying in the wilderness;
but it is Christ, and he only who is the word, distinctly and fully signifying
to us the will of God concerning our salvation.

How great is our happiness (beloved) who live in these last days, and how
great will be our misery if we be deaf to the word, by which in these last
days God speaks to us, and therefore let that Apostolical counsel be
acceptable. See that you refuse not him that speaks, rather let us hearken to
him, learn of him, Heb. 12.25.
and seek from him divine knowledge. The truth is ( brethren) thus the case now
stands. Eternal life (to wit, the only way to it) is to know the only true
God, and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent; no man knows the Son, Ioh. 17.3.
Luc. 10.24.
but the Father, nor the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal
him. This only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, Ioh. 1.8. Mat.
17.5.
he has declared him. Yea, he counsels us to buy of him that eye salve, by
which only we may see; and the voice from heaven charge us with; This is my
welbeloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him; and therefore as Peter
said to Christ, Lord to whom shall we go, Ioh. 6.68.
thou have the words of eternal life? So let us say, Blessed Jesus whither
shall we go, whom should we hear but thee, thou art the word of life?

2. I have done with the metaphorical, a word of the metonymical construction,
and so Christ is called the Word, in as much as he is the subject matter of the
word, and this we shall find true, both in a general and a special
consideration.

1. In general, The whole word either mediately or immediately in a proxim or
remote way points at Christ; to him all the Prophets as well as the Apostles
give witness; the Scriptures are as the field, and Christ is the treasure hid
in this field; they as the ring, and Christ as the diamond of great price,
which gives the luster to it; he is the center in which all the lines in holy
writ do meet; Christus velatus in veteri, revelatus in novo, in isto
praedictus, in illo praedicatus. B^ys. conc. lati. in post.
and this word of life is the very soul and life of the word: oh let us in the
reading of this sacred book break the bone, that we may suck the marrow, crack
the shell, that we may feed on the kernel, open the Cabinet, that we may find
the pearl, search the Scriptures, that we may meet with Christ in them; since
as that devout Ancient said, he found no relish in Tullies Oratorical writings,
because he could not read Jesus there. So the very sweetness and excellency of
the Bible lies in this, that we may read Jesus, as it were in every line of
it. But

2. In special, word is as much as promise, when Synecdochically taken; Act.
1.4 Luke 24.49.
and thus, as the spirit is sometimes called the promise, so Christ is called
the word, quasi eum dicas de quo loc^tus, vel quem pollicitus est dominus; to
wit, he of whom God speaks, or whom he promised should come into the world;
in this respect, those words of St. Paul, fitly explicate the phrase, where he
tells Agrippa, I continue witnessing no other things than those which the
Prophets and Moses did say should come: Christ is therefore the word, Act 26.2^.
because it is he whom they say should come, or to use Zachary his expression,
he is that horn of salvation which God raises up in the house of David, as he
spoke by the mouth of all his holy Prophets which have been since the world
began; Luke 1* 6^, 70.
Moses his great Prophet, Balaams star, Esaiahs tender plant, Jeremies branch,
Zacharies horn, Malachie his Sun, are all of them mystical Prophecies and
promises of the Messiah.

It lets us see at once, both the goodness and faithfulness of God, his
goodness in that before he gave his Son, he gave the promise of him; he was
promissus priusquam missus, first assured verbally, then sent actually; and his
faithfulness, in that as he promised, so he gave him; sicut promissus sic
missus, he was not more mercifully promised, than faithfully sent. It did not
seem good to his wisdom to confer this jewel presently, but in the mean space
that the Church might have somewhat to support her, he vouchsafed the promise
of it: divine promises are as sweet bits to stay our stomachs before the full
meal of his actual performances; the promise of Christ's first coming was that
which comforted the Jews, and the promise of his second coming is that which
now reviveth the Christian Church: and since we have found him making good his
word in the one, we may assure our selves he will fulfill it in the other;
since as he was so good as to give a word, so he will be so good as his word,
and give the thing whatsoever it is that he is pleased to promise; for so it
was in that singular eminent promise of Christ, who is therefore not unfitly
called the word; and so much for that.

2. The other substantive yet remains, to wit, life, which is in the place of
an adjective, and may be rendered as an Epithete, the living word, and look as
Christ, when he is compared to bread, Genitivus loco Epitheti capitur. Calv. in
loc.
to a stone, it is with this addition, the bread of life, a living stone, to
difference him from other stones, from common bread; so he is here called the
word of life, to distinguish him from, and advance him above other words; for
whereas other words though spoken by living persons, yet have no life in
themselves; this word is the living word personally subsisting, or else, as he
is called the bread of life, because he gives and communicates life to them
that feed on him; so here the word of life, because he is the author of life to
them that receive him: but the discussion of this falls more fitly in in the
next part, to which therefore I pass on; namely.

Genesis 2.
The particular exemplification in which Christ is characterized as God-man, as
God, as man; as God-man he is styled the life, and the eternal life; as God, he
is said to be the life which was with the Father* as man, he is the life which
was manifested.

Of each of which with all possible brevity and perspicuity.

Part. 1.
He is called the life, that eternal life. If you ask in what respect this
agrees to him, the answer is already hinted, but shall now be more largely
prosecuted; He is the life, Vera vita per se subsistens and author vitae. Justin.

Persectissime vitae rationem habet and spiritualem coeleste^ aeterna^que vita^
tribuit. Serrar. ibid.


and that eternal, two ways, (...) and (...) formaliter and efficienter in
himself, and in respect of us, as being both vivus and vivificus, living and
giving life.

1. Christ is the life, and that eternal life, because in himself he lives for
ever; this is true of him, primarily as God: this being one of his choice
attributes, that he is the living God, and inasmuch as divine attributes are
better expressed by the abstract, than the concrete, he is fitly said, not
only to be living, but life it self, and this life is most properly said to be
eternal, because it is so, both a part ante and a part post, from everlasting
to everlasting; Secondarily, this is true of him, as Mediator, God-man; since,
though there was a time when thus he began to live, to wit, at his assumption
of our nature, Romans 6.9. Rev. 1.18. Heb. 9.25.
and likewise his life on earth did expire, to wit, at his passion, yet now he
dies no more, death has no more dominion over him, but he is alive for
evermore, and that to make intercession.

2. But that which I conceive most suitable to the Apostles meaning, is that
Christ is said to be the life, because he is the original of life to us, in
this respect the abstract fitly agrees to him, because life is in him as sap
in the root, water in the fountain, to convey it to all that believe on him; in
this sense it is that Christ uses it concerning himself (as appears by his
own Commentary) I am the life, whosoever believes in me, Ioh. 11.25. Col. 3.3.
though he were dead, yet shall he live: hence it is that he is called by the
Apostle Paul expressly our life, nor is he only life, but eternal life, Vitam
largitur dum omnia fovet and conservat. Justin. Ioh. 10.28.
that life which as Mediator he vouchsafes to believers being eternal; indeed
all creatures are beholding to him for their natural life, in him we live,
move, and have our being; but the life which believers have by him, is an
eternal life, according as he says himself, I give to them eternal life. Ioh.
10.28.


This is that life which (as the learned Davenant observes) 1 Christus
promisit, Christ promised to his disciples, Daven. in Coloss. Luc. 12.32.
and in them to all Christians, where he says, it is my Fathers good pleasure
to give you the Kingdom, 2 promeruit, by his own death he purchased for all
believers, in which respect eternal life is said to be the gift of God through
Jesus Christ our Lord: Romans 6.23.
3 praeparavit being now ascended into heaven, he there makes ready for us,
according as he says himself, I go to prepare a place for you; and yet more, 4
inchoat, Ioh. 14.2.
he begins by the work of grace in the hearts of all the faithful, in which
respect he that believes on him, is said to have everlasting life: and
finally, 5 reddet, Ioh. 6.47.
he will at the last day consummate by glory. Indeed, then it is that our
bodies being raised, our persons shall be glorified, and this eternal life
actually conferred, and therefore our blessed Savior joyneth these two
together, in that forementioned place, I am the resurrection and the life: Ioh.
11.25.
thus as the ointment ran down from Aarons head to his beard, and thence to his
skirt; so that eternal life which Christ rising from the grave personally
enjoys, shall be communicated to all his members.

To sum it up, Christ, God-man, Mediator, is the life, that eternal life, in
respect of his threefold offices, of King, Priest, and Prophet: as Prophet, he
is the life by way of Revelation, discovering this eternal life to us; as
Priest, by way of impetration, procuring this eternal life for us; as King, by
way of collation, conferring this eternal life on us: and as the fullness of
water is dispensed by the Sea to the Earth, and the fullness of light is
communicated by the Sun to the Air, and the fullness of Corn was divided by
Joseph among the people; so the fullness of grace and glory of life, even
eternal life is conveyed by Christ to his Church, and therefore very justly
does this character belong to him.

And now what should this consideration teach us, But

1. To bewail our sad condition whilst we are without Christ: for if Christ be
the life all that know him not, or believe not in him, must needs be in a state
of death and damnation.

It is observable, that St. Paul, speaking of the Ephesians whilst in the
state of unregeneracy, Ephesians. 2.1, 2.12.
says, they were dead in sins and trespasses; and a little after, renders this
as the reason, because at that time they were without Christ; indeed as the
body without the soul is corporally, so the soul without Christ is spiritually
dead; and alas, whilst we are in this estate, we are without all hope of life,
being under the sentence, not only of the first, but second death, and
therefore John the Baptist says expressly, Ioh. 3.36.
he that believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him; oh heavy load, and unsupportable weight, which upon whomsoever
it abides, must needs crush him to pieces, and sink him to the depth of Hell:
Oh labor we then both in respect of our selves and others, to be sensible of
our natural estate, and if we mourn over our friends dead bodies, much more
should we mourn over theirs, and our dead souls.

2. To seek after this life, because it is eternal, and to seek it by union
with Christ, who is the life.

Indeed this temporal life may be used, but only that eternal life is to be
sought, the life that now is, is a fleeting shadow, a vanishing vapor, a day,
which though never so pleasant, cannot be long; but the life which is to come,
is a light ever shining, a leaf never fading, and such a day as shall know no
evening: and now tell me which is most rational, to seek after that life which
is lost, almost as soon as it is found, or after that life which being once
found, can never be lost? to catch after that which being got, we cannot hold,
or that which being once got, we cannot lose? and therefore that I may allude
to our blessed Saviors expression; labor not for that which perishes, but
for that life which endures to eternity. Ioh. 6.27.


To this end, let it be our continued care to gain, to assure our interest in,
and union with Christ; the Shunamite went to the Prophet for raising her dead
child: we must to Christ for the quickening our dead souls; it is very
observable what St. Peter says to this purpose: 1 Pet. 2.4, 5.
To whom coming as to a living stone, we also are built up as lively stones: so
that if you know how we become living stones, it is by coming to, and being
built upon Christ as our foundation; the soul cannot enliven the body, till
infused into, and united with it, nor can we receive life from Christ, but by
an interest in him: he that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood (says
Christ himself) has eternal life; there is life, eternal life in the flesh and
blood of Christ, Ioh* 6.54.
but then we must eat and drink it, that so this spiritual food may be
incorporated into us, and we made one with Christ.

3. Lastly, to set an high value upon Christ, and give him the glory of this
great mercy, even eternal life; of all the Titles that do express the personal
excellencies of the Lord Christ, that of the word is most glorious; and of all
those that do express the privileges we have by him, none so comprehensive as
this of eternal life, To you who believe (says the Apostle) concerning this
living stone, 1 Pet. 2.7.
he is precious; and well he may, since he bestows so rare a Jewel, and so
invaluable a pearl as eternal life upon us; indeed all our good and comfort is
wrapped up in Christ; he is the bread to nourish us, the light to guide us, the
life to save us; are then any beginnings of this life wrought in us? any hopes
of it assured to us? let us look upon our selves as vessels filled by this
fountain, stars enlightened by this Sun, carcases enlivened by this spirit,
acknowledging what we have, and hope for to be only and wholly from Christ,
that as we have life from him, he may have thanks from us: Now to him who is
the life, that eternal life, be praise and glory in the Church throughout all
ages, Amen.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN. SERMON. 4.

CHAP. I. Ver. 2. 2. (For the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and
bear witness, and show unto you that eternal life which was with the father,
and was manifested unto us.)


AMong the mystical interpretations of those four living creatures, mentioned
in Ezekiel and the Apocalypse, Ezekiel 1.5. Apoc. 4.6.
that of resembling by them, the four Evangelists, is the most usual among the
Ancients; and St. John is compared to the Eagle by them all, except Iraeneus,
who likeneth him to the Lion. Iren adv. haeres. l. 3. c. 2.
St. Hieroms reason is from the Eagles wing, which soareth highest of any bird:
St. Gregory's from the Eagles eye, which is able to look upon the Sun, and both
very apposite, for so does St. John in his Gospel look upon the Sun of
righteousness, and so are high in contemplation of his Divinity; Dum in ipsa
divinitatis substantia intendit, quasi more Aquilae oculos in solemn fixit.
Greg. in Ezekiel. l. 1. hom. 4. Assumptis pennis Aquilae and ad altiora festinans
de verbo dei disputat. Hier. in Matthew. praefat. Ioh. 1.2. Ps. 36.9 Vide Theod.
ibid.
nor is this less observable in this Epistle than in his Gospel, which both
begins and closes with the Deity of Christ: Indeed we have here in this
beginning, both the Godhead and Manhood of the Messiah, and the union of both
in one person set before us, when he says, That which was from the beginning,
etc.

The second Character here given, and which now follows to be handled, is of
Christ as God, in those words, which was with the Father: It is the same no
doubt in sense, with that in the Gospel, and the word was with God; and to this
purpose Theodoret applies that of the Psalmist, With thee is the fountain of
Life. For the better explanation of it, we must take notice of the Noun* the
Praeposition, and the Ve^^; ^ather, with the Father, was with the Father.

1. By the Father, we are here no doubt to understand the first person in the
sacred Trinity; Indeed it is a word that is taken in Scripture, both (...) and
(...), essentially and personally; essentially it is common to all the persons;
Quando divinitas intra se describitur, nomen patris sumitur (...), Quando autem
fit collatio divinitatis adcreaturas nomen patris sumitur (...) and
complectitur omnes personas. Gerard. l. 6. de. Deo patre. 1 Ioh. 3.1.
personally it is only true of the first: when it is used of God in respect to
the Creatures, it is to be understood essentially, and our Apostle so intends
it, when he says, Behold what manner of love the Father, has showed, that we
should be called the Sons of God; But when of God in order to the persons, it
is to be constru^^ personally, as here; and in the next verse, it is manifestly
so used. And the first person is called the Father, say some, because he is the
original of the Trinity, as connoting the relation he has both to the Son and
the Holy Ghost; but ^hy others, more properly the first person i^ the Father
only in relation to the second, who is his begotten after the most perfect way
of Generation, and so he only a Father in regard of him. But further.

2. The chief thing considerable, is what this means, that Christ the life is
said to be with the Father. The answer to which, I shall lay down both
negatively and affirmatively.

1. Negatively, we must not strain the expression too far, as noting either an
inferiority, or separability between those two persons, of the Father, and the
Word.

1. Not a separability, as if Christ were so with, that he were without the
Father, Vide Fulgent. ad Monim. l. 3. Ioh. 10.14.
as a cloak which a man holds in his hands is with him; but yet without him
in this sense with, is opposed to in: but that in this construction it cannot
be verified of Christ is plain, because he is said not only to be with, but in
the Father.

2. Not an inferiority, as it is sometimes used, when he that is said to be
with, does after a sort depend upon the person with whom he is in a way of
subordination and subjection, in which respect, the Son is said to be with his
Father, the servant with his Master, and the like. As for the eternal Son of
God, St. Paul says, he holds it no robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2.6.
and therefore his being with, cannot infer a disparity; indeed this expression
is true reciprocally, Ioh. 14.11.
the Father with and in the Son, as well as the Son in and with the Father; the
three persons being mutually with each other, and none superior to the other.
But

2. Affirmatively, this exposition notes, Qui ab aeterno latuit absconditus in
sin^ patris. T^^in. in loc. Ve^oum absconditu^ esse insinuat cum subjungit and
verbu^ erat apud Deum. Greg. Mor. l. 5. c. 1^*


1. The secrecy of Christ's subsistence before he came into the world, he was
with the Father, to wit, in his bosom, and so hid from the world, as things in
the bosom are recluse from common view, and the opposition of this with the
Father, to manifesting, gives some ground for this construction.

2. The distinct personality of the Son from the Father; with the Father, that
is, subsisting with the Father, and though not divided, yet distinguished from
him, hence it is that St. Ambrose makes use of this place, to stop the mouth
of Sabellius, who would confound the persons; the same person cannot be said to
be with himself, (...) declarat hypostaceos distinctionem Bez. in loc.
Subsistens apud alia^ subsistente^ Serrar. ibid. Quod erat apud deu^ non
commixtione confunditur, sed manentis verbi apud patrem folida perfectione
distinguitur ut Sabellius annotat. Ambros. de fid. l. 1. c* 5. Qui est apud
alium distinguitur ab illo quia nihil est apud se. Paul. palate. in Ioh. Quod
erat apud deum sempiternae divinitatis in patre and filio inseparabilis u^itas
edocetur ut erubescat. Eudoxi us and Eunomius. Ambros. de fid. l 1 c. 5.
but with another person, and therefore the life which is with the Father, must
be a distinct person from the Father.

3. The essential unity between the Father and the Son. He that is with
another, though he is distinct from, yet he must be near to, or else he could
not be said to be with him; nor are we to imagine this with, when spoken of the
Divine persons, to note a local (as a man who is in the same place, is said to
be with another) but an essential union, whereby though they are personally
distinguished, yet they are essentially united; and in this respect St. Ambrose
makes use of this phrase to confute Eudoxius and Eunomius. This then is the
Catholic faith, the Father and the Son are alius and alius, another and
another person, but not aliud and aliud, another and another thing; and this
Praeposition with, may serve fitly to connote both these.

4. Lastly, the Sons eternity may, be insinuated in this Praeposition, in as
much as with, stands in opposition to before and behind; as the Son could not
be before, so neither is he after the Father, but with him, and therefore as
the Father is eternal, so also is the Son. Indeed in humane generation the Son
is after, but in Divine, the Son is with the Father; nor can any moment be
assigned to the Father, wherein the Son was not. This will yet further appear
by,

3. The Verb which is set down in the Praeterimperfect tense, and that we may
comprize the full of it, take it in a double opposition to the Present, and the
Praeterfect-tense.

1. It is not said which is with the Father, St. John might have said so of him
as man, he being then ascended to heaven, and set down at the right hand of his
Father; but here speaking of him as God, he uses the past-time, he was, that
is, from all eternity with the Father: so that if any shall be so curious as to
ask where this life was before it was manifested? Christ was before incarnate?
the answer is, he was with the Father, by which the heresy of Elion and
Cerinthus falls to the ground, An te omnia Deus erat solus ipse sibi, solus
autem, quia nihil aliud extrinsecus praeter illum, caeterum ne tum quidem
solus* habebat enim secum quam habebat in semetipso rationem suam. Tertul
contr. prox. c. 5. Prove. 8.22, 23. Ioh. 17.4. Si antequam mundus esset gloria^
habuit apud deum and claritate^ tenuit apud patre^ ante mundu^ fuit, nec enim
habuisset gloria^ nisi ipse prius fuisset qui gloria^ posset tenere. Tertul. de
Trinit. lib. cap. 24. Erat, significat aliquid fuisse, and non esse adhuc
determinatu^, nec desinisse sed adhuc manner. Aquin. in Ioh. Evang.
who deny him any being before he was born of his mother: upon this account it
is, that Tertullian says excellently, The father was alone before he made the
world, and yet he was not alone because the eternal life was with him; and in
this respect wisdom says, the Lord (not created according to the unhappy
mistake of the Greek, but) possessed me (according to the true meaning of the
Hebrew) to wit, as a Father is said to possess his son, and this in the
beginning of his way before his works of old, to wit (as it follows in the
next verse) from everlasting; suitably hereunto, Christ mentions a glory which
he had with the Father, before the world was; from whence, an Ancient strongly
argues, that he was with the Father from all eternity, since he could not have
had that glory if himself had not been. Besides, when we find these two words,
eternal, and was here put together, we have reason to conceive that eternity is
to be taken in its most proper notion, as it excludes not only ending, but
beginning; acco^ding to which, it were a contradiction in terminis, to say this
eternal life was not with the Father from everlasting.

2. It is not said which has been, but which was, to note that his subsistence
with the Father is not now at an end, but this eternal life still remains
with the Father; for that Aquinas makes the notion of this word was, importing
a thing so to have been, as that it does not cease to be; and therefore when
Christ is said to come forth from the Father, it must not be taken in a rigid
sense, and is best explained by this phrase of manifesting, his making himself
known to the world in our nature, being all that is meant by his coming forth
from the Father; for the truth is, he so was, as that he still is, and for ever
shall be with the Father; and in this respect it is not unworthy our
observation, that the Apostle does not say, which was with the Father, and is
now separated from him, but only is now manifested to us, to wit, so as that
this life still is with him, and that to eternity.

To end this, let the meditation hereof,

1. Comfort us, in as much as it assures us that Christ is very fit for the
work he undertaketh, and therefore will accomplish it: The great design of the
Messiah is to reconcile us to the Father, and who fitter to do this than he
that was with the Father? Indeed he that is here said to be with, is elsewhere
said to be in the bosom of the Father; and who more fit to make our peace than
he, Ioh. ^.1^.
who lies in the Fathers bosom? upon which ground, is that expression of St.
Paul, He has made us accepted in his beloved; Ephesians. 1.5.
Christ and the Father are one by nature. Let us not doubt but he has
prevailed to make us one with God by Grace now, and by glory hereafter.

2. Encourage us against that contempt and scorn which is cast upon Christian
Religion, Facit haec ad demonstrandam fidei nostrae dignitate^. Gualt. in
Epist. Ier. 17.5.
as if we did place our trust in a mere man; and therefore the Jews upbraid us
with that curse in the Prophecy of Jeremy, Cursed be the man that trusts in
man, and makes flesh his Arm; but he is not a mere man whom we trust in, and
therefore that curse does not belong to us, for as he became man of his mother
in the fullness of time, so he was God with his Father, before all time.

3. Exhort us to adore this eternal life which is with the Father, with the
same reverence and worship we give to the Father; we need not fear idolatry,
when as it is expressly said, Io^. 5.23. Ambros. de fid. l. 1. c. 5.
that all men should honor the Son, as they honor the Father: let then St.
Ambrose, his pithy counsel take place in spite of blasphemous Heretics,
Iungat honorificientia patri filium quem junxit divinitas, as the Father and
the Son are joined together in unity of essence, so let us join them together
in unity of worship, saying in words, not much unlike those of the Elders:
worthy art thou (oh Jesus) to receive glory, and honor, and power, for thou
art that eternal life which was with the Father. Rev. 4.1^.


3. The last character remains which belongs to Christ as man, set forth in
the word manifested, which as being of singular concernment, is twice repeated,
to wit, both in the beginning and the end of the second verse; for the better
explication whereof, these three things are briefly to be considered:

What this manifestation imports.

Who it is that was thus manifested.

Why the thing here intended, Intelligens illa^ exhibitione^ promissi Messiae
per incarnationem facta^. Illyr. in loc.
is called a manifestation.

1. As to the first of these quaeries, it is generally answered; that by this
manifestation, we are to understand the incarnation of the Son of God: nor is
it without sufficient reason, since

1. This phrase is manifestly used elsewhere in this sense, so by St. Paul,
with that explicatory additament, Per incaernatione^ se^ mundo manifestavit.
Tirin. ib. 2 Timothy 3.16.1.10. 1 Ioh. 5.5, 8.
when he says, God was manifested in the flesh; nay without any addition when
he speaks of the appearing of Jesus Christ, and which yet more confirms it by
our Apostle himself in this Epistle, and that twice in one Chapter, he was
manifested, and the Son of God was manifested, that is (as all agree)
incarnated. But

2. Besides these parallel Scriptures, there is a convincing Argument in the
Text it self, to which end, you may be ple^sed to observe, that this
parenthesis is interserted by the Apostle, on purpose to prevent an objection
that might be made against, and so add a confirmation to what is asserted in
the precedent verse; whereas St. John there says, he and the rest heard, saw
and handled the word of life: it might be asked, How could this be? Tacitae
objectioni occurrit, etc. Illyr. in loc.
this living word being spiritual and immaterial, to which he implicitly
answers by adding, and the life was manifested, to wit, in the flesh, in
which respect, the* and after the Hebrew phrase, Manifestata est ipsae vitae in
carne etc. Aug. ibid.
may well be construed for; this being a strong reason to prove that this word
of life might be seen by them, since he was manifested to them; yea, which
gives much light, and adds much strength to the verity of this Exposition,
the Apostle immediately knitteth these two together, manifesting and seeing:
the life was manifested, and we have seen it, whereby it appears that the
manifestation spoken of is such as was visible, Particula (...) pro (...) juxta
Hebraicam phrasin accipitur. Zanch. ib.
and therefore must be corporeal, since only that which is corporeal is
visible.

2. That the manifestation is the incarnation is clear, but it would be further
inquired, who it is that was thus manifested? the answer to which appears by
those two Characters, the word of life, and the life which was with the Father:
it was not then the Father himself, but the word with the Father, the second
person in the sacred Trinity that was incarnated. True it is, the divine
essence was incarnate, and therefore St. Paul says, God manifested, Vide
damase. de orthod. fid. l. 3 c. 6. Chap. 3^ 8. Licet tota Trinitas in hujus
formae assumptionem, operata sit tamen, neque sp. sanctus sed solus filius eam
sibi junxit Tho. Aquin. pars. tertia q. 3 art. 1. Vide Lomb. sent. 3. did. 1.
li^^. 8. Aug. in. l. de dogm. Eccles. c. 2.
because the whole divine nature is in every person, but yet only as in one of
the persons, and therefore our Apostle says, as here, the word, so elsewhere
the Son of God was manifested. It is true, that as all external works, so this
of the incarnation belongs to the whole Trinity; but yet the termination of
this work was only in the Son, as three persons may make a garment, and only
one wears it, or three persons conclude a match, and only* one of them, the
Person married.

If it shall be further inquired, why the word, the second person was
manifested? diverse reasons are given in answer by the Ancients 1 By the word
all things, were at first made, fit it is that the new, as well as the old
creation, should be his work. 2 This word is the image of the Father, and
therefore most fit to restore the image of God in man. 3 The third is the
middle person in the Trinity, and therefore most fit to be Mediator between God
and man. 4 He is the word to reveal his Fathers will to the world, Athanas de
Incarnat* Verbi.
and therefore he fittest to be manifested in the flesh for this end. 5 He
only the Son, and therefore most suitable for him to become the Son of man,
that he might make us the Sons of God. 6 In a word, had either the Father, or
the Holy Ghost been incarnate, there must have been two sons in the Trinity,
which were incongruous. 7 But when all is said, that which we must acquiesce
in, is the good pleasure of the blessed Trinity, by whose mutual consent, the
second person, the Son of God, the word of life was made flesh, and so
manifested.

3. The last quaere comes now to be unfolded: Why the thing here intended is
called a manifestation? whereby we shall see the aptitude of this phrase, and
to this end I shall answer it, both by way of remotion, and of position.

1. We must not by any means construe this phrase in favor of those who deny
Christ to have a real body, as if Christ's coming into the world were only a
phantasme or apparition, a manifestation in, Vide Athanas. de salutari.
adventu. Christ.
but no real assumption of the flesh. In opposition to this heresy, Athanasius
says solidly, That as in the manifestation of this word, there was no
transmutation of the Godhead into flesh, so neither a fantastical
representation, but a true assumption of flesh. It is true, the Holy Ghost
only appeared in the shape of a Dove, but he came not to redeem doves: Christ
came to redeem man, and therefore would be truly man.

2. But if you will know the true reason of this expression, it is because the
Deity in our flesh, has most clearly manifested it self to men. Vide Dyonis.
ep. 3. ad Cajum. Naz. orat. 38.
The Fathers phrase (...), is not much unlike those Scripture expressions,
(...) and (...); and Gregory Nazianzen enquiring why Christ's Nativity is called
by this name, gives this pregnant reason, (...) (...), because God made
himself in a special manner manifest to the world, by coming into it.

The truth is, never did God so familiarly reveal himself, as when he took our
nature. Indeed, there is a manifestation of God in the works of his Creation,
the invisible things of his power and Godhead are seen in this visible
fabric; Romans 1.20.
but this is only of his attributes, as a picture discovers the art, Non
pater in rubo, non pater in eremo, sed filius Moysi loc^tus est. Ambr. de fid.
l. 1. c. 5. Hilar. de T^in. l. 4.
but not the Person of the Painter. There was indeed some manifestation of God
to the Patriarchs of old and (as is probably conceived) it was the Son of God
which did appear unto them, yea, and that in an humane shape; for one of those
three men that came to Abraham, is not irrationally thought to be the second
person in the Trinity; but still those apparitions were but at sometimes, and
to some few persons, and indeed were but as Irenaeus calls them, praeludia
verae incarnationis, Iren l. 4. c. 37.
forerunners of his incarnation, and as it were, the dawning of the day,
wherein the Sun of righteousness did arise. Indeed, so clearly did the Deity
manifest it self in Christ incarnate, that when Philip desires him to show him
the Father, Ioh. 14.9.
Christ tells him, he that has seen me, ha^h seen the Father. Thus as the
candle gives its light through the lanthorn, and the face is seen through the
vail, so did the Godhead manifest it self through our flesh.

But perhaps you will say, how can this be, that the Deity should be manifested
in flesh? whatsoever is a medium of discovering any thing, must be somewhat
proportionable to that it discovers: Now Flesh and God are at a distance, nor
is there any proportion between them; 2 Timothy 3.16.
but beloved, St. Paul speaking of this, calls it a great mystery, and
therefore if we cannot see how it should be, let that content us. Besides, it
cannot be denied, but that the assumption of our flesh, was in respect of the
Deity, not a manifestation, but an obscuration, and therefore it is said of him
by St. Paul, he emptyed himself, he humbled himself, when he took on him our
nature; but yet still in respect of us, Phil. 2.5, 6.
it was a manifestation.

To clear this briefly, and yet fully, you must know, That objects of excelling
brightness are best manifested through allaying mediums: thus the Sun being in
it self so transcendently lightsome, cannot be looked on by us as it shines in
its own luster, but best conveyeth its light to us through the clouds; and
hence it is, that whilst the clouds obscure, they make the sun beams to us
more obvious; the same is the case in this present matter, Gods face in it
self, is so bright, that we cannot see it, and live, which made the Israel^tes
desire that God would no more speak to them by himself, but by Moses: whereas,
Exodus 20.19.
in the face of Jesus Christ through the cloud as it were, of our humanity, God
is become familiar with men, and we partake of the light of the knowledge of
the glory of God, as St. Paul speaks.

1. To apply this, 2 Cor. 4.8.
here is matter of

1. Exultation, and that upon several grounds.

1. Because it is spoken of, as a thing already accomplished; it is not the
life may be, or shall be, but was manifested: Coelesti lumine perfusi Christu^
venturum expectabant, and videre exoptabant, quem illi futurum praestolantur,
apostuli praesentem conspexerunt Iren. l. 4. c. 24.
this manifestation was that which the Saints of the Old Testament waited for,
and rejoiced in the very expectance; for so it is said by Christ concerning
Abraham, He saw my day, and rejoiced, much more cause have we to rejoice in the
real performance.

2. When we look upon the impulsive cause of this manifestation, which was no
other than free love and mercy. Revelatio deitatis, revelatio charitatis, in
the appearing of our Savior Christ, there was an appearing of the Grace of
God, in the manifestation of this eternal life, was a manifestation of immense
love to the sons of men, and therefore says Athanasius, Athanas. de Incarnat.
our Savior gave a great experiment of his singular affection, in that (...),
being in himself invisible, he was pleased to manifest himself as the eternal
word to us.

3. And yet lastly, considering this manifestation in the effect, whereby it
appears, that as he was manifested to us, so likewise for us, even our
Redemption. The Pagans, when any great works are done beyond the common course
of nature, ascribe it to the apparition of some deity; the Son of God appears
to do a great work, such as not all the creatures in heaven or earth could
possibly have effected, this life was manifested, yea, and he was manifested,
that we might have life through him: Why art thou strange poor trembling soul,
and stand afar off from him, who draws so nigh to thee? the blessed God
was willing to manifest the riches of his love, and that all terror might be
prevented, he appears as a man; God is come down, and that not in a flaming
fire, roaring thunder, warlike armor, but clothed with the garment of flesh;
thus whilst he vaileth his greatness, he unvaileth his goodness, and therefore
say not, Who shall go up to heaven to bring down this life to us? or down into
the deep, to fetch it thence? it is nigh us, Romans 10.6.
even manifesting it self in, yea, conveying it self to us by our flesh.

2. Excitation, to endeavor, that as this life was manifested to, and for, so
it may be in us. Those words in the Canticles, Cant. 8.6.
Set me as a seal upon thy heart, and a signet upon thy arm, are by the
Ancients understood, as the words of Christ to his Spouse, thereby stirring her
up to pious affections, and religious actions, in quibus figura Dei Christus
luceat, Ambr. de Virg. l. 1.
by which Christ may shine forth, and it may appear that this life lives in
her. That expression of St. Paul, holding forth the word of life, is by some
referred to Christ, Phil. 2.16. Zanch.
whom we must hold forth to the world by pious and exemplary conversations,
that so as he was pleased to manifest himself in our nature, we may manifest
him in our lives.

I end this first general, which is the Messiahs character, who is the object
of the Gospel.

He is the lord, let us give ^are to him.

He is the life, let us seek it from him.

He is the eternal life with the Father, let us adore him.

He was in due time manifested, let us acknowledge him.

And to this word of life, who being from eternity with the Father, was thus
pleased to manifest himself; let us give in heart, in word, in life, faith and
affection, praise and thanksgiving, obedience and subjection to all eternity,
Amen.

SERMON. 5.
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN.
CHAP. I. Ver. 1. That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which
we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled of the word of life.


SUch is the transcendent worth of Christ, the word, that no words can declare
it, of the word of life, that no tongue can set it forth to the life, of the
life manifested, that no expressions can manifest it; and yet even in these
very characters, much of the excellency of Christ is delineated before us, so
that what the Psalmist said of Jerusalem, Glorious things are spoken of thee,
Ps. 87.3.
oh thou City of God, I may say of Christ as he is here represented, Glorious
things are spoken of thee, oh thou Son of God; nor is there less verity than
dignity in these sayings, that as the one cannot but attract our love, so the
other may engage our faith; this holy Apostle, and the rest had good ground
for, clear evidence, convincing proof of what they uttered; for it was no more
than what sensible experience did assure them of, That which we have heard, etc.

It is that part of the Text I am now to handle, Part. 2.
the commendation of the Gospel from certain tradition, as being that which the
Apostles had heard, and had seen with their eyes, and their hands had handled
of the word of life. Out of the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every
word be established; so runs St. Paul's maxim, lo here no less than three
witnesses, to wit, three senses, hearing, 2 Cor. 13.1.
seeing, handling, produced by St. John, to assert the truth of what he
writes: Auribus audiere, oculis videre salutem, tractavere manu corpus de
morte receptum. Tertul contr. Marc. l. c. 7. Prius audierint, quia Dominus
resurrexit, postea vero oculis in spexerunt, and contractarunt pedes and manus
and latus ejus. Didym. Ioh. ^0.27. Luc. 24 39. ^er. in loc.
some Expositors restrain it particularly to the resurrection, of which the
Apostles first heard by Mary Magdalen, afterward they saw him themselves, and
one of them handled him, putting his hand into his side, yea Christ bids them
all to see and handle him; indeed the special work of the Apostles, was to be
witnesses of the resurrection, and therefore it is not improbable that St. John
might have a singular eye to it, but yet we shall do best to take Scripture in
the fullest latitude, and so refer this, ad totam verbi incarnati oeconomiam,
to the whole economy of the word incarnate; thus according to the several
ways whereby Christ was pleased to manifest himself to them, he was heard,
seen, and handled by them: he manifested himself in flesh, and so was handled;
in his miracles, and so was seen; in his words, and so was heard.

That we may the better understand, both the intent, and extent of these
phrases, let us consider them severally.

1. That which we have heard of the word of life; it is a clause which admits
of several references. To Moses and the Prophets, that which we have heard out
of their writings concerning the Messiah, (...). Oecumen. Hug.
for it is mentioned of both, that they were read in the Jewish synagogues
every Sabbath Day, whither the Apostles often repaired.

2. To the Scribes and Pharisees, that which we have heard from their mouths in
their expositions upon Moses and the Prophets, the Pharisees themselves
preached those things concerning the Messiah that were fulfilled in him, and so
against their wills gave testimony to him whom they rejected.

3. To John the Baptist, that which we heard from him, who was Christ's
harbenger to go before him, Lyr.
and pointed at him with an ecce, Behold the Lamb of God.

4. To the voice from heaven, that which we heard when we were with him in the
holy mount. 2 Pet. 1.17, 18.
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, the Father himself by this
extraordinary way testifying of him.

5. Or lastly, (and as I conceive most suitably to the Apostles meaning) to
Christ himself, that which we heard from his own mouth, for so it seems to be
expounded at the fifth verse, the message that we heard of him, not from others
at second hand, V. 5. Mat. 5.1. (...) Hoc in loco non significat, ex aliorum
narratione aliquid accipere, sed suis auribus aliquid audire Bez. in loc.
Audivimus non ab aliis sed ipsomet filio Dei, ^ustin. ibid Aug de sermon. Dom. in
Mat.
but immediately from his own lips; we read in the Gospel, that he opened his
mouth and spoke, and as generally to the multitude, so more especially to his
disciples, unfolding to them the mysteries of the Kingdom, aperuit os suum qui
prius aperuit or a prophetarum, he that opened the mouths of the Prophets, at
last opens his own mouth, and oracula quasi auracula, those sacred oracles,
which like honey dropped from his lips, were distilled into their ears, who
continually sat at his feet to receive instruction from him; nor was it a
naked hearing which the Apostle here intends, but an hearing so, as to
understand and believe; for it is such an hearing as put them upon declaring,
which could not have been, unless they had understood, nor would have been,
except they had believed themselves; this is that which perhaps the iteration
of it at the third verse may insinuate, they heard, and heard, to wit, with the
ear, and with the heart, and that is the right hearing, when there is internus
fidei assensus, as well as externus auris auditus, Vide Lor. Did. in loc.
an inward assent accompanying our outward attention; that which Christ spoke
to his disciples, he many times spoke to many others; but as when the
instrument sounds, a multitude hear it, yet only the musical ear understands
and takes delight in it; so only the Apostles heard with a divine religious
ear, by which means it affected their hearts, and inclined them to declare and
write that they had heard.

2. That which we have seen with our eyes, that which we have looked upon; The
next sense, which is brought in as a witness, is their sight, and it is set
forth with abundance of emphasis, to unfold which, observe the extensiveness of
the object, and intensiveness of the act.

1. This that, the object is of a large extent, and may be taken in reference
to both his natures, to wit, humane and divine.

1. The Apostles saw his humanity, beheld him a man, altogether like to
themselves, sin only excepted, they saw him eating, drinking, walking, and
thereby expressing the actions of an humane body; yea, they saw him in
weariness, hunger, thirst, and so subject to the defects of our frail nature.

2. They saw his divinity, to wit, in the effects of it, those powerful
miracles which were wrought by him; such works may well challenge our aspect.
They saw him cleansing the Lepers, curing the sick, Vide Lorin: Lyrar: in loc.
opening the eyes of the blind, the ears of the deaf, nay, raising the dead;
and this, Interpreters conceive St. John especially to aim at, expounding him
by himself in the Gospel, where he says, we saw his glory as the glory of the
only begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth; yea, Ioh* 11 14:
besides those miracles which he wrought among men whilst on earth, they saw
his glorious transfiguration on the mount, his raising himself from the grave,
and his wonderful ascending into heaven, when from mount Olivet a cloud
received him out of their sight; all this, and what ever else conduced to
declaring either his manhood, or his Godhead may be very well comprehended in
the (...), that which we have seen.

2. The act is set forth with a great deal of advantage, to express the
intensiveness of it. For

1. It is not barely that which we have seen, but that which we have seen with
our eyes, an addition which may seem a (...) (since if we do see, Lorni. ibid.
Chrysostom. in Ps. 441. Efficax locutio non enim satis fuit, dicere vidimus sed
addit oculis nostris. Grot* ibid.
it must be with our eyes) but is indeed an (...), since as Chrysostom well
observes concerning the like phrase of hearing with our ears, it is (...),
the usual custom of men, when they assert any thing, whereof they are fully
assured, and that to those, who by reason of the strangeness of it, may seem to
doubt, to say, I heard it with these ears, I saw it with these eyes, and these
hands handled it.

2. It is not once, but twice, nay, thrice expressed, as if there lay a great
deal of weight in the evidence of this sense, as indeed there does; and
therefore that we may be assured they did see what they declared, it is not
only mentioned so emphatically in the first verse, we have seen with our eyes;
but again in the second, the life was manifested, and we have seen it; and yet
again, ut dilucidior fieret sententia and cer^ior veritas, that the sentence
which was obscured by the parenthesis, Zanch. in loc.
might be made more plain by an Epanalepsis, and withal, that the truth of
what is asserted, might appear more certain, it is repeated at the third verse,
that which we have seen and heard.

(...) spec tare plus quam (...) videre Zanc.
3. To express it yet more fully, here is another word added more significant
than the former, which we have looked upon; it is the same with that which is
used in the Gospel, we saw his glory, and there are several things which it
does superadde* Ioh. 1.14.


1. That they saw not only with bodily, but with mental eyes, they saw cu^m
dijudicatione considering and judging what they saw, and which upon mature
judgment was found to be as it appeared; Didym. in loc. Multa videmus oculis
quae revocata ad judicium animi secus essent. Aret ibid. Sollicitam and sagacem
inspectionem indicat. Justinian. ib.
for so Didimus refers, seeing to the body, and looking on to the mind:
Indeed this was it which differenced the Apostles from the rest of the
beholders. Christ had many spectators of his person and works, but the great
part only saw them with their eyes, but did not look upon them with their
Judgments, so as to ponder and consider aright of them, and therefore were not
converted by them; whereas the holy Apostles so saw, that they looked on with
serious and deliberate inspection.

2. That what they saw, was not done privately in a corner, but to the open
view, the word here used is the root of (...), which signifies a stage, or
theater, and that you know is an open place, Act. 10.14.
nothing more public than that which is acted upon a stage. Thus it is said of
him after his resurrection, that God showed him openly, though not so openly as
before, when he went about in several places, doing good, and working miracles,
in the sight not* only of his Apostles, but the people.

3. That what they saw, was not a transient, but a continued sight; it was not
one, but many miracles they beheld, not once, but often that they saw him; and
therefore it was not probable they should be deceived: St. Luke says, Christ
was seen of his Apostles after the resurrection for 40. days, and before, Act.
1.3. Grot. in loc.
for many years together; to this purpose is Grotius, his gloss upon the Text,
diu multumque we frequently, constantly beheld the great things that were done
by him.

4. Lastly, that they so saw as to believe, and believing to rejoice, and
rejoicing, to admire at those things* which they beheld. To this purpose is
that of the Greek Scholiast, (...). Oecumen.
beholding with our eyes, we wondered at that we saw; for that the Greek word is
used sometimes to signify, to see a thing with admiration and amazement; indeed
(...) quasi (...), miracula spectacula; miracles are such sights as may well
raise our admiration, at the beholding of them. Ipsa gradatio crescentium
verborum valde facit ad certitudinem. Illyr.
No wanden that Christ's wonders were seen with wonder. Besides.

3. And our hands have handled; The last of the senses, but not the least, nay,
greatest in point of evidence, is that of handling. Nor is it unworthy our
observation, how fit a gradation is here made; Pluris est unus oculatus testis,
quam auriti de cem. Plaut. Trucul Ipse and auditus and visus and ne phantasma
crederetur, tractatus. Tert. adv. prax. c. 15. Vide Aristot. de An. l. 2. text
94. Eos pie ad robur fidei invitabat ad tactu^ Sim. de Cass. l. 14. Luc. 24.39.
Tertium sensum adjicit tactum nam is quoque intervenit tum alibi tum in panibus
multiplicatis and Lazaro. Grot. ibid.
the Apostle proceeding still higher and higher, he begins with hearing, as
being that sense which is most capable of deception, from thence he rises to
that of seeing, which is more certain; one eyewitness being of more value than
ten ear-witnesses: and yet because seeing might pretend ludibria oculorum, the
eye might be subject to delusion, he adds another sense, which as it is
crassior, so it is certior, more gross, so it is most sure; asserting, that
what he declared with his mouth, was that which not only his ear and eyes,
but his hands gave testimony to. That one of the Apostles, namely, Thomas, did
handle him with his hands, is expressed; and where it is said of this Apostle,
that he leaned in his bosom, it implies that he handled him; nay, in as much
as we find that the other Apostles did eat, drink, converse with him, nay,
that he says to them, handle and see; it is not improbably conceived, that
they might all handle him, so much the rather considering that it is here
affirmed by St. John, not only of himself, but others; our hands have handled:
nor does this handling only refer to his person, but his miracles, the fishes
and loaves which he gave them to feed so many thousands with, the dead bodies
which he raised to life, whereby the reality and verity of his miracles did the
more clearly appear to them.

There are only two questions would be discussed ere we apply this truth.

1. How all this can be verified in reference to the word of life, which was
with the Father? Can a spiritual substance be handled, an immateriall be
visible, an incorporeal be heard, and such is the word of life, Verbum caro
factum sic sermonem vitae videre possint. Aug. in ep. Verbum Dei quod per se
invisibile, vident Apostoli, tracta^t etc. Hier. in Amos. Filius Dei in sua
natura invisibilis in nostra natura visibilis factus est etc. Cypr. de bapt.
Vide Zanch. Justin. Bez. in loc. Necessarium fuit ut Apostoli eo tactu, visu,
crederent quippe qui ad posteritatem certitudinem suae fidei erant transmissuri
Paul. pal. in Ioh. Cum displiceret ipsum Testimonium passi sunt omnia quae pas
si martyrs etc. Aug. in ep:
and yet thus it is here asserted; we have heard, we have seen with our eyes,
and our hands have handled of the word of life.

To which the answer is easily returned, that this person* the word of life,
was made flesh, or as it is in the next verse, was manifested, to wit, in
humane nature, and so though in himself he were invisible, yet in flesh he was
visible and palpable. This is that which perhaps may be insinuated in the
Praeposition (...) here inserted; it is not said the, but of, or concerning the
word of life, because it was not the very word it self, but that nature which
the word assumeth to it self; though withal, in as much as that nature was
assumed into unity of person with the word, it was the word it self they saw
and handled; and so (...) is only an Hebraism, and equivalent to (...), as
(...) in the Acts answers to (...), and so the Syriack reads it the word of
life.

2. What might be the reason why the Apostles had such sensible confirmation of
what they did declare?

The answer to which is because,

1. The holy Apostles were to be the first publishers of the doctrine,
concerning Christ come in the flesh: 2 the doctrins they were to publish, were
such as were very incredible to human reason, and therefore presently found
great opposition; nay yet further, 3 these Apostles were not only to be the
first declarers, but by reason of persecution, were to be in some kind or other
sufferers for the truth of that which they did declare: now upon these
considerations it was most requisite these planters of Christianity should be
bold and resolute in declaring and defending what they declared: Rationally
much less religiously bold they could not be, unless strongly and undoubtedly
confirmed in, and assured of the truth of those things they did declare, Quod
videt aliquis potest nuntiare alteri etc. Didym. ib. Act. 4.20.1.3. Vide
Quintil. l. 5. c. 9. (...) graeci indubitata and necessaria signa vocant. Bez.
and this confirmation they could not have by a better way than sensible
demonstration. Hence it is that the Apostles give this as the reason of their
resolvedness, we cannot but speak the things we see and hear; and St. Luke
calls those proofs which the Apostles had of Christ's resurrection, by seeing
and coversing with him, (...) which our translation not unfitly rendereth
infallible proofs, by which therefore they were no doubt strengthened in their
faith, and animated with courage.

To apply this to our selves in several particulars.

1. Here is matter of confutation, and that both direct and collateral.

1. This directly confuteth a double heresy.

Aug. de haeres.
1. That of the Marcionites, and Manichees (whereof St. Austin says Cerdo was
the author) who assert all things Christ did, were (...), only in appearance,
denying that he was truly man. But surely when we read that he was not only
heard, but seen and handled; we must needs acknowledge him real man; an
apparition may indeed deceive the sight, but it cannot the feeling; Christ was
not only seen, but felt: hence it is that this is his own argument to his
disciples, when they doubted whether he were not a spirit; handle me, see me,
for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see me to have. Luc. 24.39.


(...) etc. Oecumen.
2. That of the Nestorians, who assert two persons, the one the Son of God, the
other the Son of Mary; but were it so, St. John's words could not be verified,
they saw and handled the word of life, for it was only the manhood they saw
and handled; and if the man Christ were a distinct person from the word of
life, they could not be said to handle the one, when they handled the other;
(...) Naz. orat. 38.
and therefore we do from these, and such other like places, strongly assert a
unity of the two natures in one person, it being one and the same person, who
as God was invisible, and as man visible, as God, was from the beginning, as
man, had a beginning, as God, was immateriall, and as man palpable.

2. This collaterally confutes that error of the Papists, who assert the flesh
and blood of Christ to be corporally present in the holy Sacrament, so as that
the bread and wine are by a miraculous work transubstantiated into it; indeed
from this very clause a strong argument may be drawn, and that two ways.

1. To prove that Christ's flesh and blood is not there corporally present,
because then it must be visible; it is an undoubted maxim in Philosophy, omne
corporeum est quantum, quantity is inseparable from corporiety, and being so,
it cannot but be visible and palpable; nay, (...)* Plat. in Trin.
since it implies a contradiction for a thing to be a body, and not to be
visible, because it is as much as to be, and not to be a body, it is that which
Omnipotency it self cannot do, and therefore in vain is a miracle pretended.

2. To prove that the bread and wine in the holy Sacrament, are not
transubstantiated, but remain bread wine still, because it is a clear axiom,
bodies are such in their own nature, as they present themselves to the sense,
when it is every way disposed and fitted for the object: now that which at the
holy table offers it self to the view, and taste, and touch of the most
rectifyed organ, is not flesh and blood, but bread and wine; and therefore if
St. John's proof here be valid, that which he declared was true, because he saw
and handled it, we may with the same validity, prove it is bread and wine in
the sacrament, because by seeing and handling we find it to be such.

2. Here is matter of Conviction, to persuade us of the verity of the
Apostolical writings; It is true, the chief reason why we are to receive their
writings, is because they were moved, and extraordinarily assisted in the
penning of them, by the holy Ghost; but yet withal, this may be a secondary
reason of our assent to what they testified and wrote, because it was no other
than that which they had heard, nay seen, nay, handled; we all think it just
and reasonable to believe a man when he speaks not by hearsay, but personal
experience: and why then, is it not reason that we should believe the Apostles,
who declare nothing but what they heard, saw, and handled? This was so rational
an argument in St. John's account, that speaking concerning Christ's being thrust
through with a spear, he thus argues: He that saw it bare record, and his
record is true; therefore true, because of that which he saw: Ioh. 19.35.
and hence it is, that John the Baptist, complaining of the Jews infidelity, in
rejecting Christ, uses this aggravation; what he has seen and heard, 3.32.11.
that he testifies, and no man receives his Testimony; and in the same
Chapter, Christ himself takes up the same complaint to Nicodemus, verily,
verily, I say unto thee, we speak that we do know, and testify that we have
seen, and you receive not our witness.

To drive this nail to the head, there are but three things that can possibly
be objected against this reason, which being cleared, I conceive it will remain
unanswerable, and such as may convince a Jew, a Pagan, if they were not
wilfully blind.

That they say they heard, saw, and handled, what they never did, and so were
no better than deceivers.

That they did only think they saw such things, but in truth did not, and so
were themselves deceived.

That that which they did hear, see, handle, will not amount to a proof of what
they declared, namely, that Jesus was the Christ. To all which, I doubt not but
to return a full answer.

1. As to the first, such an accusation cannot aequitably be charged on any,
except they either were men of loose and flagitious lives, and so not likely to
make any conscience of a lie, or else that there were some great advantage,
apparently accruing by such a lie, which perhaps might have an influence, not
only on a loose, but a civil person; now neither of these can in this case be
alleged. For

1. The Apostles were men of holy and exemplary lives, Phil. 2.15.
men that did shine as lights in the world by their good conversation, men whom
those grand Apostates, and enemies of Christianity could charge with nothing
but simplicity, and therefore no reason to suspect that they should tell such a
gross lie, as to say, they heard, or saw, or handled, what they never did.

2. It is sufficiently manifest, that they were not allured to bear this
Testimony by any gain, either of honor, or profit, or pleasure; nay, in stead
of gain, there was nothing but loss, they were hated of all men, Vide Grot. de
verit. Christ. Relig. l. 2.
for Christ's names sakes; they forsook father, mother, friends; they were
exposed to hunger, thirst, cold, nakedness, tortures, and most of them to death
it self, nemo gratis malus est; no man will be wicked for nothing, nay, invent
and maintain, and stand in a lie, when no benefit, but a great injury redounds
to him by it; and therefore we may justly conceive that it was nothing but the
force of truth that prevailed upon them, and the Spirit of God burning as a
fire in their bosoms, which could not be concealed.

2. As to the second, These three things are very considerable.

1. That where the object is sensible, if there be a fit organ, an apt medium,
and a convenient distance, the sense is not, cannot be deceived, nor is there
any demonstration more certain: now these things, of which the Apostles bear
witness, were things placed within the compass of sense, as being concerning a
man, his birth, death, resurrection, and the like, all which are sensible
objects; and they who tell us they saw these things, were the companions of
this man, always near to, conversing with him; nor did ever any deny them to
be men of perfect senses; and therefore there is no reason to suspect a deceit.

2. That it was not one or two, or a few, but many, who had this sensible
experience; there were twelve who did continually attend upon Christ; 1 Cor. 15
6.
and after his resurrection, he was seen of above five hundred. Though one man's
sense might be bad, or fallible, yet it is not imaginable that so many were
deceived, especially considering that all they who testify to us what they
saw, agree for substance in one and the same testimony, not varying from, not
jarring against one another.

3. And yet once more, it is plurium sensuum experimentum, Falsa utique
testatio si oculorum and aurium and manuum sensus natura mentitur. Tertul. de
Anim. c. 17.
they had the proof of many senses, and if one, yet it is not likely that all
should be deceived; if the ear, yet sure not the eye; if the ear and eye, yet
not the hand; if any, yet not all of these; and therefore it is very
improbable, nay, impossible, they should be deceived.

3. As to the last, the contrary will plainly appear, if we consider these two
things.

1. The proving those prophecies which were made concerning the Messiah, to be
fulfilled in him, is an evident proof that he was the Messiah: but by their
senses they might and did prove these things to be accomplished in him, for
they saw him borne and dying, and rising according to the Scriptures, the
greatest part of those things which are foretold, being within the reach of
sense.

2. The proving him to be a worker of glorious miracles (such as never any
before nor since, did nor could do, unless by his power, and in his name)
proves him to be the Messiah, the great Prophet which should come into the
world: But by sense they were able to prove that such and such miracles were
wrought by him, and therefore it is very observable, that when John sent to
Christ, to know whether he was he, or they must look for another: the answer
Christ returns, is an argument drawn from sense; Go tell John what things ye
have seen and heard, how that the blind see, the lame walk, Luc 7.20, 21, 22.
the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and to the poor
the Gospel is preached: And therefore, all these considerations being laid
together, it remains as a clear truth, that Christian Religion is very
reasonable, and the sensible experience which the Apostles, those first
planters of Christianity, had concerning the things they declared and wrote, is
a strong and undeniable reason, why we should give credence and obedience to
their writings.

3. To draw to an end, here is in the last place matter of Exhortation, and
that double.

1. That before we declare things or truths to others, we look that we be fully
convinced of their verity our selves; surely if he that does any thing which he
doubts, whether it be lawful, sins, much more he that declares any thing
which he doubts whether it be true; and especially does this concern the
Ministers of the Gospel, who being to speak as the oracles of God, must speak
the word of truth.

Indeed there are two things every good Minister should be careful to do, in
respect of the things he declares.

To work the goodness of them on his own affections.

To imprint the verity of them on his own understanding.

The truth is, what we take only upon hearsay, or is only a fiction of our
own brain, and an invention of our own fancy, we can never confidently
maintain, or however not solidly; and the true reason why so many recant, deny
the truth they have declared, is (at least for the most part) because they were
never thoroughly stablished in the faith, and sufficiently convinced of its
verity.

2. That so far as is imitable by us, we follow these holy Apostles, in
hearing, seeing, looking on, and handling the Word of life. It is true, we
cannot now hear Christ speaking to us with his own mouth, but we may hear him
speaking to us by his faithful messengers; We pray you in Christ's stead, says
the Apostle: and again, it is Christ that speaks in us: 2 Cor. 5 20.12.5.
Oh then, let him that has ears hear, and let us all pray for that
hearing-eare, whereby we may attend to what Christ's Ministers speak from, as if
it were spoken by him, to wit, with all humility and sincerity. Again, we
cannot now see him in his person, but we may see him in his Ordinances. St.
Paul says, that in the Gospel, Jesus Christ is before our eyes, evidently set
forth, crucified among us; and that in the holy Sacrament, Gal* 3.1. 1 Cor.
11.26.
we show forth the Lords death till he come: oh therefore, let us in these holy
ordinances see, and so see, as to look upon, and rejoice in him. Finally, we
cannot handle him corporally in himself, but we may handle him sacramentally in
the pledges of his love, the bread and wine; we may handle him, though not
literally, yet metaphorically by faith, believing on him: Indeed it is faith
that can do all these acts, hear and see, and look on, and handle Christ; it is
the Christians ear, and eye, and hand, let us so make use of it, by faith
attending to him, beholding and embracing him, till at last the time come, of
his second manifestation, when with these eyes and no other, we shall see him
coming in the glory of his Father, and to the endless joy of our hearts hear
him pronouncing the sweet sentence, Job 19.27. Mat. 2^.34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the
beginning of the world.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN. SERMON. 6.

CHAP. I. Ver. 1. part first. That which was from the beginning.

Ver. 3. part middle. That ye also may have fellowship with us.


CHRISTIAN RELIGION has ever met with contradiction; it is true as St. Paul
says, without controversy it is a great mystery, 2 Timothy 3.16.
but it is as true, that because it is a great mystery, therefore it has
never been without controversy: nor has the Devil been wanting to blow this
slame, raise these commotions. At the very first he strove to strangle this
Babe in the cradle, nip this blossom in the bud, and devour Christianity in its
infancy, whilst he stirred up the Jews and Pagans without, various false
teachers within the Church, to oppugn true Religion; for this reason, no doubt
it was that this holy Apostle endeavored to confirm those to whom he wrote, in
the verity of Christian faith; to which end, he begins this Epistle, with
discovering both its antiquity and certainty, in these words, That which was
from the beginning, etc.

Part. 3.
The antiquity of the Gospels origination, is that part I am next to handle, as
it is expressed in the very beginning, That which was from the beginning. I am
not ignorant, that a great part of Expositors refer these words to the person
of Christ, as if St. John's meaning were thus to be construed, The word of life,
which was from the beginning: A special argument, moving them to this
interpretation, is the fit correspondence between the Epistle and the Gospel,
which begins with those words, In the beginning was the word, and is no doubt
to be understood of Christ, signifying his eternal subsistence: Indeed these
words, was from the beginning, do very fitly and fully represent that divine
truth to us. For

Verbum (...) proprie ad Deu^ pertinet. Bez. Exodus 3.14. Ioh. 8.58. Propter
murabilitatem temporum in quibus versatur* nostra mortalitas, non mendaciter
dicimus and fuit and erit, and est etc.
1. The verb was, being a verb substantive, is peculiar to God, and so belongs
to Christ as God: the being of all creatures is determined to some species, as
it is an Angel, or it is a man, and the like, only of God, we say he is
without any additament, for that is the name God gave himself; I am has sent
thee, and Christ applies to himself before Abraham was, I am. Indeed the Tense
is very improper, since eternity admits not of prius, or posterius, nor knows
any succession; but yet as St. Austine observes, because of the mutability of
time, in which we subsist, we best conceive of eternity, by referring to those
distinctions of time, past, present, to come, affirming of Christ as God, that
he was, is, and shall be, since there was no time wherein he was not; Aug. in
Ioh. tr. 19.
there shall be no time wherein he shall not be, and there is no time wherein
he is not; in which respect, he is said to be yesterday, to day, and the same
for ever. Heb. 13.8.


2. These words from the beginning, serve yet more clearly to express the
eternity of his Godhead, whether we understand by beginning, eternity it self,
or the beginning of the Creation: some construe beginning by eternity, for
though it is true, eternity has no beginning, yet in as much as it is no less
true, that there was nothing before eternity, this word beginning, may though
improperly, be applied to it, and so was from the beginning, is was from
eternity.

The most, and I conceive most rationally understand by beginning, rerum omnium
initium, AEternitas est pritcipium sine principio. Lap. in loc. Confer. Mat.
19.4. cum v. 8. (...). Oecumen. In principio sic dictum, ac si diceretur ante
omnia. Aug. de Trinit. l. 6. c. 2. Non sicut in principio fecit Deus coel^m and
terram ita in principio fecit verbum, sed in principio erat verbum. Aug. ep.
66. Coepit esse caro ex Virgene Maria sed non tunc caepit verbum, etc. Aug. in
ep.
the beginning of all things, that time when all creatures began to have a
being, and so this from, is the same with the Gospels in, and both as much as
before the beginning; in this respect, it is that St. Austin observes, it is
not said, God made him in the beginning, as it is of the heaven and the earth,
and the things in both; but he was in the beginning, even then when other
things began to exist, he had a personal subsistence, and therefore eternal,
because whatsoever was before the beginning of time, must be eternal.

And if in this sense we construe these words, they are praefixed no doubt, on
purpose to prevent a mistake, which might arise from the following words; for
whereas, they might have been apt with some Heretics to think, that this word
did not begin to be till he was heard, seen and handled, he first acquaints
them that he was from the beginning. Indeed, then it was he began to be man,
but not to be, then he was made flesh, but he was the word before, even from
all eternity, the word of life, which was from the beginning. But when I
observe the Grammar of the Text, I must crave leave to receed from this
Exposition, for it is not (...), but (...), he which was, or the word which
was, but that which was from the beginning, concerning the word of life; by
which it appears, that the most proper reference of these words, is not to
the person of Christ, Vide Athanas. Synops. Theoph. and Oecumen. in loc.
but to the doctrine which the Gospel reveals concerning him, and this
exposition no less agrees with the Logic, then the Grammar of the Text, since
in this sense, (as Oecumenius, Theophilact, and Athanasius have observed) the
words are an answer to that objection which was made against Christian doctrine
by its enemies, as if it were a new doctrine, that therefore he might take off
this aspersion, which both Jews and Greeks did cast upon Christianity; he
assures us that it is no novell fancy, but an ancient mystery, that which was
from the beginning.

And now according to this Interpretation, we are further to enquire, in what
respect this is verified of Christian Religion, Evangelicall doctrine, that it
was from the beginning.

The answer to which, will be dispatched in three considerations, each of which
exceeds the other.

1. That which was from the beginning, that is, which was preached from the
very first, Videtur omnino designari tempus illud quo primum caepit Evangelium
praedicari Vorst. in loc.
that Christianity was published to the world. That this phrase from the
beginning, is so to be understood in some places, both of the Gospel and
Epistle, is not to be denied; and Vorstius is positive, that it must be so
understood here: nor will I reject this sense, though I shall not confine the
words to it. Take it then thus briefly; soon after the Gospel was preached,
there arose up some who broached another Gospel, and filled the Church with
damnable heresies; now St. John in these words, acquits his doctrine from
partaking with heresies, and lets them know, that what he declared to them, was
not what some Heretics had lately invented, and privily brought into the
Church, but what was taught by Christ to his Apostles, and by them to the
world, from the very beginning.

2. But besides this, we may very well carry the expression a great deal
further, and look backward as far as the fall of man, which was in the
beginning of the world, and so that which was from the beginning, A condito
orb in Ecclesia semper praedicata etc. Zanch.
that is the doctrine which soon after the world began, was preached to man;
for indeed, the promise made by God to Adam, the seed of the woman shall break
the serpents head: what is it but an abridgement of the Gospel, an epitomy of
Christianity, a summary of Evangelical truths? nay, this doctrine is that which
still along was umbris praefigurata, vaticiniis praedicta, praefigured in the
types, and foretold in the prophecies; upon which ground St. Paul says
expressly of the Gospel of God, it is that which he had promised before by his
Prophets, in the holy Scriptures, and Zachary says, the raising up of Christ
an horn of salvation, Romans 1.2. Luc. 1.70.
is that he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since the
world began: the truth is, as God would never have man destitute of a way to
come to him, so the way for fallen man to come to him, has been one and the
same for substance in all ages of the Church, and the New Testament is nothing
else but the unveiling of Moses his face, a breaking of the Old Testament
shell, a more clear discovery of what was, though darkly made known from the
beginning.

3. And yet to go one step further, beyond which we cannot go, that which was
from the beginning, that is, before the beginning of the world, to wit, in the
eternal purpose and counsel of God; indeed as the permission of man's fall
which was in the beginning of time, so the effecting of man's redemption, which
was in the fullness of time, was foreordained by God before all time, so as the
Gospel is nothing else, but as it were a Copy of that writing which was in the
mind of God from all eternity; in this respect it is that the Gospel is called
the everlasting Gospel, Rev. 14.6.13.8. Tit. 1.2. Vide Est. ibid.
and Christ is said to be the Lamb^slain from the foundation of the world; and
yet more clearly this eternal life is said to be that which God, which cannot
lie, promised (that is purposed) before the world began.

From whence we may profitably infer a double conclusion.

True Antiquity is a sure mark of verity.

That Antiquity is true, which is from the beginning.

1. Would Ministers know what doctrine they ought to declare, and the people
what they are to receive? this is a good rule, let it be that doctrine which
has been anciently embraced and maintained by the Christian Church: Vincent.
Lyr. adv. her. c 9.26, 30.
a very seasonable Item in these days, wherein to use Vincentius Lyrinensis
his expression; Been fundata antiquitas scelesta novitate subruitur, well
grounded antiquity is overturned by fanatic novelty; the cry of the Egyptian
Priest in Plato, cited by Clemens Alexandrinus? Oh Solon, Solon, you are
always children; may fitly be taken up of the men of this Generation, they are
children pleased with every novell toy, Cl. Al str^m. l. 1. in fine.
and tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine. Not content with the
ancient Apostolical government, universally continued in the Christian Church
for many hundred years, we have endeavored to erect new forms, which
Proteus-like, change into several shapes, and about which, the contrivers
cannot tell how to agree. Not knowing indeed themselves what they would have;
not satisfied with, nay, much offended at the ancient devout Liturgy of our
English Church, which the first compilers extracted as a quintessence out of
the several praeceding Liturgies, both of the Greek and Latin Church: we have
erected a new, or rather no way of worship, leaving every Minister to the
dangerous liberty of an extemporary devotion, and the people to the sad slavery
of hearing those vain Tautologies, nay, many times horrid blasphemies, which
are vented in those kind of prayers. And yet once more not willing to be
regulated by those ancient doctrinal truths, which the Church, from and with
the holy Scriptures has delivered to us, how many are there amongst us, who
seek another Gospel, vent strange opinions, the people heaping up to themselves
teachers, and the teachers heaping up to themselves auditors, who have an itch
after novelty, not only in discipline, but doctrine.

Oh my brethren, take we all heed, lest we be infected with this itch, which is
the sister of superstition, mother of rashness, and the daughter of
inconstancy; rather let the Prophet Jeremy his words take place with us: Thus
says the Lord, stand ye in the ways, and see, Ier. 6.16.
and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye
shall find rest for your souls; let St. Paul's counsel to Timothy be
acceptable; serva depositum, 2 Timothy 1.13, 14. Vincent. Lyr. l. d. Jude 2.
Hold fast the form of sound words, non a te inventum, sed tibi creditum, which
was not invented by thee, but committed to thee; and according to St. Iudes
exhortation, let us contend earnestly for the faith which was once delivered to
the Saints: Finally, let St. Hieroms practice be our pattern; Meum propositum
est antiquos legere and a side ecclesiae catholicae non recedere, my resolve is
to read the ancients, and not recede from the faith of the Catholic Church.
Mos iste semper in Ecclesia viguit ut quo quisque foret religiosior eo
promptius novellis adinventionibus contrairet. Vinc. Lyr. adv. haer. c. 9. Quod
primum illud verum quod posterius falsum. Tertul. Aug. de bapt. parvul.
Indeed however it may now be made one of the marks of the well-affected godly
party to follow new ways; yet I am sure Lyrinensis sets it down as a continued
practice in the Church, that the more religious any man was, the more zealous
he was against factious novelties.

2. But further, as we must assert antiquity, so that antiquity is, what was
from the beginning, for though error may be old, yet still, that which is from
the beginning is truth; indeed as crookedness is no other but a deviation from
a straight rule, so error an aberration from truth, and therefore as a crooked
line supposes a straight, so error supposes truth; and upon this ground it
is, that the Fathers rule is veritate manifesta cedat consuetudo veritati, when
truth appears, custom must give way, because indeed, be the custom never so
ancient, truth was before it. With this it is we must justly answer the Romish
plea of antiquity, for many of their erroneous assertions, that though they
have been some of them of many hundred years standing, yet they were not known
in the pure and primitive times of the Church, and therefore as our blessed
Savior in the point of divorce, reduces the Jews to this consideration, Mat.
19.8.
it was not so from the beginning; true indeed, it has been long permitted you
for the hardness of your hearts, but it was not so from the beginning, the
first institution gives no such allowance: so we in those points of
controversy between us and the Church of Rome reduce them to the beginning of
Christian Religion; it is true, many of their doctrines have been long
published, but they were not from the beginning, they were not taught by Christ
or his Apopostles, or their Successors in the first Centuries of the Church.
Whilst therefore the Papists scoff at our Religion, as a novell faction, as
those Athenians did at Paul's doctrine; we have this in readiness to retort, and
are able (blessed be God) to make it good against them, ours is no other than
that which was from the beginning, and that even at Rome it self preached, and
professed; nor do we differ from them, but only in those opinions which since
the golden foundation of Christianity was laid by Christ and his Apostles, has
been by Babel builders superstructed, as hay and stubble, fit only to be cast
into the fire.

The last branch of the Gospels commendation is from the utility of the end.
Now the end which is here mentioned is double, Part. 4.
to wit, proximus and remotus, the proxime and immediate end, is (...), a
sacred fellowship, the remote end, which is indeed the effect of the former is
(...), a spiritual joy.

Part. 1.
The first of these is set down in these words, That you also may have
fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ, wherein this end of the Gospel, and the declarers of it, is
propounded and expounded, that in the former, and this in the latter clause,
which is enclosed in a parenthesis.

1. The proposition is, That you also may have fellowship with us, which that
we may handle in its fullest latitude, we shall consider it, both absolutely as
a benefit, and relatively as an end.

1. You have fellowsh^p with us, is a choice benefit, and such as may be
construed two ways.

That you and we may have fellowship together.

That you may have the same fellowship which we have.

Zanchy expounds it of the former, Gagnetus of the latter, Marlorate takes in
both, so shall I, the one indeed following upon the other, Vna cum illis fieri
Ecclesia. Zanch. Vt participos sitis sicut and nos. Gagn. Vt societatem cum
Apostolis habeamus and eorundem b^norum particip^s simus Marlor. Communicatione
in eadem fide Religione Ecclesia Menoch. Josh. 17.3. Ephesians* 4.5. Heb. 2.10, 12.
Ioh. 10.16. Rev. 6.11. Gal. 3.16.4.26 1 Pet. 2.5. 1 Cor. 12.12.13.
since being in fellowship with the Apostles, they became partakers of the same
privilege that they had, though this latter is that which I conceive the most
genuine sense, and therefore I shall especially insist upon.

1. The benefit here understood, may be the joining of these converted
Christians into one body with the Apostles, whilst they by embracing the
Apostles writings, and acknowledging the truth of what they declare, became
members of the Church, whereof the Apostles were the Planters. And surely this
is no small comfort, that all believers how different soever in offices and
degrees, how distant soever in place and habitation, have yet a spiritual
fellowship with one another, to wit, in as much as they are fellow worshippers
of the same God, fellow Subjects of the same Lord, fellow soldiers under one
Captain, fellow sheep in the same fold, fellow servants under one Master,
fellow brethren of the same Parents, fellow stones in the same building, fellow
members in the same body. And look as in corporations and societies, though the
particular members are never so remote one from the other; yet in as much as
they all belong to the same society, they are said to have fellowship each with
other. So is it in the Christian Church, and this relation is that which as it
carries in it dignity, it being in Theodosius his opinion, and not unjustly a
greater honor to be membrum Ecclesiae, then Caput Imperii, a member of the
Church, then Head of an Empire; so also manifold duties of mutual love and
amity one toward another, of earnest and devout prayer one for another, of
sympathy and fellow feeling one with another, of imparting all manner of
talents one to another, because they are members one of another. But

2. The more genuine construction of this benefit, is to interpret it, the
intituling of them to whom he wrote to the same fellowship and partaking, to
wit, of God and Christ, as it follows in the next words, which he with the
rest of the Apostles had, as if he should say, these privileges which hitherto
we enjoyed alone, Quae nos Apostoli hactenus soli hahuimus en nunc per
Evangelium etiam vobis annuntiantur and communicantur etc. Fer. in loc.
we now by writing the Gospel, communicate to you; we are the first members of
the Church, but not the whole body, and therefore you as well as we are capable
of the same benefits. And it is a tacit prevention of an objection which might
be made; for whereas, when the Apostle says, we write the things we have seen
concerning Christ, they might say or think what is this to us, we have not,
cannot see or handle him, it is a privilege not possible for us to attain; to
this these words implicitly return an answer, that by the Apostles writing what
they saw, they, to wit, believing the truth of what was written, might have
fellowship with them; and thus it is true of all Christians, who by faith have
fellowship with Christ as well as the Apostles, though they never saw him,
because the same interest in his person, Illi viderunt and nos non videmus and
tamen socii sumus quia fidem communem tenemus. Aug in ep. Mat. 13.16.
his merits, and those good things which are purchased by him. Excellently to
this purpose St. Austin on this very place, they saw and we do not, and yet we
are partakers of the same benefits with them, because we believe in Christ as
well as they. It is very observable in this respect, that our blessed Savior
himself, as in one place, he tells his disciples, blessed are your eyes, for
you see, so in another place he tells them, blessed are they which have not
seen, and yet have believed; Ioh. 20.29.
we then who are there no doubt pointed at, are as well happy as the disciples,
and as they, had they not believed in Christ, would have been miserable though
they saw him, so we believing in him, are blessed, though we cannot see him:
yea, Magnarum vigor est mentiu^ ^r edere quae corporeo non videntur intuitu
etc. Leo de ascens. Sermon. 1. 2 Pet. 1.1.
eo magis beati in credendo quo minus expedi^i in videndo, the want of sight
evidenceth our faith so much the more amiable. Oh let us set an high estimate
upon this grace of faith, which gives us an interest in Christ, as well as the
Apostles; it is very observable what the Apostle Peter says of those to whom
he wrote, that they had obtained the like precious faith with him, and the rest
of the Apostles; indeed of all divine gifts, faith is not of the least price,
and their faith which saw not Christ, is a like precious with them that did,
because it instateth them in the same fellowship, and therefore how should we
Christians value our faith. But

2. That you may have fellowship, argues these words, to be set down as the
end, which the Holy Ghost aimed at, in declaring and writing to them, not only
that they might know those things to be true, Non tantum ut noritis haec esse
vera, sed ut and vos non minus quam nos fructum inde participetis. Grot ibid.
but that they might reap the same benefit by them which the Apostles had; thus
as the Sun shines that others may partake of the same light with it self, and
the fountain sends forth water, that others may participate of it; so do these
Apostles write that the people might relish the same sweetness in Christ, which
they had tasted.

It is that which is observable in the Apostles, considered under a double
notion, as Pastors, as Christians.

1. As Pastors, we see in them what is the aim of a true Minister of the
Gospel, not so much his own, as his peoples benefit. St. John does not say, we
write that we may participate with you, to wit, in your temporals, but that you
may participate with us in our spirituals; true, this is the peoples duty to
the Pastor according to that Apostolical precept; Quod Apostoli predicandi
quaesierint, Fer. Gal. 6.6.
let him that is taught, communicate to him that teaches in all good things:
but this is not that the Pastor aims at, in declaring the Gospel to the
people, but rather that he may be an instrument to communicate those better
things to them. Indeed (as St. Paul observes) false teachers suppose gain to
be godliness, 1 Timothy 6.5.
minding nothing more than their own carnal advantage, but the true Apostles
esteem godliness gain, and therefore chiefly aim at the peoples spiritual
benefit; Vide Gualt. Call. in loc.
and truly this is that which (as Calvin notes) should be a singular means to
gain your credence to our writing our declarings; why will you not believe our
report, regard our message, when our end is only your good, that you may
partake the same benefit with us?

2. As Christians we may in them behold the frame of a truly pious heart, to
desire that others may have fellowship with it self, in the same spiritual
enjoyments; good Christians are no niggards of their heavenly dainties, Number.
11.29. Act^ 26, 29. Ioh: 1: 45: 4: 29.
they love not to eat their morsels alone, but invite others to the same
participation; hence that wish of Moses, would all the Lords people were
Prophets, and of St. Paul, that all were as he except his bonds: upon this
ground it was that Philip having found Christ, called Nathanael, and the woman
of Samaria, having met with the Messiah, inviteth her friends to the sight and
knowledge of him, and if you desire the reason, it is plain. Because

1. The bringing others into the same fellowship with themselves, is a means of
enlarging the Kingdom of Christ, and so of advancing the glory of God; Religion
teaches every good man to pray, hallowed be thy name, and thy kingdom come;
and surely we cannot pray this cordially if we desire not, endeavor not that
which tends to both, the winningmen to the faith of Christ.

2. The gaining others to their fellowship will be the means of making them for
ever happy, and therefore as in zeal for Gods glory, so in charity to the
souls of their brethren, they cannot but desire it; this is the different
temper of envy and charity, envy thinks it a small matter to be happy it
self, unless another may be unhappy, charity would not be happy alone, but
striveth to draw in company; this Aretius gives as the sense of these words
here, We love you as our selves, and therefore wish you as well as our selves,
Parum est si tu sis faelix nisi alter sit in faelix Vide Aret. in. loc.
that you may have fellowship with us.

3. The bringing in others, is no diminution to themselves, it is the manifest
difference between spiritual and temporal riches, those diminish by imparting,
but not these. Godly men well know, that if others have more, they shall not
therefore have the less, and it were strange not to wish a courtesy to
another, when it may be no injury to our selves; the music is not the less
harmonious to thee, because others hear it, nor does the candle the less
enlighten thee, because others see by it as well as thy self, nor is our
participation of heavenly things the less, because others have the same
fellowship with us.

To end this, let the same mind be in us, that was in these holy Apostles, and
is in all good Christians. Indeed it is that which in a bad way is usually the
practice both of the Devil and wicked men; the Devil being himself fallen,
never ceased till he drew Adam into the same pit with him; ungodly men would
have all partners in the same wickedness, and wretchedness with themselves:
they say, Come with us, cast in thy lot among us, let us all have one purse;
Prove* 1.11* 14.
and by these words they seek to entice and inveigle inconsiderate persons: for
this reason, it was that that Epicure Heliogobalus took care for the training
up of his Son in the same luxuriant courses wherein himself lived. Now there is
an oblique imitation, even of wicked men, which is commendable; as sin is
boundless, so grace must be abounding, as sin is infectious, so grace must be
communicative; evil men decrease from bad to worse, holy men must increase
from good to better, wicked men strive to make others as bad or worse than
themselves, good men must endeavor to make others as holy and as happy as
themselves; thus we may learn even of the worst of men, but rather let Christ's
Apostles be our Tutors, his Disciples, our Schoolmaster. Thus let believing
masters instruct their servants, parents teach their children, friends admonish
their friends, and godly Ministers exhort their hearers; as here the Apostles
did declare and write to the people for this very end, that they might bring
them into the same blessed fellowship with themselves.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN. SERMON. 7.

CHAP. I. Ver. 3. part last. And truly our fellowship is with the Father, and
his Son Jesus Christ.


THe Person of Christ is of all others, the most amiable and excellent; hence
the Psalmist says mystically of him, thou art fairer than the children of men,
as being indeed more than a mere Son of man; and the Spouse in the Canticles
being asked in contempt by the daughters of Jerusalem; Psa. 45.2.
what is thy beloved, more than another beloved? Cant. 5.9, 10.
returns that high, yet deserved encomium, my beloved is the chiefest among
ten thousand.

The doctrine of Christ is that, then which none more certain and undoubted: in
which respect, the main fundamental axiom of Christ's coming into the world, is
called by St. Paul a fai^hfull saying, 1 Timothy 1.15. Iam. 1.18.
and the whole Gosspel by St. James, the word of truth, there being infallible
verity and fidelity in evangelical sayings.

The sincere professors of Christ are such, as none else but they can be truly
happy and blessed: hence it is that they are dignified by the Apostle Peter, 1
Pet. 1.9.
with these honorable titles, of a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an
holy Nation, and a peculiar people.

And now beloved, if you look into this short exordium, In exordio hujus
Epistolae Ioannes tria haec nobis inculcare voluit quod nihil majus aut
excellentius persona Christi nihil certius quam Evangelium nostrum, nihil
denique beatius Christiano homine. Fer. in loc.
you shall find each of these briefly and pithily handled. The Gospels
certainty, as being most ancient and evident, is evinced in the first verse,
Christ's excellency, as being the word of life, that eternal life is insisted
on in part of the first and the second verse; finally, the faelicity of a
Christian, as being one that has fellowship with God and Christ, and thereby
fullness of joy is characterized in the third and fourth verses; well may this
golden three invite us once and again, nay often to look into, and peruse this
choice preface, That which was from the beginning, etc.

We are now come according to our proposed method to the last branch of the
second General, the commendation of the Gospel, from the utility of its end;
and having made entrance upon the first end, as it is propounded in those
words, that you also may have fellowship with us; we are now to handle the
Exposition of it in the following, and truly our fellowship is with the Father,
and his Son Jesus Christ.

Which words are a plain assertion, unfolding the dignity and excellency of
that fellowship which the Apostles and all believers with them have, Explicat
quam nobilis sit Ecclesiae societas Zanch.
inasmuch as it is a fellowship with the Father and his Son; it is that which
our translators set down with an asseveration, truly conceiving this to be the
emphasis of the pleonasm, which is in the Greek. (...).


The Greek word which is here rendered fellowship, admits both in sacred and
profane Writs of a double construction, as signifying either communio or
communicatio, communion and fellowship, or communication and partnership, and
though in some places only one of those can well be admitted, yet here I
conceive both may very well consist, and the Apostle may be probably thought to
intend that intimate communion which believers have with, and by virtue hereof,
the liberal communication they receive from the Father, and his Son Jesus
Christ.

To unlock this Cabinet, and show you the rich pearl contained in it; give me
leave to consider it, both generally and particularly; in general, what makes
up this (...) fellowship here mentioned, and in particular, as this fellowship
is expressed to be with two of the persons in the sacred Trinity, the Father,
and his Son Jesus Christ.

1. The substance of the benefit will be discovered in the general dicussion,
and that you may the more distinctly understand it, proceed with me by ^hese
four steps, which are as so many degrees of this fellowship, namely, amicable
reconciliation, effectual regeneration, comfortable association, and complete
glorification.

1. The rice and inchoation of this fellowship is reconciliation, whereby God
of an enemy becomes a friend, Ipsius gratiam and favorem haebere and amicitia
dignum reputari, and in faedere esse. Fer* in loc. Romans 5.1.
and receives us into favor; to this purpose is Ferus his paraphrase, to have
fellowship (says he) is to be in Covenant with God, to be one of the number of
those to whom he vouchsafes his special love; accordingly this phrase may be
interpreted by that of St. Paul, where he says, we have peace with God, and he
has made us accepted. The truth is, Ephesians. 1.6.
we all by nature are not only strangers, but enemies, and where there is
hostility, there can be no society, so that we begin not to have fellowship
with, till we are reconciled to God. This reconciliation of God, to penitent
believing sinners, is most elegantly and sweetly shadowed forth under the
Fathers gracious behavior toward the returning prodigal; no sooner does his
Son set foot forward to come home, but his Father saw him, there were eyes of
love, had compassion on him, there were bowels of love, and ran to him with
feet of love, Luc. 15 20.
and fell on his neck, there were arms of love, and kissed him with lips of
love: by all which expressions, we may gather what a tender dear affection of
amity there is in God toward penitents, which is the foundation of this
fellowship.

2. The concomitant of this reconciliation is regeneration, since whosoever is
accepted by God, has stamped upon him the image of God, and so does after a
sort partake with God.

Fit haec societas cum Deo per similitudinem. Serrar.
To clear this, you must know that there can be no fellowship where there is not
some similitude, in which respect, says one upon my Text, This fellowship with
God is by likeness to him, for this reason, at first it was that Almigh^^ God
intending man a creature to have fellowship with ^^mself, made him after his
own image; nor can we be admitted into this fellowship, unless this image be
renewed in, and restored to us; now, this image of God is nothing else but the
communication of such qualities as resemble those, which, for this very reason,
the Schools call the communicable attributes of God, such are his holiness,
goodness, mercy, justice, truth, and the like, and because holiness is the
chief, yea, after a sort comprehensive of the rest, therefore especially in
this, is the image of God placed, and so this fellowship with God is a
participation with him in purity and sanctity, and may therefore fitly be
explained by St. Peter's (...) partaking of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. H^b.
12.1^.
or St. Paul's (...), partaking of his holiness.

3. The progress of this fellowship is in that sweet communion which believers
(being thus reconciled and regenerated) have with God, Assotiatio cum Deo, Trin.
so that there is though not an aequality (far be it from us to make such a
blasphemous construction of this phrase) yet a near and intimate familiarity,
in which respect, God and a Christian may be said to walk, to talk, to feast,
nay, to lodge and dwell together; Believers walk with God in a holy Subjection,
God walks with believers, in affording them gracious protection, Believers
speak to God in devout supplications, God speaks to believers in spiritual
consolations, Believers feast God with their graces, God feasteth Believers
with his joys. Finally, Believers inhabit in the secret of the most high, and
God reposeth himself in the bosom of believers: hence occur those phrases of
Gods being with us, Ephesians. 3.12. R^v. 3.20. 1 Ioh. 4.15.
and our walking with God, of our having access to God, and his coming down to
us, of our supping with him, and his supping with us, of our dwelling in God,
and God in us, we being (to speak it with holy reverence) as it were convivae
his fellow commoners, conviatores fellow travelers, yea contubernales, chamber
fellows. Add to this

4. The consummation of this fellowship is in the other world where there shall
be a full communication of the image of God to us, whereby we shall partake of
purity, life, and immortality, of unspotetd holiness and indeficient
happiness, when we shall have the clear vision of God face to face, and by
virtue of that a full fruition of him so far as a created nature is capable
of, and all this without the least interruption, intermission, cessation. This
fellowship is that which for the present we have, though not re in actual
possession; yet spe in certain expectation, that participation and communion
which we have here by grace, being an earnest and pledge, asring us of that we
shall have hereafter by glory, and this shall suffice to be spoken in general
of the nature of this fellowship.

2. The further amplification of this fellowship is in that here are two
persons specified, and though it be one and the same fellowship which we have
with all the persons, yet inasmuch as two of them are severally mentioned, it
may well admit of a distinct consideration.

1. This fellowship is said to be with the Father. It is very observable to the
understanding of this, that the Father being the first person in the Deity, is
the primary original and fountain of all communication to the creature; whence
it is, that those Acts which the Deity is pleased to exercise toward the
creature are, though not exclusively; yet for the most part expressly assigned
in Scripture to the Father: thus the Father is said to come and dwell with us;
the Father is he that has begotten us aga^n to a lively hope: Ioh. 14.23. 1
Pet. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.3.
finally the Father is said to bless us with all spiritual blessings. No
wonder if this fellowship is here said to be with the Father; The neerness of
this fellowship which we have with the Father, is represented by a gradation of
allusions in Scripture; all which do excellently illustrate this truth. There
is some kind of participation that a servant has with his Master, Est societas
Domini cum servis, patris cum filiis etc. Serrar.
yet greater is that which one friend has with another, yet greatest is that
which a son has with his Father: in all these relations we stand to the
Father; we his servants, and he our Lord; Nay, not only servants, but friends,
and therefore we read not only of Moses the servant, Number. 12.7. James 2 23.
but Abraham the friend of God; nay, we are adopted to be sons, and therefore
it is no presumption to say, our fellowship is with the, because our Father.

2. This fellowship is said to be with his Son Jesus Christ, which may very
well admit of a double construction; either

Our fellowship is not only with the Father, but his Son. or

Our fellowship with the Father, is by and through that fellowship which we
have with the Son.

1. Our fellowship which we have with the father, is also with his Son Jesus
Christ.

There is a generation of men indeed in the Romish Church, who challenge this
as their peculiar, to be e societate Jesus, Jesuits, Iebusites rather, such,
who whilst they pretend to be of the society of Jesus, are in truth limbs of
Antichrist, and one day this Jesus will give them little thanks for this
arrogant assumption of his name, whilst they stand in opposition to his truth.
As for the real privilege of having society with Christ Jesus, it is not be
appropiated to any order of men, but is justly applicable to every Christian.
This fellowship which we have with Christ, is set forth in various similitudes;
such as are these, of the head and the members, root and branches, foundation
and building, husband and wife; and look what participation the members have
with the head, receiving sense and motion from it, the branches with the root,
which communicate to them sap and juice, the building with the foundation, by
which it is sustained and upheld: finally, the wife with the husband, having an
interest in his person, goods, what ever he is, and has, the same has every
Christian with Christ, who communicates himself with all his merits and
benefits unto him: Indeed as the Apostle tells us. Col. 2.16. Ioh. 1.16.
It pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell, and this not for
himself, but us, that we, as the Evangelist speaks, might of his fullness
receive grace for grace.

If you would yet have a more distinct explanation of this fellowship, consider
it in reference to each of these Titles which are here used, we having
fellowship with him as Gods Son, as our Jesus, and as Christ.

1. We have fellowship with him as he is Gods Son, in as much as we participate
of his Sonship and inheritance; Christ, though the only begotten, yet makes
us the adopted sons of God, and therefore our Apostle says in his Gospel, To
as many as receive him, he gives this power, Ioh. 1.12. Non ait patre^
nostrum, aliter ergo meum, aliter vestrum, natura meum, gratia vestrum. Aug.
ibid. Quicquid habet Christus habent illi qui cum eo sunt in societate
donatitio Iure. Na^gorg. in. loc. Romans 8.17.
to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe in his name; in this
respect, Christ tells his Disciples, I go to my Father, and your Father. Indeed
he says not our Father, because Christ's filiation is of another kind than
ours, but mine and yours, not only mine, but yours. Christ communicates to all
believers by grace, that which himself had by nature, and as thus we have
fellowship with him in the Sonship, so likewise in the inheritance: as the
inheritance is Christ's by natural right, so he conveyeth it to us by deed of
gift, and therefore the Apostle Paul says, that being children we are heirs,
heirs of God, joint heirs with Christ.

2. We have fellowship with him as Jesus, in as much as it is to believers,
that he becomes effectually a Jesus, according to that expression of the Angel
(when he gave this name to him) For he shall save his people from their sins;
indeed we are sick of sin, and Jesus is our Physician; we are captives to
Satan, and Jesus is our Redeemer; we are at enmity with God, and Jesus is our
Peacemaker; we are in danger, and Jesus is our deliverer: Finally, we are
indebted, and Jesus is our surety. Now as the Patient partaketh of health by
his Physician, the captive of liberty by his Redeemer, enemies are reconciled
by their Peacemaker, the afflicted saved by their deliverer, and the debtor is
acquitted by his surety, so have we by this Jesus, a participation of pardon,
peace, liberty, and salvation.

3. We have fellowship with him as Christ, and that whether you look upon the
mediatorial offices he was pleased to undertake, or the mediatorial acts he
performed.

1. Christ signifies as much as anointed, and we have an unction too, Psa.
45.8.
he was indeed anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, but yet,
so as that we are fellow partakers with him of this ointment; in which respect,
St. Hierom well observes, that the very name of this unction is communicated
to us, Hier ep. 140.
who from Christ are called Christians. Yet more distinctly, there is a
threefold office to which Christ was anointed, in each of which, we have
fellowship with him, namely, prophetical, sacerdotall and regal; St. Paul
says concerning Christ Jesus, that he of God, is made unto us wisdom, 1 Cor.
1.30.
and righteousness, and sanctification and redemption; as he is a Prophet he is
made to us wisdom, enlightening and informing our ignorance; as Priest, he is
made to us righteousness, absolving us from the guilt of our sin, whereby our
persons are justified, and services accepted; as King, he is made to us
sanctification, enabling us to mortify our lusts, and to live holily: thus he
becomes a Christ, and being a Christ, he is a Jesus also, and thereby
Redemption to us. In respect of this participation with Christ in his offices,
it is that we are not only in general called Christians, but in particular
said to be Kings and Priests to God the Father, Rev. 1.5. 1 Pet. 2.5.
and that of his making; and the Christian Church is called a royal
Priesthood, offering up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable by Jesus Christ.

2. This Jesus being thus anointed, for the accomplishing of our salvation,
(...). Romans 6.4, 5, 6 Col* 3.1.
and the completion of his offices, performed many acts; he was born,
crucified, dead, buried, he rose again, and ascended into heaven, and in all
these we have fellowship with him; with his birth in our new birth and
regeneration, with his cross in our sufferings, with his death in the
mortification of our lusts, with his burial in the progress of that work, with
his resurrection in our newness of life, and with his ascension in our heavenly
conversation. This is that which the Apostle Paul often intimates in those
phrases, we are buried with him, we are planted into the likeness of his death,
(...).
our old man is crucified with him, and you are risen together with Christ,
yea, yet more sutably in those expressions, the virtue of his resurrection, and
the fellowship (the same word with this in my text) of his sufferings. (...).
Phil. 3.10.
This being that which every Christian, more or less, experimentally knows,
and wherein he has a conformity to, and so a fellowship with Christ.

2. But this is not all that the Apostle here insinuates, those words, and
with his Son Jesus Christ, being not only a further enlargement of this
participation, in that it is as with the Father, so with the Son, but likewise
a discovery of the means whereby we come to have this fellowship with the
Father, and that is by having fellowship with the Son, according to which
notion, we may fitly conceive the Father to be the terminus, Ephesians. 1.6.2.13.
Romans 5.1. 1 Cor. 5 19.
and the Son the medium of this societas; the Father is he with whom, and the
Son is he by and through whom we have this fellowship with the Father, and
therefore it is else where said, he has made us accepted in his beloved, and
we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, and God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, and to name no more, they who were a far
off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ, that amity and communion which we
have with God, being only in and through a mediator Jesus Christ.

The Heathens were in part sensible of this truth, who conceiving that the
supreme Gods were defiled by the unhallowed approaches of mortals, (...). Plut.
invented Heroes, and half Gods, a kind of middle powers, to be as mediators
between those Gods and them, but this doctrine of a mediator, the Gospel fully
reveals, and this to be no other than Jesus Christ, by whom we are brought to
communion with God. Indeed there was a time (to wit, in innocence) when man
stood not in need of a Mediator, but enjoyed a fellowship of perfect amity with
his Creator; but now man being fallen from that integrity, and thereby having
lost the favor of God, there is no other way of reconciliation but by Christ.
So that as TheThemistocles, when Admetus was incensed against him, brought the
Kings son in his arms, and implored his favor, so we can by no means obtain a
fellowship of reconciliation with the Father, but by his Son Jesus Christ: in
this respect it is, that Christ says concerning himself, I am the way, the
truth, and the life, no man comes to the Father but by me; and upon this
ground, Ioh 14.6.
he is not unfitly resembled to that ladder in Jacobs vision, which reached
from earth to heaven, Gen 28.12, Scala pa^adisi fracta in Adamo reparata est in
Christo Bonav.
by whom alone we climb to heaven, so that if we will pervenire ad Deum, we
must ascendere per hominem, to come to God, we must ascend by the man, even the
man Christ Jesus.

There is only one thing further to be enquired, for the full explication of
this clause, Factis ad offensum scala beata patrem Ger. in Genes.
and that is why the Apostle having mentioned two, does not annex the third
person, and with the Holy Ghost? In answer to which, you must know, that the
third person though he be not expressly mentioned, is necessarily employed, for
the truth is, we can neither have fellowship with the Father, nor with the Son,
but by the Holy Ghost, by the spirit it is, that God begets us again unto
himself, and therefore it is called the renewing of the Holy Ghost; Tit. 3.5.
by the spirit it is, that we participate of Gods holiness, and therefore he is
called the spirit of holiness, not only because he is so in himself, but it is
he that communicates it unto us: finally, by the spirit it is, that the Father
and the Son dwell in us, Romans 1.4.
and have communion with us; in which respect our Apostle says, we know he
abides in us, by the spirit he has given us, and therefore it is, 1 Ioh. 3.24.
that we find this elsewhere directly expressed concerning the Holy Ghost, to
wit, in that solemn benediction, to the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
love of God the Father, is joined the communion or fellowship of the Holy
Ghost. Though then he is not here named, we are not therefore to imagine he is
excluded. Indeed it is a rule in Divinity, which St. Ambrose has observed to
my hand, qui unum dixerit Trinitatem signavit, Ambros. de Sp. S. l. 1. c. 3.
when any one of the persons is nominated in any external operation, all the
rest are employed; and therefore as when we find only mention of the fellowship
of his Son Jesus Christ, we must take in the Father and the spirit; 2 Cor. 1.8.
Phil. 2.1.
and when we read only of the fellowship of the spirit, we must conceive it as
well of the Father and the Son; so when here we find the Father and the Son
expressed, we must not exclude the holy spirit, and look as our blessed Savior
when he speaks of that knowledge which is the way to eternal life, though he
only mention the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.3.
is to be understood as including the holy Ghost, so are we here to interpret
S. John, and therefore may very well add by way of explication, our fellowship
is with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, and with the holy spirit: nor yet
does there want a reason (as Justinian has well observed) why the Apostle
makes no express mention of the Holy Ghost, Vide Justinian. in Ep. Cath.
as he does of the Son of God, namely because as for the communion of the Holy
Ghost; they to whom he wrote, could not be ignorant of it, as having no doubt
had experience themselves of the effusion of his gifts upon them, and therefore
it needed not to name him, but because the divinity of the Son of God was
oppugned by the Heretics of those times, therefore he thought it fit with the
Father to mention the Son; And thus much, or rather thus little of this
unconceivable, much more unspeakable benefit, the fellowship which Believers
have with the ever blessed and glorious Trinity; what now remains, but that I
bring it home by some comfortable application to our selves. There are only
three inferences which are plainly deducible from hence for our practice.

1. Whatever men do either for, or against any Christian, reflects on God and
Christ, with whom they have fellowship; Christ shall say to those at the last
day, who relieve his members now, Matthew. 25.40.
In as much as you did it unto them, you did it unto me, and it was his saying
to Saul in the vision, when he breathed forth threatenings against the Church*
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? and why this, Act. 9.5.
but because of the fellowsh^p which is between Christ and his Members. Take
then heed O ye sons of Belial, Non tam* vos quam Christum in vobis perse.
quuntur: Salv. de provid li. 8. c. 4. Est^. 6.1^.
how you scoffingly deride at, proudly insult over, and maliciously persecute
the servants of God, and members of Christ. Haman notwithstanding all his
greatness, durst not but honor Mordecai, because he was the man whom the King
delighted to honor, and dare you abuse such whom God vouchsafes to honor?
know you not that they are his jewels, and will you deface them? M^^. 3.17.
Zech. 2.8. 1 Cor. 3.16.
the apple of his eye, and will you touch them? his temple, and will you seek
to destroy them? Are they not (to speak it with an humble modesty) all in all
with God, his bosom friends, his daily associates, and dare man whose breath
is in his nostrils, do any injury to them? or can he do it, and hope impunity?
Let none deceive themselves, Qui insurgit in Christum, Domini, insurgit in
Dominum Christi, he that rises up against the Lords anointed, rises up
against the Lord, by whom he is anointed, and he that offers any indignity
unto them that have fellowship with the Father and his Son, offers it to the
Father and the Son, with whom these have fellowship, and therefore must in due
time expect the sure vengeance of the Almighty, upon so great impiety.

2. Great is the dignity of Beleivers, who have fellowship not with Kings the
best of men, not with Angels the best of creatures, but with God himself, the
Father and his Son Jesus Christ; and therefore let them not debase this
dignity, dishonor this fellowship by conversing too much with
creature comforts. When Augustus the Roman Emperor, saw Saracen Ambassadors
sporting with dogs, he asks them if there were no women in their countries:
when wicked men see Believers swallowed up of earthly contentments; will they,
not question whether there be any such divine fellowship, as is pretended:
since then we have a fountain of living waters: why do we dig to our selves
broken Cisterns? and if we have fellowship with God, let us scorn to be
familiar with the world: rather let us say with David, Whom have I in heaven
but thee, and there is none on earth I desire in comparison of thee, Oh blessed
Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to converse with.

3. How amiable and desirable must this fellowship needs be which is with the
Father and his Son, Jos. 17.21.
and therefore to be earnestly endeavored after; for this it was, Christ
prayed in the behalf of his Church, and not only of them, but all that should
believe in his name, that they all may be one as thou Father art in me, and I
in thee, that they also may be one in us, and surely this, we both may and
ought to pray for in our own behalf; (...) that you may have, was S. John's
desire for these to whom he wrote, and it ought much more to be our desire and
endeavor for our selves, that we may have; and if we have attained any degree
already, that we may have yet greater measure of this fellowship. Habeatis, i.
e: habere pergatis and in ea proficiatis, loquitur enim fidelibus qui jam
habebant hanc societatem Lapidan loc. Joh. 10.10.
This is the note of Lapide upon the Text, that you may have, that is, that you
may continue to have, and have more fully this communion, because he writes to
Beleivers, in whom this was already begun; indeed this participation being
qualitative, does Suscipere magis and minus, admit of degrees: All have
fellowship with God and Christ, as well as the Apostles, but not in the same
degree; Christ tells the Jews, I come that they may have life, and that they
might have it more abundantly. So does S. John write to these, that they might
have fellowship, and have it more abundantly, in the same fullness that the
Apostles had. If then as yet thou art a stranger, now labor to acquaint thy
self with God and be at peace, and if thy acquaintance be begun, endeavor that
it may grow to an indeared intimacy: indeed who would not hunger and thirst
after, who can be sufficiently satisfied with this fellowship?

Fellowship in it self, is a thing very delectable: the wise man much enlarges
in the commendation of it, Eccles. 4.9.10 11.
when he says, two is better then one, and pronounces a vae soli, woe to him
that is alone: indeed as the Greek Proverb runs, (...), one man is no man, and
as Euripides, one hand can make but a weak defense, (...). Eurip.
in all undertakings society is helpful. Fellowship is amiable to all creatures
(even the dove will mourn when she has lost her Mate) but especially to man
who is therefore called by the Philosopher (...) a creature born for society:
indeed for this reason banishment is accounted next to death, because it
depriveth of civil society; it is observable, how sadly this has been
bemoaned, not only by a Cain, Thou have this day driven me out from the face
of the earth, but by a Job, I am a companion to owls, Genesis 4 14. Job 30.29.
Psalm. 102.6.7.
and a brother to Dragons, and by a David, I am as a Pelican in the wilderness,
and an owl in the desert, I am as a sparrow alone upon the house top.

And if fellowship be so lovely to all men, how much more religious fellowship
to good men; if fellowship with men be delightful, how much more this
fellowship with God himself, the Father, and the Son.

This, this beloved is the only good fellowship. There is indeed a fellowship
called by that name which is the cover of many enormities, the devourer of
large patrimonies, the bane of many hopeful wits, and yet is the darling of a
great number in the world, I mean the riotous fellowship of luxurious
companions. But alas, how unlike are the thing and the name, how catachrestical
an expression is it, when drunkenness is styled good fellowship? Oh turn in
hither, and behold that which truly deserves this name, this fellowship with
God and Christ, in which there is all good of honesty, utility, and of
jucundity, a fellowship in which all safety, liberty, pleasure, and
contentment, is to be found; no wonder if the Psalmist says, Blessed is the
man whom thou choosest and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in
thy Courts, he shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, Psalm. 65^4.
even of thy holy Temple. This is that fellowship to which God calls us in
his Gospel, and of which by Faith in the Gospel we participate. Indeed as Beza
well observes upon the text; This is the very scope of the Gospel, to make God
and us at one, and as Naogorgeus appositely; Scopus Evangelii ut omnes una
conjuncti in Christo, per fidem filii Dei simus. B^z. Fides clavis est and
aditum praebet ad hanc communionem Naogorg.
Faith is the key which opens the door, and admits us into the presence chamber
of the King of Glory. Oh therefore let us cordially embrace the Gospel, and
daily strenghen our faith in it, so as we may have, and that every day more and
more of this heavenly fellowship, till at last we come to heaven, where our
faith being turned into sight, we shall have the greatest reason to say in the
language of the Apostle; truly our fellowship is now not only with Saints and
Angels, with Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, but with the Father and
his Son Jesus Christ.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN. SERMON. 8.

CHAP. I. Ver. 4. part last. And these things write we unto you, that your joy
may be full.


I Am now come by divine assistance to the end of the beginning, the conclusion
of the Exordium of this Epistle, namely, the last clause of the fourth verse, a
close full of sweetness, the subject whereof is that sweet Monosyllable, joy;
the sound of which cannot but charm our ears, and ravish our hearts; indeed
the thing which this word expresses, is the wheel upon which all men's projects
and motions turn, the mark at which all their designs and endeavors aim.
Those various design^s of men in getting wealth, grasping honor, purchasing
lands, building houses, planting vineyards, do all meet in this one center of
joy, and contentment; the truth is, this is that prize for which all run, and
yet to which few attain, because they miss the way that leads to it: would
you then, beloved, enjoy that joy you so earnestly desire, and partake of the
content you so industriously strive for, turn in hither, follow the Apostles
dictates who wrote this Epistle, that it may be subservient to this very end,
for so he tells us himself, These things we write, that your joy may be full.

I find in the Greek Copies a double reading of the pronoun in this clause
whilst in some it is (...) in others (...), in those a pronoun of the second
person, referring to them to whom the Apostles wrote, to which accords our
translation; your joy, in these a pronoun of the first person, respecting the
Apostles who did write, and so may be rendered our joy; both of these
constructions are both agreeable to the analogy of Faith, and suitable to the
scope of the Apostle, and therefore I shall omit neither.

1. The most and the best Copies read it your, and therefore on this I shall
chiefly insist; but before I enter upon the sense of this clause, it would not
be passed by, that the phrase is such, as our blessed Lord himself was pleased
to use once and again. If you cast your eyes upon that large and excellent
valedictory Sermon of Christ to his Disciples; in the Gospel of S. John you
shall find this expression twice mentioned. These things I have spoken to you
that my joy may remain in you, Joh. 15 11.16.24. Imbibisse mihi videtur
plerasque formulas Johannes quibus utebatur Christus. Lorin.
and that your joy might be full; and again, ask and you shall receive, that
your joy may be full: and now as Scholars use to imitate their Masters
language, and one friend affects those forms of speech which the other is
frequent in, so does this beloved disciple; in that style in which Christ spoke
to his disciples, He speaks to his children: indeed it is not only observable
in this, but those other phrases of keeping Christ's Commandments, of loving
one another, of abiding in Christ, and the like; which as you find them to be
Christ's in the Gospel, so here they are used by S. John in the Epistle, thus
lying in his Masters bosom; he sucked in as it were the phrases which dropped
from his lips, and here mellifluously pours them out.

To let go the phrase, that we may take in the sense and scope of the words: be
pleased to look upon them in a double reference either to the end of the third,
or the beginning of the fourth verse.

1. Refer this clause to the end of the former verse, and then the choice truth
here insinuated, is, that by fellowship with the Father and his Son Jesus
Christ; Beleivers have fullness of joy: or if you please, take it thus; the joy
which Believers have in fellowship with God and Christ is a full joy. For the
better explication of which assertion, I shall demonstrate it to be true in a
double notion, to wit, de praesenti, and de futuro, both here and hereafter;
for of both I find Expositors interpreting these words.

1. The joy which Believers have for the present in this fellowship is a full
joy. The truth of which will the better appear, if we consider it not only
positively, but oppositively; assertively, but exclusively, it being true of
this joy, and no other, that it is a full joy. What ever we have in fellowship
with the creature, is a false, a vain, an empty joy, a shadow; nay, to use the
Greek Poets phrase, a dream of a shadow; real, substantial, solid full joy, Si
gaudeam de rebus s^culi, etc. Vide Orig. Hom. 11. in Number.
is only to be found in fellowship with God in Christ; more particularly to
illustrate this truth, be pleased to know that this joy, and this alone is a
full joy in respect of its adjuncts, effects, objects.

1. There are two adjuncts peculiar to this joy, which demonstrate its fullness,
to wit, the sincerity, and the permanency of it.

1. This joy is a sincere cordial joy: a full shower of rain is that which does
not only wet the surface, but sink into the ground, Plenum gaudium cujus
interiora sunt pacata. Na^gorg. Sen. ep. 23.
be-dew the branches, but go down to the root. That is a full joy which does
not only fill the face with laughter, but the heart with comfort, and such,
yea, such alone is this joy. Caeterae hilari^ates non implent pectus sed
frontem remit^unt, says Seneca; worldly joy smooth the countenance, but have
no influence upon the soul; Guadulup. in Luc. Prove. 14.13.
nay, many times to use Guadulupensis his comparison, as sweet juicy plumbs
have stones with a bitter kernel within them, so to give the reddition in
Solomon's words, even in laughter the heart is sorrowful; wicked and worldly men
for the most part, do but counterfeit a mirth, Sen. de consol. ad polyb. c. 24.
like a Commander in a desperate battle, (to borrow Seneca his similitude) who
lest his Soldiers should run away, sets a good face on it, speaks cheerfully,
whilst yet his heart aches: but this joy is such, that it does not only with
oil cause the face to shine, but with wine make the heart glad: the blessed
Virgins expression is, P^. 104.15. Luc. 1.47. Ps. 4 6.
my spirit rejoices in God my Savior, and David says, thou have put gladness
in my heart. Indeed, Hilaris cum pondere virtus.


The Joy of Religion is not a l^ght joy, which only swimmeth at the top, but
weighty, and sinks down to the bottom of the heart, so as it exhilarateth the
inmost parts; it makes the mind like the upper region of the air, without any
clouds of sorrow, or if you will, like heaven it self, where there is nothing
but light of joy; in a word, this spiritual fellowship makes the heart merry,
Pro. 15.13.
which, as the Wise man says, is a continual feast.

Laetitia saeculi cum magna expectatione speratur ut veniat and non potest
teneri cum venit. Aug. tract. 7. in Ioh.
2. This joy is a permanent lasting joy, that is most truly said to be full,
which does not fail, and such only is this Divine joy; other joys are such as
before they come, we make great account of, but when they are come, we cannot
keep, nay, we quickly grow weary of, and as the flower often sheds before the
leaf fade, so the joy vanishes, whilst yet the thing remains: in this
respect, we may say of worldly joy, it is satiating, but not satisfying,
glutting, and yet not filling, Quae major voluptas* quam fastidium ipsius
voluptatis. Tertul. de spectac. c. 29.
like some meats which nauseat the stomach, and do not fill the belly, but
Christian joy is that which we can never have enough of; of this society, and
the joy in it, there is no satiety, and though it be a full joy, yet we are
never so full of it here, but we desire more, whilst both the desire obtains
fruition, and the fruition increases the desire; indeed this water quenches
our thirst as to any thing else, all other joys seeming vain, worthless to him
that has this, but in respect of it self, it is still kindling new flames of
love; excellently has St. Gregory to this purpose observed the difference
between corporal and spiritual delights, those when we want them are coveted,
Vide Gregor. Hom. 36. in Evang. Et Greg. Nyss. orat. de Mort.
when we have them are loathed, those are only loathed by those who want them,
but still coveted by those who taste them.

Besides, other joys are such as many times end in sorrow, how often have you
seen tears in men's eyes, after the heartiest laughter? nothing more usual than
for the Sun of carnal mirth to set in a cloud, and this serpent of sensual
delight has always a sting in its tail, that verse, Vae tibi ridenti, quia
mox post gaudia slebis Vide Goclen. de Risu.

They say, has all the parts of speech in it; sure I am, it comprizeth in it
the state of all voluptuous Epicures, who sowing in joy, reap in tears, and
after all their good cheer, are sure to meet with a sad reckoning. Indeed
carnal delights, at first glitter like gold, but at last prove heavy as lead;
and as one says aptly, they are wine in the morning, beer at noon, but they
are vinegar at night; but this joy is a remaining, abounding joy, whereof no
man had or shall have cause to repent; carnal joy, like a standing pool,
quickly dries up, and leaves nothing but the mud of discontent; whereas
Christian joy is like a fountain of water, ever running. That, (to take up St.
Bernards metaphor) is like a candle, which goes out in a snuff, Vide Bern.
sermon. de fallac. praesent. Vitae. Et Bas. hom. de Deo gratiis semper agendis.
a stink, a smoke; This, like the morning light, shines brighter and brighter,
unto the perfect day: finally, that like the crackling of thorns under a pot,
soon vanishes, and leaves nothing but the ashes of sorrow behind it, whereas
this, like the fire under the Altar, never goes out.

2. Not only the adjuncts, but the effects commend this joy, it being
deservedly called a full, because a strong joy, able to sustain the spirit
under, and bear it up against affliction; Heb. 6.18. Neh. 8.10. Solatium quia
recreat, fortissimum quia roborat.
it is the Apostles Epithete, strong consolation, and it is Nehemiahs
assertion, the joy of the Lord is your strength; when any wind arises, it
blows out, when any damp is cast forth, it puts out the candle of worldly
joy: but this joy like a torch, burns clearest in the dark night of trouble;
and which plainly bespeaketh its fullness, it is of manifold use, nay, indeed
of universal concernment in all calamities: in which respect, the greek father
affirms of him, that is in communion with God, Cl. Al strom. l. 7.
he is (...), merry in all conditions; other joys at best, carry in them only
a partial emolument, and therefore it is the joy of wealth is no antidote
against sickness; nor can the joy of health cure the sorrow of poverty, but
this joy is (...), the universal medicine, the catholic remedy against all
sorts of miseries; it makes a prison sweet, and pain easy, it makes a man
cheerful in want, and comfortable in losses, it turns a wilderness into a
garden, teaches to sing in a cage, and accounts solitary exile a courtesy,
finally it supports, in life, yea, and it comforts in death. Thus like the tree
cast into the waters of Marah, it sweetens all calamities to us; and as outward
afflictions are mitigated, so inward troubles are removed by this joy, those
wounds of conscience, which carnal mirth can only skin over, this cures, and
therefore whereas, after sensual jollity, those wounds fester the more; by this
joy the very rotten core is eaten out, and we enjoy a spiritual sanity of mind
and conscience; the sum is, let conscience accuse, let the world persecute, let
the devil tempt, yea, let afflictions of all sorts, (like the waves of the
Sea) successively, nay, simultaneously beat against the ship of the soul, this
joy like a firm anchor, will be able to stay it.

3. Lastly, the fullness of this joy, chiefly depends on the ground and object
whereabout it is conversant. It is an undoubted maxim, that the object of all
joy, is good, and therefore such as is the good, such is the joy; if the good
be only so in appearance, the joy must be needs be false and empty, but if it
be a real, full good, the joy must needs be both true and full: now, as for
worldly joy, it is only in vain, empty things. Solomon has long since passed
that censure upon these terrene comforts, all is vanity, Eccles. 1.2. Aug.
sermon. 37. de verbis Dom.
and therefore the joy must needs be gaudium vanitatis, a vain joy; whereas
this joy is fixed on God our Creator, Christ our Redeemer, and so is gaudium
veritatis, a true and solid joy, the one is a joy in corn and wine, as David
distinguishes it; but the other in the light of Gods countenance; the one in
broken cisterns that hold no water, Ps. 4.6.
but the other in the fountain of living waters; and indeed, hence it is, that
the fullness of this joy, in those forementioned respects arises; therefore
does this joy fill the heart, because it is in God and Christ, who is a
proportionable good to the heart; therefore is this joy such, as no man can
take from us, because it is in God and Christ, of whose fellowship none can
debar us; therefore is this joy able to support us under all troubles, because
it is in God and Christ, who is an universal, and all-sufficient good. Alas,
other joys being only in outward perishing things, and such as at best can
afford but some particular advantage, must needs be defective, only God and
Christ is such a good, as is of a spiritual nature, everlasting durance, and
general extent; no wonder if this fellowship alone content the mind, and the
soul find that in this, which may answer all its wants, Quid quaeris ext^a
illum? quid desideras praeter illum? quid placet c^m illo? Bern sermon de miser.
hum. Quisquis vero percipit quid valeat illa cum Deo societas h^c una abunde
contentus. Calv. in loc. Posito effecto pro causa significat ipsam be
atitudinem. Illyr, in l^c. Per nomen gaudii pleni significat id quod in re
atque pat^^ pe^ficitur. Lorin. ibid. Ps. 16 11. Aristot Eth. l. 7. c. 12. Romans
5.3.
and satisfy all its desires* Excellently therefore St. Bernard, What need
thou seek beside him? what can please without him? what do thou desire,
which thou may not find in him? he made all, he has all, he is all.
Whatsoever good thou wishest, sweet thou cravest, delectable thing thou
searchest after, it is all to be found and enjoyed in him, and that by
communion with him; good reason has St. John to wish, that his brethren to
whom he wrote, might have this fellowship, even upon this account, that the^r
joy might be full.

2. Though this joy we have for the present, be as you have heard, a full joy,
in opposition to carnal and worldly joy, yet in comparison of that caelestial
joy, it is but empty, and rather filling than full, and therefore some conceive
joy here to be by a metonymic of the effect for the cause put for blessedness,
because then alone it is that we shall have full and perfect joy, and to this
purpose some (as the Philosopher observes) derive (...) from (...), only
changing the (...) into (...), as if the word blessedness, did signify greatly
to rejoice. Indeed, as David says, in thy presence is fullness of joy; our joy
will never be full, till we come to enjoy the beatifical vision: our joy here,
is only in hope and expectation; so St. Paul, we rejoice in hope of the glory
of God: nor can our joy be full, till we come to the fruition of what we
expect. Hence it is, that all we have here is but a taste, then we shall drink
deep of the river of pleasure: Now we have only the first fruits, hereafter
our joy shall be as the joy of harvest: Finally, now the joy of the Lord enters
into us, but then it is we shall enter into the joy of the Lord, Mat. 25.21.
and be, as it were, swallowed up in the boundless ocean of that joy; the truth
is, according to this (...), so is the (...), our exultation answers our
participation, because this fellowship cannot be perfect, till we come to
heaven, where we shall fully enjoy sanctity and immortality with God and Christ
for ever, therefore then and not till then, shall this be verified, our joy
shall be filled.

And now to tell you how full that joy shall be, I want words: St. Peter
speaking of our joy which we have in believing, calls it unspeakable, and full
of glory; indeed, sentire est cordis, dicere non est oris, 1 Pet. 1.8.
the heart feels what the tongue cannot express: but oh then, how glorious,
and not only unspeakable, but unconceivable shall that joy be in seeing.
Surely, as when Christ miraculated wine, he filled the vessels to the brim,
Ioh. 2.7.
so shall he fill the vessels of our souls in that day, with the water of joy,
to the very brim, so as there shall not be the least deficiency, but an
abundance, yea, a superabundance, both over, and everflowing, to make glad the
inhabitants of that heavenly City to all eternity.

What then is the inference which we are to draw from hence, but that we learn?
what joy to seek after? namely, that which is full, and wherein (to that end)
to place it, namely, in fellowship with God and Christ.

Beloved, it is a false slander, an odious calumny, which by black mouths is
belched forth against Christianity, as if it were an enemy to all joy, whereas
it does not extirpate, but ordinate our joy, teaching us to place it on the
right object; you are mistaken when you think that we would rob you of your
comfort, and spoil your mirth; no brethren, our aim in endeavoring to bring
you to God and Christ, is (to use Seneca's phrase upon better grounds) that you
might never want mirth; Nolo tibi unquam de esse laetitiam. Sen. ep. 23. ^ Thessalonians. 5.16.
or according to St. Paul's expression, that you may rejoice evermore: Indeed,
this is our scope, to confine your carnal joy, or rather refine it, that it
may be pure, spiritual, and heavenly. Oh that you would at last be wise, and
fix your joy in the right center, by elevating it to the things above; how
should you say with that penitent Father, Far be it Lord, far be it from the
heart of thy servant, that I should account my self happy by any earthly joy,
that is the joy, which is not given to the wicked, but only to them who serve
thee, Vide Aug. conf. l. 10. c. 22.
whose joy thou thy self art, and that is the blessed life to rejoice of thee,
in thee, for thee, that is it, and no other; or in words not much unlike those
of St. Paul, God forbid that we should rejoice in any thing, save in fellowship
with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ. Gal. 6.14


2. Refer this clause to the former part of this verse, and then the truth,
which is manifestly employed is, that those things which the holy men of God did
write, are able to give fullness of joy. This is the doctrine which I shall
endeavor to illustrate, both generally of all the holy writings, and
particularly of the Apostolical writings.

1. There is fullness of joy to be had in the holy Scriptures, this was that
which David experienced, and therefore affirms concerning himself, that the
words of God were sweet to his taste, Ps. 119.103.162.
and he rejoiced in them, as one that found a great spoil; and that holy man
Ambrose upon those words, breaks forth into these expressions, I have great
cause to rejoice, for I have found the spoils for which I have not labored;
Vide Ambros. in Ps. 118.
I have found the Pentateuch of Moses, the writings of the Prophets; I have
found Christ the wonderful Counselor, and Paul the prudent builder; for this
reason, no doubt it is, that the word of God contained in the Scripture, is
compared to light, and wine, and honey, Vide Bern. sermon. 64. Chrysostom* hom. in
E^trep.
and milk, all which, are of a pleasing and exhilarating nature; indeed the
holy Scriptures are a tree of life, whereof every leaf is healing, or according
to St. Chrysostom, a pleasant garden, wherein every flower yields a fragrant
smell; or to use St. Ambrose his comparison, Ambros. de offic. l. 1. c. 32.
a feast, in which every book is a dainty dish, affording both sweet and
wholesome nutriment. No wonder if St. Paul, speaking of the Scriptures, makes
mention of the patien^e, Romans 15.4.
and hope, and comfort of the Scriptures, there being no such ground of hope
and patience, and therefore no such comfort to be found elsewhere, as in these
sacred books.

2. As this is true in general of all parcels of holy writ, so more especially
of the Apostolical writings; to this purpose St. Cyril mystically interpreting
those words of the Prophet Micah, that every man should sit under his vine, and
under his figtree, observes that wine is an emblem of joy, the figtree of
sweetness, Mic. 4.4. Vide Cyr. Al. ibid.
and by both is shadowed that joy which the Evangel^cal doctrine should produce
in those who sit under the preaching of it; indeed those doctrines which reveal
God and Christ, satisfaction to God by Christ, reconciliation to God in Christ,
can only give solid comfort to the soul, since God out of Christ, is a
consuming sire, only in Christ he is a reviving Sun; out of Christ, he is a
sin-revenging, only in Christ a sin-forgiving God: now these doctrines are no
where made known but in holy writ, and they are most clearly delivered in the
Apostolical writings, what Moses and Esaias, and Jeremy, spoke obscurely that
Paul, and Peter, and John, declare plainly, and therefore though we find joy in
those, yet by these our joy is filled. It is not unworthy our obsetvation in
the Text, that this clause. These things we write, stands in the middle,
between our fellowspip, is with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, and that
your joy might be full, as having indeed an influence on both, and by effecting
the one, it produces the other; these things which the Apostles write, reveal
God and Christ, and the way of fellowship with them, and by bringing us to this
fellowship, they convey unto us this fullness of joy and comfort.

To apply this in some short confectaries.

1. How injurious is the superstition of the Papists, and that both to the
Scriptures themselves, and to the people.

1. To the Scriptures, Vide Bellarm. de verb. Dei. l 4. c. 3.
in that they deny to them a perfect sufficiency containing all things
necessary to salvation, and that for this reason that they might advance the
esteem of their unwritten Traditions: indeed such traditions as are not
fictitious but real, not particular but universal, and clearly appear to be s^,
we reject not; but withal, we assert there are no such traditions delivering
any thing necessary to salvation, which is not to be found either in express
terms, or by evident cons^quences in the holy Scriptures, and that I may not
wander, we meet with a strong argument to this purpose in my text. That which
is able to give us full joy, must not be deficient in any thing which conduces
to our happiness; but the holy Scriptures give fullness of joy, and therefore
the way to happiness is perfectly laid down in them; the major of this
syllogism is so clear, that it needs no probation: for who can or will deny,
that full joy is only to be had in a state of bl^sse; the minor is plain from
this Scripture, and may thus be drawn forth. That which the Apostles aimed at
in, may doubtless be attained to by their writings, for they being inspired of
God, it is no other then the end that God purposed in inspiring, which they had
in writing, and either God himself is wanting in the means which he has
designed for this end, or these writings contain in them, what will yield
fullness of joy, and to that end bring us to a state of blessedness.

Laicis lectionem scripturae permittere est sanctum dare canibus and margaritas
ante p^rcos projicere. Hos. de verb. Dei.
2. To the people whom they expressly forbid to read the holy Scriptures,
esteeming the permission of them to the vulgar eye to be the casting of pearls
before swine, and the giving holy things to dogs: hence is it that in a seeming
reverence to holy writ, and withal a pretended care of the Laics, that they
may not wrest the Scriptures to their own perdition, they lay upon them a
prohibition; but the truth is, as they are but false friends to the Scripture,
so in this they are manifest enemies to the people, bereaving them of that
comfort which they might have in the reading of those divine books. Certainly
the Apostles intended that their Epistles should be read both to and by them,
to whom they wrote them: now these you to whom S. John wrote were ordinary
Christians, dispersed in several countries, such, whom in the second Chapt. he
calls not only Fathers, but young men and children, and the other Apostles
express^ly direct their Epistles, to all that are called to be Saints, as well
private persons in, as public officers of the Church; nay yet further, when we
consider what singular benefit is to be gained by the reading of the holy
Scriptures for correction, ^nstruction, and in particular, consolation; surely
it is no small injury, that the Church of Rome by this prohibition does to her
members, even as great as if the mother should deny the dug to the tender
infant.

2. How odious is the profaneness of those Christians who neglect the holy
Scriptures, and give themselves to reading other books? How many precious hours
do many spend, and that not only on workdays, but holydays, in fool^sh
Romances, fabulous histories, lascivious poems? and why this? but that they may
be cheered and delighted, when as full joy is only to be had in these holy
books. Alas the joy you find in those writings, is perhaps pernicious; such as
tickleth your lust, and promoteth contemplative wickedness, at the best it is
but vain, such as only pleases the fancy and affects the wit; Psalm. 19 8.
whereas these holy writings (to use David's expression) are right, rejoicing
the heart. Again, are there not many who more set by Plutarchs Morals, Seneca's
Epistles, and such like books; then they do by the holy Scriptures? it is true
beloved, there are excellent truths in those moral writings of the heathen, but
yet they are far short of these sacred books; those may comfort against outward
trouble, but not against inward fears; they may rejoice the mind, but cannot
quiet the conscience; they may kindle some flashy sparkles of joy, but they
cannot warm the soul with a lasting fire of solid consolation. And truly
brethren, if ever God give you a spiritual ear to judge of things aright, you
will then acknowledge there are no bells like to those of Aarons, no harp like
to that of David's, Olim mihi Tullius dulcescebat blandiebantur carmina
Poetarum. etc. Petri Dam Ser. de Christi Natal.
no trumpet like to that of Isaiahs, no p^pes like to those of the Apostles,
and you will confess with Petrus Damianus, that those writings of heathen
Orators, Philosophers, Poets, which formerly were so pleasing, are now dull and
harsh in comparison of the comfort of the Scriptures.

3. Lastly, let us so diligently read, steadfastly believe, and obediently
conform to these writings, that our joy may be full by them. It is very
observable, what the Prophet Jeremy says concerning himself. Thy words were
found, and I did eat them, and thy word was to me the joy and rejoicing of my
heart; Ier. 15.16. Ede Scripturarum coelestium cibos and ede ut permaneant tibi
in vitam aeternam, etc. Ambros. in Psalm. 118. Habeant sibi caeteri si velint
suas opes gemma bibant. serico niteant, etc. Hieron. Ep. 155. Non excedat tibi
lex de ore cordis tui, volve, revolve, versa reversa, ac tunc intelliges quid
sapiat manna, etc. Drog. Host. de sacram. Dom. pass. l. 1. Vide Ambros. l^d.
Petr. Sim. Tilet.
the word caused in Jeremy joy and rejoicing, that is, a full joy, but by what
means; it was by eating it, so must we get comfort in the Scriptures by eating,
that is, reading, meditating, and applying them to our selves. Let then that
counsel which St. Ambrose gives, be acceptable to us; Eat, and eat daily of
this heavenly manna, that thy hunger may be satisfied, and thy soul nourished
to eternal life: remember the advice which St. Hierom gives, Whatever joys
and pleasures others may take, let our delights be in the law of the Lord.
Finally, hearken to the exhortation of Drogo hostiensis. Let not the Law depart
from thy heart, read and ponder again and again, that thou may find the
savor of this manna, and with the Be suck the sweetness of these heavenly
flowers: And yet more particularly, when thou art cast into any danger,
labourest under any affliction, make use of these writings for thy comfort,
which are as St. Ambrose truly styleth them, the only refuge in all
temptations. Excellently to this purpose is that even of a Roman Bishop, in his
exhortation to the Clergy? Does any one labor with ignorance? these writings
are a light to the feet, and a lanthorn to his paths; do we weep in this valley
of tears? here we may find that which will dry our eyes, and revive our spirit;
do thou thirst after righteousness? here is a fountain of pure water? art
thou spiritually hungry? here is the bread which came down from heaven: indeed
there is no condition that can befall a Christian, Vid. Rivet. Isag. p. 406.
to which these holy writings do not afford a suitable and proportioned
consolation. I end this therefore with allusion to that expression of the
Prophet Esaias, Is. 12.3. Hier. Pr^cop. ibid.
With joy shall you draw water out of the wells of salvation. These wells of
salvation, are Evangelical truths: so St. Hierome spiritual sayings; so
Procoptus, Oh let us by the bucket of faith draw the water of comfortable
doctrine out of those wells, to the joy and solace of our hearts.

I have now dispatched the first and most genuine reading of this pronoun,
Oecumen. in loc.
the other (which the Greek Scholiast takes notice of) would not be altogether
passed by, which is (...), a pronoun of the first person, since not only some
Greek copies, but the Syriack version also so renders it, that our joy might be
full.

And thus as venerable Bede observes upon these words, it lets us see what is
the joy of a godly Minister; Gaudium doctorum fit plenum cum multos ad sanctae
Ecclesiae societatem perducunt. Bed. ibid. Senec. ep. 24.
namely, when the people by his declaring, preaching, writing, are brought to
fellowship with God and Christ, and the more they gain to this fellowsh^p, the
more is their joy enlarged and filled up. Indeed (that I may borrow Seneca's
similitudes) if it cannot but delight the husbandman when he sees his plants
grow, his trees flourish, his fruits ripen, if it must needs rejoice the
Shepherd to behold his Sheep sound, fat, and fruitful; if it glad the heart
of a Schoolmaster o^ Tutor to observe his Scholars thrive in learning, Cum
gaudere in hoc omnes fratres oportet tum iu gaudio communi, major est Episcopi
portio. Cypr. ^p. 7. ad
and increase in knowledge, it must needs be matter of abundant joy to the
Ministers of the Gospel, when they reap the fruit of their labor in the
conversion and confirmation of their people. This is that which this holy
Apostle John, as here, so elsewhere expresses to be his temper, when writing
to the Elect Lady, the says, I rejoiced greatly that I found of thy children
walking in the truth; Joh. Ep. 2. v. 4.3. v. 4.
and when writing to the well-beloved Gaius, he says, I have no greater joy
then that my children walk in truth, Ep. 3. v. 4. Phil. 4.1. 1 These. 2.19.20.
the same spirit lodged in that blessed Apostle Paul, who calls the Philippians
his joy and his Crown, and the Thessalonians his hope, his joy, his Crown of
rejoicing, his glory and his joy, by which phrases is intimated an exceeding
joy, glorying being the height of rejoicing; nay Emperors cannot take greater
joy in their crowns, then he did in those of whose conversion God had made him
instrumental: nay as if he knew not how enough to be thankful, he breaks
forth into that pathetical question, what thanks can we render to God for all
the joy wherewith we joy for your sakes. 3.9.
To this purpose was that pious speech of an holy Bishop to his flock, Eusebius
Vercell. Episcop.
implestis viscera mea, cum implestis mandata divina; your fulfilling Gods
precepts is the filling up of my joy. We read in the parable, of a woman, who
having found her lost groat, called her neighbors and friends to rejoice with
her; that finding the lost groat, Luc. 15.9.
is an emblem of a lost sinner gained to Christ, and the woman represents the
Minister who cannot but greatly rejoice at his being the means of converting
any sinner; indeed as we find afterward in that Chapter, V. 7.
There is joy in heaven over one sinner that repents; the truth is, there is
joy both in heaven and in earth, whilst both the Angels those heavenly
Ministers, and Ministers those earthly Angels, rejoice at the winning of souls
to Christ.

This is the joy of godly Ministers for the present, and shall be, yet much
more at the last day, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, Greg hom. 17.
in Evang.
at his coming, when (as St. Gregrory aptly) Peter shall appear with his
converted Jews, and Paul with his converted Gentiles, and all Pastors, with
their reduced sheep, when they, who have received any spiritual profit by us,
shall give in evidence for us, and be as so many pearls set in our Crown of
glory.

Oh then, how should we that are the Ministers of Christ, double, yea, Jo.
21*15.16.17.
treble our diligence in feeding the flock, according to Christ's threefold
mandate? how should we bestir our selves in all the ways, by all the means we
can, by preaching, writing, and that in exhorting, reproving, comforting, that
we may bring men to this fellowship, since it will be the filling of our joy?
Indeed, a lazy careless Minister, is not more the peoples, than his own enemy,
since as he hinders their good, so his own comfort: for if it be uncomfortable
when we sow much, and reap little, the success not answering our pains, it must
needs be much more doleful, when conscience gives in testimony against us,
that we have sowed but little, having been careless and negligent in the
discharge of our duty, since whereas the other is but only a cross, this is a
curse, according to that of the Prophet Jeremy, cursed is he, that does the
work of the Lord negligently. Jer. 48.10.


But further, oh that you who are the people, would upon this consideration
labor to profit, by what we preach and write to you, that hereby you may fill
our joy. Many of you pretend a great deal of love and respect to us: oh my
brethren, if you love us, do not grieve us by your unprofitableness: By your
presence, you fill our Churches, by your maintenance, you fill our purses: but
what is this, if by your obedience you do not fill our joy? many of you seem to
pity us, when you see us exhausting our spirits, wasting our bodies, weakening
our strength in preaching to you: oh then, why do you not refresh our minds,
revive our spirits, rejoice our hearts in requiting our pains, with your
fruitfulness? it is true beloved, our work in it self is difficult, but your
hard hearts, are an heavier burden to us, than our hard work. Truly if our
hearts deceive us not, to find good wrought upon you by our pains, is the best
cordial you can give us, as that godly Father said to his people of Antioch, I
feel not the weight of my labor, because I am revived by the gain of you that
are my Auditors. Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. hom. 9.


Let me then bespeak you my dearly beloved parishiners and auditors this day,
in the same language St. Paul bespoke his Philippians, Phil. 2.2.
fulfill you my joy in your endeavor, to profit by my Ministry: why shall we,
who are Evangelical sowers, be forced to complain that we sow our seed, if not
among briars and thorns, which scratch and tear (the usage that too many have
found in these days) yet among stones, so as it yields no fruit? why do you
force us with our preaching and praying, to join tears in weeping for, and over
you, because of your barreness? nay, why should we come in at the last day of
Judgment as witnesses against you, and be forced to give up our account with
grief?

I end all, if on the one hand, you will not be won to Christ by our Ministry,
know that as it is our sorrow, it will be your misery, our heaviness, your
unhappyness, if it be uncomfortable to us, it will be unprofitable to you, and
if you put us upon a woe of condoling, you will meet with a woe of condemning:
and on the other hand, if our Ministry be effectual to bring you into
fellowship with God and Christ, know that it will not only be ours, but your
joy (for so we may put both the readings of this clause together) we shall have
some, and you will have much more cause of comfort in it. For this end it is my
brethren, that we show and declare, and write. Oh do not disappoint us of our
hopes, and frustrate our desires, but for this cause do you hear, believe, and
obey, that both your and our joy may be full.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN. SERMON. 9.

CHAP. I. Ver. 5, 6, 7. This then is the message which we have heard of him,
and declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.

If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and
do not the truth.

But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one
with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all sin.


HAppiness is the Center, in which all men's desires meet, and the mark at which
all their intentions shoot; this is that which every one seeks after for
himself, and which Christ's Apostles and Ministers labor after, in regard of
their people. The safety of the flock is the shepherds care, the health of the
patient, the Physicians work, and the peoples salvation, the hearty desire,
prayer and endeavor of every faithful Preacher: Indeed, for this end, they are
set as lights, placed as stars in the firmament of the Church, that they may
guide men's feet into the way of peace, and path of life.

True happiness principally, nay, wholly consists in communion and fellowsh^p
with God in Christ, since he is that summum bonum, chief and universal good,
the fruition of which alone, can make us happy: no wonder if St. John, with the
rest of the Apostles, desiring to bring the people to blessedness, labor by
their preaching and writing, to make them partakers of this fellowship.

But as indeed (...), all things of excellency are attended with difficulty,
Plut. de. lib. educ.
so is in special this fellowship; the truth is, to be mistaken in it, is very
easy, to partake of it, is very d^fficult, the attainment of it, will
undoubtedly make us happy, but withal, it is very hadly attained unto; good
reason then had St. John, having signified this fellowship, as that which was
the end of his writing, to discuss in his writing at once the marks whereby we
may know, and the means whereby we may atain it, with which, he therefore
begins in the words that I have now read. This then is the message which we
heard of him, etc.

Having already passed through the Preface, we are now to handle the Epistle it
self; I shall not stay to give you an exact and particular Analysis, or as it
were, Anatomy of its body, and that chiefly, because our Apostle does not tie
himself to a strict, and accurate method, though I doubt not, but in perusing
the several Chapters, and parcels of it, we shall find a rational connection and
dependence of one upon the other, and all upon the principal scope. It may for
the present suffice, to know that the design of this discourse is, to instruct
all men professing Christianity, how they may try the truth of their
prof^ssion. To erect a partition wall discriminating between heretical and
orthodox, hypocritical, and sincere Christians: Finally, To deliver us a Box
of evidences, by which we may clear our interest in communion with God and
Christ, and thereby our title to eternal life; and indeed this is that which
our Apostle implicitly insinuates in the former verse, V. 4.
since the fullness of our joy must needs ar^se only from an apprehension of
our part in this partnersh^p, and expressly asserteth in the last Chapter, where
he says, Chapter 5.14.
These things have I written, that you may have eternal life.

As for the words which I have now read, Jam incipit rem ipsam attingere
suaeque doctrinae materiam p^op^nit. Lo^in. in loc.
our Apostle in them gives us a breviate of what he intends to enlarge upon in
the rest of the Epistle, summarily proposing what he does afterward abundantly
exemplify; for if you peruse the whole Epistle, you shall find (if not all,
yet) the greatest part spent in one of these three things, either in
delineating the steps of the way, whereby we walk in the light; such as are
faith, obedience, contempt of the world, and especially love to God and our
brethren, or in declaring the choice privileges of fellowship with God and
Christ, namely our justification, adoption, and glorification, or in describing
those Antichristian heretics, who pretend to have fellowship with Christ, and
walk in darkness, so that in few words if you please, we may call these three
verses the Text, and the rest of the Epistle, a Commentary upon the Text.

Begin we then now with the Text, and in it for our more orderly proceeding be
pleased to take a view of the porch and the house, and in the house of the
foundation and the superstructure, and in the superstructure of the two rooms,
directly opposite one to the other; the one as it were on the left, the other
on the right hand. The porch is contained in those words; This then is the
message which we have heard of him, and declare to you; the foundation of the
house in those; God is light, and in him is no darkness at all; and the rooms
in the house are on the one hand, the vain presumption abominable lie of those
who pretend to have fellowship with God, and walk in darkness; on the other the
assured fellowship with God, and cleansing by Christ, of those who walk in the
light. Of each of these in their order, most humbly beseeching him who is the
light to irradiate our minds with his heavenly beams, that we may clearly
discern, and effectually embrace those truths which are here set before us.

1. Enter we then into the porch, a clause which for substance and in effect we
have already handled, as having met with it in the beginning of the third
verse. And truly, were this only a repetition, it would not be supervacaneous,
because no endeavor can be too much, as for the informing our apprehensions
aright of, so for the confirming our faith in, and assent to evangelical
doctrines, indeed it is the policy of the Devil, and that which by many ways
he endeavors to cause in us both a misunderstanding of, and hesitation about
Gospel truths. It was the stratagem he used with our first parents, to beget in
them a questioning, and then a denial of the verity of Gods saying, and it is
still his practice to make us either totally deny or causelessly doubt of divine
writings; Vide Gualt. Lorin. in loc.
no marvel if the Apostle, not once, but again,; nay (as Lorinus observes)
thrice inculcates that what he was now to write, was no other then what he had
heard.

But as this is a repetition, so with some addition, and it is such an
iteration as admits of variation, if you please to compare this with the
precedent parallel clause, you shall find a noun and pronoun here added, whereas
before it is only that which, here it is the message which, and whereas there
it is only that which we have heard; here it is that which we have heard of
him, so that here are two things to be discussed de novo, which is, what it is
that hearing they declared a message, and of whom they received it, of him, and
yet there is one thing more not touched before, because it more fitly falls in,
now, the persons who did hear of him, and declare to us. We

1. That which the Apostles heard is here called a message: so our translation
renders it: as also Beza? Vide Bez. Grot. Socin. in loc.
and the vulgar Latin version; according to which Grotius tells us in one
manuscript, it is (...); Socinus would have us believe a mistake in the scribe
of (...) for (...), and that it should be (...), the noun of (...), which is
the verb our Apostle uses here for declaring. But the usual reading in the
Greek Copy is (...), and that in its most known acception signifies a
promise, nor (though I confess I am almost alone in it) do I see any reason
why we should decline the word, or its usual signification; nay indeed (at
least to me) it seems very congruous and suitable. For

1. It is the word which out Apostle afterward uses, when he speaks of the
same thing, 1 John 2 25.
that which they had heard from the beginning, presently adds, this is the
promise which he has promised, and so we have heard.

2. But chiefly it is that which very aptly agrees with the context, whether
you look backward or forward

1. In the former verse, the Apostle acquaints the people that his end in
writing these things was, that their joy might be full; and here he tells us
what those things were that would bring this fullness of joy, to which purpose
he calls them not barely a message, but a promise; which is a message of glad
tidings, able to fill our joy. Non secus ac si ingens nobis bonum Joannes
promitteret de Deo enuntiat ipsum omni modo lumen esse, etc. Velasq. in Philip.
c. 1. v. 2. Annot. ^, mor.


2. If you look on what immediately follows, God is light, and in him is no
darkness^, though for this reason, that signification of promise is rejected,
because those words are assertory, not promissory: yet a late Writer has
observed (ingeniously, though not so solidly) a congruencie even in these
words; because light represents the communicative goodness of God; here is a
tacit and virtual promise, assuring us, that God is ready to cast forth the
beams of his grace and mercy on us.

3. But I conceive in this lies the mistake of interpreters, that they
understand this message to consist in the words immediately subsequent, whereas
if we examine it more narrowly, we shall find the substance of the message to
be laid down in the seventh verse, to which the term of promise fitly agrees,
it being a manifest promise of fellowship with God, and cleansing by Christ to
them who walk in the light; and this is illustrated in the sixth verse by a
redargution of that lying promise which presumptuous sinners who walk in
darkness, make to themselves of having fellowship with God.

And as for those words in the fifth verse, God is light, and in him is no
darkness; they are apparently premised as a proof of the promise and,
confirmation of the message (for which reason I call them in the division the
foundation of the building) and accordingly that Greek particle (...) being as
well causall as declarative, may be fitly, and is so rendered by the vulgar
Latin quoniam, because, and the sense will amount to this, Because God is
light, and in him is no darkness: therefore they, and they only who walk in
the light, being thereby like to him, can or shall have fellowship with him,
cleansing by his son; and this is the promise which have heard of him.

This word, and thereby somewhat of the sense of the whole being thus cleared
to us; I cannot pass it over without a double note, well worthy our serious
consideration.

1. The nature of the Gospels message, it is a promise.

2. The tenure of this promise, it is conditional.

1. The Syriack word here used signifies Gospel, the Greek, promise: indeed
the Gospel in its chief design is promissory, it is not only an historical
narration of something done, but of this as done for us, and so a promissory
declaration of Gods good will toward us; the Prot^vangelium, first Gospel
preached by God to fallen Adam, Genesis 3.1^.
is a plain promise, The seed of the wooman shall break the Serpents head; nor
is there any promise now made to man, but what is contained in the Gospel. The
Law is a denunciation of wrath, of a curse against us, because of trangression;
only the Gospel is an annunciation of mercy and forgivenes; that breaths
forth only a cold blast, a Northwind of threatening; this sends forth a warm
gale, a South Wind of promise.

A promise it is, and that not of paying a debt, but bestowing a gift: man's
promise is ofttimes an act of justice, but Gods, of mere grace and free love,
and therefore it is that his purpose of which the Gospel-promise is the
counterpane, is joined with Grace, 2 Timothy 1.9. Ephesians. 1.7. Acts 20.32. (...),
etc. Ammon,
and that special promise of the Gospel forgiveness of sin, is said to be
according to the riches of his grace; yea one appellation given to the Gospel
is, that it is called the word of Gods grace, because it manifests his free
grace to sinners. And indeed if we believe the Greek critic, this truth is
wrapped up in the very word there used, this being the difference between (...)
and (...), that the latter is only a promise of what is due, but the former of
what is free.

A promise it is, and that such as has many promises in the womb of it, and
those as the Apostle Peter calls them, 2 Pet. 1.4.
exceeding great and precious, not of temporals, but spiritualls; nay eternals.
Fellowship with God, remission, adoption, eternal life; what not? are the
choice and precious benefits which this promise reveals and offers to us;
indeed it is a treasury of divine riches, a storehouse of the souls
provision, a cabinet of heavenly pearls, all things truly good, and justly
desirable, being contained in, and conveyed to us by this promise,

Oh let us learn to set an high value upon Evangelical doctrine. Thou have
magnified thy word above all thy name, Psalm. 138* ^.
says the Psalmist, thou have magnified thy Gospel above all thy word, may we
say; and that upon this ground, because it is promissory revelation; surely if
the whole word of God be as milk, the promising part is as the cream of that
milk; if that be as a Firmament of Stars, this is as the Sun in that
firmament. Finally, if that be as a Feast, this is the sweetest dish in that
Feast. 1 Pet. 2.2.3
Desire says the Apostle Peter, the sincere milk of the word (meaning the
Gospel) if you have tasted that the Lord is gracious; indeed we may taste the
verity of God in all his words; the equity of God in his commands, the severity
of God in his threats: but we only taste the mercy of God how gracious he is
in the Evangelical promises; and surely tasting, we cannot but singularly
esteem, and fervently desire it.

Vide Calv. Grot in loc.
2. Calvin and Grotius make the sense of these words, this is the promise; to
intend thus much. The promise which we bring to you has this condition annexed
to it, to wit, of walking in the light; and therefore it is expressed with an
if, an hypothetical conjunction; That then, which we have further to take
notice of, and would by no means be omitted, is, that the promise of the Gospel
is conditional; it is a position with a supposition, nor are the benefits in it
granted absolutely, but respectively.

It is a question moved by some how the promise can be free and yet
cnoditional, not considering the difference between a meritorious cause, for
which a thing ought to be, and a necessary condition, without which it cannot
be effected; were there a proportion of equality between the thing promised,
and required, the promise could not be free, but the Evangelical condition is
such only, as makes us meet for, not worthy of the thing promised, and
therefore has only a proportion of congruity. Mercy then is the spring from
whence the promise flows, but duty is the channel in which it runs down to
us. The primarie design of the Law was precept, commanding us to do, though
there was annexed to it a promise, which upon doing what was commanded, we
should receive. The principal scope of the Gospel is promise, revealing what
God is pleased to do for us, yet so, as that there are precepts annexed to it,
which require somewhat to be done by us, that we may obtain the promise.

What then God has joined together, let not us put asunder: the most of us
with Malchus have but one ear to hear the promise, but not the precept of the
Gospel; we like well to gather the rose, and suck the honey of a promise, but
the condition we hate as the pricles and sting; we would gladly have the
privilege assured, and yet we abhor the duty required, but be not deceived,
if you will have the one, you must do the other. God will not fulfill his part,
unless we perform ours; and therefore it is in vain to expect an
accomplishment of his promise, but on his own terms* in fine, the Gospel is a
promise, let us not be so unthankful unto God and Christ, as to reject it: it
is a conditional promise, let us not be so injurious to our selves, as to
misapply it.

2. The Apostles heard this message of him: if you ask, of whom? the answer is
to be fetched from the end of the third verse, the Father and his Son Jesus
Christ; V. 3.
it would not be passed by, that the Apostle speaking of two persons; nay
implicitly of all three, uses the singular number, saying, not which we heard
of them, but him; from which though Socinus would only gather an unity of will
and affection, Socin in loc.
yet the Orthodox conclude an unity of essence and nature. The multitude of
believers were of one heart in the primitive times, and one soul, Acts 4.32.
yet it would have been very improper to have spoken of them, as one man, but
inasmuch as the Father and the Son, though two persons, ^ave one and the same
essence, it was very proper to use the singular number, that which we have
heard of him.

That which we are here to take notice of is,

1. Partly, that these Apostles heard before they declared. It is very
observable, that in the Hebrew tongue, the same verb in Kal signifies to
learn, and in Piel to teach, and the same noun signifies both an hearing, (...)
and a report; and indeed the Greeks use (...), and the Latins auditio in the
same sense; whereby is intimated to us, that we must be hearers, ere we be
speakers, learners, ere we be Teachers, Scholars, before we be Tutors. And I
could heartily wish that this consideration might be a check to the
inconsiderate rashness of those giddy heads in this age, who never sat at
Gamaliels feet, and yet step into Moses his chair; and though they have scarce
learned any thing themselves at either School or Academy, adventure to teach
the people in these sacred Oratories.

2. Chiefly, That what they declared to the world, was no other then what they
heard from Christ, this is that which as S. John asserteth here, so S. Paul
elsewhere concerning himself: 1 Cor. 11.23.7.23.
That which I have received of the Lord, I have delivered unto you; and in
another place, not I but the Lord: Thus it was with the Apostles, and thus it
was with the Prophets, who uttered nothing but what was by God revealed to
them, and therefore you find them very often bringing in, Sic dicit Dominus,
Thus says the Lord.

1. It is an Item to Ministers, that our faithfulness appear in delivering as
wholly, so only the Counsel of God, the mind of Christ, revealed in his Word
to the people, whilst Jesuits declare what they hear from the Pope, as
accounting him infallible, whilst Enthusiasts declare what they hear from the
devil, mistaking his delusions for the spirits inspirations; let the Ministers
of Christ declare nothing but what they hear; though not immediately, yet
mediately from Christ: oh far be it from us to pretend to be his messengers,
and yet to vent our own inventions, and preach our own fancies: what
Ambassador dare deliver any thing to a foreign Prince but what the King his
Master gives him in charge; Oh let us who are the Ambassadors of Christ,
declare nothing but that message with which he sends us.

2. It is a document to the people, that the Apostolical writings, Ideo
reverenter atque inviolabiliter debetis retinere quod mihi Dominus tradidit and
ego vobis. Ans. in Cor. Jo. 10.4.
and our preaching according to them be received by you with Faith and
reverence, because they are no other then the dictates of Christ; indeed whose
authority should prevail if not Christ's? and with whom? if not the Church: it
is the character of Christ's sheep, that they know his voice, and follow it; we
need not fear that he who is the way will cause us to wander, who is the truth
will cause us to err, who is the faithful witness, will go about to deceive
us: so long as we speak the truth in and from Christ, and lie not, do you
believe and doubt not.

3. The We to whom Christ was pleased to impart this message, and by whom he
declared it to the world, Nihil in illis videbis quod aliqua praerogativa
dignum censeas. Gualt in loc.
would be considered; and that especially in respect of their mean and low
condition: if you look upon S. John and the rest of these holy Apostles with a
carnal eye, there was nothing in them which might render them worthy of so high
a prerogative: they were poor rude illiterate despised Fishermen; and who were
they that Christ should employ them to be his Ambassadors? Kings do not use to
send beggars and pesants of their errands, but Christ was pleased to make use
of these contemptible persons for his Embasie. In this respect it is the
Apostle says, we have this treasure in earthen vessels; not golden or silver,
but earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7.
are chose by Christ for the receiving and communicating of this heavenly
treasure of the Gospel. Indeed, whether you look on things or persons, still
they are mean and despicable, which Christ imployeth in his service. As the
Prophet from God appointed the water of Jordan to be the means of curing
Naamans leprosy, so has our Lord Christ instituted water and bread and wine,
common ordinary creatures, to be the pledges of his love, and conduit-pipes of
his grace to the Church; and as common things, so ordinary persons are thought
fittest by him to be employed in his work; indigent ignorant fishermen must be
the publishers of his Gospel to the world. It is that which lets us see the
freeness, the strangeness, and the wisdom of divine dispensations.

1. The freeness, in that as the Apostle speaks, there is no respect of
persons with God, Romans 2.11.
it is not external qualifications that Christ looks at, the poor as well as
the rich, the simple as soon as the wise, the base as easily as the noble are
accepted of him; nay many times he passes by these, and chooses those.

2. The strangeness, in that it is so contrary to the dictates of carnal
reason, who would not have thought it the most probable way of spreading the
Gospel, if Christ had employed the Scribes that were learned in the Law, and
the Rulers of the people to have been the publishers of it; Is. 55.8.
but Gods ways are not as our ways, neither are his thoughts as ours; he
loves to tread in uncouth paths, and for the most part such as are cross to
our reason.

3. The wisdom, in that this serves much to magnify his own name, look as the
less aptitude there is in the matter, so the less energie, there is in the
instrument; so much the greater does the skill, power, and causality of the
efficient appear, the less there is of men in any work, the more of God is
seen. To do so great a work as the publishing and promoting of Christian
Religion, by such weak instruments as the Apostles were, cannot but highly
advance the honor of Christ, since as S. Paul speaks, hereby the excellency
of the power is manifested to be of God and not of man. 2 Cor. 4.8.


2. And thus I have given you a view of the porch, be pleased now to go into
the house, and therein to take a survey of the

1. Foundation, as it is laid down in those words, God is light, and in him is
no darkness at all; if we consider these words in their utmost latitude, they
are both a position and a probation, but this latter I shall defer to the
following words. For the more full handling of this clause as a position, be
pleased to observe something, both more general and more special.

1. In general, the words are a metaphorical description of God: For beloved,
when the Apostle says, God is light, we must not think that the nature of God
is the same with that of light; indeed as St. Austin well observes, the Sun is
light, and the Moon is light, and the other Stars are light, but far be it from
us to imagine that the Creators essence is the same with the Creatures, Aug in
ep.
but something far more choice and excellent; only by light as a similitude the
Apostle would represent something of God to us; and thus it is not unworthy our
consideration. That

1. The metaphor which St. John makes choice of, is drawn from a thing very
obvious and familiar to us: Indeed, as one says well, light is that then which
nothing is more unknown, and yet nothing more known, being that which is
visible to every eye; and in this respect, the fitter to illustrate God by,
that by what we do know, Nihil luce notius simul and ignotius. Lor. in loc.
we may be instructed concerning him, whom we do not know. It is a fit pattern
for all Ministers to follow, whose work is not to make plain things hard (as
too many do) but to make hard things plain; and therefore to draw their
similitudes from common and manifest things, such as may not cast a vail over,
but give a luster to the truth they deliver. Indeed, the end of these
similitudes, is chiefly to help the mind in conceiving, and the memory, in
retainning what is by them represented; now familiar comparisons are both more
quickly understood, and easily remembered, and therefore ought espeoially to be
used.

2. The Apostle endeavoring to instruct us concerning the Creator, borrows a
resemblance from the Creature. Indeed, as the Apostle Paul speaks, there is
(...), something to be known of God by the Creatures, the earth, and every pile
of grass that grows out of it, Romans 1.20.
but much more the heavens, and the beams of light that flow from it, declare
the glory of God. God has vouchsafed somewhat of his excellencies to the
Creatures, Ps. 19.1.
and therefore in them we may, nay, ought to read something of God, and that
not only in respect of his being, but attributes.

Oh let us study this divine Art, learn this spiritual Alchimy, to extract
heaven out of earth, God out of the Creature; that as we behold the works of
his hand, so we may in and by them, see the excellency of the worker. It is a
known maxim in Philosophy, Omnis cognitio fit per sensum, All natural
knowledge enters into the mind by the sense; and it is thus far true in
Divinity, that spiritual knowledge may be helped by the sense: happy is that
man, who makes the things which he sees, as so many stayres, by which his
contemplation goes up to God, whom he does not see.

2. In particular, this metaphorical description of God is set forth both
affirmatively, God is light; and negatively, in him is no darkness at all; and
both may be construed two ways, to wit, as spoken of God, considered either,
(...) or (...), in himself, or in his influences.

1. In himself. And that

1. Affirmatively, God is light. And thus,

1. This metaphor of light (though but darkly) shadoweth forth the Trinity, the
Father being as the body of light, the Son as the beams, the Holy Ghost, as the
Splendour of both. Dyonis de divin. nomin. c. 2. Damasc. de fid. l. 1. c. 4.
Dyonisius illustrateth it by the similitude of three candles, enlightening one
and the same room: Damascen of the parelii, when there appear as it were three,
and yet it is but one sun; some have observed a resemblance of it in the
Hebr^w, (...), the Greek (...), the Latin, Lux, which signify light, all of
which are monosyllables, consisting of three letters; and in the Hebrew word
they observe (...) to be the beginning of (...) which signifies the Father,
and (...) to be the beginning of (...), which signifies the spirit, and (...)
being the middle letter, may aptly represent the Son, which is the middle
person, especially being near of kin to (...), the first letter of (...), which
signifies the Son; but as I would not altogether contemn, so neither do I much
delight in such kind of observations; and besides, it is no doubt aliene from
the Apostles scope, to intend by this metaphor, a resemblance of the Trinity.

2. That therefore which is to be considered, is, in what respects this
metaphor of light does resemble the nature and attributes of God.

And there are several Attributes of God, which are aptly delineated in the
various properties of light.

1. The light, of all bodies, is the most immateriall and incompounded, whereby
the simplicity and spirituality of Gods nature may be insinuated, which is void
not only of all matter, but of all composition.

2. The light is the first of all the Creatures, which we find mentioned in the
beginning of Genesis; the first thing that God said on the first day of the
Creation was, Let there be light, Genesis 1.3.
and this shadoweth forth the eternity of Gods being, who is both (...) and
(...), the first and the last, before all other things whatsoever.

3. The light sh^neth in all parts of the world, East, West, North, South,
every way scattering its rays: and what is this but an emblem of the ubiquity
of Gods presence, who is in all places, filling heaven and earth?

4. The light is a Creature of a resplendent beauty and luster, by reason of
which, it is apt to dazzle the eyes of the beholder, and this sets forth Gods
transcendent majesty and glory, in which respect, Psa. 104.2. 1 Timothy 6.13.
he is said to cover himself with light as with a garment, and to dwell in the
light, which no man can approach unto.

5. The light is of that nature, that it cannot but impart it self for the good
of others, shining upon the just and unjust; and this characterizeth the
diffusive goodness of God, whereby it is that as he is good, so he does good,
and that to all.

But there are more particularly two attributes, which light does clearly
discover, and which may agree to the scope of the Apostle, especially the
latter.

1. The light is of a discovering nature, so that nothing can be hid from the
heat thereof, it pryeth into every corner, Ps, 19.16.
it peepeth in at every crevis, so that all things are made manifest by it; in
which respect, it minds us of Gods Omniscience, whereby it is, that all
things are naked and open to him, even things that are most secret. To thee,
Heb. 4.12.
says David, the darkness and the light are all one, Ps. 139.11.
because God sees in the dark, as plainly as in the light, by his own light he
reveals the deep and secret things; he knows what is in the darkness, and
the light dwells with him says Daniel, finally, I try the reins says God of
himself, Dan. 2.22. Ier. 17.10.
our minds being as apparent to him as the intrailes of a beast are to us, when
the body is ripped up.

It is a truth well worthy our meditation, that we may be hereby admonished to
take heed to our ways; indeed, in this respect, that which is appropriated to
good men, is true of all men, they walk in the light, to wit, of Gods
omniscience; and oh then, how carefu^ should we be of our walk? Alas, how
vainly do hypocrites please themselves in the secrecy of their actions, and
perhaps persuade themselves, that God himself takes no notice of their doings;
whereas his eyes are upon the ways of man, Job 34.21, 22.
and he sees all his goings, there is no darkness nor shadow of death, where
the workers of iniquity may hide themselves, says Elihu concerning God,
Indeed, as St. Ambrose excellently, If thou can not hide thy self from the
Sun, which is Gods Minister of light, Ambros. offic. l. 1. c. 14.
how impossible will it be to hide thy self from him, whose eyes are ten
thousand times brighter than the Sun.

2. But to draw near the Apostles scope, light is a pure defaecate body, a
bright spotless splendour; though it shine upon filthy dunghils, it contracts no
pollution, but still retains its pure luster. And by this aptly is
represented the holiness and purity of God. Mal. 4.2.
That expression of the Prophet Malachy concerning Christ, gives much light to
this truth, when he calls him A Sun of righteousness; since what the Sun is
in sensibles, that is, God among inteligibles; Vide Gr. Naz. orat. 40.
and what light is in the Sun, that is righteousness and holiness is in God;
this is that attribute by which God is often called in Scripture, the holy God,
and the holy One; yea, Is. 63.3.43 15.
the Angels double, nay treble it, Holy, holy, holy; it is an attribute so
essential to God, that every thing so far as it has relation to God, is said
to be holy, his name holy, his word holy, his works holy, his day an holy day,
his temple an holy place, his Ministers holy persons, and all because he is a
pure and holy God.

2. For the better illustrating of this perfect purity and sanctity of God; it
is that our Apostle goes on, and to his affirmative adds a negative, in him
is no darkness at all.

Zanchy has observed concerning this clause, that it may be referred both to
the predicate, Vide Zanc. in loc.
and the subject of the former proposition, and so may be rendered in it, or in
him. In it, to wit, the light, there is no darkness, and so it is as much as if
said, God is a most bright l^ght; for look as the darkness which has no light
at all, is a thick Egyptian Cymmerian darkness, so that l^ght which has no
darkness, must needs be a most a clear splendid l^ght; but I rather refer it
with our Translators to the subject God (though the difference is not
material) in him is no darkness at all.

Before I proceed, a stumbling block would be removed, that seeming
contradiction of the Psalmist, to this of St. John, where he says concerning
God, he made darkness his secret place; but it is easily reconciled, since that
darkness only notes the inscrutable and incomprehensible majesty of God; Ps.
18.11. Vide Oecumen. in loc Lorin. in Ps.
and it is to be understood of him in reference to us, not himself. In respect
of us, because we cannot comprehend him, darkness is his secret place, but in
regard of himself, the purity of his own nature, he is light and not darkness,
as the Sun, though it be sometimes hid from us by dark clouds, remains still
in it self most light some.

And now if you would know the intent of this negative, Is. 38.1. Ps. 40.10.11.
Vid. Bez. Marlor. Lorin. in loc.
it is but the more strongly to affirm the contrary; this is an usual way of
expression in the Hebrew, as Beza observes from that speech of Isaiah to
Hezekiah, Thou shall dye, thou shall not live; and of David concerning himself,
I have preached, and have not refrained, I have not hid, I have declared, and
it is a form of speaking very usual with St. John, as you may find in the very
next verse, and several other places of the Epistle, which it shall suffice
(because it here first appears) once for all to take notice of.

This appearing to be the scope, the meaning is no more but this, God is light,
and in him is no darkness, that is, God is so pure, that not the least, the
smallest spot can cleave to him; so holy, that not any sin at all can be found
in him; as there is no defect in his knowledge, so there is no default in his
nature, and to this tend those expressions of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.4. Ps. 92.15.5.4.
Nec ignorantia nec nequitia in Deo. Dydim. (...). Europ. Vide Carthus. in loc.
He is a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he; and of
David, he is my rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him; and again, Thou
art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with
thee. Indeed the Gods of the Heathen were such as had been impure filthy men;
and therefore, as one of themselves argues, no Gods: but the true God cannot
be charged with any iniquity; nay, as Carthusian enlarges it, because it may
be said of the Angels that stand, and the Saints that are glorified, they have
no darkness of sin at all in them: in God there is not so much as a
defectibility, or mutability, which yet is in the Creatures, if considered in
themselves, because of their dependency, though the reducing of it into act is
impossible, in regard of their plenary confirmation in the state of bliss: God
then, as Aquinas excellently, is a pure, a most pure act, without the least
potentialitie: Aquin. in. 1 Timothy 6.17.
and so this in the highest sense, agrees to him, and to him only, he is
light, and in him is no darkness at all.

2. These words are true of God; not only formally, but causally; in himself,
but in regard of his influence, and that in both the clauses.

1. God is light, that is, according to St. James expression, The Father of
lights: so that whatever light there is in any Creature, it is but a ray, a
beam of his excellency. That distinction of a threefold kind of light is very
considerable to this purpose, there is lux light. Iam. 1.17.


Illuminata and non illuminans, enlightened and not enlightening, to wit, the air.

Illuminata and illuminans, enlightened, and enlightening, such is the moon.

Illuminans and non illuminata, enlightening, but not enlightened, and this is
the Sun.

It is that which may fitly be applied here, all Christians are lights as the
air, Ministers are lights as the moon, but only God is light as the Sun, to
wit, receiving no light from any other, and communicating to others what light
they have; and this exposition Zanchy conceives most suitable to the Apostles
meaning in this place, making the parallel to run thus. Look as the l^ght where
it arises, and displayeth its beams, Vide Zanch* in loc.
expels darkness, with all the effects of it, and makes all to be clear and
lightsome, so does God to all them who have fellowship with him, impart the
light of his grace, so that they can no longer walk in the darkness of sin; and
though I conceive that the Apostles aim, is chiefly to describe the purity of
Gods nature in himself, and thereby the repugnancy of walking in darkness,
and consonancy of walking in the light, to him (both because this carries in
it a full sense, correspondent to the Apostles intention, and also because the
phrases of no darkness in him, and afterward his being in the light, do
intimate that these words are to be understood rather subjective, then
effective; of what God is in himself, then what he does to us) yet withal I
cannot but acknowledge this construction, to be both pious and ingenuous.

2. And accordingly the sense of the other clause in him is no darkness at all,
amounts to this that he is not, cannot be the cause of any darkness.

It is true, God is said in Scripture to create darkness as well as to form
light, but that is the darkness of calamity, not of iniquity; Is. 45.7.
it is true, God has an hand even in the darkness of sin, so far as to limit
it, how far it shall spread, and no farther; as to permit, that it shall be,
and suffer men to walk in it, as judicially to withhold the light of his grace
from them who love darkness rather then light, whereby they plunge themselves
into greater darkness. Finally, so as to bring light out of the darkness, good
out of evil, and make all the darkness of sin tend accidentally to illustrate
the glory of his own wisdom, justice, and mercy, but still far be it from him
to be any way an impelling cause of any wickedness.

Indeed these two do one necessarily flow from the other, There is no darkness
in, therefore none can be from him; nil dat quod non habet, is a known rule in
Philosophy; no cause can communicate to another what it has not in it self:
Deus non est author eorum quorum est u^tor Fulg. l. 3. ad Monim. c. 3. Vide
Damasc. de orthod. fide l. 4. c. 20.
surely then, God having no darkness in himself, cannot be any cause of it in
us. Besides, he is an hater, an avenger of darkness, and it cannot consist with
his justice to be a punisher of it, were he himself the Author. In a word, It
is impossible that the same cause should directly produce contrary effects: can
the same fountain send forth sweet and bitter, fresh and salt water; no more
can God who is light, and the natural cause of light be the author of darkness.

To draw to an end in a word of application.

1. Our Apostle here implicitly teaches us by what means we may come to know
something of God; Aquin* part. 1. q. 13. art. 1.
indeed those three ways which the Schools mention of knowing God, per viam
causalitatis, eminentiae and remotionis, by way of efficiency, eminency, and
remotion, are all to be found in this Scripture.

We know God by way of causality, when we assert him the prime, supreme,
universal cause of all good whatsoever; we know him by way of eminency, when we
attribute to God whatsoever perfection or worth there is in any or all the
creatures, and that as being in him after a more eminent manner. Finally, we
know God by way of remotion, when we deny of him whatever imperfection and
defect is observable in the creature. A taste of all these our Apostle here
gives us, since if we understand the words both formally and causally, he
proclaims him the cause of that light and beauty, and excellency that is in
us; he attributes to him that which is the most noble among inanimate
creatures, light; and he removes from him darkness, which is a defect and
deformity.

2. Learn we with this holy Apostle to have high and holy thoughts of God, as
most pure and free from all pollution. Indeed there have not wanted such Sons
of Belial who have charged God with sin; as the Luciferians who blame God for
dooming Lucifer to eternal darkness; the Talmud which blasphemously forgeth the
new moons, as appointed for an expiation of a fault in the deity, of taking
away the light from the moon, and giving it to the Sun; and too many there have
been who charge their own sins upon God; as Plautus brings in a deboyst wretch
pleading for himself, dii voluerint, and St. Augustine speaks of some Jews
who would say, when they had done any crime, Deus voluit. Oh let all such
opinions be to us, Aug. ad art. falls. imposit. resp. 10.13, 14.
as they were to that Father, detestable and abominable; and as St. Basil
advises, though Gods counsels may many times seem strange to our reason, yet
let that axiom be firmly rooted in our minds, (...), Bas. orat. Deus non est
author mali.
that no evil can come from the good God, no darkness from him who is light.
Indeed there are two attributes of God wherein he especially delights, his
mercy and his holiness. Oh let us take heed how we diminish the one, or deface
the other, when we speak of God after the manner of men, as we represent his
power by the arm, his mercy by the bowels, his justice by the hand, so his
holiness by the face. Oh how great an injury must he needs account it, if we
shall throw dirt in his face? and therefore remember the caution of S. James,
let no man say when he is tempted, that he is tempted of God, Jam. 1.13.
for God tempts no man, neither can he be tempted.

3. Lastly, let us learn of whom to seek whatsoever light we stand in need of:
Every good and every perfect gift (says the forementioned Apostle) comes
down from above; we must shine in his beam, Chap. 1.17.
be kindled at his flame, and be lighted by his torch. Like the moon we are
dark bodies, till the glory of the Lord arise upon us; if we lack any light of
wisdom, of grace, of comfort; we must ask it of, and only expect it from God.
And therefore in a sense of our own darkness, let us sue to him, for that
spiritual illumination, which may guide and conduct us, through the wilderness
of this world, till we come to the heaven of heavens, where God in an especial
manner, is the light of it, and in his light we shall see light; even the light
of his face in glory for ever.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN. SERMON. 10.

CHAP. I. Ver. 6. If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness,
we lie, and do not the truth.


IT is an undoubted truth, that all parcels of holy Writ, are alike in respect
of their divine authority, and un-erring verity. But it is as true, that there
is some difference between them in respect of clear perspicuity and beneficial
utility, some parts of Scripture, being as more plain, so more useful then
others. Such no doubt are those upon which the Holy Ghost, has as it were set
a mark, and to which he has affixed an asterisme. Thus when we meet with a
Selah in the close, or a verily, verily, in the beginning of any sentence, and
yet when we find any dignifying clause placed in the front or rere of any
discourse, it is no doubt the spirits intention to put us hereby on a more
serious consideration on such Scriptures, as containing somewhat in them of
more then ordinary importance. No doctrine more fundamentally necessary to be
believed, then tha^ of salvation by Christ incarnate; and therefore St. Paul
does not barely assert it, 1 Timothy 1.15.
but prefixeth an encomium before it, This is a faithful saying, and worthy of
all acceptance: no lesson more needful to be learned by a believer then that
of maintaining good works, and therefore the same Apostle calling upon
believers to learn it, annexeth a Preface, This is a faithful saying, Tit. 3.8.
and these things I will, that thou affirm constantly. And surely upon this
very account we have a great deal of reason to look upon this present Text, as
nearly concerning us, since we find the doctrines of it ushered in with an
Exordium, This is the message which we have heard of him, and declare to you,
etc.

3. Having already led you through the porch, and given you a view of the
foundation, I hope I shall not need to go back and take a re-view; pass we
therefore into the rooms of this fabric, which are a Reproof and a Promise,
the one in the sixth, the other in the seventh verse, that is; as it were on
the left hand inhabited by those whom Christ will one day place on his left
hand, to wit, presumptuous hypocrites, and the other on the right, i^habited by
those who shall be set on Christ's right hand, namely sincere and holy
Christians.

1. The Reproof is that I am now to begin with, concerning which (before I
fall upon particulars) it will not be amiss to observe in general, that it is
at once both sharp and mild, discovering those two graces to be sweetly
conjoined in this Apostle (which it is pity they should in any be severed) zeal
and discretion, the one making him faithful, and the other gentle in framing
his reprehension.

1. On the one hand it is very considerable, what plainness of speech St. John
uses in this reproof; he is not meal mouthed, but sharp tongued, in home and
down right language he tells these sinners their own. It might have sufficed
the Apostle to say, They who walk in darkness, can have no fellowship with God;
but see, he uses more harsh terms, giving them the lie, who say they have
fellowship with God, and walk in darkness: we s^y in our English proverb, a lie
deserves the stab; it is accounted by all Nations an high offense, to tell a
man he lies: but the zeal of this holy man makes him bold and sharp in his
expressions. How well does fervent vehemence become a Minister in all his
addresses to the people, but especially when he reproves? Some in dealing with
sinners, and rebuking their sins, are like men that handle thorns, as if they
durst not touch them; they are loath to rub too much upon their Auditors sores,
and dare not pierce them to the quick: but surely as a cold and heartless
Petitioner, beggeth a denial; so a cold and heartless reprover, does but
harden and hearten the sinner in his evil ways. Qui timide rogat, docet
negare. T^tt 1.13.
St. Paul bids Titus, not only to reprove, but to do it (...) sharply; so our
Translators, cuttingly, so the force of the original: like good Chyrurgions,
that lance and search the sore to the bottom: indeed, a pitiful cruelty, is
far better than a cruel pity, yea, and there is found health in those smart
wounds.

And indeed, if we consider with whom our Apostle had to do, we shall find it
was not without just reason, that he is so bitter against them. It is the
counsel of St. Jude concerning offenders, of some have compassion, Iud. v. 22,
23.
making a difference, but others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire;
we must put a difference in the persons whom we reprove, and accordingly, put a
difference in our reproofs; those who offend through infirmity, and declare
themselves penitent, are to be rebuked with lenity, least they be swallowed up
of grief and despair; but others we must save with fear, that is, by terrifying
them with threats, and with a loving violence, plucking them out of the fire of
those destructive courses. Such are all obstinate trangressors, who offending
hainously, are to be checked severely, to whom (when they spurn at our rebukes)
we return St. Austins answer, Emenda^e vitia, and ego emendabo verba. Aug.
When you amend your lives, we shall mend our language.

More especially of this kind, are presumptuous hypocrites, a sort of men with
whom our Apostle had here to do, and which of all others, deserve to be roughly
handled, and that upon a double ground; the hainousness of their sin, and the
highness of their self conceit.

1. Hypocrites are the worst of sinners; we may wrong a wicked man, in calliing
him an hypocrite, but we cannot injure an hypocrite, in calling him a wicked
man: what the moralist says of the ungrateful, is as true of the
hypocritical person, Ingratum si dixeris, omnia, dixeris.
he is a very sink of all filth. Hypocrites are not only the children of the
Devil, but as it were, his first born; Malus ubi bonum se simulat, tunc est
pessimus, a bad man is then really worst, when he is seemingly best. No wonder
if such sinners find what they so well deserve, tart and severe rebukes from
the mouths of Gods messengers.

2. Besides, hypocrites, though the worst of men, have the best conceits of
themselves, and it is no easy matter to take them off; Prove. 30.12. Rev. 3.17.
they are pure in their own eyes, though they be not washed from their
filthiness, and being miserably poor, account themselves rich, and increased
with goods; they lull themselves asleep, sing a requiem to their souls,
soothing up themselves with an omnia been, so that there is need of loud cries
to awaken them. Indeed, penitent sinners are sharp to themselves, and therefore
Gods Ministers must use lenitives to them; but arrogant hypocrites are
indulgent to themselves, and therefore they must apply corrasives to them; no
man needs a more severe reprover, then the self flatterer.

It is then a fit Item for all Ministers, when they have to do with hypocrites,
to rebuke them sharply. True indeed, though none more need reproof, yet none
are more unwilling to hear and bear it, than they. This sort of men, commonly
have briars hanging at their ears, to scratch those who deal roughly with them:
condemn the feigned shows, seeming professions of hypocrites, and they will
presently decry you as a scoffer at Religion, Railer against the godly party,
and an enemy to the Saints* But we must not neglect our duty, what
misconstruction soever they are pleased to put upon it; we have the pattern of
Christ himself, who speaking to the Scr^bes and Phar^sees, hypocrites, uses
upbraiding language; whilst he compares them to wolves in sheeps clothing,
to whited sepulchers, yea, to serpents and vipers, denounces severe woes
against them, Mat. 23.27.33.
and in his Epistle to Philodelphia, mentioning those who were dissembling
Jews, Rev. 3.9.
he accounts them worthy of no better names than liars, and the Synagogue of
Satan. This was the practice of his forerunner, John the Baptist, who observing
the hypocritical Pharisees to come to his Baptism, resembles them to the most
venomous creatures, and calls them a generation of vipers: finally, this is
the example which this other John, Mat. 3.7.
his beloved disciple here sets us, giving hypocrites (and that no less justly
than sharply) the lie.

2. On the other hand, it is no less observable, that St. John in directing his
reproof, uses not the second, but the first person, saying, not if you, but if
we; by which his intent (no doubt) is to demonstrate the impartiality of his
spirit, that if He, or any other of the Apostles, could or should be guilty of
this fault, Vide Oecumen. in loc.
he would be no less severe to himself and them, then he was to these
hypocrites; by this means he plainly lets them see that these words were not
written in passion, much less out of any hatred to their persons, but only to
their practice; since he is no more violent against them, than he would be
against himself upon the same, occasion: hereby the edg^ of his reproof was
much taken off, which otherwise might have been too sharp, and the potion
sweetened, which else might have proved too bi^ter. It is a singular skill, and
prudence in a reprover, so to qualify his severest censures, as they may
appear to be free from either wrath or malice. Indeed, froward, and much more
malicious reproofs, do not corrigere, but corrodere, instead of healing, fret
the sore, like too much wind, instead of increasing, put out the flame of
devotion. To take off all such suspicions, and to render reproof the more
acceptable, it is that the messengers of God have found out several ways of
mitigating their reproofs: for this end it was, that Moses composed his tart
reprehension of Isreal's ingratitude, Deuteronomy. 32. 2 Samuel 12. 1 Cor. 4.6.
in the form of a Song, that Nathan coming to David upon an harsh errand,
begins it with a parable. Finally, that St, Paul rebuking the faction of the
Corinthians, transfers it in a figure to himself; and accordingly here St* John
uses the first person, if we say, etc.

Having thus taken a survey of this room at large, come we now to the several
partitions contained in it. And there are three things which our Apostle
discovers in this reprehension concerning these hypocrites.

The impiety of their practice, they walk in darkness.

The eminency of their profession, they say they have fellowship with God.

The incongruity of their profession to their practice, they ly^, and their
practice to their profession, they do not the truth.

These are the three paths, through which, my discourse, and your attention
must walk, beseeching God for the light of his holy spirit, that I may speak,
you may hear, all of us may do the truth, and so none of us come under the
censure of the text, for walking in darkness, and not doing the truth.

1. The impiety of their practice, is that which is described by that
metaphorical phrase, Genesis first.
of walking in darkness: for the right understanding whereof, we shall take a
short view of both the metaphors, to wit, darkness and walking, there being in
both an emphatical significancy.

1. For the better illustrating of this term darkness, be pleased to take
notice, that there is a fourfold darkness, namely, naturae ignorantiae,
miseriae, nequitiae of nature, of ignorance, of misery, and of iniquity.

1. Darkness of nature (properly and literally so called) is the absence of
light; when the Sun takes its leave of our horizon, and all things are
envellopped in the sable mantle of the night, then we justly say it is dark: of
this darkness Moses speaks, when he says, God made two great lights, Genesis
1.18. Job 3.4.
to divide the light from the darkness, and this was the curse Job wished, upon
the day wherein he was born, that it might be darkness.

2. Darkness when used in a borrowed sense, serves to represent in Scripture a
state,

1. Of ignorance in divine matters, when the mind is destitute of spiritual
knowledge, unacquainted with the mysteries of salvation. What is it, but as it
were, wrapped up in darkness? in this darkness, the Gentiles, before the coming
of Christ, are said to sit, Luc. 1.77. Ephesians. 5.8.
and in this respect, the Ephesians are said to be sometimes darkness, to wit,
in their unregeneracy.

2. Of misery, and that of all sorts, temporal, spiritual and eternal*

When the Psalmist speaks of some who sit in darkness, he presently
explaineth himself of those who are bound in affliction; Ps. 107.10. Job 10.22.
and more especially, when Job speaks of a land of darkness, he manifestly
intends the grave and its forerunner, death, the last, but not the least,
nay, the greatest of all temporal evils.

When the prophet Isaiah mentions, One that fears the Lord and obeys his
voice walking in darkness and seeing no light no doubt he is principally to be
understood of the darkness of spiritual desertion, Is. 50.10.
when God withholdeth the light of his countenance from the soul.

Finally, when we frequently read in the New Testament of utter darkness, Mat.
22.13. 2 P^t. 2.17. Jude 13.
the mist of darkness, blackness of darkness, what else do those phrases mean,
but the damneds everlasting misery, in being wholly deprived of the beatifical
vision.

3. Of iniquity, in this respect it is, that the power of sin ruling in men's
hearts, Col. 1.12. Ephesians. 5.11. Romans 13.12, 13.
is called the power of darkness, and the works of sin which they act in their
lives, are called the works of darkness, especially, flagitious enormities,
such as rioting and drunkenness, chambring and wantonness, strife and envying,
which are enumerated by the Apostle, as the works of darkness. If you ask in
which of these acceptions it is here to be construed, some Interpreters answer
in two of them, In tenebris ambulare est versari in ignorantia and peccato Lor.
in loc. Vide Oecumen. ibid.
namely, for ignorance and iniquity, but doubtless more sutably, the latter is
to be understood, namely, sin and wickedness; and chiefly, gross notorious
sins, because the Apostle speaks of the conversation; the darkness of
ignorance, is that in which men are said to sit; but that in which they walk,
is most congruously construed to be the darkness of sin.

And indeed so truly, nay fully, does this term of darkness agree to sin, that
it takes in all the other acceptions under some notion or other, each of
which, may serve as a several reason, why this appellation of darkness is given
to it.

1. Sin has relation to the darkness of nature, as a concomitant, which it
most delights in; 1 These. 5.5. Prove. 7.9. Job 24.13, 14, 15, 16, 17
most sins are such as fly the light, and love to be covered over with nights
canopy, St. Paul says of drunkards, that they are drunk in the night, and
Solomon of the young man, that he goes to the harlots house in the evening, in
the black and dark night, and Job of the adulterer, the thief, the murderer,
that they rebel against the light, and the morning is to them, even as the
shadow of death. To this purpose it is, Cl. Al. strom. l. 3. Nox and amor
vinumque nihil moderabile suadent. Ovid.
that Clemens Alexandrinus observes of the Carpocratians, that they appointed
their meetings in the night. Indeed, the night being a cover to wickedness,
makes men secure and shameless in committing it; no marvel if they make
choice of that time, and there works are therefore deservedly called the works
of darkness, because acted in the night.

2. Sin has relation to the darkness of ignorance, both as an effect, and as a
cause, in which respect, it is called by Dyonisius, obscure wickedness^

1. No sin is committed, (...). Dyonis. de caelest. Hier. Prove. 14.22. Aristot*
Eth.
but the Judgment is first infatuated; and therefore it is the wisemans
question, Do not they err, that devise mischief? and the Philosophers
assertion, every offender erreth; there is upon the heart of every sinner, atra
nubes caeca nox (to use the Poets expression) a black cloud, a dark night,
which causes him to wander, and the blindness of our mind, is that which
misguideth our feet, in which respect, sin is an effect.

2. The commission of sin, as it hardneth the heart, so it blinds the mind;
what mists, and fogs, and clouds are to the air, that are corrupt affections,
and flagitious actions to the soul, darkning, and obscuring whatever light of
knowledge shines in it; in this notion we may very well understand that of the
wise man, P^ov. 4* ^9.
when he says, the way of the wicked is as darkness, the darkness of ignorance
increasing upon men, as they go on in sinful ways; and in this respect, sin
is as a cause, and because sins are caused by, and withal, are the causes of
darkness and ignorance in the mind, very fitly is this brand of darkness set
upon it.

3. Sin has reference to the darkness of misery as a cause, and that in its
full latitude; Wherefore does the l^ving man complain (says the Church, Lam
3.40.
in respect of temporal afflictions) man suffers for the punishment of his
sin, all the miseries of life; yea, death it self being the bitter fruits of
sin, for so the Apostle says expressly, death entered into the world by sin.
It is the interposition of sin between God and us, Rom 5.12.
that eclipseth his loving kindness toward us; so says the Prophet Isay, Your
iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his
face from you: Isa. 59.2. Noli cadere in peccatum and non tibi occidet hic sol
si tu feceris casum tibi faciet occasum. Aug tract. 2. in Ioh. Mat. 25.30.
finally, it is wickedn^ss that brings eternal wr^tchedness, that being the
doom denounced by our blessed Savior, against the wicked servant, Cast him
into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnash^ng of teeth, so that in
this respect, is sin most justly called darkness, because it brings so great a
darkness of sorrow and calamity upon the sinner. And thus I have given a
dispatch to the first of these metaphors.

2. The other of walking is no less considerable, a word that is very
frequently used in Scripture, and that to signify in general a course of
life. Ambulandi verbum late patet and accipitur pro vitae ratione. Lor. in loc.
Indeed, what is our life but a walk, and all the actions of our life, as so
many steps? and as walking in a way, leads to some place or other, so does
the course of every man's life tend to some end, either of felicity or misery.
To this purpose is that metaphor of sowing, which we so often meet with in holy
writ, because sowing brings forth some harvest or other, according to the
seed that is sown. And I would to God that all men might hence learn so to look
upon themselves as sowers, as travelers; and therefore to make choice of their
seed, and take heed to their ways; more particularly this word is used, both
in respect of a good and an evil course of life* and an instance of both, we
have in this and the next verse; there it is applied to a godly, and here to a
wicked conversation.

That then which we are now to inquire into is, what this phrase of walking
imports, concerning a state of sinful living, the answer to which, will appear
by taking notice of three properties in the motion of walking, as being motus
voluntarius, continuus and progressivus, a voluntary, constant, and a
progressive motion.

1. Walking is a voluntary motion; it is one thing to be drawn, and another
thing to go; the one is an act of violence, the other of voluntariness:
walking is a free willing act, so willing, that it is an act of choice, and is
never done, Ambulandi verbum indicat de flendam delectationem. id. ibid.
but upon a preceding del^berate resolution; nor is it only voluntary, but
delightful; running is painful, but walking a pleasant motion, and it is a
great deal of content and pleasure men take in walking. All this represents
the temper of wicked men, who not only act sin, but affect it; a good man may
be sometimes drawn into sin, but bad men walk in it; yea as Solomon's expression
is, They leave the path of uprightness; to walk in the way of darkness. Hence
it is, that (as it there follows) they rejoice to do evil, Prove. 2.13, 14.
and the ways of sin are pleasant to them; for this reason, no doubt it is,
Prove. 4.17. Job. 15.^9. Ephesians. 5.14.
that the acting of sin is compared to eating, and drinking, and sleeping, as
well as to walking; nor does the hungry man take more delight in eating, the
thirsty in drinking, the weary in sleeping, than the wicked man does in sinning.

2. Walking is a continued motion, an iteration of many steps one after
another; this intimates the most characterizing property of a wicked man: he
is one who repeateth and multiplyeth sinful actions; the cup of iniquity is
never from his mouth, his imaginations are only evil, and that continually;
the special bent of his heart, and the general current of his life is vile and
wicked, I have spread out my hands all the day (says Almighty God) unto a
rebellious people, Is. 67.2.
which walks in a way that is not good, the length of Gods patience argues
the continuance of their provocations, and to note this it is expressed by the
phrase of walking. It is one thing for a man to fall, and another to lie, one
thing to step, and another to walk in any way. The Moralist says truly una
actio non denominat any one evil action denominateth a man a sinner but not
wicked; men, good men may sometimes step into an evil way, he only is to be
adjudged bad, who frequently renews his sins and makes it his constant
practice to do iniquity.

Ambulare i. e. de malo in pejus proficere Aquin.
3. Walking is a progressive motion wherein we set one foot before another and
so are still going forward till we come to our journies end. And this is a fit
emblem of a wicked disposition, which still adds sin to sin; and grows
from bad to worse. The Prophet Jeremy says of the wicked they proceed from
evil to evil and again they weary themselves to commit iniquity they walk so
long till they are weary; Jer. 9.3.5.
And when they are weary they will not give over walking. Ambula^e est ulterius
tendere and peccato peccatis cumulare Serrar. 2 Timothy 3.13. Quis peccandi finem
sibi posuit Horat.
St. Paul says concerning Heretics they wax worse and worse deceiving and
being deceived; indeed wicked men never come to their maximum quod sic, in
sinful growths, sin like the sea never will set bounds to it self. This dark
walk is a descent, wherein men go lower and lower, never staying of
themselves, till they come to the bottom. And as in walking, a man is every
step further of the term from which, and nearer to the term to which he
moves; So sinners every day, go further and further off from God, and draw
nearer and nearer to the suburbs of Hell.

By this time I doubt not but the meaning of this clause appears, and if we
look upon those whom our Apostle may be probably supposed here principally to
intend to wit the Gnostics we shall find this fully verified concerning them.
They were a sort of people that did constantly wallowe in notorious wickedness
and counted it pleasure to live in all manner of impiety Epiphanius, writing of
them says it loathed him to delineate, Epiph. adu. har. i. 1. T. 3.
what darkness of wickedness they lived in, and I tremble to mention what he
there relates, concerning their impure and flagitious practices, in which
respect it was, that (as both he and St. Austin observe) they were among other
names called Borboritae, Aug. de haeres. ad qu^d ult de^.
the signification of that name being fully verified, in them who were a
Generation of filthy unclean persons. And as this was in a very high degree to
be charged upon them, So is it more or less, true of all wicked and ungodly
persons; Wickedness is their way, darkness is their walk, in which they
willingly give th^mselves up to a course of sin in some kind or other.

To apply this, L^m* 3.40.
what other use should w^e make of this part, then that which the Church
exhorts to let us search and try our wa^es: And oh that every one of us would
deal impartialy with our selves and pass a right censure upon our own
condition, according to this description. It is a sad truth (...) -- no man
will acknowledge himself wicked though he be so. We willingly accuse our
selves to be sinners, but we would excuse our selves from being wicked. But
alas what will it avail us, not to think our selves so, if yet in truth we be
so. Oh therefore let us bring our selves to the test, and faithfully examine
whither we do not walk in darkness. Set thy self oh sinner in the presence
of God, and ask thy conscience this question. Is there no-worke of darkness
that I delight in, is there no way of darkness that I constantly go on in, is
there no sinful practice that I allow my self in ^ perhaps oh sinner thou
do not walk in chambering and wantones, I but do thou not walk in
strife and envying. Is there not some deed of darkness, or other to which thou
art addicted, with which thou art enamoured, and from which thou will not be
diverted.

And now if upon dilligent enquiry thy conscience accuse thee, and thine own
heart condemn thee, oh then be further (and that even from this very
expression) convinced of thy deplorable and miserable estate, lugere (say
Etymologists) is quasi luce egere; surely we have great reason to mourn over
our selves, because we walk in darkness. One of the plagues of Egypt was a
thick dark^nes it is the plague of all wicked men, oh that they were sensible
of it. And if you please a little further to trace the metaphor, you shall
find this phrase of walking in darkness, to denote as well the calamity as the
iniqu^ty of transgressors.

There are three no less sad then common attendants on walking in darkness
casus, error, terror, falling, wandering, trembling, all which are in a
spiritual sense sadly true of ungodly sinners.

1. Darkness is casus inductiva apt to cause stumbling and falling; these two
are joined together by the psalmist in his curse let their way be dark and
slippery, Psalm. 35.10*
in the dark men stumble at every ston^, fall into many a pit so that many
have lost their limbs, nay lives by walking in darkness, thus do wicked men by
walking in sin wound their consciences* hazard their souls, whilst their table
becomes a snare; everything they enjoy a stumbling block, and they are
continually ready to fall into the pit of perdition.

2. Darkness is erroris productiva apt to make men wander and lose their way;
how many has the night enclosed within some desolate wood, exposed to cold and
rain upon some spacious heath, whilst missing the right path, they have not
known whither to go, thus do wicked men walking in the dark, Psalm. 14 2. Isay
53.6.
miss their way to bliss, and wander up and down in folly, in this respect
the Psalmist says of them, they are all gone out of the way and the Prophet
compares them to stray sheep.

3. Darkness is timoris incussiva that which makes men prone to fears and
terrors, in the dark a man is in continual fear of some danger or other to
befall him, because he cannot see his way, nay he is apt to fall into pannick
fears, whilst every bush is in his fancy a thief, and the least noise causes
a commotion in his breast. Thus is it with wicked men many times, they fear
(according to the Psalmists expression) where no fear is, though withal the
truth is, they have always real cause of fear, in respect of the danger that
deservedly hangs over their heads. Indeed as men in the dark sometime not
seeing, Fear not the peril which they are very near to; So wicked men being
secure are feareles and not considering what they deserve fear not till they
come to feel, but when once their sleepy conscience is awakened, oh what
horrid fears, perplexing terrors, invade them whilst the cloud of vengence
is ready every moment to rain fire, hail, and brimstone upon them.

To end all, what now remains but that this discourse of darkness serve as a
light to discover to you where you are, what you do, and whither you are going;
That so being enlightened to see your utter darkness, you may walk no
further, but with incessant cries beseech him who is the Father of lights, that
he would send his spirit to pluck you out of Sodom, and by his mighty working
deliver you from the power of darkness, and translate you into the kingdom of
his dear son: Amen.

SERMON. 11.
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN.
CHAP. I. Ver. 6. If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness,
we lie, and do not the truth.


THat Preface which I find in the beginning of one of Salvians books,
concerning Gods Government of the world; I may here aptly make use of; I
suppose, yea, I am confident, my discourse of this Scripture, will be unwelcome
to many auditors, and that because it is a smart and sharp reprehension:
Arbitror imo certus sum etc. Salv. de Gub. Dei l. 8^
men naturally love to be tickled with applause, not scratched with reproof; we
relish well the honey of commendation, but know not how to digest the wormwood
of increpation. But beloved, the diet, which is not so toothsome, may be
wholesome; that potion which is very bitter to the taste, may prove healthful
to the body; and faithful rebukes, though they be not so pleasing, yet I am
sure are profitable, especially when they are seasonable and suitable, such as
this was to those in St. John's time; and I would to God it were not as truly
agreeing to many, very many, in our days, who will be found one day among the
number of those liars, If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in
darkness, we lie, and do not the truth.

Having already dispatched the impiety of those men's practice, in that they
walk in darkness; that which follows next in order is, the eminency of their
profession, employed in that supposition, If we say we have fellowship with him,
for in this supposition, there is a position couched, namely,

That many who walk in darkness, say they have fellowship with God.

For the better explication of which, in its fullest latitude, I shall briefly
premise a double distinction, and then pursue a double proposition*

The distinctions to be premised, are of

1. A double Having this fellowship, to wit, in spe, and in re, in a confident
expectation, and in a real possession.

2. A double Saying we have it, namely, a saying within our selves, and a
saying to others, that is, inward in respect of our thought and opinion, this
outward in respect most properly of our words, and not excluding gestures, and
all other ways of external expression.

The propositions to be prosecuted, are two,

1. Many say they, have fellowship with God in hope, who yet walk in darkness;
they promise to themselves, the future vision of Gods face, whilst they go on
in the wilful breach of Gods Law. This is that which they say in their hearts,
persuading themselves, that their condition shall be happy, though their
conversation is wicked; of such an one it is Moses speaks, who blesses
himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imaginations of my own heart. This is that they say with their lips, impudently
laying as full claim to happiness, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
as the uprightest and exactest Saint.

If you inquire whence this comes to pass, I answer, from the false reasonings
which are in the minds of men, concerning.

The freeness of Gods grace in electing.

The fullness of his mercy in forgiving.

The worthiness of Christ's blood in redeeming.

1. When presumptuous sinners hear that Gods election is without respect to any
worthiness or qualifications in us, they presently fancy to themselves, that
their names may be written in the book of life, as well as any other; yea, they
fondly imagine, that being elected, they shall have fellowship with God, let
them live as they list; and hence they are emboldned to presume and boast of a
future well-being, not considering that Gods election, though it be not
conditional, yet is ordinate, to wit, to the end by the means, to happiness by
holiness.

2. When wicked men look upon the extent of Gods mercy, whereby it is, that he
desires not the death of a sinner, that he is a God pardoning iniquity,
transgression and sin, not only few, but many, small, but great, all sorts of
sin: they promise to themselves a facility of obtaining forgiveness, whilst
yet they indulge to their sins, not considering that God is just, as well as
merciful, righteous, as well as gracious, and he is ready to pardon the
penitent, so he will by no means clear the guilty.

Finally, when secure sinners hear of the infinite merit of Christ's blood, how
satisfactory it is for the sins of the whole world, and therefore much more of
a particular person, they are willing to persuade themselves of an interest in
that blood, and thereby of reconciliation and fellowship with God, not
considering what our Apostle says, in the very next verse, the blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses from all sin but it is only those who walk in the light.

Thus is the sweetest honey turned into gall by bad stomachs, the most wholesome
antidotes become poison to wicked men, and the precious supports of a lively
faith, are abused to be props of presumption, by arrogant hypocrites, by reason
whereof, it is that they are so impudent as to say, they hope to have
fellowsh^p with God, though they walk in darkness.

2. Many who walk in darkness, say they have actually this Divine fellowship,
and are in a state of grace. As for the grossest sort of hypocrites, who make
pretenses of religion and holiness, a cover of their wickedness; they cannot
say it in their hearts, because their consciences must needs tell them, they
are wicked and odious in God sight: but they say it to the world, that they may
walk in the dark, and accomplish their wicked designs the more secretly,
speedily and effectually. But as for others, they say it both in opinion and
profession, they think, and accordingly boast themselves, to have communion
with God, though they walk in the darkness, both of sin and error.

Instances of this nature, there want not many in all times of the Church. The
Prophet Isay speaks of the Israelites in his time, that they did swear by the
name of the Lord, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth, nor
in righteousness. They call themselves of the holy City, and stay themselves
upon the God of Israel. And again, God himself, concerning the people says,
Is. 48.1, 2.
that notwithstanding, their transgressions and sins, in which they lived, they
would seek him daily, as a nation that did righteousness, yea, Is. 58.1, 2.
that they took delight in approaching to God: and what was this, but to say
they had fellowship with him, of this sort, were the Pharisees in John the
Baptists time, Mat 3.7.9.
though they were a Generation of vipers, yet they would say within themselves,
they had Abraham to their Father, and so in effect, that God was their God;
such were those in Phylodelphia, Rerel 3.9.
of the Synagogue of Satan, and yet they said, they were Jews, the people in
covenant with God. Against this generation of men it is, that St. Paul
declaimeth, where he says, they have a form of godliness, by which they say,
we have fellowship with God, and yet deny the power of it, to wit, by walking
in darkness; and again, they profess they know God, 2 Timothy 3.5. Tit. 1 16.
and so have communion with him, whilst in their works they deny him, by
walking in darkness. Indeed, so far has the presumption of some carried them,
that (though they were impure heretics, and at once, both in respect of
doctrine and manners, walked in darkness yet) they have said, not only that
they had fellowship with God, but that they were the only people that had
fellowship with him. This did the Gnostics (a people, as you have already
heard, that lived in all manner of impurity) pretend, that they only were the
people, who had the knowledge of God, and his Son Jesus Christ, which is
eternal life, and therefore gave themselves that title. Such was Novatian with
his followers, whom St. Cyprian compares to an Ape, dissembling it self to be
a man, because being an enemy against, Cypr. ep 73.
he assumed to himself the authority and verity of the Catholic Church. Not to
expatiate in this large field, at this day on the one hand, the Papists
appropriate to themselves the title of Catholics, assert theirs the only true
Church, wherein alone fellowship with God is to be had, and out of which, there
is no salvation to be obtained, and yet they walk in the darkness of idolatry,
superstition and impietyes, and on the other hand, the Schismatics; among our
selves, account themselves the only Saints; the pure Churches, those that
alone have communion with God in pure ordinances whilst their pride and
arrogance, malice and oppression, cruelty and bloodshed, sedition and rebellion
testify to their faces that they walk in darkness.

To apply this, all then is not gold that glistereth, nor are fair shows a
sufficient argument of realitie, the truth is there are many sincere hearted
Christians who make conscience of their ways and walk in the light that have
not so far attained, as to say they have and hope for fellowsh^p with God,
being very jealous and timorous about their spiritual and eternal estate. And
yet many base hypocritical wretches, who indulge to themselves in known
wickedness are strongly confident of felicity, yea make large professions of
piety. Take heed therefore how you give credit to pretenses esteem not a
pharisee, the holier for the breadth of his phylacteries or depth of his
fringes, every man is not presently a scollar that wears black, nor a
Gentleman that is arrayed in scarlet, nor a Christian, that is so in name and
profession, well meaning persons think all men speak as they mean, and are
as they seem, P^o, 14.15.
but the wiseman tells us it is the simple who believes every word^ Indeed
because many who walk in darkness, say they have fellowship with God to infer.
All who say they have fellowship with God, walk in darkness would argue too
little charity. But to conclude, that all who say they have fellowship with
God, have so indeed, argues too much credulity. It is true if I know not a
man's conversation, charity bids me think well of his profession and hope well
of his hopes, but with all prudence adv^seth me, that I be not presently drawn
aside with smooth words, and fair pretenses. The sum is, neither rashly
censure, nor yet hastily credit them who say they have fellowship with God,
lest as by the one, you may contemn the good, so by the other you may believe
a liar. For if they who walk in darkness say it they lie. And so I am fall^n
on the last, and maine part of this scripture.

The Incongruity of these two, the hypocrites profession and practice one to
the other they lie, and do not the truth. Prol. 3.


Mentimur ecce Peccatum commissionis non facimus veritate^ ecce peccatum
omissionis Aqui^n in l^c. mentimur refertur ad professionem non facere
veritatem ad mores. A^et. ibid.
Here are two characters given of these hypocrites the one affirmative, the
other negative, the one of lying, the other of not doing the truth. Aquinas
conceives by these two a double sin charged upon them, the one of commission
in speaking a lie, the other of omission, in not doing the truth* Aretius
better refers the lie to their sayings, The not doing the truth to their
walking, therefore their saying is a l^e, because their walking in darkness, is
a not do^ng the truth, and so the latter is added by way both of explication
and confirmation to the former.

1. Begin we with the affirmative expression, and therein inquire how this
saying appears to be a li^.

To which end be pleased to know, that there are two things considerable in a
lie, to wit the material, and the formal part, the matter of a lie is a
falsehood, the form of it is an intentionall asserting it to be true.

1. As to the first of these we lie, is as much as we say that which is false,
indeed every falsehood is not a l^e, but in every lie there is a falsehood. It
is true a man may tell a l^e, and yet speak truth; but it is then when he
thinks it to be false, and commonly the matter of a lie, is that which is
false in the nature of the thing.

Such is the matter of this saying in the text, that a man who walks in
darkness has fellowship with God I grant, a man who has fellowship with God
may fall into darkness; Recte praesentis temporit ve^bum p^nitur L^r ibid.
do some particular work of darkness, but he cannot walk in it. It is not to
be denied, but that a man who does walk in darkness, by changing his course
may come to have fellowship with God; and a man that now has fellowship with
God may be one that has walked in darkness, but to say that he who does walk
in darkness has fellowship with God, is materially a lie, because a notorious
falsehood. That this may more fully appear, consider this double demonstration.

1. That saying which is not according to, nay directly against the saying of
God, must needs be a lie; for if God be the God of truth, his must needs be the
word of truth, and so whatsoever is dissonant to it, false and lying. Now
(beloved) search if you please the whole volume of sacred writ, from the
beginning of Genesis, to the end of the Apocalipse, and find if you can any
leaf in that book, or any line in those leaves that speaks the least word
of peace or pardon or comfort or mercy from God to a man that walks in
darkness, lives in wickedness, nay indeed God has written a bill of divorce
to every such person, Act. 8.21. Pro. 15.20.11.26. M^^. 7.4. Is. 57 21. Ps.
68.21.
non est tibi pars neque sors as the Apostle said to Simon Magus, thou have
neither part nor lot in this matter of divine fellowship, who walk in
sinful courses. The Lord is far from the wicked, the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord, there is no peace says God to the wicked, God will
wound the hayrie scalpe of him, that goes on in his wickedness. Depart from me
ye workers of iniquity, This is the language which the Holy Ghost uses, and
the doom which the scriptures passes on such a person, and now tell me can
there be a more palpable untruth, then when God says no peace for men to say
peace, and for them to whom God says depart, to say they have fellowship with
him.

2. To say that is, which not only is not but cannot be is a lying falsehood,
who would not account him a lier that should as^ert a thing actually existing
which is not only improbable but impossible? now for a man walking in darkness
to have fellowship with God, is all together impossible, and the reason is
clear in the context, read but the end of the former verse, with this and the
inconsistency will be manifest because, God is light and no darkness is in him
therefore they who walk in darkness cannot have fellowship with him. For as
St. Paul puts the question intending by it a vehement negation, 2 Cor. 6.14.
what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness, and what communion
has light with darkness. We see in experience the darkness comes not till the
light be gone, when the light comes, the darkness vanishes, they cannot dwell
together and the ground of it is clear in philosophy because things of a
contrary nature do mutuo se tollere mutually take a way each other. Indeed
contrary qualities may in remiss degrees consist in the same subject but not
in intense; and when they do, it is with them as with a pair of scales, if one
go up, the other goes down, as one increases, the other decreaseth, now God
is not only lightsome but light, and such a light, as is without the least
darkness, light in the abstract, and that notes the brightest luster, whereas
the wicked man walks in darkness, yea according to St. Paul's phrase
concerning the Ephesians, Ephesians 5, 6.
he is darkness in the abstract and that notes the utmost darkness, as soon
then may the clearest light and the thickest darkness rest in the same place
together as God: and a wicked man have fellowsh^p together Michael and the
dragon could not agree in one heaven, nor the arc and dagon in one house, nor
Esau and Jacob in one womb, no more can God and a wicked man agree, A silly
old hermit was sorry that God and the devil should be at odds, and would
undertake to make them friends, but the devil bids him spare his labor for
they were everlastingly fallen out. Indeed God and a wicked man are not so,
there is a possibility of reconciliation, but not whilst he so continues, you
may as easily believe that fire and water, peace and war, purity and
filthiness, love and hatred, truth and falsehood, happiness and misery, light
and darkness can be made friends as that God can be at one with him who goes
on in his sins.

By reason of this contrariety between God and a wicked man, it is that as God
hates the wicked, so the wicked hates God, darkness does not with more
celerity fly from the light, then unrighteousness from God so that it is
impossible not only for this fellowship to be but, to be so much as desired. It
is true many wicked men desire to go to heaven but it is because they are
mistaken in their imaginations about heaven, they look upon it as a place of
faelicity but not of sanctity they only fancy it a place of pleasure and
contentment but consider not that the pleasure is in fellowship with a pure and
holy God. Alas the society of a godly man is a burden a terror to the wicked,
he cannot be merry so long as he is in his company, what then will be the
fellowship of an holy God, upon which account I may truly say, that if God
should let a wicked man into heaven, heaven would be an hell and that divine
fellowship a torment to him.

By this time I doubt not, but you see the truth of the falsehood, written as
it were with a sun beam, and what just cause St. John has to give them the
lie, Vide Aug. l. de mendac. c 42. Voluntas fallendi pertinet ad perfectionem
mendacij etc. Regn. de mend.
who walking in darkness, say they have fellowship with God, there being a
plain untruth in it, which is the material part of a lie.

2. But further in a lie not only the matter, but the form of it is to be
considered, this by the most is made an intention to deceive, for so the
definition usually runs, nor is it to be denied but that this is consecutive an
essential property, of and so annexed to every lie, yet if we speak of that
which is constitutive the essential form of a lie, it is the intention of
asserting a known faleshood, so that to lie in its proper notion is for a man
to affirm or deny intentionally that which he knows to be contrary.

If we apply this to the buisinesse in hand it is only to be charged properly
on the grossest hypocrites, who against the inward verdict of their own
consciences say this openly to men, that they have fellowship with God, yea
which makes them perfect liers, they say this on purpose to deceave, and cheat
the purblind world, that they may seem to others what they know they are not,
it is that which one aptly calls not only dipped but double dipped hypocrisy.

And yet in as much as the falsehood of this proposition is so evident, that
whosoever will make use of his reason must acknowledge it, it follows that
even they, who may in saying this speak what they think, are interpretatively
liars. If a man shall wilfully shut his eyes, and say the sun shines not,
would you account him any whit excusable for his not seeing, or rather would
you not adjudge him to tell a voluntary lie, the same is the case here. All who
assert this, are to use St. Peter's phrase willingly ignorant they cannot but
know, 2 P^t. 3.5.
and yet they will not know the falsehood of it, which, being an affected
ignorance, is so far from excusing, that it rather aggravateth; and therefore
this brand of a lier most justly rests on every one, who walk^ng in darkness,
says he has fellowship with God, and so much for the affirmative expression,
pass we on to the Negative in these words and do not the truth, this phrase of
doing the truth is very rare I find it not used in the new Testament but only
by the Master and the beloved disciple, it is Christ's phrase in his speech to
Nicodemus, he that does the truth comes to the light, and here St. John having
learned it from him makes use of it, we do not the truth.

Joh. 3.21.
An expression which at first view seems harsh and incongruous, since truth
more properly refers to the Judgment then the life, and is the object rather
of contemplation then action: hence it is that truth is that which we are said
to know and believe, and that which we are said to do is good, and this is the
most u^uall phraise of the scripture.

But if we look a little more narrowly into this expression, it will appear
apt and significant to which end we must know, that according to the
Philosophers there is a three fold truth, Metaphisicall, Logical, and
Ethicall; the first is in being the conformity of a thing to the idea, Veritas
in Essendo, Cognoscendo, Significando,
by which it was framed, the second is in knowing, the conformity of the
understanding with the thing, the third is in signifying the conformity both
sermonis and facti, of our words to the things, and our actions to right
reason, by which distinction it manifestly appears that there is a practical
as well as a speculative truth, and so this phrase of doing the truth very
suitable.

To open it a little more fully, be pleased to know that doing the truth, may
be construed two ways, and both here be made use of, to wit, by considering
truth either as the object, or the manner of this doing.

1. To do the truth considered objectively, Facere veritate^ est operari
secundum legem justitiae rectitudinis and honestatis. Tolet in Joh. Vide Cyr.
Alex. in Joh c. 3. Ezekiel. 18.5. Facere veritatem nihil aliud est quam sincere
agere vorst in loc. Is. 38.2.
is to conform in doing to the truth that is the word of God, the rule and
square of truth, and so this phrase may be expounded by that of Ezekiel, doing
that which is lawful and right, to this purpose is the exposition which St.
Cyrill and Tollet give of the phrase in the Gospel, to do the truth, is to do
according to the law of Justice, rightly and honestly, to make the law of God
the rule of our conversation, whereby we may be come acceptable to God.

2. To do the truth considered modally, is to do what we do heartily,
sincerely, and so it may be explained by Hezekiahs phrase of walking in truth,
and with a perfect heart, for as to doing good, it is not enough that we do
what is good, but that we do it well so to doing the truth, it is not
sufficient that we do what is right, but that we do it truly with a good and
upright heart, and no wonder if our Apostle here declayming against hypocrites,
whose devotion is but a stage play, a mere fained representation, and whose
conversation is after their own lusts, not Gods ways, charge them that they
do not the truth.

But if we put these two expressions together we lie, and do not the truth,
there may seem yet a further incongruity, it would have been more suitable (one
would think) to have said, we lie and speak not the truth, since lying refers
to the tongue, and so this would have been fitly annexed as a proof of the
lying, in that they speak not truth, but if we consider upon what account the
Apostle charge these hypocrites with lying we shall find this phrase was
fitly made choice of not doing, rather then not speaking truth. The reason why
this saying is asserted to be a lie, is because their walking was not
answerable to their talking, their doing, to their saying, no wonder that he
says they lie, and that is because, they do not the truth.

Non solum in falsis verbis sed in simulatis operibus mendacium est Christi
anum sedicere and opera Christi non faceremendacium est. Ambr. Sermon. de Abrah.

Non facimus veritatem, ^ e. facto non probamus verum esse quod verbo aut
cogitatione loquimur Est in loc.


To clear this more plainly, you must know that though in a strict and proper
sense, a lie is the dissonancy between the tongue and the heart, the words and
the thoughts, when a man speaks one thing and thinks another; yet in a
large and no less real notion it is a dissonancy between the tongue and the
hand, the words and the works, when a man speaks one thing and does another.
To this purpose St. Ambrosse excellently notes, that there is a lie as well in
respect of deeds as words, for a man to call himself a Christian, and not to
do the works of Christ is a lie and thus Estius glosses on these words, we do
not the truth that is we prove by our deeds, that what we say is not true.
Indeed they are alike bad, when the life, as when the heart gives the tongue
the lie, may in respect of men the former is far more discernable then the
latter, when a man speaks what his heart thinks not, I cannot presently say
he lies, because I know not what he thinks, but when a man speaks that
which his actions confute, I can easily see and boldly say that he lies.

That then which our Apostle would intimate to us by this phrase is, the
contrariety between an hypocrites profession and his conversation: his voice is
Jacobs but his hands are Esaws, like silver he looks white, but draws black
lines, audi, nemo melius, specta, nemo pejus, loquitur ut Piso viuit ut
Gallomus. Hear him talking, you would think him an Angel, see him walking,
you will find him a Devil like that stage player who cried oh caelum and
pointed with his finger to the earth, his tongue talks of heaven, whilst his
fingers are defiled with the earth, he speaks much of the spirit, but he
walks after the flesh, the discourse of his lips is holy, the course of his
life profane; in a word, his profession is angelical, his conversation
diabolical, his words are spiritual, his works carnal; he says, he has
fellowship with God, but he lies, for he does not the truth.

To apply this, when I read this Text, and consider the Times, I am ready to
believe that the one was in a special manner intended for the other, so fully
is this charge of lying verified in this generation; it was the complaint of
God by the Prophet, Ephraim Compasses me about with lies, and the house of
Israel with deceit: may he not take up the same against us? Hos. 11.12.
England compasses God about with lies, and London with deceit. Let our
ungodly, abominable, unjust practices speak, if our fastings, and prayers, and
profession, be not a loud notorious lie.

Oh that I could cry aloud this day, in the ears of these liars, to awaken them
out of their security, Ier. 7.4.
Trust not in lying words, was the caution of the Prophet to the Jews, it is no
less needful for us: let us not content our selves with false shows, nor rest
on vain hopes, it was the charge of the Prophet against the people, concerning
their King, Hos 7.3.
that they made him glad with lies; and what else do hypocrites whilst make
themselves glad with false presumption. Oh that this lying generation would
sadly consider, what a kind of lie this is, whereof they are guilty. The
Schools distinguish of three kind of lies, according to the several ends at
which they aim, to wit, jeasting for mirth and pleasure, officious for profit
and advantage, pernicious, tending to injury and hurt, Triplex mendacium,
Iocosum, Officiosum, Perniciosum.
all of these are condemned, but the latter is justly accounted the most
abominable, and of this sort is this lie, my text speaks of a pernicious
hurtful lie.

That you may see the injury which comes by it, consider it in reference to
God and his Gospel, to others, and to our selves.

1. To say we have fellowship with God, and w^lk in darkness, is such a lie as
tends much to the dishonor of God, and disgrace of Religion, St. Paul,
speaking to the hypocritical Jews, tells them, the name of God is blasphemed
among the Gentiles through you, the like may be said to licentious Christians,
the name of God is blasphemed among Turks and Pagans through you, Romans 2, 24.
Ita agimus ac vivimus ut hoc ipsum quod Christianus populus esse dicimur
opprobrium Christi esse videatur. Salv. de Gub. dei l. 4.
when the Indians were so barbarously used by the Spaniards, who called
themselves Christians, they cried out, quis (malum) Deus iste, what God does
these men serve? when the enemies of the reformed Church, hear what perjury,
oppression, bloodshed, they who would pretend to the strictest profession of it
commit, are they not ready to say, what a Religion is it, these men profess,
that can dispense with such wickedness? It was no small (though a just)
disgrace to the Pope, when the King of Hungary, having taken a Bishop prisoner
in battle, sent his armor to him, and only this in writing, Vide number haec sit
vestis filii tui, Is this your Sons coat? And it is a sad (though unjust)
reproach, which the bad lives of Christians cause to fall on God himself,
whilst profane wretches are apt to say, These are your Saints; and thus, by
our wicked conversation, our being called Christians, brings a reproach to
Christ and Christianity.

2. Besides this (which is the highest) injury to Religion, it is hurtful to
others, when they who pretend to have communion with God, lead wicked lives;
how are strong Christians grieved, the weak staggared, and they that are
without, kept back from embracing Religion, yea, encouraged in their licentious
actions? nay, if these that say they have fellowship with God, do such
abominable things, what need we trouble our selves? are profane wretches ready
to say, our lives are little worse than theirs, why should not our condition be
as good?

3. This lie will prove no less pernicious to our selves, he who is the
eternal truth, cannot endure lying lips, vident and rident demones; Devils see
and rejoice, Mendaces non fert qui est aeterna veritas. Gualti in loc,
God sees, and is incensed against such dissembling wretches; every such
hypocrite may well think God bespeaketh him in the Psalmists words, What have
thou to do to take my name into thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed,
and refusest to receive instruction? Ps. 50.16.
and must expect no other answer at that day, Math. 7.23.
when they may plead their outside devotion, and large profession, but depart
from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not.

Brethren, you may for a time cozen men, but you cannot deceive God, and as St.
Cyprian excellently, Est vera de mentia non cogitare non scire quod mencacia
non diu fallant Cypr ep. 55. Math. 25.51.
it is a mere madness not to think, and know that liars will at last be found
out. Diogenes seeing a vicious young man clad in a Philosophers habit, plucked
it off, as conceiving that it was defiled by him; and God will one day pluck
off the hypocrites vizor of piety, that he may appear in his colors, and in
that day, how far more tolerable will it be for professed enemies of God and
religion, than for such persons? It is very observable, that other sinners are
doomed to have their portion with hypocrites, as if hypocrites were the
tenants, and the rest, as it were, inmates of hell; certain it is, the furnace
of torment shall be seven times hotter for a carnal Gospeller, loose
professor, then for licentious Pagans, since their condemnation shall be so
much the greater, by how much their profession has been the holier, and the
higher they have lifted themselves up to heaven, in their religious pretenses,
the lower they shall be cast down to hell for their impious practices.

Let then every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity; it was
St. Cyprians advice to those, who took on them the name of Confessors, that
they would keep up the honor of their name, it is mine, to all who take upon
them the name of Professors. For shame let us not so palpably give our selves
the lie; quid verba audiam, cum facta videam, what avail good words, when our
works are bad? tace lingua, loquere vita, either say less, or do more. In one
word; let our actions speak, what our expressions pretend to, and our
conversation be answerable to our profession; so shall we be found true men,
and not liars, and not only knowers and professors, but doers of the truth,
and so be blessed in our deed.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN. SERMON. 12.

CHAP. I. Ver. 7. But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses
us from all sin.


RIghtly to divide the word of truth, is the charge St. Paul gave to Timothy,
and a special part of every Ministers office. To give every Auditor his due and
proper portion, as a Master of a feast does to every guest, is (according to
some expositors) the right dividing the word of truth; for which reason, no
doubt it is, that among other similitudes, 2 Timothy 2.15. Vid. Est. Lap. ibid. 1
Cor. 4.1.
Ministers are compared to Stewards, whose work is to provide for, and
distribute to every one in the family, their convenient food. What St. Paul
requires of all Christians, in respect of their neighbors and Superious,
Render to all men their due, Tribute to whom Tribute, custom to whom
custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor belongs; Romans 13.7.
That by way of analogy is required of all Ministers, in regard of their
people, to give to every one their due; reproof to whom reproof, threatening to
whom threatening, instruction to whom instruction, and comfort to whom comfort
appertains. A manifest example hereof, we have given by this holy Apostle in
this place, expressly reproving, and implicitly threatening, in the former
verse, those to whom it belongs, such as walk in darkness; and here sweetly
comforting those to whom promises belong, such as walk in the light, in this
verse. But if we walk in the light, etc. This is that room on the right hand,
into which we are now to enter; wherein, if you please, you may take notice of
three Partitions, here is the Christians

Practice, to walk in the light.

Pattern, as he is in the light.

Privilege, we have fellowship, etc.

Or if you please to reduce the three to two, here is considerable,

The duty required, and the mercy assured. Or,

The qualification premised, walking in the light, as he is in the light.

The Collation promised of.

Communion with God, we have fellowship one with another.

Justification by Christ, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us
from all sin.

The first of these is all I can dispatch at this time, wherein you may please
to observe,

The Path and the Guide, whom we are to follow.

The walk and the footsteps, which we are to trace.

The matter of the duty wherein it consists, walking in the light.

The manner of the duty, how it is to be performed, as he is in the light.

Let me crave your patience whilst I shall by the light of divine truth lead
you through both these.

The matter of the duty, which qualifieth a Christian, is said to be walking in
the light. part. 1. Romans 13.13.


There is a phrase used by St. Paul, of walking as in the day, which comes
somewhat near this of walking in the light and if we should construe light
here literally and perfix an (...) before, in the light it would excellently
instruct us in the nature of a truly Christian conversation.

They who walk in the light, walk visibly to the eyes of all beholders, walk
carefully that they may not behave themselves unseemingly, nor do any thing
which may be offensive.

1. Thus must Christians walk (as) in the light to wit. Exemplarily according
to the counsel of our savior, let your light so shine before men, that they
may see your good works, it is not enough to do good works in secret, Math.
5.17.
but we must show them openly, and though we must abhor to do our works for
this end, that they may be seen yet we must so do them, as they may be seen.

2. Exactly in such sort as may become the Gospel we believe, and religion we
profess, Romans 13.8. Ephesians. 5.15. Vide Zanch ibid
we must walk (...) that is St. Paul's phrase to the Romans, honestly, so our
translators, decently so the sense of the original, as befits those that call
themselves Christians, (...) that is the Apostles phrase to the Ephesians,
circumspectly, so our translators, accuratly, so the force of the word, Philip.
2.15.
that we may be (...) the sons of God without rebuke as the same Apostles
expression is to the Philippians, so that even a carping momus cannot spy a
fault.

But this cannot be the right way of interpreting this clause, since we find
the (As) in the next, and therefore we are to understand light metaphorically,
and so our chief work is to enquire what the Apostle intends by this metaphor
of light.

I shall not trouble you with the various acceptions of the word in holy writ,
let it sufice to know.

There is a threefold light, ad quod, per quod, in quo. To which, by which,
and in which we are to walk.

1. There is a light to which we walk, namely the light of glory, and
happiness. Those two chief excellencies life and light are not unfitly made
choice of in scripture, to shadow forth the future estate of the glorified,
St. Paul calls it the inheritance of the saints in light, to show how pleasant,
glorious, and amiable, that inheritance is, this light, Collo. 1^13. Vide dave^
ibid.
is the terminus ad quem, term of a Christians motion to which the course of
his life tends, and in which at last it ends.

2. There is a light by which we walk, and this is double to wit external,
and internal, of the word, and of the spirit, Pro. 6 23. Ps. 119.105.
(...) lex lux, the law is a light, the commandment a lamp says the son,
and he learnt it of his father who says thy word is a light to my feet, and a
lanthorn to my paths, it being Gods word that discovers to us the way,
wherein we should walk, and yet this is not enough without the other, though
adest lumen the sunshine never so bright yet, if desunt oculi eyes be wanting,
to make use of the light, it will be in vain to us. There must not only be a
light before the eyes, but a light in the eyes, if we will see to go; and
therefore St. Paul prayed that the eyes of their understanding might be
enlightened, since it is only by the direction of the word, Ephesians. 1.1^.
joined with the illumination of the spirit, that we are enabled to walk in
our spiritual journey.

3. Lastly and to our present purpose, there is a light in which we are to
walk, and that is the light of sanctity, and holiness; this being the path,
in which every Christian must tread, and when we remember that the light spoken
of God in the fifth verse, intends his holiness, that the darkness, mentioned
in the former verse, is put for wickedness, we may rationally conclude that by
light, here we are to understand holiness.

Having found out the meaning, it will not be amiss to enquire a little
further, into the Analogy of the metaphor, which will the better appear if we
consider the original, and the properties of light.

1. Light is of a celestial extraction, springs of water arise out of the
earth, but the fountain of light is in the heavens, those flowers of light,
are found in no garden, but the supernall firmament: so is holiness of an
heavenly parentage, as prudence so piety is that which is from above. That of
our Savior except a man be borne again, James 3* 17. Joh. 3.5 Vide Cyr. Al.
ibid. 2 Pet. 1 4.
may according to a double signification of the word (...) be read, except a
man be borne from above, and indeed St. Cyrill does so interpret it, our
Generation is in some sort from below but our regeneration is only from above,
and for this reason partly, though not principally, is holiness called by the
Apostle Peter the divine nature, because of a divine original, indeed Christ
calls it our light, when he says to his Disciples, let your light sh^ne before
men, and so it is subjective, but not effective, our light because in us, but
not from us; and therefore it is so ours as that it is primarily his, from
whence we receive it.

2. Light among others, has two special properties, namely claritie and
beauty, the one following the other, light is of a clear bright splendent
nature, and by reason hereof, it is of a very beautiful and lovely aspect, yea
it is the great ornament of the world, putting a beauty on all things else,
since without it, the redness of the rose, the whiteness of the lilly, all
natural and artificial beauty were as good be not existing, because not
appearing. By these two properties, are represented those two parts of
holiness which consists in purgamento and in ornamento cleansing and adorning,
in holiness there is purity which answers the splendor, and there is
conformity which answers to the beauty of light, holiness is expulsive of
all sin, and thereby makes the soul bright, holiness restores Gods image,
and thereby makes the soul beautiful, indeed it is holiness that puts a
beauty upon all other excellencies, our naturalls, morals, our intellectualls,
are then ornaments, when like the diamond to the ring holiness is superadded
to them.

You see what this light is, and how fitly light does illustrate it, but yet
this is not all, for since this light we are speaking of, is the way the only
way to communion with God, remission of sins and eternal life; and besides
since there are somethings which glitter and yet are not this light, such are
civ^litie, morality, and pharisaicall sanctity, so that it is not only
possible, but easy to mistake, give me leave yet a little more
distinguishingly, to characterize this light to you.

To which end, since God is compared by the Psalmist to the sun, Ps. 84 12.
Mal. 42.
and Christ is called by the Prophet Malachy, a sun of righteousness, and this
light is of the same quality with Gods, nay is a ray and beam of his, we may
infer that the light to which holiness is here resembled is sun-light, and so
the differences which are between the light of the sun, and that of the moon
and the stars, will aptly seem to difference holiness, from those other
things that seem to come near to it.

To instance breefly in a few particulars.

1 The light of the sun, helps a man to see, and find out the filth in his
house, yea to search into the most secret corners of every room, whereas the
moon and starlight, only helps a man to see a little abroad in the open
streets and feilds. This is a singular difference, between pharisaicall, and
real sanctity, that is curious to look abroad but sees nothing at home, so
that pharisee condemned the publican, and saw nothing in himself worthy of
blame, but this is careful to look at home, and searches into the secret
corners the very spirit of the mind so did good David when he prayed. Cleanse
thou me from secret faults.

2. The sun-light, discovers moats, and pins, Ps. 19.12.
and atom, things of the least, and smallest quantity, whereas the moon and
starlight only manifests trees, and houses, Hanc sollicitudine^ non facit nisi
spiritus sanctus qui nec minimam paleam intra cordis quod possidet habitaculum
patitur residere. Bern sermon. 1. de sp. S.
and such things as are of a great magnitude. This is the difference between
sanctity, and morality; morality teaches a man to avoid gross vices,
notorious offenses, scandalous enormities; but it is only holiness which
causes a man to make conscience of the least sins, as well as the greatest.

3. The sun-light represents those things which may be seen by moon and
starlight, in another clearer, fuller way, hence it is we cannot give so true
a judgment of the greatness, or color of any thing by moon and star, as by
sun-light, the parallel holds in this present matter. Holiness inlightens a man
to look on the same sins, which morality and civility discovers, with
another, and a clearer aspect, since whilst the civil person, only abhorres
them as enemies to his good name, Ps. 51.4. Luke 15.21.
and the moralist as repugnant to reason, the holy man loathes them, as breaches
of Gods law, and offenses to his majesty, for so repenting David, and the
returning prodigal, looked upon their sins, as against and before God.

4. The sun-light, though gradually, yet powerfully expels darkness out of
the air, so that the night becomes day, whereas the moon and starlight
only mitigateth and lesseneth it, and therefore the darkness prevayling, it is
night still, this is that which puts a difference between sanctity and
civility, civility restrains sin, but holiness conquereth it, civility
lesseneth the actings, yet takes not away the power, whereas holiness though
not all at once, yet by degrees subdueth the power of corruption.

5. Finally, the sun-light is ever attended with heat, driving away cold, as
well as darkness, whereas the moon and starlight can only illuminate, but not
warm, which appears in that, the moon and stars shine brightest when the
night is coldest, this is the peculiar efficacy of true holiness, that it does
not only irradiate the understanding but inflame the will and affections with a
love to God and zeal for his glory, in which respect it is that they whom
Christ purifieth to himself a peculiar people, are said to be zealous of good
works.

Tit. 2.14.
By this time, (I hope beloved) you are in some measure enlightened, to
understand the nature of this light, wherein we are to walk, it would not be
passed by what this imports, that we are required to walk in this light,
since the emphasis of the phrase, holds as well in regard of good, as evil.

The better to clear this, be pleased to consider walking in a double
opposition to bare stepping, and to standing still.

1. It is not taking a step, or two in the light, which denominateth a man, 1 Timothy 4.7. Isa. 1.17.
a walker; it is not a few good actions, but a good conversation, which
speaks a man, a Christian; St. Paul bids Timothy, to exercise himself in
godliness, and the Prophets counsel is learn, or as it may be rendered,
accustom your selves to do well. It is the constant habitual practice, and
exercise of holiness, which may most justly be called a walking in the light,
indeed this walking, is not opposed to stumbling, no nor yet to falling, (...)
in Kal significat and didicit and Assuescit.
there is a great deal of difference, inter carrentis casum and vitae ^ursum
between the course of life in which a man runs, and the falls he may catch in
running, if not only in some particular acts, but our general course we
practice holiness, though we cannot but sometimes fall into sin, we shall be
found walking in the light.

Ambulare brevit^r dico proficese. Aug. Sermon. 15. de verb. Apost. Prove. 4, 16.
2. It is not to begin in the way of holiness, and then stand still; but we
must go forward to perfection. St. Austin very aptly expounds ambulare by
proficere; walking is a proficiency in holiness: indeed both the metaphors in
the Text press this duty; holiness is as light which shines more and more to
the perfect day, living holily is as walking wherein we go on step by step,
till we come to the journeys end. True it is, we do not, H^mo in luce ambulat
qui in virtutum operibus proficit. Aquin.
cannot always walk with even pace, sometimes all we can do is to creep, and
then again our hearts are so enlarged that we can run; but however, the good
Christian will still be going never accounting himself to have attained. Indeed
so long as we are in this world, our holiness is rather in fieri, then in
facto, perfecting, then perfect. 2 Cor. 7* 1.
When we come to be comprehensores, we shall sit down, but whilst we are
viatores, we must walk on in the light.

What now remains, but that every one of us reflect upon himself, and ask his
soul this question; do I walk in the light, to which, by a faithful inquiry
into our conversation, according to the preceding characters, we may be able to
teturn an answer, only for our further quickening in this work, I shall briefly
mind you of these following considerations.

1, There is a great deal of difference between talking of, and walking in the
light* our lips may drop as the honey comb, whilst we are in the gall of
bitterness and bond of iniquity: many have golden tongues and leaden feet,
Acts 8.23.
it is not Scripture discourse, but a religious course, which denominateth a
man a Christian.

2. It is one thing to have the light of knowledge, and another thing to walk
in the light of holiness; too many men as well as children, are troubled with
the rickets, their heads are big, full of speculation, but their feet are
unnable, to walk in spiritual actions; If you know these things, happy are ye
if ye do them: having the light, Joh. 13.7.
may help us with Moses to see the land of Canaan, but it is walking in the
light, must bring us with Joshuah to enter into it, though we have mouths and
speak well* eyes and see well, yet if we have feet that walk not, hands that
work not, we are but idle idol Christians.

3. It is not barely, not walking in darkness, but walking in the light, that
is required of a Christian. The Pharisees religion in the Gospel consists
chiefly of Negatives, but our righteousness must exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, Luke 18.11.
Matthew. 5.20. Ezekiel. 18.31. Isay. 1.18. 2 Cor. 7.1.
so says our great Lawgiver, indeed it is good not to do evil, but withal,
it is evil not to do good; the unprofitable as well as the prodigal is an
evil servant, we must not only cast away our transgressions, but make us new
hearts, cleanse from filthiness, but perfect holiness, cease to do evil, but
learn to do well, not walk in the darkness, but walk in the light.

4. It is not a mere resolution, but the real execution of holiness, that
intituleth to happiness; Oh how many are cast into utter darkness, who here
resolved to walk in the light* in vain are those purposes which have a
conception but no birth, which only blossom, but never bear ripe fruit. The
repenting prodigal as he said, I will arise, so he did arise and go to his
Father; Luke 15.18.20 Psalm. 119.109.
holy David says, I have sworn, and withal adds, I will perform it: only
this must be understood with one caution, 2 Cor. 8.12.
if God give time and place of performance, otherwise that of St. Paul
concerning alms, is generally true; if there be a willing mind it is accepted,
in which respect it is a very uncharitable opinion which excludes all
deathbed penitent resolutions, from divine acceptance. Indeed that deathbed
promises of amendment, are seldom real, is not to be denied; yea, that when
they are real, it is very difficult, if not impossible for themselves or
others certainly to know it, must needs be granted; and therefore the case of
such persons is doubtful and dangerous: but since Gods grace can speedily work
a change in the will and affections; and where such a change is wrought, the
resolutions must needs be cordial, and such as (if life were afforded) would
undoubtedly be accomplished; we have reason to believe that he who always
accepts the deed chiefly for the will, will in such a case accept the will for
the deed: and therefore the condition of such an one, is not altogether
desperate. But still beloved this stands in full force, as to us who have as
yet life and health continued to us; our purposes will be to no purpose, if
they be not attended with practices, nor is it if we will, but if we do walk in
the light. And thus I have acquainted you with the matter, go we on to

The manner of the duty in those words, as he is in the light, wherein we shall
consider two things. Part. 2,
What is here asserted concerning God, he is in the light. What is here
required from us, employed in that particle as.


1. God is said here to be in the light, a very improper expression, according
to a strict acception. When it is said of God at the fifth verse, that he is
light, we must look upon the phrase as only metaphorical, since he is ten
thousand times brighter then the Sun, but when here he is said to be in the
light, it is a catacrestical expression, since it is impossible, either that
the light should be in him who has no accident, or that he should be in light,
who is infinite, and illimited; nay, indeed those two phrases, he is light, and
he is in the light, seem one to contradict the other, Lux non est pr^prie in
luce Carthus.
since nothing can be said strictly to be in it self, but both the phrases
being allusive, they may well stand together, and this latter, if construed
according to its true intention will be found emphatically significant.

If you please to difference the meaning of these two phrases you may refer
the one, God is light to his nature, and the other, he is in the light to his
works; so Grotius gives the sense of this phrase, he is in the light, that is,
he is conversant in most pure actions; In luce i. e. versatur in purissimis
actionibus. Grot. in loc. Psalm. 145.17.
according to that of the Psalmist, The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and
holy in all his works, to which agrees that of the heathen, (...), God could
not be God, if his actions were not exactly pure and holy.

But I rather conceave the intent of these phrases, to be the same, to wit a
delineation of Gods pure and holy nature, and there are two things which this
expression of his being in the light, intimates concerning it, namely the
perfection and immutability of his holiness.

1. There is a great deal of difference between these two expressions to have
light in one, and for one to be in the light, the former notes only some
measure of participation, but the latter a complete fruition, this may be
clear by an instance, taken from the water, a man that drinks down a small
quantity of water, may be said to have water in him, but when a man is
compassed, and covered over head and ears in water, he is then most truly said
to be in it. To parallel it with an instance in scripture, every man even the
best by reason of the remainders of sin, is said to have flesh in him, but only
the wicked man, who is under the power of sin, Romans 8.8.
is said to be in the flesh. Thus, whereas we at best have only some light of
holiness in us, God is in the l^ght, so that nothing of the light of holiness
is a wanting to him, but he is absolutely, compleately, holy.

2. There is not unfitly observed by expositours a discrepancy between these
two phrases of walking, Vide Carthus Serrar in loc.
and being in the light, walk^ng, notes a progressive motion, being a fixed
residence, we are still passing from one degree to another, and according to
the Apostles expression changed into the divine image of holiness, from glory
to glory, but he is (to wit eternally, 2 Cor. 3.18. 1 Timothy 6.16.
and unchangeably) in the light, in which respect that phrase of dwelling, used
by St. Paul, answers this of being used by St. John. He is and dwells in
that light, as of majesty, so purity, to which no man can attain, and that
from everlasting to everlasting.

By what has been said, you see what is asserted concerning God, we must now
consider, what is required of us in the particle, as, namely, a conformity to
Gods pattern by walking in, as he is in the light.

Upon the hearing of this message, I believe many are ready to put forth the
question, how can this be? Exodus 14.20.
God is so in the light, that in him is no darkness, and our lives like the
Israelites cloud, have a dark side, as well as a light, Gods holiness is
perfect, and unspotted, ours is imperfect, and defective, so that if this be
the condition, this supposition can never be a position, and not only few, but
none shall be saved.

But how harsh so ever this (which is here mentioned) may seem, yet it is no
more then what is necessary, indeed when we find St. John not once, but
again, Mat. 5.48. Levit. ^0.7.
not only in Metaphorical, but plain terms, calling on us to be pure and
righteous as God is, yea Christ himself, requiring us to be perfect, as his
Father is perfect, and God himself to be holy as he is holy, we have reason to
look upon this addition as of weighty, and needful concernment, and therefore
to remove this objection, and clear the genuine sense of this ( as) be pleased
to observe this threefold solution.

1. There is a double, ( as) to wit of likeness, and of a quality, the one
respects the kind, the other the degree, that the nature, this the measure of
the thing, (...)
our light in which we are to walk, must be like to that in which God is,
though the light in which God is, be infinitely brighter then ours, look as it
is between the stream and the fountain, the branch and the root, the air and
the sun, so it is between God and a Christian, the same water is in the stream
that is in the fountain, the same sap in the branch, that is in the root the
same light, in the air that is in the sun, though the water and the sap and
the light are primarily, and most plenarily in the fountain, the root the sun,
indeed to speak Exactly, we cannot call the holiness of a Saint the same with
Gods holiness, because this, (as all his attributes) is his essence, which is
in communicable to any creature, besides his holiness is infinite, and ours
finite, and infinite, and finite must needs toto genere distare, differ
generically, but the holiness in us, is the image of that holiness in God, and
as it were the stamp, and impression of Gods holiness upon us, in which regard
holiness, is one of those attributes of God, which the schools call
communicable, because God is pleased to communicate the likeness of it to his
Saints, and therefore they are truly said by the author to the Hebrews, to
partake of his holiness, and here by the Apostle John, to walk in the light,
as he is in the light. Hebr. 12.10.


2. We must distinguish inter effectum and affectum, actum and conatum, between
an effectual performance, and an affectionate endeavor, as for the walking in
the light you have already heard, it must not be only in affection, but action.
But so to walk, as God is in the light, is that which because we cannot fully
attain to, it will suffice to desire and endeavor after. To this purpose is
that gloss upon the text, Qui ad ejus similitudinem aspirat. Marlorat. in loc.
he is said to walk as God is in the light, who striveth to imitate divine
purity. When a Master sets his scholar an exact copy, and bids him write as
that is written, his mean^ng is, not that he should cut all his letters with
the same dexterity, and transcribe the lines with the same evenness, that he
has done; but that he should endeavor to come as near it as may be: the same
no doubt is the intention of the Holy Ghost in this, and the like scriptures to
put us upon a cordial study of following God in the footsteps of his purity
and holiness.

3. Besides these no less true then apt solutions, there seems to me yet a
plainer answer in the words themselves, by observing the difference between
these two expressions of walking, and being in the light, it is not said we
must be in the light, as he is in the light, but we must walk, as he is, look
as he is in the light, so that there is not the least darkness of sin in him,
so we must walk in the light, and not indulge our selves in any sinful work of
darkness, so that to walk in the light, as God is in the light, is so to walk
in the light, as that we do not walk in, though we be not wholly free from
darkness; he then that lives not in a course of known sin, that leads a
conversation without any reigning iniquity, as God is without any sin at all:
he walks in the light, as he is in the light, and who will not acknowledge
but this is that which every one not only may, but must attain to, who expects
these glorious privileges.

And now to what should the meditation of this clause serve but to

1. Humble us for our spiritual pride. How usual is it with most of us, to have
overweening conceits of our own worth, to think our selves better then indeed
we are, and by reason of self-sufficiency, to make a stop in our proficiency;
one special cause whereof, Quomodo pros^cis qui jam tibi sufficis Ambros
is that we measure our holiness by a false standard, and do not weigh our
selves in the balance of the sanctuary: we look upon the profane rabble of
the world, and presently judge our selves holy enough, and because we wander
not in their Cimmerian Egyptian darkness, conclude our selves to walk in the
light; but tell me, thou that please thy self as if thou were holy enough,
art thou as holy as Paul who calls to the Philippians, and in them to all
Christians, be ye followers of me: nay, art thou as holy as the Angels, Phil.
3.17.
when yet thy prayer is, that thou may do Gods will on earth, as they do in
heaven; nay once more, Matthew. 6.10.
art thou as holy as Christ, as God; whom here the Apostle sets before thee as
a pattern. Alas, thou that look on thy left hand (them that are worse then
thy self) with scorn, did thou look on thy right hand (those examples that so
far excel thee) have more reason to tremble, thou that castest thine eyes
only behind thee, and stand still; did thou look before thee, could
not choose but haste forward, stars are glorious things in comparison of
candles, but alas how is their splendour obscured when the Sun arises; compare
thy light with that of the Apostles, Angels, God himself; and be not high
minded, but fear.

Vide Alex* Alens Theol. sum. part. 2. q. 98. genesis 3.5.
2. Inflame us with a spiritual ambition, though our minds must be lowly, yet
our aims should be high: only with this caution, not to be great but good. It
was indeed the heinous crime of the fallen Angels (as is probably supposed) of
our first parents, (as is clearly manifest) that they desired to be as Gods,
but it was in point of knowledge, of Majesty, not of holiness; and truly we
their unhappy progeny, are too much of the same mind; we would walk in the
light of knowledge and glory, as he is in the light; but far be those thoughts
and desires from sincere Christians, let us make him our pattern for walking in
the light, which he has appointed us to walk in, to wit, of purity and
holiness, and thus let us walk as fast as we can, and aspire as high as we may,
till we come to the utmost degree of conformity which our created and finite
nature is capable of, and whereas man desiring to walk in the light, of Gods
knowledge, fell from his estate of innocence, our endeavor to walk in the
light of his purity, will restore us to that state of integrity; which here
inchoated, shall be hereafter consummated.

To end all, put both these parts together, we must walk in the light, as he is
in the light, and this double consectary will naturally flow.

1. True conversion makes a manifest and wonderful alteration, the Poet
speaking of a grafted tree, says. Virg. Eclog.
Miraturque novas frondes and non sua poma.
It wondreth at those new leaves, and fruits, with which it is adorned, so do
Converts themselves, and all that behold them, wonder at the change which is
wrought in them; every man by his first birth is still-born, dead in sin, by
his new birth he becomes alive to God; as the Father said of the prodigal,
Luke 15.32.
this my son was dead, and is alive; and surely what a difference was between
Lazarus lying dead in the grave, and Lazarus standing alive on his feet, the
same is between a natural and a regenerate man. Every man naturally walks in
darkness, and is a slave to the Prince of darkness, every Convert walks in
the light, as he is in the light, so that look what alteration there is in the
same air, by the arising of the Sun, the like is in the same person by the
infusion of holiness.

2. That the works of Christianity is attended with no small difficulty. Ah
Lord! how light do most men make of their general calling? how easy a matter do
they account it to get to heaven, but surely they are such whom the devil
casts into a sad sleep, and sootheth up with fond dreams; who can read that
general assertion of our Savior; Mat. 7.14.
straight is the gate and narrow is the way that leads to life: yea this more
particular delineation of that way by the Apostle, Ph^^ip. 2.12.
to be a walk^ng (...) the light, as he is in the light; and not work out his
salvation with fear and trembling. Brethren, if we intend to enjoy communion
with God, we must walk, not sit, there is no stepping out of the worlds ease,
into Gods rest; yea, we must walk upwards, ascend to divine perfection, there
is no coming to heaven p^r saltum, but per scansum: it is no leaping thither
in a moment, in a word, if it be no easy thing to be holy, it must needs be
difficult to be happy. Adhuc in pede vel ascens^ scalae positus in te deficiens
and altitudinem ejus prospiciens debes sursum manus extendere ad Dominum qui
est innixus supremae parti scalae, etc. Zu^ph l 2 de spir. Ascens.


And therefore let us in a sense of the works difficulty, together with our own
impotency, make our addresses to the Throne of Grace, and that both for the
light wherein we are to walk, and the feet which may enable us to walk in this
light: pray we that he would by his preventing grace infuse the habit of
holiness into our hearts, and then by his assisting grace strengthen us, to act
that holiness in our lives. Finally, according to the council of that devout
ancient, when we first set foot upon the ladder of piety, considering our
deficiency and Gods excellency; let us stretch forth our hands to him who is at
the top of the ladder, Cant. 1.4.
saying with the Spouse, draw me, and we will run after thee: so shall we at
the last come to him, and be with him in the light of purity and glory for ever.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN. SERMON. 13.

CHAP. I. Ver. 7. But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses
us from all sin.


THE life of man on earth is a race, and every one in this world a Traveller.
The ways in which all men walk, are fitly and fully enumerated to be two, Duae
sunt viae una aequitatis altera iniquitatis, etc. Ambros. in Ps. 1. Litera
Pithagorae discrimine secta bicorni, etc.
the one on the right, the other on the left hand; so much Pythagoras his Y
imports the one a straight and narrow way, the other a wide and broad way, so
our blessed Savior plainly asserts; the one a lightsom, and the other a dark
path, as S. John here insinuates. Hence it is that all men who either have
been, are, or shall be, are marshald into two ranks, sheep, and goats, the seed
of the woman, and the seed of the serpent, the righteous and the wicked. In
Italy after the Guelphs and the Gibellines, Mat. 7.13, 14. Cresol. de virtut.
part prima. c. 3.
there arose two factions which were called the Albi and the Atri, the white
and the black; these two indeed divide the whole world, all men being children
of God, or of the devil: such as walk in the light, and such as walk in
darkness. These two ways are so directly contrary in their natures, that
though a man may go out of the one into the other* yet it is impossible he
should at once walk in both, and therefore St. John sets the one in a manifest
Antithesis to the other. But if we walk in the light, nor are they less
contrary in their ends, then in their natures; the one leads to life, the
other to destruction: so Christ expressly, the one causes a separation
between God and us, and therefore they lie who walking in darkness say they
have fellowship with God, the other leads to communion with God, and an
interest in Christ; so it is affirmed in the words of the Text. But if we walk,
etc.

Having dispatched the qualification which respects our duty, pass we now on
to the Collation, which represents Gods mercy, and that in respect of two
excellent benefits here specified, namely fellowsh^p with God, and cleansing by
Christ; the one in those words, We have fellowsh^p one with another, the other
in those, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses from all sin, of each
in their order.

1. The first of these benefits, namely our fellowship with God has been
already explicated from the third verse, and therefore I shall not need here to
insist upon it. Indeed the phrase ( one with another) seems to intimate
another kind of fellowsh^p then that before handled: namely, that fellowship
which those who walk in the light, have one with another; but the connection
will by no means admit this interpretation, this fellowship of them that walk
in the light, being an inference from the consideration of Gods being light,
and therefore must be understood of the fellowship they have with him. Suitable
to this it is that Grotius, and Doctor Hammond, observe the space in the Kings
manuscript to be so little, Vide Gr^^. D. Hamm^nd i^ l^c.
that it may more probably be supposed as left for (...) then (...)* But our
Greek copies do plainly read it (...)* and so it may (as Beza and others
observe) admit a very fit exposition; Vide Bez. Calv. Se^rar.
in reference to God we have fellowship one with another, that is, he with us,
and we with him.

And truly this is that which we may very well look upon with admiration and
astonishment, and that both in the one part, and in the other, when we consider
that we have fellowsh^p with him, it may teach us to admire at the exaltation
of a Saint, when we consider that he has fellowsh^p with us, we have reason to
wonder at the condescension of God; how may we here make use of St. Paul's
words, Oh the height, oh the depth, Romans 11.33.
oh the height of advancemet, oh the depth of his abasement; would we not
think that beggar highly preferred, whom a King should admit to fellowship with
himself in his Palace, would we not conclude that King did much undervalue
himself, who should vouchsafe to have fellowship with the beggar in his
cottage, and yet thus it is between God and a Christian: hereafter we shall
have communion with him in his Palace, now he has communion with us in our
Cottage. Oh our dignity, oh his dignation, how high are we exalted, how low
does he stoop. The truth is, there is not a more familiar fellowsh^p between
the dearest friends, then there is between God and the Saints, in which respect
Stobaeus asserts (...), that there is a common negotiation and converse between
God and pure minds; oh let them rejoice in, Stob. in Ecl^g. Phys. p. 115.
be thankful to, and wonder at it.

That which is yet further to be taken notice of, is the habitude and relation,
which walking in the light, and fellowship with God bare one to the other, for
the better clearing whereof, conceive it in this double notion. Walking in the
light, is both Medium disponens, and Testimonium firmans, a means disposing the
subject for, and a Testimony assuring the person of fellowship with God.

1. If we walk in the light we have fellowship, in as much as walking in the
light does make us fit for fellowship with God: That we may rightly understand
this, it will be needful to make use of that known distinction between meritum
de condigno and de congruo, condignity which is properly merit, and congruity
which is only so called in a large and improper sense. Our walking in the
l^ght, has no worthiness to deserve so great a privilege as fellowship with
God, because it is no more then what is our duty, so that when we have done our
best, we have done but what we ought; but yet our walking in the light, has in
it a fitness for this fellowship, so that though it do not oblige God,, yet it
qualifieth us for this benefit, and that in two respects; inasmuch as

1. It removes that which otherwise would be offensive to God, and cause a
separation; it is very observable, that when St. James speaks of our drawing
nigh to God, and Gods drawing nigh to us he presently adds, Jam. 4.8.
cleanse your hands ye sinnners, and purify your hearts ye double minded,
thereby intimating that the cleansing from sin fits for approaching to God; now
by walking in the light, darkness is expelled, the heart is purified, the hands
are cleansed, and so the person fitted for divine communion.

2. It rendereth the person in some measure like to, and so fits for fellowship
with God, Aristot. Eth.
It is a known maxim of the Philosopher (...) likeness causes love and love
fellowship, where there is conformity, there must needs be congruity, God
cannot but take delight in his own image, Acts 13.22.
what is said of David, is true of every holy person, he is a man after Gods
own heart, he wills, what he wills, and nils, what he nils, and no wonder if
there be a friendly communion between God and him.

2. If we walk in the light, we have fellowship, that is our fellowship with
God, is assured to us by walking in the light. And if we consider the
Antithesis of this to the preceding verse, this construction cannot but seem
very genuine, that as for them who walk in darkness, to say they have
fellowship with God, is a lie: So on the contrary, they who walk in the light,
may truly say they have fellowsh^p with God, the one being an evident, and
infallible testimony of the other. To illustrate this briefly, you must know
that this (...) fellowship if taken for a participation of Gods sanct^ty, is
the cause of our walking in the light, since till we receive by this
participation the l^ght of hol^ness from God, we can never walk in it. Now
though science properly so called, is a priori from the cause to the effect,
yet our knowledge for the most part and especially in this particular is a
posteriori from the effect to the cause, and so this walking in the light as an
effect, assures us of its cause, fellowship with God.

The consideration hereof may serve for a touchstone, and a whetstone; and so
both rectify our judgments, and quicken our endeavors.

1. Let it be a touchstone, to try the truth of our interest in this
fellowship, that so we may give a right estimate of our own condition. It is
St. Peter's counsel, 2 Pet. 1.8. Vid Bez grot. ibid.
give all diligence to make your calling and election sure, this fellowship my
text speaks of, is that to which we are elected before time, and called in
time, but how shall we make it sure, Beza and Grotius both tell us, that in
several Greek manuscripts these words are added (...) by good works, which
are Metaphorically a walking in the light. If then we would not be deceaved in
the knowledge of our election and vocation, to this heavenly participation, let
us measure our selves by the course of our actions and integrity of our
conversation.

2. Let it be a whetstone, to set an edge upon our desires after walking in the
light that we may have fellowship with God, surely if we have any belief of a
deity and acknowledge him to be the summum bonum cheifest good, we cannot but
account it our happiness to have the fruition of him. If then we desire this
happy communion, let it be our care to lead holy conversations.

The truth is fellowship with God, is such a privilege which as on the one
hand it is impossible to deserve, so on the other it is not sufficient to
desire, but we must be in some measure fitted for it. There is none of us but
would attain this fellowship, only we like not the way that leads to it,
whereas it is in vain to expect the one, without performing the other, as
therefore we seriously desire fellowship with him, let us earnestly strive to
walk in the light as he is in the light, and so much shall suffice for the
first benefit here assured, pass we on to the.

2. Other which indeed is the foundation of this namely our cleansing by
Christ, and the blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin. For
the fuller discussion whereof I shall consider it two ways. In it self as it
contains a positive assertion, the blood of Jesus Christ, his son cleanses
from all sin. In its connection with the preceding part of the verse intimated
in that coniunctive particle and.


1. The plain position of this clause, is the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses
from all sin, insignis hic locus (to use Calvin's expression) an elegant, Cal^
in loc.
and excellent sentence, wherein every word has its weight, so that we might
find in it as many parts as words. If you please to allude to a known and apt
metaphor, here is observable the Physician, the patients of that Physician, the
disease of those patients, the physic for that disease, the operation of that
physic, and the efficacy of that operation.

1. The Physician, is Jesus Christ the son of God, one who being the son of
God, must needs be able and skillful, since he is the Christ, he wants not a
call to the office, and as he is Jesus, he cannot but be ready and willing to
the work, who can desire a better, who would seek after another Physician
then him in whom skill, and will, ability, and authority do meet.

2. The patients of this Physician are expressed in the pronoune us conceive it
by way of exclusion, us, not the Angels, he is pleased to have no pity on
their misery, nor to vouchsafe them any remedy, by way of inclusion, us
Apostles, as well as others, none but stand in need of this Physician, and they
most need him, who think they have least.

3. The disease of these patients is sin, a disease both hereditary, as to the
root of it, which together with our nature we receave from our parents, and
likewise contracted by our selves, upon our selves, in the daily eruption of
this corruption, by thoughts, words and works; A disease that makes the
patient sick, dangerously, desperately sick, even to the death, yea such as
must inevitably have brought upon us, not only the first, but the second death,
had not this Physician interposed, and undertaken the cure.

4. The physic, which this Physician administreth to the patient for the cure
of his disease is blood, and which is the wonder his own blood. Indeed the
cause so stood, that as none but this Physician, so nor he but by his blood
could effect this cure, and behold, he is content, to part with his own blood
for our sakes.

5. The operation of this physic, is by cleansing, indeed such is the
excellency of Christ's blood, that it is both a purge, and a cordial,
strengthening, and cleansing; none like this to comfort our hearts, none like
this to purge out the ill humors of our sins, whereby our spiritual health is
restored.

6. Lastly the efficacy of its operation, which appears by a double extent.

1. The one in regard of the disease it cleanses from all sin, that is,
whatsoever can be called sin, of what k^nd, nature, Omnipotenti medico nullum
vulnus in sana bile, Aug. in Ps. 58. Vide bern sermon. 1. de not dom. et 66. de
parv. et 13 in Cant.
degree soever it be, since the cure of no d^sease can be impossible to him
that can do all things.

2. The other in respect of the permanency of this physics virtue, employed in
the present tence of the verb, this blood never loosing its efficacy,
cleansing not only when shed but indeed, both before and after, so that the
patriarchs and Prophets before Christ, the Apostles who were contemporary with
Christ, nay all Christians after him, to the end of the world, may truly take
up this saying, the blood of Christ, cleanses us from all sin.

But that I may rather break, then crumble this bread of life, be pleased only
to take notice of two general parts in this clause namely.

The effect, or benefit it self in those words, cleanses from all sin.

The cause and spring of this benefit in those words the blood of Jesus Christ
his son, of the first briefly, of the latter more largely.

1. The benefit it self is cleansing from all sin, for the unde^standing of
which we must know that in sin, there are two things considerable to wit
macula, and reatus the stain, whereby it defiles our natures, and the guilt
by which it defiles our persons, according to these two, there is a double
cleansing, the one of sanctification, the other of just^fication, nor is it my
distinction but St. Paul's, where having mentioned walking as the genus, 1 Cor.
6.11.
he presently distinguishes it into its species, sanctifying and justifying.
The one, by subduing the dominion of sin, gradually abateth, and in due time
shall by an expulsion of the being, wholly take away the stain of sin upon our
natures, the other so takes away the guilt of sin, that the person is not in
Gods Sight, and account obl^ged to suffer the pun^shment due to it. If you ask
which of these is here understood, I answer in a large sense, we may comprehend
both, it being true that the blood of Christ has in it self a moral efficacy
to persuade, and withal has purchased the spirit of Christ, to be annexed to
it, which is the efficient cause, of the cleansing of sanctification, in which
respects our dying to sin, and redeeming us from all iniquity, are set down as
ends; yea effects of Christ's death, Tit. ^.13. 1 Pet. 2.24.
but withal, in a proper sense we are here to understand the cleansing of
justification, partly, because the walking in the light before mentioned,
includes in it the purity of sanctification, and partly, because this
cleansing is here prom^sed as a privilege to be conferred upon them that walk
in the l^ght.

To this purpose it is rationally observed, that

1. Where cleansing from sin is required as a duty to be done by us, Isa. 1.16.
2 Cor. 7.1*
it is to be understood necessarily of cleansing by sanctification, so in that
of the Prophet, wash you, make you clean, of the Apostle S. Paul, let us
cleanse our selves; Jam. 4.8.
S. James, cleanse your hands, and the like.

2. Where cleansing from sin is prayed for as a mercy, of which we stand in
need; it extends to both: P^^l. 51.27* 10.
as appears in David's penitential Psalm, where he beggeth of God washing,
cleansing, purging, and creating in him a clean heart; since though the former
principally refer to the cleansing of justification, yet the latter manifestly
relates to that of Sanctification.

3. Where cleansing is promised as a benefit to be bestowed upon us if it is
not only yet primarily to be interpreted of cleansing by justification; of this
nature are those Evangelical promises we read of in the Prophesyes of Jeremy
and Ezechiel, Ier. 33.8. Ezekiel. 36.25.
and thus I conceive we are to interpret both the ninth and this present verse.
According to this construction, the blessing here assured, is that which is
elsewhere called rem^ssion and forgiveness of sins, why it is expressed by this
metaphor of cleansing, shall be ( God willing) more fully illustrated in the
handling of the ninth verse. Let it suffice for the present, that we have found
out the genuine meaning of it, and so pass we on to

2. That which is the chief intendment of this clause, the cause and spring of
this benefit, the blood of Jesus Christ his Son.

This phrase of cleansing, is both a metaphorical and a legal word, and in
both it represents this blood of Christ.

1. As it is a metaphorical word. What water is in the corporal, that is, this
blood of Christ in the spiritual cleansing; blood in a natural way, is not
cleansing but defil^ng, and besmearing; and yet what water does to material,
that, this blood does to the immaterial cleansing; in this respect it is, that
as men use to wash themselves in water, so Christ is said to wash us in his
blood: to this the promise in Ezechiel properly alludeth, where God says,
Revel. 15. Ezekiel. ^6 26. Est metaphora deducta ab aqua qua quemadmodum abluuntur
sor^des corporis ita ^anguine hoc est sacrificio Christi tolluntur peccata
n^stra. Lubbert. Adv. Socin. de serve. l. 2. c. 17. Heb^. 9.22.
I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and for this end certainly, Christ
instituted water as the element in the holy Sacrament of Baptism, that he might
thereby signify the cleansing efficacy of his blood.

2. As it is a legal word. What the blood of beasts in the law did tipically,
that the blood of Christ does really, to wit, cleanse from sin. The Author to
the Hebrews observes, that almost all things in the law were purified with
blood, and without shedding of blood, there was no rem^ssion; thus in the
ceremonies for legal uncleanness, there was for the most part blood used, and
in their sacrifices for expiation of moral uncleaness; there was shedding of
blood, to both which the Apostle alludeth, when he speaks of the blood of
Bulls and Goats, V. 12.
and the ashes of an heyfer; the blood of Bulls and Goats being shed in their
sin offerings, and the ashes of a slain heyfer, used in cleansing those that
touched a dead body. And surely what were all these cleansings by blood, V. 24.
but types and figures of the cleansing by Christ's blood, for which cause the
Apostle manifestly calls these purifyings, patterns of the heavenly things:
indeed as the same holy writer says, it is not possible that the blood of
Bulls and Goats should take away sin, so that when expiation of sin is
attributed to them, it is only to be understood in a tipical and sacramental
sense, as they were shadows, figures, representations of this blood, whereof my
Text speaks; and therefore it is, they all vanished and were abrogated from
the time of the shedding of this blood, in which they had their accompl^shment,
and by which this admirable effect was really and fully performed, the
cleansing from all sin.

For the better understanding of this precious truth, give me leave briefly to
resolve these three Queries. What we are here to understand by the blood of
Christ. What kind of causality this blood has to the cleansing from sin.
Whence it is that this blood has this causal^ty, and when I have thus opened
the vein of this clause, I shall the better let out the blood contained it, for
your spiritual refreshment.


1. In answer to the first of these you must know that this blood of Christ is
here to be taken both metonymically, and synechdochically.

1. Metonymically, Socinus making use of this trope, understands by Christ's
blood Gods new Covenant, in which this benefit is promised; a sense which if
admitted, yet according to a right construction, will nothing advance his
design. It is true, he makes it a metonymy of the adjunct, as if the covenant
were called Christ's blood, only because it is confirmed by it; but when St.
Paul tells us in general, that all the promises are in him yea, is well as
Amen, made, as made good; 2 Cor 1.20.
yea when our blessed Savior in particular calls it the blood of the new
Testament, or Covenant, Mat. 26.28.
because it was shed (not so much for confirming the covenant, wherein
rem^ssion of sins is promised us) for the remission (that is, obtaining the
remission) of sins which is promised in that covenant, it plainly appears,
that if by blood we will understand the covenant, it must be a metonymy; not so
much of the adjunct as of the cause, and so it amounts to thus much, that the
remission of sin which is promised in the new covenant, is procured by the
blood of Christ, which is as much as the orthodox doctrine asserts. But the
right metonymy here necessarily to be taken notice of is by the blood, to
understand the death of Christ, and this of the cause for the effect; because
by the violent effusion of his blood, his death was effected.

The better to clear this, take notice that the blood of Christ was shed,
according to St. Bernard (who supposes they drew blood from his cheeks, when
they smote him) seven, but rather six several times. Soon after his birth, when
at his c^rcumc^sion they took away the foresk^n of his flesh, a little before
his death in the garden, when he was cast into that bloody sweat, Vid. Bern. de
pass dom. cap. 32. etc.
in his scourging, when they plowed his back with whips, and made long furrows
on his shoulders, upon his coronation, when they platted his head with a crown
of thorns, at his death on the Cross, in the piercing of his feet and hands
with nayls, after his death when his side was opened with a spear, blood and
water gushing forth; and truly, though none of these times, his blood was shed
in vain, Colos. 1.20. Gutta sanguinis modica propter unionem ad verbum pro
redemptione totius humani generis satis fecisset. Extrav. commun. l. 5. tit. 9.
c. 2. Clem 6.
yet it is the blood of the Cross, when together with his blood, he powered out
his life, that was the offering for sin, in which respect it is expressly so
called by St. Paul: It is indeed by some asserted, that one drop of his blood
(by reason of the hypostatical union) might have sufficed for the redemption of
the world, but that must be taken cum grano salis: since (supposing at least
Gods decree) it was no less blood then his lifeblood, that could avail to the
accomplishing this expiation.

2. Synecdochically. Socin^anizing Vorstius making use of this trope, extends
the synecdoche to that which he calls the whole oblation of Christ, and so
comprehends not only his antecedent obedience, but his subsequent glory, to
wit, of his resurrection, ascension, session, and intercession. But inasmuch as
the author to the Hebrews expressly says, that when he had purged our sins,
he sat down at the right hand of God, and again he entered into the holy place,
having obtained eternal redemption for us, Hebr. 1.3.9.12.
yea our blessed Savior himself being ready to up the Ghost cried, it is
finished, I shall not noubt to assert, Ioh. 19.30.
but that what concerned the acquisition of this great benefit was then fully
performed, though the resurrection with the consequents of it were needful for
the effectual application of it to us. This Synecdoche therefore is to be
extended only to his passion, one part put for the whole of his sufferings,
and so we are to construe it not only of his blood but his body; since as the
one was shed, the other was crucified, and as here, his blood cleanses from
sin, so in St. Peter he is said to bear our sins on his body, yea St. Paul
ascribes our reconciliation; both to his blood, 1. Pet. 2.2^.
and to his body, nor yet only of his body and blood, but his soul also in
which suffering a subtraction of the Divine vision, he cried out upon the
Cross, My God my God, Colos. 1.20.21.
Mat. 1.27.46.
why have thou forsaken me, and therefore the Prophet Isay, foretelling his
passion, (...). 53.10.
mentions his soul which was made an offering for sin, in a word, not only
his blood, and body, and soul, but his whole person is to be included, Gal.
2.20. Ephesians. 5.2. Tit. 2 11.
the passion being expiatory (as you shall hear more fully anon,) in that it
was the passion of such a person, and therefore it is often said he gave up
himself, and more appositely to our present purpose, Heb. 1.3.
is that of the Auther to the Hebrews by himself he purged our sins.

2. For the Resolution of the 2. question be pleased to take notice.

1. That the cleansing of our sins is attributed in scripture to God, to
Christ, to faith, and all of them have a real and several influence upon this
benefit, the principal efficient of this cleansing is God, to whom therefore
it is attributed in the 9 verse, the instrument receiving the benefit is faith,
and therefore it is said to be through faith, the meritorious cause deserving
this benefit at the hands of God for us is Christ's blood, indeed Socinus
asserts (with a nihil verius) that God and Christ act in the same way of
efficiency, Socin. in loc.
only with this difference, God is the principal, and Christ the organicall
cause, and so God forgiveth by Christ, but whilst he only asserts, but does
not prove it; we may as confidently deny, as he affirms: especially when the
scriptures express that not per but propter Christum, by, but for Christ we
are forgiven, Ephesians. 4 ^^. 1. Io. 2.12.
so our translators render the sense of St* Paul's (...) for Christ, sake, and
our Apostle in the twelfth verse of the next chapter, says our sins are
forgiven, (...) for his name sake.

2. More particularly, Christ's blood, is the meritorious cause of cleansing us
from sin, inasmuch, as he thereby took our sins upon himself. This is the
truth which the Apostle Peter manifestly asserts where he says: 1 P^t* ^.^4.
he bore our sins on his own body on the tree, and presently adds by whose
stripes we are healed. Healing and cleansing are parallel phrases, our sins
being the diseases of our souls, of these sicknesses we are healed, of these
sins we are cleansed by Christ's bear^ng them on his body, which, because it was
done on high, upon the tree* the Apostle uses not barely (...) but (...) which
signifies sursum tulit, not only he bore, but he carried up, whereby the
sense is not diminished, Vide s^erae I^inerar in ps. super ^e^bum. (...)
but augmented, as having in it a fit allusion to the sacrifices which were
lift up upon the Altar. It is very considerable in this respect, that the
hebrew word (...) and the greek (...) (like the latin tollo) signify both
far, and auferre, to bear and to take away, and both these are used
concerning Christ in this particular, Isay. 53.4. Joh. 1.29*
the one by the prophet Isay, where he says, he bore our griefs, the other by
John Baptist, when he says; he takes away the sins of the world, and most
aptly because he takes away the sin from us: by taking it upon himself.

To unbowel this precious truth know

1. That Christ bleeding and dying on the Cross stood in our stead and
suffered in our room; to this purpose are those expressions, where Christ is
said to suffer for us, 1 Pet. 2.21. Io. 11.50. Rom 7.3.
to die for the people; for so much the preposition (...) sometimes signifies,
as when St. Paul wishes to be an anathema (...), for or instead of his
brethren, and when the Apostles are said to be Ambassadors (...) for that is in
Christ's stead; more clearly to this intent is that phrase of the Evangelist,
where Christ is said to give his life a ransom for many, the preposition being
not (...) but (...), which always implies a commutation, and when it is
applied to persons, 2 Cor. 5.20. M^^th. 20.78.2.22.
signifies the coming of one into the room of another, so Archelaus is said
to reign in Judea, (...), in the rooom of his father Herod. Yea, that this
sense is intended where spoken of Christ's sufferings, appears by St. Paul's
question, is Paul crucified for you? for if it were only meant for your good,
1 Cor. 1.13.
Paul might have been crucified for them, as he tells the Colossians, I rejoice
in my sufferings for you, Col 1* 24.
and therefore crucified for you, must be as much as in your stead, which
neither Paul, nor any other could be.

2. That Christ standing in our stead, death was inflicted on him by God for
our sins: this no doubt is the genuine meaning of those Scriptures where he is
said to be wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities:
Isai. 53.1. Romans 4.25. 1 Cor. 15.3.
and again, he was delivered for our offenses, he died for our sins. That these
phrases cannot properly note the final cause appears, in that the end of his
death is not our sins, but what is directly contrary to our sins, the
destruction of them, who ever said that Physic was taken for death, that is,
the avoiding death, but for the disease; the disease being that which
necessitateth to Physic, besides to instance yet nearer when we say, a man
died for theft, for murder, or treason: what else do we mean, but that those
crimes were the deserving cause which brought him to his end. Thus Christ died
for our sins, our sins bringing him to his Cross, to his grave; in this sense
no doubt it is that the Apostle says, he (that is God) made him to be sin for
us, to wit, at least so far as to be made a sacrifice for our sins, when yet
he knew no sin-namely, in himself, and look as the beast in the law was slain
and sacrificed in the room, and for the sin of the person that brought it, 2
Cor. 5. ult.
so was Christ crucified in our stead, because of our sin.

3. That Christ bleeding and dying for our sins, suffered that punishment which
was due to us. It was the commination of God to Adam, Genes. 2.17. Gal. 3.13.
Thou shall dye the death. Death then was the punishment due to him and all his
posterity for sin, and this death which we must have undergone in our own
persons, is inflicted upon Christ. To this purpose it is, that Christ is said
by the Apostle to be made a curse: when this, but when he hung upon the tree,
for cursed is every one that hangs upon the tree, so that the curse which the
law pronounces against u^, was laid on him: if it be said that the curse and
death which was due to us was eternal, whereas Christ's was temporary. I answer
that duration is but a circumstance to the thing, and the reason why on us it
must have been eternal, is because our punishment could no other way be
infinite, which yet is required for the satisfaction of an infinite offended
justice, whereas the case is far different in respect of Christ, as will
appear presently.

4. That Christ having suffered that punishment which belonged to us, Heb. 7 2^.
we must needs be thereby acquitted and cleansed* to this purpose he is called
by the Author to the Hebrews, a surety: and look as the surety paying his debt
for whom he is bound, discharges him from his creditor; so Christ suffering
our punishment, freeth us from the obligation to it, which is all one with
cleansing from the guilt of sin, and the reason is plain, for since the guilt
of sin is its binding the sinner over to the punishmen^, Christ taking that
punishment upon himself, and suffering it in our room must needs thereby
cleanse us from that guilt, so that in few words Christ's blood being (...) a
laver became (...) a price satisfactory for our debt, has obtained the
forgiveness of it to us, and so we are cleansed.

Having in some measure according to the scriptures explained the genuine
notion of this causality, I shall not much trouble my self nor you with those
farfetched and ieiune inventions of the Socinians, Socin. in loc.
whereby they endeavor to elude these truths, and yet I cannot pass by one
evasion because it is that Socinus annexeth to this very scripture as if this
saying the blood of Christ cleanses from sin were no more but that his blood
declares us to be, and assures us that we are cleansed, so that what the
Orthodox attribute to the Sacrament, instituted by Christ in commemoration of
his blood, that these Heretics attribute to the blood it self, but how
incongruous it is to expound this of a declarative cleansing, appears in that
the Apostle who could best interpret his own language in the very next verse
save one, unfolds it by forgiving besides this construction makes cleansing
from sin, to antecede Christ's blood, for if it did not praeexist, Ephesians. 1 4.
Col. 1* 24.
there not be could any declaring or confirming of it, whereas the scripture,
both here and else where, plainly, positively asserteth this cleansing to flow
from, and come through the blood of Christ, the consideration hereof no doubt
forced Socinus to the finding out of other solutions, and there fore he
sometimes asserts, that Christ's blood cleanses inasmuch as it persuades us to
a belief, and hope of eternal life, whereby we are induced to holiness of
life, Vide Socin de Servat^re.
and so our sins are cleansed, but all which is hereby ascribed to Christ's
death is only a moral causality, nay rather a mere antecedency, sure it is
Christ's resurection, rather then his death which ingenders that faith and hope
in us, and it is not imaginable, that the scripture should so often attribute
that to the death, which cheifely depends on the resurrection of Christ, add
to this (which is very considerable) how remote (if any at all) an influence it
is which Christ's blood according to this sense has upon this cleansing, (for
as Grotius has well observed) the thread must be drawn out to this length.
Vide grot. de satisfact. Christi c. 1. ad finem.


Forgiveness and cleansing from sin, is conferred upon them that live holily,
to live holily, we are induced by a certain faith and hope of the reward, the
example of Christ raised from the dead, and exalted to glory for the holiness
of his life is a way to beget this faith, and hope, that glorifying and rising
his death did necessarily antecede and thus our cleansing from sin is obtained
by his blood, but how credible it is that the scriptue should so frequently, so
positively, so expressly attribute this cleansing to Christ's blood, and yet the
dependence of these one upon the other to be at so remote a distance, and of so
slender an energie, let any one who has but a competent use of his reason
Judge,

3. I proceed therefore to the answer of the last question nor need we go
further then the text it self to find that, if you would know how this blood
becomes so effectual to cleanse from sin, the answer is, because it is the
blood of Jesus Christ his son.

I shall not altogether pass by nor yet insist upon that note which Estius
has upon the blood of his son, Vide est in loc.
that in them there is a confutation of three heresies at once, the M^^ichees
who deny the truth of Christ's humane nature since as Alexander said of his
wound, clamat me esse hominem, it proclaymeth me a man, we may say of his
blood, for had he not been man, he could not have bled, have dyed; the
Ebionites who deny him to be God, since being Gods natural son, he must needs
be of the same essence with himself, and the Nestorians who make two persons,
which if true the blood of Christ the man, could not have been called the blood
of Christ the son of God.

That which I conceive here chiefly to be taken notice of is that our Apostle
contents not himself to say the blood of Jesus Christ, but he adds his son
to intimate to us how this blood became ava^leable, to our cleansing to wit as
it was the blood not merely of the son of Mary, the son of David, the son of
Man, but of him who was also the son of God.

Indeed that it was the blood of an innocent pure unsinn^ng man did much
conduce to this work since had he been himself a sinner he could not have
cleansed us from our sins, 1 Io. 2.1. 1 Pet. 1.17.
and therefore our Apostle in the next chapter joyneth these two together Jesus
Christ the righteous, the propitiation for our sins, and the Apostle Peter puts
these together as of a precious lamb without spot and blemish, to this purpose
it is St. Austin says the blood, because it was the blood of him who had no
sin himself, Aug de Trinit. l. 3. c. 15. Leo Ep. 8 3*
was shed for the remission of our sins, and Leo sutably the pouring out of a
just man's blood, for the unjust was effectual to our redemption.

But though this was a necessary qualification in this person who did shed his
blood for this end, yet that which gave the efficacy, and merit to his blood,
was the fullness of the Godhead which dwelt in him personaly, Dames^ de fide.
l. 3. c. 15.
thus Damasen speaking of his deity adds, thence his passion became of a
saving, and quick^ning virtue, and St. Cyrill expressly, his blood had not been
a price for the worlds sin, if he had been only man. Indeed Socinus asserts
that the dignity of his person added nothing to the value of his sufferings,
because the divinity it self did not suffer, but though the Godhead did not
suffer yet Godman did suffer, and he who endured the punishment was God, Cyr.
de rectan fide ad Reg. Socin. de (...)
though he did not endure it as God, in these respects it is said they
crucified the Lord of Glory, and God is said to purchase his Church with his
blood, 1 Cor 2.8. Act. 20.28.
and here it is called the blood of Jesus Christ his son, and we may as well
say it is all one, to kill a King as a beggar, a Father as a stranger, because
the mortal wound is directed against the body, not the dignity or affinity.

The sum then is this, Christ's deity being personally united to his manhood,
gives an efficacy to his sufferings, hence it is that his person being
infinite, the worth of his blood is infinite, and so it became commensurate and
adaequate both to the infinite demerit of the sin committed by us, and the
eternity of the punishment, which was to have been inflicted upon us, and by
the same reason that man's sin, being a finite act, yet deserves an infinite
punishment, because perpetrated against an infinite majesty: Christ's death
though a temporary passion, cannot but be infinitely satisfactory, because it
is the death of an infinite person, Christ Jesus the son of God, blessed for
ever.

And now what other use should we make of this but as both a looking-glass,
and an antidote.

1. In this truth as in a looking-glass, let us see these two things the
heinous nature of our sins, and the unparaleld measure of Christ's love. Peccati
inma^nitas Christi charitas Justin in loc.


1. View oh sinner the heinous nature of thy sins, from which nothing but
Christ's blood can cleanse th^e, sin if looked upon in the glass of the law,
cannot but appear sinful but when beheld in the blood of Christ, it must
needs appear beyond measure sinful: Vide Gualt: hom. in ep. Bern de not. dom.
sermon 3.
ex consideratione remedii periculi aestimo quantitatem; says St. Bernard
excellently take notice of the greatness of thy disease, and danger in the
remedy prepared for the cure of the one, and prevention of the other. Oh how
great is that wound, which nothing could heal but the Physicians death. The
truth is, Christ's blood in respect of sin, is both aggravating and diminishing:
look upon sin in Christ's blood one way; and it appears not so terrible
because this blood cleanses from it: look upon it another way, and it
appears abominable, because it could not be cleansed but by this blood. Tell
me oh sinner why do thou make nothing to defile thy self with that which cost
thy Savior so dear to cleanse thee from, how much rather should thy sins wring
tears from thee since they drew blood from Christ?

2. Behold oh Sinner the exceeding love of thy Savior, who that he might
cleanse thee when polluted in thy blood was pleased to shed his own blood.
Indeed the pouring out of Christ's blood was eximium charitatis opus, a
superexcellent work of charity, hence it is that these two are joined
together, and when the scripture speaks of his love it presently annexeth his
sufferings so St. Paul, Gal. 2.20. Rev^l. 1.5.
who loved me and gave himself for me, so St. John, who loved us and washed us
from our sins in his own blood. We read, that when Christ wept for Lazarus,
the standers by said, Io. 11.36.
see how he loved him, surely if his tears much more his blood proclaims his
affection toward us, thus may we see the bowels of his compassion through the
wounds of his passion. The Jews were the scribes, the nails were the pens,
his body the white paper, and his blood the red ink, and the characters were
love, exceeding love, and these so fairly written, that he which runs may read
them. I shut up this with that of devout Bernard, Behold, and look upon the
rose of his bloody passion, Bern. de pass dom c. 41.
how his redness bespeaketh his flaming love, there being, as it were a
contention betwixt his passion and affection, this, that it might be hotter,
that that it might be redder, nor had his sufferings been so red with blood,
had not his heart been enflamed with love. Oh let us beholding magnify,
magnifying, admire, and admiring, praise him for his inestimable goodness
saying with the holy Apostle unto him that loved us and washed us from our sins
in his blood be honor and glory for ever. Rev 1.5.


2. Make use of this truth as a cordial to revive thy drooping soul, in a time
of inward affliction: it is the note of Oecumenius upon the text. Is any one
affrighted with the light and sense of sin? vide Oecumen. Aguust in loc.
Let this cleansing by the blood of Christ make him confident, and to the like
purpose St. Austin, the devil has put in a caveat. an handwriting against us,
but let us be secure: the blood of Christ has blotted it out. Me thinks I hear
some wounded, broken sinner crying out in despair. Woe is me that ever I was
born, my sins are for number innumerable, for measure, unmeasurable, and I am
not able to cleanse my self from any, no not the least of them. Oh what
mountains of grievous sins lie upon my back, that I am not able to look up, oh
what scarlet crimson bloody sins continually sly in my face, that I am not able
to behold without desperation, oh that I had never been, oh that I might be no
more, whether shall I sly, who carry my guilt still along with me? What shall I
do to be eased of this oppressing burden? Ah my sinful soul what will become
of thee? Vile wretch that I am, where shall I appear? But stay thou despa^ring
sinner; with poor Hagar in the wilderness, Z^ch. 13.1.
thou art crying, weeping, dying, when as behold a well of water is by thee, a
fountain of blood is opened for sin, and for uncleanness, thou do well to
bewail thy own sin, but thou do ill to forget thy Saviors blood. Thou say
thou art a great sinner, true, else Christ needed not have shed his blood, thou
say thou art a great sinner, be it so, yet Christ's blood cleanses from all
sin. Dicitur Christus emundare ab omni peccato quia nullum est tam immane
sacinus quod Christi sangnine non potest el^i. Justin. in loc.
And therefore is Christ's blood said to cleanse from all sin, because there is
no sin so great from which it cannot cleanse, what if thy sins be clouds: thick
clouds, yet the beams of this sun of righteousness can dissipate them, what
though they be mountains, yet this red sea can swallow them, what though they
be scarlet sins, yet this scarlet blood can make them white as snow. View the
catalogue of those sinners whom this blood has cleansed, and thou shall find
fornicatours, idolaters, adulterers, effae'minate, abusers of themselves with
mankind, thieves, covetous, drunkards, revilers, extor^tioners have been washed
by it, for such says St. Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.9.
were some of ye, but ye are washed: look once again, 10.11.
and thou shall find a blasphemer, a persecuter, (for such was Paul himself)
nay murderers, even those who had a hand in the murder of Christ himself, 1 Timothy 1.15.
(for such were those converts at St. Peter's sermon) Act. 2.35.
cleansed mercyfully by this very blood which they shed so cruelly. Sinners,
this blood still as it were runs afresh, and the efficacy of it is as full now,
as it was at first, only remember that this blood which was shed, cleanses
not unless it be sprinkled, so much David intimates in that prayer, purge me
with hisope, Ps. 51.7.
hysope being that by which the blood of sacrifice was sprinkled, to which
answers faith, Jo. 3.14.
wereby our souls are sprinkled with this blood of Christ. The brazen Serpent
cured those who were stung with the fiery Serpent, but not without their
looking on it: The blood of Christ can cleanse us from all our sins, but not
without our applying it. Go then oh sinner in a sense of thy own filthiness to
thy blessed Savior, say to him with the Leper, Math 8 2. Ma^k 9 24. Math.
11.28.
Lord if thou will thou can make me clean, with the Father of the child, Lord
I believe, help my unbelief, remember his gracious invitation to come, and his
comfortable promise of ease, and be not faithless but believing. Nor need
thou mingle any water with this blood, popish pennances, pilgrimages,
indulgencies or any such like inventions of superstitious dotages, this blood
alone can cleanse* and by joining any thing with it, thou do what lies in
thee to defile and debase this blood. To him then, and him alone; have recourse
with a lowly, yet lively confidence, relying on the merits of his blood, which
cleanses from all sin.

2. You have seen the position in it self, be pleased now to look upon it: in
its reflection, on what proceeds, and thus we may consider it two ways.
Either as these words are an answer to some objection, which may be made
against the preceding. Or as the preceding words prevent a misapplication which
may be made of these.


1. Whereas the Apostle says in the former part of the verse. If we walk in
the light, as he is in the light, we have fellwoship one with another. It may
be objected though we now walk in the light, yet before we walked in darkness,
and will not that hinder our Communion, nay besides, though we walk in the
light: yet we still fall into darkness, and will not that make a separation
between God and us, to both these we have a clear answer returned in these
words.

Et maxim apud Johannem causaliter usurpatur. l^r. in loc. Ezekiel. 18.21.22.
1. As for our past sins, committed before conversion, they shall not hinder this
fellowsh^p, because? (so ( and) is sometimes taken; especially by S. John) the
blood of Christ cleanses from all sins. To wit, as some expound it (truly
though not fully) all past sin, it is the promise of Almighty God, made by
Ezechiell, that when the wicked, turns from his wickedness that he has
committed, all his transgressions that he has committed they shall not be
mentioned to him, indeed the convert himself still penitently remembers them,
bu^ God mercifully forgets them, and why? the blood of Christ cleanses from
them, whence by the way it is well observed by Zanchy: that it is not our
walk^ng in the l^ght; cleanses from our former works of darkness: but the
blood of Christ. Zonch. ibid.
Our present obedience is not, cannot be any compensation to God, for our
former disobedience, we now do no more then we ought to do, and therefore it
cannot satisfy for our former doing what we ought not, and not doing what we
ought to do, but the merit of Christ's blood both can and does expiate our
former guilt.

2. As for our present sins, whither continual infirmities; or our particular
gross acts, into which we may fall: notwithstanding, we walk in the light,
from these upon our repentance, the blood of Christ cleanses, and so our
fellowsh^p with God continues, it is true we cannot walk so exactly but sin
will cleave to us, sin in whomsoever it is, cannot but provoke God to separate
from him, I but the blood of Christ cleanses us from our sins, whereby it is
that we still have fellowsh^p with God. Thus does this sentence at once: both
infirmitatis nostrae nos admonere: admonish us of our own weakness, and
adversus desperationem munire, Calv. ibid.
arm us against those fears which the sins we fall into, by reason of that
weakness may prompt us to; whilst we have still a refuge to fly to a rock to
lay hold upon, a plaster to make use of, even this blood of Jesus Christ which
cleanses from all sin.

2. There is yet another relative consideration of these words; which would by
no means be left out, as being that which may serve like the angels flaming
sword; to keep of impenitent sinners from coming to the tree of life.

Brethren, this is a very comfortable doctrine which you have heard of Christ's
blood cleansing from all sin, and I doubt too many will be ready to lay hold on
it, to whom it does not yet belong; when therefore you apply this comfort, take
with you the cond^tion, if we walk in the l^ght as he is in the light; the
blood of Christ cleanses from all sin. And remember that this hypotheticall
proposition is aequivalent to an exceptive, unless we walk in the light the
blood of Christ will not cleanse us. Hence then impenitent presumptuous
sinners, here is bread indeed; but not for Dogs, a pearl, but not for swine.
The comfort of this text is precious; but not common, and though that his blood
is able to cleanse all: yet it only will cleanse them that walk in the light.
It is the strange conceit of many, that all is so done for them, that nothing
needs to be done by them, whereas Christ's blood so cleanses from sin, that we
must walk in the light, it is the horrid presumption of some, that though they
live in sin, they shall be cleansed by Christ's death whereas his blood
cleanses only such as walk in the light. Oh then, let us not deceive our
selves with vain hopes, Christ has borne our sins, we must not therefore think
to lay what load upon him we please: he only takes away their sins, who cast
away their sins. Christ's death is a plaster for wounded sinners, but we must
not presumptuously wound our selves: in hope that this plaster will cure us.
Finally, Christ's blood is a rich treasure, to defray the debts of humble
sinners, and to bear the expenses of such to heaven: but there is nothing
allowed for wanton prodigals, who spend freely, and sin lavishly, upon the
account of Christ's merits: and therefore to end all, be sure in reading, and
applying to join the beginning of the verse with the end. If we walk in the
light the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN. SERMON. 14.

CHAP. I. Ver. 8, 9, 10. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and the truth is not in us.

If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and
to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.


THat vision which Moses saw of a bush burning in the fire, Exodus 3.2. Ignis in
Rubo symbolum est sapientiae quae consistit in ^ognitione D^i and nostri lap.
in Exodus Vide Gualt. in loc.
is symbolically applied to instruct us in that most exquisite wisdom, the
knowledge of God and our selves, nor unfitly, since flaming fire is a fit
emblem of Gods purity, and the thornie bush of man's iniquity. This sight me
thinks St. John presents us within this Chapter, if you please to cast your
eyes on the sixth verse you may behold the fire, a delineation of Gods
holiness, who is light without any darkness, here in these verses you may
meet with the bush, a declaration of man's sinfulness. It was the prayer of a
devout Ancient, Domine noverim te, noverim me. Lord let know thee, let me know
my self; this ought to be the prayer, the study of every Christian to know Gods
purity that we may admire him, ou^ own impurity that we may abhor our selves,
no wonder if St. John having acquainted us with the one, here minds us of the
other. If we say we have no sin, etc.

After the Preface contained in the first verses, we entered into the body of
the Epistle, wherein we have taken notice of the Text, and the Commentary. The
Text wherein is comprised the main subject of the whole Epistle is set down in
the three preceding verses. That being handled, we are now to enter upon the
Commentary as it is enlarged in the remaining part of the Epistle. There are
three principal terms in the Text, to wit, fellowship with God through Christ,
which is denied to them who walk in darkness, and assured to them who walk in
the light. To one of these three (as will appear by the handling) every thing
in the following part of the Epistle belongs. But that which our Apostle begins
with, and most insisteth upon, is walking in the l^ght; his chief drift being
to chalk out the steps of this way to divine communion, in which he often
collaterally describes them who walk in darkness. The words which I have now
read, contain one, and that which is both the first and the last step of a
Christians walking in the light, namely an acknowledgment of his sins, contrary
to which, they who walk in darkness, instead of acknowledging their faults,
justify themselves as if they had no sin. For the more methodical handling of
the words, be pleased to tade notice in them of two general parts,

A confutation of the arrogant begun in the eighth ingeminated and amplifyed in
the tenth verse.

A consolation of the penitent briefly, but fully laid down in the ninth verse.

Begin we with the confutation, Genesis 1.
wherein we have considerable

The truth implicitly asserted.

The error explicitly confuted.

The first of these will justly take up this hours discourse; it is that,
which is though implicitly, Part 1.
yet manifestly asserted; and since accords to that Geometrical maxim, Rectum
est index sui and obliqui, that which is straight, discovers not only it
self, but that which is cro^ked; so by the clear apprehension of this truth, we
shall the better discover the odiousness of this error.

The truth plainly laid down in these two verses, is, That all men are
sinners; and that not only before, but after conversion: for if there be no
truth, nay, Gods word is not in them, who say they have no sin, it must n^eds
be a true saying, and consonant to Gods word, That all men have sin. It is a
truth which you see consists of two parts, though the latter be principally
here aimed at, and chiefly to be insisted upon.

1. All men before conversion are in a state of sin: Gal 3.22.
thus S. Paul says expressly, that the Scripture has concluded all men under
sin, nor can we understand this note of universality too largely, it being true
not only of all sorts of men, but all men of all sorts; that either have, are,
or shall be. Indeed, all men by corrupted nature, are so far from having no
sin, that they have no good: and therefore that complaint of the Psalmist is
enlarged by the Apostle, as true, of all, both Jews and Gentiles; P^* 14.1.
Romans 3* 12.
they are all gone out of the way, they are become unprofitable, there is none
that does good, no not one: but the truth of this is so evident, that I shall
not need to expatiate upon it.

All men even after conversion continue sinners: indeed by grace we cease to be
wicked, but not to be sinners. It is the note of St. Hilarie, upon these words,
thou have trodden down all them that err from thy statutes, Ps. 119.118. Si
enim peccatores spe^ne^et omnes utique sperneret quia sine pecca to nemo est
Hilar. in Ps. 118
that we are not by them that err, to understand all sinners, but wicked
Apostates: for if God shall tread down all sinners, he must tread down all men,
because there is no man without sin.

That this truth is here intended and asserted by St. John in these words, will
appear, if we consider,

1. The connection of this with the precedent verse, which evidently seems to
lie thus. The Apostle there affirms, that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses
them who walk in the light, from all sin. Whereas it might be objected on the
one hand, that they who walk in the light have no sin, and therefore need not
the blood of Christ to cleanse them, our Apostle here tacitly returns
answer, letting them know that even they who walk in the light, are not
altogether free from sin, and therefore have continual need of cleansing by
Christ's blood: and whereas it will be said on the other hand, if the benefits
here mentioned stand upon such terms of walking in the light as he is in the
light, We who have darkness mixed with our light, cannot hope to be partakers
of them: our Apostle here preventeth it by acquainting us, that it was far from
his intent by this phrase to exact unspott^d purity, or a perfect freedom from
all sin.

2. The persons in respect of whom he makes this supposition, to wit,
himself; and the rest of the holy Apostles. Indeed I do not deny but that the
aim of our Apostle in these words was to confute those in his time, who living
in wickedness, and thought themselves pure, but withal, it is manifest that
the argument by which he confuteth them is drawn a majori ad minus, from the
greater, to the less. If we our selves, (St. John and the other Apostles)
cannot say, much less might the Gnostics say, that they had no sin, for
doubtless the Apostle would never have made the supposall in such persons, if
it were not thus far true, that supposing even they should say, they had no
sin, they did but deceive themselves: and as his meaning at the 6. verse, by
putting the reproof in his own person, is to assert that if he or any of the
Apostles should walk in darkness, and yet say they have fellowship with God,
even they would be found liars; so it is his intention here to affirm, that if
he or any of the Apostles should challenge to themselves this immunity from
sin, they would be found self coseners, yea injurers of God himself.

This truth which I am now to handle, has met with many Antagonists, and
therefore I shall the more largely and distinctly unfold it in these ensuing
propositions. 1. This non exemption from sin is affirmed, not only de
praeterito, but de praesenti; in respect of time past, but present: indeed we
find both tenses used by our Apostle in this matter, Soc. in loc. vorst. in
loc. Grot. in loc.
the present in the 8. the preterperfect in the 10. Vorstius, and Grotius in
this, (as in too many other places,) tracing the footsteps of Socinus, would
expound the former, by the latter, Praeteritum pro praesenti. Ambr. de Abr. l.
1. c. 8.
as if the present tense used in the 8. verse, were to be understood of the
time past, the tense of which is expressed in the 10. and so refer both to the
state of Christians before their conversion to the faith: but I know no reason
why we may not as well expound the 10. by the 8. as the 8. by the 10. besides,
it is an usual hebraeisme, which kind of phrase our Apostle much follows, to
put the preterperfect tense, for the present, and therefore it is more
rational to expound those words, we have not sinned, by those we have no sin,
then these by those, Non dicit Joannes si pec at^^n non habuerimus sed habemus.
etc. Aug. de perfect. Justitiae. 1 Io^. 3.9.5.18.
and so this assertion is verified concerning all Christians not only before,
but after conversion, and indeed this is not mine, but St. Austins note upon
the 8 verse. St. John does not say, if we say we had, but have no sin; indeed
there are two places in this epistle, which seem to contradict this
construction of these words; the one where he says, he that is borne of God
cannot sin, and the other not much unlike, where he says, that which is borne
of God sins not. What the full sense of these Scriptures is, I shall ( God
willing) insist upon, in their proper places^ for the present, In quantum a Deo
nati sumus non peccamus. etc Aug in Ep.
it may suffice to answer, either with St. Austin, that he who is born of God,
sins not, to wit, as he is born of God. Regenerate men being therefore
subject to sin, because but in part regenerate, and that holy men fall into
sin, is because of the remainders of the old man, not so far as their natures
are renewed, or else, as St. John seems to expound himself, in the one
place, that he who is born of God, does not sin, that is, does not commit sin,
which being a synonimous phrase with working iniquity, is only true of
unregenerate persons; and in the other place, that he who is born of God,
sins not, that sin of which he there speaks in particular, namely the sin
unto death, notwithstanding which, it still remains as a truth, that even
they who are borne of God cannot say they have no sin at all.

2. This total immunity from sin is denied not only of ordinary, but eminent,
even the holiest Saints that have been, are, or shall be. The We of whom my
Text speaks, were the Apostles, who as they were dignified in office above
others, so no doubt they obtained greater measure of grace then others; yea, he
that includes himself in the number was St. John, Quis sine aliquo peccato
sine aliquo vitio cum clamet qui s^pra pectus Domini recubuit etc. Aug Ep 29.
ad Hieron. 2 Kings 10.3.
who of all the Apostles was most beloved of Christ, and as St. Austin
excellently, Who can say he is without sin, when he that leaned in the bosom
of Christ, says, If we say we have no sin. Indeed as Jehu wrote to the rulers
of Iezreel in another case, look out even the best and meetest of your Masters
Sons, I may say in this, look out even the best and holiest of Gods
children, and see, if any of them can, or dare wholly acquit themselves from
sin; the truth is, as that forementioned Father says, If we shall ask all the
Patriarchs, Aug. contr. Pelag. Epist. ad Bonifa^.
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, de sepissi dum in hoc corpore degerent una voce
concorditer responderent, they would with one consent say of themselves as
living on earth, in these words; If we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves. To this purpose is the observation of Beza, and Zanch. upon the text.
Bez. in loc Zanch. in loc
Consider who it is that here speaks, and that in his own person: who then
can be excepted out of the catalogue? It is true, there is one whom he calls
in the next chapter, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is most justly to be
excepted; of him it is said, He did all things well: Mark 7.37. Joh. 8.46.
Himself makes the challeng, Which of you can convince me of sins? he was no
doubt altogether free from the least spot or stain of corruption, but as for
any other exception, this general rule admits none. I know the papists contend
very earnestly, that the Mother might be exempted, as well as the Son,
asserting her to be free from all kind of sin. It is true, Excepta sancta
virgin de qua propter h^norem D^mini nullam pro^sus quam de peccatis agitur
habere volo quae st^onem etc. Aug de Not and Great. Excepto (...) mediatore Dei
and hominum. etc. Id. de pers. J^st. Luc. 1.47.
St. Austin in one place speaking of the saints sinfulness does except her,
but not in their sen^se, as if she were not a sinner, but for the honor of
Christ, he would not have her mentioned as a sinner, and therefore elsewhere he
is clear, and express, that all are sinners, except the one only mediator
between God and man; nor need we fear to injure the blessed Virgin in joining
her with the rest, when as her self calling Christ her Savior, acknowledges
her self to be a sinner: indeed that her conception of Christ should be
without sin, was needful, but that she her self should be without all sin, was
not necessary, nor does the Scripture, or the ancient Church affirm. Clement.
Alexandrinus is express, only the word is without fault, and St. Basil, the
Scripture bears witness only to one that he knew no sin, Cl. Al padag. l.
^. c. ult. Bas. hom. de poenit. Tertul. de orat. c. 7.
and Tertullian expressly, our Lord commands his disciples to pray, forgive
us our trespasses, as knowing himself only without sin. I shut up this with
St. Ieroms saying, If there be any who may attain to this state of perfect
purity, he must be holyer then any, nay then all the Apostles.

3. This perfect freedom from sin is not denied, Hieron. adv. Pelag.
de suturo but de praesenti, of the future, but only the present time. Our
Apostle does not say, If we say we shall have no sin, nay it is an undoubted
verity, there will be a time when we shall sin no more, yea, when sin shall be
no more: As man in his created estate had a posse non peccare, a possibility of
not sinning; so in his glorified condition he shall have a non posse peccare,
an impossibility of sinning. But now, as in his fallen estate, he cannot say he
does any good, so in his renewed condition, he cannot say he has no evil.
Alexander Alensis starteth an objection of Pelagius seemingly very accute,
Alex. Al. pars 3. quaest. 61. art. 5.
nay solid, that either God would have us without sin, or he would not; to say
he would not have us without sin, were to deny his nature, contradict his word,
which calls upon us to sin no more. If he would have us without sin, then
surely we may be so, since the Divine Will cannot be conversant about
impossibilities. To which he returns this answer, and that very aptly to our
present purpose, God would have us without sin, quantum ad futurum statum, as
to the future, but not as to our present state. And if you desire a fuller
untying of the knot, be pleased to know, that

1. Voluntate praecepti, God calls upon us to be perfect as he is perfect,
Math. 5.48. Jam. 1.21.
and requires us to lay apart all filthiness, nor is it unjust for him to
command that which we might once have done, but now through our own default
cannot, and so is impossible, not per se, but per accidens, in its own nature,
but accidently, yea in wisdom he commands men not to sin, Aug. de peccat.
merit. et remiss l. 2. Id. de perfect. J^stit.
though he know they cannot but sin, that in the disobedient he may punish, not
the cannot, but the will not, thereby glorifying his justice, and in the
obedient, he may reward the willing to do what they cannot, and so glorify
his mercy; in a word, the design of these precepts is to teach us what we
ought, not what we can, to set the mark before us which we must shoot at,
though we cannot reach to it till we come to Heaven. And therefore

2. Voluntate decreti, Gods decree is that we shall gradually come to
perfection, and here endeavoring to attain, hereafter attain what we
endeavor. To this purpose it is that the Church which Christ is said to
present to himself, Ephesians. 5.27.
not having spot or wrinckle, is called a glorious Church: to intimate says
Chemnitius excellently, That then, and not till then, the Church shall be
without spot, Chemnit. exam. Council. Trident
when she is glorious, and that is, when it shall be t^iumphant, and appear
with him in glory.

4. This impeccability is not denied, as that which might not have been, but as
that which supposing Gods council, cannot be. Aug. de peccato^ mer. and ^emiss.
l. ^.
S. Austin moves the question whether it be possible for a man assisted by
grace to be without sin, and resolves it affirmatively, nor can it be
gainsayed, but that if God had so pleased, he might have restored his Image to
man perfectly at his first conversion, or he might have conferred such
extraordinary grace (as a pecuilar privilege) upon some particular men,
whereby they should have been free from all sin. God neither has commanded any
thing which was impossible in it self for man to do, nor is it impossible for
God to assist a man fully to perform what he commands: but what need we
dispute of Gods power, when we know his purpose: (...). Gr. Naz. hom. jact patr.
divine decree has placed impeccability beyond the reach of any mere man in
this life, there cannot be any one named that has been, and we may surely
conclude, there never will be any one on whom such a praerogative shall be
conferred. From hence S. Jerome has well reasoned against Pelagius, It is in
vain to assert such a power which never is reduced into act, and to say a man
may do that which yet no man could ever do, yea (as he does) to say a man might
be without sin, Hier. adv. Pelag. dial. l. 1. Id. ad Chesiph. adv. pelag. Ro^.
7.19.
if he would, when the blessed Apostle cries out, The good I would do, I do
not, and the ev^ll I would not do, I do, is foolish, and absurd, yea,
heretical and impious.

5. There is a great deal of difference between these two phrases, Habere
peccatum and Haberi a peccato, to have sin, A^g. de not. and great, l. 6. c. 2.
and to be had by sin, to the one is required only the presence, to the other
the dom^nion of sin: There are many that can say, nay, all truly regenerate
persons may say, they are not had by, and under the possession of sin, but yet
they cannot say, they have no sin, remaining in them; the weakest Christian is
not under the reign, and the strongest is not without the being of sin: aliud
est non habere peccatum, Id. in ep. ad. Gal.
aliud non obedire desideriis, it is one thing not to have sin, and another not
to obey sin. He that obeys any sin, and yet says he is a saint, deceives
himself, and he that is a saint, should he say he had no sin, would but
deceive himself likewise.

6. It is not a possibility of freedom from gross, scandalous, enormous sins
which is here denied, H^c inter peccatum distat and crimen quod omne crimen
peccatum etc. Greg. Mor. l. 21. c 9. Absque vitio quod graece dicitur (...)
hominem esse posse (...) i. e sine peccato esse neminem. Hier. adv. pelag dial.
l 2. Phil. 2.15. L^c. 1.6. Aliud est esse sine peccato* aliud esse sine
querela. etc. Aug. de perfect. J^st. Id. in Joh. tr. 41.
but from any sin whatsoever. St. Gregory makes a distinction between crimen
and peccatum, that though every crime is a sin, yet every sin is not a crime,
and proportionably many in this life are without crime, but not without sin. To
the same purpose St. Jerome asserts, that a man may be without that which the
Greeks call malicious wickedness, and yet not free from sinful spots: and not
much unlike, St., Austin where he says, It is one thing to be without sin, and
aanother to be without blam. We may read of men without crime, without blame,
but of none without sin* It is the Apostles council to the Philippians, that
they should be harmless, without rebuke; and accordingly it is said of Zachary
and Elizabeth, that they walked in all the commandments of the Lord blameless:
and no doubt there are many godly men who lead such lives that the world cannot
tax them, nor they themselves with any known gross wickedness, but still
they want not infirmities cleaving to them. When therefore St. Paul says of
the Saints* that they are free from sin, it is an inchoate, not a consummate
liberty, and a freeedome from great, not all sins, as St. Austin appositely,
the truth is, to be without sin is the holiness of Heaven: to be without
gross sin, the holiness of earth.

7. It is not a possibility of freedom from this, or that particular sin, but
from all sin that is here denied. There are several sins which godly men may
say they have not; nay there is not any one particular great sin which a man
may not, through divine assistance, be able to avoid; Alex Al. p. 3. quaest.
62. art. 5. Ex (...) partibus p^t^st esse ex omni non nisi in resurrecti^ne
ca^nis. Aug. exp^s. in ep. ad Ga^
but to say, We have no sin at all in no kind nor respect, were arrogance in
the holiest person: this is the position of that great schooleman, A man may
shun any sin in particular, but not sin in general, and his instance
excellently illustrateth it. If there be an 100 leakes in a ship, it is easy to
stop any one of them, but difficult to stop them all; we may be in a great
measure, and in many respects, No^anter dicit (...) pr^p^i^ ergo loquitur de
peccato ut ita dicam (...) habituali and pe^petu (...) inhaerente. Ger. loc.
com. de peccato. Man. 7.11. Per conditionem communis nobis originis etc. Hilar.
ibid. Sine culpa in mundo esse non potest qui in mun dum cum culpa veni^. Greg.
hom 39. in Evang. 2. Co^. 4.16 Pr^^ecto qui de die in diem re novatur ad huc
no^dum t^tus est renovatus etc. Aug. de peccat. mer. and. remiss. l. 2. c. 7.
but not in all, free from sin, till the resurrection of the flesh.

8. Lastly these two expressions, the one of hav^ng sin, the other of having
sinned, are not improbably referd by interpreters, the one to original, and
the other to actual sins, and accordingly I shall demonstrate the truth of
this doctrine in respect of both.

1. If we say we have no sin, (that is no original sin) remaining in us, we
deceive our selves. That our Apostle here intends original sin, is probable,
because he uses the singular number sin, not sins, as if it were some special
sin he pointed at; and likewise because of the phrase of having, which
intimates, that he speaks of that sin which is as it were habitual and
innate in us. It is not unworthy our observation, that Christ speaking to his
own Disciples, calls them evil; and St. Hilaries note upon it, is, that the
reason of this appellation was in respect of that common stain of natural
corruption which did still adhere to them. Indeed we all, bringing sin with us
into the world, cannot be without it whilst we are in the world; it is the
Apostles expression, that we must be renewed daily, and it is St. Austins
gloss, that therefore we are but in part renewed, and so the old man is still
ab^ding in us. Indeed according to that known elegant expression of St.
Bernard, this sin is weakened, but not plucked up; cast down, but not cast out*
subjugated, but not extirpated in the best of Gods saints. Hence the doleful
sigh, and sorrowful complaint of the holy Apostle, Bern. in. ps. qui hab. Sermon.
10.
Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?
knowing (says that devout Father) that he should not be loosed from the root
of bitterness, Id. de advent. Sermon. 6. Dom.
law of sin, till he was loosed from his body; nor could this sin which
separateth between God and us, be separated from him, till his soul was
separated from his body.

It may be here objected what is by the Romanists asserted, that concupiscence
in the regenerate is no sin; and so, though they have concupiscence, yet not
therefore sin* to insist upon this controversy would be a digression, it is
enough, that whilst they only account it paenam and fomitem; a punishment of
sin, and as it were the fuel of sin. St. Paul no less then fourteen times
calls it by the name of sin, in the 6.7. and 8. chapters to the Romans.

Romans 6.7.8. ch^pters.
It may perhaps further be obj^cted what is generally agreed to, that baptism
be coming an instrument of regeneration, washes away original sin: and
therefore why may not regenerate baptized persons say, they have no original
sin? But the schools answer to this objection is very full, that Sacraments are
administered to the person, and therefore the person is free from the guilt,
whilst yet still the nature is defiled with the stain of original sin; and
whereas it may be retorted, that if the sin remain, the guilt cannot be
abol^shed, guiltiness being an inseparable adjunct of sin: I answer, that the
^eatus simplex, guilt abstractively considered, is not taken away: but as
redundans in personam, concretively considered, it is taken away, so that this
guilt shall not be imputed to the person whilst yet there are some remainders
of the sin in him, so that he cannot say truly he has no sin, to wit, no
original corruption.

2. If we say we have not sinned by actual transgressions, we deceive our
selves* Is. 32.13.
that expression of the prophet, upon the land of my people shall come up briars
and thorns, is not unfitly moralized by St. Gregory to this purpose, since the
briars and thorns of iniquity are to be found growing in the land of Gods
people, the hearts and lives of Gods saints. Greg. mor. l. 17. c. 10. Quis
inveniatur ita immunis a culpa ut in eo non ha bea^ vel justitia quod culpet,
vel misericordia quod remi^tat. Leo epiph. Sermon. 7. 1 King. 8.46. James. 3.2.
Cypr. de orat. dom.
Excellently to this purpose says L^^, who is found so void of fault, that
there is not in his life, what justice may blame and mercy perdon? it is the
position of Solomon in his prayer upon his supposition, If they sin against
thee, for there is no man that sins not; and the assertion of St. James
including himself in the number, who yet was called James the just, In many
things we offend all; yea our blessed Sav^our prescribes it as part of a form
of prayer, for his own disciples, Forgive us our trespasses; and as St. Cyprian
well notes, to check any high conceits of our sanctity, he minds us of our
daily sins for which we have need daily to ask pardon.

Indeed as St. Gregory aptly, we must know there are some faults not to be
avoided by the most righteous persons; such are those delicta quotidianae
incursionis, Tertull. de pud^cit.
as Tertullian calls them, sins of quotidian incursion, to which all men are
subject: yea in respect of these it is St. Ambrose his complaint, Ambros. de
Apolog. david.
unus quisque nostrum per singulas horas quam multa delin^ (...)? in how many
things do every one of us offend every hour? Cypr. l. d.
no wonder if St. Cyprian assert, opus est nobis quotidiana sanctificatione; We
have need of renewed sanctification; that as we sin daily, so we may be daily
purged by repentance; nay that the wise man makes the challenge, P. ^. 20.9.
who can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? We can neither
ascribe what purity we have to our selves, nor yet attribute perfection to our
purity.

To illustrate this more distinctly, consider

1. Even the external conversation of the best men is not exactly pure. The
life of a Christian is as it were a book, his birth the Title page, his
Baptism the Epistle Dedicatory, his years the leaves, and his actions the lines
in those leaves, and there are some lines in the leaves of the fairest life,
which by reason of their errata, are legenda cum venia, to be looked upon with
a favorable eye, since if God should examine our acts with a severe eye, Aug.
confess. l. 9. c. 13.
woe would be to the most commendable life, as St. Augustine excellently.

2. Put the case that a man were free in respect of his external actions, yet
who is free from internal motions? though thy hands were perfectly clean, Leo
de quad^ ages. Sermon. 3.
yet thy heart is not. To be free from all titillations, and motions, is not
for this life, which is a continued temptation: that expression of our Savior,
Ioh. 13.^0.
He that is washed, need not, save to wash his feet, is fitly alluded to by St.
Bernard, for our present purpose, Bern Sermon. de coena dom^.
He is washed, whose head, that is, his intentions, and hands, that is, his
operations, are clean. But our feet, which are lusts and affections, whilst
we walk upon the dust of this world, continually need washing.

3. And yet further, though one might arrive at such a perfection, 1 Cor. 4.4.
as to say with St. Paul, I know nothing by my self, yet as he says of
himself, he could not thereby be justified. Indeed it is most probable, that
the Apostle there speaks only in respect of the discharge of his calling,
concerning which he knew nothing by himself, for which he was blame worthy:
but take it in the largest extent, that he knew nothing by himself in the
present bent of his heart, and course of his life, yet he as well as David, and
so every Saint, has reason to pray, Cleanse me from secret sins; many things
being sins, which yet we know not to be so* Ps. 19.^2.
and there being much filth, and uncleanness in our hearts, which by reason of
their deceitfullnesse we are not able to discover and find out.

4. Finally, Our holiest services are full of infirmities, so that if we say,
we have not sinned in the best duty that ever we performed, Exodus 28.38.
we deceive our selves. This was visibly represented, where Aaron the high
priest, a tipe of Christ, was to bear the iniquity of their holy things; and
it is not improbably conceived as the assertion of Solomon, when he says,
There is not a just man on earth that does good, and sins not, that is, who
sins not in the good he does; Ecles. 7.20.
yea it is the confession of the Church, All our righteousnesses are as filthy
rags; upon which St. Bern^rd, Is^. 64.6. Bern. Sermon. 5. de verb. Isaiae. Gers.
de consol. l. 4.
Our righteousness though upright is not pure, unless we think our selves
better then those who uttered those words; and Gerson upon the same Scripture,
infers, Who dare then boast of his righteousness before God? No, brethren,
there is a worm in our best fruits, dross in our purest gold, smoke in our
brightest fire, spots in our most beautiful and splendid performances: our
graces are not without their defects, our duties not without their defaults:
who finds not his knowledge d^mme, his faith weak, his love cold, his zeal
remiss? Who may not complain of dullness: deadness, wandringnes in his
devotion? Who ever could say, he loved God with all his heart, with all his
soul, with all his might, and with all his strength? and ex hoc vitio no^ est
justus super terram, by reason of this defect no man can be perfectly just upon
earth: Aug. ep. 29.
for though a negative imperfection (such as there was in Adam as created by,
if compared with God) be no sin, yet a privative imperfection, (such as is now
in our best righteousness) undoubtedly is. It is no fault for a thing not to
be so perfect as another is, but it is a fault for a thing not to be so perfect
as it ought to be; and therefore because no grace existing in us arises to
that degree, no duty performed by us is exactly according to the manner which
Gods law requires, it must needs be a sin: where then it is said of any person
by God himself, that they are righteous, as of Noah, Job, and others, Cham d^
ope^um Imper. l. 11. c. 22.
it is to be conceived, says the learned Chamer, as a testimony given of them
according to the indulgence of mercy, not the rigor of justice; Id. ibid.
and where the works of godly men are called good works, though they are
absolutely called good works, yet they are not absolutely good, since as St.
Gregory says of himself, so may every Saint, Greg. Mor. l. 8. c. 8.
My ^vill actions are purely evil, but not so my good actions; indeed, we must
distinguish of sins per se, and per accid^ns, the good actions of wicked men
are not sins in themselves, but as performed by them: we must further
distinguish between sinful actions, and sin in an action; the good works of the
godly are not sinful works, but yet they have sin in them: so that to sum it
up, the best actions of bad men are turned into sin, and the best actions of
good men are accompanied with sin: so that none can say, no not in respect of
their good duties, We have not sinned. And yet I do not hereby assert, what
some do too rigidly, that a man sins in every action he does; there are some
actions done by men that are not humane, but natural, and those cannot be said
to have sin in them; besides, there may be in a renewed man some sudden
emanations of the will as regenerate, antecedencies to the conflicts and
lustings of the will as corrupt, and those may be conceived as sinlesse, but
still all deliberate actions must needs have some sin cleaving to them.

As for those doctrines therefore which assert a possib^lity of keeping the
law, of an unsinning estate in this life, I say (as Jeremy upon Hananiahs
prophecy of the speedy deliverance to the Jews) Amen, Jer. 28.6.
the Lord do so; Oh that we might be so perfect! but still I must assert with
St. Austin, it is a state, magis optandus quam sperandus, to be desired, Aug.
de pe^f. Just.
yea and endeavored, but not to be hoped for in this life; and here with St.
John, If we say we have no sin: if we say we have not sinned, we deceive our
selves.

To apply this doctrine. It is worthy to be considered by three sorts of
persons, The wicked, the weak, the strong.

1. Let wicked men take heed how they abuse this doctrine, it is too usual a
consectary, which ungodly wretches draw from these pr^mises, If the best cannot
say they have no sin, no wonder if we commit sin: and they think it a
sufficient excuse for their flagitious wickedness, every man has his faults,
would you have us chaster then David? soberer then Noah? have not the godliest
fallen into sin? so that as we may say of many rich men, It were happy for them
if they did believe that error of Pelagius to be true, an impossibility of
rich men's salvation, since it would divert them from Earth to Heaven, whereas
because they may lawfully care for the things of the earth, they care for
nothing else: the like we may say of many wicked men, It were happy for them
they did believe Pelagius his error in this particular to be true, That men
might be without sin: sure, because they hear no man can be without sin, they
think themselves safe enough, though they live in sin. But oh thou foolish
sinner, know thou not that though no man can be without moats, yet good m^n
are without beams? they have infirmities, but they are free from enormities?
know thou not that though no man can be altogether without sin, yet he is
best that has the least? Vitiis nem^ sine nascitur, optimus ille qui minimis
urgetur Flac^.
and every good man striveth to his utmost against all sin; and therefore take
heed how thou cheat thy self with these false reasonings.

2. Let weak Saints hence comfort themselves against the stirrings of their
lusts, the sense of their infirmities, and their daily frail^ies, which they
find accompanying them; it is too usual with tender consciences, to be too
harsh to themselves; and because they find much sin, to conclude, that they
have no grace. Indeed it is good to be jealous of our own hearts, still to
suspect our graces, our duties, lest they be counterfeit: but withal, we must
take heed how we censure them to be counterfeit, because they are imperfect.
There may be good gold where there is much dross, burning fire hid under many
ashes, and the truth of grace may be in that heart which is sensible of various
and strong lusts; indeed these burres of sinful corruption as they cleave to
us, so they should prick us; our manifold imperfections and infirmities, should
be the matter of our grief, but not of our despair; we cannot be too bitter
against our sins, even the least; yet we must not be too severe against our
selves, because of those lesser sins which we cannot be rid of: if the holy
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, could not, whilst on earth, say they had no
sin, no wonder if thou groan under the weight of many sins.

3. Let strong Saints be hence admonished to be

1. Lowly in their own eyes: That God will not have his Saints altogether free
from sin in this life, is not opus impotentiae, but sapientiae, from want of
power, but abundance of wisdom: and one special reason why the godly have
sin still adhering to them, is to keep them humble and poor in spirit: Indeed
Pelagius scoffs at this as a great absurdity, that sin should be a means to
prevent sin, as if fire could put out fire: but St. Austin answers him
fully, Aug. de not. and great. c. 28.
that it is no unusual thing for a Surgeon to cure a grief, by causing
grief; putting his patient to pain, that he may remove his pain; and we may
answer him in his own instance, That fire is the way to fetch out fire. The
truth is, it is not the remainder of sin, but the sense of those remainders
which is a means to humble us, and abate that spiritual pride, which is too apt
to arise, even from our graces; and look as grace accidentally causes the sin
of pride, so our sins accidentally cause the grace of humility: when therefore
we are at any time apt to pride our selves in our gay feathers, let us look
upon our black feet; and as with one eye we behold the good that is done by us,
so with the other, the evil that remains in us.

Ga^. 6.1.
2. Charitable toward their brethren. If thy brother be overtaken in a fault,
restore him with a spirit of meekness: give to thy neighbors actions the
allowance of humane frailty, and be not too rigid in censuring other men's
faults. If they offend in one thing, perhaps thou art more guilty in another;
if they fall to day, thou may tomorrow; the same corruption that has led
another aside, is still in thee; and (if grace withdraw) will soon prevail over
thee; indeed, if you practice the former duty, you will soon learn this, pride
and censoriousnesse are ever companions, and he that is lowly in his own
esteem, will be charitable toward others.

3. Watchful over their own hearts: indeed, he that carries gunpowder about
him, had need beware the least sparks of fire: what cause have we to take heed
of every temptation who are at best so prone to be led into it? Happy is the
man (says Solomon) that fears always; no doubt, he sins least, that most
fears lest he should sin; it is Jobs saying of himself, according to the
vulgar Latin, verebar omnia opera mea, Job 9.23.
I did fear all my works; let the best do so, fear themselves in all their
actions, lest they should fall into sin.

4. Frequent in prayer to God; for this shall every one that is godly pray to
thee, says David: for this, Paal. 32.6.
what because of his sins? and who? not the wickedest, but the godly in this
respect have cause to pray; Vide Aug. ibid^
and for what should he pray? surely for renewed pardon, for increase of grace,
and for the perfection of glory. We cannot say we have no sin: Oh then let us
pray with David, Enter not into judgment with thy servant oh Lord; where there
is a double emphasis observable, it is not ab host, but a servo; though Gods
servant, yet he would not have God to enter into judgment with him: and again,
ne intres, it is the very entrance into judgment, that he dreads and prays
against; not only do not proceed, but do not so much as enter; when we have
done our best, we have need to crave for mercy. Again we cannot say, we have no
sin, let us pray for more grace, Vide Hier. adv. Pelag. Aug. de lit. and Sp. c.
36.
that we may every day have less sin; so does Paul in effect, when he
confesses himself not to have already attained, but resolves to reach
forward: we must never cease to hunger and thirst after greater measures of
righteousness, till we are wholly and perfectly without any stain of sin; Luke
17.5.
and therefore we must continually say with the Apostles, Lord increase our
faith, and all other graces of thy spirit in us. Finally, since we cannot now
in this life say we have no sin, how should we pray and sigh, and long to be
possessed of that future felicity? indeed, in this respect only it is lawful
and commendable to desire death, that we may be free, not from pain or misery,
but from sin and iniquity, upon this ground we may, we ought, and the stronger
we are in grace, the more earnestly we should groan for the day of our perfect
redemption, when we shall be clothed with unspotted purity, perfect felicity,
and that to all eternity. AMEN.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN. SERMON. 15.

CHAP. I. Ver. 8.10. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there
is no truth in us.

If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.


IT is one of the sage counsels which the wise man gives, Turn not to the
right hand, nor to the left, P^o^. 4.17.
remove thy foot from evil: the genuine and literal sense whereof, no doubt,
is that we must keep the straight way, which God has chalked before us in his
word, not in the least declining on either hand, Declinare ad dexteram est
prosperis efferri ad sinistram adversis deprimi. Hug.
but withal, there are several allusions, and profitable applications made of
these words by the Ancients: Hugo takes the right hand as an emblem of
prosperity, to which we must not turn, by being too much l^f^ed up, and the
left hand of adversity, which we must not turn to, by being too much cast down;
vene^oble ^ed^ resembles by the right hand, Declinare in sinistram est
st^ltitiae se dedere in dextram plus sape^e quam sapere oportet. Bed. In
dextram declina^e est seip. sum decipere dicendo se esse sine peccato etc. Aug.
de peccat m^r. and remiss. l. ^. c. 25. Via regia deducit inter d^o extrema,
etc. (...). in loc.
(...), to which we must not turn by being wise above what is written, and by
the left hand, folly, to which we must not turn by giving our selves up to its
dictates; once more to our present purpose, according to St. Austin. To turn to
the right hand, is* by saying we have no sin, to deceive our selves; to turn to
the left hand, is to go on in sin, and yet think our selves safe, and our
cond^tion happy. Both these our Apostle warns us of in this Chapter, and it
is not mine, but Aretius his observation, where he says, the Kings high way
lies betwixt two extremes, the one whereof is to will a continuance in our
sins, the other to acquit our selves from having any sin, the former of these
which is secura delectatio peccati, a secure delight in sin, is that which is
sharply reproved at the sixth verse, which calls those liars who walk in
darkness, live in wickedness, and yet boast of communion with God; the latter
of these which is superba justitiae presumptio, proud presumption of our own
righteousness, is no less severely condemned in these verses, letting such know
how vainly they cozen themselves, and highly they injure God, If we say we
have, etc.

Having already dispatched the first branch of the confutation which is the
truth implicitly asserted; proceed we now to the second, which is the error
expressly refuted: for the handling whereof be pleased to observe these two
things, The opinion wherein the error consists, and that is set down in the
beginning of the eighth and the tenth verses, If we say we have no sin, if we
say we have not sinned. The arguments by which it is refuted, and dissuaded,
drawn from The folly of it, in that we deceive our selves, and the truth is not
in us. verse eighth. The impiety of it, in that we make God a liar, and his
word is not in us, verse tenth.



Begin we with the opinion it self, Part. 1.
which we see is not singly mentioned, but ingeminated; as if our Apostle would
hereby insinuate, that it is at once both a very common and very dangerous
disease, no less spreading then deadly, infecting in some degree or other, the
greatest part of men, of Christians.

The manner of committing this moral error, is saying, which refers both to
the tongue and the mind; saying, is not only peculiar to the lips, every
thought is interpreted by God a saying; the heart may cry when the tongue is
silent, and we may say when we do not speak. Hence it is, that though this be
not our open assertion, or outward protestation, yet if it be our inward
thought, our secret imagination, we shall be found guilty before God. The truth
is, this error is managed several ways; some say it with their tongue, and
not with their heart, they cannot but be convinced of their own hypocrisy, and
yet b^ast of exact purity, their consciences secretly nip them with the sense
of guilt, yet they pretend to the highest form of Saint-ship. Some say it with
their heart, and not with their tongue; they are not so impudent as to profess
it, yet they proudly conceit it; yea whilst with their lips they say, in
general they are sinners, they think themselves pure: Finally, some say it both
with heart and tongue, the conceit is so strongly fixed in their minds, that
they are not ashamed to utter it, proclaiming themselves to be without sin, and
all these are here included; so that if we say it with either, or both, we are
among the number of those who are here charged.

The matter of this errrour, is a denying that we have sin, or that we have
sinned: which yet is capable of a double construction,

Either, that we have not sinned in respect of this or that particular action;
thus, when we deny the fact as not done by us; like that Adulteress, who wiped
her mouth and said, I have done no evil, P^o. 30.20.
or acknowledging the fact, we deny it to be a fault, and that we have sinned
in doing it, as Jonah, Jonah 4.9.
who said, I do well to be angry, we run into this error. And surely if it be
bad, non dicere peccavimus, not to say we have sinned, by acknowledging, it is
far worse, dicere non peccavimus, to say we have not sinned by justifying our
faults.

Or, that we have not sinned, yea, have no sin at all in our whole course; that
our ways are right, our doings pure, our conversations unblamable, not only
before men, but God; this is that which our Apostle here no doubt chiefly
intends, and therefore in this sense I shall handle it.

That there are such, and that in all ages who sooth up themselves with such
conceits, is no difficult matter to demonstrate: Solomon the wise observed it
in his time, when he said, P^o. 30.12.
There is a generation of men that are pure in their own eyes, and yet they are
not washed from their filthiness: in very deed, they were filthy, and yet in
their own eyes they were pure; they did nothing but sin, and yet said, they had
no sin: and truly what generation of men has there been, wherein this
generation has not been? yea, it is not improbably observed, that therefore he
calls them a generation, because they have still succeeded one after another,
as generations do. Indeed there are two things to which hypocrites are very
prone, to s^y they have those graces which they have not: so did the Church of
Laodicea say, Rev. 3.17.
she was rich and increased with goods, and had need of nothing, yet she was
poor, and blind, and naked. To say they have not that sin which they have, So
did the Jewish Church against whom the Prophet Jeremy declaimeth, Ier. 2.25.35.
for saying, I am not polluted, I have not followed Baalim: and again, I am
innocent, therefore the anger of the Lord is turned from me: our blessed
Savior speaking of the Pharisees, calls them the whole, when he says, the
whole need not the Physician, but the sick; not that they were so in reality,
no, Mat. 9.12.
they were full of bruises and sores, but in their own apprehension, conceiting
themselves to be free from that soul-sicknesse, and spiritual disease of sin.
To the same purpose it is, that elsewhere he calls them the just ones, which
need no repentance; these self-justiciaries imagining themselves to have no
sin, Luke 15.7.
thought that they needed no repentance. Of the same arrogant temper was that
young man in the Gospel, who said to Christ concerning the Commandments, All
these have I kept from my youth, Mat. 19.20.
since to keep all the Commandments, is as much as to be without sin, there
being no sin, where there is no breach of the law.

This opinion the Gnostics against whom S. John especially levels this
confutation had concerning themselves, as if they only were the perfect
Christians, and fancying that they were no more polluted by the wickedest
actions, then the Sunbeams are by the dunghill; of this tribe was Novatus and
his followers, concerning whom S. Cyprian says, that he thought himself and
his d^sciples to be gold, Cypr. de Novat.
when as in truth they were brass, or as the Fathers phrase is, Golden Calves;
not much unlike to these were the Cathari, who had that name given them from
the high estimation they had of their own purity, whilst they were full of
poison, and therefore are compared by Epiphanius to the Basilisks, which though
a venomous creature, has a royal name; Epiphan. adv. haer. T. 1. haer. 49.
little better are the Antinomians; who account repentance a legal duty,
affirm that God sees no sin in them, nay, are so audacious, as to say they
are as righteous as Christ, and yet worse are the Familistical Ranters of this
age, who impudently assert, that what soever they do is no sin, and all these
say at least in effect, they have no sin; for you must know that a thing may be
said two ways, formally or interpretatively, explicitly or implicitly,
directly or indirectly; and thus as the Atheist says, there is no God: not
only when in plain terms, he denies a deity, but when he denies to God those
things which are the essence of a deity; in which respect, to say God is not
true or just, or omniscient, is to say there is no God: so the Justiciary
says, he has no sin; not only when he says it expressly, Psalm. 14.1.
but when he says that which amounts to as much: in which regard, to say we
keep the Commandments, we need no repentance, God beholds no sin in us,
whatsoever we do is no sin, is all one with saying, we have no sin; and
although there are few, very few who flatly deny a deity, yet many who do it by
a circumlocution. So, though there are but few who deny themselves to be
altogether without sin, yet (as appears by what has been already said) there
are many who say that which is virtually to deny it, and so are justly
chargeable with the opinion which our Apostle here declaimeth against, If we
say we have no sin.

Having in some measure discovered wherein this opinion consists, Part. 2.
it remains that we now proceed to manifest the erroniousnesse of it, that we
may be dissuaded from it: and to that end consider we the arguments which our
Apostle here uses, of which

1. The first is the folly of it, in that by so saying, We deceive our selves,
and the truth is not in us: where we have two expressions, the one principal,
the other collateral, annexed by way of confirmation: the point our Apostle
lays down is, that in saying we have no sin, we deceive our selves; and the
proof he adjoyneth is, because there is no truth in those that say so.

1. In saying we have no sin, we deceive our selves; this self-conceit is a
self-dece^t. It is at first view a strange assertion that a man should deceive
himself; if a man would deceive, it were more probable he should deceive an
enemy than a friend, a stranger than a kinsman, one that is afar off, then
near to him; nay there is inbred in every man a love of himself: yea, proximus
quisque sibi, every one is nearest to himself: and is it to be imagined, that
he would deceive himself? for a man to kill another, may sometimes be (at least
be accounted) valor, but to kill himself can be thought no other then
madness; for a man to deceive another, may by worldlings (at least) be
esteemed craft, policy, wisdom, but for a man to deceive himself, must needs be
adjudged mere folly, and yet thus it is with all wicked men, to whom by reason
of corruption, it is natural to be unnatural, whilst by doing what is sin,
they kill themselves; and by saying they have no sin, they deceive themselves.
Indeed as the Prophet Jeremy says, The heart is deceitful above all things,
and desperately wicked; Jer. 17.9.
there being a mystery of iniquity in our corrupt minds, P^o 20.17.
the heart is sometimes in Scripture metaphorically described by the belly, and
truly there are not more twistings and foldings in the guts of the belly, then
there are turnings and, windings in the heart of man, by which we are too too
witty to cozen our selves: no wonder if the wise man says, he that trusts to
his own heart is a fool; and that it was the prayer of St. Austin, Pro. 23.16.
Custodi libera me de meipso Deus, Lord deliver me from my self? (...), is an
excellent rule, remember to distrust, especially thy self; and ever keep a
narrow watch, Epictet
and a jealous suspicion over the dictates of thy own heart, which is so prone
to deceive thee.

Among those many things whereby we are apt to deceive our selves, none more
frequent then this which our Apostle here specifieth, whereby we are well
conceited of our own innocence; the truth is, we have such an inordinate
self-love, that it is no wonder we fall into self-flattery: they say in
Optickes, that if the object be too near the eye, we cannot rightly discern it;
we are very near and dear unto our selves, and therefore it is we discern not
the sins that are in our selves; Every way of man, says Solomon, is right in
his own eyes; indeed, therefore it is right in his own eyes, because it is his
own way. Prove. 21.2.
The eye which sees all other things, beholds not it self. hence it is,
that whilst we spy moats in others, we see not the beams in our own eyes,
and so deceive our selves, in saying we have no sin.

Indeed there want not other impostors who are ready enough to put tricks upon
us. The dev^ll, that old Serpent, that grand Jugler, is very busy to delude
us, and that in this kind: it is his great design to make us believe those
things not to be sin, which are so; and to think our selves not to have those
sins we have. Besides, the world, a cunning deceiver, is very willing to
sooth us up in a good opinion of our selves. Nay, there want not false
teachers, cheaters rather, who persuade their followers (at least) that they
are the Saints, the pure, the godly party; whereas they act those things which
even Heathens would blush at. But the truth is, were it not for our selves,
none of these could deceive us; were we faithful to our own souls, they could
not betray us: we are willing to be deceived, yea, to deceive our selves in the
matter of our own goodness, and that because

2. The truth is not in us. Indeed, where ever there is deceit, there is
falsehood; since to be deceived, Decipimar specie recli. Her.
is to apprehend a thing otherwise then it is, or to take a thing to be that
which it is not; True, there must be some show of truth, it must seem to be
that which we take it to be, or else how should we be cheated? but there is no
reality nor truth of the thing, else it could not be a cheat: will you know
then how men come to say they have no sin? they seem so in their own eyes, and
thereby deceive themselves: but indeed it is not so, there is no truth in their
conception; and so it must needs prove a deception. Look as when a man
deceives another, it is by a verbal or a real lie, presenting that which is
not; Veritatem non esse in aliquo est aliquem mentiri. Zanch. i^ loc.
so it is when a man deceives himself, in which respect one expounds this
negative by the positive of lying, the truth is not in us; that is, we lie to
our selves, in saying we have no sin.

It is not unfitly here taken notice of, that our Apostle does not say, There
is no humility, but there is no verity in us: Indeed, one cause, why we deceive
our selves in saying we have no sin, is the pride of our spirits: a proud man
has only one eye open, both in respect of his neighbor, and himself; of his
neighbor, he has one eye to see his spots, but not his beauty, his faults,
but not his gifts; of himself; he has an eye to see his beauty, but not his
spots, his gifts, but not his faults, and so becomes a self deceiver. In this
regard our Apostle might justly have said; there is no humility in those, Aug.
Sent. 365. Eccles. 7.16.
who say they have no sin. Indeed as St. Austin occasionally speaking of those
words, Be not righteous overmuch, and understanding it of a self conceited
righteousness, truly asserts, it is not justitia sapientis, but superbia
praesumentis, The righteousness of the wise, but the pride of a presumptuous
man: but that it may appear, that that which causes even the holiest to
accuse themselves of sin, is not only the lowlynesse of their minds, but the
truth of the thing; and that according to St. Cyprians speech, Cyp^. ^e ^pere.
and ^l^em^s.
he that thinks himself innocent, is not only proud, but foolish; yea in
plain terms, a liar, therefore he says there is no truth in us. It is the
question of the wise man, Who can say, Prove. 20.9.
I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? and such a question, to
which none can return an affirmative answer: who can say it, and say it truly,
and not be untrue in saying it? since both to ascribe that purity which we have
to our selves, and to ascribe that purity to our selves which we have not, Bez
in loc. Quis ^^is sicac^ipiend^m putat ut dicat^r propter humilitatem n^n qui^
ita vere est. Anathema sit Milevit. Council. Aug de not. and great c. 34.
are manifest and odious untruths. To this purpose it, is what Beza observes,
that these words are spoken by St. John, not only for modesty, but truths
sake; yea a council has pronounced an anathema against any who shall assert
that this was spoken only in humility, but not because so in truth: suitable to
which is St. Austins note upon these words, St. John does not say, If we have
no sin, we extol our selves, and there is no lowlynesse in us, but we deceive
our selves, and there is no truth in us, since thus to say is not only to lift
up our selves with an high conceit of that purity which we have, but to flatter
our selves with a m^s-conceit of that purity we have not.

To explicate this clause in its fullest latitude: know there is a double
truth, which may be denied to those who thus say; truth of grace in their
hearts, and truth of knowledge in their minds.

1. There is no truth of grace in our hearts, if we deceive our selves by
saying we have no sin: it is the note of Ghis^erius, occasionally upon these
words, that the sense of this clause, Gh^sler* ^n Jerem Aug. confess. l. 5 c.
10.
is as much as we defile our selves by this conceit, and it argues a want of
truth and sincerity in us. St. Austin acknowledges it an hanious sin, that he
did not account himself a sinner, nor is there a surer brand of hypocrisy,
then this foolish arrogance; indeed, good men are sometimes apt to deceive
themselves in a contrary way, by denying the grace of God which is bestowed
upon them, saying in the bitterness of their souls, they have no faith, no
love, no repentance, when yet both in the sight of God and others, these graces
appear to be in them: It is a self deceit, which must be taken notice of, and
avoided as an act of ingratitude; but yet it is an error of the right hand,
and therefore the more tolerable: but this which my text speaks of, is of
another nature, and that which only wicked men are subject to, who though they
live in sin, yet deny sin to be in them: sincere Christians often times think
themselves worse, but only Hypocrites think themselves better then they are,
and so being just in their own eyes, they become unjust.

2. But that which is the genuine sense, (as has been already intimated) is
that there is no truth of knowledge in our minds: truth in the mind is the
congruous and adaquate conceit of the understanding to the thing, and therefore
this conceit being not adaequate, but opposite, no^ congruous, but contrary to
the thing, is justly charged with falsehood.

This will the better appear, if we look into the rotten foundations of this
perverse opinion, which are no other then misapprehensions, misconstructions,
or false reasonings. The word which St. James uses for deceiving our selves,
is very significant to this purpose, (...), (...). ^.21.
which is to deceive our selves by false argumentation, this is very evident,
in this self dece^t my text speaks of, which is grounded not upon
syllogismes framed by reason, but paralogis^^s made by fancy. Thus this conceit
that we have no sin, is in

1. Some, from a misunderstanding of the nature of Divine concourse, to human
actions; as if because in him, m^n l^ve, move, and have their being, therefore
whatever they do, God does it in them, and so they can have no sin, not
distinguishing between the physical entity, and the moral obliquity of the
action, nor considering that he who makes an horse to go, does not therefore
make him to halt in his going.

2. Others, from a strange fancy of I know not what nature within us dist^nct
from us, to which our sins are to be attributed, and so we are acquitted: such
were those falsi and fallentes sancti, deceaved and deceitful Saints, of whom
St. Austin speaks, Aug. c^ns. l. 5. c. 10. Jam. 1.14.
who said it was not they that sinned, but another nature within them, whereas
St. James says, When a man is tempted, he is drawn aside of his own lusts.

3. Many, from a misconceit of what is sin, whilst they think nothing is in
its own nature evil, but only according to men's opinions of it: so that what
St. Paul says concerning meats, they say of actions, I know and am persuaded,
by our Lord Jesus, Romans 14.14.
that there is nothing unclean of it self, but to him that esteems any
thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean* this was as Iren^us informs us,
the lying Doctrine of the Gnostics, and Carpocratians, whence they concluded,
J^en. ad v. haere^. l. 1. c. 24.
that nothing they did was sin, not considering that not our opinion, but Gods
law is the rule both of good and evil.

4. Too many, from a misapprehension of the nature of justification, as if it
were an utter extinction, where as it is only a non imputation of sin, as to
punishment; as if because Christ is made to us of God righteousness, so far as
to cover us from his revengeful, Romans 14.1^.
therefore it must be also from his omniscient eye; as if because we are made
righteous by Christ, we must be as righteous as Christ; whereas our Apostle
here plainly tells us; that though Christ's blood cleanses us from all sin, yet
we cannot say we have no sin.

5. Very many, from a misconstruction of the true meaning of the law. S. Paul
says of himself, that he was alive without the law, Romans 7.9.
to wit, in his own opinion, before the law came to him in a right
representation; no doubt that which made the Phar^sees think themselves pure,
and the young man brag of his obedience, was that they knew not the spiritual
intent, and comprehensive extent of the laws: and truly thus it is still with
many civil, and moral just^tiaries, who think themselves careful observers
of the law, and are ready to answer for themselves to every commandment: they
think they fulfill the first, in that they only acknowledge the true God, the
second, in that they never bowed to an Image, the third, in that they do not
use to swear by God, the fourth, in that they are constant goers to Church on
the Lords day, the fifth, because they honor and respect their natural
parents, give the Minister good words, and wish well to their King, the sixth,
because they never k^lled any man, the seventh, because they are no whores, nor
rogues, the eighth, because they never cut a purse, or broke open an house, or
robbed on the high way, the ninth, because they never gave in false evidence to
the Judge, or Jury, and the tenth, because they were never sick for Naboths
vineyard, not considering, that the law in every precept does not only forbid a
sin, but command a duty, and that it does not only reach to the outward work,
but the inward thought, to the act it self, but the attendants, occasions, and
whatsoever has affinity with it.

Indeed besides these, it were easy to reckon up many more m^stakes, which are
in men's minds about the corrupt^on, that cl^aveth to their nature^; the
examples of those who are abominably vile, the success and prosperity God is
pleased to vouchsafe them in their ways, all of which will be found, if
weighed in the balance of the sanctuary, very l^ght, and therefore since this
saying we have no sin, is it self a misconceit, and aris^th from false
reasonings, well might our Apostle say of such, there is no truth in them.

And now what improvement shall we make of all that has been said of this
particular, but to d^sswade us from this vain, false, wicked deceiving our
selves with an op^nion of our own righteousn^sse? Alas, though thou deceive thy
self, thou can not cozen God; thou think thy self fair as Absalom, he
sees thee foul as Thersites; whilst thou esteemest thy self amiable, thou
art in his sight, a Leper, a Lazar, full of sores; the truth is, thou art never
a whit the less, nay, thou art the more sinful in Gods, because thou art
sinlesse in thine own; besides, it is no less then thy souls welfare, that is
endang^red by this deceit; and how great is that danger? we account that
Patient desperate, on whom a mortal disease is seized, and yet he says he is
not sick: is not this thy case? thy soul is spiritually sick, and thou know
it not; this conceit is that which at once both hinders our repentance and
pardon, and therefore must needs be exitial; he that is not sensible of his
sickness, will not seek after a remedy; nor will he that says he has no sin,
look out for a pardon. All reproofs, threatenings, admonitions, have no
influence upon his spirit; he fears no punishment, but goes on securely: and
indeed by this means he is without the compass of pardon, as St. Augustine and
St. Bernard excellently; Qui negat se ^alere peccatum non h^c agit ut peccat^m
non haber^t. sed ut ^^niam non accipiat. Aug. de civit. Dei. l. 13. Excl^^it
miseriae dissimula^io misericordiam, nec dignatio habet locum ubi fuerit
praesumtio dignitatis. Bern. Psalm. 50.21.
presumption of our own dignity, excludes divine mercy; and he that denies he
has sin, does not make himself the less sinful, but the less capable of
forgiven^ss: nay let me add this, that though thou may thus deceive thy
self for a while, yet the time is com^ng, when thou shall be undeceived to thy
shame, and horror and confusion. It is the threatening of Almighty God to the
sinner, that thought God was like him, sinful; and it belongs as well to him
that thinks he is l^ke God, sinless, I will set thy sins in order before
thee. Who can express what horror seized upon ruined Babylon, which had said,
I sit as a Queen, I shall see no evil? the like shame shall sit upon the face
of hypocrites, which say they have no sin, when God shall set their sins in
order before them.

Oh then be not so injurious to your selves, as to harbor this self-deceit;
you think it self-love, but indeed it is self-hatred, there being no worse
enemy then a seeming friend, a base flatterer; and that you may no longer be
thus deceived, be true to your own selves, and labor to have your minds
enlightened, your judgments rectified, that you may pass sentence upon your
selves according to truth; be much in examining your selves, searching your
hearts, trying your ways, and that impartially: the truth is, we deceive our
selves, because we do not see our selves; we do not see our selves, because we
do not search our selves; and we cannot search our selves, unless we have the
candle of divine illumination: pray we therefore that the eyes of our
understandings may be opened, and thereby the truth of saving knowledge
conveyed into us, that we may no longer be such fools, as to deceive our
selves by saying we have no sin; and this so much the rather, because it is not
only an injury to our selves, but to God, which leads me to the

2. Second argument, which is the impiety of this opinion, in that hereby we
make God a liar, and his word is not in us; and this is represented by a double
character, to wit, the blasphemy and the infidelity of those who say thus,
their blasphemy, in that they make God a liar, and infidelity, in that his word
is not in them.

1. We make him a liar, a very vehement and urgent expression, how earnest is
our Apostle in confuting this error. Magna verbo^um vehementiae prop situm
urget. Fer. Numb. 23.19. Heb. 6.1^.
Indeed this phrase at first reading may seem harsh; the thing which it asserts
being in a proper sense impossible, we make him a liar, it cannot be, God is
not a man that he should lie, or son of man that he should repent says Balaam;
and again, it being impossible for God to lie, says the Author to the
Hebrews. Indeed, If God should either do what is evil, or speak what is false,
Mat. 5. Hebr.
he could not be a God: but beloved, though God cannot be a liar, we may be
said to make him so, no really, but interpretatively, when we do as much as
lies in us, to make him so; look as an Adulterer looking upon a woman to lust
after her, though she be not defiled, is said to commit adultery with her in
his heart, and as Apostates are said to crucify the Son of God afresh,
Matthew. 5 28* Heb. 6.6.
not that he who is possessed of his crown, can again be brought to his Cross,
but that such sinners do what in them lies, to bring him to it: so
self-justitiaries, though they cannot justly fasten the least lie upon God, yet
they do what they can to make him so: perhaps indeed this is not that which
they directly intend, but yet it is that which must necessarily follow upon
their saying, and therefore this brand is justly fastened upon them.

This will further appear, if we consider what God has said both in his laws,
and in his Gospel, his law accuses all men of sin, his Gospel offers pardon
of sin to all men, so that law and Gospel affirm (at least impl^citely) that
all men have sin, if therefore (as they say) they have no sin, God must be a
liar in both: indeed the dilemma is manifest, either they must be liars, or
God; their saying must be false, or Gods: since there is an apparent
contradiction between them, God says all men have sinned, and they say we have
not sinned; no marvel if our Apostle charge them with making God a liar.

See hence at once both the pride and the danger of these pharisaical
hypocrites, Dum non vult hypocrita se accusare peccati mavult Deum accusare
mendacii^ Zancb. Romans 3.4.
their pride in that rather then accuse themselves of sin; they dare to accuse
God with lying, and lest any blot should lie upon their purity, they go about
to stain Gods veracity. Thus, as it were inverting those words of St. Paul, Let
God be true, and every man a liar; they say, Let God be a liar, so we may be
pure and true. How dishonorable, and therefore provoking this must needs be to
God? we may guess by our selves, our proverb says, the lie deserves a stab;
we cannot in words offer a man a greater injury then to give him the lie; and
can we think that God himself does not take it as an high affronts, from those
who go about thus to make him a liar? Yes certainly, and all such proud
wretches shall know it is an evil thing to cast so great a dishonor upon God,
and whilst they condemn God unjustly as a liar, he will one day condemn them
justly as liars, in deceiving themselves, and having no truth in them, yea as
blasphemers, in making him a liar, and as unbelievers in that.

2. His word is not in them, by word here some understand Christ who is called
at the first verse the word of life, V. 1.
and so his word is not in us, is as much as Christ is not in us if we thus
say, this is the rather observable, because many who say they have no sin,
pretend to have Christ in them, and be in Christ; yea that therefore they have
no sin, because Christ is in them, and they in him; whom the Apostle according
to this construction here plainly contradicts: and indeed it cannot be
otherwise, since where ever Christ is, there is his Spirit; and where the
Spirit of Christ is, there is a divine light discovering to a man the darkness
that is in him, and effectually, convincing him of his own sinfulness. But
though this be a truth, I do not conceive it the truth of this clause, and
therefore with the generality of the best interpreters; I understand it in the
proper and usual sense, not for Christ the word; but for the word of Christ,
vide est. Zanch Menoch* ^l^yr, in (...).
not the word which is God, but the word of God; And thus it will not be amiss
to consider this clause, both in i^s self and in its reference.

1. Consider this clause in its self, and that which we have to inquire, is,
what our Apostle means by this phrase? negatives are best known by the
affirmatives, as privations are by habits, and therefore by knowing what it is
for the word of God and Christ to be in us, we shall learn what this means,
the word is not in us.

The word is then said to be in us; when according to Christ's phrase, in the
Gospel, it does take place in us, Io. 8.38. quid est ergo non capit in ^^bis
non capit corvestrum etc. Aug. in Ioh. ^^.41.
((...) being there according to Camerarius, as much as (...)) and find
entertainment with us, and surely then it takes place in us, when it takes
place in our hearts, as it did in David, who says Thy word have I hid in my
heart. The word is then said to be in us when according to St. James his phrase
it is (...) an ingrafted word, and that is, when, James 1.21.
as the tree being opened, a graft is set deep into it, Acts 16.14.
and so becomes one with it, or rather it one with a graft, so our hearts
being opened (as Lydias, was) the word is deeply imprinted in it, and it
sweetly closes with the word. If yet more perticularly you ask how this is
done? I answer in one word by believing, when the mind gives a clear assent,
and the will a full consent to the word, then it is received by, and dwells
in us, so interpreters paraphrase, Non amplecti^r, non intelligimus, non
retinemus veram ejus doctrinam, His word is not in us, that is, we do not
understand and embrace by faith, the true Doctrine of his word. And that this
is S. John's meaning in this place; we need no other expositor then himself in
his Gospel, where he brings in Christ, saying, ye have not his word among
you, For him whom he has sent, you believe not, thereby plainly intimating
that to have his word abiding in us, Ioh. 5, 37.
is to believe in his word. Look how Christ himself is said to be, and to
dwell in us, So is his word, now the Apostle Paul's expression is full, of
Christ's dwelling in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17.
indeed on Christ's part, the Spirit, and on our part Faith makes the union,
between him and us, and both these, 1. These. 1.5.
concur to the inbeing of the word, when the word is received as St. Paul
says of the Thessalonians, in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance to wit of
faith.

To end this, be pleased to know that there is a great deal of difference
between these two, his word among us, and his word in us, his word is among us,
when published, and made known to us, but it is not in us, unless received and
believed by us, and therefore (my brethren) let us not content our selves with
the former, but labor to find the latter, It is very observable what St. Paul
says of of the Colossians. The Gospel is come unto you, and brings forth
fruit in you, which it could not do were it not ingrafted, Col. 1.5. Heb. 4.2.
and therefore the Author to the Hebrews says of the Jews, The word did not
profit them, because it was not mixed with faith in them that heard it, Oh
beloved it may be truly said of us, that Gospel is come to us, but is it in us?
does it bring forth fruit in us? Sic est sermo dei esse debat fidelibus Sic ut
^isci hamus etc. Aug. tr. 42. in Joh.
St. Austin excellently compares the word to an hook, which then takes the
fish when it is taken into the fist, so the word when it is taken into us by
faith, then takes us, and that not to our ruin, but safety, and St. James
when he speaks of the word as able to save our souls, calls it the ingrafted
word, to teach us how necessary it is to our spiritual and eternal profit by
the word that it should be in us, the truth is, it were far better never to
have had the word among us, then not to have it in us, that this light had
never shone in the midst of us, if it be not set up in the candlestick of our
hearts, and therefore let it be our prayer, that the Gospel may come to us, not
in word only, but in power, that the seed of the word which is sown and
scattered among us, may be hid in us. Finaly that it may please God to give
unto us increase of grace, that we may hear meekely his word; receive it with
pure affection, and bring forth the fruits of the spirit.

2. But further consider this clause in its reference and ye shall find
according to a several reference, several things not unworthy our observation.

It is not amiss to compare the end of the eighth, and of the tenth verse
together, in the one it is said, the truth is not in us, the other, his word is
not in us, and if (as doubtless we may) we look upon these as synonimous
phrases; we may observe that what he calls truth in the one, he styles Gods
word in the other; Ioh. 17* 17. Ephesians. 1.13. Col. 1.5. Iam. 1.18.
and so it amounts to that which our blessed Savior himself elsewhere
asserts, Thy word is truth, in which respect it is called by St. Paul, and St.
James, the word of truth; and that (...) eminently and primarily, indeed it may
be said of many words that they are true, but only Gods word, is the word of
truth, yea truth it self, consonant to this it is, that the psalmist calls the
words of the Lord pure words, and compares them to Silver purified in the fire
seven times, that is fully perfect: Ps. ^2 6.
so as there is not the least dross of error in them, Indeed when we consider
whose word it is namely his word, who as he is the first being; so he is the
first truth, we cannot but conclude that it must needs be altogether true, and
therefore if we would have an answer to Pilates question, what is truth, the
text gives it, it is Gods word, and if you would know when doctrines are true,
Ioh. 19.11.
this word is the only sure touchstone, and therefore the prophet Isay calls
to the law, and to the Testimony, If they speak not according to these it is
because there is no light; Isay. 8.^3.
(to wit of truth) in them.

2. If we put these two clauses together, We make him a liar, and his word is
not in us. We learn how heinous a sin Infidelity is, in that it puts so high
a dishonor upon God as to make him a liar, this clause His word is not in us,
manifestly is added as a confirmation, of the former, therefore we make him a
liar, because His word is not in us, and His word is not in us, when it is not
believed by us, so that not to believe Gods word, and to make him a liar, are
all one. Hence it is, that our Apostle in his Gospel says, He that believes,
sets to his seal that God is true, Ioh. 3.33. 1 Ioh. 5.10.
and else where in this Epistle, he that believes not God, makes him a liar,
because he believes not, look as among men, if we tell a man we believe not
what he says, we in effect tell him he is a liar, so when we do not receive
the truth of Gods word, we put as it were the lie upon God, and now tell me how
in excusable, nay abominable is the sin of infidelity, in excusable, because
that which we are required to believe is no other then truth, and abominable,
because by not believing we make God a liar.

3. Lastly, put the beginning and the end of this verse together, If we say we
have not sinned, his word is not in us, Aug. de perfect. Justit. c. 32.
every self Justitiary, as St. Austins phrase is, contrarius est divinae
scripturae, is so far from having Gods word in him, that he is directly
contrary to Gods word, and so to say we have no sin; appears to be no other
then an odious, and damnable error. If then we would not be infected, with the
poison of this error, let us always have by us, nay in us, that powerful
antidote of Gods word, let us be careful to study that we may understand it,
and by it our own sinfulness, let us often behold our selves in it, as in a
glass, which knows not how to flatter, so shall we no longer deceives our
selve, and dishonor God, by saying we have no sin, and so much shall suffice
to be spoken of this confutation: Let us every one make it our supplication,
that the Word which has now been heard by us with our outward ears; may
through his grace be grafted inwardly in our hearts, to bring forth the fruit
of an holy life, and withal of a lowly mind to his praise and glory through
Jesus Christ our LORD.

SERMON. 16.
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF S. JOHN.
CHAP. I. Ver. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.


THere are two sorts of persons among others observable in the Church, namely
glorioli, and infirmi, presumptuous hypocrites, and weak Saints, those are
commonly lifted up with an opinion of their own righteousness; these are
usually cast ^down with an apprehension of their own sinfulness, those boast
themselves to be the best of Saints, Vide Aret. in loc.
and these abhor themselves as the worst of sinners: Finally, those think
themselves to have no sin, and these account themselves to be nothing but sin.
Hence it is that Gods Ministers (though they must not be double tongued yet)
must speak in different language; to the arrogant, words of terror; to the
penitent, words of support; must use both hands, with the r^ght hand lifting up
them that are cast down, and with the left hand casting down them that are
lifted up; of both these our Apostle sets us a pattern in the three last verses
of this Chapter, launcing the sores of proud Iustitiaries, with the knife of
reproof, in the eighth and tenth verses, and pouring oyl^ of comfort into the
wounds of humble confessors in the tenth verse, If we confess our sins, etc.

Not to trouble you with multiplicity of divisions, be pleased to observe in
the words three generals, A duty conditionally required in those words, If we
confess our sins. A mercy annexed to that duty in those, To forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. The certainty of that mercy,
demonstrated in those, he is faithful and just.


These are the three boughs of this tree of life, out of each of which sprout
so many branches, and grows so much fruit that it will ask many hours the
gathering. At this time I shall enter upon the

1. Duty conditionally required, for the handling whereof be pleased to
consider it two ways, Genesis
as it is Materia praecepti, the matter of a Commandment. Cond^tio promissi,
the condition of a promise.


In the former I shall unfold the nature and exercise of this duty, wherein it
consists, how it is to be managed.

In the latter I shall discover the necessity and utility of it, as being that
whereof the absence excludes, and the presence includes forgiveness.

The former will be as the directive part instructing you in, and

The latter as the persuasive part, exciting you to the performance of it.

The dispatch of the first consideration, will lie in answer to four questions.
What it is which we are to confess. To whom this confession must be made. How
this confession must be performed. Who they are that must thus confess.


Quest. 1. What it is we are to confess, the answer to which is in these two
words, Our sins, and there are three steps, by which I shall proceed in the
handling of it, sin, sins, our sins, must be confessed by us.

1. Sin must be confessed. Divines do not unfitly take notice of a threefold
confession. Fidei, laudis, peccati, of faith, of praise, of sin; a declaration
of the truth we believe, mercies we receive, sins we commit; the first is an
act of courage, the second of gratitude, the last of repentance; concerning all
of these, the word in the Text is used by S. Paul in reference to the
confession of faith, where he joyneth believing with the heart, Romans 10.10.
and making confession with the mouth together; by the Author to the Hebrews,
H^b. 13 15.
in reference to thankefulness, where this very word is rendered giving thanks;
and by S. John here in respect of sin, If we confess our sins.

It is that indeed which both sin and the sinner very much shun; sin is so
ugly, that it loves not to appear, and being a work of darkness, cannot endure
the light; besides, the sinner is so much in love with his sin, that he is not
willing to bring it forth: that expression of the Prophet Hoseah, Hos* 10.13.
Sept.
You have ploughed wickedness, is rendered by the Septuagint, (...)* you have
concealed wickedness, and not unfitly, because the end of ploughing is, that
the seed may be cast into, and hid in the ground: this is the practice of
wicked men, to keep close their sin: they hide their talents in the napkin of
idleness, and their sins in the napkin of excuse; indeed it is a disease our
first parents were sick of, no wonder if we be infected; and therefore Jobs
expression is, If I have hid my sin as Adam; Job 31.33.
if we are not so proud as to say we have no sin, A^g. in Ps. 30. Nae ^u
verecundia bonus ad delinquendum expandens f^ont^m ad deprecand^m subducens.
^ertul. de poeni^. c 10. Theod. de pro^id. lib 10. Be^^ ep 18^. Friv^l^ nimis
^egmen quaeris anima misera, etc. G^frid Tilman in Genesis c. 3. Ambros. in Psalm.
118. Sermon. 21. Tertul. de poenit. c. 6. Ven^at fori^ mortuus, i. e. culpam
confiteatur peccat^r. Greg. in Evang. him. 26. R^go v^s per illum Dominum quem
occulta non fall^nt de finite v^lne^a^am ^egete c^nscientiam, etc. Pa^ia^.
paraen. ad poeni^. P^al. 37.5. Am bros. ibid.
yet we are not so humble as to say we have sin; with the Pharisee we can brag,
what sins we are not guilty of, but we will not confess the sins we are guil^y
of. Men love as S. Austins phrase is, clamare mer^^a* but tacere p^cca^a, to
proclaim their good, but conceal their evil d^eds; vain glory puts them upon
the one, but shame forbids them the other: indeed when sin is to be commit^ed,
shame is absent; and when it is to be confessed, shame is present.

Oh take we heed of this shameful shame in hiding our sins, which is at once
both cursed and va^n, non pudenda pecca^i c^nsessio sed perpetratio, it is a
shame to act sin, but not to acknowledge it; shame is a good bridle to keep
from sin, but a bad cover to hide it. S. Bernard calls it a foolish, dishonest,
injurious modesty; thou art not ashamed to defile thy self, and yet thou art
ashamed to be made clean; indeed it is a shame, whereof thou have reason to be
ashamed, since as it does much hurt, so it can do no good, as to that which
thou desire, all excuses are but fig leaves and paper-coverings; wicked men
as St. Ambrose says excellently, in affectu habent abscondere non in effectu,
desire to hide, but cannot fulfill it; God, says our Apostl^, is light, and
therefore there is no concealing or darkening any thing from him: the reason
says Tertullian, why God commands us to confess our sins, it is not that he
may know them, but that it may appear we know, and are sensible of them; oh
then let me say to you (to use S. Gregory's moral) as Christ did to Lazarus,
come forth by the confession of your sins. I beseech you (in the words of an
Ancient) by that God to whom all hearts are open, all desires known, and from
whom nothing is hid, that you do not skin over your wounded consciences. That
of the Psalmist, commit thy way to the Lord, is rendered by the vulgar, Revela
viam Domino, Reveal thy way, and by S. Ambrose understood of revealing our sins
to God: indeed since it is impossible to cover, why should we not discover our
sins? conceal not that which God knows already, and would have thee to make
known: it is a very ill office to be the Dev^l^ Secretary: oh break thy league
with Satan by revealing his secrets, thy sins to God.

2. As sin in general, so sins in particular must be confessed: an implicit
confession, is almost as bad as an implicit faith: it is not enough to
acknowledge our sins by wholesale, Luke 18.13.
but by retaile. True it is, a general confession may be penitent; such no
doubt was the Publicans, when he said, 1 Timothy 1.13.15. (...) etc. Chris^^.
hebr. c. 12. Bella^m. de paen. l. 3 c. 4.
God be merciful to me a sinner: but a penitent will not content himself with a
general confession, and therefore S. Paul as in one place he calls himself at
large a sinner; so in another, he particular^zeth his sins of blasphemy, and
persecution and injury against the Saints: thus does a true penitent sit, or
rather kneel down to draw his own picture in all its black l^neaments: To this
purpose it is well observed in the Text that our Apostle does not say, Si
confiteamur nos peccatores sed peccata nostra, If we confess our selves
sinners, but if we confess our sins, whereby is intimated a particular
acknowledgement of those sins whereof we are guilty. Zanch. in l c.


To open this more fully, I shall enlarge it in a threefold variation: we must
confess our sins in respect of their number, measure, merit.

1. In confession of sin, we must enum^rate the several sins which we have
committed, as he in the Comedian said, that he had invited two guests to
dinner, Philocrates, and Philocrates, a single man, but a double eater, so shall
every man by examination find himself, though a single person, to be a double,
nay a treble sinner. Confession, what is it but a setting our sins in order,
and that is to be done by a distinct and particular enumeration? 1 Samuel 16.11.
In this case, as Samuel said to Jesse, Are here all thy children? so we must
conceive that God says to us, Are here all thy sins? and as good not confess
any, as not bring forth all. Indeed this must be understood with this
limitation, so far as we know and can remember. There are some sins which we
act, and know not that they are sins: there are other sins which we have
perhaps so often comm^tted that we are not able to remember them, and surely
what we cannot either know or remember, it is impossible to recount; so that
particular confession must reach only to known sins, and in those to the kinds
and the actings only, so far as we can call them to m^nd, and yet more
especially, if the sins wherein we have walked, or which we have acted, have
been scarlet cr^mson sins; for so we find the Israelites particularizing
Idolatry, and David his murder, and Shechania^, Judge. 2.10. P^. 51.13. ^zr. 10
3.
the peoples unlawful mixtures ^n marriage: briefly, though we cannot exactly
recount all our sins, yet we must not wilfully om^t any sin in our confessions,
there being the same reason of confessing all as any, because every sin is an
offense to God, and a breach of his law.

2. In confession we must aggravate our sins by confessing, not only the kinds
and acts (so far as we remember) but the circumstances of our sins. Pelba^t. de
^^nfess.
Indeed as Pelbartus well observes; there are some circumstances of sinful
actions, which are impertinent, and neither l^ssen nor heighten our sins; these
are not to be mentioned, there are other circumstances which may somewhat
lessen our sins, but those a penitent will not much insist on, only those
circumstances which do heighten his sins, or by their badness change the kind
of his sin, and render it of a more heinous nature; he is careful to
acknowledge. When a man confesses his sin, he becomes a witness against
himself, and therefore he must on the one hand confess nothing but the truth,
(for though as Job sacrificed for his sons upon an if may be they have sinned,
Job 1.5.
so a man may charge himself before God upon suspicion, yet, he is not to
accuse himself of what he is not guilty) and on the other hand, he must
confess all the truth, and keep back nothing which may aggravate his fault.
Indeed it is our great fault in our confessions, we perhaps spet out some sins,
but others we hide under our tongues, we acknowledge something of our crime,
but yet we would make the best of it we can: if the sinner do not say, non
feci, or non male feci, I did not do the fact, or I did not ill in doing it,
yet he is too often at non multum male, 't was not very ill done. Me thinks
that of Aaron is very observable to this purpose who in confessing the Idolatry
of the Golden Calfe, uses a mincing expression, Exodus 32.34.
there came out this Calfe, as if it had happened rather by chance, then art,
and there were little or no fault in him, but the temper of a true paenitent is
far otherwise, he looks upon his sins as the greatest enemies; nor can a
malicious person, so spightfully set forth the faults of his enemy, as he will
his own: besides he knows that extenuating sin, aggravates, and aggravating,
extenuateth it, that as a charitable man gathers by scattering, so a penitent
lesseneth his sin, by acknowledging it great. Hence it is that the confessions
recorded in Scripture, are full of exaggerating expressions (as may appear in
those of David, and Ezra, and Daniel) setting forth not only the nature, 2.
Sam. 24.1. Ezra. 9.6 Dan. 9.5.
but the greatness of their sins.

3. Finally, in confession we must acknowledge the guilt and desert of our
sins, not only what we have done unjustly, but what we deserve to suffer
justly: thus we must confess as our sins, so the punishment due to us by
reason of those sins, how we deserve to be stripped of all Gods mercies, and to
have all the curses written in his book inflicted on us, this is that the
Scripture calls a Judging our selves; when we do not only arraigne and accuse
our selves unto God by a confession of the fault, 1 Cor. 11.31.
but judge and condemn our selves, by a confession of the punishmen^t and so
we find in Daniels acknowledgement, not only we have committed iniquity, we
have done wickedly, but to us, Oh Lord God belongs confusion of face, as it
is this day. Dan. 9.5.7.^.


3. Once more, as sins, many sins, so our sins, must be confessed: Aug. in ps.
51.
it is St. Austins note upon those words of David, I acknowledge my iniquity,
non intueor alios, I do not pry into other men's faults to publish them, but I
acknowledge my own offenses.

To enlarge this in a threefold consideration: we must confess,

1. Our own sins principally. Indeed we find the people of God confessing
public, as well as private sins; the sins of their princes, their priests, as
well as their own, not only the sins of their contemporaries, but their
progenitors, we have sinned with our Fathers, Psalm. 106.6.
but still they chiefly insist upon their own sins. When Gods Servants confess
the sins of others, it is upon one of these two reasons, either because they
have been theirs, or lest they should be theirs, sometimes other men sins
become ours, and fit it is, that as we have been partakers with them in their
sins, we should be in repentance, and if they do no^, yet we must confess
their sins, inasmuch as our hand has been in them: again, The sins of others
when public, if not confessed, and bemoaned by us become ours: it is not
enough for us that we do not join with, but we must mourn for the
abominations of others, but still principally our own sins must be ou^ greatest
trouble, and the matter of our confession.

2. Our sins to be our own. Many in confessing often times transfer their sins
upon others. These brats are so ugly, that when they are brought forth, we are
loath to own them, but lay them at others doors. Eve charge her sin upon the
Serpent, the Serpent beguiled me, Adam upon Eve, nay in plain terms upon God,
Genesis 3.12.13.
The woman which thou gave me. St. Austin upon those words of David,
confitebor adversus me iniquitates meas domino, I will confess my sins against
my self unto the Lord, observes, that many confess their sins, not against,
but for themselves, not to, but against the Lord, how usual is it with wicked
men to accuse not only the devil, but God for the sins which they commit,
laying them upon fate and destiny, upon the stars and clymate, upon their
constitution and complexion and the like? but the truth is as Agamemnon said
(...) neither Jupiter, nor the destinies, nor the furyes, but it is a man's
self that does him the mischief, and therefore the true pen^tent lays his
sins at his own door, and takes shame upon himself by reason of them.

3. Those sins which are most especially our own. The prophet Isay says of
himself and the people, Isa. 53.6.
We have all like sheep gone astray, and turned every man to his own way,
thereby intimating that as all men go in a wrong way, so every man has his own
way, in which he wandereth. It were easy to instance in countries, in persons,
how there is some sin, which is as it were more especially beloved and
practiced by them. Pliny writes of some Families that had privy marks on their
bodies peculiar to those of that line, and every man has as it were a privy
sin, which is most justly called his, but if we will confess our sins aright,
we must not leave out that sin, nay our chiefest spite must be against it
according to David's resolve, I will declare mine iniquity, and be sorry for my
sin. And so much shall suffice in answer to the first question, Ps. 38.18.
which respects the object of our confession.

Quest. 2. To whom confession of sins is to be made, is that which next in
order calls for a solution: True it is, we have no express and direct, but yet
we have a collateral and implicit answer in the text, and though it is not
said, If we confess our sins to God, yet it will easily appear that it is so
intended.

Indeed it cannot be denied but that

1. Our sins against the second Table as they are wrongs and injuries to our
neighbor, ought to be confessed to him, in this sense St. Augustine interprets
that of St. James, confess your faults one to another, Aug. in Iam 5.6. Ioh.
11* 56.
and without doubt it is implicily required by our blessed Savior, when he
bids a man before he offer his gift to go and be reconciled to his brother, if
he have ought against him, Matthew. 5.23.24
to wit by (at least) making an acknowledgment of the wrong he has done him.

2. Our sins having been open, and so become scandalous, ought to be
acknowledged to the Church where of we are members, this is that (...) which
was used in the primitive times of which Tertullian and others of the ancients
speak. A piece of discipline, Tertull. depaenit:
which it were heartily to be wished, were still in use that notorious,
offenders might be brought to a public acknowledgment of their sins.

3. Our sins when they are not only in themselves gross but to our
consciences burdensome may, nay ought to be confessed to a faithful, pious,
discreet minister. The truth is. There are many excellent benefits which hereby
accrue to the penitent as Zanchy has well observed, Zanch in, loc.
such as are the helping forward of his humiliation, faith and repentance, the
obta^ning from the minister more suitable, particular and direct counsels, more
spiritual and fervent prayers both for, and with him, and withal upon the
signs of his true contrition accompaning that confession, the comfortable
sentence of absolution; and therefore, though I do utterly dislike the
doctrine of the Romish Church, which asserts a particular enumeration of all
our sins to the priest as necessary to remission yea in (her last
conventicle, rather then council, pronounces an anathema to all, Council.
Trident Sess. 14. Can. 7.
who shall deny this particular sacramental confession to the priest, to be of
divine right, yea though I abhor the practice of it as used among them, by
the priest, as a stratagem to untie the peoples purses and a pick lock to open
the secrets of states, by the people, not as an hedge, but a gap to make way
for future commissions with more freedom after they have (as they suppose)
cleansed themselves by confession, Yet I could heartily w^sh, that the right
use of private confession to the priest were revived and pract^ced, since I am
confident that as many having secret d^seases p^rish, for want of reveal^ng
them to an able Ph^sitian; so may sin sick souls, either wholly miscarry or
however, sad^y continue and increase their inward wounds for want of making
known their case to some faithful min^ster.

But the confess^on which our Apostle, here intends is (no doubt) only in
reference to God, for besides that, it is a confession to be made by the
Apostles, and so the m^nisters themselves, as well as the people, it is clearly
intimated, that this confession must be made to him who is just and faithful
to forgive, and that is only God: indeed, this confession is that which must
accompany all the rest, when we confess the wrong to man, we must confess
the sin to God; Ps. 32.4. L^k. 15.18.
when we acknowledge the scandal to the Church, still we must acknowledge the
sin to God: finally, (...) (...) ad Hebr. (...) etc. Chrisost. T.C. hom. 5.
when we confess too, our confession must not be ^erm^nated in the M^nister,
and though it be made before him, yet it must be directed to God. The truth is
those confessions without this, are not avaylable, but this may, nay will be
without those, if God deny the opportunity of them, indeed it is God who is
^ither mediately, or immediately injured, it is Gods law which is d^rectly
violated in all sins, and therefore to him, they must be conf^ss^d. Thus
David said, I will conf^sse my transgress^ons unto the Lord, and the prod^gall
resolves to go to his Father and say, Father I have sinned against heaven,
and before thee, and St. Chrisostom^ adv^seth, yea beseeches the people, to
acknowledge the^r sins continually to God, to confess them before the judge,
praying if not with their tongue yet their hearts, and so much be spoken in
answer to the second quaere.

How this confession must be performed, is next to be resolved: Q^. 3.
to which end be pleased to take notice of the Antecedent, Ingredients, and
consequent of a right acknowledgement.

1. There cannot be agnitio if there be not cognitio peccati, an
acknowledging, unless there precede a knowledge of sin. David puts them
together. P^. 5^.3.
I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me, ^f our sins
be not before us how can we set them before God? and therefore to the right
exercise of this duty, th^re is required a praevious examination of our hearts,
inspection into our lives, that we may be enabled to see our sins: he that
has not yet asked himself that question, quid feci? what have I done can
never make the confession? sic feci, thus and thus I have done: and in this
respect I would though not require, yet advise it as a pious and prudent
practice, and that which I doubt not but many Christians have found benefit by,
to keep a constant daily Catalogue as of mercies received, so of sins
committed.

2. The Ingredients of this confession, are many and such as well deserve our
observation. A right confession of sin must be

1. Free and voluntary, not a confession upon the rack, or the gallows,
extracted merely from sense of pain and smart of the punishment: we read of
confessions made by Pharaoh and Saul, Exodus 10.16. 1 Samuel 15 24
but it was when Judgment either feared or felt compelled them to i^. Many
cast out their sins by confession as Mar^ners do their war^s in a storm,
wishing for them again in a calm, a true confession must be ingenious, and
must come like water out of a spring which flows freely, not like water out
of a st^ll which is forced by fire.

2. Cordial and sincere, confession to men is a work of the voice, but to God
of the heart, and that so peculiarly, as oftimes the heart alone is sufficient
without the voyc^ but never the voice without the heart, many men's confessions
come from them as water, runs through a pipe they leave no impression, their
hearts are not affected with what they confess. O let us learn to be in good
earnest, with God, remembering that as prayer for mercy, so confession of sin
must not be only a lip labor, since then instead of offering the calves of
our lips, we shall but offer the lips of calves.

3. Penitent and abasing. This is that which puts forth it self in a Three
fold affection of shame, of grief, of hatred, we must confess

1. With shame. This was Ezrahs temper when he says oh my God I am ashamed,
Es^^ 6.6. Hos. 14.2
and blush to lift up my face to heaven, to be ashamed to confess is bad, but
to confess with shame is good those words of the Prophet so will we render the
the calves of our lips, are by velasques expounded of penitent confession,
Velasqu. in Phil, c. 30 v. 10. Annot. 2
which whilst it brings by shame redness into the che^ks, as it were lets out
the blood of the sacrificed calfe, by the knife of repentance.

Luke, 18.13. Ps. 38.18. 1 Samuel ^7.6. Job. 16.20^ P^. 119.1, 6. Ier. 9.1.
2. With grief. Thus the publican for shame, stands a far off, not daring to
lift his eyes to heaven, and for grief smites his hreast. David does not only
say, I will declare, but I will be sorry for my sin, the people of God, in the
day of their confession not only say we have sinned but draw water and pour
it out before the Lord, in token of contrition. we should in confessing sins
have our hearts so affected that our eyes with Job may pour tears before God
that with David rivers of tears may run down our eyes; yea we should wish
with Jeremy, that our head were water, and our eyes a fountain of tears. But
however nonne stillabit oculus noster, if we cannot pour out shall we not
drop a tear, or at least if we cannot shed a tear, let us breath forth a sigh
for our sins, it is only the heart broken with godly sorrow, that sends forth
a true confession.

3, With hatred, confession is the souls vomit and look as what the stomach
vomits, it loathes, yea therefore it casts it up, because it loathes it, so must
we confess our sins, with an holy indignation against, and detestation of
them. There are beloved too many, who declare their sin, Isaiah. 3.9.
but it is to use the prophet Isaiahs comparison as Sodom, with impudency, they
made a sport of acting and they make a ^east of confessing their sins these are
they who according to St. Paul's expression glory in the^r shame, mention their
sin not with sorrow, but joy, hatred, Phil. ^.19.
but delight, boasting of the wickedness they act, it is a confession which is
attended with dedolent imp^nitency: but the penitent confession, is of a
contrary nature, ever accompanied with a shameful grief and loathing.

4. Believing and fiduciall, that must be like the confession, not of the
malefactor to the Judge, but of a sick man, to the Physician, we read of Cain,
and Judas confessing, but it was rather a desperate ac^usation, then a penitent
confession, Daniel as he acknowledged to them, belonged confusion, so that to
God belongs mercy; Dan. 9.5.
thus must our most sorrowful acknowledgment be joined with some comfortable
hope, of, and trust in divine mercy.

3. The consequent of this conf^ssion, must be dereliction were it only to
confess our fault, when we have done it, it were an easy matter, but if
Solomon may be St. John's expositor, it is not only to confess, but forsake
sin, Pro. 82.13.
and therefore interpreters truly assert, that confession is here put
synecdochi^ally, for the whole work of repentance, Peccat^rum confessi^
^yned^^hice vniversam penitentiam hoc l^ce significat. Vo^st in loc.
it being not enough for us to confess the sin we have committed, but we
must not commit again wilfully the sins we confess. indeed it is very sad to
consider how generally defective, men's confessions are as to this particular.
Many (as Fulgentius, ^xcellently) being pricked in conscience confess that they
have done ill, and yet put no end to their ill deeds, they humbly accuse
thmselves in Gods sight of the sins which oppress them, and yet with a
perverse heart rebelliously heap up those sins, whereof they accuse
themselves. F^lgent. de Rem. peccat. l. 1. c. 12.
The very pardon which they beg, with mournful sighs, they impede with their
wicked actions: they ask help of the Physician, and still minister matter to
the disease, thus ^n va^n endeavoring to appease him with penitent word^, whom
they go on to provoke by an impen^tent course: ^ook^ how Saul dealt with
Dav^d, ^. S^m 24.16.^7.26.2.
one while confessing hi^ injustice toward him, and soon after persecu^^ng
him in the wilderness, so do men with God* you know the story of Pharaoh who
one day says, I have sinned and promises to let Israel go, and the next day
hard^neth his heart, and refuses to let them go, and this practice is too too
frequent: our repentance is a kind of che^ker work, black and wh^te, wh^te and
black: we sin, and then we confess, we confess and then again we sin. But o^
beloved, what will it avail you to vomit up your sins by confession, if you do
it only with the drunkard to make way for pouring in more drink, committing
new sins, nay with the dog, you return to your vomit, and lick it up again. It
is excellent council that is given by St. Ambrose, Ambros. de penitent. l. ^
c. 7. et c. ^1. Aug* him. 41. Fulgent de Remiss. peccat l. 2 c. 16. Job. 34.32.
oh take we heed that the dev^ll have not cause to triumph over our remedy as
well as our d^sease, and that our repentance be not such as needs a repentance.
Indeed as Fulgentius appositely) Then is Confession of sin, Availeable when it
is accompanied with a separation from sin, and the practice of the contrary
duty; and therefore what our Apostle says of Loving, 1 Ioh. 3.18.
let me say of confessing, confess not in tongue or in word only, but
indeed, and in truth, by endeavoring to forsake those sins which we confess,
not only saying, I have done iniquity, but cordially, a^ding, I w^ll do so no
more. I^ 1.^6. Aug. Se^m 66. de Temp. hom. 4*
I end this, with that note of St. Austin upon those words of the Prophet. Wash
you make you clean. He only washes and is clean, who sorrowfully
acknowledges past, and does not again willingly admit future sins, and so
much shall serve, in dispatch of the third question.

4. Come we now in a few words to the last, which is, who they are that must
thus confess^, and that is intimated in the word we, To confess (...), Qu. 4.
is that which belongs not only to wicked and ungodly men but to St. John and
such as he was, good, nay, the best Christians, and that in a respect of their

1. Past enormities. True pen^tents, love still to rub upon their old s^res.
Psa. 25.9.
David in his psalm deprecateth the sins of his youth, our old sins call for
new confessions, and this holy men do upon several considerations.

1. To keep down the swell^ng of spiritual pride, which is apt to arise in the
best saints. King Agathocles, by drinking in ^arthen vessels, to mind himself
of his or^g^nall (which was from a potter) kept himself humble, so do good
Christians by remembering and acknowledging their heinous sins before conversion.

2. To gain further assurance of the pardon of these sins* Faith in the best is
apt to faint, and fears to arise in their minds, but the renewing of
confession and contrition supports faith and expels fear.

3. To strengthen themselves the more against relapses into those sins. The
best men want not temptations to the worst sins, especially those which before
conversion they were accustomed to, and lived in, but every new confession is
as it were a new obligation upon a man, not to do it any more.

4. To inflame their souls with greater measure of love to God and Christ. The
sense of sin is a great indearment of mercy, and the confession of sin renew^th
the sense of it: indeed we must not comm^t s^n abundantly that grace may
abound the more, but we may and ought to confess s^n abu^dantly that grace may
abound and be the more prec^ous to us, for these reasons it is that good
Christians, are frequent in confess^ng their old s^ns, but besides they have
new matter of co^^ession in respect of

2. Their present infirm^t^es, not only all that are wicked, but all that are
sinners, are bound to confess their sins, and (as you formerly heard) the best
whilst they continue here are sinners; whilst the ship is leaking, the water
must be pumped out: as the room continually gathers soil, so it must be
daily swept, and the stomach which is still breeding* ^ll humors, must have
vomits administered. The line of confession must be drawn out as long as the
line of sinning, and that is as long, as the line of living.

To shut up therefore, we may by this see what kind of Saints those are, who
are altogether for high raptures of gratulation and admiration, but think
themselves past confession and humiliation, and therefore you shall observe
their prayers to have little or no mixture of acknowledgment of sin; To all
such I shall say as the Emperor did to the Arch-Puritan Acesius, (...), Erect
thy ladder, and climb alone upon it to heaven; for our parts (my brethren) let
confession of sins be as the first, so the last round in that ladder to heaven,
by which we expect and endeavor to ascend that Celestial Habitation.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF S. JOHN. SERMON. 17.

CHAP. I. Ver. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.


THat Covenant which Almighty God has made with fallen man in Christ Jesus, is
not unfitly called by Divines, a Covenant of Grace, free grace being the
impulsive cause from within, moving God to make that Covenant. But though it be
of grace, yet it is still a Covenant, and therefore as in all Covenants, there
is a mutual obligation on both parties, between whom the Covenant is made, so
is it in this, wherein is signified as what God will do for us, so what he will
have done by us. Hence it is that we find not only in the Law but Gospel,
commands, as well as comforts, precepts as promises; yea, these promises still
proposed conditionally: for so we may observe among other places in this
Chapter, and particularly in this verse, wherein remission is annexed to
confession. If we confess our sins, he is faithful, etc.

Having already dispatched the duty in an absolute consideration, as it is the
matter of a precept, we are now to handle the relative, as it is the condition
of a promise: the prosecution of which shall be done two ways,

1. Negatively: it is not a cause, but only a condition of the promise, and
therefore it is not said (...) but (...), because, but if we confess our sins:
indeed if confession be a cause of remission, it must be either meritorious or
instrumental, but it is not, it cannot be either of these.

1. Confession is not, cannot be a meritorious cause of forgiveness, it is
satisfaction, not confession which merits remission, and therefore with men,
forgiveness upon mere acknowledgment, is an act not of equity but of charity;
in this regard the merit of remission is Christ's, not ours, his blood whereby
he has made satisfaction, not our tears which are only the concomitant of
confession. True it is, there is a congruity in confession, inasmuch as it
makes us fit for, but there is no condignity to render us deserving of this
mercy of forgiveness.

It may perhaps be here inquired why since the commission of sin is meritorious
of punishment, the confession is not of pardon? for if the sin be therefore of
so great a desert, because against God, why shall not the acknowledgement be of
as great merit, because to God? The answer to which is justly returned, partly
that whereas our Commissions are purely sinful, our confessions are not purely
penitent, since even when we confess our sins, we sin in confessing, partly,
that whereas the demerit of the fault is chiefly respectu objecti, in regard of
the person to whom the injury is done, the amends for the fault is respectu
subjecti, principally considerable in respect of the person by whom it is made:
and hence it is that though the sin committed by us, be of infinite demerit,
because against an infinite justice, yet nothing done by us, can be of
infinite merit, because we are finite persons.

2. Confession, is not the isntrumental cause of forgiveness: to clear this
the more, be pleased to know, that there is a great deal of difference between
that which is merely conditional, and that which is so a condition, as it is
withal an instrument: that may be a necessary condition, which is only
required to the qualification of the subject on whom the thing is conferred,
but that which is not only a condition, but an instrument, has some kind of
influence, into the Production of the thing, which is conferred, and this being
well observed, will serve excellently to clear that Orthodox doctrine of
justification by faith alone, we are justified, (a chief ingredient, whereof
is forgiveness of sins) only by faith, not by repentance, not by charity,
nor by any other grace or work, because it is only faith which concurreth as
an instrument to this work, in as much as it is the hysope sprinkling the soul
with the blood, the hand applying to the soul the righteousness of Christ,
for which we are forgiven, and justified: and hence it is, that the
preposition (...), Romans 3.25.
is only used concerning faith, he is the propitiation for our sins through
faith, and we are justified by faith; Gal. 2.16.
whereas it is never said, we are justified by confessing, or forgiving, or
repenting, though yet still these are conditions of justification, and
forgiveness, in as much as they are necessary qualifications, required in the
person whom God does justify, and to whom sin is forgiven.

2. Affirmatively, it is a condition, and that both exclusive, and inclusive.

1. It is an exclusive condition, this (...), is as much as, (...) this si as
nisi, if otherwise not, there is no forgiveness to be had, without
confession, though it be not that for which, no nor yet by which, yet it is
that without which no remission can be obtained. I think it is needless to
dispu^e what God could do by his absolute power, it is enough he cannot do
^t by his actual, because he will not; and truly though the^e is no need of
any, yet there is abundant reason of this divine pleasure, since it is that
which his justice, his purity, and his wisdom seem to call for. Justice
requires satisfaction, much more confessiion. If God shall pardon them which
do not confess, but conceal, and go on in sin, it would open a gap to all
profaneness and impiety, which cannot consist with his purity; finally, it
cannot stand with Gods wisdom, to bestow mercy, but on them that are in some
measure sitted for it, and we are not, cannot be sitted for rem^ssion, till we
have practiced confession. None are fitio^ mercy, but they who see the^r need
of it, hunger after it, and know how to value it; whereas if God should offer
pardon to an impenitent, he would scarce accept it, how ever he would not
prize it. It is confession which makes us taste the bitterness of sin, and so
prepares us for a relish of the sweetness of forgiving mercy.

The exclusivenesse of this condition is that which Solomon expresses, when
he opposes hiding to confessing, and as he assures mercy to the one, so he
flatly denies it to the other, P^o. 28.13.
he that hides his sin shall not prosper: and to this purpose it is that
Almighty God threatens, Hos. 5. ult.
I will go and return to my place till they acknowledge their offense and
seek my fa^e, in which done^, is manifestly intimated a nisi, until, that is
unless they acknowledge, I will not vouchsafe my gracious presence to them,
yea this is that which David found verified in his own experience, where he
says, when I kept silence, Psalm. 32.3.4.5. quid peccatoru^ confessio nisi
quaedam vulneris ruptio Greg. Mag:
my bones waxed old, day and night thy hand was heavy upon me, I acknowledged
my sin and thou forgavest: unless the sore be opened, and the corrupt matter
let out, the party cannot be healed; when the ague breaks forth at the lips,
then there is hope of its cessation. If the Apostume break, Febris cum f^ris
e^^^pit spem a^^e^t, desinendi Ambr^sin P. 3^.

Quando Ap^stema convertitur ad interiora causa m^rtis ad exteriora, possibile
ad salutem pe^ven^^e Sum. C^^c^on. Nisi quis animi sui vitia cognov^rit and
^^is prop^^i c^nfessione prodide^it, (...) non (...) (...) l. 3 (...).
st^machus. si v^^uerit relevatur etc. Orig. in Ps. 37. P^o. 18.21. ^ertull. de
p^^nit c. 8. Vide Vela^^. ^. Phi. Chrisost de ve^^. Isayae. H^^. 3 Vt qui
p^opria v^bis non (...) ^lagitia ^anatur (...) ^^s^um qui eadem De^ ^uerit
confessus absol* vitur. Sidon Apoll. l 4. ep. 14. Math. 22.12.


and come not forth at the ears or mouth, the patient is but a dead man; till
that which oppresses the stomach be cast up, there can be no ease, and
unless there be a penitent laying open of our sins before God, by self
accusation, it is in vain to expect his absolution. Those words of the wise
man, Life, and Death, are in the power of the tongue, are not unfitly
morallized by one to this purpose, if our tongues keep silence, nothing but
death to be expected; i^ they speak in humble acknowledgement, life is
assured. This is the course of the court of heaven, directly contrary to the
courts on earth, as St. Chrysostom, and others, have observed* with men,
confession is the ready way to condemnation, with God, there is no other way to
remiss^on* he that does not conceal his offense, from the judge, is sure to
suffer, he that does endeavor to hide his sin from God, shall surely suffer;
so the sentence was against the speechless offender: take him, bind him hand
and foot, cast him into utter darkness, there shall be weeping, and gnashing
of teeth.

2. It is an inclusive condition, such as where ever it is found, the benefit
is certainly conferd: this supposition, may truly be turned into a position,
this (...) into an (...) verily Godwill forgive the who confess their sins. It
is not, an it may be God will forgive, or an, who knows but he will
forgive? but a surely he will forgive: there is not only a possibility, or
probability, but a certainty of remission to confessing sinners. St. Bernard to
this purpose takes notice of a book which God keeps as it were in heaven,
and says apposi^ely quod ibi ser^bit transgressio, delet confessio, what sin
writes in, confession blotteth out of thaet book^: hence it is that we find
God himself prescribing this, as the ready w^y to forgiveness, his ministers
assuring pardon, upon the performance of this, so Nathan did David, yea,
sinners, actually obtaining pardon upon this: so did David, and the Prodigal:
and which is observable, Bern. de Inter: dom. c. 37. Number. 5.6.7. Jer. 3.12.13.
2 Samuel 12.13. Ps. 32.5. Luke 15.18.
in both those penitents Gods remission seemed as it were to prevent their
confession, and interpose it self between the purpose and the performance of
it. David only said, He would confess, and God forgave; and the Prodigal
said, I will arise and go, and whilst yet he was a great way the Father runs
to meet him.

Velox confessio vel^cior medicina. Eucher:
And now if any shall say, we have set upon this course, but not yet found this
comfort, we have confessed our sins, and they are not (at least in our
apprehension) forgiven. I answer, perhaps thou have not been serious, and
ingenious in thy confession: thou have confessed some sins, but not all; or
thy confessions have not been so cordial and penitent, as they ought to be:
and no wonder, if failing in the right performance of the condition, thou do
not find the accomplishment of the promise* but if thy endeavors have been
sincere, in confessing thou must then distinguish between the real
condonation, and the sensible manifestation: thy sins may be forgiven in
heaven, and yet not in thy conscience, as God many times hears prayer, and
yet the petitioner finds no answer; so he pardons sin to the penitent; and
yet he does not know of it; and therefore still it remains as a truth,
remission is undoubtedly annexed to confession, tantum valent tres syllabae
peccavi, says St. Austine, of so great force are those three syllables, Aug.
hom. 41.
in the latin, three words, in the English when uttered with a contrite heart,
I have sinned, to obtain forgiveness of our sins

To end this therefore, and so dismiss the first General of the text,

What an engagement and encouragement should this be to the practice of this
duty?

1 The necessity should engage us, might pardon be had upon any other terms,
this might be dispensed with, but it cannot be, there is not only necessitas
praecepti, a necessity by virtue of a command (though truly Gods bare command,
is a sufficient obligation, and therefore Tertullian accounts it boldness to
dispute of the good of repentance, Tertull. de paenitent
when as we have a precept injoyning it) but there is necessitas medii, a
necessity in reference to the end of forgiveness and happiness: there being
no other means or way wherein it is to be obtained, since by concealing of,
and indulging to our sins, we exclude Gods indulgence.

2. The utility should encourage us: were it only Gods honor, which is hereby
advanced, it should be a prevailing motive: confession of sin, though it
publish the ill qualities of the peccant, yet it has this good quality, that
it ascribes to God his divine attributes, omniscience, acknowledging it were
in vain to hide from him that sees already: mercy, since it were madness to
make confession, where we conceived no compassion; Justice, which we
acknowledge might utterly consume us; patience, which is the only cause that
vengeance did not presently follow our sins; finally power, that there is no
way to fly from him, but to go to him, in humble confessions. To this purpose,
St. Austin tells us, est confessio laudantis et gementis, there is the
confession of the thankful, Aug: in Ps. ^1.
and of the sorrowful; nay the confession of sin is a confession of praise;
yea, bis Deum laudamus ubi pie nos accusamus, by taking shame to our selves, we
give double glory to God. But if zeal for Gods glory will not induce us, yet
love to our selves should oblige us, since as it is Gods honor, so it is our
comfort, he has the Glory, we have the good, his is the praise, ours is the
profit, we being truly entitled to, and qualified for the blessing of
remission; for this reason no doubt it is that the Devil striveth what he can,
of all duties, to hinder us from this of confession, lupus apprehe^dit guttur
ovis, Sum.
the Wolf catches at the throat of the sheep, that is the devils aim to stop
our co^fessions, Concionat
because he knows how advantageous the performance of it will be unto us:
indeed, therefore he would not have us to accuse our selves, that he might
accuse us; but according to St. Ambrose his council, praeveni accusatorem
tuum, Ambros^e in Ps. 35.
let us be wise to prevent him, and the mo^e he disswades us from, let us with
the greater fervency set upon this duty, which as it is acceptable to God,
because it exalts his glory, so it is profitable to us in obtaining our pardon

Nor let us only be engaged, and encouraged to the duty it self, but to the
r^ght manner of performance; it is that upon which, as it were, our everlasting
comfort depends, and therefore, how careful should we be so to manage it, as
we may not miss of our comfort. Would thou then that God should ignoscere,
cover, do thou, agnoscere, discover thy sins: would thou have no sin
unpardoned? let no sin be unconfessed: if thou would not have God impute thy
sins to thee, do thou charge them upon thy self: would thou have God to
spare thee, do not spare thy sins, would thou speed well in the Court of
heaven? tell the worst tale thou can against thy self, would thou have
him freely to forgive? do thou freely acknowledge: would thou rejoice, and
glory in his pardoning love? confess thy sins with sorrow, grief, and
hatred: would thou have him put away thine iniquities far from him? do thou
put thy iniquities far from thee: finally, would thou have him to cast thy
sins for ever behind his back? do thou often set them before thine own, and
his face, ever remembering, that if we condemn our selves, he is ready to
acquit us; if we lay our sins upon our selves, he is willing to lay them
upon Christ; if we confess our sins, he is just, and faithful, to forgive
and so I am fallen upon the

Genesis 2.
Mercy annexed to the duty, set down in these words, To forgive us our sins and
to cleanse us from all unrighteousness

In the discussion whereof, I shall take notice of three particulars, each of
which are doubly expressed

The object, called by those two names, sin, unrighteousness.

The Act, characterized in those two metaphors, forgive and cleanse

The extent of the act; in reference to the object, intimated in the plural
number, sins, and expressed in the universal particle, all unrighteousness.

1 The object of remission, is here described by two names, and both of them
very significant.

1. The first is (...), the most usual word, by which sin in general is
called, it answers to (...) in the hebrew, and pe^catum, in the Latins, and
comes no doubt from the verb (...), which is as much as (...), to shoot
besides the mark, whence Suadas defines it to be, (...) and deriveth it from
(^) (...) and, Suid. in (...). A.
(...) as if it were, (...). It is very observable to this purpose, what we
read in the book of Judges, concerning those seven hundred chosen men of
Benjamin who could sling stones at an hairs breadth, and not miss: Judge. 7.^0.
where the Hebrew word for miss, is (...) the greek (...) whereby is
intimated to us what the nature of sin is; namely a amissing the mark. God,
beloved, has proposed to man a mark, to wit, glory and ^elicity, which by sin
we fail of, according to that expression of the Apostle, All have sinned,
Romans 17.23.
and come short of the glory of God: where the greek word (...) alludeth to
those, who come short in running to the goal, both amount to the same, and let
us see how sin makes us come short of the goal, and shoot besides the mark
of bliss: and no wonder, since according to our Apostles definition, (...),
sin is a transgression of the law, Sic. paradox. c. 3
to which agrees Ciceros definition of peccatum, that it is, transilire
lineas, as God has given man a scope to aim at, so a rule to walk by; as he
has proposed an end, so he has appointed a way, but sin misseth of both:
hence it is that sinners are said to go astray, as sheep which wander from the
fold; and sin is compared to darkeness, which causes the traveller to step
aside; so fitly is it here called (...) a deviating aberration from the right
rule or scope.

2 The second is (...), a word, which is sometimes used in a strict notion,
Vide fulgent de Remiss: peccat: l. 1. c. 12. Romans 1 18.
for one kind of sin, to wit, injustice toward man: in this sense, it is
contradistinguished to ungodliness, by St. Paul, where he says, The wrath of
God is revealed from heaven, against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of
men.

But again, sometimes it is taken in a larger notion, as applicable to every
sin; for as the Moralist distinguishes of righteousness, (...). Theog.
it is particular and universal, which universal righteousness contains in
it all virtues; so we may distinguish of unrighteousness, and so in a general
sense it comprehends all sins. Thus it is said of the Romans, before
conversion, they did yield their members as weapons of unrighteousness to
sin, according to this latitude, Romans 6.13. Heb. 8.12.
it is to be taken in the promise, where God says, I will be merciful to
their unrighteousness; and here in the text, which assures, cleansing, (...)
Dem^st. (...).
from all unrighteousness: and therefore though we may with Demosthenes,
distinguish between these two, by the one understanding a voluntary, the other,
an involuntary fault, or with Turrianus, upon the text, by sin understand
lesser, and by unrighteousness greater crimes; yet I rather conceive both of
equal extent; Tur^^an. in loc.
nor is it without just reason, that all sin is called by the name of
injustice, whether you consider it in its nature or its effects*

1 Look upon the nature of sin: it is (...), and therefore (...), a missing
the mark, and he that does so, shoots wrong, a swerving from the right
rule, and therefore must be crooked. It is one of the definitions; we meet
with in St. Austine, of sin. It is a will of getting, or keeping, what
justice forbids. The statutes of the Lord are right, says David; the
commandment is just, Peccatum est v^luntas assequendi v^l retinendi quod
justitia vetat Aug: de dua^. anim: adv^ Man: c. 11. Ps. 19.8. Romans 7.12
says St. Paul; and therefore, sin, which is a breach of it must needs be
unrighteousness.

2 Behold the effects of sin, what injury it does both to God, and to the
sinner.

1 Sin is unrighteousness toward God, denying him his dae, and robbing him of
his honor; true it is, Gods int^rnall essential glory is inviolable, but sin
depriveth him of that external glory, and honor which the creature by worship
and service ought to give to him, and though it cannot actually, yet it does
intentionally, and therefore interpretativ^ly, injure the divine Majesty: in
which respect God complains, Amos. 2.16.
that he is pressed under sin as a cart under sheaves; and it is truly said,
omne peccatum est quasi deicid um, sin does as much as in it lies commit
murder upon the sacred deity.

2 Sin, is unrighteousness toward our selves: Pro. 8.36.
he that sins against me, says wisdom, wrongeth his own soul; and that
is the greatest wrong a man can do himself, it being such a loss, as no
gain can countervaile; Matthew. 16.16.
for what will it profit a man, says our blessed Savior, to gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul: it is not unfitly observed that (...) in the
greek, which signifies loss, comes from (...) in the hebrew* which
signifies sin, sin ever bringing loss, and doing the greatest injury to
him that commits it.

And now, beloved, what other use should we make of these considerations, but
that we learn so to look upon sin, as the Scripture represents it, that we
may loath, and abhor it. Alas? whatsoever pleasure thou may have in it, it
is but the pleasure of sin; what ever Mammon thou may get by it, it is but
the Mammon of unrighteousness; and therefore when the seeming delight and
profit may allure thee, let the real obliquity and iniquity of it, affright.
thee A morally just person, would not wrong a man of a penny to get a pound: and
why will thou wrong both God and thy self for a little present emolument, and
contentment? Let not then sin any longer deceive thee, but remember what
names are given it in Gods d^ctionary, and in those names, read its nature,
that thou may hate to commit that which is so irregular, and unjust, being
therefore characterized, by these two titles of (...), and (...) sin, and
unrighteousness.

2 The act of remission, wherein the benefit consists, is expressed in two
metaphors, forgiving and cleansing, and comes next to be considered.

Indeed, some expositors refer these two phrases, to two several acts, and
so conceive this promise to consist of two parts; to wit, justification, and
sanctification: thus Beza calls cleansing another benefit distinct from that
of forgiving. Bez. in loc.
And truly it is not to be denied, but that

1 Justification and sanctification, are inseparable concomitants; indeed they
are not to be confounded, but withal they ought not to be severed,
distinguished they must be, divided they cannot; and therefore they are fitly
called twines in the womb of free grace; Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 37.
to this purpose, says St Bernard, where sin is pardoned, the g^ft of
sanctity is conferred: and in this respect St. Austin says, that rem^ssion of
sin, makes men good trees; hence it is that we find those two frequently
joined together by St. Paul, Aug. de verb. them. Sermon. 12. 1 Cor. 36.26. Ezeck.
36.26. Micah 7.19.
you are just^fyed, you are sanctified, by the prophet Ezechiel, I will cleanse
you from all your iniquities, and I will give you a new heart; and by the
prophet Micah, I will subdue their iniquities, and cast them into the depth of
the Sea.

2 This phrase of cleansing, serves very fitly to represent the work of
sanctification, whereby the filth of sin is more and more removed, and
therefore many times it is set forth in scripture by this metaphor; so when
David prays for a clean heart, Ps. 51.10.
and St. Paul exhorts to cleanse our selves, we are no doubt to construe it of
sanctification. 2 Cor. 7.1.


Upon these considerations, I shall not quarrel with any, who so interpret it
here, but I conceive it more rational, in this place, to refer both to one,
and by cleansing, understand the same with forg^ving, and that because

1 It is very probable, that St. John attributes the same thing here to God, as
the principal efficient, which he ascribes at the seventh verse, to Christ,
as the meritorious cause; now the cleansing there spoken of, as has been
already manifested, and evidently appears, is that of justification.

2 It is very incongruous, to make the sam^ thing, both the condition, and the
matter of a promise: i^ ^eed, that which is the cond^tion of one promise, may
be the matter of another, but the same thing, cannot be the matter and
condition of the same promise; now the cleansing from sin, which is an act of
sanctification, consists, though not only, yet partly in the confession of
sins, which is the condition of the promise.

Upon these considerations, I shall handle both these metaphors, as belonging
to one and the same benefit, nor is it unusual with the holy Ghost, in
scripture, to repeat the same things, under various notions; yea so choice is
the matter, here promised, that it cannot be sufficiently expressed, and
assured to us: no wonder that it is ingeminated, to forgive, to cleanse.

And indeed so emphaticall are both these phrases, that though they are one and
the same in sense, yet I shall handle them severally, as they lie in order

1 The first word we meet with, is Forgive; a word that is of all others most
frequently used; if you inquire into the plain meaning of the greek word,
(...), it is as much as to d^smisse, or sen^ away, or let alone: thus when God
forgiveth sin, he lets the sinner alone, and as it were, dismisseth his sin,
removi^g it (according to the Psalmists expression) as far from him as East
from the West: Ps^. 1^3.12.
if you observe the use of the word, you shall find it applied three several
ways, to the acquitting of one that is accused, the releasing of one that is
imprisoned, and the discharging of one that is indebted, each of which
(especially the last) serve to set forth this benefit.

When Agesilaus wrote to the Judge, in the behalf of Nicias, he used this
phrase, If he have done no wrong (...), acquit him, ^f he have done wrong;
(...) acquit him for my sake, (...)* however, acquit him, this is that which
God, Plut. (...).
does, in forgiving, acquit the sinner from the accusations that are laid
against him, by sin, and Satan. Our blessed Savior, quoting that place of the
Prophet, makes use of the noune of this verb to preach (...) deliverance to
the captives, Luke 4.18.
as if (...) were as much as (...), and thus does the pitifulness of divine
mercy in forgiving loose the captive sinners who are tied and bound with the
chains, and fetters of their sins. In the parable, of the Lord, and his
servant, who ought him many talents, this word is used to express the Lords
forgiving the debt to his servant; and this is the sense, in which the
scripture, Matthew. 1^.27.
most frequently uses the expression: and therefore in the Lords prayer, where
forgiveness is expressed, by this word, one of the Evangelists expressly joins
with it, (...) debts, forgive us our debts.

Matthew. 16.12.
And now according to this notion of the word, there are two things; it
represents to us what sin does, and what forgiven^sse does.

1 What sin does: it makes a man a debtor: grave vocabulum debitoris, Ambr.
de T^b. c. 7.
says St. Ambrose, the name of debtor is very unpleasing; yet such is every
sinner, a debtor to Gods justice, by reason of the breach of his law: indeed
man, as a creature, was a debtor to Gods authority commanding, but withal, he
was able to pay that debt to the full, and therefore it was no burden, nor
misery; whereas man, as a sinner, is a debtor to Gods justice punishing, and
this such a debt, as he is never able to satisfy; and therefore must lie in
prison for ever. It is a proverb in Suidas (...) once red with blushing at the
time of borrowing, Said in litt. A
and ten times pale for fear of paying: Augustus would feign buy his pillow who
was so much in debt, as conceiving it was good to sleep on. How can a sinner
sleep securely who is indebted so deeply?

2 But that which is here chiefly considerable, is what forgivenenesse does:
indeed it lets us see that wherein the nature of this blessing consists,
whereas sin making us debtors to divine justice, obliges us to the suffering
of eternal punishment, forgiveness, takes off this obl^gation, and
consequently the punishment it self, so that look as a forgiven debtor is
freed from whatsoever penalty his debt did render him liable to: yea from being
so much as liable to the penalty, so is the forgiven sinner from the punishment
it self, which is the remote term, and the obligation to it, which is the
proxime term of pardon; Dimi^^^^e peccatum non est h^m^ ^uam puri^e, Ans. ^ar
Deus (...). l. 1 ^ 12, Aug. in Ps. 32. Durand in Sententis
in this respect it is that Anselm says, to forgive sin is not to punish it,
and St. Austin to the same purpose, it is Gods not marking inquity, so as to
inflict the penalty due to it, and the Schools, to remit the sin, is not to
impute it so, as to punish it.

For the fuller opening this truth, know

1 On the one hand, there is a great deal of difference between these two, to
withhold the execution off, and to withdraw the obligation to the punishment:
it is one thing, for a creditor to give day of payment, and another thing to
cancel the bond: indeed the phrase used by Moses, of Gods forgiving his people
from Egypt, until now, Number. 14, 19.
seems chiefly to intend his sparing to punish them, but that is
forgiveness, in a larger, and improper sense, according to the genuine notion,
there is a vast difference between forgiving and forbearing mercy. As learned
Davenant, upon those words, Coloss. 3.13. Daven. Is^ud
forbearing and forgiving one another, has observed, that there is far more in
the latter, than in the former; since a man may forbear revenge, merely for
want of ability, or opportunity, so is it true (though not upon the same
ground,) in respect of God, his forgiving, is far more then his forbearing;
and therefore this latter he vouchsafes even to those who go on in sin;
but the former only to them who confess the^r sin; since whereas by the one,
it is only he does not as yet, by the other, it is that he will not at all
punish.

2 On the other hand, there is a great deal of difference betwixt affl^cting
for sin, and punish^ng for sin, properly so called: for though the meritorious
cause of both be the same, In sili^s damnationis vindicat i^atus in silios
gratiae vindicat propitius

Aug. de peccat. mer. et remiss l. 1. c. 36.


to wit, sin, yet the impulsive cause from within, is different, that, from an
anger mixed with love: this, from mere anger, and purely judicial wrath;
besides, the final cause, is far differen^, that is for emendation of the
person, this is for satisfaction of the law, and so whereas that is medicinal,
this is exitiall.

That God does afflict his own people for sin, yea for sin after it is
forgiven, is a case so clear, that it cannot upon any just reason be denied.
The Antinomians do but discover their own blindness, whilst they deny that
God sees sin, so as to correct it in justified persons: that instance of
David is pregnant, whom the prophet tells, 2 Samuel 12.
as it were with one breath, that God had forgiven his sin, and yet for that
sin the child must dye; that of the Psalmist, concerning the Isralites, Ps*
99.12.
is very plain, Thou wast a God that forgavest their sin, though thou
tookest vengeance of their iniquities: finally that of the Corinthians, is no
less apposite, who though they were forgiven, 1 Cor. 11.
and therefore should not be condemned with the world; yet were judged, and
chastized of the Lord, for their sin, of unworthy receiving the holy
sacrament.

But still, though God do afflict, yet he does not punish for sin, those
whom he forgiveth; unless as all afflictions may in some sort be called
punishments: and the reason is plain, because punishing for sin, is in a war
of revenge, and Satisfaction; which are dire^tly opposite to forgiveness; and
we may as well say, that ^ judge can at the same time pardon a malefactor, and
ex^^ute him, as that God can punish when he forgiveth: indeed, because those
eternal miseries, have most properly in them, rationem paenae, the nature of
sat^sfactory pun^shment, therefore forgiveness chiefly consists in taking off
the obligation to that, according to St. Paul's Phr^se, (...)* 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: but yet it is no
less true, that the obl^gation to temporal, as well as eternal punish^en^: is
taken off, so that though the same ou^ward miseries seize upon pardoned, as
well as unpard^ned sinners, yet not in the same way, as has been already
i^timated, and therefore though God, do inflict many miseries, of life, yea
death it self upon forgiven sinners to make them feel the smart of sinn^,
watchful, how they run into sin, and to declare his justice against sin;
yet not in the least, to satisfy his justice upon them for sin; that being
already most fully (as I shall hereafter show) performed by Christ.

2 You see the significancy of the first word, and thereby the nature of the
thing, pass we on to the second, which though the same, as to the thing, with
the former, yet wants not its peculiar emphasis.

That distinction of Divines, concerning remissio culpe and paenae the
remission of the fault, and the punishment, may not unfittly be made use of,
for a distinct reference of those two expressions, the former of forgiving more
properly refers to the remission of the punishment, though yet it includes the
fault, as a creditor cancelleth the bond, does thereby, remit the debt it
self: this latter of cleansing, chiefly refers to the remission of the fault,
which defiles though it include the punishment, because it is of that
defilement which is contracted through the guilt of sin.

And now as in the former, so in this expression we have two things
considerable, what unright^ousnesse does, and what pardon does.

1 What unrighteousness doth^ it makes the sinner filthy and polluted in Gods
sight: sins, as they are debita, debts* so they are said to be remitted, and
blotted out; and as they are sordes, filthy, so they are said else where to be
covered, and here to be cleansed. Oh then how odious is an unpardoned sinner
in Gods sight? It is very observable, how Almighty God describing the sinful
state of rebellious Israel, Ezech. 16. Ps. 14.1*
borrows a metaphor from a ch^ld that is not swadled, but lies polluted in
its blood* and the Psalmist, speaking of wicked men, says, They are corrupt,
and become abominable; where the former word i^ borrow^d from a dead carcass:
and truly, ^ child in its blood, is not more loathsome to our eyes, a carcass
on the dunghill is not more n^isome to our smell, then a sinful wretch* is in
Gods eyes, and to his nostrils.

2 What forgiveness does: it cleanses the sinner. An expression that must not
be strained too much, as (...) (according to the doctrine of the Church of
Rome) the pardoning of sin were an utter extinction and abo^^t^on of it, as
cleansing does wholly take away filth^ tru^ it is, where sin is forgiven, the
filth of sin is in some measure, and shall at last be wholly removed, but
that is only the effect of glorification, not of justification, or
sanctification: and indeed, as if our Apostle would prevent any such inference
from this Phrase, we find him subioyning, if we say we have not sinned, as
before when he speaks of Christ's cleansing, he adds if we say we have no
sin, so that sin is therefore said to be cleansed, not that the filth of
it does not remain, but that it shall not be imputed to us.

If then you would have the intention of the Holy Ghost in this Phrase, when
applied to forgiveness, take it thus, look as a man when he is cleansed from
filth, is as if he had been never defiled, so a sinner, when pardoned, is in
Gods account, as if he had never been a sinner, not but that God sees him to
be a sinner still, because the spot of corruption remains in him, but that
God will no^ deal with him as a sinner, nor impute it to him for condemnation;
in this and no other sense, are those expressions to be construed, when God
says the iniquity of Israel shall be ^^ght for, and shall not b^e found; and
he will cast all the^^ sins into the d^pth of the Sea, (...). ^ic^h ^.1^
Isa. ^.1^. P^. ^1.7.
and to come near the phras^ of my text, that he w^ll make scarlet cr^mson
sins, a^ white as snow, and wool, and that David says of himself, when God
shall have purged him with hysope, I shall be^ whiter then snow, that as to the
matter of guilt, it shall be all one as if they had never been polluted with
any such sins.

Nor is this all that this expression carries in it, but further, look as a
man being cleansed is amiable, and l^vely in the eyes of beholders, so is a
pardoned sinner in Gods: he is not only freed from punishment, but accepted
into favor, Hos. 14.2.
as fully at peace and amity with him, as if he had never offended him: hence
it is that the Church joyneth these two together, take away all iniquity, and
receive us graciously: or as some read it, and do us good* to this purpose it
is the schools say of remission of sins, it is not only oblativa mal^, but
collativa boni, a remotion of guilt, but a collation of good. So that in sum,
a pardoned sinn^r is cleansed, that is, as to those great intents, and
purposes, of delivering him from the wrath to come, being fully reconciled to
him, bestowing the sonship, and inheritance upon him, he is in Gods account, as
if he were perfectly pure, and unspottedly innocent, nor had ever co^mited any
sin against him*

And now what should these considerations kindle in every one of us? but

1. An earnest desire and longing after this benefit: oh my brethren, no misery
like to that of sin, which makes us filthy and abominable, yea which engages
us to a debt we can never pay; no mercy l^ke to that of pardon, which sets us
free from debt, and makes us pure in Gods sight. Oh wretched man that I am
(says the sensible sinner) who shall discharge me from this debt? if thy sins
are forgiven, thy debt is discharged. Oh that this sin had never been, oh that
I had never done it, says the sorrowful sinner; thy sins, i^ cleansed, are as
if they had never been committed* Poor penitent; poor did I say? rich blessed
penitent; thou art vile and filthy in thine own eyes; I but thou art pure and
clean in Gods: thou chargest thy sins home upon thy own account, but God will
not call thee to account for them; so that whereas Rachel mourned for her
children because they were not, thou may be comforted concerning thy sins,
because they are not: with what boldness may the forgiven sinner look death,
and hell, and Satan, in the face, no^ fearing the arrest of the Sergeant, nor
the horror of the prison, nor the cruelty of the Jaylour? with what confidence
may a cleansed sinner come before Gods face, not doubting of acceptance and
audience? no wonder if the Psalmist break forth into that sweet acclamation,
blessed, o^ according to the Hebrew, Oh the blessednesses of the man whose
iniquity is forgiven, Psalm 32 1.
and whose sin is covered.

And now (me thinks) every sinner considering the misery on the one hand, and
felicity on the other, should cry out in words much like those of the conve^t
Jews, Men and Brethren, what shall I do to have my sins pardoned? Tell me I
beseech you, what man in chains would not be at liberty? what debtour does not
long to be discharged? what malefactor desires not to be acquitted? what leper
craveth not to be cleansed? what diseased person is not restless till he be
healed? and how is it that we who by reason of sin are all these in a spiritual
sense, do not breathe and pant after the remission of our sins, which heals,
acquitteth, ransometh, discharg^th, and cleanses? nor should these meditations
only kindle desires, but

2. Quicken serious and diligent endeavors of attaining this pardon in the way
which God has prescribed, and in this respect the mercy assured lays upon us
a great obl^gation to perform the duty required. It is true, confession of sins
in a right manner is a difficult task, I, but the f^rgiving and cleansing of
sin is an excellent benefit; the sweetness of the one makes abundant amends
for the bitterness of the other; surely to him that feels the weight and
burden of his sins, the yoke of repentance cannot bu^ b^ light, and to him
that knows the preciousnesse of an healing pardon, the vomit of confession
cannot be disple^sing.

There is yet one thing more remaining in this (...) general, Pa^^* 3
and that is the extent of the act in reference to its object, expressed by the
plural number sins, and the universal particle all.

Indeed I must prefix a limitation of this extent, and it is that which St.
Paul has done to my hand, Romans 3 2^*
this forgiveness is of sins that are past, not of sins to come: when a wicked
man turns from his wickedness (says the Prophet Ezechiel) all the
transgressions he has committed shall not ^e ment^^ned, not those he shall
commit, (...)* 1^ 22.
t^ll by actual rep^ntance he turn from them. I no where read God has made
such a Jubilee as one Pope did, who gave a pl^^ary indulgence, not only for
sins past, but before hand, for sins to come a long time after: it is true,
both things past and future are present to God, and therefore the decree of
pardon extends to all times, but still the execution of that decree the actual
issuing out of that pardon, is done time by time: indeed when a sin is
pardoned, it is perfectly pardoned, so that it can be no more forgiven then it
is, but as sin is successively committed, so it is successively forgiven;
doubtless our blessed Savior would not have commanded us to renew our prayers
for forgiveness, if God did not renew forgiveness upon our penitential prayers:
what need we any other arguument then that which my Text affords, if we
confess our sins, he forgiveth our sins? What sins? Surely those that we
confess: and not till they are confessed* now whoever antedated confession?
indeed it were not penitency but impudency for a man to confess a sin before
he has committed it, since whereas true confession is accompanied with a
resolve of forsak^ng, this would be attended with a purpose of ren^wing our
sins, since then a man is not in a capacity of pardon, till he have made
confession, nor of confessing a sin till he have committed it; it plainly
appears that God does not antedate his pardons, but till sin be past, pardon
is to come.

This being pr^m^sed, we need no^ doubt to affirm, when God pardons one sin, n^
one sin is left unpardon^^. Larga Dei bon^tas ven^am non dimid^ab^t, the
acquittan^^ which mercy gives, is not in part, but in full: indeed i^ God shall
pardon some sins and not others, he would at the same time be a friend and an
enemy, and we should be at once both happy and miserable, which are manifest
contradictions; besides, God does nothing in vain, and it were in vain to
cleanse from any, if not from all sins; one leake unstopped will sink the ship,
Mat. 18.31. Is. 38.17. Ps. ^1.3
one sore not healed, may kill the body, and one sin unpardoned may destroy the
soul; no wonder that the Scripture still uses a word of extent: thus it is
said in the parable, the Lord forgave his servant all his debt: thou have cast
all my sins behind thy back, says Hezek^ah, and wash me thoroughly from my
sins, and blot out all mine offenses, so David prays.

To enlarge this comfortable truth, be pleased to observe both the ways of
expression here used, and accordingly take it in a double variation.

1. Sins in the plural number: he does not only forgive one, but many; nor
does he only forgive once, but often; he will abundantly pardon, says the
Prophet Isay; or according to the original, Is. 5^.7.
he will multiply to pardon; the Rabbis say, that if a man sin thrice, it is
pardonable, but not the fourth; God is far more rich in mercy, he that cast out
a legion of devils, will cast out a legion of sins, he that bids us forgive our
brother not only seven times, Mat 1^* 22.
but seventy times seven, will certainly be as abundant in forgiving us; the
Sea can as easily drown an whole Host of men, V. 24
as twenty soldiers; and where God forgiveth sin, he casts them into a Sea:
the Lord in the parable forgave his servant not one, or ten, or an hundred, but
ten thousand talents: were all the sins of the world the sins of one man, yet
they were to his mercy, but a drop of a bucket to the Ocean.

2. All unrighteousness, of what nature, degree ^^ever: all manner of sin and
blasphemy, (...)
shall be forgiven (says our blessed Lord) yea that the sin against the Holy
Ghost is irremissible, it is not for the mal^gnity so much of the sin, as the
sinner, because he that once commits it, can never penitently confess it, not
only pence but pounds, moa^s but b^ames, mi^^s, but talents, are within the
compass of r^mission; there is a necessity of pardon to the least, and there
is (one excepted) a possibility of pardon for the greatest sin: Christ cured
all manner of diseases, (...)
and God cleanses all manner of sins, the foulest rags may become white paper,
and mercy crosses not only the black, but the red lines of our scarlet sins
out of Gods book; to this purpose it is, that in the name of God proclaim^d by
Moses, he is said to forgive iniquity, transgression and sin, where though
there be neither the plural number, nor an universal particle, yet there is a
threefold noun which answers both, and is not unfitly expounded, as
extending both to original and actual, and to great, as well as small sins.

And now ( my brethren) what abundant consolation does this afford us against
the sense of our manifold and mighty sins? (...)
so that we may well take up the challenge of St. Paul, who shall lay any thing
to our charge? Romans 8.3.
what singular admiration should ravish us in the apprehension of this, multa
and m^^na mis^ricordia, manifo^d and great mercy? saying with the Prophet
Micah, Mic. 7 18.
Who is a God like unto thee, that takes away iniquity, and passes by the
transgressions of the remnant of his heritage? what exceeding gratulation
should flow from us, if at any time God give us assurance of this general
pardon? exciting our selves with the Prophet David, Bless the Lord, P^. 103.^,
2.3
oh my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name, who forgiveth all
thy iniquity, and heals all thy diseases. Only let me close up with a
needful caution, God forgiveth and cleanses all our sins, but it is, if we
confess them; and as we expect that his remission, so he expects that our
confession should be proportionable to our comissions; now our confession is
then answerable when our sorrow which ever attends confession, is in some
measure correspondent to our sins: believe it ( brethren) the pardon of many,
of great sins, is not to be had upon the sam^ easy terms, with that of
infirmities, and seldom offenses; as our sins are more, our tears must be
more, as our transgressions are greater, our humiliations must be deeper. If
our offenses have been not Gnats but Camels, our sorrow must be not a drop but
an ocean; Scarlet sins call for bloody tears, and if Peter sin heynously, he
must weep b^tterly. If then thy former life has been a cord of iniquity
twisted with many threads, a writing full of great blots* a course spotted with
various, and those grievous sins, multiply thy confessions, and enlarge thy
humiliations, double thy fastings, and treble thy prayers; pour out thy
tears, and fetch deep sighs: in a word, iterate and aggravate thy
acknowledgements, though yet as the Apostle says in another case, I say in
this, grieve not as without hope, that upon thy sincere and suitable repentance,
divine goodness will forgive thee thy sins, and cleanse thee from all
unrighteousness.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF S. JOHN. SERMON. 18.

CHAP. I. Ver. 9. If we confess our sins, he is just and faithful to forgive
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.


THe Text is a promise, and promises are the most comfortable part of
Scripture, the whole word of God, 1 Pet. 2.^.
is according to Saint Peter's metaphor, sincere milk, and these are the cream
of that milk: according to St. Paul's similitude, a treasure, and these are the
pearls of greatest worth in that treasure; 2 Cor. 4.7.
according to David's comparison a light, and these are the brightest beams of
that light; Psalm. 119.10^.
in them all our good is centained, by them all our hope is sustained, through
them all our comfort is attained.

The promise of the Text is one of those which (...) Apostle Peter calls
exceeding great and precious promises, 2 Pet. ^.4.
because of that which is an exceeding great and precious blessing, the
remission of our sins: that which is the sole spring of our comfort, so that
all waters which flow not from this spring, though they may be sweet in the
mouth, will prove bitter in the belly; that which is the Queen of mercies, so
that wheresoever she goes, a train of blessings attend upon her: since if sin
be pardoned, we have grace from, peace with, access to, joy in God; yea all
needful comforts both for this life, and that which is to come.

But though the Text contain a promise, and the promis^ a blessing of so great
a value, yet if it were not as sure in the performance as it is sweet in the
promise, we could not with joy draw water out of it. And therefore he lets us
see, this Well of salvation is d^gged so deep, that the water cannot fail;
this fabric of comfort is founded so strong, that it cannot fall, if we be not
a wanting to our selves in fulfilling the condition; Gods justice and fidelity
will not suffer him to be a wanting to us in performing the promise, for if we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive, etc.

Genesis 3.
It is that part of the Text I am now to handle, the certainty of the mercy in
those words, he is faithful and just.

To assertain us of the effect, our Apostle minds us of the causes: and here
are two sorts of efficient causes set before us; the principal in the word he,
and the internal impulsive in those words, faithful and just: and surely when
we consider both quis, who it is, that conferreth this benefit, and qualis, how
faithful and just he is, we may certainly conclude, the accomplishment of it:
of each therefore in their order.

The principal efficient cause of rem^ssion is He, and if you ask who this he
is, Part. ^*
you must look back, and you shall find it to be him, with whom we have
fellowship, who is light (...) self, and so no other then God himself. And
indeed such is the nature of this blessing, that if he did not do it, none else
could, it being not only his act, but his prerogative, and so his only act to
cleanse and forgive a sinner, I, even I am he (says God himself) that blotteth
out thy transgressions, Isaiah. 43.25.
by which reduplication he intends an appropria^tion, as if he had said, I,
and none but I; Who is a God like unto thee that pardons iniquity, (says the
Prophet?) by which is no doubt intended both an affirmative, and a negative,
the one that whosoever pardons must be a God, Micah. 7.18.
the other that there is no God like to him for pardoning, and therefore indeed
whatever else besides him is called God, is no God. In this doubtless, Mark. 2
7. Luke 5.21. Ambros. de Sp ^. l. 3. c. ^9. Cyr. Alex. Thesaur. l. 2. c. 4.
those Pharisees spoke truth, though with a malicious intention against him,
who is the truth: when they said, who can forgive sins but God alone? and
therefore from that very position S. Ambrose proves the Deity of the holy
Ghost, and S. Cyr^l most properly, the Deity of the Son of God.

And indeed i^ must needs be only in Gods power to forgive, because it is
only against him that the offense is comm^tted; it is no doubt a clear truth,
that only he to whom the injury is done can remit the doing of it: now David
says, and most fully, Against thee, against thee only I have sinned, nor is
that only true, Psalm. 51.4*
because he ( being a King) was accountable to none but God, for what he had
done: but because sin properly so called, is only against him, of whose law it
is a breach, and that is, God himself. Thus S. Cyril argues, It belongs only
to God to loose men from their sins, Cyr. in l. de rect. fid. ad Regi^.
for who can free from the transgression of the law, but the Author of it? and
accordingly S. Cyprian, let no man cheat and delude himself, only God must show
mercy; Cypr. de lapsis.
since the servant cannot grant an indulgence for the fault, which is done
against his Lord. Sin is a spot in Gods sight, and none can hide it from him,
unless he pleases to turn away his face. It is a debt in Gods Book, and who
dares to blot any thing out of his Book, but himself? If any man shall pretend
to forgive another debt, he offers a double injury, to the debtor, by
deceiving him with false hopes, and to the creditor, by usurping his power:
hence it is, that we find those exclusive propositions frequent in the
ancients, S. Chrisostom often, none can forgive sin but God alone; to forgive
sin belongs to none other; Chrisost. in 2 Cor. 3. him. 6 1 Cor. 15. him. 40.
Greg. in Ps. poenit. Optat. centr. Donat. l. 5. Exodus 34.7. Is. 48.11.
to forgive sins is possible to God alone. And Gregory the great, Thou who only
sparest, thou who alone forgivest: And Optatus, It is only Gods act to cleanse
and make white our scarlet sins, this is a part of Gods name, which is
incommunicable, because an expression of his nature, he is the Lord, forgiving
iniquity, and transgression, and sin; an emanation of that glory, which he
says, he will not give to another.

That which may seem to contradict this truth, is that power which the
ministers of the Gospel have in the point of forgiveness, insomuch that our
blessed Savior expressly says, Joh. 20.23.
Whose sins you remit, they are remitted.

To clear this scruple, be pleased to know, that

1. Whatever power the priest has of forgiving, it is then only effectual,
when the person is rightly qualified: we are stewards, and must not be like the
unjust steward, str^ke out our Masters debt without his leave, or otherwise
then according to his prescription; we are Ambassadors, and therefore have not
power to proclaim war or conclude peace between God and man, according to our
own discretion, but his direction, to wit, upon the testification of (that
which we at least probably conceive is) unfeigned repentance; and therefore
says Tolet well, quod in terra sacerdos, Tolet. in Joh.
in coelo Deus, What the Priest does on earth, is ratified in heaven, but clave
non ^rrante, not when he turns the key the wrong way, so that if the
confession of the penitent be not sincere, the absolution of the Priest is
invalid.

2. But further, the power which a Priest has upon pen^tent confession of
forgiving, Aug. in Joh. Tri. 5.
is but ministerial, not magisterial; ministri sunt pro judicibus baberi
nolunt, they are only Ministers, not Judges, so St. Austin, it is the King that
grants the pardon, they are only Officers that bring it.

If you desire more particularly to know how far the power of a Minister
extends to forgiving, I answer briefly.

1. They have power by virtue of their office to intercede with God for
sinners, and therefore the sick person is to call for the Elders of the Church,
that they may pray for him that his sins may be forgiven him. Jam. 5.14.15.


2. They have the word of reconciliation committed to them, wherein the promise
of pardon is revealed and exhibited: by them the holy Sacraments are
administered, which are the means of conveying pardon to those that are rightly
qualified, to which purpose it is that F^rus says appositely, M^nisters
forgive sins inasmuch as they are instrumental, Fer. in Ioh.
in those several Ordinances by which God remitteth sin.

3. They have authority of releasing those censures which have been past upon
sinners, for the scandal given by their flagitious practices to the Church.

4. Finally, they have power particularly to declare that God has forgiven
their sins, in whom they observe the signs of repentance, as they pray us to be
reconciled to God; so they may assure us upon our contrition that God is
reconciled to us, (...) per se (...) debi^^m (...) s^lvant dimis^i^nem ^act^m
^ssenden^. (...). 18. Fer. in (...) In remitte^d^s and retine^di^ (...) and
^ffici^ habent Evangelici qo^^ suble^^ legales sa^erdotes in^^randis leprosis.
(...). did. 18. l 4.

L^turg. ^f the Church of England.


thus Durand asserteth that God forgiveth by himself, releasing us from the
bond of our sins, and the Priest absolveth by declaring that remission to be
granted. And F^rus though a Jesuit, says, that man does not properly forgive,
but only assure that God has forgiven, look as the Priest in the law was said
to cleanse the leper, because he did pronounce him clean (says the Master of
the sentences) so do the Ministers of the Gospel forgive, because they
pronounce to us that God forgiveth, and in this sense our Church understood it:
and therefore says in the form of absolution, he has given power and
commandment to his Ministers, to declare and pronounce to his people being
penitent, the absolution and rem^ssion of their sins. Thus the Ministers are
instrumental in this work, and their power, as appears by what has been
said, is partly declarative, and partly operative; but stil^ the princial
efficient conferring this benefit, is God, and God alone.

The use therefore which we are to make of this truth, is for direction and
imitation.

1. Be we directed whither to address our selves for pardon in the sense of
our sins, with the prodigal, let us resolve to go to our Father, and after
Dav^ds pattern, let us implore Gods mercy.

Indeed since God has set Ministers in his Church for this end, that by their
help we may obtain the pardon of our sins, and the comfortable assurance of it;
we must not neglect, much less despise their assistance; and whereas what
others do only in a way of charity, they do in a way of authority, having power
committed to them for this end, we must prefer their help before what private
Christians can afford us. In which respect I dare boldly affirm that many
people want that comfortable sense of the pardon of their sins, which they
might attain to, did they consult with a faithful Minister, declare their sins
together with their rep^ntance to him, earnestly and humbly desiring a
declarative absolution from him.

But yet before, and above all other means, let us seek God by prayer, and
wrestle with him for this great mercy: our Church has taught her Ministers
when they absolve to prefixe a prayer to Christ, that he would absolve a poor
penitent: and as you desire absolution from the Minister, so you must direct
your prayer to God, that he would speak peace to you, so much the rather
because though he is pleased ofttimes by his Ministers, to give case to
burdened sinners, and accordingly we are to make use of them for that end, yet
the conscience can find no ease from the Minister, unless he be pleased by the
inward testimony of his spirit, to seal a pardon to it; so true is that of
Elihu, when he gives quietness, who then can make trouble? Iob^ 34.29.
and when he hides his fa^e, who then can behold him?

2. Be we exhorted to imitate God in this gracious act, he forgiveth our sins
against him, let us forgive the injuries others do against us, this was S.
Paul's counsel to the Ephesians, and that upon this very ground; Be you kind one
to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake
has forgiven you; where the ( as) is both modall and causall. Ephesians. 4.32.


As, to wit in the same manner as God does forgive us, we must others. Indeed
the parallel holds not every way, for whereas God does not forgive sins, but
to those that conf^sse and bemoan them, we are bound to forgive those who do
not confess, but persist in their offering wrong to us, according to the
precept of blessing them that curse us. And this by the way would be taken
notice of, Ma^th. 5.44.
in Answer to that Socinian argument against satisfaction from the parallel of
Gods forgiving and man's, since by the same reason that they say God should
forgive without satisfaction, because he requires man to do so, they may as
well say he should forgive without confession. It is not then in every respect,
that this sim^litude agrees; bu^ as God, when he forgiveth is fully reconciled,
forgetting all that is past, as if it had not been without any desire of, nay,
resolving against all future revenge, ita pure and perfect, Anselm. in Ephesians.
so purely and perfectly says Anselm, ought we to forgive our brethren.

And as thus in the same manner, so likewise on this ground, and so the ( as)
is causal, because God for Christ's sake forgiveth us, we for Gods sake ought to
forgive one another; we find the Lord in the parable wroth with his servant, to
whom he had pardoned all his debt, because he was so cruel not to forgive his
fellow servants, and we pray in the Lords prayer, for forgiveness of our
trespasses as we forgive others; so necessary a connection is there betwixt
these two, Matthew 6 12. 18 ^2.
that our forg^venesse is a condition of Gods, and Gods is to be a cause of
ours. Thus God does seem as it were to put it in our power, whether or no we
will have our sins forgiven, by making our forgiveness a condition of it, and
as at first he made us after his own likeness: so he still takes care, that
we may become like to him. And surely as it is Gods goodness to require no
more from, then what he performs to us; so is it but reason we should at his
command perform that to others, which we expect from him; and so much of the
first, the principal efficient He.

2. The internal impulsive causes here specified are two, 1 King. 7.15. 2
Cron* 3.18. Cant. 4.5. Zech. 4.11.
to wit, Gods faithfulness and justice, and these I may well call the two
pillars which (like Jachim and Boaz) support our faith, compare to the two
Cherub^ns which look toward the mercy seat, whence pardon is vouchsafed,
resemble to the two olive trees, whence flows the oil, or the two breasts,
which yield the milk of heavenly consolation to troubled consciences.

1. The first here mentioned is Gods fidelity, he is faithful: for the opening
whereof be pleased to observe,

1. That God has made many promises of forgiving sins, and cleansing from
iniquity to those that acknowledge them; Qui or are ^os (...) etc. Cypr. de
orat. dom.
to this purpose St. Cyprian says, Christ teaching us to pray for, assures us
God has made promise of forgiving our trespasses: Indeed God has no where
promised peccan^^ ^rastinum, to morrow to the peccant, but every where
poenitenti veniam, pardon to the repentant; If my people shall humble
themselves and pray, I will hear from heaven and forgive their sins: 2 Chro.
7.14.
so we read in the Chronicles, ^et the wicked forsake his way, Is. 55.7. Ezekiel.
18.21.22
and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon: so
runs the promise in Isaiah. If the wicked will turn from all the sins that he
has committed, all his transgressions, they shall not be mentioned to him, so
says God by the Prophet Ezechiel. Thus I might bring forth a Jury of textual
witnesses to prove this assertion, but those already mentioned, may suffice in
stead of all.

2. Know therefore further, that in whatsoever God has promised, he is
faithful; and that both in respect o^ intention and execution.

1. Of intention, inasmuch as his promises are the declaration of his purpose,
revelation of his decree, and manifestation of his good will toward poor
sinners; God has spoken nothing but what he means, he does not outwardly
pretend to forgive, and inwardly meditate revenge, but his words are the true
characters of his thoughts.

2. Of execution; inasmuch as his promises are not only Yea, but Amen, made;
but made good; 1 Kings 8* 25.
as God has a mouth to speak, so he has a hand to fulfill whatsoever he has
spoken: that nam^ Jehovah (which is as it were a proper name) signifies not
only his being of himself, but his giving a being to all his promises, and
therefore whereas God had made a promise to the Patriarchs of the land of
Canaan, yet inasmuch as the accomplishment was not in their days, it is said,
Exodus 6* ^
He was not known to them by his name Jehovah: as God says nothing but what he
means, so he says nothing, but what he does; and as his heart thinks, so
his hand ac^^th; what his tongue speaks: he many times performs more, but
never less than he promises.

And now both these being put together, that God has promised pardon, and his
promise is stable: well might St. John say, he is faithful to forgive, this
being that which his faithfulness in keeping promise obliges him to. Micah
7.18.19.
It fitly observable how the Prophet Micah joyneth these two together, He will
cast our sins into the Sea, and he will perform his truth to Abraham: as if God
could not perform his truth, except he cast our sins into the Sea; so that look
as if we pray, he is faithful to hear, if we mourn, he is faithful to comfort,
so if we confess, he is faithful to forgive.

Indeed the glory of God is much concerned in his being faithful to forgive,
not only because of the thing it self, since if it be the glory of a man to
pass by offenses, much more is it of God; but likewise because of his word
which is passed for granting a pardon, and therefore cannot be recalled,
retarded, impeded; for if God does promise any thing which he does not effect,
it must be either for want of wisdom in foreseeing what might be done to
prevent it, or for want of power to effect what he intends, or for want of
stability, as if his mind were changed, and his good will altered, any of which
if they could be fastened upon God, were an high dishonor, and but to imagine
them is blasphemy; that therefore it may appear his wisdom is infallible, his
power irresistible, his will unchangeable, and so his name may be glorious, he
must be faithful in accomplishing, as all other, so this promise of forgiving.

And now there are two graees which this fidelity of God should teach us,
namely, fidelit as and fides, faithfulness and faith.

1. What obligation does Gods faithfulness lay upon us to be faithful, and
that both to him and one another.

1. To him, as he has promised to forgive us, so we have promised to give our
selves to him; as he has promised to cleanse us from all unrighteousnes, so we
have promised to him in our Baptism to cleanse our selves by renouncing the
world, the flesh and the devil: and now, is God faithful to us, and shall we
be false to him? he is a God k^eping Covenant, and mercy with us, and shall we
be a people not steadfast in our Covenant with him?

2. To one another: let us not speak fair, and yet have seven abom^nations in
our hearts; but since the tongue is the hearts herald, let it ever declare the
Masters message, yea let not only our affections but actions keep even pace
with our expressions: we must not be open mouthed, and close fisted, long
tongued, and short handed, to make golden promises, and leaden performances;
like the nobleman who had two chests; the one whereof he called promise, that
was ever open, thither he sent all his petitioners, and there they only found
hope; the other he called performance, that was always locked, Ephesians. 6.1.
and no key would open it, but necessity; far be this from true christians, who
must be followers of God, and that especially in a faithful discharge of their
promises.

2. What encouragement does Gods faithfulness give to our faith? Sarah judging
him faithful that had promised, believed, and that against hope: since God is
abundant in truth, we may well be abundant in confidence. Heb. 11.12.
Indeed Gods fidelity should draw out the actings of our faith, and the acting
of faith will as it were draw forth Gods fidelity. Very observable to this
purpose is that expression of the Psalmist, Psalm. 31.19.
Oh how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee,
which thou have wrought before the sons of men for them that trust in thee?
In the former clause, Gods goodness is said to be laid up, in the latter to be
wrought: goodness is laid up in the promise, wrought in the performance; and
that goodness which is laid up, is wrought for them that trust in God: and
thus as Gods faithfulness engag^th us to believe, so our faith as it were
engages Gods faithfulness to perform the promise.

More particularly, let this consideration strengthen faith in believing the
pardon of our sin, upon our performance o^ the condition. Ah thou despairing
sinner whoever thou art, what do thou hereby but question, nay deny Gods
faithfulness? so that what our Apostle says in the next verse, of those who
say they have not sinned, the same may I say of them, who say their sin is
greater then can be forgiven, they make God a liar: little do thou think, how
whilst thou dare not (as thou conceivest) misapply the promises; thou
call the truth of God in question, and thereby offerest to him an high
indignity.

But consider thou drooping soul, what provision God has made against thy
infidelity. To assure thee of his fidelity, thou have his word, nay more then
so, his oath (as I live says the Lord) nay more then so, both in writing, and
that writing has Seals annexed to it, namely the holy Sacraments; how may
thou confessing thy sins, plead with God upon all these? and as Jacob used this
argument, Lord thou have said thou would do me good, so may thou, Lord thou
have said, thou have sworn that thou will forgive the sins of them that turn to
thee. Genesis 3^.^2.
I have thy hand for it in the Scriptures, thy seal in the Sacraments, so be it
to thy servant, according as thou have spoken and sworn, and written, and
sealed.

2. That which next comes to be considered, is Gods justice in those words, he
is just: not to mention all the interpretations which expositors give of this
word, I shall only acquaint you with three, and insist upon the last, as being
(at least in my opinion) most congruous.

1. Some interpreters make faithful and just to be synonima's, therefore he is
faithful and just, because it is just he should be faithful; in this respect
the Hebrew word (...) which signifies truth, is by the Septuagint translated
(...) that signifies righteousness, Vide Span^e^. e^ercitat.
nor is it without reason because it is a righteous thing to be true* before a
man makes a promise, he is free to make it or not, but when he has made it,
Ca^thus. lap. S^c. in loc.
he is not free to keep it or not; by promise a man becomes a debtor, and for
one to pay his debt, is no more then just. Indeed this is not exactly true in
regard of God, because we never so fully perform the condition, but it is
justly liable to exception, yet after a sort it is that which he accounts
himself engaged to in point of justice, to perform all his promises, and
therefore though it is mere mercy which makes, it is justice which fulfilleth
the promise. This interpretation Socinus lays hold on, hereby to evade the
doctrine of satisfaction, which this word according to its proper sense does
clearly ^avour. But the design of the Holy Ghost being in these words to
strengthen our weak faith in believing the pardon of sin, I conceive we shall
do best to expound the words in that way which may most ^onduce to this end,
and that is as affording not only a single, but a double prop to our faith,
from a double attribute in God, and therefore I wa^e this interpretation.

2. Others there are who distinguishing these two, understand by justice, Grot.
Illyr. in loc.
mercy; so Grotius here says, I interpret just to be good, gentle; and
Illyricus observes that righteousness is sometimes taken for benignity, and
clemency; in this respect i^ is that (...) which signifies mercy, is sometimes
by the Sep^uagint rendered (...)* that signifies righteousness: agreeable
hereunto, the Gre^k word for alms is by the Syriach rendered righteousness: the
merciful man's bounty is by the Psalmist, (...). 6.1. Ps^^. 11^.9. ^ Cor. 6.10.
Psalm* 10^.17.116.5.51 12.
and St. Paul called righteousness; yea upon this account mercy and
righteousness, gracious and righteous are joined together; and David promises
if God would deliver him from blood guiltiness, he would sing aloud of his
righteousness.

And now according to this interpretation we see another impulsive cause of
forgiveness, namely, the grace, mercy, and clemency of God. Among others there
are two Greek words (by which pardon is set forth) that excellently confirm
this truth, (...) and (...), Col. 2.13.
the former by St. Paul, which coming from (...), signifies to forgive
freely, and intimates free grace to be the spring of pardon; the latter by the
Author to the Hebrews, Heb. 8.12.
in that quotation of the Prophet, I will be merciful to their sins, and their
transgressions: which is by showing mercy to the sinner, in the forgiveness of
his sins; so that we may hence learn, to what we are to ascribe the pardon of
our sins; merely the good will, and grace and mercy of God. Indeed we shall
still find all those benefits (especially spiritual) which we receive
attributed to mercy; the regeneration of our nature; 2 Pet. 1, 3. Tit 3.5. Luc.
1, 76
according to his mercy he has begott^n us; the salvation of our souls,
according to his mercy he saved us; and the remission of our sins through the
tender mercy of our God: oh let us admire the bowels of love, the riches of
grace, the treasures of mercy which are manifested in pardoning and cleansing
our sins.

3. But though this interpretation may be received, yet since it is a good rule
in expounding Scripture, to keep to the proper meaning of the words, if there
be not very good reason to the contrary, and there being no reason why we
should here recede from, I have chosen rather to adhere to the litterall sense
of the word Just.

For though it be true that

1. The commission of sin deserves punishment, and therefore justice which
gives every one their due, calls for the punishing, not the remitting of sin,
and

2. The confession of sin cannot (as has been before asserted) deserve pardon,
because it is no proportionable compensation of the offense.

Upon which grounds it appears, that this justice which forgiveth, cannot be
in respect of us, yet it still is a truth in regard of Christ, God is just to
forgive; so that a Gualt^r well, he cannot but forgive, unless he will be
unjust to his own Son, Gualt. in l^c.
and inasmuch as our Apostle in the foregoing verse save one, expressly
attributes this cleansing to Christ's blood, this interpretation of justice is
doubtless most genuine and congruous.

To clear briefly and perspicuously this sweet truth of pardoning justice; be
pleased to know, that

1. The m^ledictory sentence of death denounced by the law against sinners, was
inflicted by God upon Christ, this is that which the Prophet Esaias positively
asserts, where he says, the chastisement (that is, the punishment called a
chastisement, because inflicted by a father, and only for a time) of our peace
was upon him; and again, he was oppressed, Is. 53 5.7.
and he was afflicted, which according to the genuine sense of the original is
better rendered, it was exacted, to wit, the punishment of our sin, and he was
afflicted, or he answered, to wit, to the demand of the penalty.

It may be here enquired, how it can stand with God^ justice, ^o infl^ct
punishment upon the guiltles? and if this doubt be not cleared, we shall
stumble at the threshold, and the foundation of this pardoning justice will be
laid in injustice: and truly when we find God saying, the soul which sins
shall die, Ezekiel 18.^.
and asserting those who condemn the righteous as an abomination to him, it is
hard to imagine how he can himself justly punish the innocent for the nocent.

To remove this scruple, consider

1. That God did inflict death on Christ is undeniable, and who may question
the justice of his actions, when as things are therefore just, because he wills
them to be done, whose will is the supreme rule of justice?

2. There cannot be a more necessitating reason of Gods affl^cting Christ by
death then this: so that if it be not just for God to inflict it upon him on
this ground, it is much less upon any other: That Christ should die for the
confirmation of his doctrine, was needless; it was done sufficiently by
miracles. To make way by death to his glory, was not necessary; he might have
been translated, as were Enoch and Eliah. To dye only as an example of patience
and fortitude to his followers, is a far less cogent cause, then to dye as an
example of Gods justice and severity against sin; nor need he have died for
that end, since the death of any of his Apostles might have been exemplary in
that kind: Finally, had he died only for the declaration of Gods immense love
to us, and not for the demonstration of his severe justice against sin, whilst
he had been so loving to us, he had been little other then cru^l to Christ;
There wan^ed not other ways to declare his tender affection to mankind, but
there was no other way to declare his impartial justice against sin: so that
since the inflicting of death on Christ as a punishment, carries with it a
more urging inducement then any other cause assigned, and since the less cause
there is of inflicting death upon any, the greater must needs be the injustice
in the inflicter; it evidently follows that there is nothing can so much
clear the justice of God in this act, as (that which the Orthodox asserts to be
the cause of it) his undergoing the penalty due to our sins.

3. But further, Christ becoming man is joined to us in nature, and undertaking
in our behalf, is conjoined to us by suretiship; and in sensu forensi, a
judicial construction, one with us. We see in humane Courts the Law takes as
much hold of the surety as of the debtor: and why then should it be unjust for
God to punish Christ engaging for our debt? indeed upon this account the
Messiah, though innocent, became (after a sort) guilty, not as guilt notes a
due deserving of punishment in respect of sin, either personally inherent, or
at least naturally imputed; but only so far as it notes an obligation to
the punishment in a judicial way, 2 Cor. 5.20.
as being our surety, in which respect that phrase of St. Paul is very
apposite, he was made sin for us.

4. Lastly, to put all out of doubt. The undergoing this punishment, was
Christ's voluntary Act, who as he had power, so he wanted not will to lay down
his life. He was not sent for this end without his own consent; as God laid,
so he took our iniquities upon him; the curse to which we were subject (says
Theodorus) he assumed upon himself, Tre^d. disp. l. 5. c. 5 Gr^m^r. l 3. c. 13
Arnold. de Sept. verb. tr. 1.
of his own accord, the death that was not due to him, he underwent, that we
might not undergo that death which was due to us, says S. Gregory; he made
himself a debtor for us, who were debtors, and therefore the creditor exacts it
from him, says Arnoldus* now Volenti non ^it injuria; so the moralist most
truly, if another will voluntarily substitute himself in the room of a
malefactor, though the inferior Judge who is bound by the law cannot, yet the
superior Governor may without injustice accept of it. When therefore God
says, the soul that sins shall dye, he only sets forth the ordinary course
of his providence, which impedeth not but that Christ being ready to dye in our
stead who had sinned, God being the supreme Ruler and Judge, might most justly
inflict it on him.

2. This punishment thus inflicted on Christ, is a plenary satisfaction to Gods
justice. It is true, this word satisfaction is not formally expressed in
Scripture, yet there are aequivalent phrases; such among others is that phrase
so often used of redeeming, and as if the Holy Ghost would prevent that
Socinian Exposition of (redimere pro aliqu^ modo liberare) redeeming, as if it
were only in a large sense, no more then delivering, it is St. Paul's express
phrase, ye are bought with a price, and that this price may appear to be of
full value, it is opposed to, 1 Cor. 6. ult. 1 Pet 1.18.19.
and advanced above corrupt gold and silver by the Apostle Peter: nor is it any
infringement to the merit of this price and worth of this satisfaction, that
the suffering of Christ was not every way the same that we should have
undergone; since it is all one whether the debt be paid in the same coin or
no, so it be to the full value. Vide Cal^v. (...).
Christ suffered the punishment of our sins, as Calovius well observes, though
not Se^undum identitatem omnimodam, yet per aequivalentiam, the same in every
respect, yet aequivalent to it: Indeed what satisfaction could justice demand
more then infinite, and the suffering of an infinite person, could not be
less: whence follows

3. In the last place, that Gods justice being satisfied for our offenses, it
cannot but remit those offenses to us. As the creditor cannot demand that of
the debtor, which the surety has already paid: so neither can God exact the
punishment of us which Christ has suffered, and therefore it is just with him
to forgive and cleanse us.

The case being thus cleared, it will be altogether needless to enquire whether
it had been injustice in God to forgive without satisfaction. St. Austins
determination is very solid, there wanted not to God another possible way (and
if it were unjust, A^g. de Tri^it. l. 13. c. 10.
it were impossible) but this of satisfaction was most agreeable to divine
wisdom: before God did decree this way, it might be free to have used it or
not; but in decreeing, this seemed most convenient, and after, it became
necessary: so that there can be no remission without it: and however it might
not have been unjust with God to have forgiven without, yet we are sure it is
most just with him to forgive upon satisfaction.

There is only one objection which remains to be answered, and it is that,
which seems to carry a great deal of strength in it, namely, that forgiveness
is a free act in God springing from grace and mercy; and if it be of grace, how
can it be of justice? that which is of grace is freely done, and might justly
have been otherwise; that which is of justice, there is a necessary obligation
to the performance of it: and what more opposite? besides that which adds the
greater force to this argument is, that remission and satisfaction are
altogether inconsistent. A man cannot be said to forgive that debt which he is
fully paid; so that plenary satisfaction, leaves no place for remission.

To remove this doubt, you must know that things in their own nature opposite,
may according to different respects concur to the same work, and therefore
forgiveness of sin may be an act both of mercy and justice in a several
reference. In respect of us, it is an act of mercy, mere mercy, and therefore
we are said by St. Paul to be justified freely: in respect of Christ, it is an
act of justice, and therefore he is said by the same Apostle in the same place,
Romans 3.24.25. Vide Orig. T^let. in Romans
to set forth Christ a propitiation to declare his righteousness. In these
different considerations it is, that remission and satisfaction are consistent,
inasmuch as the satisfaction was by Christ, not us, and the remission is to us,
not Christ.

For the further clearing of this answer, be pleased to observe, that

1. This satisfaction was neither performed nor procured by us: we did not,
could not do it our selves* we did not desire, could not obtain it at the hands
of Christ; it was no other then God himself: the injured person who provided,
and that no other then his own Son to perform this work: if a creditor should
of his own good will appoint his Son to pay the debt, might he not be said to
forgive the debtor? and would it not be interpreted an act of benignity? though
therefore God sent his Son to satisfy for our sins, yet he is truly said to
remit it to us; and though upon satisfaction, it is an act of justice, yet it
was mercy which afforded the way and means of accomplishing this satisfaction.

2. This satisfaction, though tendered by Christ, might not have been accepted
by God; to this purpose it is which Grotius excellently observes, G^^t. d^
sa^is^act.
that one man be discharged by the punishment of another, there must intervene
an act of the supreme Governor, and that no other then an act of grace: for
the law requ^reth that the punishment should be infl^cted on the person
offending, and accordingly just^ce might exact the penalty from the person
himself: so that notwithstanding satisfaction be made by another, yet there
must be a gracious act, which in respect of the law is relaxation, and of the
offend^r remission. That therefore God is pleased to accept from Christ what he
might in justice have required of us, is from no other cause then his gracious
clemency, and in this respect it is, that the case between God and a sinner is
not like that between a creditor and a debtor: but a King and a malefactor;
because if the debt be paid, whether by the debtor or the surety, it matters
not: nor can the creditor receiving the debt, from whomsoever it be, if upon
the debtors account, be said to forgive him his debt, whereas the malefactor is
bound by the law to suffer in his own person, and therefore the King accepting
another in his stead, is truly said to pardon him, as dispensing with that
which his law in the rigor of it did requir^.

To sum it up, Remission and satisfaction are not repugnant, when that
satisfaction is accepted which might have been refused, and when the person who
receives the benefit, is no way contributory to the performing of it; now both
these are manifest in Christ's satisfaction: for that which we do (and not that
neither of our selves, but by Gods grace) is only to the applying, not at all
to the performing of this satisfaction; and though Christ's satisfaction was so
full, that it could not be excepted against, as to the aequivalency, nay,
redundancy of its value; yet God might not have accepted of it in our behalf,
had he not so decreed of his mere goodness. By all which it appears, that
there is a sweet contemperation of justice and mercy in this work; so that we
may truly say in the remission of our sins; Psalm. 85.1^.
righteousness and peace meet together, and kiss each other; whilst justice
has satisfaction in the punishment of the offense, and mercy shows it self
by appointing Christ to make this satisfaction, and accepting of it in the
sinners behalf, whereby he is as to himself, freely and graciously, as to
Christ, justly and righteously remitted.

And surely this being well considered, every crevis will be stopped, at which
despair might creep in. When a sinner is sensible of sins, there is nothing
more affrighteth him then the meditation of Gods justice; but see, Christ
having made satisfaction, that justice which was before a cause of fear,
becomes a support of our hope, and when tha^ which only could discourage us,
is a ground of comfort; what can terrify us? If then at any time upon
remembrance of the guilt of sin we begin to faint, considering that God is just
to hate and punish sin committed, let us upon remembrance of Christ's
satisfaction, which God has accepted in behalf of all believing and penitent
sinners, be established and quieted in our minds, considering that God is just
to forgive sin confessed. Indeed the debt being paid by Christ, Gods very
Justice, (as I may say with reverence) would trouble him, if he should not give
in the bond, and give out an acquittance. The pardon of believers sins is as it
were the wages of his obedience, a legacy he bequeathed at his death, yea the
end of shedding his blood, so that as the wages of an hireling detained, the
Will of one that is dead (having left wherewithal to satisfy) unperformed,
yea, the blood of one suffering in another s^ead, if that party should
notwithstanding be executed* must needs cry, and that aloud for justice; which
is hereby very much violated. So would Christ's death, and that even against God
himself, if he should not grant a pardon to them that beleevingly and
penitently confess. Go then thou burdened sinner to God with boldness, and in
an humble confidence sue out thy pardon, not only at the throne of grace, but
the bar of Justice, in these or the like expressions, Lord, thou have pun^shed
my sins in thy Son, will thou punish them in me? Thou have accepted that
suffering of thy Son as the punishment of my sin, and therefore thou can not
in just^ce exact it of me, for this were to punish twice for one offense, which
thy justice cannot but abhor.

To close up with a needful admonition, very fit to be annexed to this ample
consolation; that the dogs may not eat the childrens bread. As God is faithful
and just to forgive the sins of those that confess them, and to cleanse them
from all unrighteousness; so he is no less faithful and just to punish their
sins who conceal and continue therein, and condemn them for all their
unrighteousness. God (beloved) has denounced as many severe threats against
the impenitent, as he has pronounced comfortable promises to the penitent; and
his faithfulness no less strongly binds him to perform the one, then the
other; Christ has satisfied Gods justice for the sins of penitent confessors,
in which respect it is just with God to forgive them, but he has not satisfied
for impenitent committers in which respect it is just with God to punish them
in their own persons for their iniquities: and therefore let the one tremble,
whilst the other rejoice in these divine attributes of justice and fidelity.

And thus through Gods assistance I have finished the first Chapter, of this
first Epistle, wherein you have heard Christ's divinity and humanity
illustrated, the Gospels excellency and certainty demonstrated, hypocrisy
detected, piety encouraged, arrogance confuted, and repentance comforted: ^
Tim. 3.1^.
so that what St. Paul says of the whole Scripture, I may justly apply to this
Chapter, It is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for Correction, and for
instruction in righteousness; for doctrine, in the great mystery of the
Gospel, for reproof of licentious christians, for correction of arrogant
justiciaries, and for instruction in righteousness, by teaching us to confess
our sins, and walk in the light.

I have nothing further to add, but only my prayers for you, and desire of
your prayers for me; mine for you, that this Chapter which is profitable in it
self, may become so to you, by the mingling of faith and obedience, with the
reading, hearing, and meditating on it; yours for me, that I may through Gods
providence, continuing my health, and his spirits assistance enlightening my
mind, be enabled to proceed in handling the subsequent Chapters, so as may be
to his glory, my comfort, and your profit, Amen.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN. SERMON. 19.

CHAP. II. Ver. 1.2. My little children, th^se things write I unto you that ye
sin not; and if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous.

And he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for
the sins of the whole world.


WHat a disease is in the body, that sin is in the soul; nor are mali humores,
ill humors more pernicious to the one, then mali mores, bad manners are to the
other: and indeed these are as more, so far more dangerous then those, by how
much the part affected is more noble. In this respect they who are appointed to
watch over the peoples souls, are not unfitly called spiritual Physicians; and
as Luke a Physician of bodies was one of the Evangelists, so all the
Evangelists, Apostles, and all Ministers are Physicians of souls.

Upon this account we find this holy Apostle as in this whole Epistle, so in
these verses performing the part of a careful and skilful Physician: Morbi
perniciosi^res plures. que sunt animi quam corporis. Cic. 3. Tusc.
for whereas the whole body of Physic is divided into two parts; namely,
(...), and (...), the one whereof is for preventing, and the other for curing
diseases; here we have this ghostly Physician prescribing to his Patients (whom
he calls little children) in both these kinds, giving them a preservative to
keep them from sin; and a restorative in case of falling into sin: My little
children, these things I write unto you that you sin not, and if any man sin,
etc.

Pertinet capitis hujus initium ad finem (...), Ma^l^r. in loc. Vide Ill^r.
ibid.
These two verses might very well have been annexed to the foregoing Chapter,
because the matter of them is pertinent to, yea depends upon that which
immediately precedeth, as Marlorate, and Illyricus have both truly observed;
for whereas in the end of the former Chapter, the Apostle insisteth upon three
things, remission of sins, as being the foundation of fellowship with God,
confession of sin, as being the first step of walking in the light, and saying
we have no sin, which being opposite to confession, is a step of walking in
darkness, our Apostle in these verses does but further amplify, explain, and
confirm these several parts; letting us know that the confession of sin he
speaks of, is such as puts on not sinning, and yet we cannot so not sin, as
to say we have no sin, and that the comfort of our remission depends upon
Christ's Advocateship, and propitiation.

In the words we have two generals considerable, namely,

A caveat entered, which requires care against sin in those words, My little
children, these things I write unto you that you sin not.

A comfort annexed which discovers the cure of sin in the following words,
and if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for our sins only,
but the sins of the whole world.

In the Caveat we have observable,

A friendly compellation, my little children.

A faithful admonition, these things I write to you that you sin not.

In the comfort we have considerable,

A disease or danger supposed, if any man sin.

A remedy or succor proposed, we have an advocate, etc. and he is the
propitiation for our sins, etc.

At this time only of the first general, and therein begin we with the

Friendly compellation, my little children. These three words in the English,
are but two in the Greek; and accordingly we may observe a word of Declaration,
who they were, little children. Appropriation, whose they were, My little
children.


1. He calls them little children, and that not once, but often, very often in
this Epistle, and here, yea not, only here, but in the most places he so
styles them upon a double ground.

1. Because though not in a carnal, yet spiritual way; they were little
children: what the Proverb says of old men, is true of all good men, they are
twice children, by Generation, and Regeneration, as when they first partake of
the humane, so when they participate divine nature, they become little children.

2. Because being regenerate, they were to be as children; our blessed Savior
puts these two together, Matthew. 18.3. 1 Pet. 1.23.2.2. Vide Hilar. in Matthew.
Amat Deus infantiam humilitatis magistram innocentiae regulam, etc. Leo.
except ye be converted and become as little children, intimating that all
converted persons become such, and St. Peter calls upon those who were born
again, to be as new born babes; indeed in little children are the shadows of
many graces and virtues, which are really found in the regenerate. Little
children cry after the dug, an image of spiritual thirst after the word, are
solicitous for nothing, a lesson of dependence upon divine providence, are
content with a little, a document of temperance; lie upon the ground, a shadow
of humility; give willingly of their meat to their play-fellows, a
representation of liberality; have no fraud nor deceit in them; an emblem of
sincerity, bear no malice, are soon pacified, a dictate of placability and
charity; are harmless and inoffensive; a monitor of innocence. It were easy
to multiply parallels in this kind; and truly inasmuch as little children put
us in mind of these duties, and thereby of avoiding the contrary sins of pride,
covetousness, injuriousnesse, guile, malice, wrath, disobedience, contempt of
Gods word, hypocrisy, and all uncharitableness; our Apostle here intending to
dissuade from sin in general, which includes all these particulars, fitly
bespeaks them in this phrase, little children.

2. It is further observable, that he calls them my little children, and this
both in respect of a real (though spiritual) relation, and also by way of a
metaphorical, yet apt allusion.

1. My little children, in real relation, God having no doubt made him an
instrument of converting many of them to, and strenghthening all of them in the
says; this spiritual affinity have all true christians to their Ministers.
Indeed primarily they are Gods children, being (as the phrase is frequent in
this Epistle) born of God; in this respect it is that St. James says, Of his
own good will begat he us, and St. Peter blesses the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, for begetting us again; and thus indeed Ministers as well as
people (if believers) are Gods children. But still secondarily, the people are
the Ministers children; for whereas God is the principal* they are the
instrumental causes of forming Christ in the hearts of their auditory, and as
the instruments of their natural being do, so no less justly the instruments
of our spiritual being, may call us their children.

To clear this a little further, you may please to consider that the word of
truth is the means whereby we are begotten to a spiritual, and nourished to
eternal life; in which respect S. Peter compares it both to seed and to milk,
the seed by which we are born again, 1 Pet. 1.23.2.2. Vide Cl. Al poedag. l. ^.
c. 6.
and the milk by which being born we are fed; now the preaching of this word is
committed to the Ministers of Christ, and they are sent and appointed by God
for this end, to publish the doctrine of salvation to men, no wonder if St.
Paul writing to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4* 15. Gal* 4 19. 1 T^es. 2.7.
resembles himself to a Father; and tells them, I have begotten you in Christ
Jesus through the Gospel, to the Galathians, compares himself to the Mother,
and using this phrase of the Text, my little children; gives this as the
reason, of whom I travail in birth again till Christ be formed in you: and to
the Thessalonians likeneth himself to a nurse that cherishes her children.
Thus Ministers are Fathers and Mothers to those who are converted, and so as it
were begotten and brought forth, and nurses to them who are confirmed, and it
were so as educated and brought up by their labors. Upon this ground it was
that Paulinus writing to Delphiuns, Paulin. ep. 15.
by whom he was baptized and instituted in christian doctrine, says to him, Tu
nobis a Dom^no, and in Domino Pater factus, you are under, and in God, a Father
to me.

And (oh beloved) that every soul in this congregation might be able to say of
me, my Father; oh that I might be able to say of you, my children; why? tell me
why do you enforce us to complain with the Prophet, we labor in vain, and
spend our strength for naught? when, oh when will you by receiving this
caelestial seed, Is. 49.2.
make us joyful Fathers and Mothers? surely what Abraham in another case said
to God, What will thou give me, seeing I go childlesse, that we say to you in
this, Genesis 15.2.
what will you give us? reverence, maintenance, I but all this is nothing, if
we go childlesse; 14.21.
our desire is (like that of the King of Sodom to Abraham) give us your souls,
that we may give them to God, and as Isaiah prophesies concerning the Messiah,
He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: so this is
our prayer to God, and desire of you, that we may see the travail of our
souls in the conversion of yours; Is. 53.11.
then, and not till then shall we be satisfied. Oh that you would do us this
honor, afford us this comfort by your spiritual birth, and growth under our
ministry, that we may be able upon this real ground to call you, as here St.
John did those to whom he wrote, My little children.

But further, we may conceive, our Apostle using this appellation by way of
allusion, thereby to teach them, Implicitly, how they ought to look upon him,
to wit, as a Father. Explicitly, how he did look upon them as his children.


1. By calling them his children, he teaches them to look upon him as their
Father, and not only in respect of his age, (for so old men are styled by the
younger, but his office (for so superiors are called by inferiors) and
accordingly behave themselves as children; in his second and third Epistles, he
gives himself the title of an Elder, being an Elder he was a Ruler, and
therefore to be owned as their Father. 2 Kings 5.13.2.12.
Naaman being a Ruler in Syria, is called by his servant, My Father. Elijah
being a Prophet in Israel is called by Elishah my Father. Micah said to the
Levite, Thou shall be a Father and a Priest to me, and surely St. John being an
Elder, Judge. 17.10.
nay more then so, an Apostle, ought to be accounted by them as their Father.
Thus tacit dignitatem suam ind^cat, says one upon these words, here is a
tacit insinuation of his dignity and the authority he had over them, J^stin.
in loc.
whereby they might be minded of their duty, and that both toward him and his
writings.

1. Toward him, a duty of reverence, filio semper honesta and sancta persona
patris videri debet, says the Civil law, the person of the Father ought to be
venerable in the sons eye, when Alexander was asked why he did so highly
respect Antipater? answered, because he was (...) instead of a Father to him;
upon this account it is, Mal. 1.6.
that Ministers may expect, and the people ought to give them a filial respect.
It is Gods argument to the Priests that despise his name, a Son honors his
Father, if then I be a Father, where is mine honor says the Lord of Hosts, it
may be the Priests argument to the people that despise their persons, If we be
your Fathers, where is our honor?

2. Toward his writings, a duty of obedience, Hear ye children the instruction
of a Father says Solomon, Prove. 4.1.
indeed whose instruction should children hear, if not their Fathers? so that
our Apostle in calling them his children, intimates what an obligation lay
upon them of conformity to his writings, and following those Counsels which
were thereby given to them.

2. But lastly, by calling them his little children, he expresses how he
lo^keth upon them, to wit, with most endeared affections.

1. He declares his love and care of them, in that he calls them his
children. He lets them see that it was no less then a paternal and maternal
love which he did bear to them, Father, says Tertullian, Tertul. de ^rat. c.
2. Eurip.
is not only appellatio potestatis, but pietatatis, a word of power but of
love, (...) said the Poe^. All living creatures love their young ones, love
many times does not ascend from children to parents, but it usually descends
from parents to children; such an affection had S. John to those to whom he
wrote.

2. And yet further, Joh. 13.33. Non ex su^^psius magnificati ne, sed
charita^is magnitudine. Cartha^. in loc.
he sets forth the dearnesse of his love in that he calls them his little
children, it was the language of his loving Master to his disciples, and he
learned it of him as being full of sweetness. Indeed sometimes diminutives are
words of contempt, and scorn but sometimes of tender respect, and no doubt this
was the reason of our Apostles using this d^minutive, not out of a supercilious
contempt, but an affectionate esteem of them. Clemens Alexandrinus has
observed that all little things are most regarded and delighted in. Vide Lorin.
ibid. Cl. Al poedag. l. 1. c. 5 Genesis 33.13. Filii diliguntur at filioli tenere
amantur. Tol. in Joh. Is. 42.17. Summi amoris Gualt. in loc. Patenter indicat
charitatem Justin. ibid.
There is in us a kind of sympathy with, and care of little things. It was
Jacobs phrase to Esau, that he must have regard to the tender children, and
young cattle in his journey. Besides parents though they love all, yet
especially their little children, let the other shift for themselves, but their
little ones they will be sure to take care of; can a woman forget her sucking
child? is the question of God himself, the sucking little babes are carried in
the arms, dandled on the knee, fed at the breast, and though the mother may
love her ^lder children, as truly, yet not so tenderly; no wonder if
interpreters conceive this expression as a word of greatest love, and
manifesting his singular care of their good.

Thus he who was the beloved disciple, shows himself a loving pastor, and as
he was dearly beloved of his Master, so his flock was dearly beloved of him,
nor was this only the temper of S. John spirit, but of the rest of the
Apostles, 2 Cor. 12.15. Phil. 1.5.
especially S. Paul who therefore tells the Corinthians, how gladly he would
spend, and be spent for them, calls God to record how earnestly he longed after
the Philippians in the bowels of Jesus Christ. Indeed to all to whom he wrote
he still expresses his entire affection, one of those titles which the holy
Apostles use in their Epistles is (...) which the vulgar renders and not
unfitly, Charissimi, and our translation dearly beloved, nor are we to imagine
this a verbal complement, but a real expression; as they called them, so they
accounted them their dearly beloved. We read concerning Aaron, that he was to
bear the names of the children of Israel in the breast plate of judgment upon
his heart, so did those holy Apostles in a mystical sense; nay, S. Paul says
of the Corinthians, Exodus 28.29. 2 Cor. 3.2.
that they were an Epistle written in his heart.

Let the same mind be in all Ministers toward their people, that was in St.
John and the other Apostles, Non minus vos diligo quos genui ex Evangelio, quam
si suscepissem conjug^o, said St. Ambrose. I love you no less whom I have
begotten by the Gospel, then if I had begotten you in matrimonial conjunction,
pro officio sacerdotis omnes christianos filiorum loco diligimus, says St.
Jerome, Ambros. de offic. l. 1. c. 5. Hier. ep. 9.
we love all christians as our children, and this we do by reason of our
office, which obliges us to it, and if all, much more those over whom divine
providence has placed us, and let our love show it self to be a parental love
by the purity, vehemence, and activity of it, that as parents love their little
children not for their own, but the childrens sake, with a great measure of
affection, not sparing any cost, pains for their good: so let us love our
people, not theirs, but them, not coldly, but fervently, not lazily, but
diligently watching, fasting, praying, preaching, and every way endeavoring
their spiritual good.

To end this first particular. It is not unworthy our observation and
imitation, that this holy Apostle being to press upon them a duty first
expresses his affection; and the better to make way for his counsels, coucheth
them as it were in sweet and pleasing language, Vide Est. Fer. in loc.
verbis non duris, sed ad admodum blandis utitur ut eo facilius persuadeat: he
uses not harsh and rough, but sweet and soft words; he well knew that the
Sunbeams, have a greater influence then the boisterous winds, and those whom
sincecerity, hardness, meekness softneth. He well knew that if he could
persuade the people of his love to them, he should the better gain their
observance of his advice; since that cannot but be be well taken, which
appears to be spoken in love. For this reason it is, that this and other such
compellations, as brethren and beloved, are frequently made use of by the
Apostle; yea, that we find them so often entreating, beseeching, persuading
that by their gentle expressions they might win upon those to whom they wrote.
My doctrine (said Moses) shall drop as the rain, Deuteronomy. 32.2.
my speech shall distill as the dew (to wit in a mild and gentle manner) and
indeed so it did; for like a tender nurse he sings to the froward child,
reproving Isreal's ingratitude in a song. Thus you see how as God did once to
Elijah so the men of God to the people have for the most part come in the still
voice; and surely it becomes well all Gods Ministers to write after these
coppies, and to endeavor, that by affectionate expressions and alluring
phrases, they may prevail with those to whom they preach. Indeed since we are
Messengers of the word of truth, we must abhor lying flattery, but withal,
since we are Ambassadors of the Gospel of peace, we must use persuading
lenity, and bespeak the people in the most loving, insinuating phrases, as here
we see St. John* did, calling them my little children. And let this suffice to
have been spoken of the friendly compellation, which seems very fitly to make
way for the

Faithful admonition. These things I write to you th^^ you sin not, Part. 2.
wherein there are two particulars further to be taken notice of.

The matter of the admonition in these words, that you sin not.

The motive enforcing it as the end of what he wrote in those words, these
things I write unto you.

1. Begin we with the matter of the admonition which is not to sin. That I may
the better illustrate what is the true and full meaning of these words, I shall
entreat you to observe these ensuing particulars, and those, such as the
comparing of this clause with the three last verses of the former Chapter
manifestly prompts to

1. In the end of the preceding Chapter, our Apostle tells those who say they
have not sinned, that they make God a liar, by which it appears that this, sin
not, is to be understood de futuro, in reference to time to come; as if he
should say, though you have sinned heretofore, yet sin not, that is, abstain
from sin hereafter, and thus this admonition is the same with that of God by
the Prophet Isay, cease to do evil. by the Prophet Ezechiel, Isay 1.16. Ezech.
18.31 Joh. 5.14.8.11.
cast away all your transgressions, and of Christ to the impotent man whom he
had healed, and to the woman which was charged with adultery, sin no more. It
was one of the prohibitions given to the Nazarites, that they should not drink
vinegar; but what need of this, Numb* 6 3. Acetum bibunt qui post vitae
sanctitatem in ve^ustatem praeteritorum vitiorum labuntur and corruptione
veteris nequitiae delectant^r Rab. Number. 16.37.
when as the sharpness of the liquor is enough to disswad^ from drinking it;
the literal reason whereof was no doubt, because it came of the wine and strong
drink, but Rabbanus makes a moral application of it apt to our present
purpose, where he says, they drink vinegar who return to the oldnesse of their
past sins, of which every spiritual Nazarite must beware. It is not unfitly
observed to this purpose by Mendoza, concerning Gods command of turning the
rebels censers into broad plates, which were fastened to the altar for a
covering, that this might he one reason, that those censors might no more ^e
employed in that sacrilegious way; for whereas had the censors rema^ned, and
not been beaten into plates, or if beaten and not fastened on the Altar, they
might have been easily again abused; now they remained as memorials of their
sins, and yet no way was left for misimploying them afterward, and surely what
should this but teach us how solicitous and careful we should be, though we
have done iniquity, to do so no more, and though We have sinned, yet not to sin
hereafter.

2. But further in the ninth verse, of the former Chapter, he advises
confession of sin, and here he adds, sin not, as if he would say, as you
confess your sins past, so sin not for time to come; indeed this is both the
truest and the safest, the most real, and the most comfortable part of
repentance, wash you, make you clean says God by the Prophet, Is. 1.15. Au^.
de Temp. Sermon. 6^.
he washes and is clean, says St. Austin, qui praeterita plangit and iterum
non admittit, who bewaileth sin committed, and does not commit sin bewailed.
Our confessions our prayers, our tears, our purposes may be hypocritical; it is
our actual forsaking of sin, which evidenceth the truth of all the rest. True
repentance does not only decline the Accusative case by acknowledging sin,
Poenitentia non s^lum vulnus praeteritum sanat, sed and ultra animam non sinit
peccato vulnerari. Orig. him. 8. in Number.
and the Vocative by calling upon God for pardon, but the Ablative by putting
sin away, and thus (according to Origens phrase) as it heals those wounds
that have been made, so it takes care that the soul be not wounded again.
Indeed this is the great mistake of very many, they content themselves with a
general confessing sin, and formal asking of pardon, and still they add sin
unto sin, but alas this is only fingere, not agere poenitentiam, to pretend,
not practice penitence; optima poenitentia vita nova, the repentance of the
life, by dying to sin is the very l^fe of repentance.

3. Lastly, In the eighth verse of the former Chapter, our Apostle says, if we
(in which number he include^ himself, and consequently the holiest men) say we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and yet here he writes to them not to sin;
two clauses which seem irreconcilable, but may be solved up by a double answer.

Either thus sin not, that is, endeavor that you may not sin at all hereafter;
though this cannot be the event, let it be your intent, the success, let it be
your design, in execution, let it be in intention; sin not (says Bid) that
is, let us take heed how we add to the frailty of our flesh by our neglect,
and therefore let us strive to the utmost we can, that we may be free from all
sin, Vide B^d. Calv. in lo^.
and to this purpose is Calvin's gl^sse, when he says, by not sinning he
means, that as far as humane weakness will permit, we should abstain from
all sin.

2. Or thus, sin not, that is, be sure you sin not de futuro, again, as you did
de preterito; in the days of your unregeneracy; as if he would say though you
cannot but sin still, yet sin not so as you did before.

To enlarge this in a double reference.

1. Quoad genus, not in the same kind. Sin not, that is, beware of those gross
sins, scarlet iniquities, in which before you lived. And thus, though it is
possible a regenerate person may commit some great sin, in which he formerly
wallowed, yet it is not impossible for him wholly to avoid sins of that nature;
nay, this is that which God expects and requires of us, that though our
garment will be spotted, yet it may not be rent in pieces; and though we cannot
be without failings, yet that we should be without scandalous falls.

2. Quoad modum, not in the same manner as before you did, not with that
fullness of deliberation, freeness of consent, strength of resolution,
frequency of action, which you sinned with in times past. We cannot but sin,
but we must not delight in, give up, accustom our selves to the commission of
sin, it was David's prayer, keep back thy servant from presumptuous sin, and it
is every good man's practice, Psalm. 19.12.
to keep himself by Gods grace from sinning presumptuously. And thus much shall
serve to be spoken of the matter.

Proceed we now to the motive, enforcing this admonition, Part. ^.
and that is because this was the end of his writing these things.

The prosecution of this lies in the various reference of the (...), these
things here spoken of. Indeed we may very well understand it both in a general,
and a particular reference.

1 It may have a general respect to the whole Epistle, and so we are to take
notice of one principal end why he wrote this Epistle, that he might take them
off from their sins. And thus here is intimated both finis scribentis; and
finis Scripturae, the end of the writer, and the end of the writing; and that
one and the same their not sinning.

1. I write these things that you sin not, that was his aim and scope in his
writing, nor was it only his, but that which all the men of God in all their
writings and preachings aimed at, and therefore you still find them harping
upon that string, repent; and shooting their forked arrows at sin. Ier. 23.14.
Ezech. 13.18.
Indeed the false Prophets, as God complains by Jeremy, did strengthen the
hands of evil doers, but the true Prophets endeavor was to restrain them, the
false Prophets as Ezechiels phrase is, did sow pillowes under their arm-holes,
but the true plucked them away. Go up and prosper was the voice of the lying
Prophets to Ahab, If thou return in peace, the Lord has not spoken by me says
Micaiah, 1 King. 2^.12.28.
flattering Ministers lull the people asleep, but faithful ones awaken them
out of their sins: oh let us herein approve our selves sincere by striking at,
and laboring to beat down sin in all our discourses.

Tota doctrina huc spectat, etc. Zanch. in loc.
2. These things I write unto you that you sin not, this was the end of all that
he wrote, nor is it only the end of his, but all the writings of the Apostles
and Prophets, so that the whole Scripture is given us among others for this
end, that we might not sin. If we look into holy writ; we shall find precepts,
reproofs, threatenings, promises, hystories; and sin not, is that to which they
all tend. The precepts are clear as glasses to discover sin. The reproofs as
faithful monitors to mind us of sin. The Threats as strong cords to bind us
from sin. The promises as gentle antidotes against sin, and The Histories as
memorable monuments of the sad effects of sin. To this purpose it is, that Gods
word is compared to a fire, which purges away the dross: to water which
cleanses away the filth, Ier. 23.^9. Revel. 22^17. Hebr, 4.13.
and to a sword with a double edge; the one whereof is to cut the heart of a
sinner for sin, and the other to cut sin in the heart of a sinner.

Oh my brethren, as these things are written by those sacred penmen, so let
them be read, heard, pondered, and observed by us for this end, that we may not
sin. These things are written in Gods book that we may not; and if these
things be written in our hearts, we shall not err. The Psalmist proposes it
to young men, and in them to all men as an excellent help against sin, Psal^
119.9.
wherewith shall a young man cleanse his ways? by taking heed thereto,
according to thy word; and presently after he sets down a probatum est, from
his own practice and experience, I have hid thy word in my heart, that I might
not sin against thee. Ver. 11.
When therefore we are to encounter with any sin, let us go to the brook of
holy writ, and thence choose out five smooth stones, a precept, a reproof, a
threat, a promise* an history; put we them in the scrip of our hearts. Let us
throw them with the sling of faith, against the forehead of Goliath; our lust
whatsoever it be, so shall we be enabled to overcome; for these things are
written that we sin not.

Besides thls general, there may be a more particular reference of this (...),
these things to the things which precede in the end of the former, and
immediately follow in this Chapter. For whereas he had in the foregoing verses;
delivered the doctrines of an impossibility of being without sin, of a
possibility of pardon of sin, and that upon confession, and besides, he was
presently to mention the comfortable doctrines of Christ's interceding to God
for us, Vide Fer. Na^g^rg. in loc.
and reonciling us to G^d, well knowing how apt men are, and how ready they
would be to make these doctrines encouragements to sin; he thought it necessary
that this caveat should be put after the one, and set before the other; whereby
the misconstruction and misapplication of these precious truths, might be
prevented, and according to this reference here is something employed, something
expressed. That these things which were written, would be perverted by some for
the encouragement of themselves and others in sin. That these very things which
would be so perverted, were written by him, that they should not sin.


1. Our Apostle no doubt foresaw how these things which he wrote, would be
abused, and therefore thought this caveat very needful; for how apt are men to
reason in this or the like manner. If we can never come to say we have no sin,
what need we care though we have sin? that which no man can avoid, why should
we go about to withstand? and thus from a necessity take to themselves a
liberty of sinning again.

Again, If God will forgive sin upon confession, what need we fear the
commission, if he is ready to forgive all sin, what need we care how many and
great sins we run into? we can confess as often as we offend, and God will
forgive as often as we conf^sse. Once more, If Christ will be an Advocate, and
propitiation, when we have sinned, why should our sins trouble us? There is a
plaster provided for our wounds, what need we fear to wound our selves? and
since Christ will free us from sin, let us sin freely.

Thus as the best of actions, so of expressions are subject to
misconstructions, nothing can be done so exactly, nor written so exquisitely,
but a wicked eye will pry, and censure, and slander; a vitiated stomach turns
all its meat into choler, a venomous spider sucketh poison out of the sweetest
flower, and men of corrupt minds will strengthen themselves in sin, from pure
and heavenly truth:; as they make the good gifts of God conferred on them, so
the good word of God published to them, fuel for their lust. St. Peter says of
many unlearned and unstable souls, that they wrest the Scriptures to their own
perdition; to wit, by making them patrons of error, no less do profane men
by making them fautors of sin; 2 Pet* 3.16.
and the metaphor there used is very emphatical, borrowed from the stretching
of men upon the rack, and as those who are racked, are ofttimes made to
confess what they never did, so these cause the Scriptures as it were to speak
what they never meant.

Oh let us take heed of learning this hellish sophistry, beware we of putting
foul glosses upon the fair Text; It is very ill to make a sinister
construction of our neighbors words, but far worse to misinterpret Gods
sayings, and we cannot more abuse these writings, then to make them speak any
thing which is either untrue, or impure.

And because it is that to which men are so prone, oh let Gods Ministers take
heed how they deliver these things too largely and loosely, without their due
caution; it is Ferus his note how wary S. John is in delivering the sweetest
doctrine of remission, and reconciliation by Christ, Vide Fer. in loc.
no less is S. Paul when he handles the doctrine of justification, and so
ought we in delivering those sweet Gospel verities so to propose them, as that
wicked men may not hereby take occasion to let loose the reins to all
licentiousness.

2. But further to prevent this m^stake, he plainly asserts that these very
things were written by him, that men might not sin. Those very doctrines which
wicked men abuse to countenance looseness, directly tend to persuade
strictness.

When the Apostle says we cannot be altogether without sin, what should that
teach us, but to be so much the more careful, and watchful, since we daily
gather filth, we had need to take the more pains in cleansing our selves. If I
cannot shoot fully home, when I have done my best, I had need draw the arrow as
far as I can, that I may come the nearer to the mark. Because my best knowledge
is mixed with some ignorance: have I not reason to study hard, that I may
attain the more knowledge? seeing do what we can we shall slip; is there not
cause of the more wariness that we may not fall, or at least not often? these
things if we say we have no sin, if we say we have not sinned, are written,
that we sin not.

Again, when the Apostle says if we confess our sins, God is faithful and
just to forgive; for what is this confession required, but that we might not
sin? the truth is, confession is required not so much in reference to sin past,
either to inform God of, or make him amends for it, but chiefly in reference to
sin for time to come, that hereby being the more sensible of the offense,
guilt, shame, and grief, attending, we may be both enraged and engaged against
it; he that by confession condemns himself for his sin, is thereby obliged
to condemn sin in himself, and the end of acknowledging our sins is, as that
the sinner may be absolved, so that the sin may be executed.

Once more when the Apostle says, God forgiveth and cleanses from all
unrighteousness, and Christ is our Advocate and propitiation for our sins;
these are sweet, yet strong arguments to dissuade from sin. Gospel Truths
favor the sinner, but not the sin; they reach forth an hand of succor to us,
but it is to pluck us out of the mire: they are a plaster not to skin, but
to heal the sores. Very apposite to this purpose is that of S. Paul, The grace
of God which brings salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us, that
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present world: 2 Tit. 11.12.
pardoning and reconciling love, cannot but 1. oblige to thankfulness, and it
were a very i^l requital for pardoning an old, to offer a new injury; Nos qui
credimus sanguine filii Del expiari peccata n^n possumus. non solicit a
peccato nobis cave^ Arnob. adv. gent. l. 7.
2. Excite, love, and love must needs make us careful not again to displease,
no wonder if Arnobius says We who believe that our sins are expiated by
Christ's blood, cannot but be ca^telous how we plunge our selves into the guilt
of sin again.

Oh let us study the purity of Evangelical doctrines, let us get spiritual
enlightened understandings, that we may judge aright of these truths. Having
these promises says Saint Paul, let us not defile, but cleanse our selves from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God:
then, 2 Cor. 7.1.
and not till then, are Gospel-verities rightly understood and believed, when
we use them not only as cordials, to revive our drooping spirits, but as
purges, to expel our corrupt humors; for these things I write to you, (says
our Apostle here) that you sin not.

SERMON. 20.
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN.
CHAP. II. Ver. 1. Part. 2. And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.


PResumption and despair, are two destructive rocks, upon either of which, if
the ship of the soul dash, it is split in pieces; they are the two dangerous
praecipices upon which whosoever steps, sail^th headlong into hell. Finally,
these are the two deviating extremes from the golden mean, to which he that
turns, must needs perish.

Indeed one of these is the more common, to wit, that of presumption, in which
respect (alluding to that expression of Saul and David) we may say, 1 Samuel 18.
despair has slain its thousand, but presumption its ten thousand; yet though
the poison of the one be more spreading, the venom of the other is no less
endangering; yea both where they seize, are deadly: whilst presumption is an
enemy to pepentance, and despair to faith, that deceives with vain hopes of
mercy, this tormenteth with hellish fears of Justice: Finally, the one
hurrieth the soul on into sinful courses: and the other keeps the soul back
from laying held on spiritual comforts.

Good reason why the Scriptures afford us antidotes against both these poisons;
and here S. John like a skilful Pilot, a wise guide, a faithful friend, warns
those to whom he wrote of both these rocks, advising them that they should
neither go on presumptuously in their sins, nor yet mourn despairingly when
they had sinned. My little children, these things I mrite unto you, that you
sin not, and if any man sin, we have an advocate, etc.

Having dispatched the caveat, proceed we to the comfort, and therein begin
with the

1. Disease or danger supposed in those words. Part. 1.
And if any man sin. The right understanding of this clause, depends much upon
the genuine sense of the Verb, sin. To which end you may please to observe a
threefold signification of it in Scripture.

1. To sin, is as much at to live in sin, and so respects the general course of
a man's conversation; In this sense I conceive that of S. Paul to Timothy, is to
be understood Them that sin (that is, says Calvin, 1 Timothy 5.20. Calv. ibid.
qui dissoluti vivunt, who obstinately go on in sin) rebuke openly; for those
who sin, though grossly, at first, are to be rebuked privately, and upon
persisting openly. It is very observable to this purpose, how the Apostle uses
those two phrases as synonimous, continuing in sin, and sinning; Romans 9* 1.15.
for so he puts the question in the beginning of the sixth Chapter, what then?
shall we continue in sin? and afterward in the same Chapter, what then? shall
we sin?

2. To sin, is as much as to do some gross act of sin, and so respects
particular falls in the course of a man's life; in this sense Joseph makes
these two parallel phrases, doing great wickedness, and sinning against God.
Thus when Job says of his sons, Genesis 39.9. Job 1.5.2.20.
It may be they have s^nned; and where it is said of Job, in all this he sinned
not, and when the question is put concerning the blind man, who sinned? this
man or his parents? is to be interpreted of some gross and heinous offense.

3. To sin, is as much as to do any thing dissonant to that exact rule which
the law of God sets before us, and so referres to frailties and infirmities in
this sense (no doubt) is that assertion of the wise man to be construed; there
is no man that does good and sins not, If you ask which of these is here
meant, Eccles. 7.20.
I answer

1. The former of these acceptions is by no means here to be allowed. Christ is
not, will not be an advocate for them that continue in their sins; he says
himself expressly, I pray not for the world, to wit, lying in wickedness; the
world of unbeleevers: impenitent sinners have no interest in Christ's
intercession, and indeed it is very observable to this purpose, how our Apostle
phraseth this clause, so as that wilful sinners might have no hold of it. For,
observe 1. it is set down in conjunction with sin not, so much the particle
And, intimates, implying, that only those who make conscience of the caveat,
have a share in the comfort, and if any man sin, to wit, who endeavors not
to sin. 2. It is set down with an if, he says, not because we cannot but
sin, (though this, as you shall hear presently, is his meaning) but if any man
sin, as if he would intimate, that the sinning he speaks of, is not a
resolute, but a casual sinning; if any man sin, that is, if it happen that any
man sin, to wit, besides his bent and course. 3. It is not in the future tence,
if any man shall sin, lest that might be an encouragement to a man in future
indulging to his sins, no, but in the second Aorist, if any man sin, being only
intended to prevent despair in men when they have sinned, so that I must at
the entrance of this paradise, place a flaming sword to keep the tree of life,
whereby presumptuous sinners may not gather the fruit which grows upon it.
The bread of this Scripture is very nourishing, but it is not common, we must
not sin as much as we please, as long as we list, and think to put it on
Christ's score, to wallow in the mire, and expect his blood shall cleanse us, to
renew our provocations, and still find him our propitiation, multiply our
rebellions, and make use of him as an advocate to plead for us* no, let us not
deceive our selves, this si quis is not so large as to take in the^ that sin,
that is, serve sin, and live in it.

2. The second of these acceptions may warrantably be admited, as at least an
orthodoxe sense of these words, and so the verb sin in the former clause, and
this may be construed identically, or differently; either thus, I write these
things that you sin not, to wit, continue not in your sins, and if any man sin,
that is, having left, do fall into sin; and so the construction is diverse; or
thus, I write these things that you sin not, that is, take heed of gross sins,
and if any man sin, that is, happen to commit some gross act of sin, and so the
sense of the verb in both clauses is the same, and according to this
interpretation, here is manifestly implied a double possibility, the one of
regenerate persons falling into gross sins, and the other of obtaining pardon
for them.

1. According to this construction, the conditional particle ((...) if)
imports a possibility for them who are converted to fall, and that into a
gross sin. Indeed there is no sin so small which a convert does not abhor,
and yet there is scarce any sin so great, which he may not commit; it is true,
on the one hand it is possible for him to live without, but on the other, it is
as well possible for him to fall into, even a scandalous crime; doubtless what
has bin, may be, and therefore when we find in Scripture eminent Saints marked
with notorious spots, we may justly co^ceive them incident to any as well as
them. Whilst grace is defective. and temptations are strong, it is no wonder
if sometimes corruptions get the mastery, and we not only step aside, but fall
foulely; very needful in this respect are those counsels of S. Paul.

1. Brethren if a man be overtaken with a fault, ye that are spiritual, Gal.
6.1.
restore such an one in the sp^r^t of meekness, considering thy self, lest
thou also be tempted, ille hodi^, ego cras, was a devout saying of a good man,
he is fallen to day, and I may to morrow; and therefore if thou stand
whilst another falls, thankfully acknowledge thy Fathers goodness, but do
not proudly disdain thy brothers weakness, Again

1 Cor. 10^12.
2. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. He is a wicked
sinner who presumes on Gods mercy, and he is a proud Saint who presumes on
his own strength: whilst we are here, temptations will enter upon us, and we
may enter into temptation. When we have acted a sin, we may fear too much, if
it be such a fear as ends in horror and despair; but we cannot too much fear,
lest we should sin. Since as the former is flagellum, a scourge of the bad; so
the latter is fraenum, a bridle to the good: nor is there a better preservative
from, then the fear of falling.

But further it is well observed, that this expression, if any man sin, Zanch.
in loc.
is elliptica oration, an elliptick speech, and there is somewhat employed, which
may be thus supplied; let him not despair or cast away all hope of pardon, and
so we see that there is a possibility of pardon for such sins. It is the
erroneous opinion of the Novatians, that sins committed after Baptism are
unpardonable, and this chiefly grounded upon that of the author to the
Hebrews, where he asserts it impossible for them who fall away (after
enlightening and partaking of the holy Ghost) to be renewed again by
repentance; Heb. 6.3.4.
in answer to which (though some interpret (...), to be no more then (...)
expounding impossible by difficult yet) I conceive we are to understand the
falling away, not of a gross fall into a particular sin, but a malicious
Apostasy from the christian Religion, which crucifieth the Son of God afresh,
and puts him to open shame, as if he were an impostor and seducer, not the
worlds Redeemer; a sin which being always joined with impenitency, rendereth
renewing impossible (...) such persons. Notwithstanding which, Tertul. de (...).
there remains a possibility of pardon for particular sins, into which
baptized and regenerate persons fall, in which respect repentance is fitly
called by Tertullian, Secunda tabula post nausrag^um, a second plank for them,
who after they are bound for heaven, are shipwracked by the storm of some
violent temptation, and therefore though gross falls are to be matter of deep
humiliation, yet not of deadly desperation.

3. Lastly, the third which is the most comprehensive acception and proper
signification of the word is by some, and not improbably conceived to be the
most genuine construction of it in this place; Si quis fragilitate (...)
^^averit. Cajet. in loc. Si de infirmitate vita subrepserit pe^catum, etc. Aug.
in loc.
in this respect the conditional particle is as much as a causal, and aliquis
aequivalent to omnis, if any, that is, because ev^ry man sins. Indeed it
were to be desired that this supposition might never be a position, but
understanding it of infirmities, it not only may, but will be so long as we
live here, and therefore as Solomon having made an Hypo thesis, if they sin
against thee, presently adds a Parenthesis, 1 King. 8.46.
and that by way of an Epanorthosis (and there is no man that sins not) so
it might here be in like manner annexed; if any man sin, as who is there that
does not sin: this being (as has been heretofore proved) incident to the best
Saints. Indeed, time was, when there was a possibility of not sinning, to wit,
in the state of innocence: time shall be, when there shall be an impossibility
of sinning, namely in the state of glory: but in this present state of grace,
there is both a possibility of sinning grossly, and a necessity of sinning in
some degree.

These daily infirmities though they cannot be avoided, yet must be bewailed,
the burres of corruption which cleave to us, must prick us. These Canan^tes
which we cannot expel, must be thorns in our eyes, and pricks in our sides;
with David we must pray, Lord cleanse me from secret sins; Psalm. 19.12. Romans 7.
ult.
with Paul we must complain, Oh wretched man that I am, but yet though they be
our grief, they need not be our terror; matter of sorrow they ought to be, but
not of despair: ever remembering that there is balm in Gilead, a remedy
appointed for these unavoydable diseases, and so I am fallen on the

Part. 2.
Remedy proposed, we have an advocate, etc.

Before we enter upon the particulars, something would be observed in general,
and indeed it is well worthy our consideration, that the Apostle prescribing a
remedy for our sins, sends us to Christ as him in whom alone our comfort lies:
Aret. in loc.
extra nos, rapit nos, sath Aretius aptly; he takes us from our selves, that
he may fix us upon Christ: Indeed he requires, that if we sin, we should
confess our sins; but still we must have recourse to Christ as an advocate for
us, and a propitiation for our sins; he calls upon us before to walk in the
light, but withal minds us of the blood of Christ, as that which must cleanse
us; none more for repentance and holiness of life, then St. John, yet still he
would have us by faith rely on the efficacy of Christ's merits. The truth is, he
that relyeth on Christ, builds upon a rock, but he that rests on his own
performances; builds upon the sand and as on the one hand we must not think
to rest by faith on Christ, and neglect our duty; so on the other, we must so
perform our duty, as still by faith to rest on Christ. The truth is, our own
performances are so accompanied with defects, that they cannot afford full
consolation. We confess and pray, and repent, but alas these very duties need
an advocate; so that as Noah's dove found no rest for the sole of her foot till
she came to the Arc, no more can we find any hearts ease, souls rest, till we
come to Christ, and this be spoken in the general.

More particularly we may observe two ingredients in this remedy, namely,
Christ's intercession and reconciliation, the former in the end of the first,
and the latter in this second verse.

The first ingredient is Christ's intercession in those words, we have an
advocate with the Father, Part. ^.
Jesus Christ the right^ous, wherein there are two things observable, The
quality, what it is, we have an advocate. The efficacy, how prevalent it is in
respect of The person with whom, the Father. The person who, Jesus Christ the
righteous.



The first thing to be discussed, is the Quality of this Ingredient, and to
that end we must enquire what this means, that Christ is called an Advocate.

The more clearly to unfold this comfortable truth, I shall proceed by these
steps.

1. The Greek word (...) here used, Aret. in loc.
is attributed in Scripture both to Christ and the Spirit, but when it is
attributed to the spirit, it is rendered by comforter, when to Christ by
advocate, and not without reason, since the spirits work is to speak
comfortably to us, and Christ's to plead powerfully for us; indeed whenever
this title is given to the holy Ghost, it is either in respect of the world,
and then it notes his pleading for God with men by way of conviction, or in
respect of believers, Jo. 16.7.8.14 19. Romans 8.^8.
and then it notes his encouraging them in all their distresses, and enabling
them by strong groans, to plead with God for themselves, but when it is given
to Christ, it imports his taking our cause upon himself, and undertaking to
intercede with God in our behalf.

2. This will the better appear, if we consider that advocate is verbum
forense, a judicial word, so that look as in all such proceedings, there is the
guilty, the accuser, Morem and consuetudinem fori exprimit.
the Court, the Judge, and the Advocate; so is it here, Heaven is the Court,
man is the guilty, Satan the accuser. God is the Judge, and Christ the
Advocate, and look as the advocate appears in the Court before the Judge to
plead for the guilty against the accuser, so does Christ before God in heaven,
to answer whatsoever the devil can object against us.

3. But further, as Christ is here called an advocate, so is he elsewhere a
Judge; thus St. Peter says, that Christ commanded the Apostles to preach, Acts
10.42.
and testify that it is he whom God has ordained to be Judge of quick and
dead. Indeed both these in respect of different times, and his several offices
are aptly verified of him.

1. Now being ascended to heaven, he is an advocate; at the last day when he
descends from heaven, he shall be a Judge; how comfortable is this meditation
to believers, that he who is now their advocate, is hereafter to be their
Judge; and if he vouchsafe to plead for them at the bar, he shall certainly
pass sentence for them upon the Bench.

2. There is a twofold office which Christ undertaketh, in respect of which
these are truly attributed to him, Judex est Christus cum residet advocatus cum
assurgit. Ambros. in Psalm. 118. ^ct. 20. Maxim. in pentecost. him. 1.
the one Regal, and the other Sacerdotal, as King, he shall one day sit as a
Judge; as Priest he now stands as an advocate at Gods hand, by his Kingly power
he shall execute the one, but of his Priestly goodness he vouchsafes the
other: and thus whilst as a King, he can and will himself confer, yet as a
Priest, he obtains of the Father remission of our sins.

4. It is not unworthy our observation, that as Christ is here called by S.
John an advocate, 1 Timothy 2.5 Gualt. in loc.
so by S. Paul a Mediator, unus utriusque nominis sensus, says Gualter; the
sense of both is one and the same, but yet there is some difference to be
observed between them. Christ is a m^diator both in respect of his person and
office, both b^^cause he is a middle person, Isidor. Hiszal. orig. l. 3. c. ^.
and because he mediateth b^^tween God and man, whereas he is an advocate
only? respect of his office. Again he is a mediator in respect of all his
offices, an advocate only in respect of his Sacerdotal. Finally a mediator,
inasmuch as he does both deal with God for man, and with man for God; pacifying
God toward man, bringing man to God, obtaining favor with God for us, and
declaring Gods will to us, but an advocate only inasmuch as he intercedeth
with God, and pleads our cause in heaven. Mediator then, is as it were the
genus, and advocate the species; it being one part of his mediatorship, that he
is an advocate. Bez. in loc.
I shall end this with Bezaes distinction, who observes that Christ is called
a Judge in respect of our adversaries, a mediator in reference to God, and an
advocate in regard of us, judging our enemies, mediating with God, and pleading
for us.

5. We may not unfitly here distinguish between a patron and an advocate,
between a defender and an interceder; the one undertaketh to justify the fact,
Aug. ep. 55.
the other only to prevent the punishment of the fault. If any man sin; far
be it from Christ to be a patron, to defend the fault, but he is an advocate to
deprecate the guilt. In the end of the verse he is called Jesus Christ the
righteous, and therefore non nisi justam causam suscepit, he cannot maintain a
bad cause; but though he abhorres to plead for the sin, Serrar. in loc^
yet he will for the sinner, and though he dare not excuse the commission, yet
he intercedes for the remission of the offense.

6. Lastly, when Christ is said as an advocate, to intercede, we are not to
fancy a supplicating voice, Non supplicium moro Calv. Est. Vide Naz. orat. 4
de Theol. Heb. 9.24.
and bended knees; no, it suiteth not with the Majesty of Christ in heaven. But
that which Christ does as an advocate, is (according to the Apostolical phrase)
his appearing for us in that celestial Court, as an Advocate does for his
Clyent in humane Iudicatories. To open this more fully, be pleased to know that
the advocateship of Christ consists in a fourefold presentation.

1. Of his person in both natures divine and humane, his and ours as our
Sponsor and Mediator, in this respect he lives in heaven, Heb 7.21.
says the Apostle, to make intercession, as he lived on earth to dye, so he
lives in heaven to intercede for us, presenting himself as one that has made
satisfaction for our offenses: hence it is, that there is not only a
ptesentation of himself, but

2. Of his merit, as the High Priest entered into that holy of holies, with the
blood of the sacrifice, so is Christ entered with his own blood, and as there
was once for all an oblation of it upon the Cross, so there is a continual
presentation of it in heaven; He^. 12.^4.
in this respect his blood is said to speak better things then Abels: for
whereas Abels blood did from the earth imprecate, Christ's in heaven deprecates
vengeance: indeed quot vulnera, tot ora, how many wounds, so many mouths to
plead for sinners, thus action is the best part of this Orator, who
intercedeth by showing his wounds, his pierced hands and feet, his opened side,
his bruised body. As a Mother entreating her son opens her dugs and breast,
so this Son interceding with his Father, Vide Greg l. 6 ep. 25. Ambros. in Ps.
118 oct. 20. Aug. in P. 25.
presents his blood and his wounds. When AEchylus the tragedian was accused,
his brother Amyntas coming into the Court, opened his garments, showed them
cubitum sine manu, an arm without an hand lost in their service, by which he
obtained his brothers discharge; So does Christ for us, by showing to the
Father as once he did to Thomas, his wounds, and his side: in which respect
Calvin says well, that Christ's intercession is nothing else but a perpetual
application of his death; Calv. in loc.
though yet withal we must conceive, that in Christ's Advocateship, there is
not only a presentation of his person and merits, but

3. Of his will and desire in our behalf, Christ interceding by the virtue of
his blood, does not beg in a precarious way, but yet he signifies his will;
and if you would know what his will is, I answer it is; That the pardon which
his blood has merited, may be granted and assured to, That the spirit which
his death has purchased, may be given for the strengthening of, That the
salvation which by his sufferings he has wrought, may in due time be conferred
on all his members: besides all which, this Advocate makes a presentation.

4. Of our prayers and supplications which we make in behalf of our selves and
others, and the prayers of the Church which she makes in our behalf. Preces
sacrificii sui odore sanctificat, says Calvin, Call. in loc.
he perfumes our prayers with the odor of his sacrifice, and so presents them
to his Father; in this respect he is as it were the Master of requests, Revel.
8.3. Ephesians. 3.12. Joh. 16 23.
and the angel (in the revelation) with the golden censer, and we are said to
have boldness of access through him, and he assured his disciples that
whatsoever they did ask in his name, should be given them.

I end this first part. Leu. ib.
Lapide observes that an advocate appearing in the behalf of guilty persons,
is to do three things. To allege what may satisfy the law, and yet the guilty
person escape. To present the humble confessions and entreaties of the nocent,
and withal to interpose his own desires and requests to the Judge in the
delinquents behalf; in all these considerations Christ is our advocate, as you
have already heard; he as it were alleges his sufferings as a satisfaction of
the law for our sins, he tenders our penitent acknowledgements and prayers for
pardon to the Judge, yea he declares it to be his own, no less earnest then
just desire; that for his sake our sins should be forgiven us. And now that you
may see he is according to Tertullians phrase, exorator, a prevailing orator,
Tertul. de pudicit. l. 2. c. 19.
be pleased to take a view of

2. The efficacy of this intercession, and that in respect

1. Of the person with whom he is an advocate, The Father. To unfold this, know

1. First, that the Father is properly the name of the first person in the
sacred Trinity, and accordingly with Carthusian we are so here to understand
it, though not excluding the other persons; Carthus. in loc.
indeed all the three persons being offended, when any sin is committed, Christ
is vertually an advocate with them all, but yet because he cannot be said
properly to intercede with himself, and lest he might be thought inferior to
the spirit, if an advocate with him, therefore his intercession is set forth as
expressly directed to the Father? And inasmuch as the other persons have the
same essence, and therefore will with the Father, Christ in being an advocate
with him, is also with them.

2. But further, the Father relates to the Son, whence the Arrians argue, that
as the advocate is inferior to the Judge, Philip. 2.6.
so the Son is to the Father, when as yet St. Paul says, he thought it no
robbery to be equal with God, that is, the Father, In answer to which

1. It may, and that orthodoxly be returned by way of concession, that the Son
is inferior to the Father with this restriction as Son, and the Father as
Father; look as though the essence be the same, yet the persons are really
distinct one from the other, so I know no reason but that we may assert, though
the persons have an equality, because an identity of essence, yet as persons
they are inferior one to the other: this solution St. Basil makes use of to
clear those words, my Father is greater then I, whilst yet he was equal with
his Father; nor is it any infringement to the truth, Bas. in illa verba.
nor encouragement of the Arrian heresy, to assert, that whereas the Son of
God, as God is equal with, yet as Son, he is inferior to the Father.

2. But letting this go, you may please to take notice, that the Son of God is
advocate with the Father as mediator, and he is mediator not as God, nor as
man, but as God-man: upon which consideration he may be truly asserted
inferior to the Father: hence the Son of God his becoming man, is called an
emptying himself (for so St. Paul's phrase signifies) whereby he that is equal
with, became in our nature subordinate to, and so capable of, being advocate
with the Father.

3. Lastly, The Father is a comprehensive expression, and may have reference
both to the advocate, and the guilty, and so either his Father or our Father.
Indeed God is the Father of Christ, and the Father of all believing penitents,
in a very different respect, whilst he is Christ's Father by Generation, ours
only by Regeneration; Christ's by natural begetting, ours by gracious adopting,
Christ's primarily, ours mediately, in and through him; Vide Ambros. l 3. de
virginit. Aug. in Johan.
and therefore our Savior says not, I go to our, but to mine and your Father,
because he is otherwise Christ's then ours, but yet he is ours as well as
Christ's; and these words the Father may well take in both, as having a strong
influence into the efficacy of the intercession.

1. With The, that is, Christ's Father, the Advocate, is the Judges Son, and
therefore the Father is illius amantissimus, dearly affected toward him, and
cannot but grant his desire, surely he that says to us, This is my well
beloved Son, hear him, will himself hear him upon that very account: as the
sufficiency of Christ's death depends upon his Godhead, so the validity of his
intercession upon his Sonship, when God says concerning Christ, Mat^h. 3.17.
Psalm. 2.10.
thou art my Son, there presently follows an Ask of me and I will give thee;
I and my Father says Christ are one; so that God can as well deny himself as
his son; add to this.

2. With The, that is, our Father, the guilty are the Judges children, and
therefore the Father is erga nos clementissimus, most indulgent toward us, and
in this respect the advocate likely to speed; great is the love of parents,
ventowards their offending children, witness that of David to Absolon,
especially when they return, witness that of the F^ther to the prodigal, pro
maximo delicto paululum supplici^ satis est patri, Terrent. adv.
a few stripes will serve with a Father for a great offense; nay, any
intercession will prevail with a Father to withhold his correction. Yea, how
often will a Father desire another to step in and intercede for his child, I
say not (says Christ) to his disciples, that I will pray the Father for you,
Joh^ 16.27.
the Father himself loves you, as if there were scarce any need of this
mediation; however no doubt but that this being the pleasure of the Lord, it
shall prosper in his hand, and Gods heart being prepared, Christ's suit must
needs be granted. To shut up this first consideration. Jacob the younger
brother obtained the blessing from his Father in the garments of Esau the
elder. Christ the elder obtains ^he blessing at the Fathers hands for his
younger brethren, no wonder if the brother pleading for brethren, and that with
the Father, become an effectual Advocate, and so much the rather, considering

2. The person who it is, and how fitly he is qualified for this office, being
Jesus Christ the righteous. This word righteous, is capable of various
acceptions, which accordingly Interpreters make use of.

1. Righteous is som^times as much as merciful, and thus Jesus Christ the
righteous, that is, gracious, and therefore ready to become an advocate for us;
Heb. 1.17. Mishez. in loc.
to this pu^pose it is, that the author to the Hebrews calls him a merciful
High Priest, one who having compassion on us and our infirmities, is willing to
plead our cause before God.

2. Righteous is sometimes as much as faithful, and so Jesus Christ the
righteous, that is, in performing his promise when he was on earth; Socin. ib.
he promised his disciples, I will pray the Father, and now he is in heaven to
perform it.

3. Righteous, is as much as just, and so Jesus Christ the righteous, Hug ib.
that is, in doing us right; if we retain him for our advocate, he will not be
withdrawn from pleading our cause by any means what ever.

4. But lastly, Righteous is as much as holy, innocent, so we find them joined
together concerning Christ, Calv.
whom the Apostle Peter calls the Holy and just one, and so Jesus Christ the
righteous is as much as pure and innocent, And this both in respect of himself
and us. Act^. 3.24.


1. In himself, he is righteous, because blameless, one who is altogether free
from sin. It is well observed by the learned Chamier, That the Apostle says
not, we have a righteous advocate Jesus Christ, Cham de satiss. l 23. c. 12.
but we have an advocate Jesus Christ the righteous. And therefore this term
righteous signifies not so much, rationem fungendi officii, as ipsius officii
fundamentum, the manner of performing this office, as a qualification rendering
him fit to undertake it, and so is most properly referd to his innocence, since
he could not have been an advocate, If he had not been in this sense righteous.
In this respect it is that Ferus says truly, vere necessaria cond^tio, Vide
Fer. Est in loc.
this is a condition necessarily requisite, since, If he had had any sin of his
own to answer for, he could not have pleaded for us, neque enim idoneus
advocatus qui ipse sit reus, as Estius says excellently, He can be no fit
advocate for another, who himself is guilty. But yet this is not all, he is
Jesus Christ the righteous or innocent not only in himself but also.

2. In respect of us, Inasmuch as he makes us righteous, cleansing us from the
guilt of our sins. To this purpose says Illiricus, he is called ^he righteous,
vide Illi^. Cajet. Lor: Gualt. in loc.
not so much in a passive, as an active sense, and Cajetan observing the
following words, he is the propitiation, says ecce justitia Jesu Christi,
herein is the righteousness of Jesus Christ our advocate, that he makes us by
his propitiation righteous, and so is enabled to plead our cause. To this
effect it is that Lorinus observes, He is such an advocate, as satisfies the
judge, not only by reason, but reality, interceding by virtue of a price paid.
And hence it is, that though he finds both us and our cause unjust, yet
(which no other advocate can do) he makes both us and it righteous, so that
though we by reason of our sins are unworthy of pardon, yet Christ pleading his
satisfaction, renders us worthy, and our cause just. And no wonder if being
thus every way righteous, he become an effectual advocate, and thus much shall
suffice for the Explication of this choice ingredient in this divine remedy, We
have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous.

To end it in a brief application, and that by way of

1. Consolation, the Greek word here used (as Vorstius well observes) may be
rendered either advocate, Perinde est. s. advocatus. s. consolator. Vo^st. in
loc.
or comforter, since inasmuch as Christ is an advocate, he is a comforter to
all penitent sinners. If you please read over the Text again and take the
words asunder and you shall find that every word breaths comfort.

1. We, it is not you, but we St. John includes himself in the number of
those sinners, who need Christ an advocate, Maluit se in numero pone^e
peccatorum etc. Aug* in loc.
and therefore we may be the less discouraged in the sense of our infirmities.
And again it is not I, but we, he excludes not others from having an interest
with himself in Christ the advocate, and therefore every penitent moy apply
this comfort to himself, which is so much the more comfortable because it is
we.

Have, it is not we may, but we have, a burdened conscience cannot be satisfied
with a perhaps, nor will it hang upon uncertainties, this comfort of Christ's
intercession is certain, and therefore positively asserted, nor is it spoken of
as a thing past, but present, not we had, but we have, and indeed it is so in
the present tence that we now may as truly say we have; as St. John then, yea
so long as there shall be penitents on earth, there will not want this advocate
in heaven, so true is that of the Author to the Hebrews, Hebr. 7.21.
he ever lives to make intercession, that is to be.

An advocate, It is true we want not accusers that will be ready to lay our
sins to our charge, Satan without, and our own consciences within, ready to
bring an endictment against us, nor have we any merit of our own to plead
before God for us, but we have an advocate to stand and appear for us, and that

With. Many times a cause miscarrieth in humane courts, by reason of the
advocates absence, but of this their is no fear in our advocate, for he is at
the Judges right hand and so still ready upon all occasions as it were to put in
a word for us to the

Father; not the Judge, but the Father to render our hope of prevayling so much
the more firm, Vox dulcissima patris verum facilitatem indecat. Fer.
this sweet word of Father implying not only a passibility, but a facility of
obtaining, so much the rather considering that it is

The Father, and so capable of a reference both to Christ and us, he that is
our advocate is not a servant a friend but a Son, and so the Judges chiefest
favorite, we for whom he is an advocate, are not slaves, or strangers, Vide
Bellarm. de ascens dom.
or enemies, or only servants, but Sons, though too dificient in our
obedience, and can we imagine that the suite should not speed, nay further this
advocate whom we have with the Father is

Jesus that signifies a Savior, and he that vouchsafes to be our Savior
will not stick to be our advocate, conc. 35. Heb^. 7.^3.
yea that he may save as the Apostles phrase is to the utmost, he will leave no
way unatempted, as by his passion, so by his intercession by the one purchasing
salvation for, by the other applying it to us, nor need we doubt that he will
be thus every way a Jesus to us, when we observe that he is the

Christ, a word that signifies anointed, and indeed so he was to all his
offices among the rest to that of his priesthood, and so this part of it which
consists in intercession. Anointing carries in it both designation to, and
preparation for an office; all that were anointed, being thereby called to, and
furnished with abilities for the office to which they were anointed, our
advocate therefore being Christ, is both a legal, and skilful advocate, called
to the bar, invested with gifts, and therefore knows how to plead and that
our joy may be full, take in the last words.

Righteous, and therefore he will not deceive us in our trust, or fail our
expectation, though an advocate be able, and knowing, yet if he be not just,
our cause may miscarry, but this advocate is so righteous: that he cannot be
perverted, nay he is righteous, and therefore can stand in Gods sight to plead
for us, whereas were he himself nocent, he must flee from the face of the
Judge, and being unable to answer for himself, could not undertake our cause.
Once more this advocate is Jesus Christ

The righteous, because so exactly, perfectly without the least spot, we know
how far the intercession of Abraham, Moses, and other righteous men have
prevayled, yea St. James says The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
avails much, I^mes. 5.16.
and that not only for himself, but others, and surely then much more must
the intercession of him who is the righteous one be effectual. Yea perhaps (as
Origin observes* Orig. hom. 8. in Number.
) Therefore Moses obtained so much of God in Isreal's behalf that we might not
be faithless, but confident in our advocate Jesus Christ the righteous.

Aug. in loc.
And now oh thou drooping sinner, let me bespeak thee in S. Austins language,
Thou committest thy cause to an eloquent Lawyer and art safe, how can thou
miscarry, when thou have the Word to be thy Advocate. Let me put this question
to thee, if when thou sinnest, thou had all the Angels, Saints, Confessors,
Martyrs, in those celestial mansions to beg thy pardon; do thou think they
would not speed? I tell thee, One word out of Christ's mouth is more worth, then
all their conjoined entreaties. When therefore thy daily infirmities discourage
thee, or particular falls affright thee, imagine with thy self, that thou
heardest thy Advocate pleading for thee, in these or the like expressions; Oh
my loving and affectionate Father, look upon the face of thine anointed, behold
the hands and feet, and side of thy crucified Christ, I had no sins of my own
for which I thus suffered, no; it was for the sins of this penitent wretch, who
in my name sueth for pardon; Father, I am thy Son, the Son of thy love, thy
bosom who pleads with thee; it is for thy child, thy returning penitent child,
I plead, that for which I pray, is no more then what I paid for; I have
merited pardon for all that come to me: Oh let those merits be imputed, and
that pardon granted to this poor sinner. Cheer up then thou disconsolate soul,
Christ is an Advocate for thee, and therefore do not despair, but believe, and
believing rejoice, and rejoicing triumph, and triumphing, take up that bold
challenge of St. Paul, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it
is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died: yea
rather, that is risen again, Romans 8.33.34.
who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us.

2. Council, and that in several particulars.

1. Since we are so well provided, seek we not elsewhere; it is not unfitly
observed to this purpose, that St. John says not, we have advocates in the
plural number, but an advocate in the singular; Zanch. in loc.
this being Christ's peculiar prerogative. Indeed the Papists have coined a
distinction between Mediator redemptionis, and intercessionis, a Mediator of
redemption and intercession, appropriating the former to Christ, attributing
the latter to the Virgin Mary, and the rest of the glorified Saints, but the
advocateship, and the propitiation are here by our Apostle joined together, and
accordingly our Church in the close of one of the Collects, putting mediator
and advocate together, prefixeth an exclusive particle to both, through our
only mediator and advocate Jesus Christ our Lord. I deny not, but that the
Saints in heaven p^ay for the Church on earth, but though they pray for her in
general, yet not for her paeticular members, whose sins and wants they are
strangers to, and therefore cannot pray for, and that they pray for the Church;
it is, ex charitate ut fratres, non ex offic^o ut mediatores, by way of
charity, not authority; as friends, not as advocates.

And whereas it is another subterfuge of the Romanists, that though Christ be
our only mediator with the Father, yet we may make use of the Mother; and the
rest to be our advocates to Christ; besides, that in their prayers, they
expressly desire the Saints to pray to God for them, even in respect of
Christ, it is both vain and impious. Vain, because it being his work to
reconcile us to God; there is no need of any to reconcile us to him, and though
an advocate be needful to the Judge, yet what need of an advocate to the
advocate: nay indeed, when Christ bids us come to him, to wit, our selves; what
an impious contempt were it of his command, to go to him by a proxy.

It may perhaps be here objected, if we may not desire the prayers of the
Saints in heaven, why do we of those on earth? 1 These 5.24. Cypr. ep. ^6.
how is i^ that St. Paul calls upon the Thessalonians to pray for him, and
St. Cyprian in an Epistle to the Roman Confessors, craveth their remembrance
of him in their prayers, and nothing more usual with christians, then thus,
both by word and writing, to beg one another prayers? but beloved, this we
desire of one another not as advocates, but only as fellow-helpers; and hence
it is, that whilst as members we pray each for other, we all in our prayers
acknowledge Christ to be him who does, and must entreat for us all. In sum,
there is a great deal of difference between a christian-desiring of their
prayers, who know our persons, Vide Aug. in loc,
to whom we may signify our wants, and a religious invocation upon them for
their prayers, who are both ignorant of us and our necessities. Let then the
Apostatized Rome seek to Angels and Saints, we will only make mention in our
prayers of the name of Jesus Christ, as him on whose intercession we depend and
rest.

2. Since he is an advocate for us with the Father, let us be advocates for him
with the world, let us plead his cause, vindicate his honor, speak for his
Gospel, intercede for his members; it is but that to which gratitude obliges,
to do for him: (as far as we may) what he does for us, and so return like for
like: indeed he can and will plead his own cause, nor does he stand in need of
our help, but he takes it kindly, when we express our thankfulness by
becoming advocates for him.

3. That when we sin, Christ may be our advocate, Id. ibid.
let us be sure to arraign and accuse our selves; it is St. Austins advice,
continually censure and condemn thy self, so may thou come boldly in
confidence of thine advocate. Indeed I may here fitly make use of those words
toward the end of the former Chapter, if we confess our sins, he is our
advocate to plead for pardon: in one word, Let us with penitent hearts, on all
occasions go to him, and humbly entreat him that he would entreat for us; he
desires no more then to be desired; prayer is the only fee this advocate
expects. Let us therefore confess, and confessing, pray to the Father in his
name; yea to himself, that he would pray to the Father, and let us not doubt
but he will perform what we desire, and obtain what we expect, the forgiveness
of our sins; and not only so, but in the end, that which is the end of our
faith, the salvation of our souls.

SERMON. 21.
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN.
CHAP. II. Ver. 2. And he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours
only, but also for the sins of the whole world.


IT is one of those excellencies which are common both to Law and Gospel, that
they require purity of heart, and holiness of life; sin not, is the voice both
of Moses and Christ, Prophets and Apostles: Indeed since they were holy men who
wrote, and that as moved by the Holy Ghost it was impossible but that all their
writings should tend to the advancing of holiness.

It is one of those excellencies which are peculiar to the Gospel, that it
provideth an Anchor in case of a storm, a rock of succor in shipwreck, a
refuge whether to fly when we are in danger; indeed the Law doometh the
transgressour to the curse, and there leaves him hopeless, helpless,
remediless; Accursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the Law to do them, Galath. 3.10.
so runs the comminatory sentence in which the sinner being involved, has no
way left (by the Law) of escaping, but must inevitably perish; whence it is,
that the legal ministration is called by the Apostle the ministration of death,
2 Co^. 3.7.
but by the Gospel comes glad tidings of pardon, and propitiation to
disconsolate sinners, and whilst we are sitting in the darkness of despair
by reason of our sin, breaks in upon us with beams of comfort from the Sun of
righteousness; thus as it says, sin not, so withal, if we fall into sin, it
says, despair not; a careful endeavor against sin it requires, yet when we
have sinned, it leaves us not without hope, but directs us to Christ as an
intercessor and reconciler, for so we find St. John here in those words, which
may therefore be truly called the Epitome and sum of the Gospel, My little
children, these things I write unto you, etc,

We are now come to the second Ingredient in this Remedy, to wit, the
reconciliation wrought by Christ, and this in the second verse, and he is the
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole
world, concerning which choice, and amiable benefit, we have two things set
before us. The nature of it, wherein it consists in those words, and he is the
propitiation for our sins. The extent of it, how far it reaches in those
words, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world; each of
which may well take up an whole discourse.


At this time only of the former, Genesis 1.
expressed in those words, and he is the propitiation for our sins.

Before I enter upon the matter, it will be needful to take a little notice of
the connection of the clause implied in the particle And. A word which may be
considered either merely as conjunctive, or as causal.

1. If we read it only as a conjunctive particle, it lets us see that Christ
being an advocate becomes a propitiation, indeed the work of reconciliation
according to a different notion belongs both to Christ's sacrifice and his
intercession, the meritorious purchase of our peace belongs to his sacrifice,
the effectual application of it to us belongs to his intercession, the shedding
of his blood upon the cross, was that which wrought reconciliation for all
that should believe in him, the presenting his blood in heaven, is that which
obtains the actual collation of this benefit, upon them who do believe in
him. This was excellently tipified under the Law by the blood, Levit. 16.17.
and the incense which the Priest made use of in the atonement, the former
prefiguring Christ's suffering, and the latter his advocateship by both which
the propitiation is made. It is that which we have reason to take notice of for
our comfort, that Christ is such an advocate, as has not only affectum, but
effectum; a desire to do us good, but accomplisheth it, as does not only
satagere but efficere, undertake, but perform; as he intercedeth for us when we
sin, so he finds acceptance and he propitiat^th God for our sins: oh let it be
our wisdom to address our selves to him as our advocate when we have offended,
and let us not doubt of being reconciled.

2. We may yet further look upon this and as a causal particle, signifying
after the Hebrew use for, and so it lets us see what gives the efficacy to
Christ's intercession (to wit) his propitiation; this will the better appear, if
we consider that

1. This propitiation for our sins was merited by Christ's blood, and therefore
God is said to set him forth a propitiation through faith in his blood, and
Christ is said to make peace through the blood of his cross; Romans 3.25. Colos.
1.20. Nititur haec (...) unica sacrificii vi and^. Bez. in loc.
indeed there can be no propitiation of wrath without satisfaction of justice,
and there can be no satisfaction of justice without shedding of blood, whereby
the punishment was suffered, which justice required.

2. Christ makes intercession in the virtue of his blood, our salvation is
obtained; first pretio, and then prece, by laying down a price, and then
plead^ng the payment before God, so that what was once offered, is continually
presented.

3. Christ being a propitiation, and so our advocate must needs speed; whilst
a man is angry, it is in vain to move him for a favor, but his anger being
appeased, there is hopes of success, especially when he pleads who was the
means to pacify him; thus stands the case between God and Christ and us, God
being ^ncensed against us. Christ takes the chastisement of our peace upon
himself, whereby Gods wrath was pacified, and he who wrought this
reconciliation on earth it is that appears for us in heaven, and therefore
let us not doubt of the power of this advocate, who cannot but effectually
prevail, because he was the prop^tiation for our sins.

Having viewed the context, let us look upon the clause it self, wherein there
is a double truth, the one implic^te, the other explicit; to wit, sins
provocation, and Christ's pacification.

Our sins incense the wrath of God against us, that is implied Jesus Christ the
righteous is the propitiation for our sins, that is expressed

Of the former briefly, because it is but intimated of the latter more largely
and fully.

1. Sins provocation is manifestly couched in this clause, and accordingly
taken notice of by Interpreters, Innuit nos nostris pec^atis Deum nobis
infensum reddidisse. Zanch. (...), Chrysostom. hom. 3, in Colos.
since there were no need of a propitiation for, if there were no provocation
by our sins, it is the note of St. Chrysostom upon the phrases of reconciling
and making peace, in the Colossians, that the one implies an enmity, the other
a war; and the same may be made here, the propitiation supposes wrath. And as
it is here intimated, so it is elsewhere asserted by S. Paul to the Romans,
when he says, the wrath of God is revealed from heaven, against all
unrighteousness and ungodliness of men, and consequently, against men for all
their unrighteousnes and ungodlines; in this respect it is, that he calls all
men by nature children of wrath, and why this? Romans 1.18. Eph^s. 2.3.
because they are born in sin. Indeed God made man (as Solomon's phrase is)
upright, and so long as he stood in that integrity, there was pax amicitiae, a
peace of amity and friendship between God and man, Eccles. 7. ult.
but they sought out many inventions, by which God was most justly provoked to
anger. Thus at first, and ever since sin has proved the makebate, the
k^ndle-coale, that incendiary between the Creator and his creature.

And how can it be otherwise? since there cannot but be enmity where there is
contrariety, and there is nothing more contrary to God then sin, nay, there is
nothing contrary to him but sin, it is opposite to him in his pure nature, it
robs and spoyleth him of his glory, it transgesseth and rebelleth against
his Law, and therefore must needs incur his displeasure. It is observable in
Scripture. that as members, so senses are after the manner of men attributed to
God, and sin is represented as offensive to every one of them. It grateth his
ears, and therefore he complains of the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah, it
disrelisheth his taste, Genesis 18.20. Gal. 4.6. Amos 2* 13.
in which respect it is compared to leaven, and that especially for its
sowernesse; it oppresses his feeling, according to his own expression. I am
pressed under you, as a Cart is under sheaves, it disgusteth his smell; for
which cause sinners are said to be corrupt, where the metaphor is borrowed from
a rotten carcass, which stinketh in the nostrils of a man. Psalm. 14.1.
Finally it offends his sight, and therefore he is said to be of purer eyes
then to behold iniquity, Hab. 2.13.
to wit, without fury.

It is a meditation that should convince us of

1 The odious nature of sin, Are any persons more abominable then the
contentious Solomon, justly declameth against him that sows discord among
brethren; Prove. 6.19.
that beatitude of our Savior, carries in it according to the rule of
contraries a curse, Cursed are the peace breakers, for they shall be called the
children of the Devil. But (oh my breathren;) how accursed, Matth^w* 5.6.
and hateful a thing is sin, which has broke the peace; not between man and
man only, but God and man, and has sown discord between, not only brother
and brother, but father and son, Oh that this thought might stir up in us a
zealous indignation against sin, God forbid, that that which is his hate,
should be our love, that that should find favor with us, which provokes his
wrath against us, nay rather since sin displeases God, let it displease us,
and let our anger wax hot against that which causes his wrath to wax hot
against us.

2 The miserable estate of a sinner, because he is under the wrath of God,
coelestis ira quos premit miseros facit, Divine anger is an unsupportable
burden, Sen. Trag. Herc.
the sinning Angels are not able to stand under it, but fall immediately from
heaven, the great men, the mighty men cannot abide it, but cry to the mountains
fall on us, and to the hills couver us, no wonder if the Psalmist put the
question, Who may stand in thy sight, when once thou art angry? Jude v. 6
Revel. 6.15.16. P^almes, 76.7.
And now tell me sinners, have not we most justly incurred this sore
displeasure, has not God both by the sin of our nature and transgressions of
our life been provoked against us from our mothers womb to this day, If one
sin be sufficient fuel for this fire, what a flame of wrath burns against us,
whose sins have been numerous, or rather innumerous? All which being serously
pondered; me thinks grief, and anguish, trembling and astonishment, horror
and amazement should take hold of us. David feeling some drops or sparks of
this anger, Psalms 38.3.
says there was no rest in his bones by reason of it, truly if we do not
feel, we have cause continually to be in fear, not only of drops, but
floods, sparks, but flakes of this vengeance, how can we be secure and quiet?
And if there be any awakened conscience, wounded soul which cries out, what
shall I do? I answer, Gods wrath is unsupportable; but not unavoydable, it
cannot be endured; but it may be prevented, we are not able to stand under it,
we may fly from it. And that by flying to him; whom my text speaks of, as
the propitiation, and so I am fallen on the Explicit ve^ity, which is here
plainly and directly laid down.

2. Christ's pacification, He is the propitiation for our sins, It is both
assertive, and exclusive, carrying it both an affirmative, and a negative, He
is, and none but He, or He only is the propitiation of both which in order.

1. He is the propitiation, Gods wrath toward man sinning, is pacified by
Christ suffering, the Rabbis say of the Messiah, that when he comes, he
shall be (...) a reconciling man, and the Apostles assertion is express, We
have peace with God, Romans 5.1.
through Jesus Christ our Lord, it is the Testimony which the Father gave
concerning Christ at his Baptism, This is my beloved son in whom I am well
pleased, M^^th. 3.17.
by which latter clause is (according to Euthymius, In quo hominib^s bona
volui. E^thymius.
Cajetan and others) expressed that favor which God in Christ bears toward
us, as he is in himself beloved, so in him God is with us well pleased.
According to that of St. Paul, He has made us accepted in the beloved, Habeo
in eo compla^entiam ad rediviendum et reconciliandum genus humanum. Cajet.
Eph^. 1.5.
and therefore accepted; because reconciled, wel-pleased in him because his
wrath is appeased by him toward us. Among other resemblances by which Christ
is set forth in Scripture, that of a stone is one, and very apt to our present
purpose. Since as in respect of Satan, He is lapis triumphalis, a stone of
victory and triumph dashing that Goliath in the forehead, so in respect of God,
1. Pet. 2.5.
he is lapis foedificus, a stone of league and amity, such as that between
Laban and Jacob, or rather lapis angularis, Psalm. 118.21.
a corner stone, for as this uniteth the wal^, which were one separate from the
other, together, so does he unite, and that not only Jews and Gentiles to one
another, but both to God.

This is that truth which the Apostle Paul planly asserts in those Scriptures
which speak of reconciliation to God, thus he says, God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, and again, 2 Cor. 5.18.
Christ is said to reconcile both (to wit Jew and Gentile) unto God in one body
by the cross, and again, It pleased the Father by him, Ephesians. 2.16. Colos.
1.19.^0.
having made peace through the blood of his cross to roconcile all things to
himself, It would not be passed by what is by Socinians objected, against
these Scriptures that they speak only of our being reconciled to God, not of
Gods being reconciled to us, and so prove not any pacification of divine wrath
by Christ's death, whence it is that they understand this reconciling of us to
God, to be no more then the turning of us from sin to God by true repentance.

But to vindicate this great truth, and that as asserted in those Scriptures be
pleased to consider briefly that

Though the phrase only run in this strain, the reconciling us to God, yet it
does not therefore follow that the reconciliation is only on our part, and not
on Gods, nay rather the one involveth the other, since if we were not sinners,
there were no need of reconciling us to God, and being sinners, there is no
less need of his being reconciled to us, unless we will say, that sin does
not provoke him, which is to deny him to be a God, And though this
reconciliation being mutual, does no less imply Gods to us, then ours to him,
yet it is very fitly thus expressed, because God is the pars offensa, the party
offended, and man is pars offendens, the party offending, he that offends
another, is more properly said to be reconciled to him whom he has injured,
then he that is offended; in which respect Christ advises him who brings his
gift to the altar, If he remember his brother have ought against him to go and
be reconciled to his brother, Mat. 5.23.24.
and St. Paul wishes the woman that departs to be reconciled to her husband,
as having by departing offended him. 1 Cor. 7.11.
But as the reconcililing of a woman to her husband, and a trespasser to his
brother is the pa^if^ing* the one of her husbands anger, the other of his
brothers displeasure, justly conceived against them; so the reconciling us to
God is the appeasing of his wrath toward us, which for our sins was incensed
against us. And that this is St. Paul's meaning appears plainly in one of
those forecited places, where the manner how God in Christ reconcileth us to
himself, 2 Cor. 5, 19* 21.
is expressed to be his not imputing our trespasses, and Christ in whom we are
thus reconciled, is said to do it, by being made sin for us, It is not
therefore our turning from sin to God, but Christ becoming a sacrifice for our
sins, and Gods not imputing our sins to us for his sake which is our
reconciltation to God, and inasmuch as it is God who being offended receives
us again into favor; therefore it is ascribed to him as his act, and because
it is Christ who has by his death appeased Gods anger, therefore it is
attributed to him, and so the clear meaning of our Apostle, appears to be
the same with that which here S. John asserts, and intends when he says of
Christ, He is the propitiation for our sins.

And because the Socinians (being resolved to make all Scripture stoop to their
reason) endeavor to pervert this text as if it were only a delivering us from
the wrath to come upon impenitents, by turning us from our sins. Give me leave
to set before you the genuine sense of this word which our Apostle here uses,
and that both in its native, signification, and legal allusion.

1. If we consider this word in its native, signification, we shall find that
the verb (...) (whence (...) in the Text comes) in all writers both sacred
and profane, Vide Grot. de Satis.
Poets, Orators, Historians, as the learned Grotius has observed: signifies
to appease, or pacify, or render propitious; and is usually construed with an
accusative expressing the person whose anger is pacified. Indeed there is one
place in the Hebrews: where being joined with (...) the plural accusative it
is rendered to expiate the sins of the people, Hebre. 2.17.
but either the use of the word there must be altogether different from its
sense of perpetual signification, or it must signify such an expiation, as
tends to a pacification, and so it is all one whether you read it here, He is
the expiation, or He is the propitiation, since the one depends on the other,
and by expiating our sins, it is that He propitiateth God toward us.

2. If we consider this word in its legal allusion, we shall find a double
reference which may be made of it.

1. To the mercy-seat, which covered the arc where the law was, whence God
gave answers, and from which he showed himself propitious to the people,
whereof we read in the book of Exodus. Hence the Seventy, Exodus 25.27:
and the Auth^r to the Hebrews from thence call it (...), a propitiatory, to
this the Apostle Paul manifestly alludeth, Hebr. 9.5.
where the very same word is used, when he says, Him has God set forth a
propitiation, Romans 3.25.
and possibly St. John in this word, might have the same reference. Indeed
Christ may well be called the propitiatory, or a propitiation in allusion to
the mercy-seat, since, there is a fit analogy between them. For as it covered
the Law, so Christ the transgressions of the Law; as thence God gave answers,
so by Christ his Evangelical Oracles are revealed; and as from thence God
showed himself propicious, so is he in Christ well pleased; but in this last
analogy (in which respect it was called a propitiatory, and serves to our
present purpose) though there is a fitness, yet not a fullness; for whereas the
mercy-seat is called the propitiatory, only because it had vim declarativam, a
declarative virtue to signify, Christ is the propitiation, as having vim
effectivam, an operative energy to procure divine favor, and therefore was God
pleased to manifest himself benevolous from the mercy-seat, because it was a
type of Christ, in whom he is propitiated toward sinners. In vain therefore
do the Socinians confine the antitype to the type, as if that Christ must be in
no other sense a propitiation, then the mercy-seat was; since it is sufficient
to make a type that there be in some things a similitude, though not in all
things an aequality, nor is it any wonder if there be more energy in the body,
then in the shadow, since the shadow is but a resemblance of the body.

2 Besides this allusion, which no doubt is most congruous, to S. Paul's phrase,
there is another more suitable to this of S. John, and that is in reference to
the Sacrifices of expiation, and atonement. Almighty God in the Law appointed
both the burnt-offering for sin in general, and trespasse-offerings for
particular sins, by which being offered up, he became appeased toward the
sinner. Now all those Sacrifices did look at Christ, and the atonement which
was made by them, was not as considered in themselves, but as they did typify
Christ's death, and the propitiation to be wrought by it.

That those sacrifices did all of them typify Christ, seems to me an
undoubted truth, and that among others for this reason, because by Christ's
death, they were abolished, and became mortua dead, yea soon after, mortifera;
not only dead, but deadly, upon this account, that to continue those
Sacrifices, was to deny Christ.

That whatsoever efficacy those Sacrifices had toward atonement, was only in
reference to Christ, must needs follow upon the former, since as when the
antitype is accomplished, the type cease, so the vigor of the type, whilst
inbeing, is from its relation to the antitype; in this respect it is that under
the legal administrations, the people offering Sacrifices, were minded of
Christ, and believing in him, and God was propitiated by those Sacrifices, as
they did prefigure, and so as it were mind him of Christ to be offerred up a
real, and effectual propitiation.

To close up this, it would not be passed by, how emphaticall our Apostles
expression is, in that he does not only say of Christ he is (...), but (...),
a propitiatour, but the propitiation it self, that is, victima (...), the
propitiatory Sacrifice. Indeed he is both the Priest, and the Sacrifice, the
propitiator, and the propitiation; according to which is that of Origin, Orig.
in Romans
God has set him forth a propitiation through faith in his blood, that by the
Sacrifice of his body, he might render God propitious to men. In one word, (to
speak after the Schools) inasmuch as Christ by his death did removere
peccatum, take away the guilt of sin, which causes the enmity, Aquin sum.
Pars. 3. q. 49. art. 4.
and offerre sacrificium Deo acceptissimum, offer up a sacrifice most grateful
to God, he might be truly said to be the propitiation.

There is only one objection which carries in it a show of reason, and
therefore calls for a solution; It is drawn from those Scriptures, Ioh. 3 16. 1
Ioh. 4.9.
in which Gods love to mankind is set down as the cause of sending Christ into
the world, whereas if Christ's coming into the world to dye, did propitiate God
for our sins, this love of his toward man should be the effect, not the cause;
and those Scriptures should have run thus, not, God so loved the world that he
sent, but, God sent his Son into the world that he might love it, and not in
this was the love of God manifested, but by this was the love of God procured,
to wit, the sending his only begotten Son.

To untye this knot, you may please to know that these two assertions are not
irreconcilable; Gods love to us moved him to send Christ to dye, Christ's dying
moves him to love us: Indeed the love of God to man is in one respect the
cause, and in another the effect of Christ's death, and that thus it appeared to
St. John is plain, in that he puts these two together in one verse, he loved
us, 1 Ioh. 4.10.
and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.

To clear the truth hereof, briefly observe these distinctions. Aquin. Pars. 3.
q. 49. art. 4.


1. Man fallen is to be considered (say the Schools) two ways, either quantum
ad naturam, or quantum ad culpam, as made by God, or marred by sin; he loved us
as the work of his hands, and that love was the cause of sending Christ, he
hated us as transgressors of his Law, and Christ by making satisfaction
removes that hatred, and obtains his favor,

2. There is a twofold love of God toward man. The one of commiseration and
benevolence; Affectus ^^m miserationis sive benefaciendi voluntas, affectus
conjunctionis and amicitiae. Cal^v. Socin. proflig.

Amor benevolentiae and ordinativus.

Amor complacentiae and collativus Arnold. Job 41.7.8.


whereby he was reconcilable, yea, himself appointed the way of
reconciliation, and this love was the cause of Christ's death. The other of
friendship or complacency, whereby he becomes actually reconciled, and so
conferreth all good upon us, and this love is the effect of Christ's death: It
is observable concerning the friends of Job, that God said to them, My wrath is
kindled against you, therefore take seven bullocks, and seven rams, and go to
my servant Job, and offer up for your selves a burnt-offering, and my servant
Job shall pray for you, for him will I accept; wherein it appears, God so far
tendered them as to acquaint them with his wrath, and the means of pacifying
it, but his wrath was not removed till those means were used. An enemy may so
far love as to propose and offer conditions of peace to his adversary, but till
those conditions be accomplished and performed, there is no amity between them:
so is it in this case, though God loved us so as to propose, nay, indeed to
perfect the means of reconciliation, yet still he is not actually reconciled
to us, but only in and by those means, the chief whereof is Christ's passion.
The sum of all then amounts to this; God considered without respect to
Christ, was though iratus, yet placabilis, actually angry, yet so as that there
was a possibility of appeasing it, he was not so far provoked with men, as with
the Angels, for whom he would not appoint nor accept a ransom, but still it is
only in and through Christ, that he becomes placatus, actually appeased toward
sinners.

2. He only is the propitiation for our sins, only Moses must go up to God in
the mount, none but the High Priest must enter with the blood into the holy of
holies; Christ alone must mediate with God for man: Indeed there was not, could
not be found in heaven or earth, any one fit, or able to undertake this work.
This will the better appear, if we consider, that whosoever would become a
propitiation for our sins, must both be free himself from all sin, and be both
capable and able to undergo the punishment of our sins.

1. He must be free from sin, and therefore we could not propitiate God for our
selves; can it be imagined a Reb^ll should pacify the King toward himself, or
fellow-rebels? whatever we could do, whilst in our sins, were but evaginato
gladio pacem peter^, seeking for peace with a drawn sword in our hand against
our Sovereign; indeed the good works of them that are in Christ, do placere,
but not pacare; please, not appease, and that only as dyed in Christ's blood;
but as we are in a state of sin, nothing we do can please, much less pacify he
Almighty. The truth is, Fer. in loc.
(to use Ferus his similitude) All the works we do are in themselves but as a
ring of iron, and could not so much as gain acceptance, were it not for faith,
which sets into them as it were the precious gemme of Christ's merits.

2. He must be capable and able to bear the punishment of our sins. There can
be no propitiation for, without expiation of sin, the expiation of sin is by
suffering the punishment; and the sin being committed against an infinite
Majesty, the suffering by which it is expiated, must be of infinite value; in
these respects it is impossible that any or all the Angels, though holy and
just, should propitiate God for out sins: since as Angels, they were not
capable of the punishment; and though they should have assumed humane nature,
yet being but finite creatures, the worth of their sufferings could not be
infinite, only Christ in himself being altogether pure, and therefore called
Jesus Christ the righteous; in the end of the former verse, and being both God
and man, and so able as God, and capable as man of undergoing such a penalty as
should by reason of the infiniteness of his person, be of infinite merit, is
the propitiation for our sins.

To end this, The propitiation here spoken of may be considered several ways,
and accordingly it may have several causes, as decreed, published, applied,
purchased. The decree and intention of this propitiation, is the work of the
whole Trinity, though especially attributed to the Father. The declaring and
publication of it is the work of Christ's Ministers, to whom is committed the
word of reconciliation. The effectual application of it to every one in
particular, is done principally by the Spirit, and instrumentally by faith. But
still the purchase and procuration of it, is only by the blood of Christ: nemo
praeter illum, nemo cum illo, there was none besides him, there was none to
joyn^ with him, he alone did undertake and accomplish the work of
reconciliation.

Having briefly, and I trust in some measure clearly explicated the explicit
truth of this clause, give me leave in a few words to apply it.

Scelesti in animum inducunt suum. J^vem posse placari omnibus hostiis. Plaut.
1. In the sense of Gods wrath for our sins, whither should we go but to Christ
for reconciliation; far be it from us to think we can pacify God for our sins
by our prayers, or tears, or alms; in all which, Gods severe eye of justice
would find matter of provocation; far be it from us to place our hopes of Gods
favor toward us in the merits and mediation of Saints or Angels, who
themselves are beholding to this Mediator; the truth is, Propter filii meritum
matter invenit gratiam, The Mothers peace was made by the Sons blood, and
therefore to him, and him alone let us have recourse, as our only Peacemaker.

And would you know how to go to him? I answer, by faith; accedit qui credit,
he comes to, who believes on Christ; and as there is no propitiation but
through him, so there is no propitiation through him to us, but by laying hold
on him, in which respect the Apostle does not only say, God has set forth
Christ a propitiation through his blood, but through faith in his blood, and
therefore being sensible of divine pleasure, let us embrace Christ in the arms
of our faith, that God for his sake may be propitious to us.

2. In the confidence of this propitiation wrought for us by Christ, how
infinitely should we account our selves obliged to our blessed Jesus? the more
to imprint this meditation upon us, consider

1. What the benefit is which Christ has procured, propitiation for our sins,
a benefit which has many blessings to attend upon it, such as are acceptance
of our persons and performances, nearness of union, and fullness of communion
with God, boldness of access to the throne of Grace, peace of conscience, and
joy in the Holy Ghost. Christ says to every believing soul that has an
interest in his propitiation, in words much like those to his disciples, Be of
good cheer, Ioh. 16.33*
I have pacified the Fathers wrath toward thee. God says to every such person
for whom he has accepted Christ's propitiation, in words much like those to
Ephraim: It is my dear Son, it is my pleasant child, Ier. 31.20.
though I spoke against thee, I do earnestly remember thee, I will surely have
mercy on thee; and

2. Who are we for whom Christ vouchsafed to become a propitiation? Jonathan
stood between Saul's fury and David, a good reason, Saul's rage was causeless,
David was innocent, but Gods anger was just, and we were offenders: the people
mediated between Saul and Jonathan, when he tasted of the honey, but Jonathan
had offended ignorantly; we have been wilful presumptuous Rebels. Abigail
pacified David's wrath against Nabal, but he was her husband, Hester diverteth
Ahasucrus his rage from the Jews, but they were her countrymen; but lo
Christ becomes a propitiation for our sins who were strangers, not allies,
enemies, not friends, enemies to him as well as the Father, and yet for our
sins he propitiateth.

3. When there was no other way left of propitiation, he undertaketh it, I
looked (says Christ) and there was none to help, I wondered that there was none
to uphold, therefore mine own arm brought salvation. Is. 63.5.
If all those glorious Angels had with united endeavors, sought to reconcile
God to man, it could not have been accomplished. As God faith in another case,
Though these three men, Noah Daniel and Job, Ezekiel. 14.14.20.
were in the land, they should deliver but their own souls, they shall deliver
neither sons nor daughters: so he seemed to say in this, Though Gabriel,
Michael, yea, all the Myriads of Angels, had not only entreated, but in assumed
bodies suffered, they should not have propitiated my wrath toward one man for
the least sin. And as Elishah said to Ahab, Were it not that I regard the
presence of Iehoshaphat, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee; 2 King.
3.14.
so God says to us, Were it not that I regard the passion and intercession of
my Son, I would not vouchsafe the least look of grace or favor toward you.

4. That Christ might be the propitiation for our sins, he was pleased to
offer himself a sacrifice; Ioh. 20.19.20
our blessed Savior appearing to his disciples after his resurrection. Said,
Peace be to you, and showed them his hands and his feet, as if he would say?
See how dear your peace cost me. Thus the case stood, we had offended, God was
provoked, wrath was ready to strike us, Christ steps in and takes the blow
upon himself, and so by his suffering God is pacified toward us.

And now putting all these together, that when none could, Christ would, and
that undertake so great a work as the reconciling offended justice; and when no
other means would prevail, but blood and death, Christ should be willing to
lay down his own life; and this for our sins, who were so unworthy of the
least regard: oh tell me, i^ each of these severally, much more all jointly be
not strong obligations of love, and thankfulness? How should every believing
sinner in the apprehension hereof, break forth into these or the like
ejaculations! Dearest Jesus, did thou procure thy Fathers love to me, and
shall it not engage my love to thee? did thou snatch me as a brand out of the
fire of Gods wrath, and shall not I be inflamed with affection toward thee?
the propitiation which thou have wrought for me was undeserved, nay, undesired;
shall it be altogether unrequited: It is true, I cannot recompense, but surely,
I will acknowledge it; I will love, and bless, and praise thee for it; saying,
in words much like those of the Angels, Worthy is the lamb that was slain a
sacrifice, and so a propitiation for my sins, to receive power, and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing.

SERMON. 22.
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF S. JOHN.
CHAP. II. Ver. 2. And he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours
only, but also for the sins of the whole world.


WOrds amiable as beauty to the eye, harmonious as music to the ear, sweet as
honey to the taste, and joyous as wine to the heart, who can read them, and not
be affected? hear them and not be ravished? meditate on them and not be
delighted? believe them, Fer. in loc.
and not be comforted? Diligenter observanda cordibusque inscribenda sunt haec
verba, says Ferus aptly. These words deserve to be written, yea engraven upon
the tables of our hearts, as containing in them that which cannot but afford
unspeakeable joy to the wounded conscience. The person spoken of is Jesus
Christ, whose very name is as a precious ointment, the thing spoken of is a
pacification between God and sinners, then which no perfume can be sweeter,
finally this benefit is set forth as obtained by this person, not for a few,
but many some, but all, and so like the light diffusing it self through the
whole world, and therefore I trust since we are all concerned in, we shall all
be diligently attentive to this precious Scripture, And he is the propitiation
for our sins etc.

Having already unfolded the nature, we are now to handle the extent of this
excellent benefit, which is expressed two ways. Negatively, and not for ours
only Affirmatively, but also for the sins of the whole world.


1. A word of the former, not for ours only, it is that which lets us see the
nature of faith.

True faith applies; but does not appropriate, or if you will it does
appropriate, but it does not impropriate to it self, a believer so makes
Christ his own, as that still he is, or may be another as well as his, and the
reason of this is.

Partly, in regard of the nature of the object which is such, that it is
capable of being communicated to many, as well as few, for as the air is a
means of refocillation* the sun an instrument of illumination, and the sea a
place of navigation, for the people of our country, and yet not ours only,
those being things so communicative, that every one may have a share in them,
nor is one man's or peoples enjoying, an hindrance to another, so is Christ a
propritiation for the sins of St. John and the rest of believers then living,
but not for theirs only, he being (...) a common good, and his propitiation
such as that the participation of it by some, does not at all impede others
from having the like interest.

And partly in respect of ^he temper of the subject, this being the frame of a
believers spirit, that he would have others partake of the same benefit with
himself. The Apostle St. Paul says of faith that it works by love, Gal. 5.6,
and accordingly as faith brings Christ home to it self, so the love by which
it works is desirous he might be imparted to others. To this purpose it is
observable, that that Holy Apostle when he speaks of a Crown which shall be
given to him, ^ Tim. 4.8.
presently adds, and not to me only: as here St. John for our sins, and not
for ours only.

To wind up this, whereas there are two objections amongst others, made against
the applying act of faith, as if it were a bold presumption in regard of
Christ, and an uncharitable excluding of others from having the same benefit,
to say he is ours, and that he is the propitiation for our sins, both will be
found no better then calumnies, since on the one hand; faiths particular
applycation is within the bounds, and according to the tenure of the
Gospel-promise, and therefore its no presumption, and on the other hand, faiths
applying Christ to our selves, is not thereby to withhold him from any other,
and therefore it is no uncharitableness, for whilst faith says, He is the
propitiation for our sins. Love adds, and not for ours only. And so much, or
rather so little of the Negative, pas^e we on to the

2. Affirmative clause, But also for the sins of the whole world, favores
ampliandi, is a rule in the civil law, favors are to be extended to the
utmost, Naogorg.
so does our Apostle here this benefit of Christ's propitiation* Amplificatio
est misericordiae dei, it is an amplification of Gods mercy; and Christ's merit,
and that

1. Implicitly, in respect of the object, since, Christ did not pacify God
only for the original sin of our natures, but the actual sins of our life,
and not only for one, but for all kind of sins. The sins of the whole world,
are a world of sins, what a numberless number of sins are every day committed
in the world, yea what sin is there so vile, so heinous, which comes not
within this latitude, the sins of the whole world, so that this propitiation
extends it self, not only to one, but many, lesser, but greater sins, not the
multitude, nor magnitude of all the sins which are acted in the world, can
exceed the virtue of Christ's propitiation, and therefore though the particle
(...) be ell^ptically cut of in the Greek, both it and its substantive are
fitly supplied in our translation for the sins of the whole world. But further
this enlargement, is chiefly to be considered.

2. Expl^citely in regard of the subject, the persons to whom this propitiation
bel^ngs, Matthew. 2^.28.
and it is set forth with the fullest advantage that may be. Indeed there are
diverse phrases, by which this universality is represented, 2 Cor. 5.14.
Sometimes it is sa^d He gave his life a ransom for many, and that is opposed
to a few, more then this, 1. Tim. 2.6.
it is said that He dyed for all, and that He gave himself a ransom for all,
yea the Author to the Hebrews says, Hebre. 2.9.
He tasted death for every man, not only all in general, but every man in
particular, in like manner the usual phrase of the Scripture, when it speaks
of the subject of reconciliation, Joh. 3.16. 2 Cor. 5.19. 1. Joh. 4.14.
and salvation is in the comprehensive word world, God so loved the world, God
was in Chhist reconciling the world, and again in this Epistle, Him has God
sent to be the Savior of the world, and yet as if this were not large enough
to this extensive substantive, is here in the text annexed an universal
adjective, whilst he says not only the world, but the whole world.

That this is so must be granted, or else the Scripture must be denied, which
has so frequently and plainly asserted it, The only thing to be inquired is,
in what sense this is to be understood, and how it is verified. I well know
there is much dispute among learned and Godly men, about the interpretation of
this, and such like Scriptures. For my own part, I have a reverend esteem of
many of them, who hold the several opinions, and I could heartily wish, that
such questions having much to be said either way, both from Scripture and
reason, might be more calmely debated then they are by some; and the ass^rt^rs
on either hand less censorious each of other. That which I shall now
endeavor, is (according to the measure ^f light, I have received by prayer,
reading, meditation, and conference,) positively to acquaint you what I
conceive to be truth, and show you how far we may safely extend, and so how we
may genuinely expound this clause, He is the propitiation for the sins of the
whole world.

To this end, Let your attention go along with me, whilst I shall prsoecute
two or three distinctions.

1. This assertion, Christ is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world,
Did. 1.
may be understood, either exclusively, or inclusively, and in both
considerations it is in some respect or other true.

1. To say, Christ is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world
exclusively, imports thus much, That there is no propitiation for the sins of
the whole world, but only by Christ, and thus we may take the whole world in
its full latitude, pro omnihus and singulis, and need not fear to assert that
there never was, nor will be any man from the first Adam, to the end of the
world, who did, shall, or can obtain propitiation for his sins except through
Christ. Deuteronomy. 4.24.
Indeed God (according both to Moses and Paul's phrase) is a consuming fire,
Hebr. 12.29.
and all mankind being fallen in Adam, is as stubble and straw to that fire
which must needs be consumed by it, if Christ's blood did not prevent that
consumption by quenching the fire of his displeasure. Hence it is that S. Paul
says expressly, God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, 2. Cor.
5.19.
thereby intimating, That were it not for Christ, the world could not be
reconciled to him. To this purpose it is that the Apostle Peter speaking of
Christ, uses a negative proposition, Acts. 4.12.
neither is there salvation in any other, and inforceth it with a strong
confirmation, for there is none other name under Heaven, given among men
whereby we must be saved, where that expression under Heaven is very
observable, as comprizing in it the whole earth, which is under Heaven, with
all the inhabitants therein. It is the promise of God to Abraham, That in his
seed, should all the nations of the earth be blessed, Genesis 22.18.
that seed St. Paul expounds mistically of Christ and Lyra's gloss is quia
nullus consequitur salutem nisi per Christi benedictionen, Gal. 3.8. Lyr. ib.
because none can attain eternal life but through Christ's benediction, and not
much unlike is Bezas note on this place. Christ is the propitiation for the
whole world, Beza in loc.
ut noverimus nusquam esse salutem extra Christum, that we may know salvation
is not to be had any where without Christ.

From hence it is that may be inferred, which elsewhere is expressed, that
since there is no propitiation but by Christ, none can partake of this
propitiation, but by faith in him, and the strength of the inference is built
upon this foundation.

Whosoever have propitiation by Christ, must be in Christ, and therefore St.
Paul says of the Ephesians, whilst Heathens they were without Christ, Ephesians.
2.12.
and presently adds in the same verse, having no hope; as if he would say,
There is no hope of Salvation for them that are without Christ.

None but they who believe in Chirist, are in Him, and therefore the Apostle
says, Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, and those two phrases; being in
the faith, Chap. 3.17.
and Christ being in us, are used by him in one verse, as one expository of the
other. The result of both which propositions is, 2. Cor. 13.5.
that seeing there is no propitiation without Christ, and without being in
Christ, none can obtain that propitiation, but they who believe in Him,
agreeable to which it is that St. Paul says, God has set him forth a
propitiation through faith in his blood, Rom* 3.25.


Indeed this must be rightly understood, and to that end qualified with these
distinctions of seminall, and actual, of implicit, and explicit faith, and
of faith in Christ, as to come, and as come. Christ is no doubt a propitiation
for all circumcised and baptized children dying in their infancy; who yet
cannot actually believe in him, but they have after an extraordinary way the
spirit of Christ conferred on them, and so the seed of faith and all other
graces in them. Christ was no doubt a propitiation for those before his coming,
as well as us, all of whom only believed in him, as to come, and many of whom
had but only an implicit, not a clear and distinct faith in the Messiah, nor
will I undertake to determine what degree of knowledge is necessary to that
Faith in Christ, which is necessary to an interest in this propitiation; but
still I say with the Author to the Hebrews, Heb. 11.6.
without faith it is impossible to please God, and that faith is not only to
believe that God is but to believe that he is a rewarder of them that seek him,
which cannot be without some knowledge of Christ; since it is only in an
Evangelical sense, that he is a rewarder, and as he is no rewarder of any that
seek him, but for Christ's sake, so none can rightly believe him a rewarder, who
is altogether ignorant of Christ.

Indeed when our blessed Savior says, This is life eternal, Ioh 17.3.
to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ Christ whom thou have sent;
what does he but as it were define eternal life by the knowledge of God and
Jesus Christ; this knowledge being both the way and the end, that wherein it
consists, and that whereby it is obtained, and more fully, when he says, God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, 3.36.
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish; what does he but set down
believing in Christ, as the way, whereby the whole world must escape perishing.
Finally, when St. Paul speaking of Jew and Greek, makes calling on the name of
the Lord Christ, the means of salvation, (...). 10.^.13.14.
and annexeth believing in, as necessary to the calling on him; what does he
but intimate, that without believing in him, there can be no salvation.

By all which we may see how miserable the condition of all those is, who have
no interest in Christ by faith; if no interest in him, no propitiation by him,
John 3.36.
and if no propitiation by him, there can none be had elsewhere; and therefore
John the Baptist sath of every unbeleever, The wrath of God abides on him; a
burden so heavy, that it must needs press down to hell. And which follows
upon this, we may see what great reason we have to pity and pray for all
Pagans and Infidels, to whom Christ, and propitiation by him, is not so much as
revealed. Indeed, that heathens who never heard of Christ, shall be condemned
for not believing in him, I believe not; the light of nature will be enough to
render them inexcusable: but how they not at all hearing, and so not at all
believing in him, should be saved by him, I cannot see by any light of
Scripture: that those among them whose lives have been eminent for moral
virtues, might have Christ by some extraordinary way made known unto them, and
so be brought to faith in him, I am willing to hope, however that Gods wrath is
not so hot against them as others, yea, that it shall be more tolerable for
them then many who are in name Christians, I confidently assert; but how
without Christ, and any knowledge of him, they should obtain propitiation, and
so salvat^on, I know not; the only charity which we can and ought to exercise
toward them who are now alive, is to commiserate the^r condition, and pour
out our supplications, that God would cause the light of the knowledge of
Christ to sh^ne in upon them, who at present sit in darkness and the shadow of
death; and so much for this interpretation.

2. The more generally received, and indeed most genuine exposition of these
words, is by way of inclusion, according to which the sense is, that Christ is
a propitiation not only for some, but all, even the whole world.

2. To understand this aright, be pleased to know further, that this phrase the
whole world, may be taken either more strictly or largely, Distinct. ^.
according to a double consideration of this propitiation, either in respect of
its actual efficacy, or virtual sufficiency.

1. These words, he is the propitiation may be thus construed, he is actually
and effectually the propitiation, yea, inasmuch as it is joined with his
advocateship, it is very probable this is our Apostles meaning, since Christ is
effectually a propitiation to them, for whom he is an advocate; and if so, this
whole world must be construed in the same sense, in which world is used by S.
Paul, where he says, the fall of the Jews is the riches of the world, that
is, Romans 11.12, 15.
as it follows in the same verse, the riches of the Gentiles; and again, the
casting away of them, the reconciling of the world: so here he is the
propitiation, not for our sins only, (who are Jews) but for the whole world;
to wit, the Gentiles in all parts and ages of the world who believe in him; and
it will appear so much the more rational, by the world here to understand the
Gentiles; if we consider that the our here spoken of, most probably refers to
the Jews; for St. John who was a Jew, would rather have said, your then our,
had not they to whom he wrote, bin Jews as well as he: and this is further
evident by the 7th ver. where he says, that they to whom he did write, were
such as had heard (^o wit what he wrote) from the beginning, Verse 7.
and those were the Jews, to whom Christ was first sent, and preached.

According to this construction, the sense of this Scripture will be best
explained, by parallelling it with those two texts in the Gospel, the one
concerning Cataphas, of whom the Evangelist says, he prophesied that Jesus
should dye for that nation, Ioh. 11.51.52.
and not for that nation only, but that also he should gather together in one
the children of God that were scattered abroad, the other Christ's own words, in
that excellent prayer wherein he says, neither pray I for these alone, but for
them also which shall believe on me through their word. Ioh. 17.20.
Thus Christ is the propitiation not only for us who are of the Jewish nation,
and live in this present age, but for them also of the Gentiles, who now do, or
hereafter to the end of the world, shall believe in him. And however the number
of them that believe, and have Christ effectually a propitiation to them, is
still but small comparatively, in which respect it may seem strange they should
be called the whole world, yet considering that whereas before Christ came, the
believers of the Old Testament were only to be found in Jury, (some few, very
few Proseyltes of the Gentiles excepted) now since Christ's death, the believers
of the New Testament are to be found (as St. Austin speaks) among all sorts
of persons, in all nations, at some time or other, Aug. in Epist.
and so dispersed through the whole world; as they congruously are called in
our Creed the Catholic Church so here by S. John, Populus Dei habet
plenitudinem suam etc. Ambr. de vocat. Gent. l. 1. c. 3.
the whole world; to which purpose is that excellent speech of St. Ambrose, The
people of God has its fullness, and there is as it were a particular
generality, whilst all men are taken out of all men, and a whole world is
chosen and saved out of the whole world.

This exposition of these words as it appears not to be irrational, so it
wants not the consent of many Interpreters, not only modern but ancient. The
design of St. John (says Calvin) in these words, is no other then to assert
this benefit of propitiation common to the whole Church. Least he should be
thought by saying, our, Vide Calv. Bez. in loc.
to restrain Christ's propitiation only to the Jews, he adds the whole world,
so Beza. Besides these Neotericks, we find this to be St. Austins
interpretation, speaking occasionally in one of his Epistles upon this Text, As
(says he) the whole world is said to lie in wickedness because of the tares,
Aug. ep 48.
so Christ is said to be the propitiation for the sins of the whole world,
because of the wheat which grows throughout the whole world. Yea, the Greek
Fathers render this very sense of these words; so Oecumenius upon the Text it
self. This he says, either because he wrote to the Jews, Oecumen. in loc.
that he might extend this benefit to the Gentiles, or because the promise was
not only made to those in that time, but all that shall come after them. Cyr.
in Ioh. l. 11. c. 8.
So St. Cyril comparing this Scripture with that of Christ's in the Gospel, I
pray not for the world, reconcileth them, by affirming that where St. John
says, the whole world, he meane^h them that should be called of all nations
through faith, to righteousness and holiness.

That which according to this construction we are to take notice of, is, the
largeness of Gods grace to the times of the New, above that to those of the
Old Testament: They who since the coming of Christ, partake effectually of his
propitiation, are of all sorts and ages of the world; to which purpose is that
acknowledgement which the four and twenty Elders in the Revelation make to
Christ, Revel. 5.19.
Thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. Among other resemblances, M^l. 4
2. Vide Ambros. P^. 11^.
Christ is compared by the Prophet Malachy to the Sun, and among others for
this reason, because like the Sun he communicates light, heat, life to all
parts of the world, and therefore he says of himself, I am the light of the
world; and again, I give life to the world. It is well observed that, the first
promise of Christ, the seed of the woman was not made to Abraham the Father of
the Jews, Ioh. 6.33.8.12.
but to Adam the Father of the whole wo^ld; and whereas the Jews call Christ
the Son of Abraham, and the Son of David, who were Jews, Christ usually
calls himself the Son of m^n, which takes in Gentiles as well as Jews. In
this respect it is well taken notice of, that the place of Christ's birth, was
domus publici juris, not a private house, but an Inn, which is open for all
passengers, and that not in a chamber, but the stable, which is the commonest
place of the Inn; for though every guest has his chamber private, yet the
stable is common to them all? to mind us, that He who was borne, should be a
common Savior to high and low, noble and base, rich and poor: besides, the
superscription upon his Cross was written as St. Cyril and Theophylact
observe, Cyr. in Ioh. l. 12. c. 10. Theoph. in Luc.
not only in Hebrew, the language of the Jews, but in Greek and Latin, the
languages of the Gentiles; and the Cross was erected not within the city, but
without the gate; to intimate says Leo, ut crux Christi non Templi esset Ara,
sed mundi, that it was not an Altar of the Temple, Leo de pass. Se^m. 8.
but the World: Indeed what part of the world is it that Christ's propitiation
reaches not to? S. Basil putting the question why the world was redeemed by a
Cross, makes this answer, Basil in (...) 11.12.
that a Cross has four distinct parts, which represent the four parts of the
world; to all which, the efficacy of the Cross reaches. Cypr. de pass.
An emblem of this truth St. Cyprian has found in the four letters of the
Greek word (...), which is given to Christ, which letters are the first of
those Greek words, which signify the four corners of the world; and St. Austin
in Christ's garment, Io^. 19.27. Aug. in (...). Tr. 118.
of which St. John says, the soldiers made four parts, to each soldier a
part, which he conceives to figure the Church, gathered out of the four parts
of the world. Indeed this was Gods promise to his Christ, Ask of me, and I will
give thee the utmost parts of the world for thy possession; and to his Church,
I will bring thy seed from the East, Ps. 2.8. (...). 43.5.6.
and gather thee from the West, I will say to the North, Give up, and to the
South, Keep not back.

From this assertion it appears that the Church is (in i^ self considered) a
great multitude, and especially the christian in comparison of the Jewish
Church. We read of Noah, that he blessed his two sons, Sem and Iaphet; Genesis
9.29.
the former a type of the Jews, and the latter of the Gentiles: now concerning
Iaphet, he says, God shall enlarge him, and he shall dwell in the tents of
Shem, to intimate, says St. Hierome, the enlarged multitude of the Gentile
believers; Hier. qu. Heb* Is. 54.2, id. in Is.
and the same Father upon these words of the Prophet, Enlarge the place of thy
tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thy habitations, spare not,
lengthen thy cords, strengthen thy stakes, says, hoc intelligitur de
Ecclesiarum magnitudine, this is to be understood of the greatness and
multitude of the Church, by reason of its spreading over all the world. It is
well worthy our observation, that whereas the Temple of Solomon had only one
gate, the court of the Gentiles which compassed the Temple had four, 1. Chron.
9.24.26.13.
yea, the City of the new Jerusalem an emblem of the Christian Church has not
four, but twelve Gates; three at every corner, Revel. 21.13.
and these never shut, to intimate what a continual confluence there should be
to Christ from all parts of the Earth.

And surely beloved, Hoc probe novisse multum prodest, it concerns us much to
meditate on this truth, Gualt. in loc.
whereby as the pride of the Jews is humbled, so the hope of the Gentiles is
erected. Indeed since it belongs to the whole world, it may well be matter of
great joy, and that such a joy as may put us upon thankfulness for this grace of
God which has appeared to all men, Tit. 2.14.
and brings Salvation. That cloud which was at first but the breadth of a
man's hand, 1 Kin. 18.44.
has now covered the face of the Heavens; that contemptible stone cut out of
the mountain, has filled the whole earth. Dan. 2.35.
Christ is as well a light to lighten us Gentiles, as the Glory of his people
Israel; nor is he a propitiation for the Jews only, Luke. 2.32.
but for the whole world of them that believe in him.

2. But further, these words, He is the propitiation, may be construed in
respect of the virtue and sufficiency of his propitiation, according to which
notion the whole world is to be taken in a more comprehensive construction.

Did. 3.
To unfold which be pleased to take notice of a double sufficiency, the one
intrinsecal, or natural, arising from the worth and value of the thing, the
other extrinsecall, and positive arising from the ordination and institution of
God, suitable to which this phrase, the whole world is to be more or less
extended.

1. Christ's propitiation is sufficient as to its natural value; for the sins of
the whole world, comprizing not only men, but Angels. There is (no doubt)
merit enough in the blood of Christ to pacify God for the sins of the devils as
well as men, and the reason is plain, because the value of Christ's passion
depends primarily on the dignity of the person suffering, so that the person
being infinite, the value of his passion must be infinite, and since an
infinite merit can have no limitation, we may truly say, He is a propitiation
sufficient for the whole world, containing as well spiritual as earthly
wickednesses, yea not only for one, but a thousand worlds, yea as many
millions, as we can imagine.

Nor does the dissimilitude of the nature which Christ took, and in which he
suffered to the angelical hinder, but that his death might in it self be
sufficient for Angels, if God had so pleased. For what crime of any creature
whatsoever can be so heinous, for the expiating of which, the shedding of the
blood of God cannot suffice? and if Christ obtained confirmation for the Angels
that stand (as the Learned generally acknowledge) that he is not a propitiation
for the Angels that f^l is only from Gods pleasure, not any want of dignity
and sufficiency in the price which was paid by him.

2 But when the schools speak of Christ's dying for all sufficiently, and
accordingly some Expositours interpret this expiation sufficient for the sins
of the whole world, it is as the Learned Davenant has excellently observed,
Carthus. Serra in loc.
and solidly proved another kind of value, to wit, such as arises from divine
ordination, and thus (though we must exclude Angels, and consider men, only as
viatores, whilst they are in the way since (as S. Bernard truly, Sanguis
essusus super terram non descendit ad inferes. Bern. in Cant. Sermon 75.
) The blood of Christ which was shed on earth goes not down to hell) yet) we
are by the whole world to understand omnes and singulos, all and every man that
has been, is, or shall be in the world so that we may truly assert. It was the
intention of God giving Christ, and Christ offering himself to lay down such a
price as might be sufficient, and so upon Gospel terms applicable to all
mankind, and every individual man in the whole world.

To unfold this truth aright, I shall briefly present two things to your
consideration:

1. A price may be said to be sufficient, either absolutely, or conditionally;
a price is then absolutely sufficient, when there is nothing more required to
the participation of the benefit but only the payment of the money; and thus
we are not to conceive of Gods ordination, that Christ's death should become an
actual propitiation without any other intervenient act on our part; He dyed
not in this sense for any, much less for all; when therefore we say, God would
that Christ should lay down a pr^ce sufficient, and so applicable to every man,
it is to be understood in a conditional way, upon the terms of faith and
repentance.

And hence it is, that though Christ dying, suffered that punishment which was
designed to be satisfactory for the sins of every man, yet God does justly
inflict the punishment upon the persons of all them who are not by faith
partakers of Christ's death, because it was intended to satisfy for them only
upon cond^tion of believing.

2. Know further, that though God intend Christ's propitiation conditionally
appl^cable, aeque, as well to every, as any man, yet he did not ex aequo,
aequally intend it for every man; it is one thing to say, He is a propitiation,
not for our sins only, but for the sins of the whole world, and another thing
to say, He is a propitiation as fully for the sins of the whole world, as He is
for ours. It is observable in Scripture, that some places speak of Christ
laying down his life for his sheep, John 10.15. Gla. 5.25.
and giving himself for his Church, and others of Christ's dying for all, and
tasting death for every one; in one place, He is called the Savior of the
body, and in another, v. 23.
the Savior of the world, nor will it be hard to reconcile these, ^ Ioh 4.9.
if we distinguish of a general and a special intention in God, that the fruit
of his (...), love to mankind, this of his (...), good will to some particular
persons by the former, he intends Christ's propitiation applicable to all,
Christus passu ^s est pro (...) nobis tamen specialite^ (...) Amb* (...)
sufficienciam sed (...) electis (...). P. Lumb. did. secunda. lit. h. Joh.
3.16. Isa 53.10. H^b 8 22 23.
by the latter He decreth it to be actually applied to some, according to this
it is that S. Ambrose says, Christ suffered generally for all, and yet
specially for some, and Peter Lumbard, Christ offered himself on the Altar of
the Cross for all, as to the sufficiency of the price, for the elect only, as
to efficacy, because he ef^ects salvation only for them that are
praedestina^ed. Sutably hereunto it is, that Divin^s conceive a double covenant
to be intimated i^ Scripture, the one universal, and cond^tionall, the other
special and absolute, the one made with all, and every man upon these terms,
Whosoever believes in Christ, shall not perish, the other made with Christ
concerning a seed which He should see upon mak^ng h^s Soul an offering for
^in, to whom He promises not only Salvation by Christ upon condition of
believing, but the writing his law in their hearts, whereby they are enabled to
perform the condition and so infal^^by partake of that salvation. By all which
it appears, that notwithstanding Gods special affection, and d^cr^e of
election whereby he has purposed this propitiation shall be actually conferd
upon some, we may t^uly assert, God has a general love whereby He has
ordained the death of Christ an universal remedy applicable to every man, as a
propitiation for his sins, ^f he believe and repent. And hence it is, that this
propitiation as it it is applicable, so it is annunciable to every man, Indeed
as God has not intended, it should be actually applied, so neither that it
should be so much as a^^ually revealed to many men, but yet it is as
applicable, so annunci^ble, both by virtue of the general covenant God has
made with all, and that general mandate He has given to his Ministers of
preaching the Gospel to all, so that if any Minister could go through all the
parts of the world, and in those parts singly from man to man, He might not
only with a conjectural hope; but with a certain faith, say to him, God has
so loved thee, that he gave his only son, that if thou believe in him, thou
shall not perish, and that this is not barely founded upon the innate
sufficiency of Christ's death, but the Ordination of God appears in that we
cannot, may not say so to any of the fallen Angels for whom yet as you have
already heard Christ's death is intrinsecally sufficient.

And now what should the meditation of this truth afford us but matter of

1 Admiration at the riches of divine love to all mankind, and which rendereth
it so much the more wonderful, that whilst it is conferd on the whole world
of men, it is denied to Angels. That God should cause his wrath to smoke
against those spiritual and noble creatures the Angels, and appoint a
propitiation, a ransom for such crawling worms, sinful dust and ashes, as men
are, is it not to be admired at? Amb^^s. in Ps. 118.
St. Ambrose speaking of these words, the whole earth is full of thy mercy;
puts the question, Why is it not said the heaven as well as the earth? and
returns this Answer; because there are indeed spiritual wickednesses in high
places, sed non illae ad commune jus indulgentia Dei remissionemque pertinent
peccatorum, but the remission of God, and propitiation of Christ belongs not to
them; well may we in this consideration take up those words of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 8.3. H^b. ^.6.
quoted by the Author to the Hebrews upon this very occasion; Lord, what is
man that thou art so mindful of him, and the Son of man that thou visitest him.

2. Consolation to all despairing souls, it is an excellent saying of Leo,
Effusio pro in^ustis sanguinis (...) ^am p^tens est, etc. Leo de ^ass. Sermon.
12. c. 4.
The effusion of Christ's blood is so rich and availeable, that if the whole
multitude of captive sinners would believe in their Redeemer, not one should be
detained in the tyrants chains. Who art thou then that say Christ dyed not
for thee, and will not be a propitiation for thy sins? when the door is open
by God, why should it be shut by thee? when God is ready to receive thee, why
should thou reject Christ and cast away thy self? view the Text well, and
tell me if the whole world do not include thee? surely, omne totum continet
suas parts, omnis species sua individua, every species includes its
individuals, every whole its parts; it is both Calvin's and Gualters note upon
the word world, Vide Gra^^. Calv in loc.
that it is so often repeated, ne aliquem a Christi merito exclusum pu^aremus,
so Gualter, that we should not think any one excepted, ne quis omnino arceri se
putet modo ^idei viam teneat; so Calvin, lest any one should think himself
excluded, if he walk in the path of believing. Believe it, never any missed of
propitiation for want of merit in Christ, but of faith in themselves; why
should I give my self over, when my Physician does not? so long as I am one of
the whole world, and my particular sins are not so great as the sins of the
whole world, I will not cast away all hopes of propitiation.

3. Caution, that we do not hence presume of a propitiation without
application. St. John says, he is the propitiation for our sins, and for the
sins of the whole world; but we cannot infer, he is the propitiation for the
sins of the whole world; therefore he will be for ours, though we live as we
list. Alas brethren, you have already heard this propitiation; as it is
universal, so it is conditional; habet quid^m in se ut omnibus pro sit, sed si
non bibitur non medetur; Prosp. ad Vincent. object. prim. Ambr^s. de fide ad
Great. l. 4 c. 1 Id in Ps. 118. Oct. 5.
this cup of salvation has that in it which can benefit all, but if no
drinking of it, no healing by it. If thou do not believe says St. Ambrose,
Christ did not descend for thee, nor dye for thee, to wit, so as effectually to
save thee, and in another place, more aptly to our present purpose; if any one
does not believe, he defraudeth himself of that benefit which is so general;
indeed, by reason of this condition it falls out, that though Christ be a
propitiation for the sins of the whole world, yet it is not the whole world, no
nor the greater, no nor an equal part of the world, but a third, a fourth
part, a remnant, a little flock, partake of this propitiation, and therefore we
have a great deal of reason to fear and tremble, lest we miscarry, and have no
share in this propitiation, which is so universal.

4. Exhortation, that since Christ is a propitiation for the whole world, we
labor to make sure our own share in this universal good, it had been little
comfort to St. John, that he could say Christ is the propitiation for the sins
of the whole world; if he could not have said, he is the propitiation for our
sins: that known saying is in this case too often verified* later dolus in
universalibus, men deceive themselves whilst they rest in generalities,
content not thy self to know that Christ has dyed for the world, but strive to
be assured that thou shall be saved by his death, it will be a sad trouble at
that day for thee to think, I had a price in my hand, but I made no use of it,
I might have obtained propitiation by Christ, but I neglected it, there was a
remedy prepared, but I contemned it. And therefore let our great care be to
gain an interest in, assurance of this prop^tiation to our own souls, that
what it is in it self, it may be to us, and it may be for our sins efficiently,
what it is sufficiently not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole
world*

FINIS.
A TABLE of the material Truths in this Treatise.
A.
ADvocate, How affirmed of Christ, how of the Holy Ghost. 351. how Christ's
Advocateship differs from his Mediatorship. 352. He the only Advocate. 363.
wherein it consists. 354. with whom he is an Advocate. 356. what gives
efficacy to it. 357, 369. he is no Patron of sin, though advocate for sinners.
353. he is no Advocate for them that continue in sin. 346.347. we must be
advocates for Christ. 365 Afflictions compared to darkness. 151, 152.
Christians rejoice in them. 110. the Word of God comforts in them. 118 for sin
inflicted even on forgiven persons. 294. Ambition spiritual commendable. 192.
Angels. Christ's death in some sense suffi^ient to redeem the fallen Angels.
397. yet not applicable to them. 400. Anger; Gods how terrible. 371. sin the
cause of it. 369, 370. Antiquity; a note of verity. 80. what kind of Antiquity
is so. 81, 82. Apostles; the meannesse of their outward condition. 133. their
integrity and unblameableness. 71. Christ's witnesses. 21. their continual
converse with him. 64, 65, 66. why needful. 67, 68.
B.
BLood of Christ how taken in Scripture. 205. how often shed. 206. how it
cleanses from sin. 207, 208.
C.
CHildren. Regenerate persons must be as such. 327. they must reverence their
parents. 330. Christ. Why called the Word. 37, 38, 39, 40. The subject of the
whole Scripture. 42. how, the life the eternal life. 44, 45, 46 His eternal
subsistence from the beginning. 53, 76. Truly man. 68. God and man in one
person. 69, 212. How he was visible. 67. His excellent preaching. 64. His
unspeakable dignity. 6^ His fitness for the work of our Redemption. 54.
promised before sent. 43. our miserable condition without him. 46, 391. In what
respects said to be righteoue. 395. The only Refuge of a wounded conscience.
350. The Parable between him and the Mercy-Seat. 375. His great love to
sinners. 215. No fellowsh^p with God but through him. 98. no salvation but
through him. 388. Christians, their dignity. 102. their charity in desiring
others may partake with them. 86, 87.385. what is done to them reflects on
Christ. 101. Christ to be manifested in their lives. 60. Church, the Christian
in it self a great multitude. 393.395 Civility, how differenced from sanctity.
182, 183. Cleansing from sin twofold. 27, 28. the causes of it. 208.
Commandments of God, joined with promises. 131. how conversant about things
impossible. 228. many think they keep them all. 252. Communion with God and
Christ, and the Saints; see fellowsh^p. Confession threefold. 264. of sin
necessary to remission, and how. 280, 281, 282. it brings glory to God. 285.
benefit to us. 283. The devil an enemy to it. 285. it must be particular. 266,
267* chiefly of our ouwn sins. 269. to whom to be made. 271, 272. its
antecedent, ingredients, consequent. 273, 274, 275. to be performed by the
Holiest. 227. Conversion makes an alteration. 192, 192. others must be desired
by us. 87. Conversation of Christians ought to be exemplary. 179. Covenant of
Grace double, one general; the other special. 399.
D.
DArkness fourfold. 150. Death of Christ in our stead, for our sins, our
dischrge. 209, 210. what gave the merit to i^. 213, 214. no benefit by it to
wicked men. 219. Deceive. Man apt to deceive himself. 246. the more need to
wheare of it. 253, 254. there are many dece^vers. 246. Despair. Antidotes
against it, Christ's blood two. 216, 217. his Avocateship. 360, 361. his
propitiation. 381. especially the undversality of it. 400. despair and
presumpt on two dangero^us rocks. 344.
E.
EPistles; their use. 12. Exordium's; the properties of them. 18. Excuse men
apt to make for their sins. 268. by transferring the fault on others. 269. the
sins of the godly, no excuse for the wicked. 276, 237.
F.
FAlls. Saints nay fall grossly. 347. fear of falling, a preservative. 348.
Father, when applied to God, how taken. 50. how God is our Father, and how
Christ's. 357. Fathers love to their children. 333, 357. Faith, the Christians
spiritual sense. 74. the means of fellowship with God. 85. it applies, but
does not appropriate Christ. 38* no salvation but by faith in Christ. 389, 390.
greatly oppugned by the devil. 126. it is neither unmannerly nor uncharitable.
386. the only instrument of pardon. 281. Faithfulness; Gods in performing his
promises. 310, 311. ground of faith. 313. man's required in imitation of Gods.
312. Fellowship between Saints. 83. with God and Christ, wherein it consists.
91, 92, 93. we may have it as well as the Apostles. 84. how with the Father.
94. how with Christ. 95, 96, 97. earnestly to be desired. 109. the difficulty
of attaining it. 197. impossible to men continuing in their sins. 167.
Forgiveness of sin, the nature of it. 292, 293. why called cleansing. 296, 297.
Gods prerogative. 304.305, 306. Gods faithfulness obliges him to it. 312,
314. It is just with God to forgive sin, and how. 316, 317. mercy the impulsive
cause in respect of us. 315. it is only of sin past. 299. its universal
extent. 300, 301. how consistent with afflictions for sin. 294, 295. how
differ^nt from forbearing. 293. earnestly to be longed after. 298. man's
required in imitation of Gods. 308, 309. Forsaking sin to be joined with
confession. 275, 276. The truest part of repentance. 335. how far it is
required. 337.
G.
GEntiles as well as Jews, capable of the m^rit of Christ's death. 393, 394.
Gnostics, their impurity. 167. their pretenses of purity. 245. God, all good
in him. 111, 112. why compared to light. 137, 138. how manifesting himself in
the incarnation. 58. no author of sin. 142, 144. Gospel, why called the Word
of life. 30, 31. its excellency above the law. 33.129, 366. accidentally the
savor of death. 34. chiefly promissory. 129. a doctrine of joy. 115. its
Antiquity. 78, 79. its doctrines, made by wicked men encouragements to sin.
340. whereas they are arguments against sin. 341. though a refuge when we have
sinned. 366. Grace; the difference between sincere and counterfeit grace. 182,
183. see holiness.
H.
HEathen, their condition to be pitied. 392. Hide our sins from God we cannot.
265. Holiness, Gods, why compared to light. 139, 140. all holiness from him.
141.187. man's holiness why resembled by light, and by what light. 181, 182.
how it fits for fellowship with God. 198. Humility makes men low-conceited of
themselves. 249. she remainders of sin in us should make us humble. 238.
Hypocrites the worst of sinners. 148. sharply to be reproved. 149. they are
best conceited of themselves. 148. they say, they have no sin. 244, 245. they
pretend to fellowship with God, 163, 164. the most miserable men. 175. the
contrariety of their conversation to their profession. 172.
I.
Jesuits; their Arrogance in assuming that title to themselves. 95. Ignorance
compared to darkness. 151. affected, damnable. 170. Image of God what it is.
92. Imitation of God required. 189, 190. Incarnation, why called a
manifestation. 55, 56. why the second person incarnate. 57. Infidelity, it
makes God a liar. 360. Infirmities, to be altogether without them the
privilege of heaven, 228, 229.349. they accompany our best duties. 234, 235,
236. they hinder not fellowship with God. 218. they ought to be bewailed. 350.
but yet must not too much discourage us. 239. John his humility. 9. prudence.
10. innocence. 11. his first Epistle, the scope of it. 2, 3, 124, 125. the
comprehensiveness of it. 4, 5, 6, 7. why cvlled Cathalick. 14, 15, 16. Joy, it
is that which all men seek after. 106. Christianity does not abolish it. 113.
the difference between worldly and spiritual joy. 108, 109, 110. Spiritual joy
is fixed on God and Christ. 107, 111, it supports in all afflictions. 110.
Judge; how Christ both Judge and Advocate. 352. we must not judge according to
outward shows. 165. our own frailties should make us judge charitably of
others. 238, 239, 348. Justice of God appeare^h both in forgiving penitents,
and punishing of the impenitent. 322, 323. Justification and sanctification
inseparable. 290. Justiciaries, their self-conceit. 244.245. the causes of it.
251, 252.
K.
Knowledge not avayleable without practice. 185, it must be communicated to
others. 24. of God, how to be attained, 143. of sin, an antecedent to
confession. 273.
L.
LIfe Eternal to be sought after. 4. how great the joy of it. 112, 113. in
what respects through Christ. 45. Light threefold. 180. Love of God to man
threefold. 377, 378. Lie, wicked men fasten on God 255. hypocrisy a real lie.
172, two things concur to a lie, 166.169. three sorts of lies. 173.
M.
MEan things made choice of to be Christ's instruments, and why, 133.134.
Mediatorship only belonging to Christ. 98.99. how different from his
Advocateship. 352.353. Men ranked into two sorts. 196. Metaphors must be
familiar. 135, 136. Ministers must be sent. 25. they must be assured of the
truth of what they deliver. 73. what they declare to others, must be received
from Christ. 132. they must give every one their due. 137, 138. their language
must be plain. 39. their aim is to beat down sin, 338. they must use mildness
in their instructions. 333.334. fathers to the people, and how. 328. their
great love to the people. 331, 332. their care of, and joy in the peoples
welfare. 119, 120, 123. they must seek the peoples benefit. 85, 86. to be
honored, and reverenced, and obeyed. 32, 330, 331, how far confession to be
made to them. 271. what their power in forgiving. 307. Morality how different
from Sanctity. 182.183.
N.
NAme; it is prudence sometimes to conceal it. 10.
O.
OBedience; the properties of it represented by walking. 184. Omniscency, Gods
attribute. 138. Original sin remaining in the best. 231, 232.
P.
PApists, we dare vie with them in the point of antiquity. 82. Pardon of sin,
see forgiveness. Precepts. See commandments. Presumption the grounds of it.
162. the difference between presumptuous sinners, and weak Saints. 262.
Christ's universal propitiation no just cause of it. 401. Pride Spiritual,
what should abase it. 103. Profession without practice a lie 170.173. the loose
conversation of professors, how great a dishonor to God, Religion, and injury
to themselves. 174, 175. Promises; their worth. 130. benefit. 43, 303. free,
and yet conditional. 130. Punishment of the guiltless, how consistent with
Gods justice. 316, 317. of the Godly, how consistent with forgiveness. 294.
Purposes without performance unavailable. 186. Propitiation. See
Reconciliation. Christ is the propitiation. 369, 374, 377. the several causes
of it. 380.
R.
REeconciliation is of God to man, as well as man to God. 370, 371. merited
only by Christ. 378. attributed both to his sacrifice and Intercession 368.
God being our Father very willing to it, 357. Redemption in what sense
universal. 395, 396. Religion Christian continually proposed. 75. Reproof
must be plain. 147. gentle. 149, 150. with respect to the difference of
sinners. 148. how profitable. 16 Resurrection of Christ how proved. 97.
S.
SAcrament of the Lords Supper, no corporal presence in it. 69. Sacrifices all
looked at Christ. 376. Saints may fall grssoely. 347, 348. Salvation, only by
Christ. 388, 389. Satisfaction, made by Christ to Gods justice. 318, 319. how
consistent with remission. 320, 321. Scriptures, their fullness, sufficiency.
8.116. they consist of three parts, 1. The certanty of Apostolical writings.
70, 71. Gods mercy in giving them to us. 13.28. Some parts more useful then
others. 145. fullness of joy afforded by them, 141. to be read by the vulgar.
116, 117.118. Senses; the velid^ty of a testimony from them. 32. Shame, when of
confessing sin, bad. 265 Sin. To sin how taker in Scripture. 345. it is a
wandering. 287. why called unrighteousness. 288, 289. it makes a man a debtor.
292. it renders us filthy in Gods sight. 296. the souls sickness. 325.
compared to darkness. 152, 153. the great guilt of it. 214. the only
makebate. 369, 370. God cannot be the author of it. 142. all men by nature
sinners. 226. The holiest not without it here. 226, 227, 228, 229. from gross
sins they may be free. 230. the sins of the godly no excuse for the wicked*
233, 234. Christ a propitiation for the greatest sins. 387. Son how destinct
from, and one with the Father. 51, 52. to be worshipped as the Father. 58. how
inferior to the Father. 356.
T.
TEstament, the difference between the New and the Old. 33.41. our happiness,
who live in the times of the New. 41, 42. Trinity illustrated by the metaphor
of light. 136. Truth three fold. 170. to do the truth what. 171.
W.
WAlking what it imports 154. Watchful we ought to be, because prone to sin.
^39. Wicked men delight in sin. 155. make it their course. 156. grow worse and
worse. ibid. their miserable estate. 158, 159. they cannot have communion with
God. 186. Witness, how many ways we bear it to Christ. 23. Word of God, a
great mercy that it is written. 13, 28. the rule of truth. 259. as it is among
us, so it must be in u^. 257, 258, a preservative against sin, and accord^ng^^
to be made use of. 338, 339. Words nothing without works. 18^. World made by
Christ. 40. how (...) the whole world. ^9^, ^99. Writing, the advantage of it.
26.
ERRATA.
PAge 12. line 36. read (...). p. 15. l. 17. (...) r. (...). p. 17. l. ^. s.
we. r. was. p. 22. l. ^. bl. the, and. r. receive. p. 23. l. 21. r. credit. p.
24. l. 32. r. e^r^and p. 39. l. 2^ r. ^^struse. and l. 30. r. Gospel p. 36 l.
35. f. their, r. word. p. 80 l 21. bl the (.) and ^ are it in l. 12. after
have. p. 86. l. 3. marg. f. (...) de. p. 108. l. 7. r. ^oye^. p. 109 l. 15. r.
these. p. 119. l. 35. r. here. p. 120. l. 22. bl. afterward. p. 12^. l. ^7. r.
hardly. p. 127. l. 10 1. (...) 1^. r. he before presently. p. 129. l. 19. r.
here. 36. r. a before promissory p. 100. l. 10. marg. r. ment^mur. p. 168. l.
18. bl. the (:) p. 201. in the Tit. (...). l. 25. r. case. p. 203 l. 27. r. it
is it. p. 204. l. 3. after clause r. (...). p. 205. l. 34. after us r. as. p.
207. l. 6. after to r^ give. l. 7. r. doubt. p. 209. l. 11. r. (...) p. 211. l.
3. r. (...). l. 23. r. could not be l. 33. f. sure r. since. p. 212. l. 25.
aft^r upon r. those words. p. 215. l. 32. r. sight p. 223. l. 10. r. according.
l. 13. bl. so. l. 35 set the figure 2. p. 224. l. 30. bl. at and. p. 226. l.
35. r. scipsi^. p. 227. l. 16. r. sense. p. ^29.^8. marg. (...). p. 246. l. 9.
after and r. as. p. 257. l. 26. f. a r. the p. 259. l. 22. after the r. truth.
p. 261. l. ^. for his r. Gods. p. 271. l. ^5. bl. the (,) after notorious. p.
275 14. ^. that r. (...). p. 276. l. 24. after su^ bl. the (,) p. 283. l. ^5.
r. (...)* p. 284. l. 1^. after sincere bl. (,) p. 287. l. 15. f. (...). r
(...). f. sua r. su^m. f. (...). p. 288. l. 15. m. r. (...)* p. 289. l. 36.
transfer the (.) from aff^ight to thee. p. 293 l. 3. f. (...) r. (...) p. 295.
l. 34. r. cancelling. p. 333. l. 24. bl. ad 27.28. f. sincerity r. severity.
28. f. hardne^s r. hardens. p. 338. l. 23. r. as clear glas^e. p. ^42. l 28.
after excite bl. the (,) p. 345* l. 3. r. repentance. p. 346. l. 7. r. it is.
p. 351. l. 6. f. this r. the. p. 355. marg. r. lap. p. 358. marg. r. Mestrez.
p. 361. marg. d. verum. r. indicat. p 362. l 9. bl. (:) 10. r. perverted. p.
363. l. 6. r. plead. p. 369. l. 10. f. the (.) put a (,) p. 370. l. 33. put a
(,) after contentions. bl. the (,) after Solomon. p. 372. l. 8. r. carrying in
it. p. 374. l. 26* after native bl. the (,) p. 381. l. 25. bl. a. p. 387 l. 20.
r. and. 21. r. Christ.

Books printed, and are now to be sold by Nathanaell Web, and William Grantham,
at the black Bear in S. Paul's Churchyard, near the little North-door
Books in Quarto.
MAster Isaac Ambrose, Prima, media and ultima, [First, Middle, and Last
things] in three Treatises, of regeneration, Sanctification, and with
Meditations on Life, Death, Hell, and Judgment, in 4. Mr. Nathanael Hardy, 11.
several Sermons, preached upon Solemn occasions, collected into one Volume, in
4. -- [The first Ep. General of St. John] unfolded and applied in 22. Sermons,
in 4. [History surveyed in a brief Epitome: or, a Nursery for Gentry] comprised
in an intermixed discourse upon Historical, and Poetical Relations, in 4. Mr.
William Nicolson's full and plain Exposition of the Church Catechism, in 4.
Dr. Stoughton's 13. Sermons, being an Introduction to the Body of Divinity, in
4. Dr. John Preston [The Golden Scepter, with the Churches Marriage, and the
Churches Carriage] in three Treatises, in 4. -- A position delivered in
Cambridge, concerning the Irresistibleness of Converting Grace, in 4. Mr.
Thomas Cradock [Gospel-Liberty] in the Extention and Limitation of it, in 4*
Mr. John Browning, [Concerning Public Prayer, and the Fasts of the Church]
six Sermons, or Tracts, in 4. Mr. Thomas Parker [The Visions and Prophecies of
Daniel expounded] wherein the Mistakes of former Interpreters are modestly
discovered, in 4. Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum ex Authoritate primum Regis
Henrici 8 inchoata, in 4. Mr. George Strode [The Anatomy of Mortality, divided
into eight Heads ( viz.) 1. The Certainty of Death, 2. Meditations on Death, 3.
Preparations for Death, etc.] in 4. Dr. Daniel Featly [The Grand Sacrilege of
the Church of Rome, in taking away the Sacred Cup from the Laity at the Lords
Table] in 4. Mr. Rich: Lewthwat [Vindiciae Christi and obex errori Arminiano; A
Plea for Christ] in three Sermons, in 4. Welsh Common Prayer, with the
Singing-Psalms in 4. Mr. John Lawsons [Gleanings and Expositions of some of the
more difficult places of holy Scripture] in 4. Mr. John Cotton [The way of the
Churches of Christ in N. England] in 4. Mr. Mr. Edward Thorp [The New Birth, or
Birth from Above] in 4. Sermons, in 4. Mr. John Vicars [The Schismatic sifted,
etc.] in 4. -- [Coleman-street Conclave visited, and that grand Impostor, the
Schismatics Cheater in chief, truly and duly discovered] in 4. Roberti Heggi
Dunelmensis aliquot Sacrae Paginae Loca, Lectiones, in 4. Mr. John Jews
[Contemplations upon these Times, or the Parliament explained to Wales] in 4.
[The Beacon flaming, with a non obstante against those that plead for Liberty
of Printing, and publishing Popish Books] in 4. [The Ranters Reasons resolved
to nothing, or the Fustification, instead of the Justification of the mad Crew,
etc.] in 4. Mr. Nath. Stephens [A precept for the Baptism of Infants, out of
the New Test.] in 4. Mr. Josiah Ricr^ft [A Nosegay of Rank-smelling Flowers,
such as grow in John Goodwin's Garden, etc.] in 4. Dr. Sam. Annes^y [The first
Dish at the Wil^shire Feast] a Sermon preached before many worthy Citizens of
London born in that County, in 4. [Communion with God] in two Sermons, preached
at Paul's before the Lord Major of London, in 4. Mr Edmund Calamy (The Monster
of sinful Self-seeking Anatomized) A Sermon preached at Paul's before the Lord
Major of London, in 4. Mr. John Warren of Hatfield-Regis in Essex [The Potent
Potter] A Sermon preached at a Fast before the Parliament, in 4. -- [The
Unprofitable Servant] A Sermon preached at the Assize at Chelmsford in Essex,
in 4. Dr. Robert Gell, A Sermon touching Gods Government of the World by
Angels, preached before the Astrologers, in 4. Dr. John Wincop [Gods Call to
Weeping and Mourning] A Sermon preached at a Fast before the Parliament, in 4.
Mr. George Walker: A Sermon preached at a Fast before the Praliament, in 4.
Rich. Meggot [The Rib Restored] or the Honor of Marriage. A Sermon preached in
Dionis Back-Church: occasioned by a Wedding the fifth of June 1655. Mr.
Valentine: A Sermon preached at a Fast before the Parliament, in 4. Mr. William
Good [Jacob Raised] A Sermon preached at a Fast before the Lords in Parliament,
in 4. Mr. Tho. Goodwin [The great Interest of States and Kingdomes] A Sermon
preached before the Parliament, in 4. Mr. Sam: Kem [The King of Kings] His
privy marks for the Kingdoms choice of new Members; A Sermon preached upon the
choice of Burgesses for the City of Bristoll, in 4. Mr. Ben: Hubbara [Sermo
Secularis] Or, a Sermon to bring to remembrance the dealings of Jehovah with
this Kingdom of England, in 4. Mr. J. P. A Sermon preached upon Mat. 22.21.
wherein is set forth the Kings Due in part, and the Peoples Duty, in 4. Mr.
Ambr. Stavely (Index Expurgatorius: Or, a short Examination of the Doctrine of
Purgatory) A Sermon, in 4. Mr. Peter Sterry (The Clouds in which Christ comes)
A Sermon preached before the Parliament, in 4. -- (The Teaching of Christ in
the Soul) A Sermon preached before the Par. in 4.
In Octavo large.
Mr. Robert Young (A Sovereign Antidote against all Grief, with the Victory of
Patience) in 8. Mr. Ben. Needler (Expository Notes, with Practical Observations
upon Genesins) in 8.
Octavo small.
Mr. Geo: Hopkins (Salvation from Sin by Jesus (Christ, or the Doctrine of
Sanctification, which is the greater parr of our Salvation, founded upon
Christ, who is both the Meritorious and Efficient cause of Sanctifying Grace,
purchasing it for working and perfecting it in his people, etc. in 8. BP.
Davenant (An Exhortation to Brotherly Communion betwixt the Protestant
Churches) in 8. BP. Cooper (The Triumph of a Christian) in 3. excellent
Treatises: 1. Jacobs wrestling with God, etc. in 8. Mr. John Robotham (The
preciousnesse of Christ to Believers, etc) in 8. (The Bee-Hive of the Romish
Church) A work of all good Catholics, to be read, and most necessary to be
understood, in 8. Testament Roman letter, Scotch print in 8. Mr. John Simson
(The Perfection of Justification against the Pharise^s, the Purity of
Sanctification against the Stainers of it, the Unquestionablenesse of
Glorification against the Sadduces,) etc. in. 8 Mr. Hall (The Loathsomeness of
long hair) A Treatise wherein the Question is stated, many Arguments against
it produced: with an Appendix against Painting, Spots, Naked Breasts, etc. in
8. -- ( Vindiciae Literarum, The Schools Guarded) or, the excellency and
usefulness of Arts, Sciences, Languages, History, and all sorts of Human
Learning, in subordination to Divinity, with an Appendix in Answer to Mr.
Webster, in 8. Mr. John Warren of Hatfield in Essex (Principles of Christian
Practice) Illustrated with Questions and Scripture-answers, in 8. Mr. Daniel
Evans (A Baptismal Catichisme) showing unto what person, whether of riper
years, or as yet Infants, the Sacrament of Baptism ought to be administered
according to the Scriptures, in 8.
Twelves large.
Mr* Nich: Byfield (The Marrow of the Oracles of God, or, diverse Treatises
containing Directions about six of the weightiest things can concern a
Christian in this life, in 12. (The Practice of Christianity) or, the Epitome
of Mr. Rogers seven Treatises, in 12. Mr. Thomas Iackson (The true Evangelicall
Temper) wherein Divinity and Ecclesiastical History are interwoven and mixed,
etc. in three Sermons, in 12.
Twelves small.
Mr. Mullard (Celestial Soliloquies) composed of several Divine Meditations
and Prayers, drawn from the holy Scriptures, in 12. Francis Thin, Esquire. (The
perfect Ambassador) treating of the Antiquity, Privileges, and Behavior of
Men, belonging to that Function; in 12.

