A DESCRIPTION OF THE Last Voyage TO BERMUDAS, In the Ship MARYGOLD, S. P.
Commander;

By J. H. (...)

Begun Nobember the twelfth, 1670. And ending May the third, 1671.

With Allowance.

London, printed for Rowland Reynald at the Sun and Bible in the Poultrey 1671.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE Governor and Company OF LONDON, For Plantation of
the Summer Islands.
AS richest Diamonds when enshrined in Gold,
And set in darkest Foyls, more Rays unfold,
So stands that beauteous ISLE on Rocks and Sands,
Encircled with Great Neptune's watery Bands;
Who when impelled with Gusts, make haste before,
Dashing themselves, Enamel all the Shore:
This pleasant PILE's the Subject of my Muse,
That late from raging Seas suffered abuse,
Now enters Port, and after dreadful Toyls,
To You (Renowned Sirs) gives up her Spoils.
The Matter, Place, Occasion, every Section
Are Yours, and therefore claims your just Protection.
Accept (Great Sirs) Your own; for by Your Eye
These Cabin Sea-sick Lines must live or die.
Your Honors most humble Servant, John Hardy. (...)

To his Honored Friend, CAPTAIN S. P. Commander of the Good Ship MARYGOLD,
1670/71.
MOst noble Captain, under whose Command,
I have been Servant both by Sea and Land,
Peruse these Lines, which though they do not show
Wonders unto you, yet they are true, you know,
Your self enduring many a bitter Blast,
From the first of the Voyage, to the last.
Read and accept them, so desires your Friend
Who is, and will be, till his Life does end.
John Hardy.

To his loving Friends, Mr. T. H. and P. H. Masters Mates of the Ship MARYGOLD.
MOst loving Friends, to you I do indite
This my small Journal, you being in sight
Of what is mentioned in it: Don't expect
Here Signs and Tangents, or a Course direct
Unto this Island: If so, I a fool
Should be by you accounted, in the School
Of Mathematics never being bred,
Nor ever heard Mysterious Lectures read
Concerning Navigation: Idle times
Was the true Product of these foolish Rhimes,
Which craves Acceptance from your friendly hand,
By him who is your Friend for to command,
John Hardy.

The Prologue.
ASsist Great Jove, and help my wandering Muse,
Poetic Strains into my Quill infuse,
To sing the Truth, the Praises, and the Fame
Of the Isle Bermuda, called so from the Name
Of Spanish Jam. Bermudas: According to Heylin's Cosmography it was found out
by a Spaniard, who was there cast away; then by an Englishman, whose name was
Forbisher; lastly inhabited by Captain Summers, who dying in this Island was
Embalmed, and his Body carried into England, but his Bowels buried at St.
Georges Island near the State-House, as they name it: It has not been long
since Inhabited; for there was found Engraven on a Palmeta-Tree these Words,
which are set up in the Governors Hall over his Chair:
though of late
Its Name was changed by Summers happy fate,
Whose Heart and Bowels buried there, to be
A Witness of it to Eternity.
CONDITUR IN HOC LOCO NAVIS PER RICHARDUM FROBISHERUM ONERIS 70. QUAE VIRGINIAE
DESTINATOR NOS OMNES HINC TRANSPORTABAT.

ANNO 1610. MAY 4.
OUR VOYAGE Outward bound.
WHen cold November with a hoary Head,
The fertile Earth with Snow had overspread,
Joined with white Frost, upon its twelfth day, we
Set sail from Gravesend, being bound to see
Bermudas, in the Ship Marygold; which Flower
OF all the Deities take in your Power,
And from all Dangers safely her defend,
Granting her Voyage may have happy end.
Into the Hope we got, and there make stay
Two Nights, when with a fair wind we weigh
Our Anchors, setting Sail into the Downs,
Where shortly we arrived, which was the Bounds
For Shipping granted then, till mighty Jove
Sent a cold quaking North Wind from above;
After twice seven days space again we set
Our Sail, and in the term of two days get
Near to a point of Land is called the Start,
From which in the dark Evening we did part,
Jove's aid imploring, for now nothing we
Behold, but briny Billows of the Sea:
When shortly, for not fifty Leagues or more,
We gotten had from Noble Englands shore,
But Aeolus that too incoastant God,
Thought good to punish us, the blustering Rod
Of West winds Fury, and dark Nights together
Made cloudy, cold, and too inconstant weather:
Now Neptune with his furious Waves does kiss,
And toss our Marygold, but it is our bliss
She Is good conditioned, though Skies-mounting waves
Do threaten death, and seem to make our Graves
In it is in satiate Bowels, her rib'd Sides
Over the white curled Billows swiftly glides;
And although over all salt Seas she takes,
Yet little water then she is wont she makes;
It being Winter time, Reason does guide
Unto the Southward Mariners to slide,
To make the Proverb good, He that does run
The farthest way about, is nearest home.
Unto which purpose we our Course do take,
Some of the Charibby Islands for to make,
And cross Thinking to cross the Tropic Cancer, and make Anguilla Sombrero, or
some of the Virgin-Islands.
the Tropic Cancer, but the wind
Proved to us more auspicious and kind
Than we expect, to our Port we incline,
So straight our Course as if it were a Line
For many days, when as that at the last,
Bold Boreas from his Den sends cruel blast
From the Western Islands, at which rocky Land
I think he keeps his Court, and does command
All Winter time, for near't we always must
Expect to have sharp storms, and thundering gust
A week or more expired in this same weather,
A pleasant day came, and fair wind together;
So Dolphins swiftly through the Ocean glide,
To prey on flying Dolphins when once struck and brought into the Ship, change
their colors very often, till at the last they die, and remain a dunnish
color, and are of this form.
Fifish so near the side;
depiction of a flying fish
The Saylors with a Fish-gig deeply wound
Their tender bodies, that a deadly sound
The form of a Fish-gig.
depiction of a fishing harpoon
Possesses all their parts throughout, the which
Small time a Proteus change of colors reach.
Though Fortune has been churlish at the best,
Yet now we are paid with double Interest;
For within four times seven fair days, we
Long wished for Summer Islands plainly see;
When as our Captain caused a To fire a Piece of Ordnance, the usual custom to
give warning to the Pilot and Inhabitants that there is the Magazine Ship on
the Coast, whose duty it is to convey into Harbor.

In Kings-Castle Harbor, about a Mile and a half from the Shore.


roaring Gun
For to be fired, which once being done
A Pilot came aboard, through dangerous Rocks
Us safely carrying without any knocks,
Into Kings Castle Harbor, where does stand
Two Castles, entering ships for to command;
After salutes to either we at last
Near Captain Hubbarbs Bridge our Anchor cast;
So Januaries twenty seventh put end
To dangere outward, which us did attend;
We now our Sails unbend, and Topmast lo're,
And in short time our Goods The custom there is to fetch and bring their Goods
aboard, and their Seamen to be at no trouble, as in other places of the
West Indies.
are fetched ashore.
The Description of the Island.
WEll at Bermudas we arrived are,
After great trouble, pains, gusts, storms, and care;
And now the ship seems rightly named to be
A Magazine, as termed, for you may see
Some selling Linen cloth, with other knacks,
Which Pedlars use to carry in their Packs;
Some Brandy buy, and such like liquid ware,
Others of new Tobacco-pipes have care
To store themselves, whilst others do agree
Good to exchange for such Commodity
The Country does afford, and some are willing
To sell their Goods at three pence on the shilling
This time it lasts not long, when suddenly
Must work all hands, the Island-Boats we see
Deep laden with Tobacco, which they bring
Unto the side, from whence we take it in.
To give description of these same The Islands Boats after this Form, carrying
five or six Chests of Tobacco, or more. They lie so near the Wind, that they
will fetch the same place they look upon, close haled.
Boats,
With tripple cornered Sayls they always float
depiction of a ship
About the Islands, in the World there are
None in all points that may with them compare
But leave we now the ship till filled, take view
Of the Land, to try if what you heard be true;
Then to begin; there is Rocky Hills so high,
They seem for to out-dare the cloudy Sky;
And fertile Valleys during all the year,
Continual Liveries of green do wear;
In which no poisonous Creature e're has been
No Adders, Serpents, Toads, or Snakes are seen
To prejudice man's health, but it is stored
With Bieves, Goats, Oxen, Sheep which does afford
Fine woolly fleeces, with such things as these
Thou do abound, tied Tie all their Cattle, as Horses, Asses, Hogs, Goats,
Sheep, etc. to Trees, where they feed on the Mellilot, and Fennel, round about
them.
to Palmeta-trees,
Whose uses are so many, not unfold
Them all can any man; from Winters cold
It keeps their Houses thatched with 't, and its mats
For bedding makes, with baskets, brooms, and hats
Nay more, it Cordage does afford, in 'ts top
A Cabbage grows, for meat, and do but lop
Or bore a hole in it, you may plainly see
A pleasant Liquor flowing from the Tree;
It Is fruit is luscious, whose stone's black as Jett,
Will make neat Buttons, if with Silver set;
And its dry Leaves will serve in darksom night
In stead of Torches, Travelers to light.
Of all the Trees that is, or The Palmeta Tree is a straight Tree, about the
height of an Apple Tree, growing with broad Leaves at the top, closed together
in manner of a Fann, which they put to several uses more than I can here relate.
ever were,
None to the straight Palmeta may compare.
The lofty fragrant Cedars here Cedar Gumm as has been often experienced, is
good for Gonorrhea's, the Berries which are like Juniper Berries, are of the
same nature as Juniper Berries are, they boil them in water and make Drink for
their constant use of it.
do grow,
The Virtues of whose Fruits and Gums to know
Requires a larger time; here you may see
The Lime, the Lemmon, and the Orange tree;
So famed throughout the world, here at one time
Buds, blossoms, green, and ripe Fruit in the prime;
Pomgranates, Gwavers, Papawes, Fig Trees too,
Whereof a Pleasant kind of Drink they brew,
With Mulberries likewise; but if I may
Call it a Tree, the Pine bears Pine are much after the Figure of a Sceth
Thistle, and in my mind taste most like a Peach, or Maligotoon; they grow in
low marshy Grounds.
all away,
Whose crowned tops and bottom compast round,
Seems as if it were with green Garland crowned.
But Oh! its delicious taste surpasses words
Deep utterance; this only Fruit affords
All taste of others in it you think upon,
Pears, Apples, Peaches, Cherries, every one
Appears int's taste; here grows the prickle Pear
Whose inside of a scarlet Prickled Pears are of a most rare scarlet color,
but its Juice will not stain, for by water it may soon be washed away; it is
thought by some that Cochinele is produced of it.
color are.
Here Is Roots as well as Trees, Potatoes good
For sustenance of man to make pure blood.
And here Cassawder, to which, though it is Juice
Be Poison, yet they now have a device
To press and grate it, so in time of need
And sometimes else, they safely on it feed
Being baked in form of Bread; here is Indian-Corn
Whose weighty Ears on a long stalk is born;
In thickness like a Cane, it Nature roul'd
Close up in Leaves, to keep it from the cold;
Which being groun'd and boiled, Mush they make
Their hungry Servants Hunger for to slake:
But let me tell you, that there cannot be
A profit without discommodity;
For though no poisonous Living thing indeed
Inhabits there, yet grows a Poyson-Weed, a shrub which runs up Trees as the
Ivy, and has poisoned abundance of People, especially in wet, foggy, rainy,
weather, as my self can witness, and poisoned some that has only looked upon
it, as many can testify.
Poyson-Weed,
Whose very sight infects some, and its Juice
Will make men itch, as if a thousand Lice
About their bodies creep, in painful Wheals
And Pimples at the last it self reveals,
But never kills; Its Counterpoyson is
Sage of the Mountain, which you cannot miss
At all times for to find, in places where
This Weed is, for it grows to it very near.
Of Fowls they have enough, such as are Hens,
Capons, Ducks, Turkies kooped up in Pens;
Wild Pigeons, and other feathered Brood,
Some bad for nourishment, yet some are good;
With Tropic Longtails, of Tropic Birds are called Longtails, from one or two
Feathers longer than the rest, about a foot or more.
whose Nest there be
Amongst the rocks, a hundred Leagues to Sea
They fly: and also near unto the Shore
Plenty of Fish is, which the They have many more fishes, such as
Greyhound-fish, Rainbow-fish, Anchoves, though I think not the right; Cragfish
as big as Lobsters; Oysters, where in sometime they find small Pearl.
People store,
As Pilchards, Sinnets, Gruats, and Salmon Peal,
With Rock-fish, Porgoes, and the slippery Eel,
And Mullets plentiful are in the sound,
The water flowing to them under ground,
Being most salt, and all I believe the Island is hollow, for there is some
holes that none can find the end of them, some hot as a Stove upon the
Northerly wind, as that near Tuckers Town; and that there is water in them may
be proved; by the Coopers Hole, the Devils Hole, and a place near Walsingham-
Bay, etc. which water though a good distance from the Sea, is as briny and as
salt as it is, which may prove a passage from one into the other.
along the shore
There are dark Caves, of a Miles length or more
Extending under ground, in which there be
Deep holes with water, though no one can see
A passage for it in: Which dreadful Lakes,
Some sort of Fish do for their Refuge take;
Beside the foresaid Fish, with The Grains are like an English Prong.
grains they strike
The horned Cuckold, Cunny, and one like
The prickled Hedgehog: Angel-fish, by light
They carry in their Boats in darkest nights;
And Groopers too, none of the meanest size,
Which salted, they do send for Merchandise
To the West-Indian Islands, with their Beef,
Which yields the Inhabitants there much relief;
Here in the time of year, the The Whales here though they be of an indifferent
large size, the Gills are not above one or two foot long at most, from whence
the Whale-bone comes; some say that Sperma Ceti is the Spawn, others think that
it lies in the head, but it is certainly found to be the fat of the Whale, for
being put into a Lamp, and burned, it will turn to Sperma Ceti, which several
in the West Indies have proved to be true, that after the Oleus part is
consumed, the substance called vulgarly Sperma Ceti, remains.
mighty Whale
Appears upon the Coast, who with his Tail
Small Boats can over-set, out of whose Nose
Hogsheads of water gushes when he blows;
Which being seen on Land, in Boats they haste
Toward him, and their Lances sharp make fast
In his fat sides, who being hurt, along
The Boats draw with him dangerous Rocks among,
Changing the water with his purple gore,
To red, which of a pale green was before,
Tyring himself, till at the last to Death
He stoops, and roaring yields up his breath,
When into Harbor near unto the shore
Being towed, they cut him up themselves to store
With Oil out of his Blubber, which they burn
In Lamps, and unto other uses turn
It on occasion: but this sort of Fish
Is not the same for which they all do wish;
No Whale Bones in its Gill or in its Head,
No Sovereign Sperma Ceti here is bred;
The difference lying, others mouths are filled
With rows of Teeth, whereas this none does yield.
Here Is also Sharks, whose head affords a Gelly,
Good for the Cholick, and gripes of the Belly; Sharks are here in abundance,
whose Backbone looks most like a Japan, and its wide mouth stands so, that he
is fain to take his Prey lying on his back; in the cavity of his head there is
a substance, which being dried is good for abundance of Diseases, but more
especially for Gripes, and easy bringing women to Bed, which the Inhabitants
have approved even to admiration, when all things else have failed.

Being dried and powdered, this same Fish they take
As well as Whales, Oil of his fat to make.
Besides these, many more Fishes are found
About the main Land, being compassed round
With four hundred small Islands, rather more,
Some one, some two Miles distance from the shore.
And now to write a little of the State
Of this same Land, its Climate's temperate,
Which does produce long Life, and its degree
Abating thirty Minutes, It Is Latitude is 32 Degrees, 30 Minutes, and it is
Longitude 316 Degrees.
thirty three
Is found for Latitude, and some men say,
Three hundred and sixteen Degrees make way
From the Azores to it, to incline
By way of Longitude, unsearched Line;
A Governor there is, who is always sent
By the Honored Company, to the intent
To put in force, whatever they think fit
TO nact for good, when in the Court they sit;
Their Judges, Justices of Peace, and Shrief,
Constables, Marshals, Bailiffs, who relieve
The oppressed, and there is Captains who delight
Themselves in Arms, with daring Foes to fight.
But I forget the Ministers, who preach
In Churches, where young Children some do teach;
But cease my Muse, for no man can unlock
This Rock of Wonders, or this wondrous Rock,
Which though but two Miles broad, and twenty long
At most, it framed is so mighty strong
By Art and Nature, none but them who see,
Can think that such a place in the world to be;
If Armies come against it, they may rest
Free from all fears, if Treason in their Breast
Do not lie lurking: But behold the Ship
Which for to fill, our Seamen will not slip
Any occasion, But with Cedars Chest,
And Ravens-foot Tobacco in Ravensfoot Tobacco, called so from its blackness
and brightness, a common Proverb amongst them, for the better Stowage.
them pressed,
The Ship's Hold fills, but whatsoever be
In Cask to stow between Decks they agree;
And now the Ship's near full, we all prepare
Our selves for going homeward, some take care
For Fowls, fat Hogs, Corn, and Potatoes sweet,
Oranges, Limes, and Lemmons for to eat
With our Provision homewards, some do think
Of Sugar, and of Liquor for to drink
In time of need, but all of us take care
Our Cabbins with Oranges filled are;
Others of Rarities which in the Sea
Grows, such as Feathers, Black-rods, Coral be,
Provide themselves to give unto a friend,
Which when arrived they unto them send.
Homeward bound Voyage.
THE Ship now quite full, and a Western Gale,
The Anchors being up, now fills her Sail,
When that the glorious Rays of the bright Sun
Through one Sign of the Zodiac had not run,
The Pilot at the Boltsprit Pilot stands at the Boltsprit end because there is
no Landmarks, and he cuns the Ship in by the Rocks under water, luffing for
one, and bearing up for another; they usually choose to Pilot them in or out at
the Suns rising or setting, because then the Sun has the least reflection.
end does stand,
Giving from thence the strict Word of Command,
For Port or Starboard, which he thinks most fit
Her over the Sharp-pointed Rocks to get;
The Castles at our parting, once again
We do salute, while by them to the Main
A Mile or two from Shore we softly hie,
Trimming our Sails on purpose to lie by,
Unbending Cables, we our Anchors stow,
And hoise our Boats in, then away we go
Our Course for East, North-East we bravely steer,
The wind North-West is, and the weather clear,
So Marches twenty second about Night,
Of Summers Island we did lose the sight;
But we not sailed a days time at the least,
The Wind it came unto the East, South-east;
We tack about, and to the Northward stand,
Where as they say, the West-Winds have command
Most of the year, but we it found not so,
For East South East, and South Winds over blow
Putting us by out Sayls we lie a hull,
The briny Waves her almost filling full;
Upon our upper Decks, where above Hens,
And Ducks, with Turkeys, are shut up in Pens;
Which was for fresh Provision in store,
Of these are drowned in four hours or more,
Full sixty seven, but at the length we find
The Storms to assuage its fury, and the wind
To cease a little, so again we set
Our Courses reefed, till the Seas do get
Abated, which are grown so vast and high,
They seem to mount us to the Cloudy Sky;
One of which stormy Afternoons about
Four of the Clock, we saw a Water-Spout
So feared by Mariners, which passed by
Us with a Circling in the muddy Sky.
These Winds after about a Fortnights stay
In these same blustering Corners, came away
Unto the Westward board, where it does blow
So hard, again we forced are to go
Before it with our Fore-Sail, which we tend
With Braces aft, until the Storms do end;
The Sea running so deep, we are forced to cun,
Winding with Quarters, the Waves beat upon;
To answer't with our Helm, and Brace, which keeps
Her right before it, through the boystrous heaps
Of Waters, these Storms eighteen hours or more
Not lasts, but presently a sudden Shower
Of Rain is poured down, when as the South.
Wind opens loud his wide and blustering Mouth
Thunder and Lightning, mixed with Hail and Rain,
Unto the North-West brings it back again;
So that it once more seems, and does appear
As if the Weather would be fair and clear;
But all our Hopes soon vanished, for so hard
It puffs, we take in all Sayls, lo're our Yard
Till better comes, and this I dare affirm
Never worser Weather's for a three Weeks term,
In which space never having any Weather
We could count fair, for thirty Hours together;
Our only comfort was, the Moon shines bright
During this gusty time, most part of Night;
But dreadful Storms, not always cruel Fate,
To us poor Saylors, did predestinate;
For when fair Weather was to make us glad,
Our Oranges so rotten, caused a sad
And heavy Countenance, scarce being found
One amongst twelve, which we may call sound
As to keep home, for since the World began
See such a Hodge-Podge never did any man;
Most part being pickled up in such a state,
We bad from good with Shovels separate,
We took them in with Care bestowing Pains
To place them lightly, now as much again
We take, for Baskets with the bad we fill
To fling away, though sore against our Will;
And now the Western Islands once more we
Repass with a fair Wind, hoping to see
No such bad Weather as we had before,
To which end, we the Deities implore,
And surely they our Orisons did hear,
Most of the Weather being fair and clear;
Though that the fresh Gales oftentimes were ranging
From one unto another, changing
Till Luna came so full butt at her wane,
A South, and South South-west wind came again
Which though 'twas for us fair, yet it was joined
With dirty Weather, as 'twere interloin'd
For us, amongst the rest, one foggy day
A Bristol Ship we meet, for the Isle of May
Being bound, there Salt to load, who did us tell
Affairs in England went then very well
When she came out, with France we having Peace,
And all War with our Neighboring Nations cease,
He told us also, how that England bore
From us of Leagues, about two times fourscore
Upon the North-East Point, and having sent
Letters by us to's Friends, away he went;
And now we are near our wished for Port, we pray
For Sol's bright Splendour, in the midst of day,
An Observation that we may take
Before our Native Land, again we make,
But those our wishes we could not obtain,
For misty Clouds to us yet still remain,
With gusts, but the water changing, we did sound
On Easter Evening, and had the ground
At ninety Fathom, Greekish Shelly-sand,
Reckoning our selves then threescore Leagues from Land;
And seeing the warm Sun us debars
Of sweetest sight, at Noon the Northern Stars
We do observe, with his two Guards most bright,
Which glistred on Sunday and Mundy Night;
Which though 'twas truly done, next day we had
A Solar Observation, which us glad
Did make (although the Wind contrary blew;
For by it how Scilly bore w' exactly knew,
And that they Channel's open, the Degree
Being forty nine, with Minutes nine times three,
At which time we let run the Lead, and found
That sixty Fathom reached to the Ground.
Another certain sign is, that the Shore
Not many Leagues is off; for Weeds great store,
Called Britain Beds, upon the Seas do float,
Which unto Seamen is a certain Britain Beds are Weeds like to Laces, which
grow upon the Coast of Britain, and so are washed off from the Rocks into the
Sea.
Note
Of being in our Channel, all Night we
Bare in, and about twelve at Noon we see
The Lizard, which we past by with a Gale
So gentle, that we carry all the Sail
Which we can make, and parted about Night
From sight of Falmouth, and by it was light
We Are near unto the Start, having past by
Portland, the Wight, and also Beachy-High,
With Fairly, Foulstone, Dover, without stay,
A Pilot came aboard, us to convey,
So we hoyse up our Sails atrip, and came
To Westgate-Bay, and anchored in the same
Till the next morning, when our Sails we set
And the same Tide over the Flatts we get
Up to the Rivers Mouth, from thence to Lee,
So to Whole Haven, and to Tilbury;
But cease my Muse, the Voyage it is done,
At Gravesend let it end, as there't begun.
Finis Itineris Maritini.
The Epilogue.
NOthing does remain, but to give Praise
To God, who to us Mortals many days
His Favors and his Blessings did bestow
On whatsoever we do, where e're we go,
By Land, by Sea, in Storms, most bitter Blasts,
In Thunder, Lightning, and in Nights o're-cast
With dismal Clouds, and from the briny Waves
Most dreadful Fury, with what e're we crave
Has granted to us, then let us with one near^
Set forth his Praise till this Life we depart;
Let all Hands say Amen, Amen say I,
So be it done to Immortality.
Finis Coronat Opus. J. H.
FINIS.

