A LOUD CALL TO Great Mourning: IN A SERMON PREACHED On the 30th of January
1661. BEING The ANNIVERSARY FAST for the Execrable MURDER of our Late
SOVEREIGN LORD KING CHARLES the First, of Glorious Memory. BEFORE The
Honorable Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament.
In the Parish Church of Saint Margarets Westminster.

By Nath. Hardy D. D. D. R. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, and Vicar of
St Martins in the Fields.

LONDON: Printed by Abraham Miller for Joseph Cranford, at the Gun in Saint
Paul's Churchyard, 1662.

Veneris 31 die Januarij, Anno Regni Caroli Secundi Regis 13.
ORDERED,
THat the Thanks of this House be returned to Mr. Dean Hardy; and Mr. Alsop,
for the Sermons by them Preached yesterday before this House at St. Margarets
Westminster; and they are desired to Print their Sermons. And Sr. Thomas Meeres
is desired to return the thanks of this House to Mr. Dean Hardy, and my Lord
Richardson to Mr. Alsop.

Will. Goldesbrough Cler. Dom. Com.

To the Honorable and Loyal Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, OF THE COMMONS
HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT.
THere were some days which were called by the Romans, Atri and infansti,
Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. lib. 4. cap. 20.
black and omnious days, days not to be reckoned with a white stone, but
marked with a black coal. Such was, and no doubt will be for ever accounted
the 30th of January 1648. by the inhabitants of England, Scotland and Ireland,
as being a day wherein one King and three Kingdoms were beheaded at one blow.
The King deprived of his natural, and the Kingdoms of their political Head.

Before that dismal Day came, I thought my self many ways obliged to be
among the small number of those who did in their Pulpits earnestly deprecate,
and vehemently declaim against that villainous attempt.

Since that time, at the yearly Return, either upon or near the day, Isaiah
62. 6.
I adventured to become a remembrancer, To God (be it spoken with reverence) of
vengeance, To the people of penitence, for that bloody fact, a fact indeed,
which though it is not to be mentioned without abhorrency, yet cannot be
forgotten without stupidity.

I have now lived to see an Yearly Fast enjoined upon that doleful Day, to be
kept throughout all Generations; and by your favor (Worthy Senators) had the
honor to be one of your servants in that solemn Work this last Anniversary.

I knew not any Subject more proper for such a Day than Mourning, and (God
knows) my design and desire was to make all sorry but none angry. If because
of my impartial reprehension, any instead of being pricked to the heart with
sorrow, Acts 2. 37. and 5. 33.
were cut to the heart with anger; I am heartily sorry I was so much
disappointed of my aim.

My hope is, that if they who heard with a left ear, will be pleased to read
with a right eye, they will find nothing but what may very well admit of a
Candid construction, However, I bless God that my faithful (though slender)
performance met with your favorable acceptance.

In obedience chiefly to your desire, and partly for my own vindication, I have
made the Discourse public, which (without any wilful omissions, and with very
few additions) I humbly tender to your review and patronage, above all
commending it to divine benediction.

I cannot pass by that remarkable passage of providence, which so directed the
Preachers Discourses, that by the discord of their Notes, they made the sweeter
Harmony, whilst the one excited you to great Mourning, Matthew. 5. 11, 12.
the other to exceeding Joy. So that I may very fitly invert the Psalmists
words, Psalm. 30. 5.
Heaviness endured for the morning, but joy came in the evening. Nor were the
Texts (upon this account) more opposite one to the other, than both apposite to
the Day, on which there was cause at once both of grief for the peoples vices,
and joy in the Kings virtues; sadness for the sins which brought him
thither, and gladness that he behaved himself so well there.

And (blessed be God) that as even on that Day of Mourning, there was cause of
Rejoicing in the Magnanimity of Charles the First; so that after many years of
Mourning, we have at length great cause of Rejoyceing in the Prosperity of
Charles the Second. Nor is it a small addition to our joy, (I speak without
flattery) that under our Gracious Sovereign, we have at this day an House of
Commons made up of Gentlemen, and those both faithful Subjects to their King,
and zealous Friends to the Church: so that we assure our selves, Unde periculum
inde remedium, as an House of Commons was the source of our former miscry; so
an House of Commons will be the happy means of our future tranquillity.

I shall only crave leave to inculcate in the close of this Epistle, what was
insinuated in the close of the Sermon. That what was heretofore fondly
mistaken, nay, falsely pretended, may by you be effectually endeavored;
namely, a thorough Reformation, not of our Religion, ( which though I will not
say it is not at all defective, yet I cannot say wherein it is corrupt nay, I
dare say, is exceeding good) but of the manners and lives of people which are
excessively bad. That your impartial zeal would purge the Land at once of that
faction and profaneness which still threaten our ruin. Finally, That you
would go on as you have begun, and improve your power to the utmost, for
promoting the honor of God, his name, his worship, his days, stablishing the
Kings Throne, confirming the Churches Rights, and settling the Kingdoms peace.

That in order to these excellent ends, Isaiah 11. 2.
the Spirit of the Lord may rest upon you, the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and the
fear of the Lord to guide and direct you in all your Consultations; and that
your labor of love to God, the King, the Church, the Kingdoms, may be
recompensed an hundredfold upon you and your Posterity, is, and shall be the
fervent prayer of

Your humble Servant Nath. Hardy.

A LOUD CALL, TO Great Mourning.
Zachariah 12. 11. In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as
the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon.
MOurning is the principal word in the Text, and it is the chief work of the
day. The Hebrew word for mourning signifies sunebri ritu lugere, a Funeral
mourning, and that this day calls for: Finally, the mourning of the Text, is
for the death of a Royal Person, and that is the dismal occasion of this days
lamentation.

Lace befits not a mourning Suit, nor flourishes of Rhetoric a mourning
Sermon. On such a day and Text as this, the Preachers words should be sighs,
his accents groans; and the Auditors tears are the best commendation of the
Sermon. For this end, I am come this day, Luke 12. 49.
though not (as my Savior says in another case) to send fire, yet, to draw
water, that this place may now become like that, where the Angel of the Lord
delivered his sad message to the Israelites, Judge. 2. 5.
Bochin, a place of Weepers; and happy will it be, if as when all Israel were
gathered together at Mizpeh, 1 Samuel 7. 6.
so the Representatives of our Israel (if that word may be used, which has
been so much abused) being assembled together in the house of God, may draw
water, and pour forth their tears before the Lord, for the Royal blood, which
as on this day was poured out, and spilt as water upon the ground: that so that
may be fulfilled in us, which was here foretold concerning the Jews, In that
day shall there be a great mourning, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the
valley of Megiddon.

I shall need no other division of the Text, than that which the repetition of
the word mourning prompts me to, since a twofold mourning is the double stream
into which the wellhead of this Scripture parts it self.

Here is a mourning in Jerusalem, and a mourning of Hadadrimmon.

The former is set down by way of praediction, In that day, there shall be a
great mourning in Jerusalem.

The latter is brought in by way of allusion, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in
the valley of Megiddon; of both which with your patience, by Gods assistance

I begin with the praediction, Genesis 1.
In that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, in which there are
four circumstances expressed; namely, the Quid, that there shall be a mourning;
the Quantus, that it shall be a great mourning; the Ubi, that this great
mourning shall be in Jerusalem; and the Quando, that it shall be in that day.
But there are other circumstances, such, as though not expressed, must be
supplied for the right understanding of this Prophecy, namely, the Quare and
the Qualis, the occasion and the kind of this mourning.

1. We need not go far to find out the occasion of this mourning, the preceding
Verse will inform us in the last clause, Verse 10.
where it is said, they shall mourn for him, by which it appears to be for
some person; the clause before that says, They shall look upon me whom they
have pierced, by which is evident, that it was the piercing of some person
which should occasion this mourning in them who did it; and if you would know
whom, the him, and the me intends, the first clause of that Verse tells you, it
is the I who says, He will pour his spirit upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and he as the foregoing words express, is the Lord Jehovah; so that the
meaning of these words is, that there should come a time, when the Jews should
bitterly bewail their heinous sins, by which they had not only offended but
grieved, grieved but vexed, vexed but (as much as in them lay) also pierced the
holy one of Israel. And if you please further to cast your eyes on that passage
in St. John's Gospel, whence you have a Quotation of those words in the former
Verse, Joh. 19. 37.
They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and an application of them to
Christ, upon the occasion of the Soldiers piercing him with a spear; we
thereby learn, that the particular sin of piercing and crucifying the
Messiah, shall be the occasion of this mourning.

2. But further, whereas

First, The prophesies in holy Writ are of two sorts, namely, threats and
promises, both which are fitly signified by those two words, burden and vision,
( though sometimes promiscuously used) threats being burdens of wrath, and
promises visions of peace.

Secondly, There is a double mourning for sin, penal and penitential, the one
whereof is forced and involuntary, the other free and voluntary; the one a
mourning of desperation, and the other of contrition. It is to be enquired,
which of these mournings is here intended; the answer to which is returned by
Expositors, both ways, and accordingly this prediction, may be looked upon
either as a threat or as a promise.

1. The Ancients seem to incline to the former construction, as if the meaning
of the words were, In that day, that is, Die vindictae divinae, in the day of
Gods vengeance upon them for their sins, and especially for that sin of
piercing Christ, there shall be a mourning in Jerusalem, by reason of the
calamities which should overwhelme them. To this purpose Theodoret where he
says, Theod. in loc.
(speaking of Christs-crucifiers,) when they shall not long after see him
coming with Majesty, (...), They shall, though too late, bemoan their own folly
and madness: and not unlike is that of St. Jerome, Hieron. ibid.
Tunc dolebunt a se crucifixum, cum viderint in claritate regnantem, They shall
then bewail him whom they crucified through envy, when they shall behold him
reigning in glory. This prophecy in this sense, Matthew 24. 32.
is the same with that of our Savior, Then shall appear the sign of the Son
of man in the Heavens, and all the Tribes of the earth shall mourn; and with
that of Saint John, Rev. 7. 1.
Behold he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also that
pierced him, and all kindreds of the earth shall wayle because of him. This
prediction began to be accomplished in that day, when Christ came in power to
execute vengeance on Jerusalem by the Roman Army; at which time no doubt they
sadly experienced the fatal ruin which they had imprecated upon themselves,
His blood be upon us. Matthew. 27. 25.
Though the final accomplishment shall not be till the last and great day of
judgment, when he shall come in person to inflict that heavy doom of
condemnation; not only upon those who crucified, but all who reject him: at
which time, it is impossible to imagine, what weeping, wailing and gnashing of
teeth; what howling, roaring and wringing of hands; what despair, horror and
astonishment; what a bitter mourning and lamentation there shall be.

I would to God, this were seriously, speedily and sadly thought on, by all
sorts of impenitent sinners; That as they have their day of sinning, God will
(sooner or later) have his day of punishing: and as the day of a sinners
impenitency is a day of carnal rejoicing; so the day of Gods vengeance shall be
a day of bitter mourning, Woe unto you, Luke 6. 25.
says our blessed Savior, who now laugh, for you shall mourn and weep: Upon
which words St. Augustine occasionally thus glosseth, Aug Sermon. 4. de ^anct.
Quod in gaudio videntur serere, necesse est illis in luctu and lachrimis
recipere. It is impossible, but that wicked men, though they seem to sow with
joy, should reap in sorrow; and however sin may be sweet as honey in the
mouth, it shall be bitter as gall and wormwood in the helly. The Author of the
Book of Wisdom passionately sets forth, the despairing language which the
wicked utter at such a time, Wisd. 5. 7, 8, 9.
Groaning for anguish of spirit, they shall say within themselves, we wearied
our selves in the way of wickedness and destruction, yea, we have gone through
deserts where there is no way ^ for as for the way of the Lord we have not
known it. What has pride profited us? or what good has riches with our
vaunting brought us? all these things are passed away as a shadow, etc. I, the
pleasure of sin passes away, but the sting remains to torture the sinner
to eternity. Believe me (brethren) sin is big with sorrow and shame, which it
must bring forth at the appointed time, In that day there shall be a great
mourning.

2. But though this be an useful meditation, I conceive the other to be the
most genuine Interpretation, which construeth the mourning here spoken of to be
penitential. Indeed some Expositors glance at the mourning of the women, Luke
23. 27, 48.
which was in die passionis, in the day of our Saviors passion, when beholding
his sorrows, their bowels yearned, and their eyes melted with tears, at which
time also, others of the spectators smote their breasts, and were astonished. But
this mourning in Jerusalem was to be (as appears by the former Verse) not by
the spectators, but the actors in that cruel Tragedy, those who pierced him:
and since it is set down as an effect of the Spirit of grace and supplication,
( or as some read it lamentation) which was to be poured out upon them; it
cannot rationally be expounded any otherwise, than to intend that godly sorrow
which shall in that day, that is, die conversionis eorum, in the day of their
conversion, be expressed by them for so heinous a crime.

As it is here foretold, it was afterward accomplished. On the day of
Pentecost the Spirit of God did in a visible and glorious manner, decend upon
the Apostles, to furnish them with gifts, and fill them with courage for
preaching the Gospel. At that time, one of the Apostles St Peter preached to
the Jews, and set before them them the heinousness of the fact which they had
committed, and when they heard this ( says the Penman of the Acts) they were
pricked in their hearts, Act. 2. 37.
and said to Peter and the rest of the Apostles, men and brethren what shall we
do? Whilst they heard St Peter's Sermon, the Spirit of grace was poured upon
them, and so at once their ears, their eyes and hearts were opened to hear
reproof, and see and bewail their wickedness. Nor was it a slight and
superficial sorrow, but a great and deep mourning: so deep that it went to
their heart; and so great, that according to the Emphasis of the Greek word,
(...), there used, it was as if the sharpest points of many poisoned Daggers,
and Scorpions stings, (...) quasi (...) scindo.
had been all at once fastened in their hearts; And of the word here used by the
Septuagint, it was such a sorrow as did cut, and vex, and wound their spirits:
nor yet was their sorrow confined to their hearts, but it breaks out at their
lips, and no doubt testified it self in their gesture, for the Hebrew word in
the Text properly refers ad externum gestum, to the outward behavior. They
that had shed the blood of Christ by the instigation of the Devil, shed tears
by the effusion of the holy Ghost; and as they had cruelly wounded him to the
death, they are penitently, mercifully by his Word and Spirit themselves
wounded with repentance unto life.

From this part of my Text thus unfolded, give me leave to present you with
these five Meditations.

1. The day of a sinners Turning is a day of mourning: true conversion is ever
attended with contrition. Man is described by the Philosopher to be animal
rationale risible, a reasonable living creature, endued with the power of
laughing; but the new man is described by the Divine to be animal spirituale
flebile, a spiritually living creature, endued with the grace of weeping. When
God does inspirare, breath in his Spirit, the sinner cannot but suspirare,
breath forth sighs; when he does infundere, pour in his grace, the sinner
begins effundere, to pour out tears. Turn you unto me says the Lord with all
your heart, ^ccl 2. 12, 13.
with weeping and mourning, rent your hearts and not your garments, and turn to
the Lord your God; where you may observe, that turning to God must be
accompanied with weeping, mourning, and renting the heart with sorrow for our
sins, whereby we have turned from him: and which seems a riddle, but is an
undoubted truth, we must at once turn to God with all our hearts, and with a
broken heart; yea that we may turn to God with our whose heart, we must rent
our hearts.

Indeed on the one hand, conversion could it be without contrition, will not
serve, Non sufficit mores in melius commutare, says St. Angustine, nisi etiam
de his quae facta, Aug.
satisfiat deo per penitentiae dolorem, humilitatis gemitum, and contritionis
sacrificium; It is not enough to amend our manners for the time to come,
unless we make satisfaction for what is past, by the sorrow of repentance,
groans of humility, and sacrifice of contrition. But on the other hand, it is
impossible, true conversion should be without contrition, Wash you, make you
clean, says God by the Prophet Isaiah, to the Jews, to intimate, Isai. 1. 15.
2 Cor. 7. 10.
that we cannot be made clean, unless we first wash our selves with the tears
of penitential grief. Godly sorrow ( says St. Paul,) works repentance, as
the sharp needle makes way for the thread. Conversion is a Regeneration, a new
Birth, which cannot be without pangs, though not in all alike, yet in all some;
the building which is raised high must be laid low, so must that reformation
which is to salvation, be founded in a sincere humiliation.

2. Mourning for sin must not only be internal, but external. True, Joel 2.
13.
the Prophet Joel says, Rent your hearts and not your garments, but that must
be taken as a comparative, not an absolute negation. In that day, Isai. 22. 12.
says the Prophet Isaiah, did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping and
mourning, to baldness and to girding with sackeloth, where every word refers
to external expression; weeping to the eye, baldness to the head, sackcloth to
the body; and the Hebrew word for mourning ( the same with this in the Text) to
the behavior of the outward man. We see in natural mourning, when the heart is
grieved it will find a vent. We observe in civil mourning what correspondency
there is in the habit: and think we that religious mourning ought not to show
it self as well as either; such I mean (as the Text intends) not closet sorrow
for secret, but public for open sins.

This I am sure was the practice of the people of God of old, who at the times
of their solemn humiliation, were wont to rend their garments, sprinkle ashes
upon their heads, put on sackcloath, and the like. And if we reflect upon the
practice of the primitive Christians, we shall find penetents prostrate at the
Church door, with neglected hair, hollow eyes, withered faces, bare feet,
begging the prayers of Saints, washing the feet of Lazars, never thinking they
could abase themselves sufficiently.

But alas! how is the face of Christendom, especially in our parts altered?
Repentance is grown stately, and even upon such days as these, and that in the
solemn Assemblies, instead of bare feet, we may behold naked breasts; of
weeping eyes, wanton looks; of dejected countenances, patched and painted
faces; of ashes upon the head, powdered hair, and of rough sackcloath, gorgeous
and fantastical attire. Oh! let us not deceive our selves with the pretenses
of a sorrowful spirit, whilst our outward behavior proclaims the contrary:
let us say what we will, and pretend what we can, I shall as soon believe him
to be sober who reeleth up and down the streets; as him to be charitable, whose
hands are not reached forth to the poor; as him devout, whose gesture is
unreverent in Gods worship; or him penitent, whose posture is bold when he
comes to bemoane his sins before God. True it is, the most humble posture
abstracted from a suitable frame of mind, is of no account with God: but it is
as true, that that God who abhors the vizor, likes well the face of
repentance. To disfigure our faces that we may be seen of men, Matthew. 5. 7.
indeed is pharisaical, but yet with the penitent publican, Luke 18. 12.
we ought to express our fear by standing afar off; our shame, by hanging down
our heads; and our sorrow, by beating our breasts. These external expressions
are, effecta, indicia, and incitamenta, the genuine effects, manifest
testimonies, and strong incentives of our internal affections. Which way soever
the soul goes, it draws the body after it; we cannot testify to men our
inward disposition, but by our outward deportment; yea, Ambros.
rectius in re affectata men's conservatur si corpus simul adhibeatur, the mind
cannot but be more intent upon any service when the body accompanies it: that
therefore our sorrow may appear to be hearty, yea, that the sorrow of our heart
may be enlarged in it self, and testified to others; let us not only grieve but
weep, mourn but sigh, break our hearts, but beat our breasts, and use all kind
of penitential expressions.

3. Great sinning calls for great mourning, Ambros. ad Virg. laps. c. 8.
Grandi plagae prolixa est medicina, grande scelus grandi indiget
satisfactione, says St. Ambrose truly, violent diseases require strong
potions, festred sores, eating corasives, and heinous sins heavy sorrow. Quam
magna deliquimus tam granditer defleamus penitentia crimine minor non sit, said
St. Cyprian; Cypr. Sermon. de lapsis.
before him, our repentance must not be less than our crime, but how much we
have put into the scale of sin, so much we must put into that of sorrow; Not
that there can be an adequation betwixt the guilt of sin which is infinite,
and our mourning which how great soever can be but finite; but that there
should be some analogy and proportion between the measure of the one and the
other. Not that this is required per modum solutionis, as a payment of the
debt, to which our sins obliege us, that must be done by Christ's blood, not our
tears. Could we weep an Ocean, it were not a satisfactory compensation to God
for the least offense, much less for great faults; but that hereby we may
express that we have a sense of sin in some sort proportionable to the
haynousnesse of it. Accordingly we find this to be the practice of penitents in
holy Writ, Manessah was humbled greatly, 2 Chronicles. 33. 11.
St. Peter wept bitterly, not drops but rivers of tears ran down David's eyes,
Psalm. 119 136.
and Mary Magdalens were in such abundance that they Matthew. 26. 57.
washed her Saviors feet. Luke 7. 38.


There are too many who have but one kind of sorrow for all sin, and that ( God
knows) but slender neither; when they have told a lie, sworn an Oath, or
committed any sin, though of a grievous nature, A, God forgive me, I am sorry
for it, is with them, sufficient repentance. But, Be not deceived, God is not
mocked with such slight sorrow, for such offenses. Our Savior speaks of a
Devil which cannot be cast out, but by prayer and fasting, Mark 9. 29.
nor can notorious faults be repented of without mourning and weeping. He that
falls into the midst of the River, must swim hard to get to shore, whilst he
who falls in by the bank side easily creeps up; he that sinketh into the mud,
must take more pains to cleanse himself, than he that only steps into a puddle.
Idle words should trouble us, but rash oaths must p^^plex us; unclean thoughts
call for a sigh, but actual adulteries for deep groans; if we have drawn
iniquity with cords and cartropes, we must not think to draw repentance with
threads; if our sins are not only clouds but thick clouds, we must not look to
escape without a shoure of tears: Cypr. L. D.
excellently St. Cyprian expostulateth with the Apostate, Putas ne tu Deum cito
posse placari? etc. Do thou imagine that God will quickly be appeased, whose
Temple thou have sacrilegiously violated, and whom thou have perfidiously
denied? Do thou think he will easily have mercy on thee, when thou would
not own him to be thine? And may not the like be said of those who blaspheme
and dishonor his name by any gross sins. Surely as that Father excellently
goes on, Id. ibid.
Orare oporlet impensius, diem luctu transigere, vigilijs noctes ac fletibus
ducere, etc. it behooves all sorts of great sinners, to pray and beg earnestly,
to spend their day in sorrow, and their night in tears; yea, their whole life
in doleful lamentation, to grovel upon the ground, and roll themselves in the
dust, because of their abominations. As our afflictions abound, 1 Cor. 1. 3.
says St. Paul, our consolations abound much more: it is true here, as our
transgressions abound, so must our humiliations; if our sins have been red as
scarlet, our shame must be red as crimson; if our sins have been a flood, our
tears must be a river. Finally, if the cry of our crimes has been as the
roaring of a Lion, our sighs must be as loud thunder claps.

4. Our greatest mourning for our sins ought to be, because by them we have
pierced God. That of Christ to the women, Luke 39. 26.
Weep not for me, but weep for your selves, would in this sense be inverted; we
must not weep so much in reference to our selves as him: not so much because of
the calamity our sins will bring upon us, as the injury and dishonor that is
done to God. What was Joseph's argument for prevention of sin to which he was
tempted, Genesis 39. 3.
How shall I do this wickedness and sin against God? should be our reasoning
in humiliation for the sins we have committed. I have done this wickedness
and sinned against God: it was so with David, who therefore in his penitential
acknowledgement, cries out, Psalm. 51. 3.
Against thee, against thee only have I sinned; and with the predigall, who
confesses, Father, I have sinned against Heaven and before thee. For this
reason it is that penitential sorrow is called by St. Paul (...), a sorrow
according to God, 2 Cor. 7. 10.
because for sin chiefly, not as it is inflictum paenae, that which brings
punishment on us, but offensivum Dei, that which is offensive unto God.

5. Lastly, This mourning for Christ's piercing is not to be confined to
Jerusalem, since all, Gentiles as well as Jews are guilty of it. The Jews were
the instrumental causes, by whose instigation, but all men were the meritorious
causes, for whose transgressions he was pierced; Isai. 53. 6.
and therefore says the Prophet Isaiah, The Lord has laid on him the iniquity
of us all. It was the hypocrisy of our hearts that mocked him, the bribery of
our hands which buffeted him, the oaths of our mouths that spit in his face; we
betrayed him with our wanton kisses, we whipped him with the cords of our
oppression, and gave him gall and vinegar to taste by our intemperance; our
pride in hair, apparel, ornaments, platted a crown of thorns upon his head,
and stripped him of his garments; Finally, our many mighty sins, were the nails
which pierced his hands and feet, and the spear that was thrust into his side.
The Lord of glory was brought to shame for our shameful lives; The Lord of
life was put to death for our deadly sins, and the word became speechless
for our crying sins. So that I may justly bring this home to every man in
this Congregation, with Nathans, Matthew. 26. 8.
Tu es homo, Thou art the man that piercedst Christ; and every one of us, were
that question put to us seriously, which was to him scoffingly, Prophecy who
smote thee? may without the gift of prophesying return the answer, It is we
that smote him.

And now methinketh every one of us should look upon him whom we have pierced,
and bespeak him in this or the like penitent language, Blessed Jesus, my sins
pierced thy side, and hands, and feet, shall they not my heart; they bruised
thy body, shall they not my soul; they fetched blood from thee, shall they not
tears from me; they made thee heavy to the death, shall they not make me
penitent to life; the Heavens were hung in black at thy passion, and shall not
I be clothed in mourning; the rock rent and clave asunder at thy suffering,
and shall my heart be more stony and obdurate than the rock. Oh! my brethren,
let us both duly meditate on our Redeemers sufferings, and our sins as the
cause of those sufferings; and that so long, till our hearts be not only
bruised but broken, our head not only become dew but waters, and our eyes not
as a bucket but a fountain of tears.

And thus I have given a dispatch to the mourning, Genesis 2.
which was the matter of the prediction, I now proceed to the other, which is
brought in by way of allusion, in those words, As the mourning of Hadadrimmon
in the valley of Megiddon.

Which words I shall desire you to look upon with a double aspect, to wit, as
they are in themselves, and as they stand in connection, and accordingly there
is a double assertion to be handled.

The mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon was a great mourning.

The mourning of Jerusalem, shall be as great as the mourning of Hadadrimmon.

1. I begin with the absolute consideration of the clause which implies the
mourning of Hadadrimmon to be very great; in discussion whereof I shall enquire,

What the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon was?

Wherein it appeared to be a great mourning?

What reason there was for the greatness of that mourning?

1. In answer to the first of these, it will not be amiss to take notice of the
various reading of, and glosses upon these words.

1. The Septuagint construe Hadadrimmon and Megiddon, as appellatives, and read
the clause thus, (...), of a pomegranate cut down in the fields, of which
reading the Greek Fathers give a double construction. Theod. in loc. Cyril in
loc.
Theodoret borrows the allusion from the noise which the woodcleaver makes,
when in hewing down a pomegranate or any other tree, he fetches as it were a
groan at every blow he makes: but St. Cyril more probably conceives, that it
alludeth to the grief of the owner, whose Orchard of pomegranates is cut down
against his will; as we have sometimes beheld in the late war, a goodly Grove
or Orchard for the safety of an adjacent Garrison hewed down, to the sorrow of
the possessour.

2. The Generality of Interpreters, and most probably construe Hadadrimmon and
Megiddon to be proper names, but yet with variety.

By the more learned among the Hebrews says Vatablus, Hadadrimmon is thought
to be the name, Vat.
oujusdam viri insignis ac cluri, of some famous and eminent person, who was
cut off at Megiddon, to the great sorrow of the people. Called. Par.
The Caldee Paraphrast takes it to be the name of him, who slew Ahab the Son of
Omri: But St Hierom and most rationally conceives it to be the name of some
Fort, or Town, or Village, near to Megiddon. We read in the Story of the Kings,
that King Josiah going forth against Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, was slain by
him at Megiddon; 2 King 23. 29.
and consequently the mourning in the valley of Megiddon, is the mourning for
Josiah, who was there slain: And it is called the mourning of Hadadrimmon,
either because near that place he received his deaths wound, or in that place
the mourning for him began.

2. That which is next to be resolved is, Wherein this mourning appears to be
great? The Answer to which is returned from that in the Chronicles, 2 Chronicles 35.
24, 25.
And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah, and Jeremiah lamented for
Josiah, and all the singing men and the singing women spoke of Josiah in their
lamentations to this day, and made them an Ordinance in Israel, and behold they
are written in the Lamentations. Where we may observe the greatness of the
mourning in three respects, namely the measure, the extent, and the duration:
It was Luctus intensus, publicus, perpetuus, a vehement, a common, a permanent,
and consequently a great mourning.

1. The mourning of Hadadrimmon was a very intense mourning: (...)
the first word which is there used, signifies to mourn as one does, ob rei
charissimae amissionem, for parting with what is most dear; and certainly where
there is a dearnesse of affection, there cannot but be an excessive
lamentation: The Greek there renders it (...), a word very significant also to
note an high degree of sorrow. It is not unworthy our observation, that the two
preceding similitudes of a firstborn and only Son, are designed to express
intensivenesse of sorrow: for though that conceit of St. Hierom be ingenious,
Hieron. in loc.
that he whom they pierced was unigenitus proprietate naturae, and primogenitus
a mortuis resurgentium, the only begotten by the propriety of his divine
nature, and the first begotten of them that rise from the dead, the only Son of
his Father, and the first born of his Mother, and that in that respect there is
a congruity; yet doubtless the true reason of using those comparisons, is upon
the account of the mourning. The loss of any Child, much more of a Son; of a
younger, but especially of the firstborn; of one among many, chiefly of an
only Son, cannot but be matter of exceeding grief: and yet as if these were not
full enough, here is another similitude annexed, which therefore doubtless was
a sorrow exceeding the former, and consequently this mourning of Hadadrimmon
was very intense.

2. Yet further this monrning was great in the extent, because a common and
public mourning: The mourning might begin at Hadadrimmon, but it went through
all Judah and Jerusalem. Country and City, rich and poor, high and low, People
and Prophets, (for Jeremiah is mentioned in particular) do all bemoan his
death: Indeed all were concerned in his death, fit it is that all should share
in the sorrow: a public loss calls for public mourning.

3. Add to this, that it was a continued mourning: It was made an Ordinance in
Israel, either that every year there should be a sorrowful commemoration of
him, or that the singing men and the singing women, should upon all mournful
occasions speak of him in their lamentations: yea to perpetuate the mourning,
Jeremiah composed Lamentations, which some conceive to be that which is extant,
those words seeming very apposite to Josiah where it is said, The breath of our
Nostrils, Lam. 4. 20.
the anointed of the Lord was taken in their pits, of whom we said under his
shadow we shall live among the Heathen. But the whole scope of that Book
plainly refers to the Captivity, which was after Josiahs death, and therefore
it was some other which Jeremy composed, thereby endeavoring that what Venus
says in the Poet concerning her Adonis, Ovid. Metam. l. 10.
-- Luctus monumenta manebunt.
Semper Adoni mei repetitaque mortis imago,
Annua plangoris peragent simulamina nostri.
the mourning for Josiah might be continually renewed. No wonder if upon all
these considerations, in progressu temporis abiit in proverbium, as one well
observes, it became a Proverb among the Hebrews, planctus Hadadrimmon, as
planctus Adonidis was among the Gentiles, and both designed to express an
exceeding great sorrow.

3. But why this great mourning of Hadadrimmon? that is the last Question,
which when answered, we shall find that it was not a foolish humor, fond
passion, but a just and rational, though a great mourning.

More particularly there are eight Considerations, which did serve to greaten
the mourning of Hadadrimmon.

1. The occasion of their mourning is Death: not a slight wound that might be
healed; not taking captive, for which a ransom might have been accepted, but
death, from which there is no return to life: When we mourn for the dead, we
mourn (in this respect) as without hope of enjoying their society any more in
this world, and therefore no wonder if it be in a great measure.

2. The death which occasioneth this mourning, 2 Samuel 3. 18.
is of a King: Know you not (says David concerning Abner) that a great man is
this day fallen in Israel, Zech. 11. 2.
yet he was far inferior to a King. Howl ye Firretrees, ( says the Prophet)
for the Cedar ( a tall and stately Tree) is fallen: The King is not only
superior, but supreme in his Kingdom, so that when he dies, the Sun as it
were sets, fit it is a night of sad mourning should follow. 2 Samuel 18. 3.
Thou art worth ten thousand of us, say the people to King David, not
flatteringly but truly; as one Sun is worth ten thousand Stars, In uno Caesar
insunt multi Marij, there are many Mariuses in one Caesar: so that in mourning
for a King, we mourn not for a mean but a great Person; nay, not for one, but
many thousands at once. What heart so hard, which will not mourn bitterly to
see ten thousand men lie dead in the fields?

3. The King whose death is bemoaned, was their King who mourned for him, it
was the King of Judah whom all Judah lamented. 2 Samuel 5. 1.
Behold we are thy bone and thy flesh, (said the Tribes of Israel to David,) so
may all people say of their own native King; can it choose but grieve a man to
have his bone broken, or flesh mangled; yea, what the head is to the body, that
is the King to his Kingdom, if any one of the members be in pain, the rest are
sensible of it, but surely all of them cannot but be affected when the head is
to be cut off.

4. This their King whose death they bemoaned was a good King, and that must
needs aggravate their mourning. Called. Parap.
The Chaldee paraphrast makes mention here, of a mourning for two Kings, Ahab
the son of Omri, and Josiah the son of Ammon. Ahab was a wicked King, and yet
lamented; it seems he is a very bad King, for whose death the people have not
cause to mourn. Josiah was a good, a very good King, (how good will appear
anon,) no wonder if there were a great mourning. Those characters, The light of
our eyes, and The breath of our nostrils, though in some sort they belong to
all, yet more especially to good Kings: well may our eyes weep when their light
is put out, and we sigh, when the breath of our no strils is ready to expire. A
good King is, Pastor populi, the Shepherd of the people, no wonder if the
sheep be scattered, when the Shepherd is smitten. Pater patniae, The Father of
his Country, well may the children grieve when their Father dies. Sponsus
Ecclesiae, The Bridegroom of the Church, and shall not the Bride mourn when
the Bridegroom is taken away.

5. The death of this good King of Judah was untimely in the slower and
strength of his age. Had he dyed as David did when he was old and stricken in
years, it might justly have been expected, but to dye in the midst of his
days, whilst he was young, was sadly to be lamented.

6. This early death was not by some disease, but by slaughter. 2 King 23. 26.
Had he with Asa been diseased in his feet, or any other part of his body, and
dyed in his bed, it were not so doleful; but to be snatched away whilst he was
in full vigor and health of body, could not but be matter of sad complaint.

7. This violent and immature death was that which their sins brought upon him.
This good King used his utmost endeavor to quench the fire of Gods
displeasure; 2 King. 22. 30.
but notwithstanding (says the Text) The Lord turned not from the fierceness
of his great wrath, wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah: and
accordingly he began the execution of his wrath, in bereaving them of so good a
King; and had they not reason to mourn for his death, whenas it was that which
their own sins had accelerated.

8. Lastly, The fall of this King was a presage of fatal ruin to this
Kingdom, what the pillar is in the house, the corner stone in the building,
that is, a pious King to his people; and surely as the removing of the pillar,
and taking away of the corner stone, weakneth the edifice, so does the death of
such a King (especially) shake his Kingdom. Besides God had declared by Huldah
the Prophetess, to this King and people, 2 Chronicles. 34. 28.
That he would gather him to his Fathers in peace, that his eyes might not see
all the evil which he should bring upon Jerusalem: whereby is clearly employed,
that soon after his departure, evil should come upon them, and had they not
reason bitterly to lament his death. So that to sum it up, since it was not
captivity but death, and that not late but early, natural but violent, of no
mean man but a King, and he not a stranger but a native, not a Tyrant but a
good King; and this both the consequent of their sins, and forerunner of their
ruin, just cause there should be a great mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley
of Megiddon.

2. There remains nothing now to be discussed in reference to the Text, but
the particle of similitude As, which knits the two mournings together by way of
resemblance of one to the other, and foretells, that the mourning in Jerusalem
should be as great as that of Hadadrimmon.

The mourning of Hadadrimmon (as you have already heard) was great in three
respects, but as the known saying is of similitudes in general, that they do
not run upon all four feet; so I may say of this in particular, it does not
hold in all three.

The mourning of Hadadrimmon was general, so was not this in Jerusalem, the
greatest part of the Jews remained obdurate, and so continue to this day. But
as the mourning of Hadadrimmon was perpetual, so no doubt was the mourning of
the converts in Jerusalem to their dying hour. And in the mystical Jerusalem,
the Church of Christ, the mourning for our crucified Jesus, shall continue to
the worlds end. And as to that which the similitude chiefly aims at (being as
it were the edge of the knife) the measure of the mourning; this particle as,
is not only a note of quality, but equality, nay, redundance, and intimates,
that the sorrow for Christ pierced, should be as great, nay, greater than that
which was for Josiah slain, and good reason upon a double account.

1. The mourning for Josiah, was by them who were only spectators of his death,
yea, assistants to him in the battle; whereas these were the enemies of Christ
and actors in that dismal Tradegy, who had so much the more cause to weep
bitterly, for that blood whereof themselves were so deeply guilty.

2. Besides (which is principally considerable as it was said of Solomon, so
may I of Josiah, Behold a greater, ey, and a better than Josiah is here, one of
whom he was but a Type, Luke 11. 31.
and to whom therefore far inferior: so that what it was said by Lamech of
Cain and himself in case of vengeance, Genesis 4. 24.
may be fitly used concerning Josiah and Christ in case of sorrow: If Josiah
were to be lamented seven fold, truly Jesus seventy times seven, the guilt of
his blood being not seventy times only, but seven thousand times seven, yea,
infinitely greater than that of Josiah.

That which I shall observe from hence is, that whereas the cause of the
mourning of Hadadrimmon was an evil of afflliction, and the cause of the
mourning in Jerusalem was an evil of sin, Our sorrow for sin ought to be as
great, nay, greater than for any outward trouble what soever. It is very
considerable to this purpose, that the Prophet makes use of so many
comparisons drawn from our mourning for worldly losses, and those of the
saddest nature; as if one, two, nay three, were not sufficient to express the
greatness of that sorrow which ought to be for our sins. The truth is, the
least iniquity is a greater evil than the greatest calamity, and consequently
the committing of the one, ought to be matter of sadder lamentation, than the
suffering of the other.

But alas! how unlike is our practice to this prediction? how far short is our
mourning for sin, of our worldly sorrow? if God be pleased to take from us any
near or dear relation, any earthly comfort whatsoever, we are ready to fall
into a bitter passion, and mourn even to murmuring; but though we provoke our
gracious God by our sins, we pass it over with little or no contrition. Like
Ulisses, who wept more for the loss of his dog than his wife, and that
Citizen, who was more grieved for the loss of his Hen called Roma, than the
ruin of the City called by that name: we can weep floods of tears for the
miseries we endure, whenas we have scarce a tear at command for the iniquities
we commit.

Oh! let us be exhorted to heighten and enlarge our mourning for our sin, and
as those Disciples prayed, Lord increase our faith, so let us, Lord increase
our repentance. It is easy to exceed in worldly, but not in godly sorrow: Let
our tears for afflictions be only to the ankles, but let those for our
transgressions be to the knees, nay, chin; they cannot be too high unless over
head and ears.

I must not shut up this without a slave for weak Christians, who may perhaps
conclude against themselves as destitute of godly mourning, because they are
sometimes more affected with, and afflicted for worldly troubles.

In order to which I shall propose this threefold consideration.

1. If our mourning be not greater intensively, yet it may and must be
extensively for our crimes than our crosses; our tears for a worldly misfortune
may be like a land-floud, more violent; but for sin, they must be like a river,
more permanent.

2. Though our mourning be greater for afflictions expressively, yet it may and
must be greater for transgressions appretiatively. There is a sensitive and
there is a rational sorrow that makes a great noise whilst shallow, whereas
this being deep is silent. We have oft-times heard one sick of the gout or
toothach, roar extremely, whilst he that is sick (perhaps) of the plague, says
nothing, and yet this latter doubtless is inwardly more sorrowful, by how
much the disease is more desperate; our passion may break forth more violently
upon some emergent loss, and yet our will may be far more displeased at the
sin we have acted, than the comfort we have lost.

3. Lastly, If our godly mourning be not so great, effectu in act, yet I hope
it is, and certainly it ought to be greater affecta in desire and endeavor. If
we cannot mourn so much as we ought, let us mourn that we can mourn no more,
and let us to our utmost, strive that our penitential sorrow may exceed all
other whatsoever.

And thus I have done the Composers part in setting as it were the several
letters of my Text; I shall now endeavor to perform the Printers in laying on
the sheets, and as it were pressing it home by a punctual and particular
Application, to the doleful occasion of this days solemn Assembly.

This Scripture (as you have already heard) speaks of a double mourning, The
one, principal and directly intended, to wit, mourning for Christ the King of
Kings and Lord of Lords, who was pierced to death by nails upon the Cross. The
other collateral and allusively applied, to wit, mourning for Josiah King of
Judah, who was shot to death with an arrow in the fields. And lo, this day
minds us of a third mourning, to wit, for Charles the First, King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, who was sentenced to death, and executed upon a
Scaffold by an Axe. That as he was a Martyr clothed in red, so we should be
mourners clothed in black.

The mourning in the Text as it was for two persons, so it was of two sorts, a
mourning of contrition for the horrid crime of piercing Christ; and a mourning
of compassion for the untimely slaughter of Josiah, both of these meet together
in that mourning which this day calls for.

Here is damnum irreparabile, a loss, a grievous loss, such as could hardly
be repaired, and that calls for the mourning of Hadadrimmon.

Here is crimen incredibile, a crime, an heinous crime, such as will not easily
be believed, and that calls for the mourning in Jerusalem.

Oh! let us mourn this day with the mourning of Hadadrimmon, for the loss of
Charles the First; and well we may, if we observe the parallel: For

Charles the First is dead.] Those who first raised a rebellious Army against
him, went so far as to secure, (that is, in plain English, to Imprison him,)
and their Army will not stay there, they go on to Behead him. Indeed as himself
tells us, King Charles his Book, chap. 28.
there are but few steps between the Prisons and Graves of Princes, but yet
whilst only a Prisoner, there was hope of being released. Charles the Second,
our gracious Sovereign that now is, was for many years banished from his
Territories, an Exile in foreign parts, and is through Gods mercy restored,
but Charles the First is dead and gone, never more to appear upon earth.

Besides, He whose death we bemoan, was no less than a King, one of the
greatest Monarchs in Europe, was our King by the indubitable right of
succession to the Crown. And he dyed not in an old decreped age, but in the
strength of his manhood, having not lived a Decad of years more than Josiah;
and being of that age of forty eight so vigorous, as that he was likely to have
lived beyond this time. Nor did he dye the common death of men, in his bed, but
that of Malefactors, upon a Scaffold: where (by the way) the strange providence
of God would be observed, Oliver the Wolf dies in his den, whilst Charles the
Lamb is brought to the slaughter.

But though these thoughts may justly move tears, yet there are other
Considerations far more cutting.

Such is that which fixes our eyes upon, not so much the greatness as the
goodness of King Charles the First; in reference to which I shall not doubt to
say, and saying to make it good, that he was another Josiah. To which end I
must entreat you to sit down, whilst I shall let you see how clearly the
various lineaments of the one are to be discerned in the other.

1. We do not find any gross personal crime laid to Josiahs charge. It is said
by the son of Syrack, that except David, Eccles. 49. 5.
Hezekiah, and Josiah, all the Kings of Judah were defective, he means
apostatizing from God to Idols: otherwise we know David was grossly culpable in
the matter of Bathsheba and Uriah, but no such sins are fastened upon Josiah.
His act indeed of going to war with Pharaoh Necho is questionable, but at worst
we must call it a sin of ignorance, since no doubt, he that believed and
trembled at the book of the Law, would not have gainsaid Pharaoh Nechos
disswasion, had he been sure that what he spoke, was from the mouth of the
Lord. But as to those vices which too often Kings, especially whilst young,
indulge unto; we read not that he is charged with them. Such an one was Charles
the First, unspotted either with incontinence or intemperance, so that even his
most malicious enemies could not lay either to his charge; indeed, he was an
exemplary pattern of the contrary virtues.

2. It is said of Josiah, 2 Chronicles 34. 2.
he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and declined neither to
the right hand nor to the left. This was verified in Charles the first, who
declined in matter of practice both hypocritical preciseness, and profane
licentiousness, and in matters of Religion, turned neither to the faction of
the Schismatic, nor the superstition of the Papists: for which cause he
commended the Church of Englands Religon to his Son Charles the Second, King
Charles his Book, chap. 27.
as keeping (to use his own language better than which I cannot) the middle way
between the Papists superstitious Tyranny, and the meannesse of fantastic
Anarchy.

3. Josiah was very solicitous to raise money and provide workmen for repairing
the house of the Lord, which had been long neglected and much decayed. Great
was the zeal of our Charles in this respect, witness that Mother Church of St.
Paul's in our Metropolis, to which himself contributed very largely, he excited
many others; and in the repairing of which he had made a fair progress. And
though the iniquity of the late times, (perhaps as well out of spleen against
him, as irreverence to God,) has debased, defaced, and almost ruined it, by
making it at once a den of thieves, and a stable for beasts: Yet (I hope) the
piety of this present age being so highly encouraged by our Sovereign that now
is, will make haste to fulfill that religious design in reedifying,
beautifying, and restoring it to its pristine splendour.

4. Josiah had a great regard to the Priests and Prophets of the Lord, it is
said of him, that he set the Priests in their charges, 2 Chronicles 35. 2.
and encouraged them in the service of the Lord: he advised with Hilkiah the
high Priest, sent to Huldah the Prophetess; and Jeremiahs lamenting his death,
intimates, that he countenanced him in his life; yea, he would not suffer the
dead bones of the man of God to be touched. 2 King. 23. 18.
How justly may it be said of our Charles? upon all occasions he showed himself
a fast friend to the Clergy; he counted them worthy of the double honor, both
of Reverence and Maintenance, and therefore would not suffer either contempt of
their Office, or alienation of their Revenues. Hear his own words, which we all
know were seconded with his deeds. I am so much a friend to all Churchmen, King
Charles Book, chap. 24.
that have any thing in them beseeming that sacred Function, that I have
hazarded my own interests chiefly upon conscience and constancy to maintain
their Rights, whom the mere I looked upon as Orphans, and under the
sacrilegious eyes of many cruel and rapacious Reformers; so I thought it my
duty the more to appear as a Father, and a Patron for them in the Church. No
wonder if the Jeremiahs of the Land mourned bitterly for the loss of such a
Patron.

5. Josiah was very careful to restore the worship of God to its antique and
primitive administration; as appears in that famous Passover, which was
celebrated by him and his people, according to the Ordinance of Moses, and at
the observation of which, that it might be the more solemn and splendid, were
the Singers employed according to the Command of David. It was not for nothing,
that the name Josiah was given him, which according to the most probable
Etymology I have met with, is as much as the fire of the Lord. He was indeed
ignis Dei, (...)
and that both consumens and consummans: The fire of his zeal did purge the
Land from that idolatry which had been committed, 2 Chronicles. 34. 45, etc.
breaking down the Altars of Baalim, the Images that were in high places,
cutting down the groves, and the carved and molten Images and Idols that were
in the Land; and withal, it did renew and refine the worship of the true God,
which had been disused and depraved in his Predecessors Reigns.

It is likely some of our fanatic zelots, will be ready to blame King Charles,
for not imitating Josiah in pulling down those things and places which had been
abused to Romish superstition, as he did those which had been the instruments
of Heathenish Idolatry. But truly such zeal had not been a divine fire, but
wild fire, nor would Josiahs pattern have warranted it. It was not lawful for
the Jews to make use of the idolatrous places for the worship of the true God,
since they were confined to that particular place which the Lord had chosen,
neither were the Images and Idols capable of being so made use of. But here the
case was far otherwise, since those places and things were easily converted to
a religious, which had been perverted to a superstitious use. Besides, I
suppose none will assert, that there is as vast a distance between a Protestant
and a Papist, as there was between a Jew and a Gentile, or is now between a
Christian and a Pagan; and therefore the like degree of zeal is not requisite
against the one as the other.

As for our late Sovereign, ( however falsely calumniated in this particular,)
he was (though a prudent) yet a real and zealous adversary to whatsoever is
truly called Popery, nor was he backward upon all just occasions to show
himself so. But the truth is, (as our sad experience informs us) there were
another sort of men, whose headstrong violence at that time deserved and
required his just indignation. As to the matter of Gods worship, his desire and
design was (like Iosiahs) that it might be decently and solemnly performed,
that the ancient and primitive usages (when Christianity first began to
flourish,) might be brought again into practice: and as it is said concerning
the Passover kept in Iosiahs time, 2 Chronicles. 35. 18.
that there was no Passover kept like it by any of the Kings of Judah: so may
I truly affirm, the public outward worship of God was not so reverently,
decently ( and yet not superstitiously) celebrated in any time of the former
Kings of England, as it was in the former part of the Reign of King Charles the
first.

6. Josiah was a man of a very tender heart, when he heard the curses which
were denounced out of the Book of God against Jerusalem and the inhabitants
thereof, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27.
he rent his clothes and humbled himself before God, bewailing and trembling at
the miseries which we^e coming upon his Subjects. And was not Charles the First
a tender hearted King? how did his heart smite him for giving way to the death
of the loyal and wise Earl of Strafford, Will you believe his own words? This
tenderness and regret ( says he) I find in my soul for having had any hand
(and that very unwillingly, King. Charles his Book, chapter 3
God knows,) in shedding one man's blood unjustly, though under the color and
formalities of justice, and pretenses of avoiding public mischiefs, which may
(I hope) be some evidence before God and man to all posterity; that I am far
from bearing justly the vast load and guilt of all that blood, which has been
shed in this unhappy War. How deeply was he sensible of the Irish outrageous
cruelties? Hear his appeal, God knows, Chap. 12.
as I can with truth wash my hands in innocence, as to any guilt in that
Rebellion; so I might wash them in my tears, as to the sad apprehensions I had
to see it spread so far and make such waste. When through the unhappy division
between him and his two Houses of Parliament, and his enforced recesse from
them, he foresaw what calamities were likely to befall his Kingdom of England,
how did his heart bleed? with what earnestness did he once and again importune
his enemies to a Treaty, and when with much ado he obtained one, what fair
terms of peace did he offer? Shall I give you his own language? Though I could
seldom get opportunity to Treat, yet I never wanted desire or disposition to
it: Chap. 18.
and again, I was willing to condescend as far as Reason, Honor and Conscience
would give me leave.

7. That expression concerning Josiah is very emphatical, 2 Chronicles. 34. 26.
Now the rest of the acts of Josiah and his goodness, (...)
or (according to the Hebrew) kindnesses. What eminent kindness did Charles the
First vouchsafe to his faithful servants in particular, and to all his
Subjects in general; he seldom (or never) suffered any service done to him to
pass unrewarded, and he was still ready to, yea, accordingly did Pass many
Acts of grace and favor to his people.

8. Finally, In the close of the narration concerning Josiah its said, Verse 27.
and his deeds first and last. Behold they are written in the Book of the Kings
of Israel and Judah. Manasseh his first deeds were bad, exceeding bad, but his
last good, very good. Iehoash his first deeds were good, 2 Chronicles. 33. 2, 3. and
12. 14.
He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, all the days of
Iehoidah the Priest; Chap. 24. 1, 2. and 17. 18.
but his last deeds were bad, hearkening to the wicked counsel of the
idolatrous and bloody Princes of Judah, but Josiah his deeds were good first
and last. In the eighth year of his Reign, whilst he was yet young, ( as being
but the sixteenth year of his age,) he began to seek after the God of David his
Father; Chap. 34. 3.
and so he continued to the last year of his Reign and day of his life. Our
Charles was at the first in his tender years a Prince of great hopes, nor did
he forsake that path of Religion and virtue, which at first he had taken up to
the last. Notwithstanding many strong temptations and sore trials, he retained
his integrity. Hear his own words, What tumults and Armies could not obtain,
King Charles Book, chap. 23.
neither shall restraint. The fear of man shall never be my snare, nor shall
the love of liberty entangle me; neither liberty nor life are so dear to me as
the peace of my Conscience, the honor of my Crown, and the welfare of my
People, and how fully did he verify his saying? The cursed proposals of his
cruel enemies, he with scorn refused, even then when death (as it were) looked
him in the face, having no doubt before his eyes that of our Savior to the
Angel of the Church of Smirna, Rev. 2. 10.
Be thou faithful to the death, and I will give thee a Crown of life.

And surely though I may justly take up the words of the son of Syrack
concerning Josiah, in reference to King Charles his eminent goodness. The
remembrance of Charles the First, Ecces. 49. 1.
is like the Composition of the perfume that is made by the Art of the
Apothecary, it is sweet as honey in all mouths, and as music to a banquet of
wine; yet with all the remembrance of his death, by which we were bereaved of
so excellent a Prince, cannot but be bitter as gall and wormwood, and would be
accompanied with sighs and groans. So much the rather, when we sadly take
notice (what I shall by and by enforce) that this good King like Josiah
suffered for the badnesse of his people: and withal, duly consider, what dismal
miseries upon the people followed the death of this good King. When Augustus
dyed, Patercul.
(says the Historian) Orbis ruinam timueramus, we feared the ruin of the
world was at hand. What fears of utter ruin to come upon City, Country,
Kingdom, did possess our spirits when our Caesar was taken from us? That
malice which deprived us of him, debarred us of the rightful Heir, so that for
many years there was no King in Israel. The basest of the people were instead
both of our Princes and our Priests; now a single, and then a many-headed
monster usurped the rule over us; during whose Tyrrany, what heresies and
blasphemies, what confusions and distractions, what decimations of the Laity,
Silencing of the Clergy, murdering of both, slavery and bondage upon all, so
that we were no better than captives in our own Land. Who can lay these things
to heart, Jerem. 9. 1.
and not wish with the Prophet Jeremy, Oh that my head were waters, and my eyes
a fountain of tears; that I might weep day and night for the slaughter of the
Father, and ruin of the daughter of my people. What as on this day thirteen
years, and for a long time after was only done apart, and in the closets,
whispering our sighs to Heaven; let us this day do together, and openly pour
out our lamentations before God and man, nor let the distance of time abate our
sense of that grievous blow which was then given: yea, let it be mournfully
remembered to all Generations, and that not only with tears of commiseration for
the sad loss, but chiefly of compunction, for the great sin, which is the other
branch of the Application.

2. As there was to be a great mourning in Jerusalem for the Crucifixion of
Christ; so let there be a mourning this day in the Cities of London and
Westminster, yea, throughout the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland,
for the Decollation of King Charles the First. I would not in this be
misconstrued, as if I went about to equalize the sufferings of my Sovereign
with those of my Savior; far be it from me, could those glorified Saints know
what was done here below, as (I am sure) the blessed Virgin Mary would be
enraged against the Papists, for attributing (as it were) to the mothers milk,
what only belong to the sons blood; so I doubt not but that blessed Martyr
Charles, would be incensed against any who should name his death the same day
with his Saviors, as if there were any comparison between the value of the one
and the other.

And as I do not equalize the blood of my Sovereign with my Saviors, so
neither the guilt of his murderers with theirs who put Christ to death. But
yet (I hope) without offense, we may take notice how near a resemblance there
was, and how as in some respects the guilt of the one was far greater, so in
some the charge lies heavier against the other.

To which end be pleased to observe.

1. In putting Christ to death, they put to death an innocent man; they did so
in cutting of Charles. True here was a disparity, Christ was perfectly innocent
from all kind of sin whatsoever, so was not he nor any other son of Adam; yet
thus far a congruity, that as there was no just cause for the Crucifying of
Christ, so neither for Beheading him. Indeed his impudent enemies drew up a
charge against him, ( so did the Jews against Christ,) but that as full of
falsehood as malice. They charge him with raising a war against the Parliament,
how justly, let the date of the Commissions on both sides decide, it is his own
Appeal, and that not long before his death. They accuse him for being a
Traitor to his people, which was so far from being true, that it was
impossible, since he never received any trust from them. I cannot here pass by
that which was very remarkable, that even those who raised the war against him,
voted his concessions at the Isle of Wight to be so far satisfactory, as that
they were a just ground for a peace; notwithstanding which, the Rebels Army
proceeded to compass his death, and yet (I doubt not) but some of the
Centurions beholding his behavior at his death, said within themselves,
certainly this was a righteous man.

2. In putting Christ to death they crucify a King, so the Magi affirm; where
is he that is born King? simulnatus simul Caesar, Matthew. 2. 2.
he was a King by birth. So was he who was on this day murdered, 1 Samuel 26. 9.
Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed and be guiltless?
was David's Question, and justly; nay, will you hear one of their own putting
the Question? Who did ever hear of any King put to death for any crime? ( never
indeed till in this monstrous age) the greatness of his Person being in worth
above any crime as civil. Tho. Good win Aggravations of sin, p. 12.
The truth is, Kings are Gods Vicegerants upon earth, their persons inviolable,
and their actions unquestionable, yet these Miscreants lay violent hands upon
the Lords anointed.

Indeed here the disparity is vast, since he whom the Jews pierced was not only
a King but a God, God Man, and in respect of his Deity, the eternal Son of God,
equal with the Father. But still in this a congruity, that as Christ in respect
of his humanity, was by descent from his Parents Heir to the Crown of Judah. So
was Charles to this of England, and consequently in this the parallel is good,
that the crime in both was the murder of an innocent King.

3. The murder of the Messiah was not done in a corner, but openly, not
suddenly, but deliberately, and that in a formal way of arraigning, accusing,
condemning and executing, was it not so here? they would not strangle him in
his Chamber, he was not slain in heat of blood, but he is brought with
premeditation to the Bar as a Malefactor; a charge is drawn up against him; a
sentence passed upon him with deliberation: his enemies adding (to use his own
words) the mockery of justice to the cruelty of malice, and at length in the
presence of his people, at the Gate of his Palace he is triumphantly Executed.

4. Christ was pierced by the Jews, his own Countrymen, Romans 9. 4.
of whom he came according to the flesh, by those who of right ought to have
been his Subjects, and to whom he had vouchsafed many kindnesses; yea, he was
betrayed into their hands by one of his own Disciples. Was it not so here? his
own Contrymen sold him, his own Subjects killed him; nay, some of them that
had been his own Servants, and obliged to him by manifold favors, were actors
in his death. And though comparing the persons murdered, the aggravation was
far, infinitely far greater on Christ's part; yet if we compare the persons
murdering, there are several circumstances which render King Charles his
murderers more inexcusable. For

1. Though the Jews accused him, and instigated the Romans against him, yet the
Judge that condemned, the Soldiers that executed him were Romans; Here, the
Accusers, Witnesses, Judges, Soldiers and Executioner were all of his own
people: whereas the Romans were heathens, and the Jews Moses his Disciples;
These, were such as called themselves Christians, nay, professed the same
Reformed Religion with him whom they destroyed.

2. St. Paul says of Christ's murderers, 1 Cor. 2. ^8.
Had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory; these
Miscreants knew, acknowledged, yea, in their very Charge call him their King.

3. There were no promissary Obligations from the Jews to Christ; but these
Rebels had by manifold private and public promises, protestations and oaths,
engaged themselves to preserve not only his life but honor.

4. Finally, Pilate wanted not the stamp of Caesar's authority to constitute him
a legal Judge; This Court of Justice (as they were unjustly called) had not the
least shadow of Authority. Should both Houses of Parliament have conspired to
erect such a Iudicatory, (which God forbid) it had been altogether illegal,
much more, if only one? The whole House of Commons have not, nor (when rightly
constituted) ever did, challenge to themselves alone, (except in reference to
their own Members) a Iudicatory power over the estate or life of the meanest
Subject, much less over their lawful King. But in this case, not both Houses
but one, and that the House of Commons; and that not the whole, nor yet the
half, but only a remnant, (the rest of their fellow Members having justly
deserted them, or being violently secluded from them) most illegally gave a
power to some of themselves, the Army and others, to undertake and accomplish
this desperate and horrid design.

So that in this one Fact, there was a concatination of many sins. Malice and
murder, ingratitude and hypocrisy, insolence and impudence, false-swearing and
forswearing, rebellion and treason, wilfulness and obstinacy, are those black
lines which do all center in this one black design and dismal fact, of taking
away the life of Charles the First. And now tell me, if all this considered,
there be not great cause of great mourning for so great wickedness.

Those whom this mourning does in the first and chief place concern, are the
surviving murderers; Surely if King David watered his couch and his bed with
tears for the murder of Uriah his Subject, what floods of tears ought they to
pour out day and night, who being* Subjects, rebelliously and traitorously
murdered their King. Oh! let it be our hearty prayer in their behalf, that by
an unfeigned and propo^^^nal sorrow, for shedding the blood of their King, and
through faith in the blood of Christ, they (with some of those who crucified
him) may obtain remission of their sins, and salvation of their souls; and well
may we, when the Royal Martyr himself did so affectionately and zealously pray
for them, as you may read at large in the last leaf of his incomparable Book.

But if through Gods just judgment, John 1. 44.
( like their Father the Devil) they be given up to impenitency, yet let us
mourn, and that partly for them, even upon this account, that they do not mourn
for themselves: according to that example of a devout Father, Hieron.
who told a wicked wretch, Hoc plango quod teipsum non plangis, I bewail this,
that thou do not bemoan thy self.

Chiefly for the sin it self, and that not only upon our own account, it being
our duty to mourn for the abominations which are acted by others, least
otherwise they in some sort become our own; but principally upon the account of
Religion, which has been made to stink (that I may allude to Jacobs phrase) in
the nostrils even of Turks and Pagans, Genesis 34. 30.
by the committing of this horrid fact.

Nor yet is this all, I must this day require all those to mourn, who did in
any kind either by tongue or pen, purse or person, contribute to, or assist in,
that rebellious war which made way for this traitorous murder. Believe it,
there is a remote, as well as an immediate guilt. As their hands were imbrewed
in his blood which were lifted up at the sentence in the Hall, so all their
hands are sprinkled with it, which were stretched forth against him in the
field. He that makes another drunk, is not only directly guilty of his
drunkenness, but indirectly of what other sins he then commits, though perhaps
it was far from his intention, that he should commit them. It was not I believe
at first in the design even of them that acted this villainy, much less in the
thoughts of many others, who engaged in the war; but neverthesse, the
assistance to that Rebellion involveth in the guilt of, and therefore engages
to a deep sorrow for this blood which prosperous success at last emboldned the
Rebels to shed.

And now I heartily wish, that may call for mourning might end here. But I must
crave leave to call upon those who assisted and endeavored his welfare, to
mourn also for their oaths and curses, intemperance and incontinence,
looseness and profaneness, by which God was provoked to blow upon his
Counsels, blast his Armies, and deliver him up to the will of his enemies.
Josiah was slain by an Egyptian, but the sins of his people caused God to take
him away. Christ was put to death by the Jews, but we all procured it by our
sins; it was so in this case, the Scotch Rebel-Army basely delivered and sold
him to the English Rebels Army, who barbarously condemned and executed him. But
even the English Royal loyal Army were too too guilty, whilst notwithstanding,
the goodness of their Cause, through the badnesse of their lives, they lost
the Field, upon which those sad events followed. So that The Presbyterian.
brought him to the block, and the Independents cut off his head.
what has been no less truly than commonly said in another way, I may sadly
allude to upon this account, and justly say, That whilst the malice of the
Sectaries cut off his head, the wickedness even of the Royalists helped to
bring him to the block.

Let us all therefore lay our hands upon our hearts, smite upon our breasts,
and every one say in the bitterness of our souls, I am that Jonah, for whose
sake that terrible tempest came upon the Pilate and the Ship, King and Kingdom.

And yet further, let us mourn, yea, mourn and weep, that notwithstanding our
sins brought such dreadful judgments upon our King and Kingdom, our persons
and families, those judgments have not wrought any reformation in our lives, so
that though we have been humbled we are not humble, and have been sorely
smitten, we have refused to receive instruction.

Nay once more, let us mourn, yea, be afflicted, and mourn, and weep were it
possible a Sea of tears, to consider, that notwithstanding God has pleased in
the midst of judgment to remember mercy, and commanded an unexpected and
blessed change for us; so that instead of usurping Tirants, we enjoy our native
Rightful King; instead of that black, (so the Martyr justly calls it) we have
a white Parliament; that instead of no Lords, new Lords, by no just power; we
have both old and new Lords of a right extraction, an House of Lords spiritual
and temporal, according to its ancient constitution; that so much villified
Order of Bishops, being by the providence of that God who only works great
marvels, (as it is in the Collect) restored to their pristine splendour; that in
the room of a pack of bloody Rebels, we behold a full House of Commons, whom
for their loyalty to the King, and zeal for the Church, all generations shall
call blessed; and whose dissolution I hope I shall not see, till the house of
David and the house of Aaron be more firmly seiled. That by the means of such a
King and such a Parliament, we obtain safety, liberty, tranquillity and
prosperity, together with that which is far more prctious, the liberty, and
shall we trust in due time, the uniformity of Gods public worship. I say, that
notwithstanding God has punished us less than our iniquities deserve, and
has given us such a deliverance as this, we do again break his Commandments,
and that with an high hand, hard heart, and stiff neck, most ungratefully
returning monstrous iniquities for miraculous mercies.

Nor must we think we have done enough in mourning, ey, though it be a great
and bitte^ mourning, no, there is something further required, that our
humiliation may find acceptance, and therefore give me leave to commend unto
you a double item.

1. One (and that which in some measure I am prevented in,) is that precious
Royal blood, which on this day was villanously shed, must not only be deeply
mourned for by all, but thoroughly avenged by those to whom the sword of justice
is committed. Justice, justice was the loud cry of that hellish Crew, to that
infernal Court, may it not be justly the cry of all Loyal Subjects now. That
good King whilst he lived, prayed for mercy, but now dead his blood calls for
vengeance. In the dark night of persecution, we often prayed to God how long
Lord holy and true, wilt not thou avenge; O! let not God have cause to say to
us, how long will not you avenge?

2. But secondly, those sins which any way procured this days fatal blow,
would not only be mourned for, but turned from by our selves, and (as much as
may be) suppressed in others, I have already intimated, There were sins, ey,
and those grievous sins on both hands.

On the one hand, Schism, Sedition, Rebellion, Treason, were those sins which
did instrumentally procure his death, and you have done well, (Loyal Worthies)
exceeding well, to use the best means for the restraint and reformation of them
by severe and extensive Laws. Taking care that Rebellion (to which the other
sins are subservient) may be destroyed in that which was its principal engine,
the Illegal League and Covenant made by a faction in two Nations, without the
consent, yea, against the command of their lawful Sovereign, and in its rotten
principles, those doctrines which give power to two Houses of Parliament in
some cases, to take up Arms without or against the Kings command, and
distinguish betwixt the personal and politic capacity of a King, as to the
point of resistance, which till they be utterly disclaimed both by Clergy and
Laity, there may be just suspicion of new Insurrection upon the first occasion.

On the other hand, Swearing and Drunkenness, Chambering and Wantonness,
Pride and Profaneness, are among the number of those sins which were the
meritorious causes that wrought His and his Kingdoms ruin. Oh! let not these
escape your severest censure. Revive and reinforce the old Laws, and if it be
needful, prepare new, for the more careful observation of Gods public
worship upon all holy days, especially the Lord's Day; together with effectual
restraint of those want on vanities and wicked vices which abound among us.
That you may the better prevail with others by your Laws for a speedy and
thorough reformation, begin it I beseech you at your own persons and families,
that you may be patterns to those among whom you live, of piety, sobriety, and
all manner of virtue.

And oh that that Prophecy of Isaiah concerning the Jews might be accomplished
in the people of this Kingdom, Isai. 4. 4. Mal. 3. 3.
That the time might come, when the Lord should have washed away the filth of
the daughter of England, and should have purged the blood of London and
Westminster from the midst thereof, by the spirit of judgment, and by the
spirit of burning. And that that of Malachy concerning Christ's coming in the
flesh, might be spiritually fulfilled among us; that his spirit may come and
pass through the whole Land, and sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, upon
both those parties which have been so long divided. That so we may from the
bottom of our hearts, bemoan, detest and abandon, not only one the sin of the
other, but both their own sins. Oh my Brethren! would but the one party mourn
for, and leave of their execrable hypocrisy; and the other their abominable
profannesse; the one their mock cantings, and the other their fond rantings;
the one their spiritual, and the other their corporal pride and drunkenness;
the one their impious forswearing and false swearing, the other their vain and
rash swearing; the one their schismatical separation from, and the other their
atheistical neglect of the public worship. Finally, the one their seditious
and rebellious, both principles and practices, and the other their vicious and
licentious conversations; and both their mutual strifes, envyings and
animosities, there would be no need either to fear the return of those
judgments, under which we so long groaned, or to doubt the continuance of those
blessings which at present we enjoy.

It is high time that I should now dismiss you till the Evening Service, when I
doubt not but the abler gifts and longer warning of my Reverend Brother, will
supply my manifold defects. Nothing now remains but our praises and prayers,
our praises in behalf of the Father, our praises and prayers in behalf of the
Son: And I beseech you let us all join together

In hearty thanksgiving to Almighty God, for Charles the First of glorious
memory; that excellent pattern which he gave (as on this day) of meekness and
charity, and withal of courage and magnanimity, in the midst of his
sufferings. For Charles the Second our now gracious Sovereign, that he has at
length recompensed his and his Fathers deep sufferings upon his head with
choice blessings; So that God seems by his happy return and settlement, Psalm.
51. 10.
to promise that he will comfort him and us according to the years wherein he
has afflicted him, and the days wherein he has seen evil.

In earnest supplications, not for Charles the First (he needs not our
Prayers) but Charles the Second (who I am sure deserves them) that he may be
such a one every way as his Royal Father was, except his sufferings; that he
may be like to Josiah, except in the fewness of his days, and sadness of his
end. Finally, that he may have a long, peaceable, prosperous and glorious Reign
over us, that so whereas our mourning for the Fathers Decollation, is like that
of the converted Jews, for killing the Prince of life; our Joys for the Sons
Restoration, may be like that of the Shepherds, yea, the Angels at the birth
of Christ, when they sang that heavenly Anthem, Glory to God on high, on earth
peace, good will toward men; and as our mourning for the one is like that of
Hadadrimmon for Josiahs slaughter, our Joy for the other may be like that which
was in Jerusalem at King Solomon's Coronation, And let all the people say, Amen.

FINIS.

