Die Martis, 1. Maii. 1660.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That M. Nathaniel Hardy is
hereby desired to print and publish the Sermon that he preached the 30. of
April 1660. in the Abbey Church Westminster, before the Lords of Parliament,
for which he has their Lordships thanks: and that no person shall presume to
reprint or publish the said Sermon, without his privity and approbation.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

THE CHOICEST FRUIT OF PEACE Gathered from the TREE of LIFE; Presented to the
Right Honorable The HOUSE of PEERS; IN A SERMON Preached before them at the
Abbey Church of Westminster, on April 30. 1660. being the day of their Solemn
Humiliation.

By NATH. HARDY Preacher to the Parish of S. Dionys. Back-Church.

Isaiah 4. 5. 6. And the Lord will create upon every dewlling place of mount
Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and a smoke by day, and a shining of a
fire by night, for upon all the glory shall be a defense:

And there shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat,
and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm, and from rain.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Joseph Cranford at the Castle and Lion in S.
Paul's Churchyard. 1660.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE House of PEERS.
My Lords,
SHort warning is some Apology for slender Performance; however what I cannot
further fairly excuse, I hope your goodness will freely pardon.

It was enough you were pleased to put your ears to the penance of hearing, but
much you should put your eyes to the expense of patience in reading this
unpolished Discourse; Such as it is, in obedience to your Honors command I
humbly tender to your acceptance.

The great hopes which divine providence has given us of an happy settlement
by your Free Convention, prompted my thoughts to this Subject; and it fell out
very sutably, that after my Reverend Brother had minded you of the duty of
humbling your selves, the comfortable Message of Peace should be presented to
you.

The day of your Fast was according to Ecclesiastical denomination the Eve of
a Feast, and that a Conjunction of those two Apostles of Christ Philip and
James; and (blessed be our gracious God) it was the eve of a day truly
festival, upon a civil account, on which that knot between his Majesty and
his people began to be tied, which I trust shall neither be untyed by subtlety,
nor cut asunder by violence.

From this May Day we promise our selves (through Gods mercy) a pleasant
Spring, yea, a joyful Summer of prosperity, after a cold Winter of tribulation;
especially since we find it seconded with another day of a free and full,
public and peaceable Proclamation of our Sovereign Lord King Charles, his
undoubted Right to these Realms, of which he has so long, no less unjustly in
respect of him, than unhappily in respect of us, been deprived: a day wherein
the fruit of (almost) all men's lips, was that joyful acclamation and hearty
supplication; God save the King.

And now (My Lords) be pleased to go on resolutely, unanimously in finishing
this blessed work; Be zealous for the glory of God, the honor of his Majesty,
the prosperity of the Church; and tranquillity of the kingdom, so shall you be
dearly beloved of God, and highly honored of men.

Commending your pious and loyal endeavors to the blessing, and your noble
Persons to the grace of God, I take leave, subscribing my self,

Your Honors most humble Servant NATH. HARDY.

THE CHOICEST FRVIT.
Isaiah 57. Part of the 19. verse. I create the fruit of the lips peace, peace
to him that is far off, and to him that is near, says the Lord.
THis day is a time of Humiliation, and this Text a word of Consolation. That
for which we are this day to be especially humbled, is the sin and misery of
our former War, That which this Text comfortably assures, is the blessing of
a future peace.

This day is not only a day of humiliation but supplication, of tears but
prayers, and this Text teaches us what should be our principal Petition,
namely, Peace, Peace.

Finally, I am this day in a peculiar manner to address my self to you Right
Honorable, who are all of you Proceres Regni Peers of the Realm, and some of
you have been, and in Gods good time may be again Comites Regis, Attendants on
a King; and this Text is the saying of him who is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords. Well may the greatest Lords be Auditors when the Lord Jehovah is the
Speaker: I create the fruit of the lips peace, peace to him that is afar off,
and to him that is near, says the Lord.

In the discussion of this Scripture, I shall briefly touch upon the Author
mentioned in those words, says the Lord, and chiefly insist upon the matter in
the rest of the verse.

1. This phrase and form of speech (says the Lord) is frequently used by all
the Prophets, sometimes with additions, the Lord God, the Lord of hosts, the
Lord thy Redeemer; sometimes with variation, says the high and lofty One,
says my God, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it; and thus sometimes in the
beginning, sometimes in the middle, sometimes in the close of their Prophecies,
nay, once we find the beginning, the middle, and the end of one verse to be,
Thus says the Lord of hosts.

If you shall ask, Quest. 1.
Why the Prophets were so bold as to affix Gods Name to their Messages? The
Answer is easily returned, Because they received their message immediately as it
were from Gods mouth. The Hebrew word which we read report, Isa. 53. 1.
properly signifies hearing, to intimate that what the Prophet reported to the
people was no other then what he first heard from God, with which accords that
of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 23.
I have received of the Lord that which I delivered unto you. When an
ambassador delivers nothing but what the King himself has given him in
charge, he may truly say, Thus says the King, well then might the Prophets use
this form, Thus says the Lord, whenas their Predictions are no other then
divine Revelations. Indeed there were then many false Prophets of whom God
himself says, They prophecy lies in my Name, Jer. 14. 14.
I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spoke I unto them. But
this hinders not why the true Prophets should make use of Gods Name in
delivering their messages.

As for us who are not extraordinary Prophets but ordinary Pastors, and
therefore lay no claim to immediate Revelations, we do not, dare not attribute
any such authority to our discourses, any further then they manifestly agree
with, and are clearly grounded upon the holy Scriptures, and accordingly we
desire you to prove our sayings, and only so far to approve them, as they are
concordant with the Prophetical and Apostolical Writings; But withal,
inasmuch as we are duly called to the office of preaching Gods Word to the
people, and so long as it is no other then his word which we preach, we can
boldly say it is the great God who by us speaks, and accordingly we ought to
be received as such by you.

If it shall be further enquired, Quest. 2.
why the Prophets do not content themselves to deliver their message from God,
but bring in God himself as delivering it, I shall return this answer, that by
this way of expression their Prophecies might make the deeper impression upon
the hearers: The Prophets well knew

1. How incredulous the people would generally be. Isa. 53. 1.
We find this Prophet complaining, Who has believed our report? If you
observe the predictions of the Prophets, you shall find them for the most part
either threats of misery to the bad, and that whilst their condition was
prosperous, or promises of mercy to the good, and that when their estate was
calamitous, and truly it is no easy matter to make the one believe so as to
tremble at the threat, or the other so as to hope for the promise; When our
mountain is strong, we are apt to say, it shall never be moved, and when our
condition is low, we are ready to think it can never be raised.

2. That there would be no better way to gain credence to their predictions;
then by minding the people that they came from God; Whatsoever has the stamp
of divine authority upon it, must needs be current coin with all that are not
direct Atheists* He that believes that there is a God, must needs believe,
that what he says is true, and therefore the true reason why their sayings
were no more regarded, was because those to whom they spoke did not consider
that they were the Lords sayings. No wonder if in the last verse of this
Chapter, which is a denunciation of war against the wicked (says my God) is
inserted, and here (says the Lord) is annexed to this annunciation of peace.

Let us all then learn whenever we are about to read or come to hear the
word of the Lord either read or preached, beforehand to fix this thought in
our minds, This is no other then the word of God which I am now to read or
hear; that so we may attend with the greater reverence, and assent with the
firmer confidence. And oh that you (my Noble Lords) who are in the language of
the Psalmist coetus Deorum a Congregation of Gods, Psa. 83. 1.
would remember that the great Jehovah always stands in the midst of you, and
now speaks to you in the language of this Text, I create the fruit of the
lips peace, peace to him that is afar off, and to him that is near.

Having by this short Preface concerning the Author (I hope) in some measure
quickened your attention, I shall now proceed to insist upon the matter of the
Text, which seems to be like a chariot running upon four wheels, a tree
spreading it self into four branches, or if you will, the river of Paradise
parting it self into four heads:

Here is observable,

The Excellency of the Object, Peace, Peace.

The Universality of the Subject, to him that is afar off, and to him that is
near.

The Causality of the Agent, I create. And

The Facility of the accomplishment, the fruit of the lips.

And now whilst I shall drive this Chariot, climb this Tree, wade this river,
let it be our prayer, that the fruit of my lips in handling, and your ears in
hearing, may be Peace, Peace to all our souls, and so I begin with

The Excellency of the Object, Genesis 1.
Peace, Peace; For the unfolding whereof, I shall consider it first as
propounded, and then as ingeminated.

The blessing propounded is peace, Part. 1.
which according to the double meaning of this Prophecy, admits of a double
exposition.

1. The mystical sense of these words is the vocation of the Gentiles to the
faith of Christ, and in sense the peace, peace to him that is afar off, and to
him that is near, is peace to the Gentile, as well as the Jew; and that as
secondarily of one with another, (the partition wall being taken down) so
primarily of both with God (the enmity being taken away between God and man)
through Christ. And that this Prophecy ascends to this upper spring of
celestial peace, appears by S. Paul's allusive expression, in his Epistle to
the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2 13, 17.
In Christ Jesus, you who sometimes were afar of, are made nigh by the blood of
Christ. And again, he came and preached peace to you which were afar off, as to
them that were nigh; fitly answering to this of the fruit of the lips peace to
him that is afar off. But the handling of the words in this sense best befits
that solemn Feast of the Epiphany, and therefore I shall now insist on the
other exposition, which is both most suitable to a Fast, and especially to the
occasion of this.

2. Now the literal sense of these words refers to the restoration of the
Jews, and accordingly the peace here assured is the nether spring of temporal
peace, and more particularly the Jews peaceable departure out of Babylon, and
quiet settlement in their own Country.

1. Almighty God foretelling by the Prophet Zachary this restoration, Zech. 4.
6.
says, Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit. There was no might
enforcing, nor power compelling, but only Gods Spirit mollifying their enemies
hearts toward them, so that they went as quietly out of Babylon as their
Ancestors had done out of Egypt. And surely no victory liae to that which is
without garments rolled in blood, and a recovery of just rights when in a way
of peace is most desirable.

2. If you cast your eyes backward in this Book, you shall find God assuring
tranquillity to the Jews when returned to Jerusalem; Isa. 32. 17. and 33. 20.
My people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in
quiet resting places; and again a little after, Look upon Zion the City of our
solemnity, thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that
shall not be taken down, not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed,
neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken; And were not Peace a common
theme, and had not the miseries of our late wars abundantly taught us, it were
easy here to enlarge upon the excellency of this mercy, for every man to sit
under his own Vine in quiet, and enjoy his rights with peace; Our Prophet in
the close of this verse sets it forth by the metaphor of health, and indeed
what health is to the body, that is peace to a people, health is the peace and
agreement of the humors in the body, and peace is the health and welfare of a
Nation, and as it is health without which there can be no contentment in any
outward advantages whatsoever, so it is the peaceable enjoyment of our
possessions which renders them truly comfortable, and this was the mercy here
promised, and not only so but

2. Ingeminated, and that not without singular Emphasis, peace, peace, that is
peace restored, confirmed and multiplied.

1. The Collation of a mercy is amiable, the continuation yet more desirable,
but the restoration is most acceptable. Such was this peace, a dismission
Babylon wherein they had been miserable captives, a return to Judea whence they
had been doleful exiles, and such a peace was a double peace, not only because
it is the restoring of a former peace, but it is also highly commended by the
misery of that bondage which had for many years deprived them of it. Mercies
are most valued after we have known what it is to want them; Health is doubly
amiable after a desperate sickness, a calm is never more lovely then after a
violent storm, the Suns golden beams are most glorious after a dark night, and
peace is doubly beautiful after a ruinous war: Look as summum infertunium
fuisse fortunatum, affliction after a prosperous estate is more bitter, so
prosperity after an afflicted estate is the sweeter.

2. There is a peace which is only as a skinning the sore which afterward
breaks forth the more virulently, and there is a peace which is an healing
the wounds, a firm peace, to intimate which perhaps the word is doubled. Those
words the fruit of the lips are read by some the fruit of the banks, the banks
being as it were the lips of the river, and then it means the fruit of the
tree, which grows by the river side, concerning which the Psalmist says, its
leaf shall not fade, Psa. 1. 3.
a fit emblem of a lasting peace. This is that peace for which the Church
prays, when she says, Isa. 2^. 12.
Lord thou will ordain (or as the Hebrew word most properly signifies
stablish) peace for us, such a peace as is not built on the sand but the rock;
This the Psalmist was confident of when he says the Lord will bless his people
with peace, Psa. 29. ult.
that is, he will give such a peace as shall be a blessing, a peace which is
not a blazing comet but a fixed star.

3. Peace though it be but one word, and that a monasyllable, is a Volume of
mercies, containing whatsoever conduces to the welfare of a person or people;
and probably for this reason there is a duplication of the word to note a
multiplication of blessings. 1 Chro. 12. 18.
When Amasiah wished to David, Peace, Peace be to thee, what did he thereby
intimate, but all kind of prosperity? Sanct. in (...).
and here Sanctius glosseth this, peace, peace, to mean cumulatissimam pacem,
such a peace as brings with it an heap of blessings. We cannot have a better
Expositor of Gods Word then himself, Ier. 33. 11.
where he says, I will bring it health and cure, I will reveal abundance of
peace and truth. To this purpose is that metaphor which we find used by this
Prophet, where he brings in God saying, Isa. 48. 18. and 66. 12.
Oh that thou had hearkened to my commands, then had thy peace been as a
River. And again, I will extend peace to her like a River; by which at once is
noted a permanency of peace, with an affluence of all sorts of blessings, and
if you shall ask how far this River of peace extends it self? you have an
answer in the

Universality of the Subject, Genesis 2.
to him that is afar off, and to him that is near.

And yet before I discuss the Universality, it will not be amiss to take
notice of the propriety, which though it be not expressed in the Text, may be
supplied from the Context and other parallel Scriptures.

If you look downwards upon that which follows, Ver. 20, 21.
you find the wicked expressly excluded from having any interest in this peace,
who either should not at all return to their own Country; or if they did,
little benefit or comfort should accrue to them by it; so that the him in the
Text, is him that is godly and upright. It is very observable that antithesis
which our Prophet makes between the righteous and the wicked in Jerusalem,
when it was besieged by Sennacherib; Isa 33. 14, 15. 16, 17.
On the one hand, the sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised
the hypocrite: where you see the seeming Saint is in as bad a condition as the
open sinner, and no wonder since the one is no less wicked then the other,
nay, malus ubi se simulat lunc est pessimus, the evil man is then worst when he
would appear to be best; On the other hand, He that walks righteously and
speaks uprightly, etc. he shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be
the munition of rocks, there is safety, bread shall be given him, his waters
shall be sure, there is plenty; and as the crown of his rejoicing it is added,
V^^. 1^. 15.
Thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty, but still these blessings are
limited to the righteous and upright-hearted; and surely this was no less
verified of them when captives in Babylon, then when besieged in Jerusalem.

2. If you look upward on the close of the former verse, you find mention of
mourners, and a little higher of the broken and contrite spirit, so that the
him in the Text is the him that was a mourner by the Rivers of Babylon for
Zions miseries, and for his own and others iniquities. The Psalmist speaking of
this very mercy, Psa 126. 4.
the turning again of the captivity of Zion, says, they that sow in tears
shall reap in joy, which relates not only to their miserable condition, but
penitent disposition; It is the sorrow of contrition that fits us for the joy
of restoration, since God loves to pour the oil of his mercy into broken
vessels.

3. If you cast your eyes upon the promise of God by Moses to his people, Deuteronomy.
30. ^3.
of having compassion on them, and gathering them from the Nations whither he
had scattered them, you will find the condition premised, to be returning to
the Lord, and obeying his voice. By sin we forsake God, by repentance we return
to him; by committing sin we transgress his Law, by doing righteousness we
obey his voice; no way to settle any Nation but by unfeigned repentance and
universal obedience.

Having given you this brief account of that which is to be supplied in
reference to the propriety, be pleased now to look upon that which is
expressed, the Universality of the Subject, him that is afar off, and him that
is near. Indeed the number here used is singular, but it is not a person only
but the body of the people which is intended, and that as well those afar off
as near.

For the clearer understanding whereof, you must know, that when the Jews were
conquered by the Babylonians, there were some in patria relinquendi, to be left
in the Country, and those were the poor of the Land, to be Vine-dressers and
Husbandmen; there were others in captivitatem abducendi, to be carried away
captive to a strange land, and among those some were upon the borders of Judea,
and so near, others afar off in remoter Countries; and whereas they who were
afar off, might conceive themselves under an incapacity by reason of the
distance, to return into their own Country, the promise is extended to him
that is afar off, as well as him that is near; yea, as if he that were afar off
should be sooner at home then he that is near, he as set in the first place. If
you please to look upon a preceding passage of this Prophecy, you shall find
an enumeration of those several Countries from whence God would recover his
people from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and fram
Elam, and from Shinar, and Hanath, and from the Islands of the Sea: and it
follows, Isa. 11. 11, 12.
He shall assemble the Outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed
of Judah, from the four corners of the earth; and that promise mentioned by
Moses, and repeated by Nehemiah, runs thus, If any of thine be driven out unto
the utmost parts of heaven, Deu^. 30. 4.
from thence will the Lord thy God gather thee, Neh. 1. 7.
and from thence will he fetch thee.

That which would here be taken notice of, is how divine providence brings to
pass improbable events: that those who were near hand should return in peace
was not unlikely, but for them who were afar off to be restored, what more
improbable? and yet this was effected: Who would have expected that Abraham and
Sarah being stricken in years should have a child? Genesis 21. 5.
and yet when Abraham was an hundred years old, and Sarah not much younger,
Isaac is born. Who would have thought that Joseph when sold as a slave by his
brethren, and imprisoned as a malefactor by his Master, should have been so
highly exalted by Pharaoh? and yet he became second in all the Land of Egypt.
Who would have imagined that David, when hunted as a Partridge upon the
Mountains, and forced to fly out of his own Country, should ever come to sit
on the Throne? and yet he was in the appointed time King both of Israel and
Judah; and we trust it will not be long ere we have a like example in our
David. And therefore let us learn not to measure divine proceedings by the last
of our carnal reason; rather with Abraham let us believe and hope even against
hope, and when things are at the worst, nor to despair of deliverance,
especially when we consider,

The Causality of the Agent, Genesis 3.
I create; or as the Hebrew participle signifies, I am creating, as if what
was indeed long after were then to be effected, because it should be as
certainly, as if it were presently brought to pass.

This word Create is used sometimes in a proper, and sometimes in an allusive
sense.

In a proper sense it is attributed,

1. Primarily to the making of the world with all things therein, so we often
read of Gods creating the Heavens and the earth.

2. Secondarily, to the preserving of all things made, (...)
so the Psalmist says, Thou sendest forth thy spirit, and they are created,
thou renewest the face of the earth; with which agrees that Maxim in the
Schools, Conservation is a continued Creation.

2. In an allusive way, it is applied to that work of

1. Spiritual Conversion, in which respect Converts are said to be New
Creatures, 2 Cor. 5. 27.
and the new man to be created after God in righteousness and true holiness.
Ephesians. 4. 14.


2. Temporal Liberation: thus when any strange and unexpected, glorious and
eminent deliverance is wrought by God for his Church, it is called a creation,
and such was this, to which my Text refers.

There are two works of God which are singularly transcendent, namely, his
first and his last work of Creation, which was in beginning of time; and of
resurrection which shall be the end of time, and to both of these is the
restoration of the Jews compared, and that by this Prophet, To the
resurrection, where he says, awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust, Isa.
26. 20.
and to the creation, in this, I create peace.

If you please, I shall spend a little time in cracking the shell of this
metaphor wherein we shall find many wholesome kernels contained.

1. Creation is Gods peculiar act, the choicest flower of the celestial Crown,
and Prerogative of the Deity. It is a Question moved by the Schools, Whether
God can make such a creature as should be able to create another? but it is
resolved negatively, and not without reason, since that were to make a God,
Creation being an act of Omnipotency, which is incommunicable to any thing
less then a God. It is observed by the Hebrew Critics, that these Verbs (...)
are used of the Creatures, but this Verb (...) in the Text only of God, Such
was this restoration of the Jews, a work so wrought, that it did proclaim God
to be the Author; and therefore the Church expressing her confidence of
accomplishing it, looks up to God, Lord, thou wi^t ordain peace, Isa 26. ^2.
for thou have wrought all our works, and God himself foretelling it says, I
will make the wilderness a pool of water, Isa 41. 18, 19, 20.
I will sow in the desert the fir tree, and the pine, and the box tree
together, that they may see and know, consider and understand, that the hand of
the Lord has done this, Psa. 126 3.
and the holy One of Israel has created it. And accordingly when this work was
accomplished, it was said among the Heathen, the Lord has done great things
for them, and indeed the wise God is for the most part pleased so to bring
about his Churches deliverance, that it may appear both to themselves and
others that it is his doing.

2. Creation is Gods immediate act, in the accomplishing whereof there was no
instruments made use of. Some Philosophers indeed have fancied, that God
created lesser gods; and by them made the world, but Job says, Job 9. 8.
he alone spreads out the Heavens; and it is a Maxim in the Schools,
Instrumentum creationis creatura esse non potest, the Creature cannot be so
much as an Instrument in the work of Creation, the Creature can do nothing
alone without God, but God can do any thing alone without the Creature; yea*
the Creature cannot be subservient in the work of Creation, and therefore it is
a good argument against the Arians, that Christ is no creature, because he is a
Creator; for by him were all things made, John 1. 3.
and without him was nothing made that was made: Indeed as all works ad extra,
so that of the Creation was the work of the whole Trinity, in reference to
which it is observed, that the first letters of (...) and (...) are in (...),
each person being as it were co-efficient in this work, the Father, by the Son,
through the Spirit, creating the world; but there was not, could not be, any
thing less then God a co-worker in it. Thus the restoration of the Jews was as
it were Gods immediate hand, and therefore he says, I will have mercy upon the
house of Judah, and will save them by the Lord their God, and will not save
them by bow, Hos. 1. 7.
nor by sword, nor by battle, by horses, nor by horsemen. And though there
were persons isntrumental in carrying on the work, as Cyrus, Darius,
Zerubbabel, Ezra, Nehemiah, yet they were such as God did immediately and
extraordinarily raise up, and it was done without secondary means, which are
usual in recovery of our Rights. It is so many times in Gods vindictive and
gracious acts, there is little of man, that himself may have all the glory.

3. Creation is a merciful act, as there was no isntrumental, so neither any
deserving cause of the framing of the world, (...), to them that ask what was
the moving cause of the Creation, no other answer can be returned, but (...),
the grace and goodness of God, says Phillo the Jew. Philo.
It was not a natural act to the Trinity (as the Generation of the Son is to
the Father) but a voluntary and free act, arising from the good pleasure of his
will; and when there was nothing besides God, there could be nothing without
God to move him to it; and therefore the Psalmist attributes the making of the
heavens, not only to the depth of Gods wisdom but the length of his mercy;
psa. 136. 5.
To him that by wisdom made the Heavens, for his mercy endures for ever. And
surely it was no other then mere mercy which moved God to command salvation to
the Captive Jews; so the promise runs, Isa. 54. 7.
with great mercies will I gather thee; and yet more fully, Ezekiel. 36. 32.
not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord God, be it known to you. Indeed
whatsoever deliverances God at any time vouchsafes, and that to his Church,
are to be ascribed, not to her merits, but his mercies.

4. Creation is an act whereby something is produced out of nothing, to wit,
either simpliciter or secundum quid; mere nothing, so was that first matter
created, or that which is no way disposed to the production of such forms, as
that matter was in respect of the things created out of it. And what less was
the restoration of the Jews, who were no way able to rescue themselves, nor yet
the Babylonians disposed to let them go? Thus many times that God which
cemmanded the light to shine out of darkness, who framed this beautiful
Edifice out of that rude chaos; and every spring clotheth the naked trees with
leaves, spreads the bare earth with a green Carpet, and enammeleth it with
flowers, by his wonderful power, wisdom, and goodness, brings happy
settlement out of disorder and confusion.

5. Creation is an irresistible act, as being the work of Omnipotency, and such
was the Jews liberation. Indeed the wicked were like the troubled Sea, Ver 20.
that is, as some gloss it, the wicked Babylonians used all the ways and
means possible to disturb and hinder the peaceable return of the Jews, and it
was true in the History, Sanballat and Tobiah with many others endeavored both
by power and policy to obstruct their prosperity, but that power and wisdom
which created the world, knows no impediments; I will work says God) and who
shall let it? Isa. 43. 13.
Unless there were a power above his, none can; and if there be, he is not
God. Except the Lord keep the City (says David) the watchman watches but in
vain; Psa. 127. 1.
and if the Lord will keep it, the enemy opposes in vain: Ioh 31. 21.
so true is that of Elihu to Job, when he gives quietness, who then can make
trouble?

6. Lastly, Creation is an instantaneous act, a sudden passage from not being
to being, without any successive motion or previous alteration. It is true, the
world was not finished in less then six days, but the act of creation upon
every one of those days, was in an instant; and though in this the parallel
is not full, yet thus far it is true, that the Jews return out of Babylon was
sudden and speedy. To this tend those expressions in this Prophet, Who are
those that flee as the clouds, Isa 60. 8.
and as the doves to the windows? And again, who heard such a thing as this?
66. 7.
Who has seen such things? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day,
or shall a Nation be born at once? for as soon as Zion traveled she brought
forth her children; Thus though God is long before he begins, yet ofttimes he
quickly makes an end.

Though therefore the vastness of our confusion, strength of our adversaries,
length of our sufferings, weakness of means, and sense of our unworthiness,
may discourage us; yet when we remember that God can, and does create
deliverance, let us be encouraged (especially considering what he has begun to
do) to an humble, confident, and patient waiting for the completion of our
salvation, and so much the rather, Genesis 4.
because of the facility of the accomplishment, in those words, The fruit of
the lips, which is the last particular, and comes now to be handled.

To the right understanding whereof, the Question would be made and resolved,
whose lips are here meant? and according to a various reference, there are
several interpretations.

More particularly, it may be looked upon either as the fruit of Gods or man's,
of his or our lips, and each in a double notion.

If we refer the fruit of the lips to God, we may understand a double word, to
wit, imperii and promissi: the fruit of the lips, that is, his word of command,
and that lets us see how God would create peace; or else the fruit of the lips,
that is, the word of promise, and that lets us see why he waited to create it.

1. I create the fruit of the lips, that is, God would by a word of Command
accomplish peace, and this sense very fitly agrees both with the thing, and
the phrase. As to the restoration of the Jews, it was effected by a word, God
did but speak to Cyrus, and he makes a decree for their returns; so it runs in
this Prophecy, Isa 45. 1.
Thus says the Lord to his anointed to Cyrus. And as to the phrase of creating
it, is most suitable, psa. 148. 5.
since Creation was by a word, he commanded, and they were created, says the
Psalmist of the Heavens, Jussit and extendit campos. -- said the Poet of the
earth. Ovid.
It was but an Ephphata, and the deaf ears were opened; a tace, and the raging
Sea was still; an obmutesce, and the devils were silenced; but a fiat, and the
heavens and the earth were made. It is very observable, that of the devil to
our Savior, Matthew 4. 5.
If thou be the Son of God command (or as the Greek word signifies speak) that
these stones be made bread; intimating that if he could turn the stones into
bread by a word, he would conclude him to be the Son of God; this being indeed
peculiar to a Deity, that his word is the work, and his most glorious
operations are but the fruit of his lips.

2. I create the fruit of the lips, that is, it had been the fruit of his lips
in promising, and therefore it should be the work of his hands in performing.
The words of the Lord (says David) are pure words, psa. 12. 6.
as silver tried in the fire, purified seven times. Seven is a number of
perfection, whereby is intimated, that Gods promises are perfectly pure,
without any dross of falsehood; he speaks nothing but what he intends, and
will execute: perhaps for this reason it is said, not the words of the lips;
but the fruit, to intimate, that his words like fruit spring from the root of
his heart, and that they are not leaves but fruit, real performances. It is
not so with men, ofttimes their lips have leaves, but no fruit; or their fruit
is like the apples of Sodom. For as those are fair to the eye, but molder in
the handling, so most men's promises are pleasing to the ears, but wither in the
hands which should fulfill them. But far be this from the faithful God, who
will not alter the thing that is gone out of his lips; psa. 8^ ^4
yea, heaven and earth shall pass away, Matthew 24. ^5.
but his words shall not pass away.

And therefore in all conditions let us learn to feed upon the fruit of Gods
lips, lay hold upon his promises, which are pabulum fidei, the food of our
faith. Solomon says of the lips of the righteous, that they feed many: it is
most true of the righteous God, whose promises afford sound nutriment.

It is very observable, that the Author to the Hebrews, mentioning the
accomplishment of that promise to Abraham concerning a numerous posterity,
uses the same metaphors which are expressed in the promise, namely, of the
stars of the sky, and sands by the sea shore, to intimate, that the performance
was full as large as the promise. Indeed as in nature rather then there shall
be a vacuum, things will move contrary to their nature; so rather then there
shall be a vacuity in Gods word, he will work wonders, and create peace. What
room then for infidelity when we have such sure promises? And therefore
wheresoever we find this fruit growing, let us feed heartily, believe
confidently, that our souls may live.

2. If we refer the fruit of the lips to man, it may be understood either of
our prayers, or praises, or both.

How fitly they are called the fruit of the lips, will appear, in that the lips
are of great use in both; when we pray, we must take with us words and say; and
when we praise, Hos. 14. 3.
we must render the calves of our lips: Psa. (...) 1 28. and 66 9.
David says, With my voici have I cried to thee, O Lord, and we often read of
the voice of his prayer; and prayer is often styled a calling upon God, and
upon the Name of the Lord. But more especially are the lips necessary in
praising, since our praising God is only a confession of what he has done for
us, and that is to be done by the mouth; for which reason the Psalmist calls his
tongue his glory, because the chief instrument of offering praise, whereby God
is glorified. Indeed neither our prayers nor praises must be only the fruit of
our lips, but of our hearts also, otherwise we are but as tinkling brass and
sounding cymball. Psa. ^3.
Prayer is often called the pouring out of the heart, Psa 5^ 8 and 50 ^l.
and lifting up of the heart; and the Psalmist says, he will praise God with
his whole heart, if that join not in those duties, we offer the lips of calves
instead of the calves of our lips; Psa 62 8.
but still the lips are the most proper instrument of expressing both our
supplications and gratulations, (...) 3. 41.
and therefore both aptly called the fruit of the lips.

And now according to these acceptions, Psa 9. 1.
the fruit of the lips is to be looked upon either as an antecedent or the
consequent of this Peace which God creates.

1. I create the fruit of the lips, that is, the peace which God creates
should be the fruit of their lips; the matter of their earnest prayers. If you
peruse the thirty six Chapter of Ezekiels Prophecy, Ezekiel. 36 37.
you shall find a Catalogue of many precious benefits which God would do for
his people, but in the close, Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this be
enquired of by the house of Israel. Prayer is the sluice that keeps out an
inundation of judgments, and the key which opens the cabinet of mercies.
This is that duty to which the Psalmist excites, psa (...) 6, 8.
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, and presently after he practices it when he
says, Peace be within thy walls; he will do little for Zions peace, who will
not pray for ir, and whatever we do will be to little purpose without it, it
must be (so far as we are able, and when called to it) the fruit of our hands
in endeavor, but chiefly the fruit of our lips in prayer.

2. I create the fruit of the lips, that is, the peace which God shall create
must bring forth the fruit of the lips in praises. This exposition is looked
upon as so much the more genuine, because we find the sacrifice of praise,
Heb. 13. 3.
called by the Apostle the fruit of the lips, though his allusion, there is not
to this but that of the Prophet Hosea, H^s. 14 3.
the calves (which by the Septuagint is read the fruit of the lips) when God
works any deliverance, he puts (as the Psalmists phrase is) a new song into
our mouths, psa 40. 3.
giving us just occasion of singing praises to him. I create (says God)
Jerusalem a rejoicing, Isa. 65. 18.
and her people a joy, and gaudentis est gratias agere; Joy clothes it self
with the garments of praise. And very fitly is this construction joined with
the former, since it is but just, that as we are importunate to obtain, so we
should be fervent in giving thanks: and those blessing, which are won with
prayer, should be worn with praise. Indeed it were a shame to open our mouths
wide when we beg, and shut them when we should bless; nay, to cry aloud, give
us our daily bread, and but whisper out, Hallowed be thy Name; especially
considering, that our Petitions for mercy in times of distress, are usually
joined with vows of thankfulness; and if deliverance have been the fruit of
our lips in asking, and thankfulness the fruit of our lips in vowing before, it
is most just that it should be the fruit of our lips in paying and performing
it afterward.

And thus I have run through all the parts of my Text, by way of Explication;
spare me but a few minutes of your Honorable patience, whilst I shall close
up all with a suitable and seasonable Application.

Right Honorable and well-beloved, though we have not like the Jews been
carried captive by a foreign enemy into a strange Country, yet for these many
years we have been miserable slaves to an usurped power in our own land; and
those bitter Lamentations of Jeremiah, in reference to the Babylonish
captivity, are in several passages fitly applicable to our late condition.

The breath of our nostrils, ^am. 4. 2.
the anointed of the Lord was taken in the pits of those Usurpers, and then
when we said we should live under his shadow, they violently hewed down the
Tree, cutting off the head upon pretense of saving the body. The precious
stones of Zion (our Nobles) comparable to fine gold, V. 2.
were esteemed as earthen pitchers, rejected as useless; our Palaces were
swallowed up, and our strong holds destroyed; the Gates of our City as it were
sunk into the ground, and our bars broken, Chapter 2. 5. 9. 6.
the Places of our Religious Assemblies shut up, and our solemn Feasts
forgotten; The Princes were polluted, the Priests despised, and the people
sighed under heavy burdens. In few words, The Crown is fallen from our head,
Chapter 1. 11.
the joy of our hearts ceased, Chapter 5. 3, 5, 8, 15, 16.
we are made Orphans and Fatherless, our necks under a sore persecution, yea,
servants ruled over us, and there was none to deliver us out of their hands.

But he who is the God in the Mount has looked upon our afflictions, and heard
our cry, put an hook in the nostrils of those wild Phanaticks, who did ride
over our heads, and trampled us under their feet; he has raised up an ever to
be renowned Zerubbabel, before whom the Mountains were made plain, by whose
prudent as well as valiant conduct, through Gods wonderful mercy, mighty
Forces were conquered without a Fight, and scattered without a Rout; Our eyes
now behold instead of those brambles and thorns, which thought themselves
firmly rooted, a Garden of choice flowers of the Gentry transplanted as it were
from all parts of the Country into the House of Commons. Our goodly Cedars are
now planted again in their own House, which was for so many years empty,
unless when those Mushromes crept up in it, and we hope ere long to see the
Stately Oak. Finally, we are come out of the Babylon of confusion, and
returning not as some are pleased to phrase it, to the Onyons and Garlic of
Egypt, but to the honey and milk of Canaan; and that as the Jews then did,
without the effusion of blood.

And now (my Noble Lords) what is our earnest hope and expectation, but that
the great God will honor you to be the Instruments of completing that
deliverance, which he has been pleased as it were to create for us? In order
to which, though it is far from me to undertake to give your Honors direction,
yet give me leave to acquaint you, what is looked upon by all good men, as that
which must make us happy; and accordingly what is our petition, and we doubt
not but will be your Lordships endeavor, namely, the blessing of the Text,
Peace, Peace.

Peace in the State, and peace in the Church. I mention the State first, since
though the peace of the Church be first in order of dignity, yet (if I may
humbly offer my thoughts, the peace of the State would be first endeavored in
order of Time; since though the State cannot flourish unless the Church be
settled, yet the Church cannot be so well settled, as when the State is composed.
It is very observable, what a difference there was between the Altar, which
Solomon made in a peaceable time, and that which Moses made when the people
were in an unsettled condition in the wilderness. The Altar which Moses made
was but five cubits long, Exodus 27. 1.
five cubits broad, 2 Chronicles 4. 1.
and three cubits high; but the Altar which Solomon made was twenty cubits
long, and twenty cubits broad, and ten cubits high. The work of the Temple went
on but slowly, when the builders of it were forced to have a sword in one hand
as well as a trowell in the other; but when once the State is duly settled upon
its right basis, in quietness, both hands will be at liberty to build the
Temple. Peace then would be first sought for in reference to the State, by an
harmonious Union* What other is the State but a political body? and what other
peace can be desirable in a body, than an union of the head with the members,
and the members one with another? The State is as a Building whereof the two
Houses of Parliament are as it were the two walls to support and defend it; but
that which must unite and consequently strengthen these two walls is the
Cornerstone, being set in its proper place; and by this means there will be,
to use the language of my Text, Peace to him that is afar off, as well as to
him that is near; yea, he who has been so long, too long afar off, will become
near.

When this work is once done, that which would be earnestly contended for, is
the peace of the Church, that the breaches which scisme has made so wide, may
be closed up, the hedge which faction has pulled down may be reared up, and we
may once again be a garden enclosed, and keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace.

Nor is only Peace to be desired in both, but to use the duplication in the
Text, Peace, Peace, that is a firm lasting peace in both, and to this end.

Peace and truth according to the Prophet Zacharies counsel; Zech. 8. 19.
Love the truth and peace; that truth I mean which was once delivered to the
Saints, which is contained in the holy Scriptures, and is collected in the
Articles of the Church of England.

Peace and righteousness; for so this Prophet assures us, Isa. 32. 17.
the work of righteousness shall be peace; Righteousness I say, which gives
to every one those rights which are due to him by the laws of God and of the
Realm; and though a full reparation of all injuries is not to be expected, yet
a restitution of every man to his just right ought to be endeavored.

Peace and love which is called by the Apostle, the bond of perfection, Ephesians 4 3.
because of peace, that love especially, Col. 3. 14.
which covers a multitude of offenses, forgets and forgiveth injuries,
purges all malice, rancour and revenge out of the minds of men, in which
respect I could heartily wish for a Temple like that which was built at Rome,
Jovi positorio, wherein all men of all parties might lay down all heartburning
and animosity against one another for any former wrongs.

Peace and government, for what peace where there is no government? what
government either in Church or State more likely to establish a firm peace then
that under which we did so gloriously flourish for so many years, enjoying both
peace and plenty?

Peace and order, without which there can be no government; order in the State
by a fit subordination of the Subjects Liberty to the Sovereigns authority;
order in the Church* by a sweet attemperation of paternall presidency with
fraternall presbytery.

This is that peace which we trust God will now by you ordain for us, and oh
that all of us would prepare our selves for it by unfeigned repentance and
better obedience; our wickedness has obstructed our peace too long already;
let us speedily, resolutely, jointly cast it away, that it may be no longer a
Remora to retard our deliverance.

And for the more happy accomplishment of this great blessing, let us remember
that it must be the fruit of our lips: Of your lips (Right Honorable) who
together with the elders of the people are entrusted with the grand affairs of
the Kingdom, we doubt not but it will be the fruit by your unanimous votes for
an happy Restauation.

Of our lips, who are the Ministers of the Gospel, I trust it will be now the
fruit by our joint preaching for peace. Time was, we were the Trumpetters of
war, too often sounding with alarums to the battle; it is high time we should
be now the Heralds of peace, proclaiming, persuading a blessed accommodation; we
have too long like those Babel builders been confounded, because divided in our
languages; oh that we might now like all the holy Prophets have as it were but
one mouth to speak but one and the same thing.

Of all lips, to wit, Princes, Priests and people, it will (I hope) be the
fruit, by our prayers and praises. Thereare, I am confident, many here present,
yea, many thousands in the Nation, who comfortably look upon those beginnings
of deliverance, which are wrought as the fruit of their lips, their devout
cries to God, especially in secret; and for this they return to him the fruit
of their lips, their fervent thanks. In order to which you have done exceeding
well (my Noble Lords) to set apart a day of giving to Almighty God the praises
due to his Name.

That those hopeful beginnings may have a joyful consummation, let it still
be the fruit of our lips, the matter of our renewed prayers; and in this
likewise (Right Honorable) you have done worthily to assemble your selves this
day, for this. Indeed I cannot but here sadly reflect upon our late times,
wherein such days as these were too justly observed to be no other then
forerunners of some dismal decollation, decimation, or such like abomination
to be voted and acted; not peace, peace, but blood, blood, was their design;
and to carry it on the better, it must be the fruit of their lips, and
pretended as done by an impression upon their spirits from heaven, after their
prayers, on a day of humiliation* But we persuade, nay assure our selves better
things of you (My Lords) who are met this day for seeking the blessing of God
upon the Meeting of both Houses of Parliament, in order to a Settlement of this
Nation. Which, that it may be speedily and happily effected by you, has been,
is, and shall be, not only in public but private, this but every day, as
yours, so our uncessant Request at the Throne of Grace; and let all the People
say, Amen; yea, the Lord God say so too: In whose power alone it is to do, what
here he says, I create the fruit of the lips peace, peace, to him that is afar
off, and to him that is near, says the Lord.

FINIS.

