Feb. 26. 1643.
THis learned, pithy, and pertinent Sermon, claims of it self more then a bare
Imprimatur, but the Author will not think much, if it be said, Materia
superabat opus, such was the Learning, language, exemplary piety, and happy
pains in promoting the Gospel of the worthily much honored Gentleman, whose
Funerals it solemnized, together with his constant faithfulness and usefulness
to his Country and Religion, in despite of all dangers, losses, sufferings,
that he deserves a just Volume to transmit the beams of such a light to
posterity, wherein I dare say the highest wit and love met in one, might sooner
grow bankrupt, then prodigal.

Charles Herle.

THE SAINTS GAIN BY DEATH, And their Assurance thereof.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE Funeral of that worthy Patriot Richard More,
Esquire, late one of the Burgesses in this present Convention of Parliament for
the Town of Bishops-Castle in the County of Salop.

By Humphrey Hardwick, Chaplain to his Excellency the Earl of Essex, L
General, etc.

The Text. 2 COR. 5.1. For we know, that if our earthly house of this
tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with
hand, eternal in the heavens.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Philemon Stephens, at the sign of the Gilded Lion
in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

TO THE MVCH AND WORTHILY HONORED Sir ROBERT HARLEY, Knight of the Honorable
Order of the Bath, and Knight of the Honorable House of Commons for the County
of Hereford.
Right Worthy Sir,
THis soul-weaning Funeral Sermon, preached by my reverend brother, at the
Interring of my much honored Uncle, Richard More Esquire, being through the
importunity of some brought from him unto me to be put in Print, and
recommended to whom I should think fit: I knew not who could better make
attestation to this indefatigable Senators worth then your self, his bosom
friend.

What testimony is here given him, either by my faithful brother, or by me,
is but an Epitome of yours, and his Countries larger knowledge of him. He
spent his last breath in prosecuting and promoting that
Scripture-Church-Reformation, whereunto his parents had been zealous Witnesses:
who were not more careful of his education in religion, and learning, then he
was apt to take it. In so much, that at ten years of age he was able to read
the Old Testament in the original. Though the death of his father in his youth
diverted him from going to the University: yet he grew so active for the
public, that it is hard to tell, whether he did more service to his Country
before, or after he was in Commission of the peace. I should sorrow as a man
without hope of repair of his Countries loss, but that he has left a son, as
fit to succeed him in his place, as in his estate. In difficult businesses, for
his Country, he was not wont to strain courtesy, to follow others: but was
willing to lead the way, and break the Ice. He was a Sanctuary to conscientious
men in their persecutions. I could name some, who falling into limbum patrum, I
mean the courts of Tyrannizing Prelates, who found him ready by his travails,
friends, counsel, purse, to help them out. He would lose the greatest friend
he had to stand for the right of his poorest neighbor. He was a friend, so
thoroughly cordial, that in all his undertakings for any, on any occasion, with
Boaz, he could not rest, till he had effected it. He was a countenancer,
upholder and frequenter of Lectures and Lecturers. He hated vice in all, but
especially in Ministers, whom yet he had rather reclaim then ruin; and he was
wont to let them know, that he so loved their parts, as he abhorred their
exorbitancies. As Christ descended to do his Fathers will, so he was willing to
stoop to any place below himself to do his neighborhood service. He was no
(...), no self-putting-forth man, he sought rather to be, then seem strict. He
much honored the Lords day and his Ministers; his opinion was to his death,
there was due to God a 7th. part of our time, and a 10th. part of our estate.
Some of his last words were, How are the Ministers provided for? He lived much
by faith, especially in these sad and exhausting times: as appears not only
by his deeds, his casting into the public treasury all his plate, and all
that he could make or get; but also, by such as these his latter speeches:
Every man must rise and fall with the public. We must give all for gone, and
wait what God will do for it. And it makes no matter what becomes of me and
mine, so it go well with the public, as I am confident it will in a short
time. And when some told him it was like to go ill with Shropshire: He answered,
Shropshire wants faith, as well as other places. And when some of his family
toward his end was speaking solicitously to him: God (said he) that feeds the
Ravens, will not suffer you to want. I do not love these distracting thoughts.
Thus his faith wrought with his works to the last. And yet it no whit blunted
his industry for the good of his family. A careful father he was of his
children, for whom (being four sons and one daughter) he had provided
plentifully in his life; and a tender husband over his dear and pious consort,
who had lived with him above 50. years, and had done him much good, and no
hurt, all the days of his life, to who^ he left by will, made three years
before his death, 400. l. over and above jointure; but the Lord has given and
the Lord has taken away, and which of his, here, can now say his bread is his
own? Such is the rapine of war. From which he is now freed, being absent from
his body, present with his Lord: to which mark you also are pressing forward,
as a Taper daily spending your self, to light others. The Lord make you and
your posterity to fare the better for your public faithfulness: so prays

Your Worships to serve you in the Lord, MATTHEW CLARKE.

THE SAINTS GAIN BY DEATH: And his assurance thereof, Manifested and applied.
2. COR. 5.1. For we know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens.


THE years of man are threescore and ten, (said David) a great while compared
to an hour; but considered with eternity, they seem scarce a minute. The swift
revolution of all-eating time soon rowls up the thread of man's life: the day by
hours, the month by days; the year by months, our age by years soon steps
away. Our infancy is like yesterdayes evening, we have slept and forgot it;
Our youth, the morning past, our manhood the midday present, old age comes
anon. He who has past these stages, knows best the truth of this. For time
past is a certainty found to be nothing, time to come an uncertainty, seeming
to be much, time present is a fleeter; the Sun goes, and the Sand runs,
quickly do we bring our seventy to an end, as a tale that is told. But alas who
can promise himself that number? not one of multitudes live thus long. How
many ways do misery and death conspire to fetch us off in the several ages
of our life? Poor mortals, we are incident to a dissolution every day. Hence
some of the wiser Heathen defining our life called it, Mortis imago, an image
of death, accessus and decessus, an entrance, and an exit. The Philosophers
judgment was, optimum non nasci, proximum cito abolert; but we Christians are
men of better hopes, and can make more comfortable description of our
pilgrimage. We may call it the dawning of an eternal day, the Eave of a
glorious Festival; a way wherein we walk to blessedness, and whether this be
long or short, the matter is not great; if we wait long, the tediousness of
expectance will be recompensed with increase of welcome: if we soon end the
journey of this life, the less will be our share of misery: whether thus, or
thus long or short, a good Christian should not care much: For we know if our
earthly house of this tabernacle, etc.

These words stand in the book of God as an argument to confirm something
which went before. S. Paul in the precedent Chapter, is in a holy
contemplation, as it were balancing his present afflictions with his future
hopes. Those he finds stinted, measured, bordered with timely freedom and
deliverance; but of the latter there is no end, his hopes are things blessed,
Chap. 4 8.
eternal, tending to his own spiritual advantage and the Churches Emolument.
Whence he concludes that his affliction which was but (...).
light and for a moment did work an (...). ver. 17. With abundance upon
abundance.
exceeding eternal weight of glory. And lest this affirmation might seem
strange, the Apostle does demonstrate how he collects it, not from the things
which are seen, being temporal; from which no such weight of glory can spring,
but from the things which are not seen, these are eternal, these make up the
weight of the forementioned glory: to these St. Paul has an eye, of these
invisibles he is ascertained, For we know, says he, that if our earthly
house, etc.

My Text thus placed in the book of God tenders to our view a double prospect,
here is an house and a building to be seen. Now an house we know is nothing but
an habitation for man to abide or dwell in; the thing therefore which is
Metaphorically so called, is either these organized bodies which we bear
about, or else it must be understood of that natural life or state of being
which we have in this world; by three Items charactered out unto us in my Text.
First, this house is described ab origin, (...), it is from the earth, so
says the same Author, the first man is of the Earth, Earthie. No better metal
then the Potter uses to frame his pitchers of, to that the Apostle seems to
allude, and intimates the brickle frailty of our present state. Secondly, we
have the house described, a statu mutabili (...) of a Tabernacle, a moveable
kind of habitation, every night almost it finds a new place. Here we have no
abiding City, we continue not at one stay, nec uti, nec ubi, statu nor gradu:
We run the changes, pass from one condition to another, so mutable is our
earthly house. Lastly, it is pointed out ab interitu, it is a house of a
perishing dissolving frame, (...), this supposition is not so much to be
understood de re peritura, as de modo sive tempore resolvendi, it is past all
paradventure, that this house of tabernacle will be dissolved, but the manner
how, the time when, may be supposed: the Apostle then gives all men leave to
imagine that the present troubles and afflictions which he then sustained, the
great and imminent dangers wherein he was plunged, might happily burst the
thread of his life, before his natural course were run, or by some violent
dissolution. If thus or thus, it is but a hasty injurious pulling down of a
house which would otherwise dissolve it self after a little more time, for it
is but a perished house.

The latter prospect in our view is a building, not (...) but (...), an
habitation of a more rare stately frame, by this we must understand, the state
of an holy soul departed, of a good Christian in another world. This building
is one of those Mansions of which our Savior speaks of, John 14. And in the
Text we have it described, First, from the builder and author, (...) of God. We
attain to our earthly Tabernacle by an order established of God in nature; we
have by means and second causes, all the things of this life: but the building
which is above, is given immediately by God. Thou shall bring me to glory,
says the Psalmist. It is our Fathers will to give the Kingdom himself: sure
it will make our future state the more excellent, that we have it immediately
from the blessed hand of God. Secondly, this building is set forth in the
quality of it, (...) not made with hands, it is not of a visible make, or
frame, tools and instruments were not employed to compose it. (...).
The pure eternal will of God framed this mansion according to his own
counsel, secret to us: A building removed far beyond the reach of man's
capacity, which is, Thirdly, described in the Text, from the stability and
perpetuity of it, (...) eternal, not for days, and for months, for times and
for seasons, but for ever is this building framed. Lastly, it sets out the
dignity of place, this building is in (...) in heaven, that Empyreal Throne of
the most High, where dwells blessedness for evermore. Thus we have seen the
house and building in the several passages of my Text.

We may next consider whose these are, to whom they do belong: and remarkable
it is, that the Apostle does express no special interest in the former. He
calls it a house of Tabernacle; the word this in English is more then is in
the Original. The house of Tabernacle is a common habitation, where all the
sons of Adam dwell alike: Gods Elect can claim no more interest in this then
others; well then may the Apostle pass this without an Item of propriety;
whilst he claims the latter in a special manner, saying, We have a building:
by which he literally and immediately, points out his own interest, and in his,
intimates the right of all the Saints, like as in another place he says, A
crown is laid up for me, and not for me only, but for all that love his
appearing. True and rightly believing Christians have this honor, that the
building not made with hands is only theirs.

The third considerable circumstance in my Text is the order, and here we may
note, the first is that which is natural, then that which is spiritual; the
first is of the Earth, earthie, the second in Heaven, heavenly; By the frail
house we pass to the firm habitation, when the former is dissolved, the
latter takes place.

The last thing I shall propound is the note Certainty: in the first word
(...), We know: it was not a thing S. Paul much doubted, or had a mere conceit
or conjecture of, but a thing of which he was fully persuaded. He knew of a
certainty, that when his earthen Tabernacle was dissolved, he should be
possessed of the Heavenly building: and what he speaks for himself, he
intimates for the comfort of others, of all that are vessels of honor, heirs
of grace, called by the Word and sanctified.

These the several passages considerable in the words I read, yield us three
circumstances of holy doctrine. 1 From the description of our earthly Mansion,
we may collect, that our estate in this life is frail, transitory, perishing.
2. From the excellency of the building, not made with hands, we gather that the
state of a true Christian in the world to come, is blessed and eternal in the
heavens. 3. By the note of certainty we may conclude, that every converted
heart, and careful soul may and ought to be assured, that when his body shall
be dissolved, his soul shall have an happy dwelling with God in heaven.


These sentences of holy doctrine are too plentiful subjects to be fully
discoursed of in one Sermon: I will speak in a word of the two former, and but
briefly of the last.

That our state and condition in this life is frail, transitory, perishing,
who can deny? Let old Jacob come in, and he will affirm, that few and evil are
the days and years of his life: and, My days are swifter then a weavers
shuttle: Oh remember that my life is wind, said Job: Job 7.6, 7.
And again, is not man born to trouble as sparks fly upward? The Scripture is
wont to compare our present state with things most frail and perishing. Our
life is as a flower, as smoke, a dew, a blast, a breath, a bubble, it is
vanity, it is as nothing.

I fetch arguments to confirm this from what we are; and what are the best
things we can have? 1. Consider we have frail bodies, no better then a lump of
earth, an handful of worms; at best, liable to a thousand griefs, pains,
aches, diseases, distempers. 2. Have we not frail spirits also, subject to many
troubles, doubts, fears, terrors, perplexities and amazes?


What is the union of these, being our natural life, but a fading, perishing,
dying kind of being, still spending it self, and burning out its own candle?
They have judged right, who have wrote, that misery and man's life are
convertible terms: And when the Limners do picture sorrow, they make it like a
man. Thus from what we are we may see this truth.

And what good things does this life afford? riches, honors, pleasures, and
secular learning.

As for riches, Riches.
what are these but a finer kind of earth, having an high price stamped on it?
and if man could compass all the treasure under heaven, what a deal of
discontenting gold would there be? too much to use, too little to content the
greedy heart of man: Midas-like we would be glad to be rid of our first wish:
Not all, but a part would man have, yet I trow it is the biggest part: Dives
would have none so rich as he. Sed, quid juvat immensum, what good will a great
heap do us? was ever man happy in abundance? great riches is but matter of
trouble, dangerous to the possessor, an ill master, a treacherous servant:
There is a dying nature in them, they have wings and will be gone, and yield
but little content while they stay; for he that loves silver is not satisfied
with it, this is vanity and vexation of spirit.

What are honors in this life, Honors.
but supposed excellencies, which have no true being, accompanied with cares
and cumber, the object as well of envy as of esteem? If we could go to the
ashes of dead Alexander, they will tell us what he found in his great preferments:
surely they would acquaint us, that those honors were not worth the labor,
equitandi per Britannos and cursitandi per Germanos, pati pruinam. It was a
subtle trick of Satan when he tempted Christ with the offer of worldly honors,
that he showed only the Kingdoms of the earth and the glory of them; never
pointing out the cares, troubles, discontents which abounded in those kingdoms,
for then they would have been no provocation at all. The man in Plutarch said
wisely, that he who considers the troubles of a Crown well, would not gather it
up in the street. The happiness of great places is more in that they are
thought so, then that they are so. You that are our Senators do now
throughoutly know what poor happiness it is to be incessantly troubled with a
world of other men's businesses, and have little time to think on your selves and
your own affairs; and lo, that is the good of high places. I may compare
earthly honors to the plate at a Lottery, it is exposed to open view, makes a
great show, and if a man do chance to light on a prise, it is no great matter,
only it is drummed out, and trumpeted abroad, to tell the world; and this is
the glory of it: Even so, if some of those many that venture hard for honors
do speed, it is no such great matter, only the business is trumpeted out,
told abroad, and the world has some apprehension of it; but alas, the wisest
of mortals found this also to be vanity; yea, a fleeting vanity, Gloria
Crocodilus.
flying fastest from such as pursue it most: How often has one day found a man
in high honors and low disgrace?

A third sort of the best things of this life are pleasures; Pleasures.
now what froth? what chafe? what nothings are these? I may sever them into
harmless recreations, or sinful delights; the former, being the best of
pleasures, are a kind of fading vanities, which perish in the use of them;
there is but a mere shadow of content in them, which we apprehend to be before
us; but alas, we seldom overtake it. Cast back your thoughts on our youthful
pastimes, how did we prize our gains and hopes of winning but an handful of
Counters? no pleasures in the world I think can ever so much take us as those
did; yet a few years with discretion do show us what poor contentments they
were: Manhood deems as meanly of the frolicks of our youth, age and riper
judgment well knows all pleasures to be a fleeting joy, which is gone as soon
as had. As for sinful delights, Satan so tampers with our natures, as to make
them seem great in expectation before they are attained; but when they come to
be possessed they vanish: What sugared delights do beloved sins promise? but
alas, they still shamefully deceive our expectation; the delight wings away,
and the act leaves a guilt behind. How little is our life the better for our
pleasures?

The last ornaments of our earthly tabernacles is humane or secular learning;
Learning. Litera tutissimae sunt divitiae, quae nec eripi possunt nec gravant
circumferentem. Erasm.
these I grant are of all the safest treasures, they can neither be plundered,
nor be they burdensome to the bearer; but true it is, that no full content or
perfection can be had in knowledge; frail man but weak of brain, has his
vessel too shallow to comprehend sufficiency: Our study does but learn us of
our want, put us on to a further search into letters, and render us still less
satisfied. I gave my heart, said Solomon, to know wisdom, and I perceived that
this also is vexation of spirit; for in much wisdom is much grief, and he that
increases knowledge, increases sorrow, Eccles. 1.17, 18.

Lo thus, my brethren, we have taken a brief view of all the things which our
earthly house of this tabernacle does afford, and we have found as well by what
we have, as what we are, that our state and condition here is frail,
transitory, perishing: As evident likewise will it appear, that the building
not made with hands, the state of a faithful soul after this life, is blessed
and eternal.

Witness first the many titles of excellency which in Gods book are given to
it: The Apostle speaking of it, calls it the riches, glory, and inheritance of
Saints in light; so he styles it by way of eminency: Now riches does there
comprehend all things profitable, glory all things graceful and delighting;
inheritance signifies perpetuity, everlastingnesse. In other places it is
called light, life, joy, blessedness; all in abstracts, to intimate the most
transcendent perfections that can be. Yea, more, it is affirmed to be a
kingdom, to be a Crown; to be a kingdom of glory, to be a crown of life, to be
an eternal weight of glory, which passes not away: The time would fail me to
set forth the least part of that high praise, those sweet and admirable
testimonies which the holy Scriptures give of it.

1. And in reason it may appear thus, if we consider who provided this
building, and at what rates it was purchased. Know we then, that as it was not
of man's framing, so was it not of his providing; this was such a building as
eye had not seen, nor ear heard, nor could it enter into the heart of man, it
was not in his power to turn his hand to making of any such provision; none of
them can by any means redeem his brother, or give God a ransom; the redemption
of the soul is precious, man must let that alone for ever, Psalm. 49.7, 8. nor
could the Angels reach this work, they fell and cannot help themselves; nor can
their own fellow Angels steed them in this behalf, it was an infinite work to
provide these mansions; none therefore but the blessed Son of God, who is
coequall with the Father, could prepare this building, nor could he obtain it
at any lower rate then his own precious blood, shed in a most ignominious and
cursed manner: and by this we may guess at the worth of this building.

2. Secondly, consider for whom it is provided: not for the world, Christ would
not so much as pray for them; it was for his own, for those who were his
Fathers children, the elect of God, holy and beloved, the sons and daughters
of the King of glory. If men that are evil will provide fair buildings for
their children, what buildings will our heavenly Father by his Son provide for
his? Yet more, these Mansions were prepared for the best of Angels, those
incomparable spirits which remained pure as they came out of the hands of God.
Christ provided the place we speak of for their eternal habitation: which may
sufficiently prove the building not made with hands, to be blessed and glorious.

Lastly, call we to mind the chief end for which it serves, namely, to
manifest therein the highest degree of Gods revealed glory, and to participate
the most transcendent measure of happiness to the chiefest creatures;
therefore this building, that state and condition must needs be blessed and
eternal in the heavens.

If I had time to stay on this point, I could further illustrate the glory of
our future condition in the particulars of it: As 1. the taking again of the
soul into the blessed hands of God who gave it. 2. The beautifying of it with
glorious endowments, polishing it for an heavenly eternal being. 3. The
actual admittance of it into the Empyreall heaven that is above. 4. The
conjoyning or planting of it into the all-ravishing society of Saints and
Angels. 5. The uniting of it to our glorified Savior as its head or husband.
6. The conferring on it fullness of joy and infinite rivers of pleasures. 7.
The filling of it with the blessed vision and fruition of Jehovahs face in
glory. Take a glimpse of these things in the sight of our minds, and I shall
need stay no longer in the confirmation of the point.

Now the light of these holy truths reflected on our selves, does wonderfully
accuse almost all men and women of folly and madness, for our so much love,
seeking, joying, delighting and contenting our selves in our earthly house of
this tabernacle: how foolish and unwise are we to choose the worser, baser
building, to be taken up wholly with the things before us, to place our heart
and affections on things below, which are frail, transitory, perishing. We
can blame Esau for preferring a mess of pottage before his birthright; Ahab
for selling his soul to get a vineyard; the fool for building bigger barnes,
and solacing his soul with goods laid up; but alas, we are many of us guilty of
the same folly; we live taken up with a secure joy out of a vain apprehension
of pleasure in our present state and the enjoyment of outward things; as if we
had chosen them to be our chief portion, and this world to be our Heaven: Your
consciences can tell you that you are even more guilty then I can speak; you do
and will love most the house of tabernacle, and will not be persuaded to unglue
your affection, and take off the eagerness of your pursuit after the things
that perish. We have many warnings, especially in these times, from heaven,
from earth, from God, from man, by the loss of goods, friends, houses, lands,
fathers, children, husbands, all bespeaking us to abate our love to the world,
and the things of this world; yet pity it is, few or none will enter into a
due and dutiful consideration of the vanity of these worldly things, or once
in good earnest endeavor to wean their hearts from these earthen Tabernacles.

As faulty likewise and blame worthy are we for our supine negligence, our
extreme carelessness, our want of love to, and esteem of the building not made
with hands, the state of a blessed soul after this life. Who has such high
uprising thoughts of our future condition as it deserves? few there be that
take it into serious meditation at all; Most men seem to determine of their
souls, (as the Jews said of Christ) Let God save them, if he will have them:
We are bent to enjoy that which is present, and think little what shall become
of our souls, when our flesh shall sink into the grave. As therefore our too
much care of this earthly Tabernacle, so our too little regard of the heavenly
building, is a just shame and reproach unto us: now to make every soul truly
sensible and mindful of our great miscariage in this business, I will give
you a Parable of a woman, which traveling with child brought forth a Twin, and
both children being presented to her, she falls deeply and fondly in love
with the one, but is careless, disrespectfull of the other; this she will
nurse her self, but that is put forth; her love grows up with the child she
kept her self, she decks it fine, she feeds it choicely; but at last, by
overmuch pampering of it the child surfets, becomes mortally sick, and when it
was dying, she remembers her self and sends to look after the other child
that was forth at nurse, to the end she might now cherish it: but when the
messenger came, she finds it dying and gasping likewise, and examining the
truth, she understands that through the mothers carelessness and neglect to
look after it the poor child was starved: thus was the fond partial mother,
to her great sorrow and shame, deprived of both her hopeful babes. For
reddition of this Parable, you may please to take notice that every Christian
is this mother, the children are our body and our soul, our earthly and
spiritual building; the former of these it is, that men and women fall deeply
and fondly in love with, whilst indeed they are careless and neglect the
other, this they dress and feed, nothing is too good or dear for it; but at
the last, the body surfets, comes by some means or other to its deathbed,
when there is little or no hope of life, then men begin to remember the soul,
and would think of some course to save it, the Minister he is sent for in all
haste to look after it: but alas! he finds it in part dead, in part dying, and
the very truth is, the owner through neglect and carelessness has starved the
Soul, and it is ready to go to Hell, before the body is ready for the Grave;
and thus the foolish fond Christian, to his eternal sorrow and shame, loses
both his body and his soul: and may not this throughoutly check the extreme
folly, and indiscretion which the world is guilty of?

I shall then close these two points with a word of admonition; since it is
evident that the building, not made with hands, is so transcendently more
excellent then the earthen Tabernacle, let it be the highest of our cares, and
chiefest of our endeavors to lay up treasure in heaven. Labor not so much for
the food that perishes, as for that which endures for ever. Seek all ways,
use all means to be clothed on with that house from above. And for motive or
inducement to this, I will use only one, not of mine own framing, but a shaft,
as it were, out of the Lords Armorie. They are our Saviors own words. What
shall it profit a man to win the whole world and lose his own soul?

I come now to the last circumstance of Doctrine; every converted heart and
careful soul may and ought to be assured, that when his body shall be
dissolved, his soul shall have a dwelling with God in heaven. And first in
testimony that there is a certainty, I allege, Romans 8.1. There is no
condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus, who live not after the flesh,
but after the spirit. Lo here an express affirmation of the thing, and a
manifest description of the persons. Numerus certus non solum quoad numerum
numerantem ut suggerant Arminiani sed quoad numerum numeratum ut orthodoxi
tenent.
In the 2. of Tim. 2.19. we have a like proof. The foundation of God stands
sure, having this seal, The Lord knows who are his; see, my brethren, it is
not only how many are elected, but who they are, who be the very individual
and numericall persons. That regenerate men may and ought to gain assurance is
likewise evident by such places as enjoin us strictly to examine our selves,
whether we be in the faith or not, 2 Cor. 13.5 to prove our selves and our own
work, Gal. 5.4. to make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Were not
the precepts of this kind strange, if we could not, if we ought not be
assured? Add to this the many properties, qualities, signs, tokens set down
in Scripture, to design and note out the Elect of God. Was not Job certain,
that his Redeemer lived? yet we find not, that he had any revelation or
extraordinary warrant: But why do I instance one, since all the Worthies in
Gods book did attain to a certainty of faith, (...). Heb. 11.39
and serve as a cloud of witnesses to prove my truth?

1. Which I may yet further confirm by diverse arguments, the many clear
promises which the Lord made to the faithful in his Book for their
establishment. 2 Cor. 1.20, 21. Does not every dutiful son assure himself of
that portion which his good Father has promised him? How much more may the
heirs of glory be assured of that our heavenly Father so plentifully promised?

2 Our blessed Savior has fully purchased our salvation, and completely
justified all his: for God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself from
the beginning; and may not we be assured of our inheritance since the price is
paid?

3 Christ does continually pray for us at the right hand of God, saying, Father
keep them, for they are thine, and thine are mine; and sure it is, none shall
take his sheep out of his hand.

4 The Lord has vouchsafed us his Word and Sacraments as a specified and
sealed Covenant to confirm it. Now when a man conveigheth any thing unto us by
a specified and Sealed Covenant, we expect it sure; how much more may we assure
our selves of the Covenant of God, since he has given us his written Word and
seal to confirm it?

5 Lastly, Christ has prayed the Father, and he has sent the Spirit into our
hearts to seal every rightly believing soul unto the day of Redemption, to
testify to our spirits that we are of God. Tell me now my brethren, are not all
these things true? can any considering man therefore so much as think, that
when God has done so much, so many ways of our assurance, a careful soul may
not, or ought not to be sure, that when his body shall be dissolved, his soul
shall have an happy dwelling with God in the heavens?

It peremptorily affirming that men can have but a mere conjecture, which
weighed does scarce amount to a probable opinion. This false uncomfortable
doctrine of the Pontificians, I might justly and sharply inveigh against, but
supposing here are no favorers of Popery I pass it.

with the rest of men I speak of, to go to the flames of hell unawares. How can
it be that reasonable souls holding the Protestant Religion should so fool
themselves? Ah! Damned Satan, it is thy doing, thus to delude poor souls, that
out of slothfulness they might come to hell, rather then take pains to be
assured of Heaven. Think seriosly my brethren, what folly it is for a Christian
to live he knows not in what state, and when he dies, to go he knows not
where; had it not been good for such a man he had never been born? mind this I
pray you, and suffer this word of reproof to work upon you, that it may not be
our case in the end.

What remains but that we be all stirred up and provoked by the power of Gods
Word to make sure of the building, not made with hands. Let not vain
presumptions, blind hopes, and ignorant supposes beguile our souls. But since
we evidently see, that men may and ought to be assured and know, if our earthly
house be dissolved, we have a building of God in the Heavens; let us labor
after assurance: and the better to satisfy and prevail with your souls and
consciences, I will acquaint you that there are three kinds of assurance. 1
Such as God does require of all men generally as duty. 2 Such as God does
accept of some in mercy. 3 Such as God does vouchsafe to some in bounty.


The first is an assurance of evidence: the Lord does require that all those to
whom the word of salvation comes, should be so well acquainted with it, as to
know the promises, understand aright the properties and characters of those to
whom they belong, and be able to evidence to themselves, that those promses do
belong to them by those properties and characters. That the Spirit by working
on their hearts, does testify to their spirits that they are the Elect of God.
To attain this kind of assurance, is the duty of every Christian.

The second is when a Christian, not so well versed in Gods Book, is not able
so exactly to apply the promises in special manner to himself, or evidence by
any such particular properties and marks. Yet knowing in general the way of
Salvation by Christ, applied by Faith and repentance to sinners, does as it
were throw himself as a believing and penitent sinner on God, and trusts to be
saved by the righteousness of Christ; and out of this hope, he loves God and
Christ, desires and endeavors to forsake all his sins. This I may call a
certainty of affiance, which God does accept of, from many poor ignorant
souls in mercy.

The last is an assurance of obsignation, whereby God does so firmly seal the
faith of some, that they do so steadfastly, and undoubtedly believe that Christ
died for them, as they had seen him die on the Cross, and he had told them
that he did die in particular for them, or as if God from heaven had revealed
it by miracle. And whereas it is sufficient if the two former assurances exceed
doubtings, this does really exclude doubtings. Now this high kind of certainty
is usually given to men after long and fiery trialls, when men have stood long,
and in an eminent way for Christ, as did the Apostles, and Martyrs, or when men
have been of great standing in piety, and of great integrity in ways of
godliness. To such God may, and doubtless does vouchsafe of his glorious bounty
this high kind of assurance; but I conceive it is not required of all men as a
duty. Thus briefly without obscurity, I have showed you the doctrine of
Christian assurance: let me earnestly entreat and prevail with you, to desire
and endeavor after this sweet grace; the excellency, the comfort, the
commodities of it are more then sufficient motives, if I might illustrate them.
How good is it at all times, in all conditions of our life, and especially at
our death? I, you will say, we do desire assurance, but how shall we gain it? I
answer, we may obtain it, 1. By a cheerful and ready answering the call of God
in his Word; when he speaks we must hear, submit our wills, yield our spirits
to the power of his ordinances. Such hearing is better then the fat of Rams,
and will by degrees work assurance in us. 2. By a new and holy conversation:
the way to be sure that we have learned Christ, is as touching our former
conversation, to put off the old man, which is corrupt according to the
deceitful lust, to be renewed in the spirit of our minds. If we walk as the
profane how can we hope for assurance? 3. By expressing a true zeal and a
religious care for the things of God. S. Paul acquaints us, that he which is of
God, cares for the things of God. Wen a man's heart is listlesse and
unsolicitous of holy things, he may vainly presume, but cannot warrantably
assure himself to belong to the Election of grace. 4. By continual prayer and
endeavor to improve in our spiritual condition; Add to your faith, virtue; to
virtue, knowledge, etc. thus an entrance shall be ministered abundantly. By a
labor to increase in soul goodness, there will come in such a perfection of
love as will cast out slavish fears, and settle the heart more and more in a
sweet and comfortable assurance. These are the directions which I give, and the
Lord bless them to you all.


And now I have ended my Text, I might stray long to speak of that late grave
and worthy Senator, whose Funeral we celebrate. My neighboring abode and some
acquaintance with him for diverse years might furnish me with plentiful
Encomiums of deserved praise; but it is not my guise to speak much in this kind;
briefly then with good conscience I may testify him to be a man exemplary in
all manner of conversation in his family, in his country, in public, in
private affairs: Known he was to be a man of great learning, well skilled in
the languages of it, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin.
and no stranger in its rational systems: His many virtues were crowned with
his much zeal for Religion, his great love to zealous, able Ministers, and good
people in the worst of times: witness, amongst other things, his Pen in their
vindication against the gallie ink, which sprang from a bitter spirit, His
Answer to the Glass of Schisms.
and a lying tongue. In a word, he was a true Mecenas, a real Patriot, much
loving, and wel-beloved of his Country, seeking not theirs, but them. The
cause of piety and Professors was in our parts sufficiently known to have a
friend on the Bench where he sat. And what was best of all, his goodness and
virtue did age and increase with him: His righteousness was not like the
morning dew; or, as those who glory to be Patriots for a while, but then like
the stellae volantes, lose their blazing light, cause sterility, and go out in
a stenchfull nastinesse. Our learned and religious Brother did shine most
bright in the evening of his days: His faithfulness and constancy, his zeal
and affection, his pains and diligence in the great cause of God and his holy
truth, this Church and Kingdom, deserves all commendations, never ending but
with his breath. This will justly number him among the Worthies of our English
Nation, who have given up themselves wholly to seek the glory of God and the
good of the Land. His memory with theirs shall be precious in after ages, maugre
all malice: Or, if posterity should be so ungrateful as to forget, yet
doubtless their glory will increase in a better world. Amongst whom I say,
this our brother was not wanting to act his part, even to the end, and so has
brought his gray hairs with honor to the grave: And now his earthly house of
this Tabernacle is dissolved, he has a building of God, not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens.

FINIS.

