A Scriptural and Rational ACCOUNT OF THE Christian RELIGION; PARTICULARLY,
Concerning Justification only by the Propitiation and Redemption of the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Romans 5.1, 2. Therefore being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ. By whom also we have Access by Faith into this
Grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the Glory of God.

Psalm. 14.1, 2. The Fool has said in his Heart, There is no God: they are
corrupt, they have done abominable Works, there is none that does good. The
Lord looked down from Heaven upon the Children of Men; to see if there were any
that did understand, and seek God.

Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish and unwise? Is not he thy
Father that has bought (...)? Has he not made thee, and established thee?

London, Printed for Jonas Lumley, at the Bird in Hand near the Maypole in the
Strand. 1695.

THE PREFACE.
IT was the usual Saying of an excellent Person, That variety of Books [tho
upon the same Subject] concerning the Principles of Religion was very
advantageous, that every one might be furnished with a Weapon fitted to his
Hand. For as in Water Face answers to Face; Prove. 27.19.
so the Heart of Man to Man: As in general, so in particular respects.

Therefore it may be hoped that in the perusing of the following Discourse;
some also may be gratified with the Agreeableness of a plain Representation of
so great a Truth. An Interest in Redemption by the Satisfaction of the Death of
our Lord Jesus Christ, is that by which every Christian must stand or fall
before the dreadful Tribunal of the Justice of God. Accordingly the Principle
of Justification by the Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, and Righteousness of
Jesus Christ, is the Article of Faith by which every Church must stand or fall;
It being the Pillar and Ground of Truth, the Rock upon which our Lord has
built his Church, against which the Gates of Hell cannot prevail. This is the
Rock upon which the Reformed Churches were recovered from Antichristian
Apostasy. For other Foundation can no Man lay, 1 Cor. 4.11, 12.
than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 2.6.
But instead of building upon this precious Cornerstone with precious Stones,
Zech. 4.7.
to bring up the head-Stone with Praise to Divine Grace; many unhappily have
not taken heed how they build with Wood, Hay, Stubble, Materials for fuel of
Contention, to make Jerusalem Babylon, Psalm. 87.3.
and defeat the glorious Things spoken of the City of God. That Jerusalem might
be a Praise, Isa. 62.7. Psalm. 48.2. Isa. 32.17. Jam. 3.18. Romans 5.1.
and the Joy of the whole Earth: For Peace is the Fruit of Righteousness.

But this must be for a Lamentation and Prognostic of Desolation, if not
prevented by infinite Grace and Mercy; that after so many Years Gospel Light
there should be regard to false Teachers, 2 Pet. 2.1.
privily bringing in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them.
Privily indeed, pretending an Inquiry after sensible Ideas of spiritual and
supernatural Truths of Eternal Life: Whereas they are not able to give an Idea
of the Breath of Natural Life. Suborning also a Spectre of Rational
Demonstration to determine and judge Things invisible, which can only be the
Objects of Faith in the Word of God: Whereas the use of right Reason is
miserably lost and overwhelmed in the Ruins of Apostasy from God. Vanity now
possessing the Mind, the Understanding being darkened, Ephesians. 4.17, 18.
and alienated from the Life of God, through the Ignorance that is in them,
because of the Blindness and Hardness of their Hearts: Thus being past feeling,
they give themselves over to Lasciviousness, and to work all Uncleanness with
Greediness. For the Heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked, even in these pretended Rationalists as well as others. That this is
the true State and Temper of the universality of Mankind, is undeniably
evinced, by the continual Practice and Conversation of all the World in all
Ages and Countries.

Therefore Natural right Reason is no where to be found directing the Tenor and
entire Compass of Human Affections and Actions.

But those baptized Epicures (as they are termed by the most Worthy and
Honorable Mr. Boil) that strut under the Name of Deists, but are indeed
Atheists, without God in the World, renouncing the Providence of God, rejecting
the Justice of God, denying the Immortality of the Soul, and the Future State
of Rewards and Punishments.

Thus Mankind is subjected to a Baseness and Wretchedness, inferior to the
worst of Brutes: And thereby also rescinding the Bond of Security and Peace
among all Human Societies and Relations, which can only consist in the Fear of
God. Such happy Infects who desire to live apace may receive their own Idea
from Mr. Cowley.

After Death I nothing crave, Epicire.

Let me alive my Pleasures have.
Happy Insect, happy thou, Grasshopper.

Do neither Age nor Winter know;
But when thou'st drunk, and danced, and sung
Thy fill, thy flowery Leaves among,
(Voluptuous and wise withal Epicurean Animal)
Satiated with thy Summer's Feast,
Thou retir'st; to endless Rest.
But this is the certain Conviction and inevitable Doom of such Men, Eccles.
9.3.
That the Heart of the Sons of Men is full of Evil, and Madness is in their
Heart while they live, and after that they go to the Dead. Heb. 9.27.
But as it is appointed unto Men once to die, so after this the Judgment.

A Scriptural and Rational Account of the Christian Religion.
The invisible Things of God from the Creation of the World are clearly seen,
Romans 1.20.
being understood by the Things that are made, even his Eternal Power, and
Godhead, so that all Men are without Excuse. Consequently there is implanted in
every intellectual Mind a Conscience of Good and Evil, Romans 2.15
accusing or excusing, according to the Work of the Law written in their
Hearts; so that there cannot but be Trembling at the Apprehension of Judgment
to come. Act. 24.25.


For the Elements of a Rational Creature are dependent upon the Creator for
Life, Deuteronomy. 30.20.
(God is our Life, and the Length of our Days) and for a Rule of Action, which
can be no other than the Will of God, the only Eternal Reason of Good and Evil:
Not any thing being antecedently good to the Unchangable, Eternal, Holy Will of
God.

Also for the End and Felicity of Being, Prove. 16.4.
which is the Glory of God, including the Salvation of the Immortal Creature.

God made Man upright in his Image, Eccl. 7.29.
engraved his Mind with a Law, Romans 2.15.
holy, just and good; a Rule of perpetual Righteousness, and 1.12.
to direct and judge all Human Affections and Actions. But Sin, 1 John 3.4.
which is the Transgression of the Law alienated Man from the Eise of God, Ephesians.
4.18.
who thereby becoming vapid and unprofitable, Romans 3.23.
fell miserably short of the Glory of God, subjected the Creature to Vanity,
Romans 8.20.
Vexation and Death; renounced the all-sufficient Goodness, Truth and
Sovereignty of the Infinite Almighty Creator, God blessed for ever: Shall not
then the Judge of all the World do right?

For according to his Fear due to his Infinite Perfections, Psalm. 90.11
and Absolute Dominions, such is his Wrath in the Execution of Vindictive
Judgment upon all Sinners; so that if there could be an Intermission of this
providential Circulation, an immediate Deliquium of the Universe must ensue.
The conscientious Awe of this being the only real Security of Human Relation
and Society: There must then upon every heinous Offense be either Satisfaction
to Justice, or the Execution of Justice.

Both which entirely and absolutely depend upon and proceed from the Will of
God, which cannot be liable to any finite Thought or Assignation. Who has
directed the Spirit of the Lord, Isa. 40.13, 14.
or being his Counselor, has taught him? With whom took he Counsel, and who
has instructed and taught him in the Path of Judgment? Romans 11.33.
O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! The Riches
of his Grace has abounded toward us in all Wisdom and Prudence; Ephesians. 1.7,
8, 9.
according to his Pleasure, which he has purposed in himself. To declare his
Righteousness, Romans 3.26. and 4.5.
that he might be just, and the Justifier of the ungodly which believes in
Jesus.

The Institution and Hope of this Redemption was revealed to our first Parents,
under the forlorn Consternation of their Fall, when God gave the Promise of the
Seed of the Woman to bruise the Serpent's Head. Genesis 3.15.
In the Scriptures relating the History of the World, and of the Church before
the Ministry of Moses, it has not pleased the Holy Ghost to speak particularly
of the Institution of Ceremonial Worship and Religion.

But as from Adam to Moses, Death, the Wages of Sin, reigned; now Sin is not
imputed when there is no Law; for Sin is the Transgression of the Law: So
likewise the Salvation of the first Patriarchs, and of the whole Church of God,
particularly of Abel and Enoch, could not be obtained but by Faith in the
promised Mediator, without which it was impossible to please God Neither can
Faith be separated from Obedience to a Word of Command and Promise.

The Object of Faith being from the beginning, even Jesus Christ, the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

The Expression of the Prophet Jeremy, is to this most apposit, Jer. 17.12.
A glorious high Throne from the beginning is the place of our Sanctuary: That
is, from the beginning of God's reconciling the World to himself Jesus Christ
the Lamb of God, slain from the Foundation of the World, was the only and
necessary Mediator of the Covenant of Grace between God and Man for Redemption,
and Remission, also for Intercession and Acceptance, who so became the Author
of Eternal Salvation to all that obey him. Heb. 5.9.
Obedience then to the revealed Will of God is the indispensable Duty of all
true Worshippers of God with Acceptance.

It pleased God in gracious Condescension to Human Frailty, before the Fullness
of Time came that Jesus Christ should offer up himself, once in the End of the
World, when he appeared to put away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself, in that
mean time to institute Sacrifices which were not voluntary Devotions by the
Will of Man, either gratulatory to God, or representative to the Offerer, but
exact Performances according to the express Precept of God. For, as Lactantius
says, God only can teach how he would be worshipped.

The Evidence of this also appears from the words of holy Scriptures, Heb. 11.4.
concerning Abel offering a more excellent Sacrifice, by which he obtained
Witness that he was Righteous, which could not be unless his Sacrifice were
entirely and only such as God commanded; so that being dead, he yet speaks,
and instructs us in this great Truth, That there can be no Righteousness in
any Religion, but as it is the Observance of the Word of God.

It evidently also appears, that Sacrifices were of Divine Institution, because
they were only to be such Offerings of Beasts and Fowl, as were not by natural
Distinction, but by positive Command, selected to be clean and made capable to
be sacrificed; all other Species being excluded as unclean.

In the next place, must be understood the right End and Intention of
Sacrifice. The Scripture speaks expressly, Heb, 9.22. and 10.4.
that without shedding of Blood there is no Remission of Sin; yet the Blood of
Bulls and Goats could not avail to make the Worshipper perfect: so that the
continual Sacrifice daily offered, and all other extraordinary Burnt-offerings
occasionally appointed by the Law, were merciful Surrogations of Typical
Propitiations with respect to Christ, whose Blood only could take away the Sins
of the World: Heb. 13.20, 21.
Whose Blood, being the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, could only make the
Comers unto God perfect.

Man being made, in Honor, did not therein abide, but because like the Beasts
that perish.

Also being raised up to Hope in the Promise of Grace by, Jesus Christ, they
apostatized quickly, becoming vain in their Imagination; Romans 1.21, 25.
and their foolish Heart being darkened, changed the Truth of God into a Lie,
and worshipped and served the Creature more than the Creator, who is blessed
for ever.

Notwithstanding there remained in the Hearts of the Heathen Idolatrous Nations
a Conviction, that there was a necessity of Propitiatory Sacrifices to appease
the Wrath, and atone the offended Justice of Divine Majesty.

Profane Histories are full of continual Instanccs of the Solemnities of
Sacrifices Ilastical to appease the Wrath of God: All which Offerings were
feigned and imposed, as if divinely authorized and instituted: And the
Ceremonies relating thereunto, styled Mysteries, as being the visible
Signatures of spiritual Intention and Efficacy. For tho the Medium and Object
of propitiatory Worship by the Heathen, were vain and false; yet most rational
was the indelible Conviction of the necessity of Propitiation and Atonement
toward God for the Remission of Sins committed by the Rebellion and A postacy
of Human Creatures.

The mystery of Godliness, great without Controversy, Tim. 3.15.
represents God manifested in the Flesh, believed on in the World. This is the
Mystery of God, Col 2.2.
and of the Father, and of Jesus Christ. The Explanation of which is, That God
was in Christ 2 Cor. 5.19, 21
reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them:
For he has made him who knew no Sin, to be Sin for us, that we might be made
the Righteousness of God in him.

This Reconciliation and Remissfion is always expressed under the Notion of
Ransom, Atonement, Redemption, Propitiation and Expiation; all which is to be
performed by the Death of a slain Sacrisice: Heb. 9.22.
For the Scripture testifies, without shedding of Blood there is no Remission
of Sins. Heb. 10.1.
But it is not possible that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away Sins.

The Divine Justice could not take Plcasure in any Sacrifices which were
offered (tho by the Typical Law) for Sin, so as thereby to receive
Satisfaction. Therefore when the Son of God came into the World, a Body was
prepared for him, therein to do the Will of God; by the which Will we are
sanctified through the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all. For
it is only the beloved Son of God, in whom God can be well-pleased with
sinners, Heb. 9.14.
even through the Blood of Christ who through the eternal Spirit offered
himself without spot to God; who purgethi'geth our Consciences from the dead
Works of Sin, to serve the Living God: For by one Offering he has perfected
ever them that are sanctisied. Heb. 10.14.


Therefore to imagine any Possibility of the Pardon of Sin without out the
atoning Propitiation and Satisfaction only obtained by the Blood of Christ, is
an evil Figment to palliate the desperate Wickedness and Sinfulness of Sin, to
make void the Law of perpetual Righteousness which is the in^sible Rule and
Judge of all Affections and Actions, and does indeed effectually contemn and
blaspheme the infinite Majesty, Holiness and Justice of God, the Creator and
Preserver of all Beings; and, consequently, miserably deprives a Sinner of that
strong Consolation given by God to those that fly for Refuge unto Christ, Heb.
6.18.
to obtain by his Resurrection (the Evidence of his complete Satisfaction to
Divine Justice) the Answer of a good Conscience.

The Worshippers thus purged, Heb. 10.2.
as the Scripture says, having no more Conscience of Sins, Isa. 53.6.
the Lord having laid on him the Iniquities of us all, who do the Work of God,
to believe on him whom he has sent.

For this is the true Cabala, the faithful Saying, and worthy of all
Acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15.
That Christ Jesus came into the World to save even chief Sinners.

In the Cases of Life and Death according to universal Justice in the World, it
is fatal not only to be an Outlaw, flying from Justice, Mute in refusing to
answer Justice; but it proves no less mortal to suggest a Plea which the Law
will not allow.

If a Criminal condemned to die be favored with some Reprieve, and then by the
Sovereign's Commission entrusted with an important Employment, the faithful
Discharge of that Trust is mere Duty, but not Merit; and he remains still a
condemned Malefactor, liable to the former Sentence by the Law of Attaint and
Death, from which not any thing can deliver but a Pardon from the Sovereign,
laid hold on, and legally pleaded by the Criminal. It is thus according to the
Rule of Righteousness, between the Judge of all the World and every Mortal
Creature, that God might be just, Romans 3.25, 26
and the Justifier of him which believes in Jesus. Therefore we must not be
ignorant of Saton's Devices; the Popish Doctrine of Merit, by Works sprinkled
(as they say) by the Blood of Christ, available to Justification and Salvation,
1 Timothy 4.1, 2.
is an Antichristian Departure from the Faith, and the teaching of Lies in
Hypocrisy: For there cannot be any Work possible to be accepted by Divine
Justice, but what is an Act of Obedience to the Law; and the best Performances
of such is but, as our Savior says, that of an unprofitable Servant; Luke
17.10.
When we shall have done all those things which are commanded us, we must say,
We have done that which was our Duty to do. Therefore the Observance of a
present Duty (the Neglect or Male-performance whereof would be criminal Guilt)
cannot in any just Construction be assumed or imputed to expiate a precedent
Transgression guilty of Felony and Treason.

Yet this Truth does not in any degree exempt from the Obedience of Faith,
which is the inseparable and indispensable Obligation and Duty annexed to the
Covenant of Grace: So that there is not in the least degree any Pretense for
Antinomian Libertinism. For the Grace of God that brings Salvation, Tit. 2
1^, 12.
has appeared to all Men; teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and Worldly
Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World:
Because Faith unites us to the Principle of Life, and works in us by Love,
which is the Operation or Activity of Life, in the fulfilling of the Law.

There is also another Method of the Depths of Satan to cloud the Glory of
God's free Grace, and the complete Merit of Christ's Satisfaction and
Righteousness, and also to shake the Confidence of a Sinner's Hope to obtain
Remission and Acceptance, by suborning the Act of Faith to share in the Merits
of Christ. Now how weak and unreasonable this Supposition is, will appear by
the Consideration of parallel Cases of Civil and Natural Instances in
Judicature: Tho the guilty Person cannot have Benefit unless he plead the Royal
Pardon, yet there is no Virtue in the Plea and humble Claim, but only in the
extensive Validity of the Pardon. Likewise in desperate Sickness, or deadly
Wound, the healing Virtue is not in the mere Application, or receiving the
Sovereign Balm, or Elixir; not withstanding the Patient cannot be healed
without the Reception or Application of the Remedy.

Thus it is with a Sinner before the Divine Tribunal: Faith believes the Truth
and Goodness of the Promise, and embraces and relies upon it; that is, upon the
Redemption purchased by Jesus Christ for complete Salvation from the
Condemnation and Corruption of sinful Death, for Reconciliation and Acceptance
with God, and for Participation of Eternal Life which is in Christ Jesus, to be
communicated to all those who by Faith receive Christ, and so have an Union of
Life with Christ.

Now as in the Body the Artery and Nerve is the Ligament, the Vessel and
Conveyance for vital Union and Motion unto all the Members by the Blood and
Animal Spirits: So Faith to the Soul is a Means of vital Union with Christ, and
of the Application and Merits of Christ. All which is effected by the Spirit of
Christ, Cor. 5.17.
without which we are none of Christ's, James 2.26.
and Faith it self is dead.

The Look of one stung, with the deadly fiery Serpent, to the Brazen Serpent,
had no share in the healing Virtue of that Divine Ordinance; yet without
looking up to the Brazen Serpent the Person stung could receive no Benefit but
must die. So Faith has no justifying Virtue inherent in it self: For what may
prevail to justify, must make the Conscience perfect. Consequently the
Efficient of Perfection must of it self be perfect; but Faith cannot be such,
for it is not of our selves, Ephesians. 2.8.
it is the Gift of God. Now whatsoever is received, is received according to
the Measure and Capacity of the Recipient, which (...) and frail (...) it
cannot be (...) the Law was weak and (...) through the Flesh, so even the Gift
of Faith is not able through the remainder of Corruption to perform any perfect
Work. Therefore the Scripture represents the Lord Jesus Christ under the Notion
of the most tender Compassion to the weak in Faith, Isa. 42.3. Mat. 12.20
that he will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, but
will bring forth Judgment unto Victory: which proceeds not from any Virtue and
Power inherent in the Work of Faith, but from the Righteousness and Strength,
Isa. 45.24.
which only is to be found in the Lord Jesus by (perishing) Sinners, who sly
for Refuge unto the Hope that is set before them, Jesus Christ the Son of God.

Even as the Manslayer under the Law could not be secure from the Avenger of
Blood, if he were found out of the City of Refuge; it was only the City of
Refuge which conferred and established his Preservation and Safety: So the
Sinner cannot be saved from Wrath to come, without Faith in Christ. But the
Propitiation according to the Will of God, by the Blood of the Everlasting
Covenant, can only make a Sinner perfect before the Tribunal of God's infinite
Justice. Therefore to assign any degree of Ability to any Act of Faith as
meritorious of Justification, is to usurp upon Christ, and to incur the severe
Animadversion of the Almighty. Job. 40.14.
Then will I confess unto thee, that thine own Right Hand can save thee.

The everlasting Covenant of Grace is ordered in all things and sure: 2 Samuel
23.5.
For the Foundation of God stands sure, 2 Timothy 2.19.
having this Seal, The Lord knows them that are his. And, let every one that
names the Name of Christ depart from Iniquity. Psalm. 50.16.
But unto the wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or
that thou should take my Covenant into thy Mouth? These Scriptures fully
evidence, that although the Covenant of Mercy to Sinners is established only in
the free Grace of God, and the meritorious Satisfaction and Righteousness of
the Lord Jesus Christ; yet there remains an utter Incapacity in any Person to
partake actually of the Benefit thereof, Romans 8.9.
until by the Spirit of Christ (without which not any can be Christ's) he be
born again, and made a new Creature.

For the State of every Man since the Fall is a Complication of Misery under
Condemuation, Dementation, and mortal Corruption. Accordingly the necessary
Remedies are distinct; Justification to take away Condemnation, and
Sanctification to free from Corruption by a new Principle of Life; by a renewed
Faculty of Life acted by a new Rule, the Word of God written in the Heart,
directed to, and aiming at a new End and Mark, the Glory of God, and the Prize
of our high Calling in Christ Jesus, our Eternal Salvation.

Accordingly the Tenor of the New Covenant is both promised and expressed in
the Old and New Testament: Ezekiel. 36.25.
Then will I sprinkle clean Water upon you, and ye shall be clean. This imports
that washing thoroughly, and cleansing from Iniquity and Sin, so as to be whiter
than Snow; Psalm. 51.7.
which is supplicated by David, and promised by God to Sins of the deepest
Stain, Heb. 12.24 and 13.20, 21.
being effected by the Blood of Sprinkling, the Blood of the Everlasting
Covenant, which makes us perfect to do his Will. and 9.14.
For the End why the Blood of Christ, who by the Eternal Spirit offered himself
without Spot to God, purges the Conscience from dead Works, is to serve the
Living God: But God is the God of the Living, not of the Dead. Therefore as the
Condemnation of Death is to be taken away in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1.
so the Corruption of Death is to be abolished, 2 Timothy 1.10.
which cannot be without a new Principle and Faculties of Life, and being made
a new Creature. Accordingly the Covenant of Grace proceeds to promise, Ezekiel.
36.26.
A new Heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you.

This is that renewing of the Holy Ghost vouchsased unto the foolish and
disobedient, Tit. 3.3.
who are unperswadable by any Moral Argumentation, being deceived, serving
diverse Lusts and Pleasures; because the Heart of Man is full of Evil, Eccl. 9.3.
and Madness is in his Heart while he lives, and after that he goes to the Dead.

This is the native Misery of every one; and the Recovery is as wonderful as to
restore the Habit and Exercise of Reason into a Person depraved with Idiotism,
or Madness. Now as they who are such, tho they are sometimes capable of
uttering some words sensible and rational, yet they are utterly unable to
perform or maintain the Tenor of reasonable Discourse or Conversation: So
neither can any mere animal Man dead in Sins and Trespasses, 1 Cor. 2.14.
before he be made a new Creature by being born again, Joh. 3.3.
live to the Glory of God, the End of Being, or in Communion with God, the
highest Felicity of every Intelligent Being. This is the Gift of God, as our
Lord says to the Jews, Joh. 6.65.
No Man can come to me, except it were given him of my Father. Judas indeed
came to our Lord, as many do, in Profession, but not in Heart: He did believe
with a Faith of general Assent, and of particular Fiducial Assiance in the
Power of Christ for miraculous Operation, but not with a Faith of vital Union
with Christ, so as to dwell in Christ and Christ in them, so as to live by
Christ which cannot be without having the Spirit of Christ. Joh. 6.56, 57.
Also our Lord says, Romans 8.9.
I have chosen you, and ordained you to bring forth Fruit that should remain
and persevere, even much Fruit, Joh. 15.5, 16.
to the Glory of God. Election, Vocation, Justification and Sanctification, are
inseparable. Eternal Election is unto Holiness, Ephesians. 1.4. Romans 5.18.
and Justification of Life is universally and necessarily conjoined with
Renovation of Life: The End of which is Activity, Joh. 15.6.
Operation, Fruitfulness, without which there is Death, Burning, Ephesians. 2.10.
Destruction; for good Works are ordained by God to be the Walk and
Conversation of every Child of God: Heb. 8.10, 11.
For this is the Covenant God makes with every Israelite, to put his Laws into
their Minds, and write them in their Hearts, as both the Rule and Inclination
of Life, which is indeed to be taught of God to know God, Hos. 2.2^
without which it is impossible, that God shall be to any a God
Covenant Relation, or that any can be a People to God. Now as the Principle of
Life, and the Operation of Life, so Justification and Sanctification are not
confoundable, yet always inseparable. For of God are we in Christ Jesus, who of
God is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption: That
no Flesh should glory in his sight; but according as it is written, 1 Cor.
1.29, 30, 31.
Let him that glories glory in the Lord.

From the beginning of Apostasy the Devil was a Murderer and a Liar. When he
speaks a Lie, he speaks of his own; for he is a Liar, and the Father of it.
He envenomed the old World with the evil Imaginations of continual Contempt of
God, and profane Irreligion, which broke out in all the Acts of Wickedness and
Violence, justly provoking the Vengeance of God to destroy that World of
Atheistical Rebels.

When through infinite Mercy a small Remnant of eight Persons were not only
spared to survive the Deluge, that had swept away the World of the Ungodly; but
much more, a Covenant of Grace and the Blessing thereof was renewed to them and
to their Seed, confirmed unto Noah, Genesis 8.20, 21.
by the Acceptance of instituted Sacrifice; Then again, the great Adversary and
Deceiver of Mankind tempted the new World to distrust Safety in the Promise of
the living and true God, and to attempt Self preservation in a Structure of
Babel, or Confusion, in the Land of Shinar, the proper Base upon which was to
be built and established the House of Wickedness; Zech. 5.8, 11.
that is, the Mystery of Iniquity, the Doctrine of Devils, to suborn the
Worship of Baalim, of many Lords, or middle Gods, Mediators between God and
Man. Tim. 4.1.
Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter Times some shall depart
from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils.

This is the notorious Apostasy from the absolute Simplicity and Purity of
Christian Religion, Christanam Religionem absolutam and simplicem anili
superstitione confundere. Am. Marcellin.
unto the fabulous Superstition and Will Worship, which gangrened both Eastern
and Western Churches.

The Mediation of Saints and Angels, being introduced as succedaneous to the
Heathen Adoration of Baalim, Heroes and middle Deities, called Dii Medioximi.

Those Pagan Idols, Isa. 2.19, 20, 21. Rev. 6.15, 16.
having been cast to the Moles and Bats by the Divine Influence of Gospel
Light, in the Manifestation of Truth, even this faithful Saying, and worthy of
all Acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the World, the only Mediator
between God and Men, to save Sinners.

Now also for these last, hundred and fifty Years, the Gospel-Reformation
(miraculously both begun and preserved) has again as it were brought Life and
Immortality to light, exploded the fabulous Legends of Popery, evidenced the
pretense of Antiquity to be no other than as Defection from Primary Institution
precedes Restitution and Reformation, convinced the Idolatry of the Mass, and
the Superstition of their Will Worship, and Adoration of Saints and Angels; all
cherished by an imposed Ignorance, Joh. 16.3.
the Parent not of Devotion, but of crual Persecution.

But as in the first Manifestation of the everlasting Gospel unto the World,
that lay in Darkness and the Shadow of Death, the Serpent cast out of his Mouth
a Flood of deceitful Errors, Rev. 12.
of desperate Wickedness, to carry away, with that Flood the Church from the
Rock of Truth: So now the Reformed Churches have been and are infested not only
with the Dragon's great persecuting Wrath, but no less dangerously with the
Serp^^i^^^^ Suggestions of false Teachers, Pet. 2.1.
^^vily introducing damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them.

This being the Master-stroke of Satan, by verisimilar Errors to suppress the
Fundamental Truth of Salvation for Sinners, by the Expiatory Propitiation of
the Death of the Lord Jesus Christ, in Satisfaction of the Justice of God, Ephesians.
1.4, 9.
according to his good Pleasure, which he had purposed in himself before the
Foundation of the World.

That this Truth may appear in a right Light, it must be considered, that all
the Divine Attributes are equally of infinite Perfection: Consequently to
detract from, or limit any, is to evacuate and effectually to deny the
Essential All Sufficiency of God. Therefore to retrench the particular and
universal efficacious Providence of God, and to impeach the supreme absolute
Justice of God, is, under the Prosession of owning God, Romans 1.23.
not to glorify him as God, but to change the Glory of the incorruptible God,
into an Image made like to corruptible Man, a mere Idol, which is nothing in
the World, 1 Cor. 8.4.
and as the Prophet expresses, Isa. 41.23.
neither able to do Good or Evil.

But from everlasting to everlasting the Lord is God: Psalm. 90.1, 11.
Who knows the Power of his Anger? According to his Fear, so is his Wrath:
according to the infinite Perfections, for which God is indispensably to be
feared; so is his Wrath in the Vindictive Execution of his Justice upon every
Violation of his holy, just and good Laws, the natural Rules of perpetual
Righteousness, to direct and judge all the Affections and Actions of all
Mankind. Herein therefore the manifold Wisdom of God is glorified in the
Establishment of the infinite Perfections of Justice and Mercy in the
Redemption and Salvation of Sinners.

It being impossible to make way for immense Mercy to be manifested without
Satisfaction to infinite Justice which otherwise must be exposed to blasphemous
Contempt, and Annihilation: Accordingly the Apostle Paul expresses, that we are
justified freely by his Grace through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ,
Romans 3.
whom God has set forth for a Propiriation, through Faith in his Blood, to
declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins; that he might be just, and
the Justifier of him, even of the ungodly, which believes in Jesus. So that
Faith cannot fly for Refuge unto Mercy, until plenary Satisfaction be made unto
Justice; 1 Pet. 3.21
thereby to obtain the Answer of a good Conscience toward God, through the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

The Scripture fully and always testifies, that Remission of Sins is an Act of
absolute Sovereign Justice, vouchsafed upon plenary Satisfaction, represented
under the Notion and Terms of Redemption, Romans 3.24, 25.
Propitiation, Ransom; which word (...) used by the Septuagint, Numb. 35.31,
32. is duly translated Satisfaction. Mark 10.45.
And the learned in the Hebrew observe, 1 Timothy 2.5.
that the word in the Original imports sufficient Preservation, which a Sinner
can only find in the complete Merits of the Death, Resurrection, and
Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, applied, by Faith, and imputed by
Grace. Accordingly the Scripture styles the Act of Divine Pardon to be
Justification, Romans 5.1, 9, 10, 11, 19.
Reconciliation, Atonement, Righteousness; all which words are juridical
Phrases, evidencing such a Person to be Rectus in Curia, right in Court,
according to the judicial Authoritative Sentence of Law. This cannot possibly
be obtained, or performed, unless due Satisfaction were made to the infinite
Justice of the Divine Majesty.

For Pardon upon any other less or diluted account must leave the Justice of
God violated and void of Satisfaction: Also the Sinner must be without
possbility of a Conscience free from Guilt; consequently never able to arrive
at Peace, Act. 13.39. and 10.36, 43.
which flows from being justified by Faith in Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1. Ephesians. 2.14.
who is our Peace with God.

It is also absurd Contradiction to imagine any Benefit can possibly be
obtained by the atoning Virtue of the Death of the Lord Jesus Christ, without
the quickening, regenerating Power of the Spirit of Christ make the Sinner a new
Creature.

There is the manifold multifarious Wisdom of God magnisied to a Sinner, that
the Work of Grace may be completely perfect, in respect of the Justice and
Mercy of God, and of the damning Guilt and deadly Corruption inherent in the
desperate Wickedness of every Sin.

Yet the manifold Wisdom of God decreeing from Eternity, and effecting in the
fullness of Time, the Redemption of Sinners by the Blood of the everlasting
Covenant, could not possibly have any Cause or Motive antecedent to the Eternal
Purpose of God, which he purposed in Christ Jesus out Lord, and from the
beginning of the World was hid in God.

For it was both impossible for a sinite narrow Intelligence, to conceive how
God should be manifest in the Flesh: And it would have been impious,
blasphemous Presumption, to imagine that the Son of God, who knew no Sin,
should be made a Propitiatory Sacrifice for Sin, unless the Will of God had so
promised and declared.

Indeed the immense Goodness of God made this known immediately after Man's
Apoltacy, by the Promise of the Seed of the Woman to break the Serpent's Head;
Genesis 3.15.
that is, to destroy the Works of the Devil, and more evidently by the
Institution of Sacrifices. For it is a most absurd Derogation from the
Sovereignty of a Creator, and Contradiction to the Duty of a Creature, to
impose upon God the necessity of accepting the groundless Fancy of a guilty
Malefactor in the highest degree of desperate Wickedness, Jer. 17.9.
to be a Price of Redemption from everlasting Wrath: Considering also that Man
had no Title of Interest or rightful Power over any of his Follow-Creatures,
Psalm. 50.
to substitute any of them a Sacrifice for his Sin.

Indeed It was an early and due Apprehension that every Sin was of capital
Guilt, and Forfeiture of Life: But it could never have entered into the Heart
of Man, to conceive how God could be just, and the Justifier of Sinners, Romans
3.26. and 4.5.
until God had revealed it by his Spirit and the Word of his Grace. The
Apprehension of Propitiation attainable by Sanguinary Sacrifices, could not be
a Primary Notion in any Human Mind, but consequent and derivative from the
Institution of Sacrifices by the express Command and Appointment of God,
without which it was impossible to please God.

For Faith cannot be or subsist without a word of Command and Promise: But to
fancy a Religious Worship to appease the just Wrath, and to conciliate the
Favor of the Majesty of the Great and Terrible God, the Creator of all Beings,
by any performance of Offering not instituted expressly by God, is a presumption
becoming a dumb Idol, or some precarious Superstition; and is an effectual
practical Denial of the insinite Perfections of God, obtruding and imposing the
Blood and Carcass of a wretched Calf or Sheep, to expiate the Guilt of most
nefandous Crimes, and satisfy infinite Justce. Neither can there be any
possible ground of Reason to imagine that the Ceremonial Ordinances of
Sacrifices, Heb. 9.1.
and other Rites of Divine Worship and Service, were instituted by God, with
respect to, or Motive from the superstitious Practice or Expectation of profane
Sinners, who offered their Devotion to Devils, as the Word of God expressly
testifies, 1 Cor. 10.20.
That the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils, and
not to God.

But Sacrifices, and all other Typical Services and Ordinances, were by God
appointed, until the time of Reformation, when Christ came an High Priest of
good things to come, (that is everlasting) who by the eternal Spirit offered
himself without Spot to God, by his own Blood to purge our Consciences from
dead Works (that is, Heb. 6.1.
from Sins deserving Death) to serve the living God.

The Ceremonial Law had a Shadow of good things to come, Heb. 10.1, 4, to 10.
but not Virtue to make the Comers thereunto perfect; For it is not possible
that the Blood of Bulls and of Goats should take away Sin.

Therefore because in Sacrifices and Offerings for Sin God could not take
Pleasure, as therein receiving any Satisfaction to Justice: When Jesus Christ
came into the World, he faith, Heb.
A Body have thou prepared me; Lo I come to do thy Will, O God; by the which
Will we are sanctisied through the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once:
But this Will of God was not induced by any Temporary Consideration, it was
from everlasting, Ephesians. 1.4.
God has chosen us in Christ before the Foundation of the World. 2 Timothy 1.
God has saved us, and called us with an holy Calling, not according to our
Works, but according to his own Purpose and Grace, which was given us in Christ
Jesus before the World began. Tit 1.2.
In hope of Eternal Life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the World
began, Who verily was foreordained before the Foundation of the World, but was
manifested in these last Times.

It could not then be in Compliance with any Human Apprehension of Expiation of
Sin by any Sacrifice of any Creature, that Jesus Christ was constitued and
given by God to be the Propitiation and Redemption for Sinners. Ephesians. 1.
But contrariwise, God having according to the Counsel of his own free Will
made known to our first Parents in their dismal Fall the Mystery of his Will in
the Promise of the Seed of the Woman to break the Serpent's Head; And then for
the Confirmation of that Promise, and for the support of Faith, instituted
Sacrifices, revealed first to Adam, then to Noah, and consequently in them to
the whole World of Mankind:

Noah builded an Altar unto the Lord, Genesis 8.20, 21.
and took of every clean Beast, and of every clean Fowl, and offered
Burnt-offerings upon the Altar. And the Lord smelled a sweet Savor; or a
Savor of Rest and Satisfaction.

Now this could not he affirmed or believed, unless such Sacrifices had been
according to the express Institution of God, who (as was before observed) only
could appoint the Discrimination of Beasts clean and unclean: All which also
was performed and accepted with respect to, Ephesians. 5.2.
and in virtue of the Offering and Sacrifice of Christ himself to God for a
sweet smelling Savor.

Immediately upon Noah's Sacrifice, Genesis 9.9.
God established his Covenant with Noah, and his Seed after him.

Thus all Mankind was by Divine Institution initiated in the Religion of
Propitiatory. Sacrifices, all in reference to, and deriving Virtue and
Acceptance from the Merits of Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.29.
the Lamb of God, which takes away the Sins of the World.

But as it is charged upon Israel, both by David and Moses, Psalm. 106.13, 21.
Deur. 32.
so all Nations soon forgot God's Works, they forgot God their Savior, which
had done great things for, their Preservation; they corrupted themselves; Deuteronomy.
32.5, 15, 16, 17.
their Spot was not the Spot of his People; they for sook God which made them,
and lightly esteemed the Rock of their Salvation; they provoked him to Jealousy
with strange Gods; they sacrificed to Devils, not to God: So that the offering
of Propitiatory Sacrifices by the Universality of Mankind, was not a Human
Invention, but, a Derivation from Divine Institution, tho wretchedly corrupted
by Satanical Suggestion. Neither was there any Rite of Religious Worship among
the Heathen, but what was pretended to be a Direction and Command from Heaven,
so deeply engraven was the Impression in every Rational Mind, that Divine
Worship could not be acceptable unto God, unless commanded by God.

The whole Work of Redemption and Salvation of Mankind by Jesus Christ, was in
every part and respect proceeding originally from, and effectually to fulfill
the Will of God. Salvation by Christ was promised before the World began:
Ephesians. 1.4. 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 1.2. Mat. 27.35 Mark 15.28. John 19.28, 36, 37.
In the fullness of Time he was made of a Woman; his Sufferings in every
particular Circumstance was to fulfill the Scriptures.

Our Lord died according to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15.3, 4.
and rose again according to the Scriptures; that is, for the End appointed by
the Word of God, to make full Satisfaction to the infinite Justice of God; so
as to make perfect the Comers unto God by Jesus Christ by Faith, Heb. 9.9. and
10.1. and 10.22.
in whom the Heart is sprinkled from an evil Conscience; that is, from the
Conscience of the Guilt of Evil: 1 Cor. 15.17.
To obtain the Answer of a good Conscience toward God, 1 Pet. 3.21.
by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, without which cur Faith is vain, and we
are yet in our Sins; void of any sufficient Plea to answer the Charge of the
Law of Righteousness at the dreadful Tribunal of the Divine Majesty.

The manifold unfearehable Wisdom of God in the Administration of the Riches of
insinite Grace, exceeds what Creatures can ask or think. The most large and
advantageous Pardon from an Earthly Sovereign to a Rebel, cannot reclaim a
Felon's Mind, or alter a Traitor's Heart. But they who are in Christ Jesus, and
free from Condemnation, they have the Spirit of Christ, by which they are made
new Creatures, Romans 8.
and enabled to walk nor after the Flesh, but after the Sprit. Ephesians. 3.18.
This is the Comprehension of the Love of God in Christ extended to all Saints.
Yet the primary Reason of the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ, was to make
Satisfaction to the Justice of the holy Creator for the Sins of Rebel, Apostate
Creatures. It then became a consequent Corollary of our Lord's Death, to awe
from Sin, and represent the abominable Sinfulness of Sin. In all the righteous
Administration of Rewards and Punishments, supreme Justice obtains the first
and necessary Consideration; so that if there were no Persons to be deterred
from future Crimes, yet Justice requires severe Animadversion upon the present
Malefactor; otherwise, How shall God judge the World? Romans 3.5, 6
God cannot be unrighteous in taking Vengeance upon the Damned in everlasting
Torments, where there is no place for Repentance, nor Capacity for the Benefit
of a deterring Example.

The happy Sum of the Doctrine of Man's eternal Redemption and Salvation is,
That God has given us the sure Mercies of David: Act. 13.34.
He has made with us an everlasting Covenant, 2 Samuel 23.
ordered in all things and sure; and this is all our Salvation: where no proud
Pharisee can assume or impute to himself, nor any humble repenting Sinner doubt
or despair: Heb. 6.17, 18.
Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of Promise, the
Immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath, that by two immutable
things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong
Consolation, who have fled for Refuge, to lay hold upon the Hope set before us;
which we have as an Anchor of the Soul, sure and steadfast, Jesus Christ, the
same yesterday, to day, Heb. 13.8.
and, for ever: Amen. Now for a Corollary to the precedent Discourse, that it
may be evidenced not to be a private Opinion, but the Doctrine of the Church of
England according to the Scriptures, here are subjoined the Expressions of the
Homily of the Salvation of Mankind only by Christ our Savior from Sin and
Death Everlasting.

Homily.
Because all Men be Sinners and Offenders against God, and Breakers of his Law
and Commandments; therefore can no Man by his own Acts, Works and Deeds (seem
they never so good) be justified and made righteous before God: But every Man
of necessity is constrained to seek for another Righteousness or Justification,
to be received at God's own Hands, that is to say, the Forgiveness of his Sins
and Trespasses in such things as he has offended.

And this Justification or Righteousness which we so receive of God's Mercy,
and Christ's Merits, embraced by Faith, is taken, accepted and allowed of God
for our perfect and full Justification. For the more full understanding hereof,
it is our Parts and Duties ever to remember the great Mercy of God, how that
(all the World being wrapped in Sin by breaking of the Law) God sent his only
Son our Savior Christ into this World, to fulfill the Law for us, by shedding
of his most precious Blood to make a Sacrifice and Satisfaction, or (as it may
be called) amends to his Father for our Sins, to assuage his Wrath and
Indignation conceived against us for the same. But here may Man's Reason be
astonished, reasoning after this fashion: If a Ransom be paid for our Redemption,
then is it not given us freely. For a Prisoner that paid his Ransom, is not let
go freely; for if he goes freely, then he goes without Ransom. For what is it
else to go freely, than to be set at liberty without paying of Ransom? This
Reason is satisfied by the great Wisdom of God in this Mystery of our
Redemption, who has so tempered his Justice and Mercy together, that he would
neither by his Justice condemn into the everlasting Captivity of the Devil, and
his Prison of Hell, remediless for ever without Mercy, nor by his Mercy deliver
us clearly without Justice or Payment of a just Ransom But with his endless
Mercy he joined his most upright and equal Justice. His great Mercy he showed
unto us in delivering us from our former Captivity, without requiring any
Ransom to be paid, or Amends to be made on our parts; which thing by us had
been impossible to be done: And whereas it lay not in us that to do, he
provided a Ransom for us; that was the most precious Body and Blood of his own
most dear and best beloved Son Jesus Christ, who besides this Ransom, fulfilled
the Law for us perfectly; and so the Justice of God and his Mercy did embrace
together, and fulfill the Mystery of our Redemption.

And of this Justice and Mercy of God knit together, speaks St. Paul in the
third Chapter to the Romans; Romans 3.
All have offended, and have need of the Glory of God; but are justified freely
by his Grace, by Redemption which is in Jesus Christ, whom God has sent forth
for us, for a Reconciler and Peacemaker through Faith in his Blood, to show his
Righteousness. And in the 10th Chapter, Christ is the End of the Law unto
Righteousness to every Man that believes. And in the 8th Chapter, That which
was impossible by the Law, in as much as it was weak by the Flesh, God sending
his own Son in the similitude of sinful Flesh, by Sin damned Sin in the Flesh,
that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, which walk not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. In these aforesaid places the Apostle
touches specially three things, which must go together in our Justification.
Upon God's part, his great Mercy and Grace: Upon Christ's part, Justice, that
is, the Satisfaction of God's Justice, or the Price of our Redemption by the
offering of his Body and shedding of his Blood, with the fulfilling of the Law
perfectly and thoroughly: And upon our part true and lively Faith in the Merits
of Jesus Christ, which yet is not ours, but by God's working in us. So that in
our Justification is not only God's Mercy and Grace, but also his Justice,
which the Apostle calls the Justice of God; and it consists in paying our
Ransom, and fulfilling of the Law: And so the Grace of God does not shut out
the Justice of God in our justification, but only shuts out the Justice of
Man; that is to say, the Justice of our Works as to be Merits of deserving our
Justification. And therefore St. Paul declares here nothing upon the behalf of
Man concerning his Justification, but only a true and lively Faith, which
nevertheless is the Gift of God, and not Man's only Work without God. And yet
that Faith does not shut out Repentance, Hope, Love, Dread, and the Fear of
God, to be joined with Faith in every Man that is justified; but it shuts
them out from the Office of justifying. So that although they be all present
together in him that is justified, yet they justify not altogether. Nor the
Faith also does not shut out the Justice of our good Works, necessarily to be
done afterward of Duty toward God: (for we are most bounden to serve God in
doing good Deeds, commanded by him in his holy Scripture, all the days of our
Life) but it excludes them, so that we may not do them to this intent, to be
made good by doing of them. For all the good Works that we can do be unperfect,
and, therefore not able to deserve for our Justification: But our Justification
does come freely by the mere Mercy of God, and of so great and free Mercy, that
whereas all the World was not able of themselves to pay any part toward their
Ransom, it pleased our Heavenly Father of his insinite Mercy, without any our
desert or deserving, to prepare for us the most precious Jewels of Christ's
Body and Blood, whereby our Ransom might be fully paid, the Law fulfilled, and
his Justice fully satisfied: So that now Christ is the Righteousness of all
them that truly do believe in him. He for them paid their Ransom by his Death,
he for them fulfilled the Law in his Life: So that now in and by him, every
true Christian Man may be called a Fulfiller of the Law; forasmuch as that
which their Infirmity lacked, Christ's Justice has supplied.

Now that the most important Truths which have been represented in this small
Treatise may appear in right Light, let the following Propositions be duly
considered according to Reason, enlightened and directed by the Word of God.

God having given to Man an Intellectual Faculty, to judge and discern of the
Nature, Use and Excellency of Things, a Conscience of the Laws of things
morally good or evil; and the certain inseparable Appendixes of Rewards and
Punishments are imprinted upon the Mind, with inward experimental Assurances,
as certain as that we know that we are, and have a Being. The Demonstrations of
which Truths are clearly manifested in the Word of God, the Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament, Sacrae Scriptura non movent, non persuadent, sed cogunt,
agitant, vim inferunt. Jo. Pic. Mirand. Ep. Him. Barbir.
which do not only move and persuade, but effectually constrain and enforce an
enlightened Soul to yield Obedience to the incomparable and undeniable Divine
Authority thereof, as to the Fountain of all saying Knowledge, and the Standard
and Rule of all holy Practice, in order to everlasting Blessedness, the supreme
End and Felicity of Man. Now as Mathematical Theorems, tho equally
demonstrable, yet are not alike perceived and apprehended by every Human Mind,
the Faculty not being rightly disposed to the Object as in species visible, it
is not sufficient that the Object and Medium be duly disposed, unless the Organ
be suifficiently enabled and not disturbed: For neither a blind Eye nor a
Jaundice Sight can judge of Colors.

Accordingly the holy Scriptures, which are the lively Oracles of God, full of
Lights and Perfections, do fully demonstrate the great Mysteries of Godliness,
concerning the eternal invisible, yet certain and necessary Felicities, and
Duties of Rational Intelligent Beings, whose Immortality also is therein
undeniably proved: Yet notwithstanding, all these glorious and excellent Truths
of the Spirit of God are not received by Animal Minds, to whom they are
Foolishness, (as all sort of Wisdom is to Fools) because of the Blindness and
Ignorance of the Understanding; the Mind it self (the governing Power in Man)
being vitiated with the sussusion of Vanity, and the deceitfulness of Sin,
until the Power of, the Spirit come into the Soul, with a quickening, renewing,
restoring Demonstration upon the Intellectual Faculty, to make it receive in
Love the benign Influences of eternal Truth and Goodness.

Accordingly consider duly,

1. That from everlasting to everlasting, God is Infinite in his Perfection of
all Divine Incomprehensible Attributes, whose Essence is eternally in and of
himself, and gives and preserves all Beings, which were made for his Pleasure
and Glory, according to his own Will, not out of any necessity of Nature, his
Majesty being exalted above all Blessings and Praise: so that his infinite
Essential Glory cannot be liable to any Addition or Detraction from any
Creature.

2. That in the beginning of Time God condescended to manifest his immense
Wisdom, Power and Goodness in the Creation of the World, and all Beings
therein, by the Word of his Power, by which all things are upheld and do
consist: All being made and preserved for the Glory of God, according to the
Original Law of the Will of God respectively dispensed to every Being.

3. That all things were made for distinct final Causes, appointed by the Law
of God to be the Rule, for the Operation of Life conferred upon every Being.

4. That the Providence of God does actually, effectually, continually govern,
and overruled all the Actions and Operations of all Beings to his Glory,
according to his determinate Counsels. For known unto God are all his Works
from the beginning of the World; so that all contingent Effects and Actions of
all created Beings, are not only futurely turned and disposed, but primarily
decreed and ordered to be infallibly subservient for the Glory of God's
eternal, Truth, Justice, and Goodness.

5. That as Activity and Operation is the necessary Expression of Life, it is
also necessary that there be an universal Law to direct, regulate, and judge the
Affections and Actions of all Intelligent Beings: Which Law can only be the
holy and righteous Will of God, the Creator of all Beings, who only can
righteously reward and punish all Actions.

6. God made Man upright, in his Divine Image (...) Righteousness, Knowledge and
Holiness, with Freedom of Will, but under a Covenant of Life upon Obedience,
and of Death upon Disobedience, which is Sin: For Sin is the rebellious
Transgression of the Law.

7. Man, tho made upright, being left to the Freedom of his Will, rebelled
against and renounced God his Creator in his all-sufficient Truth and Goodness,
and sought out, and embraced the Vanity and Iniquity of the Devil's Lie; by
which Apostasy and Rebellion, Mankind fell into a state of the Condemnation and
Corruption of Death, which is endless Misery, according to the righteous
Judgment of God.

8. The first Parents of Mankind were not only Persons individual, but common
Representatives of all their Posterity.

The Evidence whereof necessarily flows form the Consideration of the Covenant
of Life, which God made with Man, when created and placed in Paradise: The
eating of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil being threatened with Death,
which passed upon all Mankind both Infants and Adult, according to the
righteous Denunciation of God, and the Consent of Man necessarily supposed; for
otherwise the refusal to consent would have been a Sin, preceding the
Transgression in eating the forbidden Fruit.

The Equity of this is owned by the universal Justice of all Nations, according
to which capital Crimes of Parents corrupt the Blood, and divest the Posterity
of all Privilege conferred upon such Families.

Thus all the World must justfy the Ways of God to be most equal.

9. The Apostasy of Mankind was not only one transient Act of Offense against a
positive Command, but the Sinfulness of Sin extended to an utter Renunciation
of the Love and Fear of God, and introduced a Corruption which the Scripture
styles, Death, in all the Powers and Faculties of a created Life.

10. The Justice of God being infinite, the rebellious Offense against that
Justice must necessarily incur an everlasting Punishment: Such as the Infinite
Wisdom, Righteousness and Holiness of God the Creator determines to inflict, to
vindicate his Glory.

11. The Salvation and Redemption of Man liable to eternal Wrath, as it
proceeds only from the free Grace of God, so it is impossible to be effected
without Satisfaction to the infinite Justice of God: For without such
Satisfaction the Godhead would be exposed to continual Dishonor; and the
Fountain of all Righteousness residing only in the infinite Justice of God,
(the violation thereof remaining unsatisfied) consequently there must be always
a failure of common Justice in the World.

12. It was impossible for any mere finite Creature to satisfy the Offense done
by Sin against the infinite Justice and Majesty of the Creator.

13. It was impossible and also unlawful for any finite created Intelligence,
to imagine, or contrive, or effect a due Satisfaction for the Rebellion of the
Creature.

14. It is the undeniable Sovereign Propriety and Right of God blessed for
ever, the Creator and Possessor of all Beings, to contrive, appoint and
accomplish the Means of Satisfaction to his own infinite Justice, and of
Salvation for his miserable, condemned, corrupted Creature.

15. Right Reason is the Faculty of discerning the difference between Good and
Evil: The Lamp of God for intellectual Evidence for the practical Judgment
concerning all Objects, Prove. 20.27.
being derived from and the Exercise of Knowledge, which is part of the Image of
God in Man; but this being lost by Man's sinful Apostasy from God, there is
necessity of the recovery and renewal of the Faculty of right Reason by
supernatural Light and Power. Prove. 6.23. Heb. 8.10


16. Tho the invisible things of God, even his eternal Power and Godhead, are
clearly seen from the Creation of the World, so as to leave Man without Excuse:
Yet the Manifestation of the Grace of God for the Salvation of Sinners, through
the Satisfaction of his Justice by a Redeemer, is and can only be revealed by
the Word of God, contained in the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament,
and made effectual upon the Heart and Mind of Man by the holy Spirit. For the
things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God: 1 Cor.
But God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all
things, yea, the deep things of God.

17. God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the
Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days completed the whole Canon and
comprehensive Cycle of the Revelation of his Will, as the only Standard in
Truth and Goodness for the Faith and Obedience of Mankind.

18. The Word of God contained in the holy Scriptures fully makes known the
Love of God in Christ which passes Knowledge; (...) the Kindness and Love of
God our Savior toward Man, which first appeared in the Promise of a Redeemer,
confirmed according to the manifold wisdom of God, by the Institution of
propitiatory Typical Sacrifices and Ceremonial Worships, as Shadows, and
Pledges, and symbols; that in the fullness of Time God should be manifested in
the Flesh, even Jesus Christ the eternal Son of God, who is the true God and
eternal Life.

19. It is impossible for an intelligent Beings to divest the knowledge and
obligation of Dependence upon God his Creator and Preserver: Consequently the
Devotion of continual Worship is indispensable Duty and Felicity, in drawing
near to God, the only infinite, eternal, all-sufficient and necessary Good.

It is also undeniably true, that the only Rule of acceptable advantageous
Worship must be the revealed Will of God: For only God can direct and teach how
He will be supplicated and worshipped. The knowledge of this Rule in the
Manifestation of the Light and Perfection of Divine Truth and Goodness, is only
to be found in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, wherein is revealed
the absolute Simplicity and Perfection of the Christian Religion, freed from
the Confusion of vain and fabulous Superstition and Will Worship.

20. The Covenant of Life and Happiness vouchsafed by God to Man upon his first
Creation, being by Man's Apostasy forfeited, and the Ability to fulfill it
utterly lost

A second Covenant (called the Covenant of Grace) absolutely free on God's
part, but entirely necessary on the part of Man, is by God instituted for the
Salvation of Man: The Tenor of the Engagement to which Covenant is the
Institution of Baptism, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost.

In which Ordinance is summarily represented the Truth of the Doctrine of the
Divine Trinity in the Unity of the Godhead: for as the Father is revealed to be
the God of Glory, so is the Son to be the Lord of Glory, and the Holy Ghost the
Spirit of Glory.

The incommunnicable Attributes of the Deity being ascribed unto the Son, and
(...) the Holy Ghost, as unto the Father, in respect of Creation of
Preservation, of Regeneration, of Omniscience; the Necessity of Redemption and
Regeneration is evinced by the Misery and Death common to all, and by the
universal depraved Vitiosity of all Mankind. Nor it is impossible that either
Redemption or Regeneration can be effected by less Power than Divine
Omnipotence and Omniscience.

The knowledge of the Heart in all the inmost Recesses of Thought and
Imagination is ascribed to Jesus Christ, and to the Holy Ghost.

The contrary cannot be fancied without the greatest Absurdity: For if the
Redeemer and Mediator were not essentially able to know all the Thoughts and
Dispositions of the Heart of Man, then some profane Hypocrite might mock, or
defeat with false pretended Devotion the Intercession of our Redeemer, or
wickedly and securely lie to the Holy Ghost: Also something most necessary for
a Sinner, might escape the discern of our Mediator, so that he could not be a
Savior to the uttermost; consequently they who come to God by him must remain
most miserable.

The essential Being of God is of such terrible Majesty, covered with the
Light, dwelling in the Light inaccessible; so that no created Intelligence can
possibly arrive at any due Perception of the Godhead, but only according to the
Revelation whereby God vouchsafed the Manifestation of his infinite
incomprehensible Being; which Manifestation of the Deity is given in his Word
of Truth to be God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost, one and the
same living and true God, blessed for ever.

21. The Efficacy of the Covenant of Grace consists in Redemption and
Regeneration.

Redemption by the Propitiation to Divine Justice through the Satisfactory
Merits of the Sufferings, Death and Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ,
according to the Will of God for the Justification of a Sinner.

Regeneration by the Holy Ghost in the Renovation of the Soul, quickened and
sanctified in all the intellectual Faculties unto Newness of Life by a new
spiritual Birth.

The Condition of the Covenant is Faith, fiducially resting on Christ, and
vitally uniting unto Christ for Justification and Sanctification by effectual
Vocation.

The Obligation and indispensable Duty of the Covenant, is the Obedience of
Faith working by Love in the fulfilling all the Commandments of God.

22. The Covenant of Works being made with the first Adam who was a mere
Creature, and therefore liable to fall when left to the freedom of his Will,
the Perseverance in his created Uprightness could not be secure: But the
Covenant of Grace being made with the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, both
the Performance of the Duty of Obedience to the Precepts of the Covenant, and
the final Perseverance in the Conditions of the Covenant, are according to the
Promise of God, by the Spirit of God, enabled to, preserved in, and perfected.

So that no believing Sinner may presume in himself, or despair in the Grace of
God, by whose Power he is kept through Faith unto Salvation.

The everlasting Covenant is ordered in all things and sure; for this is our
Salvation, that nothing shall be able to separate us from the Love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

23. That which is styled Natural Religion, is the Rational Conviction upon the
Intelligent Mind of Man, of indispensable Duty to fear, trust, obey, believe
and love God with all his Heart, Mind and Strength, according to the
Commandments of God.

Therefore there is a necessity of the Revelation of the Will of God, by which
is made known the complete Perfection of instituted Religion.

Instituted Religion is the Rule of true Wisdom to bring Mankind to eternal
Happiness, by directing all his Affections and Actions in the Fear, Faith and
Love of God, to their proper Objects, according to the Will of God, and the
Glory of God.

That Religion only is true, which is the Practice of Obedience to the Word of
God, and accordingly brings us to God in Spiritual Worship by Jesus Christ
alone, who is the only Mediator of Redemption and Intercession. That Wisdom
which was the Enquiry of Philosophy, the Demonstration of Theology, is the
Possession and Practice of the pure undefiled Christian Religion, which removed
from all Profaneness, Superstition and Will Worship, is the commanded and
accepted way of Worship to God in Spirit and in Truth, of Obedience to all the
Commandments of God from Love to God, of Righteousness to the Neighbor, with
Love, as to ones self, of Holiness and Sobriety, in respect of his own Person
made and renewed in the Image of God, all upon hope of everlasting Blessedness
to the Glory of God. Romans 5.2.


This Religion is the Characteristick Excellency of Man, and is the only true
Cement and Security of Mankind in all Conditions and Relations.

24. The Felicity to which the Christian Religion gives Title and Possession,
is both temporary and everlasting. In this Life Conversion from Darkness unto
Light, from the Power of Satan unto God, from the Folly and Madness of Vanity
and Sin, unto the Fear and Love of God, which is the beginning of true Wisdom;
Justification from the Guilt of Sin, and thereby Peace with God; Sanctification
by the renewing of the Image of God in Righteousness, Knowledge and true
Holiness, by the Spirit of God dwelling in the Soul, to quicken, direct,
preserve in the Paths of Righteousness from all Apostasy, Adoption to be a
Child of God, an Heir of Heaven, and to have Right and Acceptance to cry Abba,
Father; that is, to be emboldened to approach the Throne of Grace, and to offer
continual Sacrifices of Supplication and Thanksgiving, upon our only great and
glorious Altar, Heb. 13.10, 15.
the Lord Jesus Christ, in him drawing near to God our exceeding Joy. Psalm.
43.4.


This State gives Contentation in every Condition, under the assurance that all
things shall work together for our good, and that all our most difficult Labor
to resist Temptation, to overcome the World, to mortify Corruptions, to deny
Self, shall not be in vain in the Lord, but shall receive a full Recompense of
Reward in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Therefore whatsoever is done or suffered, is in hope of the Glory of God,
knowing that the State of this present World, is not capable to receive the
Blessedness and Glory of Eternity in Heaven.

The Felicity of Eternity cannot possibly be represented, or declared by the
Tongues of Men and Angels. Unspeakable Words, 2 Cor. 12.4.
incapable to be heard or uttered in this Vale of Tears, are necessary to set
forth what Eye has not seen, Psalm. 31.19. Isa. 64.4. 1 Cor. 2.9.
nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart of Man, the things which God
has prepared for them that love him, and fear him, and wait for him, and trust
in him, before the Sons of Men. This is that immense Felicity when we shall
know as we are known, and shall be changed into the same Image, from Glory to
Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, in the Beatifick Vision of God to all
Eternity, when the Lord shall bring all his Servants into the Possessions of
the Joy and Glory of that Kingdom, which God has prepared for them before the
Foundation of the World. But most dismal shall be the woeful Misery of those who
refuse to obey the Gospel commanding to crucify the Flesh, with the Affections
and Lusts, to renounce a vain Conformity to the Pomps and Pleasures of the
World; to forsake a vain Conversation, received by Tradition from our
Forefathers; to deny self, so as to cut off Right Hand and Foot, and pluck out
right-Eye and to cast them away. They that account such Lessons too difficult
to be observed, must hear, and perish under the Sentence, Depart from me ye
Workers of Iniquity into everlasting Fire, where the Worm shall never die, and
the Fire shall never be quenched.

The Conclusion and Sum of the whole is this.

In the beginning, i. e. from Eternity, Joh. 1.1, 3.
was the Essential Word, and the Word was with God: All things were made by
him, and without him was not any thing made that was made. 1 Timothy 3.10.
Who in the fullness of Time was God manifested in the Flesh; for of the Seed of
Abraham, as concerning the Flesh, Christ came, Romans 9.5.
who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen. In whom we have Redemption
through his Blood, Col. 1.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
even the forgiveness of Sins: Who is the Image of the invisible God, the
firstborn of every Creature. For by him were all things created, that are in
Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and invisible; whether they be Thrones,
or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers: All things were created by him, and
for him. And he is before all things, and by him all things consist. And he is
the Head of the Body, the Church: who is the beginning, the firstborn from the
dead, that in all things he might have the Pre-eminence. For it pleased the
Father, that in him all Fullness should dwell: And having made Peace through the
Blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things unto himself, whether things
in Earth, Heb. 1.1, 2, 3, 8.
or things in Heaven. God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in
time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto
us by his Son, whom he has appointed Heir of all things; by whom also he made
the Worlds. Who being the Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his
Person, and upholding all things by the Word of his Power, when he had by
himself purged our Sins, sat down on the Right Hand of the Majesty on high. For
unto the Son he says, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever; a Scepter of
Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom. Because God has appointed a Day
in the which he will judge the World in Righteousness, Act. 17.31.
by that Man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given Assurance unto all
Men, in that he has raised him from the dead.

Now it is easier for Heaven and Earth to pass, Luke 16.17.
than one tittle of the Law to fail. The Son of Man shall come in his Glory,
and all the holy Angels with him; then shall he sit upon the Throne of his
Glory, and before him shall all Nations be gathered. Mat. 25.3, 12.
Then the foolish Virgins, that neglected opportunity to provide Oil, shall be
excluded Heaven: Luke 14.18.
They that in diverse Instances agreed in one Consent to prefer and overvalue
present Animal Enjoyments before the Lord's Invitation to his Marriage-Supper,
shall never taste of Eternal Life.

They that thought it a hard Saying and not to be born, the Command of our Lord
to crucify the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts, to renounce a vain
Conversation and a Conformity to the Fashion of the World which passes away,
that refuse to deny self, to take up the Cross, to cut off right Hand and Foot,
and pluck out right Eye, and cast them away.

All such must hear, and perish for ever under that dreadful Word, Mat. 25.41
Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. But on the other side, to those who believed the Truth as it is in
Jesus, without contradicting or blaspheming, received it in Love and the
Obedience of Faith, not holding it in Unrighteousness, the King shall say, Come
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
Foundation of the World. Ver. 34.
But where shall ungodly Sinners appear, that send after the Lord Jesus into
Heaven this Rebel Message, We will not have this Man to reign over us? Luke.


That renounce the Satisfaction and Redemption of Christ, that blasphemously
deny the Deity of Jesus Christ the Lord of Glory, they shall say to the
Mountains and Rocks, Fall on us, Rev. 6.16, 17.
and hide us from the Face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the
Wrath of the Lamb: For the great Day of his Wrath is come, and who shall be
able to stand?

Few Men have been found in any Age or Country, to have filled their Hearts
with such profligate Madness to deny God. Indeed Cicero says, that Epicurus
while in words he allowed a Deity, he did really and by pretended Notions
utterly disavow the Providence of God, without which the Name of God must be an
empty and contemptible Sound.

For, as Cicero observes, if the Fear of God, and Reverential Regard to the
actual Providence of God be denied, or weakened, thereby also the common Faith
and Security of human Society, and the Ground and Foundation of universal
commutative and distributive Justice, is altogether subverted.

The Psalmist affirms, Psalm. 14.1.
that the Fool has said in his Heart, there is no God. Jer. 17.9.
That is the Disposition and working of his Heart in the desperate Wickedness
and unexpressible Deceitfulness of all its Purposes and vain Imagination, to
avow the casting off the regard of God.

Therefore the Psalmist immediately adds, They have done abominable Works,
there is none that does good. Accordingly the Psalmist again expresses, The
Transgression of the wicked says within my Heart, Psalm. 36.1, 2.
that there is no Fear of God before his Eyes: For he flattereth himself in his
own Eyes, until his Iniquity be found to be hateful.

It is therefore most irrational Dementation to detract from the infinite
Perfections of the Eternal God; for thereby Man is left in a wretched
Condition, more abject than that of the Beast which perishes, liable to the
Miseries of this Life without the help of the Awe and Encouragement of future
Punishments and Rewards.

There needs not any Foreign Topic of Argumentation to prove the Existence of
God, and his absolute Sovereignty over all Beings. For the Conscience of Good
and Evil radicated in every human Intelligence, is a continual and unanswerable
Evidence of the infinite Perfections of the Eternal God, blessed for ever.

It is most absurd Folly and Contradiction, to own a Nominal God, and to deny
the Essential Attributes of the infinite Perfection of the Deity. Eternal
Being, Truth and Goodness are the infinite Perfections of one Almighty,
All-sufficient God.

Eternity of Being implies Original Essential Existence absolutely simple,
altogether independent, wholly immutable, universally powerful, everywhere
present.

From whence flows Almighty Power, to create and uphold all things according to
his Will; to be the only Cause of all other Beings, and of all Causes of their
Life, with all distinct and proper Abilities thereof; of their Operation, with
all the Powers of Exercise, Rules or Limits to direct and govern, and End of
Performance.

Of their Subsistence with all Circumstances of Time and Place, for the
Beginning, Continuance or Progress, and finishing their Course with all
diversity and alterations of Condition therein, Sustentation and Regulation, as
necessarily flowing from, and depending upon God as Origination.

Truth is original, eternal, infinite Righteousness, and Holiness, and
Knowledge; the Perfection of excellent Eminence, whereby the Divine Majesty and
Essence is infinitely exalted above, and separated from all possibility of
Communion with, or Respect unto Vanity, Impurity, Unrighteousness, or
Wickedness, and does satisfyingly rest in his own All-sufficient Sovereignty:
Thence derives and dispenses to all Creatures the Law of Truth, to guide and
direct inherently the Sustentation, Operation and final Determination of all
Beings, according to their several respective Natures, for the mutual Support,
Preservation and Comfort of the Universe, all in subordinate necessary
Subjection to the supreme Obedience unto the Will of God, and ultimate Aim and
Regard to the Glory of God.

The Effect of this eternal Truth is the Stream of Truth, the Law of universal
Justice, Righteousness, Equity, by God implanted in the Nature of all Rational
Creatures, to direct and judge all their Affections and Actions.

This is Truth scoffed by the Profane, vainly discoursed by Morosophists, found
possessed and enjoyed as the Happiness of all that fear and love God.

This assigns the End to all Controversy, is the Standard of Conscience, and
the Basis of all Rational Conversation.

The Manifestation of this Truth is the revealed Will of God.

For Knowledge in God both satisfyingly comprehends the All-sufficient
Perfection of the Divine Essence, and effectually determines and appoints the
Nature, Operation, Use and End of all Beings to his Glory.

According to the Conformity to, or Alienation from this Eternal Truth, is the
Result of Happiness or Misery to every Rational Being: For Divine Truth and
Goodness are convertible and inseparable.

God only is good originally, essentially, infinitely, eternally,
all-sufficiently.

Goodness is the Root, the Branches are Love; God is Love, Mercy; God is the
Father of Mercies, Consolation: God is the God of all Comfort, Patience and
Long-suffering; God is the God of Patience, and his Long-suffering is
Salvation; his Loving Kindness is better than Life.

Forgiveness is with the Lord, that he may be feared: Psalm. 130.4, 7.
Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is Mercy; and with him is
plenteous Redemption.

But this abundant Mercy is not in any respect Encouragement to Presumption,
Romans 6.1, 2
or continuance in Sin: for that is to despise the Riches of his Goodness, Romans
2.4, 5
and Forbearance, and Long-suffering; not knowing that the Goodness of God
leads to Repentance; but after the Hardness and Impenitency of Heart,
treasureth unto it self Wrath against the day of Wrath, and Revelation of the
righteous Judgment of God.

God that dwells in Light inaccessible, cannot be perceived and apprehended in
any other Manifestation than as he is pleased to reveal himself, which can only
be in his Word, wherein tho there be sufficient Evidence to satisfy a created
Intelligence what is the infinite Excellence of the Divine Object of Worship,
yet it remains absolutely impossible for the most exalted created Mind fully to
comprehend the Perfection of the Divine Essence.

Notwithstanding what is revealed thereof as the Object of Faith, is
replenished with immense Goodness and Beauty, to be the all-sufficient and
necessary Felicity of an immortal Rational Creature: Thus the highest and
deepest Mystery concerning the Deity, tho not possible to be investigated by
human Capacity, yet being revealed by the Word of Divine Truth, necessarily
constrains the Understanding, Will and Affections to adore, believe, and
receive in Love the Truth of this glorious Mystery.

The Manifestation of the Divine Essence cannot possibly be arrived at, but by
such Revelation as God is pleased to make of himself.

No Man knows the Son but the Father; Mat. 11.27.
neither knows any Man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son
will reveal him.

Neither can any Man say that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost. 1. Cor.
12.3.
The Ladder of Divine Knowledge, by which the Mind ascends to God, the Top
whereof reaches to Heaven, is yet set upon the Earth.

For although the very Light is a Covering to the Glory of God, Psalm. 104.2.
yet things material, visible, and humanly intelligible, present the Shadows of
excellent Evidence, subservient unto the incomprehensible Perfection of Light
and Truth of the Trinity in Unity of God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, the
only and true God, blessed for ever.

There are Signatures in the Nature of created Beings, to assist the Mind in
its Ascent of approach to behold the Goodness of the glorious Mystery of the
Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Divine Essence.

The Doctrine of the blessed Trinity is shadowed in all Beings, viz. a Trinity
of Subsistences in Unity of Essence.

In every individual material Substance, there is Height, Length and Breadth.

In every the same Luminary Orb there is Light, Heat, fructifying Influence.

In every Man, Understanding, Will, Affection, yet the same univocal Soul.

In the Godhead was always acknowledged Entity, Truth, Goodness, subsisting in
Unity, always from the Foundation of the World declared to be eternal Truth of
God.

The holy Scripture declares in the Trinity, of the Godhead distinct
Properties, yet one and the same Infinite Essence; and in every Person of the
Godhead. Attributes incommunicable to any but God.

Creation of all things is assigned to the Son of God, to the eternal Word of
God.

John 1.1, 2, 3. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God.

The same was in the beginning with God.

All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was
made.

Both the Creation and the Sustentation of all things are assigned to the Son
of God.

Heb. 1.1, 2, 3. God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in times
past unto the Fathers by the Prophets,

Has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has appointed Heir
of all things; by whom also he made the Worlds.

Who being the Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person,
and upholding all things by the Word of his Power, when he had by himself
purged our Sins, sat down on the Right Hand of the Majesty on high.

The Knowledge of the Heart of every Man is assigned to the Son of God; Joh.
2.25. Who needed not that any should testify of Man, for he knew what was in
Man. Compared with I Kings 8.39. For thou, even thou only know the Hearts of
all the Children of Men.

Isa. 6.1, 5. the Prophet says, I saw also the Lord sitting upon a Throne,
high and lifted up.

Then said I, Woe is me, for mine Eyes have seen the King the Lord of Hosts.

This Vision of Jehova is expressly applied to our Lord Jesus Christ.

Joh. 12.41. These things said Esaias, when he saw his Glory, and spoke of him.

Also Joh. 2.24, 25. But Jesus did not commit himself to them, because he knew
all Men: And needed not that any should testify of Man; for he knew what was in
Man.

I Joh. 5.20. speaking of Jesus Christ, This is the true God, and Eternal Life.

Also to the Holy Ghost the Scripture assigns the Creation of the World: Genesis
1.2. And the Earth was without Form, and void, and Darkness was upon the Face
of the Deep; and the Spirit of God moved upon the Face of the Waters. And God
said, Let there be Light, and there was Light.

Likewise the Works of Divine Providence; Isa: 63.10. But they rebelled, and
vexed his holy Spirit, -- Where is he that put his holy Spirit within him? The
Spirit of the Lord caused him to rest; so did thou lead thy People to make
thy self a glorious Name.

The Work of Regeneration is ascribed to the Holy Ghost; John 3.5. Except a Man
be born of the Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God. Tit. 3.5. According to his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost.

The Knowledge of secret Sins is ascribed to the Holy Ghost; Acts 5.3, 4. Why
has Satan filled thy Heart to lie to the Holy Ghost; thou have not lied unto
Men but unto God.

Likewise the Sin against the Holy Ghost is declared to be unpardonable; Mark
3.29. He that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, has never Forgiveness,
but is in danger of Damnation.

These and many other Scriptures evidence the Truth of the Unity of Essence in
the Trinity of the Divine Persons; Joh. 10.30. I and my Father are one. I John.
5.7. For there are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and
the Holy Ghost; and these three are one. Compare also 2 Timothy 3.16. All
Scripture is given by Inspiration of God. And 2 Pet. 1.21. Holy Men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

Likewise in the last words of David, 2 Samuel 23.2, 3. The Spirit of the Lord
spoke by me, and his Word was in my Tongue; the God of Israel said, etc. Thus
the Doctrine of the blessed Trinity is not merely Notional, but Real; it is not
fictitious, but eternally true; it is infinitely good, therefore necessary to
be believed, and adoringly received in Love as the Principle of Felicity to
Intellectual Creatures.

The Divine Trinity is Incomprehensible, therefore to be adored, not doubted,
nor subjected to Human Argumentation, which cannot illustrate that which in all
respects necessarily excels all Methods of finite Proof or Evidence, tho the
Reality and Efficacy thereof be most certainly and feelingly perceived and
enjoyed.

The curious Inquiry is like gazing upon the Sun, which dazles our weak Eyes.

For now we see through a Glass, 1 cor. 13.12.
darkly; now we know in part: but when we shall know even as also we are known,
when we are brought into the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.4.
then we shall hear those unspeakable words which in this State of Mortality
are not possible to be uttered, fully to reveal the Glory of the Divine
Trinity. What the Lord said unto Moses, is also spoken unto us; We cannot see
the Glory of God and live; but the Lord makes his Goodness pass before us, and
proclaims his Name before us, Exodus 33.19, 20.
that he will be gracious to whom he will be gracious, and will show Mercy on
whom he will show Mercy; according to the eternal Election of God the Father,
and the Redemption by God the Son, and Sanctification by God the Holy Ghost,
into which Truth all Believers who shall be saved, are baptized.

The Duty of common Philanthropy obliges deeply to grieve at the Folly and
Madness of Epicurean Sensualists, who renounce the Glory of the Image of God,
and the hope of immortal Felicity, and corrupt themselves to be like natural
Brute Beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, vainly imagining to evade the
impartial Justice of the Almighty God, with whom is terrible Majesty.

No less miserable are the Profane, who take up a scoffing Name of Deist to act
the Atheist, renouncing the Fear of God which is the only Bond of Human
Society, and rejecting Hope in God, which is the only distinguishing Excellency
of Man above the Beasts that perish.

Unreasonable also is the Pride of those who deny the predestinating Prescience
of God the Father, Romans 1.23.
changing the Glory of the Incorruptible God in (...) of corruptible Man; as if
they thought God to be altogether such an one as themselves, Psalm. 50.21
who upon any Disappointment or unexpected Accident, endeavor to patch up a
Remedy for unforeseen Inconvenience. But let the Potsherds of the Earth strive
with, Isa. 45.9.
and discourse of the Potsherds of the Earth.

But unto the eternal Wisdom of God are known all his Works from the beginning
of the World, according to that determinate Counsel and Knowledge of his own
Will, Acts. 2.23.
who has appointed all things that ever shall come to pass, and all for his
own Glory; so that not any the least thing, even the falling of a Sparrow to
the Ground, Matthew. 10.29, 30.
befalls by chance, but by Divine Appointment.

Also the most flagitious Wickedness that ever was contrived and acted, even
the crucifying the Prince of Life, was to fulfill the determinate Counsel of
God, for this very end to accomplish the highest Exaltation of Divine Glory and
Goodness in the Salvation of Man.

Which Salvation likewise is made effectual only to such as are ordained to
Eternal Life. Act. 13.48.


They also deny the meritorious Satifaction to the infinite Justice of God by
the Death and Righteousness of Jesus Christ, for the Redemption of Sinners from
Wrath to come; by which miserable Error is effectually and really denied and
evacuated the Essential Justice of God.

They also deny the necessity of the Almighty efficacious Grace of the Spirit
of God to sanctify, regenerate and quicken those that are naturally dead in
Trespasses and Sins, under that Corruption and Impotence, wherein all are
alienated from the Life of God.

Now concerning the words used by the Orthodox to express the Mystery of the
Divine Trinity:

It ought to be considered, that Words of Rational Speech being the Signatures
of Things, there are many more things to be expressed than are words to
represent them: For such is the Poverty of every the most copious Language,
that there is necessity to apply the same syllabical Word to signify various
and different things, which yet receive the Certainty of Interpretation from
the Rational Contexture of the respective Discourse.

Thus in the Controversies raised by Heretical Blasphemers against the Doctrine
of the blessed Trinity.

The Orthodox to vindicate the Truth of the Scriptures, which abundantly
testify both the Essen^^^^ (...) and the distinct ^^^perties of God the Father,
God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, have made use; of several words, as Person
and Co-essential, to express and signify the scriptural Truth of the Identical
Substance and distinct Properties of the Divine Trinity in Unity.

Therefore the possession and use of the aforesaid Words or Phrases are duly
retained by the Church, according to the Meaning and Intention clearly made
known in the holy Scriptures, which ascribe, as before mentioned, unto the
Father, unto the Son, and unto the Holy Ghost, Attributes of Essential Divine
Perfection, incommunicable to any but unto the only living and true God, who
from everlasting to everlasting, is God blessed for ever.

Religious Worship being the absolute Sovereignty of the only living and true
God, both in respect of the Object of Worship, which can only be God; and in
respect of the Rule of Worship, which can only be appointed by God: For all
other Objects of Worship are despicable vain Idols, and all Rules, Mediums and
Ways of Religion not instituted by God, are blasphemous Detraction from the
Truth and Majesty of God. It must therefore be that the great Temptation to
Atheism is Superstition; that is, a Human Composition of Religion, when the
Fear (that is, the Worship of God) is taught by the Precepts of Men.

The course of Rational Argumentation carrying the Mind to infer, that if the
Object of Adoration must be obliged to depend upon the Will and Fancy of Human
Imposition, how, and when, and with what Mediums or Ceremonies it shall be
adored: Then the Deity must become a mere Fiction, and such Religion nothing
but an Idol-Contrivance of the crafty, or the foolish: Such Superstition being
sacrilegious Invasion of the Divine Majesty, to institute or practice any Rite,
Formulary, or Ceremony in Religion not commanded by God, or otherwise than God
has commanded: because God only can be the Lawgiver of his own Worship; Isa.
33.22.
for all other Worship falls short of Acceptance with God, consequently cannot
make the Worshipper happy, but prepares for an Atheistical Rejection of all
Religion. The most refined Human Intelligence could never find out to
Perfection the Works of God, which are the Objects of our Sense; so as fully to
discover the Formation, Texture, Consistence and complete Use and End of
created Beings. Who can fully understand the glorious Orbs of Light which dazzle
the Beholder? Psalm. 150.1.
Who knows the Firmament of his Power? Who knows the Ballancings of the Clouds,
the wondrous Works of him which is perfect in Knowledge? Job 37.16, 17.
how thy Garments are warm, when he quieteth the Earth by the South Wind?

The very Augmentation of Stones and other Subterranean Materials, the Growth
of Vegetables, the Production, Generation, Use and Operation of Animals, even
of the most despicable Insects, have escaped, and surpassed the diligent
Inquiry of the most sagacious Pretenders: The Certainty of all which having
only Substance and Evidence in Faith, Heb. 11.1, 3
by which we understand that the World was made by the Word of God; so that
things which are seen are not made of things which do appear.

But who can by searching find out God? Job 11.7, 8.
Or, who can find out the Almighty unto Perfection? It is as high as Heaven,
what can thou do? deeper than Hell, what can thou know? Yet this is Life
Eternal, Joh. 17.3.
to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent.

The Mysteries of the Divine Trinity, and of the Incarnation of Jesus Christ,
God manifested in the Flesh, must necessarily transcend the Comprehension of
any finite created Intelligence. But tho the Love of Christ passes Knowledge,
it is impossible for sinful Man to be delivered and saved from Wrath to come,
that is, from eternal Death, but by unfeigned Faith in God the Father to be
just, and the Justifier of an ungodly Sinner, Romans 3.26. and 4.5.
which believes in Jesus; in God the Son, who only is able to save to the
utmost, having by himself purged us from our Sins, and satisfied Divine
Justice, is only capable to be an everlasting Mediator of Redemption and
Intercession: Also in God the Holy Ghost, who only can regenerate and sanctify
a Sinner, to be received into Communion of Life with God for ever.

Now for a Golden Clasp to the rehearsed Truths, none of them being of private
Fancy or Invention, duly consider the two first Articles of Religion, being the
Doctrine of the Church of England, published in the beginning of the
Reformation, confirmed by Act of Parliament, and continually subscribed by the
Clergy.

Articles of Religion.
I. Of Faith in the Holy Trinity. THere is but one living and true God,
everlasting, without Body, Parts, or Passions, of Infinite Power, Wisdom and
Goodness, the Maker and Preserver of all things, both visible or invisible. And
in Unity of this Godhead, there be Three Persons of one Substance, Power and
Eternity, the Father, Son, and the Holy Ghost.

II. Of the Justification of Man. WE are accounted righteous before God, only
for the Merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by Faith, and not for our
own Works, or Deservings: Wherefore that we are justified by Faith only, is a
most wholesome Doctrine, and very full of Comfort, as more largely is expressed
in the Homily of Justification.




FINIS.

