Biceps Mons Pernassus
Alte Volaris

Contemplatia

Fons Helicon

Long Monstrans

Mundus

(...)

Historia

(...)



THE GRECIAN STORY: BEING AN Historical Poem, IN FIVE BOOKS.

To which is Annexed THE GROVE: Consisting of Diverse SHORTER POEMS upon several
Subjects.

By J. H. Esquire

Mundi Schema and Effigies Historia; Triste cum Jucundo; Dulce cum Amaro:
Bonum, malumque Humanum Genus; multum fragile Animo, ut Corpore: summa per
Observationem Prudentia; Plena varietatis Natura, and Fortuna etiam; Vtraque
admiranda.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar,
near Devereux-Court. 1684.

THE GRECIAN STORY, BEING AN Historical POEM.
THat time of Year when the Earth grand Parent shows;
Does beauties choice, new flaunting Brood disclose:
When paints her Cheek, with Gems adorned (as 'twere)
Imbroidered Garb; may Curtisan appear:
Whilst, more advanced, the Sun with wanton eye,
Much fonder ray does Court her from the Sky,
Smiling in Beams: when spruce-drest Groves abound;
Through chirping Consorts noise withal resound,
Sweet Songs of joy: Heaven cheerful, pleased survay'd;
Cloud- masks discharged, bright, azure Face displayed,
Dropped pearly Dews; then free from Congelation;
The World restored since former Youth's privation.
No sooner had the Lady Morn in state,
Ushered by Star, walked forth her Eastern gate;
From glorious Couch Rose-spread to take the air,
That still might seem with blushing Cheeks more fair;
Scattering her Dew like Crystal Pendents round,
As Favors to adorn the fruitful Ground:
But straight beheld on large Ortesian Plain
(Prime Rendezvous) great store o'th Pastor-train,
Choicest Arcadia famous for Shepherds.
Arcadian youth, most active Men,
Each walking from their Country-grange as then.
Young Females (last) conjoined, that gaudy Day
Quick, early Risers too, but mirthful Play
Was their chief end, supreme; and more to grace
PAN'S Festival, styled God of Sheep, that Place,
Each Shepherdess showed trimmed and beautified
With handsome Garb; careless, neglected Pride;
Nice, formal freaks of Art could shun, forbear,
Tho flaunting too: good skins and Features there:
As Nature thought to the World it should be known,
She was not ti'd to gorgeous Courts alone.
Let it suffice, some had the name of Fair,
Might Princes please: Young Pastors too did share
For manlike Form, ingenuous Parts combined:
Tho Shepherds called not proved of servile kind
(Since kept their Own or Fathers Flocks) but there,
Like Graziers now, gentiler Stamp did bear.
These searching for their several Loves with joy
O'rerang'd the cheerful Vale: when those less Coy,
Soft, gentler Hearts sometimes, by purposed chance
Like Willing Strays (mistook for Ignorance)
Soon found out them: met both did freely prove
What sports, delight Conceit with harmless Love
Could best commend, repasts of Youthful pleasure;
Songs chanted, walked, or danced in Country measure;
Green banks like Plush bespread, with Flowers each where,
(As heaven with Stars) begem'd, embroidered there.
But Fame's record, amongst the rural Train,
Does one advance as Glory of that Plain;
Their Prince esteemed, whose gallant Form excelled,
ORSAMNES called: pronounced unparalled.
Clearest brown Cheek: his bright, triumphant Eyes
Born conquerours, fair Virgin-troop their Prize;
Such lovely flames and Manlike both survay'd:
Seemed court-bred Star: well-mounted Brow displayed.
Each feature, part conjoined choice Ornament;
NARCISSUS might, ENDIMION represent.
His large, spread Locks in many a gallant Curl
Showed sportive Wantons there, like trembling Purl
OF the shoulders danced when moved, whom wandering Wind
Did dandle often like Playfellow, untwin'd;
Whilst Nimphs their Sighs did breath, enamored train;
Heart-gives they seemed those Gazers to enchain;
However Himself less then disposed to Love:
For body's form did rarely builded prove.
Transcendent Mind, adorned with noblest Parts:
Choice Virtue too advanced his grand deserts.
Age twenty one: whose certain Birth we shall
E're long declare, Breeding conjoined withal.
Spruce Hat he wore, the height, breadth indiff'rent Crowned,
Green Taffaty; neat-folded Wreath went round
Made of the same: for Garments too excelled;
Suit, Coat green Taffaty, clasped down beheld
With silver Plates, of the breast and sides, behind;
Long, branched form; with choice Aurora lined.
Short Buskins (last) for color, Stuff compli'd,
With ribbond-knots of fair Aurora ti'd,
Such proved the Youth: whilst most of the Pastor-train
In Rural way their minds did entertain,
With Games and sports, Himself (reserved breast
Of late howere) that time beyond the rest
Contemplative, (through weightier Cause (which we
Shall name ere long) disposed for privacy;
Walked farther off toward delightful Vale,
From whence did blow fine, gentler-breathed Gale,
To calm his thoughts; then view the lovely Spring;
Found Cordial-ease whilst Birds in quires do sing.
'Twas May's first Day; whose Flowered beauty appeared
That time beyond young Female ones preferred,
Cheeks, lips and eyes; that Champain dress beheld,
Through sober glance sad Clouds in part dispelled.
Drawn further on to the Vale at last, one while
His silvered Bow's imploi'd then; to beguile
Slow Morning-hours, Philosophy, choice Book
Maintained discourse by Crystal-streamed Brook:
Till solemn Thoughts return, raised (last) again,
Did softly tread that flow'r-imbroider'd Plain:
Earth smiling round (as 'twere) upon the Skies,
As Heaven on earth; for Cheek Serene complies.
By this the All-surrounding Sun with have
(Swift, fiery Steeds) Day's Morning-Stage o're-pass'd;
No need of drenching them, nor Southern Bait
Took for himself drives on his Chariot strait.
ORSAMNES when, being still disposed to rove,
Cast pleased glance upon the walled Grove;
Don two miles walk, Noon's heat offensive found;
Whilst That appeared on gentler rising ground,
Spring's gallant Plumes; by Pastors talk excelling;
Like Fortress fair Sun's beamy Darts repelling:
At hand besides, yet nere by him survai'd;
Strong Fancy draws to view that branched Shade:
Marched further on to the Gate, from whence he might,
If open found, have clearer Glancing Sight.
'Twas walled round; The walled Grove
near that close Gate within
Stood Porter's lodge: Porter himself had been
Rambling that Morn to the Alehouse standing nigh,
Whence drunk returned; so, entering there (none by)
The Wicket left unlocked (nor strange, forgot)
Well closed, no more, like fudled, drowsy Sot
Roul'd on his bed; whilst kennel'd Dog did keep
Bad watch withal (chained up by day) asleep.
ORSAMNES seeing clear way, the Lodg-door closed,
None to debar, strong, fair Excuse supposed,
He stepped within, used wary feet and Eyes,
Thoughts to retreat ere Rangers glance surprise:
First Prospect on it far more encouraging,
It seemed prime Bower, Plantation for the Spring.
The Form was thus: 'Twas cut out round by Art;
Some Mossy Roads, more large, from the walled Part
(Free Shade from beams, Tops something open tho)
Did streit as lines directly point and go
To the middle Ground, where handsome Habitation;
The Rest, more narrow Walks in circle fashion
Did wind about, grand Theater beheld;
Close tops like Arch, by growth not least compelled:
Thick, thinner Trees between, tho here and there
Small spaces found might Garden-plots appear,
Worn Flowered dress. ORSAMNES viewed, approved
That branched Maze; whilst Silvan Songsters, moved
To general chanting joy, their Chorus sing;
That Princess-month like Servants welcoming.
Birds pleased and Shades, which gave conjoined shroud;
King skreen withal against beams of Noon allowed;
Shunned straight Road from the Gate (with wary glance)
For the planted part, where he might best advance,
Crossed winding walks, marched further on concealed,
Till came to the midst, small dainti'st Green beheld;
Cut Orb-like round, where purling Riv'let strayed,
Did seem to dance through small carved Channel made
To view the Spring; two foot for breadth bestowed;
Whose Crystal stream Gold-sands (as 'twere o'reflow'd,
Mixed gaudiest colored Shells, by Art designed:
In midst of all neat-formed Mansion shined.
Thin Trees dispersed like Tufts adorned the place;
Some Park-stands, bowers conjoined Prospective grace.
ORSAMNES now, least caused perchance offense
By curious mood, through Shades retired from thence;
Way trod before, toward the unguarded Gate,
Refreshment found by what beheld of late:
When from that part most soft and gentle Noise
Stole to his Ear, whether 'twas Humane Voice,
Which talked, sung, complained, or what not knowing;
Till nearer drawn proved cheerful Sound, sweet growing;
Well chanted Song for pleasure, brought thus far,
And dandled by the pleased, delighted Air,
Since loath to loose. His mind could not dispense,
For truning back, if sidewaies ranged from thence
Much wanderer; those straight broad Roads were feared;
This sculking way most free, reserved appeared.
'Twas stronger now, seemed choicely rare, surpassing;
Have bad conciev'd, thus, gentler forwards tracing,
(To smallest Noise) he marched by that ground,
Close larger Plot with Hedge encompassed round;
Where lurking Shades would stragler's glance repel,
Some longer stay might be adventured well.
Prime Music 'twas of Lute and Voice composed;
ORSAMNES there, with bord'ring Parts enclosed,
More to regard (befriended by that Shade)
Each other Sense to the Hearing servant made.
Those nimble Birds which moved about that Bower,
Inspired appeared throught her Harmonious, power;
Lute, charming Voice: Leaves danced, when smaller pause
( Wind-shaken often) showed gentle Claps, applause.
Those chirping Songsters seemed as mute and dumb,
Sat pearch'd as 'twere her Scholars then become.
Last words of the Song were these,
This World abounds in Care and Strife,
Best suits my Thoughts the Virgin-life.
By which ORSAMNES plainly did conclude
She was a Maid, or the Tongue did much delude,
Air lastly upon the Lute, in which her Hand
Did nimbler way, more sweet the strings command;
Both ended thus, Birds seemed to practice round
In thankful Song, whilst from well-shaded Ground,
ORSAMNES heard, applauds; choice female Art:
Found now more lingering thoughts, loath to Depart.
Good mind he had to see that place enclosed,
Then view those Lips, those Hands which formed composed,
These warbled sounds, if might be termed Fair,
Whose Voice and Touch proclaimed themselves so rare:
Then would be gone. Thus roused, with gentle paces
He stalked about that Hedge, through se'vral places
Sight strove to dart, till found reserved Door;
Not locked, forgot; one Person saw, no more.
Transcendent Form, in midst of all descri'd,
Prime Excellence, by none on Earth outvi'd:
Sweet lovely Face to that might Cheap appear,
So rich in Beauty showed; conjoined there
Her Body's daintiest Shape, exact Compound;
Task for all Pens; whose praises to resound,
Fame's trumpet Breath might want; the Sight would move
Proud Kings themselves (perchance) to fall in Love.
Fond Suitors turned; much more inferior Men
To view, Admire: conceived small marvel then,
ORSAMNES tho, upon that Gazing score
Imploi'd his Eyes, as harkening Ears before.
A Virgin 'twas as did by the Song appear;
CLERMANTHE named, tho called PARMENA there;
Who midst the heat, by chance withdrawn descended
To the Bathing Fount; there (Song with Music ended,
Thence manly Spies debarred) to the foot at last
Unclouds her beauteous World, which seemed to cast
New Beams upon that gloomy place as tho
Bright second Morn were breaking from below,
More choicely Fair: or perl skinned Nymph revealed,
Some feigned Lady of the Water then beheld.
Upon the Bank fine Satin Mantle lay
(Sky-colour'd) spread, did Silver knots display:
Silk under- robe or Petticoat beside,
Green like the Spring, Hood, Sandalls there descri'd.
The Fount was large, The Fountain.
Long-square; for art excelled:
Ore the midst half way, by Pillars strength upheld,
Square carved Frame; left open either side:
On the top sat God of the Sea
NEPTUNE crowned (Triumphant pride)
In Chariot drawn; Sea-horses form presented
(All done with paint and Gold) which Water vented,
Dropped through their Mouths, part froth, like Foam below
Champing the Bit. Beneath there seemed to flow
High swelling Sea, and at four Corners made
Curled Meaner Sea-Gods.
TRITON'S shape which Trumps did use displayed,
On Dolphin backs advanced; whence Waters fall
Like sportful Streams, through the Fishes mouths withal.
Viewed Fount it self, at either distant End
Wild, carved Rocks did near to the bank ascend:
Goddess of Wood.
DIANA naked sat bathing there on one,
Coy Nymphs behind; ACTEON farthest shown,
Whose branched Crest speaks bold presumptuous prying:
Near the other Rock, their hands with Harps complying,
Mermaids beheld; and partly above the Stream
Fish-heads appeared from Craggy sides of them:
Through Engines too dispersed their Water- Shower,
Squeezed from both Tops like Arched Cystal-bow'r,
Quite over those Nymphs beneath, small Rail the place
Encompassed, where, ranged with painted grace
Stood carved Beasts like rampant Guard to the Fount,
Viewed over against (near the hedge) Prospective Mount;
Whose stairs with gilded Rails showed beautified,
Where perching (last) prime-coulour'd Fowls descri'd.
Who looked upon the Place but glancing fashion,
Might think he saw some small, New-coin'd Creation,
Fish, Birds and Beasts; CLERMANTHE Goddess there
(Bathing below) to the Fancy's eye appear.
Whose beauties now with sob'rer Smile, and then
More serious thoughts ORSAMNES viewed ag'en.
Her Eyes were black spread flaming Rays
Which Diamonds could far outblaze; Clermanthes Person.

Transcendent beams: fair Soul from thence
Did shine with glorious Form to Sense.
Two glist'rng Mints of Lightning were;
Choice beauties Worlds; mysterious there;
In whose full Globes Night, Day intwin'd,
Both black and Fair at once combined,
Seemed darker- veyl'd least else confounded
Men's view, destroi'd, tho sweetly wounded;
For Persons struck by that fair Eye,
Well pleased appeared still so to Die.
Such lovely fires withal beheld,
Faint Stars, Sun's gaudy Beams excelled.
Lights, fountains seemed on Earth (survai'd)
New Morning kindled thence, displayed.
Her Forehead large, high-rais'd to the Eye,
Spread forth like pure, Majestic Sky;
Did Throne of State to Beauty there
Joined Chastity withal appear:
Warm whitest Alps of Snow present;
First lovely Part, choice ornament.
Then viewed those Cheeks, delicious Bowers,
Where constant Spring, enlivened Flowers;
On Lillies there, fresh Roses blowing
Two Suns above their beams bestowing.
Here used that Archer small to lie
( Love's Boy) made wanton by her Eye,
For mirthful play; each outward Part
Still pleased to Range, if barred her Heart.
Next, daintiest Lips; fair Ruby-gem
But Mean-complexion'd, thought to them:
Prime modells closed, when smiled however,
More graceful Shapes presented there:
New beauteous Forms through Speech descri'd,
Tho words pronounced like Death, Denied
Whose living Marmulade might show
(Enjoi'd) Restorative, as tho
Chill, frosted Veins could warm repair;
Breathed Sweets against Infectious Air:
Pearl-store concealed. 'Twere sad that none
Should kiss such Lips but Maids alone.
Her dainty rising Nose most white,
As curious- formed, to please, delight:
Fit Part for that transcendent Face:
The Chin conjoined Perfections Grace.
Fine, gallant Hair, wreaths lofty-spread,
Like silken Crown adorned her head;
Some wanton, dangling Curls although
Resplendent Cheeks made fairer show;
Choice heightning Foyl: seemed Courted, danced
By every blast of Wind, advanced:
'Twas clearer Brown and served for Shade,
Whilst Sun-bright Eyes their beams displaid:
Love's Ambushment might well appear;
Pity such Hairs should wither there
Under coy Virgin-vow, since Strings
For CUPID'S BOW; fit bredes for Kings.
Her Neck might stately Fort present,
Pillar to the Breathing Firmament.
Strange Clime displayed, where Lillies, Snow
(Conjoined) did Summer-winter show:
Upon that Frame with glory moved.
Prime choice Compound by Mortals loved,
Di'monds there worn, to Fancies eye,
Showed sparkling Joy being placed so nigh.
Then Breasts surveyed which swell, aspire;
Nurses conjoined to the Babe Desire:
Did soft like trembling Jelly show,
Or Streams when gentler Gale does blow,
Dimpling their Cheek. These the Eye supposes
Love-gods beloved Mounts, whence loses
His Arrows often in wanton play,
Does Wound withal: Between there lay
Milk-path for's Walk; still slumber'd on
Those Pillows too when weary grown.
Her Arms like Twins in gentle fold
Played with themselves, by Nature's Mold.
Exactly cast; where Pearl descried,
Grown Envy-pale by the Wrists outvy'd.
Free Prisoners the are who there remain,
Find beauteous Grate, choice Guardian:
'Twere sad these should embrace none other
But Female Arms, or one another.
Her dainty, curious Hands (prime Pair)
By Queens might envied prove, so rare,
Those nicer Palms, soft, smallest Stream
Each azure Vein conceived in them,
Like beauteous Founts that wandered over
Choice Lilly-banks, made Island-store.
Seemed prime for Tooth, as could send out
Diseases rage, advance the Gout
To Galliard's lofty Height, and stroke
Fierce Panthers tame so fair a Yoke.
Now, lower wading strait, beheld
Her silver Wast, unparalled:
Wreathed by the enamored Stream in sign
Of fond regard, so Crystalline;
Choice-form'd withal: much blessed be Those
So wealthy an Armful may enclose:
Like Zodiac, surround (as 'twere)
That gallant World of beauty there.
ORSAMNES loved, Orsamnes in Love.
never before till now
That taking way (such Form, so beauteous too)
Did Woman contemplate; pierced through the Eyes:
The unlook'd-for Chance might more withal surprise.
Strong, secret Charm like Plant still there detained,
Porter forgot, past Griefs, Love primely reigned
Nere Woman thought worthy of Sigh, or Passion,
Till viewed that Princess, Queen of the Creation;
In whose fair Eyes bring troop of Masquers shined,
Virtues did seem with Beauties there combined.
That Man crowned Fortune's Favorite confessed,
By whom this Pearl, conjugal Gem possessed.
Her costly Clothes upon the ground, beside
Rich Jewels worn chief rank Gentile implied:
Whose worth although conceived Transcendent, rare;
Why should his Person, Parts, Birth joined despair?
Her Song's last Words howere, as proved inclined
To the Virgin-life, least fixed Course, designed,
Bred qualmish thoughts; made solemn Vow, if so,
(Bent to observe) he then might seem to Woo
Some marble Statue's shape, there Suitor be;
Or Court the Northern Ice, as melting, free;
Deaf Winds and Wave, coy Lightning grasp, infold:
But those faint Thoughts by stronger were controlled.
Thus, he resolved his Mind to break, discover,
Nor lose the Man whilst showed the fervent Lover.
Mused straight withal how near Approach to gain,
Some Parley, speech, joined Kiss-salute obtain.
When from that Place sad Damping cause appeared,
(Nice, hardest Task) lest strange Surprisal feared,
Some Lust-design, she should scriek out, exclaim
Ere he could Speak; destroyed that courting Aim.
Found Naked (next) would move, incense far more,
Thus viewed, beheld: if waited there at door,
She might whole Hours (perchance) in Bathing spend,
Till Scouts betrayed; so lost desire End:
What posture best, what Words to settle, please
(If should come forth) her Troubled thoughts, Appaise,
How to order all: he first employed his Brain
To drive her from that Fount, till Clothed again.
Thus softly trod to the Fenced part Behind,
Nearest to her, where shak'd (as had designed)
Those Branches, Leaves; as some had fallen by chance
Against the Hedge, no view nor naked glance:
When Noise o'reheard, like one from the Fount below
Trampling the Bank, Clothes rus'led to and fro:
Which proving well, to the Door he strait did trace
(One side thereof) as newly reached that Place:
Where heard Silk garment moved, Feet tread the Grass:
By the Hedge conjoined to the Entrance nimbly pass.
Which Noise her Self conceived, good Omen thought,
As Fortune there by gentle Hand had brought;
Did with his Plot like Patroness combine:
So (drawn most near) prepared for's Love-design.
'Twas she indeed; for, rus'ling Noise o'reheard
Through shaken Leaves, conjoined Hem had scared;
Thick Trees behind; no Men approaching there
(But one in the House) imploi'd Maidservants were.
Thus then (sad Virgin-thoughts) it seemed a Stranger,
Slunk into the Grove unmarked; some Lustful Ranger
Might naked view, watch closely at Door withal;
When she forsook the Fount surprise, enthral;
Door left unlocked by chance, remembered then:
She longed therefore till 'twas made fast again
So, hurled to the bank; Smock on, silk Petticoat,
Short upper Robe, fine Mantle near forgot,
To the entrance strait she ran, where (much more bold)
Might lock the Door, or Persons face behold:
But then hard Task increased CLERMANTHE'S doubt,
Door opening from the Green, Key left without.
While stepping forth, ORSAMNES bowing the knee
Almost to the ground, seized on immediately
That Door witheld, (when coy, strange Start she made:
Fear, wonder joined) thus Blazed his thoughts and said.
Orsamnes Courting Clermanthe.
Transcendent Star, which beauty's Queen do shine
( As of this Grove) whilst Each their Crowns resign
And bow to Thee, the Imperial excellence;
Pardon this Bolder Act, and leave dispense
That I may kiss your Hand: next Thanks declare
For my Repast; those Music- strains most Rare,
Like the Author 's self. CLERMANTHE then had grown
Much frighted, Scared, withal Disdainful shown,
But that she saw her Young Surprizer there
In The lowlyest way; small grounds for Rape appear:
Mild gentle Brow, well civillized Tongue;
That Silken Garb should to none Base belong:
For Person (last) excelled, Prime Male perfection;
Liked all, approved, tho free from Love-reflexion.
Thus, bashful Glance, still prone to Virgin-fear,
She joined reply: Pray Sir, withdraw, Forbear
That stop, Restraint; like Stranger to this Grove,
As unto Me; tho chance thus far to Rove
Through kept, well Guarded Gate: Kissing my Hand
Seems vain Desire; where Lonely grounds Command
Bad Thoughts may cause: Too formal Thanks expressed,
Such Music proved; my own Reserved Breast.
'Twas meant withal to Please. ORSAMNES then,
Joined humble Bow, this Answer framed ag'en.
Fairest, believe, nothing thought dangerous
Shall hence proceed, tho Door surprised thus;
I Will Honor boast, 'twas done from sober Mind;
Chaste like your Own, for virtuous Love inclined.
My Entrance (next) with Ranging Walk thus far
Excuse may plead, None there to stop, debar.
For the Music, Voice, if not given thanks to You,
I shall thank Fortune for it, Sight Lovely'st too.
Person conjoined; Both Praised, advanced howere.
Prime, dainty'st Blush, CLERMANTHE answered there.
Since then the First you Heard, the last Beheld;
This Grove surveyed withal (scarce paralelled)
Pray, Sir, withdraw; shown Civil way retire:
Your Self commended so. Sad harsh Desire,
ORSAMNES thought, those words by Her expressed
Departing Doom; breathed from so noble Breast,
With milder Terms soft Voice allayed, the more
His Heart through Love inflamed, Captived before.
He thus replied: Sweet'st Madam still conclude,
My Carriage shall be far from Wanton, Rude;
Unsoyled prove; your Favor sought from thence;
Still kept, observed those Bounds of Reverence:
And yet defer that late condemning Voice
Of leaving you so soon; thought Fairer Choice
Sentence of Death CLERMANTHE settled now,
More quiet thoughts, thus spoke with gentle brow
I cannot, Sir, yet charge You (I confess)
With any Act, the least Unworthyness:
But you must know I here live close, concealed,
Hid from the World (the cause not now revealed)
Mind (next) Contemplative; here, lastly do
But sojourn late, may be Observed with You:
Wanton Compliance thought: when roul'd about
Her full black Eyes (each choice resplendent Scout)
Before and on the sides tho partly Fear
Their Beams might them betray: Bird fluttering there,
Next, babbling Leaves oreheard, with wandering Blast.
ORSAMNES when; Be those Nice Thoughts orepast
(Madam) I pray, such jealous Clouds dispel;
Your Honor shall be vindicated well
By Me whatere: that Fault mine own be told;
And let me join short Lovers Suit, unfold.
It Is Love, I grant, tho may withal protest,
Conjugal Flames do warm this faithful Breast:
And if thought Crime to Love, what Heroes ( found
In choice Records) Offenders are renowned.
Heaven Love commends, Applauds, since cheerful This
The Creatures Joy, and Conservation is:
World's grand supporting prop, large Spheres infold
Each other there; Vines the Elm conjoined hold:
Bright Sun does court the Earth in smiling Rays,
Till that her Fruit and Flowery Brood displays;
As tho were meant for Amorous, designed
Examples both of Love to Human kind.
Your own Cheeks, Lips and Eyes such Charmers proving,
Chide powerful Those, but blame not Me for Loving.
Begged Kiss-salute; CLEMANTHE'S Cheeks display
Large blushing Tide, when heard that Rising way
From the hand to Lips; tho strait called back ag'en
Each crimsOn Stream, new Thoughts perplexed then,
As feared some Tramplers Noise (confirmed tho
Men came not there, Maids task'd at Home did show)
Sweet, wilder Glance; ORSAMNES joined withal
That strong persuasive Point (till then let fall
Orsamnes made known to Clermanthe.
Through Lover's Heat, and Courting part) that He
Was better Man in all regards than She
That time conceived; if thought no cheat orehold,
Nor forged device: did strait the same unfold:
Ere long by us, tho now reserved, expressed;
CLERMANTHE when (with Wondering Thoughts possessed)
Casting on him more serious Eyes, fixed there,
From Lilly-cheek'd did turn all Rose as 'twere:
Remembered well sh' had seen him once before,
At great Court-Masque, some two Years since, no more:
In the old King's days (his Father too beheld)
Informed 'twas He; thought Person choice, excelled,
Then but Nineteen: heard gallant Praise of him
That Time, more afterward, spread grand esteem.
Which view declared, her own Rank then and Name
She sober told withal. When heard the same,
ORSAMNES strait remembered with best power
He saw her too at Court, that Masquing hour:
Thought Grecian Star, inquired, was told 'twas She,
Then but Fifteen (her Father there did see)
Placed not far off: the old King soon after Died;
Great Change conjoynd, as shall be specified.
This told to her, Himself in thoughts surpised
Through that unlook'd-for Chance, much cordialliz'd
Since the Omen rare; he strait his former Suit
Repeated thus. I hope that Kiss-salute,
Sweet'st Madam, now your Servant may obtain,
High Favor thought: She silence showed again.
He therefore tastes with cheerful Gratitude
Those choice Preserves. ORSAMNES then pursued
His first Assault, throught stronger Flames did prove
More earnest Combatant in the field of Love.
Fairest of the Sex, so strange this Accident
May be conceived, that I should hope the Event
Might Happy prove, and you my blissful Choice
Ordained by Heaven, may your Confirming Voice,
By gentle Grant accomplish my Desire;
So Honored more what now I Love admire.
CLERMANTHE sweet with streaming Blush replied,
More pure than from the Morning's Cheek descried,
(Startled through Noise withal conceited so,
Servants at work) It strange indeed may show,
( Such things in the World) what consequence so'ere
The Attendant prove. Soon spoke, she paused there.
You may suppose, Love's Archer-boy this while
Close Ambush'd sat, with many a pleased Smile
Dimpling his Cheek, to see this amorous Duel,
Choice Lovers Scene; tho would not seem too cruel:
Brandished small Dart, then clapped his Hands, as tho
Had plainly said; Thus powerful proves our Bow,
If task'd too far, that little God was sorry.
And from CLERMANTHE now will raise his Glory.
Sweet, beauteous Maid she saw prime choice Affection, Clermanthe in Love.

Rare Man conjoined; nere meant for Coy rejection:
Love shining through most Lovely Person found,
Bright Virtue's Beams withal, more praised compound:
Words, Actions then proclaimed his Noble Breast;
Of equal Rank unto her Self confessed:
Cleared shortly All: Thus Love's warm, powerful Dart
Does kindly pierce the fair CLERMANTHE'S Heart.
ORSAMNES from those Suns her Eyes beheld
Sweet gentle Morn to break, fair Hopes revealed,
Made new Love-charge for Marriage-grant, assent,
Which should be Ingagement-like, with Joy, Content
Writ on his Heart: His Case because (as there
Most briefly told) long, Formal ways, whatever
Admitted not; open Address and known;
Thus craved her present Grant, that She Would alone
Meet strait without the Grove, on shaded ground;
Thence walk to large Dervan; close Lodging found.
She answered then; Her Case the same appeared;
Hid from the World, withdrawn, else Danger feared.
He urging more, CLERMANTHE sweet replied,
Such Noble worth could not be long Denied:
And since Necessity conjoined withal,
His Way approved, whatever Event befall.
ORSAMNES when to show his Grateful sense,
Kissed strait her Hand for that rare Confidence
In him reposed; desired with cheerful Brow
A Kiss for Seal, which she did Grant, allow.
Thus from her Hand he mounts to the Lips, from whence
Snatched Cordial food with sober violence;
Restoratives; as after that long Fast
Would eat, devour: took Second, Third Repast;
Short time that way improved; neglecting neither,
First Begged, then Kissed, kissed, begged as 'twere together:
Well shrouded so her Bashful Cheeks (uncloy'd)
By numb'ring more, till Ten for Seal enjoyed:
How could she cross, Deny? one might suppose
Her Lips Blushed too, since pressed so often by Those.
Stolen Flight resolved.
Both for the Main resolved thus howere,
For Ord'ring all they strait consulted there:
Choice Meeting ground, thick-shaded Rock designed,
Flight-shoot beyond the Grove, to either's mind:
Thence four miles Walk to the Burrough-Town which Place
Pastors less used; some Lonely House, tho base,
For Lodging got; sent Letter strait that Night
To Uncle of his in the Pastors Vale, to invite
His friendly help for close retreating Grange,
Like Sojourners, till Calm, more settled Change.
New Suitor feared.
For the Lady of the Grove, she might suppose
(Since Lines sent dangerous) some did Disclose,
CLERMANTHE inform She there discovered proved;
Might be Surpised, if fled not strait, Removed.
But if now told her Self, her Man or Maid
She Would send with Her, ORSAMNES found Betrayed.
This further Cause to the Sudden way (as 'twere)
That Speedy Course compelled, told briefly there.
That Lady of the Grove had Stout young Son, a Knight,
(Years twenty one) tho Lordly honor might
Claim for Estate: good Person, Parts enjoyed;
Much proud thereof; had Year and half employed
In Travel then. Come back to Thracian Land,
His Mother sent him by convenient Hand
A Scroul of Lines, in which her Pen expressed,
CLERMANTHE was so long there Lovely Guest:
Whom he had Viewed at that Court-masque before;
Now choicely improved grown for Beauty's store,
Both Body, Mind; as Daughter prized, Beloved:
This first She heard her Read (as Fortune proved)
In Garden-bow'r. An Answer from the Son,
Ere long was brought, Observed well, which don,
CLERMANTHE followed her to the selfsame Bower,
List'ned behind whilst all she Read that hour.
There heard her Self like Star advanced to the Sky
In his conceit, fond Amorous Thoughts most high,
As Love-inflam'd, Pearl, Gems (to the height commended)
Presents for her from the East, by him Intended:
Would fly with Wings of Love to's Native ground
Court her for Wife, that choice Advantage found:
And doubted not from's Horse there to alight
Next day at Noon. Thus then, more speedy Flight
So long deferred, 'twere strange to Steal away
His Men, Himself like scornful, squeamish Stray
Might follow Her, ORSAMNES so surprise;
Fixed on Revenge, no Sword to equallize:
Strong, Daring proved, at Nineteen years, no more,
Had Two Disarmed in Field, proud Conqueror.
ORSAMNES joins, He scorned his Rage, although
Used but short Poyniard's help with Shafts and Bow;
Yet must Advance her Goodness prime, howere,
More Quiet gift her Self's Possession there.
Orsam. leaves the Grove.
Thus, Things resolved, taking then brief Farewell;
He chose that Way which (thought) might best Conceal
To the guarded Gate; Wicket still open found;
That Porter fast through Drunken Slumber bound.
Good fair Excuse to curb howere, oresaw
Since Absent so, clear, friendly Entrance saw:
Tho 'twas Resolved by Them (perchance Descried)
That He should walk about the Grove's right side
(Half-part thereof) She turn Contrary way,
Lest (bad Conceit) that Fellow might betray:
So, marched to the shaded Rock, where, shrouded well,
For's best Beloved stood Amorous Sentinel.
Clermanthe folows.
CLERMANTHE strait stepped back to the Foutain-grot,
Where (tho her Lute Discharged) not prove forgot
Hood, Fan, nor ribbon'd Gloves through nimble Speed;
Much less small Jewel-box, Rare chance indeed;
Brought down that Noon, where Pearl of dainty'st kind,
Necklace thereof, strung on the Bank, designed.
So spirits roused, Face veyl'd like Skies o'recast,
She smoothly trod through branched Shades at last
To the mentioned Gate, where Wicket found but closed;
Else had she knocked as for the Fields disposed.
Thence ( Glancing round with flaming Eyes, less fear)
Through bord'ring Clump of Palms, well shrouded there,
She crossed Flight-shoot to the Rock, conjoined shade;
Where dampt Noonday, small ^^^inkling Dawn displayed.
Being entered there, ORSAMNES (joyful man)
Given kindest Kiss, Embrace, thus spoke, began.
Welcome most Fair to this reserved Cell,
Love's friendly Bower; where no Though shall Rebel
Against your Chaste Command, like Temple deemed
You being here: This Favor ( choice-esteem'd)
Your Servant shown was nere by the Sex outvy'd;
Prime confidence. CLERMANTHE Blushd replied.
Your Love Desert conjoined outweigh'd thus far
My strict Resolves, Both termed singular;
Of equal height; well Conquered me, oresway'd,
ORSAMNES then; Dear, sweetest Madam, (said)
Your Goodness pleased ( Transcendent that withal)
To prize them so, which like Sun- beams did fall
On doubtful Heart. This spoke, but short Demur,
Choice Kisses only there obtained from her
(Now Free, Themselves) those thought prime Bait Repast
For's voyage then to great Dervan at last:
'Twas four miles Walk; with Quiver armed and Bow
Poyniard by the side for's precious Charge did show.
Thus on the walked through that small Shade combined,
Which Screen-like covered them from Ground behind.
The Sun did then drive down his Western Road,
Noon past some hours; with blazing Chariot showed
Like Prince of Day as large Evening-stage behind:
Whilst the Azure skies smiled on their Walk designed.
Scarce half a Mile they measured over, when heard
Loud-sounding Voice; CLERMANTHE partly scared,
As Porter from the Grove, but branched Fence
Standing between, they hearkened both from thence:
When spoke again, conjoined from Rocks above
Vanlor and the Echo.
Shrill Echoes Noise. No; No (said there) Mad Love
Best fits thy Name, here then sit down, Bemoan ye:
Ay me! Each. Aim! Hark, there is DIONE: Each. DIONE;
It Is she. Each. It Is she. My joy, Contents the more;
O do still think on thy Vanlor. Each. Vanlor:
Indeed. Each. Indeed. It sounds like pleasing Ditty;
Say It once again, do truly Pity? Each. Pity.
Dearest Dear. Each. Dear. Thus then my Heart renew Love;
DIONE's kind, and proves thy True-Love. Each. True-Love.
False never. Each. Never. Cease then to Importune;
Her Breast pertakes in thy hard Fortune. Each. Fortune.
Sighs, Groans. Each. Sighs, Groans. O soft and gentlest-hearted,
Day dismal 'twas these Hands thus parted. Each. parted.
Accursed. Each. Accursed. What friend did speak, unfold it;
That I was here? Winds surely told it. Each. told it.
'Twas strange. Each. 'Twas strange. Stay Nymph, and do not pass me,
DIONE sweet, but first Embrace me, Each. Embrace me.
IN the Ghostly Shades. Each. Shades. Where not storm shall sever,
But we shall Love intwin'd for ever. Each. Ever.
I come then. Each. Come then.
This Party by those Names forementioned
ORSAMNES knew; 'Twas handsome Youth, well bred,
Of birth Gentile; dwelt near their Pastors Plain
And called VANLOR: amongst the Beauteous Train
His Choice DIONE fair, was ranked, allowed,
Who being Wore, long Friends debate like Clowd
Dispelled at last; that Afternoon before
Their Marriage-day, when Love's Conjugal store
He thought to enjoy (as Bedfellow surmis'd)
By burning Feaver's Rape was seized, surpised.
Bad Rival thus consumed that gallant Frame,
To feed that Fire, unquench'd the Lover's flame;
Dead in few Days: when, Grief o'recharg'd his Mind,
(Strange Fever there) to Frenzy grown: confined
By's Mother ought Enraged strait did prove;
Would Range abroad, since hoped to Grasp his Love
Midst fields and Shades; used sad Complaint, where found
Kind Echo's answering Noise, upon that Ground
He Would Parley, stand; sick Fancy pleasing so;
Till, Lost through Rambling Mood, most Dumpish grow,
Mute many hours: might sad Example be
Of world-bred Change and frail Humanity.
Whom there they left to seek the uncertain Cell
Of's Ayr-born Love; compassionate Farewell.
Thus on they Walked, till near three Miles of the four,
Main Task dispatched; when chanced to traverse over
Smooth Velvet Plain, with Flowers adorned to the eye
Like Summer- Gems, large River gliding by,
Which through the midst in various Wanton Maze
Sported it self; whilst Trees their Plumed grace
Joined from the Bank; Sun-fans or Screens (as 'twere)
To the Pearl-cheek'd dancing Nymph resembling there.
Orsamnes and Clermanthe surpised.
Close by that Stream their Journey lay, delight,
When thundering Noise ere long, did partly affright
Of Horses hoofs, beheld Six Armed Men
(Some distance off) Loud throats conjoined then,
Much bawling heard: Those, Those are they, They said,
Quick, Seize 'em both. O Heavens! we are Betrayed;
CLERMANTHE strait; This seems some foul Design.
Madam (said He) if Rogues they prove, Combine
To Rob, enthral, I may some while Defend
Till Rescue chance. For that Surprising end
Approaching near; ORSAMNES with bent Bow
(Back turned to Her) cried stand; your Business show;
Or he that first Assaults does meet his Death.
When staring round, with wild, confused breath
O Fates, (they cried) This proves not He, past doubt,
Nor is that She. Like stange mistaken Rout;
Held on withal their former rambling Quest:
Much cheered, revived FERNANTHE'S drooping Breast.
The Cause was thus: Not full two Hours before,
A handsome Sharking Youth, fine-cloath'd (no more)
Had stolen young Girl, which wealthy Portion claym'd,
From crabbed Guardian, TORQUARES named;
Whose Daughter Bride that day, great Celebration:
This Youth to dinner came, Intruding fashion,
With certain Friend; Danced with that Golden Lass;
Found Courting pause sometimes, no Heart of brass,
Softened, orecame: yet once before beheld;
Wooed then by Looks, now the Hand and Tongue revealed
Love's powerful Charms. She sitting by as tired,
Whilst others Danced, slunk forth to Grove (desired)
He followed strait, as Prize conveyed from thence.
These Horsemen strait pursued, lest for Defense
Should Marriage plead: informed, they crossed this plain,
For Stature, Garb much like those Two (in vain)
ORSAMNES and FERNANTHE thought; howere,
Fast tied, conjoined in Wedlock-bonds they were.
The Storm orepast, those Banks they traversed so
Under green Arched Bower (Trees ordered Row
By the wandering Stream) with more delight, contented;
Birds from each Branch their Songs to May presented.
Next, crossed the Plain, where blazing Sun forth shined;
Too Hot FERNANTHE thought, no gentler Wind:
Large Wood did stand close-rang'd of the other side,
By which their way, whence marching out descried
A Man and Horse; small Paniers bare the same,
As tho not far from private Lodge they came.
Reaching that Path, they suddenly beheld
Armed Troop of Horse, warlike, before concealed;
(Which turning down from the end of Wood appear)
Marched toward them: CLERMANTHE strait through Fear,
New doubtful Thoughts retired within the Shade,
Pulled back ORSAMNES too, did then persuade
They might withdraw within that Path, Retreat
(Since winding showed) till marched by that great,
Offensive Troop; still found disturbed Breast,
Feared sad Events. ORSAMNES strait expressed,
Her Motion not displeased, but did Conjure,
Presaging Less, she would prove more Calm, secure.
Somewhat withdrawn, beheld not far below
High wall and Door, that shrouded Lodge might show
Whence the Horseman came which they did late descry:
Through longer Walk CLERMANTHE when grown Dry,
Much Heat withal, some cooling Drink desired;
Mile yet remained, small Time howere required.
Thus, down they went, knocked, open proved the Door;
Viewed, pleasant Place, which draws them on far more.
Large Green there was, Part finely Shaded found,
Part Open left; well ordered, handsome Ground:
High-wall'd about, to the Gazer seemed express
Cheerful Reserve, more Solemn Pleasantness:
Showed fitted for Grave Philosophic mind
For contemplations cause Retreat designed:
Art tired (as 'twere) with curious Courtly way,
And wearied grown, thought here a while to Play.
Hereafter more: in the Nook beyond the Green, The Hermitage

Large Hermit's Cell (yet like to Bower) was seen.
Approaching near 'twas formed all, cut out
From Natural Rock, seemed Thunder-proof about,
Thick Iron Door, the Walls with Vines orespread;
Spruce, civil Wildness showed, discovered.
Its pleasant Front proclaimed, the Dweller there
Had thought to steal some Comfort, Joy (as 'twere)
From the open World and Grief withal; would show
Translated Man, the Elyzian Fields below
This Ground conceived; till ( Mortal part laid by)
True Ghost become, would fold his Arms and Die.
No Person there they saw, yet all found Neat;
Furnished tho plain, as served for Retreat
Some Master still: Stools, Table, Chair and Bed
Trunk, Linnen-Chest, Hourglass, well ordered:
Bright Sword of the Wall, whereto did Belt belong;
Vessels of Earth, for Books convenient Throng.
Large Cupbaord too, where Cheese and Butter store,
Bak'd-meat conjoined which for Half-week, or more,
Would the Host content; brought newly in, there laid
By the Countryman forenam'd, still so conveyed
Twice every Week, Dervan from thence a Mile
Beer (last) there was, Strong waters; tho some while,
His Taste was pleased with Pure adjoined Fount;
Of Natur's Wandering Cellar made account.
Soon looking forth, Glance cast, from Corner there
( Garden of Herbs, beyond) did strait appear
Lusty, ancient Man, then Fifty years might show;
Mean, plainer Garb, joined comely Persontho;
Naught Dazzled when their Finer Ones beheld,
As if had seen what far (in Youth) Excelled.
Salute discharged, ORSAMNES said, They were
Two Strangers come from Corinth lately there;
For Delphos next, kind Uncle where survived,
(Rich, wealthy man) of golden Coin deprived,
And Horses both by Thievs, Six Miles from thence:
Should now Retreat to the worthy Friend, from whence
They came that Morn, for courteous Aid, Supply:
The Lady, through Hot, toilsom Walk grown Dry,
Would gladly Taste of his Refreshing Beer.
The Hermit conjoined, You both are Welcome here;
Some Noble Rank proclaim; my Mother proved
Corinthian born, my self long Travel loved
And now may Honored seem through that Request,
So fair a Lady found my Drinking Guest.
Led strait the Way, whilst Each to Muse began;
As tho mistook this Plain-cloath'd Hermit-man.
Both entering next, there sitting down, He draws
Fresh, milder Beer which Heat dispelled, the Cause
Of droughty Thirst; retired then to Chair,
Set Countenance, as something would Declare
Which marked by Them, FERNANTHE gave close Sign
They yet should Stay, with his Discourse combine.
ORSAMNES asking him, How long did Dwell,
So Hermit-like, in that Reserved Cell.
The Hermit 's Story.
He thus replied: Know I have Traveled far,
Viewed much of the World conjoined large Sorrows share:
This proved the cause, I nobly am Descended,
And born to Prime Estate, had Stars befriended;
TIMONDES called; My Father of chief Repute;
But Uncle vile ( Degenerate like Brute)
DORSENGAR named, Court- Servant them Designed
To this King 's Grandfather, of sordid Mind;
Most Covetous; through Malice too the rather,
By Forged Witness brought, did Brand my Father
OF the Bastard- Brood, his Mother termed a Whore;
Seized all the Land: Gems, Gold (convenient store)
Small Farm my Sire reserved, which left to Me:
Soon after Died. Thus fallen to mean Degree,
My Nursing Soil conceived Disast'rous Ground,
I Traveled strait, through Change Contentment found
Did rove this Earthly Maze, like Winds Comrade
Sun 's Fellow-traveller; large Part survay'd:
Both Southern Heats and Northern Frosts endured;
Till thoughts for Home, Arcadian Grave allured;
Best Bed at last, so trod my Native Shore;
Purchased this Ground, still kept good useful store.
Resolved to spend my wearied Age Retired,
And Contemplate, Life's Active term inspired:
EUPHORBUS called. Sol 's comfortable Beams
Here full Six Summers shared; for cold Extremes,
My Winter- Grange stands at Dervan, so nigh;
Kept by that Clown which brings me Food- supply;
Small, meaner Form, Reserved too like This.
Good Friend howere not Harsh, Distastful is
I well can Read and Walk, may Study now
Patience, content, although with older brow.
ORSAMNES, whispering her, did say, That Name
Himself had heard, Misfortune both by Fame.
Strait giving Thanks for their Repast does end
With hasty Leave; still Five miles to their Friend.
That longer Walk? Five Miles? said He again;
Will you so far that Beauteous Charge orestrain?
Adventure both? since now does Later prove;
Robbed next of Clothes, and Her perchance, your Love
This Honor ( pray) conjoyn, small Supper take,
Then homely Bed; clean Sheets you shall not lack.
For She your Spouse appears: My self shall rest
In that old Chair; it is Rational Request.
My Wife, I grant, ORSAMNES strait replied;
But for one Month her self to Chastness tied
By Solemn Vow. TIMONDES said again;
If such Conjugal League, you boldly then
May lie down on the Clothes, next Noon depart.
CLERMANTHE still bare sad-presaging Heart
Against Dervan, new Damp-like thoughts arose;
Thus, jog'd ORSAMNES strait, that he should Close,
Accept the Terms: Who well was pleased, the rather,
Since seemed to Both like Noble-minded Father:
These words returned: Grave Sir, Orsam. Clerman. lodged in th Hermitage.
I shall embrace
Your Offer for my part ( such being the Case)
As Friendly, wise, if She Will conform, Allow.
CLERMANTHE strait replied with smoother Brow;
I join assent; but for clean Sheets (She said)
None shall be used; best way for Bashful Maid
To lie down Clothed: nor fear of Cold this time,
Since Night unto May- day; warm Grecian Clime.
Both took their Seats, reposed; Their Landlord then,
If this Night please (said) try the Next again.
I Am half Corinthian blood ( as first did show)
My Mothers Country- folks more Welcome so.
Conjoined withal, It Is strange with me to leave
My utmost Door unlocked thus long, receave
This for the Cause; Man late Departed hence
That brings my Food: Dervan yields store from thence.
So walked forth; Now safe Reserved they be;
ORSAMNES strait CLERMANTHE grasped, more free.
( Kisses conjoined) Did pray, She would compose
Her troubled Thoughts; calm, cheerful Looks disclose.
Found safe Retreat whilst in that Rocky Bower
The Host Noble, kind, till longer Journey's hour.
The Hermit returned; after exchanging there
Some pleasing Talk with them (more free from Fear)
With joined Content; to show them was disposed
Small Garden- Plot behind the Cell, enclosed:
Fresh Arbor there, where set down (as desired)
He left them Both that Private way, retired
(Young loving Pair, sad late Misfortune past)
To cheer, refresh themselves (while pleased) at last.
ORSAMNES strait welcomed CLERMANTHE now
In kindest way, each showing cheerful Brow.
That Branched Place the Grove by far excelled,
Since Free withdrawn no fear by Scouts beheld.
Their Stories then, Time, Place fit for to related;
Small Parcel touched in the Grove communicated:
ORSAMNES first began, that her Request;
His briefly told, by us more large expressed.
The Story of ORSAMNES.
His Father was a Prince, of great Estate, The Prince Orontes.

High Parts conjoined; withal unfortunate:
Might Kingdom claim; whose Grandfather did wear
Thessalian Crown, but, lost through Conquest there.
Fled to this Realm; to the King by Match allied.
Stout, gallant Spirit this Prince enjoyed beside;
Not Rash howere; Commander's Heart and Brain:
Frank, bounteous Hand, beloved by Vulgar Train
Grand State Affairs could manage, bear as well
As Titles weight; in Nobler Points excel.
Much Traveled had, then sought at Home Repose
(Now Forty four) prime Person joined to those;
Orontes called. By the former King was deemed
His Realm's defense, choice Guardian esteemed;
And so with other Offices (where gained
Much Honor, wealth) Lord General ordained.
For the Active part, did thrice overcome, defeat
Laconians strength (proud Borderers) tho great,
In dreadful War. Third Battle fought, howere,
ORSAMNES Deeds proved Memorable there;
Nineteen for Age, yet had so much of Man.
Joined Soldier both, to lead their Army's Van:
Did prime Exploit, when through fresh Troops supply
The Foe rushed boldly on, Shout raised to the Sky,
His falling back, Himself environed then
(Some Captains more) fought against a Crowd of men,
That courage, Valor shown; cut forth a Way
For safe Retreat, strait Rallied all that day,
Charged, routed them; the Prince main Body led;
Took Banners store, the ground with Slaughter spread:
This Younger Act ORSAMNES Fame increased,
Two years ago; when that old King Deceased.
Orontes disgraced.
Thus shined the Prince like glorious Constellation
For Fifteen Years, till dark Eclips, privation
By this young King the unworthy Son, at last;
Oreclouded strait with Divorce more disgraced:
Minions advanced like Stars about the Throne,
Which errors daubed, his Vice could fawn upon;
Did Meteors prove, with feigned Beams appear;
Whereas the Prince still truly blazed there
To the Grecian World. The Story, fortunes thus
Of's Grandfather shall be declared by us.
Thessalies King he proved, Thessalian King's Story.
an old Greek Nation,
ACHILLES Soil, of famous Celebration;
Chief Town Larissa there whose Borders be
By the Corinth-Sea disjoined from Arcadie
Was Brother's Son to the former King, no more
Then Daughter left, by Law Debarred therefore;
No Women there to Reign; Bergonda named;
With haughty Breast, was Handsome too proclaimed.
He seized thus the Crown, of Noble Mind
And Parts Himself, with graceful Form combined.
Some half years Reign orepast, Important Reason,
Friends too conjoined (disposed well that Season)
To move that Princess for his Wife incited;
Thought Safe, secure their Persons so united.
But such the Chance, she then contracted proved
To one of the greatest Lords, by her Beloved:
Wherefore she would not break those former Vows,
Nor change her Choice; soon after did Espouse.
He scarce had Reigned whole Year, when thus the Event:
That Lord grown Strong for Party eminent
To the Neighbor- King of Macedon Allied;
His Wife great Spirit too conjoined with Pride;
Ambitious Both; her Father, (last) the old King
Much Loved, esteemed, thence more encouraging;
They showed their Aim to usurp the Crown, Design:
Which soon perceived, (nor Grateful to Resign)
The King prepared to Oppose withal Prevent:
But this advanced their Treasonous thoughts, intent,
They found at Councel-board a Traytor-friend;
And Second near his Person did Attend.
Such proves great Princes Fate sometimes; Those told
His Secrets often, State-Cabinet controlled;
By which grand loss though Ambush-Plots devised:
Strong Towns and Forts by sleights Betrayed, surpised:
Much sunk and weakened so: It came ere long
From Skirmishes to Battles Armed throng,
That Game of Blood: where sent him no supply
The Arcadian King, tho Friendly, near Ally;
Wars with Laconia then; whilst the other aided
From Macedon. But ere that time, persuaded,
Doubts of the Event, huge, massy Sum (unknown
To the Traitors there) he sent by Night alone
To 's trusty Friend near Corinth-Sea, that Shore,
Where ready Bark for swift Transport before.
Battles fought.
Both Armies joined, much doubtful Conquest there;
Whilst Fortune with uncertain Wings (as 'twere)
Hovered aloft: Till Party of the Lord's of restrong,
Forced Squadron of the King's Horse upon the Throng
Of their own Foot; much Broke, Disordered so:
Reserve of the King's beside (for greater blow)
Joined to the Lord: down rould the stream withal
Like Floods by the Wind: more sad; their General
(Brave, valiant Man) fighting amongst the Crowd
Was slain in the Back; by whom (as under Cloud)
None could Affirm: by's Own conceived Betrayed:
When Total Rout, next, Flight ensued Dismayed.
The King fled.
The King (not far) being soon Informed, took Flight,
Reached with some Few that faithful Friend by Night;
His Mass of Gold embarked (with his Treasure free)
Crossed over that narrow Sea to Arcadie.
There purchased great Estate, help Kingly Style;
Made also Arcadian Duke, in shorter while
Young Lady chose, his Son called Prince; as now
To the Grandchild that (ORONTES there) Allow;
ORSAMNES Duke. The Arcadian King that time
MISENI ruled, with all that Western Clime
To the Adrian Main; the Isles Samos, Ithaca;
On South rich Isle of Rhodes. Laconia
Made Argos then (to the Corinth-bounds) obey;
The Isls over against it in the Aegean Sea.
For Close of all: That Counselor of State,
Vile, treacherous, was by false Wife (just Fate)
Betrayed Himself; who to Appaise Desire
In second Spouse, did Villain fee, Conspire
To Murder him: Stripped then and seized his Gold,
'Twas thought by Thievs: Chance soon did all unfold.
That Rogue, ere long, was Hanged for's Robbing trade;
Confessed this Fact at Death, plain, open laid
By each chief Circumstance; a Note her Hand
And Seal produced, which did with Murder brand.
So lost her Head, that Trayt'rous Courtier there,
Till from his Horse, when Scull did broke appear:
To the Prince again: Orsamnes Story again.
Hence 'twas his Noble Heart
Chief Wound received, from Wif's conjoined Part
CLARENZA called; much Good proclaimed, as Fair;
Whose Rape believed and Death, we shall declare;
Year and Month past, then Thirty five, no more;
Tho May was done, June's gallant form she wore:
Strange manner too thereof, Disast'rous fashion
To the Loss conceived most Dreadful aggravation.
Thus proved the Chance: Being with her Retired
To Country House, far off, by Both desired.
(Near April's) month, which then showed Spring-like Dress)
For calm Repose since Court-bred Heaviness;
Fine, neat Park-lodg, choice Place for recreation,
Deer, stored Ponds, strange Beasts and Fowl, Plantation
From diverse Shores; the Senses Summer- Bower:
To Range well pleased for Prospect-cause one hour;
Nature's chief Picture-draught, Hills, Dales combined,
Groves Crystal Streams, the Eyes wandering Maze designed:
They traversed from their Gardens Postern-dore
In sudden way (small Dog for train, on more)
To the joining Park, through that beyond the Fence,
To planted gloomy Walk, few yards from thence;
Soft Gale whist gently Breathed as thought, Unseen.
When Coach, six horses wheeled along the Green
Behind their Backs, from Shades that bordered there;
Came up to them, Six Armed Men did bear.
Which strait Leaped down like Thunderbolts to ground;
Four with drawn Swords (since no Defendants found)
Orontes Assayl'd.
Aslayl'd the Prince; whose nimble Poyniard warded
Some Fatal thrusts, his Back with Elm close guarded
Some Deep received, such Courage, Valor shown,
Skill, strength conjoined (short Weapons aid alone)
'Twas wonderful: Help! called with strained Breath:
CLARENZA'S Fortune thought like second Death.
Their Chief at first (nor Stranger proved) thus Crying,
Now, Villian, pay the old Mortal Score; the art Dying.
Wide seemed his Wounds, large Doors resembled there
For Life's sad Marching forth, whose Colors were
Clarenza seized.
In Blood displayed, CLARENZA her Self (Forlorn,
Mouth stopped with Glove) by the other Two was born,
With dismal Eyes her Lord beheld, as tho
Would Toss like Balls for last love tokens so
To their Coach-Den: which by the Comrades espied,
They followed strait, least Danger chanced, Descried.
Down fell the Prince; Those joyful Galloped on:
Soon after made that Mentioned Walk to groan
Loud Woman's Voice and Page, Two Keepers came;
Sad mournful View. Strange Cry conjoined they frame
Wild, straggling Girl, she called to the Lady round,
No Answer heard but Tongues Redoubled Sound
(False Echoed Noise, complaint) which pierced her Ear.
Both Beepers strait did raise with Sorrow there,
To the Lodge transfer Corps-like their Dying Lord;
Whose Soul and Body's joined League, accord
Best care preserves, till Surgeon prime attended.
Some Horsemen scoured the Plain, those Hills ascended
Woods, Rocks withal seemed pleased to Chant from far
CLARENZA'S sounded Name, tho senceless are:
Gone now She proved. Thus, Parties Feigned still
To the weak, Orewhelmed Prince that she was Ill;
Through Fright small Fever caused safe-harbour'd tho;
Inquired his Health: Forged Letters (lastly) show
Confirming way; by the Woman made, whose Pen
Her Lady's Hand well counterfeited then.
Got hopeful Strength in time through powerful Art
Disturbed tho for Brain, much Gauled Heart.
Through Wifes grand Loss, since say their Coined Delusion;
Still more Delays, he formed Sad Conclusion
That she was Dead; and as conceived by Day
Such Nightly Dreams would Fancy draw, portray;
New Act those dreadful Thoughts, so strong, that He,
'Twas Truth, affirmed, like Waking Sense and free.
Slumbering one Night (tho not obser'd) in Bed, Orontes's Dream.

When full-fac'd Moon with fainter Beams bespread
His chamber-walls; near Twelve, that Solemn Hour
Curtains left open wide, large Gazing power
Before him strait (as was conceited) stands
CLARENZA'S perfect Shape those very Hands
Cheeks, Lips, and Eyes (such Clothes conjoined) beheld;
Transformed far from That which late Excelled.
Striking her Breast, where mortal Wounds appear,
She sadly Points to the Crimson Fountains there,
Torn Garments, Blood. When Furious grown, and wild,
He reached to Grasp; Waked thereupon, Beguiled.
Sounds loud her Name, tho called to the fleeting Air;
Confirmed Thoughts that should her Ghost declare,
CLARENZA'S Shade: through Noise came Tumbling then,
Like Goblins too, the Roused, disturbed Men.
Thus know the Ground of that sad Chance, Gordanus the Surprisor.
Event:
Chief Villain there once passed for Eminent;
Was Earl for rank, Estate; same time beside
Did Move to enjoy CLARENZA for his Bride:
GORDANUS called; but lodged unworthy Soul,
Mean parts, Debauched; whom Vice did sway, control:
Nor Handsome Form, bad Choice conceived, unwise;
Grand Quarrel too, ere lost that Beauteous Prize,
Between him and the Prince; Thus Both he hates
To the utmost prayed for Vengeance from the Fates.
This melted Lord, consumed through Riot now,
Had brought along ( Sold all to the Cart and Plough)
Some Golden Cash, large Regiment's command
Procured by chance in Creet, that Foreign Land,
Now Candie called: those Five Comrades (base Men)
Owed like Himself, lived much by Cheats as then.
Tho some years past Lower Officers they were
Under the Prince, till He discharged them there
( Lord General) did for bad Crimes remove,
Whence loathed to Death. Now under this they prove,
Grand Coronel should march Laconian way
To their Seaport, which Realm conjoined lay.
Thus, prancing on Quarter of Mile below,
Humor to see that dainty'st Lodge, bestow
Some Cursing Coin their last Farewel's expense,
They rod to the pale, prospective View, from thence.
So, driving forwards near that Pale, Concealed,
Through clump of Trees, none from the Park beheld;
They saw the Prince and Princess walking there,
Both glancing back: beyond Park-gate, howere;
Prime, Single Ods no Sword, through last Disgrace
More bold by far; their Lodge remoter place;
Nor used that Way beneath, they soon contrive
Foul Stratagem, to Both Storm-like did drive:
Left him for Dead (they thought) Seized her by Power,
Mouth stopped with her own Gloves, that dreadful Hour.
So carried strait along in the Coach's end,
Arms held by two, whilst Cloak did Mufler lend
(Nor heard, nor seen) beyond Arcadia's bound
In shorter time; more pleased Laconian ground.
Wood, Rock conjoined they chose, for Savage Heart
Fit Scaffold, Stage conceived; where (foremost part)
Revenge began: that grim GORDANUS sought
To Ravish her, the Hands firmly tied when brought
Now She should prove his Paultry Whore at least,
Tho not his Wife: in vaunting way expressed.
Not far from the Act, when almost Wandering flies
Her grieved Soul in Sighing Gale to Skies;
Loud Huntsmen scared them there, approached that Shade:
Death was resolved; lest Blood or Corpse betrayed,
Found quickly out, nor Strangling time perchance
(Too gentle Doom) ere Dogs and Men advance;
Confirmed thoughts that Rock would batter well
(Near side thereof) securely Breath expel;
Dark Trees below; her Body's dainty'st Frame,
Clarenza thrown down a Rock.
Like noisome Trash, was hurled down the same.
Good Friends still sought to please, persuade howere
That she might prove Unharm'd, Restored there.
That Lordly Rogue, Comrades this Vengeance found,
Passing by Sea (large sops for Whales) were drowned.
Conjoined to these, sad last Affliction proved,
His only Daughter, beauteous Pearl, beloved,
(Seventeen for age) of the choice Transcendent kind;
FONTANA called, much Goodness too combined;
Soon lodged in mournful Vault amongst the Dead;
At Mantinea then, where Sojourned
With Countess-Aunt; which He by chance orehead
After that Dream, so long thereof Debarred.
Through Sorrow's weight oreburthen'd now, oppressed,
He lived withdrawn; Reserved, pensive Breast:
Yielding too far (unwares) to rising Passion,
Strong Fancy's power, which in great Grief vexation
Do Lord it often like Tyrants over the Mind;
Joined Custom's aid, leave strange Effects behind:
Bad Fogs produce in clearer Reason's sky:
Lost Blood withal (till Spirits fresh supply)
More wrong to the Brain and Heart sad Spleen diseased;
Much heightened too, since Physick-course displeased.
Then 'twas hard Task to curb those Thoughts, suppress;
That Lodge was loathed where caused so great Distress.
Too near to the Court, large Mantinea found
Chief Country House; Third on that City's ground.
Musing upon some Gentler Place he chose
Their Pastor-soyl's Convenient Repose
Orontes turned a Pastor.
New Clime, as 'twere, to the Court-bred Pomp contrary:
Pleased Thoughts withal, that might some Braveness carry;
Show Scorn, contempt thereof; tho Pastors then
(As first we Said) not counted were Base men;
But owned the Sheep, like Grasiers now, more free:
Far Noised the Pipes and Flocks of Arcadie.
Thus, Fixed, resolved; nor strange to onserve Extremes
Lodged in one Breast; like Sun's declined beams
Withdrawn to the lower World, from State he falls,
Transcendent height to Pastors meaner walls:
Large, gorgeous Pomp (best pleased with Those) forsook;
Green Fields, conjoined Shades, and wandering Brook:
Most harmless Life, Contentful thought, as Plain;
Took handsome Grange amongst the Pastor-train.
Fed Flocks withal; nor must his only Son,
Styled Duke by birth, the brave ORSAMNES shun
That Farm's retreat Arcadiaes glory tho
(Then, Twenty's age) for gallant Parts might show;
Best Warlike Grounds conjoined; tho men may now
Choicely improved ( age Twenty one) allow:
Since gave Himself to Study, Contemplation;
Philosophy; Great horse for recreation:
Thus long performed that Duteous Task beside,
Still with his Father's Solemn Way complied;
As then whole Year. Four Gentile Pastors.
Same Pastor's life embraced
Four of the Gentry's Rank, thrown down, Disgraced
(As was the Prince) by that unworthy King;
Men of Desert, conjoined in suffering
As Friendship late: kind former League expressed;
Some under him great Offices possessed;
Strong Ground although to the Prince shown high Regard
Till times might Change. Near Farms by chance prepared;
Two Widdowers, with Sons, conjoined in One;
Two more Wives, Daughters had, took Farms alone.
Both whom the Prince, Wives, Daughters so Esteemed,
That He with Lord ORSAMNES urgent seemed,
To join High Blood with Theirs, and choose for Bride
One of the Two Girls; should (lastly) in the Grange reside:
PHILAURA the one, MERDONE the other named, Two Gentile Shepherdesses.

Much Handsome Both for Person, Parts proclaimed;
Whilst seemed to the Prince most Rare, unparalled:
Did so conceive ORSAMNES scarce compelled,
Since Prime the Choice, might Grant, comply from thence;
Tho Both did fail to please his curious Sense:
Nor proved withal to Marriage-thoughts inclined,
Or Pastor's Grange. The Prince (through clouded Mind
Disturbed before) for last Half-year, that Part,
(Since seemed Withdraw) made Sad ORSAMNES Heart.
This briefly Told, wherein did Sympathize
FERNANTHE'S Looks and Heart, with Sun-like Eyes
Breaking, as 'twere through Cloud, these Words expressed:
Your Story heard, my Lord, does manifest
Sad, Strange Events; much noble Virtue found
In bearing all, with Wreath Triumphant crowned.
Madam, ORSAMNES said, like darkened Sky
My Mind appeared, but through your Beams supply
Much Cheared proves: those Winter- Fogs dispel'd,
Fresh-blossom'd Spring of Joys ( as 'twere) beheld:
Conjoined withal, one Kiss from her Desired
To cheer his Thoughts, with that late Task o'retir'd.
FERNANTHE then in brief her Story told
ORSAMNES there, which we shall largely unfold.
Sad Fortunes past; for Words, so choicely laying
Unkindness to her Stars, bright Looks displaying
Conjoined that while, that mournful Sounds might show
Tuned thence to Sweet, and Sorrow Lovely grow.
The Story of CLERMANTHE.
Her Father was a Duke, The Duke her Father.
by splendid Birth
And Fortune great, since Lord of spacious Earth:
Proved Her withal to Cyprus Crown (which we
Shall yet Reserve) for Parts past mean degree:
Life temperate till Thirty's Age out-worn,
Did for Ten years the Marriage Bed adorn:
Was Noble-minded thought, as nobly Trained;
Soon afterward to Private Lust enchaind.
Nor that so Stolen, as unsuspected neither,
Whence altered seemed, more Weak; like dancing Feather
Ruled and o'repowr'd by wanton Female's Blast:
Did Charmed appear, Transported so at last:
Who Crossed him ought that way might Thunder move,
Deep Hatred raise from strongest former Love;
VERDORUS called. Her Mother was the Niece
To the great Corinthian Queen, might challenge Greece
So Good and fair, Gems seldom found in One;
Fit Mother for CLERMANTHE'S Self alone.
EUGENE named; whose Beauty's wronged in part
By Ten years time, The Dukt's Concubine.
tho flourished well (his Heart
Disposed withal for Change) VERDORUS kept
Loved Concubine, which Meals did take and Slept
Under's own Roof; by Match far off Allied;
GONDACE called, for Wanton way complied:
The House-Governess, if so mean-stiled be,
(Placed at same Board) EUGENE'S Deputy.
Choice, handsome Form she had, but Foul within
As that showed Lovely, Fair; Wise for all Sin,
Bad thoughts, Exploits, for Deadly Practice too;
Where Spite Ambition's cause could Murder do;
Prime Boldness, Garb; Enchantment- Spells (as 'twere)
Her Looks displayed, joined Graceful Carriage there:
Ingenious, last; Smooth-tongu'd with Haughty Spirit,
Could Goodness Feign, to void of Virtuous merit.
This Minion, Pearl, afraid Wife's dear Relation,
Desert conjoined, with powerful, Friends persuasion.
Might cause her Self to be Discharged; Estrange
Her great, Fond Paramour; most loathsome Change;
Plump Fortune shrunk to Want, High Dreams beside,
What Glory, Wealth if she could prove his Bride;
Wife to the Duke: or Govern all howere
In Wifely Room, were not EUGENE there:
She was resolved, when Sick Distemper found,
To Poison her; close, Advantageous Ground.
As for EUGENE'S Thoughts, less Jealous head,
Soft, gentle Heart, but small Disturbance bred
(Those Actions for Two Years to Her unknown)
Kind Favors spoke Ally's regard alone.
Son also had brought forth EUGENE'S womb,
One Daughter more couched in their Slumbering Tomb.
That Season past, by Fit of Sickness when
The Duchess seized, that Vile GONDACE then
For Poisonous Feat prepared; but Night before
Duchess dies.
Through Fever Dead: well pleased the Ambitious Whore:
Though Friendly Fates therein with Her Conspired.
Twelve Years CLERMANTHE'S Age; then Flower admired:
Some Thirty two GONDACE'S Self, tho seemed
By View not Twenty four, fresh Coin esteemed,
And tho fallen short of her main Mark, the Seizing
Wife's gallant Style (that looser Way then pleasing
The Duke's depraved Taste) she is Mistress grown;
Does Planet-like that Sphere command alone.
The Servants all Feared, Flattered strangely now,
Run, fly like Purchased Slaves, most humbly Bow.
Nor questioned least what was his Lordship's Will,
Her Nod does check, Command, and her Frown still
Cashiering Doom appeared: his Treasure lies
Open as Day for her Vain Masqueries,
Pomp, gaudy Furnitures; whose Golden Tide
She seemed to Rule; could Draw from thence beside:
Choice future Hord, enlarge her Private Store;
As seized his Heart, that Rifled long before.
Which ways (her Female World enjoyed, Resigned,)
The Duke observed not; Transported Mind.
Son too she had Sixteen Years old, kept there; Gondace's Son, Brisoldan.

Her Forward Self that, scarce Sixteen, did Bear.
Tall Man-like Branch, much Handsome Person framed;
For Carriage, Garb complete, BRISOLDAN named:
Owned her strong Natural, Ingenious Head,
As baser Heart; with Council- Milk so Fed,
He thrived like Hopeful Youth, to her Desire,
For bad Exploits; loved to overreach, Aspire:
Much Favored (last) Ranged at the Duke's own Table.
This Spark to make more mounting, Great (if able)
She Roused her Thoughts, strange Plot resolved upon;
CLERMANTHE the Heyr his Wife must prove alone.
Thus spent no Day, Gondace's Plot upon ^lerman.
wherein her Female Art
Played not some Forged Scean, bold Stage-like part
On Young CLERMANTHE'S weakness. First, she Aws
With her new Greatness, State; thereby to cause
More Reverent thoughts of her (forsooth) Esteem;
So, valued High (joined Choice regard) might seem
Following Kindnesses; then, more Descended,
Showered gentle Favors often, with Love attended:
Such Birdlime used. Called forth to the Garden, Grot,
Walked, chats with her; then, as Grand Height forgot,
Familiar grown, the Wanton Wag she plays;
Toy'd there sometimes, conceived no meaner Grace.
Then, Gifts for Baits; no tempting Knack, Device,
If well could draw CLERMANTHE'S Younger Eyes,
Too Costly thought: brave Clothes conjoined, the Father
Free in the Extreme, to please, content the rather
GONDACE'S Mood: fine shows and Masquing sports;
Which Way withal BRISOLDAN choicely Courts,
Chief Revel-master there; so Forward Brain:
How Active when she wanted ought, does strain
Ere fully Spoke, expressed, as in that Air.
Of her Commands did Breath; then (soft Love-prayr)
Small Sigh was dropped for Cloze: Thus, having won
(First) Love her Self, she thought the Observant Son
Kind Liking, next; She might Advance the better
To the main Exploit, FERNANTHE grown her Debtor:
Since deep-implanted Love betrays the Mind
To baser Motions often, struck Fondly blind.
Five Months dissolved, to the Garden, summer-bower
GONDACE walked, where known (withdrawn that Hour)
CLERMANTHE was; and after Grave salute,
To which more solemn Gloomy Smile did suit;
Set down by Her, with Crafty Brain as bold,
She thus began. Madam, I must unfold
My hopeful Son' s Misfortune, Gondace's Motion to Fernan.
Change, whatere,
Who may like the early Blasted Bud appear.
Hence proves the Cause; it is so, Love 's wounding Dart
Transpierced has (Unarmed) his Tender Heart;
Thrown from your Eye, which foul Effect displays,
Long Watchful Nights, and sad, complaining Days.
Good, Gentle Youth! you may be Informed still
More Glory it is to save by far, then Kill.
My Self withal that choicely valued Son
Should owe like Debt to You, ere Lost, undon.
It Is for grand Cause, the Light of my own Eye
And your true Servant, next, sworn Votary
That thus I Plead, Persuade, Things, proving so,
Fair Innocence should not foul Murth'ress show.
Nor move I strange, Injurious Thing, that jars
With Friendship ought; tho from the unkinder Stars
Small Turfy ground Enjoyed, He Is Rich within;
Whose Breast appears Young Virtue- magazin
For Person, Parts by None whatere Excelled;
If Mothers do not Dote, Prime Piece beheld.
Nature ( well Task'd) not Played at all when made him;
And my Alliance weighed, let none Degrade him
From Nobleness, if that Transcendent Mind
Style him not so: for Wealthy Lands combined,
You Will have Estate for Both; let sordid Moals
Dig still beneath, to Brave and Virtuous Souls
All Is in that Term, Enough: besides 'twill prove
Obliging Grant, engage to stronger Love.
For Titles, last, no Doubt conceived there,
My Son in Wedlock tied to the lawful Heyr,
Shall strait great Lord become, advanced Head;
Styled Duke in the End, Your Father being Dead.
CLERMANTHE, first this Motion entertained
With Wonder's Glance, then dainty'st Blushes stained
As tho she would that Silent way upbraid
GONDACE'S settled Cheeks, since none displayed.
Roused strait her Reason's strength, tho Young descried
Unworthy Plot with fairer Gloss, outside,
Prime-varnish'd ore; Covetousness conceived,
Ambition's threads that Garment, tho Weaved
With Silken Love. Nor was by Friendly Bond
Obliged so far, as to be Strained beyond
Her Sober Self, fit Honor's Bounds; although
Directly against the Stream she dared not go,
Thought Soothing best a while, since Matched orehard;
High Spirit saw, joined Father's Fond Regard.
These Modest words for Answer framed alone;
She no such Beauty's Stock could Challenge, own;
Nor well conceive such Amorous Passion sorted
With her Son 's tender Years; Those rather Courted
Pleasures, Pastimes, were Strangers found to Love:
Thus, Suckled Hope; whatere the Lord might prove.
Forth strait they Went to Gallant Water-grot,
Conjoined Grove, GONDACE'S Ordered Plot;
Fine Summer House, with Trees encompassed round;
Space left for Walk; where on the Shaded ground
(Choice Turf withal) carved Fountains store beheld,
In Circle ranged, whose Curious Art excelled.
Six 'bout the Room, shown Dancing Streams from far,
(Joined Murmur's noise) like Watery Theater
That Room it self with costly Marble shined,
Pictures, Rock-work, for pleasant Bower designed.
Being set, Pastimes to please Clerman.
reposed; Prime Musick-strains in Parts
(BRISOLDAN joined, not wanting for those Arts)
Flowed sweetly round like Streams in one full Tide
Or the Ears Perfume, to the Lady's sense did glide:
For Storms (as 'twere) good pleasing Lullaby;
The Soul's prime Minion thought, since Harmony
Makes up the Amired Soul: how cordial Passion
Those can present, Tune forth in various fashion:
Now Joy, then sad Complaint; as also prove
Kind Melting Sounds, more Soften the Heart for Love:
To the curious Hands conjoined (last) Voice-quire,
Whose Language, Words more Raise, advance Desire.
SONG.
I.
Two Voices. What Is choice Beauty barred from Love?
Dainty'st Meats and Drinks vain prove.
Two Other. Whilst kept Withdrawn, untasted:
Those Treasures small Felicity
Give the Owner till Enjoyed they be;
In Handsome Time, well wasted.
Chorus of Six.
Rainbow-Clowds, for Show appear
Your Red amd white; It Is Man's fruition
Makes substantial Comforts there:
Best Conjoined seems your Condition;
So y' are most Your Selves, whenere.
2.
Two Voices. Whilst Youth, Beauty crown thy brow,
Gems Combined;
Ripened Fruit for Taste designed,
Two other. Rot not on the Summer's bough.
Autumn-Blasts will scatter all
Your Pride, well mounted Glory;
Those to Earth despised fall,
When You too late are Sorry.
Chorus of Six.
Froward Coyness then restrain
Wisest way, since Harsh Disdain
Few Commend;
Reap Beauty's end, reap Beauty's end;
Those choice Delights, which else you nere Attain.
Next walking forth, there Warbled through the Grove
Clear, lively Cornets which for Conquest strove,
Amongst Boughs aloft; first One heard Single sounding,
Another then, Former's lost Noats rebounding,
Like mirthful Eccho's Play, did Flourish over
Short, ending Strain; to that conjoined more:
Third, Fourth succeed, still Answered round by Course;
Lodged circular, till from some Place (perforce)
Nymph Echo raised, turned Wanton Pratler there.
Then joined their Noise, as meant the Grove to tear
With powerful piercing Blast, and Fright those small
Plumed Inhabitants (rare-voic'd withal)
Through their Green branched Cabins. These for Cloze,
Seemed swallowed by Recorders Sound, with those
Strong, larger Throats, Sackbots and Shalms, unview'd:
When Wood-Nymphs came, by Satyrs strait pursued,
From Shaded part, (feigned wild-bred Silvan Lovers)
Showed Antic Dance: the Girls with Leaf-wrought Covers
Bedrest and Flowers; their Men like Goatish kind,
Skins Hairy wore, small Horns and Hoofs designed
Pipes held in sport, Nymphs Hunting Darts aloft:
What Wanton Postures there; fond Kisses often:
Strange freaks beheld: whilst, Shrouded close on high,
Their Music seemed Celestial Waits of the Sky.
These Courting ways BRISOLDAN paid (whenere)
His prime Observances, Brisoldan's feigned Love to Clermanthe.
Love-duties there
( Dissembled tho) as Vital Powers were lent
For that Regard: would Verses too Present
(For Parts, ingenious Brain well furnished, stored,
As those Young Years could probably afford)
By the Mothers hand, Ambassadress complete:
Nay, Chamber kept, at last, Love-qualms so great;
Befooled his Nightcap, Health; whilst former Road,
Kind Favors still, the proud GONDACE trod.
And when sometimes her Lover's Charge renewed,
CLERMANTHE, falling back, would thus Delude,
Fence gentler way: Her Son's approved Desert
Not questioned was, but Light, inconstant Heart
That doubtful Age, those younger Years; her One
Does Plead withal, yet Fancy 's Power not known,
What Choice to make; these further Thoughts unfold,
Her Father 's Frown, at last: when strait the Bold
GONDACE Smiled, with careless Glance replied:
Were They but once confirmed by Vows, and Tied
Marriage-time come, when fit to make Relation,
Discovery; her Powerful, short Persuasion,
FERNANTHE 's Planted Love, Son great in Favor,
Should easily draw the Duke: yet seemed to Waver
The Lady's thoughts, Conjoined grounds of Fear;
Some gentle Change, event still Hoped for there.
Thus held they on their Lingering Siege (grand Prize)
Till Time Four Years near Progress'd through the Skies.
During that while, His true Love to Clermanthe.
BRISOLDAN played so long
Love's fonder Part, Tormenting, last, more Strong
Those Amorous thoughts, Desires grown Elder now,
Near Twenty's Age; the choice CLERMANTHE'S Brow
Love's Royal Throne, as 'twere, transcendent Beauty;
Dressed round with Darts and Flames, commanding Duty;
Tall Person, nigh Sixteen advanced in some,
Perfection showed, all Ravishment become:
That he had Qualms sustained, True, sober Fires;
Tho swelled with Love Ambition's vast Desires;
Saw brave Estate, was there Enamoured,
Honor conjoined; proved Duke her Father dead:
Some Lord before. Proud, haughty Soul did own,
False, Treacherous; great Parts corrupted grown
On Vice did wait, Base Ends far more than other,
Ingenious, Bad betimes, like the Harmful Mother.
Who still could Hope; with Fondest Thoughts survay'd
His Person, Parts; Fine gallant Garb Displayed:
Court-gem conceived; such Things might do the Feat;
CLERMANTHE at length Enjoyed, tho Fair and Great.
Large MANTINEA then Proclaimed in State,
With Public Shows, their New, chief Magistrate;
Prime Town some eight Miles off, where born along
Choice Pageants were, through Vulgar, gazing Throng.
But that CLERMANTHE had beheld before,
'Twas Yearly done, so Disregarded more.
Next gaudy Day, with various Pomp to the Eye,
Ambassador from Egypt-land passed by: Egyptian Ambassador.

His Lady afterward, when Wives they brought
(Left Space howere) Show more Triumphant thought.
Then Public Entrance made, Strange People seemed;
Large Tawney Train; beyond first Sight esteemed:
Tho clearer Tawny, better Faced by far
(Less Southern Clime) than True Moroccos are.
These to behold CLERMANTHE was inclined
(Tho seldom saw that Town, more closely Shined)
GONDACE too conformed, BRISOLDAN waited;
Set tho are in large, Long-window'd Room, dear-rated.
The whole Room not Free, left to themselves, howere,
Places by Others first Bespoken there.
A great Young Lord by chance was there before;
Soon after Second came, trod selfsame Floor,
Took the other side; in the Midst CLERMANTHE sat:
Who scarce Regarding Them, well pleased with that
Her Window showed; on Her they Fondly Gazed
Transported way, such Beauteous Form, Amazed.
Strait Marked by BRISOLDAN'S Jealous Glance;
Fortune did both for Rank, Estate advance.
Known Lords to him by Name; turned watchful Scout,
He Steals near man to the Last, bad Rival-doubt;
Leaned Slily there as tho the Street beheld,
Heard speak to's Friend; She Is Rare, unparalled:
His Page sent down from the Servants told below
Whose Coach, what Lady brought: Resolved did show
For Suitor thus; Her Father known in part:
Stung through the Ear BRISOLDAN'S gauled Heart.
Slunk then to the Foremost Lord (like Stranger howere)
Stood sneaking by, as Glanced through Window there:
Face covered tho with Handkerchief, unseen,
Wiping his Nose, as passed those Lords between:
Heard him no less her Beauty's Praise admire;
Boy charge withal of the Coachman to enquire
Whose Daughter 'twas; informed thereof, Relation,
Strait to 's Comrade used strongest Protestation, Two Lovers in Love with
Fernanthe.

He would her Servant be: Both Gazed again,
Till viewed each other Both with Heart's Disdain.
Last-ent'ring Lord did monstrous Doubts discover,
That Foremost would (whom named) prove Rival-lover.
BRISOLDAN thus now Hot, then Cold appeared,
Like different Climes, as burned with Rage, or Feared:
Since Those he thought, the substance might Enjoy
(His Part the Shade) long, Hopeful Dream destroy.
Then came the Show; scarce pleased BRISOLDAN'S Sense:
Chief Sight to the Lords CLERMANTHE'S Excellence.
Others fair Eyes, with Here Is being looked upon,
Like Window's Glass conveiv'd to the Diamon.
Ambassador passing by.
The Ambassador was Pompous way beheld
In Chariot drawn; for Glist'ring Robes excelled:
Showed Tauney Cheek; Twelve Moors, coal-black to The Eye
(Strange Garb) on foot; Gay, mounted Boys led by
Fine Horses clothed: Twelve Servants rode before
With colored Darts, short, Gaudy'st Garments wore:
Three viewed as foremost Rank, loud Trumpets bearing
On either side the King's tall Guard appearing.
Then followed strait, for State, Two Coaches more,
Six Horses each, Arcadian Coaches store.
His Lady, last, in Gorgeous Chariot shined
(Good Space between) Two Handmaids sat combined
Beneath her feet; Eight Tauney Youths attended:
Spruce Pages horsed; Coach followed all; so ended.
This done, performed, CLERMANTHE Rose, passed by;
Such Light'ning-stream conceived to the Gazers eye;
As walked along, Lords jointly Bowed, which She
In modest, Sob'rer way returned, less Free;
On each small Glance: BRISOLDAN forced to Lower,
Whilst Ushered down prime Grecian Star that hour.
Returning Home, he told GONDACE all,
Which raised no less her Spleen, ambitious gall;
That those great Lords, should thus Delude in the end:
Hope not yet Dead, each Brain does now Contend
To stop their Course, Love bear'd on either side
BRISOLDAN (last) for the Actor's Task complied.
Thus ordered 'twas: He when next Morn displayed,
To Mantinea Rode; bought ready-made
Spruce Clothes Gentile, false Hair, with Youngest Beard,
Black Patches strait to the Front and Cheek preferred
For Soldiers Scars; grown Tall, of Man-like frame;
To that Last-enter'd Lord most boldly came
Where Lodger proved: with Forged Craft assayl'd;
Whose Haughty Mind, (since Duels fought, prevailed)
Soon Fired was, conceived; great former Brawl
'Twixt him and the other Lord, Swords Drawn withal:
Still fester'd Grudg: So Valliant, Stout (whatere)
That Foremost Lord, unused Affronts to Bear.
After Salute; he said, Brisoldan's Plot upon the Lords.
That he was known
To the other Lord, tho well Acquainted grown
With this Lord's Worth, by Fame; Transcendent, high;
Told him; That Lord, come from the Show (base lie)
With His glass of Wine pronounced in Vaunting fashion,
He saw CLERMANTHE there; Grand Admiration!
Would Suitor prove: This Lord (said) did no less
By Looks and Words ( which Page oreheard) express:
But he could Spoil his Game; to the Duke would Write,
He kept his Whore, Diseased through that Delight;
Drunk often withal (so, Daubed his Nobler parts)
If met would Slash him there for's Love- deserts.
Was crossed, oresway'd, or else in former Jar
He had well marked his Flesh, like Man of War:
Another by, who Smiled at all in Sport;
Then drank CLERMANTHE'S Health in Ranting Sort.
Bragged, that he had her first Salute that day
First Glance (conjoined) Farewell, when walked away,
BRISOLDAN said; tho he conceived, as then,
He scarce would Write ( proud Rival 's Tongue, bold Pen
Bad Trusting tho, howere ( yet for the Abuse,
'Twas foul and Base; did Loathsome thoughts produce.
Tho wished well to that Lord, yet He much more
True Honor Loved; Disclosed it on that Score.
His Lordship now might best Discretion use
For Noble grounds, Prevent, or Season loose.
The Lord's Enraged; each younger Lover found
(Where Spirit bred) Hot, Credulous compound:
Kept lately his Whore, indeed; last month Diseased
(BRISOLDAN so heard from Comrades, well pleased
Since served his Turn) could Drink Carousing part;
Yet this foul, strange Affront did Stab to the Heart;
Some things tho True: conjoined their former Jar
Like Fester'd Wound, more Gal'd withal by far:
Those Terms on that: base Rival-threats, at last,
If at the Duke's should meet; no Point orepass'd:
Two Others there. BRISOLDAN showed that while
Of Honest Stamp, Parts, Person, Garb Gentile.
Thus, Thanks returned, he vowed straitways his Page
Should Challenge bear, with Rival's storming Rage.
BRISOLDAN'S glad; conjoined; Were it not Best
To talk, Confer? since what that Lord expressed
He may Recant; for the Suitor's Game, howere,
Your Lordship's Cards as Hopeful, Good appear.
No, that is in vain; Blood drawn, (the Lord replied)
Disarmed at least CLERMANTHE'S more my Bride.
The Hour, Place, in Fuming Mood, told thereupon;
Five the Afternoon: forth false BRISOLDAN'S gone.
Pen, Paper brought, this angry Stream did flow,
For Challenge meant; Time, Place set down below
The Challenge.
The Challenge.
Sir, stead of Lord, take these in shortest way;
Your Saucy, foul Affronts orepass'd, I say,
Strong Ground enough for Challenge this shall prove,
Presumpteous Thoughts to Court CLERMANTHE'S Love:
If that Disclaimed; then I shall Draw howere
For the Praisant part in Words, Chastise you there.
Meet me if you dare, by Five, etc.
Swelled the other Lord; nor much those Points admired;
Since fondest Looks did speak what Both Desired,
That day before; Suitor's Resolve might fall
From Servant Friend by chance, oreheard withal;
The Affronts there named last Quarrel seemed indeed;
Nor would be Dared from Love; to meet agreed.
BRISOLDAN was with Doning Food well pleased,
Since Hopeful Thoughts Both might by Fate be seized;
Dead Pair perchance; or grant, but One should Die,
CLERMANTHE would that Killers Tongue Deny:
If Both escaped Wounds may Love-suit defer
Some Mischief clawed BRISOLDAN'S Heart howere.
When Twelve was past, he rode to the Meeting Place;
Cops branched Shade concealed Dissembling Face,
False Treacherous Breast; the Horse, Man oreclouded so;
Those Lords well matched Appeared, might equal show,
Skill, Valor, Strength, The Duel of the two Lords
on each their Page attended
High Wrath, Disdain Words Talking quickly ended
The Fight began; Both first and second Pass
Deep-wounded were, their Flesh no Steel, nor Brass.
Much wasted proved those Crimson Streams of Life:
When Third Assault, resolved to close the Strife;
That Lord, termed Challenger (Each changing ground)
Advancing made most furious Thrust, large Wound;
The same received; Both plentifully Bled,
Grapling withal, First Lord fell down as Dead,
The Other aloft; soon Rouled tho of the side
Stretched Conqueror: small Joy Triumphant pride.
When both did Cloze, Youth from next Hill descended,
On gallop came; Six more well armed attended;
Whose Voices loudly exclaimed from far, Hold, Hold:
But came too late, both Bleeding on the Mold.
Young man Dismounted straight, falls on his Breast
Who fell beneath; sad Voice conjoined expressed.
With Sighs and Tears: his Body clasped round,
Some fonder Brother thought, most strange Compound
Of Sorrow showed; the lordlike Corpse appearing,
(Sense vanished, gone,) his Hair most wildly tearing;
Off came the False: True Woman's Hair instead
Flowed largely down ( Plaits broken) from that Head.
Young Lady 'twas, of Beauteous Personage, Young Lady in Man's Clothes.

To whom that Lord himself did far Engage.
By former Vow; now second Choice advanced;
Small Marvail tho, since on FERNANTHE glanced,
That Wonder saw, chief Mistress styled, Supreme.
That Lady by some Page (sad Fear extreme)
Told their Resolve, (what Quarrel's cause unknown)
Went clothed Man-like to the Magistrate alone;
Had Order straight to stop them Both, surprise,
But came so late, that Death before her eyes
Seemed first to Grasp, detained as Prisoners there:
So Arraigning them, Sense, motion found, however,
Good signs of Life; to MANTINEA then
Both carried are, Restored by skilful'st Men:
That Lady too her Lord enjoyed; Frustrated
The other Lord's Suit, for cause anon Related.
BRISOLDAN with GONDACE pleased the Event
Since thought them Dead; Gondace's last Trial of Fernanthe.
vain Art's Experiment.
She then Resolved on last Assault, by Storm;
Madam (began) four years, I may inform
My Son and Self has waited for kind Grant:
You cannot now (this Age) be Ignorant.
Of your own Breast, what choice your Fancy pleases;
BRISOLDAN'S Tall, to Manlike Frame increases;
Shown Excellence for Body's part and Mind,
And as the Sun still constant Servant shined.
To the Globe beneath, proves (last) most faithful Lover:
Pray, now your Thoughts for clearest view discover.
CLERMANTHE when, with sob'rest, radiant Eyes,
Good, gentle voice (shunned Scornful part) replys.
BRISOLDAN may with far more ease, success
Seek other's Grant for Wedlock's Happiness.
I feel my Heart no way to Love disposed;
And when shall change, least Marriage- thought disclosed.
Should Poise things well for that so prime Relation;
Conjoined with all my Father's Approbation.
Such Looks and Words, shown plain Refusing there,
GONDACE now might Raise their Siege, Forbear.
Thus had she Time, much Care with thoughtful Brain
Still fondly Sowed, the expected Crop to gain;
Tho Reaped but empty Wind, at last: She saw
CLERMANTHE now grown Tall, past Girlish Awe
Woman become: four years produced and bred
Much Wisdom too: Hope failed, like Vapor fled.
For then the Lady's thoughts did more despise
That meaner Choice, GONDACE'S self, whose Prize
Her Father made; his Wench long time concluded:
Next, Mother wronged; the Daughter (last) Deluded.
Tho, power too weak, showed Carriage fair discreet;
Proved much Reserved, withdrawn as feared to meet
Fresh Love-assaults: GONDACE therefore now
Turned off, dispair'd with angry Female-Brow.
Destructive Heart. Tho monstrous Aggravation
Swelled, hightned all, that Scornful Indignation
Should she Oretop, or Clash, with her contend;
Yet Regent there, her Father at Boards-end:
Thought Loathsome, Rack: Thus, She Is resolved for trying
Sure Fatal ways; CLERMANTHE'S shortly Dying.
Then could she advance, Ingraft withal her Son
To the Duke VERDORUS'S Heart, no Marvel don;
Plant him for the Heir; That Man who best might claim,
Since nearer far Allied to the Duke became.
( Wife's Nephew 'twas) Conceived, in Travel Drowned
(None left of Blood) or Dead on Persian Ground.
Nor Spleen so well concealed but it appeared;
Flashings whereof CLERMANTHE saw, and Feared.
Two Weeks dissolved, CLERMANTHE'S Breast and Head
Through Sorrow pained; joined watchful hours in Bed;
Broth was bespoke: Asking the Girl, (when espied)
Whose making 'twas; The old Nurse, she strait replied;
GONDACE there withal: bad, Jealous Qualm
Disturbed her Heart; Door locked, she gave the same
Fernanthe's Dog Poisoned.
(Great Part) to little Dog, who Pining lies
Some smaller while, then Rouled, gasps, and Dies.
Death Honored found his Lady's Taster there,
Then Life's Reprieve; her Mortal pangs did bear.
This viewed, beheld, strange Horrors seized, possessed
Her fainting Powers, sad, Storm-distemper'd Breast;
Such wickedness in the World should be diclos'd,
Nay Womankind; her self withal Exposed.
To that grand danger Death: like Glass was seen
In that poor Dog what She should there have been,
Sighs for whose FUNERAL, beloved of late,
More for her Fears conjoined, perplexed Estate
Laid on the Bed she Rose, then Walked about;
Life's Sickly Lamp seemed near to going out.
Death's dreadful Masque, Ghosts, Sables Winding-shrouds
(For Music Knells and Groans) her Fancy o're-clouds.
Through sad conceit like Graves that under Floor,
Since durst not speak (tho fatal Storms did Roar.)
Acquaint the Duke, complain; confirmed mind,
Such proved GONDACE'S boldest Front, combined.
Smooth, crafty Tongue, encouraged (last) far rather
Through Powerful Charms over her enchanted Father.
( High thoughts of Her conjoined withal) that She
Would Swear, 'twas a Lie; base, spleenful Forgery:
CLERMANTHE killed her Dog, had poisoned there
That Broth herself; 'Twas made by the Nurse however:
(Tho confident the old Nurse abhorred that Sin;
Stepped partly aside GONDACE dropped it in)
Out-staring all till seemed but Envious Spite,
As Saucy checked their close Content, delight.
The Duke enraged, found her Life become,
Through either's Hate, like Rack's tormenting Doom.
If silent was, Death shortly seized her still,
Her Soul however the Whore's Tenant seemed at will.
Thus down she sat, like Sorrow's mournful Spouse,
Death's Bride as 'twere; did the utmost Courage rouse.
Still Beauteous, Lovely, tho with self debated:
What should she do? each hand Destruction waited.
When clearer thoughts these words did seem to impart,
Clermanthe's Flight.
CLERMANTHE'S Hope; kind Beam did cheer her Heart.
Thus raised, resolved ( young years never more discreet)
For flight she straight prepared her nimble feet.
The rest of the Broth was thrown away, lest spied;
Supped by that Girl, whoever, thereof they died.
The Old Nurse, (poor harmless Wretch) condemned for all
That little Dogs might seem Death Natural.
Small Linnen-change, much Gold, rich Jewel-box
In her large Scarf conveyed; Backdoor she unlocks;
Which friendly led to the Garden's shaded side,
Glance thrown like Lightning round, lest caught, descried;
So through long covered Bower where if beheld
Sh' had walking seemed did smoothly trace concealed.
(Often glances back) to the Postern-door, at last;
Mufl'd from thence conjoined Fields orepass'd
Toward her Nurse, MORNEDA called (whose Farm
Mile distant was; whom chanced to take by the Arm.
In midst of the way to Bushes drawn, runs over
Her mournful Tale with Tears; which Perled score
Nurse dropped as fast again; concurred that She
Would find her out some Lodge reserved (whilst Free)
Some sheltring place from dreaful Storms whatere,
That she might closely Lurk, and Sojourn there.
Two years expense and charge to undergo,
Gold Coin she brought, for after- times did show
Rich Jewel- box, thought worth three thousand pound,
Mothers kind gift; when death did seize, surround;
As tho she would that needful chance Presage,
Nurse, some of them might for more Coin engage.
Good, gentle Nurse was walking softly then
Some five Miles off, Week ere returned again;
To visit Aunt; at home no wonder so
Through absence caused: CLERMANTHE poized tho,
She had but one Maid, true faithful Wench beside,
If Search should prove, as if themselves complied.
Strong Hopes to please her mind Nurse briefly told;
Ill staying there, by the way would all unfold.
Thus, forth they rushed from Trees, bad danger fearing;
Their Journey's course began, no Scouts appearing.
Nurse then informed, The Lady of the Grove.
that Lady's house seemed best
Within the Grove, her self kind noble Breast
Her Mistress proved; Married from thence, before
CLERMANTHE'S Nurse; never Maid regarded more.
Long Widow there did dwell, withdrawn, retired;
Had but one Son who Traveled, loved, desired;
Was newly gone to the Eastern Parts, enclosed
By the Asian Bound for several years disposed.
This (last) conjoined; when, visited of late,
She had CLERMANTHE Praised at the highest rate;
That Lady wished, she had such a Gem, 'twould be
In Daughters stead to cheer her Privacy:
Coach straight they hired, since forty miles from thence
(Close veiled withal) needful convenience.
CLERMANTHE set at Neighbor-town, concealed,
Nurse first to the Lady went, her Case revealed;
Who liked the thing: their motion did advance,
CLERMANTHE in the mean time, lest crushed perchance.
Her Fortune's hoped for to empty Air
High Daughters claim (GONDACE'S earnest care.
To urge she thought) strong Fancy in her Father
That she was Lost, or plainly, Dead much rather;
BRISOLDAN'S hopes no Poisonous Plot expressed
(Flight's cause) however lest seemed from Lying Breast.
More hated, loathed; there gentler Lines she penned
For his own View: deferred till Journy's end.
(Ink mixed with Tears) lest stopped by the War debarred:
Given by Nurse to Boy soon afterward.
When going back, for Duke VERDORUS Hand
Well mufled too, lest he should ask, demand
What Face she had, or known by the Boy descried;
Questioned with Threats where the Lady did reside.
For the Duke VERDORUS.
My Lord, your poor CLERMANTHE'S gone; Clermanthe's Letter to her Father.

Tho stragled far, not left alone;
Heaven knows the cause, yet time shall never
Dissolve true Daughter's Love, wheree're.
She Is Living, Safe; once more may see
Your Walls by gentle Destiny.
CLERMANTHE.


Thus, brought by Nurse to the Lady's Grove, at last, Clermanthe in the Grove.

(Choice, pleasant Seat) kind welcome also past;
As Cousin sent by dying Mother's Will,
Left to her Charge: called there PARMENA still;
Year nigh consumed in Solemn way, till now,
With what content hard Fortune would allow.
This briefly told (by us enlarged far more)
Some General Points touched only in the Grove before;
ORSAMNES did for Sympathy comply,
CLERMANTHE sad beheld, whose sober Eye
Viewed his again; both struck with wonder there:
Much shorter while, since so conjoined were:
Their Princely Births and their disastrous Fortunes
Like gentle Loves; the thought whereof importunes.
Sigh, Smile from both. ORSAMNES then began,
First silence broke, Dear Madam, with what Train
Of Sorrows, Griefs have you conversed, thought rather;
Caused by that Whore and Charmed, Seduced Father.
To the Poisonous cloze, embraced her kindly then
It Is true my Lord; said she with sigh again.
I Have suffered much for my young years, however;
Stranger to the World, showed newly entered there,
Weak Combatant. Madam, did then express
ORSAMNES strait; Y' are Crowned prime Conqueress
As of my Heart; such courage shown thus far
Wisdom conjoined, both like your Person Rare.
My self have lost those Spirits in sympathising
With your Discourse, I may need cordialising:
One kiss do want for choice restorative
Which, often obtained, did drooping Thoughts revive.
Here shall be joined (as fit) more short Relation
Touching the Duke, GONDACE both, Narration.
Of those neat things to the Lady's Flight o'repast,
When from that Boy her Lines received, at last:
Brief, calm Farewell; no Poison there expressed,
Lest caused more Hatred, Rage in either's Breast.
The Duke did read with troubled thoughts, displeasure, Dukes Story with
Gondace,

Bad, secret Qualm GONDACE shown at leisure.)
Since strange departure seemed of only Child,
Which might for worth deserving Gem be styled.
But strong Self-Love, close, wanton Flame endeared,
GONDACE'S Charms those Vapors largely clear d.
Caused great Allay, since coffeehouse found
Through their delight conceived the o're-powerful Ground.
Deep Grudg withal GONDACE gained that Favor,
High room, regard; still meat of dainty'st Savor.
For Poisonous Plot, no glance upon that Score,
Nor had believed such painted Masque she wore.
Thus calmed best way his Thoughts, that since one House
Fayl'd to contain them both with friendly Brows;
She proved withdrawn; no Clashing Jars, Contest
Through Envy, Pride, was safe her Lines expressed.
Conjoined withal She might return again,
Those Fogs dispelled (perchance) which seized her Brain.
Mean time, he thought, that Jewel-box supplied
For use, expense, large heap of Gold beside:
GONDACE too seemed grieved she so was Hated;
By cunning Arts the Offense still aggravated.
Tho known her self grand Cause, foul guilty Soul.
No news heard of the Broth, she thought the whole
By the Dog devoured, who might through Nature there
Seem Dead, Disease; Glad that she is Gone however.
Tho was confirmed, that She could all outface
To the Fonder Duke preserve her wonted Grace.
For Death, that Task might soon performed be,
Through Grief, Mischance, despair by Destiny,
Four Months dissolved, the Duke with thoughtful Brain
More Poizing all, for Temperance again.
First Married life; now either way had proved;
Nor could that Pearl discharge, so much beloved:
And wanting Son withal, one former Dead,
( Fond, eager grown thereof) strong Fancy bred,
Heaven would more his last desire befriend,
Upon that Ground to's Mistress condescend:
Good fruitful Soil GONDACE thought as Fair;
Under sixteen BRISOLDAN'S self She bare.
Those things once moved, no want of heightning Charms
Suckled they seemed 'tween proud GONDACE'S Arms.
Thus, by consent, both joined were together,
Man, Wife indeed; no Pompous business neither; The Duke Gondace Married.

'Twas stolen, conceald from all but Household- eyes,
Since no great cause to vaunt of such a Prize:
Enough 'twas done grand Fortune's wealthy Sum,
Good, honest Choice more stately Forms become.
GONDACE now did mount that Glorious Tower,
Prime Orb she aimed at that Dismal hour.
When thought to expel his Wife EUGENA'S Breath
By Poisonous Art (two years before her Death
Long pause endured) she is placed in the Dutchess-row,
For gorgeous Pomp the Arcadian Queen might show.
Bad News whereof MORNEDA failed to send
(CLERMANTHE'S Nurse) lest more should griefs extend.
Both thinking on that Evening-task behind
Two Letters came; for the Uncle first designed
In Pastor-grange; the Prince ORONTES last:
They walked to the Rocky Cell, lest time o'repast.
TIMONDES said, he hoped they had that hour
Well cheered, refreshed themselves in the Garden- Bower.
They told him yet: good the open air, clear Sky
With Azure Cheek the Place did Beautify.
'Twas branched serene against Beams withal, well spread,
The Hermit conjoined; tho never was Courtier bred.
Like that base Uncle of mine, yet I have used
Great Courtiers company; not scorned, refused
By the Prince ORONTES self at twenty's Age;
E're wooed his Wife; when we did both engage
For Fellow- Travelers, ( mine thirty tho)
First year abroad eat, drank together so:
Parting with him on farthest Persian Ground:
ORSAMNES known by Fame, brave Youth, Renowned.
That former time with Duke VERDORUS too
I Have Hunted, Boul'd, ere his fair Wife did Woo,
EUGENE called. They answered; he might be
(In smiling way) worthy of such company.
Joined other talk; for stepping forth alone
He asked their leave; when both more cheerful grown.
Those Words observed, consulting strait for best,
Resolved their Case should be to Him expressed.
Their names withal, since liked their Host so well:
Beyond Dervan conceived that private Cell;
If found franck Offer made (their strong conceit)
Till the Uncle could inform of grange-retreat
TIMONDES viewed, they told him who they were;
Their skulking aim, Dervan, short while however.
When he with Joy ORSAMNES did embrace,
Then kissed her Hand; prayed them command that Place.
Whole Week, if pleased: Widow there was dwelt nigh,
Washed Clothes and made his Bed, for Food supply.
Should charge that Clown which kept his Winter-grange.
Mile off, DERVAN; conjoined, what pleasing change
They liked cold meat; by her informed, 'Twas so,
For Corinth-friends; themselves withdrawing tho
To the Garden Bower (nor known by her) and she
Should bear their Letters Sealed conveniently.
Orsam. and Clerman. lodge in the Hermitage.
Thanks given; Pen, Ink, Paper brought, they fall
To the writing work, shown nimble speed withal.
To the Uncle first; his worthy Choice declared,
Then help desired; some place tho mean prepared
For their Retreat till Fathers mind composed;
Sent by some Swain that Note to him enclosed:
Prayed the Uncle to Appais: directed well,
He there should find them both in the Hermits Cell.
To's Father, last, penned these few Lines alone,
Soft, gentler way, as tho for Travel gone.
For the Prince ORONTES.
My Lord, being Noble, Young, much tired
Through Pastor's Life, Travel desired,
I beg your Pardon for short space;
Shunned dangerous, Remoter place:
Those Virgins, which may worthy prove,
I cannot grant Conjugal Love:
ORSAMNES.


That Widow knocked at Gate, convenient hour
(Her custom, use,) who, by TIMONDES power,
Conjoined their large reward, was well inclined,
(Both called Corinthian Guests) for the walk designed.
'Twas soon agreed: three Miles (we said before)
It was to the Grove, to the Uncle's Grange two more:
Prime Evening then, May Day; those Letters were
Took nimbly thus, with plain Directions there.
Now, Reader, from that Hermitage a while
To the Pastor-coast transferred our Ranging Style, The Pastors Sacrifice.

Those Actions there this days grand Festival;
What Offering proved, joined Rural sports withal.
For Pan designed, this Flocks Protector named,
Near to ten's hour by signal Noise proclaimed.
They Sacrificed on large, convenient Mount
(From whence did flow their God's exalted Fount.)
Twelve choicest Kids, twelve white selected Lambs,
With Garlands dressed of Flowers ( their bleating Dams.
Whilst mourned their Loss) Milk, Frankincense and Wine,
Some lively Youths did jointly then combine
To louder Musick's sound in cheerful Dance
Round the Altar there, both heels and Hearts Advance;
Devotion thought: their Feast at noon o'reflowing:
Then, the After-time in Country-games bestowing.
These Rural- Strifes, which Greeks did well regard, The Pastor-Games.

Performed were, prize joined for each, reward.
First Running proved; who, thinly clothed like Air,
Could foremost touch the Post, adorned made fair.
With Ribbons, Flowers; that nimble way excelled.
Next Wrestling was; who most to the ground compelled
By strength and Art; could braveli'st Foyl, overthrow
May Lady should keep either Prize, bestow;
Choice for that Year; like Princes ranged in State:
Persons set by to Judge and Arbitrate.
Music conjoined; who, for their ear well-mounted
On Scaffold raised, was skilful thence accounted;
Could sweetly the Harp, Pipe, Cithron, voice, command;
Bay-wreaths alone, took from their Lady's hand.
For close of all; whoever in handsome Verse,
Viewed on that Stage could well pronounce, rehearse
Their great god Pan's their Love's, or Pastor's praises,
Those Poets style with Crown of Laurel graces.
The choicer Ground, large Theater for these
Was Verdant Plain, whose sides by slow degrees
Increased to small, thin-planted Hills, from whom
Pure streaming Founts, like Daughters of their Womb,
Broke gently forth; not Born to the world before;
Whilst Brooks beneath that Champain Wandered over.
Square Plot there was, with Palms environed high,
All but Fore-parts that void for the Ear and Eye;
Plank'd Galleries conjoined, their backs enclosed;
Top like some Bower for Nimphs and Swains composed.
The Widow reached that Grove, walked strait from thence
To the Pastor's Ground, fit times convenience.
Well came to the Lord THERSANDER'S Grange, Lord. Thersander his Uncle.
(so proved
That Uncle called) much valued Man beloved.
She found him there, returned from Rural sport;
Who, dwelling far ( Past former Life) from Court,
Lived too withdrawn; no medler in the State,
High, public things, which often to Envy, hate
Does more expose; yet since his Wife there died,
Times doubtful thought, for Pastor's Grange complied:
One void by chance (those Farms forementioned
By the Owners left, laid by through Age, or Dead;
Proved also near) allayed his Brother's Sorrow;
Since for Himself small comfort need to borrow.
Prime, cheerful heart, as stout, resolved withal
What chance soever; more Frankly liberal:
Industrious for his Friend, there strongly Loving;
As faithful found, rare poized Temper proving:
Young, handsome Widower, had then no Child;
Might (well set forth) dear Uncle (last) be styled.
Was talking then (returned) in pleasing way
With His Housekeeper of the Rural Games that day;
Fair Virgin 'twas, well born, well bred beside,
Wife's Cousin-german proved, so near allied;
With whom she sojourned, by both esteemed:
Since her Decease: this Lord so worthy deemed
For Rank and Parts, next, kind Regard so great;
That she conjoined in this Change, Retreat,
(Whose newness both did please) as Friend bacame;
Mild, gentle showed, Florena called by name.
THIRSANDER read those Lines, for gallant Choice,
By's Nephew there declared, did much rejoice:
Approved that way, withdrawn; as Traveled so;
Wrote nimbly back ( Florena of Council tho)
His strong belief for Place, as they desired,
With Country-friend twenty miles off, retired:
Should thither Ride, however; inform them well
Third day ere night within their Hermit-Cell:
She thus returned; that Note enclosed, by Swain,
Was sent to the Prince ORONTES Farm again.
The Prince that time did tread those pleasing Grounds,
Conjoined lay, in whose small Pastor-bounds
Kingdom conceived; with calmer thoughts surveigh'd
His wandering Flock, where harmlesness displayed
Mild innocence: those Flow'r-deck'd Banks beheld,
Spruce branched trees, where Natures work excelled.
Courts proud and gaudy'st Art: there Crystal stream
Did slide along, Glass to the Sun's Gold beam.
Soft Murmur's noise; whilst Springs Musicians sounded
May-carols forth, with Azure Sky surrounded.
Whose general Calm complied with thoughtful Breast,
If its own Heart enjoyed, free way possessed.
He had much Action shared disastrous Passion, Orontes Contemplative.

Now subject found for sober Contemplation:
Had read large World of Men, might study there
The whole Globe it self Celestial Hemisphere.
Prime Model thought; did nature's Map afford,
Grand Volumn, Book, each Leaf with wonders stored.
Page, Line thereof, but that so common viewed
He causes, grounds of things could name, conclude;
Their Order, use observe, more private pleasure;
Then best enjoyed that Phylosophic. Treasure.
Conjoined Thoughts withal where day does Range,
Or night succeed, dispersed Scense of Change;
IN the Monstrous Deep, four wandering Seasons shown,
Like Fortunes of Mankind; such proved his Own.
When after all those later Griefs would rise,
Like damping Fume, or gloomy Cloud surprise.
Last Cross appeared, ORSAMNES found so slow,
Where Wifely Choice prime Persons rare did show.
(Their Fathers worth to the height esteemed, commended)
And with unpleasantness on him attended
To either's Farm; as they by the Fathers (taught)
To his own Grange for conversation brought:
ORSAMNES where allowed (though free from Courting)
Fit, kind Regards, which proved to them Transporting.
Nor swelled those Rival-girls, since the one at least,
MERDONE named, of milder, gentle Breast:
Their worthy Fathers too, well tempered Men,
Still kept the old friendly League unbroken then. His two Friends Dorin,
Vernon.

That Evening both the Prince saluted there;
THERSANDER (last) conjoined part did bear.
All came to the Grange; that Notes delivered strait,
By Shepherd brought; THERSANDER'S Order late:
When read the same, his eyes did Wrath disclose,
Joined angry Words; bad Fume from Spleen arose;
Then, changed that way, he thoughtful, sad appeared;
First, absent Son beloved, whose Danger feared:
Next, Marriage-aim destroyed, where Choice designed
One of those Girls. THERSANDER, they combined.
To calm his thoughts, each part well vanished over;
For Travel, said, 'Twas done same way before
By's Grandfather (which thing the Prince confessed)
Short time, no dangerous place, that note expressed.
ORSAMNES too, the Prince conjoined there
Much Gold received his Travell's charge to bear.
THERSANDER'S mind shown plainly thus to the view,
DORSIN, VERNON took their Farwells, withdrew.
Nor ended so; PHILAURA, named of late,
Worse Torment seized through Love's dispairing Fate;
Who, from her Glass more Beauty's stock descrying,
Prime handsome Girl, each Shepherdess outvying.
May-Lady called last Year (MERDONE tho
This day their Choice might almost equal show)
Wit's stronger Parts, and for confirming Ground,
More kind respects from Duke ORSAMNES found,
As she conceived; high Spirit (last) did prove;
Bred more Ambitious Dreams conjoined with Love.
To Bower withdrawn, where Gales soft murmur made,
(Whilst the Envying Sun last pleasing Glance displayed)
Through sober thoughts; her Father was o're-heard
To tell that News; Philaura's trouble for Orsamnes.
with which like Thunder scared,
Heart's Qualm began, that rather seemed to bleed;
Strange Soul-convulsion felt, Hope's gasp indeed.
She louder Sighed, then wept Love- Storm as't were,
Deep Groan the last: but being less private there.
Small Garden 'twas, She mounts from thence back-way
To the Chamber, Bed, whereon Prostrated lay.
Sighs, Tears, and Groans increased to mournful Sum,
As lost the whole World, Grief's perfect Draught become.
She naught beheld but brave ORSAMNE'S Face
Her Fancy saw, Portray'd in every place.
There last she viewed his Person thought; and there
Last heard him speak; such looks for wounding were.
Bright Darts and Flames; such, such his words then found,
Love's Music Notes, Harmonious Compound:
There last he spoke to her, joined kiss-salute
Pleased that Sense too; what Sighs did breath compute.
What Groans for them, by Turn, as those should prove
Loud Funeral-Knells to all her Joys of Love.
Tongue roused at length, Philiura's complaint.
tho seemed in part to Fail,
She thus began: prime wonder of the Vale
Of Greece, the whole World (paused there) O most refined,
Choicest of men, but hard withal, unkind.
Thy Conquest Trophies, to our Anguish, smarts,
On Maiden Ruins built, and, broken Hearts.
I sent thee mine, which, tho discharged to day,
Never whole returned; 'twas broken by the way:
Such here it proves: That Heart, once Ayr-like Free,
Now worn Tormenting Chains; loathed Destiny!
Nor Marvel thought since seized by Love- distraction:
I hoped too much; with Hope conjoyned-action.
Too much I looked, alas! too strangely Loved,
Fond, easy Soul: till Freedom Blasted proved.
Weep, weep my Traitor-Eyes, in kindness now
O're^low and Drown me quite; sigh Breast till thou
Want Air to breath; rend, break my Heart outright;
But live ORSAMNES still, enjoy this Light.
O Love! thou worst of Tyrant- Lords, to whom
Death mild appears! how lingering, slow thy Doom!
True Lovers often in Torment, pain surpass
The rest of the World, die ten fold over, alas!
Not Loved again: groaned there for sad Rejection,
Then Mused, straight, thought of each rare Perfection;
His Body more advanced by far, and Mind,
Thus (lost) new-rated all, as Love inclined.
Week's term expired, more strange resolve possessed
(Shown afterward) her Wave-distempered Breast.
That other Nymph, mean while, MERDONE named,
More humble Girl, of calmer Temper framed;
Less smoth'd by Hope (Choice, Beauteous tho to the eye)
Could better far with Grief's sad weight comply;
Such Fortune bear, tho Loved as well as she;
Since loftier thoughts may raise the Storms degree.
Sighed, wept her Sorrows forth in Gloomy Bowers,
Like April's gentle Blasts and sober Showrs.
This far that Pair: tho seemed revived now
SILVANOR'S Heart, with Love-perplexed Brow;
PHILAURA'S Servant long; Lovers of those two Maids.
began to feed
More cheerful hopes: same did MONTANUS breed,
MORDONE'S that; both born Gentile howere
Their Fathers with the Prince turned Pastors there.
Lived in one Farm with single Pastor then,
Both Widowers (these the Heirs) well-landed men:
Choice, gallant Youths, for each regard might show;
Much darkened through ORSAMNES Glory tho,
From Suit refrained, Transcendent Rival-fearing:
In Looks (Glass-like portray'd) their thoughts appearing.
Writ Poems (last) where those young Virgins shined
Terrestrial Stars. To these by voice assigned,
Since Conquerors, that running wrestlers prize
May Day, last year; when Pan's great Feast did rize.
Took from PHILAURA'S hand, May Lady then;
All newly come to the Pastor-Farms, tho mean.
This Day MERDONE She; from whom Both gained
Their Laurel wreaths, for Music, Verse obtained.
We shall Revisit now (still safe and well)
That Princely Pair within their Hermits Cell
When Seven's Hour, Orsamnes and Clermanthe in the Cell.
TIMONDES spreads his Table
With cleanly Cloth, such Food, as he was able.
( Good, wholesome kind) did Range before them there;
First, Cold Baked meat, Cheese, Butter in the Rere:
Wished Frankly eat, meats for the whole Week beside:
(If the are disposed) soon from DERVAN supplied.
Both thanks returned, whilst hightned more their Food
Strangeness of the Place, winged Chanters from the Wood.
Their Supper done, The Hermit's Ground.
Both walked forth contented
To view the Ground, thus briefly represented.
Large Green there was, Long-square in the midst did rest
Small, handsome Pond, four-squared Form expressed.
Clear, smooth as Glass; 'bout that low Mount was raised
For broader Walk; the sides adorned, praised.
Through well set, comely Trees; those ordered so,
That every Third did pleasant Fruit-tree grow.
Like Gems to the Rest, or painted part, as 'twere,
First glanced or might Orchard-Grove appear.
Beneath that Bank, on each enlarged side
(Since Mount long square) good open space descried.
Flat, verdant green, did single Arbor stand
Of Laurel, Bays, which Winter- blasts command;
Still Freshly branched, conjoined close to the Wall:
Same planted Trees set round that Fence withal;
Mixed Cipress there; and near to one of them,
(That side of the Cell) small Fount from Rock did stream,
Adorned by Art, tho something Wild, o'regrown:
At foot beneath, where Watery Cistern shown,
Nine Muses Carved beheld, in Silvan Dress,
With Instruments joined consort to express:
Apollo's self (then Patron) higher raised;
Whilst from the Top rude, wanton Satyrs gazed.
At either end of the Bank (still space between)
IN the Flat beneath, where through Prospect seen.
On every Part small closer Walk beheld,
Whose length went cross to the Gate-side excelled.
With flaunting Palms, their tops like Roof combined;
That noblest Branch for Conquerors designed.
'Twas large and various Ground; first open space
Led from the door to the Hermit's dewlling place.
Bank by the Wall proved here and there beset
With Corans, Roses, Paunsey, Violet.
CLERMANTHE found in this unlook'd-for Sight
(Joined Nature, Art) ORSAMNES both delight.
Not much past Nine (still lusty, ancient tho)
Their Woman knoc'd, THIRSANDER'S Note did show:
Both nimbly read those Lines (by the Hermit heard)
Contentful way; gave the Agent great Reward.
ORSAMNES then declared, of Virgin-vow
His Wife had made three Weeks remained now;
He therefore would sad Fancy charm, delight,
And Feign at least that proved his Bridal night.
CLERMANTHE Blushed, their Landlord smiled withal;
ORSAMNES when to's pleasing Task did fall.
Cropped several Flowers, wherewith that verdant Ground
Did flaunting show, till gathered choice Compound.
CLERMANTHE then (whilst the Hermit led the way,
Grave Father-like) to the Cell did guard, convey.
In formal sort, Saluted her at Door;
Then finely strewed with Paunseys round the Floor.
Pinks, Violets; Rose decked the Marriage Bed:
Clean Pillow-bear provided for her Head.
Want of Night-cloaths; which being worn at Home,
(Choice couching Garb) did rarely well become.
The Duke seemed active tho, as for that end
Pulled off her Hood; did Handmaid-like attend.
Reached, holds the Glass; till caused in her that fashion
Sweet, sobrest Blush through strong imagination.
He leads her Bridegroom-like, prepared so,
To the larger Bed, where couched down might show.
Shot Lightning-flash, or falling Star exposed:
Whilst the Hermit sat with his Friendly Chair enclosed.
Thus, Curtains drawn 'twixt them, TIMONDES there;
Still Window's Light CLERMANTHE'S Face howere
Thence to behold; he lay down by her side;
Both in their Clothes; warm season well complied:
Grasped her in's Arms, whilst Silver Moon that hour
With Fainter Beams adorned the Rocky Bowr.
Blush strained into her Cheeks, least then might prove
Years Vow forgot: those foremost Fruits of Love:
In Kisses seized, which should his thoughts content;
Nere in that way (so free, so excellent)
Enjoyed before, for Posture's pleasantness,
Time, Pillow, Bed; Bridal resemblances.
Her Beauties sparkled round, those fairest eyes
(on Gloomy Couch) like Morning-Stars when rise.
Or Rosy blushing East when Break of Day,
Her Cheeks and Lips conjoynd' did show, display.
TIMONDES slept that while, good Honest Heart,
Becalmed thoughts, till bare, Loud snorting Part.
At later Heurs, the Rest themselves disposed
Conforming Both, their Gallant Eyes they closed.
Come gentle sleep, bind this Transcendent Pair
In Silken Bands, most beautiful and fair
Of all thy drousie Realm (with Slumbers now
Bedewed their Eyes) since to thy Scepter bow.
Give Cordial-like Repast, no strange Offense,
Unpleasing noise disturb their quiet Sense.
Here Joined more touching that Shepherdess, Philaura again

Fair Nymph Gentile, who Mourned in sad Distress.
PHILAURA called, Beloved ORSAMNES gone; Vesta Diana, Goddess of Chastity.

Ere break of day this Plot resolved upon:
Close walk by stealth to the Vestal Nunnery,
Far distant Place, known vowed Society
Of Heathen Maids (such found in Rome, elsewhere)
For Chaster minds, reserved provided there.
She would make One; by the Father tho discry'd
They Locked her up, persuasion-salves applied
To cure this last Disease; broke forth in View:
SILVANOR whilst for Love did strangely Sue:
Pastor Gentile, which mourned for her before;
Tho hid, concealed; Advanced upon that Score.
By Parents, Friends, since might her thoughts reclaim
From Vestal mood, and the old disastrous Flame.
Such the other too, MONTANUS called expressed;
Still constant served MERDONE'S gentle Breast,
Soon noised was ORSAMNES Voyage round,
Who then whole year upon that Pastor-ground
Had dwelt reserved. A second Festival
Third day did prove, to Ceres due withal;
Goddess of Corn; performed cheerful fashion:
In the Afternoon used Sports for Celebration.
Prime Shepherds did short Masque-device invent, The Shepherd's Masque.

The Lord ORSAMNIS Praise to represent.
(So much beloved, esteemed) Spruce for the Attire;
Worn Flowery wreaths, the best of their Voice-Quire.
SILVANOR and MONTANUS Song composed.
Framed Notes and Words, each Stave with Chorus closed.
SONG.
1.
Two Voices. Honor's chief Gem, brave Lord Farewell;
Still Shine, excel:
Tho changed these Flocks rude Bleating sound,
With Native Ground,
For Climes remote where Wonders dwell,
Chorus of all.
Gentlest Gales on Waters Floor
Conduct thy Barque,
Conduct thy Barque to Foreign Shore.
2.
Two Voices. Next Pan himself Thou here did Reign,
Like Star of the Plain;
And through thy Beams the Pastor fries
Could Civillize:
Much Raised advanced their Rural Brain:
Chorus of all.
Choicest Honor (last) did show.
With vulgar Rank,
With vulgar rank conjoined below.
3.
Two Voices. Prime Male Compound, whose Virtue, Parts
Did take our Hearts.
And Forms united excellence
Much pleased our Sense.
Small Grange would Cloud thy grand Deserts.
Chorus of all.
Pastors shall howere Record,
They could long time young Duke afford
Advance, Proclaim
Thy Praise to Fame,
And Glory in the Lord ORSAMNE'S Name.
Song ended thus, their nimblest Youth and Art
All showed in Masquing Dance, for second part;
Loud Musick's Noise; as would perform thereby
Some Court-exploit for the Ear and gazing Eye.
ORSAMNES health then Marched stoutly round,
Triumphant way, to the clearer Cornets sound.
Whist Hills and Rocks, like chanting Eccho's station,
Did Partners seem conjoined for Celebration.
That drunk by all, one of their Masquing Train,
Great Friend to Shepherds, Sheep, with cheerful Brain
These Words pronounced (OSAMNES since disposed
That Life to leave) set Speech; their praise disclosed.
Kind Brothers of the Flocks, to gentle whom
(Grand Patrons thought) for constant dwellings come.
Peace, Quietness, joined harmless Innocence;
There seek protecting Roofs, find shelter thence.
If any where. O Choice, contentful Life!
Unused to Jars, that boiling envious Strife
Of haughty Courts, their Wanton Luxury
Proud, gorgeous Pomp withal; from Projects free.
No painted Vizards worn, but the inward heart
And outward Face alike; matched either part:
Kings have left Thrones by your retreat befriended;
As Swains from you have Kingly Thrones ascended.
Then chose they strait, for well conjoined pleasure,
Prime Virgins there at hand, danced Rural measure.
Whilst Grandsires nodded off, talked are and over,
Themselves had done the like in Youth, more.
Now for the Court we shall advance more high;
To that young King our Pen conform, apply,
Whosoever the Prince Disgraced; Acts there declare:
Great Lords conjoined, some strange, as various are:
But if too Long conceived, o'repass, refrain;
Third Book presents our Chief, large Story again.
The End of the First Book.
THE GRECIAN STORY, BOOK II.
THat King fore-nam'd which now two years had Reigned
(Brought up Prince-like) bad Humors bred maintained; The Arcadian King.

So wronged Ingenious parts; made also less,
Corrupted them through sensual thoughts, excess.
Good Reason had (nor the outward Form did want)
But Fancy ruled, by far Predominant.
Extreme for Lust and Wine withal appeared:
Chief Men, great worth conjoined, disliked and feared.
Nay, loathed the more, if by his Father seemed
(Such Prince ORONTES was) Beloved Esteemed.
Prime Courtiers, Lords like Coin himself pourtrai'd:
Luxurious Stamp Commanders (last) displayed.
His former Acts, remarkable although,
Not glanced upon, we shall some Later show.
Outlandish Prince was entertained there
( Month past) with Sports, and Dancing Balls in the Rere.
Proud Tilting came, performed as choice Farewell; Tilting at Court.

In which those Lords might others Parallel.
The King was placed in the End, one Story high,
(Large Gallery) that Stranger- Prince set by;
Prime Ladies, next beneath on either hand
Tall Scaffold, Arched for Gentry's Rank did stand:
'Twere long their Pomp and Braveness to recount,
Both Man and Beast; whose acts did there surmount:
The Attendants Garb, each Amorous Device
While prancing passed; well well pleased those Grecian eyes.
Two take for all; whom we shall mention more,
Joined afterward of the Lovers Rival-score: Two Lords, Melargon, Valenson.

Both now for Honor sought, that Mistress Fame,
MELARGON and VALENSON called by name:
Earls by Degree, Court-gems might represent
For Person, Parts; its noblest Ornament.
Both of the Kings own Years, now Twenty-four;
Companions too; choice marks of Favor wore.
First Armor had Grass-green, well silvered, brave;
White and Green Plumes his lofty Crest did wave.
Red Sorrel Horse marked with black spots, whereon
(Imbroider'd work) Rich, Prime Caparison.
Where the Artful Hand Spring-banks could represent,
Dressed round with Flowers. Before in Order went
Two Pages Footmen two, attired in Green,
Silk, Silver knots, as all had Pastors been;
Such Hooks and Bags: each formal Shield did bear;
Fine Mount portray'd, Sheep grazing painted there;
These words beheld, large Characters, above
My Master feeds on Hope; Device of Love.
Armor Seagreen the last; gold works adorn
The Horse Dapled-grey, like Clouds; by whom was worn
Choice Furniture; by Art imbroider'd over,
Rocks, mounting Waves: his Gallant Helmet bore.
Sand-colour'd Plumes, Seagreen; so, gently pranc'd:
Two Footmen, Pages joined before advanced;
Coats of Seagreen, like Merchants all arrayed;
Knots silver, Gold; their Buskins Sand portrai'd;
Those Sprucely Decked with feigned Pearl, embost:
Their Shields like Seas, where Barque by Tempest tossed
Amongst the Rocks; ore-clouded, Stormy Skies:
Their Words aloft; I venture for fair Prize.
Both well performed; Curvets, joined Race Carrier;
Broke well their Staves, might equal matched appear.
The King ere long those Scaffolds viewed of the side;
Some Leisure, Pause, where Gentry's Rank descried:
Tilting that way, instead of Warlike Lance,
With wandering Eyes, he cast Lascivious Glance
Chiefly on Two; for Nature's Gems designed;
Which amongst the Rest like Planet Beauty's Shined.
Viewed, as he thought before, remembered tho
Their Pictures 'twas; large Female Train for show.
In's Gallery; Corinthian Painter these
(Exactest drawn) sold him for Rarities. The King Enamored on two Women.

Inflamed thus, he turned and whispered strait
'Two Courtiers there (behind his Chair did wait)
Of's Bedchamber, could wanton Princes please;
Called VANDIMONT by name, and DARDIGUES.
Both Active found, had Served him often till then
For close Venerious ways; confiding men.
The First commands to trace one Party home
( Clothes, Person, Seat described) learn well the Sum
What, who she was, each needful circumstance,
Then charged the Last with cautious Care advance.
After that next, below, enquir^d the Main
Concerning her, inform him strait again.
Both said, they knew their Party, and also where
They lodged last week; would follow them however.
Night being come, and all for Bed retired,
That VANDIMONT, done the Agent's Task, desired
(More knowledge got) informed thus far the King;
Knight's Wife she was who did small Portion bring:
Had Married been four Years, yet at that time
Scarce Twenty two; was Wedded in her Prime
Forty himself, but fair Estate orecame;
Housed where she was; DORASTA called by name:
Her Nurse withal chief Waiter proved for Power
Might serve as Baud; found great regard that hour. Dorasta one, a Wife.

Then DARDIGUES informed him of the Last,
That Maid she was, scarce nineteen Years ore-past;
Gentile for Birth, small Portion tho, less Pride:
With Widow-mother too did still reside.
Not far from whom a second Widow lay
(Known to himself) who lived but meaner way;
Familiar Friend to both; kind visitings;
Choice private House for such Venerious things.
Himself had wanton Plots on her, but now
Those Lustful thoughts to the King his Master bow:
That Royal Town as constant Seat they chose;
Fit subject for Temptation hence arose.
The King with both well pleased seemed; for he
Loved Maids since fresh, ungathered. Flowers they be;
Most Longed withal for Joys unknown of Love:
Next, fancied Wives, since more restrained did prove;
Unlawfuller: Good Choice (conjoined) if Old
Their Husbands last, bred strong Desires, more bold:
Yet Fancy's vote the Maid preferred; Mardiva the Other, a Maid.
by name
MARDIVA called; first place that Virgin-flame,
Thus, DARDIGUES should Tempt that Neighbour-friend
By golden Bait to serve their wanton end:
That to her House, or his Own drawn (where-ere)
The King might speak, and closely enjoy her there,
For 'twas his Humor, choice sometimes to Woo
By his own Person, Parts; overcome them so:
High Self-conceit had proved Victorious
(Conjoined Reward) more proud of the Conquest thus.
DARDIGUES liked the Employment well, since found
Strong PANDAR'S Brain; good Advantageous Ground.
That Foreign Prince to Corinth being gone,
To the Widow called SILEUCA walked anon,
Unfolded there the King's Desire, expressed, Dardigues Plot upon Mardiva.

How grand Reward she thence might reap, made blessed,
If closed, compli'd or else, the Royal Hate,
And Anger both proved her oreclouding Fate.
SILEUCA, tho less Friend to Bawdy ways,
Did Virtuous Courage want such sharp assays
To cross, Repel; nor glistring bait despised;
So Poizing all, since Regal Stamp comprised.
The King commanded it; to join Consent
Best course she thought, whatere the last Event:
Tho was informed MERDIVA'S Stock should prove
To Wealth advanced by that concordant Love.
Thus, 'twas agreed; her careful maid should bear
Some Patterns strait (things then expected there)
To the fair MARDIVA'S hand, with Lines enclosed
Which this contained; That were she pleased, disposed
To come next Day in the Afternoon, near Three,
Prime Rarities, left in her Custody
She should behold; and hear important thing
Concerned her self: close, private Visiting.
Nor danger of her Mother's sight at all,
Gone forth alone great way to Funeral.
Note penned and sealed, the Girl with nimbleness
Her Task discharged, found good effect, success:
MARDIVA there, she would not fail (replied)
About that hour; stolen lastly, undescry'd.
Glad DARDIGUES returned to Court from thence,
And gave the King this warm Intelligence:
By whose Command takes up on Liking, strait
Choice, gallant Stufs, Silver, Gold, for Bait.
(The King had Gems) those to SILEUCA soon
Price left, conveyed, for next days afternoon.
Next cheerful day, Court-Dinner being ended,
The King took Barge, by DARDIGUES attended;
Who fine, small Building owned by the Water side,
Half mile from Court; good Prospect thence descried:
Spruce Garden-plot beyond, adorned with Flowers;
Carved Statues there, clear, Perled Fount and Bowers:
Prime Chamber 'twas, with Pictures garnished round,
Choice Room for Bed; fair Parlor next the ground.
Thither would come the King, like private Station
For calm retreat, Books, sober Contemplation;
Met Women tho, enjoyed; back way for them
Prepared by Land: if proved Nice, coyer Gem,
By Hacney- Coach to other Places ranged:
Now to SILEUCA'S came, disguised, changed. The King with Mardiva.

Suit-Hair and Beard; by her received however.
Like Merchant- friend, convenient Chamber there.
Things ordered well for the Plot Venerious,
Near the hour of three (word kept precisely thus)
MARDIVA came in plain Silk Robe attired;
Beauty from thence the more advanced, admired;
Sky-colour'd 'twas with Scarlet Ribbons trimmed,
To which the Face like Sun resplendent seemed;
White Sarcenet-Hood, same Scarf, with Roses dressed,
Much like the Morn; part-veil'd her Snowy Breast.
Bright, curled brown Hair, which whilst their Beams displayed
Her gallant Eyes, Spruce, Lovely Clouds portray'd.
Tall, handsome Form for the Body's Shape designed;
Prime Carriage last, to take the more, combined.
Door shut, withdrawn, SILEUCA told the King,
This was that Virgin friend, whom she did bring
Jewels to see. When raised, with Amorous Eye,
Respective Bow, the King joined strait reply,
She welcome was; her self transcendent Gem
Would his dull Toys disgrace, showed Box of them.
Stars Sparkling Light did seem from thence to rise,
Whilst Day breaks forth through fair CLERMAMTHE'S Eyes.
Part dazzled tho by Those whom viewed, beheld:
Then Stuffs surveyed which on the Board excelled,
Prime, gallant Choice; each sight did praise, advance
The King conjoined with wanton Lovers glance
Those at your Service are, much startled when
Blush stained her Virgin Cheek, conceiving then,
Some Suitor 'twas of Merchant-rank (what ere)
By the Widow brought. False Beard discharged the re.
She back retired strait, shown Reverence,
Jewels forgot, more Wonder blazed from thence.
Sweet, fly not, said the King; I come in Love,
Not harmful way: Next part Salute did prove.
Fond, Amorus MARDIVA (strangely Tried)
She looked not for so great a Guest, replied:
Amazement seized the King conjoined again,
That Guest your Lover's found withal, restrain
Those wandering Thoughts; two Kisses more conferred:
Went farther on, whilst Silent she appeared.
At Tilting late, MARDIVA fair (said he)
Whilst others broke their staves with Gallantry,
Your Eyes Encountered mine; Dart beam from thence
Struck through my heart. Great Sir (she said) the Offense
Was to my thoughts unknown, these harmless Eyes
Not Guilty of that Treasonous Charge, Surprise.
Wound pleasant 'twas (the King conjoined) your power
Holds Balm withal; the Traitor loved that hour.
Strange chance (she said) most mighty Sir, that I
Should fondly seize, far rarer Objects by,
Overcome your Princely Heart. I viewed none so
(Joined he again) snce then Love-qualms do grow,
And crossed desire does turn to strange Disease;
Your gentle Breast may Cordial yield, appease.
I now would you enjoy. Great, Royal Sir
She answered then (short blushing pause, Demur;
Unusual streit) I should in noble kind
Most gladly serve you, Handmaid-like, Resigned.
Count you this then Ignoble, he replied,
Your Prince to meet in Lovers Joys uney'd?
That natural way which Humane stock preserves?
Next, chears the world. Your Majesty observes
What Is Truth ( she said) confirmed, but in this Case
Unfit, irregular; 'twould wrong, Disgrace
Clear Virtu's Rule. The King conjoined again;
Why should Brute Beasts more freedom have then Men?
Their Lords and Masters, in Delight and Pleasure,
Because (said she) Man's stored with higher Treasure.
Reason in him commands, does curb, restrain
That roving mood. Fancy ( said he again)
It Is fond Conceit: True Man, and Rational
I boast my self, yet no such check at all
Do find, Restraint. Tho feel not now perchance,
Great Sir ( she said) You may ere the Morn advance:
No, no, nor then ( he said) except in Dream;
Thrown by such waking toys ( looks angry Beam
Strait darting forth) Your Portion more shall rise,
By Thousand pound, if gentle grant complies:
Brave Clothes withal. When glancing on the ground,
MARDIVA thus; that Love, Sir, I have found,
Zeal for yur Honor's Cause (joined boldness too)
Lastly, your Health, I dared to expire for you.
Choice Riddle, Paradox; said then the King,
To dye for the Honor, Health, ( amazing thing.)
Not Live to my content. Great Sir (said she)
Unlawful that; nor pure such Joys would be:
My Fame struck dead withal, I should where ere
Like Cankered Rose to the virtuous World appear.
Thou shall my Rose be thought (he said) Persume;
What World can know? These are sworn Friend; Presume
Close placed, withdrawn, where we kind Arms may spread,
For many Hours conjoined in naked Bed.
Let not thus change, Coy, froward mood, translate
That nobler Passion Love in me to Hate.
It Is your King speaks; Great Ones would sue for this
Now Offered you; come, seal the Grant with kiss:
So, drawn most near, conceiving then less Wise
Word-batteries, did strait her Lips surprise;
As scaled the Fort. Your Majesty (said she,
Obeisance made) I hope will Pardon me;
Some Moral Rules, long since by Mother taught,
Joined Virgin bashfulness, produced and wrought
Those Arguments; Love-motions (last) soon ended,
Breed Slightings often, with value scarce befriended.
Well, (said the King) since now disposed for the Action,
Grand Patience proved, make Amorous Satisfaction.
This earnest take for all (Box open there)
Choice Diamond Ring, since the hand did baer appear,
Thrust on her Finger strait; sealed Kisses then
Roused from deep thoughts, the fair Mardiva when
These words conjoined. Great Sir, my Mother may
Want me ere long, through some regards this day;
Will guess that I am here: She Is Passionate,
May wrong your full content in Bed, create
Disturbance strange; asking your Royal leave,
I shall step down door locked, the Key receive
With mine own hand; maid charged to answer none
( As Folks abroad) for staying till night unknown.
Her Hood and Gloves dropped on the Board howere,
Like gentle Pawn for the handsome Person there.
Walked nimbly forth, so down the stairs withal;
The Maid below did in their hearing call:
Being come to the Door, Your Mistress tell (said she)
Mardiva slips away.
I could not stay: went forth most hastily.
For thus it was; Pure, Chaste, MARDIVA proved,
Till saw the King to Roughness, Anger moved;
Talked (lastly) of Hate; then seemed to cloze, comply;
Plain Forcing feared, those two Assistants by
(Faint Virgin-heart) this way resolved upon
For her Escape; felt wrack till she was gone.
Trip'd toward home, whose passage proved by chance
Close and obscure, till did small way advance;
When thought of the Ring, so long through fear forgot,
Orewhelmed Brain with this departing Plot: Mardivas trouble.

Sad Qualms perplexed her through double Crime;
The King deceived, Robbed, Cheated then same time.
Was grieved far more, since might have left that shrouded
Under her Hood and Gloves, till gone o'reclouded.
Thus, dared she not go Home least was pursued,
There seized on; nor backward course conclude
To tell and trust the Maid: might prove beside
By the King again or DARDIGUES descried.
She therefore chose this nimblest way, did go,
In The joining Street, to her young School-fellow;
Rich Tradesmans Wife, DELPHINE called; conjured
To give SILEUCA back that Ring, secured
For the Royal hand; perhaps remaining there;
Or carry strait to the Court, s^^^h D^ng^^, fear.
DELPHINE came, sent up that Wench with speed;
SILEUCA stealing down, of the Ring was freed.
Walked to MARDIVA'S Mother then, expressed;
MARDIVA proved that time her friendly Guest;
And Husband lodged two Nights abroad, place free,
(By her desired) her Bedfellow would be:
So prayed her not to expect; alltho designed
To ease that way MARDIVA'S troubled mind.
MARDIVA fair, glancing next Morn below
On Garden-plot (from her new Lodging so
Balcone joined) She was that time beheld
By brave young Man, whose Preson, Garb excelled;
And he by her; tho strait her self withdrew
Behind that Glazed Screen from further view.
Yet so observed, he proved Enamoured thence, Corinth-Lord.

Face, Body's form, conjoined Excellence.
It was a Young, Corinthian Lord, lodged there,
Of gallant Parts, Estate did grand appear.
Who ranging far, set down for Travels cloze
The Arcadian Realm; from whence for Corinth goes,
His Native Soil; VENDORMES called by name,
These things DELPHINE heard, received the same
From's Countryman that brought him first well tried,
Her long-known Merchant friend; lodged there beside.
VENDORMES thought, his Travels large and free
Did nere present like beauteous Rarity;
Asked what she was: DELPHINE (since no danger)
Informed him to the full, found Noble Stranger.
After high Praise, strong Love conjoined expressed,
Her Friendly help he sought, (then Lordly Guest)
For some acquaintance. She replied that Hour,
She would perform what lay within her Power.
DELPHINE told MARDIVA'S self again;
His Rank, prime Parts, Estate, did naught restrain.
VENDORMES, she had Plot devised before
So, up ere long he came, passed by that Door,
DELPHINE; called; as wished to speak with her,
DELPHINE; loud; she said, without Demur,
I Am here, my Lord, (the Door unlocking strait)
Few words with special friend, and I shall wait
On you beneath, when glance, with humble Bow,
If proves your Friend, he said (shown pleasing Brow
Entering upon it) I may presume to kiss
Her Fairest Hand (although conjoined to this
Her sweetest Mouth) for Rudeness in the Action
I do her Pardon crave, Corinth Lord Courting Mardiva.
as satisfaction.
Blush the Answer was. You were too quick for me,
My Lord (DELPHINE then) I had more free
Come down to you. VENDORMES strait replys;
Most powerful Charm sent from that Lady's Eyes
Did draw me in. MARDIVA answer made;
She taught them no such Charms. VENDORMES said;
But Nature did, might boldness thence excuse,
She Is now reserved (DELPHINE said) Recluse.
Then second Pardon's begged; said he again;
That former Power does here to stay constrain,
Which first O'recame: while does with you Dispense,
I may presume yet more, no great Offense.
MARDIVA then; she was my Schoolfellow;
May Partner fit for close Retirment show.
Conjoined VENDORMES there; Tho Framed she be
For Sighs, or Smiles; Joy, mournful sympathy.
My self may equal prove: Please but thus far
To take from her my natural Character;
I might be then confirmed Co-partner too
When she with Blush, DELPHINE that of you
Has given my Lord (replied) most Noble one.
If thought (said he) sincere, that Favor shown;
Then, Gentlest, grant still leave to stay, enjoy
Sight of those Eyes. DELPHINE strait (convoy
To the Amorus Plot) My Lord will scarce remain
Two days within the Realm. He joined again.
It Is Truth, indeed, and so may well-Improve
My precious Hours in point of Chaster Love.
Tho wandered far, I never did see, behold
This Lady's Beauteous Match; She Is prime enrolled
Thought Singular. Since then my Lord (said She)
You Traveled scarce awake, with Senses free.
'Twas not in Dream, Madam, you may conclude
(VENDORMES said) your mind more Rare, unview'd.
Thus, longs my Heart, till for Corinthian home
You pleased to advance; Travels grand Prize become:
Those daintiest Arms my Port conceived (as 'twere)
Haven of Rest, content. Shown Blushes there,
MARDIVA joined; more knowledge in that Choice
Of Wife methinks ( my Lord) e're passed your voice
With Wisdom should concur. He strait replied
I Have found so much, in this short space descried,
And heard much more through that great Friend's Relation,
As has confirmed my thoughts. Whence took occasion
DELPHINE strait to speak: I did inform
His Lordship how you fled Lascivious Storm,
The King himself ( still purely Chaste, unstained)
Young, Handsome tho; Gems, Gold like trash disdained
VENDORMES joined, like Hope-exalted man,
'Twas primely good; I Will be your Guardian.
Best Maid, through Arcadie; Convoy where're;
Grant for Reward, tho Life endangered there.
This Loved compound; Mind, Bodies, choice perfection,
When Blushing she, well pleased glance reflection;
Something, my Lord, Y'ad need to mark (replied)
That Is good in me, since little else beside.
Small worldly Fortune have. VENDORMES when,
Fairest, I valu't not; conjoined again;
Throw't all in Alms away, what would you more?
DELPHINE said; did summon strait to the Door
Their Merchant- friend; who, being admitted free,
Confirmed his Rank, Estate, in each Degree.
This heightened too, might pleasing thoughts advance;
Kind Uncle of hers at Corinth dwelt, by chance
Well known to both, informed of his Name:
Thus, jointly all Confederates became
For present Grant, importunate did show;
Choice Grounds on either side enforcing so.
VENDORMES prayed, She rather would strange Doom
That hour pronounce, than bid him leave the Room
Unsatisfi'd; since shall most constant Lover,
As earnest be, no Paper-flames discover.
Turning from them to the Window strait, retired
As 'twere for sober Pause (tho small required)
Things thought of, Poised before; such light from thence
Clear Reason blazed, Love, Fortune's eminence.
(Her Mother too, for certain grounds, well pleased
Might follow them) here thoughts of Danger seized
Still doubtful Fears of the Royal power, that Ring:
Never by SILEUCA given perchance to the King:
VENDORMES Person (lastly) much approved,
These joined o'recame; the fair MARDIVA loved.
So, turned again, pure Blush withal, refined;
My Lord ( She said) Your Person, Parts, combined. Mardiva, Lord contracted.

With noble Love, of choice, deserving Rate
Have won me yours; may be contracted strait.
If you Desire; but for the Marriage- Bed,
Lest through Revengeful Storm Disturbance bred.
Delay till calmer hour I shall propound,
When we do reach more safe Corinthian Ground.
VENDORMES closed, much Joy; exchanged were
Kind, mutual Vows, with Kiss concluding there.
After some Talk, short general Discourse,
Which still did raise Affection-flames, enforce;
Love heightened more; down the elder Merchant went,
DELPHINE both (being called) by their consent,
Took Order too for Journey the next Morn;
Leaving them there by Vows ingage'd and sworn,
To their hearts wish; since Love would private be
Whole Hours dissolved in pleasing Talk most free.
Choice kisses joined, conserves more Cordializing
Since looked not for (both gently sympathising)
Till the Evening came, ere 'twas desired tho,
Much trampling Noise, loud Voices then below.
Through the entry sound MARDIVA forth did glance;
Strait DARDIGUES, that Pandar viewed (sad chance)
In The Garden plot; Mardiva's trouble again.
retired again, she heard
These Words from him; That, that is the Room, regard.
Whence strait conceived, that Ring they wanted thus,
By false SILEUCA kept; Base Covetous;
So found her out. O fly my Lord (said she)
Or both undone. Why, joined Amazedly.
VENDORMES there. I saw that Man, she said,
Came with the King; that Ring's the cause: Betrayed:
He named this for the Room. I Will either Dye,
(Said he) or Rescue you. She joined reply;
'Twill more enrage, they come; by all our Love
I beg, conjure, withdraw. I Will not remove
(Said He) this Sword at hand (Door fast however)
Heard trampling up their Stairs, then knocking there:
VENDORMES with drawn Sword seemed Treble-liv'd;
Shall I go skulk (said he) my Spouse Captived?
Who knocks there? speak, It Is I, DELPHINE said;
Standing without. MARDIVA when, Afraid,
Peace (answered strait) I saw beneath that Man
Came with the King. No harm (said she again)
Unlock, I Will tell you all: Opening the Door,
Soon closed then; Thus 'twas (She said) no more:
That DARDIGUES by the King was lately sent
To the Corinth Merchant here for this intent,
To take up Stuffs on Liking; gorgeous too;
Now back returned, were meant (it seems) for you.
But why those Words (they asked) that, that is the Room,
Our Merchants Warehouse 'twas (she said) being come.
He showed them that bide there they should unlade;
Would soon depart, his price in Gold repaid.
She came to tell, her Maid informed her there,
MARDIVA'S Mother strait would Guest appear.
Both joined Rejoice. Soon walked forth DARDIGUES;
Their Merchant tho with franck Reward did please.
For clearing all; SILEUCA with that Ring
(Who had at first fallen down before the King,
And Pardon begged, since well performed her part)
Now kneeled again: MARDIVA'S honest heart
Humbly excused, grown sick forgot the same;
'Twas soon Returned, no need of further Claim.
His angry Mood, that Gem beheld appeared
More pacified, since then no Cheat was feared:
Young, peevish Girl, he said; would trust no more
Their Female Sex beyond the Chamber door.
To the Widow paid however (Gold) fifty pound,
Took then false Beard (still Qualmish on that Ground)
Brought Hackney-Coach, rode strait with DARDIGUES
To the Summer-Bow'r; warm Fit did there appease
With cooling Fruits; then joined good Wines repast:
Clothed like himself returned to the Court at last.
Her Picture tho (discharged from the honored Room
In's Gallery) condemned to Flaming Doom.
MARDIVA'S Mother came, by both desired;
Spruce Widow 'twas, cheerful, but then expired
Her Fortieth Year: VENDORMES whom did show
Much Love, regard. She was informed so
Of past Events; her Daughters Gallant Choice,
Journey resolved; gave her concordant Voice.
By the Lord withal strong earnest Invitation
To Corinth joined (as Neighbour-Soil, Greek Nation.
Kind Brother there) for constant Residence:
Which She embraced; much pleased showed from thence.
Supper being brought they set themselves to the Board;
Where Mirthful Talk did Musick's part afford.
Things were prepared for Horse by Morning light;
Her Mother too Lodged there that cheerful Night.
By five next day, that Merchant their comrade
(Who still young Factor left) they entrance made
Upon their Course as did the rising Sun;
Ere night o're-pass'd th Arcadian Bounds, that done,
Reached few Miles off good, noble Friend, lodged there:
Third Morn beheld, they both Espoused were.
More Formal way, Mardiva Married.
with mutual Joy, Content:
Might either show their Sexes Ornament.
After some days repose they did proceed,
Till reached his Gallant House, for Rest decreed.
(By friend resigned strait) brave Country-seat:
In Corinth too large Winter-house, complete.
Her Mother in short time sold all at home,
VENDORMES and MARDIVA'S Guest become,
Whose Virtue found reward, much magnified;
Spent there her days, with Comfort lived and died.
The King's fixed now for Knight's young Wife no less,
DORASTA named, shown ardent eagerness:
Called VANDIMONT, prime Wenching Engineer,
Concluded strait, that Nurse, which proved so near
To her own self in place, found choice regard;
Should first be drawn by tempting Golds Reward,
To bring her where he might the Business move:
Still Thoughts disposed (as strongest ground for Love)
By Person, Parts, to assault again the Last:
Next, VANDIMONT'S own House for place surpassed:
Like that of DARDIGUES, by the Water side.
Beneath the Court, few Buildings there deserved.
Backdoor to the Field withal through the Garden led:
Thus VANDIMONT the Affair strait managed.
He sent his Boy with meaner Clothes attired, Valenson's Plot on Dorasta.

Who Nurse informed, one from some Friends desired
To speak with her, Field lay by the Garden gate
Where remained; that Business proved of weight;
Bequeathed to her fair, handsome Legacy;
Nurse said she would follow him, more privately,
State Garden-way; strait VANDIMONT (being come)
To corner Nook withdrawn, disclosed, in sum,
What Golden Shower might cause, or Storm produce
The King's kind motion made if should refuse,
For private Meeting with her Lady, where
His Love might speak; found Grant, enjoy her there.
Nurse (fainter heart) scarce dared to Jar, dissent,
Liked well the Gold; nor Lady's stolen content
Grudged, Envied ought. Yet should she not Agree,
Feared casting off, tho pleasant Brain and Free.
Told VANDIMONT, she much approved that way,
The King's own Person, Words might best oresway.
Tho longed withal, it could be so contrived
As not to seem her Act; least thence deprived
of Favor, Place, DORASTA'S Heart unknown;
Yet hoped well, Frank, pleasing Temper shown.
She could entice her forth perchance to View
Prime Needle-works (which valued well she knew)
To House reserved, the King concealed there;
But that would plainly her design appear.
Chief Place affirmed well-shaded Park, that stood
Short Mile from Town which pleased her walking mood.
Through the open Fields from Garden-gate would call
Nurse single forth, each slightly veiled withal:
Next day resolved was for tracing thither,
Where the King might (with VANDIMONT together)
Salute disguised, as chance, if found less Coy,
Love- Parley past, amongst branched Shades enjoy.
Old broken Lodge there also stood, combined,
Close Garden-plot, dark Arbor there behind.
Wise VANDIMONT approved her Female-Brain,
Tho that scarce close enough to entertain
For longer Dalliance thought; the King beside
Loved naked Bed, his House to the wish complied
If her could draw through selfsame Fields below
By's Garden-wall (since pleased with walking so)
He had prime Plot to fetch her in, that She
Should not Gainsay: Nurse Guiltless thought and Free.
Which told her strait; in view the Place beheld
Nay then 'twas Right (she said) bad fears dispelled.
DORASTA once each Week with her alone,
Walked by that Door to the Bathing Place unknown,
For Women used; the time two days from thence;
Past one half-hour: bred last more confidence;
Her Husband gone this Morn, weeks stay designed:
Thus, both withdrew, for next exploit combined.
Day come and Hour, DORASTA, Nurse attending,
Each veiled withal, from the upper Field descending;
Passed by that Garden door, where Scout did stand,
Arrived VANDIMONT, viewed sign from Nurses Hand
That those they were; least some mistake perchance,
Good Marks beside; he forth did strait advance;
The Lady Arrested so in the Kings name,
Then Treason's charged pronounced, being in the same.
Joined with her Spouse; the King's Sealed Warrant shown:
He Guard could call; best gently walk unknown.
DORASTA, guiltless Heart, next, confident
'Twas Spleen against them both, with calmness went;
Whist Nurse attends. Locked fast his Garden door,
Midst gloomy Shades she was informed more;
At her own House surprise was meant that Day,
But Knight's withdrawn; so, walking down this way,
Viewed from her Postern-gate (observed howere
The like last Week) he seized her veiled there.
For Traitors Charge, that might from Envy grow,
Or weak conjectures ground, soon answered so.
Close Passage trod, some Stairs they mounted then,
Strait entered Lobby-door, locked fast again:
Next to large Room he both did lead, convey,
Which might the Masters bounteous Hand display.
Prime furnished 'twas, adorned with Painters Art;
Rich Air, Perfumes to the Smell did yield, impart:
Choice Cupbord shined; to smaller Table led
With daintiest Banquet for the Taste bespread.
Where VANDIMONT prayed, she would sit down, Repose;
'Twas meant for her; chair last of Velvet shows.
Wondering at this (Nurse seemed to admire withal)
Since Prisner brought; he gave loud hem for call;
When from th's one side (close Room, reserved tho near)
Soft Music sound conjoined to please her Ear.
As 'twould be Chief; with Sight, Taste, Smell contend:
She sat and heard, Door marked in the furthest end.
Forth came the King, did gorgeous, The King Courting Dorasta.
brave appear
For Gems and Gold; Crown only wanted there.
When, rising strait, performed most humble Bow,
The King saluted her with pleasant Brow.
Whilst Blush adorned her cheek: Madam (did say)
I hope you will pardon all, that boistrous way
Which brought you here; tho Rude, uncivil Action,
The end's gentle, kind; shall speak large satisfaction.
Great Sir (said she) I grant, that foul pretense
Did much amaze my thoughts, but innocence,
Untainted Heart ( same does my Husband bear)
Supported me. Pray then, sit, Taste however.
( The King conjoined) or I shall guess but ill,
First wrongful Qualm lies on your Stomach still.
I Will share with you. So both began to eat;
Drank Wine in Christal-glass; that Sugared meat
Touched slowly found; Madam, so nice? (said he)
No Poison's there; if not for Taste more free.
Let Us talk withal, amongst those Ornaments,
Prime Rarities my Gallery presents,
Your Picture hangs, and I much longed to see
How far that Shade might to your self agree.
Sure, Royal Sir, ( she then, with Blush distained)
Your Painter's Art heightened the Life, o'restrain'd.
If it becomes that place. The King replied,
It much does wrong, by sober Judgment tried;
And I should punish him for the Fault, if were
Within my Realm, asked you not Pardon there.
Madam, in brief, I liked your gallant Shade,
The Substance tho, whence living Beams displayed.
More Beauteous far ( words smiles conjoined their part)
Through Longings has Inflamed my gentle heart.
For sweet enjoyment. Said DORASTA then;
I hope, great Sir, you now but Jest again,
As in that Formal Treason Charge before,
Not so (he said) that was but varnished over.
This earnest Truth confirmed Her cheerful Tongue
Coined strait reply; I hope your Grace ere long
Will choose a Queen for your content. Perchance
(He said) I may; mean while my Joys advance.
Kind Madam, want relieve (Kiss Sealed between)
I shall from you learn to embrace a Queen.
(More Kisses there) as my choice Governess.
But I am bound, great Sir (she said) no less
Then to an Husband's Yoke, wave that, replied
The King again, why should you more be tied
Than Brute Beasts are? next, grant you did enjoy
Young, handsome, strongest Spouse, which often does Cloy.
Yet change for Bedfellow need not offend;
Joined Royal too: Your King's desires befriend.
As for your Spouse, Earl's Title, place we shall
Of profit, power on him confer withal.
And free from least suspect, upon this Ground,
Her Father since Died for the State, Renowned:
Those lost rewards the Son shall have, inherit;
Tho Knightly Rank, not void of Nobler Merit.
There VANDINONT; his warlike Service shown
Of grand Concernment proved, most public, known.
This also her Self from the Husband's mouth had heard;
Who wondering seemed they found no more Regard.
The King proceeds; Your here concealed remain,
Time, Place does serve; choice Room shall entertain.
Five Hours in daintiest Bed, composed for Love;
Your Spouse far off; that man does faithful prove,
(Whose Oath conjoined) should the other blab, betray
Her great Reward's to Ruin turned next day.
Nurse kneeling strait, swore secret Oath, whatere
Her Lady and his Highness Acted there.
DORASTA'S Changed no longer could contend, Dorasta yields.

Keep Virtues bounds; shown streaming Blush in the end
(Like Morning-Cloud, these words did join, disclose:
Your Majesty so prime a Champion shows
For the Courting way, choice Person viewed rare Parts,
That I want strength to check the orepowerful Darts;
Nor further can Deny. Kiss given, the King
The Agreement Sealed; taken by the Hand, did bring
To the joined Room; while, signal knock for cause
From VANDIMONT their Consort strait withdraws:
There Windows shined, bedeckt with many a Flower
In Crystal pots; adorned like Summer Bower.
Large Bed appeared; white Satin half beheld,
Mixed broad Carnation- Panes, to the eye excelled;
Four gallant Plumes above, sprigs silver Plate;
For Venus self: the whole Chamber delicate:
That (said the King) should prove new Marriage- bed.
Nurse then was called, since useful Waiter bred,
Pins soon with Clothes discharged, both Couched were;
Nurse strait withrawn, the King embraced her there:
Fierce Tyrant played, as ore his Subjects Wives
(MARDIVA lost) would claim Prerogatives.
Her Beauty's viewed by Day; thought singular,
Choice Prince's Bedfellow; like Morning Star
Couched by his side, or Chloris Queen of Flowers:
Thus, pampered way, dissolved the pleasing Hours.
Nurse was mean while by VANDIMONT invited
To the other Banquet there, her Taste delighted.
(Himself for Slumber's laid) like Queen she sat
On Velvet Chair; her belly crammed with that.
Then stuffed large Hankercheif, till drowsy grown,
Clasping her Arms (like kind Companion shown
To VANDIMONT) sleep yauning way devours
In goodly State, whole comfortable Hours.
As thought by Dreams to enjoy her Ladys pleasure,
When waking viewed choice Pictures round at leisure;
Talked (last) with VANDIMONT; till summoned then,
'Tween Seven and Eight, for the Handmaids Task again.
DORASTA Rose, Dressed takes her leave, retires;
Walked out unknown, well slack'd the Royal Fires.
Six days dissolved, her Knight returned home;
Of Princely word the King's discharged become;
Coined Earl he was through Father's grand desert:
choice Place obtained withal for second Part.
No Jealous Thoughts disturb, since long ago
The old King (conceived) might more regardful show.
DORASTA Poising now that She had strayed
From Virtu's Path, much wronged her self, betrayed
Kind Husband too at once; thur far vain Pride,
And sensual humor both had Gratified.
That those Delights, unlawful Joys did send
Sorrow to the Heart, proved bitter Sweets in the end;
'Twas sober point, awaked from former Dream,
Whereof the King main cause appeared, Supreme:
For She might more unfortunate be Guest,
Since Tempted so, than Bad, Lascivious Breast:
She fixed upon Retreat as Loyal Wife,
Tho found hard Task, howere, internal Strife.
To do, perform; all wandering thoughts again;
No vulgar Act, Sense, Fancy where did Reign
Usurping Lords, to make them know Subjection;
Mount Reason on the Throne, wise circumspection.
Thus should the King new move, maintain the Chase;
Tho she might well in that reserved place;
When Bathing-walk conjoined; she strait composed
Brief Letters form, this modest Sense enclosed.
LETTER to the King.
Great Royal Sir; Dorasta's Letter to the King.
I have thus far complied
With your Desire, which seem not satisfied:
Tho may my self now Staler grown appear,
Strong, powerful grounds do cause me to forbear.
Entreat withal, You Will Pardon and Excuse;
Much Beauteous Choice, unlikely to Refuse
This City yields: thus gently stoop, Dispense;
Nor take from That I cannot Grant Offense.
DORASTA.


Nurse charged strait (who was chief Woman then
To the Countess styled, besides her Gift, not mean,
Of The Royal Gold) when second Message came
By VANDIMONT, through new enkindled Flame,
Meeting defir'd, those Lines should answer prove,
That wanton King, whom stronger Power did move,
Than that the fair DORASTA once enjoyed
Can thoughts appease; u^g'd strait again, uncloy'd:
This Note received then Poizing (last) the case,
True Bargain was by her performed; that Place,
Title conferred, small wrong to the Regal Chest;
Urged then no more; Fears might perplex her Breast.
Let none by such Example prove bold Strays,
Since few reduced found; tho in that Maze
If wandering are, conceived with Roses spread,
Let them in Time like her Return Misled.
Next for those Lords, Those two Tilting Lords.
whom Tilters we proclaimed;
MELARGON and VALENSON also named:
Who likewise had great Wenchers been, although
That first did cheat the last of's Bedfellow;
Dark Winter's night, her Spouse being lodged from Home
Admitted was; VALENSON not then come
(Close Friend the Maid) enjoyed concealed howere:
Now Suitors both to brave young Lady were
For different Ends; MELARGOM sought a Wife
For good and lawful Heirs, but wanton Life
Meant to reserve; hold on this Ranging Pleasure;
Wished Beauty too, conjoined large Golden Treasure.
VALENSON aimed at Marriage-Beds delight,
More Honest thoughts, Reformed Appetite:
Whith Rival-chance not to themselves unknown,
Lord's Daughter 'twas, grand Portion called her own.
Choice Beauty too with prime of youth beheld;
MARDIVA'S Form, DORASTA'S Paralleled:
CANDORA named. Mother Earl's Wife so great;
Near to that Royal Town their Country-Seat.
Both had been there Strong, earnest Suitors deemed,
For Lordly Rank and Youth, Parts, Person seemed
So equal both, Estates, that doubtful shows
Her Female Judgment often for choosing cloze,
Such Chance befell, that both one Night did send
They would next day for Answer wait, Attend.
Her plain Resolve declared (if the Honor done
To kiss her Hand) Four the Hour that Afternoon.
She both did Grant, still doubtful thoughts on either
To fix her Choice, till saw them both together;
Thence best confirmed, tho startled at the thing,
Next days Resolve; besides well managing
The whole Business so when they themselves should view,
No Rival-jar might afterward ensue.
Thus, being withal of pleasant Brain, conceit,
And Virgin-freedom, Power (yet held complete)
Disposed to use; She the following way contrived:
Such Order gave, who Foremost man arrived
They should Conduct to certain Room; express,
She Would strait be there: the last (gave charge no less)
To joining Room convey, withal advise
To wait some while: both kept their Hour precise.
VALENSON first appeared, to the further Room
No sooner led, but strait MELARGON'S come,
To the next conveyed. CANDORA Roused her Brain,
Thought fit VALENSON first to entertain.
Entering which Place, she caused that door to send
Such loud Report, joined trampling noise in the end,
MELARGON strait (next watchful, harkening ear
Like Suitors often) spied larger Window there,
Corner of the Room, which looked into that other;
Glanced through the same, small start, since saw another;
Unpleasing Man; loathed Rival there beheld
Salute his Mistress Lips, through Envy swelled,
Bad, doubtful Mood: and tho few words were caught,
To mark by stealth their Actions thence he sought.
Salute performed, Valenson's Courting Candora.
I hope my Lord (said she)
You Will bear with some delay. Most willingly
Madam (replied VALENSON strait) since it is
Favor whene'r to grant your Servant this
The sight of you. Both in Couch-chair reposed,
Whose Prospect was to the Window's view disclosed.
Madam, he said (kissing her hand) I have
Thus long your Servant been, tho men more brave
For Person, Parts my Rivals prove by none
In Love of you this Faithful Brest's outgone.
My Lord ( She joined) It Is Truth, I may declare,
More Suitors plead for Grant. Yet to compare
Men's Persons, Parts I like not now; for Love,
Whereof you Boast, that may Dissembling prove.
Madam (he said again) that splendid eye
Of your Choice Mind, conceived mst searching spy,
Judicious one, False, Counterfeited Lover
Through his played Scene, Disguise would soon discover:
Grant such it were, my Lord ( She strait replied)
Yet skilful Art performed on the Actor's side
May Cheat, Deceive, conjoyn (VALENSON said)
Madam, withal, if viewed in Glass, Surveyed
Your Powerful Beauties and Perfections be,
'Twill frame strong Argument for Love in me.
I doubt perchance (replied CANDORA there)
The truth of those; nor does that Coin appear
Alike to all; Opinions, Fancies vary
What Beauty's or Perfections name may carry:
Such Men in the World. VALENSON strait replys;
Sure, Madam, You may read Love in my Eyes.
Those pro^^ (...) Books (said she again) as Tongues
False (...) we, to whom belongs,
Judge well by them (weak Womankind, Alas!
How many might choose better Husbands, pass
For happier Wives! You now withal may Love,
Yet change soon afterward, inconstant prove.
I beg, entreat, fair Madam, Try me then,
VALENSON said: She joined there again;
But I must take before I try, be bound
In Wedlock fast. Those future Points Profound,
Madam (said he) none can presage, they may,
Where likeliest thought suppose that is Truth you say,
My Lord; She strait replied. When further he;
And I shall crave that Candor, Charity,
You Will now Believe my Love and Hope the best
For dark, succeeding Times with gentle breast:
Strong, Solemn Vows if more confirming Spell,
Command, they ready are. You can speak well,
My Lord (CANDORA joined) would Action prove
The Consequence; however ( Hand strait did move.
Behind that Couch, took Chaplet thence beneath)
I crown you thus with this fair Laurel-wreath,
As Person of much Honor, high desert:
Adorned his Head: while star'd (viewed closing part)
MELARGON first; then Rubbed his Louring Brow;
Since Rival's Crowned (as seemed) Victorious now
In the Amorous Combat Conqueror; for he
Wished handsome Wife, tho ranging thoughts, still free.
VALENSON'S Words; as your fair hand has made,
Madam, this Wreath more green appear, displayed
Fresh Beauties thence; so my raised Hope does spring
(Pardon presumptuous Heart) more flourishing.
My Lord ( she joined) I must withdraw some while,
Another waits for me (also, pleased Smile)
Departs the Room. VALENSON'S thoughts advanced:
MELARGON frowned; that way no longer glanced.
Hearing next Door to open strait, much noise,
VALENSON curious too (tho heard no voice,
Speech yet conjoined) that Windows Light descrying,
In the end of the Room, looked through, must needs be prying,
When Rival saw, CANDORA both appear,
Green Laurel Wreath in hand, Salute him there.
At which did start, amazed, as tho beheld
Some Vision strange; exploit unparalleled.
The Lady chose this formal Way, Candora wood by Melargon.
conceiving
MELARGON saw first Part, his mind bereaving
Of calmer thoughts; VALENSON now should see
Like done to Him; shown pleasant brain and free:
These words expressed: My Lord, I shall desire
You would excuse my stay, speech did require,
Since foremost came, another Person of Honor
MELARGON strove to check, whilst gazed upon her
Distempered Mood, Glance on that Wreath, more freed;
Madam (conjoined) I thought it long indeed,
Since came this day to wait on you, enjoy
Your presence thus. She answered there, less Coy.
(Still Laurel shown) truly, my Lord, before
I was engaged upon that civil score;
To each confirmed last night my Promise too;
Had you come first I had done so to you.
Now, being here, I shall your Brow present
With Laurel-wreath, as noble Ornament
Thing due to your regarded worth, Desert:
So placed it on. When secret Qualms of Heart
VALENSON feels, which told, he truly Loved;
Changed Countenance, so unexpected proved:
Lost how t'expound her thoughts, dark Ridling way,
Misterious; as Dreamed that Wooing day.
Since seemed Himself crowned singular, liked best
MELARGON Pleased in part, these words expressed;
Madam, this Branch proves Glory's Engine, worn
By Conquerors; in public Triumph born;
And so embraced by me: Strong Hopes as well
Your Hand and Heart conjoyn, each parallel.
Marriage performed, you will conceive that I
Did both deserve. CANDORA framed reply;
That best appears, my Lord, by real action,
Thus found this last amends, good satisfaction.
Then walking to the side, Room's middle part,
She there by Sleight unclos'd (small piece of Art)
Close Wainscot door, to the other Passage made;
VALENSON called; who came with his wreath displayed:
She standing just between them in the Door,
Both the Lords viewed by her at once
The Rivals strait, whilst each green Laurel wore.
Viewing Themselves as meant to Fight some prize;
Less pleasing way, when she these words applies:
Observe, my Lords, I both thus make Renowned;
In Honor's Sign, not Conquest's tho, have Crowned;
That Is due to One, here is Promise, Grant to Neither:
Be that deferred until the King comes hither;
To Hunt in the Park within two days Disposed:
When I my Choice shall name, by stealth disclosed.
Mean while no Message heard; and here from both
Entreat withal, you would engage by Oath
No Quarrel now, nor afterward to advance
Concerning me; on each cast pleasing Glance;
Tho, all that time, Surveyed with curious Eye
Their Persons both; plain Objects standing by.
The Rival-Lords disjoined, enjoined thus,
(Some lowering looks Assault less dangerous)
CANDORA viewed; then, poizing well the Case,
Self-flattering each; VALENSON in first place,
Since first was Crowned, might Choice proclaim more free;
MELARGON pleased the last, held firmer be,
Best second thoughts; concluding Parts implied;
The whole former Act excused by her beside.
That Lord came first: nor dared they least gainsay
Their Regent-queen, both swore most formal way.
This done, She said, She now must take her leave,
Third Suitor waited long, whom should receive
In Manners too; tho did withal intend
To cast him off. So, marching to the Room's end,
Betwixt them both, VALENSON joyful seemed
On her Right hand; which Chance MELARGON deemed,
Worth small regard; was pleased, in his own Room
Since left by Her: to the Door thus being come,
The Earl, Countess both, by call did strait appear;
Entered that Place; CANDORA leaves them there.
Wine being brought, the Earl fairly drank to One;
To the Other She; no first nor last then shown;
Shunned all distasting Cause: himself did lead
VALENSON down, the Countess, who did plead
MELARGON'S Suit, (being faour'd most by her)
Walked down with him to the Court; where short demur,
(Footmen and Pages called) no Jars intent,
Both several ways to MANTINEA went.
Third Suitor was Young Country Squire, well born, Third Suitor to Candora.

Person indifferent, Clothes (fondly worn)
Fine, Brave enough; for Wealth by far, Third Suitor to Candora.
Estate
Outvy'd those Lords, but joined an empty pate;
Light, shallow Brain; where Worldly means do swell,
Not always found good Heads to order well,
Tho spending Hands. His Father had much Gold
Sent to this Lord, which made his Mother bold
To send him there amongst Courtiers Game to play;
Since Promise had of fair and open way
To speak with her, in private too, that hour;
If could o'er-come by Loves enchanting Power.
Long time He walked in the Gallery, there made
Fine Legs to the Pictures often well painted shade,
In's Mistress stead; stretched forth himself with Hem;
Then wiped his Nose, brave Bandstrings, toy'd with them.
Kissed his hand too, choice Parts surveyed all over;
His Cloak now cast this way, then that, he wore.
Long Practice-time; at length CANDORA appeared,
When Dazeled grown, his eyes through Beauty blear'd,
He kissed in have the Lady of the wrong side,
At which she smiled, tho Laughter that implied;
Which he grand Favor thought: informed in the end,
(Service forgot) his Mother did commend
Her self to Her; charged him withal to wait
Upon her thus. Well pleased CANDORA strait
Did thanks return. Loud Hem, then gazing round.
Fine Pictures there (he said) tho braver found
In's own Long Gallery, with Cap and Feather
The huge Court- Baboon, Bear, Dog fighting together.
Then Is House advanced, Those Lordships rare; which all
Were his (did say) and should to the Heirs befall
From his own Body sprung for Everlasting.
Then praises on his Hounds and Horses casting;
But for brave Mouth Jouler did Chant, excel.
If Mouths so brave (CANDORA joined) 'twere well,
If one had brought to speak for him. when he
(Large smile) replied; her self beneath might see
Whole Brace of them; but those for Hunting noise
Then wooing better far: bad, take her Choice.
When proved his Spouse ( He strait conjoined then)
His Hauks should make her Qualmish, Sick again
With Patridg- food; his Horses cram with Plate
( When won the Rases all) for gallant State
Her Cupboard round; nor should she want great store
Of Parrots, Dogs and Monkeys too, that wore
Their Silver chains. CANDORA smiled, reply's;
She should the man much more regard and prize
Than Monkeys, Dogs. Indeed? he answered there;
Then I shall fit, well-serve your Turn whatere
My Father got twelve Children; I Will outgo;
Boys, Girls o'th, Giant- kind, if you will but show
Good Breeder, last. Fear then (CANDORA said)
They Would eat too much. For that be naught afraid,
The Squire conjoyns; I can maintain them all,
Back, Belly's part: did both content, enthrall.
Then asked, How goes the day? large Dyal spied
Through the window there; his own (said) that outvy'd.
Daubed round with Gold: Best those, which the hour of night.
Could point withal, twelve months by fair Moon- light.
Informed her; next hour shall serve to tell
His Voyage, Traunt to the Court; 'twould please her well
Till Laughed again. Which story Alarmed as 'twere,
CANDORAS thoughts, such Terror caused to the Ear.
No end of Fooling Game; straitways She said;
Fine Evening 'twas to walk: when answer made;
He Would wait on her: if that she loved to do,
More gallant Mornings found, and Evenings too
In his large Garden, then all Arcady.
Scarf wanting was (CANDORA joined) which she
Must go about. The Squire would needs attend:
No (said CANDORA strait) Some private end
Business she had. Said he, if for Maids Water
Himself would Basin hold, that none might scatter.
She prayed him rather there to wait somewhile
Till her return. Walked forth with pleased Smile.
After short Pause, this stout-grown Wooer advanced
To Window large, thence for the Garden glanced; Candora steals away.

His Mistress where beheld (with Maid again;
Long walk they passed; what Damp, confounded Brain.
As Dreamed, or saw some Cozening Apparition,
Since far from thought, in that high-flown condition,
She Would serve him so: till gazing more and more,
To the Fields they went (at last) through Postern door.
When scratched his Head, next, staring strangely round
As Tooth then drawn; uncertain where, what Ground
He trod that time; at door, upon the one side
(Seen further off) he painted large descried
Grim Conjurer, long Gown, small Wand and Book
Viewed Spirits dreadful Form, Hobgoblin-look
On the other side, as raised by him then:
Which lively Draughts, carved out like Painted Scene
In Board complete, as standing on the floar,
Sense, Fancy so possessed (disturbed before)
He strait conceived, that Fellow raised her Shape
To abuse him there, when pondring (large Gape)
How best to send for her, since durst not well
Come nigh the Door; maid did those Clouds dispell,
Entering that way, bad, Dreaming thoughts diffuse:
Who told, he must her Lady Pardon, excuse;
To Wife in Labor called forth, desired
Till the next Morn when, yauning strait, o'ertir'd
With His wooing Task, it seemed (he said) that she
Could like Women in Labor 's Company
Better then his; he will now take Horse be gone;
Mother inform of all: for Wives, 'twas known,
He could have those in the Country far and near,
Would Leap at him. The Earl, Countess both appear;
Said, two great Lords that day did Suitors wait;
And Foremost came. Those Lords then take her strait
Between them both (replied) brave Hunting Day
Was lost for her. So, Wine in Courteous way
Being offered there; like Blow that gentlier smarted
( Men loudly called, and Dogs) he strait departed.
CANDORA thus withdrawn spent serious hour,
Near gliding Brook reposed, where nature's Bower
Large branched Palm; whilst gentle murmur made
Wi^^ tossed Leaves and Streams, to the Ear conveyed;
Birds chanting round: sat musing there upon
Each Lordly Servant's weight, poised (being gone)
In all Regards; lest should too late Repent
Unwiser Choice: so, back to the Chamber went.
Next day dissolved, which well did fix, Compose
Her doubtful thoughts for Person, Parts in those;
Tempers conjoined; The King Hunts there.
the King with gallant Train
For Hunting came; that Lordly Pair again:
By him regarded each, tho sought indeed
Prime Virgin course, who stood for Spouse Decreed.
The Earl to the Park attends with Countess there;
CANDORA might DIANA'S self appear,
Goddess of Groves (so lovely thought, beheld,
Pure-chast withal) on daintiest Horse excelled.
The lofty Stag, chief Silvan Burgess grown,
From cool, dark Cabin raised, pursued alone
By dreadful Hounds (strong scented Rout) beyond
His branched Forts, though Lawn, refreshing Pond;
Chased, driven still in Flights hot Burning Fever
From whom the Herd (scared Friends) themselves did sever;
Whilst different Horns rung doleful Knells as passed,
(Joined Eccho's noise) till reachd, Assailed at last,
Used Forked Head when Feet but vain for Flying:
Sunk after Gallant Bay, shown Courage Dying.
So Noblest Persons fall by the Vulgar Crowd;
Concluding Peal for Obsequies allowed.
The King went then to the Mansion House, Invited
(Among Courtly Train those Rival-Lords recited)
For prime Repast; to the Chamber being come,
CANDORA pleased withdraws to joined Room,
The Countess next, the Earl talking with the King:
Good order took for Banquet's managing.
Stole when returned, unto MELARGON strait,
Informed, her Daughter would not Choice relate
Till Banquet past, whereof she hoped well;
VALENSON saw, who strait began to swell;
Then damped his stouter thoughts, as tho declared
That Choice by her: thus, almost half despaired:
Yet rouzing Patience there, lest Resolution,
When Banquet came took part till the conclusion.
That done, tho Qualm his Lordly Stomach found,
The Countess too gone forth on choosing ground
Strait toward Him did cheerful way advance
CANDORA'S Maid, viewed by MELARGON'S Glance,
From first beheld, who musing thereupon,
Civil Discharge conceived she brought alone:
Countess her self should best declare the Voice.
That Girl, howere, VALENSON named for Choice; Valenson chosen by Candora

From the Lady (last) entreats to stay behind;
Thus, private way, disclosed her gentle mind.
Well pleased he was; the Countess entering then,
Informed strait MELARGON'S Ear again,
Her Daughter Choice on the Other chanced to fall,
Nor could she help: MELARGON'S vexed withal.
CANDORA thought (nor Erred) he was more high;
Of prouder Strain, might least in Love Comply:
Best liked that Other's Person too, at last;
By whom ere long in Joyful Arms embraced.
VALENSON thus Bob'd him of the Wifely score;
Tho Cheated proved in Wanton aim before.
Next Drinking large, Venerial Game's there found)
The Court did through ambitious Arts abound;
Mines, Counter-mines grand Avarice, but one
More pleasant Passage thought, shall here be shown.
An ancient Earl there was, ALVARUS named,
Who held great Place for benefit proclaimed;
By this Young King confirmed at Coronation,
Now two years past, whom he in pleasing fashion
Had humored from a Boy, till Man complete:
Proved Widower of pleasant Brain, Conceit
As cheerful Heart, being told for certain then,
His Place was aimed at by two such men, Alvarus's Plot against two Lords.

Of Lordly Rank, who hoped to Beg, succeed,
After his Death; joined former Grudge indeed;
Were VELDAR DURAS called: Strong thoughts, disposed
To gull them Both, his Project was disclosed
To's Doctor's Son (last, Chamber-Groom combined)
That the only Heir, by Nature's Gift designed.
The King was then some nine miles off from Town,
At Country-Seat belonging to the Crown,
SILENDROS called; those Lords that time; howere,
In The City with their Train, Resided there.
Which known over night, scarce Four, nor Break of Day;
That Groom, Lodged at his Feet, called up straitway
The Doctor, Son (both in their Clothes) desiring
Their help, his Lord found near to gasps, expiring.
Ere long by Them. Declared that he was Dead;
Convulsion- fits, joined Apoplex in the Head.
By Seven that Morn Hearse brought before the Door;
Six Horses in it, for large attendance more:
Then the Earl but loosely veiled, and wrapped in Gown,
Betwixt the Doctor, Groom was carried down,
Laid in the Hearse; that Servant Guardian there;
Since left command they should his Corpse interr
At Country House, some twenty Miles remote:
Son also rode along: This lastly note;
By the Houses of those Lords, which near did stand,
The Hearse was to pass, beheld on either hand,
So might to Them that Earlier Hour be known;
When scarcely proved for Court Silendros gone.
If were perchance, their Wives (being left behind)
Would send them strait the posted News like wind.
VELDAR, whose Door the Hearse first marched by
(Since sat up late) in Bed did prostrate lie;
But soon informed (more Life from thence appearing)
ALVARUS Death; tho DURAS greatly fearing,
If Ready was; strait called up two Men,
Which came from's Country House, and should again
That day depart, unknown to DURAS both;
Gave private Charge, whilst there Himself did Cloth.
The King would not SILENDROS leave that Day
He heard over Night; Seven Miles from whence (side-way)
Did DREMOS stand, which next chief Mansion showed:
Four Miles from Town out SILENDRO'S Road,
Large turning Lane to that called DREMOS went:
They should choice Horses take for this intent.
The First should keep just over against that Lane,
SILENDROS Road, where shrouding Trees, most plain
Might DURAS see far off; the last close by
In The Lane concealed; whn DURAS came, drawn nigh,
The first should Ride forth strait, then the other meeting
Perform their Parts enjoined, like Friendly greeting.
Fit Beasts mean while prepared, much shorter Race
Through Pasture-grounds, they timely gained the place.
On Gallop DURAS came, approaching there,
First Scout rod forth, as from SILENDROS were
That Morning come; Lane left with all the other
Like DREMO'S man, Saluting one another.
The first loud spoke, What, did you meet the King?
Yes (said the last) some four miles off: which thing
When DURAS heard, he asked where he was gone;
To DREMOS- Park for Hunting Game anon.
That Fellow cried; toward MANTINEA going
Whilst he took DREMOS Lane, round gallop showing.
They told their Lord (soon after met) the Event;
Who with much speed toward SILENDROS went:
No Gallants could, inflamed with Amorous Fire,
More Poast it for choice Mistress whom desire.
Alighting there, his Face in the Gate descried
Third Courtier strait through Windows glass uney'd;
Who had like Aim, news then brought from his Wife;
And guessing VELDAR'S Plot, lest Rival-strife,
Walked to the King near hand in's Gallery;
Spring-lock'd that Door for time more large and free;
Soon got the Grant: those Persons all so great,
That who first spoke was sure to do the Feat:
So passed through furthest Door to Garden known,
Since cropped this Flower of State Triumphant grown.
VELDAR strait reached the Door, which finding closed,
Some thoughts the King might private be disposed.
Paused there a while; tho trod but thorny Ground,
To the furthest Door then traced through Garden round;
Which Friendlike open stands, the King at leisure,
His Suit preferred who answered to small pleasure,
Another came before: did strangely amaze;
As tho some envious Sprite the News should blaze.
Groom to that Last walked by however, indeed
When the Hearse preparing was, with nimbler Speed
The Wife informed (lodged not far off) again:
Thus, VELDAR might have kept his Bed till then.
Tired VELDAR came, dismounts before the Gate,
Who finding ( Gaul'd) no King at Dremos late,
That Party Drunk conceived, the News that brought,
Himself, mad to believe; with Jealous thought.
Spurred for Silendros strait; how longed to reach,
Whole Acres every step, well warmed each
Both Horse and Man; joined chafing Fever too
Still VELDAR in his eyes would all undo.
Went in at last, his Suit did then declare;
Tho came too late, walked forth for Garden air,
Hot Journey thus endured; tho pleased in part,
Since DURAS Bob'd, whom thught of less desert.
ALVARUS well mean time, whose Hearse (as't were)
Seemed trouling Couch, made up contented there
Small nightly Rest in the Chamber-Grooms soft Lap;
Slep^ many Hours; for Cloze to pleasing Nap,
Smi^^^ on the Way, those- Lords deluded so;
To think how like the Fable-Dog they would show,
Which snatched at fleeting Shade; crossed one another;
More Air in the Hearse allowed,, no Veil could smother.
At Journey's end his Legs began to move,
Next the Arms and Head, which did amazement prove
As Joy to the Servants showed, Revived thus:
Tho said to be thing less Miraculous
Benumbed, Lethargick Corpse one present there
Saw born to the Grave, Sense, Life restored howere.
He entered the House, large Supper's meat did eat,
Like former Man; best Music, Sauce to the meat
From his own sportive Brain: did there repose
Three Summer Nights: refreshed (for final Cloze)
Passed MANTINEA'S streets, Fourth day again,
Well Mounted by those Lords, Alvarus Triumph.
attendant Train.
The Hearse following: as March Triumphant 'twere,
Death conquered, Foiled; might Ghost to them appear.
More Patient tho, third Man their Partner found;
ALVARUS Bob'd them all upon this ground.
Short time orepast, yet something Lusty Man,
Tho Fifty five, this second Freak began;
He was for Wife resolved, those Lords foresaid
As should that way more doubtful make afraid:
Wished Portion tho conjoined, that also Loves;
Something (would say) to buy her Pins and Gloves.
Just over against his Lordships House did lie
A Persian Dame, viewed from his Gallery:
Widow she was, complete for Persian Dress;
Aged Forty years, showed Person's comeliness.
Next day at Neighbor's House, the same he found
(Once Fellow-Traveller on Persian ground)
Set by his Wife; who jesting said, Kiss past,
There was good Spouse for him. ALVARUS cast
Much fonder Glance, joined pleasing Words withal,
Since Persian spoke; strait Business home did call.
He liked her well, Advanced the Persian Nation;
Sent Man next day to the Lodging for Relation
What, who she was: her self mean time (since thus
That Friend informed, he seemed covetous)
By Servant spread, if sent to the House t'inquire,
She had in Gold two thousand pound entire;
Jewels five hundred more. Kind Visit made,
His Lordship saw Gems, Cash by her displayed;
Her self most Prized affirmed; Marries the Persian Widow.
sealed Countess there
Upon her Lips: third Morn conjoined they were.
Strong Fancy, thought of Boys and Girls, brave show,
Since found at Night good, pleasing Bedfellow.
But, Morning come, she told him plain, that Treasure
Her Brothers was; being gone for ( Vow not pleasure)
To Delphos late; if Died by Hand and Seal
'Twas Hers confirmed, whose Person howere might well
(She hoped) content: Lords Daughter too, for cloze.
Part- cramped although, yet pleased the Bridegroom shows
Week spent, her Brother come, made private claim;
Whose Man, by stealth, did back convey the same,
Lest known abroad: ALVARUS thus at last
Was caught himself; by weaker Sex surpast.
They left their native soil upon this ground;
A Lord he was near Persian Gulf, renowned;
Who having slain one of the Royal Blood
Defensive way, Assaulted in large Wood
Through spiteful cause; the Sophy's Anger fearing
Strait Galloped home, grand, Dreadful Storm appearing,
Fifteen short Miles; two Sisters where remained
This Widow, whom himself through want maintatin'd,
And Virgin-one by second Wife beside
(Scarce twenty's Age) since Father Intestate Died.
Those took, with Gems and Gold by joint accord;
Seeing Barque for Egypt bound, he went aboard,
Reached Memphis Walls, that Sister where was lost,
In strangest way, unknown: Thus sadly crossed,
By Nile through Mid-land Sea soon hither came;
To Athens then, Renowned Place by Fame.
(Not distant far) Rich Uncle's welcome Guest
Where calm Retreat enjoyed, contented Rest.
The STORY of the Persian Lady ZELMANZA.
THat Sister gone Transcendent Beauty shined
ZELMANZA called; as choice for virtuous mind:
To Pity whom if (Reader) the art disops'd,
Conjoined take her Fortune strange disclosed:
If tho withheld too long thou shall appear
From our chief Story, until next Book forbear.
In Memphis Lodged prime Town of Egypt known,
Now Cairo called; she Garden traced alone
( Brother gone forth, in the House their Sister maid)
Where Field close joined neglected Banks displayed;
Stepped through the Door, on Fortunes Changes musing:
When four tall Rogues, bad Thievish Practice using, Zelmanza Seized by Thieves.

Tho seized sometimes on Virgins Young and Fair
Advantage got, then sold for gainful Ware
To Outlandish Customers, Fresh Merchandise;
Viewing her Form and Youth, convenient Prize,
As passed along; brave Persian Clothes withal;
One slipped between Her and that Door, t'enthrall,
Pulled close, Spring-lock'd the same, a second Glove
Thrust in her Mouth. Third Poniard sharp did move,
That held against her Breast, threating for Dead
If marched not on with nimble Foot, where led.
They crossed that Field to River near at hand,
Blind nook where fifth with Boat did waiting stand
For such Exploits; so down the Stream they rowed
Whilst her fair Eyes like Crystal Founts or'erflow'd:
New dismal Voyage thought, most strangely feared;
Till at the length their dreadful Place appeared.
Wild, loanly Walls with Moat encompast round,
Dark shaded Creek for Gloomy entrance found.
'Twas Lodge amongst lofty Trees, fit Den descried
For Murders, Rapes, ill gotten Goods beside:
Mean Couch howere they could by chance impart;
Whereon she lay in Clothes, sad, gauled Heart.
There proved that time a Lord Ambassador
Sent from Morocco's King, grand Tawny-Moor;
That Fez conjoined to's Master's Scepter bending;
Dominion large, by the Western Seas extending.
Most Lustful Prince, most Proud withal, as great;
This Lord next day should toward Home Retreat:
Wherefore that Night their Captain like Comrade
Informed his Ear what gallant Persian Maid
(True Virgin found) they had; of noblest Birth,
Such known to be; Young, Beautiful as the Earth
Could then produce. Choice, Lovely Brown indeed;
Prime Feature, Person joined, might wonder breed.
The Lord was pleased, since Kingly Present thought,
ZELMANZA'S thus next Morn by Water brought,
Convenient way unto his Garden Door, Sold to Morocco Ambassador.

Sea-prize by them affirmed, on Lawful Score.
Her Person viewed, tho Face bedrench'd in Tears,
Whilst through that Shower bright Sunshine breaks, appears;
Maid being approved; then mounting Golden Sum
For Price discharged, he Lanched forth for home.
Sad Glances back the fair ZELMANZA cast
On Memphis Walls whilst Nilus Streams she passed;
Some Comfort tho, since from that Barbarous Crew
To Nobler Hands transferred; o'rewhelmed too,
Since wandering farther off from Sister, Brother,
Kind Uncle, last (what Heart such Griefs could smother!
To strange and Tawney World, she knows not where
(Tho heard it named) sighs constant Breath, as 'twere.
Reached Midland Sea, they Western Course began,
Propitious Gale, like waiting Guardian,
Attends their Barque; conveyed them smoothly over
The brinish Deep, passed Carthaginian Shore,
Where Dido died then turned to Northern Dance,
South-west again with pleasing Dalliance;
Till Mauritania past in large Degree,
Where Tunis, now Algiers, called Barbara.
When Storm arose, Great Storm at Sea.
the Winds in blustering Fray
Contending met, orewhelmed proved the Day;
Heaven masqu'd in Cloudy Black; the Seas did rise,
And foaming Waves discharged against the Skies;
The Air Field for all; whilst those incensed round
Poured Floods beneath, with Ordnance seemed resound,
Grand Thunderclaps: where Lightning seemed the Fire:
As tho the World would raging break, expire.
With Horrors strange the General Face orespread
What viewed, beheld; Men wishing themselves Dead
Through Dying Fears: whilst Bandy'd seemed and lost
Their laboring Barque, from Water-Mountains tossed
To Watery Vales confused Noise does grow,
Loud Storm within, extreme; false Sands below,
Rocks feared above, Waves, sinking strait from thence:
ZELMANZA'S Heart much calmed through Innocence
More sudden Fate (if seized her there) might free
From lingering Death withal, strange Slavery.
Long Strife orepast, the Winds did make retreat;
Clouds spent, withdrawn, smoothed Waves allay as great.
Tho toiling Barkere's disordered Tackling, Dress
(Much wronged by the furious Storm) caused heaviness.
Till primely advanced their Voyage (last) they found,
Driven near to Mauritania's Western Ground;
Now called Tangier; where soon repaired they are
So, Steered along through Streits of Gibraltar.
By Southern Course rech'd warm Morocco's Shore,
Rude-formed Towers; she Persian saw before.
Arrived safe, ZELMANZA (Beauteous Maid)
To his own House the Ambassador conveyed;
Whose White all wondered at, fair She again
Their Sun-burn'd Crowd; tho brought by Tawny Train:
That Lord went strait to the Court, shown humblest duty;
The King informed, what Noble Persian Beauty,
Maid also, brought; was charged that Female Prize
He should next Morn present to the Royal Eves.
ZELMANZA came, Young Courtiers Gazed large store,
Deep Tawny tho not Black Complexion wore.
Not such big Lips, flat Nose, out- Brows designed
As Black-Moors have; tho some that way inclined:
Prove Deeper then the Northern Tawneys far,
Tunis Algiers, if the Ancient Natives are.
Mounting the Room, unveiled; when Sorrow there
Did heightning Foil to the Beauteous Face appear.
The King advanced, with light silk Robe arrayed, Zelmanza viewed by the King
of Morocco.

Where gaudiest Flowers (some Silver, God) displayed;
Reached past the Knee; long Breeches, small below,
Linen that time: from calf all bare did show.
Fine Girdle wreathed of glistring stuff beheld:
Black, short eurl'd Crown, whose Gorgeous Role excelled.
Used high raised Cap abroad, of Silken kind,
Choice Sprig thereon, some Linen mixed, combined.
Pure Linen Clothes on Tawney Neck was worn,
Much pleated, spread: wrists Pearl and Gems adorn.
Viewed proper Person, large; bad Features there,
Grim Countenance; Years twenty five did bear.
Approached with Loftiest steps, ZELMANZA Bowed;
Whom he did take by the Chin, great smack allowed;
Cheeks clapped withal; told certain standers by,
Who Persian spoke, he liked her Lip and Eye;
The whole Person there; that Nation pleasing seemed,
Stout Gallant 'twas; her self the more esteemed.
Informed whereof, no Words returned then,
But sober Look; Joined Reverence again.
Next, order gave, to the Female Mansion she
(Some private Room) should strait conducted be;
Therefore Twelve Days with choiceness Dieted.
Strong, heightning Meats, so brought to's Royal Bed.
Given Larger time, since Health perchance impaired
Through Voyage long and bad withal; declared.
Thus, She Is conveyed, where noble Slave must show,
To the Captain-Eunuch's Power, Seraglio:
Which crowd of Women held, all tended there
By Eunuch-slaves, to who their Quarters were,
And Wards assigned. ZELMANZA lodged alone,
Was by the Kings command (at first unknown)
Left to Arabian's Charge, being born and bred
Nigh Persian Bounds; which somewhat comforted;
That Language spoke; informed her many a thing,
What time she should be embraced by the King.
An Africa Princess, maid, last night enjoyed;
For Beauty's Gloss who wanting proved, and Void,
Since Tawney Face, their Climates near the same;
Well-Featur'd tho, good proper, Handsome Frame:
Whose Life far off, nigh the Red Sea began,
With Feathers dressed, as now the American.
Straggling not far from Shore to Isle of Pleasure,
(...) ^^^oyned Maiden Treasure.
In the Afternoon, there was performed at Court
Triumphant Scene, which did grand Pride import.
Tall Black-moor-King and Queen, took Pris ners late,
Were Marshalled up, were under Cloth of State
This King enthroned; great Lords and Ladys by
Much Naked they were, tho part did shrouded lie;
From bottom of their Wast down to their Knee
Silk Garments worn, large, Loose withal and free,
Small Panes conjoined; did diverse Colors show:
Short Buskins each, Sandals on feet below.
Wreathed Stuffs went round his Head, brave Flap behind:
Viewed Taudry Quoif for Hers which flaunting shined.
Drawn near, the Man's stretched Prostrate on the ground;
Whilst the Haughty King (Triumphant Garb then Crowned)
Trod on his Sable neck, like Threshold laid,
The Woman, last, along the Floor displayed;
When Sister caused, with those great Ladies there
To tread on Hers, that they might Brag wherever,
They Trampled on a Queen: Examples proved
Of Fortune's change; late like to Rocks unmoved,
Now from their Thrones cast down (sad Wars event)
By the Conqueror did Footstools represent.
Then Glancing forth, two thousand Black-moors Bowed
In Ranks beneath, like sad Captived Crowd.
Three days dissolved, The Morocco Princess's Marriage.
great Marriage Celebration
Performed was, Chief Persons of that Nation;
His Sister Bride, with choice, Grand Favorite,
Prime Lord conjoined; which we shall strait recite.
When Sister, Daughter of a King to Wed
Subject was pleased, new way 'twas ordered,
Form singular; unless the Bridegroom found
Of The Royal Blood, so marched on equal ground.
Princess her self there Paragon esteemed
For body, Face; that Lord transcendent seemed.
In The Morn their Marriage was at Dinner placed,
Her Table near the King's, like Princess graced,
Silk Canopy; whilst greater Ladies tho
(Distance between) as Guests were Ranged below;
The Bridegroom came, fine Napkin large did bear,
Chief Carver's Task performed in Duty there
Till second Course was brought; the Princess then
Carved him thereof, same daintiest meat again.
Drank unto him through Wifely Kindness, last,
Which he did Pledge: so with that choice Repast
Taking his Leave, new Carver for the Board,
To joining Room withdraws where Table stored;
Lords, Courtier-guests; he took the highest end,
First on her Morsel feeds; who strait did send
Large boul of Wine as third Conjugal Favor, Wine there Lawful before Mahomet.

In which he drank her Health with pleasing savor;
That done by all to rude loud Musicks sound:
For the Afternoon some Masque-like shows were found.
When Bedtime came, the Bridegroom (Formal sight,
As Chamberlain's great place) bare Waxen light,
And Pot of choice Perfumes before the Bride
To the Chamber door; with Reverence complied:
Then to some Lady gave, not far withdraws.
She entered there; undrest, by Marriage Laws.
Laid first in Bed, she rang small Silver Bell;
To the Bridegroom Summons 'twas (her Virgin-knell
Might be conceived) who forth most bravely pranc'd,
Loose Garment worn, to her Beds feet advanced.
Then Naked crept in there, with Blindfold Art,
Did Travel thus by every prostrate Part
Of The Female world, which should Subdue, enjoy:
To the Pillow come, She Rising strait (less Coy)
Conjugal Kiss vouch-safe'd, exalting so
His humbleness; who then might bolder grow.
For the Evening part (which touched before alone) The Morocco's Masque.

Masque-like Device, by them thought Rare, was shown.
Where the King himself conjoined, not Vizarded;
Spectatress chief the Bride, over whose head
Viewed Cloth of State; Young Bridegroom at her Feet:
Whereto (Grand Favor there) ZELMANZA sweet
Was brought, conveyed, placed amongst Nobler Train;
That might behold his Active Parts and Brain;
Thence more Enamored prove for wanton Fire
Match well his Kingly heat, sublime Desire.
Rude fashioned Scene beheld, for Wood portrayed,
Rocks on each hand, which Wildest show displayed.
Thence five Black-Moors clothed middle Part, appear,
Whilst Gaudy Toys the Arms Legs adorned there;
With Truncheons each; led tame Baboon in string
(Most jovial Way) strait fastened to a Ring:
Then joined in Antic Dance, which Ruder Part
They could well do, perform by Nature's art;
That done did all their comely Beast surround,
Strange Postures used to stranger Music sound:
Whilst that danced in the midst (tho Brutish Fashion)
Taught so before, still true to's constant Station.
Last came five Tawney-Moors, Morocco-kind,
Their Truncheons held aloft, as tho inclined
For the Angry Stroke (skin clad, fierce Roaring Boys)
Who joined with the other five to Musick-noise,
In Skirmish-Dance; their Truncheons knocked to Tune,
Till drove the Black-moors forth, Triumphant soon:
Then danced about that Beast of largest Size,
Which haled away like goodly Conquered Prize.
Then came the King; six Servitors before,
With choice perfuming Pots, who midst the Floor
Fell off one either hand, eight stalk behind:
Great Persons saw, strange, glistring Robes designed.
He danced alone, would like himself appear;
Now up did lead to ruder consort there,
Those joined Pairs, then down, then on the side;
In The midst withal showed frisking, lofty Pride:
Such used his Lords, some vulgar Forms beheld,
Like plainer Country-dance, tho there excelled.
Last, Herald's voice pronounced in bawling way,
The King was Foreign Prince; passed nigh that day
Their Glorious Court, and so was pleased to be
Kind sharer in this Grand Solemnity.
Whilst drooping Glance ZELMANZA cast on all,
Foregoers thought to the Maiden Funeral.
His Royal Person then did strait advance,
Took forth the Bride for gallant Country Dance;
Fantastic Jig might seem; which being ended,
To take the Bridegroom forth she condescended.
He next took Lady there, she chose a Lord;
That Ruder half dispatched, by joined accord
They fell to mixed Dance, where best was shown
Their jumping Art: his highness seized the Throne.
This Dancing done, their Taste contentment shared
With the Eye and Ear, Choice Banquet being prepared.
To which the Bride, great Ladies also moved;
ZELMANZA, last (grand, second Favor proved)
Zelmanza called to the Banquet
Was brought along; like Rose conjoined wi^h them
Amongst Champain Flowers, midst Beads of Glass the Gem.
Tho Qualmish then for the Taste, as dancing sight;
Sad Reason, Fear close Damp to Sense-delight;
Viewed their preserves, then stranger Faces round,
Did touch, tho scarcely eat; hearts Grief profound.
Each wanton Glance thought mortal Dart to be,
Directed from his Tauny Majesty;
Who Drank to her (choice honor meant) for cloze
Transcendent Acts, never used before to those
Slave-Concubine; but Private way retired.
Bred Wonder, Envy both, (so strange, admired)
In The Female Crowd; Envied by a Great Lady.
one She 'bove all the Rest,
Whose Father Second Lord, (of late Deceast)
Within the Realm; took next the Bridegroom the place.
Who being indifferent for Tawny Face,
Good Countenance, brave, Gallant Limbs combined;
Most Proud thereof; Ambitious Lofty mind;
Throught some grand Favors by the King bestowed,
Had thoughts of being Queen; nor Dream it showed:
Her Fancy could in confidentest way
Grasp Royal Crown, ascend the Throne that day,
Obeisance made by all: turned Jealous now
ZELMANZA might be she, her Greatness Bow
(So others feared) to thing by Fortune brought;
That White, Outlandish Baggage called, in thought
Resolved was, Death's Bride she should become,
E're prove the Queen; for Bed cold Marble Tomb.
Young, Noble Lord, for Person handsome framed
Well Featured last, much more did Burn, Inflamed
With Love of Her; grown Jealous of the King,
Those Beams of Noon to the Twilight's glimmering.
Since strange she seemed of late, showed Disregard
If Truth confirmed, tho wanted Heart so hard
To Kill his Sovereign, himself that hour
Resolved to Die; such Love's strong, fatal power:
Since often observed, where Moral honesty,
Nor settled strength o're-rules, that Men will be
Revengeful found on such as cross, oppose
Or Act theri Wrath upon themselves, for cloze.
That Violence amongst Tawny Brood discovers,
And Black-moors too, like European Lovers.
Their Banquet done, ZELMANZA in a Barge
Was strait conveyed to her Arabian's charge,
In The Women's House; whose private Chamber more
Consorted with her Grief than Courtly floor;
Tho Birds enthralled more Blissful seemed to be,
Sung, Chanted often in Cage-Captivity.
One Week o'repast, Zelmanza's Picture drawn for the King.
her Eunuch-Guardian
The King employed, since proved ingenious Man,
Good Painter found, her Face to draw, pourtray;
Fine Tablet size, contracted Form; did say,
He would her Picture have, Night clothed for Bed;
Now in the Prime ere lost her Maidenhead:
Which he performed, tho tedious Task it showed
In poor ZELMANZA'S thoughts, long Hours bestowed;
That shade since should like Harbinger fore-run
Substance it self; through his vile grasp undone:
Till Begged the Workman often for pleasing Face,
Kind, Cheerful Glance, least caused his Arts disgrace:
Nor Credit all, might forfeit, loose that Hand
Through Pencill's fault, by the Tyrant's Mood, command.
ZELMANZA thus for Wanton strength, delight
Was choicely Fed; Venerial appetite;
Tho pampered Maid but for the Shambles seemed,
His Royal Couch and Arms no better deemed.
She numbered often both Nights and Days (sad sum)
Like Men Condemned till the Execution come.
No hopeful Daun to avoid, escape descried
But the King's Death; then Slave to the next beside.
Last mournful Night, then troubled Fancy well
Might keep awake (each lodged in Crystal cell)
Those Lovely Eyes, choice Gems in silver cases,
Yet gentle Sleep o'repower'd with soft embraces,
And Soaked them both long time in Slumbring Dew;
As pitied for that Night which should ensue,
Grasped by the Moore Rest long might there forsake;
Whose Lustful Arms conceived Tormenting Rack.
Sleep fled by Seven, last Virgin-day allowed,
When wished bright Skies o're-veil'd with Sable Cloud;
The Sun close Mourner turned (who gilds the Glass
With gaudy Beams) like her sad Breast, alas!
Choice Bathing was for the Afternoon designed, Her last day's Bathing.

Every third day observed; This tho combined
With heightning Sweets, more wanton Sense to please;
Which would breed Qualms in her ( she thought) Disease.
Next; curious Smock perfumed she should put on;
Like Shroud conceived, her Winding Sheet anon.
Meant for his Bed. Prime Night-cloaths then should wear;
Which through Conceit caused loathsome Headache there;
Morocco's daintiest Garb. Dressed (beauteous Maid)
When the Evening came, she should be Veiled conveyed
To the Lodgings of the King, Court-meal, repast
For Supper joined; to's Royal Bed at last.
Each Fancy saw. (like Mournful Scene beheld)
As Cloud no way but by his death dispelled;
Tho poor ZELMANZA thought not of her own, Great Ladies Plot on her

Same Day Resolved; sad, Tragic Point, unknown.
That great, young Lady whom we mentioned,
Through Jealous thoughts, proud Heart Distemper bred
(BRINDOTA called) much heightened too their Rage,
ZELMANZA'S Form when heard (more bad Presage)
For Tablet drawn; with Gems adorned, most bright;
She vowed her Death before their coupling night:
Lest Fonder Mood that time the Match conclude;
Or else remain still Guest at Court, delude
Her hopes ere long: choice Means, convenient found
For Actor, took; whereof thus proved the Ground.
Women they used, Cooks places some enjoyed
For the Concubines; whilst others were employed
In carrying up; washed Clothes, made their Bed;
Served the Eunuchs too, their Quarters limited.
That Landress, which did tend ZELMANZA fair,
Her Eunuch both, had Girl (Temptation snare)
Who this great Lady served, preferment high;
Her self in Want withal found large Supply:
Whom visiting the Lady in private Room,
Oath passed for Secrecy, ZELMANZA'S Doom.
Thus told, declared: would have this Dining meal.
To Poison her, which she might temper well
With her choice Broth; 'twould work midst second hour;
When close Locked up, feared no complaining Power.
Soon striking Dead. Tho, when enjoyed by the King,
Free leave for Gallery, brave furnished thing.
Garden high-wall'd below, Moat round howere;
No Bathing Task till Four performed there.
Face Drawn withal, Landress beheld the same;
So kept, reserved: Thus, when 'bout Four she came
With the Eunuch, those things brought, ZELMANZA Dead;
She should admire: Some Appoplex in the Head,
Impostume broke might cause that speedy Fate
(In Words conjoy'd) since she would point of late
To that, and Throat sometimes, large Golden sum
Now promised Her, choice place when Queen become.
This Woman proved hard Heart, besides those Great
Engagements past, to come; the Poisnous Feat,
Tho Murder 'twas, could not deny, refuse;
That way applauds, her utmost Care would use;
The Poison took; her Daughter (last) must not
Be told, informed, kept, stranger to the Plot.
ZELMANZA, whilst lay musing under Cloud
That Morn through Virgin-fears, to Sorrow bowed;
She heard the Door unlocked, which startled her;
Thought strange that Hour: soft way, without Demur
That Eunuch entering; more serious Eyes,
As tho the Brain did weightier thoughts comprize;
Which startled more: He prayed her nimbly then
To Rouse, be Dressed. What Cause? said She again:
Madam (He joined) I come to set you free;
Your Honor saved withal, and Chastity;
Freed too my self, next Life great'st Satisfaction;
If You Will be Ruled. What Danger in the Action?
Kind Sir, said she again; None valuable,
He strait replied; Tho Fortune proves unstable:
You must be locked within that larger Chest
For safe Convoy: So, told her all the rest.
The Lady thought 'twas hopeful way, and yet
Found Horror in the same; joined Trembling Fit:
Loath to Decline, nor tedious pause allowed,
She Is ready strait; Silk under- Robe for shroud,
Then Persian Mantle worn, with nightly Dress,
Which well became; showed sweet in heaviness.
Zelmanza locked in a Chest.
Sad, drooping thoughts howere, that darksom Room,
When entered first, least might presage her Tomb.
Locked fast She was, like Beauteous Corpse, some fine
Choice Jewel there, resplendent Silver Mine.
Door Locked withal, He Marched down from thence
For the main Exploit of solemn Consequence.
This Eunuch, when some two years past Captived,
By the King's command of Manly parts deprived, The Eunuch's Plot.

Soon Gelded was; of Sanguine Temper framed;
Proved Wanton, Amorous; thus therefore Tamed.
Of Life's chief Joy, contentment Robbed as 'twere,
'Twas Butchers Act conceived. Nay, Guarded there
His sportful Flesh in Concubinal Station;
Often saw, but never enjoyed, grand aggravation.
Wherefore, if could of this choice Gem debar
(Whom Piti'd much, born Neighbor too) so far
Cheat his desires, Revengeful Stab it seemed:
Freedom conjoined withal, most dear esteemed.
That Bondage more (stout Heart) didained thus,
Since Baser Nation proved, termed Barbarous:
Nay more, his Friend their Master-Eunuch late
Advanced was, and One whom This did hate,
First under-Eunuch, should in the Room succeed.
That very Morn, ten for their Hour agreed,
Cart should bear forth his various Furniture
(More than what Goods to the Place belonged) thing sure,
Known certain 'twas; from which concordant chance
Strong, cheerful Ground did fainter Hope advance.
Great Roman Lord Ambassador beside, Ambassador from Rome, Philarchus.

PHILARCHUS called, did there as then Reside;
Prime Person, Parts, most Noble tempered Breast,
Who Traveled Persia long; their Speech expressed.
Employed for State Affairs, unpleasing Jar
Caused by this King, which might produce a War.
Should now return, provoked in high Degree;
For Rome was then in her Minority;
Like spreading Branch, the Italian Queen, no more:
Contest with these maintained, as Quarrels, store
With Carthage had, North-Eastern Clime to them;
This Ruled South-West, worn Powerful Diadem.
That very Noon he should his Barque ascend,
So the Eunuch heard, might their Escape befriend.
Thus, Morn before day slunk to the Lord Disguised,
Old Coat, false Hair, Beard Roman-like (devised
For such exploits) clapped on abroad, close laid;
The Lord himself could Persian speak, we said.
ZELMANZA'S Form, drawn for the King, was brought,
Face, Bodies half, strong tempting ground, as thought:
In private Room the whole Plot unveiled, descried;
Lords Daughter 'twas, great Neighbor born, beside:
Her Brother known to the Lord on Persian Ground,
When Traveled there, being much engaged, bound
By friendly League; then showed her lovely Shade;
Fine Persian Garb, choice Nightly Dress purtray'd.
'Twas Sorrow's draught, much more might Pleased move;
She, Virtuous Spouse (Informed) as fair would prove.
Prime, Noble Act, however; if chanced to find
Some sturdy Servitor, fit strength combined,
He the Hands and Face could Tauny turn by Art;
Black, frizled Hair, Frock brought for Porters part:
High, Monstrous Walls, deep Moat beyond there lay,
Unpassable, through the Gate their only way.
The Lord saved Zelmanza.
The Lord bred Noble thoughts, much Piti'd there
Her Goodness, Beauty joined, sad Virgin-fear
The obliging Bond by which to the Brother tied,
When Stranger trod their Persian Soil, beside.
Last place believed he could produce prime Man
For Porters Task, as told the Guardian:
Yet was disposed, from whence she came should be
Kept from his Train; the Eunuch did strait agree.
Base Rogues (he said) did both of them enthrall,
No Prize of War; then sold for Slaves withal.
Conjoined thus; would He but leave afford
Himself might come with Chest of Goods on board,
'Bout Twelve or One; or if hard Chance prevented,
When the Evening came (to which the Lord assented)
Barque Lanched forth, he could in public fashion
(Thanks given the Lord) make this devised Relation.
That driven by Storm, some while there Landing then
For needful Cause, their frighted Countrymen
Throught fearful haste (alarmed) left them on Shore,
Partly withdrawn; when thought of Slavish Whore,
Like dreadful Rack ZELMANZA terrifying,
Or Poisoned also told, One great in power
Would seize on them for Spies, and her Deflow'r:
Like Chest of Goods he strait conveyed her thus,
Throught that Friend aid, their Lodging Dangerous,
The Lord seemed pleased, strait called up to the Room
One that in Persia served him, his Groom;
Strong backed was known, stout heart withal, of free,
Ingenious Brain; given Oath for Secrecy,
The whole Plot disclosed; if well brought off the Prize,
He should to place of Wealth, advancement rise;
Mean while large Golden Sum; 'twas ample Wages:
Whilst the Eunuch there to own the stealth ingages;
As hired that Man for Chest of Goods no more:
The Groom conjoined on that adventurous Score.
Left daubing stuff, whereby with ease he might.
(Black, short curled Hair) seem Moorish changed over Night.
Next Morn Frock used, The Plot for freeing Zelmanza.
tied Porters Cord, and Sack,
Well-colour'd too, that Groom with Lusty Back,
'Tween Seven and Eight, to Cloister did repair
(Shown him last night, such was the Eunuch's care)
Dark, skulking Place near the House of Concubines;
Viewing their Gate; most fit for such Designs;
Whence saw all Passengers, should lurking there
Watch well that Cart for carriage did appear.
Nine's Hour at hand, that Cart came marching by
To bear the Captains Goods, two Porters nigh,
Attending it; their Gate being open spread,
Groom followed strait, behind the Cart did tread,
Like Moorish, Porter employed; passed freely through,
Entering their Cout, much cheared, rejoiced too
( Few then observing ought, not least suspected)
He the Eunuch soon descried, by Glance reflected
Upon his Window there (thing ordered so)
Which viewed the Court, and Gate; close place below:
There met by the Eunuch was, to the Lady's Room
Conducted then, Short, Private way to whom
Did prove by chance; Rap given for sign (tho small)
Porter was brought, he is locked in too withal.
Down the Eunuch walked again, for second part,
To's Window there, till Laden saw the Cart;
When driving on, locked fast his Chamber door,
With nimble Foot did mount ZELMANZA'S Floor.
Entering whose Room, door locked, well Corded found
That Chest besides; Rap given for warning sound
'Twas bearing forth (the agreement so) in have
Fixed on that Roman's Back, securely placed;
No Noise ore-heard, clear way when peeping through,
March forth, he said; Door nimbly locking too.
Some thoughts, at first, to bring Her forth by Night,
Dressed in Man's clothes; great Dangers tho did Fright.
Thus, down the Stairs ZELMANZA strait was born, Zelmanza carried down.

Next through the Court; bedewed with Tears that Morn.
Her Coffin-wall; each Morrish voice, as said,
Down there, and search that Chest, her thoughts dismayed.
The Eunuch come nigh (large Wicket known) to the Gate,
With angry Words informed the Porter strait,
Their Captains Cart was gone, Chest left behind,
They must overtake the same: showed Troubled mind.
They Are not gone far; the Porter cried withal:
Had drank large Draught that Morn, grand Festival:
Well knew, that Eunuch 'twas by the Captain Favored;
With Cart the Porter came; thus nothing waver'd,
Unlocked it there. Being marched through, more Free,
Third Rap he gave; for Sign ordained, that She
Had passed the Gate; which seemed like Music sound
Unto her Ear, as cheerful Cordial found
To the pleased Heart; Life-spirits roused from thence,
Sad Qualm although, feared Stormy consequence;
Since She conceived much clouded Fate remained;
More windings in that Dangerous Maze contained.
Reached that dark Hole where left, he strait put on
That Coat, Hair, Beard, turned Roman-like, unknown.
They Walked not far till had prospective View,
Of open Place, where sight appeared, grand Crew,
Which made him Stare; the King beheld withal
His Courtly Train, that day choice Festival. The King (...) Riding to the
Temple.

Then marched to the Temple proved for Sacrifice
Unto their God, since late Victorious Prize;
That Black-moor King and Queen, enslaved Crowd:
Sad Glance howere by the Eunuch was allowed.
First Oxen went, brave Gilded Hoofs and Horns;
Ribbon each Neck with Garland too adorns.
Then Courtiers came, Great Lords, his Majesty
Mounted behind on Beast of Barbary;
Gay Foot-cloth shown; the Umbrella such, large spread,
Least scorched his Tawny Cheeks born over his head.
Footmen and Guard in gaudy Coats descried;
With painted Bows and Darts, on either side.
The Princess next, in Gallant Charret drawn,
Fine colored Robe; her Scarf of Cobweb-Lawn,
Wrought with Silk Flowers and Gold: whilst in the Rere,
That Royal One Triumphant did appear;
Eight Black-moon Slaves like harnessed Beasts compelled,
Whose squinting Glance the dreadful Whip beheld.
The Eunuch was cloyed, that Hour, for Moorish show
When first perceived, least stopped, surprised so;
Soon Turned off. Few Lanes in nimbler sort
Being marched through, clear way to their Seaport,
Fourth Rap he gave, which sound proclaimed that She
Now reached the open Fields (that Sign should be
By both observed) much cheered her gentle Heart;
Less Pantings now; small Hole through the upper part
Gave purer Air, she thought, more pleasing Breath;
Though still did Range Confines (as 'twere) of Death.
For, marching on, new Sight did startle, invade
His watchful Sense, beneath broad Beaches shade
Eight sturdy Moors descried (not far from All,
One chanced to know) that Gladsom Festival.
Triumphant met; some Drinking were, did soak
Their Tawny throats, whilst others danced to stroke
Of Instrument, did Rudely beat the Ground;
Wild, Antic Dance as proved their Musick-sound:
Shouts joined often. These things observed and Feared;
Worse through their Ranting, Drunken Mood appeared;
Tho trod less used Path, he stragled more
So, Stalked along, till reached the Blissful Shore.
Fifth Rap then gave, whose Voice ZELMANZA taught,
She now, at length to the Roman Barque was brought:
Heart Dancing through that is pleasing Melody;
Pure Blood refined did mount withal more free
Her Crystal Cheeks; now Light would Bless her Eyes,
When from that Chest as from the Grave should rise.
Zelmanza took aboard.
The Lord's informed, received him strait from Shore
As Friend to the Groom, resolved upon before;
That Precious Chest like Goods withal Aboard,
His Gallant Barque tho thought with Beauty stored.
This Business done, convenient Gale of Wind,
They Launched forth for Northern Course designed;
When the Eunuch told that former framed Relation,
(Mindful of Fair ZELMANZA'S Restoration)
In Public sort to the Lord, as was agreed:
Who seemed well pleased the Lady so was freed
From Danger's jaws, commands t'unlock the Chest:
ZELMANZA when being Roused, with cheerful Breast,
Called all her Beams into her Radiant Eyes;
So Morning Sun from the World beneath does Rise.
Which Beauty there like fairest Coin beheld,
With Virtue's stamp (conceived unparalled)
Charmed all his Thoughts; whilst the Eyes with love overflow;
Whence She might view the wounded Heart below.
Himself by her thought Rare Accomplished Man;
Who stooping strait, like Gentle Guardian,
To raise her up, Saluting then, did sound
Her Language forth, which learned on Persian Ground. The Lord and Zelmanza.

Madam (said he) You Are welcome to the Day,
Which does, as 'twere, your Beauteous Form Pourtray;
To Freedom, last. My Lord (her Answer so)
Both cheer my Heart; great change for Beauty tho
That Stifling Chest, tormented thoughts beside
May cause, produce. Madam (the Lord replied)
Your Cheeks Triumphant prove, so fresh appear,
As slumber'd on soft Bed of Roses there.
(Kissed strait her Hand) I hope you will believe
You Are now secure, tho sadly'st late might Grieve,
Under my Charge, whilst Ranged this Watery Floor
( Next powr's Divine) as amongst your Friends before.
Choice Country men. My Lord (ZELMANZA said)
Such Noble worth there seems thus far displayed
That I may hope to find in you dear Brother,
LOCRINUS Lost. Madam, that Name's another.
Obliging Bond; said he ( Your Virtue One)
My Self to him good while Engaged, known
On Persian Ground. So, taking Her by the hand,
He prayed She would his Cabin use, Command:
Conducted Her. Hot Waters strait were brought,
Cordial Restoratives; convenient thought.
(Long, dreadful Qualm endured) to cheer her Spirits:
Shown Choice regard, so high ZELMANZA'S Merits.
Small pause, their Dinner came, handsome Repast;
Fine, pleasant Room for the Lady-guest at last.
The Lord sat down, that Eunuch too, their Friend;
ZELMANZA, Mistress like, must take Board's end,
Adorned the same: whilst curious Artist there
Touched sweetly Roman Harp, to please her Ear.
Dinner being done, She prayed, She might (for cloze)
Her shaken Limbs on Bed sometime Repose;
And Calm withal her late Distempered Breast
(Where stranged disordered Thoughts) throught gentle Rest:
Silk Roman Couch (the Lord's) at hand, in view;
Who taking leave, in Civil sort withdrew.
Laid down thereon, She slept some pleasing hours,
Till frightful Dream of loathed Morocco's Towers,
The Tyrant's Bed, Embrace discharged her Sense,
Waked her again; felt Deaths assault from thence:
When musing say (not twice Redeemed as 'twere)
On her Grand Change, past, present Fortune there:
As for the King, Morocco King.
when News was brought anon,
The Eunuch and She (Doors open broke) were gone;
Amazement seized: Porter with Oaths denied,
Such passed the Gate; nor by others Marked, descried:
In the Eunuch's Room withal, for Pleasure made,
They Picture framed Hobgoblin strange Portrayed,
Which his Familiar's shape was thought conceived;
By the Laundress's mouth, Ly nimbly weaved;
Who said (when peeping through) she saw him stand
Last Night near Twelve, with small black Book and Wand,
For the Porters sake; thus bred appeared strong Fancy,
That She was Conjured forth by Negromancy:
And that of Late, he tried that Magic Art,
To free Himself, conjoined ZELMANZA'S part.
Wherefore the King, storm past of Rage, disdain
(Witch, squeamish Baggage termed) Town scared in vain;
Tho fed more High through late conceit, that night
Would the Africa Princess grasp for known delight:
(Here Is) Royal Flesh, did Brag confirmed) that so
He might not want good pleasing Bedfellow.
Tho large Choice there, both Fair and Brown beheld,
But courser Form; ZELMANZA'S far excelled.
That Lady, next: whose proud, aspiring Mind
Decreed ZELMANZA'S Fate; when all combined
To serve her Turn, hope's lofty'st elevation;
Her Lids were drawn awry in strangest fashion,
Soon afterward; the Eyes staring made that hour,
Looks Horrid grown, malignant Humour's power.
Showed Branded thus by Heaven, since sought to blast
Another Beauty, Life withal, at last.
Hopes of the King, like Dream, or Vapor fled;
Lord-Servant to, once deeply enamoured.
Now on the Couch ZELMANZA claims your Eye,
Who, having kept her thoughts composed thereby,
For the Eunuch called, who entered strait: did then
That Dreadful Mornings Maze range over again
In Talk, Discourse; Morocco's loathsome Ground,
Some time dissolved, the Lord admittance found.
After Salute to the chaste ZELMANZA there, The Roman Lord and Zelmanza.

He hoped (conjoined) that Bed, how mean soever,
For Travel used (by his own self beside)
Offended not, nor Slumbers calm denied.
She answer made; that harmless Couch was free
From such Offense, like her own Fantasy,
(No bad Infection there) gave kind Repose
The Lord with Smile declared, He should from those
Good Omen draw, since slept upon his Bed;
To which with Blush, no more, She answered.
Kissing her Hand, ere long the Lord withdrew;
Whilst those, well-pleased, did former Talk renew.
When Supper came, they joined in neat Repast;
Till bedtime stayed the Lord; to the very last:
ZELMANZA then must needs accept, command
His Chamber, Bed, small Cabin near at hand
Himself would take, lodged Guardian-like appeared;
To which gave way, sin he was Master there.
Calmly the choice ZELMANZA slept thereon,
Whilst seemed to Rock, not Rouling Waves alone,
But gentle Winds to Lull her Brain asleep;
Until the Sun long gilt the watery Deep.
And Glass'd him there; gave fair ZELMANZA'S Eyes
( Light's smaller Orbs) good morrow from the Skies.
Well dressed by Nine, the Eunuch had leave to enter,
Called strait by Name; tho formerly dared venture
With boldest Foot; the Lord would wait, forbear:
Short Pause observed, did thus Salute her there:
Madam, I hope, you well have Nature paid
Her Slumbring Debt, midst darksome Nightly Shade, The Lord Courting Zelmanza.

If Winds and Seas disturbed not. My Lord,
(Said she again) both joined in Friendly accord
Did Sleep advance; my self withal to those
Long time Companion proved, tossed Bed's repose:
Troubled how'er, your Lordship was discharged
From your own Couch. When he thus Speech enlarged;
Good Madam, please t'o're-pass that Complement,
Your sadness mine becomes, least discontent.
Both sitting down, the Lord with Lovers Eyes,
Which mutely spoke, whilst the Heart did sympathize,
Proceeded thus: Pray (Madam) think, conclude,
You Are Mistress of this Taller Barque (tho rude)
Grand Train, my self; as of that Roman Bed;
Queen of my Heart. ZELMANZA answered;
Your Friend, my Lord, that name conjoined shall be
Great Honor thought. Transcendent worth (said he)
Madam, like Yours deserves that Mistress- style
Over Kings themselves. When she with sober smile:
Enough my Lord, preform'd; what is Noble, brave;
To Freedom's height advanced dejected Slave.
Choice Title bears, tho You should add no more;
Which Heaven, I hope, will pay like gallant Score:
With Prime of Joy's Reward. When he again;
Your Virtue 'twas engaged my thoughts as then
To that exploit, whatever. Were that the Ground,
My Lord (she said) yet none but Breast Renowned
Would so take part on falling Virtue's side;
Your Praise thereby Proclaimed. The Lord replied;
Worth, Madam, may show powerful Influence
Where Lustful Heart; tho in that wanton Sense
If Guilty ought, I should not Court your Love:
For Wages, last, choice Blessing from above
Your self appears: You shine that Regent Star
Which Rules in me, has steered (as 'twere) thus far
My Gentle thoughts; and now the Haven prove
Of grateful Joys whereto their Barque does move.
Pardon, my Lord (said she) this Virgin-Brest
If scarce your mind conceives, in words expressed.
That Dark, Mysterious Way, the Lord again,
Madam, (replied) then I shall speak more plain,
Clothed like Sun- Beams; I love with Heart entire;
You for my Spouse in Marriage joined desire,
When Blushing strait, You speak, my Lord (said she)
There plain enough; although how Cautiously
For your own Interest, Good Wifely Choice
Does Question prove. That Self- arraigning Voice,
Madam ( he then) does charge my Judgment thus,
Which I conceived exact and curious
For Body, Mind withal. My Lord (she said)
There hangs a Lute, may't thence be known, displaid,
Whether your Tongue be matched by skillful hand?
That wants no speaking Art. Through which Demand,
The Lord Observed, shown pausing thoughts, intent
To wave some time that Wooing Argument:
Lute taken down, Madam (said then) your Will
Thus far o'resways, whatere my Ruder skill.
Warbled forth pleasant Strains performing so
What the Artful Hand, well-Languag'd Ayrs could show.
With pleasing smile, Madam conjoined there,
Methinks, those daintiest Fingers should appear
Musicians too ( Lute held forth on the Board)
Teach mine, impove. These hands shall wait, my Lord.
Rather (said She) on yours, learn more from thence;
Those Master-like: Showed Female Excellence.
So choicely played her Lute might seem to be
That Timber Womb gave Life to Harmony.
Madam (he said) methinks that Voice withal
Should match the Hand, whose Speech sounds Musical.
Both mean alike, my Lord, (said she again)
Long joined at last, far more transporting then;
Prime Gestures used, whilst Voice and Beauty so
Did heightened by themselves, advanced show,
Dinner being come, since pleased his Ear and Sight,
ZELMANZA next should her own Taste delight;
Choice Wines command: that done; each want supplied,
The Lord although in thoughts unsatisfi'd:
He (all withdrawn, but the Eunuch-friend) pursued
His former Aim, that Love-Assault renewd:
Thus strait began; Madam, my last request
I now shall Raise again, this Lovers Breast,
Whilst calm abroad, does swelling Sea appear,
Till your kind Grant allays the Surges there;
Tossed Barque my Heart, when forced to discover
Pure, Crimson Blush so fervent seemed her Lover;
My Lord (said she) I Am yet but Veiled shown,
So strange to you for the Wifely Choice unknown;
Your Noble Heart may split perchance become
On Marriage-Rocks; Wed Discontent at Home.
Madam (He said) in you those Virtues shine,
Like Heaven of Stars clear Firmament combine;
That fixed I am, resolved. She answered;
Such worth, my Lord, rather adorns your Head
Like Wreath of Beams, my thoughts may well propound,
That I should choose upon the surer Ground.
Dear Madam, ( then said He) for I Will take hold,
Last Words so gently breathed; he kind and bold,
Conjoyn for cloze, It Is Truth, my Lord, ( She said)
You Harbored thus, when lost, enslaved Maid,
So bound me Yours ( if worth the claim, howere)
That Thraldom, Death conceived, next, Strumpet there;
Those worst of Ills; How can I then Deny,
Seek Courting Forms. PHILARCHUS made Reply;
Sweet Madan then, since Love strange fears o'recloud,
Bind all contractive way. Which she allowed;
Tho Blushed in Grane. Before the Eunuch past
Engaging Vows; with Kiss Confirmed at last. Philarchus and Zelmanza Contracted.

Here the Eunuch begged withdrawing leave, should go
And drink kind, Friendly Glass (the agreement so)
With that Comrade in Danger Roman Groom,
Who Persian spoke; departs withal the Room.
New Crimson Flood when drowned strait (as 'twere)
ZELMANZA'S Cheeks, the Escutcheons blazed there.
Of Modesty, conjoined with Virgin-Love;
Thus left alone; tho Spouse PHILARCHUS prove.
Who first with Eyes, in Glance, Tongues pleasing strain,
Next, clasped Arms his Lover's Charge began;
Then, Kisses Sealed, each like to Balmy Dart:
Whence chiefly spoke the Language of his Heart
Hers gently answered there, contracting Vow
Did Charter late, choice Privilege allow.
For then She seemed in large Degree his Own,
First Fruits might Reap gathered from Lips alone,
Midst which transported thoughts would there express,
Drop Latin Words sometimes: when She no less
Fine Persian spoke, in answer to that other;
Seeming to understand thus one another:
Thence pleased both, till finding their mistake,
Laughed at themselves, as from some Dream awake.
Did Kisses strait, with Language joined, renew;
Tho talked in Persian all, which either knew:
Kind Dialogues contentful way exchanging
(Such Virtuous wantonness) no farther ranging,
Till four choice Hours, in private Cabin-room,
Dissolved were; as Taste of Joys to come.
When the Eunuch called; the Lord himself retired
For some regards, his Spouse more loved, admired.
By six that Even their Barque had Traveled far,
Reached Midland Sea through Streights of Gibraltar.
'Twas Month of June; when, passing Cape of Land,
Two Ships they strait descri'd on their Right hand;
With Roman Flags, like Countrymen, displayed;
Which drawing near, (as meant to Seize, Invade)
Sea Fight with Carthage men.
Set Carthage Flags aloft, like Mortal Foes,
Well Manned they were for Fight and Bording Cloze.
Men filled their Decks, whose ugly Captain there
ZELMANZA saw like Beauteous Blaze appear,
When Glanced forth; himself by her beheld;
More loathsome thought, as she with him excelled
For Dainty Prize; inflamed his Lustful Breast.
The Romans Armed for Fight themselves addressed,
With Gallant Lord, whilst poor ZELMANZA feared;
In Clouds again, new dreadful Fate appeared.
Still more observed this World's vast maze of Change,
Where Joy and Grief by turns do wander, range:
Night Day succeeds, does mournful Scene present;
Late Comfort's Dawn, now Warlike Bows are bent:
Her Self and Lord for Death, or Slaves designed;
Grief most she thought did Seize on Humane kind.
Praid him in Sighs withdraw; who answered,
He fought for her; was their Commander, Head,
Example both; should freedom Heaven's deny,
He would in Thrall partake, or bravely Dye.
The Arrows began, each seeming Mortal Dart
Sent to her Lord, next, aimed at her own Heart.
Few Roman's harmed, because the Carthage-men,
Knowing their Ods, advanced for Grapling then
With all their Power; would try the Game by Sword:
These fiercely Shot, those strove drawn near to Board:
The Assault increased on Fair ZELMANZA'S Score;
PHILARCHUS'S Wife, or the Captain's Slave and Whore.
When blustering Storm, most Furious Blast did rise,
Like Jar 'tween Winds and Waves, o'er-clouded Skies; Tempest at Sea.

Which broke off theirs, strait parted them asunder;
Now near to feed the Deep; loud claps of Thunder:
Barques tossed like Balls upon the Foaming Main;
Some comfort 'twas her Lord enjoyed again;
Tho, dreadful Thoughts, least should with her be drowned;
Who cheered her Heart, did strait to Her propound
Hope's Anchor there; that freed from Barbarous Foes,
They now were left to Heaven's wise dispose.
Thus Both conjoined sat waiting when the Waves
(Sharp Rocks, or Sands) might prove perchance their Graves.
Till hurled, at last upon the Italian Shore,
Bad, Craggie part, where streams did beating Roar;
Split thence their Barque, with Planks the Waters swelled
Like broken Limbs, third Dreadful Change beheld.
Those Romans there, since practiced swimming Art
From Boyish Age, made toward that nearest part.
In The River's mouth; which way strong Winds constrained
The floating Waves (more ease) the Bank obtained.
The Eunuch, Hurt men got each their Friendly Board
(Like diverse more) brought all to Land restored.
ZELMANZA kept in the furthest end her Seat,
For Death's cold Rape prepared; like daintiest meat
For the hungry Whale; PHILARCHUS by her side:
Near Sinking now, through Streams o'er-whelming Pride,
Loud Scriek withal; the Lord, whose faithful Breast
Philarchus, Zelmanza on his Back swiming.
Soft Groan conjoined, Love, Sorrow thence expressed,
Laid down his Back; her Folded Arms were cast,
Like Crystal Collar, Chain, in nimblest have
About his Neck (most dear, Conjugal Gem)
So takes the Waves, as She Grasped Him with Them:
Life's Guardian thought, small Barge conceived as 'twere,
Whilst the Arms and Legs well formed Oars appear
(Her Face tho drenched often) with Labor, toil
He sought that Bank fore-nam'd, whence Waves Recoil:
But Winds still driving on, like Helpful Hand,
That precious Load he brought most safe to Land.
Kissed off those Briny Drops (when gathered Breath)
On her fair Lips and Cheeks, from Thraldom, Death
Thus freed, discharged; said there, he should requite
Her kind Embrace upon his Wedding Night.
Who, dew'd with Pearl-like Tears of Joy again,
His Prize thrice over (declared) She should remain.
Then Servants came, congratulated round;
Who first that clearer way their passage found.
This Fortune join, the Lords (with many more)
Prime Box of Gold came floating to the Shore.
PHILARCHUS and ZELMANZA both were then
Franckly received by Neighbor Fishermen;
Large Village near to the Roman Lords that Bowed,
Whom Fires and Beds, strong Waters too allowed.
Hard Couches soft that time appeared, less plain;
Sweet, coarser Food; want curbing nice disdain.
Third Morn by Coach they trod the surer Land,
Reached Lofty Rome, which did that State command;
The Lord's own House, prime, gallant Seat beheld,
For Furniture, choice Garden, Grot excelled.
The Event of his Embassage being shown
To the Senate-Lords, both Married were, less known;
Married at Rome.
PHILARCHUS when, transformed that Water-bed
To Gorgeous Roman Couch (small Danger bred)
True waking Act, ZELMANZA fair Embraced
( Moroccoe's King in fondest Dreams) at last.
That Groom for Porters Hire Place Wealthy found,
Such the Eunuch to, since Loved their Roman Ground.
The Lord ZELMANZA last (like equal prize)
For Gallant Temper, rare did sympathize.
Ship Saild e're long for Athens, Grecian State;
ZELMANZA'S Brother where, since Flight of late
From Persia's King, with Uncle did reside;
Rich, Beauteous Heir enjoyed withal for Bride:
To whom she Lines conveyed, tho thought her Dead;
Now to's great Friend conjoined in Marriage Bed:
Lines thence to the Countess-Sister carried were,
In Arcadie, much pleased, rejoiced there.
The End of the Second Book.
THE GRECIAN STORY, BOOK III.
Orsamnes with Clermanthe in the Hermitage
AFter so long digressive way, Retreat,
Whole second Book, while seemed to forget
That Princely pair (clothed on the Hermit's Bed)
Our wandering Pen, the are now re-visited.
Both well did sleep till near to eight next morn,
When fair Sunbeams their Window's Glass adorn;
Birds chanted from their Bowers, whilst (gentle Heart)
Good Morrow Each to the other did impart.
ORSAMNES joined his own with many Kisses,
Same Posture there counts over his Morning-blisses;
With twofold Joy CLERMANTHE embraced, revived
As 'twere from Death whom Sleep pourtrays, new-liv'd.
TIMONDES tho waked earlier, because
Much sooner slept then they; with musing pause,
Would not disturb them ought, till, by consent
Both rising Clothed, did Day's salute present.
ORSAMNES said, That they had wronged so far
His elder years, unkindly to debar
From his own Bed, that it might seem a spite
To claim his proffered Grant for second Night;
Distemper caused; tho their sad Fortunes then
Did urge, enforce. TIMONDES joined again.
No Danger feared; that Chair ( He thought) would be
Convenient Couch; for several Nights agree.
Thus, forth they walked for Morning Air survay'd
That pleasant Ground which we before displayed;
Mounting that Bank, Their Pastime there.
well planted either side
Whose every Third fair Fruit-tree was descried;
They marched round that Pond in the midst enclosed,
Like Glass Long-square, the Bank for Frame supposed:
Whence Tarrass-like the whole Greeen could view, command.
Cherries were there beheld, not far from hand,
With paler Cheeks since short of Ripening time,
Tho forward showed through warmer Southern Clime:
Like Curtezans allured the Sense to pleasure;
TIMONDES prayed them taste his Orchard-treasure,
ORSAMNES well those dangling Gems could reach,
Cropped bunch thereof, was Taster next to each:
And then disposed for more pleasant Mood
Held to CLERMANTHE Part (enticing food)
But draws them by her Rubie mouth, deceived;
Who smiled withal, that cozening way bereaved.
Then proffered one more Choice, but there again
Deludes her daintiest Hand, held forth in vain.
(TIMONDES pleased) which She well to requite,
When given in earnest proved, through feigned Spite
That Gift refused; till he must make her eat;
So gratified for the former Wanton Cheat:
Holds some of them by her fresh Lips, compared,
When ripe in the Prime Inferior far declared
Then near her Cheeks advanced the Blushing Rose
(There partly blown) mean Beauty thought to those:
As Diamonds had held before, laid by
For gloomy Trash to the Radiance of her Eye.
After good Walk, The Hermit's Travels.
set down, TIMONDES there
Formed shorter Map discoursive way (as 'twere)
What Parts he saw of the World; tho now confined
To this small Nook, still free, unbounded Mind;
Such their Request, did Travels there display,
In which beheld the lesser Asia;
Tirus and Sidon South; so, further on
To Antioch, the Assyrian Babylon:
Next, Persia's Soil, that great Mogul's, where brood
Of Elephants; Fields washed by Ganges Flood:
Ranged China's self, then the Indian Isles returning;
Viewed the Ethiopian Parts, still Summer's burning,
Black, Sooty Crowd: that warm Arabian Shore,
Where Aden's Tawney Crew, choice Spices store:
Next, through Red Sea, joined Egypt Realm to those;
Much Western Ground, by Midland-waves, for Cloze.
Large Bag of Gold, by Friend which chanced to die,
Fellow-Travellor, given him as great supply.
Prime Towns he named, what Customs, Fashions there;
Conjoined withal his own bad Dangers were.
Far more the Duke had read; both with content
And wonder heard, those elder years t'invent
Such Form, good Words; like faithful Book remain
For Memory, that stronger tempered Brain:
Tho thus withdrawn, Interred (as 'twere) alive,
Kept active Soul that Hour, contemplative.
When Dinnertime their Stomachs both (he said)
Being likely roused through larger Voyage made,
Long Morn's Discourse, he would their Taste at last
(Since the Ears were cloyed) refresh with small Repast;
So walked away; that branched Bank commended
For Dining Room: ORSAMNES strait attended.
Brought, laid the Cloth (used Nature's Carpet there,
Green, Flowery Soil) Meat, Drink, conjoined were,
Himself, choice Servitor upon that Ground;
Good cold Baked Meat, Cheese, Butter ready found:
Their Landlord saving, till Summers warmth denied,
His Stomach well with that cold Food complied.
Joined also, his Man (being warned strait for more)
Should still Supply with fresh, convenient store
From great Dervan, Mile distant off, where he
Small Winter Grange left to his Custody.
Plumed Chanters heard, Thrush, Blackbird, Nightingale,
Which striving seeem'd who should for Voice prevail.
Dinner being past, Discourse conjoined to please, Ways for content.

They walked about that Pond again with ease,
Where Angle lay; TIMONDES prayed them, try,
What Fish there was then Hungry tho not Dry;
Showed Baits withal. ORSAMNES sitting down,
CLERMANTHE near, her Sexes choice renown,
He took the Rod; Fishing (did say, conclude)
Was the Ancient Game o'th World, t'o're-reach, delude:
Small Prizes caught: whilst, gathering Flowers there,
Some moved by gentle Gale did crave (as 'twere)
CLERMANTHE'S Hand, through humble Bow expressed,
Till planted in her Clear, Transcendent Breast.
Pinks, Violets, the Maiden blushing Rose,
Well pleased with sight, perfumed smell of those:
Fish tossed like mirth, (or chance) did make to fall
In The Water, Pond beneath, redeemed from thrall.
Prisners Captived; so sprucely showed (e're Dead)
With their Pearl-Coats and Scales enammeled.
She then should the Angle take, tho (charmless Breast)
Was loath to learn, since Treachery expressed;
Failed there, deceived: how could she choose? for why,
The enamored Fish (most part) might Gazing lie
On dainty Lips, the worm regard no more:
That Master-Angler caught the Day before.
From thence they passed to the Walk beneath, flat Green;
Where the Arbor joined to the Wall, good Space between
That and the Bank; which trod a while, enclosed
Within that Bower they sat them down, Reposed.
Close by that Fount from Rocky Womb descending,
Which Subject gave for large Discourse, well tending
To the Philosophic way, that learned Sphere;
Between ORSAMNES and TIMONDES there:
Natures chief Causes and Effects designed, Discourse of the Hermit and Orsamnes

Firm, Constant Course with various Change combined:
Such the Earthly Globe's night, day, four Seasons prove;
Whilst the Heavenly Orbs their certain Wheels do move
Still round, grand Machine, Frame: Star-Gems on high
(Yet Worlds of Light) adorn that vaulted Sky;
Planets their Rooms; low'st the Ayry Regions spread,
Strange Volume, Book, where wonders may be read;
Each Character, green blade of Grass that is found
Worthy regard; what then the whole Compound?
That multitude termed things of Vegetation;
Roots, Herbs and Plants, Trees, Fruits and Flowers formation;
Spice, Grane, Perfume: That different Sort where shines
The Pearl and G^m; Stones, Marbles, various Mines, etc.
Wind, Thunder, Lightning, Meteors, Hail and Snow;
Ebbs, Tides, Earthquakes, things caused above, below.
Joined things of Sense, from the Insect brood, so small
( Winged, Creepers both, quick, liveliest found withal)
Scarce seen, discerned, to the Ostrich, Elephant;
Such like the Sea from least to the Whale may vaunt.
Fine Artist prove those Waxen Desks the Be,
Spider round Web, Bird Chambers in the Tree.
Last, Humane Rank, grounds Moral, Rational;
What Noble, Wise, and Good in Men they call:
What Best befits, and Graces every Action;
Knowing themselves, conjoined, that satisfaction.
With curious Arts and Tongues, State-Wisdom too
Man furnished seemed, much knows and much can do.
Sad Frailty howere both Body, Mind display,
That brighter Coin bad Mixture does Allay;
Where Fancy, Passion much o'er-rule, and grown
Usurper like, Mount Princely Reason's Throne.
Joined Crosses, Cares of the World, sad Accidents
Disturbing too (dreadful as strange Events)
From Men, from furious Beasts; things named before,
Fire, Water-floods, etc. Nature's Destructive store.
Thus 'twas resolved, Man's chief Content does rest
Within the Mind, reserved in his own Breast:
Tho outward things Nature support, maintain
Like Building props ( Life-food, what may sustain
Essential found) next, Cheered against Worldly ill,
Advanced our Joy, yet the apprehension still
Does Rule, O'er-sway: but Loathsome Feasts appear
When faintish Qualm, distempered Palates there:
Prime Colors, scarce bad Jaundice-Eyes restore,
Nor Musicks please where Storm-vext Waves do roar:
The Sun seems lost when Fogs make dark the Sky,
Such Passion found where Lordly grown, two high:
Many that heap of Worldly Comforts claim,
Still wretched Poor through troubled Minds became;
Whilst others in great want (Life's Winter-season)
Settled Brains, Hearts, themselves enjoyed, sound Reason.
Upon these Grounds fixed their Discourse, although
For several times; did well concordant show.
Each the other gave what full Content desired;
TIMONDES often ORSAMNES Youth admired
So much to gain: ORSAMNES (truly scanned)
His ancieet Age so much could bear, command;
Knowledge grand Weight with Years distempered Load,
Nor Task unpleasing to CLERMANTHE showed
(Wise, as ingenious Breast) still to discover
More Solid Parts in her Selected Lover
To Goodness choice conjoined, brave Gallant Spirit;
Worth Prizing thought that stock of Manly Merit.
TIMONDES feared Time might too far be spent
Upon this Grave, more Solemn Argument,
Philosophy for Lady's tender mind;
Conceived too, young Lover's (heart combined)
Would be sometimes left to themselves, alone
Whose Love's not yet day and half old were known;
That might withdraw for hours retreat (he prayed)
Some things in the Hermitage should be Surveyed.
Our Princely Pair that Arbor when beheld, Both Lovers in the Bower.

Wood, planted Ground (what farther paralleled)
Walls lofty Fence, conjoined Fountain there,
Past Acts of the Lady's Grove revived were,
ORSAMNES pleased, CLERMANTHE sweet entwined,
More freedom now with these last Shades combined;
Much heightened thoughts that way, Sealed many Kisses,
Both well conformed then to the present Blisses.
( Chaste sober Hearts) what gentle time allowed:
Reaped while Sunbeams: ere long black, stormy Cloud
Might Darken all; which being by Heaven declared,
For Change, howere, their noble Breasts prepared
Then forth they walked to the Fount on furthest side
By the Arbor there, which from small Rock did glide,
(Mentioned before) nine Muses carved round;
Phoebus above; where good contentment found,
Whilst Prattling way clear silver Stream did flow,
(Soft murmur's Noise) to the Cisterns framed below
ORSAMNES styled CLERMANTHE in the pleasant mood
Bright Venus there, as met in shady wood
By Young Adonis self (tho Chaste that Hour)
In The Loving prime, e're felt Boar's dreadful power:
His Poniard laid of the Gross, conjoined intent,
That should Adonis Boar-Spear represent:
Delightful Scene was thus performed then,
Till Both well pleased, resumed themselves again,
Done hour and half, TIMONDES came, inquired
(Convenient time) where they to Sup desired:
Both close that first Low Walk in the level Green;
Planted with Palms; fair space (we said) between
That and the Bank, their Parlor called there;
Could ready Food good Meal did then appear;
Cloth spread, they couched down, for Carpet Grass;
Grove- Songstress seemed best Musick-noise surpass
(His Man against Noon, by the Widow warned, designed,
Brought large supply; themselves withdrawn behind
To the Garden-Bow'r) their Supper being ended
Joined various talk, till Sleep proved recommended.
Thus spent their Hours in choice, contentful way,
(Sometimes alone, reserved) well pleased by Day,
That past, upon the Hermits Bed reposed
Kind, sweet Good-nights, Good-morrows there enclosed
Lusty TIMONDES slept in the former Chair,
Strong Signs whereof, heard Snort by the Noble Pair,
ORSAMNES waked third Morning first; and now
Some Damping thoughts through her years Virgin Vow
Three Weeks behind, for clearing Fancy's Sky
This Song did frame, his Lute supposed by.
SONG.
1.
Come thou friendly Hand and Voice,
Let your Art, Orsamnes's P^em.

Well conjoined, sooth my Heart
(Grief by Charms allayed) Rejoice;
Riddles showing:
Time howere
Does Bound appear
For Payment, full content bestowing.
2.
Master of my Beauteous Flame,
I Burning. prove;
Whilst oreflow dear Streams of Love
Thirst-like want of Joy proclaim:
Daunt with pleasure,
I do own
Chief Mine alone,
Yet not dare to Grasp the Treasure.
3.
Ripe and Wealthiest Ground of Corn,
Grapes Possess
Of Transcendent Lusciousness,
Starved withal, since Fruit forborne:
Hope still eases,
Seems t'afford
Sweet Crop, Gold Hoard,
Whilst Delayed sad Fancy pleases.
This He at Noon did to her Hand present,
Who found in that Poetic way content.
Third Day being come, in the cloze whereof, third Night
(Whole second Book between) we did recite,
That Uncle of his, the Lord THIRSANDER named, The Prince Orontes.

Who well to the Pastor-life with his Father framed,
By the Widow wrought, he would inform them there
Touching close place, reserved till Cloud of Fear,
Caused by his Fathers angry mind, dispelled;
Thoughts pacified (which made him thus concealed
Like Traveller) for Choice of One of those
Two Nimphs Gentile, whose Fathers same Life chose, Philaura and Merdona.

Still strongly bent: thought needful to repeat
His mind being well conformed by that Retreat,
CLERMANTHE would ( Husband enjoyed, to own
Her safe Defense) be to her Father known,
VERDORUS, Duke.; Year past from whom She fled,
Since by his Concubine near murdered.
Through Poisonous Broth soon raised to Duchess glory:
Things thus revived, we shall enlarge our Story.
THIRSANDER came not then, by Ten at Night;
Nor Trouble caused, since various Chances might
Produce Delay; well harbored both howere:
They thought to wait till fifth, sixth Evening there.
If failed that time, their Widow should be sent
To's House again, for knowing more the Event.
Sixth Evening come, TIMONDES walked strait
To the Widows Lodge, whom found Distempr'd late,
Not fit to Go; then 'twas resolved, designed
ORSAMNES should, for ease of doubtful Mind;
Five miles the Walk (as we declared before)
'Twas three to the Lady's Grove, to the Grange two more.
Thus by Tens hour, Orsamnes goes to his Uncle.
the Hermit's old Coat preferred
Hat, for Disguise, false Hair, with younger Beard.
In Travels kept by him, least (wandering Stranger)
Through spiteful Chance pursued; more free from Danger;
Borrowed one Sword (second from Foreign Land
TIMONDES brought) with Quiver, Bow at hand,
Poniard by's side, before we mentioned,
He prayed CLERMANTHE rest upon the Bed
Till Walk performed; Moon shining from the Sky
(Choice season, calm) with paler Majesty.
Then, taking Leave, her hand he grasped there,
Sigh breathed upon it, against Mischief Charm, as 'twere,
Preservative; which She again repaid;
Kiss strait conjoined: Eyes cast to Heaven, as said,
O guard from Thrall Mine and the Worlds best Treasure:
So, marched forth, scarce Journey thought of pleasure.
The Hermit attends to Lock the outmost Door,
Returning strait; to the Cell (we said before)
There proved an Iron one, two Bolts beside,
Guard strong enough, scarce Robbing Fears descried:
No more remained but wishing her good rest,
So to his Chair withdraws like Drowsy Guest.
The Duke went on his Nightly Pilgrimage,
Then seventh of May did his best powers engage
For speedy work dispatch; renewed (as twere)
Acquaintance with those good Informers there,
Choice marks he saw: the way not much unknown,
Trod the same Week by him, first Book 'twas shown.
Yet straggling Erred sometimes, blamed here is have.
There slowness tho; till two full Hours o'repast,
(Well breathed withal) did reach THIRSANDER'S House,
Whom strait from Bed by gentle knock did rouse.
THIRSANDER thought, FLORENA both, 'twas he, His Cousin named first Book.

One faithful maid door opened presently.
Salute discharged, THIRSANDER informed him there,
He had procured close Place, reserved (how ere).
For their retreat, with Country-Friend; desired;
Twenty miles off; Himself withdrawn, retired.
Conjoyns the unlucky Ground of that delay;
Returning back with speed the second day,
Riding five miles, he was assaulted then;
Horse, Money seized by four stout Highway-men,
Stripped to his Hose: strait walking back again,
Near that Friends House he got diastrous strain
In his right Foot; for skilful Surgeon sent,
Whilst fresh and warm, used Salves convenient
Suppling the Nerves, till time did strength restore;
New Horse and Clothes supplied of the friendly score:
Came home that night, the Horse strait by Swain returned,
(Such promise made) so, 'till next Morn adjourned
His Walk to Them. DERVAN would furnish well
For Horses, Coach when left their Hermit-Cell.
Thus, forth they Marched, both Armed with Swords combined,
Made nimble Have the Moon while Friendly shined.
We now return to her that seemed then
Like Mateless Dove, CLERMANTHE'S Self again:
Who laid of the Bed in Clothes, and long conceived
ORSAMNES stay, of him sleep both bereaved; Clermanthe's Loving Fear.

With whom she was ( Night-wanderer besides)
Resolved to wake, She nimbly roused, then Glides
To the Window strait: Clear Moon beheld did there
Like sober Handmaid shine, Trees calmest were;
Showed Solemn Brows; tall guard resembled round;
But naught for Lovely Shape adorns that ground
Like to her Lord: when, gentler voice; My Dear,
O why so long! She said, Displeased here,
ORSAMNES failed with Moon, tho well contented,
Torch-bearer thought of the Sky; more harm prevented,
Less Wandrng too; She sadly back retired;
And falling on her Couch, straitways respir'd
Complaining Sigh; Then Pearled Tear did move,
Steal softly down; the Arms lastly folded prove,
Bemoaned her Heart. She mused with thoughtful Brow,
First, Time could grant for Journeys length, allow;
THIRSANDER (next) till dressed; last, for Return;
Then, counting the Hours (as thought) began to mourn,
Her several Scores cast nimbly up, as tho
Too much the Time for the Labor, Task did show.
Done longer pause, short word conjoined, alas!
She roused again, to the Window strait did pass;
There looking forth, Not yet? tho fairest night;
Ah me! She breathed: Clermanthe's sad Complaint.
when lamentablest sight
That Earth could forge did wound her Beauteous Eyes;
That Man appeared, whom her own Heart did prize
Transcendent way, born at full length between
Two Corps-like, Dead, cross the open part of the Green;
To's Shirt unclothed; whilst Moon did faintly gaze
Like sad Spectator there, unveiled Face.
Lamp gave to all: his Shirt with Spots distained
Like bleeding Hearts, whilst hung beneath disdained
Large, dangling Curls: upon his Youthful Breast,
ORSAMNES-like, Green Silken Robe did rest, That Coat named in the first Book.

Long, broad Plate-Buttons joined; Hat, naked Sword
Like the Hermits, Lent; too plain she saw, abhorred:
Broad Garter round his Arm held forth to View,
Bright Scarlet Dye, which well CLERMANTHE knew;
Such given by Her, and worn still Wreathed there:
Sad, dreadful Marks! whose Corpse thrown down, as 'twere,
For branched Grave, in the small, low Walk bestowed
(That with Palm Trees) the Men departed showed;
This Object viewed, O Horror strange (she cries)
Sight, sight enough to blast Heavens purer Eyes,
And damp their sparkling Flames! O Tenfold Death!
Ah, Woe, Woe, Woe! Why do I fondly Breath?
The World my self undone, Farewell, farewell
Choice, Noblest Worth, same Form, what things excel;
Joys fly for ever, lost my Dearest All,
And I Am no more. Tears Gem-like stream did fall;
Wrung Whitest Hands, as would the Fates o'erpow'r,
Charm back this harsh Event: obscured that Hour
Bright Beauty's World. TIMONDES, that could take
Deep, Sober Rest, much less prone to awake
Kept longer up, joined Midnight's season then;
Doors thought secure, was loath to Rouse again:
First noise not heard, near the End like Dream conceived
CLERMANTHE strait, almost of Voice bereaved,
These Words conjoined. I come (she said) I come,
To share withal sad, strange disastrous Doom,
My dearest Lord; to take last Frozen Kiss
Then dye upon thee there, my living Bliss
But lately thought, now opened proved his Eyes,
To the Window reeled; he star'd on the Earth and Skies
Amazed Man, naught Viewed unknown before:
CLERMANTHE hurled meanwhile to the Iron Door
Where found the Key; what nimblest strength could do
That way employed, unlocked, unbolted too.
Forth strait she ran; My dear ORSAMNES; cries:
Four Villains when did grasp her there, Surprise,
With sturdy Arms bruised Fairest Innocence
CLERMANTHE tho scarce Frighted seemed from thence;
Since those conceived the Butchers of her Lord,
Whose Hands might Death to her own self afford,
Cure bleeding Heart; strange Griefs extreme that Hour
Nature's Grand Fears did stifle much, orepow'r.
Life's Joy discharged: yet struck to the Soul, confounded,
They stopped her Loving Course, these words she sounded
(Sad voice) from mournful Breast. Come, welcome You,
My Lord's joined Murderers, since I shall sue
For that Death's stroke, to which constrained of late,
Enforced himself; tho, worse than Savage Hate,
Kill me not here: Spare the ancient Man in the Cell,
Next, let me breath of the Corpse my last farewell,
Then wound my Heart; I shall confess you are Men;
Beasts, Furies else, broke from the Infernal Den,
Three of that Rout leaped in at first for Prize,
TIMONDES grasp, whose Sword before their Eyes
Took then in hand; fast bound he proved however
Her Jewel-box, much Gold they seized there
The Fourth in sport CLERMANTHE rudely led
To the Sable Curtain'd Walk, Named in the first Book worth 3000 l.
whose Fatal Bed
Black Couch appeared of all disastrous Ill;
That Stygian Wood where Ghosts inhabit still.
The Corpse when viewed, She takes her nimble flight
(Tho sent sad voice before) and like some bright,
Shot Meteors Flame, falling upon his Breast,
These Words conjoined there: O thou, the Best
Of Men but late ( true Lovers honor, Glory)
As now of Ghosts; tho for thy Fortune's Story
To the worst of Fates ordained; I Am come, I Am come,
My dearest Lord ( clasping her Joy's spread Tomb
His Body, Neck) thy Wretch'd CLERMANTHE it is
O Cursed Name! that kneels to take last Kiss;
Last Dire Farewell; then break my Loving Heart,
Ah cold, cold Kiss of Death (small, sudden start
Conjoined, She said; Quick, have, that Villain crying)
Death's Frost Alas! then, blood-steep'd Wounds espying,
Ah Crimson Founts (said she) that you had flowed
From mine own Heart: Life's open Sluice and Road,
Sad Forts (as 'twere) whence bravest Soul conveyed:
Had we not Both (...) One? Why Tardy stayed
My half b^^^nd? (...) Marble felt, no Voice
Breathed Wi^^per ^^ard; Death's my resolved Choice;
Life torment found: You that did prove of late
Cruel, Severe, now Kind become; stern Fate
Divorced us here on Earth, grown Friendly now
Join us again in the other World; I how
To the Stroke withal, with him would partner prove:
O Kill me over my breathless Lord and Love.
Here stooping down, upon the Face she gazed,
When like false Dream beheld, most strangely Amazed,
She started up, strong thoughts, Conceit implying
'Twas not ORSAMNES Corpse: She spies 'twas not Orsamnes Corpse.
O you all-eying
All-knowing Powers, am I awake ( She cries)
Or are you Pleased thus to Delude mine eyes
With painted Form and Cloud? then is not This
My dear ORSAMNES? hah! such Cordial bliss!
Transcendent change! whence that green Robe (before)
Long, Silver Plates? his Arm broad Ribband wore
( 'Twas Scarlet) round; whence came that Hat and Sword,
By the Hermit lent? what Signs could more afford,
The hour, place, conjoined? -- my Heart it is like, not He;
It Is not ORSAMNES Face, tho the rest agree.
Ah! lives my Lord? some gentle, wandering Wind
That Fear discharge, miraculously kind:
Fain would I so avoid the stroke of Fate
Which threatens me like Brat unfortunate
Cast out to direful Chance; for thee could Live:
Thus more concerned, since through the Heart- wounds they give
Thy Self withal may Bleed, contentment fled,
Nor long survive, known poor CLERMANTHE Dead.
Here came those Three: that Youth was called VANLOR, The Corpse of frantic
Vanlo^.

Of rank Gentile, and named by us before
In the first Book, who Frantic way did Rove,
Sad wanderer, talked near that Walled Grove
With Echo long (oreheard by the Princely Payr)
That his dead Love conceived, DIONE fair;
Next Morning meant for the Marriage-celebration:
He thus would Range about lamenting fashion,
Seek for her Ghost in fields and Darksom Shade,
Ere 'twas unto the Elyzian banks conveyed.
Would Furious prove by's Mother kept, confined,
Else quiet with that overclouded Mind,
Came Home for Supper, Bed; this straggling Night
Killed in that Place: from longer Torment might
Freed thence appear, Heart's Wound as cured his Heart,
Lanc'd Sorrow's Ulcer thus by wholesome smart,
Life loathsome grown; which sad CLERMANTHE found,
Her Lord thought slain: thus take the Cause and ground.
These wandering Rogues did prove the youthful Scum
Of false DORSENGAR'S Train, undon by whom
The Hermit's Father was first Book did show;
Great Courtier bred his younger Brother tho;
Which made him Bastard thought by subornation,
Seized all the Land: at length ( Revengeful fashion)
Stabbed by his Slave, Blackmoor one evening-hour,
On drowsy Couch in's Garden, Summer-bow'r.
The Men discharged by 's ranting Son, whose name
TERGORAS called, (vile Coin, for stamp the same)
Bold Cheats they turned, stout Highway- Thieves at last,
Grim Landlords of the Road; for six Years past
Good thriving Trade: tho called Gentiler way,
On Horseback then, till fallen to bad decay
Through drink and Whores, their Horses sold or Dead,
Deeply engaged, more sculking Life they led
And robbed on Foot; Four others joined anon.
Thus, Sergeants feared with Hues and Cries well known
From MANTINEA'S Coast they took their Flight; Chief City there.

This Wood did reach Thirty Miles off that Night.
Half hour ago made hungry Baiting pause;
Then were for next Sea port resolved, because
Liked Pirates robbing way, the unfriendly Land
Less favoring; some Stock withal in hand
For lanching forth. These scouting by the Wood side,
To see how clear the Plain, they strait descried
Hapless VANLOR (still thirst for Booty there)
In gallant Garb, Vanlor killed.
large glist'ring Plates appear,
Breast, sides, behind; no weapon, Arms displayed;
Entering that Path, disposed for branched Shade
Dark like his Clouded Thoughts (turned Silent then
More mute sometimes, orewhelming Dream again)
Near-hand withal; good Golden Cash perchance:
Whose Lodge not far might well their Prize advance.
In's Pocket born the Key: they gently move,
Dogged him along till drawn most near did prove.
Entering that outmost Door (why open found
Anon declared) they did the Youth surround,
Thrust forth by Stabs his Noisless, musing Soul
In bleeding Stream; with Corpse then softly stole
(Born longest way) to the small low Walk expressed,
By the Lady there beheld, Cause of Clermanthe's mistake.
whilst on his breast
Hat, Coat and Sword (convenient place) where laid,
Till cross the Green to the planted Palms conveyed.
That Hat she thought the same worn by her Lord,
From the Hermit took, and his the naked Sword;
Tho each to Thief belonged, the Corpse then bearing.
That Scarlet Ribband round his Arm appearing,
Came from his Love, DIONE dead of late,
Green Silken Robe, long Buttons, broad of Plate
(Her Lord's such too) for's Marriage was intended,
Prime Fancy's Garb thus fondly apprehended;
Conceit sometimes, that worn, 'twas Marriage- Day,
His Love at night enjoyed, such Dreaming way.
By all these Marks, his Body's equal size,
Face, handsome form, curled Locks (that last Disguise,
False Hair and Beard forgot, tho might howere
Be pulled, fall off in blustering Scuffle there)
Time, Place at once, CLERMANTHE strait concluded
'Twas loved ORSAMNES Corpse, with ease deluded:
Through double Night near-hand concealed sad Passion,
Dark Shades withal. The Rogues thus hasty fashion
Corpse hurling down, small Coin about him tho,
But Key to's Chamber Door, that plain did show
True Key to the Cell beneath, which might howere
Yield gallant Prize; Himself mistaken there
For the Owner on it; Retiring strait they All
Stole by that Pond (unseen) to the blinder Wall,
(Else Window feared) when, open found the Door,
They seized CLERMANTHE, as you heard before.
For Door to the Green, TIMONDES since did wait
To let ORSAMNES forth, till something late,
Dull, drowsy grown more have; CLERMANTHE'S rest
Regarded too; the Lock (less strongly pressed)
Did shoot too short; or Stop, had hindrance there:
Those Bolts above beneath forgotten were,
The Wall it self so smooth and High that none,
Except by Ladder raised, could mount thereon.
Ransacked the Cell, where Box of Gems they found
(CLERMANTHE'S named) thought worth three thousand pound;
Gold-heap (the Duke kept his, whilst Faithful Man
TIMONDES store reserved at great Dervan)
Two of their Clump dragged that Dead Corpse in have
To deep Pit, Well, by which they lately passed
IN the Wood, near going back (might easily do)
Less danger afterward: The other Two
Clermanthe led away by Thieves.
CLERMANTHE haled along, keen Dagger shown,
Sheathed if Refused (what Cause shall be made known)
In her white Crystal Breast; tormenting Fear
Tho seemed like Death, yet She chose rather there
To be so Drawn by them in slower fashion;
Some Time for Help that way and preservation,
Cast dismal Glance of the late contentful Cell,
Whilst breathed in Sighs to all her Joys Farewell.
Thus led between that ugly Guard, did show
Fair Innocence it self captived so:
As Sons of Hell conjoy'd to Massacre
Prime Excellence, what counted Perfect, Rare.
Dismal Death's walk it seemed, great Justice when
Intranc'd appeared, and Rapine from his Den
Governed the World: Mouth stopped with her own Glove
For Noise, Complaint, less Danger thence did prove.
She gazed on Trees, on shining Moon, whilst Those
The Monsters Shroud; might the other Lamp suppose
Helping their Work; all is calm and Lulled as 'twere;
Bad Nature seemed Confederated there.
Leaving the Green, then Path, the adjoining Wood
They entered Both; when One of them (vile brood)
Sounded small Whistle strait, to which Another
Answered far off; Four more ( Each being sworn Brother)
Their Stuff did guard, Captain stayed there beside;
That followed they, through Branched Ground best guide.
'Twas their Design CLERMANTHE should be led
Unto their Chief, After Rape, to be Sacrificed.
for's pleasure Ravished;
To PLUTO next, termed God of gainful Prize
And Hell conjoined, prove Off^ring, Sacrifice:
One's Motion liked by All, their Hands so late
Employed in Blood; mean Beast tho served for that
With Brimstone-sume, by Thieves performed before,
First week of May, on that Devotion-score
As by Themselves, through sculking fears and Flight
So long deferred, then May the Seventh Night:
Beast wanting tho, Man, Woman seemed t^ excel;
PLUTO thought King of Ghosts, whose Empire well
They had enlarged Zeal stronger now, since He
Not only brought them off, from Danger free,
But that choice Prize (which grand Advancement showed)
Rare Box of Gems, joined heap of Gold bestowed.
Her dainty'st Body, Head should strait be thrown
In that deep Well, laid by VANLOR unknown.
Their Captain's pleased, longed for that Rape, agreed
For the Sacrifice, whom so they styled indeed:
BRISOLDAN 'twas, her Suitor found over bold, Thieves Captain Brisoldan.

GONDACE'S Son (whose Plots we did unfold
First Book, at large) her Father's Concubine:
Held on Four years to the Poisonous Broth's Design,
CLERMANTHE'S flight, his Feigned then earnest Love,
Ambitious thoughts till fondest Dream did prove:
Near Death withal Two younger Lords ensnared
Least through their Rival suits himself debarred,
Tho She withdrawn, Disdainful Part expressed,
That Love turned monstrous Hate, enraged Breast.
CLERMANTHE viewed, BRISOLDAN swelled with Pride,
Strong Lust, Revenge, that gallant Theft descried:
Fate Servant showed to the Wish, like rare Convoy;
Could ( Scorned before) CLERMANTHE now enjoy
(Willing, or not) so Greedily desired;
Scarce Waking thought, Chance singular, Admired:
Coy Mistress there to 's Wench transformed, a Slave,
Then followed Death; smooth passage ore her Grave
To the Style, estate of Duke; yet kept he on
False- Hayr and Beard, nor would by Words be known
Till Ravishment. Her Spouse there slain (they told)
Deep Well received; Bonds did their Father infold.
BRISOLDAN'S Cause, Brisoldan's fortune.
how joined with those Men
We thus impart: That proud GONDACE when
The Duke to Wifely Honor pleased to advance,
He swelled with Haughty'st Mood stranger Arrogance;
Gam'd, Drunk and Whor'd; for costly Garb by none,
(Rich, gallant Choice) nor courtly way outgon;
Best Lords Comrade; Years Twenty one did bear.
Chief Town did haunt; at Dice engaged there
On Tavern-board with Son of Prime Grandee,
Loved by the King (Coin plenteous store and free)
Good while He could not Fortune charge, condemn;
Till great Stakes lost, bad words, then Rage extreme,
This surly Youth stabbed that young Lord to the Heart.
Then grasping his own Bag large Golden part,
Bright Sword unsheathed, broke down with his Man, no more
(The House favoring) to the Court, where backward-Door;
Took each their Horse (kept ready-sadled there)
So galloped through; till such bad Chance (whatere)
Lamed both their Beasts. At length to Ford they came,
But monstrous Showers had swelled last night the same.
Known Bridge far off: Both paused did Gazing stand,
When Armed Troop beheld on their right hand
Marching that Way, upon their lest Another:
Large Wood beneath appeared, which used to smother
Those mentioned Thieves. If back to the Field they passed,
Or sculking Wood, those Troops might seize at last.
His Man (constrained) prime Cellers Vault disclosed
In Uncle's Lodge, whose entrance so composed.
With that Nice, curious Art 'twas admirable;
Midst of that Wood; Who, when more wealthy, able,
Kept Inn in the Royal Town, had harbored long
Those Thieves, their Horses too, as Sharer strong
In their Exploits, till broke, to the Lodge retired:
Those turned Foot-rogues withal, when Case required,
Done Robbery fled to that Celler-vault,
The Host partner still: there they might Lurk uncaught
That Night, next day, till slow Pursuit appeared;
Then slinking March abroad, small Danger feared
To Corinth-Realm, with Kinsman there remain,
Till Pardon's grant Duke, Duchess could obtain.
Their Horses least, as tho the Men not far,
Suspicion caused, unsadled left they are
In Pasture-ground. Thus through that Branched Maze
His Man did guide, BRISOLDAN'S lodged, repaid
Large Golden Rent; or Rogue- Comrades howere
Grand heap for Stook bestowed, styled Captain there.
Those fearing too bad Seouts, that second Night
By general Voice resolved with Him for Flight:
Knew well these Parts, would prove like Guard, defend,
Marched Thirty Miles, stout, Praieant grown in the end.
Nor touched himself past ^rime, or this to come
Since with few Words might have Reversed the Doom;
'Twould Acted be by others Plot, design,
Next, by their Hands; None Him could Undermine,
Nor charge as knowing Her, whose Man by the way
Imposthume seized: 'Twould prime Revenge display.
First Rape then Death; when Beard pulled off, descried
'Twas done by Him, Tormenting Rack beside;
These words conjoined [BRISOLDAN'S here] alone,
Well stopped her Mouth for making her self known.
Thus should She be disrobed strait to the Wast,
Pure Flesh beheld, white Hands by Cord embraced
Led forth by Two (Triumphant Form, Slave prize)
For easy Ravishment, then Sacrifice.
ORSAMNES, thou not know this Dreadful Cross,
The endamag'd World's, but most thy Fatal Loss:
Does no kind Gale Sigh, Whisper'st in thine Ear?
Loud Thunder roar the chance, nor Earthquake there
Tremble it forth? such Strange-tongu'd Prodigies
Would Suit such Monst'rous Act: do not the Skies
Inform by scroul of Stars? some Raven crying,
Fatality! choice worth, chief Beauty's Dying.
ORSAMNES with THERSANDER entered well
Orsamnes with Thersander come to the Wood.
That Hermit path, near the outmost Door to the Cell,
Shown nimble Speed, when on the Shaded Side
ORSAMNES large, white Hankerchief descried
Dropped on the Ground (sad Storm his Thoughts) believed
CLERMANTHE'S 'twas; leaped strait to the Door, Soul-griev'd,
That Open found, Orewhelm'd; within the Green,
CLERMANTHE, called: heard the Hermit's Voice (unseen)
She Is gone, Surpised: ran strait to the Door again,
Viewed Glimmering Light, good distance off, remain;
( Moon shining forth) That for those Rogues concluded.
With soft but nimble Pace (nor least Deluded)
They reached that Ground, where small Turf-Altar reared
( Men trampling through small open Glade) appeared;
Bright Sword, few Flowers thereon: of the nearest side
Dim Taper burned: on farther Bank descried
Some hurling down a Woman there, fair Load,
Since, Petticoat discerned, CLERMANTHE showed.
Strange, horrid Scene; whilst clearest Moon displayed
Her fainter Beams. Both rushed into the Glade;
Swords drawn, turned Tigre-like, some Targets found,
Thrown there by chance, strait snatching from the ground.
The first of them ORSAMNES Sword did make
Soon breathless Corpse. then Second Life forsake
(Half-arm'd, confused) with Spirit prime, undaunted,
Love joined, Revenge; Third Soul enlargement granted,
Pasport for Hell: that valiant Rage did show,
As freely would such Mortal Dooms bestow.
Tho Died Himself. Some, whilst did staring range
For Targets there, less used their Swords, so strange
Sudden Assault. THIRSANDER (whose Courage bold
Might almost Match with his Nephew be enroul'd,
Their Cause the same) Fourth Villain soon did leave
Carkase on ground; then Fifth of Life bereave
With Active hand; Sixth prostrate laid for Dead;
Lastly, with Seventh engaged, Eighth Person fled.
Orsamnes fighting with Brisoldan.
BRISOLDAN now (strange, startling Accident)
Had found his Shield; ORSAMNES by the Event
Her Husband thought; with Coat tho meaner-priz'd
( Fine Clothes beneath) Hat and false Beard disguised;
Since Flight disdained, with naked sword advanced:
ORSAMNES whom (viewed costly Garb when glanced)
Their Chief conceived, good Cause brave Courage suited;
Sharp language, thus, Villain, thou Dy'st, saluted.
Villain thy self (BRISOLDAN said) art thou
That Woman's Spouse; fierce voice join frowning Brow.
ORSAMNES joined, I am. BRISOLDAN strait,
Then know, above all Womankind I hate
That Harlot first, who Prostrate there lies Dead;
And next her Thee: ORSAMNES answered:
I now conclude, BRISOLDAN the art, most base,
Scorned, Loathe'd Name; my Sword upon thy Face
Shall print that Style and Heart. With sternest Pride
BRISOLDAN, The Hand I Will first chop off, replied;
Thy Throat shall sheath this ravenous Sword therein.
ORSAMNES joined, Thou talk Mad- like, unseen
Death's Fate so near; lest should the Strife enlarge,
If so thou Dare, let us Both our Shields discharge,
Laid on the Earth. Agreed; BRISOLDAN cries:
Thrown down they were. Both proved of equal Size,
Same Proper height, breadth, strength; well matched for Age,
Years Twenty one; did fairly so engage.
First sharp Assault, ORSAMNES made large Wound
In the Oth^r's Thigh, more Active Body sound;
Blood streamed withal, his gallant Garb oreflowing
(New Crimson-died) thence much enraged showing.
Monster do Bleed? the stout ORSAMNES said,
Nezt, Death may seize. I scorn thy paultry Blade,
(BRISOLDAN joined) and Thee. ORSAMNES then
Proved second Pass, encount'ring Each again,
Broke the Other's force, soon caused his Dreadful smart
Slashed off whole Cheek reght Hand, next cleav'd his Heart:
Falling on whom like ponderous Fate (howere
Small Scratch received) confirmed great Conquest there.
THIRSANDER held Seventh sturdy Thief that while,
(Hard Grapling task) till joined to the Slaughtered Pile;
His Soul unkennel'd too; Skin rac'd (no more)
Came bravely off: Eighth fled, we said before:
Tho tumbled down that mentioned Well, by chance,
As did that Way with hasty Foot advance:
Clermanthe found of the ground.
Then running to the World's Glory late, so prime,
CLERMANTHE'S Self (sad Conquerours that time)
Half-nak'd she lay, not seen till then, revealed
Farther than Neck; by the Altar's Turf concealed:
(ORSAMNES thoughts orewhelm'd) found Senseless lying
Head tho left on, She seemed more than Dying:
Where sadly exclaym'd' O strange, disast'rous sight!
As ever was brought forth by dreadful Night;
Black mischiefs Womb! CLERMANTHE, called, did say,
It was ORSAMNES voice. Each needful way
THIRSANDER strait (that Time afforded) used,
Her Temples bathed, strong, powr'ful Spirits infused
(Brought little Glass) since not least Wound appeared,
Nor Bruise beheld; some strangling Death was feared;
Rubbed, bowed her Body often. Ah Horror! crying
ORSAMNES mournful voice; You never dying
Powers above discharge my Life, since take
Chief Joy from me, so cease tormenting Rack
Prime worth's destroyed. THERSANDER bathed her Breast,
'Twas Cordial juice as good for the Head expressed,
(Seldom forgot) her Body the Other bowed:
Through friendly Chance cold Water was allowed,
Left by those Thieves, of the Face drops sprinkled were:
ORSAMNES calling still, CLERMANTHE, there.
Clermanthe freed from Trance.
When strait appeared soft Motion in each Part,
Deep Trance desolv'd, like curious Watch by art
Whose nicest Wheels do move in order round;
Such was that dainty'st Frame, revived compound.
Her wandering Soul, as newly wakened then,
Traversed with Joy it is Beauteous House again;
Choice Rooms surveyed; fine Progress 'twas and rare;
Delightful Scene, to see that World of fare,
Prime- Lovely, sweet like Model new-created,
By Heaven Inspired: each wonder Grace restated
In Cheeks and Lips: those gallant, Sun-bright Eyes
Break through their Morning lids while the Eastern Skies
Sol broke to view't as 'twere: ORSAMNES tho
Was pleased to think, those Rays from Her did flow,
His Light of Joys at least: spring-like fresh, warm
CLERMANTHE showed, much industry, that Charm
ORSAMNES Voice new-blest the World; howere,
THIRSANDER'S Art proved instrumental there.
When, grasping, Her with joyful violence,
He second Trance to endanger seemed from thence;
Such Kisses joined as stifle would in Love,
Change so supreme, might well transported prove:
Both mutely sat. Parley'd with Hearts combined,
Souls whispering forth sad Tales as 'twere (intwin'd)
Of former Grief: whilst Rape declared prevented
Rogue's gasping Tongue, ORSAMNES thoughts contented:
Who thus did silence break, You losty Skies,
Immortal Powers of Daylight do these eyes
Behold sent back beloved CLERMANTHE ( as 'twere)
From Shades of Death, or Heaven's triumphant sphere?
Soul on the way, Body deflowered by none?
Transcendent Gift! this Flesh that Honor shown
To Bleed sin Her, worthy of Fame's record.
When she again; Has then kind Heaven restored
To these glad Arms my worthy'st Lord, and Gem?
So long bewailed in that disast'rous Dream,
As Carkase, Dead? Another's Corpse although,
My Champion joined withal, much heightened so!
No more lost precious Blood, my Joys revive;
Now do I Breath ORSAMNES found alive.
Thy Conquest Palm deserves, that Trance was kind,
Since made me prove to thy great Danger Blind.
She strait declared that dead Corpse viewed before,
ORSAMNES-like; how running through the Cell-door
They seized on Her, next to their Captain brought:
Then bound her Arms for Rape, strange Torment thought;
His ^^ard pulled off, these words conjoined beside
[BRISOLDAN'S here] plainly Himself descried:
With dreadful Wonder struck, Mouth stopped that hour,
So near his loathsome Grasp, then Murdering power
(Hopes to be the Heyr, like Poyson's second part,
Death mea^t by whispering saw) orewhelmed Heart,
She fell ^^tranc'd when laying down for the Action;
Viewed by the Duke: Thief gave more satisfaction.
Much joy'd ORSAMNES still, that rare escape
From deadly Hands, what next to Death a Rape.
Frantic VANLOR that Corpse did strait appear,
Whom ranging so for Prize they Murdered there.
Now troubled thoughts for's noble Host in the Cell, Their trouble for the
Hermit.

Whose Voice, left there alive, informed him well,
Tho Bound hand, foot, it seemed CLERMANTHE told,
It cheered her when Thief did first unfold,
He lay looked up in Bonds, upon the Ground
Thrown there the Key; with gladsom Fortune found,
Like Jewel caught; hard task to break the Door;
'Twould need long time, whatere Disturbance more.
Their Booty seized upon the Earth was laid;
Her Box of Gems much Gold therein displayed,
As yet unshar'd; their Thievish Coin, more high
BRISOLDAN'S Stock was left to the Passer by.
THIRSANDER here should strait their Agent go
To the Town Mile off, Dervan, preparing so
Fit Hackney- Coach for the Journey was intended;
But changed the case, bad Chances apprehended;
Whole hours that Work required, Straglers might well
View those Dead Thieves, then range to the Hermit's Cell,
ORSAMNES Armed found, THIRSANDER there
(Perhaps returned) Both known; or led howere
To the Magistrate, known so; if not confined
Much Trouble caused, spoiled their Retreat designed.
Walking themselves was thus resolved upon;
Cottage there proved by which Himself had gone,
Short of the Town, good Ancient payr descried,
Where they might sculk till could that Coach provide:
Say, they were Robbed, unhors'd, some Gold although
Reserved, concealed, their Host paid freely so.
Back strait they Walked, All walk to the Hermitage
TIMONDES Bond's discharged,
Whose Joy flowed high CLERMANTHE well enlarged;
Grieved tho for's drousie Have, since the outmost Door
Mistook, not Locked: CLERMANTHE did deplore
The unhappy Chance, her opening the other there
Large heap of Thanks to him returned were:
Tho paid for Food themselves, that Coat mean-priz'd
Borrowed and Sword, false Beard, the Duke disguised.
THIRSANDER had BRISOLDAN'S Beard and Hair,
Seized on the Ground. Lastly, the noble pair
Promised Returns, when Fortune gave them Power
For kindness shown within that Rocky Bower.
CLERMANTHE upheld by them on either side,
They trod the Path till the open Field descried.
That Prince of day now the upper World had raised
From nights command, Tall, lofty Mountains blazed
With Gaudy Brows; Woods Golden Dress did wear;
And Men awaked from Slumbring Trance appear;
Work, Pastime sought: whilst plumed, Silvan Quires
Chanted their Songs unto his Mourning-fires:
Who Proud did seem to dart his Beamings round,
Viewed half the Globe like second Lordships ground.
Hear empty Coach, four horses through the Plain
Did pass by them, should fetch gentiler Train,
Lodged in Dervan, to Marriage Feast that Day,
Their Walk resolved just then upon their way;
CLERMANTHE faint through longer Watch that night,
Joined dismal sorrows Task, last dreadful Fright,
They Fe'd the Man for ease, convenience,
Much closeness too, more quick Convoy from thence.
Reached that but short of the Town, All shrouded in a Cottage.
they all alighted
Back-passage where (less marked) to the House invited:
That ancient Payr (found Dressed) THRISANDER told
Their Robbed Mischance, concealed tho much Gold,
Would them Reward: when strait small Parlor there
CLERMANTHE saw, which cleanly Face did wear,
But now adorned by her, prime Beauty shrouded:
So CINTHIA does Masque her Beams o'erclouded;
So Gems and Gold are lodged in Earthen Cell;
Bright Pearls contained within the simpler Shell:
Good, cheerful Hostess found. In Chair reposed,
Needful that time, Strong Water brought, disclosed
From Crystal Glass, for Cordial warmth, support;
To strengthen thence Nature's disordered Fort,
The Heart's drooping Spirits, Garrison restore;
Prime Body tho, transcendent Temper wore.
Burnt Frankincense, to precious Air consumed,
Whose curled Clouds that meaner Place perfumed:
Refreshed the Brain, to Slumbers (last) incline
If might with those more freely then combine.
Their Host meanwhile THIRSANDER employed with speed
For Hackney Coach, least there disturbance breed
That Troop found Dead: was soon informed again,
None could be got that day, hired forth as then.
One they might have next Morn by the early'st Hour:
Things proving thus they gave him second power
That to bespeak. Then, since their Parlor spared,
And Room for the Lords above. They had declared,
(Kept Garret for themselves till Morn disclosed)
Clermanthe laid down for Sleep.
CLERMANTHE strait upon the Bed reposed.
Her Beauteous World which Slumbers should o'ersway;
Curtains being drawn expelled did seem the day:
When purest Lids, each Crystal Box as 'twere,
Those daintiest Gems her Eyes enclosed there.
(Conformed withal) till Sleep with soft embraces
From Brain and Heart sad thoughts, distemper chaces.
The Lords had born (conjoined) their Watchful share,
Long toilsom Walk, large Grief, did pleased repayr
To the upper Room; their Horses then desired
When Dinner dressed by Two (since much o'retir'd)
To call on them: so, prostrate Subjects there
To King-like Sleeps command did strait appear.
Thus Nature's paid her Slumbring due Repast,
Eight hours arise; all rested well to the last
The Lords being Roused, Both streit below descended,
CLERMANTHE raised, whose Sleep then newly ended.
Found primely Cheered, which then their Case required;
Strong appetite to the Food by her desired:
ORSAMNES self gave ear with Joyful Passion
To the Gladsom Change made known by her Relation.
Dinner was brought, she rising from the Bed
Since not unclothed; 'twas neatly ordered.
Their Hostess, Host sat down, invited there, Their Host and Hostess.

Joined pleasant Talk to the handsome Meal whatever;
Chiefly the Man, who soberly confessed,
That fairer then CLRMANTHE never had pressed
That Marriage Bed, but his own Wife (repaid
With Thumps by her) who might be then best Maid
Perchance he thought. CLERMANTHE Blushed, replied,
She scarce should wish her Servant by her side,
Those Words pronounced. Good Wife Thump'd him again,
ORSAMNES smiled; did ask his Reasons then
For those hard thoughts. Because (he said) She might
Prove Married Spouse to that brave Youth Downright,
Tho Sister called; his Wife ( esteemed the Flower
Of all their Sex) did prove first grasping hour
Virgin complete ORSAMNES answered thus;
I Am bashful Spouse, when it shows Presumptuous
To lie by her, O (said the Man) because
She has now some Breeding Qualms, that squeamish pause.
Distemper past You may with Arms infold her
(Which made the Duke with smiles again behold her)
Hard Wooing brunts (said he) could Trecite,
Plough the easier Task, before our Wedding Night:
Then bad Mischance, the Pis-pot was overthrown,
Foul Sign methought. Wife Box'd him thereupon.
Then she their strange Adventures told at Court,
Which served for Cloze, when rode in stately sort
To see the King; grand Troubles with the Guard
(Huge Loobies there) torn Scarf by them debarred;
Bad Fall by the way, Yet after all (she said)
Found but a Man: with both her Arms displayed.
Dinner dispatched, more comfortable Meal
Remembered scares, CLERMANTHE pleased so well,
Whilst homely Walls surround; may represent,
The Mind does yield 'bove the outward Form content,
World's Gaudy store: strong proof whereof imparted
(Base for their Rank) the Host, Hostess cheerful hearted:
THIRSANDER prayed, since still She seemed inclined
To Drousiness, on Lighter Meat had dined,
She would again repose more calmly there,
Two hours perchance; since should next Morning bear
That second Task, way twenty Miles, begun
(So weak of late) with the Early Rising Sun.
All leave the Room, ORSAMNES wal'd above;
THIRSANDER then found the Host good Agent prove.
For Hackney Coach; quarter past Four (daylight)
Which he bespake; well paid Himself that Night.
CLERMANTHE slept two good Hours more, till Five,
Which still did raise her fainter Spirits, revive.
ORSANMES then called down (the Door well closed,
Left to themselves) of the Bed by her reposed
Where Acted over kind further Chaste Love-part,
Like the Hermit's Cell; much cheered his Gentle Heart
Till spent three hours in choice conjoined pleasure,
Exchanged delightfulness (convenient Leisure)
Till the Hour of Eight; when the Horses did appear,
Their Supper brought; THIRSANDER entered there.
All sitting down took second good Repast,
That Seasoned too with Frank Discourse, at last;
(Same mirth-conceits by the Host and Hostess vented)
Till near Tens Hour, when all their Beds contented,
Laid down thereon in Clothes, that way inclined
For the early Journey more next Morn designed.
Thus, leaving them to Rest, we Story shall
Relate, upon what Grounds Original
CLERMANTHE Heir to the Ciprus Realm proclaimed;
Which was in our first Book but only named:
Tho Various, Large, it may the less offend,
Since she from thence did for the half-part descend.
The Cyprus STORY.
IN Cyprus-Isle, which stands by Fame Renowned, The Cyprus King.

A King did Reign, with Noble Virtues Crowned
As well as Gold; much handsome Person proved,
As Royal Head; for Temper choice beloved:
Of mild and Gentle Strain, to Peace inclined:
Learning Advanced, Ingenious Arts Refined.
Since Good himself, was prone to think (more free)
Others so too; for whih Credulity
Might seem less Cautelous than Crowns required;
More open laid to Breasts Ambition fired,
Young Bachelor, past twenty one of late,
Had Reigned Two Years in grand Monarchal State.
Great Duke there was which from some Stock begun, Duke Bromor.

One Grandfather, proved Second Brothers Son;
Next Heir to the Crown (Four Years was Elder tho)
BROMOR by name: Tall, handsome formed did show.
The Sister married had to the Lycian King,
From whom one Boy (three years for age) did spring;
Proud sturdy Soul, most Iron-temper'd Breast,
As Subtle too; bad Stratagems possessed:
Could well conceal what Mischief-plots designed,
Farse, smoother Tongue Dissembling Face combined;
Ambitious Heart enclosed: Sought Regal swall,
Crown drenched in Blood, So cautious tho that way,
He Would stronger prove, well Fortified before
Gave deadly Stroke, lest Clashing on that Score
Hard Grapple found from Rival-Earl of power
(Joined Valor, Noble Parts) of the Blood that hour,
Third Brother's Son it was, PISANUS named:
Would so (next place) Destroy as least defamed
Might prove to the World, in the Dark; engaging there
Few Instruments, the Exploit would less appear
(Close Miner under Ground) those Faithful thought;
Few Tongues withal less Blabbing danger brought:
Fit Tempers too conjoined, where Spleenful Spite
Against Greater Men, Wealth, honor should invite.
Strong Forts obtained, Armed Party for the Field
Choice Season (last) for which did also build
On some great Lords, who Malcontent Aspired
To Chief Commands; the Soldiers Love acquired.
Things not yet Ripe to give that Mortal Blow
He sought to Bar the King from Marriage, so
Issue prevent, whence Troubles often treated;
That deeply Feared might soon be celebrated.
Since thus did chance; the King had fixed his Love
On Baron's Daughter late; which tho did prove
Beneath his Rank, was Princely Beauty deemed,
ELVORA called, The Kings Love to Elvora.
and high for Parts esteemed:
Like Champaign- Star in's Progress- Road beheld,
Then Ranged in the City's Firmament excelled:
Whose Father BROMOR Hates, tho likely now
To Mount, advance his joy'd, exalted Brow.
The King did Court her first in the Country Air,
The City last, such ways as might declare
Marriage-resolves, yet not o're-hasty led
(That Point by the Father greatly'st furthered,
Brother in Travel then) found Civil Duty,
Humble Regard from fair ELVORA'S Beauty.
This Lady, tho young Lord of handsome Fortune, Elvora's Love to the Lord
Philantro.

Prime Person, Parts, did fervently importune
For Spouse before, had strongest Zeal expressed,
Philantor called from deeply wounded Breast:
Found grand Return from Her, Exchange of Love,
Like balmy Salve, what next to Vows did prove:
But then discharged by the Father was from Sight,
Gave clearer way to the Sun's majestic Light.
Nor proved the King for Person much out-shin'd,
But he first seiz' her Heart, whose Fort resigned,
Held there strong Tower; tho Gates through Reverence
The King received, Daughter's Obedience.
Partly in all the King's Addresses there
PHILANTOR looked, PHILANTOR spoke, as 'twere.
Which amorous League to BROMOR not unknown,
Slight Motion tho by the King believed alone.
Prime Agent used for Council and for Act,
(Tho meaner hands might serve for murdering Fact,
In that grand point more dangerously bold)
Was Groom of the King's own Bedchamber inroul'd;
NORTHAMBRIS called: Both Fellow-Students were,
Young chief Comrades, might self same Coyns appear.
For Temper, Stamp; crafty and bold as he,
Dissembling too. Obtained that Place, Degree,
His Father had, when served this present King:
Whom, tho in slighter way, found favoring,
Shown good regard, small Honor, Wealth, and Power
Thence hoped for: thought Drops to BROMOR'S Shower.
'Twas thus contrived; PHILANTOR being at Court,
Viewed by the King, since often did there resort;
NORTHAMBRIS, having Letter ready penned,
Like Woman's Draught, the King at Dinner's end
Preparing for the Garden, Summer- Room
Where took Delight; most nimbly stole that Groom
To the private Lobby, where the King should pass,
Dropped there those Lines; at further Door (fit place)
Peeped through to see the Event: That Paper vile
[ To the Lord PHILANTOR] superscrib'd for Style.
The King came in, viewed, takes it up, did stalk
To the Casement strait, where spied PHILANTOR walk
Cross-arm'd beneath, as trod before this Ground,
Here dropped the same: Seals ready-broken found;
Unlap'd it then, Elvora's Name below;
Scarce viewed his Eyes did jealous Wonder show,
Trouble conjoined; which pleased NORTHAMBRIS well,
Strong Physic proved, no mean Enchanting Spell:
Both thought 'twould prove Qualm-like Demus at least;
So Gentle known his unoffensive Breast.
Forged Letter, as from ELVORA.
For the most Worthy, High-deserving Lord, PHILANTOR.
MOst Noble Lord, Forged Letter.
in Answer to your Lines
Be these exchanged, where loving Pity shines;
As wretched Love quite darkened Yours, o're-clouded:
You wished those Thoughts in bloody Ink were shrouded,
Drawn from the Breast (since Love's prime part does show)
As true Blood formed that Heart portray'd below,
Kind Token sent, and sure I am mine own,
(Like Pearl-returns) were mixed with Tears, o'reflown;
Since having long transferred my gentle Heart,
Lodged close by Yours, it needs must share in smart,
Mourn, sympathize. Nor can those Kingly Rays
So blind my view, or Titles gaudy blaze
(Crowned Queen) transform my Thoughts, so powerful prove,
That I should lose my self, forget your Love.
For were I 'twixt those Royal Arms in Bed,
On Marriage-night, with Shades environed,
Sighs breathed I should think of PHILANTOR there:
Souls still may join, tho Bodies parted were.
I Subject am and Daughter both, over swayed
By strange Command, each claims Obedient Maid:
Yet, tho to other bound, shall ever be
What Is here subscribed, to the height: prove really
Your most Truly, Loving, Honoring, Compassionate, ELVORA.


Both cautious were in forming this, no Glance
On the Lady's Chastity ('twould best advance
Their cheating End) before, or after wedded:
Least possibly the King, grown Jealous-headed,
'Twas forged Device, might urge, disclose the same,
By Love o're-pow'r'd; or through revengeful Flame
If Truth conceived; she clear her self thereby:
Thus daubed he would smother all like Destiny:
Strong, former Love, unsoyl'd, that sober Mind;
Then leave her to Phil^^ter's Charge resigned.
Nor missed the Mark thus far, their pregnant Plot
First solemn Pause, concealment then begot.
But yet the King soon afterward did send
Her Father Present choice, would so extend
His Bounty late, which doubtful Fears did breed
Some Visit least might follow that, succeed.
Both roused their nimblest Brains for Confirmation, Bromor's Plot.

To strengthen all through the Eye, Ear's Demonstration.
Ordered 'twas; The Groom (as wished, desired)
Found the Amorous Lord to the Garden- Shades retired.
My Lord (said he) this Boldness pray excuse,
Since Friendly'st Crime, tho break your serious Muse;
And aims at your Contentment, Joy alone.
Take It briefly thus: It Is naught to me unknown
Your former Love on fair ELVORA placed,
Her kind Return, till the Royal League embraced;
Out-rivall'd so, discharged, else choicely esteemed:
I Have been in Love, your sad Copartner seemed;
Felt Tortures often, did loose the Virgin-Prize,
And therefore can more strongly sympathize:
Conclude withal, you may be Victor crowned,
One harmless Thing performed, which I Will propound.
The Lord replied: That former Love- affair
( Kind Sir) I grant, now wrapped in dark Despair;
Tho I should close, conjoyn in any Thing
Not Traiterous, against Person of the King.
Thus then my Lord (said he) Do you conceive,
You could obtain, through bright ELVORA'S leave,
To meet Her in that Bower by the Marble Cell
Within the Grove; vouchsafed as last Farewell
To all your Joys? Close way through the outmost Door?
Used her Maid 's help next Week ( as I before
Am well informed) from Guardian- Father free,
Lodged then far off some Country- Works to see.
I think I could, replied PHILANTOR there;
Joined the other strait, then banish Drooping Fear;
I Will draw the King that time to the Branched Stand
Mounted with Steps, which does that Place command,
T'observe your Amorous Stealth; the Passion sway,
Joined Kiss- Salutes in view: I shall display
( Prologue to the Scene) your former constant Loves,
Exchanged Hearts: whose Noble Temper proves
So gentle, mild, that falling off ( no noise)
He Will leave you Both to share Conjugal Joys.
Foregoing Day tell me the intended Hour
( Good Space between) for meeting in that Bower;
Which Summer Evenings now, should be desired
Near the Hour of Four: from the Handmaid first required
That friendly Grant, that she would let you pass
Soon after Twelve, that you might view the place
For several Hours, your Pensive Thoughts compose:
Then watch till each of us new-landed shows
By Boat, disguised, near the Hour of Two (no more)
Then leave unlocked (withdrawn) that Outmost Door,
That we may mount the Stand: I Will tell the King
'Twas done by the Maid her self, concealed thing
This further Grant, when the Lady does depart,
That you may pause good while to cheer your Heart.
For settled Mind; walk forth soon after then,
That we may pass the Door I Will strait again
Lock fast the same, the Key thrown over there:
Promise to the Maid, you will do it your self however.
Thus parted they, by each contented Glance;
The Lord did strait 'bout the amorous Work advance:
Philantor writes to Elvora.
First, Letter framed ELVORA'S self should view,
Did strongly for that mentioned Favor sue,
As tho 'twere Life-support; termed last Farewell;
Since loved and grieved beyond known Parallel.
Named the Arbor, Hour; Suit she might grant much rather,
Going next day to lodge far off her Father:
Begged to take leave of Her like setting Sun,
E're Darkness seized, that parting Grace if done,
Remembrance on it might cordial Warmth supply;
That Balm withdrawn through fester'd Wounds may dye.
Did mount in sob'rest height, Love prompting all;
True Passion shown, as choice, Rethorical.
Then, Second for her Maid, smooth too, composed,
(Preparing Charm) which that First Note enclosed.
Named the entering Place, near Twelve (expert before)
That further leave for pausing some time more,
When the Lady gone, till calmed disordered Mind,
He Would lock the Door. Sh' had found him bounteous, kind;
His Creature once, soft, gentler Heart beside;
Now Dimon-Ring for closing Bait applied;
Meranda called. His faithful Nurse (most wary)
Feigned business with that Wench, the things did carry;
Found private Talk: She strait did Melting prove;
Her Lady more, Lines shown, conjoined to move.
She grants to meet him.
Elvora read, then sadly paused thereon,
Dropped moistened Pearls, short Answer framed anon;
Writ by her Maid: Such Acts might Tempest breed,
But high Regard did conquer Fears, exceed;
His Love o're-come, her Reason condescended:
'Twas true, next Morn her Father Journey intended,
Lodged Nights abroad; that Afternoon, Four the Hour,
She Would Meeting grant in that Reserved Bower.
Glad Nurse returned with speed to the Lord at home,
Gave those fair Lines, who strait informed the Groom.
NORTHAMBRIS, pleased, Northambris and the King.
assaults with hasty Mind
The King himself (by Bromor so designed)
E're Day withdrawn: Great Sir, (said he, more bold)
I have important Business to unfold,
Worthy Regard; which tho unhandsome Face
Might bear, present, perhaps offend your Grace,
Yet Loyal Aim and Heart it owns, does prove
Duty from thence; may well for Pardon move
There has betwixt ELVORA and the Lord
PHILANTOR been deep former Love- accord,
With Vows conjoined; from You perchance concealed.
You may, when heard the whole Truth thereof revealed,
Your best Discretion use in that Transaction:
As please proceed, more future Satisfaction.
The King replied, with solemn Glance, I heard
Of Motion made from Progress, tho debarred:
No Mutual Love exchanged, the Lady free.
NORTHAMBRIS then, next Evening You may see
Meeting by Stealth, so satisfy your Eyes;
If pleased to take small Pains in close Disguise:
( Time, Place did name) by the Wench disclosed there
As Dutious Act; no Lust- intent however.
That Arbor, Grove not then to the King unknown,
Since had there talked with Her himself alone.
Through gentle Lines took lately up and read
Startled before, sees Thoughts of Wonder bred;
Yet nicely curious too, did only say,
He scarce believed: conjoined strait that way
To go along, would trust his seeing Sense:
Performed with ease, whatever the Consequence.
The King goes to the Grove.
Next Afternoon, the King, Court-Dinner ended,
Close Lobby past, to the private Stairs descended:
Where nimbly took false Hair and Beard, beside
Large Coat, which well NORTHAMBRIS Cloak did hide
(Himself transformed withal by dext'rous hand)
Called pair of Oars, e're the Hour of Two did land
Near to that Grove, it is Postern-door, the Men
Should wait till Seav'n, when they would return again.
PHILANTOR watched, set in by the Maid before,
The King descried and Groom, unlocked the Door;
Withdrew to sculking Shade, that closed alone,
Thence saw them mount their branched Stand (unknown)
Door locked by them: He walked there an Hour,
As entered then, passed by to the shady Bower.
Which viewed, the King strait fortified his Heart
(Found secret Qualm) for next succeeding part.
Small open Place there lay, in the midst was reared
Fine Marble Cell, which Sacred once appeared,
To the God of Woods devote, adorned round;
Arbor of the side, for the Lady's case on Ground.
Well viewed by the lofty Stand, whose gloomy Shade
Had Lattice-Window there for Prospect made:
Adjoining (last) did fall from smaller Mount,
With Murmurs Noise, the God SILVANUS Fount.
ELVORA came, about the Hour of Four,
( Maid strait withdrawn, fast locked the Garden-door,
None else should pass) might PHEBE there have seemed
Her Bow laid by (since Goddess fair esteemed)
To range those Shades, or bath in the pearly Fount:
Doubts rising now to firm Belief's Account.
Drawn very near, PHILANTOR forth did stand,
And making humble Bow, kissed strait her Hand,
Then said, He should presume to reach her Lips
(Breast struck withal) after long Joy's Eclipse;
Kiss sealed thrice over; so entered the Arbor there:
Sad, Royal Scout the King might then appear.
The King He stands. Views Philantor.
Both sitting down, the Lord did thankful show
For this grand Favor, grant ( Looks mournful tho)
With sighing Breath; since last Farewell included:
Much former Grace, now by fond Dream deluded,
Since Rival proved the King. Then ranged over
His World of Griefs, Misfortune's ample Score.
She Pitty's Coin repaid from gentle Heart,
His Noble Worth acknowledged there, Desert;
Which still should highly esteem, and constant Love,
Tho now by Fates must overruled prove:
Joined Sigh withal for Echo to his own,
Love-flaming Eyes, where equal kindness shown.
He kissed how often her Hand with pleased Sense!
Then dainty Breasts! used sober Violence,
Transported Way: Thus (last) dissolved were
Three amorous Hours; much Passion vented there.
The King falls off from her.
The King mean while, ELVORA'S Chastity
Not doubting ought, since left alone, so free,
There with himself long private Combat held:
Love-Passions sought to calm, which rose, rebelled:
His Forces raised, to noble Virtue's Power.
Joined Reason's armed Band, till parting Hour.
PHILANTOR'S Worth well poised, their former Love
In gentle Seal, which barred from Joy did prove
When near attained; his Kingdom's Sphere was stored
With Beauteous Stars, her Equals might afford;
Free, kinder Hearts: thus, Fancy o're-aw'd does yield,
Passion gave way, whilst Reason kept the Field.
Forth late they came, PHILANTOR humbly bowed;
Begged K^ss for last Farewell, by her allowed,
Thrice counted, sealed: Spectator from that Stand
The King of all; then, kissing her fair Hand,
She gone by giving knock, the Lord, sad-hearted
( Door locked by the Maid) through the Outmost walked, departed.
The King did follow soon, some Words expressed
For falling off, through deep-resenting Breast;
Concealment joined of these kind, stolen Affairs:
Door locked, that Key thrown over, to the private Stairs,
By Water came: NORTHAMBRIS Joy did rise,
There soon discharged his former Cloud, Disguise.
PHILANTOR gone, that Bitter- Sweet enjoyed,
Her Father tho, like Storm did well avoid,
Came not off free from dangerous Consequence;
For, walking near to the River's Bank from thence,
A Gentleman but lately set on Shore,
Outlandish Clothes (whom he had seen before)
No sooner viewed his Face, but marching nigh
With glist'ring Blade, cried, Draw thy Sword, or Dye.
Wherefore, said he again; My Rival the art,
The other replied: Thus soon to the Fencing part,
From Talking fell; for Combat did advance:
That instant passed by (through lucky Chance)
Young gallant Earl (forenam'd) of the Royal Blood,
Third Brother's Son; next Child of BROMER stood
Heir to the Crown (behind* did Servants wait)
PISANUS called; Who, knowing PHILANTOR strait,
Ran, stepped between, their Quarrels cause inquired:
My Rival, said the hot Youth, through Love infir'd,
ELVORA sought to enjoy. PISANUS when,
Showed his mistake, since Royal Suitor then
The King himself; which cooled his Youthful flame,
Thus parted They, and Reason overcame.
That Youth, well-born, the Lady foremost wooed;
Being Discharged in Travel time bestowed,
To cause Forgetful Cure; returning late,
PHILANTOR, (heard) should Marriage celebrate,
Enjoy the Prize, from whence this Passion swelled;
The Lord so near her house, that Grove beheld.
The King being safe retired, more strongly now,
Truly Himself; from Sight withdrawn, the Brow
Through the Eye disturbed more, that ruling Sense,
Pause (last) conjoined, whose cooling Influence
Damped Fancy's former Heat, Passions allayed,
No mutineers has Calmer Thoughts o'ersway'd;
He fixed on falling off, Retreat designed
B^st manner tho, best way with sober Mind.
Would keep reserved the Cause, lest, swelled with Rage,
The Father against the Daughter might engage;
Their Wedding Hopes destroyed, o'rewhelm the Lovers,
Nor Discontent (such Princely Breast discovers)
Would give the Lord; conceived as slighting Action:
Wrote strait to him for Friendly satisfaction.
The King writes to her Father.
That He should then break off, on serious Ground
Known to himself, yet no Disgrace redound
To's Daughter's Virgin- fame; Person high-priz'd,
Good Parts withal: nor be by the Lord surmis'd,
Bad disregard (Entreats) Truth would appear
By the friendly Tokens sent to either there.
Patent there was for Earl, choice Place conjoined,
Good Lining thought; his Daughter (next) was coined
A Countess too: Third Parchment made her Spouse
(Blank left) an Earl, who e're her Vote allows:
His Picture sent her, last, prayed, to be worn;
Which Diamonds did garnish round, adorn:
Here Is plain desired, which worn by him should be
Till Wife enjoyed, then kept as Rarity.
BROMOR was galled, that Lord advanced so,
Had Marriage held might prove much greater tho.
This noble King thus would not Joys possess,
Seem happy through Others unhappiness;
True Love confound; that Dutious carriage rather
Would well reward in Daughter both and Father.
ELVORA 'S Calm, some Lords, believed, his mind
Had changed of late; her Father so inclined.
PHILANTOR, when that Groom did all display,
The King's retreat, rejoiced triumphant way;
Tho Thoughts conjoined, That, being discharged before,
The squeamish Lord on new Conjugal score
Would scarce proceed; yet like the Match, content;
ELVORA too might Judge the same event.
Thus, Best it seemed to force, constrain (as 't were)
Her Father to what well Approved however,
Steal her away. Nor Fond those thoughts, untrue:
Penned smoothest Lines for fair ELVORA 'S view.
His suit preferred with that persuasive Ground,
Entreats She would some Day and Hour propound.
When He shall wait on Her with Coach-convoy,
Grove's Postern Door, same Night as Bride enjoy.
Request to the Maid withal formed thereupon,
Which baited was with second Diamon.
His Letter found ELVORA pleased, and kind,
Rare tempered Breast; their former Loves combined
Did fill contentments Scale, that Side o're-poizing;
Tho Queen laid there, in Subject now rejoicing;
PHILANTOR 'S weight o'recame: their Thoughts did close,
That stealth would not her Father's Mood oppose: Elvora stolen away by
Philantor.

Thus grants; one Evening fair, locked by the Maid
Their Garden-door, passed Grove's conjoined Shade,
Both met unspi'd: PHILANTOR in his Arms
Strait caught Her up to the Coach, least bad Alarms.
( Kiss sealed withal) well knowing in his own Breast,
Through what late Storm did sail for Port of rest.
Grief's Coin now stamped with Joy, the Lady's Eyes
Close-panting Heart whilst sweetly Sympathize.
Six Horses brought, they are gone most nimbly thus,
As every Beast were winged like Pegasus.
(Raised dusty Cloud) till came to private Cot,
Where Priest concealed lay for Marriage-knot:
Man, Wife they proved; PHILANTOR 'S House by Night
In The Country reached, free Place for their Delight:
ELVORA when did on her Lord bestow
An Earldom, joined with Lovely Bedfellow:
Queen called her afterward. Next Day the Bride,
Through pleasing Lines, her Father pacified.
Who style of Earl for's Daughter's sake did bear,
And his own too; with gainful Office there:
Great Portion added strait; Her Brother come
From Travel next to Cyprus, Native Home.
New Wife moved to the King.
The King thus Free, some Lords did more persuade
To Foreign Match, conjoined with Princely Maid:
More Honor brought more wealthy Portion so,
Strength through Allies; less Danger (last) would grow;
Prime Power on Friends of the Queen conferred perchance,
Often envy caused did civil Broils advance.
Nor BROMER grieved such Match, thought longer weaving,
More hardly found, as slower Task conceiving:
But some good Friends showed strait by Portraicture
The Tyrian Princess shape, might well allure
His Royal Eye and Heart; both Body, Mind
For Wonders choice by Nature meant, designed:
ORNANDE called; ELVORA 'S Beams out-blaz'd
In his own Thoughts, while the Person tho was praised
Beyond the Work, by those which her had viewed,
Thus, for that Voyage small, He did conclude.
It chanced so, that proud young Lycian King, Bromor's new Plot.

Duke BROMOR 'S Brother in Law (both managing
Close friendly League) her Picture too beheld
With strongest Love as Pride conjoined swelled:
Thing known to the Duke, had Navy great at hand,
For Voyage meant withal to Tirus-land.
BROMOR sent strait by BARQUE to Lycia,
(Which over against, near the Waves Aegean lay)
By secret Messenger, in traitorous Lines
Informed him of the Ciprus-Ring's Designs.
Bad Council gave more Ships to join, exceed,
Land there before, first Motion made with speed.
Since Cyprus-King with but few Ships would go,
Small Danger feared; if won, prevailed tho,
Love's prize enjoyed, launch forth with haste to Sea;
There watch for the King's return, that gallant Prey;
Bridegroom and Bride: small Pinnace left for Scout
Which should inform what time the King sets out
With His Tyrean Pearl; which was with speed intended,
Match being once made, short Bridal form, soon ended:
When might (grand ods) Assault them both, surprise
(Strong Quarrels ground) the King first sacrifice
To Vengeance there, destroy; the Queen detained
For slavish Whore, since scorned by her, disdained.
Which acted, past, BROMOR set on the Throne,
That yearly Sum (to's Father due, well known)
For two Aegean Isles, claimed long before;
Should now be paid; Discharged the former Score.
That Lycian King, as young, was monstrous proud,
Most violent where is Fancy ought allowed;
Joined Lust, Revenge; did deeply grudge this King
For the Money-cause, tho false, pretended thing:
The whole Plot approved, had Navy great in store,
Did foremost Land on Tirus wealthy Shore.
Love-suit advanced, which late was motion'd here;
When Word received that Ciprus-King was near:
Which kept the Princess off, his Haughty way
Unpleasing found; that Game would slowly play.
Soon came the other King; Wise, faithful Head
( Dimon an Earl) left Ruler in his stead;
PISANUS brought with him, good Ships Convoy.
Being landed there, the Princess self with Joy
Beheld from Tarras-Mount, over Garden-Wall
As rode along; fair Omen thought withal.
With lowly Bow salutes, which she repaid;
Prime Person deemed, beyond her painted Shade;
Did court her from his Eyes that Language free,
Whilst Hers did speak regardful Modesty:
Cheeks blushing too, both might conjoined discover
Soft, gentle Heart, to cheer the Royal Lover:
Who was received, his Landing known before,
By many a gallant Coach on Tirus Shore.
The Cyprian and Lycian King meet: Rivals.
Those Princes looked but strangely on each other,
Yet checked their Rival-heats, did Passion smother:
That Lycian's Heart close-boyled tho, and Eyes
To harbor seemed offensive Jealousies.
Salute performed, the King his Thoughts declared
To the Father first, where met with grand Regard:
To the Princess then her self did strait advance,
Love's Power disclosed: kind Speech with pleasing Glance
Returned from her. At several Tables placed
Both Strangers sat for Meals, to avoid Distaste,
Each side the King; by whom the Princess there,
Might Food to both their gazing Eyes appear.
Nor came They in went forth (whene're) together,
For that nice point, Precedence given to either.
If the One her Morning- Presence had, enjoyed,
The Other his Tongue for the Afternoon employed:
But in three Days the Cyprus King was crowned
Love-Conquerour, her Heart to the utmost bound
Ransacked, o'recame through winning Gracefulness;
So clear and cordial showed in each Address.
Whereof her Father informed, the Choice allowed,
Tho cautious way his Thoughts would overcloud,
Before them both declared, Conjugal choice
He left, transferred to's Daughter's only Voice,
Whom most concerned Disposal of her Heart:
Who mildly said, She should perform that Part
Two Days from thence, her Father's Coronation
Then kept, observed with feasting Celebration.
That Day being come, and Royal Dinner ended,
To the gallant Tilting Course they were attended: Great Tilting.

In which the Tyrian Lords, as for their Dress,
Brave Clothes, Caparisons, so Manliness
In breaking Staves, and Horsmanship might seem
Ciprus to match, the Arcadians brave esteem.
When Supper past great dancing Ball ensued,
Choice, gentler Motions of the Foot there viewed;
Fine Masque of Peace, as the other showed of War,
Wherein conjoined (nice Sex) the Ladies are:
For Trumpet's sound, soft Music proves the best,
Mars's-triumph that, This Venus's expressed:
The Tyrian King under brave Cloth of State,
His Daughter near; Those rival Princes sat
On either side (good space although between)
With Canopies; ORNANDE showed the Queen.
Great Lord appeared, did toward her advance,
With humble Bow took forth for courtly Dance.
Which well performed, the Princess in the next place
The Ciprus-King invites, with pleasing Grace;
Who kissed her Hand, said, that, with her fair Eyes,
Both near conjoined ( unskilful else, surprise)
Would make him Dancer prove; next hopeful part,
The Hand might withal on him bestow the Heart.
Much galled the Lician-King, since deeply feared,
Fore-goer kind that to the Last choice appeared;
Love's Vote implied; Great Lady (next) refused,
Told her he was to the dancing Slight unused.
All ending well, when he his Thoughts did strain
To varnish Wrath with careless show, disdain;
Ornande chose the Ciprus King.
ORNANDE walking up to her Royal Sire,
Made known her firm resolve, at his desire.
Chose Ciprus-King: since first (did plainly say)
Was Neighbour-Prince; in the second place did sway
Three gallant Isles, by Nature fortified,
Which pleased her thoughts 'bove Continent, outvy'd:
So since could wed but One, to the other she
Wished fair conjugal choice, prosperity.
That Lician King, who thought both Person, Throne
Neglected thus, conjoined with louder Tone
His Motion was first made; if the other were
Nearer for Place, his Realm not stands however
Much farther off; like the Under-World remote:
For Kingdom, next, it seems, Her Thoughts did Float
'Bout Island- Ground; His Continent's fair side
Had Water too, whom could with Victor's pride
By Land enlarge, whilst the other Sea enclosed:
Wed Princely Neighbors, Fair when so disposed.
The Lician King goes to Sea.
Informed the King, He would next Morn depart;
Winds swelled his Sails, as Rage, Revenge his Heart.
The Ciprus-King (chief Points confirmed) did move
For Marriage strait, as drawn by earnest Love,
So State Affairs in the Isle, next Morning there
(Done formall'st way) did Royal Spouse appear:
That Night enjoyed choice, Princely Bedfellow,
ELVORA'S loss forgot, Exchanged so.
Third Morn beheld, He left the Tyrian Shore,
Large Sails advanced to pass that Watery Floar,
With His lovely Bride; whom gentle Winds befriended,
Like Servants there upon their Barque attended:
Tho Trayt'rous Blasts might be conceived withal,
Confederates for their Destructive Fall:
Since Lician King did watch for them by the way,
By Scout informed, they lanched forth that day.
Such chance did prove, that near same fatal time
This Ciprus-King should pass, from Egypt Clime
(Not Western far) great Navy steered along,
Whose purpose was to invade with armed throng
The Syrian Coast, East-soyl to Tirus-land;
Their King on Board; who when beheld (left hand)
Those Licean Flags, seized Barque had also told,
Their King was there (much proud himself and bold)
Against whom bred former grudge; disposed with Fleet
Next year to invade, North-east, partly opposite
On the Asian Shore; nor knowing whether now
Egypt might prove their end: with haughty Brow
Changed his Design, would fall on them by the way,
If shattered all, advance for Lycia.
Join Conquest brave by Land: but, passing by,
Might more exalt their Hearts, base Fears imply.
Thus drawing near most dreadful Fight began, Sea Fight.

Their Arrow-storm returned by the Lycian.
Who dreamed of smaller Task, triumphant Joy,
B^th sought by Arms each other to destroy.
Here raging Fire, whilst grapl^ng Fury swelled,
There Streams of Blood upon the decks beheld.
Or both combined: Here ranging Darts brought Death,
There Glist'ring Swords; Now heard the Groaning breath
From wounded, dying Folks, from Sinkers then
To the Watery Grave; confused Noise of Men.
Grand Loss there proved, tho most to the Lycian side,
Whose King two Wounds received, to tame his Pride;
Night parting Them, The Lycians slunk away;
Their Royal Pirat lost his Prize that day.
The Ciprus-King mean while passed fafely by
With His Gallant Queen, Thought strange, when Glancing Eye
OF the Fighting Game; soon Famagosta viewed,
Grand Triumphs where, Solemnities ensued.
Whilst BROMOR Qualm did feel, tho galled much more
When heard of that Great Loss from Lycian shore;
Since failed of good Friendly help by Sea
From's Brother in Law, for Grasping more the Prey
Dear Ciprus-Crown: was now more strong, prepared
For the Murdering Blow, yet still through Fears debarred;
Confronting Broyls; State-Engines slowly moving
Through larger Wheels: the Queen with Child strait proving;
That Cross withal: thought Bug-bear-like an Heir
To his Conceit, more Trouble thence might fear.
Thus still Delayed, till She Is Big-belly'd grown;
Yet hoped He for Miscarriage-chance, Dead one;
Or Mother, Child both dead: That Lycian-King
Then well Repaired; strong Thoughts for Murdering,
Found also likely Way, less Dangerous
To his own Self, yet surely Done; 'Twas thus.
He kept stout Man, as Chamber- Groom preferred, Bromor's fourth Plot

Much crafty too; Black Agent, choice apper'd:
Who formerly possessed some good Estate,
Did Travel far; Returning Home of late,
Spent all on Cyprus-ground; then glad to sue
For Fort's Command, which being Another's Due,
More known besides, the King that Way bestowed:
This swelled with haughty Spleen, revengeful showed:
to BROMOR'S Service got by aid of Friends,
Who finding Him well Formed for his Ends,
Choice Journey-man, soon raised to Chamber-groom:
Then gave at Council Board the second room.
This Traveller from Egypt-Country brought
A Syrian, whom there enslaved he Bought
For Serving-man; by the Fellow thence Beloved:
But since his Fortunes broke, like Vapor proved;
Discharged, left Free, e're long so Fortunate,
To Lord preferred, whom BROMOR then did hate;
In the Under- Butler's room, where kept the Wine,
Drawing it off; seemed marked for their Design,
Both King and Queen well entertained were
IN the Summer, Progress-time, Lodged also there.
The King being still for Mornings Draught disposed,
( Greek, Cretan Wine; or from those Grapes enclosed
In Ciprus Isle) e're walked abroad, well known
To BROMOR 'twas, good way for Poys'ning shown:
More private, close then Formal Meals appeared,
Sent up by Page; less Deaths to others feared:
Tho if the Queen did Taste thereof by chance,
(Mother, Child dead) 'twould more his Ends advance.
That Lord withal, whom BROMOR loathed, might be,
If Poison thought, charged with that Treachery.
Nor knew these Two how then they were employed,
By whom, and where (since still That Lord enjoyed
Himself in Country-Seat) till met one Day
IN the Royal Town; informed Themselves that way:
So, near that Groom to's Lord was named, nor Men,
As his First Master, Bromor's Servant then
For least Suspicion- glance. Thought useful, right,
He urged the Man to meet again that Night,
Such the Hour and Place; when he would things unfold
Should that low Rank advance, yield heap of Gold.
BROMOR'S informed, 'twas thus resolved by both:
The Fellow met, being bound by solemn Oath
To Secrecy, that Groom disclosed there
His Spleen against the King: this Salve however;
If he could drop that Poison, held in the Hand
In's Morning's Draught, he might that Gold command:
Large Bag descried. Spent near three hours 'twould show
It Is working Power; less Poison thought so slow:
He would be there (false Hair and Beard) disguised,
As viewed the Court: no Partner thus surmis'd
BROMOR at all: their Poison working well,
The Syrian strait to the joining Cops should steal.
So would himself, with bag of Gold attend:
To the Prize however conjoined sad bloody end:
Whilst gave the Gold, should stab him there to the Heart
With the other Hand (close Murderers known Art)
Lest the Author named, if caught, e're left the Isle:
And BROMOR too would be engaged mean while
To hunt, pursue, when lost the Royal Breath
Through Poison seemed; 'twas Mouth well closed by Death:
The Poniard tho left sheathed in his Breast,
As killed himself. This now (at last) expressed;
He might take Horse (there good Post-stage was found)
Soon the Haven reach, imbarque for foreign Ground.
This Syrian was greedy of the golden Bait,
Rank more Gentile, joined rambling Brain of late:
(Part-cloy'd with Cyprus-land) did strait combine:
Said, He sent up that Morning's Draught of Wine:
Last Progress there, could well have don't that Hour;
New-come to the Place; had still that drawing Power;
Would now perform: The Poison took desired:
Tho charged to hide it safe, till Use required.
BROMOR'S much pleased: King, Queen, with courtly Train
E're long that Lord two Nights did entertain,
Groom scouting near: but Night before struck dead
That Syrian proved, through Apoplex in the Head:
Fate caused in Time his Execution there,
No Poison found, BROMOR'S enraged however.
The Queen has a Daughter.
Soon afterward the Queen was brought to Bed,
Of lovely Daughter there delivered;
MINDANA called: sad Qualm to BROMOR'S Heart,
Yet seemed allayed through Female Sex in part,
Since might excluded prove on stronger Ground
From Government; for Women there were crowned;
Sometimes did nobly Sway: tho, when displeased,
Could of that Child, like Snuff blown out, be eased.
Nor found convenient Plot, till Lycian King
From's Neighbors Trouble found, discouraging;
Thence more debarred; the Queen grown big again:
That second Stab, since Boy might nourish then:
Yet armed for that however. Brought forth appeared
Prime second Girl, (more through their number feared,
Tho liked the Sex) AURELA named the last.
The Queen with Joy two Months besides o're-pass'd.
BROMOR, informed his Brother in Law again
Was quiet, clear, forged on his Anvile-Brain
Fifth likely Plot; which was resolved upon: Bromor's fifth Plot

The Groom joined Actor there, tho not alone.
That Groom of the King less forward to engage
In The murtherous Part, played well behind the Stage;
Complied (whatever) for bloody Circumstance,
Scarce the Act it self, since caused more doubtful chance.
There lay conjoined to the Garden-Wall at Court
Choice, planted Ground, green Walks of various sort;
Which used much Two Afternoons the King
Summer each Week (tho most in the pleasant Spring)
From Four till Seven; withdrawn for Contemplation;
As good Retreat, more private Recreation.
To the Garden joined the Door; Thus none would enter
(Tho 'twere unlocked) those Afternoons, adventure,
To BROMOR known; the King being there beside
Would bolt the Door. In The midst thereof descried
Green branched Stand, Park-like, with Stairs ascended
(Such in ELVORA'S Grove) for ease commended
And Prospect both; weary of the Walks below,
He Would mount that Bower; 'twas constant Custom so:
Known from Himself to that NORTHAMBRIS, Groom,
This was ordained his sad, surrounding Tomb.
That Planted Ground was walled so high with Stone,
And smoothly laid, by Ladder climbed alone.
BROMOR'S base Groom had found a Parthian out
In The City there, young, rambling Fellow stout.
(Could speak that Tongue, since traveled much that Land)
Greedy of Gain, tho grasped by Murther's hand.
Drinking with whom, his wilder way descried,
Spendthrift, debauched; great Money's want beside:
(Through that much gauled seemed) bad Inclination:
Known BROMOR'S Will, tempted him next Collation.
First secret sworn, showing large Bag of Gold,
He did at last foul Treason's Plot unfold.
That Youngster joined; the Exploit was ordered thus: The way for Murdering.

Hired Ladder brought to the Wall more dangerous,
Suspicion bred; nor could themselves ascend,
Clamber to the Top, this chiefly served their End:
One set upon the Others Shoulders there,
Crouching down low ( both proprest Persons were)
That rising then, This might the Wall bestride,
Tree standing near; Ropes Scaling-Ladder tied
To Branch thereof, the next might mount the Wall,
Ladder plucked over each Step to the Green withal.
For closer way concealed, that Place was shrouded
With clump of Trees, fit for their turn, o'reclouded.
Then running up that shady Stand, Board-floor,
Ranged with drawn Swords on either side the Door,
Might see him enter, walk, mount (last) the Stairs;
Just coming in seize on him strait, unwares
Stab given in the Breast, Poniard which he did wear
Stuck in that Wound himself as murdered there:
The Tree then climbed by Cords, that Ladder so
Laid cross the Wall, one might descend below;
Rope-Knot untied, the other slip down to Ground;
In's Fellow's Arms: no Sign for entrance found.
For surer way, NORTHAMBRIS to the King
That Key of the Grove, when Dinner past, did bring;
If Mind disposed to walk that Evening- hour,
Should strait tell Bromor's Groom, for timely power
To reach that Branched Stand: if chance fell out,
Charged afterward, he should (most watchful Scout)
Give notice by small Horn, from the Garden-side,
For quick Retreat to the Wall again unspy'd.
Thus was this Noble Prince (sought Worldly Prize)
By Kinsman, Servant, doomed for Sacrifice:
Where Villain proves deep-planted in the Breast,
'Twill break through All through base self-interest.
That fatal Day appeared, the Sun arose
With splendid Beams, fit for triumphant Shows
At Court designed; but this that Morn's Event,
The King was seized by Fever violent:
Clear, sanguine Temper proved, inflamed the more;
Much heated too, Hunting that Day before.
BROMOR'S by the Groom NORTHAMBRIS told, did send
To's Brother in Law, with Fleet to wait, attend
The Cyprus King dead of Fever.
For the King's Death: the King thus languished
(So L^mps do waste) till Week dissolved, then dead:
In's gallant Prime, tho Fortunate thus far,
Since BROMOR'S Hand escaped, vile Murderer.
Yet he had reigned five Years, with Glory crowned;
Two with that Queen for Good and Fair renowned,
Three Years before; might Cyprus-Sun appear;
Much worldly Honor, Health enjoyed however,
Much Blessedness; with Love the Scepter swayed,
Now lost withdrawn beneath Death's nightly Shade.
Bromor seized the Crown.
BROMOR strait seized the Crown, strong Party's power;
Joined some great Lords: Two Female Babes that hour
Could claim alone, those void of Language too;
Whose Friends wished well, dared neither speak nor do:
Feared Lycian King withal, large Fleet-supply
Then ready known: They must conform, or dye.
For that young Parthian Rogue, made privy there
To the Trayt'rous Plot, vile BROMOR'S Groom however,
(Since that Exploit NORTHAMBRIS did prevent,
King sick declared) paid the Hire of Gold, content,
Known the King's Death; such BROMOR'S Charge, command,
As sure of the Crown; then stopped with the same Hand
His talking Mouth; two Bottles got, choice Wine,
To's Chamber brought, like friendly Part, design
To drink the King's, young Prince his Health, infected
Through Poison the one, which to the Rogue's Taste directed,
Drank the other himself; then leaves him strait, could say,
His Kingly Master's business called away:
Slow Poison 'twas, six Hours when took their flight,
That Morning's Draught proved his eternal Night.
The King deceased, and BROMOR on the Throne,
His grieved Queen extremely jealous grown
Of further Baseness now, (suspect before)
That he who This could dare, would venture more
Till all secured; join Blood to's Usurpation;
She thought how to preserve in cautious fashion
The living Stock, whilst mourned for the Dead;
Those Remnants of her Lord, late honored.
The eldest Girl sent away.
Thus the Eldest Branch, sweet Comfort of her days,
(MINDANA called) with speediest Art conveys,
Nurse joined too, to the Earl her faithful Friend,
DIMON forenam'd; prepared for that end.
What Sighs and Tears, what clasping Folds and Kisses!
How called She back again her parting blisses!
Wept sober, new Farewels; till at the last,
Cried, take it away: yet followed then in haste
To the Threshold, Door; did k^ss, embraced it there:
Mothers most strong and yearning Loves do bear.
Forth Nurse did steal with Royal Infant-Gem
(Back-way, reserved) to Grove where stayed for them
Coach and Six Horses, sent from the Earl (expressed)
Which Matron bare, well known for faithful Breast
(Stranger to Nurse) his Keeper's Wife indeed;
Who cheering strait the parting Babe, with speed
Her Princely Charge received, by joint Accord,
Termed Kindred tho, small Orphan by her Lord:
To pleasant Lodge, in Park far off, did ride,
There had from Him Commands, with Coin supplied
(Told, Nurse should soon appear) for handsome breeding:
MINDANA'S lost, CLARINE'S Name succeeding.
Nurse back to the House, as by the Queen desired,
(Since further Plot) through gloomy Walks retired:
Where, Fellow-Nurse Partner conjoined, that Night
Small Coffin Sable-spread, by Torches light,
Was carried forth, as tho the Infant died
Of Pest-disease, by the Royal Mothers side.
The mournful Queen much heightened all, sick-brow'd,
Reserved became; thence hasty Grave allowed.
Kind Nurse however soon afterward (unknown)
To the private Lodge and Little Lady's gone.
The second sent away to Arcadia.
Her Sister proved next Morn, since last Eyesore
To the Tyrant thought, sent down to the watery Shore
With tender Nurse, by Boat to pass away;
As't had the Infection caught, and so should stray
For Country Grange beneath (feigned Cause pretended)
To Voyage tho much larger recommended.
New Storm of Sighs and Tears, Woe's second Part,
Since given up to the Wind and Wave (sad heart)
Vows, Prayers made that beauteous Innocence,
Sea- Tyrants charmed, might escape withal from thence.
Nurse walked along the Bank, some Miles below,
Where not observed, Greek Merchant (ordered so
By the worthy Earl) sent out his Boat that way,
Inbarqu'd them strait, soon gained Arcadia:
His Brother where did Dwell, choice Nobleman;
Lines sent Who 'twas, proved Gentle Guardian:
PENDARNE called, concealed AURELA 'S Name.
The Queen's infom'd to the Grange they never came,
So, noised 't was if Pest by the way they Died;
Or might prove Drowned through sad mischance beside.
Her mournful self (no small Complaints as then)
Locked up, Reserved; deploring State again.
BROMOR well settled now, securer grown,
Both dead conceived; proud Thoughts, as Heaven should own
His trayt'rous Plots, himself choice Favorite,
Since snatched that youthful King from worldly Light,
Saved murdering Pains: those Princely Babes no less
Blasted by Fate, preventing Kindnesses,
Their Deaths when near decreed: at Pampered leisure,
To Royal Cares joined Royal Ease and Pleasure.
Rape made of the Crown, strong sensual Thoughts returned,
Toward the Queen his lustful Humor burned. Bromor's Lust toward the Queen.

Some grounds for Hope, Success; since would not wed,
Maid's Choice, preferred; besides, her Marriage Bed
To the Lycian King Affront extreme would show,
Dear Brother in law; might well assault her so.
Such Fortune 'twas; PISANUS, named before,
Young, handsome Earl, third Brother's Son, what is more
Heir next his Boy to the Crown, of noble Parts,
Much loved the Queen; for Person, Estate, Deserts
Might hope t'obtain for Wife: had jealous guess,
E're the King died, of BROMOR'S Treacherousness;
But loath to break their Calm, till Proofs appeared
Strong, evident; now blazing forth, as feared.
Thought, the Queen loathed him too, since trampled on
Those Royal Babes like Steps unto the Throne.
Vent'ring abroad, through Fever late confined,
He came to visit her, Love-suit designed.
When walking up, BROMOR did land, unwares,
With those two Grooms and Guard at Water-Stairs;
Entered the House; asked strait, If then their Queen
Were private found: by the Maids (first got between
The Room and them, from Her withdrawn, descended)
Was told, the Lord PISANUS there attended.
When, Blood disturbed, He mounts the second Floor
(Place known to him) till reached a Lobby-door,
Where plants his Guard; then strait with either Groom
(Short, matted walk) traced to her Lodging Room;
Soft, gentle Steps, unheard as unexpected,
There listening stands, as some Device projected.
Salute performed, Absence excused before,
Thus heard the Lord his Speech enlarging more:
Madam (said he) I much condole, Pisanus Wooing the Queen.
lament
( Deep sharer found) your Loss, sad Discontent
For gallant Spouse, what did those Babes withal
( Each princely Branch from Kingly Root) befall:
Succeeded (last) by vile Usurper there,
Unworthy Head. BROMOR could scarcely bear
Those thundering Terms. Yet checked his lofty Pride,
Hearkened for more. The Queen again replied;
Most cautious that bad Time, reserved way
(Tho good Conceit) lest the Earl should her betray;
Might stoop to BROMOR'S lure, deceive her thus,
Ensnare her Tongue; grown partly treacherous
( Charmed in whole Months by him) with circumspection
Her Words did poize, whatever, no sharp Reflection:
It Is Truth, my Lord, she said, that treeble Loss
Proves weighty Load, but Heaven. ordained the Cross,
And I must bow with patient Shoulders then
To bear, endure. He strait replied again:
Good Comfort, Madam, seem their natural Deaths,
Since rendered up that Way their mortal breaths;
Grand Tribute due: confirmed my Thoughts, Belief,
That Tyrant was resolved to raise your Grief,
And seize their Lives, as grasped the Crown: tho I
E're you be wronged his quartered Slave shall dye.
BROMOR'S all Storm, scarce kept his Bounds, the Door;
Still hearkened tho, the Queen thus answered more:
Indeed, my Lord, conjoyn your best Allay,
Strange Wound it seems to lose them natural way;
Whether my youngest drowned, does Doubt appear
Alas! dear Madam (strait PISANUS there)
I thought that Child by the self-same Plague destroyed:
To which the Queen, both Child and Nurse (employed)
Prove dead by the Way, or drowned perchance; replied;
No News of them. Now swelled with raging Tide
Proud BROMOR'S Heart, boiled forth against the Man
Tho pleased with Her; till Wooing* Task began:
Madam, I have most humble Suit to you,
True Lover's, chaste ^ thall. That joined too.
Bromor assaulting Pisanus.
O'reheard enough; besides the Traiterousness,
Sharp, threatening way, did Courting Form express
To spoil his Aim; he rouzed then; unarmed,
Saw Peeping through (Thoughts there to pass unharm'd)
Rushed in with naked Sword, Door only closed,
Grooms following if need for Help imposed.
( One seized the Queen) These Words his Rage unfolding,
Traitor, thou breathe thy last. The Lord beholding
This fierce Assault, convinced, o'reheard they were;
Case desperate; to dye, fall tamely there
Abhorred, did loath; snatched up strait smaller Stool,
Like ^arget used; did with that Fencing Tool
Put by his first strong Charge; when second made,
Held fast the entangled Sword; did stoutly invade
For grasping Close: but BROMOR got Command
Of nimbler Steel, sharp Poniard in's left hand,
Stabbed him to the Heart, down falls he on the Ground, Pisanus Killed

To Loyal Truth brave Sacrifice renowned.
Cast scornful Glance upon the Corpse, to the Queen
He marched next, till then restrained between
One Guardian's Arms, lest might disturb (whose Heart
Had fainted there, not knowing what dismal part
Designed for Her, but that her Noble Spirit
Gave Strength, upheld; now taught PISANUS merit)
Madam (began) I hope you will dispense
With this last Act, less pleasing Violence
Shown in your Room, since against a Traitor proved;
One next in Blood; my Wrath so strongly moved
On pow'rfull'st Grounds, I could not damp the Flame
(Those witness shall) nor wait for Legal Claim
But did my self this Justice on him there.
The Queen replied, Reserved Thoughts however,
Much Trouble, Sir, seized Me (like your own Rage)
My Chamber should be found the unhappy Stage
Of that bad Accident, could not with those
Soft general Terms but melted Tears disclose.
Corpse carried forth to the Guard at lobby-door,
By his command, like Wanton paramour
He coined his Face in part; bedrest those Eyes
With lustful Flames, where raging late did rise.
(So sturdy Mars was termed Venereous)
Left Private now, the Queen Assaulted thus.
Madam the Ground of my Approach was Love, Bromor's wanton Motion.

Tho Wrath did enter first, O're-ruling prove.
Your handsome Form makes That again to sway;
Contrary power, so Night's expelled by Day:
Love now the Lord conceive, whilst Anger show
Rough Marshal used to make my Passage so.
I cannot wed, foul Breach thereby effected
'Tween me and Lician King, whom You rejected,
My Brother in Law; wherefore my Heart desires
Some private way to Enjoy, quench the Amorous Fires.
The Queen whom shame, Grief both invovl'd, Replied:
Sir, I am sunk too much through Cares ( the Bride
Of Sorrow thought) to Clasp with sensual Pleasure;
And Virtue so regard (Choice Female Treasure,
Prime Coronet) Honor conjoined as never
Those to Abuse through Act unchaste, whatever.
BROMOR replied; Concerning Cares, You may
By willful Passion Wound your self, Betray;
Death All does Seize: I lost a Princess, wife,
Beauteous, Choice Gem esteemed; Young Daughter's Life
Strait followed Here Is: for Virtue, next, and Honor
( There Tempting Looks, cast Wanton glance upon her)
Those Nice Regards, Fantastic Cheats they be,
Bar Nature 's general Due: nor plead Degree;
If you styled Queen, I Am King for Parallel,
Hereafter too your Cares from hence may swell;
Their Number raised if Grant withdraw, close Frown:
Your Lord small Portion had, much wronged the Crown;
And I may crave your Jointure on that Score
With fair Pretense, leave but Third Part, no more.
Sir, The Queen's disdain.
said the Queen (with Grief, concealed Disdain)
I could confute your Arguments as vain,
Joined Morals in the midst; and for the Close,
You may proceed as Please, Deprive of those
My worldly Comforts left; yet never I
Shall Yield, Consent; Poor Widow, Chaste shall Dye.
He answered strait: Time, Place do serve Combined;
None least shall Know, it is secret, close designed
If now Disturbed your Thoughts, untuned Jar,
Pause till the Morn. She said; more hardened far,
Sir, I shall prove through Thinking more, by then,
Never Conform. He should, conjoyns again;
Then you may Thank your self, not blaming Fate,
If I Am Revenged upon your Fair Estate,
Just punishment, to the Full Performed there:
This (lastly) if Blab'd, Disclosed, ( which I shall Swear,
Was False, through Spleenful Grudge) as Final Doom,
Fifth part's your Lot. Abandoned so the Room.
The Queen deep Gash received, tho found Allay,
Joined Comfort too; since spoke that Cautious way
Touching himself, those Babes, believed both Dead;
That Act concealed withal: choice Courage bred
Strong-temper'd Heart: Then strained through her Eyes
To the Lord PISANUS Ear, sad Obsequies.
BROMOR gone forth, at further Lobby-door
Strange Sight beheld, Young Lady Weeping over Young Lady weeping over the
Corpse.

That prostrate Corpse; tall Guard on either side,
She kissed his Cheeks, as would their Rosy Pride
New-plant that way, recall; Lips blasted there,
Make Fresh again touched by her Own appear
Body then Clasped, Life's Province late beheld,
As grapple would with Death, till thence expelled,
Found Conqueror, wiped over his Wounded Breast,
Sad mournful Breach whereby that Fort possessed;
Invading there; Tears dropped for Balm thereon;
Loud Sighs, laments for Charming back (since gone)
The Enlarged Soul, drawn nigh, Transcendent seemed
For Beauteous Form, Terrestrial Star esteemed.
Asking, who't was; His Sister, strait they said,
Being VERDOLINA called: that hapless Maid
It proved indeed; who absent was long while,
With Noble Aunt remained in Creta's Isle,
Late Candie called. By BROMOR never beheld
Since Girlish Bud, now fair-blown Rose, excelled.
Week past arrived, sick Brother visited,
Followed to wait of the Queen; tho rather led.
Drawn on that Hour his Love-suit to advance;
Till found Dead Corpse nigh the Lobby-door, first glance:
Known by the Groom did stay; tho heard below
The King was there, that Lobby free might show.
BROMOR'S amazed, Bromor in Love with Pisanus Sister.
such Beauty in Sorrow's Dress
Midst Sighs and Tears appeared, choice Loveliness.
Such Lightning broke from Face o're-clouded grown,
Grief served as Foyl to that fair Diamon.
More sparkling too conceived since unexpected,
New Flame arose, beyond that last, rejected:
Which monstrous Fortune's Curse, transcendent seemed,
Since Brother had destroyed, so highly esteemed.
His amorous Fancy raised, advanced of late,
Proved Tinder-like. The more in that strange Fate
Did strive to rouse his sturdy Mood, he burned
With stronger Fires; to new Excuses turned
Whilst She loathed more: informed, tho hasty Fashion,
What caused his Death, foul treas'nous Procuration.
She only said, Whatever the occasion proved,
She found most Worthy Brother slain, beloved.
Permitted so PISANUS Footmen there
Strait carried down the Corpse, to the Goach did bear,
Which served for Hearse: when ( fired in Streams) by Water
BROMOR returned; tho joy'd with his late Slaughter.
Much time that Day reserved, alone he spent
(Partly transformed) in thoughtful Discontent.
Fit toylsome proved, through strong Desire and Rage,
The first did burn, to the Person's Form engage
The last tempestuous Roared upon that Ground,
Since Sister 'twas, Dear Brother murdered found.
Both strangest Gall next Kingdom's Loss appear,
Tormenting Racks: Lust craved Enjoyment there
Like hungry Panch, Doubt swelled his wrathful Mood:
Crushing those Thoughts increased the unruly Brood.
That twofold flame (near blinding Reason's Eyes)
To stifle strove till mounted, more did rise:
Tempting to the bawdy Lure of Concubine
Thought vain Conceit, he fixed of the Wife's Design.
For Person proud enough, great, princely Parts,
Bright Scepter, Crown conjoined for Good Deserts:
Next Heir her self, but his own Boy, beheld;
Fit Spouse for him conceived, unparalleled.
She thus obtained, which gallant Conquest were,
For handsome Choice kept private Wenches there,
If was refused, on that provoking ground,
He had revengeful Salve to allay the Wound.
Pisanus voted Traitor.
Thus Council called in haste, furnished with Men
Bad like himself, to whom declared then
What forced PISANUS Death from his own Hand.
Foul Slanders heard; first, marked with Tyrant's brand,
Then Murderer; did threatening Words express,
Vile, Traytor-like (both Grooms sworn Witnesses)
So could he not confront his Passion more,
Wait Legal course, but of the Queen's Chamber-floor
That Justice did Himself, Pisanus Dead,
Passed Traytor's Vote; his Lands all Forfeited.
Strait published Smooth and King-like Declaration,
The Councils Hands conjoined, to please the Nation:
Then tuned were his Amorous Thoughts, o're-strain'd
For Writing Task; this Sense the Scroul contained.
Bromor writes to the Lady.
First said; Although her Brother's Words did move
Distaste like Gall, to the Sister His should prove
Soft, Oily, kind: as Blood streamed from his Breast
(What Language cause, sworn Witnesses expressed)
So Chaster Love to her flowed from his Own;
Wife there Queen joined, with Marriage Bed a Throne;
Which Most would highly esteem, ranged on Record
Her Brother Traitor was by the Council Board;
Lands forfeited. Next Day, when the Evening he
Would visit Her for Answer kind and free:
If slighted This through Froward, coy pretense,
Then thank her self for the harmful Consequence.
The Lady found strange Qualm from BROMOR'S Love;
Bad Man conceived, would scarce good Husband prove;
That Motion loathed: Writ back with Weeping Shower,
She Would wait for Him next day, Five the Evening-hour.
Short Pause She made as sad, most serious too;
Resolved what in that Extreme to do.
Since was next Heir to the Ciprus-Crown but one
Bred jealous Thoughts (his sturdy way well known)
He Would seize on her, lest Married keep confined
(Nor was it Mistake) as Treas'nous Plots designed;
Still close Restraint, while played Refusal- part:
If but withdrawn, thought Foul, disdainful Start,
Might stop the Ports, Ransack the Town for her:
Thus Flight resolved, best seemed the least Demur.
The Lady flies disguised to Creet.
For Agent's help her Faithful Man she chose,
Whom brought from Creet; sad Case did there disclose.
Charged him step down to the Haven, what Barque, there see,
Launched forth e're Nine next day, for Rooms agree:
Or hire some Barque; Gold-bag in the hand descried,
Her Brother's Gist; Two good men's Suits provide;
Gentiler That for Her, false Hair, no more;
For him false Hair and Beard; shroud All before
In The joining Cops, Fit Place t'undress as then;
Inform her (last) 'Twas Morning-hour, near Ten.
The Man things well discharged, successful there;
Informed Her; Soon Dined through hasty Fear;
He first stole forth to the Cops, she strait pursued
Through Lobby down to small back-yard, whence viewed
Those branched Shades, where each Disguises wore
(Suit, Periwig) then trod by three the Shore:
Where Barque set out by Six for Egypt-land;
Soon thence for Creet, where the Noble Aunt remained.
She there arrived, like gallant Traveller,
Beautiful Youth; seemed Male as female Star;
Complete for either Sex, since tall did grow,
Choice, dainty-limb'd, Nineteen for Age might show:
Worn dark-brown Locks and curled, black Patch (with Sword
For Soldier's Garb) did Foyl to the Check afford.
Well horsed next Day she marched with Serving-man,
Her Course toward their Town supreme began.
Young Lord of Crete lands there.
Young Cretan Lord there landed at same time,
From Travel back returned to's Native Clime.
Proved great for Rank, Estate, more Worth from hence,
Through Body, Mind's conjoined Excellence.
That Night refreshed, next Morn with smaller Train,
For Voyage meant by Land, set forth again.
As Forest passed, fine chirping Consorts there,
Strong, mournful Cry for help did pierce his Ear;
Some robbed, or wounded seemed; no noise again,
More dismal thought, as sadly expired then:
Nor distant far; when, Noble-temper'd Breast,
Courageous too, the Lord rushed in, addressed
For their Relief: prime, gallant Youth beheld,
Four stripping him; Mouth stopped by Glove, compelled;
Man gagged and bound beneath: which Rogues descrying
The Lord, they all leaped strait to Horse, were flying.
The Lady 'twas, whom Those surpised by the Way,
To strip began; great Fear, when should display
Her swelling Breasts, they might (not least controlled)
Ravish her Person, next her Bag of Gold,
She cried out loud, like Death's Assault did strain;
Those vanished, gone, buttoned her Clothes again.
The Lord came in, Man-like salutes her there; The Lady freed by him.

Said, Worthy Sir, I much rejoiced appear
In your Escape, nor should my Life have seemed
Too hard a Ransom thought, your self redeemed.
She Thanks returned; Unworthy was (declared)
Of that grand Favor shown; next place, despaired
Of recompense: but Heaven (She hoped) would more
Conjoyn for all, Discharge that Weighty Score.
Fine handsome Garb, rich Bag of Gold (fore-nam'd)
Viewed on the Ground, no mean Degree proclaimed.
Both mounted strait; as Marched through the Wood,
She told the Lord, what way that Thievish brood
Surprised them; like Travelers rode by,
Till Two her man Disarmed; dark shelter nigh,
Four seized on Her; Next Death to Vote began,
Conjoined, She was a Ciprus Gentleman,
But lately Landed there those Parts to see,
Some Friends withal of Noble Quality.
The Lord then changed his Talk to Ciprus-Isle,
Touching that Realm's Affairs; much pleased mean while
With her Discourse; so choice and sweetly flowing;
Of strongly Friendly League ambitious growing.
Forest passed through, He said; I now must bend
My course to the Royal Town, as Journies end;
And should be Glad, Kind Sir, if did Agree
Our ways, conjoyn to enjoy your Company.
The Lady feared her being discovered so,
Through modest Thoughts withdraws; Predended tho,
That She should turn aside to the Right hand,
Visit some Friends else was at his Command.
So parted they, the Lord kept on the Road,
She turned strait to Village near, bestowed
Some two Hours there, refresht since lately Frighted;
In the Evening reached that Town Supreme recited,
The Aunt's Dwelling Place, whose Husband was a Lord;
Large Portion left with Her by Will's Record.
Saluted the Aunt, unknown, Tranformed so;
Then named the Cause, that Deadly Murdering Blow.
Her Brother seized, Lands forfeited withal;
Loathed BROMOR'S Love, feared like Tormenting Thrall:
That Thieves surprise, each sad Event declared;
While the Aunt conjoined in Sorrow largely shared.
Discoursing thus, Great Person entered there,
The Husband's Ally, with whom did also appear
That Cretan Lord; who did by chance Attend
The Lady met by the Lord again.
(The Other, well met in the Street) like Honored Friend
Coming to the House: the Lady strait espied
E're could withdraw, Embraced with Joy beside:
(Being Stranger else to the Aunt, who wonder does)
Said Noble Sir, I Am Glad to meet You thus;
Fortune, tho crossed me on the Way, unkind,
Has now restored You Here, Amends designed:
My Lord (She said, the Uncle that Style allowed)
Those Friends removed to the Town, to whom I vowed
My first Regards, I followed Hasty fashion;
My second Thanks for your Grand Obligation.
Last Words conjoined did from her Aunt dispell
That Wondering Cloud, how Both were known so well;
Her Champion thought. When He did These express:
My Honor 'twas and Grateful Happiness
So to Redeem, whilst I ravell'd on the Road,
Then asked the Aunt, whence her Acquaintance flowed:
He was a noble Ciprus youth (She said)
That knew her best Friends there, their Loves conveyed.
PALMEDON urged for more Acquaintance then,
To know her Lodging, Prayed, She joined again:
'Twas in that House; her Aunt the Lady proved;
Should live with her, that Country well beloved.
PALMEDON Pleased, Prayed, He might have that Honor
(Which granted was) Next day to wait upon her.
Tho now enjoyed her Presence there whole Hour,
Whilst his Friend talked to the Lord in Garden-bow'r:
So closely Embraced sometimes, that Blushes Died
Her Virgin-Cheek; Pulse strongly Beat beside.
Did last, That she would prove his Guest, Comrade
For various Sports, kind Bedfellow: persuade,
Choice Cretan Horse Presented was next Morn,
(Rich Saddle That, Spruce, Ribon'd Mane adorn)
To ride that Day abroad: some Races were
Meant on the Downs, might serve for Pastime there.
Here may be joined, what Powerful Conquest showed
Her Man-like Form, First Evening spent, bestowed
In the Haven-Town; where seen but Walking by,
Young, handsome Lass was wounded through the Eye:
Rich, Wealthy Maid; shed Tears, Transported so:
Nor soon Discharged those Qualms which thence did grow.
Next Day He came, their Dinner past again,
Saw VERDOLINA Dressed like her self then;
Brave Woman's Garb, complete to the Foot beheld
Tho Face adorned those Clothes so choice, excelled.
Salute performed, PALMEDON to Ask began,
If Sister 'twas to the Ciprus-Gentleman? Palmedon in Love with Verdolina.

The Aunt told him strait, That she was still the same,
Disguised before; strong grounds whereof could name,
Enforcing all; true Woman now become:
When he did Gaze, like one struck partly Dumb.
Rousing his Thoughts; Pray, Madam (answered then)
Speak plainly, I do conjure, speak't once again:
She Is so, my Lord, indeed, (the Aunt replies)
(Fresh stream her Cheek o're-flow'd, more flaming Eyes)
My Niece she proves withal, conjoined the Aunt;
Earl's Daughter born; next Heir but one, may vaunt,
To Ciprus-Crown: the King did (last) Refuse:
BROMOR'S Love-scroul strait pleased to produce.
PALMEDON joining thus; O Gallant Mind!
For the Empress fit of all termed Womankind.
That kissing strait her Hand Regardful fashion,
'Twas happy Change (he said) choice Transformation,
If this last Sex to him found Gentle, kind:
Her Answer proved to bashful Blush resigned.
Both the Uncle, Aunt, her Self he now assailed
For taking Coach to the Races named, Prevailed:
Her new Horse too Side-saddle brought, Attended,
Whom she did mount when they the Downs ascended:
Well pleased with Air and Sport: nor need of Man,
The Lord himself proved watchful Guardian
To the Sights conjoined Good Parley-space however,
His Amorous Suit enclosed, Advanced there
Strong Hope (poised other Grounds, Gem to possess
So late Redeemed from Thievish Barbarousness.
(Which she did Grant was Highest Obligation,
Life, Chastity preserved from Violation)
Found civil, fair Regard from Her, as One
Loved private Worth, tho scorned base BROMOR'S Throne.
His Charge Next Day renewed, the Third o'recame
Choice Beautie's Fort; surrendered proved the same.
That Diamon was set besides in Gold;
The Aunt's Chest for her did Portion great infold:
PALMEDON 'S Joined, no Tirant-Storms annoyed.
True Woman, Maid in calmest Creet enjoyed,
To the Queen we turn, The Ciprus Queen again.
who largely felt the Smart
Of BROMOR'S Threats, Revenge, Third only Part
For Jointure left; of the Chaste and Virtuous Score
(Pretense small Portion brought) declared before;
Vnqueen'd appeared, retired to Country-Grange.
Tho much her self did prove in Fortune's Change,
Mind framed to that; found sober Ease, Content;
Since often it is known, that Comfort, Settlement
Seems from the Heart as well as World procured,
Calm, steadfast, Thoughts: Rock-like the Waves endured.
As for her eldest Hope (CLARINE now)
Good Fortune's Her did frequent Sights allow;
(Stolen Joys withal, transporting, sweet appear)
Since visiting that worthy Countess there
The Earl Dimon's Wife, as Friend ( Artesa named)
Whole Month sometimes, who part in Council claimed;
They Two would thrice the Week to the Park repair,
Mile's distance off, to take the Evening-Air:
(Choice Prospect thence withal beheld) in Coach:
Which pranced round, they would the Lodge approach,
And enter there for pleasing Bait. Queen with her Child in the Park Lodge.
The Queen
Her small CLARINE thus, brought always in
By the wary Nurse (ARTESA'S View pretended)
Fondly'st enjoyed* First Glance, dear apprehended,
Cross the open Court she saw it gently go
In Nurse's Hand, whence Tears did stream; although,
What strongest Yernings proved, Heart-meltings over
Her harmless Babe! Nurse, Countess by, no more;
What Medley of Joy and Grief! Passions compound:
Both Tears and Smiles! such Drops and Sunshine found
In gaudy May; kissed, hugged, embraced then:
By the gentle Babe was clasped strait again,
Who smiled withal; till wept poor Heart, at last,
For Company: when stronger Sorrow's blast
In Sighs did breath the o'recharged Mother there;
Then babled often, That spoke in Looks however:
'Twas rarest Scene, did cause from thence to rise
Sad Pleasure in those two Spectators Eyes.
The Queen did weep, yet weeping pleased withal,
Since joined with Life, yet free, exempt from Thrall
Her Orphan-pair: Fortune (what is more) so kind,
That One of them proved in her Arms intwin'd.
CLARINE e're long could bear small babbling part,
Some Words had learned, which joy'd the Mother's Heart.
Tho bigger grown, and apprehensive more,
Wary the Queen became (too fond before)
Lest ought betrayed; her Passions used to smother;
Tho, when constrained like soft and tenderest Mother,
Such blossomed Wit, small Buds of choice Perfection,
Rare Beauty, Growth observed, sad Glance, reflection
Of The Father dead, then, Child's abused Estate
She whispering Sighs would breath; or turning strait,
Weep forth kind, hasty Showers by stealth, as 'twere,
Chose Corners for it, discharged her Passions there;
Dropped molten Pearls: Then, cleared her clouded Sky,
Toy'd, prattling Game renewed; till wandering Eye
The Child and Nurse talking.
Of sweet CLARINE marked the Change, at last;
Who asked Nurse (sad Glance withal then cast)
What was the Cause that Lady wept for so:
Nurse answered there, Dead Lord the Ground does show;
Two little Daughters also lately dead,
The one of your Years, Resemblance great, which bred
Strong Love to you (the Queen did thus ordain,
If Question asked) the Child replied again;
I pity her, so fine a Lady it is;
And for her Love, how great so'ere that is,
Methinks I love her more than she loves me;
Nor can I rest well satisfied, till she
Does kiss me often, embrace; kiss me again;
Fain would I dwell with her. Nurse pleased then,
Y' are yet too young, nor big enough, replies:
Ah! said the Child, with cheerful, sparkling Eyes,
I thus could talk with her, and find her Play
Sometimes however, when She Is disposed that way.
By Nurse (next View) informed of all, the Queen
Would say her self, while kissed, embraced between,
Your Mother (pretty one) most dear was found
To me, showed Sister- like, upon which Ground
This Love's expressed, declared; you (lastly) do
In Mind recall my buried Daughters too;
Most like the First; that Change of Passion breeding;
Love, Sorrow both by Turns (as 'twere) succeeding.
Madam (then said the Girl, with pleasing Grace)
Would Heaven she was alive, that Servant's Place
I might enjoy, on her Attendant prove.
When the Mother strait conjoined, in Smiles of Love;
You may, Sweetheart, reach nobler Rank, Degree,
And serve the Queen; Prime Maid of Honor be.
Thus then the Girl; That little Lady dead,
I rather should serve you, more honored:
Although your self may prove the Queen perchance,
You look methinks like one. Did raise, advance
Her sober Joy, such pleasant Talk, replies:
Yet still the Queen departs with weeping Eyes.
PENDARNE (last) that faithful Earl could tell
(From's Brother Lines received) that She was well
In Arcadie; transported from that Clime
News often by Sea: Epistles too in time
Sent from her self; when her small dainty Hand
Could Letters frame, and the useful Pen command,
In The Lord's enclosed: Her Mother's Rank however
But Baroness (new Name) informed there.
Nor knew that Merchant more (least blab'd, descried)
But that some Noble Orphan 'twas allied:
Eight years of Age, for Beauty's Stock improved,
CLARINE was transplanted strait, removed
To the Lord's own House; like princely Gem, well set,
Prepared seemed for Nobler Cabinet.
Much pleased found the Queen withal, uncloy'd,
Tho for whole Months still constantly enjoyed.
When Twelve years old what beauteous Person there!
Such the early April's blossomed Cheeks appear
But mounted to that gallant height, Sixteen,
So tall as Woman thought, true Princess, Queen
Blazed in her Sun-bright Eye, breathed from her Breast,
That Wisdom thence proclaimed: fair Beauty's Crest
Her Brow presents, joined Honor's glorious Throne:
The Queen made known to Mindana.
When Princely Birth unveiled was, made known
Unto her Self, the Queen, ARTESA by,
By the faithful Earl, apart. What Ecstasy,
Kind Bosom- trance in each beheld that Hour!
Tears, Kisses, Smiles: Joy showed its Sovereign Power
At first in the one Joy, Wonder in the other;
Grief (lastly) tho in Daughter both and Mother
Did equal sway, through Fortune's harmful Wrong:
That virtuous Passion there (which lasted long)
Prime Nature's Scene, clear Fancy better may
To the height conceive, than my dull Pen portray.
The Earl Dimon now was Eager to behold
MINDANA graced with Father's Crown of Gold;
His pregnant Breast o'recharg'd (as 't were) did prove
Through Loyal Thoughts, conjoined with ample Love
(So choice, transcendent Branches) as right and just,
E're long to the Queen, some Lords of greater trust
His Mind unclasps, made Firm by solemn Oath;
Then Views of Her, reserved Conversings both
By them enjoyed, brave, Princess-like Esteemed,
All wept that Hour, Transported strangely seemed
Both Eyes and Ears, Engaged (last) their Hearts;
Whilst BROMOR loathed as void of all Deserts.
The present Time served choicely for their End,
Advantage gave, did well those Ways befriend.
that Tirant was much fallen in the General Rate,
His People's Love; as sunk from Manly State
Through sensual Vice and Ease; the Soldiery
Much Less'ned too, Debauched, exposed more free
For Armed surprise: good, lawful Cause, well-grounded
Wise Agents felt that People's Pulse, Propounded,
What if alive their Queen MINDANA were;
That strongly Beats, strait Army's raised there.
Bromor slain in battle.
BROMOR advanced for Fight into the Field,
Proved mangled, Slain; Both Grooms; chief Town did yield,
Near all the Realm. His Son, then Twenty one,
Still kept a strong Sea-Town (stout, haughty grown)
Where then retired: Manned Garrison before:
Good Shipping had, tho much from the Asian shore,
By the Lycian King, his Uncle, whose Heart Defied.
That Elder Queen, with Ships, Men, Food supplied;
By her refused: could partly so contend,
Tho not Assayl; that place, Himself defend.
MINDANA thus did Mount her Father's Throne, Mindana Queen.

The Queen well pleased, much Honor Glory known:
Prime Grace that Earl, Artesa both enjoyed
Marriage forborne, till rooted out, destroyed
Proud BROMOR'S Son; upheld by Near Relation,
That Lician King, Town's Natural Situation.
Her Sister like the Arcadian Sun did rise,
With Pleasure, Joy to most Spectators Eyes;
Spread morning- Beams; for worth of Mind excelled,
When but Sixteen, in the Royal Town beheld,
Young, Gallant Duke enamored does appear,
(Love's Prisoner caught) conjoined in Marriage there.
Years Reign o'repast, They came to Ciprus Court,
Did both the Queens through gladsome Joy transport;
Who Her received as Raised from the Dead,
Four Months Detained withal: so visited
By Sea Fourth year; their Gentle Loves commending
Sixth too the same: which Year completely ending,
That virtuous Queen (far-fam'd) ORNANDE Dies:
Whose Daughters both there closed her mortal Eyes.
In Either State Sh' had prime Example been,
MINDANA saw, did leave a Glorious Queen.
AURELA gone with Sails advanced behold
ORNANDE set Sun like, dark Clouds unfold.
That Sturdy Heir grown so much Elder now,
More strong, for Headpiece far, Revengful Brow;
Shut up by Land in that Port-Town, Confined;
Flight loathed by Sea, to Abandon all, Resigned.
Much strength at last from's Kingly Uncle gained:
Old Soldiers those, the like himself maintained
In's Garrison: the Queen's but raw, most part,
He Swelled, Resolved to Stake (Adventurous Heart)
His utmost All. By handsome Sleights were spread
Forged Papers round, that True MINDANA 'S Dead;
This feigned, a Cheat; so, cozened of his Right:
Joined Stronger, Manly Sex, to Draw, invite.
Battle with Bromor's Son.
Took then the Field; Both Armies met (tho far
From the Royal Town) to try that Game of War.
First fierce Assault endured on Either side;
Both Horse and Foot; sharp Arrows storm descried.
The Queen's best Troops of Horse disordered were
In The second Charge broke, spoiled their own Foot there:
Their Captains tho led on: They fly, they fly;
Loud shouts, did Baul the Insulting Enemy.
Commanders strove, Part-Rally'd them again;
But most in the Rear confused and Fled, in Vain
(Scarce looking back) the Van o'repow'red so
For Flight conjoined; whilst their Triumphant Foe
Held on the Chase. The Queen's Informed by Post,
And Dimon the Earl her Crown showed plainly lost.
Thus with that Faithful Friend, large Golden store
Laid up by Her, much BROMOR'S gained before
( Countess Deceased) whilst Open proved and Free
The Imperial Port, Mindana. flies to Arcadia.
She sailed for Arcady;
Having then Reigned six years on Ciprus-ground;
Welcome from Sister there, the Earl's Brother found.
After short time, less Pleased with Worldly Strife,
Vain Pomp conjoined disposed for Single Life
Reserved too; no strange Extremes however
Nor Sullen mood, still She-Companions there;
Resolved to leave no Child, that might Disdain
Their wretched Chance, as gulled of Crown complain:
(Tho could her Self Digest, rare Precedent,
That Fortune's Change) for sober Mind's content,
She fixed upon that Vestal Nunnery,
Not distant far, where Maids might Live more free
From outward Chance and Worldly Cares, Retired:
Much Splendor known, by Others sought, admired
Thus with some Maids of better Rank attended,
Who honored Her; that Life the Place commended
(To the Sister's Claim transferred lost Ciprus-Glory
She would as Nun conclude her Royal Story.
But here the young Arcadian Queen, (choice, Fair
For Beauty known, for Princely Parts as rare,
Of her own years) much taken with Her before;
Joined with her Sister, some Great Ladies more
In earnest Suit, She would live less Confined,
Keep smaller Court, still Queen, reserved Mind:
Her Steward the Earl (since brought great Mass of Treasure)
Offered fine House, Grove, Garden for her Pleasure:
Chaste, Single there: with which She Closed complied;
Good Friends enjoyed, a Virgin Lived and Died.
From that dear Sister's womb, as great Grandchild,
CLERMANTHE came; might justly so be styled,
Heir Next the Duke her Father, to that Crown;
Since the only Branch survived of choice Renown.
Some few Days past, a Yearly Sacrifice
There was performed (which here we shall Comprise)
Within that Nunnery by the Virgin- Train
Which Those for VESTA 'S Honor did ordain; The Vestal Nunnery.

Goddess of Chastity, DIANA so
That House withal the Prime of Greece might show.
We shall not first to the fall Describe, Such were in Rome.
portray
Their Lodging-rooms, nor Garden-walks display,
Fountains and Bowers; well-planted Wilderness,
Green, wandering Maze, their Evening- sports express:
Fine Pencil's Art, choice Needle-works composed,
By which their Virgin-fancies were disclosed;
Joined Musick-Consort too, and Vocal Quire.
As for their Garb, particular Attire
'Twas White and Green; First should resemble there
Pure Chastity, the Last fresh Spring appear.
Here too, by the way this Sonnet take along,
Learned still by Them, and called the Vestal Song.
The Vestal Song.
VAnish all fond Love-Delights
Fancy-show'rs, The Vestal Songs.

Fleeting as the Air, or Hours
When they Please vain Appetites:
Frothy Bubbles,
Thralls tho fair,
False Sweets they are;
Dreamed Joys, Waking whilst their Troubles.
II.
Life's abuse and Reason's too,
Cheats they be;
Fondlings Brutes your Partners see
IN the same sensual Mess with you:
Which Discovers,
As does prove
Your Boy- God Love,
You are blind before turn Lovers.
III.
Welcome Dearest Virgin-state,
Let my Soul
Thought of other Loves control,
Thou my Choice and Beauteous Mate:
Pure, untainted,
Free alone
Your Bliss is known,
Whilst our Selves, not changed, Transplanted.
Let Us then Twine,
Clasp, embrace, near Vesta's Shrine,
Joys our Offspring prove Divine.
Thus was their Sacrifice: The Vestal Sacrifice.
In The furthest end
Of The Temple there, which did with Steps ascend,
Great Vesta's carved Form, completely shined;
Advanced above: right hand thereof (designed
On Painted Cloth, but rare) in Forrest-shade
She seemed with all her Virgin-Train portray'd,
Hunting the Deer; 'twas formal, lively Chase.
On the other side beheld with Beauteous grace
Washing her self, where crystal Streams abound.
Beneath that Cloth o'respread the hallowed Ground
With Damask Carpet was of purest white
And Green, conjoined Panes. There (handsome sight)
Small Table appeared, same Silken clothing wore:
Near that did stand fine gilded Rayl, before.
First entered there, loose, comely Garment wearing,
With long white Veil, their Reverend Priestess bearing
Large, spread white Lawn; in the midst thereof displayed
Choice Garland, Wreath of Lillies, Laurels made;
Sprinkled with Drops of Froth for Winter- Snow,
Then Summertime: Lillies should Chastness show;
Pure Emblem that; and Laurels Triumph boast
Over conquered Love; green Woods declare where most
Vesta delights: those Drops of Froth presented
Clear Virgin-Thoughts; swelled so by Art, invented.
Then single Nun (chief, Senior) marched there,
Who small, white Wicker Baskets, choice did bear;
Fine open-work; well painted half with Green
(Same Ribons viewed) through Bars discerned, between,
Lillies conjoined with Laurel branches store
Held in white Cloth as Wreath in Lawn before.
Then came their Virgin-Train by comely Pairs
(Proved numerous) bound decent way, their Hairs
Worn long Lawn-Veil, with lofty, Tow'r-like Dressing,
White, mixed Green, puffed Diadem expressing.
Held in one Cup small China-Dish by each
Of White, cold, trembling Jelly (meant to teach
Chaste Emblem too) fine Pot of Incense showing
In the other Hand, round sweet Perfumes bestowing.
Thus up they walked with formal, sober Pace
To the Steps, made treble Bow, beneath which Place
Their Altar stands; then did themselves divide,
Falling off strait to Ranks on either side.
Priestess mean time, First Nun to the Top advanced,
That Table's Foot, where seemed Devoutly Intranc'd;
Both Kneeling there; then ( Raised of the Table's head
(Joined humble Bow) that purest Lawn she spread,
Triumphant Wreath. Then from the Attendant Maid
Those White, Green Baskets takes, which set, Displayed
In Handsome Form upon the Damask Floor
(Choice Present thought, that Carpet named before.
Last The Other Nuns did mount, Obeisance showed
(In Payrs conjoined) their China-Dishes strewn
On brims of the Table round; beneath Retired,
Fell off to Rank^ again, as first required.
Their Priestess then, from Joining Room of the side,
Brought Sacred Coals, to the Altar strait applied;
Who^e Hallowed Top with Faggot small she crowned
Of Juniper, whom white, green Ribonds bound:
Caused gentle Flame, in which did Spices throw
Arabian Gums, to smoke consumed so:
Whose sweet Devotion-Cloud ascended there:
No Blood beheld. These (last) Conjoined were;
Whilst Burning thus, that Handmaid Nun (well taught)
Two Crystal Vials forth, Large-fashon'd brought.
Same beauteous Form; through the One discerned White Wine,
Through The Other Milk, pure Chastness to define:
The Priestess Each like streaming Fount Distilled,
From those Transparent Wombs, till round She filled
Their Altar's Trench; to the Goddess last Oblation.
During these Rites, for Anthe^'s Celebration,
Those other Nuns well ranged on either side.
Grand Chorus All, thus Vesta Magnified Their sacred Song of Anthem

Song.
GOddess, with Silver Bow Adorned,
Quiver of Gold; upon whose Brow
Bright Moon appears; let naught be scorned
These Maiden V^taries that Bow;
Thus beneath, with Ra^sed Eyes,
Fume of Incen^e Sacrifice:
Gentle fashion
Vows regard, this small Oblation.
II.
Beauteous Deity of Shades,
Transcendent Cheek, as Purest Breast;
Where fond Desire no Thought invades,
Love 's Archer still Disarmed, deprest;
Virgin-troop Vouchsafe to Shroud,
As thy Handmaid- Train allowed:
Greater Honor
None does Wish to fall upon Her.
III.
Brighter then those Lillies Show,
Which were Presented late to Thee;
Emblems for the Heart, Unspotted too,
Shine mildly forth, and grant that We
Like our Goddess (tho less Fair)
Chaste may prove as Purest Air:
Each Low-bending,
Chants thy Praise till Heaven ascending.
Thus, the Anthem past, their Priestess leads the Train,
With Senior Nun retired; the Rest again
(Conjoined in Prayers) fall back like her; with Those
First Threefold Bows performed the Solemn Close.
None for this Sigbt Spectators were Allowed
But Virgin-rank, A Youth's conceit.
which proved sometimes a Crowd.
Where may be joined the Exploit, adventured on
By Traveller Gentile of Macedon;
Who for their Nun's late Female Show inclined
(Amongst his Travel's Stranger things Designed
For Talk at Home) good Person, smooth, no Beard,
Like Handsome Maid, neat Woman's garb appeared
Well Acted 'twas; when All Walked forth beside
For the Garden-air, First beauteous Nun descried
(This Plot conjoined) He strait to Her Addressed
More ciyil, formal way, preferred Request
That She so far would favor Him to view
Their Garden choice, if Fame's report were True:
Was pleased with all the rest, e're long might be
One of their Virgin- Train, Society.
The Nun conforms; Surveyed and Praised that Hour
(Joined too Discourse) each Walk and pleasant Bower.
Large Thanks returned, He took his last Farewell;
Kiss firmly Seabd, thought beyond Parallel;
Her Order, Self combined; ten Travels don
Could boast at Home, Kissed handsome Vestal Nun.
We here shall Join more serious, Sad Event, A Plot against the Prince.

Might raise the Prince ORONTES Discontent:
ORSAMNES too had shared, but Unreveal'd,
IN the Cottage-walls near large Dervan concealed,
With His Uncle, Princely Love; from whence begun
Voyage next Morn should be by the Rising Sun,
To the Merchant's Grange for their more Calm Retreat,
Till Fathers Mind Composed: which we repeat.
That Youthful Prince, the Arcadian King forenam'd,
From Sensual Thoughts, excess not least Reclaimed;
Fantastic Ways; Worth noble Virtue slighted
(By's Father loved) with Humorous Moods delighted:
Damp cast on all Ingenious Parts by those*
His Younger Lords, whom for Companions chose,
Near Servants too like Proper Coin (as 'twere)
Might of Himself Resemblances appear:
Having thrown down that Gallant General,
ORONTES named, bad, Scornful Way withal;
Two Years ago; which Power, Command had held
From the old King some Fourteen Years, excelled:
Soon after that Wife's, Daughter's Loss, ( First strange)
With several Friends retired to Pastor-grange
Which, after that long Story told by us
Of The Ciprian Queen, shows well Repeated thus.
Two Courtiers Great, which Spiteful Rancour bred
Against the Prince for Father's sakes then Dead,
Much for their Own; tho grudged ORSAMNES more,
Distastful Grounds; Who (as we said before)
Star shined at Court till Nineteen Years of Age,
Then Manly seemed for Gallant Personage,
Transcendent Parts, conjoined well Governed Spirit,
Great Battle fought, shown Brave Commanders Merit:
Whose Parts withal now Rarely Improved were.
Not satisfied tho from that Courtly Sphere
Son, Father fallen, since Lived still Unconfined;
Kept large Estate, their Ruin they Designed.
Knowing their own Power upon the King, whose Breast
Still much with Both displeased, by Tongue expressed.
Their Train well lay, They thus Gave Fire, began;
They told the King; for that great sturdy Man
ORONTES, Prince, no doubt there could be found,
But he was (well Discharged on Cautious ground
Of Jealousy) from that Commanding Height:
Bold, forward Son. Tho now, far greater weight
Filled Reason's Scale, Convincing Argument
Showed their Ambitious Ayms, Traytor's intent;
Revengeful too, their Sovereign to Unthrone:
Since they had kept long time Abroad (unknown)
Their Agents, Engineers, Disguised with Clouds
To raise the People's Spleen, Tumultuous crowd.
Confirming thence, that their Conjoined Retreat
To Pastor-Life was but the more to Cheat,
Befool the World; till Armed for Action; then
This Rustic Swain's Lord General ag'en;
Might Seize the Crown; as Prince, ORSAMNES graced
The King's choice Parts and Person Blur'd, debased.
This entrance made, and certain Lord then Dying;
'Twas Friend to the Prince conceived, Forged Letters as from the Prince.
in Plots complying,
They told the King: whose Warrant strait possessed:
The Closet broke ( Each well prepared Breast)
Of that dead Lord: Two Letters (said) found there,
Grand Proofs of All; Penned by themselves however:
Which clasped within their Palms (slight Juglers Art)
They seemed to Take up, with sudden Start,
Foul Treason; Cried: then showed Some Others by,
ORONTES Name beneath; well Feigned to the Eye,
Since Order they had got Two years ago,
Of Military kind (fair Copy so)
In the old King's days, writ all with his own Hand,
When held that place, Lord General's command:
Same thought by the King Himself. The whole matter penned
Did Treas'nous Plot most plainly comprehend;
To Advance their Ayms by the Rising Multitude,
Old Soldiers joined: the Crown did Their's conclude:
Light Head the King was called, fierce Tyrant there;
Could D^staff with more Art than Scepter bear.
This strengthened was by second Plot far more
In their return, tho Forged the Night before.
First Plot being laid when the Lord on his Deathbed,
Their Letters ready penned; last Night known Dead;
One of those Two Yyoung Vagrant met by chance,
Corinthian Greek, who did toward Him advance;
Craved begging way some Alms, might help to bear
His charge for Home; did sturdy, bold appear:
Whom thought fit for his End, called strait aside
To Sculking Nook, thus for the Employment tried.
He should but seem one of their Shepheard-Train,
Green Bonnet bought; Hour past, same Place again
Letter from him receive, in's Pocket shroud;
Next Morn near such an Hour, there (under Cloud)
Watch till he saw Him come that Way, with More,
Then March forth Nigh to him, by the Tavern-dore;
Where, spoken to, such Certain Answers make
(Full Lesson taught) till some those Lines did take,
From's breeches Seize: should be secured then
In The House few Hours, till his own self again
Caused his Discharge; no Harm, be Confident;
High Golden Fee (which named) for his Content
Would Pay him there, the Rogue joined strait, Complied;
Those Lines received; Green Bonnet did provide.
That Courtier with his Fellow- Cheat combined
(Those Witnesses) passing Next Morn designed
Same street, their way to Court, don Prank before,
That Rogue marched up to Them by the Tavern-dore.
Green Bonnet on. That Courtier ( First of the Train)
Stopped, saying, What art thou? some Shepheard-Swain!
Said he, Perhaps I am. Joined The 'Other then,
What do thou here in this Great Town? again.
I Have Business here perchance: The Rogue replied
Some Gugaw for your sweet heart to provide:
Said Courtier, next. Not so, I Message have
To Person of Honor: joined that Vagrant knave.
This seems a Prajeant Clown: fay'd He again:
Tho Shepherd am, I serve a better Man
(The Rogue conjoined) then any here I see,
The Greatest Man but one in Arcadie.
Who Is that? (Both said) the Prince ORONTES there?
He joined; Perhaps the same. Said they; whatever,
In this shows something more; Search him; did call
First Courtier strait to the Standers by withal.
In's Hose that Letter found, of the Front Direction
To the Lord, Deceased; Seal broke, for more Reflection,
ORONTES Name below; That Former Hand,
Judged for his Own: when, given by them Command
To bring't away; The Fellow kneeling Cried;
He was but Neighbor to the Prince, beside
Glad of some Gain; Cap should have left behind;
If any Harm 'twas sore against his Mind:
Begged to go home. That Courtier called strait
The Vintner forth, informed, 'twas Thing of weight;
Charged him to Lock that Fellow up, immured;
Till he more Order gave should be secured:
Three forged Letters show the King.
Brought all three Letters to the King, with Those
For Witnesses: Each did plain Treason infold;
ORSAMNES joined. For that young man, They said,
Whilst bred at Court, when but Nineteen, displayed,
His lofty thoughts, bold, Daring Spirit too;
Now twenty one, that Father might outdo:
Seemed perfect Heir to's Haughty, Ambitious Breast,
And Peoples Love, Whose Darling, Gem expressed:
ORONTES Grandfather (they joined again)
Thessaha's King, expelled by War as then,
Sculk'd in this Realm; got vast Estate, and so
Both Foreiners, no True Arcadians show.
'T was Gallant way to seize them both by Power,
Then Strongly Lodged in Mantinea's Tower
The King might of their Heads dispose at Pleasure:
Well hoped themselves to share the Land at Leisure.
This also swelled bad, Jealous Rage and Hate,
Some Rumors of a Rising Party late
Through Discontent; ore-burth'nous Taxes found,
Tyrannick scourge; no small Provoking Ground.
Two Troops to seize the Prince.
The King like Wax did take the Seal, inclined
That way before, from Two such Men Combined
Gave Order strait, Two Troops, whilst Evening-light,
Well Horsed and Armed should March, on the Second night
Bring up the Prince, ORSAMNES both Concealed,
To the Fort Supreme: Next Day, just Cause revealed
Chopped off their Heads: Their formal Declaration
To the Vulgar Crowd, joined Foulest Aggravation:
This was that Way resolved for their Surprise,
In The Prince's Grange; whilst slept with Drowsy Eyes
On Cottage-Couch the Duke; that Plot intended
Unknown to All; less Care their Hearts offended.
That Speedy Order given more Handsome Ground,
Courtier that Rogue Discharged small Danger found
Through his Preventing foot; He knew 't was none;
Corinthian Cheat, paid the Hire of Gold unknown.
That former Troop, descried (by the Princely Payr
Near the Hermit's Path (as did First Book declare)
Both falling back, should strait have seized upon
Their late Lord Treasurer; false Grounds alone
Of Cheating used in the old Kings Days; however
Escaped their Hands, being timely Imformed there.
The End of the third Book.
THE GRECIAN STORY. Book IV.
WE now Return to the Noble Payr again, Orsam. Clerman. in the Cottage.

Thersander the Uncle joined, whom did contain
Those Cottage-Walls (lovely House not distant far
From that great Town, Dervan) which slumbring are
Upon their Beds in clothes; next Morn by Five,
Hired Coach should Journey take (as did Contrive)
To the Merchant's Grange, withdrawn some time to avoid
Their troubled Fathers Sight; more Peace enjoyed
(As said before) till Those well pleased again:
The Host Hostess too Asleep since the Hour of Ten.
Now three in the Morn; unheard that Noise tho Loud
(Good space between) by Armed, Tumultuous Crowd
Robbing the Town, large, Wealthy Corporation;
Which Plund'ring Storm from hence took Derivation.
Laconians strong Bordering Neighbors were
Unto that Realm; more spiteful Grudge did bear
Against Arcadie, for Three Grand Overthrows
By the Prince ORONTES given (as plainly shows
Our foremost Book) being then Lord General,
In the old King's Days: that Third much caused withal
By the Duke ORSAMNES Hand, when but Nineteen.
(Near the old King's Death) renowned valor seen.
This Prince then Reigned; taking Advantage great
Of whose loose, Sensual Way, secure Conceir
Of his own strength, Commanders placed beside
In Frontire-Forts and Towns, whose Glory, Pride,
Dice, Wenches, Drink (small Soldiers worth) appeared;
They the other Night surpised before 't was Feared
(Power, Craft conjoined) two Garrisons together,
None placed between. Having secured Either;
Embold'ned thence, such prime Retreats withal,
Strong Armed Bands Reserved, whatever befall;
Broke through their Bounds to plunder, spoil next Day
In several Troops; some to Dervan did stray:
Laconians plunder Dervan.
Entered past Nine at Night, like Torrent spread
About their Plund'ring Task, Town fired they fled.
So 'twas one Great Commander came in the Rere
(Which robbed the Towns next Part to the Cottage there)
Loaded with Prize, the Attendant Armed train;
Marched by that way through near Adjoining Lane.
False Rogue there proved, that trod Laconian Ground
Like Vagrant once, then Paultry Neat-heard found;
Had naught Himself to lose, Grudge, malice bare
(Now prime Revenge) against that Ancient Payr:
To the Captain step't, whom told in Fawning fashion,
That he had viewed their Soil, much loved the Nation;
Could bring to special Prize just in their Road,
That Cottage strait (adjoining Place) he showed;
Rich Miser's House, but far more to Invite
Three Persons lodged, by Coach conveyed, that Night;
Did noble Rank, Disguised withal appear,
Nor stirred they forth, He tending Cattle there;
One Woman was, Fine-cloath'd, for Form excelled,
Beautifull'st Creature e're their Eyes beheld.
Those Soldiers strait desired to Plunder them,
Their Captain grants; as for that Female Gem,
Choice Lady named 't would Present Race afford
To's Brother sent, Province-commanding Lord
(Whose (...) he thought to be) choice Concubine;
Those M^n for Slaves, great Ransom last Designed:
If (...) (...) to ^^m conveyed withal;
But st^p, short Task, might soon surprise, enthrall.
Thus, choosing forth some Thirty Men however,
He Foremost Led, must view the Lady there.
Broke open strait with ease their Outmost Door;
Next then unlatch'd, soon trod their Parlour-floor:
CLERMANTHE saw like Morning Star arise
Clothed from the Bed; tho scared through that surprise
Shrieked loud withal; strait Grasped her Cabinet
OF the Table there, whose Gems proclaimed her Great,
Fine, glorious View; did hundred pound in Gold,
For Soldiers Share when the Action past, behold.
The rest strait charged to take the Men Alive
If so they could; which words did cheer, revive
CLERMANTHE'S Heart; One told the Host too at door
They were Laconians, thought Thieves before.
The Captain Her did leave to Faithful Guard,
Four of the Troop, with Box of Gems, Declared
For Present meant to the Earl his Brother's hand;
Those Men withal: whilst she did mournful stand,
Could only Entreat, They Would spare her Uncle, Brother;
By the Captain thought of Noble Rank, no other.
Made haste to mount the Stairs, those Guarding Men
Charged there to stay, till He returned again.
This proved mean notice; CLERMANTHE'S Shriek so loud
Raised both the Lords, (whom still their Clothes did shroud)
From slumber, Bed; to them did Robbers show,
Till heard that Word [Laconians] from below.
Nay then we are Slaves (ORSAMNES said) Hard Chance!
Fighting perhaps our Freedom may Advance;
CLERMANTHE'S too; Revenged, if falling Die:
Truth; said THERSANDER there, did join, Comply.
Orsam. Thersand. assayl'd.
Thus, snatching up their Swords, two Targets (last)
Hung there beheld, they ran to the Door in have:
Entry there was, with Stairs at either End,
Those furthest from the Kitchen did Ascend
To Garret-room; Trampling on Both they heard;
These First the Duke, Thersander next did Guard.
Indiff'rent Light through Windows viewed each side,
'Twas the Hour of Three: then Day by Four descried:
The Assailants on the Stairs, from Wall to Wall,
But single Man could Mount at once withal.
They found them Both filled strait with Grim-look'd Faces,
And glist'ring Swords; Death seemed in their Embraces.
The Foremost this spoke to ORSAMNES there;
Yield, or the art Dead: struck Target fiercely however,
Glanced on his Leg. The incensed Duke replying,
Thou Dearly Pay'st that Score; clear way descrying,
Pierced through his Belly strait: grown Humbler so,
He prostrate falls. The Next gave monstrous Blow
On's Target-Boss, revenged with Cloven Head,
Seemed tumbling down to grasp Comrade there Dead.
A Third the arm Lifted high, Foot hindered tho
By Fellow's Corpse, lay gash'd in the Neck below.
A Fourth, like Steps upon their Bodies raised,
Striking his Shield, the Sword but gently Grazed
On his left Arm; ORSAMNES strait (well Guided)
With Thundering Blow, Skull, Cheeks and Jaws divided.
The mounting Fifth ran through, gave Hasty Death:
Sixth followed then, Who Cursed with Gasping breath.
THERSANDER had laid Five Asleep, tho found
One's Walking Mark in Thigh's unpleasing Wound.
The Captain fights.
Their Captain now, Charge given (as said before)
To the Lady's Guard; sounding to the Parlour-floor.
Much jumbling Noise, joined Targets, Swords above
(Unlook'd-for Chance, since Harder Task did prove)
Rushed wildly forth: The Ascent found strangely spread,
New Staircase made compiled of the Dead:
Called not, Give way; Thus foiled by single Man
Well-armed Crowd? Slave, Death's thy fatal bane
Mounting a loft, He struck ORSAMNES Shield,
Whose monstrous Force made Part thereof to yield;
The Sword by glance did hurt his Shoulder then:
Take now thy Doom; ORSAMNES speaks ag'en:
With powerful Blow Chopped off his Arm, beneath
Fell the Hand and Sword, as loath to Part in Death:
Cleft then his Brain, whose Body Prostrate there
Might grovelling Joined to the Hand and Sword appear.
Now raged All, Rushed madly on Combined;
More than ORSAMNES thought for Spoils designed
So mean a Grange; for had they known their Number,
Which might the best Payr's Courage, strength incumber
(Tho prime the Place) They Yielded had perchance:
CLERMANTHE too their Spirits did Advance,
Voice heard below. With Foremost next did Clash
(Eighth Champion 'twas) good fortune had to Gash.
The Encountrer's Hand; down fell the Sword, and He,
Stooping to Reach, Lay there for Company.
THERSANDER Sturdy Sixth destroyed that Hour: Orsam. Thersan. Captive.

When, Torrent-like, (o'represt by growing Power)
Stayrs Top they gained and Sword; some ran behind
ORSAMNES strait, whose Arms they grasped, confined
To Pris'ner's Bonds; pleased both did Bleed however;
Thus Foiled at last; Part-tir'd with Killing there.
Lieutenant then, which Captain's Place supplied,
Did enter too, to that Great Lord Allied;
Chief Governor of that large Province known
Next to the Arcadian Bounds, ruled there Alone,
BORGANES called: the Lords being brought below,
To the Parlour- Door (Viewed by CLERMANTHE so
With streaming Tears, close Joy they were not Dead,
As they Saw Her) He charged they should be Led
To the Band returning Home, with Lady sent
To the Governor; their Captain's known Intent;
Fine Jewel Box: o're-heard by Each the same,
Which cheered their Hearts, more hopeful Thoughts did frame;
Not Parted thus; or Chance whatever should be,
Joined Friendly Sharers seemed in Misery.
ORSAMNES cast on Her sad Glance, Farewell,
As She on Him; tho Views oft-times befell,
They rode so Nigh: ORSAMNES Golden store,
And Here Is by Soldiers Siez'd, of the Plundering score.
With the Ancient Payr small Coin as then they found,
Tho had put out to Use Four Hundred pound:
They also took their Captain's Corpse along,
More valued Bulk, left there the Vulgar throng.
All brought to L. Borganes Castle.
Next Day, by One, to the Borders All did trace,
By three their Charge brought to the Intended Place;
Still Hope reserved, that Life of the Soul as 'twere,
Prime Anchor found midst stormy Waves, what'ere.
Grand Castle 'twas, large-compass'd Work beheld,
Tall, stately Towers, for Gallant Form excelled;
Fixed on a Rock, cut Passage out from thence
For Horse and Coach, seemed Beauteous, strong Defense.
The Master on it was that Dead Captain's Brother,
BORGANES called (as said before) 'bove Other
Commanding Lord of that Provincial Coast
Next Arcadie; for, Younger Years might boast
Scarce Twenty eight, joined Handsome Person too;
Then Widower; much Soldier's Way could Do;
Stout, Valiant Heart, Proud, Haughtiest tho beside;
Most Cruel where Displeased, that Harmful Bride:
Seemed the Hand of Fate, if Power withal combined:
Brave Courtier's Garb, extremely Lustful Mind.
Entering large Hall, Lieutenant mounts Above,
Informed the Lord what from his Brother's Love
Choice Token brought; that Box of Gems presented,
Bright-shining Each; Worth ra^ely tho augmented
Joined the Owner's Self, most Gallant Female Prize;
Those Jewels seemed Dark Foyls unto her Eyes;
For Beauty might her Sexes Queen appear;
Scarce Twenty's Age. Two Men Seized also there;
One brave Young Man, was called at first her Brother,
Still Parted so agreed, their Uncle the Other:
She Couched beneath, Those Lodged just over her Head,
Disguised Great Persons seemed, roused then from Bed,
Tho when conjoined his Brother Slain at last,
Cloud seized his Brow, bad Damp his Thoughts o'recast:
Killed by her Brother, told, Seven more laid Dead,
( Self wounded tho) by Stayrs Advantaged,
On Top thereof: Six Slain at the Other End
By the Uncle too; did all below Attend.
BORGANES swelled, that Captain since did prove
His only Brother, whose observant Love,
Great V'olour joined did Highly esteem, Advance;
Designed for Heir: Then Thoughts on the Lady glance;
Pondered her Brother 'twas; strong Combat bred
Lust, wrathful Flame, till the Amorous Conquered:
Had Nephew too (seemed Hopeful little Boy)
For Settling more, might his Estate enjoy.
Prisoners mean time still kept Asunder were,
Sad Views although; by Looks might Parley there.
Clermanthe shown to Borganes.
CLERMANTHE then was brought to the Dining Room,
Cheeks close, Obscured, since that Captived Doom;
BORGANES there; Who rose with Formal Grace,
Advance nigh, wished Her Unveil the Face;
Which was Performed: her Beauties from that Cloud
Strait Breaking forth like Morning fair from Shroud
Of darkest Night; tho Sweeter Beams beheld,
Far daintier Blush BORGANES thought, excelled:
Saluted Her: Such Lovely Form there shown
In Sorrow's Dress, what Joy'd! Triumphant grown!
Nor Singular that Lord's Conceit, the Rest
Much Wondered too: These Words He joined, expressed.
Bright Nymph, Discharge Sad Thoughts, to Beauty's Sky
Lend pleasing Rays again; since shall Descry
Frank Lord within these Gentle Walls, and there
Like Governness more than Captived appear;
Fair Vsuge prove like your Fair Self from us:
Wanting for Naught. CLERMANTHE answered thus.
If found such Noble Mind, so free from Blot,
Since born to Thrall, I should Embrace my Lot;
And thank the Gods by whom 'Twas Ordained
Your Prisoner first: Cheeks there with Blush distained;
Conjoyns withal; I hope that Nobleness
Performed to Me, will more it Self express
Toward my Brother, Uncle now Captived;
Those Friendly Used more Cheered my Heart, revived.
Both Lords apart confined
To That given Gentler Nod, He strait Withdrew
To Lobby, Place which the Hall beneath did View;
Both Lords beheld; Who showed their Due Regard,
Yet like themselves; Low Baser Ways debarred:
Gave Order there, they should their Arms unbind,
Keep them within Two several Rooms Confined;
Their Hurts well Dressed. Had Stout, convenient Man,
Who Jailer proved to All, close Guardian;
Wore Poyniard Sword; Armed Under Groom attended;
Two Locks each Door with Iron Bar defended:
Young Lady near, the Lord's Half- Sister called.
Pitty'd that time both Wounded so, Enthralled;
ORSAMNES most, Brave Person, gallant Spirit.
Worth in her Self pleased with Another Merit:
Free Motion made to searth his Wounds (Admired
For Female Skill) since Haste that Task required,
Bound up, no more: That Elder might be Dressed
By his own Man. Conjoined there to the rest
'Twould kindly took by the Lady prove, sad Cloud
Darkning her Thoughts. BORGANES strait Allowed.
Both liked their Ease thus far, some comfort thence,
Tho feared, prepared for Harmful Consequence.
BORGANES then Returned to the Dining Room,
CLERMANTHE where did Wait, to Fairest whom
Showed new Respect; speaking to the Lady by
Fore mentioned, MELVORNA called (whose Eye
Seemed Handsome Glass to the gentle Soul, as 'twere)
Joined Matron grave, which the Household ordered there;
She was by the First, two Pages going before
Burned choice Perfumes, Clermanthe's Lodging Room.
conveyed on self-same Floor
To Gallant Room, most bravely furnished;
Prime Satin, Flowr'd; Couch, Chairs, Stools, Table, Bed
Suiting to the Walls; rich Lace, Purl-fringe beheld:
Showed Bridal pomp, tho chiefly Bed excelled.
For Curtains Buttons, Loops behind, of the Side,
Silver Plate-flow'r Long broad quite down Descried
Inamell'd part; on Top at every End
Four stately Plumes did Gorgeous Sprigs extend.
From midst of the Roof, hung partly down below,
Pure, Branched Crystal Candlestick does show.
Bright Glass there was, whose Ebon-frame, Inlay'd
With Ivory, and Gold, prime work Displayed.
Silver Flow'r-Pots, in to the Windows Ranged there,
Most finely wrought did Flow'r'd by Art appear.
Choice Pictures, small Adorned the Room, but those
Of the Amorous kind, did Want^nness disclose:
Fair Venus by Adonis Arm's embraced;
Her Turtles near, his Hunting Dogs there placed,
Boar-spear withal; aloft Young Cupid hovered,
Whose burning Torch lascivious Flame discovered.
Cinthia next (Brow Moon did wear) upon
Green Latmus Mount, clasping ENDIMION;
Her Charet by; his Flocks beneath were spread;
Those truly Kissed, whilst The other Gazed or fed.
The Third prime Chimney-piece, great Jove descending.
Whilst Danae her beauteous Form extending
On gallant Couch; with Wonder seemed behold
The enamored God through Falling Shower of Gold:
Blush joined there; bright Looks from Her descried;
Tho Bashful She, He Is Drawn most Wanton eyed.
Two Windows showed Broad-Paved Court for State,
Two Gardens small (but Curious, delicate)
On the other side; choice Flowers, green Arbours there;
The whole might Compound of Rarities appear:
Which Prospect, Room (tho both for kind Excelled)
She sadly Viewed with careless Glance Compelled.
MELVORNA prayed in Courteous Terms, Advised
That She would Clear her Braest, too much surpised
With Damping Thoughts; nor Poison that Estate
Through jealous Fears as strange, unfortunate.
CLERMANTHE joined; That She should frame that Hour,
Conform her Self what was within her Power
To this Great Change; not bred nor used however
To foreign Thrall* MELVORNA answered there;
She hoped her Treatment Fair would prove, and Free,
Not Pris'ner-like, tho such did seem to be.
Short Talk o're-past, that Matron entered then, Clermanthe's Banquet.

Both Pages too (spruce, Flaunting Garb* again:
The Cup^ board strait with Glasses Chrystalline,
Much Plate adorned, (some things begem'd) choice Wine:
With sprinkled Flowers the Table-cloth o're-spread,
Neat, curious Banquet (last) replenished,
Both Wet and Dry; with Gallant Voyders graced;
From that small Room conjoined, where ready placed:
Some fine, Raw Fruits, in Season, Ripe that time;
May's Week o'repast, more Warm that Grecian Clime.
MELVORNA Prayed (as from the Lord desired)
Through longer Fast, bad Journey Faint, O're-tir'd,
CLERMANTHE with that Hasty Bait dispense
Till Supper 's Hour; made good Amends from thence
Entreats withal her Absence to excuse,
Since time about her Brother 's Wounds should use,
His Surgeon then. CLERMANTHE Thanks repaid;
Much Honored by such Noble Hands ( She said)
Her Brother seemed MELVORNA'S. Answer tho,
Slight, Small they were, Sh' had else not ventured so.
She being gone, That Matron mentioned,
To please her Master's Mood well Trained and Bred,
CLERMANTHE informed (since ordered to Attend)
She might observe thus far how Noble Friend
His Lordship proved, what high Regard, esteem;
That Chamber there was Furnished, dressed by him
For's Second Self, beloved Wife's delight.
With Solemn Glance conjoined CLERMANTHE bright,
Meaner her Turn would serve: The Other when,
She was thought Worthy of That: replied again.
CLERMATHE prayed her to Sit down, Combined
As Partner so. She said, She was designed
To Wait on Her. Thus, down the Lady sat;
More Comfort far (since thought unpleasing State)
ORSAMNES Wounds but small, well Treated there,
THERSANDER both Spirits refreshed whatever:
Paid Natur's Due, could Stomach more invite,
Since Qualms of Mind breed Qualms in the Appetite.
That well performed, She prayed her Thanks might be
Returned to the Lord for's great Formality,
Joined Bounteous Part; that Much might prove laid by
Next Time, Desired, since ill does Suit, comply
With Sadder Thoughts: One Dish for Meal, no more
Would please Her Best; one Waiter for large store:
And that for Dressing Point, Undressing too,
She might be her own Maid, no more ado.
Being Asked, What Meat they should for Night provide?
One Dish (Eight the Hour) what Wholesome thought replied.
Till then (entreats) She may be left Alone,
Reserved way; her Senses Drowsy grown.
( Night's watchfulness, long Journey's Task endured)
Want Sleep's repose. By the Matron was assured
None should disturb her Slumbering Rest, Inthrall
More Private Thoughts; next Day Himself designed
For Visit there. To whom in Grateful kind
CLERMANTHE sent her Thanks for that Regard
Her Brother found, no Needful Ease debarred,
And Uncle both; same Favor hoped for still.
The Matron joined; It was his Lordship's Will,
Prepared for Them, their Wounds when only Dressed;
Were Severed tho. Things carried out again,
Both parted thus; Clermanthe her Self confined.
She Spied the Armed Guardian:
Two Doors were Locked on Her, besides her Own
Lobby's next That, Secured as left Alone.
There sad, Her trouble.
Alas! She breathed, since saw her Thrall;
True Prisoner found, tho Handsome Jayl withal
Eyes fixed of the Floor: nor was that the only Grief,
Her Freedom lost, ORSAMNES thought the Chief.
Both parted too: when Sorrow's mournful Cloud
Did break in Tears, those Crystal Drops allowed
To ease her Heart; conjoined large Sighs expense
For Stormy Blast, conceived Allay from thence
Close folded Arms, as tho she would restrain
Hope's Cordial there, in the Gentle Breast detain:
Then from the Ground cast up to Heaven her Eyes;
Submission and Imploring both descries.
More leave to Range, She glanced with smaller Start
On the Pictures there, since seemed portray'd in part
Her Gallant Lord; was pleased to think anon
ADONIS He, then choice ENDIMION;
Prime, lovely Forms, tho mean She thought to The Other,
In whom was Lost more than Pretended Brother:
To the Windows next she trod which viewed the Court,
Three sides thereof, perchance in Real sort
Good Fortune might his Person choice present,
From Window seen; but no such Ornament,
Brave, Manly Object found, her Eyes deluded
Long waiting time; whence not Lodged there Concluded;
Or else same kind Conceit Himself would move
To look for Her; strong Sympathizing prove:
Then Sighs at last) She draws his Picture there
By Fancy's Art, Life, Soul conjoined, as'twere.
Till from dead Walls, short Pleasing Dream expired,
To her own Breast, chief Picture- Case, retired.
Told afterward, He lodged in backward-room,
THERSANDER both, thought Either's mournful Tomb.
MELVORNA fair, ORSAMNES Visiting, Melvorna the Lord's Sister.

Informed first (which Cordial did bring)
His Sister's well, was kindly Treated there;
As He himself should for her sake appear;
Although had Slain (disast'rous hour) last Night
BORGANES only Brother in the Fight,
And Heir's withal by the Father's side. Displeased
To hear that Point (the Lady tho Appeased)
ORSAMNES joined, He sorry was; that Chance
Did prove defensive way. With Sober glance
She told him then, Her self for Surgeon's Part
Was by the Lord employed, which curious Art
She had much Used, if he dared Venture on
Her Female skill. Who answered thereupon,
With prime Respect; Thought needless that Demand,
Since Honor 't was Allowed so Fair a Hand,
And noble both. His Hurts unbound, Displayed,
Two Scratches proved, the Third but Slight (she said)
On the Shoulder's Top; inflamed however and Swelled
Through Riding Motion long, that Act compelled,
She dressed Orsamnes Wounds.
Choice Instruments, to Task she strait did fall,
Shown curious Eye, nice, Daintiest Touch withal; (Disdained
Cleans'd, Searched, Asswag'd; tho Cheeks more Red
Skin seen so white, to Handle too constrained;
Soft-panting Heart: scarce knows what Fonder Guest
Might steal that way into her Virgin- Breast.
Each Crimson Drop lost Ruby did Conceive;
Thus, work performed, She takes her Sober leave.
E're long (conjoined) All perfect well should be:
ORSAMNES thanked her Gentle Charity.
For's Uncles Wounds House- Surgeon did provide
(Slight, smaller ones) at first was satisfied.
Refreshment- Bait o're-past, his Chamber- Door
Was Locked and Barred by the Guardian, as before
Sad, jealous Fears of stormy Cloud behind
Tho Calmer Pause did Cheer his Princely Mind.
Sweet the Intervals where Agues reign appear;
Stout Heart's conformed to the present Change whatever:
And partly through Night's Combat- work o're-tir'd,
Day's longer March; grown Drowsy, Rest required;
He laid him down, to Cheer both Heart and Sense,
On friendly Bed, through Slumber's Influence,
(Like second Meal) Disposed seemed to be
Sleep's Prisoner too, more Choice Captivity;
Whose grateful Bonds his Powers did seize, surprise;
Good Plasters often to Care, much Cordiallize.
THERSANDER was Dressed there mean time by One
Which served the Lord, First Hurt small Glance alone;
The next not Large: was Pleased when heard them Tell,
ORSAMNES and CLERMANTHE used well:
Good Bait received; same Toylsom Task endured
Both Night and Day ( locked up no less secured)
Found equal Cause to ly down on the Bed,
With slumber's Balm refreshed his Drowsy Head.
BORGANES too thought 't was best Course to make
That time Retreat (since Grief for's Brother's sake
Distempered grown) for Calmer mind's composing;
Lest surly Glance, too boisterous words disclosing,
Might strangely Damp the Lady's Breast, o'er-cloud:
Same cheerful Pause to her own Self allowed,
For body, Mind; beholding so next Day,
More beauteous View; as clearer Beams display
When Fogs withdrawn: both Looks and Thoughts more Free;
Nice Female Sex much ruled by Fantasy.
Strong, Amorous Mood his Wrath did balance well,
And served, Sluce-like, when that began to Swell.
The Lady, Clermanthe's wary Mind.
last, on Simpathizing Ground
With both those Lords (their sad Copartner found)
Sought Slumbers ease, Repose for Body, Mind;
When well refreshed, for the Evening-Task designed
(E're Supper came to Pause and Contemplate,
What Carriage fit for her Enthralled Estate.
And that she might clear Fancy's Sky the more
From Clouded Thoughts, upon that Slumbr'ing Score,
Which hinder Sleep, against Reason often Rebel:
Or break it through Disturbing Dreams expel:
She left her mind to Range in part, surveyed
That Gaudy Room, those Beauties there displayed.
Prime Garden then below, with curious Dress,
Where Nature's self did Bride-like Flaunt express.
Whose smaller Draught might even in the Windows there,
Fine Silver Pots with daintiest Flower's, appear.
Couched, last, on Bed, she closed her Radiant Eyes,
(Whilst Crimson Cheeks remained, like Western Skies,
Sun new withdrawn) as Courted Slumbers so,
Which strait Embraced that Fairest Bedfellow.
Spent near Three pleasing Hours, Awaking then,
Her Eyes restored to the World their Beams again.
Being well refreshed, as Case did Urge, importune,
She Mused upon this present Change of Fortune;
Since Slave become; though nobly used thus far,
How least might cause Offense, breed Fatal Jar
Touching her Self; ORSAMNES (next) Cap^iv'd,
THERSANDER (last) showed for her Sake Repriv'd:
Chief Captain slain in the Fight, by them perchance;
What Words to use, what Action, Countenance.
Those, She resolved, should Mild and Gentle be,
Shown great Regard (joined Chaste) Conformity:
All in the Lord's Power: Lustful as Haughty Mind
In the outward Looks appeared and walk combined.
Whilst pondered thus, bad Mournful show ensued,
Which might have Damped her Gentle Heart, if Viewed:
Tall Soldier 'twas, found Mutineer, tho Slight;
By the Lord's own Voice condemned to Death last Night,
Pinnon'd, naked Wast, to backward- Court was led,
Where kneeling down, Lopt off his Martial Head
By nimble blade; That Kissed the Dusty Ground,
The whole Body followed strait, late one Compound,
Now sad Divorce; Blood streamed for Tears, as 'twere
Such High command BORGANES challenged there.
Near the Hour of eight (for Supper meant) she heard
That Lobbies Door unlocked by the Armed Guard; Clermanthe's fair usage.

Next opened was her own, MELVORNA when
Entered the Room; grave Matron for the Rear;
Spruce, single Page with Voyders did Appear;
Choice Linen, Glasses brought, Perfumes and Wine;
Much Gorgeous Plate she did before Decline.
MELVORNA there (salute performed) expressed,
She hoped CLERMANTHE had well composed by Rest
Disordered Frame. What served (she said) contented.
MELVORNA then her box of Gems presented
As from the Lord; these Words; That he Conceived
They best her self became, therefore bereaved,
So thus restored all. She strait repaid
Large solemn Thanks; tho was not used (she said)
To handling Gifts, yet, since 'twas lately her own
Nor charge to him (less nice through Scruple Grown)
She should receive the same. MELBORNA then,
Her Brother's Wounds were Dressed; informed again;
That worst but small. Kind thanks from grateful Heart
Returned were, for that great Honor's Part.
Goodness conjoined. Naught jealous of her Lord:
MELVORNA tho might Beauties Style afford.
Cloth being spread, her Supper came; 'twas Neat;
Showed curious Look, as choice and dainty Meat:
Three Dishes brought, Preserves for Garnish laid:
Page strait withdrawn, that Matron only stayed.
MELVORNA there informed, Her brother chose
This short Repast Complyance-way to Close
With her Desire; Plate, Servitors prevented.
CLERMANTHE joins: One Dish had her Contented
But for MELVORNA'S worthy Company
If would take part. Who did like Guest Agree.
Thus down they Sat MELVORNA'S Handsome way,
Civil Regard, Discourse conjoined that Day
Much Pleasing proved; so that CMERMANTHE well
Could for Companion Choose, Thought, She Would excel,
IN the close, Arcadian Grange, before Designed,
But here sad Fears did Damp Conversing Mind:
Yet framed her Self. Concluded their Repast,
MELVORNA said (with Glance to the Window cast)
She could not well, that later Hour, invite
To the Garden- walks, CLERMANTHE joined, The Sight,
Prospect thereof Contented her as then,
Till more Reposed. MELVORNA said again;
If rang small Silver Bell, Disposed whene're
For Walking was, Door should stand Open there.
And None disturb that time her privacy
More than She pleased. Thanks were returned as free.
Done short Discourse, MELVORNA Fears expressed,
That She should prove Injurious to her Rest,
Then past Nine's Hour (that Month tho fair Twilight
Beheld abroad) wished strait to Her Goodnight.
That Matron too, CLERMANTHE since Desired
To Dress her Self, Undress, took Leave, Retired.
Half-hour dissolved, She laid her down in Bed
Like Beautie's Mine, with Silken Quilt o'respread; Clermanthe left alone.

Flowr'd Satin Curtain's drawn; tho Sad the Heart,
Sense Drowsy grown, to slumber's Nightly part
Conformed proved: Sleep soon did bathe her Eyes,
Till Seav'n next Morn in Gentle Bands surprise.
Then Spirits cheered, She falls in sobrest fashion
To the former Work, Behaviour's contemplation:
Since, Dinner past, encounter should (as 'twere)
BORGANES Strength; first Single Combat there.
Well slept the Lord, tho early Wakers be,
For Thoughtfulness did Partners prove, Agree.
She heard by Nine opened that Lobby- Door,
Then from that Place, on brave Good-morrow's Score,
Prime Music sounds, Good morrow.
whose sweetly flowing Stream
Spread through the Air, in Consort joined Supreme
For the Art-full Hands; Voices succeeded there,
Which last by Nature's Organs framed appear,
Are breathed from Life, so the Instruments excelled,
Their Song it self most Amorously Swelled
Through Love-conceits, to raise more fond Desire;
Warm colder Heart, Inflame where Former Fire:
She Sighed at all, bad End Presaged and feared,
Those Courtly Forms so High, o're-strain'd appeared.
Small Garden- Birds, at last, conjoined too,
Showed Chanting round what Native Power could Do.
She Dined at Twelve, Two Dishes brought, no more.
That Matron left for Waiters, as before:
Eat pretty well, tho Qualm'd to think upon
Bad Second Course which should Succeed anon,
BORGANES there; All Voyded, carried thence,
She walked about, shown Beauteous Excellence:
Near the Hour of Two, her Musing's broke by Sound
Of Cornets heard from that small Garden-ground;
Such proved their Place besides (Conjoined Those)
Three Echoes there did Dandle back the Close
Of every Strain, by Turns, in perfect way;
Retorted so like Nature's wanton Play,
Or sportive Dance; as Vaults and Walls thereby
Would speak their Joy, CLERMANTHE Lodged so nigh.
That Prologue past, BORGANES entered there,
Whose choicest Rube did Shining, Brave appear,
Flowers Silver, Gold; Pearl-buttons, large beheld;
Neck, Sleeves at the hand with Rows of Gems excelled;
Silk underneath: Same Buskins, garnished
Their Tops with Rubies, Pearl: on Gallant Head
Great, Flaunting Plume; like Princely Brides-Groom dressed:
Young, hadsome Person too conjoined to the rest.
His Looks and Walk Proud, Amorous Mode displayed;
Given Kiss-Salute (Both sitting down) He said,
Borganes courting Clermanthe.
Bright, Lovely Guest, having Convenient Pause
Afforded you for calm Retreat, because
Long Journey, Watch endured; to bar Complaint;
'Twas now Resolved, that Sober Visitant
I might appear: those Friendly Thoughts disclose
Lodged in my Breast. When Blush her Cheek o'reflows
She Thanks retun'd for's Lordship's Nobler way,
Kindness Vouchsafed; those Gems received last Day;
Things Lost in her Account. Grasped thereupon
Her whitest Hand, BORGANES thus went on:
Those mentioned Toys forego, Great Troop behind,
Like Harbingers, then Cheer perplexed Mind;
False Prisoners Name can nothing Wrong, disgrace,
Where Truly Free; Commandress of this Place:
I shall be Yours my Self conjoined beside,
No Vulgar Gift. CLERMANTHE again replied:
Those Words, my Lord, do Clouded, Dark appear,
Hold Double Sense, but the Aim, Design whatever;
Methinks You should not Soil your Greatness, State,
Nor Judgment Brand so far, to take for Mate
Such Homely Choice, Conjoined Low Degree;
Mean Form and Birth. He Answered earnestly:
Love does not Prize grand Titles, Names alone,
Fond Shadows the are; tho Noble Branch (unknown)
Your Self conceived; for Person fair Prevent,
In my Esteem, all Doubtful Argument:
And tho I cannot Woo You as a Spouse,
Since choicest Wife Deceased, made Solemn Vows
Against that Estate (but Thraldom thought indeed,
Unpleasing Bands) this may in the Room Succeed;
As Mistress I shall Court, Embrace You so:
Be Constant, last. CLERMANTHE, Whose Blood did show
Strange, Ebs and Tides for the Crimson Stream, as then,
His Wanton Aim unveiled, conjoyns again:
Since so, my Lord, that You by Vows are bound
Against a Wife, I shall not on that Ground
Seek those to Break; unworthy Maid however
So high Regard; but yet, methinks, to bear
Your Mistress-Name You should Disdain, despise;
Unchaste withal. The Lord these Words replies:
Tho, Beauteous Nymph, found Prisoner seized by War,
I may Dispose of all You have, and are;
Appoint for Bed; yet such my Gentle Mind
Your own Good parts with Handsome Form combined,
That I shall Court your Grant e're Joy's Fruition;
Show Servant-like. And for the Unchaste condition
You talked of, why should the Beasts more free
(Man 's Drudges born) that Pleasure take than We;
Leave those Fond Dreams, Conceits as far from True;
In the Act of Love like Food pay Nature's Due.
CLERMANTHE saw the Wind began to Rise,
More Blustering grown; BORGANES Rolled his Eyes;
Thus, Drooping Feared sad, Stormy Cloud from thence;
Best Sayls Withdrawn, used Anchor's Calm defense,
Mild, humble Way: her Person his Slave withal:
These words returned: my Lord, first place I shall
This Favor beg, that You would Gently please
To Pause some time, for Cure of Love 's Disease;
Try whether Passion 's Force may Conquered show
By Reason 's Power, good Ransom taken so.
'Twere Simple Act (said He) that Task to prove,
When srongest Reason for it, as vain to move
For Ransom, Price; That Person 's Valued more,
Who Is worthy thought these Arms. I pray implore,
CLERMANTHE joined, large Time may be Allowed
To calm my Heart, which Sadness does o're-cloud,
Much Damped through Fortune 's Change, whose Qualm disgraces
Both Body, Mind, unfit for Love 's embraces.
Thus, not Denied, that Pause did Reason seem,
Sad Thoughts Weak Temper joined; the Lord's esteem
Raised so likewise, Advanced; since less Approved
That Easy Girl, should fall when first was Moved
Into his Arm's: observed (next) a Maid
Her Self she called, more Nice that Way, o're-sway'd:
Some Time might be Allowed upon that Score;
'Twould Heighten (last) Love's choice Delights the more.
Then talked at Large; first place his Travels told,
What Dangers there; Court-like did next unfold,
Gand Honor's heap; lastly his Commanding Power,
High Government, Provincial Lord that hour:
In Each whereof showed Proud, vainglorious Breast,
Short Chronicle of his own Praise expressed.
Which changed Discourse had Pleased CLERMANTHE well;
But after each Kind, her Form like Beauteous Spell
So Charmed his Fancy through the Gazing Sense,
He could not hold from Wanton Violence:
Conceived He had Rare Temperance descried,
That Longer Way of Argument beside.
Reached forth to Kiss; and tho She often Withdraw,
Nice, Modest Look's conjoined to Check, o're-aw;
Some Words withal; Nay, Pray, my Lord, excuse:
Nothing would Serve, BORGANES still Pursues
Her Lips till Seized. Those Dainties must assuage;
Like Baits should prove for every Talking Stage
His Tongue o're-pass'd; Firm-Seal'd each Kissing Close,
Done often too: Love (said) poclaim'd by Those.
Strong Thoughts withal 't would Warm, prepare her Heart:
Who durst not Chide, nor Act the Scouling Part,
ORSAMN lest, THERSANDER Tortured be:
'Twas well if saved that Way her Chastity.
BORGANES (last) conjoined, their Garden-door
Should Open stand when Rung that Bell (before
By the Sister named) or strait, if She desired;
With Proud Half-smile, slow, Stately Walk retired.
Clermanthe walks in the Garden.
CLERMANTHE then traced round, Distempered Way,
Her Chamber there for Troubled Mind's Allay,
Such the endless Kissing Task; well pleased tho
That Rack withdrawn; did Cooler also grow.
After some Pause, Conceit their Garden-Air
With change of Place, might ease in Pensive Care,
She rung that Bell; which Signal given alone,
Smaller Backdoor (by the Hangings hid, unknown)
Was strait Unlocked: That Matron, there Descried
Asked, Would she Walk? CLERMANTHE fair replied;
She meant some time inth' Garden-walks to spend
If Private so: None should disturb, Offend,
The Matron said; Her Self would Wait above
Till She returned; The Lord's Arch- Bawd did prove.
Down smaller Stairs to the Garden-ground She passed,
Pleased, Kissed there by Gentle Gales (at last)
Stead of that Lord; Tormented more than Cloyed
Those Warm Lascivious Bouts, now Pause enjoyed.
'Twas Comfort too, First Clash so well opposed,
Ground laid for More; good Virgin-Fence disclosed.
She softly Traced, Grief's Solemn Thoughts in part
That time Discharged, for more Contented Heart;
Sad Spirits cheered: So on Becalmed Shore
Weak Barks repaired rough Storms confront the more.
She viewed their Flowers, May's fragrant Beauties showing,
Green, dainty Knots, and Walks; small glance bestowing;
Prime carved Statues there for Art excelled,
Wire-closed Room with choicest Birds beheld,
Which seemed to chaunt her Welcome often; fair She
Their Fellow- Prisoner, joined Captivity.
Walking enough, Sigh breathed, Clermanthe's trouble.
She made Retreat
To Arbor near, with Roses dressed complete.
Bad Sighing Cause, whose stranger Fortune showed
Like gilded Cup, with Poisonous Draught o're-flow'd,
There Sitting down, She Thought-full pondered then
How best to Ward the Lord's Assaults again.
Ransom was named, proved Scorned tho, despised;
Crossed Lust- Design; and were that valued, pris'd,
How loathed to Move, while kept that Murtheress,
The Duke her Father in such Great Distress:
'Twas Prince (she thought) ORONTES should that Score
Discharge for Both, its Freedom did restore:
But Ransom passed for Dream; their Fortunes thus
Showed Dark, Confused, and Highly dangerous.
Nor durst She term her Self ORSAMNES Wife,
Fond, useless Plea, lest soon Destroyed his Life.
BORGANES Words, that He would Visit so
Each other Day; did cheerful Pause bestow.
Thus, Hope preserved; near Seven, Supper's hour,
She mounts the Stairs withdrawn from the Garden-bow'r.
The Matron tempts Clermantis.
That Matron, e're did back return, made bold
(Well practiced Part) her Thoughts thus to unfold.
CLERMANTHE informed, How Happy She might prove,
If would Comply with the Earl BORGANES Love;
So Princely, Great, for Person, Parts admired:
And tho might well Constrain what He desired,
Did Court her Grant, esteemed as choicest treasure;
Besides Himself, much Rare conjoined Pleasure:
That Garden's use, brave Gallery at hand;
Might range the House, Horse, Charet both command
To take the Air, in daintiest Park below;
Next, Country-grounds; Her Self the Attendant go,
His Sister called, when pleased; should Gorgeous shine,
Prove Wife indeed, tho Name of Concubine.
Her Brother, last, tho Eight had Slain, left Dead
Brother to the Lord (till then not mentioned)
And Uncle (tho Six more) enlarged, Free:
BORGANES would Each Point confirm, agree.
CLERMANTHE saw her Bawd-like way, and Trade,
Proved Armed withal; short, Gentle Answer made,
As done to the Lord Himself; no Granting One,
Nor lest Denied; Excuse, Demurs alone.
When Supper came, Two D^shes brought, no more,
But dainty Food; the Rest as Night before:
That ended, past, lest farther Talking cause,
Wished Privacy, the Matron strait with-draws.
ORSAMNES Room, THERSANDER'S both did stand
Delightful Way, remoter Fields command;
Large Nature's Draught, fine, Pleasant Prospect there;
Tho Here Is by Art more Curious Ground appear.
From that Rock's height viewed Gallant Park below,
Where They could see BORGANES hunt the Do,
And lofty crested Buck; Prime part of all
Their Silvan Chase, to the Dying Funeral:
Heard Horns and Hounds, tho scarce their Sense at leisure;
Too Solemn Thoughts for such Discordant Pleasure.
BORGANES still each other Day renewed
Fond Visits there, Borganes way of visits.
Surrender to conclude
OF the Beauteous Fort; his Rampant Thoughts o're-aw'd,
And Pride extreme (joined Hunting Games abroad)
With utmost Art, that in the End he Might
Strong Fancy please, through Height'ned Love's delight;
Free closing Grant for mutual embraces,
Or all Pretenses Barred, such Lurking places.
Never tortured so by Self-restraint before;
At Second Time conjoined of the Wanton Score,
For Powerful Grounds, what Matron did express,
Touching her self; those Grand Advantages,
Prerogatives (thought Mistress-like) should be
By Him performed; her Uncle, Brother Free.
His Manner was, given first in Stately kind
Long Kiss-Salute, to Ask, next place combined,
If She enjoyed yet Settled Thoughts, composed:
Her Answers Smooth, still Fair Regard disclosed.
Hard Task conceived so soon (She then expressed)
For that great Change to frame her Virgin- breast:
Still hopes withal, his Goodness might o're-sway
That Fancies Power. Who Said, No Charm, Delay
Could Alter ought, nor Ransom taken be,
The Provinces, the Crown of Arcadie.
So changed Discourse, conjoined oft-times, however,
That Amorous Charge those Kiss-encounters there,
Volley, Shot-like, as meant to take to Storm
The whole Garrison (to which She must Conform,
Sad, qualmish Heart) as would her Lips devour;
And leave none for ORSAMNES Self that Hour.
Those Fruit-repasts, since longer Pause, delayed,
Should Fancy's Appetite conten (He said)
Till the only Food, that Meat Complete of Love.
Thus, forced to bear (since Vain Excuses prove)
The Offensive Load; weighed her Enthralled estate,
Proud Temper, Harsh with which Engaged; sad Fate!
On her Wise Cards, well Acted part till ended,
ORSAMNES and THERSANDRE'S Cause depended.
'Twere Pleasing View to have Beheld what fashion,
This sweet Young Lady, awed by Power, Lust, Passion,
Carried her Self; whose lips tho Suffered Rape,
Happy thus far the whole Body chanced to Escape:
Used Garden-walks sometimes for more Content
(Rung Silver Bell) tho Sad conceived the Event.
Tenth Day 'twas now, Borganes fifth Visit.
Fifth Visit also there,
Near Two in the Afternoon (same Hours they were)
BORGANES came; in Scarlet clothed, choice Dye,
With Gallant Lace and Gems adorned to the Eye;
New Feathers flaunt. Had Buck run down that Day
For's Morning- Sport, then changed for Wanton play;
Renewed his Female Chase, Domestic Man:
Given Kiss-salute Thrice over, He thus began:
Speak, Beauteous Nymph, your Thoughts Composed now*
Well calmed your Heart! Serener grown that Brow
For kind Returns in the Amorous Point of Love!
When Faintest glance, My Lord (said She) 'twould prove
More than Girl 's Task to rectify a Frame
So much Disjoynted late (no smaller Main)
By Fortune 's Hand; than let me Beg how-e're,
Your Noble Breast would yet Dispense, forbear.
The Lord replied; You charge, bright Nymph, thus long
Vnjuster way Great Fortune 's Act with Wrong,
Since brought to Love 's kind, Friendly Arms: what is more,
Grand Person, Style conjoined much Wealthy store.
I crave my Lord (said She) your Gentlest Gloss,
Upon my Words, since former Freedom 's loss,
Joined Chastity 's, Injurious may appear,
Tho Walls of Gold, Bed Gems imbroyder'd there
BORGANES when: Those Things of meaner Weight
Through Fancy 's Power to their Gigantick height
Nursed, Fostered are: cool Gales to Storms will rise,
Conceit them so. My Lord ( She then replies)
These Real prove: New strangeness of the Thrall,
Faint Heart conjoined both Plead for Me withal:
Ask longer Time: your Goodness claimed from thence:
Sighs whispered forth their Softer Eloquence.
BORGANES Lowr'd; yet seeing her Gentle Strain,
Sole fault Demurs, becalmed his Harsh Disdain;
Lust too in part; Ambitious Head to wear
Her Conquest- wreath, since Beauty's Star shined there,
Transcendent Form; thought Noble Rank beside:
Huge Fancy (last) what Joy, when Both complied,
In Love's Embrace was found, Concordant Fire;
Her Lips with all gave Food to please Desire.
Prime choice Preserves; no Churlish Taunts expressed;
His Person too (thought) Warmed the coldest Breast.
Well, Said the Lord, This Points prorogued a while
Some Business does Disturb to Day, beguile.
Breaks the Argument; Next Afternoon's again
For Parley ordained, your faint, weak Heart till then
Rouse, strengthen, Cheer. To the Kissing Task did fall,
Monstrous, extreme; Her Fine conjoined for All.
She dared not Lower, ORSAMNES lest from thence,
THERSANDER both fell Dreadful Consequence:
Was pleased this Day o're-past, and for to Morrow,
Some Hopeful ground did mitigate her Sorrow.
How Sad, perplexed this Lady's Fortune seemed!
Submisful Prayers Demurs best Help esteemed.
Next Afternoon BORGANES does appear, Borganes sixth Visit.

(Promise not broke) prime Gallant Garb did wear;
Choice Purple Velvet 'twas, imbroider'd high
With Silver, Gold; Buskins, brave Knots comply.
Saluting Her with Proud, advanced Crest,
Set down withal, his Language thus expressed.
Sad, Pensive Maid, I hope good Nature's Power,
Discretion too Conjoined, have well this Hour
Composed your Heart for kind Embrace and Free,
Our Love's return. Scarce brought to that Degree,
My Lord, She said, (with Sober Glance) as might
Fit Handmaid serve to Please your Appetite,
One farther Suit give leave to Name, which I
Presume your Pious Thoughts will not deny,
So sweetly Spoke that still She Charmed, Clermanthe's Suit to Borga.
o're-sway'd
His blustering Mood. What Suit? BORGANES said.
That first, my Lord, I may (She answered there)
Six days Devotion Keep, observed where-e're,
Some Yearly Rites to Palace Honor done;
Next Morning through chief, Royal Town begun,
( Whence was my Birth) performed by Womankind
Since Goddess- name of Wisdom to her Assigned.
Which sacred Part shows Custom on Record;
And I conceive. You would not wish, my Lord,
This Body given up then for Bed Unchaste;
Nor the Hallowed Even now that way Embraced.
BORGANES Scoul'd, Things should so crosly fall;
True Custom 't was, well known through Greece withal;
Next Morn began, each May proved celebrated,
Like Frost to buds his Rampant Joy abated:
Yet still disposed to Please, some Thoughts beside,
PALLAS provoked might spoil his Wanton Pride,
If such grand Deity; with short Demur
(Whilst She felt doubtful Qualm) thus Answered her:
Three Days I can, tho hardly, Grant, Allow.
When she Beseech'd, his Lordship would not now
Defraud the Goddess of her Ancient Right,
Nor her own Heart through Troubled Thoughts be night,
Which Clouded was before; increasing sorrow:
BORGANES Grants, tho Patience needs to Borrow.
Here Craving strait his Lordship's furtherance,
Command withal Things needful to advance,
That Matron came; by whom she was supplied
With Olive-boughts, Flower's, certain Herbs beside.
Those First made Wreath that Goddess to present
Her branch proclaimed; for sweetness, Ornament
The Flowers conjoined, and strewn in the Windows there:
The Herbs (last) Mysterious called: brought Spices were,
And choice Perfumes, which Evening, Morn did rise
In Fragrant Cloudsto Heaven for Sacrifice:
Still used sometimes their Garden-walks although,
That Branched Bower, more cheered refreshment so.
Prime Truce 'twas thought? how sweet those Pauses be
To troubled Hearts in strange, Extreme Degree,
None well can doubt; 'Twas like the Enlarged Breath
Same strangling Cord withdrawn, Reprieve from Death:
So Dreadful Rape conceived; faint Hope (but Glance)
That Heaven however might sent Deliverance.
MELVORNA fair (mean time) her Patient's Health
Through Cure regards, Melvorna's love to Orsamnes.
till her own Heart by stealth
Did Wound receive. Transpierced through the Eye,
And wanted now, Kind Balms to pour, Apply,
ORSAMNES Hand; from Pity grown to Love:
Which, whilst to Crush she thought, did mount above,
More sturdy far, like Tirant-Lord became;
So that Himself observed her changed Frame,
Both Looks and Words, tho scarce thought Love's Disaster;
Much less that Sore required from Him the Plaster.
Wary their Talk, two armed Guardians there,
Informed by Her his Sister's Health however;
Her Six days close, Reserved Devotion Granted;
Joy to ORSAMNES Heart, which sadly panted
Through Fears of Her; yet Maid conceived, unstained,
Free Pause that while: Told, the Uncle well remained:
Contented more: foul Plots, presaging mind,
Were against CLERMANTHE'S Chastity designed.
Tho midst her Solemn Task, far stranger Rites
Performed were, one of those Moonshine-Nights
Upon the Leads, just over against her side,
Where builded large Two stately Towers descried;
Her Roof adorned the Same, opposed to those;
The first of them did Pair of Stayrs enclose,
The Next, small Distance off, fine Lodging held,
Served One of the Men whose craft in Stars excelled.
Forth thence He came with swarthy Face and meager
Black, Garment worn, white Wand and Book, most eager
To making Circle falls; Strange Figures there.
E're long two Maids mounted the Top did bear
Wax- Taper Each, in Petticoats alone;
Who, Sign observed, walked to the First Door, thereon
White Smock did lay, Back placed aloft well spread;
Then marched Thrice round the Tower, whilst' the Other Read*
With Tapers first, next sprinkled Fountain Water
Last, Myrtle-leaves: (fair Venus-Branch) did scatter
Fond Joy, Vine: Then turned their Smock, the Breast
Upwards displayed; with Leaves that also Dressed:
He Verses spoke, when sudden Whirlwind blew,
And Gently Danced those wanton Leaves in view.
They both to the Circle walked, their Tapers bearing,
Glass shown to them by Turns, in which appearing
Their Husbands Form: Contrived Plot that Night
In The Longing Mood: till, bent for plainer Sight,
Both marched the Circle round, Bedewed withal,
Strewn that with Leaves; whilst Figures great and small
His Hand performed. Entering the same, Affrai'd.
The Chief was ranged (plump Lass, MELVORNA'S Maid)
Before his Breast; placed Landry-Wench behind;
He read from Book commanding Terms to Bind,
When from the Stairs well-formed Youth, in show
Gentle appeared, Hand laid of the Breast, and so
Bending to Her, walked strait behind last Tower:
Same Face she saw in the Glass that wondrous Hour.
Then set before that Landry-Maid, whilst she
Retreats behind; By him pronounced agree
Same Blustering Terms: when Carcass of a Man
(Strange Spouse) came stalking forth, his march began;
Nodding to Her withdraws, with plain Death's Head;
Showing the Grave should prove her Marriage Bed:
When she scarce startled seemed, since was before,
Contemning Fates, inclined to play the Whore:
Life better far concluded from the Heart.
All thoroughly weighed: Both taking leaves depart:
He walked to the Cabin-Tow'r, which Place did bring
From Stars above to downright Conjuring.
Those six Days past, which time the Noble Maid
Had often thought on best Resolves, displayed
Her strongest Hopes for choice Deliverance;
Some strange Event their Freedoms to advance;
But None appeared; till near o'r-whelmed Breast:
Since now to her last Plot constrained, Distressed,
Last Fencing Ward; sole Anchor thought to be,
So nigh to Wrack her Virgin-Chastity:
Borganes visiting Clermanthe.
BORGANES came, that former Wanton Hour;
Still gallant, Brave to boast his Wealth and Power;
Triumphant Looks withal, as Gained the Prize:
Such Caesar's used, when their victorious Eyes
Grand Spoils observed: Kiss given, salute he made
Short, sudden stop; her Gestures since displayed
Sad Gloominess; Like Damps from troubled Heart,
Disordered Mind: thus Blazed his own in part.
I Hope my calmness (Nymph) your late Devotion
Have hatched no sullen Brod, nor strange Commotion
Within your thoughts, since clouded Eyes and brow;
I came your full consent to Challenge now;
That Fortress there, Assaulted long, Resigned
To my Dispose. When Fainter Glance declined;
My Lord (she said) it proves my Grief, that I
Should still, tho more Engaged to Grant, Deny,
Your Patience beg: if Asked thereof the Ground,
This New Restraint, bad, secret Causes found
Within conjoined ( which long before have seized
Head, Body both) my Frame make so Diseased,
That, answ'ring your Desires, not Health alone
But Life's in Danger brought; and I am prone
To hope (my Lord) your Goodness may preserve,
And spare them Both. BORGANES might observe
Sighs breathed withal, her Looks more faintly range;
These words expressed; I wonder at this change,
Since your Plump Cheeks small Sickness breach do show,
Good color, Blood conjoined; Proclaimed tho
By you large Batteries: I deeply fear,
Proud, coy Disdain, some Froward mood however
This mock- Distemper wrought, these Qualms created;
Which First I scorn, the last most foully Hated.
When gentlest she; That proud disdain, my Lord,
Next froward Mood, I humbly may Disown:
For weakness, last, that Fault's no wonder known
In Flesh and Blood; nor Apt my Cheeks, beside,
To tell forth a Disease, tho change descried
Not small in Them: I therefore Beg, Implore
Your Lordships tender thoughts: Time may restore
This Body's strength, and Partner make more able
For your Desires, not now considerable.
So sweetly Breathed (True Causes to Complain,
Distempered Head) she charmed him partly again:
He doubtful stands, confused Thoughts, as 't were;
Proud Heart sometimes, lest seemed Neglected there,
Swelled Boiled aloft; then Lust's enraged Tide;
Till Reason warned, Perchance She not belied
Her Health that Hour: Strong Fancies (last) of the Pleasure
(Still constant Aim, reserved) in largest measure,
To the height Enjoyed o're-rul'd Him as before:
Orsamnes in a course of Physic.
Well (there He said) Six Days conjoined yet more
I shall allow, Tho forged Plot, pretended,
Your strength to Advance; prime Doctor's ai'd commended;
All Shifts thereby Debarred; his cautious Art
You Will scarce Deceive, tho Patience on my Part.
No Kiss-farewell, too Stout for Fondness grown,
Urged Sickly mood, like Storm withdraws o're-blown:
Such thought by Her: glad there CLERMANTHE seemed,
From Virgin-wrack six Days again redeemed.
Next Morn great Doctor came, with Gravest touch
Her Pulse did feel, Water observed as much;
Not far from Health, conceived; sad Fumes although
Clouding her Head, the whole Body 's Frame might show
Thence weakened more: the Stomach droop and fall,
Broke Nature's Rest through Watchful Thoughts withal.
(Those strength-Supports) which Ord'ring her own mind
Would Rectify. Gave choice Receipts, designed
To cleanse those Parts whence Harmful Vapors rise
Well cleared the Spleen: with Cordial's (last) Supplies:
Took in his View: wherefore She waved none,
Dissembler else concluded thereupon:
Tho with Distempered Head most strongly She
Wished sharp Disease, apparent Malady.
Was often too, by her Grand Doctor's care,
Prescribed to take below the Garden-Air;
Where having Walked, set down in the Branched Bower
Sighed, Mused often; Wept forth moist, Pearly Shower,
That Matron waits in the Chamber-Window still,
Made bold sometimes to use her Bawdy skill;
E're locked backdoor, at last; Informed her there,
Her Lord from View would those Six Days forbear,
Left wronged their Physick-work, her Health withal;
Whose Absence pleased like freedom found in Thrall.
His Doctor tho vile Agent thought to be,
Should strength restore till lost Virginity.
Sixth Afternoon the Doctor told, Declared
His Learned Thoughts, but little Changed, impaired
Her former strength, Convenient Temper then,
Tho troubled Mood might cause bad Fumes again,
Disorder more: BORGANES Heart did please,
Now willful Qualm must prove her main Disease.
Borganes with Clermanthe again.
Past the hour of Five (too long that Night's delay)
His Lordship came, did Looks severe display.
Surpised She was withal, far less Composed;
Last Thun'dring Storm (conceived) that hour disclosed.
Approaching near, same Clouded Eyes beheld,
Since troubled Heart (worse Anguish then Concealed)
Stout Pause he made; Plump Cheeks observed that time,
Fresh-colour'd too; choice Temper found, so Prime,
That Sorrow's hand had scarcely Plundered there,
Tho Lodged so long; small Spoils from thence could bear.
The Lord demands; If Sickly Cause still vexed her;
Or sullen Mood, Coy, froward Qualm perplexed her;
By the Doctor thought fit Partner for his Bed:
Strong frame restored. CLERMANTHE answered
Mild, gentle way ( of hope yet scarce bereaved,
Tho Languishing) That Doctor was deceived;
Nor could his Art with Wonders tho endu'd,
What she did Feel 'bove her own Sense conclude.
Cross Humor 'twas (BORGANES strait expressed)
That spoiled, Disturbed all from Wilful Breast,
If harmed before; well practiced Jugler's Trade
Prime Favor shown with Cheats at last Repaid.
Tyrant in Looks and Words, Imperious now
As known her Lord, put on Commanding Brow.
When Sighs with Tears conjoined, most Humble She
Begged Gentle Thoughts, Forbearance, Clemency.
Vain Prayers (he said) thy Brother has thus long
Escaped through Thee; Pampered and Healed, grown strong;
But now shall strait Discharge that Mortal Score,
By whom my Brother Slain, Sev'n Soldiers more.
(Tears wept She there, such May's soft Shower discloses,
Which Christalliz'd her Cheeks bright Lillies, Roses)
And for thy Self, Coy Girl, convenient way
Shall teach Obedience, what I am. Display.
My Lord (She joined; for my sad Brother's Crime
(If such there were) since proved that dangerous Time,
Defensive Act, it may for Pardon plead;
Ransom vouchsafed, like Crown adorn your Head.
And so for me your Gentle Beams I shall
Sill prostrate Crave. Such words, Tears joined withal,
As might produce in Savage Breast compassion;
These mournful flowed, those Sounded sweetest fashion.
Clermanthe threatened by Borganes.
Well (said the Lord,
Used Thundering Tongue) you're both enslaved Prize;
This Doom receive; if not next Noon, full ended,
E're, yiedling Grant strait brought, and Recommended
By the Matron 's Voice, that Youth shall breath his Last:
Thy Rape Succeeds. Which Dreadful Judgment past,
My Lord (She said) tho should then for more
Dispensed Leave, yet longer Time implore,
I hope your Mercy may be found for Either:
Pearl-tears conjoined: None (said the Lord) for Neither.
Vain proved Complaints, for now the Man was Right,
Himself become; Soft, gentle Thoughts take flight.
Most Proud he was and Lustful both, past change;
As Cruel too; Revengeful Flame not strange
Where crossed, Opposed: never like Regard had shown,
CLERMANTHE'S Charms that Power could vaunt alone.
Thus, shaking the Head; Go, sturdy Girl; He said;
Frown darted, last: left there the or'e-whelmed Maid.
CLERMANTHE'S now through Direful straight distressed,
Grief-Labyrinth, Sad Thoughts, confounded Breast:
What Course remained? on Rack her Sold appeared;
'Twas last Extreme, tho long Presaged and Feared.
If She Refuse, nor with his Lust Complied,
Next Afternoon the Lord ORSAMNES Died.
If she did Grant, 'twould Wound her own sad Heart
And Fame to Death; Self-Murtheress in part.
That Way conceived; most Loathsome to her Mind;
Here Is Love to Him, to Virtue there Designed.
The Last prevailed, O're-came, much strengthened tho
By Powerful Arguments: if Yielded so,
She likely lost ORSAMNES Love withal,
Tho saved his Life, were both discharged from Thrall;
Grand Forfeiture: still Friend perhaps Confessed:
This farther thought, his Noble-temper'd Breast
Pure love preserved, did Goodness so advance,
He might Disdain that Life enjoyed, perchance,
Which She should Purchase thus; o're-whelmed seem;
Such foul Deceit where Lodged so fair Esteem.
Nay, tho She Grant, the Tyrant's humor cloyed,
He might however through Vengeance Fall, destroyed
What credit, Faith in so unworthy Breast?
So vile thus far and Barbarous expressed?
What Is more, his Death might prove to Her unknown,
Whilst they Affirmed was Free, enlarged grown;
Dead the Uncle too, she kept as Concubine:
Both ways Abused, thought Living Death's Design
Thing Possible throught strange Event, beside
Both might Escape that Doom, tho She denied.
If, lastly, Killed her Self, ORSAMNES sure
Was strait Condemned, should Mortal stroke endure. Clermanthe's chaste resolve.

Thus, firm, Resolved She would not do that Base,
Unworthy Act; tho Dreadful found the Case:
Yet many a Sigh, sad Groan she breathed, however,
For that hard Vote since did Unkind appear.
Past the hour of Twelve Sleep charmed her drowsy Sense,
Took Pity of most virtuous excellence.
BORGANES now, that he was Gulled, deluded
By Female slights (strange Patience lost) Concluded;
Froward Neglect, not nice Conceit alone
Coy Virgin mood (if Cause thereof were know)
Which swelled far more Disdainful Wrath, grand Pride;
Since handsome Person thought by none out-vv'd;
Few could his Charge withstand, make long Demur,
Much less inthralled Slave, so counting Her;
Joined Greatness, Parts: Next Chief, Transendent Aim,
Compliance Crossed; unanswered wanton Flame.
Now Burned Revenge; and thus the Spleen began;
ORSAMNES Dies, his Brother's Slaughter-man.
Sev'n Soldiers more: Her Rape like Justice pleased,
If Granted not tho Death her Brother Seized.
That Hour's declared for his appointed Doom; Orsamnes death decreed.

Which being o're-heard, MELVORNA in the next Room
(Half- Sister called before, and well Inclined)
In whose soft Heart Love, Pity were Combined,
Deep Wound it gave; to the Chamber She retired,
Where against her Peace Tumultuous Thoughts conspired:
Strange Agony possessed, Tormenting Fit,
Knowing BORGANES Wrath would surely hit,
Judgment pronounced. And tho her tender Soul
That Act abhorred, yet could She naught Control,
Nor Change, persuade his sturdy Mood, however;
Conjoined withal, her Worldly Fortunes there
Sprung from that Brother's Hand, who Thwarting hated.
Thus, Doubtful Sad, whilst with her self Debated,
She only dared (bold Point conceived) by Lines
Informed ORSAMNES of those Black Designs.
Letter from MELVORNA.
Learn, Sir, from hence BORGANES Wrath, whose Ground
Does Mortal prove, lost Brother's Blood, Renowned;
Killed Seven more; tho Chief conjoined Cause
Your Sister's chaste Delay's if still withdraws,
Next Noon refuse, your Death makes Satisfaction,
Her Ravishment; no lingering stop, protraction;
Quick, Certain both: Ransoms contemned, Whatever:
And tho My Self too Feeble Maid appear
On your behalf, yet thought I to Inform;
That so you might Prevent that fatal Storm,
If possible, or else Prepare for Dying:
This Charity weak troubled Heart supplying.
Seven's Evening-Hour then come for Visit too,
(Next Morn the Last, when Cured, no more to do)
She thither walked, where Four did Armed stand;
Her Work performed, dropped slily into his Hand
That smaller Note, unmarked by the Rest;
Next Morn by Eight She should Conclude; Expressed:
So, taking leave (close Sigh conjoined) Retired:
ORSAMNES Heart found wondering Cause, Admired.
Door Locked again, Orsamnes trouble.
that Paper he Surveyed
Dismal Contents; Perplexed more, dismayed
For wronged CLERMANTHE than himself became;
Thus softly Breathed; Ah, Tyrant's cruel Flame!
Poor, harmless Dove! For, cast but smaller Glance,
These dreadful Points through stronger Circumstance
Did Truth appear; That Person's Worth beside;
Four, not unarmed, for Guard of late descried:
BORGANES Looks no less did Represent
First hour, He thought, at least her Ravishment.
Thus stands he still sometimes, Deep, musing fashion,
Then Walked about; Next, frowned through Indignation:
Why Ransom scorned but for such Vile Regard?
So strong the Room, Escape Night, Day debarred.
Nor Armed to break through those four Men did prove,
Pass the House and Gates, or Free in time his Love
Tho freed Himself; by the Lord soon Ravished;
Through Lustful spite; THERSANDER Murdered, Dead.
No Way conceived but stoutly to Endure:
Yet if next Morn by Eight, for Perfect Cure,
MELVORNA came, Something He Forged, designed,
Which might perchance Allay his Troubled Mind.
MELVORNA kept next morn her Hour for Close
OF the Surgeon's Work, when time ORSAMNES chose. Orsamnes suit to Borganes.

All done, to Entreat (o're-heard by the Guard as then)
That She to Beg would please, since wanted Pen,
Thatfavour from BORGANES Hand, that He
Might move his Sister strait, Adviser be
Strong Hopes to Bow that Way, beyond All other,
If might Converse; use frankness of a Brother.
Tho Strengthening more, Sad last Farewell intended.
She said, His Message should be Recommended.
Departing thus, called Witness Guardian,
The Suit preferred; whereto, then boisterous Man,
Somewhat employed, the Lord no Answer made
But Frowns alone; sharp Language so repaid.
CLERMANTHE too that Morning waked again
With same resolve, tho thought, Clermanthe's sadness.
She saw as then
ORSAMNES Funeral- Day; dark, Cloudy Skies
Like Sables worn; moist, sadly streaming Fyes;
Whilst those dropped gentle Showers as both would there
Conjoined in Solemn Obsequies appear.
Disturbed e're long She proved with Croaking Noise
From Ravens sent (strong Morning-Waits) whose Voice
Seemed Ominous, caused sad, Presaging Breast.
By Ten again, that time completely dressed,
Glancing through Window's glass of the Garden-side,
Stout Falcon seize with Tyrant-pow'r, descried,
Small harmless Dove, whose tender Flesh became
His choice Repast; She Wept, bewayl'd the same:
Bad Signs conceived; The First did seem to unfold
ORSAMNES Death, her Rape the Last foretold.
She Armed her Heart for All by meditation;
Grief's more Endured through serious Preparation.
Dinner being brought, she said, She would Eat none,
Nor Supper taste, for Private Reasons known:
No Granting sent by the Matron to her Lord,
Forbearance Craved; which swelled his Rage, abhorred.
Past the Hour of Three, whilst walked cross the Room
Still casting Glance (since feared ORSAMNES Doom)
To the Window that his Chamber- Stairs beheld,
She heard loud Noise which tramplers Feet Revealed;
Soon after Saw brought down to the Court (Paved Floor)
A dismal Corpse, viewed Winding- Sheet, no more,
By Two conveyed; the Face then covered;
Some walking by, her Heart then closely Bled;
Since strait Confirmed ORSAMNES 'twas by All,
No Coffin, Cloth, Course Shroud for Funeral
Thought good enough; by Scullions born below,
Those being his Stairs (that Matron told her so)
BORGANES Threats that very Time (as feared)
When Dinner done; right length and breadth appeared.
That Under- Guardian followed Them (espied
Long since by Her) with Keys in the Hand beside.
Carried from thence beyond the Gate, small Green,
(What Sighs and Groans) Grave there directly seen;
The viewed no more; that for last Couch, retreat,
Dark Curtains drawn, spread the Earthen Coverlet:
When Groaning loud, Clermanthe's long complaint.
through Sorrow strait struck Dumb,
Finding with all her Legs too Weak become,
For the Heavy Heart, Grief's monstrous weight to bear,
She rouled down of the Bed; Supportment there,
Then beats her Breast, as that would Charging Brand
With her Lord's Death, not Vile BORGANES Hand:
Guilty thus far Conceived, Disast'rous Cause,
Since the Act refused, so by BORGANES Laws
ORSAMNES Died: strange Case appeared, that She
Without his Fall could not Chaste, Vi^tuous be.
Then Horrid Thoughts her Mind did over Cloud
Through Passion's strength, Death the only Ease allowed.
Longed for That seemed, Hopes of his Life before,
Now Dead by her beheld must still Deplore.
Her Rape Death-like; why not Used shortest Way
By her own Hand? the Enlarged Soul might stray
After her Lord, beloved ORSAMNES find
In the other World; their Ghosts however Combined:
Grief Slain withal (since Life but Racked, Tormented)
Joined some Revenge, BORGANES Rape prevented.
Then Sob'rer Thoughts; Hope rather Powers Divine
Might cross that Ravishment, base Lust-design;
Before that Hour ordain some Speedy Death,
Through Apoplex, Impostume seize her Breath.
Nor for that Act lest deadly thing there known,
Knife, Sizars, Bodkin, Garters caught and gone;
BORGANES saying, He Would wear like Favors Those;
Bed-cords were left alone for, strangling Close.
Thus several ways perplexed Mind beside,
Which might in Part o're-whelmed Thoughts divide
From that Grand Loss, ORSAMNES Death complaining,
That Is Sense Allayed; her own sad Doom remaining.
Each nearer Noise did Clap of Thunder show,
Rape's storm at hand; the Heart's Trembling caused so.
Past Sev'n it proved, no Supper brought however.
Nor Bed was made; by Her forbidden there.
She lay Reserved till Nine, o're-clouded Skies
Fit Season for that Ravishment, Surprise:
When plainly heard unlocked the outmost Door,
BORGANES thought, some Trampling Noise next Floor;
Unlocked her own, Dove's terror felt She then,
Near the Eagle's Claw; locked strait the same again,
As tho he single stayed, might Trial use
For Grant, at last, call more if she Refuse:
Next, bind Her to the Bed-posts; enjoyed at Pleasure
Such his Intent e're Grasped the Beauteous Treasure.
There casting Glance, half Curtain drawn, Descried
Dim Taper's beams, heard Gentle steps beside:
When Gazing wildly forth, She strait beheld
ORSAMNES Form which lately so excelled,
Now Fainter looks conceived, and Paler-fac'd;
White Linen- Cap, Shirt only down to the Wast;
Ghastly, as thought, his Ghost conceived there,
Such dismal kind Her self might then appear.
She thus began; If the Art ORSAMNES shade,
My Longer Life do come to Check, upbraid:
Orsamnes came to Clermanthe.
ORSAMNES, stopped her Voice by sign (soon ended)
Hand on his Mouth, which softest speech attended.
CLERMANTHE, Peace (pointing to those at Door)
I True ORSAMNES am; Breath as before:
Tho scarce confirmed, till felt his Hand and Lips:
So, raised Her from that Dark- Bed's Eclips,
(Lest Speech o're-heard) did lead to the furthest wall,
Where found Couch-chair, soft Voice enjoined withal;
Both sitting down, She told with Panting Heart,
Did first what caused that Strange mistake impart;
Viewed dismal Corpse; what Torment bred, revealed
Next, thoughts of Death, what way those Clouds dispelled.
Third place conjoined, why She would not comply,
But the Act delayed, ORSAMNES tho might Dye;
Which Grounds you heard before; ORSAMNES when
Applauded All; informed her Self again
MELVORNA'S Lines; who (lastly) the Agent proved
For this short Grant, to view his Dear-belov'd.
Joined the whole Cause: longing (He said) to take
Last sad Farewell, I choice Pretense did make,
For this Salute, as tho through my Persuasion
You might be Won to Yield; which strange Oration
I never shall Breath, tho Death's avoided thence,
But Cross, Oppose with strongest Eloquence:
Life on such Terms disdained; your Grounds allowed
Keep Virtue still, tho Fate these Eyes o're-cloud.
CLERMANTHE when, It much, my Lord, Allays
Sharp Sorrow's Wound, since You conjoyn and Praise
My Act thus far; Hopes of your Life however:
But speak, My Lord, although I Ravished were,
Would You still Love me as Friend, both freed, Enlarged?
Since name of Wife cast off, that Thought's Discharged.
My Dearest Choice, ORSAMNES joined again:
I Constant am: my Love Chief Cause (complain)
To those Grand Streights your Person so Exposed:
Pure Virgin- mind in the Act withal Disclosed:
That Nobler Part does still Enamour Me,
For Real Friend bound in Supreme Degree:
I Will Dwell with You ( if Please) like Dearest Brother,
And tho not Wife, Vow never to Wed Another:
Thus showing Your 's that Single way confined
From all the World, my Heart to You Resigned.
CLARMANTHE there: those Gentle Words expressed
Do much, my Lord, Confirm, this Troubled Breast,
May satisfy; were You but Well Restored
Alive and Free, whatever my Case deplored.
My Souls late Joy, (ORSAMNES then, whilst Breath
Conclude me Thine, expect however my Death:
Hope brought to the Gasp: You that such Torment found,
My Loss bewailed since Three on Fancied Ground,
May better far the True Sustain (so nigh)
My Real Doom. She joined with Tears reply;
I Mourned indeed upon this Chamber's Stage
In doleful Form, as at the Hermitage;
But Living now too Loose; I dur'st not yet
My hope Discharge. Then Faintest Hope permit,
( ORSAMNES said) lest deeper Wound from thence;
Shunned those black Thoughts, Self- murdering Violence,
We Mortals are Subject to various Change,
Like those Four Seasons prove, which Wander, Range;
Or blustering Winds; for the outward Fortunes so,
And Bodies both; much Frail, Uncertain show:
I Am full Resolved: if Fate should seize on Me,
Love still thy Dead ORSAMNES Memory.
Tears streamed there, drowned those Fair Orbs, her Eyes,
Sighs stopped her Tongue, sad Pantings the Heart surprise;
Falling on's Breast, as tho last Mournful Score
Would than Discharge, or Dye her self before
In his own View; whom he with Arms upheld,
That fainting Treasure the Indies both excelled:
Torn manly Heart: till rouzing Spirits again,
By Kiss revived, She speaks with doleful Strain:
Know, my dear Lord; kind Thoughts of You each hour
Shall last till Death destroys Rememb'ring Power.
ORSAMNES when, I owe to Nature said,
That Mortal Debt which now proves early Paid,
Some Forty Years cut off; this World however
I Have well observed, and known much Sorrow there;
Worst Change conceived from thee to Go, Depart,
That keenest makes Death 's cold and frozen Dart.
My Lord (She said) how still does Height'ned prove
My Loss Extreme through This Transcendent Love
To all conjoined: Life burth'nous grown from thence,
Follow I may e're long such Excellence;
Much more that Kind and Sad Discourse to the last,
Dismal Compound, till Hour and Half o're-past.
ORSAMNES then; my Death I do Conclude
Will sudden seize, as my last Sleep intrude
This very Night; if short resolving Pause
You cannot Obtain, before my self withdraws,
Till the hour of Eight, next Morn; it is my desire
(No Change then found) by Day- light to Expire.
I Will try, my Lord (said She) tho make to Swell
His Lustful Rage. Both sealed last Kiss-farewell,
When She did Faint again, till by another
Revived seemed; Each grasped the Hand of the other,
Sighed, wept for Close: to the Door they walked then,
Given gentle knock, 'twas opened strait again.
Clermanthe's last suit to Borganes.
Six Armed for Guard, that Matron there did stand,
Who asked, if She would stoop to the Lord's Demand.
CLERMANTHE prayed, She would beseech him there,
For that night's Pause, till Eight next morn forbear;
Since sick through watchful Hours distempered grown
To strange Degree. Her suit should be made known,
The Other replied, tho 't would her Lord incense:
Returned with Grant (why did so far Dispense
We shall unfold) That Hour required (expressed)
Her plain Resolve: some Ease to tortured Breast,
ORSAMNES thus, the Lady being spread
(As found her there) upon her mournful Bed,
Was guarded strait to's Chamber- Jayl, confined;
Where musing lay through sad, disturbed Mind.
BORGANES (know) did sculk thus long at Door
Which down to the Garden led, placed there before
ORSAMNES brought, Dark-Lanthorn ranged by;
Prime Ambush 't was for the Hearing Part, more nigh;
Since did conclude, They Would choose that farthest End.
Couch- Chair for all: This Door might help, befriend.
That Morning He their Conference delayed,
Besides Affairs, since Hoped, the Enthralled Maid
Would Grant herself at Noon; nor Leisure then,
Till night Deferred (convenient Hour) again:
Close dark approach. ORSAMNES, fearing Death,
Might use employ his utmost, Talking Breath,
Strong'st Arguments ( he thought) to change her Mind:
No hopeful Way for's Wanton Aim declined.
To the Lock-hole joined his Ear, unheard, unseen;
Those Hangings parted well for the Door between.
But softer- Voic'd, besides the Noble pair
Strait farthest off withdrawn from their Couch-chair
That Door observed; ORSAMNES Back to him,
Faint, murmur-like their lost Discourse did seem.
This heard; small Groan [my Dearest Choice] expressed:
[ My Soul's late Joy, conclude me thine] to the rest,
More strongly Breathed from fervent Thoughts, more High;
Deep Lover's Both Declared strait thereby.
Yet might the Man for Life good Agent prove,
Advise so far, She Grant in tender Love.
[Pure Virgin mind] That heard conjoined more;
Thence showed still Perfect Maid, as thought before.
This, Lustful Mood, and Anger both would Please
First Grasped his Virgin-Wench, Flames to appease
( Maid thought since found so Lodged apart we told)
Choice daintiest Dish: next place, through Fear controlled,
Given from Himself, by his own Hand Presented;
The Heart Racked (as 'twere) tho Life enjoyed, Tormented:
Prime Taster thus, till sought perchance Another,
Stomach grown cloyed, Revenged withal Slain Brother.
Glad found their Cheat, that Matron met below,
Night's Pause conjoined, her Answer since did show
Plain yieldingness; if changed next Morn, denied;
He knew what Way to take, ORSAMNES Died:
Could Heighten all from many a fearful Dream,
Dead Brother's Ghost, found Horror thence extreme:
That Amorous Youth in Grave, She might resign.
Love's Fortress strait, observant Concubine.
That Corpse She saw Egyptian Slave did prove,
Which for some Crime was Prisoner kept above
ORSAMNES Stairs, and Lashed Diseased Died;
For whom that mean, base Funeral descried.
CLERMANTHE lay, sad, watchful Thoughts, on Bed,
Small Slumber so; next Morn disturbance bred
(The same to the Lords) by Trumpets Warlike Sound,
Whose joined Noise their Castle-walls rebound.
When Eight that Matron came, unlocked the Door;
Bid's her Resolve; last time, BORGANES Swore. Clermanthe's constant way.

Much weak she was; that lingering Plea renewed:
For Mercy toward her Self and Brother su'd.
That Matron then Informed by the Lord's Command,
Eleven the Hour, if She did waiting stand
At her Court-Casement there, She should behold
That Tragic Sight which He but late foretold.
Door locked again, now Galled o're-whelmed Heart,
She trod the Room, to the window Glance in part:
Till nigh Ten's Hour, more Wonder caused there
Loud Musick's noise: Cornets, Recorders were
Shalm, Sackbuts heard, great trampling through the Court:
This Pageant saw beneath of stranger sort.
Jove's Statue 't was, A ^strange show.
on whose curled Head did stand
Imperial Crown; shafts grasped in his Hand
For Thunderbolts; blue Mantle, like the Sky
Adorned with Stars, in Charret placed to the eye,
Globe at his Foot: the side did Eagle bear;
One thrusting on the Wheels, encompassed there
With Painted Cloth like Clouds, that trouling Hour,
So seemed to move by the God's Transcendent Power.
Priest foremost walked, Musicians on each side,
Silk Coats, with Garlands too, in Flaunting Pride:
BORGANES next did March, Triumphant Way,
Worn Glist'ring Clothes; large Train the Rear display.
For Cause of all that Noise, this show related,
His Birthday 't was, observed, well Celebrated;
Then from the Altar came, done Sacrifizing,
IN the corner of that Court small Temple rising:
Not that such Love to the Gods, or Honor showed;
But ostentation Pleased, thought Prince-like mode.
Thus Jove from thence was softly born along
(Fine Progress through smooth-paved Floor, that Throng,
To the upper end of the Hall, where Cloth of State
By the Hour of Twelve should Table have with plate,
Choice, dainty Meats; as tho the Lord would bring,
Jove used like Guest, new Banquet-Offering;
Priest by for Servitor, Board voided then,
Should ride in Pomp to's Temple-walls again:
Long glancing there, the Noise of Drums was heard,
For Action of more solemn kind, regard
Intended proved; Dreadful, presaging Fear;
When she beheld BORGANES strait appear,
Troop from the Hall: this mournful show ensued,
ORSAMNES self e're long brought down she viewed
By Ruffians (then strangly o're-whelmed Breast)
The Arms tied behind, black consequence expressed:
Shirt down to the Wast, no more, white Cap discerned;
Still gallant Form, tho sadly'st there Concerned;
Undaunted Looks, Calm, guiltless Thoughts declared
To grapple strait with direful Doom prepared.
BORGANES words, That he to Justice now,
Next Jove supreme, would sacrifice allow,
Pale Brother's Ghost withal; that Day being Born,
Twin to himself, CLERMANTHE Groaned, Forlorn.
Thus amongst the Guard whilst farther did Advance,
He cast to the Casement there Kind, sober glance,
Held open viewed; which then seemed wounding Dart
(Tho lately Pleased) to her confounded Heart.
So through the Court was led to the joining Green
(That Front by the Gate low, cloistered walk) well seen,
Too plain perceived; there Tied with Dismal Band
To Post She saw, by the Lord's express command;
Now Naked half, like Statue (thus compelled)
White Marble, pure, tho living Eyes beheld.
Six Archers over against him Ranged, Bows bent,
Which Sergeants of black Death might Represent;
Should Aim at the Heart, Life's Fortress called, and bring,
From distant Ground, Stern Fate of the swiftest Wing.
There loud she spoke; Clermanthe's truble.
O Heavens! what view descried
To Blast my Soul (the Hands sadly wrung beside,
Breast beats how often! Sighs seemed with Tears compounded)
Break, break my Heart, withal Words mournful sounded.
Thus, manly Face, resolved Thoughts (whatever)
For Death's cold charge, might serious then appear,
More Solemn turned; Eyes cast to Heaven composed:
Cap's drawn beneath, with Darkness all enclosed:
Whilst long brown Locks, moved often by Gentle wind.
Seemed Kissed (as't were) for last Farewell, entwined.
Now Faint she proved, despaired, half closed Eyes,
As waited for same Deadly Trance, surprise;
Near Sunk withal: When loudly strained voice,
That called, Hold, Hold; great Trampling Horsmen's Noise
Opened Them quite again, part wakened there
Her Drooping Soul; since first did Dream appear:
Then all their Hats plucked off beheld, young Man
Gallop to the Lord, whereby Demur began;
Viewed Handsome Form, brave clothes, large Train from thence,
BORGANES Self strait bare through Reverence:
Speaking to whom, Turned up in Haste she saw
ORSAMNES Cap; more speech conjoined, withdraw
Those Archers there, his Body; Arms, unbound;
When plainly seemed Awake, revival found.
It was their Young Laconian Prince indeed, The Laconian Prince.

Who ranged had those Parts, convenient Breed
For the Hunting Game; liked well that Recreation;
Owned warlike Thoughts withal: did take Occasion,
Their Borders found so Nigh, to View, behold
Those strong, Arcadian Forts (we lately told)
Were Seized by them before they did Invade,
And Prisoners took both Lords, the Noble Maid.
Returning Home, He thought some Hours to rest,
Then Hunt in the Park, BORGANES Royal Guest.
Entering the Green, that Mournful Show descried
Choice, Gallant Limbs, Gentile lower Garb beside,
He called to stop the Doom, till more was known;
Which made them Glance, strait hold their Hands each one,
Nicking then Shafts, Word given should all let fly.
Speaking to the Lord, they Unveiled his Face to the Eye;
When Gallant Form, prime Countenance beheld,
Undaunted Brow, thought scarcely Paralleled:
Seemed his own Years. Asking, what was the Offense;
BORGANES told; joined Height'ning Grounds from thence,
Ghost-Dreams, as heard before. The Prince inclined
To gentler Thoughts, thus blazed his virtuous Mind.
My Lord, we'll Grant, your Noble Brother 's Fate,
Sev'n Death 's conjoined, might rise to Mournful Rate;
OF the Prisoners Life you may withal dispose
Subdeu'd by War; yet since that Action shows
Prime manly Valor's Stamp, Defensive Ground,
Choice Person (last) let not hard Thoughts be found,
I pray, entreat, if he is Redeemed by Me,
Ransom discharged: your Dreams tho Frightful be,
I am Confirmed they will cease, when Trial proved,
That Object; Cause thereof Withdrawn, Removed,
Strong Fancies Power, whilst here He Stays, and Passion
Do forge, Produce that Ghost-like Aggravation.
BORGANES galled, as felt his own hard Breast
By the Archers struck, sad Grant, these words expressed:
Sir, I shall hope what you Presage, declined Orsamnes given up to the Prince.

Those former Fears; He Is now your Slave, resigned,
From Ransom free: Then strait entreats, His Grace
Would enter the House, there take Refreshment-Glass,
Soon after Dine. Pointed toward the Court,
Speech with ORSAMNES feared, named Hunting sport
Asked, where his last. The Prince, Drawn on before,
I Will send for Him when Dined; loud spoke, no more.
BORGANES whispered strait that Guardian,
To keep him Close, locked from the Prince's Train,
CLERMANTHE, lest revealed; forewarned withal
No Servants Blab what Prisoners left in Thrall.
Thus, on they marched; ORSAMNES, being untied,
Most Eager seemed to thank the Prince, beside
Beg for CLERMANTHE, whose danger thought like Death;
Tho saved himself; but forced to spare that Breath,
By the Archers strait, stern Guardian o're-sway'd,
Encompassed round; Point barbarous (They said)
Slave to Intrude, his Highness tho expressed,
He Would send for Him: that partly eased sad Breast,
Those words o're-heard; half naked (lastly) then:
Thus hopeful, Cheered, to the Chamber brought again.
CLERMANTHE too, upon that Boarded ground
Gave thanks to Heaven, from whence the Rescue found,
Where first beheld; thoughts comfortable grown;
Glimps of Sunshine that dreadful Storm o're-grown.
Her Ravishment whilst stayed the Prince, as 't were,
(So heard him styled) conceived avoided there:
Good hopes withal ORSAMNES would, if Free,
Gain her release from Rape, Captivity.
MELVORNA (last) kept doleful Feast in Bed, Melvorna's trouble.

Dining on Grief, or Grief like Vultur fed
Upon her gentle Breast; strange Rack endured
Through brave ORSAMNES Doom, so lately cured:
When the Maid by chance (tho feared disturbing Fault)
Informed, the Prince had his Redemption wrought,
Would take along to the Court; which strait revived,
Cast down withal, of hope that way deprived:
For, Love complained, tho Charity's contented,
Caused drooping Heart, great ease, since thought prevented
CLERMANTHE'S Rape, to the Brother Favor shown
Might fetch her off: loved Rival there unknown.
Now Trumpets noise, loud Music strait was heard, Borganes feast.

Meat dancing up; their Prince with grand regard
Placed at Board's end, Alone, that part supplied
With choicest Food; most gallant Feast descried.
Somewhat beneath BORGANES Sat, great store
Of worthy Rank; on the other side, same Floor
The Prince's Train; best end reserved of the Hall,
Where Jove beheld, BORGANES choice withal
Honored that Room to bear him company;
Who had his board of Dainties too, most free;
Prime Cloth of State advanced, did Sober dine
With looking on; accept for Food Divine.
Soft Music gave their Ears no mean repast
From Skilful Hands, rare Voices joined at last.
BORGANES, tho never Birth with less content
Did Solemnize, Heart Qualm'd through this event;
Like Wrack such Courtly forms to the tortured Brain,
Whilst thoughts of losing fair CLARMANTHE again:
Tossed by the four Winds his Breast appeared through Passion
Lust's Funeral in that grand Celebration.
Yet midst Despair, would strive the Prince to draw
To the Park beneath, e're next ORSAMNES saw,
CLERMANTHE so concealed; done Hunting sport,
Seek to employ with Games of youthful sort,
Fine Shows conjoined till Supper-time, and Bed;
Then all displayed, torn Heart, Tempestuous Head.
The Prince sent for by Post.
Scarce dinner done, when Post came from the King,
Entered the Hall, harsh Message tho did bring;
The Prince should have to the Court, if thought to find
Dear Mother there Alive, whose earnest mind
Was him to View (in dangerous estate
Threescore Miles off) e're seized proved by Fate.
This heard, He Starts, leaped from the board, Sad brow'd,
BORGANES thanked; called for his Horse aloud;
Eight should ride Post on the ablest Beasts, the rest
Come with ORSAMNES afterward, expressed.
BORGANES too cried, Fly, to his own Men,
The Horses still kept for Hunting sadled then:
Waits on the Prince, who hurried through the Court,
By the Lady viewed, mounted in hasty sort;
Like boisterous Wind departs, of the gallop gone,
Which strangeness caused Heart-Pantings thereupon.
Back came the Lord, whose Joy did equallize
The Prince's Grief, reserved, saved best Prize;
Choice Wisdom thought, that timely way Allured,
Drawn off the Prince through courteous Charms, secured
ORSAMNES, last; no Pleading now for's Love;
Day's Journey and half e're reached the Court 'twould prove,
Long threescore Miles; next Night (Revenge, content)
Could close with fair CLERMANTHE'S Ravishment.
Those left behind were still detained in the Hall,
Should their King's health and Queen's carouse withal,
Till the Prince far off: ORSAMNES then back-way
To the Stables led, where those with Horse did stay,
To gull CLERMANTHE'S sight, as tho he were
Repriv'd alone, and still kept Prisoner there.
Heard trampling noise, She saw those other Ten Clermanthe's trouble again.

Pass through the Court, take horse, which raised then
Sad, dreadful thoughts; her Lord still Slave conceived,
Her self withal of Freedom so bereaved:
The Prince first gone, then All the rest; now feared
Sure Ravishment; late Joys like Dream appeared,
Things as before: yet where despairing ground
Hope still preserved, best comfort, Anchor found.
Their Hunting done, for which great Persons were
(Both Noble Rank, Gentile) conjoined there,
Woods Echo heard; some Games withal renewed
That yearly Feast, in the large Park-Lawn ensued.
Thus, the afternoon dissolved, e're the Evening ended,
Five young Black-moors with feathered Garb attended,
Showed Jugler-sleights; next, tumbled on the Ground;
Wild, Antic Dance to strangest Musick-sound.
BORGANES (last) with Guests of Noble fashion
Concludes in Wine that Native celebration,
For the drinking Game like others too disposed;
Stout Champions all; so long 'twas e're they closed,
Took Horse, Farewell, Run down like Stag that Day
His Lordship near did seem; could gravely say,
He was inclined for Slumbers, ease that Night;
Strong Rape deferred, best morning's Task, delight,
Ten's certain Hour: THERSANDER should withal,
As joined in's Brother's Death, by the Archers fall.
We now shall change our Scene to Arcadia, The two Shepherdesses,

Cast smaller Glance; more pleasant Passage may
Concordant prove, long Grief surveyed, distresses;
Nor lost, forgot those Two fair Shepherdesses,
Of Rank Gentile; by the Prince so Worthy deemed,
Each fit for Lord ORSAMNES Wife esteemed.
PHILAURA, who did most his Loss deplore,
Stopped in her Nun's design (as heard before)
Through Parents, Friends choice Council used that season,
Passion at length gave way in part to Reason,
Touching SILVANOR'S love whose still applied
Strong, constant Suit, for Birth Gentile beside
So that to Her not gained alone Access
His fervent Lines, those Love-embassages,
But his own Self: her mind and Face how-e're,
Too much Obscured, caused by ORSAMNES there.
Else not disdained his Person, Parts, Estate;
Who Coyness Wooed at large, Laborious rate,
Herculean-like, Transporting Power of Love;
Tho Crowned at length, Triumphant chanced to prove^.
Her Birthday 'twas, SILVANOR well befriended Silvanor with Philaura.

By certain Nimphs conjoined, with Mask attended;
Story took from that Golden Ball, near Troy,
Three Goddesses at strife which should Enjoy: Mask.

He Paris proved, who first in shorter Dance
Entered the Room, did next with Speech advance;
Last turning off to the Wall, should there (He said)
On Ida's Mount withdraw for pleasing Shade.
Then Juno, Pallas, Venus (fine for dress)
In Dance appeared, those striving Goddesses,
The first whereof for Queen of Heaven was Crowned:
After neat Dance to Rural Musick-sound,
That Golden Ball came trundled through the Floor;
Contention bred, to whom for Beauty-store
As Prize pertain'd: next Man, they strait agree,
Should judge, Resolve; which Paris chanced to be.
Grand Homage showed to each great Power Divine,
He changed the old Tale for handsome, new Design:
Since Paris then pronounced that, Costly Ball.
Bright Venus Due, as fairest of them all.
Spoke thus to the Point; His weak and mortal Sense
Could not well judge of Heavenly Eccellence,
Through dazzled Sight, did All most fair Proclaim;
Nor would provoke their Wrath's revengeful Flame:
But Skilful found in choice, Terrestrial Beauty,
Should, with their Leaves, that Prize present as Duty
To the fairest Maid on Earth; Transcendent there;
For goodness too might Singular appear.
Conjoined strait to Them most lowly Bow;
Each Tongue vouchsafing Grant, with pleased brow
He to PHILAURA walks, Kissed her white Hand,
Prayed her that Ball, his Heart receive, command.
She takes the same with sobrest Blush, regard
(Love lightning forth her Eyes) as due Reward.
Those Goddesses approved strait the Choice,
Saluting her; with joined, Concordant Voice
Made their request, She would for each bestow
One Kiss on him, that Thankful Favor show.
Then Parents came, good manners (said) required
They should Advance what such great Powers desired;
Youth worthy thought: when Silent grant allowed, Philaura won.

SILVANOR those three Kisses seized as Proud
And joyful Man, repaid with Lover's Heart;
Here Is Panted too, felt closely flaming Dart.
JVNO then called for Banquet from the Sky,
Which Six young Boys brought there immediately;
In Linen clothed, like Spirits of the Air,
Winged Servitors; first Task PHILAVRA'S share:
That done, the Boys danced strait their nimble Round,
So fluttered forth to loud Recorder's Sound.
The Goddesses PHILAURA informed, that she,
When Cloyed beneath, to their Society
Should mount aloft; Request conjoined (for close)
That whilst She shall on Earthly Bed repose,
PARIS may Lodge in her choice Arms, delighted;
True faithful'st Swain and fairest Nymph united:
So forth they Danced, kind, friendly League beheld;
Young PARIS last, for the active Foot excelled.
This was performed (SILVANOR'S Plot, projection)
With so much Honor, Love, and hearty affection
To the bright PHILAURA'S Thoughts, All conquered were,
Looks, carriage now mild, Gentlest both appear:
Since no Affronts endured, disdainful way,
'Twas clouded Morn transformed to Gaudy Day.
Next, on MERDONE glance, that second Maid,
By the Prince urged for ORSAMNES Choice, we said;
MONTANVS whom did Woo, Pastor gentile; Merdone won by Montanus.

Which Youth Siege gentler found, enjoyed that while
Kind Summer-looks, nay, reaped conjoined Kisses,
Strong Lovers Food; first Course to the larger blisses:
So Gained her Heart, chief Fortress, Magazine.
Did travel through that Sea called Love-design
With friendlier Gales, whereas bad, Stormy weather,
Rocks, doubtful waves threatened (hard chance) together
SILVANOR's Barque: true cause we thus reveal:
MERDONE, tho ORSAMNES loved as well,
Was much less Raised by mounting Hope, Desire,
So found less Grief, could calmer way Retire:
Choice Temper, last; could better estimate
Another's worthy Love, when saw of late
Her own Refused. Next Glance behold we shall
BORGANES Towers, CLERMANTHE left in Thrall.
The End of the Fourth Book.
THE GRECIAN STORY. Book V.
LEaving that Lord, whose Brains twice buried were
In Sleep and Wine, This Chance does next appear.
Young Wench there was, of handsome Form, Gentile,
VARNESA called; and which might claim the Style
Of honest too, good Heart, ingenious Head;
Whom their chief Town, great Lacedemon bred;
Mother of Arcady, much loved the Nation.
Twelve months ago she left that City's Station,
To the Lord preferred; one's Daughter fair beside
The Attendant proved, prime Spirit owned beside:
Made now the Pris'ner's beds, Meat brought withal,
Being troubled, Grieved for their disast'rous Thrall,
THERSANDER'S Doom, CLERMANTHE'S Ravishment,
Next Morn designed no doubt of the sure Event;
For some Cross words to the Matron too, debate
Threatened by the Lord to be discharged of late:
CLERMANTHE, last, thought Noble Rank (by glance
Brave Gems beheld) her Fortune might advance
She fixed on Hopeful way for their Release;
Furthered that Night through prime advantages.
Thus, calling Guardian forth from Drink, Young Maid Varnesa.
whilst made
CLERMANTHE'S Bed, whom followed strait Comrade
With Bottle of Sack, each charge to view, behold;
Next was THERSANDER'S Couch, where (slily bold)
Small Paper thrust, those talking at the Door,
Into his Hand, well penned these Lines before.
Your Nephew, Sir, by the Prince freed from the stake,
Is gone to Court, Your self same Place must take
To Morrow's noon, by Archers there shot Dead;
Near Ten in the Morn the Lady's ravished.
I Am Friend to both, shall safe convey from thrall,
Twelve the Hour to Night: false Hair and Beard withal
That Trunk does hold, Coat too by chance, large sized,
Wait then for me, if loved your Life, disguised.
THERSANDER That with wondering Thoughts (although
Back turned) reads; and partly Joyful so,
Partly Afraid, informed the Wench by sign,
He should approve, in every Point combine.
On shelf before, whilst made the Guardian's bed,
Large Paper laid she saw, wherein she read
Few Lines of the Top; the Lord's own Hand and Seal
Joined far beneath; short Order did reveal
For one of the Frontire-Towns, should go next Day
Ten's later hour so heard the Guardian say.
That strengthened much, those Lines cut off at Night
Safe Pass for All through the Borders she could write:
So strict each were since Wars began, that thus
Men traveled through, else Task more dangerous.
Bedtime drawn nigh, Varnesa's plot to free Orsamnes.
her Chamber joined withal
To the Guardian's Room, who drinking stayed in the Hall,
She waited till he came; past ten however;
Door open left (that Lock disordered there,
Well known by her) when drenched like Sponge in Wine,
Soon couched He sleeps: snor'd loud for her design.
Which Summons heard, she softly stole to the Chair
Where lodged his Clothes, took thence with nicest care
CLERMANTHE'S Keys: THERSADNER'S wanting tho,
That for his Door; yet searched she to and fro,
Ground, Table, Shelf; nor in the Window seen:
If was o're-heard, This prompt Excuse had been,
Her Glove's she there did leave, when made the Bed,
Should walk forth Early in the Morn, by bis'ness led.
From shelf his Paper takes, that Key thrown by,
Dropped in some place, midst Drink perchance did ly.
Thus, Grieved for him, tho Joy'd for her, retired.
(Who yet should know the Event, that Care required)
She writes that Pass, short Order penned above
Cut off, large Space, for that Intent did prove;
Prime Counterfeit for Clerk-like hand did show,
BORGANES Name and Seal seen there below;
My Tenant's Daughter 's there, let safe and well
Pass through your Guard, conjoined my Hand and Seal.
If stop that Way, in strange, unlikely sort;
By-passage failed; Haste then to the Prince at Court.
This done, performed; no Light, Noise heard to offend,
Dark Lanthorn took, best Gown for useful end,
First, to THERSANDER's Room she walked however,
( None lodging nigh) gave gentle Rap when there:
He come to the Door, through the Lock-hole she expressed;
His Key could not be found, though partly blessed,
The Lady's was; what Way, from loathsome Thrall
Should her release; Himself resigned withal
To the Charge of Heaven. THERSANDER prayed; With speed
(Sad, Thoughts reserved) the Lady might be freed;
Duke's Daughter and Heir, that Youth's intended Bride,
Of Princely Rank; they would her Advance beside.
He wished she should to the Merchant's Grange repair
In Arcadie, from thence by Lines declare
To that young Lord at Court, that also he
Should thither come, when by the Prince set Free:
If Life, Escape, Himself would find them there.
All Points (she said) should be performed, whatever.
Varnesa going to Clermanthe.
To the Lady's Room she gently walked then,
Opened both Doors, locked fast the same again;
Scared with which Noise, couched only upon the Bed,
Since feared that Night she should be Ravished;
CLERMANTHE thought, now plainly her Doom would seize her,
Sunk, panting Heart; wished Death might free, Release her.
Till hearing softest Tread, small Light displayed,
That doleful Hour, sad Fancy's Damp o'resway'd;
New strong Conceit some Ghost might then appear,
ORSAMNES too (still thought reserved there,
The Prince being gone) prove closely murdered, slain:
Glancing on Her, strait overwhelmed again;
Since sent (conceived) on Bawdy grounds before,
The Lord at hand; did Trembling way Deplore.
Till humble Bow, the Maid informed her,
She came to Free; conjoined without demur
(Soft Voice) what more Revived, how well Redeemed
How noble Lord by the gentle Prince, tho seemed
Still Prisoner there; conveyed at last Back way
To cheat her Eye, gone toward the Court same Day;
Her Rape by ten resolved: those Keys did show
Should free from thence, Enlarge, not finding tho
THERSANDER'S Key (whose Death next Noon concealed)
How safe the escape, that Pass (in brief) revealed:
Wished Rouse, advance, lest Danger proved, surprise;
Showed new-bought Gown might serve for their Disguise.
Clermanthe led forth by Varnesa.
CLERMANTHE cheered, bad Fears conjoined withal;
Damped for THERSANDER'S Case, yet hopes from Thrall
Her Lord might get him freed, to the Prince request;
Joy'd too when heard his Clear Advice expressed;
Loathed Couch forsakes, then followed strait her Guide,
Took box of Gems, some Linen there beside.
The Wench unlocked, in the corner, small strong Door,
Hangings thereon, by the Lady unseen before;
Fine Closet 't was, reserved; then opened strait
Trap-door concealed, nex't that thick Iron- Grate
(Those Keys to all in Ring of Brass contained)
By Ladder thence through empty Hole they gained.
The Ground it self, where hollow Vault descending
Quite underneath, till reached the Fields extending:
Strange Cloister seemed that Hour, more pleasing tho
To the Lady's Eye then Gallant Jayl did show.
'Twas dug in time of Wars through wary Fear.
By the Lord thereof. Escaping Passage there
When Castle lost: nor knew that Wench the walk,
Till the Guardian (her Kinsman too) did stalk
Same way by Night to near adjoined Whore;
Tho said, Stolen visit 't was to Friend (no more)
Which had his Lord displeased, o're-clouded Man;
She waiting there till he returned again.
At Cavern's Mouth, some Iron Bolts removed
That held all fast within, like Door it proved;
The outside did show firm, natural Rock however,
Close carved Crags conjoined, Trees shading there.
Thus through that womb with small Offense they passed,
Till like Newborn given up to the Feilds, at last.
Tho Solemn Thoughts when thus at large exposed,
Round nightly Shade; clear Moon however disclosed
Her fainter Beams, on verdant Plains bestowing
Like Tinsell-dress; Woods lined with Sables showing.
June's warmer Month but newly entered then,
VERNESA cheered CLERMANTHE'S Heart again.
That Garment brought (Door closed) by Trees o're-clouded,
Was strait put on, her Own in the Bushes shrouded.
Sev'n Miles it proved to the Bord'ring Parts, known Way
To the Wench however; by Five, when Break of Day,
They well should Reach the same of the Pass-port-score,
Walk freely through; Ten's hour and not before
Her Rape resolved, no Post could them prevent:
By Passage found might be to their Content:
Thus, clothed strait, less feared surprising Glance,
Both veiled withal for the Borders the Advance.
THERSANDER tho, Thersander's trouble.
mean time, Transformed prove
In thoughts as Garb, Death's Fate so near; unmoved,
Musing he stands one while, then Walked about,
Next stares of the Walls, and Door, cross Fortune's flout
Sad, strange appeared: to the Windows glance at last;
Fair Prospect viewed, by Fancy trod, o're-pass'd;
Wresting some Bars, one loose, perceived, the Stone
Bad, flaw'd, and broke; with his Knife much larger grown;
Then utmost Strength Fire-fork conjoined applied,
He tears it forth, tho afterward descried
Steep Rock beneath: no thought to pass above,
Such Walls and Gates, that the only Way did prove.
Coat found in Trunk, false Hair and Beard put on
(By Actor used in play) This fixed upon
Cut large Bed's Cord, the same securely bound
To stronger Bar (that distance tho from Ground)
Almost despaired) He slides thereby, descended;
No Crauling saw, such Crags, so hollow-bended;
Cord far too short; yet crept great way by chance,
Till proved Six Yards to the Earth, unpleasing Glance:
Forced, Groveler-like, from shelving Crag to fall
On the Hands and Knees, lest broke his Legs withal:
Was something Bruised however; beholding then
Strange Voyage late, that monstrous Rock again,
Look cast in thanks to the Sky, with cheerful Pace
(Next Way conceived) for the Borders he did trace;
Prime Marks when came observed, Hopes now to see,
Stolen through by Night, CLERMANTHE in Arcadie.
Past Four half-Hour, Clermanthe's fears.
the Lady and her Convoy
Drew near to the Bounds, much Damped her former Joy
Through Virgin-fears, conjoined long nightly stage;
Roused Dismal thoughts what changed in the Hermitage,
(Sad progress known) moved Leaves by wandering Wind,
Black Shadows scared, Birds, Beasts to start inclined:
Yet the open Walks, no Woods dark maze offending,
Trees scatt'red pleased; whilst constant Moon befriending.
Now morning- Cloud showed that Remaining Part,
THERSANDER 'S Thrall, ORSAMNES grieved Heart.
Cast backward Glance, she saw from bushy throng
One hast'ned toward them, pursued e're long
By louder Voice; Stay there and cease your flight,
We must not part thus: scared through stranger Fright
CLERMANTHE proved, as tho surprised, betrayed.
Near reaching Her, Is not your Name (he said)
The Lady broke from Jayl? Confounded more,
Dumb Marble grown, far plainer than before.
Next, turned up her Hood (which She let fall)
Conjoyning strait, THERSANDER see withal,
That Body, walk showed Here Is far off descried,
VARNESA 'S too, Way, flying Hour beside.
Then known Himself (tho with false Hair and Beard
Coat, last disguised) that Name and Voice conferred:
Wonder as much o're-sway'd, seemed nightly Dream,
Till briefly'st Heard the escaping stratagem
CLERMANTHE Joy, that Guardian found, expressed;
Tho said, He followed that surprising Jest
So far She might have Swoon'd perchance that time:
THERSANDER smiled, asked Pardon for the Crime.
This now remained, He joined in the Pasport so,
Who used her Pen and Ink; great Space below,
Their last cut off; lest not By-passage found
More clear and free, the Day then shining round.
Let pass this Man, Two Daughters safe and well
'Bout their affairs; Conjoined my Hand and Seal.
But casting Glance, Armed Man with Garment rude,
Black Hair and Beard behind a Tree they viewed,
Drinking at Fount, Horse by; whom All to shun
Straitways, Avoy'd (THERSANDER unarmed) begun;
More follow might: Till he called loud (as fled)
And asked, which Way to Lacedemon led.
VARNESA knowing, informed ( Both yiel'd however)
Shown two large Towers, which did far off appear.
When mounting strait (no Time for more Discourse)
His lusty Beast, small Gale by ^entle force
Turned up his Coat, Silk Garment, Green espied,
Broad Silver Plates; well marked the Voice beside;
THERSANDER called, whilst galloping did prove,
If you ORSAMNES are, THERSANDER love,
Turn back again. He turned, this Answer made;
Are you THERSANDER then? Who joyful said,
As sure as You ORSAMNES there, and This
CLERMANTHE called: who strait unveiled is.
Said; Nay, my Lord, and could you leave, (unkind)
CLERMANTHE thus to Danger's storm behind? Orsamnes known by them.

Speak, Was th^s well? THERSANDER joined more,
She Is yet unstained, pure Virgin as before.
Dismounted strait, cast wondering Glance to the Sky,
Kiss sealed, embrace, thus proved the Duke's reply;
CLERMANTHE, fair I so Disowned, as she
ORSAMNES late, when seemed Discharged and Free
Fled First from him. Clouds both however concealing
She in few words her strange Escape revealing.
All joined their cheerful Hearts on hopeful Ground,
Much thanked VARNESA too, like Maid renowned:
ORSAMNES Chance deferred Time Dangerous,
That place less free: tho told at large by us.
Riding with Four of the Prince's Armed men,
(Six staying to Quas^ by the way, late Evening then)
Through Forest large, they proved ass^vl'd e're long
By thievish Rogues, ^ight made the sundy Throng.
All soon took Flight, Himself unarmed Fled
(His, the Uncles Life, CLERMANTHE endangered)
By one pursued, whose Horse by chance did Fall,
Through friendly stump; He gaining Ground withal,
Rode back with speed, escaped; resolved Mind
For Journey strait to the Court, that way resigned
To the Prince again, if suit might there prevent
By nimble Post CLERMANTHE'S Ravishment.
Tho near despaired, the Prince then tied far more
Upon that Ground^ to the Lord engaged before.
Came near to the Forest bounds, much wandering tho
Lest fresh assault, Glance cast through Glade below,
He viewed a Horse forty yards off, the Night
Just entering then, whose Rider came from Fight
(One of those Thieves) lay Dead upon the Ground;
Brought rouling Bulk thus far with Mortal Wound;
There Tumbling fell: false Hair and Beard descried,
(Loose amongst the Boughs) long Coat, his Sword beside.
'Twas Safe conceived to Borrow all, employ
More honest Way, lost the Armed Band, Convoy;
These should both shroud, desend, lest backward straying,
Troopers perchance (long since observed) betraying
Might seize on Him; or else BORGANES Men;
For sudden Death convey to the Castle again,
As tho broke loose from the Prince's Train, Escape:
Mean while however performed CLERMANTHE'S Rape.
Thus strait Disguised he ^rod the Field; thought best
To ^ide about, lest Haunted by the Rest;
Then finding none ^'inform, He ranged all night,
By ^edges crossed, Brooks, Woods conjoined spite,
Till near to the Borders came; where Dry with sorrow,
Long Travel, Watch, draught from the Fount did borrow.
Now for THERSANDER and ^^ARVESA, She
His Charge become, good Horse would wanting be:
One saddled strait, Gra^ing they saw at hand,
That dead Thief's 'twas^ then freed from all Command,
Wild Traveller; Who all that Night (when strayed)
ORSAMNES thus, dressed Master like, Comrade
Did follow still: CLERMANTHE fai^ behind
Himself should ^ide, best Guardian designed:
He seized that Horse^ next might those Two be there
Joined in the Pass, lest stop perchance, whatever
That should be us'd^ unless By passage sound
E're long by the Way, thought clear, convenient Ground.
ORSAMNES now Resolved, as partly free
From the Prince, discharged by Gentle Destiny,
To Guard CLERMANTHE Home, since He^'s before
(Contracting Vows) upon the Marriage score:
Her welfare next, Endangered so that time,
Chaste Honor both, to leave more sinful Crime
That Due performed to Loved, Transcendent Wife,
All Graceful Points to the Saver of his Life
Should be observed; resigned to the Prince's Hand
By sober Pen, where-e're did please, command
True Servant still. Which Thoughts (by goodness moved)
On Moral grounds CLERMANTHE'S self, approved.
But second time their Pass deferred, laid by,
New Sight beheld; Day spreading through the Sky.
Large Coach they saw from certain Hill descending, Arcadian Ambassador.

Grand Troop withal, that way but slowly tending
IN the borders Road, where they should join below;
On side thereof great single Person go,
There walking down, whose Garments Stately viewed;
Whom they did strait Ambassador conclude
From their young King, with large attendant Train
Returning now for Arcadie again,
Well known by them, Good, noble Lord esteemed,
Great Friend withal to the Prince ORONTES seemed,
ORSAMNES both; which wonder caused, that He
Proved so employed for Trust, and Dignity.
Thus, mounted strait, Disguised; the Women on
Spread Saddle-Cloth's, this Plot Resolved upon.
Advancing to grave Horse man in the Rear,
THERSANDER asked, if such a Lord walked there.
Yes, the other said; He then conjoined, We be
Arcadians born, resolved for Arcadie;
The, stricter times of late, please to allow
Oblige thus far, that, being Conjoined now
With your grand Train, we may, unquestioned more,
Pass as belonged to the Lord Ambassador.
He, welcome All (like former Friends) replied;
They closed strait with Him on either side.
Discourse by the way, He gave them information,
What Treaty held with that Lacoman Nation.
Those Frontire Towns and Forts, but lately seized,
Should Rendered prove, the Arcadian King since pleased
To give large Sum; thought, as the Affairs then stood,
Better by Coin redeemed than Native Blood.
Peace (next) Confirmed till Fifteen years expired,
With Joy to both the Realms so much desired.
His Lordship chose that early Hour to shun
June's fainter Heat; things well transacted, done,
With shorter Speed to Kiss their new King's hand,
GONSALVUS too, when both did strait demand,
With cheerful thoughts, Arcadian King dead.
Then is the young King Dead?
Yes the other answered there, his life was ^led
Near Month ago, if that be News, unknown;
And the Uncle now ascends the Royal Throne.
Conjoined strait; He Died in Grateful Hour,
ORONTES when should be brought up to the Tower
Midst Nightly Shades, false, Treas'nous Charge, Pretense
(ORSAMNES Partner joined) with Violence;
Then soon condemned: given speedy Order to
Two Troops of Horse; One of their Captains tho
Was sick that time, the Other Drunk did prove,
Whence caused some stop, Demur: e're Those could move;
Night past Inflamed, and Day before, the King
Through Surfeit, Wine, felt extreme Vomiting;
Enraged withal: was couched so in Bed:
Then further Pause, till Change discovered:
His Uncle too conceived the Prince 's Friend,
But soon Speech lost, and Life, so proved his End.
Those Courtiers ^led, through Guilty hearts, that framed
False Traitor ^anes, most ^ouly them defamed.
How did this News transport their Thoughts, Revive!
His Father snatched from dreadful Block, Alive!
Invited too by the Noble King, of late,
From Country Grange to's former Glory, s^ate,
(Said the Ancient Man) ORSAMNES also now
Might Walk abroad with Free and cheerful Brow:
Much Calmer proved the Prince's troubled Breast,
Which showed in Looks and Language both, expressed.
Orsam. the rest pass the hounds
Thus, soon They passed the Bounds, no Qualmish fear
By the Men endured, nor Female Pantings there:
Trod safe the Arcadian Soil, bright Morn to the Eye,
Fresh checked arose; serene both Earth and Sk'^;
Adorned by the Sun's resplendent Rays, who seemed
To smile on their Success, as Dear esteemed.
Half hour dissolved, They part in Friendly sort;
Those prancing on their Way to the Royal Court.
Held Council now, since thought of former Cares;
Thus 'twas Resolved, for Ord'ring their Affairs:
They should withdraw to the Merchant's private Grange;
THERSANDER next, salute (such gladsome Change)
The Prince himself, in's Pastor Farm as then,
Hoping to find more cheerful, pleased again
Endeavor there to Frame his Thoughts, compose
By fit degrees, ORSAMNES choice disclose;
Virgin of Noblest Birth, Good, fair combined;
More equal Match for Him by far Designed.
If gentler Grant (small Doubt) when heard Relation
Joined pivate Way their Marriage celebration.
Thus on they passed through Verdant Fields, the ground
Bespread with Flowers, soft Gale Companion found,
Which cooled the offensive Beams; well Horsed were;
CLERMANTHE tho good Pillion wanted there.
When the Evening come, Minerva's Temple.
They fair, large Mount ascended
On whose smooth Top (through Prospect choice commended)
MINERVA's Temple viewed, shown lofty Pride,
With Pillars round, carved Statues beautified:
Much aged Front appeared, tho to Sense,
Might claim withal more solemn Reverence.
Prime Porch observed, mounted by steps, degrees;
The Soil adorned with Palms, and Laurel-trees,
In order ranged before, of the sides, behind;
Proved shorter Walks with pleasing Shade combined:
Strait marched they, Spectators, softly round,
Whilst Trembling Leaves gave hollow Murmur's sound.
Entering the Walls, with shining Marble graced,
Viewed from above Minerva's Image placed;
Bright Helmet worn; Spear grasped in one Hand,
Shield the other bore: Triumphant way did stand.
Should Honored by large Town beneath appear,
Devotions often by Them performed there.
From top o'th Mount did Gallant Prospect show,
Prime Nature's Scene, viewed Verdant Plain below,
Joyn^d rising Banks, Grove wandering Crystal Streams:
Two Miles from thence, Gilded by the Sun's fair Beams,
MORBELE's lofty Towers; on whose right side
(Good space reserved) that Merchant's Grange descried.
Thus down they walked to the next adjoining Plain,
Near skirts whereof large Fountain forth did strain
From hollow Rock, whose tumbling Stream in the fall
Deep Murmur made; Stone- Cistern there withal;
Whence danced away, to the open Field resigned:
MINERVA'S Fount, her name with that combi'd.
Walking by the side, through Bushes clump o're-shaded,
Sad, mournful Voice their Ears from thence invaded.
(New Torrent-like did seem) complaining Sound,
Sighs mixed and Sobs; thought Female Grief's compound:
Approaching near, they Woman's Garb beheld,
More turning strait (by tramplers noise compelled)
Her Head that way, Morneda's Self it proved;
No meaner chance CLERMANTHE'S Nurse beloved.
Who coming to that Lady's House (when late)
IN the Grove, Clermanthe 's Nurse Morneda.
declared, with strange Events to wait
Upon CLERMANTHE there, the Night before;
Then told by her on that departing score,
How She was slipped away, some Terror bred
(As seemed) Conceit of being discovered;
Nurse sadly'st feared, that, lost all Worldly Joy,
Despairing grown, She might her Self destroy:
So, lost in her own Thoughts and way through Passion,
Sh' had wandered thus, since Morn, in doleful fashion.
CLERMANTHE strait grasped her in the Arms, entwined,
Nurse, take thy Mistress; said; when the over-kind,
Transported Heart was near for Joy to swoon;
How hugged her Lady, wept! nor could be soon
Convinced thus, but 'twas her Lady's Ghost:
Tho when Informed, what Spouse she there might boast,
That Prime complete, young Lord withal; O then,
Had not CLERMANTHE Kissed it in again,
Her Soul might have leapt for and took Vagary,
As did her Body late, thus, mean Breasts carry
True faithful hearts: till Self become, restored
All sitting down on Bank by joint Accord,
She speaks her weighty News with sober brow,
Whilst gentle Ear CLERMANTHE does allow.
That proudest She, GONDACE the Whore, of late
By Duke VERDORVS raised to Wifely state,
CLERMANTHE's Father (as you heard expressed, Duke and Gend^^^

When her own Self some three Months Fled, distressed)
Found True to him long former wanton season;
Joined six Months more, when Marriage Vows with reason
More strongly should oblige, began to rave
Through Lustful thoughts; which, though to them she gave.
Slight honor's Check sometimes, within few Days
Great Flame became. Nor fond, unanswered blaze,
Convenience only sought, fresh choice in Loving,
As did the Duke, whilst married Man, approving.
This blew the Furnace, last, want of a Son,
Prime Honor, Fortune's Heir (CLERMANTHE undon)
That longed to Breed; and doubtful of her Lord,
Six Months since could no Sign, small Qualm afford,
Nor former Years; resolved to Change Condition,
Diet, try more, so serve both Lust, Ambition.
The Object was Gentile young Man and Neat,
In Persia born, whose Model showed complete
For Face, for Limb; well bred Outlandish Piece,
Her Grace's Usher proved, conjoined to These
Prime Voice, rare musick's Art: whom Secret Favor,
Amorous before, now taught Exploits far braver,
Boldness to the height; since Look's could Paint desires,
Her kinder Touch inform the Heart's Wanton fires:
So from her Hand to Kiss her Lips He mounted;
Then Grant obtan'd for what is Supreme accounted.
Soon afterward the Duke himself did Ride
To Hunting meeting, famed (that way complied)
Eight Miles from Home; where meant withal to spend
Two following Nights with Borderer, great Friend.
But so it chanced that wrangling Morn, a Fray
( Sport's wrong-side often) did turn to Tragic Play
Their hunting Game; the Masters Curs become,
Like Boars themselves; small Cause how-e're the Sum
Of The youthful Jar: from words they fell to Wounds,
Smart Sidings followed strait, until their Hounds,
At length most Moral seemed! which manly Chase
So dogged grown, Thought dangerous that Place
(Foul, Bloody Broils) VERDORVS thence withdrew:
And being informed, his Friend was wandered too
Far off with all his Train, for longer Season;
Vexed at the strange Event (nor without Reason)
Some Hag as tho his morning Way had crossed,
He galloped Home, both Friend and Pleasure lost.
O're-heated much, near Three Arriving there,
Proud Wife abroad (for walk conceived, where-e're)
Through Garden strait he gently Marched, unfound,
Went toward the Grove, high walled, enclosed ground.
(Fine Grot, large Summer House, named long before)
With private Key unlocked the outmost Door.
On thence to the Room, for coolness softly tracing,
Tall-branched Trees the Ardent Sun outfacing:
Choice, silken Couch there spread for Day's Repose
Whilst Drowsy Murmur Streams withal disclose.
Drawn near, Approached, some Rust'ling Satin heard,
So whisper Wind and Leaves, nor Him debarred,
Conjoined twice-o're: to the Window Stealing when,
He Glanced through, Surpised, Amazed then;
Bad Prospect there; Gondace false.
strange wanton Antic racked
That way his heart; GONDACE found in the Act
With her own Cringer, formal Man; disdain:
'Twixt both himself conceived Tormented, Slain
So deadly thought ( Fourth time this last did prove,
Thrice stolen Exploit, no Qualms that way did move)
Now near to rise. When vexed, enraged mind,
Sharp Poyniard was unsheathed, as Death designed;
Remembering thoughts strait curbed his Hand although,
Since made Her first his Wench, prepared her so:
That Man might like fond Slave become how-e're,
Through's Lady Duchess Charms transported there.
Yet Rushed he through, not locked their Bawdy door,
Since the Outmost was; which by the prostrate Whore
As soon perceived, still Dagger drawn descrying;
Some mangled Torture feared, much longer Dying; Gondace's Death.

She snatched forth strait short Poniard worn (the fashion)
From the Usher's side, and through despairing Passion,
Disdain conjoined, Stabbed her own Self to the Heart;
CLERMANTHE so revenged that Tragic Part.
Her Man escaped, found Door to the Fields, back-way
Through which He came, none there to mark, Betray.
The Duke beholding that Self-execution,
Their Silken Couch stained too with Blood's effusion,
O're-whelmed stands through Wonder, wrath sometime;
So little Feared, so basely false her Crime:
Strange grief withal, EVGENA's Discontent,
CLERMANTHE's loss when Thoughts did represent,
GONDACES Pride; through fondness swayed before:
CLERMANTHE tho seemed first withdrawn, no more,
Now Dead conceived: sad Fortune, last, that She
Should Charm so far, enslave his Fantasy.
Thus, back He walked (distempered Mind) again,
Informed of the chance, Event his Houshould-train;
Went Sick to Bed: where Passion's strongest Power,
First Heat conjoined, did Fever cause that hour.
Burned high next day, his Will was then composed,
In which CLERMANTHE's Self sole Heir disclosed,
If living found, if living found; expressed
That often over, with Tears, from mournful Breast;
PLENORMUS else, EVGENA'S Nephew, named,
From Travel come: what kindest Thoughts proclaimed!
Might he Live still to Enjoy her there again,
Whose precious worth advanced in lofty strain!
But the Oil of Life did seem through Feaver's fire
To wast, consume, the Lamp must then expire.
MORNEDA strait informed Him, Safe and well
CLERMANTHE proved, did Poisonous cause reveal
Why She Is withdrawn; nor far Rom^te confined;
Which cheered Him so, rare Doctor's Art combined;
Prime mending Change next morn did break, appear;
In some few Days near well restored there.
That Element over awed, Tyrannick Flame
And burning Zone, cool, Temperate became.
Her Nurse with Joy rode strait to the Lady's Grove,
CLERMANTHE gone, over whelmed, did strangely Rove.
This briefly told, how fair CLERMANTHE's Heart
Rejoiced proved! since like Triumphant part
Crowned all the rest: The Duke her father freed
From that false Whore, who by the one hand did Bleed;
Next, said from Death; grown (last) so Tender, kind
As once He was, e're that Transported Mind:
Whose life she prized, through Noble- tempered Breast,
Beyond the Estate; large joy to Nurse expressed.
ORSAMNES too, THERSANDER Partners were,
Since Prime the News, with Thanks embraced her there.
Thus, Mounting all, they Rode contentful way
Toward Morbele Town, e're close of Day,
Through Verdant Field, brave Prospect in their Eye;
Some two Miles distant 'twas: Approaching nigh,
They turned aside to the Rural Grange, most Neat
Amongst Trees reserved, long since ordained Retreat.
Arriving there, Orsamnes Clermanthe at the Gr^^ge.
Both the Owners welcomed them
(THERSANDER's Friends) each thought resplendent Gem,
High, Princely Birth conjoined. All fasting proved,
Long Journey, Watch, sharp Cares withal, which moved
To cheerful Bait (first place) their Appetites;
Next Timely Hour their Sense to Sleep invites.
That Solemn Year of Fair CLERMANTHE's Vo^,
Chaste Month behind, was slowly expired now;
Yet was ORSAMNEs drawn ( Rare changes found)
Still to defer, on choice Important ground,
For certain Day, till Fathers both consented;
Nor doubt thereof, so all distaste preventend.
By one of them received, in the noblest kind
Might be performed their marriage part designed.
THERSANDER rides next Morn from thence with speed
To the Duke VERDORVS first (being so agreed)
Whom strait informed, his Daughter well did prove,
Letter presents, conjoined with dutious Love:
Wherein she named the causes of her Flight,
Did, next, her Noble, virtuous Choice recite:
Craved, last, his Grant: that welcome so might find
ORSAMNES there, as equal Guest combined.
High flowed his Joy when did her Hand behold,
To the Poys'ning part did thus himself unfold;
He could not think, conceive that Plot before,
Ambitious Ayms for the Son, conjoined more.
Rich Box of Gems, Gold- Coin for her Expense
Might serve (he thought) where-e're her Residence.
Her Choice, next place, advanced, whose Father proved
Honored by him for Rank, desert, beloved:
The Son at Court he saw, proclaimed to be,
When but Nineteen, their Kingdom 's Rarity:
With Princely Birth such Person, Parts, that now
He should much wrong his own to disallow,
As Daughters Judgment joined: the Lord her Choice
Wronged too withal: gave strait confirming Voice.
Then Letter by THERSANDER sent however
First shown himself) to the Prince ORONTES there:
Given for Change of times Congratulation,
Urged his Assent for the marriage-Celebration.
To's House invited too, chief, noble Guest,
Fit Place for that, 'bove Pastor's Grange, expressed:
He would the Estates third part to them Resign,
And her for Heir to the whole at last Design.
THERSANDER th^se choice Points to the worthy Pair
Did, Cordial like, with pleasing Breath declare.
Next cheerful Morn, THERSANDER post was sent
To the Prince besides for closing fair event.
Things thus did prove; That Prince so great, High-plac'd
Lord General, till was thrown down, disgraced
By the former King; Next, seized Transcendent Wife
By Rival's Hand, abused, robbed (lastly) of Life
As did believe; hurled down from Rock, we told;
Prime, only Daughter too, Sev'nteen years old,
Coffined, interred; withdrawn to Pastor's Grange:
Now two full Years dissolved; That further change,
Two Troops of Horse ordered to seize upon
His Person there, false Traytor-grounds, as shown;
E're which the King through-monstrous surfeit died,
Whose Place supreme his Uncle strait supplied:
He sent the Prince strong, Friend-like invitation
To's Royal Court, great MANTINEA's Station.
The Prince that time reserved Thoughts expressed,
The old Pastor- Grange most pleased his Solemn Breast.
Whereof informed, strait gentle Lines did send
That noble King, choice Doctors recommend
Which bare the same; to try their useful Art
Importuned, moved, conjoined cheerful Heart.
Friends joined withal; Four of the Gentry there,
Which Pastors turned, withdrawn; bad sharers were,
Time's changed rejoiced: The Prince did bow, complied,
Whose Sorrows ground their Crosses far outvy'd;
To Physic framed his Thoughts, Two Years rejected,
Much wronged Mind, Body both, that way neglected.
Thus were dissolved with hopeful Change ten days;
Well cleansed Parts few humors bred, did Raise
Less Vapors far, which seem like Fogs to shroud
Sometimes the Brain, and Reason's Sky o're-cloud.
With Body still does Sympathize the Mind,
That Is Organ harmed the Soul does droop combined:
And long sad Thoughts Distemper breed, Disease;
His Sprung from thence, asked Twofold Cure, release.
The Prince his walk.
That Evening past, the Prince to range disposed,
Small Mount did trace by his own bounds enclosed
With Palms adorned, where Silver stream descended,
From verdant Bank, by the Others shade befriended,
Soft, gentle Murmur caused; whilst wandering Wind
Toy'd with those Leaves, their Wisp'ring noise combined.
Place for Refreshment used, some Truce, cessation,
When overti^'d with Sorrow's Contemplation.
There, Couched down, of the Realm's last state He mused,
Next, on the World, what change through Both diffused;
The inconstant World, where greatest Ranks not free;
From Towers may fall to the Cottage, low degree;
And the Innocent embrace the Block perchance.
Prime Comforts gone: such cast reflective Glance.
His Lot conceived; strong Courage to endure
Chief Balm appeared, till Death performed the Cure.
Now second Change, High Room in the King's regard,
Tho Heir to the great Thessalian Crown declared.
Contentment 'twas, his Son escaped their Hand,
Thought Traveller to some more friendly Land,
Death might on him, if there, perchance have seized.
Thus, spread upon the Bank, grown partly pleased
Through Care's Allay, soft Slumber charmed his Sense;
While Fancy waked, this stranger Dream from thence.
He seemed set down on smaller Rock, reposed; The Prince his Dream.

Sheep Grazed behind, vast Sea before disclosed
Near foot thereof; Storm further off appearing,
Whence troubled all. Winds loudly chased, Waves roaring
To fight against the Skies, Skies charged again,
Joined Thunder Showers; midst which tumultuous Scene,
Discordant Jars fair Bark seemed overtost,
Bandy'd to Ruin 't was, there sunk and lost
ORSAMNES thought: when Surges swelled more High
In his own Breast, conceived. Transformed Sky,
All changed round to silent Calm as 't were;
Lulled Babes became; smooth- Cheek'd like Virgins there
(Soft Gales) the wrinckled Main, delightful Season:
When Marble Temple strait (thing strange to Reason)
Came Floating on the Sunshine- Gilded Wave,
Tall Porch advanced; Masque-like this prospect gave
Gods, Goddesses in Ranks beheld, enthroned;
And near their Feet, as Favorites there owned,
Young Man and Maid appeared, resplendent Shining
Each Garland crowned, their Hands withal combining:
That Youth, ORSAMNES showed, Virgin most fair.
Nimphs first did ride on Dolphins Backs, that bare
Baskets of Flowers; some handled Harps, as tho
Stilled the Airy Broyls, moved Waters charmed below
To pleasing Trance with their Harmonious Noises.
Drawn near the Rock, they mounted strait, soft Voices
In Quire conjoined; the Way besprinckled round
With Roses, Violets for Venus-Ground;
Love's Bridal Shore. Next following Beheld
That heavenly Train (each radiant Sun excelled
Viewed from the Deep) with light, Celestial Paces.
Come where He sat, Apollo first forth Traces,
ORSAMNES in his Hand, whom gently does
Present to Him: for words saluting thus.
Take, Retired Lord, most brave,
Transcendent Youth foom Water's Grave;
Seeming lost as 't were to thee,
And sunk, destroyed by Destiny;
Setting Star more Bright may Rise
From thence adorn the Arcadian Skies:
Then Pallas came, spread Rays divine, as 't were,
Leading that Nymph, this Sense conjoined there.
Take this beauteous Maid withal,
Whom thou may thy Daughter call;
Lady choice, excelling Mind,
For that renowned Youth Designed:
Hope for more, Heaven does ordain,
Dead Joys may live, Revive again.
This past, All vanished round, did leave however
That Young, prime Couple still conjoined there.
ORONTES, when those Bonds of Slumber broke,
Through Strangeness caused, contentful next, awoke.
Thus often in Sleep what Things we fear and hate,
Or Love, Desire, strong Fancy does create,
Form, represent; most tho where Thoughtful Mind,
Pensive, reserved; Remembrance more inclined.
Thersander with the Prince.
As from that Mount 'tween six and Sev'n descended,
THERSANDER came, whom faithful Love commended;
Salute discharged, with pleasing Language sound,
His Son's Return declared from Corinth Ground;
Adjoined Land; since that Laconian Thrall
Might Damp his thoughts; Life's Danger there withal.
Absent himself good while with Friend of late,
Long troubled too for settling his Estate.
Then named that gallant choice to be admired,
His Son her Father's Lines consent desired;
Love nobler found, choice like himself, most free:
Virtuous and fair proclaimed, supreme Degree.
The Prince approved: Tho Friendship great (did say)
Each Woman's Person, Parts, reserved way
Moved for those Nymphs: their Fathers (next) long while
Both Pastors turned with Him, of rank Gentile;
Known worthy Men; Each Fellow- Sufferer:
Yet time's Face changed, his grant conjoined thus far:
Duke's House the Place for Marriage Celebration,
Tho Physic course bound him to the Pastor-station,
Joined solemn Thoughts. Dear Wife and Daughter Dead
Those stranger Ways; still Heart-Distemper bred.
Then told, when pleased his sober Dream; Inclined
To think some Good Presaging part combined:
Thus, that his Son, escaped from Dreadful Hands,
Like wrack or Storm, the King's surprisal Bands,
Should (lastly) Spouse enjoy whom favor showed
The God's themselves; choice Pledge from Heaven bestowed.
The Prince in Physic course
Entering the Grange two Doctors did declare;
Fortnight more past He might with Freedom share
In that Conjugal Feast, take Journey thither:
The Prince resolved (THERSANDER joined together)
Marriage should be deferred; Dervan beside
Would Coach, six Horses yield, which they would provide.
Home then He rode, small Mile to's Pastor- Grange;
Found fair FLORENA there, did Kiss exchange,
For kind Salute, tho set so firmly on
She blushed withal; that Way before unknown.
Both sitting down, whence came He briefly told,
Did next their Maze of dangers past unfold;
Whilst wonder caused, as Joy, such prime Event:
More pleasing Glances too, Dart-like, were sent,
From the Eye sometimes; the same in Supper while
She could observe: which done, with sober smile
Set down by Her, He Kissed her there again,
Most firmly Sealed (till blushed like Scarlet then)
These words conjoined; the Times were Changed now. Thersander wooing Florena.

ORSAMNES pleased, well smoothed the Prince's Brow;
He served of late his Nephew 's Love-design,
Now something for himself would Act, combine:
Gave Kiss withal: then second, Third bestowed:
Whilst Bashful, wandering, Blood her Cheeks over flowed.
Tho soon THERSANDER informed, that he desired
Her for His Wife Chaste, Love his Heart enfir'd.
She said again; His Lordship pleased to Vent
New gladsome Thoughts in Jesting Merriment.
Times changed of late. THERSANDER joined reply;
Plain Earnest 'twas, hoped she would not deny:
With Kiss confirmed. FLORENA'S gentle Heart
Began to Pant, scarce free from wounding Dart.
THERSANDER then but Thirty Five for Age,
Choice tempered Mind to's comely Personage:
Great Birth with large Estate. She Twenty four,
Good, handsome proved; beloved on either Score:
Well born She was, his Wise's Ally, and found
Same Temper last; for Marriage hopeful Ground.
After short Pause her answer framed thus;
Such worth in him Beheld (if serious
In what expressed) high, friendly Obligation,
Like Brother thought in that reserved station,
She could not least as Husband slight, refuse
( Blush there conjoined) being honor so to choose.
Thus soon the Bargain made, as He desired,
By Kiss confirmed; since Buis'ness haste required.
He told her; She next morn with him must ride,
Companion to CLERMANTHE prove beside,
Who wished her there; same Priest and Marriage-day
Should serve for both, tho done in private way.
'Twas Twelve before THERSANDER could for Close
Seal parting Kiss; then sought they Bed's repose.
Next day they reached the Merchant's Grange, e're-night,
Whose News enlarged our Noble Pair's delight,
Brought from the Prince; CLERMANTHE (Courteous, kind)
FLORENA Embraced, scarce thought her Aunt designed;
Well pleased, tho Marriage thus put off, They were,
The Prince himself since would be present there:
That Pause withal might Joys advance the more,
Both Bodies, Minds like to themselves restore;
After long Task endured, that former Maze
(So dreadful thought) where wandered many days.
Nor stands VARNESA, that late kind Convoy,
As unconcerned Spectator of their Joy,
But Partner too (CLERMANTHE under Cloud
Obscured before) chief Woman's place allowed.
CLERMANTHE's Self, now public grown, beside
With choice Garb their next great Towns supplied.
Next Morn with Beams the Globe did Beautify,
As would with their intended March comply,
Adorn the way; like blushing Handmaid there. Orsamnes Clermanthe going to the
Duke.

Things being well ordered now, Disposed, what-e're,
All forwards set (Hired Coach) by early Hour;
Morning withdrawn to the Oriental Bower,
Bright Noon succeeds; that Stage being over past,
His Charet drives the Princely Sun in haste,
Down the Azure Western Road, with blazing Head;
Whilst they themselves through Flowery Banks, fine-spread,
Their Journey took; till entered Forest wild
( Birds chaunting round) by false, bad Track beguiled. Strange sights beheld.

Near midst thereof, soft Groans like some Tormented,
Strokes loud they heard; soon after that presented,
Through smaller Glade, more Dismal Sight to view;
Nor Danger much appeared, 'twas Female crew:
Five mufled Hags did jointly all surround
With Birchin Rods a naked Man, fast bound.
The Hands tied to lofty Branch, the Feet both closed
To stump beneath, thus General Mark exposed:
Mouth (lastly) stopped, Exclaming barred thereby.
ORSAMNES with THERSANDER drawing nigh,
The Body clothed, through constant Scourges there,
With Crimson Skin, Transformed might ill appear;
Blood from most parts: like Anvile at their will,
So Scourged by those Infernal Beadles still,
As meant, like worst of Rogues, to Conjure out
His Vagrant Soul: often crying thus the Rout;
Slave, Villain, we are Furies come to rend
Thy vilest Flesh. Such did their Garb porten'd.
One pursie Hag set all the rest at gaze,
When saw the Lord's, in both did Wonder raise:
Sweet Truce how-e're to the Tortured Wretch became,
Whose Looks and Groan did Either's Mercy claim.
They asked the Offense: those Hags made strait reply:
Strange Thefts and Rapes that Rogue performed hard by;
Flesh-Div'le 'twas Great providence thus Bound Him;
They Furies sent with Scourges to surround him.
Still strange the Case, as tho some Mask from Hell;
That Troop withdrawn, when is Tongue released well,
No Thief (He cried) Himself was Robbed and bound;
When the Hags unclos'd their Riddle strait profound,
TERGORAS 'twas, DORSENGER'S Son and Heir, The Cause thereof.

Whom Uncle we to the Hermit styled there;
Ruin withal; since Bastard made his Father;
Prime wealth, Estate through Forged Plot to gather,
( This (like himself) by Fraud, conjoined Power
Had three of the Husbands near undon that Hour.
Fourth's Daughter ravished late; still Neighing on,
Tempts second Lass to play the Whore, unknown;
Good, modest Girl: close, Pandar- Letters woo,
That She would meet at certain Cave below,
Where grand Reward. Those Letters chastely viewed,
To the Mother brought, thus Vengeance was pursued.
The Girl writes back, She Would wait upon him there,
But he should come by stealth, None else appear.
Full Bargain 'twas, the Day and hour designed;
This done, those Wives and Mother's all combined;
Their Husbands help, did take their Place before
In that large Cave upon revengeful score,
Hair, Beards, transformed: One watched like Sentinel,
If single came (far off discovered well)
Least caught perchance; strange Place, reserved so,
That none but Wanderers that way would go
To cross their Plot: He entering, naught Afraid;
We Sword men are, Deliver strait; they said
( Robbed them far more) of's Golden Cash did ease him;
Left naked, bound, sign gave for the Hags to seize him.
Their Husbands gone, These strait, like Furies sent
(Strange, muffled Garb) came forth to Scourge, torment;
Nor known by whom the wrong; those Men Disguised
Thought Robbers, Thieves, whilst Guilty Heart surmis'd
The Hags came from Hell. This told with mutt'ring breath
(Just Doom conceived, tho's Father bled to Death)
Concealment gained with all, They vanished round;
Both Lord's the Man (corected thus) unbound;
Who pleads for safe Convoy to the Forest side,
And suffered was behind their Coach to Ride:
Next Cottage shelter proved, where Fault was laid
On Thievish Gang, Witch-hags that so betrayed:
Girl sent him word She came to the Place, but then
Spied dreadful Thieves, ran frighted back again.
ORSAMNES, tho small Warning needed, thence,
Good Lecture 'twas against Rapine, Violence.
Lost way being soon restored, with much delight
They Pra^ced on, till well Discerned (glad Sight)
Great Duke VERDORVS walls and lofty Towers;
Skies smiling round, Birds chanted from their Bowers,
On branches serch'd, conjoined in joyful Song:
New-drest Fields, Groves appeared, as marched along
(Prime Summer's Garb) their Mistress to Entertain;
Whilst Roses spread Skie's western Cheek again,
Like Morning first: and the amorous Sun, as 't were,
Welcome. Good Night gave choice CLERMANTHE there.
A Country Show
Not far from the House, large Troop with Joy, content
From Grove appeared, Sons, Daughters did present
Of Harvest All; were spruce tho plain to the Eye,
Men Sickles bore, tossed, Flourished off on high,
Their Women Rakes; whom Hats of Straw adorn,
Joined bunch of Flowers: Wheat- Girdle wreathed worn
'Bout every Waste. Those Foremost Two that led,
Like Sovereigns, each their commending Head
(Brisk, jolly pair) were these, the God of Wine,
Whose curled Crest, plump Waste, broad Leaves of Vine
That Month became; in's Hand however beheld,
Glass-Bottle of Grapes, his spritely Blood, excelled.
His Sunburned Queen Corn's Goddess proved, was crowned,
Wheat-sprigs and Flowers; same Girdle did surround:
Full Basket had with Fruits gay Wealth enriched.
Both bending there, by Turns withal Beseech'd
CLERMANTHE taste that Part from plenteous store
(In Country Rhimes) small Earnest 't was of more;
Much Corn and Wine their Lot should prove, Engaged,
Fruits of the Womb not Ground alone presaged.
Which She received with gentlest Smile from them
Known Tenants there, each took like precious Gem; Clermanthe brought Home.

Who this rude Mask did hasty way compose:
Showed Country-dance to Bag-pipe strait, for close.
E're-long to the Gates they came, from Coach descended,
Where stood the Duke with larger Train attended;
Who strait advanced, Salutes with high Regard
ORSAMNES first, whose Welcome there declared.
Then falls upon CLERMANTHE's Neck, bestowed
Kind Father's Kiss, Embrace, till Joy o're-flow'd
In melting Tears; which were Repaid again;
Told her; She should Succed her Mother then,
Prime Mistress of that House, to the height esteemed:
For which her thanks not least Defective seemed;
Eyes cast to Heaven; from Death restored, as 'twere,
BORGANES Rape, conjoined Sad Thraldom there.
The Old Servants then came near to Kiss her Hand;
Who, Freed from that Gondace's Slavish Band,
Young Lady viewed, did fall to downright Crying;
Loud Welcome that, their want of Words supplying.
Supper being past, the Duke ORSAMNES shows,
FLORENA too his Garden brave (for Close)
Founts, Walks, and Bowers; Neat, curious every Thing;
CLERMANTHE to ORSAMNES Whispering:
There the Arbor was, where made her first Bold Motion
That Concubine, BRISOLDAN's Base Love-potion:
There Mused She often, then walked with folded arms,
Feared Dreadful Wrath, when saw dispelled her Charms;
Nor proved that Grove, the Room, large Water- grot
( Fatal to the Whore) where the Amorous Songs, forgot:
When Cornets heard from Branches Round did cease,
Loud Hobois, last, wild Satyrs Dance to please:
Long Arched Bower withal, through which she fled,
When Poisonous Broth thrown out, near Murdered:
Viewed Sun's departing Beams for more Content,
Whilst former Care did present Joys augment.
Short Masque-device, Kinsman by the Mothers-side,
PLENORMUS framed, with which Themselves Complied;
Against Marriage-night: for Scenes employed (what more)
Chief Painters, Engineers, that Artful store
In Mantinea found; Brave Clothes prepared
For Wedding-garb e're long by us Declared.
The Prince comes.
That Fortnight past, the Prince ORONTES came,
Done Physick-course, whence All did Joys proclaim:
Temper well changed for Body and for Mind,
Still Solemn tho; Wife, Daughter's Loss combined.
Saluted first the Duke, with whom begun
Close, friendly League; next Smiled upon his Son:
CLERMANTHE (last) did Kiss, Embrace withal,
Whom now ( He said) should Wife and Daughter call,
Stead of those seized by Fate; thought much improved,
Seen when last Masque at Court; like Gem beloved:
So Prime ORSAMNES Choice (conjoined well)
The ra^sack'd Greece scarce found her Paralle^.
Then gave Her with his own Hand, Exhorted tho;
He should Good Husband be, Deserve Her so.
Next Morn but one, which rose most Blushing-fair, Clermanthe's Marriage.

Like Bride it self, when calm, serene^^ Air,
Their Marriage proved (all Parties joined and free)
With public State performed, Solemnity:
Grand Troop of Lords and Ladies there present,
(Such gallant Show) Star-Spangled Firmament:
Those Mansion-Walls clear Cornets, Trumpets sound,
That gladsome Noise did Cheerful way Rebound.
Forth came the Bridegroom, Bride, their Hands entwined,
Whose Vsker, Lord THERSANDER proved designed:
So Lovely both, Transcendent Pair they seemed,
Like Suns of the Globe, as either Sex, esteemed,
Observed by All great Wisdom, Power Divine,
So well could frame; as well did Match Combine:
She blushed, he smiled, both cheerful Hearts portrayed
In Looks Serene; conjoined beams displayed.
His Suit and Coat, which Gallant showed to the Eye,
Sky-colour'd Satin proved, of choicest Die:
The Coat was large, reached down to the Calf, no more,
With Clustered Grapes, high-wrought, embroidered over;
Gold-Purl the fruit, set off the leaves beheld
With Silver Plate: Rich, Gorgeous Work, excelled.
Long Buttons, Loops, Enameled those, broad-spread
The Breast and Sides thereof fair Garnished.
Buskins to That with Gallant Ribbons tied,
Whose Tops with Pearls and Gems were beautified.
Her Gown White Satin was, whose lower Part
Did please the Eye with same Embroidered Art,
High Border round the Skirts, of Growing Flowers
In colored Silk; some Silver, Gold; Pearl-show'rs
Dissolved on them from scattered Clouds above,
Like Drops of May: Birds there, Flies seemed to Move.
Her gorgeous Arms Carnation Satin wore,
With Silver Caulwork- Dress part-cover'd over,
Like the Orbs of Light; same Garb withal her Head
(Joined Rubies, Emeralds, Saphires round) bespread.
Tho still what Garb so e're by Her was worn,
CLERMANTHE'S Self did Braveness grace, Adorn,
Both having passed their General Bow, Salute,
Customs observed, which Marriage there did suit;
The Priest advanced, Themselves prepared withal,
Next, Clasped Hands for Posture Conjugal;
Were Joined in Formall'st sort, the Arcadian way,
Tho Blushing Stream the Bride's fair Cheeks display.
This done, the Prince and Duke came near, the Rest
Of The Ample Train themselves withal Addressed,
Gave kind Salutes; conjoined then beside
Wishes of Joy to the Bridegroom and the Bride,
Shrill Cornets noise, with more Loud Music then
Did seem to Speak, Chant forth the same again.
The King Guest there.
Word strait was brought, the King meant to be there,
Would Dine with them; Young Prince his gallant Heir;
Joined Princess too, his Wife contracted Way:
Informed was of this great Marriage-day:
ORSAMNES loved, tho Guest appeared much rather,
Since Present found ORONTES there, his Father.
For Duke VERDORUS Self. He lived Retired;
Sought Ease, enjoyed, till both late Kings Expired;
Held in with That last Reigned; less Object far
Of Envy proved, more Free from Court-bred Jar.
Thus, Table's ordered strait, before He come,
In the Upper end of their large Dining Room.
He came by Twelve, Embraced ORONTES there,
Like ancient Friend; great'st Signs of Joy, whatever:
Much Glad he was (Declar') to see him then
Wear smoother Brow, and Range abroad again.
VERDORUS, Next; the Bridegroom, Bride, for Close;
Wished them all Joy: Prince, Princess as kind shows.
Now Trumpets heard, Meat seemed to Dance a Measure
To the Warlike sound, brought in for Pallat's pleasure,
Triumphant Taste; with Choice of Food delighted,
As tho They had their Regal Guest invited.
The King well pleased to Dine in Friendly accord
With the Other Guests, reserved the Midst of the Board
To's Royal Self; some Space of the sides, before;
The rest filled up with Lords and Ladies store.
The Bride at the Upper end, whilst waited He;
Might claim that day her Female Sovereignty.
Set down in State, soft Music entertains
( Banquet for the Ear) with choice Harmonious strains,
Wherein the Greeks excelled: in the midst the King
To the Bride and Bridegroom Drank, both Honoring.
The Conduit Claret poured, might Hogshead show,
(Rich, Natural Fount) for the Vulgar broached below^
Dinner being past, where Ransacked far might seem
Three Elements for food of choice esteem,
Restored by the King, with gracious hand,
To the Prince ORONTES former Power, command:
Whose solemn heart (small pause) in Thankful way
D^clin'd the same; put off till farther Day.
Convenient hour they rode in stately sort
To the joining Park, prepared for Hunting sport; Hunting in the Park.

The King, the Prince, ORONTES too complied,
The Duke and Lords, with Brides-groom, beauteous Bride;
Young Princess there, well mounted All did show,
Great Ladies, last; fine, gallant Prospect so.
ORSAMNES Horse was Bay, by Nature trimmed,
Dressed with black spots; for color choice esteemed,
So ordered those; best Gloss, did shine so clear,
Like clothed in Satin all; as Silken near
For smoothness thought: his Nostrils breathed and Eyes
Bred Flames, as 'twere; prime Model, shape descries.
Trod the Earth so mounting, Proud, as if some one
OF the Sun's fleet Coursers was, disposed for none
But the heavenly Road of Day; did prance as knew
What form he had, Great Rider's beauty too,
Both excellent: ORSAMNES which inclined,
Governed by Art, might seem to back the Wind:
Both Horse and Man so jointly Moved, as neither
Were single piece, but both did grow together.
Here Is dappled Gray, prime, handsome thing for Beast,
So delicate appeared; which often had pressed
GONDACE'S Self: his well-spread Mane, unbound
(Like Nymphs neglected Hair) near touched the Ground.
Bright, smooth as Glass, so beauteous- limbed, as it
For Rosey bed, some silken Couch were fit.
Light-prancing too for the Heel, but showing more
Fine, awful reverence, as thought he bore
Some Goddess-weight, Divine; whose Heavenly Load
Lest should on the Earth offend, most nicely Trod.
Large Saddle Seagreen Velvet was, by Art
Wrought Silver Waves, whose storm-like, mounting part
Did Froth present; imbroyder'd Dolphins there,
Rich skaled all; both Dolphins, Waves (as 't were)
Might seem to Roll when the wanton Beast did move:
Her stirrup choice did Silver Gilded prove.
Eight Footmen next her Lord and Her, commended
For the handsome Garb, Princess the same attended.
Then came the King's, young Prince's Coach of State,
Brides Charet Third, that proud GONDACE'S late;
Triumphant 'twas, with Purple Velvet lined,
GORGEOVS the rest, Purl Fringes broad combined:
Six Horses white, by the Duchess used before:
In the Rere beheld conjoined large Coaches store.
Stag being run down, which did Life's course conclude
Through noise of Horns his Funeral ensued, Short Silvan Mas^^^.

The Huntsmen's tuneful Peal; whilst Partner-sound
Both Woods and Rocks, sent Echoes far, rebound:
Cool, pleasant Creams were brought that Evening-hour,
By Silvan Servitors, long covered Bower
Well furnished, most dainty Fruits and Wine;
Clear Cornets too their warbling strains combine,
Perched on the Top thereof; in Rural Dance
Those Silvans Masquer-like (for close) advance.
The King with Prince and Princess now did take
Their formal leaves, tho Invitation make
First of ORONTES, Duke, then Brides-groom, Bride
To the Prince's Marriage near, who strait complied;
Sev'n Days from thence, being yet betrothed alone;
Next way to the Fields for Mantinea gone.
ORONTES Duke returned in the Charret strait,
With Brides groom, Bride, large Coaches train in State.
Some should lie there, since Mask performed that Night,
Others in the Town; the rest depart, Moon light.
Banquet there was, which served in Supper's stead,
Their Table now for wanton fancy spread;
Small hunger's cause; well pleased the Nobler kind;
Thus ranged by Eight for the early Mask designed:
Which soon began, appeared with comely brow,
As shorter Time, best Agents could allow.
First place observe although, the Ground of the Plot
On these two Things depends (perchance forgot,
Long since declared) Heir to the Thessalian Throne
Brides-groom, the Bride to Cyprus-Crown was shown.
MASQVE.
When Curtain drawn, first Scene 1. Scene.
thereof portrayed
Rude Wilderness, great falling Storm displayed
Of larger Hail; the branches bowed as 'twere
Through the violence, did hoary grown appear,
Both Rocks and Ground; heard noise like blustering wind,
Seen Lightning flash: strange horror's Den designed.
Thence Goblins came, Hell- furies such invented;
Troubles of the World, harmful Brood represented:
Rage, Malice, Envy, Rapine forth advanced,
In wildest Garb, their boisterous Antique danced.
These being returned, the Scene 2. Scene
was changed quite;
To lovely Calm, fine prospect of Delight:
Spread on each hand beautiful Mount to the Eye,
With Laurels, Bays, victorious Palms on high,
Choice noble Plants; pure honor's Temple the one
Did Garnish fair, from the other Virtue's shown.
Rivers beneath, like ropes of Pearl displayed,
Or Crystal Chains adorned the Field, o're-stray'd:
Banks dressed with flowers between those Mounts descried,
IN the farther End two Barques at Anchor ride;
Smooth, calmest Sea; both Rocks and Waters face
Gilt by the Sun, the whole Sky serene did grace.
Neptune far off, in Charret drawn (as 'twere)
With Tritons, round did range for Pleasure there.
Priests viewed, as tho from that first Mount descended, Priest message.

To the Brides-groom, Bride joined Message recommended.
Great Princely Pair, from Honor's Temple, know,
I Am sent to You Ambassador below:
Six younger Knights sent from Thessalian State
To proffer, yield the Prince ORONTES late
That glorious Crown, due from his Grandfather,
Expelled by Treas'nous force, unlawful'st War:
Six Ladies too from Cyprus wealthy Land,
With Crown, which Duke VERDORVS may command
Their beauteous Queen MINDANA'S Heir disclosed;
Who fled from thence by Tyrant's Arm Deposed:
Each Troop withal engaged ( such high Regard
Shown to your selves, their Royal Heirs declared)
These Crowns should be first to your Hands presented.
Long crossed through Storms by Furies raised, augmented,
To honor, Virtue's Temples at the last
Both Parties came; Sea's dangers overpast.
Where finding All they Agents were employed
To married Pair, Prince, Princess called (o're-joy'd)
Now Fellow- servants grown, the Example moved,
Each made their worthy Choice, united proved:
Will shortly here with their Grand charge attend;
Mean while their humblest Duties recommend.
Returning back, one Water- Nymph each side
From the shore appeared, Water- Nymphs, Sea-Gods.
in Marriage- Song complied
For this chief joined Pair, and All the rest;
Robes stained like Waves, with Tensel-borders dressed.
Sea-Gods near them beheld (called Tritons were)
Long Coats, Seagreen, who joined for Chorus there.
SONG.
1. Nymph. FUries, Storms o're-master'd prove,
Heaven that band to Hell confounded;

2. Nymph. Smiling calm appears for Love,
The Earth with gales of Joy surrounded:

Chorus, Nymphs, Sea-Gods. Birds do sing,
Their welcome bring;
Lovers and Flowers cause double Spring.

II.
1. Nymph. Two, like Suns, conjoined grown,
Brought forth strait six Pair of Lovers;

2. Nymph. Honor, Virtue's stamp each one,
Like their Lady, Lord, discovers;

Chorus all. -- Which do shine,
Whilst Beams combine
Great, Influential pair, Divine.

III.
1. Nymph. Thus, Triumphant proves at last
True, Noble Worth, with Laurel crowned;

2. Nymph. Those joyful twelve, dangers o're-past
(Set Stars) do clearly rise, renowned.

Both Nymphs -- Whilst display,
Transcendent way,
Those Sun-like Two new-breaking day.

Chorus of all, Nymphs, Sea Gods. All Delights
That may Reason, Fancy please,
(Clear from Bodies, Mind's disease)
Attend your Day's, conjugal Nights:
And let no more
( Still smoothed Waves as calmest shore)
Foul Envy's Storms disturb like those before.

Triton speaks. Come forth you Ladies of the Stream, Advance,
Express your Joy by cheerful, flowing Dance.

This being said, those TRITONS all withdrew
Behind the Scene; that Rockie part in view.
Four Water-Nymphs did then conjoined appear
To the other two, same Glist'ring Garb did wear;
Walked down the Stairs, in smooth and gliding measure,
Their parts discharged like Champaign Dance of pleasure.
Nymph speaks. Approach ye TRITONS from the deep, prepare
( Kind partners too) by Dance your Joy declare.
Four TRITONS then, black Curls, the steps desended,
Trumps wreathed shown, whose artful Dance commended.
These being returned, the Scene was changed strait; Third Scene.

Viewed Garden's from, most dainty, delicate;
Prime flowery Dress, choice Walks, with Tarras- Mounts,
Carved Statues rare, with artificial Founts;
Fine Arbours, some of the longer sort descried,
Like branched Arch, seen planted Fruits beside;
Clear lovely Sky, bright scattered Clouds how-e'er, Cupid, Ayr-Spirits.

Small airy Spirits perched discerned there.
Four, as from them, came sliding down below;
From the Garden strait (gold Quiver, silvered Bow)
Small Cupid joined; W^ng'd handsome Boys, as shown
Their Prince himself still Danced there alone.
He back to the Garden walked, those Spirits then,
By Masking art, soared up to the Clouds again.
Fourth Scene then viewed, Fourth Scene.
where HYMEN'S bower designed
(Termed Marriage- God) with silver Pillars shined;
Long, open From, the Skirts beset with Roses;
Green Laurel else both Back and Roof incloses.
Grand Maskers placed beneath, those Ladies, Knights,
Twelve, threefold Rank; whose Prospect Sense delights.
Skie-colourd Silk by the manly Troop was worn,
With Silver Stars, each Garland did Adorn:
Carnation by the Maids with Silver Flowers,
White Ribbon-knots, the Heads lofty-drest like Towers.
This well observed, Gilt Charet from the one side
Softly descends, Charrets descending.
small Clouds did break, divide;
Chief VENUS sat, brave-trim'd white Garment wore:
Star on her Brow: Three Graces ranged before,
As choice Concomitants, whom did invest
Fine, party colored Stuff, like Sisters dressed.
From the other Side a silvered Charet came,
Where Hymen viewed in Crimson Robe, like Flame
Besprinkled all: at Foot young Hebe placed,
Goddess of youth, green Mantle, Silver-grac'd.
Whilst sliding down, by turns, they choicely Sung,
Till midst of the Air their fixed Charets hung.
SONG.
Venus. HYMEN, HYMEN, HYMEN;
Break forth thou Marriage- God, descend,
Thy cheerful presence Lend,

3 Graces. To VENUS and the Assistant GRACES.
Heightning Love's Embraces:

Hymen HYMEN comes, great Beautie's Queen,
My Daughter too behold,

Hebe. Goddess of Youth, till Spring-like green,
Choice Bridal Guest inrol'd.

Chorus of Water-Nymphs, Sea-Gods. Sea-Gods and Water-Nymphs loud Quire,

Conjoyning All,
This Festival
Let Us chant till the Early Globe admire.

II.
Venus. Have Thou conjoined in Marriage- Bands
Those worthy'st mortal Payrs,

Hymen. Combined they are both Heart and Hands,
Show like Terrestrial Stars,

3 Graces. Whilst their Master, Mistress there,
Which did the Examples prove
May beauteous Sun and Moon appear.
In The ga^lant Orb of Love.

Chorus of Water-Nymphs, Sea-Gods. Both are Suns for splendid Rays,
And may conjoined seem t'outblaze
Those lofty Seven;
Chief Lights on Earth beheld, as those in Heaven.

III.
For leading way unto the Rest,
Thus Venus bounteous Mind's expressed;
I Will give to the Female Train, confirm
Beauty till Elder age.
For Love till last Expiring Term
I shall to Both engage.
And we Graces (Each Assures)
Youthful Season whilst endures,
From our Amorous Store, Treasure.
Contribute Joy, Mirth and Pleasure.
Chorus of Water-Nymphs, Sea-Gods.
Woods and Rocks with Echoes sound,
Like us, their Praises round,
Until to the Arched Sky rebound.
Prove their Joys like Streams o're-flowing. Grand Masque Dance.

Favorites of Heaven showing;
May They be
Rare Precedents to all Posterity.
This Song performed, their Charets slowly rise,
With equal Pace till shrouded in the Skies.
Then forth Grand Masquers came, Six handsome Pair; Fifth Scene.

Tho foremost Two might seem Trascendent, Rare
Next Brides-groom and the Bride did All advance,
Trod Floor beneath for First Grand masquing Dance:
Where Sounds well pleased Spectator's Ear, and the Eye
Fine Motion caught, choice Form with Bravery.
This Dance being closed thus, the Scene was then
From Summer-Bow'r to City changed again,
In The Front whereof great Royal Palace shined,
Magnificent for the Princely Pair designed.
The Masquers here their Faces turned to the side,
Where sat the Brides-groom and the Beauteous Bride,
Low-bowing All; then strait their middle pair
Marched softly forth, and, shown Obeisance fair,
Presented, ranged a Crown at Either's feet:
So to their Place withdraw: mean time that sweet,
Harmonious Troop sung from the Scene, their Station,
( Nymphs with Sea-Gods) like joyful Celebration.
SONG.
1 Nymph GReat, transcendent Pair for Birth,
Virtue as corporeal Beauty,
TO whom of Duty

2 Nymph Stoops prime Excellence on Earth
See what Heaven restore

Both Nymphs For you more.
Chorus of Water-Nymphs, Sea-Gods.
Gifts thought worthy your Receipt;
To advance and make more Great
Your Honor, Happiness, Complete.

II.
1 Nymph Those Bright Crowns, Allegiance showing,
From two Faithful Lands embrace;

2 Nymph Prince, Princess called, such Presents owing
Your High Fame as Royal Race

Both Nymphs Rule withal over Subjects Hearts
Either Crown imparts.

Chorus of Water-Nymphs, Sea-Gods. Next those Kingly Fathers there
You Successors choice Appear;
May for the inward Worth and Merit
Seem their Virtues to Inherit:
Prove entwined
Scepter, like your selves, combined
And never be your Glorious Rays outshin'd.

Song being closed, their secoond Dance begun,
Prime, stately That: with which the Masque was done.
All thus performed, Strange Event.
that Gallant, leading Pair
Walked strait to the upper end, where in great Chair
ORONTES sat, bowed, saying, Our Lord and Father.
When startled grown, overwhelmed, confounded rather.
These words conjoined; What art Thou with that Name,
Those Looks employed to Torture me? I am,
My Lord (she said) your Daughter. Hah! My Daughter!
(He answered strait) such once I had; seized, caught her
By the trembling hand, lest Air, deluding Dream;
Gazed on her Face; whilst Blood's disordered Stream
Recoiled to the Heart: Your Daughter, she replied,
FONTANA called. Ghosts wander then; He cried;
She was long since Dead Corpse, Coffined, interred!
Thought Dead, My Lord ( She joined) what is that I heard?
(Said He) Thought Dead! Good Gods, Am I Awake?
No doubt, said She, my Lord. O Do not take
(He strait conjoined) the Advantage of that Form,
Known Voice withal, to raise bad Sorrow's Storm;
I want no more, She smiling, weeping then,
Heaven knows I am your Daughter, said again,
Which strait confirmed the Brides-groom standing by.
Strait snatching her in Grasping way, more nigh,
Kiss sealed (tho panting Heart) most plain, said He;
It Is now my Girl, FONTANA, very she;
Closed in mine Arms. Who kneeled conjoined too,
My Husband This, be pleased ( my Lord) to view;
For which stolen choice, tho Virtuous, noble prize,
I pardon beg. Thou have it Daughter, rise,
(He said) the Man's worthy of great Regard,
Saluted Him, wished Joy to both. Declared
ORSAMNES then, They were good while concealed
Within that House; now (thought fit'st time) revealed:
Her Life it self kept lately in the Dark; unknown:
Much wonder from Spectator's Eyes was shown,
When from below did (marked by All) ascend
A Lady slightly veiled, A Second strange Event.
to the upper End,
Of gallant shape for Garment Handsome, neat;
Who drawing near to the Prince ORONTES seat,
Thus spoke, (with Arms mean while himself Entwined)
My dearest Lord. When partly of the former Mind
Delusions Reigned, grown staring, Who art Thou
(Joined he withal) come to torment me now?
That Body, Voice? I am (she answered there)
Your Married Wife. My Wife! Transformed as 't were.
The Prince conjoined. Yes; Answered she again;
Your Wife CLARENZA. Fates mock mortal Men
(Said He) to Death; looked under the Falling Hood;
Hah! somewhat here disturbs my Frantic Blood.
(Startled much more) perchance this General Night
Dead waken round, those Living to Affright:
Some mangled Doom to her Destruction brought;
I viewed her mournful Ghost. Dead Carcass thought,
( She joined) my Lord; but Heaven, Prime skill beside
Go, the art her Handsome Ghost, He strait replied:
And this that Field of Ghosts Elizean:
Or Dreams deceive, No shadow ( She again
Conjoined, Wept, unveyl'd) Trust Senses Power;
Your Wife Disowned thus! Strange Pregnant Hour
Big-charg'd (said He) with Miracles; Love-flaming,
Caught, held her, Kisses her, then strait exclaiming,
Nay, now thou art She, CLARENZA'S self, confessed;
That Dying hour does seize perchance, Arrest,
And Heaven ordains through monstrous Favor, I
Should thus Dissolve in Gladsome Ecstasy.
My Reason Strength does want to endure the Load;
Lest this frail Barque with Joys be overflowed.
Mother and Daughter ran most fondly there. Fontana and Clarenza.

TO each others Arms, as then both raised were
From slumbering Tomb, since thought each other Dead
Those Postures, Looks, such Joy shown, figured,
Like Sorrow for the Half-face; Tears, smiles compound;
Their gentle Hearts so strained, Transported found.
The Brides-groom then, to the Height rejoiced, came,
His Duty paid; CLERMANTHE too the same,
Owned for dear Mother in Law; whom strait entwined
CLARENZA there, high Birth, as Noble Mind
Informed of; still Beauty choice beheld
That Youthful Pair withdrawn, scarce paralleled,
All Wept at last; till She more solemn fashion
(Returned to Life that Realm) congratulation
From Greatest Ones received: Some looked as tho
Strange Vision saw, no Masque, since ended so.
The Prince could scarce those Comforts rightly enjoy,
So strange appeared, till Both their Tongues employ
For the manner how (short needful Grounds alone)
They Death escaped; least wrong to the Bridegroom shown;
CLARENZA's Part soon heard, FONTANA's tho
Thought best for Private Hour, reserved so.
Of Both e're long more largely inform we shall,
Since various Webs, more Threads comprize withal.
Then marched forth the Lord THERSANDER there, Thersander with Florena.

FLORENA led by the Hand; She blushed however,
Whilst He did smile; stoll'n Match it proved that day,
Since the Brides-groom ( He said) did lead the way,
Chose the Honest Road Himself had followed thus,
Grown Married Man; times changed, less dangerous.
Which large Contentment gave, unlook'd-for sight,
Wished Joy by All for second Wedding- Night.
When strait Advanced a Third conjoined Pair,
CLERMANTHE'S Nurse, who showed that faithful care,
MORNEDA called; and Doctor skilful grown
In Physick's Art, by name of Vordes known;
Friend to FONTANA and her Husband there
(More said anon, Guests name withal did bear
As then Themselves) being Thirty five for Age,
Spruce, handsome Man, did with MORNEDA engage,
Of pleasing Form, scarce thirty three o're-past:
Rich Widow proved, near MANTINEA (last)
Good Grange enjoyed, stolen Match that Morn beside,
For which She Pardon asked of the lovely Bride.
And now the Bride was led by Virgin-train
( Each seeming close, confederated Brain
For private Plot) to the Marriage Bed in haste,
Like precious Pearl from Garments there uncas'd
To Enrich the Sheets: most lovely Form then wore
When purest Self, with nightly Dress, no more:
Her Body shrouded Decent way (fair Gem)
Like Beautie's Mine, or unknown World by them.
The Brides-groom next (concomitants) was called;
Who Clothes discharged, which then like Harness galled,
Stiff Coat of Male; advanced strait to the Bride,
Was couched there by his Beloved's side.
All soon withdrawn, ORSAMNES reaped at last
Love's Harvest- Fruits, bad Former Toil o're-past;
Height'ned, endeer'd the more: late Storms annoyed,
Now Calm appears; CLERMANTHE fair enjoyed.
THERSANDER then retired (less formal State)
To his FLORENA'S Bed, since growing late;
Would lie alone no more: The Doctor proved
Copartner too, MORNEDA much beloved.
Next Day was kept FONTANA's Marriage Feast,
Wife Year and Half, Each former Person Guest;
Who the Upper end adorned too as Bride:
For Hunting All in the Afternoon complied.
Those Stories here may fitly Ranged ensue, Clarenza's Story.

CLARENZA's first, shown smaller Map to view.
Surpised and Coach'd, her Husband left for Dead,
Near that Park-lodg (which largely mentioned)
By foul GORDANVS Hand, since Rival graced,
Himself Refused; the Arcadian Bounds o're-past,
Laconian Wood fit thought for Act so vile,
Rambling with his Comrades for Certain Isle.
And there by Huntsman scared from Ravishment,
First Grand Design; Death next resolved Intent;
Tumbling Her down from Dreadful Rock, least Blood
Dead Corpse descried. Those near as ranged the Wood;
Slight sprouting Branch, forth from that Rock well growing,
Cut off the depth large way, Rare Fortune showing,
Her daintiest Limbs embraced, more Gently so
Did Dandle strait to Branch sprung far below,
Which kissed them kindly there; but weaker found,
Surrendered (last) to the Hard-saluting Ground:
Where senseless bulk she lay, tho Fair with all,
Body much bruised and Head, so great the Fall:
Chief Lord of the Hunting Train came Riding by,
Through Field conjoined, cast gentler Glance, sad Eye
On the mournful Object there, whose Form excelled;
Rich Clothes, brave Dimon-Carkanet beheld
(Whereof through Haste by the Villains not bereaved)
Showed Nobler Rank, some signs of Life perceived.
Strait carried her to the House of worthy Friend
(But Half mile off) whom for important end
Did Visit late; nor soon departing Guest:
And being a Man of learned Parts possessed,
As Lordly Name, Degree, with skilful Hand
In the Surgeon's Art (praised by Laconian Land)
First Motion caused, waked slumbering Sense e're-long,
The Head sadly harmed; faint Spirits made more strong,
(In part renewed) conjoined certain Days:
Tho still so weak for Voice and Brain, alas!
Could not make known her self; nor came the sound,
Least Noise thereof beyond the Arcadian Bound.
The Lord returning now through great Affairs,
Yet loath to leave (since Ranged amongst his Cares)
CLARENZA there, might else be thought Unkind;
June's season, warm, soft Litter's Bed combined,
Took Her along: whose House there harbored showing
Prime Surgeon, best, from whence his Knowledge growing;
But Crazy Man, not fit at all to Ride,
Loathed for some Cause that Country's Part, beside
Large River's stream (next) to be Ferry'd over
Which proved between: such (last) her Beauty-store,
Fine handsome Grace returned, the Lord in the end
( Widow, or Maid) did choice for Wife intend.
She Is seized by Pirates.
Crossing by Ferry-boat that River there,
Deep aslo found, Pirates that shrouded were
Behind a Rock, manned Barque with sturdy Train,
Strait Seized on them; complaints were lost, in Vain.
Might Charm as well Tempestuo^s Storm as those
Rought Plund'rers of the Wave; nor could oppose.
By svvimming strait the Lord escaped their Povv'r;
Some going to Cast over board that Hour
The Lady's self, like Bulk diseased, espying
Small Box of Pearls, rich Diamonds there lying
(Grand Fees for Cure) their Captain tenderhearted
First Life allowed, then skillful Hand imparted
(Choice Surgeon) toward her Health; withal designed
That She should prove his Gallant Concubine.
Now long at Sea, and Gained convenient Prize,
They steered for Home with their Robbed Merchandise,
Landed on Tyrian Ground; their Prisoners where,
Sold off for Slaves, like Market-Beast appear.
CLARENZA proved the Captain's Gem, well tended
In his own House, till Beauty choice commended;
Through Health restored more Lustful way inclined:
Strong Temper found, with sad, perplexed Mind:
Thus, lovely Form preserved tho Grieved Heart,
Pleading with Tears (where joined her Friendly Part
His Sister too) she might be rather Sold
For Lady's Handmaid, since good Present Gold
The Captain liked, long doubtful Ransom thought
He Grants thus far; to the Court CLARENZA brought.
Friend placed Her where the Queen should traverse by,
Who viewed her strait (informed) with pleased Eye;
Much Beauty loved, and praised the Greekish Nation;
To wait on her gave large consideration,
Known what She was, being humorous, and proud,
A Princess should, to slavish lowness bowed,
On her attend, for one whole year at least
No Ransom should her thence redeem, Expressed.
As for her Lord, since Wounded saw to fall
By Murdering Swords, left Prostrate so withal,
She did conclude him Slain, sad Mourner there:
Lived Favored thus, Captived Restraint how-e're.
That year expired, Arcadian Merchant, friend
Landing by chance, She seen, did strait attend;
Told her Lord's life, withdrawn as Pastor tho;
Fair Daughter's Death, whence Tears did Cheeks o're-flow:
Had that young King still breathed, sh' had found him dead,
Soon both returned, made shorter by the Head.
Now, constant Heart, to enjoy her Lord desiring,
By the Queen set Free, whose Promise so requiring;
That Merchant bound for Home soon brought her hither,
To Mantinea thus they came together:
Where noised she heard ORSAMNES Wedding-Feast,
Her Husband their, proved nightly intruding Guest.
GORADNUS with those five Comrades, all bound
For Cretan Isle (just vengeance, Doom) were Drowned.
FONTANA'S Story.
FONTANA'S Chance, next place we shall present,
Shown more at large since various for the Event.
Mother being by GORDANVS seized, thought Dead,
And Father gash'd with Wounds, confined to's Bed
In that Park-Lodge; to the Royal Town (less fear)
And Countess-Aunt she is sent, great Widow there:
For age Seventeen, ripe Beauty grown, excelling,
Choice Parts, sweet Nature too those Parallelling.
Sent Order the Aunt should her direct, beside,
In all things Mother like; Fontana's sent to her Aunt.
her wary Guide
For Marriage-choice: which part she changed thus,
Incroaching way; Times being grown dangerous,
She should in All dispose of Her, full Power
For the Husbands choice: as told Her self that hour.
Harsh froward Temper was, so strict did prove,
She never from her Daughters sight should move,
Or elder Maid's; to the Garden followed strait,
Nay, Closet-door, given Porter Charge at Gate.
Few day's conjoined, an Earl of handsome Fortune,
Known by the Aunt, did her for Wife importune;
Coarce Person tho, of Weak, defective mind,
Whom much She loathed; the Aunt eagrest way inclined:
Large Gifts from him received; did urge, o're-strain:
FONTANA pleads her younger Years again. Silvander love to Fontana.

Her Aunt and she e're-long, one solemn Day,
MINERVA'S Temple entered both, to Pay
Devotions their, which time her Gallant Spouse
Beheld her Form, SILVANDER called, and Bows
TO Imperial Love: Goddess on earth She seemed,
To whom all Hearts due Sacrifice esteemed.
Anthem then Sung, He fixed delightful Eyes
Upon Her often, whose soberness implies
True speaking Flames of chastely tempered Love;
Since in those Orbs the Soul does clearest move.
Looks su'd and vowed, as 'twere, not marked by the Aunt,
But much by Her what Thoughts Predominant;
Conjoined transcendent Form, rich Clothes surveyed,
Prime Countenance no meaner Rank displayed,
Nor vulgar-temper'd Mind to the loving Heart:
Which Gestures so were answered on her Part,
(Choice, Modest Sweetness shown) Despairing Thrall
Not threatened proved, presumption Checked withal.
Rites Sacred past, SILVANDER followed home
His morning- Star, till set and housed become,
Good space between; where seeming blinded grown,
Soul lost with Her, Vordes Silvander's Friend,
forth marched strait (well known)
That Physick-Doctor mentioned once before,
And Vordes called: now take conjoined far more:
Choice Friend he was, first by his Grandsire trained,
Brought up from clouts; by's Father next maintained
In Student-way long time, till learned Art,
Much practice got: This more obliging Part,
By him redeemed, when Murther's dreadful fear,
Prime Doctor thought by the Aunt, then Lodger there;
Her darling- Girl his Patient also proved:
Whom walking near (as by rare Fortune moved,
Conducted so) SILVANDER strait embraced?
Which Act FONTANA saw, since chanced to cast
Glance from above; then more concealed, retired
To cloister, nook, with earnestness inquired
Who that young Lady was, next, the elder Aunt;
Since Doctor seemed employed, there conversant.
VORDES informed; when strait SILVANDER prayed,
That through his Power (if ruled so far, o're-sway'd)
He might Salute that choice, transcendent Part
Of Nature's works, breathed forth by Tongue his Heart,
As did that Morn well blaze it by his Eyes:
Tho damping Fears, which Lovers often surprise.
VORDES grown sad, that motion, Task propounded,
Knowing how hard, what obstacles surrounded;
Informed again her Princely Birth, Descent,
Father alive, with Portion's large Extent,
That Countess Aunt's high-soaring thoughts beside
Great, loftiest Aims for Her (as no mean Bride)
Both Rank, Estate for one most earnest seemed,
Huge landed Lord (by the Lady naught esteemed,
Himself in heart conceived) for cooling close,
Strict Aunt; severe, both Maids and Daughters, those
Still Scout-like followed Her; no way for them
To obtain the Prize; unequalled Stratagem.
SILVANDER Galled, conjoyns, Much valued Friend,
I Am plunged, sunk, if your kind Aid not send
Supporting branch, as 'twere: in losing her
I Am lost my self; this life and all (dear Sir)
Seem there wrapped up, Involved: her gentle Glance,
Eyes pleasing Beams did sooth my hope, advance;
No cruel Breast proclaimed; O, make me Able
To Wed, enjoy, or call me miserable.
The Doctor moved, since well conceived that High,
Threefold engaging Score, strong friendly Tie
Conjoined, last; entreats, that he would Pause,
Self-conquerour perchance, till Night withdraws;
To's Lodging come next Morn, they would talk again.
VORDES departs with shrewdly puzzled Brain,
Sad- tasked thoughts (since likely Fi^ to endure)
By what safe means both grand Exploit and Cure
To bring about; prime Cordial showed Fruition:
First Groundwork tho in that abstruse Condition
The Lady's Grant appeared, to obtain her Love,
Good hopes whereof did from her mildness prove.
Choice Temper, Sweet; Transcendent Form and Shape
Of young SILVANDER joined (whilst loathed as Rape
That Lord's embrace) Garb, Carriage Courtly were:
Harsh, sow'r her Aunt, shown friendly'st Aspect there
Toward him regard, whose Patient when arrived
First weak became, of healthful Spirits deprived
Through Mother's loss, sad Father's Wounds combined:
Tho Love o're-past, great cloudy Maze behind:
So followed still to every Chamber-floor,
Their Garden-walks (as said) her Closet-door
Warned Porter too; how, shunned all noise, Alarm
To bring her clearly off, no Magick-charm.
Long mused he thus; next morning found in Bed
SILVANDER there, when kindly visited,
O're-charg'd through Passion's weight, Tyrannick power:
Disordered Pulse, grown Fever-like that hour.
Good Doctor, help (did say) release me from
Loves torture, thrall; this burning freezing Doom.
Grasped by the hand, thus VORDES answered well,
Be cheered most noble Youth, like charming Spell,
I now am bound to serve thy Lover 's Passion,
Tho plunged perchance in the dangerous Navigation.
Leave strait the Bed, your Amorous thoughts compose,
Write next to Her, most powerful strain disclose
Of honor, Love; that Temple's Place express
Where first you saw, what Garment wore for dress,
That She my know by the Mark, your Person then:
Three Hours dissolved I shall return again.
SILVANDER pleased his Noble thoughts portray'd, Silvander writes to Fontana.

Fine, handsome words with Love conjoined displayed;
Harmonious for Language, Musical,
Might Savage Breast to mildness move withal;
How painted forth her Beauties, his Love-passion,
For present the Heart enclosed, sincere Oblation.
VORDES returned, Writes largely underneath,
Informed her several ways, as powerful Wreath
To crown Belief; begged in first place, conjured
Her Faith to all He wrote, next, strongly assured
Of his Friend's Nobler Birth, tho Highly raised
Their Ancestors, choice Parts, good Nature praised;
Known to him from the Womb; held then in's Hand
Full fifteen hundred pounds a Year, brave Land.
Love, last, confirms, tormenting Rack descried,
SILVANDER breathed through Hope, might else have died.
The Gods did then for awful Witness call,
Whose Powers He feared, Adored. But least befall
Nice doubts of the Person ought, he craved thus far,
She would next Morn some Window grace like Star,
IN the painted Room to the Street, Ten choicest hour,
When in such Clothes that Youth, the Grecian Flower,
Should walk, pass by, hand fixed upon his Breast:
Whom if she would with Favor crown, make Blessed
By secret flight, as they should safely Ordain,
Then begged of her next Morn to that again,
Before Elev'n, Placed near sick Cousin's Bed,
Wall's darker side (as used) He entered,
She Would stroke for sign with gentle hand her Eye,
Then thrust in the Bosom strait; drawing more nigh,
Take lower under's Cloak (nor fear of sight)
A Glass from wary held forth hand, but light,
Covered with Paper all, which does display
True use thereof, to the Closet, Desk convey;
Hid first, reserved (since 'twas no smallest size)
IN the pocket, Handkercher from wandering Eyes:
Tho Suit conjoined, if doomed beyond Repeal
That noble Youth for grave, she would these Conceal.
Down VORDES walked; entered, Eleven past,
His Patient's Chamber where most fitly placed
FONTANA sat (kind Visitant become)
Wall's darker side each Morning used; on whom
Cast sober Glance, by her Observed the more,
Design conceived, since saw hm Grasp before
SILVANDER, Talk, drawn near her Cousin's Bed,
While stooped her Pulse to feel, Cloak shrouding spread, The Letter given
Fontana.

He Thrust beneath into the Lady's hand
That Paper, which she took; from view restrained
(Such warning had) thought Honest, good intent;
Some Pause to' the Closet's Council Board she went:
Maid following. Doo^ fast, that Spy to shun
(Whilst new-blown Roses Cheeks displayed) begun
To read the Lines; when milkie white in part
Their crimson Claret drowned, sweet, tender Heart.
She viewed them all with words as it were begem'd,
Gilt through her Eyes conjoined Rays; tho streamed
Small doubt fron thence of the Person Love-diseas'd,
Before Ten's hour to grace, Adorn she pleased
That Window's Glass; through which (clear, Christalline)
Beheld did like to the fair Aurora shine,
Through the Eastern Casements, standing, Reading there
Large, broken Pane confederate as 'twere:
Maid working by. Good pause, SILVANDER came,
Might Sun present, seemed Clothed all in flame,
Gold, Beauty, Love; his Mistress strait descryes;
Whom closely Wooed, no her first darted Eyes,
Then raised to Heaven, with Hand a cross the Breast:
So marched slowly on, such looks at least,
Mild Beams discerned break forth that Window's Cloud,
As scarce by deadly, cruel heart allowed.
This Scene o're-past, Fontana's Love.
much more that second Day
The sweet FONTANA mused, did poize, survey
Those things of Weight; that loathsome mentioned Lord,
Strict sow'rest Aunt, urged Match which she abhorred;
SILVANDER'S Birth, Estate, her sober mind
Did well content, choice Parts with goodness shined
( Doctor believed) for Person there excelled,
Transcendent 'twas, she thought, unparalleled:
Face, Body both compound enamouring:
Love (last) advanced all, from Noble Spring,
Sublime and high, since craved her self alone.
Thus, Sigh she breathed, part-wond'ring at that One,
Two strait conjoined; perceived more plainly there
That She was now Transformed, self lost as 'tvvere,
Prime part inthrall'd, given up unto another
Which strange invading Fits, while thought to smother,
Stout Lords became; more mused, the more she loved;
Kind heart, Alas! Revoltress closely proved,
SILVANDER'S Advocate, whence Victor crovvn'd.
Thus, sad through fancy-qualms, Love-breeding found,
Disarmed Maid she yields, shevv'd governed by
VORDES well known, great Love, and Destiny.
Next joyful Morn, at the hour and place required,
She gave to him those signs for grant desired;
Sweet, gentle Way; set down with cautious hand
His Glass received beneath, from view detained.
After some Pause to the Closet then she trip'd,
Maid following; locked fast the Door, unstrip'd
The environed Glass, worn Paper- shroud before,
Wherein VORDES did strangely thus Implore.
First place, Vordes lines.
that She would Trust with boldness, su'd,
Heaven and his faithful Care, resolve, conclude
For secret flight (strange hazards else did run)
Which should that safe and Gentler Way be done,
So prime Exploit (to be well mentioned
Next Morn by Lines, given near her Cousin's Bed)
The whole World should near pursue, from Flight debar;
Lest the Aunt, or Father (known) caused stormy Jar,
Till He enjoyed more clear, contentful Mind.
Mean while conjured, She Would drink that Rare-design'd,
Choice Cordial there, whose Virtue Sovereign
Would breed new Spirits, revive both Heart and Brain,
For the matchless Work at hand: Of Meaner Power
Sh' had proved some, but begged to observe his hour.
Next Morn by Nine, her usual Hour to Rise,
Should tell her Maid, in Trundle-Bed that lies,
Her watchful Night, till the Hour Eleven (as ghest)
She Would fain enjoy some cheerful slumbering rest.
Eleven come, through Thirst distempered show,
Send down for Drink, Silk, Sizars, left below,
Which She should use; Maid gone, the Chamber free,
Step then to the Closet strait most hastily,
Drink all that Potion off, the empty Glass
Thrown through that Window there, vvild, bushy, place,
Lest found above, some thoughts of Close combining,
Her body strait to th'Bed again resigning,
'Twould sudden, Short refreshing slumber breed.
Tho prayed, conjured, as Loved their Lives indeed,
That Scroul o're-Night in the Closet should be burned,
Each part of the Plot that was to Cinders turned.
The same he warned vvithall (that Caution-store)
In those first Lines, by Her performed before.
Thus far 't was managed well, good hopeful Ground:
Next young SILVANDER'S heart he cheered, which found
Want Cordial too, since seemed to endure
Strange doubtful Wrack: enjoined, he should procure
False Hair and Beard for Each of them, anon,
His further Lover's Task should then be known.
Next Morn by Nine FONTANA told the Maid
Her Watchful Chance, great want of Sleep she said,
Would till Eleven's Hour still keep her Bed.
That time being come, Feigned Thirst, distemper bred,
Sent down for Drink, her Sizars, Silk below;
Drank Potion strait, each Rule observing so
To the Bed again: Well Couched there e're long
Thick Vapors Fog seemed to o're-cloud and throng
( Sense lost) her stifled Brain; as 't were Congealed;
Limbs stretched forth, whilst Sable Darkness sealed,
Closed up her Eyes; no Blood in Cheeks was seen:
Thus showed Death's pale, tho fair-Complexion'd Queen.
That Wench returned with lingering Foot to the Door,
(Since partly hid by the Lady Night before
Both Sizars, Silk) unlocked, drawn near the Bed,
Made sudden Start, since thought FONTANA Dead.
Called up in haste her Aunt, the Doctor then,
Fair Corpse beheld, like Picture handsome Scene
Of Humane Frailty 't was; full view displayed:
Sad, troubled Glance, Breast struck withal, He said,
Clear Symtoms, signs of that Disease were found,
Which does the Vital Spirits, Parts surround
Wiht Present Death: Asked then, Did She complain
Of watchful Head: next, felt as drowsy Brain?
Yes, spoke the Wench: If craved not Drink, requires;
O, much; She cried; That s^ew'd it is Venom, Fires,
He strait conjoined; persuades her Aunt however
She should till Nine at Nightly couched there,
Furnished with Shroud; which would inform, how Strong
Those deadly Bands; tho afterward (least wrong
To the Living found) Interred without Demur,
Because that secret Poison, lodged in Her,
Would by that Hour in Fumes break forth, Exhale;
Which the Aunt approved, scarce seemed to mourn, Bewail
(Stout harder Heart) tho lost Transcendent Niece,
Whose Death might claim the o're-flowing Tears of Greece.
And thus e're long FONTANA Shroud did wear, She Is shrouded Corps-like.

As lay in Bed, by Wench performed there;
Choice Landry-Maid; who on her Fingers spying
Two Dimon-Rings (which through sad Care less eying
Were worn that Night, Each worth some forty pound)
By the Sheets concealed, as tho great Portion found,
Longed for the Prize; strait hid them with her Hand,
Some others near, but Next at her Command:
Then closely strained to pluck Them off, although
The Flesh being partly swelled, Prevented so.
Joyners sent for, fit Coffin to provide,
Took measure for it, fair Clasps bespoke beside.
The Doctor strait walked to SYLVANDER then,
Need not false Hairs and Beards bespeak again,
Found ready they are; viewed also Coffin there,
Which wished Him former Even bespeak however:
Fair-clasp'd, FONTANA'S size, near filled with Mold,
('It Was meant for Mirth, conceit, the Workman told,
Done so to the Hand) barred asking why, Wherefore,
SILVANDER'S self; 'tvvas all o'th Loving score.
Now, e're Eleven that very Night, disguised,
False Hair and Beard ( same brought for Him) Advised,
Worn longer Cloak, from's Garden-lodging trace
Built midst the Wall apart (Fine Jonely Place,
Like Summer-room) to the joined Fields one Door;
Which Fields the Countess Garden lay before,
That Is Postern Gate, short Walk (each Chance excelled)
Viewed strait by Him, thick Bushes near beheld:
Reach those for sculking Shroud, that coffin bearing,
When Whistle heard, next, savv himself appearing,
(Which would be about Twelve, He might be sure,
Things deeply vveigh'd, then thought most safe, secure)
March with the same to the Door, small Task behind,
E're long enjoy that Wished For Gem designed;
When Nine at Night, which made it full Ten hours,
No sign in the Corpse perceived of Living Powers;
The Lady thus, being coffined then in haste,
Small Fun'ral-Pomp, tho certain Torches, cast
Sad, mournful Flames, some Weeping Household- Eyes,
Was carried down to the Garden-Vault, which lies
Amongst Shades, reserved; but near the Postern-door
Where joined to the Earl's large coffined Corpse. (no more)
So left by All, Night's darkest curtains spread,
Lodged in that Doleful Chamber of the Dead.
When past Eleven half-hour, The Shrouder's Plot.
that Wench fore-nam'd,
Whose greedy Breast those Dimon-Rings inflamed,
Stole down, Dark Lanthorn got, through Walks about
To the Postern-Door, where Key (thereof no doubt)
Left ready was; Convenient each Day
For the Doctor's Use, when Bui'sness called that Way;
(Might go, return all Hours, if case required;
Next, had Backdoor to the Garden, as wished, Desired)
Tho seldom stayed beyond Ten's Hour at Night:
Lets in her Rogue-sweet-heart by small Starlight,
From broken, old Cot, before the Doctor came,
Brought Coffin with fair Clasps, like the Other's Frame,
(Done by his Wenche's Rules) filled near with Mold.
For, size observed, She left (feigned Buis'ness told)
The Corpse in Bed, with Ring's concealed Treasure,
Informed that Rogue, at hand, her Will and Pleasure,
So back to the Place again: Both Rings however
Felt safe by stealth, when lodged in the Coffin there.
Being entered thus, they marched Gloomy way
To the joining Vault, where down by the Earl did lay
His cheating Box, and took up for his Own
CLERMANTHE'S Coffin strait, near the Earl's, well known:
Hugged under the Arm walked forth the Garden-Door,
Locked by that Jade: Those Bushes (Path before)
Too nigh for the Opening Noise, concluded Plot,
He crossed the Fields to the same old, broken Cot.
His precious Load cast down withal, began
To break, unclasp, those mentioned Rings to obtain;
Or Fingers crop'd if sullen stayed behind:
Corpse thrown in the River there, moist Tomb designed.
That Landress (left those Garden-shades) quite gone,
Three quarters past Eleven, time fixed upon,
VORDES Himself (thus far thought pleasing Chance,
Exactly poised each needful Circumstance)
Dark Lanthorn took, stole down to the Postern-door,
Where, tho observed, might walking seem (no more)
His Use sometimes, Garden then clear descried,
Next, Fields conjoined; hair, Beard clapped on beside:
He whistled strait: Vordes with Silvander.
when Roused SILVANDER there
Did from that Thick Disguised all appear,
Coffin, Cloak-spread, marched up to the Postern so:
Door locked again, after his Friend did Go,
(Like stout convoy) through Trees, as meant to tread
Some Maze of Death; till Vault they entered.
SILVANDER sighed, strait Gazing wildly round
Where sweet, Beloved FONTANA should be found.
So down with that False Load, did VORDES say,
Take up the True, and help to bear away
Your Mistress there; shown the other Coffin then,
Ay, me! conjoined SILVANDER strait again,
And have I found Dead Mistress Corpse descried?
No, no, She lives, She Breathes (VORDES replied)
Quick, take Her up. My sad presaging Soul!
Spoke the Amorous Youth: Those fonder Thoughts control
(Said VORDES) join, let us bear her strait from hence.
Thus grasped by Fither's side, through Trees from thence
Their new, False Coffin's born in the Garden-dore
( Free way for the House) Key left as used before.
Entering the Field, Cloaks spread, the right Pathway
Thought less Reserved, They crossed the same, did stray
Further about; could turn at last, advance
To the Garden room. Thus, near they walked by chance
The old, Broken Cot; which by that Rogue descried,
Just then prepared her Fingers to divide
From the dainty Hand, since could not from those Rings:
Still fast, unmoved; Both thought through Guilty stings,
Pursuer-like, come from the Garden-part,
Throat-cutting Thieves at least; with fearful start
Forth madly ran, left Corpse and Prize behind;
Part viewed through the Open Wall with Whiteness shined;
Since Glance did cause the strangeness of the Action,
VORDES looked in therefore for Satisfaction.
The Rogue far fled, through Candle-beams displayed,
Amazed saw where True FONTANA laid.
Good Heavens (said he) Both cheated are, Fontana found naked.
abused,
Here lies FONTANA Naked. Dire chance (Soul- bruised,
SILVANDER spoke) Alas! And is this She?
True Dead Corpse now shows murdered, slain I see:
Kneled, Kissed her there. No, no, She Breaths (said then
VORDES o're-whelm'd, sad galled Heart, again,
Confounded Thoughts) it is only a deep Trance
I cast her in; be cheered. With nimble Glance
The Body marked, no Wound nor Bruise espied;
When strait withal those Dimon-Rings descried,
Much raised, Rejoiced Man; observe, behold,
Grieved Youth, (conjoined) those tempting Gems and Gold
Which caused this stealth; some Shrouder's information
That Rogue employed for Change (clear Demonstration)
They stuck so Fast; let us bear Her hence, Depart.
SILVANDER there; If found Dead Corpse Thou art,
I shall not long outlive thee ( Fairest Bride)
Nor mine own Joy. Sh' has not least Harm (replied
VORDES again) and who but mad, Distracted
Would wound a Corpse, which Living Wrong never acted?
June 's Month it is (last) for Warmth: that Drowsy Potion
I Have used before. Thus, closed with Hasty motion
Her Coffin's Top; then the Other nimbly broke,
Lest Jealous Thoughts next Morn might cause, provoke
(Fit Tools for breaking Here Is had VORDES brought,
When reached their Room) Planks taken tho, since thought
To Burn all there, the Earth scattered on the Ground.
This said He more; That Drink, prime, rare Compound,
Others have Tried on Begged, condemned Men;
Known Parties All; my Self so used it then.
Forwards They marched, then, turning Both strait way,
Did crose that Path, to the Garden-room convey.
Arriving there, Fontana laid in bed.
She Shrouded was again
In soft, warm Bed, no Bruise; SILVANDER then,
At dismal Sight! Death 's mournful Draught! exclaimed;
Said VORDES strait; It Is through that Drink fore-nam'd,
She sleeps alone; in Heaven and Art confide;
Done hour and half She Will surely Wake beside.
Then please thy Sense with all her Charming Graces.
O Heaven! the Lover joined, What Wrack surpasses
My Torment, Fears? so long? That needs not neither
(VORDES again) this Frost, strange Cloudy Weather
My Art can sooner Thaw, like Fog dispell;
Then, Fifteen hours, Nature would clear't as well.
Thus, VORDES 'nointed, Bathed with povv'rful things
Her Temples often, strong, Searching Odours brings;
Some burnt in Fume withal beneath her Nose;
After short while good Warmth external grows, Fontana Awakes.

Motion discerned, each Sense awak'ned there;
And Crimson Blood does Blossome-like appear.
Viewed with grand Joy, She lives; SILVANDER cried;
She Moves, choice Virtue, Beauty else had Died,
With mine own Heart. Embraced her, Kisses then
Did snatch that Ravenous way (true Lover's Scene)
As tho he would short Life's advantage take,
That dearest Flash, lest soon again forsake:
On modest Cheek to avoid, would thus improve
That living Dream for's hunger-starved Love:
Kisses indeed, whose kindest Larum more
Might waken her at that choice Ruby-Dore.
Roused gently now, prime former Spring's portray'd
On Lips and Cheeks, new raised so, displayed
From Winter's Tomb, as 'twere; her gallant Eyes
(Life's Morning-break SILVANDER thought) their Skies
Shined forth, unclos'd. O Heavens, She strait expressed
Where am I now? what World! Madam at rest
In the good, old World, and safe; VORDES replied:
Are you not Ghosts then, Shades? she joined beside.
No Ghosts but Men, they answered strait; indeed,
Said she again, that Vale of them (if freed)
I wandered, passed but now; You VORDES there?
Pray, where is SILVANDER? words like Music were,
Since seemed her Tongue, harmonious Voice to sound
His Name in favor forth, that moment Crowned
Lord of the World; View, Madam, He expressed,
With suit conjoined, Petition-like addressed,
For Pardon if his Love has least Offended,
Alas! said she, (which gentler Glance attended,
With blushing stream) I thought not you so near,
You have it Sir: As though Translated here
To the highest Joys, he passed from snowy Hand
To the Coral- lips. When she, Sleep's drowsy band
Has held me long, conjoined: VORDES replied,
'Bove fourteen hours. Where am I brought beside?
(Said she again) -- my Aunt -- Heavens bless me (then)
How strange these Walls appear: the Doctor when,
Smiling conjoined; you are, Madam, now in the Arms
And Bed of young SILVANDER, powerful Charms
Against all Spies; far off, Is It possible;
VORDES! said she. Most certain truth, to the full;
He answered; Sweet Madam, let not that
Displease; conjoined low-bowing SILVANDER strait,
Love 's saucy Crime. It does not Sir, she said,
But yet the manner how may strangely invade
My wondering Thoughts; -- What Is here, a Winding Sheet!
Dead Woman's Shroud! Tied close still at the Feet.
Am I Awake? Know Madam ( VORDES told)
Deep Trance did seize your Powers of the Brain, infold
By the Drink I gave, thought Dead; when nine at Night
Lodged in the Vault; e're twelve ( used Candle- light)
Stoll'n thence by Us, false Coffin laid in the Room:
That dreadful Part reserved, the whole Story's sum.
Bless me (said she) Pale Corpse conceived and dead!
Close- Coffined too! my chamber lastly, Bed
That doleful Vault! Joy of my Heart, you were:
SILVANDER said. Dead, or Alive, what-e're
( She joined) methoughts, that lower Field I passd
Where Shadows, Ghosts, there gloomy Wood at last.
'Twas well You kept your Trance- exploit concealed,
I scarce had ventured else. Nor, being Revealed,
Best Lady, had my Self (the youth replied)
Exposed you thus, tho through Despairing Died.
Come Punies, weak (VORDES conjoined) you are
In Nature's Learned Schools; shunned harmful Jar,
By this Device you follow may (free Ground)
This gallant Man to's Country Travels- round
The whole Grecian World; since Numbered with the Dead:
My Self too safe, secure, unquestioned.
When, gentle Glance, with blushing Smile displayed, Fontana yields for
Marriage.

She joined; The Gods indeed have both conveyed
Strangely together thus ( All powerful, wise)
What ever else may Prove. To whom replies
SILVANDER strait; It Is in your Sovereign Power,
Dear, Sweetest Madam, now, this happy hour
Like Heaven 's Voice, to close up all for Me
In Blessedness. Her answer soft and free;
Since both conjoined have Managed things thus far,
Way Prosperous, I shall not least Debar,
Your Choice oppose. In thoughts Exalted when,
Dear Madam, said the Youth, be pleased then
To Seal that Grant, confirmed by a Kiss.
Which Point Allowed, He reaped that single Bliss
Ten, twelve times over. With Scarlet Blush said she;
You cannot charge, I hope, my Modesty
Now after all, your Selves since caused these
Strange, Naked Postures. On our bended Knees,
Best Madam joined SILVANDER) We should rather
Implore your Pardon for it. Like Cheerful Father
(Said VORDES then) to both; Neglect, despise
Such squeamish Toys, too formal Niceties
'Tween Love conjoined Hearts; I hope e're long,
Madam, 'twill prove your Marriage Bed, no wrong.
Till Five next Morn VORDES remained there,
When both the Lovers well Acquainted were
Fit Task performed from Candle's Light (there found
Tinder if need) whence Flames did soon surround
Those Coffin-planks, lest the Household- wench admired
Making their Bed. These several hours expired,
Madam, he said, I shall for shorter space
Now leave you both. Which words expressed, Alas!
And will You leave Me thus? then strait replied
FONTANA sad: There stands (said he) descried
Your Noble Guard; believe that Character
I wrote of him (When joined Petitioner
SILVANDER too for Gracious confidence)
'Twas best, He said, that hour withdraw from thence
To's Chamber unseen, some Doses Physical
Her Cousin should by sev'n receive withal:
E're the hour of Eight he would Attend her there;
When they would Provide for needful Things to wear.
Priest, last, took Order for, to join their Hands
(SILVANDER'S Task) in formal Marriage-bands.
Mean while with Chaste Delight the enamored Pair
Did melt those pleasing Hours, Things new and rare,
Love-dainties thought by Both though well might show
Through former Fear advanced more Height'ned so.
Night's gentle shades o're-past, the fainter Dawn
Next Glimmering, now, Golden Charet drawn,
Forth Rode the Sun; did Morning- Beams display;
SILVANDER when, conjoined her Beauteous Ray,
His M^stress clasped, o're-joy'd (as stranger sweet)
In Death's large Smock, or dismal Winding Sheet;
Like Corpse Revived: Possession gained from thence,
In his own Bed, of Virgin- excellence.
VORDES Returned, Vordes returns.
which time bv All Agreed.
SILVANDER should (since least Observed) with speed
Go for silk Gowns, some ready made, Fine, spruce;
Linen conjoined; what-e'refor Present use
By the Sales-men brought; Her Self both Heart and Brain
Next Night Compose with Nature's Rest again,
SILVANDER on the Bed: 'twas wholesome way
Needful for both; next Morn their Marriage Day.
SILVANDER'S Part discharged in no long time,
Vievv'd Choice of all; two near-siz'd Gowns, the Prime
FONTANA chose, Concealed, since viewed them there
IN the Bedchamber; nor VORDES would appear.
Refreshed that Night, spruce was next Morn the Bride, Fontana Married.

Their Priest at hand for Marriage-part complied;
The Lady Veiled, VORDES did Witness show,
False Hair and Beard, proved much transformed so.
FONTANA found that Night (less fear of Harms)
New burial, Trance in brave SILVANDER'S Arms.
Next day by twelve 'twas thought best to be Gone,
Since She was forced for Maid of the House alone
Still to be Veiled, when came to make their Bed;
With Hackney- Coach four Horses furnished
(No Man that time to Observe) all things Complete,
They Pranced down to Gallant Country-seat,
With Doctor first exchanged, Kind Farewell.
The Lady there did with much Honor dwell,
Far off large Plenty too; her Aunt being Dead,
Times changed great MANTINEA Visited:
To the Brother here, eight Miles from thence disclosed,
Long Guest withal; joined in that Mask composed
For Dancing part, tho from the Prince concealed:
When That was done, with Wonder, Joy revealed.
Their Story thus Both did hovv-c're Advance,
Frame for the Best; That through Lethargick Trance
Judged long time Dead (VORDES not named tho)
She Coffined was, lodged in the Vault below,
By the Rascal stoll'n at Night, some Shrouder's friend,
Her Di'mond-Rings conceived their greedy End:
Tho ran from all, SILVANDER passing by
The old broken Cot; who strait most carefully,
Thinking her Noble born, perchance not Dead
Some Signs of Life, conveyed her to his Bed,
Where soon she Waked, restored his fervent Love,
Choice Worth conjoined did Marriage-motives prove;
For Life engaged (last) that strongest ground,
Sh' had surely else by the Rascal there been Drowned.
Stoll'n Match, concealed, since Rank so far beneath
Might more disturb the Prince than Natural Death,
Till Times were changed, his Temper both as now,
When they could all Disclose, more cheerful Brow.
Sev'n Days dissolved, Young Prince his Marriage.
ORONTES rode to Court,
His Wife, young Married Pairs in gallant sort,
VERDORUS too; the Prince's Wedding Feast
Then Solemnized, much Royal Pomp expressed,
Which we o're-pass: the Brides-groom, Beauteous Bride
Midst of the Board, some space reserved, descried,
Then Lords and Ladies round: at upper one
The King dined there, like to Himself, Alone.
The King that Day did offer second time
ORONTES Power of General, those prime
Late Dignities which He accepted then;
As with the old King, choice Favorite again;
SILVANDER coined an Earl, was Honored more,
Great Place conferred; found Portion's wealthy Store.
Grand Tilting past, like Brides-groom, Bride combined,
Prince, Princess fair, they left to Bed resigned.
Next Day they saw choice, Gallant Shows presented,
Dancing at Night their Pleasure well Augmented.
We shall not here amongst Persons of great Style, Two Shepperdesses.

Those Shepherdesses Two of Birth Gentile,
Slight or forget, much Handsome Both proclaimed;
PHILAVRA and MERDONE also named:
Either by the Prince ORSAMNES choice proposed;
Sad Mourners found his Travel, when disclosed.
Nor Pastor- Youths well-born, termed Either's Lover,
Whose Fathers All (we did before discover)
Turned Pastor's like the Prince; joined loss, Disgraces;
Till now Restored unto their Former Places,
Held under Him (as Time, Example led)
From Rural Grange the chief Town visited:
The Prince with Joy Congratulate, their Friend.
ORSAMNES where these Lines did also send
To Either Girl 'bout that Departing Action,
In Noble Way; gave Formal Satisfaction.
For the Fair, Gentile, and Highly deserving Maid, PHILAURA. Same Style sent to
MERDONE.
I Pray, Believe that I not disesteem'd
Your Person, Birth, nor Parts, all worthy deemed;
But then so Young, less strongly was Inclined
To the settled Marriage-Way; discordant Mind
For Pastor's Grange withal; Ordained by Fate
CLERMANTHE (last) my Spouse, conjoined Mate.
Your Person how-e're shall chastely prized be
Next unto Here Is, much loved your Memory.
And choice Deserts: remaining still to the End
(If proved, tried) your most Regardful Friend,
ORSAMNES.


These Lines did pour in Either's Virgin-brest
Joy's cheerful Balm, through wounding Grief oppressed,
Whilst hearty Love conceived disdained, scorned;
Tho both with Tears, like drops of Pearl, adorned
Each gentle Word, as moist'ned thence should Grow
What kind Love-fruit his Hand did there bestow.
Joined now they are (each thought Conjugal Gem)
To the constant Youths which suffered much for them;
SILVANOR whom MONTANVS we did call,
Both born Gentile, of handsomn Parts withal;
Whose Portions fair were lastly Doubled by
The bounteous Prince (might late Regard imply)
Left in the Wives power, more Awed their Husbands so:
Two Marriage- Days on purpose chosen show,
Each Partner thus in the Other's Wedding-feast,
Matched to their Rank, good, fair Estates at least.
Nor the Hermit's love forgot, The Hermit, Timondes.
whose faithful Cell
Did shroud ORSAMNES long, CLERMANTHE well,
TIMONDES called: being Lord, possessor made,
Through his kind means, of all that Land (we said)
False Uncle seized, since Bastard-branch pretended
His Father was; to the Harmful Heir descended;
That vicious Son, in the Forest lashed of late
Till much Blood drawn, now Bleeds He in's Estate.
TIMONDES tho was hardly tempted then
From's Hermitage to the open World again;
Kissed the King's Hand at last, where also seemed
Much prized for his Grave Discourse, esteemed.
Nor wanted Heir, since Brother's Son was found
Who managed all, deserving thought, Renowned.
That Cottage- Host preferred, Robbed near DERVAN
Of some small cash by the Troop Laconian.
ORONTES much, CLARENZA now desired
To view their Country House, so long retired;
Whose cheerful Guest the Duke VERDORUS proved,
Young Married Pairs, THERSANDER, his beloved;
Large, Court-like Train. 'Twas gallant Princely Seat,
The House, Gardens, Park; rich Furniture, complete.
How Honored, Loved, Proclaimed the People's Voice,
Men Shout as tho their King they saw, Rejoice.
Soon there approached his Wedding Day, which He
Did then Observe with Grand Solemnity; Orontes's Feast.

From Conduit Claret falls, some courtly Scene
For plenty State was now beheld again.
Eight Weeks dissolved, ORSAMNES once Distressed.
Mindful became (since loathed ungrateful Breast)
Now Gladsome Thoughts, who saved his Life Redeemed;
LACONIAN Prince: for Years Both equal seemed,
Their Stature too; like-temper'd were for Mind,
Internal worth rare Person's Form combined:
Discharged strait that Honor's Point forenam'd,
To which her Gentle Self CLERMANTHE framed.
He Letter by swift Messenger did send,
Where thankful Heart drawn truly forth, thus penned.
Letter fom Orsamnes.
For the most Renowned and Excellent Prince of Laconia.
GReat Sir, Receive, after Salute from me,
My humble Thanks for Life and Liberty?
Since was by You redeemed, most noble Breast,
Tho Captive-Man still to your self confessed;
Excuse conjoined withal, wherefore of late
I left your Men, the Realm; Destructive Fate
Threatened by Thieves, unarmed for Fight, surprise
I fled their Swords: then ranged till Dawn did rise:
When, Asking way to the Court, encountered there
My wandering Spouse, whose Virgin-beauties were
By the Lord that Morn for Ravishment ordained;
Pursuit might Seize, thus Both to Flight constrained.
I still your Servant am, and shall Resign
My Self to You, what Place you shall Design:
This Favor Grant, that I may Number over
My Verbal Thanks upon that Princely Score,
And your own Person serve; left Dearest Wife,
New- Married, Last, for Him that saved my Life.
ORSAMNES.


More Ground for this free Proffer Personal,
Since Peace for Fifteen Years confirmed withal.
The Prince rejoiced ORSAMNES escaped that Danger,
Whom long Deplored as Dead, tho Foreign stranger;
Through gentle Love redeemed for Friend, Comrade
Thought Nobly born, but now Great Duke displayed.
Highly applauds this Gallant Act, that so
He should Resign Himself, when Free did show,
Captived way; own Heart was Captivated
In Friendship's Bond, that Strain so highly rated.
Wrote nimbly back, made known of the other side,
He would not Prove in Honor's Game outvy'd.
The Prince his Answer.
For the Most Noble and Renowned Duke, ORSAMNES.
ILLustrious Lord, I well may count it one
Grand Happiness to save, preserve (unknown)
Such Gallant Worth, transcendent Rank comb^^'d;
Whom I for Choice Companion there designed,
Whilst Your Self pleased to stay: your Looks proclaiming
What now You are: and so (place handsome naming)
Shall You Receive, for stronger Friendship's ground,
In mine own Arms near to the Arcadian Bound,
Joined Hunting sport; if Beauteous Lady shall
Thus far Allow, whose Pardon asked withal.
Left free, my Lord, you are, those Bonds expelled;
As your own Man, no Servant now beheld.
I Challenge You to meet Me, Time and Place;
Next, Grapple there, contend in Love's embrace.
Prince of Laconia.


This Joys advanced, well pleased CLERMANTHE shows;
Nor Doubt at first brave Husband so to lose
In Complement; that Prince could scarce be infected
With such vile Mood, discharge (whatever) expected.
They met e're long upon the Borders, where
Kind, The Prince, Orsamnes meet.
Friendly'st parts by Both performed were.
That Noble Prince at first (of grand Renown)
Saying, That he would not for Royal Crown,
His Horse had failed one Minute's time, in the end,
When did that Earl BORGANES Green ascend.
ORSAMNES Words; Death's Slave he then had proved,
To the Prince, now Servant was, High Style, beloved.
Whom strait the Prince by Word Discharged, as Lines,
From that Captiving Bond, all Claim resigns.
Conjoined too; He was from Feasting Board,
Then called in Haste, Mother near Death (restored
After however) which made him so Neglected,
And left behind; tho choicely else Respected.
Strife thus Appeared in Gentle Conversation,
Which should Exceed; joined Hunting Recreation.
Fourth Day thereof, ORSAMNES following
The Young Prince near. ( Unarmed, thought needless thing
For the Hunting Sport, in's own Laconian Bounds)
Through Forest there, most eager after's Hounds;
ORSAMNES Armed; out-rid, or lost their Train,
They Galloped down between Two Pales in vain,
Close, winding Way; to the Keeper's Lodge the one
Orchard belonged, to Fish Ponds large (unknown)
That other Pale: in the end locked Pasture-Gate.
Where being stopped, the Prince returned strait,
ORSAMNES both, through narrow Pound as 'twere:
When proved by Four, The Prince assaulted.
drawn Swords, Assaulted there.
Treason, the Prince cried out; ORSAMNES when
Ran the First through; the Next, most fiercely then
Thrust at the Prince, the Duke turned nimbly tho,
And Pierced his Hand, down fell the Sword below;
The Prince leaped off, and strait snatched up the same,
But second thrust from stout ORSAMNES came,
Down fell the Man; whilst from the Third received
Slight hurt Himself, whom strait of Life bereaved
As due Reward; which by the Fourth espied,
He turned back: ORSAMNES as Quick eyed,
Pursued the Rogue; said, Yield, or else the art Dead;
Who strait obeyed, the whole Plot discovered:
Hence found the Cause, of those Four Villains, Three
To Man of better Rank and Quality
Did Sons appear; their Sire for great Offense
By the Prince from Place of gainful Consequence
Discharged proved, more Worthy in his room:
Two of them late from Camp returned home,
Left Foreign Land; the Third from Travels then;
Grown Strangers All, much vexed, enraged Men,
Through Father's Loss, this Hunting time they chose,
Of Public Note, for Vile, Revengeful Close.
The Prince for several Days had traced there,
Well, fleetly Horsed, but still Prevented were;
Found severed thus, great the Ods, his Death conspired,
Next Brother too for Heir to the Crown desired.
ORSAMNES thoughts much joy'd the Event this day, Orsamnes disengaged.

Well cleared proved (by the Prince confirmed) same way
From that great Bond, that large obliging score;
Freed him from Death, Who saved Himself before;
Nay thus surpassed, adventured his own Life,
Lost some Blood too in that unequal Strife.
The Prince embraced the Duke for Kind Farewell,
Gave Dimon- Ring whose Beams did Blaze excel:
Thus flames my Love (conjoined) thus Lasting it is:
The Noble Duke like Gem exchanged for His:
Both every Year to Meet, were also bound,
Whilst Health did serve, on that convenient Ground.
ORSAMNES from the King and Prince might boast
Welcomed Return, tho pleased CLERMANTHE most.
Twenty years Peace Laconian King new-sign'd,
Through this young Friendly League, close Aw combined;
His Father since as General now commands,
Thrice conquered, spoiled (we said) their Armed Bands.
Three Years dissolved, much Joy to all Content,
Great Honor joined, ORSAMNES Eminent:
Who with CLERMANTHE fair the year divided
'Tween Father, Father-in-law, with each resided;
Two Sons beheld, one Lovely'st Daughter there:
ORONTES Chief, tho Subjects name did bear,
Great'st with the King; as young ORSAMNES made
Prime Friend to the Prince SILVANDER next Comrade.
That time, as tho PLENORMUS, when Composed
His Wedding- Masque, Prophetic Art disclosed;
For Half thereof; Crowns brought to each (like Dream)
Brides groom and Bride, the Apparent Heirs to them;
Ambassadors came from Thessalia, Thessalian Lords.

Which did present that Crown in Humble way,
To the Prince ORONTES Self, whose brave Grandsire
(Long since their King) did hither strait Retire;
Thrust ^orth (we said) by War, Usurper's hand,
Who did that Crown through the Princess, Wi^e demand,
Sole Child to the former King (as mentioned we)
Tho Women should not Reign in Thessaly:
Brother to the King ORONTES Grandsire crowned,
Prince Father called, so styled Himself, renowned.
Her Race extinguist, gone, their General Choice
ORONTES named (like Parli'mental Voice)
As Lawful King, joined Virtue's noble score;
Three Years last past Renowned, Fourteen before.
ORSAMNES next the Apparent Heir does prove;
Now calm that State, Serene through Subjects Love:
No glimps of Broyl, Corrival to the Throne
Bad Storms to cause, He might the less disown.
ORONTES took with largest Thanks Farewell
Of The Noble King, Oro^^es King, departs.
grown Equal, parallel;
King League confirmed; whose place of chief Command
To young SILVANDER (next) the Royal hand
By Gift transferred, then Twenty five for Age;
Could well Discharge, Duke's Title more to engage,
ORONTES only Daughter his Wife become,
So stood for Duke in brave ORSAMNES room:
Kept most of the Land, Large Portion had beside,
Loved for Himself, as late FONTANA Bride.
ORSAMNES and the Prince withal entwined,
Exchanged Farewell, through Brothers League combined.
CLERMANTHE fair, young Princess act the same,
Wiht tears infold, each called by Sister's name.
The Duke VERDORVS joined to go along
For Daughter's sake, Conceits beside more strong
Of Virtuous Wife there Dead, false snare the Last,
That House might breed, with Cloud his thoughts o'recast:
PLENORMUS left chief Lord, Commander there.
THERSANDER attends, who Duke's great Name does bear,
Since Brother to the King: for Dutchess-Style
FLORENA wants not comely Grace that while:
FONTANA tho withdrawn Conversing way
By Pen's enjoyed, not far Thessalia.
Performed short part by Land, through Sea they glide,
Those narrow Straits which Arcady divide
From Thessaly (Corinthian) crossed over;
Strong, cheerful Gale, soon reached the intended Shore.
We shall not here each Formal Point relate
When Borders passed, nor with what Mounted State
Through Streets they rode, King, Queen, by all desired;
Thronged Windows, Ground; how Princess, Prince admired,
Both Grecian Suns conjoined thought, excelled;
What Trumpets heard, Train'd-Bands each side beheld,
Met by great Lords, chief Magistrate, the Rest
Of prime Larissa's Town, in their Robes dressed.
What Shouts were heard, our Book does largeness show,
And Writer may with Reader weary grow:
Nor Crowning Pomp, at last, whose glories there
Might new-fal'n Stars from Firmament appear;
The King in Charet drawn, brave Train attended,
Proud Tilters viewed, with Feasts and Masquings ended:
We leave them thus, both Royal Pairs combined,
Whose Honor, Happiness Transcendent Shined.
FINIS.
Books lately Printed for William Crook, at the Green Dragon, near
Devereux-Court, without Temple Bar. 1684.
THE Odes and Epodes of Horace, in five Books. Translated into English, by J.
H. Esquire the Author of this Book. Octavo. price bound. 1 s. 6 d.

The Loyal Incendiary, or the Generous Boutifeu, a Pindarique Poem, occasioned
by the Report of the Owner's bravely setting Fire to the Rye-House as the King
came from New Market. By Sam. Philips, Fol.

A Thanksgiving Sermon for the Discovery of the late Phanatick Plot, September.
9. 1683, By Dr. Jo. Harrison, Rector of Pulborow, Sussex. Quarto.

A Discourse about Conscience, Relating to the present Difference among us, in
opposition to both Extremes of Fanaticism and Popery, in Quarto, price
stitched, 6 d.

A New Survey of the present State of Europe. Containing Remarks upon several
Sovereign, and Republican States, as Italy, France, Lorrain, Germany, and all
the Princes and Principalities of the Empire, Spain, Protugal, etc. With
Memoires, Historical, Chronological, Typographical, Hydrographical, Political,
etc. Brought down to the Year 1683. By Gideon Pontier, Chief Prothonitor of
Rome. Done into English by John Beaumont Doctor in Physic, in Octavo, Price
bound, 2 s. 6 d.

The Complete Solicitor, Entring-Clerk, and Attorney, Fully instructed in the
Practice, Methods, and Clerkship of all his Majesty's Courts of Equity and
Common Law, Superior and Inferior, as well those at Westminster and the City
of London, as elsewhere throughout the Kingdom of England. A Collection more
Correct, Uniform, and Universally Advantageous, than any ever Extant hereofore
in this kind, Octavo. Price bound, 4 s. Printed by the Assigns of R. and E.
Atkyns Esqs for J. C. and F. C. and sold by Tho. Basset and William Crook.

Moral Instructions of a Father to his Son, upon his Departure for a long
Voyage; or an Easy Way to guide a Young Man toward all Virtues; With an
hundred Maxims Christian and Moral. By Dr. Chamberlain, Author of the State of
England, and his Son, P. Chamberlain, Author of Compend. Geograph. in Twelves.
Price bound, 1 s.

All these Seven Books are new published this present Michaelmas-Term. Also the
Five Books following are Reprinted, and the New Impressions of them published
this same Term.

1. Mr. Hobs his Translation of all Homer's Works out of Greek into English.
The second Editin in Twelves. Price bound, 5 s.

2. Mr. Hobs his Wonders of Darby Peak, in Latin and English, the fifth
Edition, in Twelves. Price bound, 1 s.

3. Dr. Addison, Dean of Lichfield, his Introduction to the Sacrament; being a
short, plain, and safe way to the Communion Table, in 240. Price bound, 6 d.

4. Mr. Hughes his Flower-Garden, and his Complete Vineyard, both Printed
together, in Twelves. Price bound, 1 s. The third Edition.

5. Mr. Chillingworth, his Protestant Religion the safe way to Salvation,
against the Papists: with his Sermons. To this Impression is added, His Reasons
to persuade a Friend of his to return from Popery to his Mother Church of
England. in Folio. Price bound 12 s.

The Garden And Grove of The Muses
F.H. Van Houe Sculp


THE GROVE: CONSISTING OF DIVERSE SHORTER POEMS UPON SEVERAL SUBJECTS.
ORNANDE'S Lute.
SIght, Smelling, Taste, with Feeling Sense be gone,
Now useful found the officious Ear alone;
Go, slumber all, or the idle Loyt'rers play;
But thou attend, grand Favorite, this way:
ORNANDE, whislt gives Life to the senseless Lute,
And Warbling Language where 'twas lately mute.
Hark what delicious strains, most heavenly rare,
Do sweeten and enrich the adjoining Air.
Those Grecian Harps like blustering Winds would be,
Compared to her transcendent Harmony,
Or notes of the bubbling Brook, mean Music is
Bad Discord thought untuned Noise to this.
Depart all dumpish Cares, black Clouds of Sorrow,
My humane World withdraw, fly till the morrow;
I could forget I Am Earth, or burth'ned frame
With dross of Flesh, to Elemental flame
Refined, as 'twere, turned vital Spirits show;
Whilst Blood does dance as 'twould the Banks overflow.
Hark, there is conjoined more sweetly solemn strain,
Which Charms our sense transformed way again;
Men stand by the Walls, and furnish so the Room
Like Arras-pictures there, or for some Tomb
Statues each meant, designed, whilst only flies
Small glimps of Life, or Twilight from their Eyes;
Till pleasant Sound, more cheerful change restore
From binding Trance for action, as before.
Now let my Sight return, more waking Sense,
Her form behold, Face, body's excellence;
Transported thoughts through the Eye, conjoined ear,
Well viewed that daintiest shaped Musician there
Now Touch withal, that sense does breed Desire
Those Lips to seal, but dares not so Aspire;
Longs strait therefore that beauteous Hand to kiss:
Fond Dream! -- forbear; -- all would be spoy'd by this.
ORNANDE'S close Retirement.
WHY do (Reserved) Spectators shun,
ORNANDE, choice, terrestrial Sun?
So long withold our Break of day,
Till Darkness Lovers Hearts o'resway?
Did we too far (neglectful) slight
Thy Presence, when enjoyed that Light?
ORNANDE so (found justly nice)
By Want does raise, advance her Price;
And angry Absence shall alone
Make thee more reverenced, more known.
Prime Beauties were not made at all
For cloystring Tomb, Live-burial,
Fit for Bats, Owls; those splendid Seven,
The unwasted Lamps of Earth and Heaven,
Grand Brooches worn, they were not thrust
In Corners ought, forgotten dust,
But shine to the World, and progress by
Like blazing Pageants through the Sky:
Choice Rarities beneath, things pure,
Still locked in Cabinets, obscure,
Pearl, dainty Gems then lose their glory;
Sight too preserves thy beauteous Story.
'Twere wholesome now to take, fair Maid,
The open Air in Field or Shade.
Much traveled Land, as 'twere by the Eye,
From some tall Mount prospectively,
Beholders Thoughts amazed round,
As though new rising Morn were found:
For, as thy Sights our Physic prove,
Dull, drossy Spirits sublimed above
Pure, active Fire, whilst Ayr-like so
These earthy Lumps, our Bodies grow;
And Bloods do dance in every Vein,
Thou physick'st too thy Self again.
Spring's dainty-breath'd, delicious Air
Will make thy Cheeks more rosie-fair,
(Choice Wonders now) like Beds of Flowers,
Breasts flourish more, joined Lilly-bowers:
That Angel-shape would please our Eyes.
With motion Angel-like, surprise;
Found nimbler far, that gallant frame
So lively as all Soul became:
Then show thee abroad, Sweet'st, Fairest, thus,
The art Cordial to thy self, and us.
Letter sent to ORNANDE.
The Offering.
Sweet'st, fairest Maid;
ACcept my Vows which Incense-like do rise,
And fume before thee in solemn Sacrifice;
My flaming Heart with chaste Desires allow,
My Morning offered Sighs, and Evening too;
Receive their kinder Breath, whereof each one
Seems to put up short begging Orison,
Love-suit to thee: still pity the Complaint
Each whispers in thine Ear, and lest I faint
In my Devotions, please but other while,
To answer by the Sparkle of a Smile
That I Am accepted; but if Frowns you bring,
My Heart is then turned to dead Offering.
Fain would I please my Fair, O, gently bow
T^inform my Ignorance, and teach me how:
Crown me thus far, thy favored Votary,
And I Will disclaim each Mistress else but thee.
The Good Morrow, Under ORNANDE'S Window.
FAirest, Sweet'st, good morrow from
Thy Servant Voice, Lute joined present;
Day's glorious, Lord (the Morn's Bridegroom)
Has gilded long the Firmament;
Bountiful for warming Rays,
To the World bright influential Shower,
Though I seem frozen here this hour,
Till thou my lovelier Sun do blaze.
II.
Songsters chant the Spring each-where,
Joy'd Earth and Heaven their Smiles combine;
Grand Nature's Cheek does pleased appear,
Then do not Thou displeased shine:
Lovers may have their bad Days
Good joined withal, last Night my Sun
Did set through lowering Clouds, Night done,
O let her rise with clearer Grace.
III.
May that slumbring Dew did steep
Her heavenly Eyes, transferred to the Heart,
Have softened that whilst she did sleep;
Could Pillows down same change impart,
Mollify, kind Thoughts recall!
Break sweetly'st forth, my Sun, disclose
Thy Casement's East whence morning shows,
This Act of Love regard withal.
IV.
If concealed in Bed, my Fair,
O might this Song ^ull gentler yet
Her charmed Brain! Morn-slumbers ra^e!
Deferred till Noon thy blazing sweet;
When Visit shall be (last) designed,
For lightsome Warmth; show Beamy clear,
That I may vaunt my choicest Dear
Waked mild, although she slept unkind.
Lovers mixed Weather.
What Is the cause great Lovers prize
The Object more, full, last enjoying,
When bad Doubts, cross-gales do rise?
Found reserved, or sobrer coying?
Seldom when through pleased Glance
Smiles sparkle forth, kind Words intrance;
Sweet-meat-kisses
Dainty-like withdrawn, rare Blisses.
II.
Clouded Morning- Scene blown over,
Gorgeous Day much takes, contenteth;
Sick Distemper past, far more
Health desired, what Joys presents!
Dangers where, sharp Thraldom seize,
Prime the Enlargement thought, and Ease:
All things vary,
Heightened prove from bad contrary.
III.
Coyness though, when shall exceed
Civil bound, Affronts discover
(Churlish scornful way) does breed
Jealous Qualms in the joined Lover;
Through precedent Gall worse far
Last Embraces relished are;
She Is low-prized,
When enjoyed, who once despised.
Thought thereof ( Love's former Wounds
Skinned over alone) the Sense confounds.
ORNANDE The Spring 's Mistress.
BEhold those Crystal Founts,
Which wander over the verdant Plain;
How branched, plumed those lofty Mounts!
Plush-banks bedrest with Flowers again!
The World's revived:
Earth sine with Masquing Robes, bright Heavens surround.
And gentler breathed Gales abound,
Whilst Mo^^als show new lived.
II.
Chief Empress of the Spring,
Come forth with all thy beauty power
Thine Hand maid since such Smiles does bring.
Let not the daintiest Mistress lower,
Least spo^l'd from thence
This Field's ^ai^ Spring time with my saithful Heart's
Drooping thy Frown to both imparts
Through strangest Influence.
III.
Come, Sweetest, let us trace
To yonder Bower, prospective Hill,
Winged Chanters where, far more to grace,
Are joined in chirping Consort still,
There Is Ve^^s Fount,
Like mo^st^ed Pearls stram'd through those Rocks above,
All Lectures may Joy, Beauty, Love,
At once to thee recount
ORNANDE'S Evening Walk, and Voice
ORNANDE and I (which here by me
Amongst joyful Hours recorded be)
ORNANDE and I, this Evening la^^,
Walked forth to breath large Garden a^;
That (...) Decrease of gaudy Day,
When the Sun bestowed well tempered Ray,
No^ faintness bred while Darts Good night
From western Orb, with drow^^e light
Such, gentle Mo^n, for both inclined
Nice, dain^e^ Sex of Woman kind.
Those harmless Gales were only straying,
Which dance the Leaves with wanton playing
So^^ Murmur's noise, conjoined to this
M^^'s flowered Breed like Stranger's kiss
Dandled ORNANDE'S Han, as ^aught
Love's ^onde^ Arts, withal ^methought^
Showed Reverence, l^st by their crime
One Curl disturbed proved that time:
Becalmed the Air to gentle Rest,
(...) her more cheerful Virgin Breast.
Who having pleased her wandering Eye,
Spring's gallant S^^ne beheld, clear Sky,
Conjoined Grove ^o^ change allowed,
Fi^^ Lovers Ma^e, where under Cloud
Prime Beauty appeared, heard choice^^ Note
From (...) small formed Throat,
Strong (...) withal Bird, praised to be
That (...) best (...), Harmony:
(...) (...): who strait begun,
As would to the low declined Sun
Chirp forth then ^ank (...), till Night
Clad S^ngs maintain whilst he gave Light
Which pastime heard, contentful Noise,
ORNANDE (at my Request) her Voice
Joined also there to the ^^^hful Qui^e,
Bright Goddess seemed did late inspire
Those plumed Creatures with their Skill,
As chanted forth her Praises still,
That under Grove, through Fancy's power,
Transformed seemed to heavenly (...),
So well that Face and wa^^^ing Tongue
Might to sweet Cherubims belong.
'Twas prime Delight to the closing end,
Best (...) that the Ear could apprehend;
Unless those Sounds advanced of above,
Sweet ^^eath'd, (...) (...) of Love
Reason o'resway'd, else I had nigh
Proved guilty of Voice Idolatry.
ORNANDE and the Nightingale.
'TWas charming Voice, but join, how (...),
Breathed by that She, transcendent fa^^!
Whose love ^est Face and Person showed
That choice Compound, prime view bestowed,
All (...) Consort framed to (...)
Proved (...) silent Harmony
Both Senses thus did blessed appear,
For Love's Record grand Wonder there.
Each warbled Sound by her composed,
So soon as born showed wrapped, enclosed,
Then, straightways dead, embalmed within
Such Breath as though perfumed had been.
The whole Song, complete (as Fancy deemed)
Delightful Soul of Music seemed.
If Orpheus
Thracian Harp could Rivers cause
( Greek Poets feigned) make wanton pause,
Beasts, charmed Stones themselves and Trees,
Whilst danced their Antic Revelries,
Her Voice H' had made more powerful prove,
Till Bruits however should fall in Love.
ORNANDE when did Song conclude,
This from the Grove Content renewed:
As drawn by Emulation's Pride,
The ambitious Nightingale replied,
Would sing her part, so, chanted round
(Fine Nature's Skill) the adjoined Ground:
Which marked, I prayed she would again,
With some short voluntary strain,
(As Fancy pleased) by turns, in jest
Still answer it; had my Request,
ORNANDE sung, then the Nightingale,
Now She, then She, which should prevail:
'Twas earnest Combat grown from play,
Sharp Voice-contention for the Day,
(Such Lovers thoughts) till strained still higher
That Bird as 'twould e're long expir^.
When I did beg from joined Seat,
ORNANDE first would make Retreat,
And end that Strife so caused by me
Though granted a false Victory;
Stopped, silenced there her Mouth with Kisses.
From her own Hand, held up, those Blisses
Since she my Lips declared that hour,
All taken off by Fancy's Power
From the Hand again, so partly seemed
To kiss the Lips, prime sweet's esteemed.
The Face and Glass.
SWeet'st, let me hold
That Glass like Handmaid, uncontrolled,
And show thee more than the World can vaunt, present,
Thy Equal there for Beauty's grace,
Yet not, since proves but shadowed Face,
Thine living, true, substantial Ornament:
Else lovely second self descried,
In Tablet drawn, my Heart beside.
II.
More guiltless, know,
Well pleased I can this Duty show,
Since rest confirmed, that Sight not make thee proud;
Though strongest Cause of Pride there be,
Transported Thoughts, Self-extasie,
Such Wonders blaze through that transparent Cloud:
Which beauteous Mind for Worth I do
Advance, proclaim unequalled too.
III.
Nothing more high
In Looks appears to the Stander by,
Than what may speak Content, or Carelessness;
As all beheld this sober hour,
With Thanks to bounteous Nature's Power;
That bright, smooth, frozen Lake, designed for dress,
Not fondly viewed (fantastic Dream)
As gazed that Narcissus, lovely Youth.
Boy in crystal Stream.
IV.
Still grant permit,
I have more Ends conjoined in it;
Hoping, that, while seen there those charming Eyes,
Thou may my Love-distemper'd Breast
Pardon, relieve withal, make blessed:
And though my Wages paid, since Beauty's Skies
Thus long behold, for full discharge,
That Rate by gentle Kiss enlarge.
So shall my Thoughts be settled well,
How far thou do ( touch, pleasing Smell)
That dainty Form in the Glass excel.
ORNANDE'S Morning Walk.
'TWas fresh cheek'd May most gallant round,
Like to the Year's Queen adorned, crowned;
Imbroyder'd Garb, those flaunting Plumes
For Robes of State, conjoined Persumes:
The old Chaos-World transformed each-where
(Such, Winter thought) whose Brow did bear
New, choice Creation stamped, large Train,
Leaves, Blossoms, Flowers beheld again.
Forth walked fair She who might present
That Princess-Month, more excellent;
Forth prime ORNANDE traced, Earth- Star,
Whilst honored proved my self so far
To attend, her Walk's chief Favorite,
Sole Guardian to my Soul's delight:
Called out by her as joy'd Translation,
To Kingly Throne, grand Celebration;
Since Champion thus become, Defense
To weak, but fairest; Innocence.
For well ORNANDE knew, that I
Would for that Charge proctecting dye.
Temptation though proved all her Shape,
Would punish not conceive a Rape:
Whose Hand was strait conjoined to mine,
Did that with lively Snow combine.
Naught envied there great Turk, Mogor,
China's Tartarian Emperor,
Huge Persian King; so sceptered I
Could vaunt much rarer Monarchy.
Things senseless, as we farther go,
With Rival Courtship seemed to woo
ORNANDE fair, produced in me
Choice mirthful kind of Jealousy:
Birds chant Love-Songs, small Gales (as 'twere)
Breathed gentle Sighs, often kissed her there;
Moved Flowers bowed down their lovesick heads,
Shown Reverence from grass-green Beds;
Whilst Hills and wanton Groves rejoice,
Resounded (last) her heavenly Voice:
Strange active Soul! What thing does prove
Breed like to Thoughts, Conceits of Love?
With the Elm's large Branch long time enclosed
(Whose Leaves soft Murmur cause) reposed,
When I had offered up such Vows,
Like Incense, as chaste Heart allows,
Her Breast the Altar made, thus, thus
ORNANDE breathed, harmonious,
Delightful Sounds, Compliance shown.
In gentle way; she pleased to own --
Fondling, restrain, nor Sweets so rare
Disperse abroad throught the open Air;
Repeat them to thy self, unless
Venus Love's God grand Witnesses:
Feed, feed my liquorish Ears, revived
Your Joy, strong Fancy makes new-liv'd:
Whilst Cupid all does room afford
(Words, the Hour, and Place) in Love's Record.
ORNANDE'S Presence.
NOW shines on me my sweetest Sun,
Nor proves my glorious Spring yet done;
Absence sad thereof depriving;
Whilst my Soul may seem to dance,
(When it is not laid in blessed Trance)
Through those Joys from thee reviving:
Now I view
Fair Bearty's World, embrace it too.
II.
Touch the Hands and Breast that Tongue do hear,
Words, Voice, both musical to the Ear;
Yet, for Pleasures more abounding,
Let me Time's advantage take,
Some Kisses reap for goodness sake;
Whilst those Eyes thy Servant wounding,
Grant, impart
Lips sugared Balm to cheer my Heart.
III.
Barred Love's chief Food, transcendent hoard,
Those Cherries, fruits desire afford:
Sweetest, Nay, -- so short my Blisses!
Think not One can please, rejoice,
Or more obtained their Dainties choice
Consume at all, cloy me with Kisses,
Who may swear,
Each Touch does breed new Longings there.
So highly graced,
I have no fainter Lover's Taste;
Nor can those Lips through freeness wast.
The Farewell.
SWeetest, know, did not control
Sad Fortune, Fate my Steps this hour,
Thus to leave I had no power,
Parted as from mine own Soul:
Clouds thine Eye do seem assailing,
Gentlest Heart as grieved with me;
Which sober Looks grand Honor be,
Prime Love-support; since Smiles prevailing
(Dear, I vow,
Of late) would scarce content me now.
II.
Yet, too solemn Change, over sad
I fancy not, least that kind Trouble
Should increase my own Grief double:
Leave me then to the mournful Shade
(Such thy Want (as 'twere) producing)
And with gentle Beam bedress
Those Orbs, though smaller Flamingness;
Still, like thy self, choice Sparks diffusing:
Though indeed
Worst Glances there may Pleasure breed.
III.
Wandering Ghost thy Servant shows,
This Vow made to my choicely esteemed
(Thoughts of her so precious deemed)
Night shall never these Eyes enclose,
Nor Morning their Lid-curtains sever,
But thy beauteous Image shall
Still sleep by me, and wake withal:
Prove my Joy's prime Guardian ever:
Objects rare
Shall still present to me my Fair.
I thus depart,
Until thy radiant Presence dart
True Life again into my Heart.
One to his Fair, coy Mistress.
SWeet, beauteous Maid, but cruel-coy,
Severest-nice, when, to enjoy
One kinder Grant hard Taks does prove;
Herculean Labor found in Love.
What though that daintiest Hand touch mine,
Whose Beauty's more than chrystalline?
Would it least stained and soyled be,
Or lose the curious Form, by me
But kindly pressed? Since never I
That Virgin-Snow advance so nigh
But with washed Hands; nor touch their Down,
But fear of bad conjoined Frown
Prepares my Palm: Your Glove all day
That leave enjoys, your Sizars may,
Silk, Needle, Lawn, nay, meaner Thread;
My Hand debarred, thence banished.
Suppose them changed by You in part,
More pure by Touch, same Chimick Art
Would my corce Hands sublimed refine.
Or say those daintiest Lips touch mine,
Would that decrease their Balmy Store,
Or waste their Delicates the more?
Since lasting Sweets, unchanged the are;
Their Color, form still rosy, fair,
Though kindly sealed, Rubies excelling,
When kissed may prove more red, and swelling.
Soft wanton Gales with hovering Play
Are joined to them, Suns gaudy Ray,
Slight Toys sometimes which Fancy please,
My Lips inferior thought to these;
The Fly may buz and kiss unblam'd
That Cherry-pair, my touch disclaimed.
Can you dart Frowns; complain, when I
Near starved beg small Charity,
The Alms of one Kiss: no fault, offense
There to crave Meat; some Food dispense:
Would you not Life's Support bestown,
When not your self the poorer grow?
Nay, Sweetest, nice conceits forbear,
By Kiss you may prove Riches there;
Those Love's first-tasted Course appear.
The Earnest doubting Lover.
THrough Doubt, Desire he freezes, burns
(Found Ague-change) and his Breast turns
Froz'd, Torrid Zone; fair shape adores:
Can grasp his Thraldom when deplores:
Thank, blame his Stras, as kind, unkind
Talk to himself, and wandering Wind:
Haunts curled Streams, where gloomy Trees,
Wild Rocks and Caves societies,
Kisseth his Chain, Love's pointed Dart,
Hopes, Fears fill qualm'd, convulsion'd Heart:
Man of all Weathers droops this hour,
Next Smiles, thought Sunshine, Honey-show'r:
How poised her Words: each Glance and Look
Anatomized; her Face his Book:
He moves, sighs, breaths by Rule, what more?
To the good-behaviour bound all over:
None delves in the Indian Mines more hard
Than he for Female Gold's Reward:
Some Heave- Conceits, more Hells do seize him,
Naught but to enjoy or dye can ease him.
The violent Despairing Lover.
MUch like the ore-fond, tormented Lover,
Whose Travels Scorns alone discover
To the chased Stag? Their Dwelling bear
Same form, sad-fortun'd Both appear,
Wilderness round his Fancy shows,
Which wild, disordered Thoughts compose;
Hunted by Dogs each strong for Scent
(Grief, Rage, Despair) fierce, trubulent;
Whose Mouths cast Venom, from whose Eyes
Swist flaming Balls (as 'twere) surprise.
Those dreadful Horns resemble well
(Since sounding forth their mortal Knell)
Those sharp disdainful Checks that came
From his too coy, severer Dame:
Found terribler, more shrill beside,
Through Fancy's Eccho's multiplied.
That frightful Huntsman's Glance, called View,
When throught the Road or Lawn pursue,
Her Form conceived condemning Face,
Which Lightning darts through every place.
That Shaft lodged in his Breast, Desire,
Now pointed seems with flame of Fire,
Which eats Life-spirits, blood feeds upon:
Then tip'd with Ice despairing grown
Full-blown with Sighs, imbost withal,
Through raging heat, near the Funeral.
Thus, when (confounded Thoughts) sad Race,
So long maintained, the unhappy Chase,
As faintest, gasping Hopes supply
With broken Breath, when 'midst the Cry,
No Comfort's cooler Stream relieving,
Nor Reason's Bay, at last help giving;
With Stag-like Fate he falling dies,
Scorn's Triumph and Love's Sacrifice.
Song, on Hero and Leander drowned.
HERO, sad, distressed Maid,
Since that winged Archer, Boy,
Deceitful grown, thy thoughts betrayed
To Love, but scarce enjoy.
Unfriendly the Hand, 'twas cruel Bow
Which did Wound thy poor Heart so,
As false that raging Wave
Since could with murther's act comply,
Gallant Youth constrained to die,
His moist, untimely Grave.
II.
HERO watched with constant Eyes
To see her Darling-Love,
And from small Tower entreats the Skies,
Thracian River Hellespont.
Broad Waters gentle prove;
Many a Vow she numbered over,
If transported safe for Shore,
To the Gods of Seas and Wind;
Too rough because their Stream, she feared,
Large that Swimmer's Task appeared,
Might drown their Joys, unkind.
III.
HERO viewed, thought all below
Pleased Water's face to smile,
Winds hushed, becalmed, Heaven does show,
Conjoined to cheat, beguile:
Then ranging Glance from far descries
(Nimblest often yourn Lovers eyes)
LEANDER waves embrace:
Who leaving Shore with joyful Sight,
Her self by Hung a^ her VVindow.
Torch discerned Moonlight,
Cut through the Streams apace.
IV.
HERO looked with gladsome Thought,
And hastened down to shore,
Mean time those Waves were swelled, high-wrought,
Loud Blasts began to roar:
When Strait that Storm increasing there
Through blustering Sighs and Tears, as 'twere,
She saw's Love to fail.
Choice, fleshly Barque his Body show
Wrack-like beaten to and fro,
Faint Arms nor Legs avail.
V.
HERO grieved, when (drawn more nigh)
LEANDER spent, quite fired,
With stretch'd-out Arm and mournful Cry,
Her Name sunk down, expired:
Who took no time to gaze, complain,
Sighs and Groans were thought but vain,
She saw no Cause to live;
So that devouring Wave bestrides,
Which strait her daintiest Body hides,
Both crystal Tomb does give.
Scorned Scornfulness.
KNow thou, fair Tyrant she, e're long
Cracked may fall
Thy glist'rng Scepter, Crow, and all,
Beauties Commandress-fort, Her lovely Person.
so strong:
When those Eyes, Earth-Stars but late,
Lamps of Day, to dauning turn;
Like twinkling Tapers prove, hard fate!
Glowworms false Fires more clearly burn.
II.
Those Cheeks and Lips, where Spring admired
(Cloud o'recast)
To Autumn changed, December, last;
Thy Pageantry's brave Show expired:
When thou shall the living Tomb
To thine own Beauty's Corpse appear;
This Epitaph o're-heard, like Doom,
While tread'st the Streets -- [She was however.]
III.
Then shall those former Slaves of thine
Kings become,
Who spent, to please, large golden Sum,
Thy churlish Mood, perverse Design;
Seemed to endure the Lash, there laid
Prostrate all before thy feet.
Expecting Dooms, one Smile displayed
Their morning- Star conceived, so sweet.
IV.
One Kiss of the Hand, or naked Breast
Life-food bestowed;
Calm, gentler Word their Music showed,
Fond Lovers thus in Chains, distressed:
Then, though proudly thou did scorn,
Nobler they may pity thee;
Or long before perchance (freeborn)
Turn wise, renounce Love's Slavery.
V.
Court next their Pleasures, ease no less,
Looking on
Thy scattered Beams, undazeled grown,
Charm-proof against Frowns, or smiling dress:
Queen of s^^e fair Land, as 'twere,
Leaving thee, for Subjects void,
When thou may wish the had used there
Less Scorn, more Love-delights enjoyed.
Beauty and Frailty.
HOW Beauty shines to Youthful Sight!
Prime Face and Body's choice, compound!
Amazement caused, with Love, delight,
Both Map may seem of Heaven renowned,
And the Earthly Globe's with all, such Wonders found;
The whole World's Contraction:
Though this transcends for Excellence,
Life sparkling thence,
All heightened (last) through Words, Smiles, graceful Action.
II.
What Sun-like Beams adorn the Eye!
Soul's radiant Orb! bright Masquers there;
Beauties with Virtues joined on high,
Do glistring move: Spring-beds appear
In gallant Cheeks, or each presents, as 'twere,
White, crimson Bower:
Choice, daintiest Fruits (Pearl, Ruby's gem)
Lips boast in them:
The Front Love's silver Throne, or Regal Tower.
III.
Alas! that Nature's prime should be
Like meaner Works destroyed, so frail!
How beautiful's the Rose to see,
Perfumed like Garden's Queen! though pale,
Carcass e're long ( Scent lost) we may bewail:
Such joined, observed
The Tulip too, blown Gillislow'r,
Fine-cheek'd this hour;
Fruits lovely thought, tho soon appear shrunk, starved.
IV.
All Creatures change, prove faded here,
Bodies with Minds, that sinking Fate;
Like Seasons Daughters of the year;
Those Beauties gone, transformed that late
Could Hearts command, in their triumphant State,
Now pitied, scorned:
Bright Virtue, Wisdom though may lend
Glory to the end;
Each Brow by these like Wreath of Stars adorned.
The fair, young Shepherdess, her Funeral also.
IS any Pastor's Ear so deaf to Fame,
That has not heard of fair SOLVANDRAE'S Name?
So used to the bleating Noys, that Funeral-Knell,
(Which groun'd this Nymph to Earth, did Hearts congeal)
Nere mentioned was; thus far more happy, free,
Since ignorant of the common Misery;
ARCADIA'S Loss: the Sun with haste was gone
From her black Funerals, and Night came on
In Sables clad. O, what new-raised Train
Of mournful Ghosts, as 'twere, then trod the Plain!
Whose ceremonious Form that Grief comprised,
As each their own near Funeral solemnized.
Death's March it seemed; first went young Swains, by pai^s,
All crowned with Cypress-branch, as Usherers
To the solemn Hearse; four next the same, that led,
Showed painted Shields, where drawn on Sable Bed
Young, pale, dead Virgin lay, white Shroud did wear
For Bridal Clothes bare Face beheld, however
(Bounteous even then) by Death's black Arms embraced,
And on the Top, white Characters was placed,
This must my Brides-groom prove: with Sadness so
All passed along. Behind the Hearse did go
A single Swain, what mournful Tread! sad Glance!
True Bulk of Wretchedness, whose Countenance
Life- damp displayed; seemed Ghost to the Corpse before;
Sigh-storm did breath, whilst Cheeks bedrench'd (their Shore)
His Torrent eyes; transcendent thus was found,
Surpassed in Grief his Hat did mixed surround
Small Willow, Cypress-branch, writ largely above,
Black Characters, Death does my Rival prove.
Then came the whole Virgin-Train, white Skarfs did wear,
Part veiled like clouded Stars, while Torch-light there
Caused dismal Noon. Thus all did softly trace
To the last, retiring Cell, most loathsome place
Where they should leave their slumbring Nymph behind;
Earth-Chamber 'twas, which near transformed half blind
That Youth beholds: Never spoke Sorrow more
Then Silent now, what different Passions store!
Here Sighs, there Tears, pale Cheeks, all making one
Consort in Grief; his part excelled alone.
They viewed their utmost round, till lost the Sight
With whom their Eyes seemed as 'twere buried quite,
That way to enjoy; with solemn thoughtful Muse,
Whilst churlish Clods and cold seemed there to abuse
That gallant Form, which, lately thought more nice,
Complained not now; by Death intranced lies:
Curtains being drawn, all closed, never daintier Frame
Was lodged in simple Earth, their Tongues proclaim.
TRANSLATIONS.
Englished out of French.
SONG.
Il y a dans ce Village, etc.
IN this Village long has shined
That bright Star my Thoughts adore;
Paris, where such beauteous Store,
Nothing vaunts so choice, refined:
Ah! Ah! sweet to me
Fair Eye, though to dye for thee.
II.
She commands my Heart entire,
That with her dear Law complies:
More than King my self I prize
Through that hopeful Love-desire.
Ah! Ah! sweet to me
Fair Eye, though to dye for thee.
III.
So delightful, gently seizing
Proves her Beauty's charming Grace,
Freedom's height far less I praise
Than that Servitude so pleasing.
Ah! Ah! sweet to me
Fair Eye, though to dye for thee.
IV.
I not know what artful Passion
Other Suitors can invent;
But for all deep Complement,
Breath to her this Protestation;
Ah! Ah! sweet to me
Fair Eye, though to dye for thee.
Englished out of Petrarch in Italian.
On the first Sight of Beauteous Laura.
Era'l giorno, ch'al Sol si scoloraro, etc.
THere was a Day, when the Sun's Beams grown pale,
With yours beheld, appeared; Light's chief Disposer:
When those fair Eyes (unguarded Breast, too frail!)
Strait bound my Heart, Love-band alone the Incloser.
'Twas then no Time for breach-repairs, Defense,
So strong the Assault: nor small proves my Suspicion
(Though Lovers Griefs seem vulgar thought) from whence
Those former Wounds received, my Slave-Condition.
Treacherous Love found me disarmed there,
When throught mine Eyes free road to the Heart extending,
(Eyes places now, sad Foards of Tears, as 'twere!)
Though scarce with Cupid's Honor, Glory ending:
Struck naked me with Dart, that time nor shown
To coy, well armed You his Bow alone.
Another out of Petrarch, in Italian.
Lassare il velo o per Sole, o per Ombra, etc.
On coy Laura, veiled.
THat you discharge your Veil by Sun or Shade,
I cannot of late perceive; that Joy discover;
As you believed my great Desires allayed
That Mu^^led way, which throng my Heart all over.
Tho lurking Thoughts, close-harbour'd there, do now
Perplex me still; Sight lost, bred more desiring.
I once observed fair Goodness grace that Brow,
But since my Love showed the Hearts internal firing,
Your yellow Sunshine- Curls are gone, beclouded more;
Each radiant Glance quite overcast, obscured.
Thus, snatched from me what most I prize, adore,
If governed by that Veil; worst Plagues endured.
Since, frozen still to Death, be it hot or cold;
Your Eyes sweet Light does darken and infold.
Englished out of Monte-mayor, in Spanish.
On Leander drowned, swimming to Hero over the Hellespont.
Leandro amoroso fuego ardia, etc.
LEANDER, burning with an amorous Fire,
Stole down in haste to the watery Shore, attended
By one Love-thought for guard, his dear Desire;
Through whose bold force no danger apprehended,
That Is flaming Light through Streams did wounder raise,
God God of the Sea.
Neptune roused with angry Waves to quench it,
Whilst Cupid knew, he could have damped that Blaze
'Tween HERO'S wished, for Arms; best way to drench it.
The Morning smiled, Vovage advanced, as 'twere;
Night gently came, with friendliest Shades surrounded;
More kind than either Love or Fortune were;
Sad Lovers Fates! Hope often by Death confounded!
That Love and Fortune that should Powers combine,
To kill, destroy that gallant Youth Design.
Another out of Monte-Mayor, in Spanish.
The modest doubtful Lover.
Los oios no peccaron en mirar os.
MIne Eyes (fair Maid) not sin, whilst but behold;
When the only aim to view and to admire you:
Should my Heart merit plead, though too over-bold,
Wish me no worse than still to want, desire you.
Never speak my Tongue, be it rather charmed and dumb
Than smallest Word to Gain, enjoy should mention.
If Tears design to soften and overcome,
You punish may by marbled Heart's Prevention.
But don't withdraw from me your Wweetest Sight;
For though that Grant produce my secret Anguish,
Sad Days I Will spend beholding you, Earth's Light;
Since no Life else partake, my Soul must languish.
Your View debarred, I am but dead, or dying.
Hopes of my Torment there best Ease supplying.
A Third out of Monte-Mayor, in Spanish.
The Shepherd deeply enamored.
Fstava Lusitano repastando, etc.
YOung Lusitan sat grazing ( solemn turned)
His gentle Flock, through verdant Plane dispersed:
Green Sheep-hook Scepter-like the one Hand adorned;
Whilst viewed the Ground, with his sober Thoughts conversed.
Then the E^es advanced, he soon forth breathed this;
If the art so Prime, my Love-disease, excelling,
Who says, To lose my self not saving is?
Doubts he go grant in Pain, there is Pleasure dwelling?
Since for my Cure no comfort- Balm is sought:
She need not to regard me. O Fairest Creature!
Those Ignorants mistake my pleasing Thought;
For since well viewed thy Form divine, rare Feature,
I count if Grief not to be grieved, Heart-wounded:
My Malady's my Medicine thus compounded.
FINIS.

