PPOSSO KAI OPISSO

A SERMON, EQVALLY POINTING FORVVARD, and BACKWARD, AS IT WAS Delivered in the
Vniversity-Church of Saint Mary's in CAMBRIDGE.

By P. H. B. of Divinity, and sometime Fellow of Queens College in Cambridge.

In his Forenoone Course before that Universitie, upon the 22. day of November,
in the year 1640, being the third Sunday after the beginning of this present
PARLIAMENT.

Eccles. 1. v. 9, 10. The thing that has been is that which shall be: that
which is done is that which shall be done: and there is no new thing under the
Sun.

Is there any thing whereof it may be said, see, this is new: It has been
already of old time which was before us.

Virg. -- Sic illi oculos, sic ora ferebant.
Printed in the Year, 1647.

To the READER.
REader (whosoever thou art) that do scruple or make any doubt of the truth
of the thing, done in such manner, time and place, as the Title Page does
Preface; Know that this Sermon verbatim, being preached in the very beginning
of this Parliament before the whole Universitie, and a good part of the Town
of Cambridge, there are many Hundreds of People, that can attest and justify
every tittle in the Title Page, yet living every where, howsoever distressed,
or wheresoever dispersed, throughout this Spacious Kingdom.

The Author is a Priest, and graduated in Divinity, in the time of Ignorance,
and Popery, before the Gospel here in England; otherwise, he is a Gentleman of
a very good and ancient House, and Extraction. A Gentleman and a Scholar, note
that; for Blood and Learning, Generositie and Breeding, they are the two entire
constitutive Principles of a Malignant, as complete as Matter and Form of a
Natural Body. Out upon them both; for wheresoever they meet in one; there
needs no further Proof, you may certainly and infallibly conclude, such a
Person an enemy to this our State, Reprobate, and altogether untractable to
this Blessed Reformation.

The Publishing of this Sermon, I assure thee (not upon the Public Faith, but
in the word of an honest man) is not with the Author's Notice, much less his
Consent; which indeed was never a^^^d, we supposing it to be with him, as it
is generally with all other Malignants, who though they be no whit ashamed, yet
are very much afraid of their Malignancy.

It remains then only, that thou be rightly informed why this Sermon,
(being Preached so long ago) came not to public view long before; or why it
is just now held forth.

Not Before, because the publishing of it before might justly have been
interpreted very prejudicial to the wisdom of the Managers of this Holy
War, as if they had not had sufficient Abilities of understanding and
judgment to carry on this Holy Cause, and business of their Holy Covenant,
unless they had had this Pattern or some such Copy set before their eyes,
whereby to direct their whole Counsels and Actions.

But now that the Work is so done, as the most envious Malignant cannot say,
that ever any of their Predecessors in any Age have gone beyond them; It is
very seasonable, yea requisite and necessary indeed, to present to all the
world this following Discourse, and that for this reason, which (if you mark
it) will plainly infer the necessity.

For seeing that all the Orthodox, painful and Godly ministers (put into the
several Benefices of this Kingdom by this Blessed Parliament) both in their
single exercises upon their Cures, and when they have exercised some 4 or 5 one
over another head upon solemn humiliation days, have wrought powerfully upon
the dullest capacities both of City and Country, and contributed much, yea very
much, by their labor in the Cause, and mannagement of this holy War: but
more especially seeing that the Reverend Assembly of Divines did not only pray,
preach, exhort and counsel to this effect, but also did work wonders,
dispense with Oaths, (as much as ever the Papists can boast their Pope to have
done) and make the very Scriptures themselves, especially in the English,
Welsh, and Scotch Languages conformable and subordinate to this holy War, and
holy Covenant, as much as to their own Presbytery and beautiful Discipline:
It is then most expedient and necessary, that this Sermon be now printed for
the justification and vindication, both of the one and of the other, from the
slander and obloquie of the Reprobate, Wicked, Cavalier-Prelatists, and of the
Separatists, and Independents, that all the world may see, understand, attest,
and give judgment, that neither the Parliaments Orthodox Ministers have
taught, incited or stirred up the people to any thing, nor the Reverend
Assembly of Divines have directed, or counseled any thing in this holy War,
and this holy Covenant for which the word does not both hint and hold forth a
most clear Text and warrant as you shall find it written, --

-- NUMB. 16.3. And they gathered themselves together against Moses, and
against Aaron, and said unto them, Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the
Congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them: wherefore
then lift you up youselves above the Congregation of the Lord?
MY Text presents unto you a famous Rebellion in the Jewish state, which shows
the Antiquity of this sin, although perhaps not that height of wicked Policy
so fully reached and accomplished by the villainous cunning inventions of
after-ages; for, Nihil inventum and perfectum eodem tempore, never was any
thing so exactly at first excogitated, invented or found out, as nothing could
be added by succeeding ages to complete and perfect it. Yet the sin of
Rebellion (although perhaps not now first devised, yet sure but in its Cradle
and infancy, especially as it has reference and relation to this state of the
Jews, Numb. 10.11.
by computation of time in all probability not two years old since their
freedom from the Egyptian bondage) wanted so little already of its full
perfection, that here in this frame you may behold the complete form and
figure of it with all parts and Lineaments fully integrated, Nay, and many
accidental perfections, though not all which were added to every part as it
grew from strength to strength, till it came to its just Bulk and Stature. As
in the body of an infant you may find every part of a man, as Front, and Eye,
and Hand, and Leg, although not the several graces and comeliness of every of
these parts, as the majestic rise of the Forehead, and vigorous quickness of
the Eye, the pure whiteness of the Hand, and the decent proportion of the Leg,
until this infant be grown to some consistent measure both of height and
bigness: So I say here in this rebellious act, is represented every part and
limb of Rebellion, and after-ages have but added a cleanly contrivance and
carriage to some of these parts, that rebelling may appear more graceful and
comely to the eye of the world, as by the viewing of the several particulars
in my Text will more plainly appear, Where you have,

Par. 1.
Rebels, The Rebels, They (i. e.) Korah of the Tribe of Levi, and Dathan,
Abiram, and On of the Tribe of Ruben, v. 1. and 250 Princes of the assembly,
Famous in the Congregation, and men of Renown. verse. 2.

2.
Materiale peccati, expressed by an unlawful assembly, and se ipsos
co^gregaru^t, And they gathered themselves together.

3.
Formale peccati, that which does specificate the sin of Rebellion, notified
in the Parties against whom they were gathered together, and that was contra
Mosen and A^ronem, the Supreme Prince and Chief Priest.

4.
Capitulatio, The incapitulation or Treaty after they were gathered together,
and had made their party good and strong, then and not till then they begin to
capitulate and treat, and dixerunt eis, And they said unto them,

Gravaminum Remonstratio, 5.
in their treaty, here is a Remonstrance or Declaration of their grievances,
Moses was too high in State, and Aaron in the Church, there must be no supreme
Prince nor chief Priest, but it is a paritie both in Church and State which
they seem to require, and therefore they break out first with an exclamation,
Nimium arrogatis, Ye take too much upon you. Secondly, with an expostulation,
Quare elevamini? Wherefore do you lift up your selves above? etc.

Gravaminum Ratio, 6.
That they may not seem to be mad without reason, here are the pretended
reasons or grounds of these their grievances, sufficient in their opinion to
justify an Insurrection; And indeed, if true, the strongest Motives that can
be, for they are cunningly drawn from Religion and Gods Honor, for they can
prove from Gods own Words, that all the Congregation was holy, every one of
them; and therefore there must be no Aaron, no chief Priest. Secondly, 'Twas
apparent that the Lord was among them, and therefore it was a derogation from
his Honor to have a Co-adjutor in Government, and so their must be no Moses,
no supreme Prince, Reasons very specious and persuasive.

But sevently and lastly, 7.
If ye would know that which the Logicians call Causam (...), the true,
Primary, Internal, impulsive Cause of all this Tumult and Rebellion, ye must
not look for it here in my Text in the public Remonstrations and
Declarations of the Rebels themselves, for that is usually kept secret and
close from the peoples eyes amongst the chief of the Faction, and is either
disclosed by the Notorietie of the fact, when they have attained their ends and
purposes, or else by the diligent search and enquiry of some honest Historians
of those times, and the true Primary Impulsive Cause of this Rebellion is
discovered by Moses to be Pride and Ambition, Eccl. 10, 13.
The beginning of all sin. Korah was but an inferior Levite, and he aspired
to the Priesthood, as Moses plainly told him, v. 10. Seems it a small thing
unto you, that God brought thee near to him, and all thy brethren the sons of
Levi with thee, but seek ye the Priesthood also? For which cause, both thou
and all thy company are gathered together against the Lord: So that the true
Cause of Korah's rebellion was ambition, he aspired to the Priesthood, and
Aaron stood in his way, and therefore his chief aim was against Aaron. Dathan
and Abiram, though they were Princes of the Assembly yet they were inferior to
Moses, and that was it troubled them, Secundi gradus erant impatientes, they
could not brook any superior, as they plainly told Moses, v. 13. Is it a
small thing that thou have brought us up out of a good land that flows with
milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness, except thou make thy self
altogether a Prince over us? So that Ambition too was the true cause of their
rebellion, they aspired to Supremacy, and Moses stood in their way, and
therefore their chief aim was against Moses. So that whatsoever color or
pretext they make in their public Remonstrances or Declarations, be it
Religion, or Conscience, or care of the Common good, the true cause and ground
of their rebellion was Pride and Ambition. Korah was ambitious of the highest
place in the Church, Dathan and Abiram in the State, and therefore they were
gathered together against Moses and against Aaron, and all this worthy of
belief, upon the credit of Moses a faithful Historian, and also an Inspired
Penman of holy Scripture. And so here is you see, delineated and drawn a
perfect Model of Rebellion, and Rebellions of afterges, if they have added any
thing, they are but some quaint tricks and devices to adorn and set forth the
several parts of this Fabric; this still for form and fashion, standing a
complete and perfect Pattern; And so I proceed to the first part of my Text.

Rebels, Par. 1.
The Rebels (They) Korah, Dathan, Abiram, and On of the Tribe of Ruben, and 250
Princes of the Assembly, Famous in the Congregation, and men of renown; In
whom there are three things observable that make this Rebellion dangerous: The
first is, Combinatio, Levita and Ruben, The Levite and the Rubenite joined.
Secondly, Eminentia, Principes coetus, Princes of the Assembly. Thirdly,
Popularitas, homines celebres, Famous in the Congregation, and men of renown.

1. Combinatio, Korah of the Tribe of Levi, and Dathan, Abiram, and On of the
Tribe of Ruben: And though none but Korah be named of that Tribe as being the
principal Head, and one that had his particular aims and ends, yet it is
evident, that more of the inferior sort of the Levites were gotten in to
participate of this Rebellion, because Moses in the 10 v. speaks in the
plural number to Korah, and the rest of his brethren the sons of Levi, Seek
ye the Priesthood also?

Now the Levites, either because they were Gods lot and portion to do the
service of the Tabernacle, Numb. 2.33. Numb. 18.20.
and so were not numbered amongst the rest of the children of Israel by Moses,
or because God was their lot and portion, and therefore they had no inheritance
in the division of the land of Canaan; for one or both of these reasons the
Levites may very well be called by the name of (...), the Clergy or lot of the
Lord, so that they joining with the Rubenites, it seems that both Clergy and
Laity were combined together in this Rebellion; and this conjunction gives a
strong encouragement and countenance to the action, for the Levite or Clergy
alone would have wanted power and strength, the Laity or Rubenite alone could
not have had so fair a color and cloak of Religion to cover their Rebellious
practices, but both joined together make a strong faction and a fair show; and
the action appears more glorious in the world when there is such a combination
between the two maine parts of the state; and therefore Adonijah when he
exalted himself, saying, I will be King (when as Solomon was designed before
both by God and his father David for that Regal Office) he took this course;
He combined himself with the Priest, and chief Captain to make his party
good, He conferred with Joab the son of Zerviah, 1 King, 1.7.
and with Abiather the Priest, and they following Adonijah helped him, without
his help he saw there was but little good to be done, and therefore Abiather
the Priest was a fit and useful instrument for his ends. And that unnatural
Rebellion of a neighboring Country which mask't it self under the specious
Title of the Holy League durst not venture upon the temporal power alone, but
he that professes himself to be the Aaron of the whole world, is combined
with Dathan and Abiram against Moses, and the Levites out of their Pulpits must
make public Invectives and Declarations against Moses, and a College of the
Prophets must be gotten to advise the simple People to Arm themselves against
Moses, and Aaron's legate to countenance the Action must reside in the chief
City, and the famous Writer of the Controversies in the Church of Rome,
Bellarmine Chaplain to the Popes Legate in France, at the time of that
Roman-Holy-League.
has got no great credit amongst the French Historians for being one of his
Retinew and company, and indeed he may justly be suspected for a Boutefeau and
Incendiary in that Rebellion, seeing he published such rebellious Divinity to
the whole world. And I would that some of the same Aaron's Emissaries had not
been so lately busy in this kind to the disturbance of our sweet Peace and
tranquillity. But these and the like need not applaud their Brain for any new
invented Policy, for we can Track them to the very fountain and springhead from
whence they derived their Plot. This here in my Text was their first Pattern
and Copy, which they like Apes do but imitate and follow; here are the Clergy
and Laity joined together, the Levite and the Rubenite Combined; Korah of the
Tribe of Levi, Dathan, Abiram, and On of the Tribe of Ruben.

2. Eminentia, They were not of the inferior sort of Commons, but the chief
of the Nobility, for so you may read in the second verse, they were principes
coetus, Princes of the Assembly, qui tempore Concilii per nomina vocabantur,
says Saint Hierome, who were summoned by name to the public assemblies and
meetings to consult with Moses for the good and welfare of the whole nation.
They were e coetu convocati says Tremelius, such as were chosen and convocated
out of the congregation to the public consultations and deliberations of
state, but now they have changed their title, for instead of Convocati they are
become Convocatores authors of seditious assemblies; They that should have
waited Moses his call, do now call Moses to an account; nay they, who by their
eminency and place should have eased Moses his Shoulders of the burden of
government, by their disloyal carriage lay on more weight and pressure to the
disturbance of the whole state, which must needs totter and shake at the
disjoynture of such maine pillars; As in a structure or building if but a pin
or punchion or gice do fail there is no great fear, but if a post or beam
start aside from the frame, that threatens subversion and ruin: if the poorer
sort of the Rubenites; or the lowest of the Levites had kindled this fire, it
might have easily and soon been extinguish't, but when a Korah, Dathan, and an
Abiram, Princes of the assembly, break out into a flame, that will require
both speedy help and strong remedies, both which the wisdom of God used for
the suppressing of these men's Insolences, as in the sequel you shall hear.

3. Popularitas* Here is the most dangerous and most pernicious quality in a
Rebel, and that is their popularity, for the Text says they were Homines
celebres, famous in the Congregation, Verse. 2.
and men of renown; by their plausible conversation and popular deportment
they had gotten themselves a name and fame in the Congregation, for there are
two things requisite to Popularity. 1. Virtutis simulatio, a specious show of
virtue, such especially which respects the Common-good, together with a
querulous complaint against the present government. 2. Populi Palpatio, a
stroaking and clawing of the Congregation by a submisse and humble carriage.
Now it seems, that these Rebels here had adumbrata, though not expressa
virtutis signa, some shadows and outward resemblances though not the express
image and portraiture of virtue, otherwise they would have been infamous in
the Congregation rather then famous; but though they had no stock of virtue
within themselves, it is likely their outward show and carriage was borrowed
from honesty and goodness, which together with their fauning courtship, and
observance of the peoples humors, did purchase them fame and renown in the
Congregation. And this you shall find to be the constant practice of these
kind of Rebels; Absalom was a cunning artificer in this work, when by fair
speeches and flattering promises he went about to steal away the hearts of the
men of Israel from his father David, 2 Samuel 15.
as you may read, where after he had prepared his stage at the entry of the
gate, in the view and face of the people, then he falls to acting of his
popular parts; For,

1. Ver. 3.
When any man that had a controversy came to the King for Judgment, Absalom
called him, and said unto him, See thy matters are good and right, but there is
no man deputed of the King to hear thee: There Is an exclamation against the
present Government.

2. Verse. 4.
Absalom said moreover, Oh that I were made a Judge in the Land, that every man
which has any suit or cause might come unto me, and I would do him justice:
There Is Virtutis simulatio, his specious show of virtue.

3. Verse. 5.
And it was so when any man came nigh unto him, to do him obeisance, he put
forth his hand, and took him and kissed him: There Is Populi Palpatio.

And that you may see the dangerous consequence of this cunning carriage you
shall find in the 6 ver. that by these means Absalom stole the hearts of the
men of Israel.

Catiline that great conspirator against the Commonwealth of Rome was excellent
(says the Orator) versare suam Naturam, Orat. pro Mar. C^^^.
et regere ad tempus, to turn and wind his nature and disposition, according
as the present opportunity and occasion required, The behavior of Rebels.
et huc atque illuc torquere et flectere, he could writhe and bend it this way
and that way as he pleased, so that he could behave himself, cum tristibus
severe, cum remissis jucunde, cum senibus graviter, cum juventute comiter,
sadly with the sorrowful, jocundly with the merry, gravely with the old man,
courtly with the young man, et specie quadam virrutis assimulatae, and by a
specious counterfeit of virtue deceived many good men. Caesar the first
Sovereign over the Roman state, Sobrius ad Rempublicam evertendam accessit,
says Tully, he came with temperance and sobriety to the subversion of the
Commonwealth. These and many more examples in Histories may be good Caveats to
make us take good heed how we judge men's actions by their persons and outward
appearances, that because their persons and lives at least in common appearance
are free from those noysom sins that infect the times, therefore their actions
of affronting and rising up against their lawful Sovereign proceed from
Religion and Conscience, and care of the Common good; No by no means: But our
surest course is, to judge men's persons by their actions, if their actions be
unsound and irregular, if they gather themselves together against their Prince
and Sovereign, against Gods express Word and Commandment, be their outward
appearance never so specious and glorious, we may assure our selves they
neither fear God nor regard man, but only to serve their own turns. These
(they) in my text were famous in the Congregation, and men of renown, yet they
proved impious Rebels, and came to a fearful end.

4. But were the common people spectators all this while, were not they fetched
in by some trick and devise to participate of this Rebellion? A head without
the help of a hand may contrive, but not execute; the people must set to their
helping hands, or else the plot though never so well contrived cannot be
efficacious, and therefore to make this first part complete, you shall find in
the 10 verse. that Korah had gathered all the Congregation against Moses and
Aaron; Korah the Levite, and indeed this task is commonly imposed upon the
Levites, who by their Office and Ministry (if they will abuse it) have a
fairer way, and more powerful means, to draw away the hearts of the poor
people from their loyalty and obedience to their lawful Sovereign, and
therefore they are commonly sent out by the Grandees of the faction about the
Congregation, instead of the fire of devotion to kindle strange fire, the fire
of Rebellion; and therefore Korah the Levite here he was employed in this
service. He gathered all the Congregation, etc.

So that now this first part is very complete, the combination strong, the
Levite joined with the Rubenite; the party's eminent, Princes of the assembly;
their behavior plausible, famous in the Congregation, and men of renown; and
the people hook't in by wiles and tricks to serve the great men's turns; so
that there wants but a signal or watchword and then they are up in Arms, and
that belike was given, for in the next place you shall find them gathered
together. And that is the second point.

Materiale Peccati, Par. 2.
the general act of Rebellion expressed by an unlawful assembly, et seipsos
Congregarunt, and they gathered themselves together. They had often murmured
against Moses and Aaron. Were they pinched or streightn'd with any little
calamity, many times inflicted by Almighty God for their probation and trial,
Moses and Aaron were sure to be blamed: If at Marah they do but stand in want
of sweet water, Exo. 15.23.16.2.
or in the Wilderness of Sin be pincht with hunger, Numb. 13.32.
or by the false reports of those Spies that went to search the Land, be made
believe that Canaan was but a barren Soil, and the people thereof mighty and
valiant, Moses and Aaron must be reviled, and threatened, and murmured against,
when God knows they could not help it. So that it is no wonder that now they are
rebelliously gathered together against them, for murmuring is a near
disposition to Rebellion; when men take the liberty to complain, and chide,
and expostulate, and murmr against their Governors, urged many times by
necessity to some unpleasing and seeming rigorous actions, it is a bad sign
and portends no good. When sudden gusts of wind begin to murmur upon the Seas,
and the waves swell and toss, it is a sign the storm is not far off; The
children of Israel here, after they had once learned to murmur, ere long they
find the way to Rebellion, and are gathered together.

Et Congregarunt seipsos, Here begins their unruly demeanor and undutifull
carriage, by an illegal assembling themselves together. What had they so soon
forgot the Silver Trumpet, which but a little before was appointed by the
ordinance of Almighty God, for that very use and purpose, to gather the
Congregation together? as you may read, Numb. 10.3. At the sound of two
Trumpets all the assembly were to be gathered at the door of the Tabernacle of
the Congregation, and if but one Trumpet sounded, then the Princes, heads of
thousands, were to be gathered together to Moses; And the sounding of these
Trumpets was by a perpetual law appropriated to the sons of Aaron: Now these
Princes take upon them the office both of Aarons sons and Trumpets too, and
most disorderly and seditiously gather themselves together, not to, but against
Moses and Aaron. And indeed what else can be expected from such unruly
assemblies? when people gather themselves together without any order or
direction from their lawful Governors, it is commonly for some bad end and
purpose, the blasts of such winds gathered together are for the most part
violent and fearful; In such assemblies are hatched Treasons, Heresies,
Rebellions, Schisms, Conspiracies, and all manner of Villainy; and therefore
those who by their own Historians were counted cautelous Princes in the world,
as Henry the seventh of England King, by name, knowing the dangerous
consequences of these unlawful assemblies, scarce suffered any Parliament to
pass in his time without some provision by Law against these disorderly
courses of peoples gathering themselves together; and it seems it is not amiss
for their own security, as appears by these assemblers here; for when they
had gathered themselves together, it is not ad or circa Mosen, but contra Mosen
et Aaronem, and that is the third part, etc.

But here, by the way you may discover a little want of art in mannaging this
part of Rebellion, for they might have taken an opportunity to have been
gathered together by the call of Moses his Trumpet, and then they had begun
more legally, and perhaps might better have defended their actions against
public obloquies; and when they were once thus fairly and orderly gathered
together, their party being so potent and strong, they might have chosen
whether they would have bin dissolved or no at Moses his command, until they
had attained their ends and purposes; so that this part of Rebellion might have
been somewhat corrected and amended by foresight, but yet it is no great matter,
for those that venture upon such enormous actions as these, need not stand upon
such nice points of Law for their justification, and therefore we will not
censure them for this oversight, but proceed to the third part.

Par. 3.
Formale peccati, That which does specificate the sin of Rebellion, and
distinguish it from all other sins, notified in the parties against whom they
were gathered together, and that is, Contra Mosen and Aaronem. As there were
three Adjuncts or Circumstances in the parties Rebelling, which made this
Rebellion in a high degree dangerous, so there are three Adjuncts or
Circumstances in these parties against whom they Rebelled, which makes this
action in a high degree flagitious; For it is,

Contra Mosen supremum Principem, and Aaronem summum Pontificem, legitimas
potestates.

Contra Mosen mitissimum hominem, and Aaronem Sanctum Domini.

Contra Mosen and Aaronem divinitus orainatos, and sic per consequens contra
Deum.

It Is contra Mosen supremum Principem, and Aaronem summum Pontificem, legitimas
potestates. Moral virtues and vices are formally distinguished, and
constituted, by general acts limited and determined to special objects,
either commanded or forbidden by some Law, Ordinance, or Constitution; As for
example, it is not every occision or killing that does Constitute the sin of
Murder, one may kill a beast, or a bird, or fish, or a creeping thing, and yet
not be guilty of this sin; but if this Genericall act of killing be
determined or limited to a Reasonable creature, prohibited both by Divine and
Humane Law to be killed, which is the Occisio hominis, the killing of a man,
then it is Murder. So it is not every disorderly gathering together does
Constitute the sin of Rebellion, for had these here gathered themselves only
in perturbationem ordinis vel pacis, the Assembly might have proved but a
plain Conventicle; or had they gathered themselves together only to do some
unlawful act, ad Terrorem populi, whereby either the peaceabler sort had been
feared by the fact, or the lighter sort emboldned by the example, and gone no
farther, it had been either but simply an unlawful Assembly, or a Rout, or a
Riot at most; but when they gathered together, contra Mosen and Aaronem,
against their supreme and legitimate Governors, ordained by Almighty God, the
Act specificated by this object, does formally Constitute the sin of
Rebellion; so that here is presented unto us a perfect definition of Rebellion,
Rebellio est congregatio subjectorum contra potestatem a Deo ordinatam. Now the
vitiositie of this Act ( i. e.) of the subjects gathering themselves together
against the power ordained by God, can never be altered or changed by the
goodness of the end or motive, because all sinful actions contract their
Vitiositie or badnesse primarily and chiefly from their principle and form;
Now the principle and form of all sin, according to S. John, is (...) Ioh.
3.4. (...), 1 John 3.4.
Sin is the Transgression of the Law: which perfect definition, S. Aust. does
but explain by distinct specificall acts in which all transgression does
consist, when he says, Peccatu^ est dictu^, vel factum, vel concupitum, contra
aeternam legem, Sin is either a Thought, Word, or Deed, against the eternal
Law of God. Now gathering together against the power ordained by God, which in
the least degree must needs be an act against the Divine Law, as is plain to
be seen totidem verbis, in Romans 13.2. Romans 13.2.
Whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, that act must
needs be a sin against Almighty God; and if it be a sin, it is not the
goodness of the end can warrant the perpetration of it, if the Apostles rule
be true, Malum non est faciendum, Romans 3.8.
ut inde eveniat bonum, We must not do evil, that good may come thereof; And
of those that slanderously reported of S. Paul, that he should say any such
thing as Let us do evil that good may come, he pronounces this sentence as
dis-avowing such a damnable conclusion, that their damnation was just. Vitium
fit ex qualibet defectu (says the Schoole-man) When any part or least
circumstance that is requisite to the goodness of an action is defective,
absent, or wanting, the whole action becomes vicious, much rather when the
principle or form is wanting, which consists in the conformity of our actions
to the Divine Law, which is the Original, Principle, and Rule of all our
Deeds, and the goodness of the end which does but circumstantionate the action
can never change the vicious nature or being of it. It Is not Readiness keeping the
best of the Cattle for sacrifice can excuse him for the breach of Gods
Commandment; and if God in absolute and unlimited terms pronounce, Whosoever
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, I cannot see how the
goodness of the end, be it Religion, or Reformation, or the common good, can
warrant any such resistance from the transgression of Gods ordinance, except
these or the like limitations had been specified and annexed to the Command,
Law, or Ordinance of Almighty God. Vbi Lex non distinguit, nos non distinguere
debemus (says the Civilian) Where the Law does not distinguish in what cases
such a thing is to be done, or not to be done, we ought not to determine and
define those cases of our own head and power, without the authority of the
Lawgiver. Either God could, or he could not have specified these particular
cases, in which Subjects might have resisted the power; to say he could not,
were in plain terms to deny either his omniscience, or Omnipotency, either
that he did not know all those particular cases, or that he could not transmit
them either by word or writing, whereby we might know and observe them. To say
he could, but would not, methinkes it sounds somewhat harsh, that God should
impose such a hard obligation upon the Conscience, not to resist the power upon
pain of death and damnation, and yet reserve some particular limitations
within the secrets of his own breast, to be found out by the uncertain
deductions of Humane Reason. It is not the wonted course of the goodness of
Almighty God, to deal so closely and reservedly with mankind in a matter of
so great Consequence, that so nearly concerns the salvation of men's souls,
and the conservation of peace and tranquillity in his Church. And if there
were any such reserved limitations in Gods breast, I wonder S. Peter and S.
Paul, who knew the mind of Christ, and professed, that they shunned not to
declare the whole counsel of God, Cor. 2. last.
Act. 20.27.
especially handling this subject, ex professo, should not once so much as
mention any of these limitations, but ever speak in an unlimited manner, Romans
13. v. 1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers; and whosoever resists the
power, 1 Pet. 2.13.
resists the ordinance of God; and Submit your selves to every ordinance of
man for the Lords sake. If they knew any such matter, it was not agreeable to
the Candor and Sincerity of an Apostle to conceal it, nor yet to the zeal
and religious fervency required in an Apostle not to practice it, when living
in the time of that Monster Nero, especially having the power of Miracles, they
would suffer the Church of God, to be so cruelly persecuted by that wicked
Emperor. Or if these limitations have been delivered over by tradition, to be
put in practice by the more-flourishing times of the Church. I wonder in the
time of Dioclesian, when Christianity (by the enemies Confession) had almost
overspread the whole world, that so many thousand Christians would so quietly
and patiently suffer their bloods to be spilt upon the ground for Christ's sake,
and yet not once draw a sword against that wicked Emperor in their Masters
Cause. What? was there no zeal, no jealousy for Gods honor in these holy
Martyrs and Saints of God? Or if yet the Church had not sufficient opportunity
to put this Divinity in practice. I wonder that Iulian's army, consisting for
the most part of Christians, would suffer that Apostate in that scoffing manner
to deride Christ and his Religion, when they had so fair occasions and
opportunities, either to castigate, depose, or murder him. What? was there no
spirit of fortitude in those valiant soldiers, so stout and daring in their
Emperors Battle, and so remiss and cold in Christ's Cause? And yet it is more
strange, that for almost a thousand years after Christ we cannot find these
limitations, in what cases it is lawful to resist the higher powers, either in
the practice of the Church, or in the writings of ancient Fathers and Orthodox
Christians? It Is very well known, that 'twas the ambition of the Church of
Rome, first taught and maintained this Divinity in the world of resisting
lawful powers. And I wonder, that those of the Reformation, who could not so
much as endure a Vestment or an harmless Ceremony, eo nomine, for that very
reason, because it had been used by that Church, would so easily join with
them in deposing of Princes, and rebelling against Sovereigns, that they would
strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Cammell. Well, whatsoever motives or occasions
others may lay hold of for resisting of the power I know not, I am sure these
Rebels here could find but little in the persons or behaviors of their
Governors, to gather themselves thus rebelliously together against them, for
'twas:

2. Contra Mosen mitissimum hominem and Aaronem sanctum Domini, Eccl. 45.1.
Against Moses a merciful man (said the son of Syrach) who found favor in
the sight of all flesh, and was dilectus Deo and Hominibus, beloved both of God
and man, and whose memorial was blessed in all generations against Moses, a
Prince who delivered them out of the Egyptian bondage, brought them through
the Red Sea upon dry land, in and out before them to defend them from their
Enemies, held the balances of justice from morning to evening, and weighed to
every one his right and due, smore the stony Rocks, so that waters gushed out
to quench their thirst; procured Manna from Heaven for them and Quails too,
not for any necessity but to serve their Lust, and then against Aaron a holy
man like unto him, Eccl. 45.6, and ver. 16.
whom God chose out of all men living to offer sacrifices to the Lord, Incense
and a sweet savor for a memorial to make reconciliation for his people to
appease Gods wrath and divert his punishments due to their offenses; and what
could they desire more, and yet for all this, they are gathered together
against Moses and Aaron, where we may observe the restles and unquiet commotion
of some men's ambition, who though under their gracious and pious Princes they
enjoy the blessedness of Peace and sweetness of plenty. Foelicitatem
utriasque gladii, the happiness of both swords; of the sword of Justice, for
the defense of the right and punishment of the wrong doers, and the sword of
the spirit, Ephesians. 6.17.
which is the word of God, yet are never content until they have unsheathed a
third sword, the sword of Rebellion to make way for their own ambitious ends
as they do here, Contra Mosen mitissimum hominem, etc.

But thirdly, there is a higher power then either Moses or Aaron nearly touched
in this Rebellion, and that is God himself; for it is thirdly, Contra Mosen and
Aaronem divinitus constitutos, and sic per consequens contra Deum, Against
Moses and Aaron, the one constituted Prince and Governor, the other
consecrated High Priest by divine appointment and institution; so that though
they be gathered together intentionally and directly against Moses and Aaron,
yet it is virtually and in effect contra Deum, against Almighty God himself:
and therefore Moses in the 11 ver. truly states the nature, form and condition
of their action; for he tells them plainly that they were gatherd together
contra Dominum, against the Lord, not contra Dominum Mosen, against my Lord
Moses, but contra Dominum Mosis, against Moses's Lord, and not contra Aaronem
sanctum Domini, but contra sanctum Dominum, against the Holy, Holy, Holy Lord
God of Hosts. And so was this action in after times generally thought and
accounted of by the whole Nation, as appears by the daughters of Zelophehad,
who then they came to sue for the inheritance of their father before Moses,
Eleazar and the Princes, they use this argument, to incline that honorable
bench to favor their cause, saying, Our father died in the Wilderness, Numb.
27.3.
and he was not amongst them that gathered themselves together contra Dominum,
against the Lord in the company of Korah; and it is worth the observation:
whosoever does gainsay, murmurre or resist the Ordinance of Almighty God,
either in the supreme power or chief Priesthood, or any other legal
Constitution, Order and Commandment of Almighty God in the Scripture phrase, is
usually termed a Rebel against the Lord. So that these Rebels here and all
their followers, though they esteem themselves but (...) fighters against men,
or at the most but (...) fighters against Princes and Rulers, are in deed and
truth (...) fighters against God himself, and yet most impudently they would
make the world believe it is for Religions sake and Gods honor that they
gathered themselves together against himself and his own Ordinance.

After they had gathered themselves together, Par. 4.
and made their part strong and good then, and not till then, they begin to
capitulate and treat, and dixerunt eis, and they said, etc.

This is the common policy of Rebels, They never enter into a contestation
with their superiors till they are so potent and strong, as they are able to
grapple with Authority, and can securely slight and contemn their Princes
just Commands; for should they appear in small troops and daringly affront
their Sovereign, his just indignation might consume them in a Moment; and
therefore those subjects whosoever they were that our Savior speaks of in the
19 of Luke were but poor silly Rebels in respect of this policy; Luke 19.14.
for after they had out-brav'd their Sovereign, with their saucy and
peremptory Message: Nolumus hunc regnare, for want of sufficient power to
maintain and defend their words, were feign to submit themselves to the sword
of justice, for so the Text says, at the return of the King they were all
slain. ver. 27.
These Rebels here were wiser in their generation, then so they would not
openly contest and expostulate with their Superiors until they were gathered
together, and had made their party strong and good, then, and not till then,
they come forth with their saying, Et dixerunt eis, etc.

2. Et dixerunt eis: The voice of Rebellion is not usually so soft and gentle
in such unlawful assemblies, you shall commonly hear of an Exclamarunt, a
loud clamor, or a vociferarunt, a gaping outcry, such as was heard at Ephesus
for the space of two hours, when the people cried out, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians; and indeed when the heart has once transgrest the bounds of loyalty
and obedience, and the hand unsheathed a sword against the Lords Anointed, it is
hard for such a slippery member as the tongue, to keep it self within the
bounds of modesty and due respect: Yet such Rebels as these, that rely not so
much upon their own power as the peoples favor, must make use of such cunning
arts and devises as are likely to gain their good opinions, and therefore at
first they keep down the swelling pride of their hearts from breaking out in
the uncivil language of the tongue, that although they be not innocent, yet by
the sequels of innocence fair speeches and submissive remonstrations they may
with more facility instill the venom of their rebellion into the hearts of the
Congregation, but Naturam expellas furca licet usque recurrer, a flame pent in
and refrained will at last burst out, though they begin here with a Civil
dixerunt, they fall presently to an uncivil exclamation, Nimium arrogatis, and
an immodest expostulation: Quare elevamini, etc.

Gravaminum remonstratio, Par. 5.
A Remonstrance or Declaration of their grievances, etc. Nimium arrogatis quare
elevaminis, Wherefore do ye lift up your selves. It seems they accuse them
of Intrusion and usurpation, that they had taken upon them more then they could
answer, by lifting themselves up and intruding into the chair of State, and
See of Ecclesiastical government, without any order or Institution from
Almighty God* and if this be their grievance they complain of, they themselves
must needs know 'twas an impudent Lie; for 'twas not long before, and they
could not but hear of it, how God had much ado to impose this office of
government upon Moses, who sought to divert God from his intention and purpose
by many excusive arguments, as you may read, Exo. 3, and 4. The first argument
is drawn, a condition personae, from the means of his Person: Exodus 3.11.
Who am I that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring the children
out of Egypt. The second is drawn, Exodus 4.1.
a Populi incredulitate, They will not believe me, nor hearken to me, for they
will say, The Lord has not appeared unto thee. Verse. 10.
The third is drawn, a naturali impedimento; Alas Lord, non sum facundus, For
I am a man of a slow speech, and a slow tongue. Well, when God had answered all
these arguments, Moses, to show his averseness from any such aspiring desire,
breaks out too uncivilly in the fourth place, Verse. 13.
with a mitte Domine quem missurus es, Send Lord I beseech thy Messiah and
Savior of the world, whom thou intend'st to send, insomuch that God in plain
terms fell out with him, 14.
And the anger of the Lord was kindled against him. So that you see, Moses was
much importuned by God himself to take this office upon him; and after he had
entered upon it, the crossenesse and frowardness of the Congregation quickly
made him weary of it, which made him complain to God, I am not able to bear
all this people alone, Numb. 11.14.
for it is too heavy for me; Insomuch that God was feign to join 70 of the
Elders of Israel to bear the burden of the people with him. It seems Moses
was of that Princes mind, who feelingly said, That if a man did but know the
care, solicitude, and trouble of Government, Coronan jacentem non tolleret, He
would not take up a Crown, no not so much as from the ground to wear it.

Exodus 26.
And as for Aaron, he was called to the Priestly Function and eminency in the
Church by Almighty God himself, Levit. 8.
and consecrated by Moses at God's appointment to that office in the face of
the Congregation, so that he was lifted up too by Divine Institution; and
therefore these Rebels must needs know, that 'twas a manifest untruth and an
impudent Lie, to say, that they usurped this Power and Authorite, or lifted
themselves up above the Congregation. And here you may observe the base nature
and corrupt disposition of Rebellion, breaking out for the most part in
ulcerous calumnies and putrified accusations for Rebels, especially such as
these, who ambitiously aim at Supremacy, cannot with any probability or
likelihood hope to attain their ends, unless they can bespatter their Moses
with some foul aspersions, either with defects in his Person; as
Illegitimation, Usurpation, or Vitiousnesse in manners; as Injustice,
inconstancy in Religion, or Disabilities for Government; as Sloth, Negligence,
and the like; And when they can find no just cause for these odious
imputations, then they seek by Infamous Libells, and false rumors and base
reports, and black-mouthed calumny, to sully his white and pure name, as these
Rebels here most maliciously charged Moses and Aaron with usurpation, Nimum
arrogatis and quare elevamini.

2. Super Congregationem, above the Congregation. Although these great men here
had raised this Rebellion for their own private ends to satisfy their Pride
and ambition; yet in the expression of their Grievances, they seem to aim at
the Peoples good, and pretend nothing more then the redressement of their
opposed injuries, as though their Privileges and Liberty; were extorted and
wrested from them by this exaltation of Moses and Aaron above the Congregation:
And indeed this is a cunning policy of these Rebels; for knowing their own
weakness and inability, to overtop their Sovereign without the Peoples help and
aid, it is requisite that upon all occasions they should both ingratiate
themselves with them, and also palliate and keep close their ambitious
designs from their intelligence; And therefore in their public Declarations
and Remonstrances, Populum crepant, they insist much upon the pretended Wrongs
and Grievances of the Congregation, as if they had undertook this quarrel
only for their benefit, and therefore they charge Moses and Aaron in the
behalf of the Congregation, and in the next place they insert a universal
Sign in the favor of the people, Since all the Congregation, etc.

3. Super Congregationem Domini, above the Congregation of the Lord. Here they
begin their Religious Plots and Sanctified Policies, they think themselves
safe and secure from all storms and winds, if they can but shroud themselves
sub Nomine Domini, under the Name of the Lord. Those in the seventh of Ierem.
that stole and murdered, and committed Adultery, and swore falsely, thought
themselves free from all Thunderclaps, so they did but cry Templum Domini
templum; and the Devill's instruments in a^te-rages made such a common use of
this precise policy, that it grew into a Proverb, In Nomine Domini incipit
omne malum, God knows how long it will last, I am sure it begun betimes, for
these Rebels here could make use of this Vermilion to color their foul
facts, and profanely insert the Name of the Lord to set a fair gloss upon
their adulterate Wares, and therefore they cry, Super Congregationem Domini.
But here by the way you may discern a gross error in their mannaging of this
part of their Rebellion; for here they fall too bluntly upon the business, and
oppose themselves too broad, and directly against Moses and Aaron, they carried
it with better slight and more art. In the 14 chapter there they used some
circuition and winding about to get advantages before they came to this maine
onset; there they fell first upon some of Moses his servants, as Ioshuah the
son of Nun, and Caleb, the son of Iephunneh, who had done Moses and the
State good service by their fidelity and faithfulness, in their public
employment for the common good. Those they sought by Calumny, clamorous
Accusations and Forgeries, of the number and strength of their enemies, and
barrenness of the Land, to disgrace and ruin, I, utterly to put them to
death; for all the Congregation bad stone them with stones, verse. 10. Here had
they gone so to work, and begun with Caleb and Ioshuah, and if Moses for his
honours-sake, or public safety, should refuse to sacrifice those Loyallists
to God and their Country, then they might with a more plausible color of
manners have gathered themselves together for the dis-placing of those supposed
disturbers of the public peace, and for the judgment and censure of those
pretended Delinquents against their Country, who by evil counsels sought to
bring both their Prince, Moses, and themselves, his people, upon a most barren
Land, and a most dreadful and invincible enemy. And thus by degrees they might
have proceeded till they had had a fairer way to a Nimium arrogatis, and a
Quare ele vamini? Now eo incipiunt quo incredibile est pervenisse, They begin
at that height of wickedness, to which it is almost incredible that any
subject should ever ascend or aim at. In this particular sure they are much
over-seene; but yet, Fortem animum praestant rebus qua^ turpiter audem.


They set a good face upon their foul enterprises, and would make the world
believe they have good grounds and reasons for what they do, and so I come to
the 6th part.

Gravaminum ratio, Par. 6.
the pretended grounds or reasons for these their grievances. All the
Congregation is Holy every one of them, and the Lord is among them. All the
Congregation is Holy every one of them, and therefore no Aaron, etc. No
High Priest, and here they mask their hellish purposes under the sacred veil
of Religion, drawing an absurd consequence, that there must be no chief
Priest, from a wilfully misconceived interpretation of Gods own word, because
all the Congregation was Holy; for the better understanding, answering and
considering of this their sophistical argumentation, we must know what
holinessee is as it relates unto the Creature, and of this the Holy Ghost gives
us a full description. Omne consecratum and sanctum sanctorum Domino. Leu.
27.23.
The Old Bible renders it thus; Every thing separate from the common use is
most Holy to the Lord, whatsoever is separate either by the institution of
Almighty God, or the vow and free Dedication of man, from the common use of men
in secular and worldly employments, for the service and honor of Almighty God
is termed in Gods own phrase Holy unto the Lord, and therefore as you may read
in the same Chapter, if a man did dedicate an house or a piece of ground or a
field separating the propriety and use of it from the rest of his temporal
estates, unto the use and service of Almighty God, it is there called and
accounted as a thing Holy unto the Lord; and also the tithe or tenth both of
the seed of the ground, Lev. 27.32.
and of the fruit of the trees, and the younglings of the cattle, after it was
separated from the nine parts which might be applied to common use for the
maintenance of the owners was called, Holy unto the Lord, Lev. 87.32.
and the Sabbath day because it was separated from the other six days, wherein
men might labor and do all that they had to do; this being set apart for the
service of Almighty God, therefore it was called Holy unto the Lord, Exo. 35.2.
and the whole Congregation of the children of Israel because they were
separated from the Gentiles to keep those Laws, Precepts and Ordinances which
God has appointed for them, whereas he suffered other Nations to be defiled
with their own vain imaginations, therefore the whole Congregation are called
an Holy people to the Lord, Levit. 20.26.
and this seems to be that part or portion of Gods word, which these Rebels
here use or rather abuse for the inducement and bringing in of a purity into
the Church of God, and as a reason why Aaron should not be lifted up above the
Congregation of the Lord. But here they use a palpable equivocation in the word
Holiness; for in regard that Holiness is a separation of a person or thing
from common use to and for the service of Almighty God, in regard of several
services of and to Almighty God, there are several and distinct kinds of
Holiness; as in respect of persons, there is sanctitas Conversationis and
sancritas Functionis; of Conversationis, when men are separated from the
vanities of this wicked world, as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes,
and the pride of life and devoutly dedicated to the obedience and observance of
Gods holy will and Commandments; and then there is sanctitas functionis, when
certain men are separated by divine institution from the rest of the
Congregation to wait and attend Gods service, and to officiate at his Altars in
the Priestly function. Now though it be granted that all this Congregation were
holy the first way as well as Aaron, (i. e.) separated from all other people by
the gracious choice of Almighty God to serve him in their lives and
conversations by obedience to those Laws, Commandments and Ordinances which
God had appointed for them: yet they were not Holy by way of Function and
office as well as Aaron, (i. e.) separated and set apart by the call and
election of Almighty God to officiate at his Altars, and to Minister before God
in the Priestly office; for thus Aaron and his sons alone were Holy, as being
but a little while before set apart for the Priestly office by the vocation of
Almighty God himself, and consecrated by Moses to that Holy Function, in the
view of the whole Congregation, as is plain to be seen. And therefore in the
fifth verse. of this Chap. Moses told Korah and all his company, Exodus 28.
saying* Levit. 8.
To morrow the Lord will show who is his, and who is Holy, (i. e.) in office
and function as the next words plainly declare, and who ought to approach near
unto him ( i. e.) as a Priest to offer Sacrifices, burn Incense, and perform
other Sacerdotall Functions. And indeed the Lord showed it with a vengeance by
the dismal destruction of these unhallowed Rebels; and so you see how these
Rebels here most profanely pervert and abuse Gods sacred word, because all the
Congregation were Holy, as being separated from all other people by the choice
of Almighty God, to keep his Commandments and Ordinances, therefore by this
aequivocating trick and shift, they would have set up this whole Congregation
to stand in competition with Aaron for the Priestly office, and so have thrust
him out of that eminent place in the Church, to which God had called him.

And by another Religious trick, not unlike this, they give an heave at Moses
their Prince and Governor, for the Lord was amongst them, and therefore there
must be no Moses pretending here the honor and glory of God, for therein lies
the force of their argument: The Lord was amongst them by day in a cloud, by
night in a pillar of fire, and at other times in glorious appearances upon
special occasions, and therefore it was a derogation from the honor of
Almighty God, that such an inferior as Moses should take upon him and exercise
authority when the King of Heaven and Earth was present, and here most
impudently they abuse God's honor to cover their unworthy and base practices,
for they could not be ignorant that God himself had imposed this office of
Government and Superiority upon Moses, and that with great reluctance on his
part, and had seen it confirmed to him by many signs, miracles and wonders.
In Egypt at the red Sea and in the Wilderness, usque ad stuporem naturae; and
what though God were present amongst them, as he is every where, and can
command the whole world, solo Nutu, yet it is very well known that it seemed
good to the wisdom of Almighty God to govern this inferior world by second
causes, so that as he disposes and orders the vegetative Natures, as Herbs and
Plants and other Fruits of the Earth by the notions and influences of the
Heavens and Elements, and the animal or sensible creatures by the power and
wisdom of man: so he orders and governes Humane Societies by Kings and
Princes, whom he calls Nutritios; and therefore it being God's Ordinance and
pleasure, Esaias. 49.23.
it could be no derogation from his honor or glory that Moses was lifted up
above the Congregation of the Lord, for had it been praejudiciall to his
honor, the wisdom of God could have disposed otherwise of the Government of
this world; but yet Religion and God's honor were glorious shows to dazzle the
peoples eyes, that they might not pierce into the depth of their ambitious
designs, and therefore they cried out, All the Congregation are holy, and the
Lord is among them, and so no Moses, no Aaron.

And see here the corrupt nature of Rebellion; There is nothing so Holy,
nothing so Sacred, nothing so Pure, but it is profaned, polluted, and defiled
by her abminations. Religion, that sacred bond tying God and man together, is
made an instrument by Rebellion to undo all Humane Societies, and the fairest
virtue in man's soul is made a Mask to hide the deformities of the foulest
Sin. When ambition swells, or discontent breaks out, or fury rages, then
Religion must be used as decayed faces do, Fucus and Cerus, for the basest
offices to cozen and delude the world; And those who before, like the unjust
Judge, Neither feared God nor regarded man, can now fawn upon those whom
before in their pride they scorned; and to advance their own ambitious ends,
force themselves against their own nature and disposition to seem Religious:
Nay, and make shift to wrap out a place of Scripture too, as the Devil did to
our Savior, but most miserably wrested and abused to serve their own lusts,
as we must obey God rather than man.

Whatsoever this or that particular man, or this or that particular
Congregation, shall conceive and interpret to be the Word of God, though this
Conception and Interpretation be against the authorized doctrine and discipline
of the present Church, and the Consent and Practice of the ancient and
Primitive Church, yet this must be obeyed as the Word of God, and that too with
rising up and rebelling against their Sovereign, contrary to the express Word
of God himself; but let them take heed they do not venture too far, least
they be numbered in the list of that unlearned, and unstable company, of whose
doom S. Peter speaks that wrest Saint Paul's Epistles, 2 Pet. 3.16.
as they do also the other Scriptures unto their own destruction. The
Practice of these Rebels here, show this devilish device to be a great deal
more ancient then S. Peter's time, for they could produce a place of Scripture
and Gods honor too, for the maintaining of their Rebellious actions, when
ambition was the true Cause and Ground of their Rebellion. And that is the 7th
Part.

Par. 7.
Korah was ambitious of the highest place in the Church, Dathan and Abiram in
the State, and therefore they were gathered together: Korah it seems in place
and eminency was next to Aaron and his sons, as being Prince and head of the
Kohathides, whose office was to bear the Sanctuary, a charge of greatest
Honor and Note among the Levites, so that he could not endure to see his
Cousin Aaron enter into the glorious Sanctuary whilst he stood without, or
that Aaron and his sons should cover the Sanctuary and all the Vessels
thereof, and he must not so much as see when the holy things were covered, or
touch any holy thing lest he dye; this was that discontented him, and therefore
his aim was against Aaron.

Dathan and Abiram were Princes and Heads of the Rubenites, who came of the
Elder-house, even of Ruben the eldest son of Jacob, and they could not endure
to be over-topt by the yonger-house by Moses and Aaron, that descended from
Levi the younger son of Jacob, this was that they stomack't, and therefore
though their chief aim was against Moses, yet perhaps Aaron's eminency was an
eyesore to them; they could not endure to see the Miter and the Scepter in the
younger-house, and therefore they are gathered together against Moses and Aaron.

And indeed all the world may perceive, and so might this whole Congregation
too, (had not they been most miserably blinded and besotted) by the weakness
and silliness of these men's Reasons, that their own ambitious hopes, and not
the peoples Good was their maine drift and end; for can any man with reason,
think or imagine, that all the Congregation should have been Aaron's, and
Priests, because they were all Holy; or that they should all have bin
Governors, and Princes, and Rulers, and do what they lift because the Lord was
amongst them? This were a mad conceit to enter into a Wise man's brain; but
they made use of these popular pretenses to curry favor with the people, who
suffer themselves so easily to be gulled and caught with these gilded-baits;
and when by these Traps and Gins they had caught the people, and won their
aid and assistance for the deposition of Moses and Aaron, then no doubt they
had other tricks and devices to fetch and turn the Congregation about for the
advancement of their own fortunes and honors, and by preferring some specious
privileges, in favor of the peoples Liberties, to stop their mouths, they
themselves would have assumed the power and authority both of Moses and Aaron.
And this Plot, so cunningly contrived and carried in every particular, by all
humane likelihood would have proved efficatious, had not God out of his
wrathful indignation, at their damnable Impieties, and for the vindication of
his own honor, profanely abused by these unhallowed Rebels, cut them off in
the midst of their wickedness. For will you hear the issue of this Tumult
and Rebellion, when they had now screwed up their Plot to the highest pitch,
and were now ready to seize their prey, Korah and the two hundred and fifty
men, with Censers in their hands, and Fire, and Incense, intruding themselves
into the Priestly Function; Dathan and Abiram, Lording of it in their Tents,
and proudly answering Moses his Messengers, We will not come unto him:
Almighty God, by a strange and unheard of punishment, consumed them in all
their sins. As for Korah, Numb. 16.32.
Dathan and Abiram, they that opened their mouths in a Rebellious manner
against their lawful Governor, God in his just judgment suffered the
inferior creature to open her mouth against them, for so the Text says, And
the Earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the
men that appertained to Korah, and all their goods; They and all that
appertained to them went down alive into the pit, and the Earth closed upon
them, and they perished from among the Congregation. And those 250 who would
needs be meddling with fire, with the fire of Rebellion against their lawful
Governor, and with the fire of incense against Gods express Ordinance,
incensed Gods anger so far that he quickly fired them out of the world, for
so the Text says, And there came out a fire from the Lord and consumed the 250
men that offered Incense.

Quorum exitus perhorrescis, eorum facta imitabere? Thou that tremblest at
these men's ends, will thou imitate their deeds and actions?

Romans 2.3.
And think thou this O man, that judge them which a^ such things, and do
the same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God?

Who will render to every man according to his deeds.

To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honor,
and immortality, eternal life.

But unto them that are contentious and do not obey the

Well, when men have tried all their Counsels and ways, they will find the advice of King Solomon to be the most beneficial and advantageous for the
salvation of their own souls, and the conservation of peace and tranquillity
both in their private states and in the public state wherein they live, Prove.
24.21, 22
to fear the Lord and the King, and not to meddle with them that are
seditious, for their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin
of them both? and so To God the Father, to God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost,
etc.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 5. lin. 4. ges read ages. ib. l. 9. Korah, r. Korah of the Tribe of Levi.
ib. l. ult. l (...), r. (...). p. 16. l. 7. qualibet, r. quolibet. ibid. l 14.
circumstantionate, r. circumstantiate. p. 21. l. 2. (...). p. 22. l. 28.
Elevaminis, r. Elevamini. p. 24. l. 31. opposed, r. supposed. p. 25. l. 24.
Templum, r. Templum D^mins. ib. l. 25. afte-rages, r. after-ages. p. 27. l. 16.
holinessee, r. holiness. p. 27. l. 18. and, r. est. p. 28. l. 15. puritio, r.
purity. ib* l. 24. Conversatio^. r. Conversation. p. 30. l. 23. notions, r.
motions.


