THE HAPPIEST NEWS FROM IRELAND That ever came to ENGLAND.

Since their first Rebellion.

BEING A TRVE AND EKACT RELation of a great Overthrow given by the Earl of
Clanrickards Company, December. 20. being 500. foot, and 100. horse, to the three
great Rebels, who tebelled lately, The Earl of Care, The great Lord Mackdavo,
and great Lord Donmadoffe

Wherein is set down the Number of the Cities and Towns, which they have
taken since the Rebellion. Also the bloody Massacre which they have used to the
Protestants in Clogham, three miles from the City of Carry with the Earl of
Clanrickards Speech to his soldiers, and the soldiers Answer to the same.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN GREENSMITH, 1641

The treacherous Earl of Care.



C R

The happiest NEVVES From IRELAND That ever came to England, since their first
Rebellion.
MY Lord of Care went forth with six thousand Rebels, and marched to Clogham
three miles from Carry and fired it, and murdered all the Protestants which
lived there, that was but four Households. They entered the house of one Simon
Sloper a Merchant, and ravished his wife before his face, and then hanged him
at his door: then they marched to Kilwort, a great English town, and of very
great buildings, but by the way they came to Master Moulseies house, an English
man, and a trooper to the Earl of Wormod.

But he himself was not at home, for they soon entered the house, and
murdered all that were in it to the number of 15 servants and children: when
they had done this bloody deed they took the old gentlewoman, and hanged her
upon the walls before the gate, ripping up her belly, and so cruelly in an
inhumane manner took out her bowels, and wrapped them about her neck, and
then would have fired the house, but could not, it being all stone-worke.

Then they batred down the house, and so marched away toward Kilmouth, who
presently took the town, and batring down the houses about their ears,
murdering all the protestants that they could meet with, be setting the town
round about, to the intent that none should escape there hands: thus they
murdered them all in a cruel manner, some having their quarters torn in
pieces, deflouring the women, and hanging their quarters upon the walls, and
hanging some up by the heels, whipping them to death, and others tare the
flesh from their bones with pinceeres, and hanging little children upon hooks
by the throat, thus when they had searched the Town in every house, and took
arms for 300. men, in like manner dealt they with Iormoy, and Cormock; for
there they ripped children out of their Mothers wombes, and hanged them up, and
trampled them under their feet.

There lived on Marke-Davo, seven miles from the aforesaid Lord of Care, who
had built a castle by the black-water side, which have bin many years of
building; for the wall was 6. foot thick, and valted round about.

Wherein he did keep 6 Smiths at work for the space of two years, making
provision for war, and now of late he bought all the best horse that he could
get, his treachery is now discovered for upon the 20. day of December. he marched
out the assistance of the said Lord of Care, with one thousand foot, and two
hundred horse, they marched tovvard Feather about 10. miles from him, a vvalled
town most inhabited with Irish, and as soon as he came thither with his
forces the gates were presently opened: but as soon as he was entered, they
presently massacred the prorestants, and taking Mr. Lovv the Minister they cut
out his tongue, fleying the skin off his head, and back, saying, that they
would make a Drum head of his skin, that the Heretics may hear the sound of
it.

Then they hanged his quarters on the Gates but his wife they killed not, by
reason that their intent is to keep her, and so to have her to fullsill their
Lust when they please.

The Town and Castle they keep in their custody, and leave a strong guard for
the safety of it. The other marched from thence to Clummell, a very spacious
town, it being five miles from Feather aforesaid, and they battered down the
greatest part of the town, and murdered most of the protestants there, and got
arms for a 100. men: and thus marching from thence toward Turlow, they met
with that cruel and bloodthirsty Rebel, the treacherous Earl of Care, with
his forces, and so marched together toward the City Talow.

But now courteous Reader, all this aforesaid being doleful and lamentable, I
will bring thee to a true and joyful Relation.

The Earl of Clanrickard having notice that the three great rebels aforesaid
were marching toward Talow, he therefore caused the drums to beat up, to call
his forces together, and then spoke to them to this effect.

Fellow soldiers and Contrymen, give me leave to speak some fevv words
unto you* which are these. The great Mackdavo and the Earl of Clare are
marching toward Talow, intending to take the City, and to put the poors
distressed Protestants to the svvord: therefore noble Countrymen take courage,
and fight with me your fellovv-souldier against these Rebels, whose delight
is in nothing but to spill the blood of poor Protestants.

The soldiers Reply.
Most noble Earl, we do not think our lives too dear to lose for to fight
in a true and just cause, and under such a Noble and valiant Soldier as your
self is, we will spend our dearest blood, and fight as long as we have
breath to do your honor service.

Then the drums beat up, and the Earl of Clanrickard marched toward the City
of Talow with his forces, which were in number 500. foot, and 100. horse, where
within the space of half a mile they espied the rebels forces, and there
marching toward them, the Earl of Clare caused a file of men to be drawn out
to play against them, whereupon a bloody Combat did ensue, and the Rebels had
the worst: this b^^tell held from 9. of the clock in the morning till 3. in
the afternoon, and in the space of 6. houtes were slain on the rebels side
about the number of 500. and of the protestants 50. whereof was 40 ^oot* and 10
horse* then the rebels were feign to flye-and it it is tho^ght that they are
gone to renew their forces, and to have another battle with the Earl of
Clanrickard.

FINIS.

