AN Humble Essay TOWARD The Settlement of Peace and Truth IN THE CHURCH, As a
Certain Foundation OF Lasting Union.

The Workman made it therefore it is not God. Hos. 8.6. Nec enim Fas est
Cultorem Dei a Dei Cultore Violari. Lactantius Lib. de Ira Dei, cap. 14.
LONDON, Printed for N. Simmons at the West end of Paul's, and T. Simmons in
Ludgate Street. 1681.

AN Humble Essay Toward the settlement of Peace and Truth in the Church, as a
certain Foundation of lasting Union.
THE Dignity of Mankind above the sensual Brutes consists specially in the hope
of Eternal Happiness, the Direction and ground of which hope is Religion. All
Religions that ever were embraced, pretended Authority from Divine Revelation,
and the Command of God: the Truth and Certainty of Christian Religion, has
alone this excellency, to be a firm and evident ground of hope of Eternal,
Happiness. For Christian Religion by undeniable proof is Authorized by the
Command and Institution of God; and in the Rules and Practice is both agreeable
to the Simplicity, Purity, Righteousness of the Divine Majesty the Object, and
to the Rational Being of Man the Subject of Religion. The universal Practice of
all Ages and Countries acknowledges the necessity of Religion. But Religion is
not an Opinion Fansifully suggested, or cunningly devised, or powerfully
Imposed, all which can only erect a private or public Superstition; which is
no more Religion then that Creature is a Man which in its odious resemblance is
the reproach of Man, and therefore the more contemptible: Religion comes from a
deeper root and higher cause. It is connatural with every Rational Being upon
which is indelibly Engraven the Fear, Trust, and Love of the Power, Truth, and
Goodness of God. The Blurring these Impressions cannot be attempted without
essasing the Characters of Human Intelligence, and sinking Man into the lowest
form of Beasts. Religion is the first born of Truth, and as the Opposition to
Truth is either from a downright Lie; or a verisimilar Semblance, so Religion
is either affronted by Atheism, or abused by Superstition.

An Atheist properly so called, was hardly if ever found, the sad Pretenders,
who have told their miserable Wishes that that there were no God, have been the
fewest in Number, and the weakest in Argument of any sort of Fools ever
appeared to disgrace Mankind. There have been more Idiots and Franticks then
ever there were Atheists; and Bedlam it self without expecting a lucid Interval
can afford as rational Discourses as Democritus and Epicurus with all their
chance Medleys of Motes or Attems.

Atheistical Propositions are equally unworthy and destructive of Human
Excellence. The Glory of Man peculiar to him, of all material Beings, is that
he is not only by unknown Instinct, ledd to the end of his Being, but he knows
the reason of that End for which he was made; and is capable to enjoy the
felicity of that Knowledge. We perceive by the Structure and Formation of those
Beings, with whom we converse, what is their use and value. The shape of the
Laborious Ox, and generous Horse prompt their service and end: No less evident
are the indications of Human composition. That Man is made in the Image of God,
and that his ultimate End and Felicity is to glorify and enjoy God for ever,
is no remote Notion or Speculation; it is a truth touches every sense, and when
not clouded by malicious or stupid inadvertance draws conviction from every
Member,

The profane contemners of Religion, yet assert a use and proper End for
everBeing, and all its parts. Permit then the Atheist the trial by his beloved
sense. Let him tell for what End and Reason of all visible Beings Man only is
formed to kneel upon his knees, and support his Body erect, to lift up his
Hands, to lift up his Eyes. Was Nature wise in all other, and foolish only in
the construction of parts to these Postures without use? No, Nature (which is
nothing else then the will of the Almighty in the Order of the Creatures)
formed the Body to those Postures for that excellent End of Divine Worship. The
bended knees testify humble Devotion to the great Creator, from sense both of
the Suplicants mean Original, and infinite distance below the Heavenly Majesty.
The stretched out Hands evidence as the inability of the Petitioner to help
himself, so the earnest desires of Divine Assistance; the up lifted Eyes
signify the hope and trust, and engage the Love of Mind and Heart upon God
Almighty, who only can be our necessary and all-sufficent Good. This is a truth
so undeniable that should ten thousand Persons of so many different Nations and
Languages fortuitously meet; if any of that Assembly (though every one a
stranger to all the rest) kneel, stretch out his hands, and lift up his eyes,
all present would conclude that Person by these Gestures performed Adoration to
God.

There is not any in his right Wits can immagine those Characters of Devotion
either the effect of vain Fear, or the Infinuations of Politic contrivance,
for every Rational Mind, must be conscious of the same awful Reverence and
entire Dependence, therefore with most freedom Addresseth to the performance of
Religions Worship when Human help can least succor, and Human Fear can least
awe. It is then most absurd that the Innumerable sober Inhabitants of the World
should be fooled and scoffed out of their present and future felicity by a few
profane Attoms bred in the shallow confines of Wit and folly.

Well matter it self (the Epicurian Idol) has conviction enough to baffle an
Atheist; but passing through this House of Clay, if we converse with what is
within; that which prompts the Tongue, and acts the Eye, Hand and Foot; that
which thinks and rules, it will appear there is a Conscience of Good and Evil,
of Justice and Injustice always Witnessing there is a God. This is no
precarious conceit, every Man sometime or other feels within himself the
powerful accusation or acquital of Conscience. This is the Verdict in every
Man's breast which waits upon the Tribunal of God. For it is silly as well as
profane, to pretend Reverence to God only for the Excellence of his Being,
without the fear of his Justice. The Justice of God is the security of the
World without it. Human Society cannot safely subsist. Only the fear of God can
rule the Heart, and oblige Conscience, without which there cannot be either
Order or Relation, Commerce or Propriety. The whole World being continually
liable to the assaults of Fraud or Violence, until true Religion give Security
and Peace.

Superstition is indeed the Apology of Irreligion, by which back Door Atheism
sneaks into the World. For Superstition having cankered the Mind with unworthy
conceptions of God; Atheism presumes to enrage it self against the Notion of
the Supreme Being, it misconceives and would not Obey and Worship.

Superstition devests the Deity of true Majesty, and perfection dares to give
it self Laws of good and Evil, of Holy and Profane, and so instead of
worshipping God, Consecrates as it were an Idol. God is the only Object of
Worship, and the only Lawgiver of the Rules and Rites, Isaiah 33.22.
of the Materials and Circumstances of Religion, whatever Creatures invades
this Prerogative of Heaven, though under the most Devout and Humble pretense,
does thereby expose the Godhead, and provokes the sensualist to deny or
contemn that Sovereignty it sees usurped upon and dethroned.

Superstition.
Superstition is vain and ignorant Devotion directed either to a false Object
or to a Right Object in a false manner. When directed to a false Object it is a
breach of the first and great Commandment, Thou shall have no other Gods before
me. In the Obedience to this Commandment is fixed the Foundation of all
Religion. Non potest igitur noc Religio a sapientia seperari, nec sapientia a
Religione and cerni: quiaidem Deus est, qui and intelligi debet quod est
sapientiae and. Hono rari quod est Religionis. Lactant Lib. 4. de vera Sap, P.
356.
For as there is no Wisdom without Religion, so without Wisdom there cannot be
Religion. The property of Wisdom being to direct the way to Happiness, and of
Religion to give interest in and obligation unto what is perfectly true and
good which is only to be found in the Divine Unity. Whatever is varied and
multiplied must necessarily forsake the perfection of Unity: And can no more
Answer the end of Devotion, then can in the Firmament a Parelius, or Mock-Sun
shed forth the Influences of Light, Warmth, and Growth which continually beam
from the real Sun.

An Idol is nothing in the World, that is, 1 Cor. 8.4.
no such thing as the Superstitious suppose or Esteem. It cannot do Good or
Hurt; or Reward or Punish. He that comes to God must believe that he is, Heb.
11.6.
and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek Him. All we can
understand of a false God, is to know in what Age and Country, and by what
Artifice the Idol was Consecrated: And the highest Inquiry can only find out
that, Qui singit sacros auro vel marmore unltus, non facit ille Deo. qui rogat
ille facit. Mart.
neither the Painter nor the Statuary, nor yet the Consecration can effect this
Apotheosis, it is only the deceived Heart makes what he Worships to be his God.
What a wretched Deity is that which has no subsistence, but in the deluded
fancy of Superstition that can at will and pleasure profane or destroy the
adored Shrine.

Knowledge begets Religion, therefore in Holy Scripture, the Profane and the
Idolaters are said not to know God, as is chiefly charged upon the Priests
Hophni and Phinehas, 1 Samuel 2.12.
and King Manasses. 2 Cron. 33.13.
Ignorance is the Mother of Superstition it cannot be of true Devotion This is
true likewise in the other branch of Superstition, when Worship is directed to
a right Object in a false manner; which is a breach of the second Commandment
and incurs the Wrath of God, who is a Jealous God, that will certainly visit
the iniquity of Illegitimate uncommanded Worship.

The Church of England teaches that no Religion is in that place wheresoever
any Image is. Hom. against Peril of Idolatry, Second Part.
This is a Quotation out of Lactantius who fully gives the Reason, Religio
nulla est ubicunque simulacrum est --
Because God the Object of Worship must be greater then Man, Non Religio in
Simulacris sed mimus Religionis, Lact. de Orig. etc. Lib. 2. P. 229.
and Religion the manner of Worship must be Divine that is from Heaven.

Therefore whatsoever Object or Medium of Worship is invented or contrived upon
the Earth can only have a Mimick Semblance of Religion, but is not Religion.

The ancient Champions of Christianity most rationally convinced the Vanity of
Heathenish superstition, because their Idols, which were the Mediums of
Worship, were continually subject to the disposition of those that Worshipped
them, which implies the grossest contradiction, viz. That Man should make God
after his Image. This is that Sacrilege condemned by Minutius Faelix, Min.
Fael. P. 46. Sacrilegij enim vel maximi instar est, Humi quaererequod in
sublimj debesinvenire --
that seeks in the dust for what can only be found come from above. It Is that,
like the Witch of Endor makes Gods ascend out of the Earth; she and the unhappy
King employed her, were evident Types of what befalls all that forsake the
lively Oracles of Divine Truth. A grave Spectrum in Samuels Mantle may promote
the Deceit, but still it is not any thing Divine or Heavenly. Such pretended
gods are Devils indeed; they cannot make any Holy or Happy; Jon. 2.8.
they can only terrify and torment when they are Executioners of Divine
vengeance upon those forsake Mercy by following lying Vanities.

Such also is the Religion that teaches any Medium or way of Worship not
commanded by God; Col. 2.23.
it may have the show of Wisdom, but it comes not from above, therefore Saint
James says it is Earthly, Sensual, James 3.15.
Devilish. It holds not the Head Christ Jesus to whom is given all power in
Heaven and in Earth. Christ is the only Savior, and the only Lawgiver of his
Church. He is the only Mediator both of Reconciliation and of Intercession. He
only has Power to Authorize the Institutions of Worship, and in him only is
the promise of acceptance. All Religion in every part of it being Consecrated
to us in the Blood of Christ. So that whatsoever Worship is not derived from
our Lords Institution, Romans 14.23.
has neither Command nor Promise, therefore is not of Faith, and whatsoever is
not of Faith is Sin.

There may be costly Oblations, strict Regularities, clamorous Devotions,
pompous Services in the Worship of God, but if uncommanded they fall under that
severe Animadversion, Isaiah 1.12.
Who has required this at your Hand, in vain do you Worship me. Matthew. 15.9.
Such service is no better then the Athenian Devotions, Act 17.22.
which St. Paul calls too Superstitious, an ignorant Worship of an unknown God.

We know it is equally Treason to serve a Usurper, and to Usurp the Regalities
of the Lawful Prince by forging new Standards of Commerce or Charters of Grace,
or Laws of Allegiance. It is so in Religion Crimen lasae Divinae Majestatis. To
apply any peculiar Act of Worship to a Creature, or to Institute any Act of
Worship to God. It is a Principal of Natural Reason to Worship God only
according to his own appointment. Aug. de Consen -- Evan. Lib. 1. c. 18. --
quia si alio modo cum cohere vellent, quam se Colendum ipse dixisset non utque
illum Colerent, sed quod ipsi finxissent -- Isa. 65.7.
For Worship not commanded by God, is not Worship to God but to Humane
Imagination.

Upon this account the Prophets denounce Judgments upon the Isralites for
Blaspheming God upon the Hills; that is in the high Places where God was
Worshipped in a manner not commanded by God. Therefore it remains a blemish upon
the good Kings of Judah, See this fully evinced by Mr, Mede in his Com. upon
Apoc c. 13. P. 624, 625.
who abolished the false gods, notwithstanding, permitted superstitious Worship
in the high Places to the true God. The Lord Jesus also tells the Woman of
Samaria that the Samaritans Worshipped they knew not what. -- 2 King. 15.4.35.
2 Cron. 33.17.
Not because they worshipped a false God, that was not their Crime; but because
they adored God by a Worship invented by Man and not appointed by God, Joh.
4.22.
'twas therefore mere Superstition which could not bring to Salvation the
blessed of End of true Religion. Superstition is fitly called a colloguing with
God, Joh. 15.14.
consequently the acceptance must be as diverse from that of Religion, as
flattery is from friendship. For they only are the friends of Christ that keep
his Commandments.

Religion is the rule of true Wisdom to bring Mankind to Eternal Happiness,
Religion.
by directing all his affections and actions to their proper Object according
to the will and command of God. God Isaiah 45.18. Acts 17.26, 27.
who made the World of nothing created it not in vain. He formed it to be
inhabited; and made of one Blood all Nations of Men, for to dwell on all the
Face of the Earth, that they should seek the Lord. Not as though he needed any
thing, seeing he gives to all life, and breath, and all things, Neither is he
worshipped with Men's, hands, nor dwells in Temples made with hands. It is
equally impossible for Man to be happy without Religious dependence upon his
Creator. And for the Worship or Service of any Created Being to be necessary
unto God.

The whole world was made an Harmonious Scheme; every Being from the least and
lowest, to the greatest and highest, chiming into the Consort, whereof Man was
the chief Musician, Eccles. 7.29.
Man was made upright in a likeness of conformity to his Creator. His mind,
will, and affections replenished with Divine knowledge, Righteousness and
Holiness, by which he was capacitated to exercise the Dominion bestowed upon
him by God, over all the Living Inhabitants of the Air, Earth and Water. Man
therefore is justly defined to be a Rational Religious Creature, therein
consisting the formal ultimate difference from a Brute, and the highest
character of his Nature.

The Excellency of true Religion to be such as before represented, will appear
in all the due acceptations thereof; by which also will be manifested the
vanity and mischief of all false Religions; Rectum est index sui and obliqui.
for Truth presents the Rule and Indication both of it self and of what is
false.

God who subjected all Creatures to Man bound Man to himself by the Law of
Religion. This was the Covenant of Life, God vouchsafed to man as soon as
Created, which our Lord Jesus rehearsed to the Scribe in the Gospel -- Thou
shall Love the Lord thy God with all thy Soul and Mind, and Heart, and
strength; and thy Neighbor as thy self; do this and thou shall live. Luke
10.28.
This is the perfect Rule of true Wisdom, the way to real Happiness; when the
Soul and Mind, the understanding and Judgment know God as the only Infinite
All-sufficient Good, the Almighty Creator, Ruler, and Preserver of all Beings,
thence concludes there can be no happiness, but in conformity to the will, and
enjoyment of the favor of God; accordingly the whole Heart, Will, and
Affections, Fear, Trust, Hope, Delight in God; and the strength of all the
Powers both intellectual and animal Serve, Obey, and Prays His Sovereign Lord
in whom he lives, moves, and has his Being. This is vita frui, To live indeed.

As the Eternal Power of the invinsible Godhead is clearly seen by the Creation
of the World, so all the Creatures we see have such evident Signatures of the
Divine Wisdom, Power, and Goodness as exact a behavior; converse, and
enjoyment, according to the Law of entire Love; for love is the fulfilling, and
Lust is the transgression of the Law. Romans 13.9, 10.
Therefore he loves not God who loves not Himself and his Neighbor in
conformity to the Image of God in which Man was made Holy and Upright.

How Pleasant, and Safe, and Happy would Life be, if every one did to another,
only what he would receive from another; if every one were sincerely loved by
every one!

This is Natural Religion, for he only that does Righteousness is Righteous,
as God is Righteous, 1 John 3.7.
This was the felicity of innocent Man before his Heart was venomed with Lust
and Vanity. And even now the work of this Divine Law is Written in all Men's
Hearts to which their Conscience bear Witness.

The Conclusion or sum of the whole matter of Religion is, Eccles. 12.13.
Fear God and keep his Commandments, This is the whole Duty of Man. Therefore
the second part of Religion, called Instituted, is therein necessarily
comprised, and from thence derives Evidence of Authority and Obligation, being
given before the fall, to establish and direct natural Religion, and since the
fall to supply its defects. This part of Religion is fitly called supernatural,
or Revealed, and is known not by Reason, but by Faith For though it be the
highest Reason to believe the Word of God which is the only ground of Faith,
yet Faith is above Reason, representing things not seen by Reason, and
evidencing Divine Objects more certainly then any Method of Reason can
demonstrate viz. by the infallible word of God.

Instituted Religion is the Rule of Divine Worship both Moral and Ceremonial,
prescribed by God. Instituted Religion.


Prayer by which the Heart powers out it self to God, by which the Soul ascends
to God, Psalm. 62, 8.
is only such when animated with the Privilege and Authority of Gods Word.

For only God can teach how he pleases to be prayed unto and worshipped. Solus
Deus docere potest ut se velet orari.


It is the Word of God that teaches we shall not be heard for our much
speaking; Tertul. de Orat. c. 9.
that we must not use vain Repetion, as if prayers like Egyptian Bricks, were
to be delivered by Tale, Mat. 6.7.
or there were Efficacy and Interest in a Phraseologie of Devotion.

All Flesh is guilty and silent before God, Psalm. 65.23.
until the word of promise opens the lips, Romans 8.26.
and teaches the Heart how to pray. And this, Tertul. p. 6.60. sine Monitore
quia depectore Oramus.
says Tertullian, was the Practice of Primitive Christianity. It is the
Scripture that assures whoever calls on the Name of the Lord, Romans 10.13, 14.
shall be saved; But it also says, How shall they call on him whom they have
not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard?
For Faith (without which it is impossible to please God) Heb. 11.6.
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, which we cannot hear but by
Preaching, the great and standing Ordinance of the Church in all Ages and
Dispensations,

In Paradise God Preached to Adam how he would be Obeyed, particularly in
keeping the Sabbath, in not eating the Tree of Knowledge. Jude 14. 2 Pet. 2.5.
Enoch and Noah were Preachers to the Old World before the Flood. And every Age
since has enjoyed wherever was a Church, Isa. 30.20.
the blessed Promise that though God gave the bread of Adversity, and the Water
of Affliction; yet their Eyes and Ears were not deprived of Teachers. Deuteronomy. 8.3.
For both the Law and the Gospel instruct this Fundamental Lesson, Mat. 4.4.
That by the word of God, Man lives more necessarily then by Bread. Obedience
thereto giving the Warrant and Value to all Religious performances; without it
all Devotions, though never so exactly observed, Amos 5.25.
being by God Contemned and Rejected. Acts 7.2.
As the Holy Ghost by Stephen testifies against the Jews.

Consequently in all Ages and Places as Preaching has been either slighted or
esteemed, so has Religion it self declined or flourished. How famous were the
Churches of Greece, Asia, and Afric, when Chrysostom, Austine, and other such
excellent Bishops were their Preachers! But when due Preaching was neglected,
Ritual Idolatrous Superstition by degrees fretted and cankerd out the Truth and
Power of Christian Religion at last (after long Contempt of Divine
long-suffering which should have led to Repentance) sadly exposed those
Churches to Ruin and desolation by the Miscreant Superstition of Mahometanism.

The Latin Churches have been as miserably shipwracked by the Idolatrous
Superstition and Tyrany of the Sea of Rome. For not content with the absolute
Simplicity and Spirituality of Christian Religion; Pompus Liturgies of Devotion
were invented. Upon which Foundation by degrees was reard the whole Tower of
Antichristian Babel. The Sacrifice of the Mass, and all other Popish Idolatries
to Saints and Angels sprang from this Original, to wit, The enjoining and
requiring a Superstitious Formulary of Words composed by Men as a necessary
Liturgy of Divine Service. This Usurpation upon the Divine Prerogative (whose
alone it is to give Laws of Worship) first confers upon a set of imposed Words
greater Interest and Efficasie of Devotion as more the Prayers of the Church,
then any other Supplications though composed of express Scripture Phrases,
uttered by the same Minister, and offered up by the same Congregation at the
same time. This boldness once assumed Additions were facile; and then without
fear of the Lord of the Church, or regard to the Peace of the Church, under the
plausible Name of Ecclesiastic Uniformity, this Mechanic or Artificial
Religion is enjoined as the necessary Sum of Church Devotion. Hence issued
those Iliads of Mischief, for so many Ages have Corrupted and Destroyed the
Church. And wherever such Opinion obtains, there is a Gap opend for the Roman
Idolatry and Tyranny to be re-established Jure post Liminij.

It is but suitable to irreligious profane Mouths to scoff at Praying by the
Spirit; alas poor Creatures they seldom name their Maker but to Blaspheme Him!
But any that call themselves the Tribe of Levi, the Clergy of God, they are
Successors to Hophni and Phinehas who knew not God, and have no part nor lot in
Him, if they reproach and persecute those that pray, as did the Glorious
Company of the Apostles, the Noble Army of Martyrs, the Holy Church through out
all the World in Primirive Christianity, Tertul. p. 6. sine monitore quia de
pectore.
that is, without Bead, Book, or Formulary from the Heart by the Spirit, who
helps our infirmities, Rom, 8.26.
for we know not what we should pray for as we ought. God alone (as Tertullian
says) can teach how he will be prayed unto; and for that end gives us his Holy
Spirit. Tertul. Lib de Orat. c. 9.
The Divine Form commonly called the Lords Prayer is Doctrinal, Deus solus
docere potuit ut se vellet Orari --
and the most excellent Summary of Prayer, but not always necessary to be used;
Tertull. ibid Dominus Prospector humanarum necessitatum seorsum post tradictam
orandi disciplinam Petite Inquit Jus est superstruendi Extrinsecus petitiones
--
every Christian has right to ask in the Name of Christ for whatsoever is
according to the will of God; and for Public Worship in the Church. It Is the
Ministerial Office in Preaching to speak as the Oracles of God, and also to be
the Mouth of the People to God in all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, 1
Pet. 4.11. Ephesians. 6.18. and 4.8.12.
by which Christ gives gifts to Men for the work of the Ministry.

In contradiction to this reasonable Service in Spirit and Truth which only is
acceptable to God, the Church of Rome has turned Prayer into a mere Rote or
Charm of unintelligible Words. No wonder then that they have also introduced a
Ritual of Ceremonial Religion, for the most part a medley of Judaism and
Hetheanism.

Religious Ceremonies are Acts of Divine Worship, Religious Ceremonies.
expressly Instituted by God, and to be continued or altered, enforced or
abolished only by the command of God. In Holy Scripture the same word is for
Ceremonies, Precepts, Mandates, Statutes, Judgments, Ordinances of Worship,
which appears by comparing Psalm. 19.9. Psalm. 119.15, 16, Numb. 9, 3. Heb.
9.1.10. Luke 1.6. and many other Scriptures.

The Ceremonial Law began imediately upon the Promise of Mercy to lost Man, by
God's Institution of Sacrifice, and other Ceremonial Rites vouchsafed as
Subsidiary Reliefs and Assistances to the weakness and frailty of Faith in the
Promise of a Savior and Redeemer.

The Sacrifice Offered by Abel could not have been by Faith, Heb. 11.4.
consequently not acceptable, had there not been an express word of Command and
Promise from God to be the Object of Faith.

The difference of Meats clean and unclean was observed before the Flood. Genesis
7.2.
After the Flood at sundry times, and in diverse manners it pleased the Wisdom
of God to give to his Church, Ordinances of Divine Worship, which were Types
and Figures and shaddows of what was Spiritual and Heavenly, respecting Christ
who was the Substance; being Carnal Ordinances imposed until the time of Gospel
Reformation, as the Apostle to the Hebrews at large declares. Heb. 9.19.
Abraham received the Sign of Circumcsion a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith,
through which the Promise was made, Romans 4.11.13.
that he should be the Heir of the World.

Moses received the Institution of the Passover, and under his Ministry was
completed the Law of all Ceremonial Rites, Sacrifices, Priesthoods, Times, and
Places of Worship; But David and Solomon put the last Hand to finish and fix
the Administration of all Typical Divine Service by appointing the Courses for
the Priests and Levites, and Building the Temple at Jerusalem, the only fixed
and authorized Place (in the World for Sacrifice to be offered) by God.

In all which there was not any the least particular of Humane Invention or
Institution; Heb. 3.2.
for Moses who was faithful in all the House of God, Heb. 8.5.
made all things according to the Pattern showed to him in the Mount, and did
all things according to all that God, Exed. 40.16.
commanded him, so did he.

Also David a Man after God's own Heart, and Solomon the wisest of Men did not
presume to appoint any thing concerning the Service of God, of their own
Device. The Place for the Temple was designed by God, and Consecrated by Fire
from Heaven; and all the Buildings and Apartments of the Temple; 1 Cron.
28.11.12.19.
all the Courses of the Priests and Levites withal the Vessels of Service in
the House of the Lord, were according to the Pattern David had by the Spirit,
all which said David, the Lord made him to understand in Writing by his Hand
upon him, even all the Works of that Pattern. But all these though of
unparralel'd Magnificence and Beauty in their Composure; full of sublime Wisdom
in their design, and of significant Instruction in their use, were yet, Heb.
7.18.9.
as the Sripture says, Weak and unprofitable could make nothing perfect. Acts
15.10.
A yoke not able to be borne. Heb. 8.7.
A Law faulty and decaying, unable to make him perfect, Heb. 9.9.
that did the Service as pertaining to the Conscience, 1 Pet. 7.21.
For it was not possible thereby to take away sins. Heb. 10.4.


Therefore the Wisdom of God to revoke his Church from Ceremonial Ritual
Service, and to prepare for the Simplicity and Liberty of the Gospel Worship;
Heb. 8. ult.
caused the Glory and Excellence of the Mosaical Law to decay and wax old, and
at last to vanish away. This was the reason the Structure of Zorobabels Temple
was so sadly unlike the Magnificence of Solomon's; Hag. 2.8.
for Silver and Gold were then as before at God's dispose.

The second Temple had no Ark, nor Mercy Seat, nor Vrim and Thummim. Heb. 9.8.
All this signifying that Light and Perfection, Peace and Blessedness could not
be manifest, while the first Tabernacle was yet standing. Therefore at last the
Temple was utterly destroyed not in Judgment for rejection of the unbelieving
Jews, but in Mercy to the believing Jews and Gentiles, in remedy for ever
against Ritual and Ceremonial Worship. For if the Law of Ceremonies when
commanded and blessed by God were a Yoke too heavy for any Neck to bear; how
dangerous then is it for any Humane Authority to tempt God, Acts 15.10.
by commanding what is by God with no less Solemnity abolished then it was
before Instituted?

Concerning which St. Chrysostom eligantly Discourses to the Judaising
Chiristians of his time; Chrisost. Orat. prima Contra. Jud.
that as a Physician who to prevent his Patients mischief by unseasonable
drinking cold water, breaks the Cup in which he would drink; so the most wise
God to cure the zeal and dotage after antiquated Rites and Ceremonies, all
fulfilled in Christ utterly overthrew and destroyed Jerusalem, which was the
only place lawful by God's special appointment to offer Sacrifices, and perform
other Rites according to the manner and time prescribed by God.

It is also of special remark that Julian the Apostate designing thereby to
ruin Christianity, commanded the Jews to offer Sacrifices, and set up the
Jewish Religion; they replied it was not lawful in any other Place then
Jerusalem; Julian thereupon not only Authorized, but furnished Money to
reedifie the Temple at Jerusalem. Accordingly the Jews attempted, pulled up all
the Foundations of the very ruins left by Titus, overthrew, and prepared
materials for a new Temple. But dreadful Fire and Tempest from Heaven destroyed
those preparations and dissipated the Enterprizers of that new Babel with so
much terror, Tripart. Histo. Socra. Scholast. Lib 3. c. 17.
that never since was made the like attempt. Upon which event Civil then Bishop
of Jerusalem, pronounced the fulfilling of our Lords Prediction, that of all
the goodly Buildings of the Temple there should not be left one Stone upon
another. Moses as a Servant was faithful in the House of God; he did not
detract from, nor add unto any of Gods commands; and whoever presumed, to do
either received a just Recompense of Reward, Heb. 2.2.
how much sorer is the guilt to Usurp and Invade the Authority of our Lord
Christ who was faithful in his own House the Church of the Living God, Isa.
33.22.
over which He is the only Lord and Lawgiver, James 4.12.
who having accomplished, all things prefigured by the Ceremonial Law. John
19.28.30.
He took it out of the way, Col. 2.14. Dan. 9 24.
nailing it to his Cross. Having brought in Everlasting Righteousness; He
established a Spiritual Worship such as Man performed in Paradise; and suitable
to what is done in Heaven, John 4.23.24.
so near as Humane Frailty. Such only is the true Worship God seeks and accepts.

Two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper, and no more our Lord Instituted
in his Church, to be Administered to all Nations, and to remain until he come to
Judge all such as presume to withhold from or impose upon his Church purchased
by his Blood, any thing less or more then his word of command and promise has
ordained. These are not empty signs, but through the Spirit, 2 Cor. 11.3.
real effectual Exhibitions and Seals to Communicate Divine Grace. But what
dismal havoc in the Church has Satan made by the abuse of these Holy
Mysteries! It Is the inevitable consequence when once Minds are corrupted from
the Simplicity that is in Christ, to be miserably deceived and disturbed.

Innumerable have been the Schisms, 2 Cor. 11.23.
Persecutions, and Desolations of Christian Churches upon this account: St.
Paul who had the Spirit of God reformed the abuses among the Corinthians
concerning the Lords Supper by reducing them to the Institution of Christ. Quod
volumus Sanctum est.
But proud and haughty Prelates (full of that Typhus Secularis -- The old bane
of the Church) have Consecrated their own will and pleasure to be the Standard
of Divine Service. Thence came the presumption to deny the Cup to the Laiety,
Rev. 1.6.
because not Priests in their Style; though in Gods account every true
Christian is both King and Priest; and by the greatest absurdity to
Metamorphose the Bread into a most abominable Idol. An Idol of Moloch to which
so many Thousand Children of God have been Victimes. Thus still where the Hour
and Power of Darkness prevails, the Body of Christ is not Communicated but
Crucified afresh, and his Members torn asunder and tormented.

As the Sacrament of Love, so that of Faith and initial Life, Baptism has been
wretchedly abused by the additions of vile and nauseous or vain and
insignificant signs. It Is sadly a Lamentation, and God in mercy grant it may
not be so any more, that the same signs are commanded by one Church as
Symbolically significant, and in testimony of Odoration; and by another Church
declared to be insignificant, Mat. 2.24.
and without any adorable respect; yet in both Churches those Rites are
Constituted Conditions of Communion though never made so by Christ. But
Servants that dare to turn their Ministry into Dominion, Acts 17.31.
and beat and kill their fellow servants, must expect their doom designed them
by the Lord when he comes to Judge the World in Righteousness.

The Authority of the Church is pretended for this, That Name is highly
venerable therefore to abuse it is the greater crime. It Is an Article of Faith
to believe a Holy Catholic Church, but heinous is the offense to subborn the
Name of the Church to destroy the next Article -- The Communion of Saints,
without which the Notion of a Church is empty and unprofitable.

The Holy Catholic Church is the Body of Christ, Col. 1.18.
the Spouse of Christ; Ephesians. 5.2. Gal. 4.26.
it is the Heavenly Jerusalem which is free, Heb. 12.22.
which is the only Mother of us all. Out of this Church there is no Salvation,
for whoever is a Member of Christ's Body, Ephesians. 5.23.
to such and only to such Christ is a Savior. Of this Body every vissible
Christian Church is an integral Part or Member.

Visible Church Act. 19.
The Articles of Religion describe a visible Church to be a Congregation of
faithful Men in which the pure Word of God is Preached and the Sacraments duly
Ministered according to Christ's Ordinance in all those things that of necessity
are requisite to the same.

Which such a Church Christ has promised to be always even to the end of the
World; Romans 3.2.
the Authority with which our Lord invested the Christian Church being the same
as before to the Jewish; that unto them are committed the Oracles of God, Mat.
28.20.
that is according to his express Commission, the teaching to observe all
things whatsoever our Lord commanded.

This is the great Charter of the Churches Liberties and Power. Here is no
pretense for any Jurisdiction to make other conditions of Communion then of
constitution.

The conditions constitutive of a Church are sufficient for Salvation, the End
and Perfection of every true Church; therefore they are sufficient for the
Title of every Member to admission and continuance in the Church.

This was all was required by Christ and his Apostles, Acts 19.31.
whereby the Churches were ed fied walking in the fear of the Lord, and the
comfort of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied. The first trouble to the Church
within it self, was from the atempt to subvert the Foundation of Christianity
by introducing other conditions of Church Communion then Christ appointed, Acts
15.24.
but that was remedied by the direction of the Holy Ghost in the first Council
at Jerusalem.

The contrary Practice to which in after Ages has been the great occasion of
the confusion and ruin of most of the Christian Churches, and still remains
(like the Woman's bloody Issue that wasted all her substance an incurable
disease. So that it may be truly affirmed, the impiety of the Nicolaitans and
Gnostics who reckoned and practiced the grossest Immoralities as things
indifferent, proved less mischeivous to the Christian World, then the rigorous
exacting and imposing in different things as necessary. Upon which account on
one side sprang Separations and Schisms, and on the other most bloody and
inhumane Persecutions; for it is convenient that commands not Authorized by
right Reason should be enforced with rage and cruelty.

The conditions therefore and Articles of Peace (as they are called) in the
Church ought not to be any other then such as as are necessary to Salvation.
Because the Belief and Practice of every Church most be as Homogeneal, as are
in all Beings, Life and Operation. According to this rule of Divine Truth, the
Church of England reformed it self from Popery, and upon all occasions
justifies the Reformation: Because the Union of the Catholic Church depends
upon the making the Foundaations of its Being and the grounds of its Communion
adaequate. So that only these things which ought to be owned by all Christian
Societies as necessary to Salvation, on which the Being of the Catholic Church
depends, ought to be the necessary conditions of Church Communion. Consequently
the proper cause of Schism, lies in transgressing those Bounds, which observed
might through Divine goodness conciliat the universal Peace of Christendom.
That according to the same Evidence by which the Reformed Churches condemn the
Romanists for imposing the Belief of things as necessary to Salvation, which
are not necessary to the Being of the Catholic Church. There ought not be
imposed conditions of Uniformity upon any Member of the Church, which were not
antecedently necessary for the Being and Unity of the Church, the later
Imposition being eventually Equivalent with the former, because they exclude
from the means of Salvation. It Is Murder to mix Poison with the Diet of the
Family, and almost as cruel to constrain the Table to any Meat or Sauce against
which there is Antipathy Must he starve that cannot Eat Champignons with his
Capon?

Poison and Famine determine alike. How uncharitable then are they who abhor
the Roman Poison, yet debar those of the same Household of Faith from the Bread
of Life, by the mixture of some unnecessary Rites, their weakness (suppose;)
cannot digest, They that like Champignons may Eat as they please, but it is
inhospitable and barbarous to force them upon those that conceit them
Toad-stools. It is the Peace and Entertainment of every Civil Table, to allow
the indisputable Liberty of Tastes and Appetites; and to require Uniformity in
Eating and Drinking, would be most slavish Imposition to disorder and confound
Mankind. How much worse may any presume to disturb the Table of the Lord, the
Freedom of which as well as the bounty is the Purchase of his own Blood.

Nor was there any such custom in the Church of God. 1 Cor. 11.16.
The Primitive Church continued steadfast in the Apostolical Doctrine and
Practice according to which standing fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has
made us free; only necessary things were commanded, things indifferent in their
Nature, being as they ought, left indifferent in use and Practice.

For it is only the Divine Prerogative; and not in the power of any Creature to
change the Nature of things to be practiced in the Worship of God, so as to
require what is in it self indifferent to be used necessarily as condition of
Church Communion. The Divine Method to restore and preserve the Churches Peace
is to command things necessary, and to leave things indifferent to the
Arbitrary description of every Christian to perform or not perform as shall
seem conducible to present edification.

Thus Timothy was voluntarily Circumcised by St. Paul, Acts 16.3.
in order to a present Service; but the same Apostle would not permit Titus to
be compelled to be circumcised, Gal. 2.3.4.
because it would have brought the Liberty of the Church into Bondage.

After the Decease of the Apostles, many Rites and Ceremonies, not commanded by
God, crept into the Church; but they were Arbitrarily practiced, Tertul. Lib.
de Cor. Militis, c. 2. Nam si idco dicetur Coronari Licere quia non prohibeat
Scriptura aeque retorquebitur ideo Coronari non Licere, quia Scriptura non
jubeat.
not at all enjoined, as Tertullian manifests and particularly instances among
many others; the signing the Forehead with a Cross upon several occasions of
Civil Conversation. These and others by him mentioned, says, That Learned
Father, were only Customary Practices not warranted by Scripture. But for
things imposed the Rule, says he, is before; I believe (for whatsoever is not
of says is sin) I must know what Scripture it is that commands me to obey.
For, -- Sed quod non prohibetur ultro est permission. Imo prohibetur quod non
ultro est permissum.
says he, this or that is not Lawful because the Scripture does not forbid
it; but that is unlawful which the Scripture does not command. The Discourse is
directed against the Imposition of any humane Rite upon the Conscienceofany
Christian. And the reason isenforced by him, C. 11. Ter. de Cor. mil. Credimus
ne humanum sacramantum Divino superduci Licere, and in alium Dominum respondere
post Christum?
because it is not Lawful to superinduce any Humane Sacrament or Ordinance upon
a Divine. What havoc in the Church did the breach of this Rule make? One
instance concerning Easter may serve for all.

The Christian Churches (all under the Dominion of one Imperial Crown) varied
among themselves concerning the Observation of Easter. Socra. Eccles. Hist.
Lib. 5. c. 21. Eusebius. Lib. 5. c. 3.
Nevertheless communicated without discord, That variety as says Irenaeus,
commending the Unity of Faith. Every Sect had sundry and diverse Rites and
Ceremonies; yet therefore conceived they no worse Opinion of others then of
themselves. To be short, faith the History, among the Customs and Observations
of all Sects, we shall not find two which follow and retain one and the same
order of Service: Notwithstanding the Customary and Arbitrary practice of so
many various and different Rites; the Peace of the Church remained entire
until the Arrogance of Victor Bishop of Rome Imposed upon the Churches
concerning Easter, and broke the Unity of Communion. Then as the same History
Notes, the Commandments of God were despised, and Men established Canons of
their own. They made no account of the Law determined by the Apostles, which
only prescribed the Observation of things necessary, and rashly urged the
Practice of Decrees contrary to the Will of God, contending about Festivals as
it were for Life and Death. It is too well known what blood and ruin this
Usurpation in the Church occasioned in Britain and other parts of Christendom.

In succeeding Ages the Latin Churches differed much in the practice of
several Rites and Ceremonies, Council Lat. 4.
yet without breach of Communion. So that when the Fourth Lateran Council made
a New Cannon of Catholic Faith, viz. The Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
another Cannon immediately Decreed, That provided their Unity of Faith were
professed, If in the same Diocese or City, several Persons Observed diverse
Rites; The Bishop was enjoined that the Offices of Divine Service should be
Administered to every one according to their own various Rites.

In the English Church before the Reformation the Rites and Usages were
various: since the Reformation (until the late Act of Uniformity) the only
condition of Communion enjoined by Law was Subscription and Assent, 13 Eliz. R.
c. 12.
not to a Uniformity in Rites and Ceremonies, but to all the Articles of
Religion, which only concern the Confession of the True Christian Faith, and
the Doctrine of the Sacraments. This was sufficient for any Minister though
ordained in other Form then prescribed by the Rubric.

The Ceremonies also retained in the Rubric, Dr. Stillingst. Irenic. P. 122.
In composing our Liturgy those Holy Men who did seek by any means to draw in
others at such a distance from their Principles as the Papists, did never
intend by what they did for that End to exclude any truly tender Consciences
from their Communion.
seem not to be necessarily Commanded, but rather Temporarily reserved and
recommended: for the Cross is not enjoyed in private Baptism; the Reverence at
the Name of Jesus is not determined how or when to be performed. These and the
like are declared in the Rubric to be indifferent in their Nature, and were so
accounted in the first Practice after the Reformation, during which time the
Church of England flourished in great Peace. The disturbance and breach of
which being occasioned by the strict Imposition of Rites and Ceremonies in
themselves indifferent; the increase of those severities still widening the
breaches and heightning the disturbances. How easy might the cure be
accomplished, if the Practice or Omission of all the Rites and Ceremonies in
the Rubric, not commanded by the Word of God, were left to that indifferent
Freedom prescribed in the Seventh Cannon made 1640. Can. 7. 1640.
concerning the Situation of the Communion Table; and the approaches there
unto, and the doing Reverence and Obeisance coming in and going out of
Churches, etc. viz. That the Rule of Charity prescribed by the Apostle be
Observed, which is, that they which use this Rite despise not them who use it
not, and that they who use it not, condemn not those that use it.

The Doctrine of the Church is owned and believed, Art. of Relig. 8.21.
because it is taken out of Holy Scriptures for what is not so, has neither
strength nor Authority though Constituted by any General Council whatsoever.
Accordingly in Divine Worship Human understanding ought not to Contrive or
Impose, but entirely Observe the absolute and simple perfection of the Gospel.

The departure from which, Religionem Christianam absolutam and simplice
Arinesti superstitione confundens Am. Mar.
as was long since Observed, even by Amianus Marcellinus, proved the Confusion
of Christian Religion by vain Superstition.

It is the Command of Christ, Joh. 10.4.5.8.
therefore no Crime in Christians, not to obey nor know the voice of any but
Christ in matters of Religion, Est in Vniversis servientibus non Dominium sed
Ministerium Opt at. Milevi. Lib. 5.
to whose Scepter only it belongs. For all in the Church by what Names or
Titles soever dignified, are yet but Servants, now the Universal Property of
Servants is Ministry not Dominion. They cannot make, Laws, they can only obey
and require Obedience to the Laws of Christ our King and Lord, Isa. 25.9.
for whose Salvation the Church waits.

The Divine Will is the only Rule and Measure of things; Therefore Chrisostom
declares to the Judaising Christians, Crisost. Ora. prima adv. Judaeos.
that the most devout Severities if not commanded by God are no better then
Debaucheries. That only being pleasing and acceptable to God which is commanded
by God: And that which is most plausible and venerable according to Humane
Opinion, if not commanded by God, is most vile and impious. Lord Bishop of
Hereford's Epist. to a Friend concerning Popery.
Accordingly a Reverend Prelat Sums up all in this Conclusion, I will in the
worship of God do only that which his Will tells me is acceptable to his Divine
goodness.

Therefore to say, Though the Rites and Ceremonies be indifferent and
insignificant, yet when once commanded by Authority, it is heinous to disobey;
it is a real Conviction of Sacrilegious abuse of Authority to enforce Humane
Constitutions Rival with the Divine Law in Matters of Religion; which is to set
Man's Post, Ezok. 43.8.
by God's Post, against which Crime God denounces severe Judgment.

But from what Authority does the Command proceed? If from the the Church, the
Articles of our Religion teach that things ordained even by General Councels as
necessary to Salvation, Art. 20.21. 1572.
have neither strength nor Authority, unless it may be declared that they be
taken out of Holy Scripture. If it be replied these are not ordained as
necessary to Salvation, but to Uniformity,

The Answer is clear and certain, because the Connection between the means and
the end is indissoluble, therefore whatsoever is Ordained as necessary to
Church Communion, the means of Salvation (unless Salvation may be had out of
the Church) is Ordained as necessary to the End it self; Salvation and the
Command being not taken out of the Holy Scripture, is no Law, therefore there
cannot be any Transgression.

But if urged as a Law Civil or Municipal, it has no more Obligation upon
Conscience, then the Statute forbiding to eat Flesh in Lent; 5 Eliz. R. c. 5.
which expressly provides whoever shall declare it to be the Service of God
shall be punished as a spreader of False News, that is as Guilty against the
Law of Praemunire.

The Civil Magistrate is Ordained of God, and Invested with the high
Prerogative to be Custos and vindex utriasque Tabule; but not with any power to
alter or abrogate any Command of God, or any Ordinance of Divine Worship, or to
enjoy, any other Condition of Church Communion then is expressed in the Gospel.

It is not in the power of any, no not by the Universal consent of Mankind, so
to change the Nature and Signification of any Acts, of Worship as either by
applying to a Creature what is peculiar to God, or by Instituting any Devotion
to God, not by him required. Dr. Stillingfleet's def. of discourse concerning
Idolatry, etc. page 259. 260.
It being (as was before Observed) a Principle of Natural Religion to Worship
God only according to his own appointment, for Worship not at all Commanded by
God is not Worship but Fancy, Aug. De Conson. Evang. L. 1. cap. 18.
and can have no Obligation upon Conscience; which in performances of Religion
is the grossest Contradiction. We must be taught by God what is due Honor to
God: For as it is Crimen laesae Majestatis, Hibar. De Trini. Lib. 5. p. 54.
not only to perform Allegiance to another Person then the King; but to Make or
Constitute ex proprio Motu, a Law for the Acts or Circumstances of Allegiance
to be tendered to the King, because thereby is directly Invaded the Supreme
Athority: So to apply Acts of Divine Worship to a Creature, and to address to
God in Worship by any Rite or Ceremony of Humane Invention, both include
Blasphemy, because thereby is taken away from God the Peculiarity of his
Dominion and Excellence whereby he is God alone. For as the Sovereign
Prerogative of making Laws of Civil Government is not Transferable to any
Subject, much less may any Creature usurp the incomunicable Attribute of Divine
Auchority, to make Laws of Religious Worship. This happy Privilege belongs to
the Magistrate, that what is already a Divine Law, Dr. Stillingfleet's Irenic.
Page 44.
he may Enact to be a Law of the Land, and require the Observance of what was
before in Conscience Obligatory, and Animadvert upon the Offenders. The Princes
of the Hethen World might well be allowed to make and unmake their Religious
Rites, because Invented and Authorized only by themselves, and thence many of
them proceeded to receive even the Flattery of their own Apotheosis. But every
sober Mind judges all such Assentation to be as a great Offense to the Divine
Majesty, who will not allow the giving his Honor to another; so a real
Contumely and mock Honor to any Prince, to Invest him with Divine Authority.
It Is no less sinful now by a new Mode of Deification to place the Magistrate in
the Throne of Christ, who only has Supreme Right to make the Laws by which
Kings Reign. It is therefore worthy the Consideration of all Christian Princes,
that the very making Laws for Religious matters not commanded by God shakes the
greatest Prop of Thrones, Conscience of Duty which in such a Case has no
Obligation. Dan. 6.22.
Therefore Daniel when cast inro the Lions Den for breaking the irreversisible
Law of Darius; tells the King that God had delivered him from the Lions,
forasmuch as he was Innocent before God, and had committed no offense against
the King, which could not be true if the Decree of the King had been Lawful.
Jer. 27.6.7.8.
God gave to Nebuchadnezzar absolute Dominion over all the World, threatening
Destruction to whatsoever Nation, would not Obey him. Notwithstanding it was
Holy and Pious not to Obey him, when his Command was otherwise then the Command
of God. For pure and undefiled Religion, which Obliges to Obey the Magistrate
in all matters of Civil Policy forbids Obedience in Matters of Religion not
warranted by God's Word, and Commands to suffer rather then sin. This, from the
Apostles days until now, has been the Epidemical Motive to persecute the
Disciples of Christ, because they do contrary to the Decrees of Caesar. Acts
17.7. Gregi Nazi. Ora. Prima con. Julian.
Upon which account Nasiansen objects against Julian the Apostate, the
Contrivance of this Pestilent Mischief against the Christians; that whereas it
was the general Custom (and not refused by Christians) to perform a Civil
Reverence to the Statues and Images of the Emperors, upon which also were
usually Engraven Representations of some Triumph or Magnificence of the
Emperor. Julian instead thereof, with his own Image caused to be Engraven the
Idols he worshipped. Thereby either to ensnare the Christians into Idolatry, if
they Reverenced his Image, or if they refused; to expose them for doing
contrary to the Imperial Decrees generally observed by Christians. The like
Device has been long Practiced to enforce Humane Rites and Ceremonies, and
stablish Hierarchich Policy in the Church, by procuring from Princes, Laws
under the Specious pretense of Uniformity to enforce their Religious sigments.
By which Julian subtilty, the Christian Churches must be either entangled in
the Yoke of Bondage to Humane Rites and Ceremonies from which Christ has made
them free; (...) 5.1.
or if they refuse the Snare must be exposed to severities, as if the most
heinous Malefactors.

This is one of the Impious Policies proposed to the French King to extirpate
the Reformed Religion in France. (...) de la (...) de (...), p. 84, Dan. 8.25.
Such crafty Policy the Prophet Daniel foretold would be used to destroy the
Holy People, that is the Church of God. And whether managed by an
Ecclesiastical or Lay Papacy the difference is little. How sad a Prospect does
Christendom present when most of the Princes and Magistrates must either
execute or be exposed unto the rage and cruelty of Priests, who have indeed
that Title to the Tribe of Levi, Genesis 49.5.
for Instruments of Cruelty are in their Habitations. It Is a dismal truth that
all the Persecutions of the Heathen Emperors cannot equal the Inhumane
Barbarities and innumerable Slaughters committed, by those that call themselves
Christians, upon Christians, because they dare not perform any Act of Worship
to God, not Commanded by God. For upon this Point depends the real difference
between Religion and Superstition. There springs the Corruption; what ever
follows is but the enlarging and deepning the stream of endless Error. So that
as it was justly charged upon Epicurus, Cicero de Orat. P. 212.
that while his profession owned a Deity, his Practice and Discourse,
effectually overthrew Religion; because he denied the rewarding and judging
power of God. It may be as justly charged upon those that enjoin Humane Rites
and Ceremonies, that they open the Flood-gate of all Schism, and expose to
contempt Divine Worship, while they talk Zealously for Religious Order and
Uniformity. For whatsoever obtains Authority in the Conscience must be received
from God before it be delivered to the Church, as the Apostle Paul professes,
disclaiming on his own behalf, 1 Cor. 11.23.
and all the Apostles all that Spiritual Dominion, and Authority over the
Church which belongs only to God.

There is not therefore any thing to be done in the Worship of God, which God
has not Commanded. Because to every thing in every part of God's Worship, a
Word of Command is necessary to be a warrant of Practice; and a Word of Promise
for hope of acceptance, without which nothing can be expected, but rejection as
of vain Oblations, Isa. 1.12, 13. For whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, Romans
14.23.

Every part of Worship is an Act of Obedience to the Sovereign Lord of all
Beings; but if not Commanded is presumption, according to the warning, Prove.
30.6. Add thou not unto his Word, least he reprove thee, and thou be found a
Liar. Such performances have only a show of Wisdom in Will Worship, Col. 2.23.
but are real Usurpations upon the Authority of Christ, the only Lawgiver in
Religion. It Is Sacrilege, which in the proper Notion is to RobGod of his
Honor in matters of Worship, Romans 2.22. Thou that abhorrest Idols, Do thou
commit Sacrilege? 1 Cor. 2.6. Heb. 3.6.
Every Act of Uncommanded Worship derogates from the Perfection of
Christianity, and the faithfulness of our Lord Christ, and consequently prefers
the Shadows of the Law, (which were completely Instituted) before the Substance
of the Gospel. Every Rite or Ceremony not Commanded by God, is contrary to the
simplicity of the Gospel, and the Liberty of Christianity, wherein we are
Commanded to stand fast; Gal. 5.1. Minia. Falix.
and as Minucius Faelix expresses to erect it a Trophy to God, above the
Commands of all Wordly Dominion. For not only what is forbiden expressly in the
Gospel, but what is beside the Gospel is unlawful. Gal. 1.8, 9. It prefers
Humane Opinion before the Wisdom of God, it is called, a Tempting of God, Acts
15.10. And consequently is a sin of presumption. A breach of the First and
great Commandment. Mat. 4.10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shall thou serve; which is
not performed by any uncommanded Worship, for the Precept is plain and
Peremptory, Ye shall not add unto the Word, Dent. 4 2.
which I command you, neither shall you diminish ought from it, that ye may
keep the Commandments of the Lord your God.

In the Will of God (to which nothing can be antecedently good) is the only
Eternal Reason of Good and Evil; and the Declaration thereof his Word, is the
only Rule to direct the Rational mind, how to serve and worship God, and how to
perform the Duties of Righteousness and Charity to all other Beings. The
Obligation and Rule of Distributive and Commutative Justice, is plainly
expressed in the Word of God, so that every Common understanding knows the
meaning of -- Thou shall not kill -- Thou, shall not steal; no less plainly and
fully does the Scripture teach all Religion, which is Justice toward God,
Pictas est Justitia adversis D^^m. Cicero.
whose sole Prerogative it is, to teach how he will be Worshipped. It Is
Sacrilegious Detraction from the Infinite Wisdom and Goodness of God, to
imagine the Rule of Faith and Life, needs any Infallible Interpreter, or
Additional Legislation. Psalm. 19.7.
Therefore David says, The Law of the Lord is perfect, Psalm. 119.96.
and I have seen an end of all Perfection, but thy Law is exceeding Broad. It
is not scanty in any directions to blessedness, or the means thereof; in the
Word of God, and only there may be found the sure Rule to avoid both the
confusion of Libertism, and the Tyranny of pretended Ecclesiastical
Infallibility and Authority. If the Golden Rule of our Lord, Mat. 7.12.
Whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, Do ye even the same to them;
were Written (as the Emperor Severus caused it in his Palace) in the Courts of
Princes, it might be a happy Memorial, that as they justly vindicate the
Invasion of their own Royal Prerogatives and Legislature, their duty is to
preserve inviolate the Majesty and Authority of God Almighty by whom Kings
Reign, who is a Jealous God, and will not give his Honor to any other. The
Lord Chancellor in his Speech to both Houses of Parliament, Apr. 13. 1675.
Printed by his Majesty's special Command, says, That Religion as it works upon
the Conscience; as it is an inward Principle of Divine Life, by which good Men
do govern all their actions, the State has nothing to do with it; which
doubtless ought to be understood agreeable to St. Paul speaking of the
Apostolical Power, can do nothing against the truth, 2 Cor. 13.8.
but for the truth; that is, there is not any power under Heaven Civil or
Ecclesiastical can lay any Obligation upon Conscience in Matters of Religion,
and a Religion, without Conscience is no Religion.

The Jesuits indeed (and it well becomes their Morals) teach that their Church
has no power over Internal Actions, Jesuits Morals Page 387.
the evident Consequence of which Position overthrows the Foundations of
Religion, and Christian Piety, but other Doctrine cannot be expected where
Religion is only an Artificial Worship, and the Church only a Politic Guild or
Corporation.

As there is but one God from whom, and to whom is derived and directed all
true Worship (though as St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 8.5.6.
There be many called gods, whether in Heaven or in Earth; 2 Cor. 4.4.
and there is the God of this World) Gal. 4.26.
so there is but one Church the Mother of us all, ^ Tim. 3.16.
the Heavenly Jerusalem, Which is the Pillar and Ground of truth, Joh. 17.17.
the Word of God which only Sanctifies Religious Commands to Oblige Conscience.
Yet there be many Churches, some Heavenly, some Earthly: For beside the
Idolatrous Pollutions of some Churches which render them Synagogues of Satan;
There is also in some Churches, a mixture of Civil Policy by which the Word
Church becomes a Law Term, and signifies a Body Politic, endowed with certain
Honors, Privileges, and Revenues by the Munificence of Kings. Such is the
Gallican Church, and such is Ecclesia Anglicana, according to the Purport of
several Statutes, 26 H. 8. c. 1.
in, which respect it is a part of the Estates of the Realm. 24 H. 8. c. 12.
Lord Chapter Justice
But all the Privileges and Dignities given by the Crown to the Church, Cook
5. report.
as it is a Political State in the Realm, is in order to, and for the sake of
those Administrations necessary to its Being, as a Member of the Catholic
Church, Article ^9.
that is, a Congregation of Believers, in which the Word of God is purely
Preached, and the Sacraments in things necessarily required according to the
Institution of Christ rightly Administered. It must be therefore altogether
Irrational and Unchristian to suborn an Authority in a Political Church to
subvert the Essential Liberty of any Member of the, Catholic Church.

If the Reverend Prelates of Christendom, would govern their power according to
this undeniable Rule of Christianity, it would notably conduce even to their
own security. For if the Ceremonial Accidents in the Church were not
necessarily imposed, the dignified Accidents therein would be rendered more
agreeable to all Christians and Mankind. If Religion were cleared from
Additional Superfluities, which can no otherwise secure and adorn it, then
Clouds and Mists do the Sun, the World might enjoy the desired felicity of our
Lords Kingdom, the Empire of Light and Love. Prisons, Fagots, Gibbets, would be
no longer the miserable Propagators of Faith, the Benign Influence of Princes,
would not be Intercepted from their Subjects, the Obedience of Subjects would
be Conscientious, Religion (no longer supposed an Awful trick) would be
embraced and obeyed in the absolute perfection and simplicity of Divine truth
and Goodness. For therein only may we find a certain Foundation for lasting
Union among Christians. Force and Violence may under pretense of extirpating
Heresy; or exacting Uniform Decency and Order determine in a Common Calamity
and Destruction; by such Course Princes may be deprived of their People; and
People forced from their Dwellings into Graves or Goals or Wildernesses. But
that is Desolation not Peace. It Is not Union but Depopulation. No, Tacit. v^t.
Agrie. Vbi solitudinem faciunt, Pacem Apellant.
the way to find and stablish Peace is only in the way of Gospel Truth, which
gives Glory to God in the Highest, Peace on Earth, Good Will toward Men and
among Men; From which only can be hoped a certain Foundation of lasting Union
among our selves. For suppose a present Submisson and Compliance unto the
Humane Rites and Ceremonies enjoined as Conditions of Church Communion; yet
there can be no Certainty such Union shall be lasting, because the Terms are
Arbitrarily alterable, and may with one breath vanish and disappear; to make
make room possible for shaddows of another Mode but no less troublesome. Has
not this been within fresh Memory, misery and almost our ruin? But if we
consider what is our Defense against the Common Enemy, we may find what may be
our Cement among our selves. Dr. Stillingfleet's Rat. Acct. Page 53.
Learned Dr. Stillingfleet in his Rational Account of the Grounds of the
Protesant Religion has excellently demonstrated. That the Union of the
Catholic Church depends upon the Agreement of it in making the Foundation of
its Being to be the Grounds of its Communion. For the Unity being intended to
preserve the Being, there can be no reason given why the Bonds of Union should
extend beyond the Foundation of its Being, which is the Owning things necessary
to the Salvation of All. From whence it necessarily follows that whatsoever
Church imposes the belief of other things as necessary to Salvation, which
were not so Antecedently necessary to the Being of the Catholic Church, does
as much as in it lies break the Unity of it. And those Churches who do desire
to preserve its Unity, are bound thereby not to have Communion with it so long
as it does so. These things premised, says he, we shall thereby find what the
necessary Conditions of Ecclesiastical Communion are, and consequently where
the proper cause of Schism Lies in transgressing those Bounds, and what
Foundations may be laid for the Peace of the Christian World.

Upon these Grounds was the Church of England Reformed from the Idolatrous
Superstition of Popery, defends it self against their assaults, and thereby can
only be preserved. For the Church, which is the House of the Living God, can
receive no Edification but what is Homogeneal with the Foundation; Ephesians. 2.20.
the Doctrine of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 3.10, 11.
and Prophets Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner Stone.

The Sum of all is briefly comprised in the Words of a late Learned and Pious
Divine in the Church of England, Mr. George Lawson's Coment. upon the Hebr. c.
9. N. 5. Printed 1662.
viz. He that will not serve a God, is a profane Atheist. He that serves any
but the true God is an Idolater; he that serves the true God after his own
Fancies, and the Inventions of Man, is a Superstitious Fool. He that Inventeth
Rites and Ceremonies and Modes of serving God, and imposes them on others is a
presumptuous Wretch; for as God alone does know what kind of Worship and
Service is fittest to be performed unto Him, so He only has Power to Impose it.

These two Books are lately Printed for Nevil Simmons, at the Three Cocks at
the West end of S. Paul's, and Thomas Simmons at the Princes Arms in
Ludgate Street, 1681.
Church History of the Government of Bishops and their Councils Abbreviated.
Including the chief part of the Government of Christian Princes and Popes, and
a true Account of the most troubling Controversies and Heresies till the
Reformation. Written for the Use especially of them: I. Who are ignorant or
misinformed of the state of the Ancient Churches. II. Who can not read many and
great Volumes. III. Who think that the Universal Church must have one visible
Sovereign, Personal or Collective, Pope or General Councils. IV. Who would know
whether Patriarchs, Diocesans, and their Councils, have been, or must be the
cure of Heresies and Schisms. V. Who would know the truth about the great
Heresies which have divided the Christian World, especially the Donatists,
Novatians, Arrians, Macedonians, Nestorians, Eutychians, Monethelites, etc. By
Richard Baxter, a hater of false History. in 4o.

A Treatise of Episcopacy; confuting by Scripture, Reason, and the Churches,
Testimony, that sort of Diocesan Churches, Prelacy, and Government, which
casts out the Primitive Church-Species, Episcopacy, Ministry, and Discipline,
and confounds the Christian World by Corruption, Usurpation, Schism, and
Persecution. Meditated in the Year 1640. when the Et coetera Oath was imposed.
Written 1671. and cast by. Published 1681, by the importunity of our
Superiors, who demand the Reasons of our Nonconformity. By Richard Baxter. in
4o.

FINIS.

