LOVE and FEAR The inseparable Twins OF A BLESSED MATRIMONY.

Characterized in a SERMON Occasioned by the late Nuptials between Mr William
Christmas and Mrs Elizabeth Adams.

Preached in St. Dionis Backe-Church by NATHANAEL HARDY, Mr of Arts and
Preacher to that Parish.

COLLOS. 3. 18, 19.

Wives submit your selves to your own Husbands, as it is fit in the Lord.
Husbands love your Wives, and be not bitter unto them.

(...). Chrysostom. Hom. 20. in Ephesians.

Quoniam una natura in viro and faemina est, idcirco vir quasi seipsum ita
mulierem diligere commonetur; mulier autem quia persona inferior est
conditionis causa non naturae viro subjecta, timere cum jubetur. Ambros. in
Ephesians.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Nathanae Webb and William Grantham, and are to be
sold at the Sign of the Black Bear in S. Paul's Churchyard near the little
North door. 1658.

To the Generous Mr WILLIAM CHRISTMAS Merchant, and the Virtuous Mrs ELIZABETH
CHRISTMAS his Wife, many comfortable days and a blessed Eternity.
Worthy Friends,
PArdon me that I join you together in one Dedication, since God's ordination,
and your mutual affection have made you one. It was your undeserved respect
honored me to be the Instrument of accomplishing your nuptials. It was my
Cordial desire of testifying my gratitude, and promoting your welfare, made me
so bold as to become your humble remembrancer of those duties, which I doubt
not you both knew, and resolved to practice before. Finally it was your
unexpected acceptance and approbation of my weak labors put you on requiring,
and me by that means on effecting the publication of them.

What has caused my delay in fulfilling your desire, I suppose you already
know: Being now through God's wonderful mercy raised from my sick nay almost
dying bed, I have made what have I could to finish the work.

This plain and homespun piece, such as it is, I present Sir, to your candid
eye, Madam to your fair hands, together with my humble thanks for your noble
favors. As the hearing it did affect you, so I hope the reading it will profit
you, and not you alone, but others who shall vouchsafe the perusal of it.

And now Courteous Friends, my hearts desire and prayer to God for you is, that
you may be ravished each with others love, that your quiver may be full of those
Prove. 5. 19. Psalm. 127. 5. 122. 7.
harmless arrows, to wit, Children; that peace may be within your walls and
plenteousnesse continue in your habitation: Finally that you may live long
together in Earth, and for ever in Heaven. I rest,

Yours to be commanded in the Lord, NATH. HARDY.

To the Right Worshipful THOMAS ADAMS, formerly Alderman and Lord Mayor of this
Anciently Renowned City of London, saving health, sweet contentment, eternal
felicity.
Right worthy Sir,
DId not speaking or writing truth of them that are alive incur a suspicion of
flattery, had not the beams of your Graces been abundantly resplendent to this
whole City from those Orbs of Authority wherein you were justly placed;
Finally, were it not that I know how repugnant the publication of your worth is
to the humility of your mind, who desire laudanda facere non laudata audire, to
do things praiseworthy, not to hear or read your own praises; an Encomium had
been the Proemium of this Dedication.

But though upon these considerations I shall forbear to characterize those
eminent virtues, by which you oblige all that know you: yet give me leave
(Honored Mecaenas) to make a public acknowledgement of those munificent
favors by which you have engaged me, since I had the honor and happiness of
enjoying you as a Parishioner; an ingenuous recognition being as the least so
the utmost payment that I can return.

In testimony of my Gratitude, and observance of your desire, I here present to
your Judicious eye what not long ago was offered to your Religious ear. What
should render this unpolished discourse acceptable to you I cannot conceive,
unless it be the special Interest you have in the joyful occasion of it;
namely the happy marriage of your deservedly beloved Daughter. Indeed
matrimonio prospicere, to provide fit matches for their Children, is the last
but not the least care that lies upon the Parents: well may it be a just cause
of singular joy, when a marriage is consummated with the Parents consent and to
the Childs content. May your joy be still multiplied in their mutual loves,
prosperous estate, and an hopeful progeny descending from their loins.

And now Worthy Sir, give me leave in few words to tell you what great things
the Lord has done for me. It is not many weeks since by a violent Fever I was
brought low, very low, so that my soul drew nigh to the grave: But it has
pleased the powerful mercy, and merciful power of my gracious God to deliver me
from going down to the pit, so that my life sees the light; and (praised be
his goodness) I am in some measure restored to health. God has done his work
of mercy, mine of duty remains, to be thankful and fruitful. It is no small
piece of Christian skill, rightly to improve mercy when conferd; this is my
task, which that I may be enabled to perform, I earnestly desire both yours and
the servent prayers of all God's people.

I have nothing further to add, but only my prayers for you, which shall never
be wanting at the throne of grace, that your days on earth may be lengthened,
external enjoyments sanctified, spiritual graces increased, inward comforts
enlarged, and your good works at last rewarded with a Crown of glory.

So prays your affectionate servant in Christ, NATH. HARDY.

EPHESIANS. 5. 31. Nevertheless, let every one of you in particular so love his Wife
even as himself, and the Wife (see) that she reverence her Husband.


AMong the many commendable Excellencies of Holy Writ, this is none of the
least, that it is a Treasury of all kind of Learning both divine and humane,
Supernatural and Natural, Theological and Moral. In this regard it is not
unfitly compared to the Sea, since as all Rivers Sicut e mari omnia flumina,
ita e divina, Scriptura omnes humanae disciplinae oriuntur. Mend. T. 1. p. 17.
come from the Sea, so all Sciences and Arts from the Scripture. Indeed where
shall we find more Logical Arguments and Rhetorical strains then in these
Writings? What deep secrets of natural Philosophy, sublime notions concerning
the Heavens and the Stars may we read in many of these Pages? Finally, no such
characters of Ethical virtues, sound rules of State Policy, choice precepts for
Oeconomical practice, as these holy lines afford. Astronomy the Queen of
Mathematics, Logic and Rhetoric the chief of Arts, yea both natural and
moral Philosophy may by an intelligent Reader be found graven upon the Bible in
their several characters: One of these, to wit, Moral Philosophy in the
Oeconomical part of it, is that which our Apostle teaches in the close of this
Epistle. There are three combinations which concur to keep up a complete
Family, Husband and Wife, Parents and Children, Master and Servants; all of
which S. Paul though succinctly yet distinctly and fully here instructs in
their several duties: The two latter in the beginning of the following Chapter,
the former in the latter part of this, and that most compendiously in the last
verse which I have now read unto you, Nevertheless, etc.

Before I enter upon the Text it will be needful to take a little notice of the
context, the connection which these words have with the preceding, and that is
implied in the particle which begins the Verse, Nevertheless.

Indeed because the Apostle in these words concludes his former argumentation,
Beza renders it it aque, therefore, as if Initio versiculi non converti (...)
veruntamen sed igitur, quod omnino videatur esse in his verbis conclusio
superioris tractationis. Beza in loc.
it had vim illativam, the force of an illative conjunction; but this is a
needless straining of the word contrary to its proper signification: The
generality of Interpreters retain the native sense of the word, whom our
Translators justly follow, reading it as an exceptive conjunction; and so it
has vim, (...), a force of recalling the Apostle from insisting any longer
upon the great mystery before mentioned.

If you cast your eyes on the foregoing Verses, you may observe the example of
Christ and his Church, brought in as a Revocat Apostolum haec particula a
praedicti mysterii fusiori consideratione. Bod. in loc. (...). Theoph. ibid.
Non impedit praeceptum expressum quod de typica adumbratione dixi. Aret.
pattern for men and wives to follow, whereupon S. Paul digresseth into am
excellent Discourse of that spiritual union which is between Christ and his
Church, making use of Marriage as a representation of this sublime mystery; and
now in the close he recalleth himself to his first design, letting them know
that though what Moses relates concerning Adam and Eve was mystically applied
by him to Christ and the Church, yet the literal sense of it was in force to
them, nor must his allegorical hinder them from a moral application of what he
had said concerning Marriage.

A good Item for us in reading the Scriptures to take the sense of them in the
fullest extent. Of many passages in holy Writ, there is both a literal and a
spiritual, a mystical and a moral use to be made; and it is our duty both to
search out the sweetness of the mystery, and observe the plainness of the
Letter; and as we are taken with the comforts of the one, so not to neglect the
duties of the other.

Having briefly viewed the Context, come we now to the Text it self, wherein
are three general parts worthy your serious consideration.

The particular relations whom it concerns specified, to wit, Husband and
Wife.

The several Obligations laid upon each unfolded, On the man, that he so love
his Wife as himself, On the Wife, that she reverence her Husband.

The punctual application to be made by every one of those duties to himself,
Let every one of you in particular.

These are the three precious fruits we are to gather from this branch of the
Tree of Life, and though in hearing they may not be sweet to your taste, yet I
am sure if well eaten and digested by meditation and practice they will yield
wholesome nutriment to your souls.

Begin we then with the Relations concerned in this Scripture, Genesis 1.
to wit, Husband and Wife. Almighty God though he is a Lover of Unity, yet not
of singularity; himself is but one, and yet he is not alone from all eternity,
there is a Trinity of persons in the Unity of Essence. And if we look into the
Creation we shall find though an Harmony yet a plurality, or rather a duality;
the world consists of an heaven and earth; in the Celestial part there is a Sun
and a Moon, in the Terrestria^ part Land and Sea: and yet further if you look
upon the little world of man, you may take notice of a soul and a body; in the
soul, of a rational and a sensitive part; in the rational of an understanding
and a will; in the sensitive of an irascible and concupiscible appetite: and in
the body most of its parts are made in pairs, two eyes, two ears, two nostrils,
two lips, two arms, two thighs, two legs, two feet. Finally, Man being thus
made, God said of him, It is not good he should be alone, Genesis 2. 1^.
and therefore as he had made other living creatures male and female, so he
provided a woman for man, makes her out of him, joins her to him, whence sprang
this relation in the Text of Husband and Wife, the man (so soon as the woman
was made) becoming an Husband, and the woman a Wife.

This pair is primum par and fundamentum omnium parium, Aug. de bon^ conjug.
(...). Hieroc. de Nupt.
the first pair and the original of all others; those various relations of
Parents and Children, Master and Servants, King and Subjects do all spring out
of this. Prima naturalis humanae societati^ copula vir and uxor, Man and Wife
are the first link of humane society, to which all the rest are joined,
Families, Cities, Countries, Nations, the whole world, yea, the Church
militant, nay, a good part of the Triumphant depend upon this pair of Husband
and Wife. Conjugium principium urbis est and quasi seminarium. Cic. de offic. l
1.


Multitudes flow from this Relation, but the relation it self is only between
two; it is not (...) and (...) nor (...) and (...), but (...) and (...), man
and wives, wife and men, but man and wife, unus, unam, uni. The one God has
appointed one Bern.
woman for one man. It was so in the institution, and the Prophet Malachy's
ratiocination from it, is both plain and strong, Mal. 2. 15. Nec artifex nec
materia defecisset. Tertul. exhor. ad castit.
Did not he make one? yet had he the residue of the Spirit. He could have made
more then one Eve for Adam, yea if at any time, then it might seem most
necessary for the speedier peopling of the world to have multiplied his wives,
but wherefore one? because he sought a godly seed, that is, a seed arising from
godly means: Nor is that Argumentation invalid which upon this Subject
Theodorus urges to the Saracen in point both of pleasure and peace. Adam in
Paradise no doubt wanted nothing that might be for the fullness of his content
and comfort; and yet he had but one, whereby it appears (...), the pleasure
of having Theod. Opusc. in Bibl. patr. T. 1. Gr. Lat.
one wife surpasses that of many. Again, where there are many Wives there
cannot but arise violent and deadly contentions, which the man having but one
wife prevents, and therefore is most conducible to that most desirable good in
all relations, namely Peace; from which with other arguments he justly
concludes, (...), Monogamy is more comfortable and honorable then Polygamy.
Indeed he qui unam costam primus in duas divisit, to use S. Hierom's phrase,
who first (as we read of) divided the one Hieron.
rib into two parts, was Lamech a wicked Tyrant; and it is observable that the
name of his second Wife Zillah signifies a Numerus conjugii a maledicto viro
incepit, primus Lamech duabus maritatus tres unam carnem fecit. Tartul. ibid.
shadow, such an one being only the shadow of a Wife. The truth is Polygamy
even in the Patriarchs was at the best but an infirmity, which though connived
at was not allowed of by God, and therefore not to be imitated by us. That
Marriage is nearest to the primitive institution, surest of divine Benediction,
which is only between two persons, who thus united are here called Husband and
Wife: and so much be spoken of the Relations. Pass we on to the.

Obligations laid upon them, These are summed up by the Apostle in two words,
and those may very well be expressed in two Monosyllables Love and Fear; that,
the Sugar to sweeten all the duties of authority belonging to the man; this,
the salt to season all the duties of subjection belonging to the wife. Both,
the marks which they must severally shoot at in all their carriages and
behaviors one toward another.

The man's duty is set down first, and indeed fit it is the man should be first
in the practice of his duty: precedence calls for presidency, priority of place
priority of duty; the inferiors are best encouraged to do their part when they
that are above them become exemplary to them in performing theirs: the man
would be accounted, nay indeed is, superior to the wife; but then he must go
before her in a good example; that by the doing of his she may be animated in
performance of her duty.

In the duty of the man there are three things worthy our Observation.

1. The quality of the act, Love. 2. The propriety of the object, his wife. 3.
The energy of the rule upon which it is grounded, by which it is measured, so as
himself.
First, The act required is Love, in the handling whereof I shall endeavor to
resolve a double Quaery, namely,

1. Why this duty is particularly mentioned. 2. Wherein the practice of it
consists.
1. It Is a Question not unfitly moved, why the Apostle makes choice of Love, to
express the man's duty by, since there are many duties which the man owes to
the wife as well as love? To which I answer, That it is not without special
reason both in regard of the present fitness and the comprehensive fulness
of this duty of Love.

1. The fitness of expressing the man's duty here by Love will appear, whether
you look backward or forward.

1. The Apostle a little before calls upon the Wives to submit. Now indeed that
which belongs to the man in most direct opposition to submitting, is governing,
but men are apt enough to exercise their authority without bidding, and
besides, this was already employed in the woman's duty of submitting; letting
that go therefore he rather chooses to call upon the man for Love, both
because that men are most apt to be defective in this, and likewise that this
will teach them how to use their authority. For though it is not love but
fondness which In ea soap deficimus licet domini satis studiosi. Aret. in loc.
Rigorem virilis Legis emollit, neu potestate quae praevalet nimius quis sit in
dominatu uxoris. Amb. in Col. 3. 19.
makes a man forget himself, and that power God has given him over the Wife,
yet true Love will learn him to exercise this power sparingly, mildely, and
affectionately. It is too often seen that men because of their superiority
insult over their Wives, and why this? but for want of Love; no marvel if
authority degenerate into Tyranny where this Moderator is absent; for this
cause it is that the Apostle supposes the power of governing, and requires
Love as potestatis temperatum, that which should temper and moderate the use of
that power.

2. In the following clause S. Paul minds the Wife of reverence, and therefore
the Man of Love, to intimate that his expression (...). Oecum. ibid.
of Love is the best way to gain reverence from the Wife, in which respect the
Scholiast says excellently, If thou would have thy Wife to reverence thee,
do thou love her. To force a fear from the Wife by an austere, churlish, and
surly carriage, is that which neither befits the Husbands place to exact, nor
the Wives to yield: the Woman must be not drawn but led, not forced but wooed
unto her duty by Love.

2. As this duty of Love was the most fit to be here mentioned, so is it the
most comprehensive of all other duties; so that in naming this he implies all
the rest. What the Greek Orator answered when asked what was the chief thing:
in an Demosth.
Orator, first action, secondly action, thirdly action, the like may be
returned to any that shall enquire what is the prime duty of an Husband, first
affection, secondly affection, thirdly affection; And as Love in general is
said by the Apostle to be Romans 13. 10.
the fulfilling of the Law, in which respect it is fitly resembled to David's
Instrument of ten strings, and wittily called a good Catholic, so Love in
particular is the fulfilling of that Law wherein the duty of the man to the
wife is required, which that it may the better appear pass we on to the

2. Quest. Namely, Wherein the exercise of this Love consists; To resolve which
we must consider it in its Antecedent, Concomitants and Consequents.

1. The Antecedent of this Love is a due estimation of the Wife. Judgment is
the source and spring of affection from which it proceeds, and according to
which it is proportioned; what the mind esteems not the heart affects not,
whereas what we highly prize we dearly love. The Love then of a man to his wife
supposes in him a singular account and an high valuation of her. Thus every
man ought to esteem of his wife as donum Dei, God's gift, and that choice and
precious, such a present as the whole world cannot afford him the like. And yet
more particularly the man ought to look upon his Wife under that notion which
was the special end of God's giving her, namely, as an help meet for and
suitable to him.

The Wife since the fall is appointed for three ends, ad remedium, ad sobolem,
in adjutorium, for a remedy against fornication, for the procreation of
Children, and for helpful communion; this last was no doubt the first in divine
intention, and so ought to be in the man's apprehension. He that takes a wife
only as a remedy will love her but as men do physic, for use, yea, for mere
necessity. He that marries only for posterity will love her as a Mother not
as a Wife. He only can rightly love a Wife who looks upon her, and
accordingly takes her for a oke-fellow and companion. The right estimation
then of a Wife is to account her as next to himself, and Non es dominus sed
maritus, non ancillam sed uxorem sortitus es, and gubernatorem te voluit esse
Deus muliebris sexus, non praepotentem. Amb Hexam. lib 5. cap. 7. Psa. 128. 3.
Aug. de bon^ Conjug.
so above either children or servants. Thus the Father wills the man to
consider, that by Marriage he becomes not a Master but an Husband, and takes
not an Handmaid but a Wife; In this respect the Psalmist comparing the Wife to
a Vine, places her by the sides of his House, not in fastigio on the top of an
House, nor in pavimento by the floor of an house, but in lateribus by the sides
of the House, a middle place between both: Lateribus sibi junguntur qut pariter
ambulant, they that go by our sides are our companions, such is the wife to the
man, and so ought to be in his esteem. Indeed the formation of woman out of
man's rib clearly represents this truth. On the one hand she was not made of the
Head, and therefore not domina, she must not rule over the Husband; nor yet of
any anterior part, and therefore not praelata, she must not be before the
Husband: On the other hand she was not made of the foot, and therefore not
serva, to be kept under as a servant; nor yet of any hinder part, and therefore
not postposita to be put behind as a child; but she was made of a rib in his
side, and therefore socia, to be esteemed and used as a fellow-helper.

2. The Concomitants or ingredients of this Love are desire (...). Arist. Rhet.
l. 2. c. 8.
and delight. The Moralists distinguish of a double Love, to wit, amor
benevolentiae and amor complacentiae, a love of benevolence, whereby we
heartily wish and accordingly endeavor the good of another, a Love of
complacency whereby we are well pleased and satisfied in the enjoyment one of
another. Both of these make up the man's Love to his Wife, namely a cordial
desire of her welfare, and an affectionate delight in her society. The most
proper act of Matrimonial Love is complacency, Pro. 5. 18. Deuteronomy. 13. 6. Ezekiel.
24. 16.
in which respect this Loving is called elsewhere a rejoicing, and the Wife is
called the Wife of the bosom, the desire of the eyes. The bosom is a place of
repose, and the things we put in our bosoms are such as we take delight in;
for this cause Christ is said to be in the bosom of the Father, to note that
it is John 1. 28. Mat. 3. 17. Joh. 13. 23. Joh. 20. 2.
he in whom the Father is well pleased; and John is said to lean on Jesus
bosom, because the Disciple whom Jesus loved, and in whose converse he was
singularly delighted. The desire of the eyes is that which in the absence we
long for, and the presence of which we behold with joy; So that both these
expressions do plainly intimate what contentment and satisfaction the man ought
to take in the converse and enjoyment of his Wife. And therefore it is
Solomon's counsel, Let thy Wife be to thee as the Prove. 5. 19.
Loving Hind, and as the pleasant Roe, or according to the Hebrew, an Hind of
Loves, a Roe of favors: the mates of those females are the Heart and the
Roe-buck, which as Naturalists observe are of all other creatures the most
inamored with Diligendi vocabulum tum ad affectum sum ad effectum refer
oportet. Daven. in Col. 3. 19.
their mates, to instruct the man what an affectionate wel-pleasednesse he
should have with his wife.

3. The Consequents of this Love are chiefly protection, provision, and
Toleration; Love is ever active, being like the fire, which where it is sends
forth light and heat. Indeed Exhibitio operis probatio amoris, action is the
most real proof of affection, only that love being true which is not otiosus
but officiosus, in word but in deed: Thus the husbands love to his wife must
manifest it self.

1. In protecting her to his power from injuries: it is the Psalmists
expression, Thou Lord wilt bless the righteous, with favor will thou compass
him as with a shield. Love always improves what ability it has in being a
shield to what it affects; Psalm. 5. 20.
so ought the husbands love to express it self in defending his wife from
wrong. It is well observed that the rib of which woman was made, was taken from
under the man's arm, to teach him, that as the use of the arm is to keep off
blows from the body, so the office of an husband is to ward off dangers from
his wife. It is the speech of Ruth to Boaz, Spread thy skirt over thine
handmaid: The Hebrew word which we render skirt, Ruth. 3. 9. (...) Proprie alam
significat Buxt.
properly signifies a wing; and so the metaphor is borrowed from birds who
spread their wings over their young ones, to preserve them from harm; this was
that Boaz owed to Ruth as a kinsman: but much more when an husband, it being
the man's part to spread the skirts or wings of protection over his wife. That
expression which Abimelech used to Sarah concerning Abraham, Behold he is to
thee a covering of the eyes, is very Genesis 20. 16.
considerable to this purpose, since as Ainsworth has well observed, it
denotes not only subjection on the Woman's, but protection on the man's part.

2. By providing for her conveniences: Love is full of care, and care is
diligent in providing: such a provident care the man owes to his wife; and
that not only so far as is necessary, this being due to the meanest servant in
the Family, but as is convenient and suitable both to her relation as a Wife,
and to his place and condition; This duty is that which the Apostle expresses
a little before in two significant words of nourishing and cherishing, the
former whereof as one has well Ephesians. 5. 29. (...), primum ad alimenta alterum
ad vestimenta referendum. Zanch.
observed refers to food, the latter to raiment, both which in a plentiful
measure the man according to his degree and estate ought to afford his wife,
and the latter word being a metaphor borrowed as another has observed from the
hens sitting upon her eggs to keep them warm, and thereby to hatch her brood,
does elegantly express what a tender cherishing Significat gallinarum more
incubare, and calore foetum partut idoneum reddere. Aret.
care Matrimonial Love obliges a man unto. Indeed when the man marries a
wife, she leaves her friends with whom she was educated, and her friends
commit her to her Husbands custody, good reason he should have a special care
to provide for her; and because this Love must be Christian as well as
conjugal, this care ought to be conversant not only about her bod^, but her
soul: In which regard the Apostle Peter wills Husbands to dwell with their
Wives as men of knowledge, instructing 1 Pet. 3. 7.
them in the things which concern their everlasting welfare.

3. By bearing with their infirmities: S. Paul speaking of charity, among other
properties, tells us she is not easily provoked, 1 Cor. 13. 5, 7. 1 Pet. 4.
8. Charitas amat quos tolerat, tolerat quos amat. Greg. Meg. in Ezekiel.
Sialienos, multo magis uxorios debes tolerare and emendare mores. Ambr. lib. 8.
in loc. cap. 16. Col. 3. 19. Daven.
she bears all things, and S. Peter that she coveerth a multitude of sins;
though love be not blind, yet oft-times she winketh, as not willing to take
notice of the wrongs that are done: Thus ought the Husband to express his
affection to his Wife. Indeed this is the trial of his love, not to be stirred
up to wrath, when yet provocation is given, but silently to pass by and
patiently bear with her failings: every one will love when he is pleased; but
that is love, to bear when provoked: this is that which the Apostle intends
when to this precept of love he adds a prohibition of bitterness; Husbands
love yove your Wives and be not bitter against them, that is, ob leves causas
exasperari, upon slight causes, small offenses, to have their love abated, or
wrath exasperated. This the Heathen Philosopher saw, who therefore wills
Husbands to pass by (...) Aristot.
their wives infirmities. And thus you have beheld the several lines of the
man's duty meeting together in this one center of love.

What now remains but that all men learn to square their practice by this
precept? but alas how just cause is there given by a great part of men for a
sad complaint, or rather a sharp reproof! I would to God there were not some
who in stead of affecting abhor, loving, loath their wives: and the most though
not guilty of the contrary vice, yet are too defective in the exercise of the
virtue; they do not hate, and yet they do not love their wives, and in this the
bare want of love is no small sin.

Be pleased to consider a while in particular the contrarieties between the
rule and men's practices; How many Husbands have base and unworthy esteems of
their wives, as if they were their drudges, being more kind to their servants
then them? Little better are they who with that Emperor imagine wife to be a
name dignitatis not voluptatis, as if it Aelius Verus.
were enough for wives that their Husbands vouchsafe to honor them in marrying
them, and in the mean time they may indulge themselves the licentious liberty
of voluptuous conversing with other women; whence it is their wives society is
rather a burden then a pleasure to them. No less justly are they to be
condemned who prodigally consume that estate in riot and luxury by which their
wives and family should be maintained with needful conveniences: Surely in such
men Nec amor viget mariti nec fides Christiani, there is neither the faith of a
Christian nor the love of an Husband. Finally, how deservedly are they to be
blamed who put a sinister construction upon all their wives actions? if she be
devout, she is an hypocrite; if grave, she is melancholy; if cheerful, she is
wanton; if she stay at home, she is a drone; if she go abroad, a gadder; so
that, nothing their wives do can please them: whence it is that they are apt
to quarrel with them de lana caprina, upon every trifle, and are often enraged
without any just occasion.

By these and several other ways do men discover a great defect of this duty
which our Apostle here calls for; but I wish that such would sadly consider how
repugnant these courses are to Christianity, since what S. John says in
another case, I may no less truly say in this, If a man say I love God, and
hates 1 John 4. 20.
his brother, he is a liar; for if he loves not his brother whom he has seen,
how can he love God whom he has not seen. In like manner, If a man say he
loves God and hates his wife, he is a liar; for if he loves not his wife whom
he sees, how can he love God whom he has not seen? Be we therefore all of us
exhorted to a careful and cheerful performance of our duty; and as the Apostle
elsewhere advises in the general, Let 1 Cor. 16. 14.
all things be done in charity, so shall I in this particular, Let all things a
man does to his wife, be done in Love; his looks, his speeches, his carriage,
his actions, his familiarity, yea, his authority; his admonitions, yea, his
reprehensions, let all be sweetened with love: as the salt is first set on and
last taken off from the Table, and is eaten almost with every dish; so let love
accompany him in the whole course of his behavior toward her. Thus ought
conjugal love to be extended, but withal it must be limited to the right
object, his wife; which leads me to the

Propriety of the Object, Thy Wife. To clear this, be pleased 2d. Part.
to distinguish of a threefold Love, spiritual, natural, and matrimonial:
Spiritual Love is that we bear to a woman as she is a Christian, and so where
there are the greatest measures of grace, there ought to be greater degrees of
love; and in this respect another woman may deserve love when a man's own wife
does not, because she may want those impressions of grace which others have:
Natural Love is to a woman as woman, and thus a man may love other women
besides his wife, but still he must love his wife before other women:
Matrimonial Love is of the wife as she is a wife; and this is solely and wholly
due from every man to his own wife. The Greek word (...) here used signifies
as much as (...) (which is by some therefore made the Etymology of it) such a
love whereby a man rests satisfied in the object loved; this is that which
Solomon requires where he says, Let her breasts Prove. 5. 19.
satisfy thee at all times; and the contrary to this the Law forbids, Exodus
20. 17.
where we read, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors Wife.

A fault too common though very heinous, as Nadab and Abihu offered strange
fire in the Censer; so a great many harbor Exodus 20. 1.
strange fire in their hearts, I mean love to strange women: yea, with such a
spirit of lewdness are some possessed, that they therefore cannot love them
because they are their Wives. It is an expression which (though odious) some
mouths have not been ashamed to utter, I could love her were she not my Wife;
as if a man should say, I could love these Lands, these Goods, but that they
are mine, which how unreasonable a reason it is cannot but be obvious to every
man.

Oh far be this distemper from us: learn we therefore as to refine our love
that it be not sensual, so to confine it that it be not extravagant. It was the
praise of Constantine that he was Juvenis Uxorius, though young, devoted in his
love only to his Wife, let him be our pattern. The Ring given in Marriage is
but one, to teach the man that his love must be singularly contracted to the
person of the Wife. The truth is, that love which is as it were cut into many
rivulets must needs run weakly, nay, he that gives not all his love to his
wife indeed gives none at all; besides that is most true in this sense, Deus
amat cor extensum Genesis 1. 3. and 9. 10, 11.
non divisum, the Husbands love must be extended but not divided; a heart and a
heart is hateful in God's sight, nor can such expect his benediction. It is
well observed that in the beginning whilst the waters were over the earth,
there was nothing but barrenness; but when they were gathered into one place,
the earth brought forth fruits, and the Sea fishes: that love will be most
fruitful, which is only settled upon the Wife, and therefore let this counsel be
acceptable to all men; Cause the stream of thy affection to run in one channel,
the lines of thy delight to meet in one center: Love as entirely as thou can
so it be thy own Wife, and so much the rather because she is thy self: which
leads me to

The Energy of the Rule upon which this love is grounded, 3d. Part.
and by which it must be measured, as himself.

It is a question here moved by some, Why the Apostle having Quest.
proposed so excellent a pattern already as that of Christ's love to his
Church, should now add another of a far inferior nature, to wit, our love to
our selves; to which this answer is fitly returned.

This pattern of self-love is annexed, not as if the other were Answ.
not abundantly sufficient both to persuade and direct to the duty, but because
this, as S. Chrysostom says excellently, is Chrysostom. in loc.
(...) a more domestic and familiar example. The love we bear to our selves is
plainly felt and discerned by us; not so Christ's Love to his Church, it being
a love which passes knowledge: every man knows how he loves himself; Ephesians.
3. 19.
only the spiritual man knows, and that but in a scant measure, how Christ
loves his Church: besides, our love to our selves as it is better known, so
more easily imitated; whereas Christ's love to his Church is both so
transcendent in its own nature, and so far remote from our apprehension, that
though we must follow after it, yet we may despair ever to come near it.

But it may be further objected, Is not self-love a vice? are Obj.
not those hypocrites branded for this among others, that they are Lovers of
their own selves? how then comes it to pass that 2 Timothy 3. 2.
self-love is here set down as the rule of a man's love to his Wife?

To which it is easily answered, That it is not self-love but the exorbitancy
of it, which is elsewhere condemned as a vice, Sol.
and it is not an inordinate but a regular self-love which is here commended as
a rule. The first and primary object of our love is God himself, and as he is a
superexcellent good, so our love to him must be a superlative love, such was
David's when he cried out, Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none
upon earth that I desire besides thee; not goods, nor children, Psalm. 73. 25.
nor wife, no nor self may be loved as God. Next to, and under God comes in
self, there being nothing except God which can or ought to be dearer to a man
then himself, this is that love by which in general the love to our neighbor,
and more particularly the love to the wife ought to be regulated; for so our
Apostle here proposes it, that a man should love his wife as himself.

This as in the Text may very well admit of a double construction, there is a
sicut similitudinis and veritatis, an as of likeness and resemblance, and an
as of verity and samenesse; both these may be here used, and accordingly it
represents two things in order to Conjugal love, namely, modum and motivum,
the manner how, and the reason why the man should love his Wife.

1. The most proper and frequent acception of this Conjunction as, is only to
note likeness, and thus the meaning is, that a man's love to his Wife should be
like that he bears to himself, so that by tracing the similitude we shall learn
much of the manner how this love is to be performed, and that in these
following parallels.

1. A man's love to himself is cordial without dissimulation. Though a man may
seign amity to others, yet no man ever in this kind dissembled with himself;
such should a man's love be to his Wife; not an outside but an inside, not a
feigned but a hearty love. The Poet calls love (...), a fire that burns
withinin; and Plutarch says of friendship, That as minerals are hid in the
bowels of the earth, so this must be seated in the bottom of the heart. And
surely much more true ought this to be of the love between man and wife, who as
they are one flesh, so should their hearts be joined together in one, and as it
was said of Jonathan that his soul was knit to David, so 1 Samuel 18. 1.
ought the soul of the Husband to the Wife.

The Ring in Marriage is put upon the fourth finger of the left hand,
concerning which Aulus Gellius acquaints us from Appion, that the Egyptians in
anatomizing men's bodies, observed nervum Aul. Gell. l. 10. c. 10.
quidem tenuissimum ab eo uno digito ad cor hominis pergere ac provenir^e, that
singer of all the rest to have a small nerve passing from it to the heart, the
truth of this I leave to skilful Anatomists to determine: the moral use which
the man ought to make of it is good, that putting the Ring on such a finger he
be admonished of that near union there ought to be between, and dear affection
in his heart to his wife.

2. A man's love to himself is constant. No man in his right mind was ever
brought to hate himself; such ought his love to be to his wife: not like Nero's
quinquennium, for a short time, a few years; but as long as the relation so
long must the affection continue, even till death do part them. The Ring given
in marriage is of a circular figure, and a circle is the image of constancy, to
teach the man how perpetual his love should be. This latter will follow upon
the former, since quos verus amor tenuit tenebit, that affection which is
unfaigned will not be fading. Sen. Tract.
And yet more particularly, look as though a man see others stronger,
healthier, handsomer then himself; yet he does not therefore fall in love with
them to slight himself, or wish his head upon their shoulders: So though other
women be more beautiful and lovely then his own Wife, yet must he not dote on
them and neglect her, or so much as wish an exchange. And yet further, as
nothing can make a man to be out of love with himself though he be deformed or
by some sad accident maimed and debilitated; so neither ought any natural
defect or accidental mischance cause a remission, much less a cessation of the
man's love to his wife.

3. A man's love of himself is tender; no man can handle one so (...). Theoph.
in loc. 1 Pet. 3. 7.
tenderly as he does himself. If thou have a blear eye, a lame foot, or any
other member afflicted, will thou presently pluck it out, or cut it off, or
will thou not rather use it with the greater regard? such must a man's affection
be to his Wife, expressing it self in gentle and tender dealing with her: how
chary are men of their glasses, because as they are bright so brittle? the
woman is the weaker vessel, which must not be a cause of contempt but respect;
and the more weak she is by reason of any sickness or distemper whatsoever, so
much the more tender care ought to be had of her. Indeed I read of some who in
stead of tenderness have been cruel to themselves in cutting and lancing, but
they were either idolatrous, as Baal's Priests, or Daemoniaacks, 1 King. 18.
28. Mar. 5. 5.
as he in the Gospel; and surely we may account them either besotted in their
minds, or possessed with a devil who lay violent hands upon their wives. The
Husband indeed is to govern the wife, but consiliis non plagis, with counsels
not stripes; neither divine nor humane Law intrusts the man with a power of
castigation over his Wife; yea, the civil Law allows her a Bill of Divorce,
si probare possit maritum verberibus illam assecisse, if she have evidence that
her Husband strikes God. l. 5. tit. 17.
her; and the reason is added quia verbera sunt ab ingenuis aliena, stripes are
for flavish not ingenuous persons: yea, even among the Heathen we find not any
unless mad or drunk, practicing this unnatural cruelty.

4. A man's love to himself is industrious, whilst his head is ever contriving
and his hand acting what may do himself good; nor does he account the greatest
study or pains too much for his own advantage; nay, what is not a man willing
to part with, lands, goods, all he has for the preservation of himself? such
ought his love to be to his Wife, parting with, going about any thing which may
conduce to her comfort, and this not grudgingly but freely: Right Love is not
in verbal Complement but real implement,; nor need beneficence be squeezed as
wine out of the grape, but it flows naturally from love as water from the
fountain; thus does the loving Husband prevent his wives desire in seeking and
endeavoring her good.

5. The love of a man to himself is pure, not for base and sinister ends, it
is not himself as thus or thus accomplished, but purely himself that he loves;
such ought a man's love to be to his wife, not because she is rich, or young, or
fair, but because she is his Wife. When Martia Cato's daughter was asked why
she did not marry, she answered, Non se invenire virum Hier. contra Jovinian.
qui se magis veliet quam sua, she could not find a man that would love her
more then hers. I wish it might not be charged on too many men: they love only
with their eyes and their fingers, because of the beauty they see in, or the
money they receive with their wives; not with their hearts, out of an ingenuous
or rather pious respect, to that relation of a Wife wherein they belong to them.

6. And lastly, A man's love to himself is superlative; proximus quisque sibi,
Charity ever begins at home; and self-love surpasses a man's affection to
any other whatsoever: thus ought his love to his wife transcend his love to all
other relations, exigit vehementissimam dilectionem, quia non potest esse
vehementior Marlo^ in loc.
quam sui ipsius dilectio; Our Apostle in this expression calls for vehemence of
affection because self-love is of such a nature. The Ring given in Marriage is
of gold the choicest among metals, to intimate that the dearest affections
belong to the Wife: for this cause (says Moses) a man shall leave father and
Genesis 2. ult.
mother and cleave to his Wife, not as if Marriage engaged men to put off
natural affection to their parents, and when they begin to be husbands they
must cease to be children, this is a gloss fit for none but a Pharisee to put
upon that Scripture; but conditionally, if they shall seek to alienate his
affection from his Wife, and comparatively if a man be put to that sad strait
that either his wife or his parents must perish, he ought first to relieve his
Wife; and if you will know the reason of all this, it is because she is
himself, which brings me to the

2. Consideration of this as under the notion of identity, as, that is, being
himself: it is that acception in which this conjunction is sometimes taken,
where it is said concerning Christ, We saw his glory as of the only begotten
Son of God, it notes John. 1. 4.
not a likeness but a reality, being the only begotten Son of God; and in
the same construction is that commendation given of the Thessalonians for
receiving the Word as (that is, being 1 These. 2. 13.
indeed) the Word not of man but of God; the same sense is here to be given,
as, that is, not only, non minus quam seipsum, not less then himself, but quia
illa est altera ego, because she is a second self: To this purpose is that of
S. Jerome, who makes it to be a Hier. idid. ver 28. (...) Chrysostom. hom. 20. in
Ephesians.
sicut non similitudinis, sed ponderis; and thus where a little before it is
said, He that loves his wife loves himself, the meaning is not only that he
does good to himself, but that she is himself. The truth of which will easily
appear upon a double consideration,

Of her original by creation, being made of a rib which was a part of the man;
so that when a man takes a wife reparat latus suum, repetit costam suam, he
repaireth his side, regaineth his rib, and lays her in his bosom who was
taken out of his Genesis 2. 18.
side. In that expression in Genesis of making an he'p meet for him, the last
words for him are fitly rendered according to the Quos nec ipsos singulos
condidit Deus and tanquam alienigenas junaeit, sed alteram ex altero creavit
signans etiam vim conjunctionis in latere unde illa detracta formata est. Aug.
de Bon. conjug. Ezekiel. 37. 17.
original coram ipso, that is as a glass that reflecteth upon him his own
image, ipse coram se himself before himself, that which he sees being taken
out of himself.

Chiefly of her near Conjunction by marriage with the man; in which respect as
they are one flesh, so the Law makes them one person. Man and wife, what are
they, but as two springs meeting and so joining their streams that they make
but one current; so that the water of the one and the other cannot be severed:
or as those two branches in the Prophets hand enclosed in one bark; and so
closing together that they make but one piece and the same fruit comes of
either. Indeed so close and near is the communion, that as to use they have all
things common, bodies, children, houses, conditions of prosperity and adversity.

And now what improvement should all men make of this consideration but to
enlarge and increase their affections toward their wives? Indeed it is a most
unnatural thing for a man not to love himself; it is no less not to love his
wife: even irrational creatures teach a man to love himself, and in that to
love his Wife: a man loves his goods, because sua his own, parents love their
children as suos being their own, much more should he love his Wife as seipsum
being himself: though a man's own goods be not so wealthy, children so comely as
another, yet the nearness of relation engages to affection. Nemo patriam amat
quia magnam sed quia suam, every man's Country Sen. ep. 67.
is most acceptable to him, because though not so great or fertile as others,
yet it is his own, his native soil. Be thy wife far inferior in riches,
beauty, and such like ornaments to other women, yet this obligation lies upon
thee to love her, because she is thine; yea, so much thine as that she is thy
self. And thus I have given a dispatch to the man's duty; I now proceed with
less brevity, but no less fidelity to

The woman's part, as it follows in those words, and the wife (see) that she
reverence her husband.

We are not here to imagine that when the Apostle calls upon the woman for
reverence he excludes love; love is no less the wives duty then the man's:
conjugal affection must be mutual (...) Theoph. in loc.
and reciprocal: the Husband must love his Wife as himself, and the Wife love
her Husband as her self; so that whatsoever has been said concerning the man
in this respect, must and ought likewise to be observed and practiced by the
woman. Hence it is that elsewhere this is expressed concerning the younger
women, that they love their husbands: The truth is, the Tit. 2. 4.
Apostle here requires love and somewhat more from the wife, such a love as
expresses it self by fear, such an affection as yields cheerful subjection:
The Wife see that she do not only Ephesians. 6. Uxorum timere est cum timore,
diligere, virorum autem tantum diligere, quia dilectio perfectorum est. Ambr.
in Cass. Chrystost. hom. 20. in Ephesians.
love, but reverence her husband. To this purpose Theophylact says aptly, the
wife must love her husband as a member, and fear him as the head: the man
indeed being the superior is only bound to love, but the woman being imperfect
and inferior is obliged to fear.

It is an observation not unfitly taken notice of by the golden mouthed Father;
and therefore not to be passed by, that the Apostle enlarges about love, and
only mentions fear (...), he sets down the extent of love in leaving
father and mother and cleaving to the wife, the manner, by Christ's love to his
Church, and a man's to himself; not so of fear: and he gives this reason,
(...), because he would have love especially to prevail both in man and woman,
since whereas fear will not cause love, love will produce fear. Upon the same
ground I have in imitation of the Apostle, spent the greatest part of the time
in handling love, allotting to it an elder Brothers portion, though withal I
must not neglect in some measure to prosecute this of fear, which particularly
belongs to the wife.

If we cast our eyes on the 5. verse of the following Chapter, we shall find
the Apostle setting down fear as a chief ingredient (...).
in the servants duty: and here a Verb of that Noun is used to express the
wives duty to the husband; but though there be this agreement in the word, yet
there is a great deal of difference in the thing; and therefore the Scholiast
speaking of servile fear makes this exception, (...) Oecumen. in Ephesians. 6. 1.
(...), this is not that fear which is enjoined the Wife. The fear of a slave
and a wife differ specifically; the slaves fear is only of the rod not the
person, the wives only of the person not any rod. The slaves fear is oft-times
accompanied with hatred of his master, the wives fear is always attended with
a love of her husband. The fear of a servant and a wife differ gradually, since
according to the measure of the distance so is the degree of the fear; and thus
the servant being in a far lower condition, and so at a greater distance from
the Master then the wife from the husband; his fear must be of a more aweful
and submissive temper: in which respect the Apostle uses two words, the one
expressing an high degree of the other, to wit, (...). Theoph. ibid. (...).
Theoph. in loc.
fear and trembling, such a fear as is joined with trembling; whereas the wives
fear is only so much as does declare that the man is superior; nor must it be
of that nature as to cause a trembling at, but rather a delighting in her
husbands presence; not such as makes her to quake when she sees him, but only
keeps her from rising up against, contradicting of, and insulting over him.

To unfold more particularly both the intent and extent of this reverence,
which is the wives debt to the Husband, be pleased to know that there is an
inward and outward reverence due from all inferiors, and in special the wife;
the intent of this fear wherein it consists, we shall find in the inward; the
extent of it how far it reaches, we shall see by the outward acts.

The inward reverence carries in it an act both of the judgment and the will;
Of the judgment, dictating the Husbands superiority; of the will dreading to
do any thing which may displease him.

1. This principle must be firmly asserted to and acknowledged Congruit vi^^
dilectio, mulieri timor: servo vero non solum metus sed and tremorjungitar.
Hier. in loc. 1 Cor. 11. 7.
by the wife, that the husband is her superior; indeed there is a double
priority belonging to the man,

1. In respect of sex he being the male, and the woman the female, upon which
difference the man is called the image and glory of God, and the woman the
glory of the man; man God's image and glory, because in him a resemblance of
God's dominion and majesty, as being Lord of the world; and the woman the man's
glory, it being an high honor to the man that so noble a creature as the woman
should be inferior to him.

2. Nor is this all the ground of his superiority, since not only as man he is
before the woman, but as an husband he is over the wife; and therefore as in
respect of sex, so much more of relation and office, is the man's authority to
be asserted. In Prove. 2. 17. 1 Cor. 11. 3.
which regard those titles of head and guide are given to him: since what the
guide is to the traveller, and the head to the members, that is the Husband to
the wife for direction and government. Indeed this truth is so clear in sacred
Writ, that it cannot be ignorance but arrogance, want of sufficient information
but peremptoriness of pride that causes in any a denial, or so much as a doubt
concerning it. That pattern of women, Sarak, acknowledged this, when not out of
a feigned flattery 1 Pet. 3. 6. Non blandiendi consuetudinesed hujus
subjectionis testificandae voluntate. Daven.
but a just humility she called her Husband Lord; and this is the first step of
that reverence here commanded and commended to all the daughters of Sarah, that
they cordially assent to the Husbands primacy and authority over them.

2. From this naturally flows in the will an aversation from what offends
her husband, whereby out of an awful respect to his power and place she dares
not displease him; yea, in consideration of which she abhors it as the
greatest evil next to the breach of God's precepts, to contradict her Husbands
will. Hence it is that as the Apostles expression is (...) she takes care, and
that a serious thoughtful care which Cor. 7. 34.
way she may please her Husband, so as it is her joy when she can give him
content, and her grief when any thing falls out that crosses his will, and
proves distasteful to him. Thus as the iron is drawn by the Loadstone, the
marigold opens and shuts with the Sun, and the glass reflecteth the form
and figure, the posture and motion of the body; so does her will conform it
self next under God's to her Husbands pleasure.

2. Upon both these follows that outward reverence in her.

First, Gestures, When by her respectful carriage and observant demeanor
toward him she testifies her reverent regard of him: in token of this it was
that Rebeccah when she saw Isaac, lighted of her camel, and covered her self
with a Veil: this is Genesis 24. 64: 65
that fear which S. Peter minds the Wives of in those words, Whilst they
behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear, it 1 Pet. 3. 2.
being such a fear he there calls for which is expressed in their conversation;
and that such as others may behold, to wit, in their reverent deportment
toward their husbands. Thus as the Moon though when the Sun is absent she
govern the world by her influence, yet when the Sun appears she veileth her
light: So the wife though she be Ruler of the Family in her husbands absence,
yet when he is present she must declare her reverence by giving place to him.

Secondly, Speeches, and that both to and of him; To him, when he is with her,
fairly entreating, modestly answering, mildely persuading, humbly admonishing;
and when occasion is, wisely forbearing to retort upon his passionate
expressions. Of him, when he may be far from her, having the fear of him before
her; and therefore not mentioning his name without respect, and avoiding any
expressions which (though out of his hearing) may betray any contempt either of
his person, or power, or place.

Thirdly, Actions, When her reverence of him causes her willingly to do what
he requires, and abstain from what he Nunquam erit voluntaria subjectio nisi
precedat reverentia. Marlor. in loc.
forbids. Indeed reverence is the rise of obedience, and obedience the best
testimony of reverence: that subjection cannot be voluntary which is not the
effect of reverence; nor can that reverence be real which does not put upon
subjection. It is very observable in Scripture that the fear of God and keeping
his Commandments are frequently joined together, to intimate Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
the inseparable connection between them, since whosoever fears God cannot but
keep Gods Commandments; and he cannot keep Eccles. 12. 15.
God's Commandments that does not fear him: It is no less true in this of the
wife to the Husband, who ought to manifest her fear of him by her obedience to
his desires.

And now beloved, I could wish there were not cause given by wives as well as
men of a deserved accusation and a severe increpation. Indeed some kind of
fear is too prevalent in many women; nor are the men in this to be exempted, I
mean Sancti caeteros de suo affectu aestimant, and quia ipsis est amica veritas
mentiri neminem putant, libenter credant quod ipsi sunt non possunt suspectum
habere quod non sunt. Ambros. l. 3. de offic. 10.
a fear of suspicion and jealousy in regard of each others fidelity. A crime
that for the most part is found in them that are guilty themselves: as charity
prompts good men to think others are as faithful and just as themselves; so
lust makes evil ones surmise others to be as vicious and licentious as they. A
sin which cannot but be an enemy to the duties here enjoined, since jealousy
must needs expel love out of the man's heart toward his wife, and hinder the
woman from yielding that reverential fear she owes to her husband. Finally, a
fault which like envy carries with it its own punishments, guawing the bowels,
distracting the thoughts, and tormenting the spirits of them who give
entertainment to it: in which respect wise persons are unwilling to harbor it
even when there may be too just ground and reason for it.

But to return to the fear my Text calls for, though there be too much
oft-times of that other, yet too little of this fear is to be found in most
women: how true this charge is let the careless irreverent carriage of many
wives testify. Solomon in the Proverbs mentions, An eye that mocketh at his
Father and despises to obey his mother: Indeed by the eye it is that the Prove.
30. 17,
soul does much express it self in mocking and despising, and there are too
easily to be observed eyes that despise their Husbands. Women of proud and
scornful behavior not only toward their Neighbors but Husbands. Nor are only
the eyes but the tongues of many in fault, by reason of sharp, passionate,
presumptuous and impetuous speeches, whilst they speak either chidingly like
Jezabel, railingly like Zipporah, scoffingly like Michol, or reproachfully like
Job's wife; nay, so little regard have they of their husbands, that they care
not in discourse before others to divulge their faults, and (it may be) load
them with calumnies: So that what Jacob says to his sons Simeon, and Levi in
regard of their cruel exploit, You have made we to stink amongst the
Inhabitants of the Land, may Genesis 34. 30.
many men say to their wives, You make me to stink amongst my neighbors and
friends by your reviling words and opprobrious speeches; yea, to carry it on a
little further, I would to God there were not a generation of women in the
world who tread Antipodes to this duty, instead of fearing their Husbands they
would make their Husbands stand in fear of them; whose study is not to please
but cross their Husbands wills, who will either have the mastery, or wage a
continual war with them; Aspiring shoulders that will not content themselves
to have a room below their head; Monsters of their sex inverting the order in
which nature or rather the God of nature has set them, as if the woman were
not made for the man's comfort, but the man to be at the woman's command.

But I am persuaded better things of you, though I thus speak, only I beseech
you accept a word of exhortation to the practice of this duty. Our English
Translation here supplieth a word see, which is not in the original; but yet it
is implied in the (...) that she reverence, before which is supposed a verb
that must signify as much as see, let the wife look to it that she fear her
husband. It is then a strict charge that is here laid upon the woman by the
Apostle, give me leave from him to give it you. Have a care that this duty of
fear be not omitted; it is not an arbitrary thing which you may do or leave,
but a necessary work to be performed by you; I know you are ready to say with
them in the Gospel, This is an hard saying, who can bear it? but be it never so
hard in your apprehention, it is but just and right according to God's
Ordination, and to repine at John 6. 60.
it is no less then to murmr at God himself.

Oh therefore see, beware that you grudge not at this precept; and again see,
look that you cheerfully perform it: and indeed were it seriously considered
that it is not a servile but an ingenuous fear which is here commanded, and
that this fear from the wife is allaied with a precept of honor from the
husband, Casta ad ^irum inatrona parendo imperat. Publ. Ser. Sapiens quaedam
dicebat filiae suae eam cum duceret ad thalamum, Mea filia, sta coram viro tuo
and ministrae ei; si fueris ei ancilla, ipse tibi servus erit, etc. in lib.
Nus. c. 6. (...). Occum. ibid. (...). Chrysostom Hom. 20. in Ephesians.
nay, that where this is practiced, it does regain a mutual respect from the
man, whilst by obeying she commands, for so the mother told her daughter, Do
thou minister to thy husband, and he shall do the like to thee; be thou his
handmaid and he shall be thy servant; and thus as Sarah called Abraham Lord, so
he called her Sarai, as much as my mistress: these meditations could not but
sweeten the bitterness of this precept to them. In a word, let there be but a
cordial love in the wife to her husband, and this command of fear will not be
grievous to her: as fear is the spring of subjection, so love is the rise of
fear; in which respect the Scholiast says fitly, if love be present, fear will
follow after it and attend upon it; and as the man's love engages him to honor
and protect, so the wives will no less oblige her to fear and subjection.

I shut up this, yea both the man and the woman's part with one admonition to
them both: As the one desires to love his Wife, and the other to fear her
Husband, let both strive to have the love and fear of God rooted in their
hearts. It is very considerable, that fear God and the King are put together by
Solomon, and fear God and honor the King by S. Peter, to intimate, that the
former always inclines to the latter: the like I may say here, fear God and thy
husband, fear God and honor thy wife, since he that is faithful in his duty to
God, cannot but be careful of his duty to man. The Rabbis have observed, that
if the word (...) which signifies God, be taken out of the word (...) and
(...) which signifies man and woman, there remains nothing but (...) which
signifies fire; nothing but the fire of malice in the man's heart, the fire of
pride in the woman's, and the fire of contention between them both is to be
expected, when God is not loved, feared, served and honored by them. And thus
much be spoken of the second General, the obligation laid upon the man and the
wife. I hasten in a word to

The punctual application to be made of these duties, Let every 3. Genesis
one of you in particular. And this is done two ways: by a word of generical
comprehension, every one; and words of individual specification, of you in
particular: both which though expressed only in the man's part, yet are by a
parity of reason to be supplied the wives, every one in particular, both man
and woman being obliged to the practice of their duty.

1. The first word is of a generical comprehension, every one, of (...).
what degree, quality, condition soever is concerned in these precepts; yea
every one is bound to their several wife or husband, be their condition or
qualification what it will. It is, though very sad, yet too common for both
sexes to plead excuses for their non-observance of these divine injunctions. On
the one hand many a man is apt to say, I could love my Wife were she a person
of quality, but she was my servant; were she Qud voles apt nubere nube pari.
Ovid. Epist. Quam male inaquales veniunt ad aratra juvenci. Tam premitur magno
conjuge nupta minor. Id.
wealthy, but she brought me nothing; were she meek and quiet, but she is
froward and perverse. It is true indeed wisdom teaches thee beforehand to
take care that there be virtuous qualities, and some proportionable equality of
estate and degree in the person whom thou choosest for thy wife; but having
once entered into that relation, justice obliges thee to give her the love due
to a Wife. On the other hand many a Wife is ready to pretend, I could reverence
my Husband were he not a mean person, one whose fortune has been raised by my
estate; not considering, that how superior soever she were before, yet by
marriage she becomes his inferior: And again, I could reverence him were he
not a man of a debaucht, profane and vicious life. Indeed I could wish that
many men did not give too much occasion by their loose lives of that contempt
they find in the eyes not only of Wife, but servants; but still be the Husband
never so faulty, and his practices licentious, yet in respect of his place and
relation, the Wife owes him reverence: the truth is, nemo excipitur, none is
excepted, let none of either sex dare to exempt themselves.

2. Because what is spoken to every one, is accounted as spoken to none, our
Apostle brings down the general to individuals, every one of you in
particular; or according to the (...).
Greek, one by one: Take this as spoken to him and her, and so each apply their
own duty to themselves. It is that which concerns Ministers in all their
doctrines, not to shoot at random 2 Samuel 12. 7. Acts 2. 36. Heb. 4. 2.
but aim at the mark; like David's, Thou art the man and S. Peter's, You have
crucified; and here S. Paul's, You in particular. It is that which all hearers
are enjoined, to mix faith with what they hear, and that by a particular
application of the word to their own hearts and lives; and yet more closely to
the text, it is that which Man and Wife, each one in regard of themselves ought
to take notice of, and square their own practice by.

And well were it if this were duly thought upon, and accordingly perfomed. But
alas, we every one look to another, not our own duty; and to speak my thoughts
freely, I fear this will be the use or rather abuse which too many will make of
this Sermon. It is very likely that when you come home, the Husband will read
his Wife a Lecture of her duty, and the Wife ring a peal in the Husbands ears
concerning his, and so whilst each upbraid the other, both forget what
belongs to them in particular. Oh how preposterous a course is this! as if a
Scholar should only mind how his Schoolfellow learneth his lesson, and not
look on his own: or a man should take notice what is good Phil 2. 4. (...).
Bas. Hexam. (...). Theoph in lo^. Acts 20. 30.
for his neighbors, but not his own disease; and therefore whereas the Apostle
in another case most justly advises, Look not every man on his own things, but
every man also on the things of others, my counsel in this case is, look not so
much on the duties of others, as every man on his own.

And so much the rather would this be considered in the present matter, because
it is so frequent for both the Man and the Wife to excuse their own neglect by
the others default. What apologies more usual then these? the Man says, I
could love my Wife did she reverence me; and the Wife I would reverence my
Husband did he love me: both are ready to say, Let him do his, or she her duty,
and I will do mine. But oh how vain is this plea, since neither is the man
only obliged in case the woman perform hers, nor the woman if the man perform
his part, but both because God has enjoined each particular to fulfill their
own work whatsoever the other do. Excellent counsel to this purpose is that
which a Greek Father gives, where he puts the question and answers it, What if
the Woman do not fear thee, yet do thou love her, and so perform thy part; and
likewise the Woman though she be not beloved, yet let her reverence her
Husband: Surely, as our blessed Savior was used to say, it is better to give
then to receive, so in this case it is better to pay then to require; if
another fail in duty to thee it is thy cross, but if thou fail in duty to
another it is thy curse: assure thy self oh man or woman, it is more acceptable
to God and commendable amongst men, that thou should do thy own part, then
challenge that which is another toward thee: and let me add one word more,
That man or woman who sees not more faults in themselves then in the other, is
either arrogant, or ignorant, or both.

To end all: Though we must every one apply to our selves, yet we may every one
exhort each other; the Husband the Wife, and the Wife (with a due regard) the
Husband. Though our application must be peculiar, yet our supplication ought to
be mutual; the Husband for the Wife, the Wife for the Husband, both together
that they may know and practice their duties. Let us therefore pray one for
another, and let it be my prayer for you all here present this day, who are
knit together in the matrimonial bond, that every Husband may love his wife as
himself, and every wife reverence her Husband as she ought: And yet more
especially for that worthy pair, whose Nuptials have been lately solemnized,
that by the practice of their duties each to other, they may be happy each in
other; and the blessing of Heaven may be upon them both, even a peaceable
tranquillity, hopeful posterity, abundant competency, with length of days here,
and a never fading glory, an eternal felicity hereafter.

Amen.
FINIS.

