THE PIOUS VOTARY AND PRUDENT TRAVELLER: CHARACTERIZED In a Farewell-SERMON,
occasioned by the voyage of Nathanael Wych Esquire. President to the East Indies.
Preached in S. Dionys Back-Church, Mar. 14. 1657.

By NATH: HARDY, Minister of the Word, and Preacher to that Parish.

PSALM. 76.11. Vow and pay to the Lord our God, let all that be round about him
bring presents unto him that ought to be feared.

BERN. de modo been vivendi, Sermon. 62. Vos ipsos vovete and reddite; necesse
est ut qui vovit etiam reddat, quia vovendi se debitorem fecit.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for John Clark, and are to be sold at his shop under
S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1659.

To my Honored Friend NATHANAEL WYCH, Esquire. Chosen President by the Honorable
English East India Company; Together with his Virtuous LADY ANNE WYCH, the
influence of Heavens dew, the affluence of Earths fatness, and confluence of
all good things which concern the life that now is, and that which is to come.
DId not the law of Thankfulness forbid me to deny what you are pleased to
require, these imperfect Notes had not been made thus public. But I had rather
incur the censure of indiscretion than the brand of ingratitude; and if the
perusal of this unpolished discourse may add to your comfort, I shall be the
less troubled, if the publication of it detract from my credit; especially
considering that the concernment is very large; and as I pray it may, so I hope
it will, be of good use and benefit to Merchants, Mariners, Soldiers, and all
sort of Travelers, who shall think fit to make it their Vade mecum.

And now (worthy Friends) give me leave to congratulate your mutual happiness
in that matrimonial union whereof you have honored me to be the instrument.

Yours (Noble Sir) in your dearly beloved Anne, whose name imports grace or
favor, (...) ab Heb. (...) gratiosus, benignus fu^t. Prove. 18.22. Ruth 1.16^.
and in finding whom (according to Solomon's assertion) you have obtained favor
of the Lord; one who so fully retaliateth your love, that she says to you as
Ruth did to Naomi, Where thou go I will go, and where thou dwell I will
dwell; having learnt the just extent of that first Institution, which though it
only mentions the man, no less truly reaches to the woman, Genesis 2.24.
who must leave Father and Mother and cleave to her Husband.

Yours (Honored Madam) in your deservedly beloved Nathanael, whom I doubt not
but (according to the signification of his name) you thankfully accept of as
Gods gift; (...) compositum ex (...) dedit, and (...) Deus.
One, who is the Third Brother of his Fathers house, upon whom the Honor has
been conferred, of being sent as Chief Officer into foreign parts about
public employments; yea one whose singular dexterity and integrity rendered him
no less acceptable to the Adventur^rs, than his courteous affability does to
all who know him.

I have nothing more to add but a Benediction: May she whom you have taken
into your bosom, be a Leah for fruitfulness, as well as she is a Rachel for
amiableness. May you do worthily in India, and by a zealous care of Gods
Honor, together with a faithful discharge of your Trust, be famous both in
India and England. May that good hand of Providence which has joined you
together, bless and preserve you both at home and abroad, by sea and land, in
your persons and relations, in your going forth and coming home. May you both
live to return (as you go forth) with honor. May you bring home (what you
cannot carry with you) an hopeful Progeny. In a word, may you live together
long on Earth comfortably, and for ever in Heaven happily. So prays

Your most affectionate Friend and Servant, Nath: Hardy.

THE PIOUS VOTARY.
GENESIS 28.20, 21. And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and
will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment
to put on,

So that I come again to my fathers house in peace: Then shall the Lord be my
God.


HAving a great Journey to go in a little time, I would not be long in setting
out; and therefore lest I should be prevented (by the expiration of the hour)
before I come to my Journies end, I shall not detain my self-or you with an
introductory Exordium.

The words are a part of Jacobs Vow, who is not unfitly called Pater votorum,
the Father of Vows: Musc. in loc.
This being the first Vow which we find upon Record in Sacred Writ.

That I may the better lead you into the several rooms of this excellent
Fabric, it will be needful to ascend by Three Steps, in the Resolution of
Three Quaeres.

1. What this means, that Jacob vowed a vow, saying. 2. To whom this vow was
made. And 3. Upon what occasion.
Qu. 1.
In Answer to the first Quaere, there are three things to be explained, what it
means, that 1. Jacob vowed: 2. That he vowed, saying: 3. That he vowed a vow,
saying.

Aquin. 2a. 2ae. q. 88. art. 1.
1. Jacob vowed. To a Vow (says Aquinas) there are three things required;
Deliberation, Purpose and Promise: The promise must proceed from the purpose,
and the purpose from deliberation. A Vow must be a voluntary act; (...) vovit
affi^e cum (...) ^ecit spontaneum
which cannot be, unless some deliberation precede; it must be an unfeigned
act, and that cannot be where there is no true purpose: Finally, it must be an
obliging act, and this cannot be without a promise.

If you please, we will reduce the three to two, namely, A deliberate
Intention, and A resolute Obtestation; whereof the former brings on the latter,
and the latter fast binds the former.

1. On the one hand, if a deliberate intention do not go before, either there
will be no Vow made, or if made, it is not likely to be performed; nay though
performed, it is no other than a mocking of him to whom it is made: A Promise
without a Purpose being no other than an illusion.

2. On the other hand, Though the intention be never so real, yet if not
seconded with a Promise, it is no Vow. Fil^u. tr. 2 ^. 6.2.
In a Vow (as a Casuist well notes) there is voluntas seipsum obligandi, a man
does will to bind himself to the performance of that which he vows, and that
is not done by a bare intention, but an obtestation. Hence it is, that whereas
a purpose may be altered, a vow cannot be recalled: So that when its here said,
Jacob vowed, the meaning is, that he did deliberately bind himself by promise,
with an intention of performance.

2. He vowed, saying. Deus ^ordis auditor sicut and inspector. Tert. l. de
orat. c. 13.
That in a vow use should be made of words, is not always necessary, since He
to whom the Vow is made understands the language of the heart: P. Lomb. sent.
4. did. 38. part. 4.
In which respect Peter Lombards definition of a Vow is somewhat redundant,
where he says, it is testificatio quaedam promissionis spontaneae, a certain
testification of a voluntary promise, the testification being only a
circumstance, not essential to a vow. And accordingly, whereas its here
expressed, Jacob vowed a vow, saying, it may very well be construed of saying in
his heart; for so in holy Writ the heart is oft-times said to speak: Though yet
withal we may interpret this saying in its most proper notion, as referring it
to his tongue, with which he might utter this Vow. For (as Aquinas well
observes) there is a double use of words in making Vows: Aquin. l. d.


1. The one is, when we are in company, that others may take notice and be
witnesses of our Vows. Upon this account it is very fit for those who have been
notorious sinners, being penitent on their sick-beds, to declare their Vows of
amendment of life.

2. The other is, that even when we are alone, the elevation of the voice might
make a deeper impression upon the heart, it being very evident in experience,
that our wandering thoughts are kept in, and our dull affections quickened by
vocal expressions. In which regard its not improbable, that Jacob, though for
ought as we read, alone, might vow, not only inwardly in his heart, but
outwardly with his mouth.

3. He vowed a vow, saying. It is not without some singular Emphasis that this
kind of phrase is made use of. It is not said, He made a vow; but He vowed a
vow. Verbalia addita verbis augendi vim habent, is a known Rule among the
Hebrews; verbal Nouns being added to the Verbs, Jo^l* 2.28.
do much increase the signification. When we read of seeing visions, and
dreaming dreams, the gemination intimates the clearness of their visions, and
the solidity of their dreams. When David says, He found in his heart to pray a
prayer to God, 2 Samuel 7.27.
it means doubtless far more than saying a prayer* to wit, the sincerity and
fervency of his devotion: and therefore that Hebraizing Greek-phrase of St.
James concerning Elias, (...), Jam. 5.17, 16.
is looked upon as parallel to that, (...) in the preceding verse, and is fitly
rendered by our Translators, He prayed earnestly. In like manner this phrase of
vowing a vow, implies the doing it with fullness of deliberation, freeness of
consent, earnestness of desire, solemnity of engagement, resolvednesse of
execution. Vows are not to be made rashly, but considerately; forcedly, but
freely; slightly, but seriously; feignedly, but cordially; perfunctorily, but
solemnly; waveringly, but steadfastly: In a word, not as it were in jest* but
earnest, with a firm purpose of binding our selves by promise to the
performance. To give you then a short, yet full Paraphrase upon these words,
Jacob vowed a vow, saying; it amounts to this, that Jacob upon mature
consideration, with a settled intention made a solemn promission, testifying it
with verbal expressions. And so much shall suffice to have been spoken in
answer to the first Question.

Qu. 2.
If in the next place you enquire, To whom this vow was made, though it be not
expressed, yet it is plainly implied that it was to God; for of him he
presently speaks in the third person, If God will be with me; nay, in the
close of the Vow he addresseth himself directly to God in the second person, V.
21.
Of all that thou shall give me I will surely give the tenth to thee: it was
not to any of the Angels whom Jacob saw ascending and descending upon the
Ladder, but to the Lord who stood above it, V. 12, 13.
to whom he vowed this Vow. Religious vows are only to be made to God: For
this reason David calls them Gods Vows, where he says, Thy vows are upon me, O
God. Psalm. 56.12.
Upon this account it is, that sacrifices and vows are joined together, Isa.
19.21.
in that prediction of the Prophet Isaiah concerning the Egyptians, They shall
do sacrifice and oblation, yea they shall vow a vow unto the Lord; vows being
Gods peculiar, no less than Sacrifices. Suitable hereunto Peter Lombard says,
P. Lomb. l. d.
A Vow is the testification of a promise, quae Deo fieri debet, which ought to
be made to God: and Aquinas positively affirms, that it is Actus latriae, an
act of worship, Aquin. l. d.
yea of that worship which even the Romanists acknowledge to belong to God
alone; the more is it to be wondered at, that they practice vowing unto the
Virgin Mary, and to other Saints: But leaving them to their follies, it may
suffice us, that there is no example in Holy Writ of any Religious Vow made by
any godly man, to any other than the great Jehovah.

If once more you shall ask, Upon what occasion Jacob vowed this vow, the
Context will return the Answer; Qu. 3.
If you cast your eyes upon the beginning of the Chapter, you shall find Isaac
calling Jacob, and blessing him, and enjoining him to go to Padan-Aram, V. 1,
2, 3.
that he might take a wife of the daughters of Laban: In obedience to his
Fathers injunction Jacob takes his journey, and being on his way, that he
might the more effectually implore Divine Aid, makes a sacred and solemn vow.

All religious vows are of two sorts, either (...) or (...), vows of Prayer or
Praise.

1. We read of the Mariners in Jonah, that when the storm was ceased, Jonah
1.16.
and the Sea calm, they offered sacrifice to the Lord, and made vows: and
David, being delivered from death, and tears, and falling, resolves, I will
walk before the Lord in the land of the living. Thus our holy Mother the Church
teaches us, See the English Liturgy in the prayer after the Communion.
when we receive those dreadful Mysteries, and offer that sacrifice of
Thanksgiving, by way of vow to present our selves, our souls and bodies to be a
reasonable, holy, and lively sacrifice unto God. Indeed, vows of obedience and
duty to be performed, are excellent testifications of Thankfulness for mercy
already received.

2. The same word in the Greek (...), signifies both a prayer and a vow; and
most usually vows are the attendants of our prayers: In which respect David
says, Thou, O God, have heard my vows, meaning his prayers, which were
accompanied with vows: Psalm. 61.5.
More especially those prayers which are made either for obtaining of some
eminent good, or for the removing of a present, or preventing an imminent evil,
have still been fortified with Vows. Jonah 2.9*
Jonah being delivered from the Whale, mentions the paying of his vows, which
he made, no doubt, when he cried unto God out of the Whales belly. David tells
us of his vows which his lips uttered, and his mouth spoke when he was in
trouble. Psalm. 66.14. Oration per modii voti prolata. Par. in loc.
And here Jacob being on a perilous journey, makes a prayer unto God in the
form of a vow. It is a strong Argument when in the day of trouble we can plead
with God not only his promises of deliverance, but ours of obedience: No doubt
David thought it so, Psalm. 132.1, 2.
when he prays, Lord remember David and all his afflictions, how he swear
unto the Lord, and vowed a vow unto the mighty God of Jacob. Great dangers
feared, miseries felt, wants to be supplied, are just occasions not only of
fervent prayers, but solemn vows; and good reason, since vows are as it were
the wings of prayer, by which she flies with swifter speed to heaven; and being
there, they are as it were her Advocates to obtain a merciful audience with a
gracious answer. St. Austin observes of Annah, that Samuelem impetravit, quia
cum poscerit, vovit, she prevailed for a Samuel, Aug. Ep. ad Prob. 121. c. 16
because when she prayed, she vowed; and to the same purpose Damascen, per
orationem ac promissionem Samuelem procreavit, Damasc. de fide l. 4. c. 11.
she brought forth a Son by a prayer and a promise. Indeed, as our prayers
manifest what we desire God should do for us, so our vows that we are willing
to do for God: And no wonder if we then most prevalently incline God to mercy,
when we most strongly engage our selves to duty.

Learn we after Jacobs example, upon special occasions to make solemn vows to
God. It is very amiable in Gods eyes, when we endeavor by vowing both to bring
a voluntary necessity upon our selves of doing good, and withal to contract a
nearer familiarity, that we may the more effectually prevail with God in our
devotions. Art thou then cast upon a sick bed, and desire to be recovered;
engaged in some desperate warfare or dangerous wayfare, whether by Sea or Land,
and desire to be preserved or delivered: Finally, art thou environed with
necessities, straits, difficulties, and would be supplied, advised, directed?
do not only pray to God for health, counsel, safety, but vow to him the
performance of some singular service upon the grant of thy request.

And whereas it was the fault of this good man, that what he now vowed he was
afterward backward in performing; nor did he pay it till it pleased God as it
were aurem vellicare, Genesis 35.1* Par. ibid.
and voti istic olim suscepti admonere, to twich him by the ear, and put him in
mind of his promise: Let us not only vow a vow by saying, but pay our vow by
doing. I am vovisti, jam te obstrinxisti, tenetur apud Deum sponsio tua, Aug.
Ep. 45.
says Saint Austin excellently, having vowed thou art bound, thy promise is
upon record in heaven. Bern. Ep. 2.
And as Saint Bernard elegantly, just exigitur ad solvendum, qui non cogitur
ad vovendum: He who was not compelled to vow, is justly required to pay. And
therefore to allude to Saint Hieromes expression with a little alteration,
Hieron. in hist. Jepht.
Be not in vovendo stultus, foolish in vowing, nor yet much less in non
reddendo impius, wicked in breaking. Vow not easily without very just cause,
and do not dare to violate thy vow for any cause, but rather according to that
pithy advice of Gregory Nazianzen, (...), Naz. Orat. 53*
having begun a promise by vowing, consummate it by acting: ever remembering
that excellent saying of the Wiseman, When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer
not to pay it: Eccles. 5.4, 5.
Better is it that thou should not vow, than that thou should vow and not
pay. As therefore thou do adjoyn vows to thy prayers, so annex prayers to thy
vows for grace to keep the vows thou have made. It is S. Austins question upon
those words, Psalm. 132.1. Aug. ibid.
Lord remember David how he vowed a vow to the God of Jacob, Ad quam rem, To
what end would David have God remember him? To which he returns this answer, Ad
hoc memento, ut impleat quod promisit, Lord remember David for this end, that
he may fulfill that which he has promised. Let the like be our petition to God
whenever we vow a vow to him: nor can we do it better, then (with a little
addition) in that Collect of our Church, The Collect for the fifth Sunday after
Easter.
Lord from whom all good things do come, grant us thy humble servants, that by
thy holy inspiration, we may think (and vow) those things that be good; and by
thy merciful guiding may perform the same, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Having led you up the stairs, and opened the door, be pleased to enter in and
take a view of the several rooms in this well-compacted building. More
plainly, in this vow of Jacob, observe these two generals: The Matter, and the
Condition. In the former, we shall see promissionem, what he promised to God,
namely, that the Lord should be his God. In the later, Petitionem, what he
desired of God, namely, that he would be with him, and keep him in his way, and
give him bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that he may come again to his
fathers house in peace.

That which we are first to insist on, 1. Genesis
is that which is last in the Text, and is expressed in these words, The Lord
shall be my God. For the right understanding whereof, be pleased to know,

1. This phrase, the Lord shall be my God, is capable of a double construction,
either in a way of descending from God to man, or in a way of ascending from
man to God.

1. By way of descending from God to Man, the Lord is his God, to whom he
vouchsafes a peculiar favor, and of whom he is pleased to take a special
care. In this sense he is called the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, Exodus
3.6.
and the God of Jacob, and it is the matter of the promise which God made to
Abraham and his posterity, Genesis 17.7. Vide Merc. in^ loc.
I will be a God to thee and thy seed after thee. In this notion some
Interpreters here take it, understanding these words as the last branch of the
condition of Jacobs vow, and then the matter of it is only that which follows
in the next verse. But had these words been intended by Jacob as a part of the
condition of his vow, he would probably have placed them in the beginning,
since this near relation of having the Lord to be his God, is the foundation of
all the rest; and therefore according to this construction, the rational order
of the words had been thus; If the Lord shall be my God, and be with me, and
keep me in the way that I shall go, etc. Nor is there any need, (as will
hereafter appear) of fastening this interpretation upon the words to avoid any
objection which may be made against the other, to which (with the generality of
Expositors) I shall rather adhere, and accordingly construe the words.

2. By way of ascending from Man to God, and so they begin, yea after a sort
comprehend the matter of his vow. For the further clearing of which, know,

2. That even in this latter construction, the words are capable of a double
notion: The one general and ordinary, the other special and extraordinary.

1. In the general and common notion, The Lord is his God, who makes him the
sole and whole object of his trust, love, fear, worship and obedience. Those
Divine Attributes which are praedicated of the Deity, do justly call for all
these. His omnipotency obliges to trust, his goodness to love, his justice to
fear, his Majesty to worship, and his Sovereignty to obedience. Were not these
excellencies in Jehovah, he could not be a God; and unless we perform these
duties to him, he cannot be our God. When David says of God, Thou art my God,
he proves it by this, Psalm. 31.14.40.8.
I trust in thee, and in another place by this, I delight to do thy will. When
the Church says, O Lord thou art my God, Isa. 25.1.
she presently adds, I will exalt thee. When that Heathen King said to
Daniel, Thy God, he adds as it were by way of explication, Dan. 6.16.
Whom thou servest continually. That first and great command, Thou shall love
the Lord, is with this addition, thy God. By all which it appears, that the
Lord is then our God, when we place our confidence in him, set our affections
on him, and yield subjection to him. It is foretold concerning the Christian
Church by the Prophet Hosea, I will say to them which were not my people, Thou
art my people; Hos. 2.23.
and they shall say, Thou art my God. Now as for God to say of us, we are his
people, is as much as to say, we are those whom he has culled out as his
peculiar, with whom he is entered into covenant, and to whom he will vouchsafe
singular defense and succor: So for us to say of him, Thou art my God, is as
much as to say, Thou art he whom alone we account worthy of our faith, hope,
love, fear, and service. Indeed these two are reciprocal. What, or whomsoever
a man makes his God, that he trusts in, is afraid of, bears love, and yields
service to: and to what or whomsoever a Man gives all or any of these, that is
a man's God. Not but that in a subordinate and relative way we may perform at
least some of these acts to the creature, to wit, for and under God. Yet still
whatsoever it is, that these acts are so directed to, as that they are
terminated in, is our God. By this time you see what is the general import of
this part of Jacobs vow.

That which may rationally be objected, is, Object.
that this is the matter of a command, and therefore needless to be the matter
of a vow. That first Commandment, Exodus 20.3.
Thou shall have no other Gods before me, does manifestly imply, Thou shall
have me for thy God: Semper in negativis meminerimus affirmativa contineri.
Strigel. loc. Theol.
according to that known rule of expounding the Commandments, Where the
Negative is expressed, the Affirmative is included. This is a part of that Law
which was engraven from the very first upon our hearts, and therefore Jacob
could not be ignorant of: so that it may seem absurd for him to bind himself by
the private law of a vow to that, to which he could not but know himself
already bound by the public Law of God.

Answ. L^ym. tra. 4. c. 2.
In Answer to this Objection, it is well returned by Layman and other Casuists,
that Nihil obstat rem eandem ex diversis obligationum capitibus debitam esse,
and debitorem pluribus ac diversis vinculis astringi: It is no repugnancy for
the same thing to be due upon diverse considerations, no more then for a debt to
be secured by several Bonds. Indeed (as Aquinas excellently distinguishes)
those things which are absolute necessaria, Aquin. 2 a. 2 ae. quaest. 88. ar. 3.
absolutely necessary, that is, (according to the definition in Logic) Quae
non possunt aliter se habere, for which it is impossible to be otherwise then
they are, cannot be the matter of a vow. How frivolous a thing were it for a
man to vow that he will not fly, or that he will die, since the one cannot be
performed, nor the other avoided. But those things which are only
hypothetically necessary, to wit, ex suppositione finis, upon this supposition,
that we will attain such an end, may very well be the matter of a vow, since
that which I must do necessarily in order to an end, I may yet do voluntarily,
making choice of it as a means to that end, and what I may do willingly, I may
willingly vow to do. Of this sort are those things which God has commanded,
to wit, necessary upon this supposition, that we will give God the glory of his
authority, and obtain for our selves eternal felicity: and therefore it is no
way irrational for a man to vow the performance of them. Nay if you will
believe Saint Austin, Vows of moral duties are more acceptable to God, then
those which are only of things ceremonial and indifferent. There are many
(says he) that vow not to drink wine for a certain time, and to fast certain
days, Aug. de Not. Dom. Ser. 3.
Sed non est votum optimum nec perfectum, adhuc melius volo: But this is not
the best and perfect vow, I would have you make a better, offer your selves to
God by holy manners, chaste thoughts, fruitful words, by ceasing from evil,
and turning to good. And yet nearer to this Vow in the Text, he says in
another place, In Psalm. 75.
Quid debemus vovere credere in illum, sperare ab illo vitam, been vivere, what
ought we to vow to God, but to believe on him, hope in him, and live to him?

No wonder then, if we find several instances of Vows and Covenants of this
nature. Moses having delivered the Law to the people, causes them to enter
into a solemn Covenant of observing it, Exodus 24.7.
All that the Lord has said, we will do, and be obedient. When Asa gathered
all Judah and Benjamin together to enter into a covenant, what is the matter of
it, 2 Chr. 15.12.
but to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, with all their hearts, and with all
their souls? The like was the matter of those covenants* which were made in the
time of that good King Josiah, and of that excellent Governor Nehemiah, 34.31.
for so it is expressed, to walk after the Lord, to walk in Gods Law, Neh. 10.29.
which was given by Moses the servant of God, and to observe and do all the
commandments of the Lord our God, and his judgments, and his statutes. Thus
David says of himself, I have sworn, and I will perform it, Psalm. 119.106.
that I will keep thy righteous judgments: And here Jacob vows, that the Lord
shall be his God. These are those communia vota, common vows, as S. Bernard
calls them. Hoc totum omnes debemus vovere, says S. Austin. Bern. de modo been
vivendi, Ser. 62. Aug. in Ps. 7.5, 5.
Whereas other kind of vows are peculiar to some sorts of men, this is that
which all of us ought to vow.

Quest.
If you shall yet more particularly enquire why the servants of God may and do
bind themselves to bounden duties? I answer, especially for two reasons:

Answ.
1. That hereby they may testify the reality and fervency of their desire to
fulfill Gods precepts, and in particular to take him for their God; what we
earnestly desire and cordially intend we are ready by all means and ways to
oblige our selves unto. He that truly means to pay his debt, will not be
backward to enter into bond. Indeed, so great has been the zeal of the people
of God in this particular (as appears in those forementioned instances) that
they have not only engaged themselves by protestation, but adjuration, nay
execration, entering into a vow, Hoc voto suae voluit infirmitati consulere,
etc. Merc. in loc.
nay oath, yea curse, to seek the God of their fathers, and walk in the law of
the Lord.

2. That hereby they might provide against the infirmity and perverseness of
their corrupt nature, which is so backward to what is good, that many cords are
scarce strong enough to bind us to the Altar. It is in this case with us as it
is with wild beasts, which though put in enclosed grounds, Mend. in* 1. Reg. c.
5. Number. 11.
yet will not be kept in, unless iron fetlocks be put upon them, Religionis vota
compedes, says one elegantly, vows are as it were those fetters with which we
had need to be kept within compass, notwithstanding the enclosure of divine
precepts.

To come closer to this particular in my Text.

1. Were there neither law nor vow to bind us to have the Jehovah for our God,
yet even this is reason enough that he is Jehovah; a word which signifies one
who both has an absolute and perfect being of himself, and is the author and
original of being to all things besides himself, and who then, if not this
Jehovah, should be our God?

2. The obligation of a divine precept to this as all other duties, is so
great, as there cannot be a greater, and therefore there needs no other to be
added to it to make it stronger than in it self it is; nay, whatever other
obligations are joined with it, they are inferior, in force and energy to it.
This one consideration, that God has required us to take him for our God,
ought in reason to engage us more strongly than either any promise which God
has made to us of rewarding those who have him to be their God, or any vow
which we have made to him, that he shall be our God. Major est authoritas
imperantis quam utilitas servientis, Tert. de poenit.
says Tertullian truly, Divine authority should be of greater force than our
own utility: and therefore Gods precepts, which have upon them the stamp of his
authority, are more binding than his promises, which persuade by representing
to us our own advantage. And how far short the obligation of our vows is to
that of Gods commands, will appear from that of an Ancient, who said, no less
justly than devoutly, Domine plus tibi quam mihi, meipsum debeo, Lord I owe my
self more to thee than to my self: and consequently it is most just that God
should have a greater command over us than we over our selves; and if so, his
precepts must needs more bind us than our own vows.

3. Notwithstanding it is in it self so reasonable to have the Lord for our
God, and the precept is so express of having none other; yet, we are all very
prone to make something else our God; whilst the ambitious man says to
honor, the voluptuous to pleasure, and the covetous to wealth, what David said
to Jehovah, thou art my God; which of us, if we seriously examine our selves,
may not accuse our selves of Idolatry, if not corporal yet spiritual, whilst
we shall find something or other which we trust, or fear, or love, or serve
more than God.

4. By vowing to have the Lord for our God, we add, though not a stronger, yet
another obligation to that of divine precept, which appears in that the breach
of it adds a new guilt; for whereas before the vow, if a man sins, he is
only a transgressor of the law, after it he is also a breaker of covenant: and
so contracts upon himself a double guilt; in which regard, the laying a vow
upon our selves to avoid that from which, or do that to which we are already
bound, cannot but be to our corrupt nature both fraenum and stimulus, a bridle
to restrain us from the one, and a spur to excite us to the other.

I end this, as for those things which are manifestly sinful, to vow them
(under what pretense soever) is height of impiety. Those covenants which engage
men, instead of keeping Gods law, injuriously to violate at once the law both
of God and man, and perfidiously to break their own former oaths, are no better
than leagues with Hell, and covenants with the Devil. Upon which account, how
great cause this land has to mourn bitterly, and repent speedily, at once,
both for making and breaking vows, I pray God we may all yet at last consider
sadly. But as for those things which are plainly commanded us by God, we cannot
bind our selves too fast to the performance of them; and therefore, though the
very command should be enough to oblige us, yet it will be both our wisdom and
piety, (considering the perverseness and deceitfulness of our own hearts) by
voluntary vows* to impose upon our selves (even) necessary duties; and in
particular to vow with Jacob here, that the Lord shall be our God.

2. Besides this general, there may be a more peculiar construction of those
words, The Lord shall be my God, by expounding them not seorsim, but
conjunctim, Vid. Musc^* ^oc.
not by themselves, but in conjunction with the following verse, and so the
meaning is, he would in an extraordinary way own the Lord as his God, by
erecting a place for his worship, and consecrating a tenth part of his estate
to his service; and in this sense the Lord shall be my God, is most properly
the object of a religious vow.

To illustrate this a little, know, that according to the determination of the
Schools, the object of a vow strictly so called, must be,

2. Bonum melius, that which is good, not only in the positive, but the
comparative degree, and consequently the more excellent any thing is (provided
it be within our power to perform) the more fit to be the matter of a vow. Vid.
Est. in Sent. l. 4. did. 28.


2. Bonum indebitum, such a good as we were not obliged to before our Vow.
Indeed this must be understood in a qualified sense, by distinguishing between
the substantials and the circumstantials of that good we vow; as also between
an express and a virtual command. As we cannot do, so neither can we vow to do
any thing which may justly deserve to be called a work of supererogation, that
is, a thing which is over and above what the latitude of Gods law reaches to:
But there are some things we may vow which are not expressly commanded, and
circumstantiated by the Divine law; and to speak properly, things of this
nature are the most fit matter of Vows.

To bring this home to the present case, though that Jacob should have the Lord
for his God, is for the substance of it an express command, yet to have him
for his God in such an extraordinary way as here he mentions, Luke 19.8.
was more than Gods law did expressly enjoin. For Zacheus to give his goods to
the poor is that which the law of God obliged him to; but to give half his
goods was a free will offering, the law having no where precisely determined
how much of our goods we should give. That David should praise God was a duty
directly prescribed, Psalm. 119.146.
but that he should praise him seven times a day was no where exactly
determined. In like manner, that Jacob should have the Lord for his God, so as
to worship him in some place, and to honor him with his substance, was
according to express precept, but that he should so own him for his God, as to
erect an Altar in that place for his Worship, and to give him the tenth of all
that he should have, was no where punctually enjoined him, and therefore he
does here engage himself by vow to do them.

I shall close up this with a short meditation: When we expect extraordinary
favors, it is but reasonable we should vow some eminent service. That Merchant
did very well in making (had he done as well in keeping) his vow, Luke 12.48.
who being in apparent danger of losing his ship, goods, life, by a violent
storm, vowed to Jupiter if he would bring him safe to shore, Hecatombs of
sacrifices to be offered upon his Altar. Our Savior says, To whom much is
given, of him much shall be required: it is no less true, God looks for much
from him who expects much from God. This no doubt was the inducement which put
Jacob upon this engagement, that in such a special manner the Lord should be
his God: And so I pass from the matter to

The condition of this Vow, as it is expressed in those words, 2 Gen*
If God will be with me and keep me in this way that I go, and give me bread to
eat and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my fathers house in peace.
Wherein two things offer themselves to our consideration, namely, The manner of
proposal, and the things propounded.

The manner of proposal is in the particle If, Partic. 1.
which being of various construction, and here liable to misconstruction, would
be a little examined and rightly settled. To which end I shall discourse it both
Negatively and Affirmatively.

On the one hand this particle If is not in this place, Negat.


1. Si dubitantis, an If of haesitation: indeed many times it is so used,
things which men are sure of they express positively, but when they are
doubtful they speak with an If. So the Psalmist: Psalm. 77.9.
If he has shut up in anger his tender mercies, in a way of doubting; and
therefore our Translators fitly read it as a question, Has he shut up? with
which agrees that of Saint Paul to the Chief Captain, (...), Acts 21.37. V.
Merc. in loc.
may I speak unto thee? thus (as Mercer tells us) some here construe it, and
look upon it as this holy man's infirmity, that he doubted whether God would be
with him or no. But since Jacob had but even now been assured by God in a
vision, that the things here mentioned should be performed, it is not rational
to imagine he should so soon entertain doubting, when he had so lately received
an assurance from the God of truth.

2. Nor yet is it Si stipulantis, an If of stipulation; when this parricle If
is used in contracts and bargains, it carries in it a restriction, and
includes in it a negation If, then, in such cases implies else not. And thus
we are still to understand it where it is prefixed before the promises which
God makes to us: so in that speech of God to Cain, If thou do well, shall
thou not be accepted? Genesis 4.7.
And again, in those words of God to Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 7.14
If my people which are called by my name, shall humble themselves and pray,
etc. then I will hear from heaven, etc. But we must not thus construe it in
this promise of Jacob to God, as if these words did import, that if God would
not be with him, etc. he should not be his God: for this were to make him a
base hireling, who serves only for his wages. Indeed this was that calumny
which the Devil would have fastened upon Job, when he says, Does Job fear God
for naught? Job 1.9.13.15.
And how false it was appears, as by his patience under afflictions, so by his
resolute expression, Though he slay me, Gratis amandus est Deus, etc Aug Dom.
18. post Trin. Sermon. 1.
yet will I trust in him: far be it from Job or Jacob to serve God for end,
they that take him upon such terms, are not holy but crafty; nor is their
service obedientia, but mercatura, a yiedling obed^ence to him, but rather a
trading and merchandising with him. He loves God best, who loves him for
himself, and resolves to cleave to him though he seems to leave him. Such was
the temper of the Church, as is expressed in those words, Psalm. 44.19, 20, 21.
Though thou have sore broken us in the place of Dragons, and covered us with
the shadow of death; If we have forgotten the name of our God, or stretched out
our hands to a strange God, shall not God search this out? The same spirit it
was that lodged in those three Worthies, when they peremptorily told
Nebuchadnezzar, ^^^ 3.17, 18.
Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery Furnace,
and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O King; but if not, be it known unto
thee, O King, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden Image
which thou have set up. Nor need we doubt to affirm the like of Jacob, that
however God should deal with him in his journey, yet he was resolved that he
should be his God.

2. On the other hand, we may very justly look upon this If in a threefold
notion, namely, as

Affirmat.
1. Si inferentis, an If of illation, and that two ways:

1. By way of consequence, If sometimes is as much as when or after. Thus by
the Prophet Isaiah, where it is said, He that is left in Sion shall be called
Holy, If, that is, Isa. 3.4.
(as our Translators render it) when, or after the Lord shall have washed away
the filth of the daughter of Sion. To which accords that of our Savior, John
16.7.
If (that is, after) I depart I will send him unto you. And in this sense it is
likewise used by the Latins, so in Terence, Herus si redierit, Terent. Phorm.
When my Master comes home. According to this construction we may take it here,
but with a caution: When, or after God shall be with me, he shall be my God, is
not to be meant exclusively, as if he were not before. No doubt Jacob being
piously educated, Eum semper pro Deo agnoscam and colam. Mer. in loc.
had already learned to take Jehovah for his God. But notwithstanding he might
resolve that after his return he should still be his God, and that then he
would make a public and extraordinary testification of it, by building him an
Altar in this place where he had so graciously appeared to him, and giving him
the tenth of his estate.

2. Or, by way of causality, If may import as much as because, and is so used
many times in the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. My mouth shall praise thee (says
David) with joyful lips, if I remember thee upon my bed, Psalm. 63.5, 6.
and meditate on thee in the night watches. Where the particle (...) is not
only ordinal but causal, importing not only the time, but the reason of his
praising God with his lips, namely, the meditation of him in his heart. Thus
when the Apostle says, If you be risen with Christ, Col. 3.1.
seek those things which are above, that If has the force of a Because, and so
it is in all hypothetical syllogisms. Accordingly that known saying of Cato, Si
Deus est animus -- may well be rendered, because God is a Spirit. Cato Sent.
And where it is said in Virgil, -- vestro si munere tellus
Virg. Georg.
Chaoniam pingui glandem mutavit arista:
In this acception it will hold here very well, Because God will be with me,
etc. And that which Jacob implies, is, that the collation of mercy should be an
obligation to piety. If Jacob find God merciful, God shall not find Jacob
undutiful. This is that which he both might and ought to do. No wonder if he
promise to do it.

1. It was that which he might do. Though Divine favors should not be the
final, yet they may be the impulsive cause of our service; though they must not
be the high prize for which we run, yet they may be spurs to quicken us in our
race. We must not look upon them as our ultimate end, but we may use them as
persuading motives. God himself so propounds them in his Word; surely then we
may so propose them to our selves.

2. Nay more, this was that he ought to do. It is but reason, that if he
prevent us with his benefits, we should follow him with our service. If he draw
us with the cords of love, 2 Samuel 17.7, 8
we should run after him with the feet of obedience. God takes it very ill from
David's hands, that having heaped upon him so many mercies, he should despise
his commands. When he had planted Israel like a vineyard on a fruitful hill,
fenced it, gathered the stones out of it, in a word, Isa. 5.1, 2, 3, 4.
done so much as more could not be done for it, he justly looked that it should
bring forth grapes, and takes it unkindly that it brought forth wild grapes. It
is no more than what justice and thankfulness requires, that if God does hire
us with his benefits, we should do his work; let out his good things to us, we
should pay him rent; and that his sweet voice of love should be answered with
an echo of praise. The Poet being sensible of Caesar's favors, Virg^
resolves -- Erit ille mihi semper Deus, He should always be to him as a God:
Musc*
Much more justly does Jacob cum proposito gratitudinis, in a way of gratitude
here vow, If God will be with me, etc. then God shall be my God. Nor is this If
only a particle of illation, but

2. Si admirantis, an If of admiration; Id. ib.
for so Musculus glosseth upon the words. Jacob having received assurance from
God of manifold mercies to be conferred upon him, knows not how enough to
express his sense of Gods love toward him, and therefore prorumpit in votum,
breaks forth into a vow, and begins it with an If, which (as sometimes it has)
seems to have the force of an Interrogation, and that in a way not of doubting,
but wondering. As if he should have said, What? is it thus? Will the Lord be so
exceeding gracious to me, and shall not I be more than ordinarily grateful unto
him? Nay surely, if God will so far vouchsafe as to be with me, and keep me in
this way that I go, etc. he shall be my God.

3. Lastly, it is Si orantis, an If of supplication. When Moses uttered those
words, And now if thou will (he intends as much, oh that thou would) forgive
the sin of this people; and that of David, Exodus 32.22. Psalm. 139.19. Luke
22.42.
If thou will slay the wicked O God, though it be rendered by our Translators,
as if it were Si asserentis, an If of confidence; surely, it may no less fitly
be translated, as Si optantis, an If of desire, Oh that thou would slay the
wicked. Suitable to this is that of our Savior, Father if thou be willing,
that is, (on that thou would) remove this cup from me. And thus in that of
the Poet, Si is as much as Utinam, Si nunc se nobis ille aureus arbore ramus
Ostendat --


To this notion the forenamed Expositor alludes, Virg. Aeneid. 6. Non per
modum conditionis, sed cum spiritu precationis. Musc. in loc. Par. ibid.
when he says Jacob uttered these words, not as a condition, but a Petition.
And to the same purpose Paraeus, non dubitat sed petit: Jacob does not doubt,
but ask: So that we may well read the words, Oh that God would be with me, and
keep me in this way that I go, etc. According to which construction his design
is to express what were those things which he desired God should do for him.
And so I am fallen on the

Matter proposed, in these words, God will be with me, and keep me in this way
that I go, Partic. 2.
and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to
my fathers house in peace. For the full handling whereof, I will first take the
clauses asunder, and then put them together.

1. If you look upon them severally you shall find there are four things that
Jacob does here desire of God: 1. His merciful presence, will be with me: 2.
Powerful protection, And keep me in this way that I go: 3. Convenient
provision, And give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on: 4. Prospereus
rediction, So that I come again to my Fathers house in peace.

1. The first thing that he craves of God is his merciful presence, that he
would be with him, and this is indeed the genus that comprehends, the cause
that produces all the rest. In which* respect Saint Chrysostom says upon
those word, Gen 21.20. Chrysostom. Hom. ^6. in Genesis
God was with the lad (...), This (meaning Divine presence) is both our
strongest weapon and richest treasure.

Indeed in a large sense there was no need for Jacob to desire God to be with
him, since nothing is withou him. Suppose we in our thoughts a sphere of
infinite greatness, whose center is every where, and circumference no where;
it must necessarily follow, that all things besides are encompassed by, and
contained in it. Such a sphere is God, no wonder if Seneca could say, Sen. de
benef. l. 4. c. 8.
Quocunque te flexeris, ibi illum vide bis occurrentem tibi, nihil ab illo
vacat, opus suum implet; which way soever we turn our selves we may behold him
meeting us, who fills all he has made, and is absent from none of his
creatures. Well were it, if we would ever thus behold him present with us,
wherever we are, and whatever we do. This is that presence of God, which
though there is no need to desire, yet there is great reason to observe, that
we may not dare to do any thing unbeseeming so glorious a Majesty.

But doubtless that which Jacob intends when he would have God to be with him,
is, that he would vouchsafe his peculiar, intimate and effectual presence,
whereby he is so with his own servants, as he is with none beside. It is not
unworthy our observation, that gradation of phrases, by which this presence of
God is set forth in Scripture. The Lord is nigh to all that call upon him in
truth, says the Psalmist; whereas Solomon tells us, Psalm. 145.18.
he is far from the wicked. Nor is he only prope, but cum, nigh, but with his
servants; so he says to Israel, Prove. 15.29. Isa. 41.9, 10.
Thou art my servant, I am with thee. Nor is he only cum, but circa, with, but
about his people, as the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord round
about them that fear him, says David. Nor is he only circa, but in, about,
but in his people. So the Psalmist, Psalm. 125.2. Psalm. 14.5.
God is in the generation of the righteous. Nor is he only in, but in medio,
in, but in the midst of them, I come and will dwell in the midst of thee, says
the Lord. Zach. 2.10.
To be with is more then to be nigh, since nearness may consist with some
distance. To be round about is more than to be with, since he that is only on
a man's right or left hand may be said to be with him. To be in is more then to
be round about, since that does only note an adjacency, this an inherency.
Finally, to be in the midst is more than only to be in, the middle being the
very center. And why all these expressions, but to intimate Gods near,
special, and gracious presence with his people?

This was that which Jacob desired: and good reason; For,

1. Jacob had left his Fathers house, where were his best friends on earth; and
what could now render his life comfortable but the presence of God in heaven?
It rejoiced David to consider, Psalm. 27.10.
that when his father and his mother forsook him, yet the Lord would take him
up. And surely now Jacob was gone from his father and mother, it would much
revive him to have God with him. Am not I better to thee then ten sons, 1 Samuel
1.8.
said Elkanah to Hannah? God is better than parents, or kindred and friends,
and his presence with us will sufficiently recompense their absence from us.

2. Jacob was now in a journey, and, at such a time especially, good company
does well. Comes facundus in via pro vehiculo, says Publius truly, a cheerful
associate speedeth a man's way; and reddit iter leve and breve, makes a man's
journey seem both easier and shorter. But no company like to Gods; Solus non
est cui praesul adest Deus, says S. Ambrose sweetly: Amb. l. de Isaac c. 3.
Bern. in Cant. Sermon* 8 5.
Jacob, though alone, is not alone, if God be with him. It is an excellent note
of S. Bernard upon those words of Christ to the Spouse, Arise and come; Non
paru^ confortat quod audit veni and non vade, etc. It was no small comfort to
the Spouse to hear that sweet word Come, and not Go; by which she understood
that she was not sent, but led, and that her bridegroom would go with her. Quid
enim difficile sibi illo comite reputet? For what way can be rugged to her,
whilst he vouchsafes to be her companion? If God be with us in a prison, it is
no longer a confinement: Neque enim poterit carcer videri in quo Socrates erat,
Sen. in Consolat. ^d Helv^d. (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 46.
said he, That cannot be a prison where Socrates is: but I may much more truly
say, That cannot be a prison where God is. If God be with us in a desert, it is
no longer solitary; he cannot be lonely, though alone, who has a God to cheer
him. Excellently S. Chrysostom, if God please, though we be in a wilderness,
we need none else to accompany us.

3. Homo gaudet de propinquitate amici, every man is glad to have his friend
near him. If a man be on a journey, the company of a stranger is acceptable,
but of a friend is most desirable. Jacob knew the Lord, his Grandfather
Abraham, his Father Isaac and himself had found him to be a sure, a fast
friend; can you blame him to desire his society? No friends to a man in any
difficulty like a good God and a good conscience.

4. Jacob made an account of troubles which might befall him in his way; no
wonder if he would have God go with him; Chrysostom. l. d*
(...), says the Greek Father sweetly, When we have God propitious, we are
more secure in the open field than others are in walled cities. The truth is,
John 6.17. Vid. Cyr. Alex. ibid. Psalm. 23.4.
I do not on the one hand much wonder at the fear of the Disciples in the ship,
when besides the darkness of the night, and vehemence of the storm, I read
that Jesus was not come to them: on the other hand, I less marvel at the
confident resolution of David, Though I walk through the valley of the shadow
of death, yet will I fear no evil, when I presently read, for thou art with us.
If Gods presence go with us, as we need not care who else is with us; so
neither need we fear who or what is against us. It is moved as a Question, Why,
whereas the Prophet foretold concerning the Messiah, thou shall call his name
Immanuel, the Angels precept is, Thou shall call his name Jesus. Isa. 7.14.
Matthew. 1.21.
To which this ingenuous answer is returned, that the names Immanuel and Jesus,
though they differ in sound, are much one in sense. Immanuel signifies God
with us, and Jesus a Savior; and if God be with us, salvation cannot be far
from us. In one word, as the presence of the Sun dispels all clouds, so does
Divine presence prevent all troubles, at least the evil of them.

5. Jacob supposes he might need supplies in his journey, and he knew Gods
presence would furnish him. The Lord is my shepherd (says David) therefore I
shall not want; Psalm. 23 1.
whilst the shepherd is with his flock he will not let them want either
pasture or waters. Nihil ei deest cui adest omnium plenitudo, says S. Ambrose,
No good things can be absent where the fullness of all things is present.

6. Lastly, Jacob considered that the chief errand about which his Father sent
him, Ver. 2.
namely the taking of a wife, was a matter of serious concernment: besides, it
so fell out, that he was entrusted by Laban with the managing of his estate,
and in all weighty undertakings; who fitter than God to consult with? To this
accords Tostatus his gloss, Tostat. in loc*
If God will be with me, dirigendo negotium and statum meum, to direct and
order my affairs. It is no small content to a man, when he has a friend no
less prudent than faithful at hand to advise with; the only wise God is both
the safest guide and the best Counselor.

By all this it appears how needful the special presence of a propitious God
is. Indeed Moses made so great an account of it, that being to conduct the
Israelites to the land of promise, he says unto God, If thy presence go not
with me carry us not hence. Exodus 33.15.
Oh let it be our wisdom, as always, so especially when we are engaged upon
perilous journeys and weighty businesses, by earnest prayer to implore, and so
secure the Divine presence, as here Jacob does, when he says, If God will be
with me.

2. The next branch of his request is, His powerful protection in those words,
And keep me in this way that I go; wherein there is something implied and
expressed.

1. The thing implied is, That in this way which Jacob was to go he should
stand in need of keeping. Indeed, which way can a man go wherein he may not be
endangered, and therefore needs to be preserved? There are but two ways
wherein any man can go, either the earth or the water, the land or the sea, and
both are perilous. As for the earth, that indeed is steady, but our footing on
it is not steady; many have stumbled upon plain ground: and as for the perils
of the water, they are both manifold and manifest. By land we meet with hills
and deserts, bogs and thieves: by sea we are tossed with tempests, assaulted by
pirates, run upon the sands, and dash against the rocks. I speak not this to
discourage any from going that way to which God calls them, though it be never
so long a voyage by sea, which yet seems to be more dangerous than the land. It
is a pretty story of him, who saying That his Father, Grandfather, and great
Grandfather died at sea; and being asked, Why then do you go to sea? Replied,
Where did your Father, Grandfather, and great Grandfather die? and being
answered, In their beds; wittily retorted, Why then do you go to bed? The truth
is, there is no just reason to be more timorous, at least not more anxious,
when we go by sea, than when we go by land; but withal, so great is the peril
of both, that we stand in need of being kept. And this Jacob well knew, else
what need of this prayer?

2. The thing expressed is, that Jacob desired God to be his keeper: The great
Jehovah is the Lord Keeper and Protector of his servants. The Lord keeps the
feet of his Saints; 1 Samuel 2.9. Vid. Mend. ibid.
So runs the Song of Hannah: where if the question be asked why the feet are
mentioned? the answer is aptly returned, that the feet bear the whole weight of
the body; and besides, they are most subject to danger, so that by keeping of
the feet the whole body is preserved. The steps of a good man are ordered by
the Lord, Psa* 37.23, 24.
and he delights in his way; though he fall he shall not be utterly cast
down, for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand: where Almighty God is compared
as it were to a loving nurse, or a tender Mother, which holds the weak child
(when it goes) by the hand, that it may not fall. What the Devil said of Job,
Job ^.10.
Have thou not made an hedge about him? is true of every good man; the way
which he goes is hedged about with the fence of divine protection.

If it shall be enquired, How God keeps his servants in the way they go?
Quest.
The Answer is returned by the Psalmist, Answ.
The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him: Psalm.
34.7.91.11, 12.
And again, He shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy
ways, they shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy feet against
a stone. Where by the former Scripture it seems that one Angel guards many; See
the Question ingenuously discussed in a book called The Guardian Angel, by R. D.

Beatos illos spiritus propter nos remittis, in ministerium custodiae nostrae
deputas, etc. Bern. Psalm. 91. Sermon. 12.


and by the latter, that many Angels keep one. That a particular Angel is
assigned by God to every particular person is by some probably asserted, that
all the Angels have a charge given them to guard the Saints is certainly
assured; and by the way we may at once take notice of the dignity of the
Saints, whom God so highly honors, as to make as it were his houshold-servants
to attend on them; and of the Angels humility, who willingly condescend not
only to be comites, but bajuli, as companions to go with us, but porters to
carry us, putting as it were their hands under our feet to do us service.

Nor is Divine protection less efficacious, because by the ministry of Angels;
since that Maxim, Agens per medium est minus efficax in agendo, A mediate agent
is less effectual in operation, only holds true when means are used propter
necessitatem, not of choice, but of necessity. Whereas this cannot be imagined
of God, who can preserve all things by the same immediate hand which made them.
It is then no other but his good pleasure which moves him to make choice and
use of Angels in this service. Nor yet are we to conceive that God does so
depute the Angels to this employment, as that he takes no care of us himself;
for though the Angels keep us ratione executionis, by ministerial service, yet
God keeps us ratione gubernationis, by his overruling authority and
providential influence. Verse 12, 13.
If you do but cast your eyes a little before upon Jacobs vision, you shall
find this truth excellently illustrated, where the ladder represents Jacobs
journey, upon which the Angels ascending and descending intimates their care of
Jacob going and returning, Vid. Par. in loc.
upon the top of which the Lord stood, to wit, not only as a spectator, but a
moderator.

How happy are the servants of the true Jehovah! Heathen worshippers are fain
to keep their gods, the great God keeps his worshippers. Fulgosus tells a
pretty story of one Musonianus, who perceived the Roman Army to stop in their
march by reason of a bird sitting on a tree, in expectation of whose motion a
Soothsayer stayed them, that he might divine by it; whereupon he shot his arrow
and killed the bird, saying in derision, What help can be expected from these
creatures, which are not able to prevent a danger hanging over their own heads?
All those Dii Tutelares, Tutelar Gods, (as the Heathen falsely called them)
could not save themselves, much less their worshippers. But our God whom we
serve, is both able and willing to keep us.

To him therefore let us have recourse, on him let us depend for protection in
all our journeys and voyages, and let us set him between us and harms. They are
well kept whom God keeps. His eye is ever watchful, his hand is always
powerful, He will not suffer thy foot to be moved, he that keeps thee will
not slumber nor sleep. Psalm. 121.3, 4.
Tuto dormivi, nam Antipater vigilavit, I slept securely while Antipater waked,
said Alexander; we may both awake and sleep, ride and sail, walk and run secure
whilst God preserves us. We are neither safe without him, nor in danger with
him. Except the Lord keep the City, the watchman watches but in vain. Psalm.
127.1.
If he withdraw his protection, it is neither the strength of horses and
multitude of forces in war, nor the skill of the pilot and tallness of the
vessel at sea can preserve us; and if God undertake our defense, it is not the
greatest dangers can injure us. Vides equum been ^ormitum, bonis viribus, magno
cursu praeditum? ista omnia videntur tibi promittere de illo salute^, sed
sallent, si Deus non tuetur. Aug. in Ps. Vid. Cyr. in Amos c. 2. Amb. l. de
Joseph. c. 5.
How perilous was the Israelites journey out of Egypt, when in all probability
the red sea might have been made redder by their blood, and the hills on both
sides made larger by the heaps of their dead bodies, but the mighty God was
their keeper, and brought them safe, not only out of Egypt, but through the
sea and wilderness unto the land of Promise. Indeed, as S. Ambrose excellently,
ibi plus auxilii ubi plus periculi, when danger is greatest then divine help is
nearest; and the more perilous the way is, the more does God glorify his
mercy in his servants safety. He that keeps the sea from overrunning the
earth, can keep us from miscarrying; though it be by sea, neither waves nor
winds can hurt him whom God will preserve; and therefore in our greatest
straits let us not cast away our confidence, but exercise our devotion, praying
to God with Jacob here, that he would keep us in the way we go.

3. The next branch of his desire is convenient provision in those words, And
give me I read to eat, and raiment to put on.

It may be here enquired, Quest.
Whether Jacob had not provision of bread and raiment already with him? And if
so, Why is this inserted in his petition? When Abraham sent forth Eleazar his
servant to find out a wife for Isaac, Genesis 24.10.
he sent him forth with ample furniture; and is it to be imagined that Isaac
would deal worse by his Son than his Father Abraham did by his servant? But to
answer this, know,

1. That how well soever Jacob were provided, Answ.
this prayer was not needless; Hoc tanquam pauper and vere Dei mendicus dixit,
nec mirum, cum and Rex maximus ege^um se ac pauperem and mendicum professus
sit. Rup. in Genesis Merc. in loc.
even rich men must be Gods beggars, and (as will appear by and by) have reason
to pray for bread and raiment though they have it.

2. It is not improbably conceived, that Jacob was sent forth from Isaac but in
a mean condition, without any plentiful sustenance or attendance. For this
reason, says Mercer from the Rabbis, Quo citius rediret and anhelaret ad
domum patris, that he might think the sooner of returning, and make the more
haste home; and perhaps withal, that he might be the less envied and maligned
by his* brother Esau, who was enraged against him.

3. Besides, the extent of Jacobs desire for bread and raiment was till he came
back to his Fathers house, and possibly his stay might be longer then he
intended, and so his provision fall shorter then he expected.

To let this go, you may take notice in this request of these three things, The
matter of his desire, bread to eat, and raiment to put on; The Donor from whom
he desired them, namely, God; and upon what account, in that word Give.

1. The things he here desires of God are bread and raiment. Bread being the
most general and needful food, is by a Synecdoche in Scripture put for all
kind of Aliment which is necessary to the sustentation of nature, and raiment
includes all things needful for the clothing of the body. Indeed some of the
Rabbis conceive, that Jacob having now got the birth right and blessing, had
an eye to the sacerdotall garment, Vide Merc. in loc.
which the firstborn did minister with in holy things. But this is a
far-fetcht conceit: the most genuine sense is, that all things necessary for
his feeding and clothing are here meant by bread and raiment.

Vide modestiam Jacob, necessaria tantum postulat. id. ibid.
That which would be taken notice of is the modesty of this good man, who only
desires things necessary. He does not ask of God Quails, or Manna, but only
Bread; he does not beg purple and fine linen, jewels and ornaments, but only
raiment. It is as easy for God to give his servants delicacies as bread, silks
as cloth, superfluities as necessaries; and if he be pleased to bless our
lawful endeavors, and throw in abundance upon us, we must receive it
thankfully, and use it rightly. Such, no doubt, was Jacobs resolve, as appears
by that part of his vow, to give God the tenth of that state he should bless
him with. But still with Jacob we must not enlarge too much in our prayers for
temporals. This is that our Savior has taught us Christians in that excellent
form of prayer, Give us this day our daily bread: upon which Ggregory Nyssen
thus elegantly glosseth, Matthew. 6 11. Gr. Nyss. de orat. Dom orat. 5.
(...) (...), etc. Give us bread, not dainties, nor riches, not golden
ornaments, nor silver vessels, or precious stones; not herds of oxen, flocks of
sheep, or troops of horses; not large revenues, stately palaces, or numerous
attendants (by all which the mind is too much withdrawn from better things) no,
only give us bread, that which may support nature and preserve life.

Oh how does this check our grasping, soaring thoughts and desires! know we not
that riches and honors are things too great for our bodies, and too little for
our minds? they are more than we can use, and less than we would have; we may
be well enough without them, and cannot be satisfied with them. Let me then
bespeak you in those words of God to Baruch, Jer. 45.5.
Seek thou great things for thy self? Seek them not: Or in that excellent
counsel of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.9.
Having food and raiment, let us therewith be content. It is a known saying,
Cui satis non est satis, nihil est satis: our Proverb Englisheth it, Enough is
as good as a feast. And if you would know what is enough* let Juvenal answer:
In quantum sitis atque fames and frigora poscunt. That which is enough to keep
off hunger, thirst and cold. Juven. Sat. 14.
It was Agurs prayer to God. Give me neither poverty nor riches, Prove. 30.8.
(both being like Scylla and Charibdis, destructive) but feed me with food
convenient for me: And if you would know what is convenient, I answer in few
words, that which is necessary for our own preservation, which is suitable to
the present station wherein God has set us, and is justly requisie for the
charge committed to us. Within these bonds let us limit our desires, so shall
we be followers of this godly Patriarch, who only craveth bread and raiment.

2. The Donor of whom he desires this provision is God, the Lord in heaven is
the disposer of all things on earth, we neither have them of our selves, nor
can have them from any other but him, or at least by his appointment. It were
easy to instance in all the various comforts of this present life; how it is
he that builds the house wherein we dwell, Psalm. 127.1.41.3.127.2. Math. 5.45.
Psalm. 23 5.
that makes the bed (especially in our sickness) whereon we lie, that gives
his Beloved sleep and rest upon her bed; that causes the sun to shine and the
rain to fall, that prepares a table for us, and causes our cup to run over.
But I shall confine my self to the present instances, the bread we eat is out
of his cupboard, and the raiment we put on out of his wardrobe.

He gives us bread, inasmuch as he blesses the seed, and gives the earth
strength to bring forth corn; whereas the corn gives bread to us, he gives as
it were bread to the corn by the dews of heaven, and sends seasonable weather
to ripen it and gather it in: He gives us raiment in that he gives us sheep,
and covers them with wool to clothe us: He gives us both bread and raiment,
in that he gives health and strength to earn them, peace and quietness to
enjoy them, art and skill to make them. Finally, he gives us bread and raiment,
inasmuch as he gives strength to our bread to nourish us, heat to our raiment
to warm us, a blessing with both, making them beneficial to us. Bread and all
external things are but as so many lumps of the first Chaos, having in them
neither life nor light, neither strength nor comfort, unless a word proceed
out of the mouth of God. Matthew. 4.4.
The truth is, if God give us not our bread and raiment, we shall either not
have them, or having, not be able to use them, or using, shall not be refreshed
by, or satisfied with them.

Whether therefore we want, or have bread and raiment, let us desire God to
give them us. If we want them, let us, with the hungry Ravens, cry and call
upon him; nay, if we have them, let us still cry to him for his blessing on
them, humbly acknowledging all to depend upon his gracious influence.

3. The account upon which Jacob desires bread and raiment of God, is Gift;
whatever we have of God comes of free-gift. We neither can deserve any thing of
him, nor repay any thing to him; not only the glories of that other life, but
the comforts of this life are undeservedly conferred upon us; the smallest
crumbs are greater than our merits, and the worst rags better than our deserts.
Oh my soul, make much of this word Give, and account it the chiefest ground of
thy hope for whatever thou want, and the greatest strength of thy title to
whatever thou have. If God will give me bread to eat and raiment to put on, is
Jacobs form of prayer at his going forth: I am not worthy, or (according to the
Hebrew) am less then the least of all the mercy and of all the truth which
thou have showed unto thy servant, Genesis 32.10*
in his form of thanksgiving when he returned home. And surely the
consideration of our unworthiness should so much the more oblige us to
thankfulness. The more freely any thing is conferred, it is both so much the
more acceptable to him that receives it, and the more worthy of praise to him
that gives it. Oh let us learn with all humble thankfulness to acknowledge
the very bread we eat, and the raiment we put on, to be not debita, but dona,
due debts, but free gifts.

4. The last branch of Jacobs request is a prosperous reduction, in these
words, So that I come again to my fathers house in peace. It is usual with the
Hebrews synecdochically by peace to understand a state of Prosperity. Merc. in
loc.
Mercers paraphrase is, salvus and incolumis, a safe and prosperous return to
his Fathers house in due time, is that then which here Jacob desires of God.

There is implanted in every man by nature a love of his Fathers-house, Lips.
de constable. 1. c. 10.
his native soil, where (as Lipsius elegantly phraseth it) we drew our first
breath, and our feet did first tread; where our infancy flourished, childhood
played, and youth was educated; where the Heavens, the Rivers, by often view
have become familiar to us; where of a long time our kindred, friends and
companions have lived: In a word, where there are those objects of content,
which in vain we seek for any where else. True it is to a wise and resolved man
(as Teucer once said) Patria est ubicunque been est, Cic. 5. Tusc. Ovid.

Delicatus ille est adhuc cui patria dulcis est, fortis autem jam cui omne
solum patria, perfectus cui mundus exilium.

Hug. de S. Vic. Natal. Com. Mythol. l. 2. c. 8.

Eurip. in Aegr.


Where ever a man is well, that is his country: Omne solum forti patria, to a
magnanimous mind every place is alike. He that thinks he can live no where but
where he was born, and would confine himself to his fathers house, wants either
wit, or courage, or both. A prudent and valiant man reckons himself with
Socrates and Diogenes to be (...), a Citizen of the world, and therefore
refuses no honorable employment, though it be to the utmost parts of the
earth. But yet still, as the Orator said truly, Nullus locus est domestica sede
jucundior, No place is more desirable than a man's native seat. To which agrees
that of the Greek Poet, (...); What is more delectable to a man than his
fathers house? Hence it is, that

(...), etc. Hom. Odyss: 1.
1. Though other places be more wealthy, fruitful, pleasant than a man's own
country, yet (as he said) quia sua, because it is a man's own, he prefers it
before them. Rome was far better than Scythia, and yet the Barbarians would
leave Rome to return to Scythia. A stately palace in another Land (to allude to
Homers expression) is not so pleasing as a man's Fathers house, though it be a
cottage. Sertorius, a citizen of Rome, having obtained many conquests abroad,
at last sent to Pompeius and Metallus that he might return home, saying, Malle
se Romae ignobilissimum civem, quam exulem omnium aliarum civitatum Imperatorem
nominari: He had rather be one of the meanest inhabitants of Rome, than a
Governor of all other Cities.

2. Banishment from a man's Fathers house and Country has been ever accounted a
grievous punishment: -- (...) -- No greater trouble than for a man to be
deprived of his native soil. Eurip. in Med.
A Prison at home is more welcome than perpetual exile. Those captive
Israelites sit down, and striving as it were to outvie the Rivers with their
tears, weep by the waters of Babylon, saying, How shall we sing the songs of
Sion in a strange land? Psalm. 137.1, 4.
Jephtah took it very heinously that the Elders of Gilead cast him out of his
Fathers house; and as if they could not well have done him a worse injury, he
construes it as a clear argument of their spiteful malice: Did you not hate me,
and expel me out of my Fathers house? Judge. 11*7.


3. When men are in foreign parts, (whether it be by forcible compulsion, or
voluntary consent) they cannot choose but often think of their fathers house:
De loco peregrinationis proprii domicilii crescit affectus, Cass. in Psalm. 137.

Patriae memoria dulcis. Live. l. 3.


Our love to our home increases by our absence from it: And therefore it is
when we are abroad in our persons, we are at home in our thoughts. So Ovid
found it in his banishment, Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos
Ducit, and immemores non sinit esse sui. Ovid. de pont* l. 1. eleg. 4.



There is such a sweetness (says he) in ones native soil, that though a man be
absent from, it will not suffer him to be unmindful of it.

4 Though upon some occasions men may be willing to leave their fathers house,
Aves ipsae per era vagantes proprios nidos aman^: erratiles ferae ad cuhilia
dumosa festinant, etc. Cass. l. 1. ep. 20.

-- assueta leones an^ra petunt -- Ovid. l. d.


yet they are desirous of return. We see it in other creatures; the wild
beasts, which go abroad to seek their prey, return to their dens; the Conies,
that go forth to feed, haste back to their holes; the Hare, that is put up by
the Hunter* and pursued by the hounds, and almost tired, makes back to her
form, though it be but to dye there. It is no less true in men; As they that
are at Sea do often look toward the shore, and long for the Land: Sic ii qui
in peregrinis locis ad patriam suam aspirant, says Lipsius, so do Pilgrims and
Travelers seek after their own Country. Lips. Cent. 2. ep. 54.
Homer and Ovid do both tell us of Ulysses, how desirous he was to come so
near his Country, as but -- (...)*
Hom. Odyss. Ovid. l. d.
Fumum de patriis posse videre focis;
to see the smoke coming out of the chimneys. Thus Jacob here, though at his
Fathers command he left his house, yet he expresses his desire of coming
thither again in peace.

This it is he begs of God, as well knowing, that as the success of his egress,
so the welfare of his regress did depend upon Divine Providence. Alexander ab
Alexandro tells us that one of Juno's names was Iterduca, Al. ab Al. Genial.
Dier. l. 6. c. 4.

Aug. de Civit* Dei. l. 7. c. 1.


and S. Austin, that she was called not only Iterduca, but Domiduca, the
Heathens looking upon that Goddess as a guide of their journey both in going out
and coming home. This is undoubtedly true of the great God, by whose renewed
goodness it is, that after long travels and many troubles men return home in
safety. If he please to appoint a man's return, though there be never so many
mountains of difficulty in the way, he shall over-leap them all. Good King
David, by the rebellion of Absalom, was forced to fly from Jerusalem, 2 Samuel
11.14.26. and 19.15.
with a sad heart (God knows) and (as appears by his doubtful prayer) with
little hopes of returning. But not long after the Rebellious Traitor with all
his confederates is discomfited, and the King comes again to Jerusalem in
peace, to the great joy of all his loyal subjects, and confusion of his
enemies. The experience I doubt not of many can attest how wonderful
providence has not only carried them forth, but brought them back. And surely
this is no small mercy, yea, indeed it is that which completes all other
favors, when providence thus lengtheneth out the line of a man's tranquillity.
That which inviteth men to go forth, is an hope of coming home; scarce any man
would leave his country were he sure to die before he returned. A comfortable
egresse is a good beginning, a successful progress is an addition to, but a
safe regresse is the consummation of the mercy. No wonder if Jacob desired of
God so to keep him, as that he might come again to his fathers house in peace.

Having thus viewed the clauses asunder, put them together, and so look upon
this petition of Jacob in a double reference, both forward and backward.

1. Look forward to the answer that God gave Jacob of this request, which we
find far to exceed it. He desires of God that he might be kept and fed while he
was abroad, and come home safe: But lo, over and above his desire, whereas he
went forth with a staff, he returned with two bands; he went out alone, and
returns with wives and children, servants and cattle; his desire was only to
come again in peace, and behold, he comes again, not only in peace, but with
wealth. Thus are Gods grants many times larger then our desires: David asks
him life, and together with life he gives him a Crown. Solomon desires
wisdom, Ps. 21.2, 3, 8. 1 King. 3.13.
and with wisdom he gives him riches and honor. The Thief upon the Cross
would only be remembered by Christ, and Christ assures him that he should be
with him in his Kingdom. Luke 29.41.


Thus as a little water put into a pump, makes way for a great deal more to be
drawn out; and as those thin and insensible vapors which ascend from the
earth, fall down in great and abundant showers; so do our weak and short
prayers return with full and enlarged answers, God dealing with his servants in
this case as Joseph did with his brethren in Egypt, Genesis 42.25.
when he did not only put the corn in their sacks, but the money wherewith
they purchased it.

How should this consideration engage and encourage us to the duty of prayer!
Men in suing to their betters many times ask more then they expect; but in
suing to God we may expect more then we ask: when we go to men they deal with
us as the Echo with the voice, cut off half of our petition; but when we go to
God, the crop of mercy which we reap, is far greater then the seed of prayer
which we sow.

^erse 15.
2. Look backward to that which was a ground of his prayer, namely the promise
which God made (when he appeared) to him. Behold I am with thee, and will keep
thee in all places whither thou go, and will bring thee again into this
land; for I will not leave thee until I have done that which I have spoken to
thee: so that indeed his prayer is nothing else but a repetition of that
promise.

Quest.
It may here be enquired, what need Jacob trouble himself* to pray for that
which God had already promised? his word being passed the performance is sure;
to what end should Jacob pray? one would think that this should argue some
diffidence in Jacob, nay forgetfulness in God, as if he needed to be put in
mind of his word; and God might have retorted upon Jacob, why do you trouble me
to ask what I have already granted?

But for answer hereunto; know, Answ.


1. That it has been the usual practice of Gods servants to pray to him for
those things which he has already promised; not only Jacob, but Abraham his
Grandfather, Genesis 25.21.
having received from God the promise of a Son, entreats the Lord for his wife,
because she was barren. All the Saints of the Old Testament prayed for the
Messiahs first coming, and we now pray for his second coming, though yet both
of these are clearly promised in holy Writ.

2. This practice of Gods servants is founded upon very good reason; For

1. The prayer of the upright (according to Solomon's Proverb) is Gods delight:
Christ says unto his Spouse, Cant. 2.14.
Let me hear thy voice, which then makes the best Music in his ears, when it
is the echo of his own voice. Men love not to be troubled with suitors, but
God is wel-pleased with frequent addresses, yea therefore he defers to fulfill
what he has promised, that we may be the more importunate in desiring it.

2. Divine promises are so far from being impediments, that they are
encouragements to prayer: If I know that he to whom I petition is well-affected
toward me, and well-pleased with what I desire of him, it cannot but embolden
me to go to him; what are the promises, but declarations of Gods good will
toward us, and what he is ready to do for us? and therefore we are justly
animated to go boldly to the throne of grace.

3. More then this, the promises are not only encouragements to, but arguments
in prayer. It is a sufficient argument to prevail with any honest man, that
his word is past, much more with the faithful God. Accordingly this holy man
urges upon God in that prayer he made when he was returning home, Genesis 32.10.
thou saidest thou would do me good; with which that of David agrees, deal
well with thy servant according to thy word: and therefore instead of desisting
from prayer, because of a promise, we should rather plead the promise in our
prayer.

4. Yet further, prayer is the condition and means of obtaining what God has
promised. After a catalogue of many sweet promises made by God to his people,
it follows, Thus says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 36.37.
I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them.
As Repentance is the condition (if not always expressed yet implied) of
avoiding what he has threatened* so is prayer of obtaining what he has
promised: and as the space between the denouncing and executing of the menace
is the time for the practice of repentance, that the evil threatened may not be
inflicted; so the space between the making and accomplishing of the promise, is
the time for the exercise of prayer, that the good promised may be performed.
The promises are as it were a storehouse of blessings, but prayer is the key
that opens it; they are as it were the well of comforts, but prayer is the
bucket which must draw out the water.

5. Add to all this that which may fully satisfy, Not only is prayer as an
antecedent condition to the performing of a promise, but a promise must
antecede to the making of a prayer: so far should we be from neglecting prayer
because God has promised, that only what God has promised ought to be prayed
for; S. John is express, If we ask according to his will he hears us; 1 John
5.14*
intimating that no prayer can have audience and acceptance, but what is
according to his will; which will is revealed in his word, and (as to the
things which we are to desire) particularly in his promises. Among the many
requisites to an effectual prayer, faith is not the least; Indignus esse divina
benedictione censetur, qui Dominum dubio quaerit affectu, says S. Ambrose, he
that asks doubtingly begs a denial: Matthew. 21.22. Ambrose.
whatsoever you ask believing (says our Savior) you shall receive; and
accordingly S. James is express, James 1.5, 6*
if any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, but let him ask in faith; now
the choice prop of faith is the promise, for though we believe God is able, yet
we cannot believe he is willing to grant our desires unless we have a promise
to declare it. Since then the rule of our prayer is Gods will, and that will is
revealed in the promises; yea since the promise is a choice ground of faith,
and faith is a necessary ingredient into prayer, it manifestly follows, that
we cannot make an acceptable prayer to God, unless it be founded upon faith in
a promise, and so according to Gods will. Let it therefore be our care to study
the promises, that we may be acquainted with them, have recourse to them, and
make use of them, so as by them not to be hindered from, but rather encouraged
to, and quickened in our devotion; for so it was with Jacob, whom we find upon
the receipt of a gracious promise putting up a fervent prayer.

But now methinks I hear some saying, Object.
we are convinced that a promise is an inducement, not only to thankfulness,
but prayer; and had we such a promise as Jacob had, we could pray both
confidently and fervently. But God has no where said to us, that he will be
with us in our journeys, to keep us and provide for us, and bring us home
again; and therefore how can we hope and pray for those blessings?

To remove this doubt, be pleased to know, that

1. The promises which are made to particular persons in Scripture, Answ.
so far as they are of general concernment, belong to all the servants of God.
It is very observable that the promise which God made to Joshuah, I will never
leave thee nor forsake thee, Joshua 1.5.
is not only repeated but applied by S. Paul to all Christians, for otherwise
the argument had been very weak; Let your Conversation (writing to the Hebrews)
be without covetousness, for he has said, (namely, H^b. 13.5.
to Joshuah) I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. Thus, what God said to
Jacob, he says unto every one of his servants when we go forth by sea or land.
Indeed he says it not so expressly, particularly, positively to us, as he did
to Jacob; therefore it is that, whereas Jacob having received such a punctual
promise from God, might assure himself that nothing should hinder his return
home, we may not be so confident; he that goes out in the morning, though but
for a day, cannot be sure that he shall come again to his house in the evening,
since he does not know what God has appointed to befall him. But yet withal,
he that goes forth (as here Jacob did) for many years, may upon this very
promise made to Jacob, so far assure himself, that God will be with him, and if
he see it fit for him (as he did for Jacob) he will so keep him and provide for
him, that he shall come again to his fathers house in peace: And what man,
unless he think himself wiser than God, would desire it upon other terms?

2. God has been pleased to vouchsafe many promises of protection and
provision to his servants in general; which among other places you may meet
with in the 34.91. and 121. Psalms, where it would be observed, that though the
promises are made to all the godly, yet some of them run in the singular
number, Thee and Thy; He shall cover thee with his feathers, he shall give his
Angels charge over thee; Psalm. 91.4, 11.121.8.
the Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in from this time forth
and for evermore. And why this? but that every servant of God in particular
might take those words as spoken to him, and in all dangers might apply them to
himself for the strengthening of his faith, and the quickening of his devotion.

I shall wind up this with these following directions:

1. Be sure the way wherein thou go be Gods way, that is, such a way for
which thou have either his command that thou shall, or at least his warrant
that thou may go in it. It is very observable, how the Devil quoting that
Scripture, He shall give his Angels charge over thee, Mat. 4.6. Moller. in P.
91.
mangles it, leaving out those words, to keep thee in all thy ways. Upon which
Mellerus his gloss is very apposite, In omnibus viis tuis, i. e. In vocatione
tua, In all thy ways, that is, in thy calling wherein God has placed thee, in
which alone thou may expect Angelical and Divine protection. For a Rebel who
goes forth to fight against his lawful Sovereign, a Thief, a Pirate, who lies
in wait to rob and spoil men of their goods and lives, to pray that God would
be with him, and keep him in the way that he goes, were not a petition, but a
presumption: for though it be true, that Almighty God do sometimes suffer (for
reasons best known to himself) such wretches to prosper in their wicked ways,
yet they cannot either justly expect* or religiously desire it; and by how much
the more devoutly they seem to undertake such attempts, by so much the more
abominable they are in the eyes of God, who never more abhors Robbery and
Rebellion, then when it is masked with Religion and devotion. Let every one
therefore, who hops and craveth Gods blessing, be careful that he have Gods
call; nor let him think it sufficient that Gods providence seems as it were
to open a door, unless Gods word warrant him to go forth.

2. Be careful together with thy prayer to God to join thine own endeavor* God
will be with us, but then we must not be wanting to our selves; He will give us
bread to eat and raiment to put on without our merit, but not (if we be able)
without our labor. He will keep us in the way we go, and that so as we may
come again in peace; but then we must not needlessly thrust our selves into
danger, and use the best means we can to preserve our selves. In vain does
that scholar think to get learning who neglects his book; or that husbandman
look for an harvest who throws his plough into the hedge. Jacob was fain to
serve Laban for that bread and raiment which he desired God to give him. God
can keep us by a miracle without means; he has done so, where means have been
wanting, but he has no where said he will do it, whilst means is afforded.
Oculus ad coelum, manus ad clavum, is the Pilots practice, as his eye is upon
the star, so his hand is upon the helm; Orare is to little purpose without
Laborare: in all dangers, as thou liftest up thy eyes to God for his succor,
so thou must put forth thy hand to the means of self-preservation.

3. Before thou go on thy way take thy farewell of thy sins by Godly sorrow
and repentance: your iniquities (says God by the Prophet) have separated
between me and you. If any sin unrepented go with us, Isa. 59.2.
God will leave us; and if iniquity be found in our hands, we cannot expect
that his protection should be over our heads. I wonder not if Israel turn their
backs before their enemies whilst the accursed thing is in the Camp. They are
Gods own words, I will not be with you any more, Josh. 7.12.
except you destroy the accursed from among you.

4. Resign thy self to God as by a voluntary submission to his dispose, so by a
willing subjection to his commands. He takes none to be of his charge, whom he
finds not to be of his family. This of Jacob, If God will be with me, and keep
me in that way which I go, etc. then the Lord shall be my God, may well be
inverted, If the Lord be thy God, then he will be with thee, and keep thee in
thy way, etc. It is a false Maxim on the one hand, that only actual
protection obliges to subjection; I am bound to obey my parents (whether
civil or natural) though they be not able to protect me; and much more my
God, though he will not preserve me. But on the other hand, Subjection only is
that which entitleth us to protection; so that unless I serve and honor God,
I do in vain expect that he should bless and keep me.

5. Finally, Begin, continue, and manage thy whole journey with frequent and
zealous prayers to God for these blessings. Nor will it be amiss, nay I would
commend it as a very fitting preparative to all weighty undertakings, that thou
before hand engage thy self to God, (after Jacobs pattern) by a vow of some
eminent service to be performed in case he be pleased to give thee the success
desired, and beseech him that he would prove and try thee whether thou will not
faithfully make good the obligation thou have made to him.

Having observed these rules, go forth ( in Gods name) cheerfully,
courageously, confidently, expecting divine presence and providence to
accompany thee: And whereas, because the general promises of temporal
blessings in Scripture are made, cum exceptione crucis (as Divines speak) with
the exception of the Cross; things may not altogether succeed according to thy
desires, yea it may so fall out that not only troubles but death it self may
befall thee in the way which thou go: let this be thy strong consolation,
that if thy life be at an end before thy way; it is that which thy gracious God
sees best for thee, and if he do not so keep thee as that thou shall come
again in peace to thy Fathers house on Earth; it is that thou may so much
the sooner go to thy Fathers house in Heaven, where are many mansions, and
where thou shall be in rest, John* 14.2.
peace, and bliss to all eternity.

And thus I have at length brought you through all the parts of my text, and
should now put an end to my discourse, but that I have a worthy person in mine
eye, whose lately intended voyage is the occasion of this discourse, and to
whom in a few words I must crave leave to make a particular address.

It has pleased Divine providence to call you forth, from your friends and
Fathers house: The way you are to go is long, to the remote parts of the world,
and in that respect may seem tedious; your passage is by Sea, and that may
prove perilous; the dangers of the Sea being probably more and greater then
those of the land: But withal, your employment is not only lawful, but
laudable, just, but honorable; you are entrusted with the goods, and employed
for the good of many, in which respect you are likely to be (...), a common
good. Besides, (which is no small comfort) God has provided for you a meet
help, a loving yoke fellow, to go with you, one whose society will recompense
the absence of your other friends, and beguile the tediousness of the way, yea
one who will help to bear a part with you as well in your trouble, as in your
enjoyments.

Nothing now remains but to make sure that God may be with you in the way you
are to go: in order to which the example of this holy Patriarch is well worthy
your imitation; as he did, so do you bind your self to God by some solemn vow
at your going forth, to do some extraordinary act of piety, of charity, at your
coming home; and not only so, but while it is called to day, consecrate your
self to his service; throughout the whole time of your voyage walk with him,
cleave to him, ever remembering that of Azariah to Asa, The Lord is with you
while ye be with him, and if ye seek him, 2 Chr. 15.2.
he will be found of you, but if ye forsake him he will forsake you. Nor let
this only be your personal care, but what lies in you take care that those
who are under you may serve the Lord, so as the glorious name of God and Christ
may not be blasphemed among the Indians by the profane, intemperate and
unclean lives of English Christians. Thus doing, doubt not of the hand of God
upon you for good, and for your greater encouragement call to mind former
experiences, remember how God has been with you and kept you in this very way
that you are now to go, so that you came again to your Fathers house in peace;
his hand is not shortened, that it cannot save, nor is he less willing to keep
you now, if you keep close to him.

I shall end my hortatory consolation to you with an intercessory supplication
to God for you, for your Dear Consort, and all that go along with you. Nor do
I doubt but all your friends here present will join with me; nor shall we only
now but continually make mention of you in our prayers; and by the way it may
be a comfort to you when you are upon the tempestuous Sea, and in that
Barbarous land, that you have a stock of prayers in England going for you.

And now, what better, fitter, fuller prayer can be made for you by us or by
your self, then that which here in effect Jacob makes for himself? That God
Almighty would vouchsafe to be with you and keep you in the way which you go,
and at last bring you again to your fathers house in peace, so as your friends
who now part from you mournfully, may then meet you joyfully, and our prayers
may be turned into praises and songs of deliverance. Finally, not only that
you may come to your Native Country in peace, but, that when you come again,
you may find it in peace, the breaches of Church and State healed, every one
enjoying his rights in quiet, sitting under his own fig tree, and eating the
fruit of his labors with joy and thankfulness: and let all that wish well to
you, to the Church, to the Land, say Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

