The Right Way OF Seeking God.

A SERMON Preached at Great Yarmouth On the 11th of May, 1692.

Being the Day of the Monthly Fast.

By James Hannott Minister of the Gospel there.

1 Cor. Xv. 10. -- Yet not I, but the Grace of God.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Snowden for Edward Giles Bookseller in Norwich near
the Marketplace. 1692.

To my worthy Friends, Inhabitants of the Town of Great Yarmouth, who frequent
that Religious Assembly I relate unto.
Beloved in our Lord!
THE Design of the following Sermon is to give the true Notion, (tho not a
perfect Description,) of a Religious Fast. The frequent Return of these Days, I
have feared should occasion our degenerating into a Formal and meet Customary
Observance of the Externals of them. To prevent this, and more fully to
explicate and press the Duty of a East-day, my thoughts were exercised upon
this Subject. And when the Discourse had served you in this, it was laid up
among its fellows; it being no part of my intention, in either the Composing or
Preaching of it, that it should be more public. And there it had still
continued, if the joint Request of several of you, had not obliged me to
deliver it into your hands. I question not but it was a holy zeal for the
Divine Truths insisted on, your regard to the practice of Righteousness, your
love of Mercy and desire to walk humbly with God, from whence your importunity
did proceed, accompanied with a hope that the same things might be promoted in
others; which is so good an End, that if it may in any measure be attained, I
shall have no cause to Repent of my compliance with you in it. The Lord grant
it may be so, to whose blessing for that purpose I now commit it. And for you,
my Heart's desire and Prayer is, that ye, may stand perfect and complete in all
the Will of God: Walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord
blameless.

I am Your Obliged and Affectionate Servant in the Gospel. J. H.
Yarmouth June 16. 1692.
The right way of seeking God.
Micah VI. 8. He has showed thee, oh man, what is good: and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, and to love Mercy and to walk humbly with
thy God?
THese words are the Prophet's answer to a sollicitous question that the Jews
did propound unto him. To understand the design and pertinency of the Answer
'twill be needful we reflect upon the Question, and also the occasion of it.

The Lord had a controversy with his People, ver 2.
and said that he would plead with Israel. And that that He charges them with,
was their Ingratitude and unthankfulness to Him for his many favors and
benefits bestowed upon them: Two of which, as more signal, He does particularly
recount; ver. 4.
his delivering them from the Tyranny of Pharaoh in Egypt, ver. 5.
and his defending them from the Enchantments of Balaam in Moab.

And having such evidence to produce in his Cause, He might well challenge
them, as He does, ver. 3. oh my People, what have I done unto thee, and wherein
have I wearied thee? q. d. what have I commanded you, that you should count my
service a Burden? or wherein can you fault my conduct and providence toward
you? have I been unmindful of you or wanting to do you good? if I have, come
forth and plead it, and testify against me. But on the contrary does not the
whole of my proceedings with you testify for me? Witness what I did for you in
Egypt, and what I did for you in the Wilderness: you had to this day been a
Captive People, if I had not redeemed you; had not I defended you, the Devil
and his Agents had prevailed to scatter and break you in pieces. Remember, oh
my People these things, my ancient loving kindness to your Fathers whose
Mercies you inherit; and have you any cause then to complain of my service? can
you mend your selves by changing your Lord? oh house of Israel, ^^ek. 18.29.
are not my ways equal? are not your ways unequal?

This charge was so home and demonstrative that they had nothing to reply, were
convicted in their Conscience, and justify God: they are made sensible that
they had complained of Him without cause, that they had falsely accused his
Providence, and by their unthankful and undutiful carriage toward God, had
highly provoked his Anger against them; and now that that they are most
sollicitous about is, how they may have the Lord pacified and reconciled to
them.

^^r. 6.
Hereupon they move the Prophet with this Question, Wherewithal shall I come
before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God? The Lord, (as if they had
said) we see, is Angry with us, as indeed he has just cause to be, and we are
afraid that his Judgments should break forth upon us, as we have deser'vd they
should; oh! What shall we do to avert them? How shall we make our appearance
before this high God, or what shall we say unto him, or who shall direct us
what to do, that we may get the Lord to be at peace with us?

My Text contains an Answer to this question, only before the Prophet comes to
that, He represents this People as suggesting some methods to themselves which
they thought might serve to atone the anger of God and to procure his favor
toward them. They inquire whether a punctual observance of the outward
Institutions of God's Worship might not avail to that end, and proffer to
address themselves to him with burnt Offerings and Calves of a year old, as the
Law required. And if more than the ordinary Sacrifices were necessary in their
Case, they will spare no cost, but profess they were willing to do more than
indeed it was either possible or lawful for them to do. Thousands of Rams they
are ready to offer; ver. 7.
would ten thousand Rivers of Oil suffice, could so many be procured, they
would pour them all out before Him; and whereas nothing could be dearer to them
than their Children, and amongst them the first born, yet if God would accept
of the death of a Child, they were willing to cause it to pass through the
fire. Jer. 32.35.
Provided that they might retain their sins, their injustice, unmercifulness
and proud disobedience to the commands of God, they will be as bountiful,
expensive and laborious in the externals of Worship as God would have them to
be. They will load his Altar with their Sacrifices, provided they may still go
on to load God with their sins, they will devote all their substance to the
Temple if they may be excused the dedicating themselves to God as a living and
holy Sacrifice, Romans 12.1.
which is the true reasonable service. They will pour out thousands of sighs
and prayers to God, Fast as often as He will, confess sin as much as He would
have them, so that after they have confessed it, they may be allowed to return
to the practice of it.

No, no the Prophet tells them, it is not your offerings, your Rams, your
Rivers, nor your Children, that will serve this turn: These things, though some
of them be such as God has appointed, yet these alone will not please God,
there is something else God looks for from a People that would humble
themselves aright before Him, and meet God in his Worship with acceptance; and
if you ask what that is? He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what
does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly and to love mercy and to walk
humbly with thy God? q. d. you inquire how you may come before the Lord, how
you may humble your selves in a right manner, so as that the anger of the Lord
may be turned away from you, and you may escape his impendent judgments. You
seem to be very desirous to have the Lord still to be your God, and that He
would continue you to be his People, that He would still go on to deliver and
to defend you, as He has done in times past: then know that it is not
sacrifices only that God desires, but that which in conjunction therewith he
does principally and ultimately require, is, that you do Justly, and love
Mercy, and walk humbly with your God: these things are good and acceptable to
God, and indispensibly incumbent upon you, as the Lord has showed them to be
his mind and will concerning you; And though there are other things that God does
require, which in their place and time are to be attended to, yet nothing
comparatively with these, as to do justly, to love mercy and walk humbly with
thy God.

In which words we have these two general parts.

1. A tacit Reprehension that the Prophet gives this People, reproving that
fleshly confidence they placed in the external duties of God's worship, and
much more in those arbitrary ways of Devotion which were of their own devising.

2. A positive Direction that he lays before them how they might come before
God in his own instituted Worship with acceptance. And in that direction there
are three particulars considerable. 1. A discovery of a Divine rule which we
are to attend to in all our addresses to God, and that is the Revelation God
has made of his mind and will to us, he has showed thee, oh man. 2. A
specification of things that are conformable to that rule, and to be regarded
by us, viz. Justice that is to be done, Mercy that is to be loved, and Humility
that is to be expressed in our walking with God. Owen on the Spirit. p. 331.
The last of which, walking humbly with God, compriseth the whole of our
Covenant Obedience, Genesis 17.1. as the two former are eminent instances of it in
particular. 3. A Rational enforcement of the forementioned duties by arguments;
one taken from the goodness of the things, he has showed thee, oh man, what is
good, another from the Will and Command of God concerning these things, and
what does the Lord require of thee? These things are good, to do Justly, to
love Mercy, and to walk humbly with God, and these are the things that God
requires, and you must mind and attend unto, if you would so appear before God
in his Worship, as to have the Lord pacified to you, and his anger turned away
from you. The whole of which may be thus summed up.

Doct. That a People who would humble themselves aright before the Lord, would
have the difference between Him and Them comprimised, and would come before the
Lord so as to be accepted with Him; must not rest in and take up with the
external duties of God's Worship, but attend unto those things in their
practice that are expressive of Real holiness and Obedience to the will of God
in what he commands and requires of them.

Before I proceed to prove and improve this proposition it will be needful to
premise this in the first place, namely, that the answer that the Prophet in
the text gives to this Peoples question, and the conclusion I have now formed
from it, does not respect the way of Atonement or making satisfaction to the
Justice of God for sin. For as to that there is the same insufficiency in the
highest acts of Evangelical obedience as there is in the performing the duties
of Divine worship.

The payment of one debt cannot discharge us of another: now we stand engaged
to God in a twofold Debt; a Debt of punishment, that is the consequent of sin,
whereby we become obnoxious to the Curse of the Law, the Wages of sin is death:
And a Debt of Duty which is our obligation to the Precept of the Law, Romans 6.23.
and the payment of the Debt of Duty cannot discharge us from the debt of sin.
When we do our duty we do but what we ought, and the doing what we ought cannot
be a compensation for the doing of what we ought not to have done. If we come
short in our duty that further increase the Debt of sin, but though we perform
our duty that does not, lessen the former debt. We are debtors still to the
Justice of God, because we have violated his holy Law; the Sanction of which
was, the Soul that sins shall die, and are utterly insolvent or incapable to
pay this debt by the most exact and continued obedience that we can yield to
the commands of it, Gal. 2.16.
for by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified.

If therefore the Question be in what way is the justice of God satisfied for
sin? in what way and upon what account is God reconciled to Sinners? What is
the meritorious and procuring cause of the Grace and favor of God to a Person
or People that have provoked his Anger against them by their sins? He has
showed thee, Oh Man, in his word, that it is not any Obedience of thine, that
thou do or can perform unto God, but the obedience, the sufferings, the
Righteousness of his own Son our Lord Redeemer, that is the only meritorious
procuring cause of God's being reconciled to Sinners. Heb. 7 22.
He is the Surety of that better Covenant that has paid the debt of sin for us
and in our place; 1 Cor. 5.21.
that was made Sin for us by offering himself to God, Heb. 9.26.
and did appear to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.

But if the Question be, what it is that God requires of man according to the
terms of the new Covenant, that would have the benefit of Christ's mediation,
so as to have God actually reconciled to him, and the Anger of God turned away
from him? He has showed thee, Oh man, that it is not some slight external
devotion: An outside fasting, or confessing of sin, and humbling your self for
a day; but that in conjunction with a Serious and Hearty performance of these
duties, you do justly, and Love mercy, and walk humbly with God. Our Prophet
does suppose God's acceptance of the atonement for sin made by our Lord Jesus
Christ, but lets them know that without a Performance of the necessary duties
of the Gospel, their claim to that atonement would be fruitless and
ineffectual. As there was something that God required of Christ when He
substituted himself in our Room to answer for our sins which was his dying for
us, so there is something that God Requires of us, if we would have the benefit
of the death of Christ. The Gospel does not make void, but establish the Law in
its preceptive power. Christ's dying for sin, and our doing the will of God do
very well consist. For to this end He dyed, ^om 14.9
and rose, and revived, that he might be the Lord both of the Dead and Living.
That as he dyed for sin, so we should die to sin; and have communion with him
in his rising by our walking in newness of Life. That which God required of
Christ was obedience in a way of merit, that which God requires of us is
obedience in a way of duty. Our obligation to obedience is not dissolved, but
enforced and heightn'd by the mediatory Obedience of our Lord Jesus. To. do
justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with God ever were, and ever will be
incumbent on the Reasonable creature; and are those things that the Lord
requires of them that would Seek him with acceptance and success.

This premised, I now proceed to confirm the truth of the Proposition, and the
proof of it will depend upon showing these two things; 1. The insufficiency
that there is in a bare performance of the duties of Religious Worship separate
from the duties of justice, mercy and humble walking with God, to procure the
favor of God to a People. 2. The necessity that there is of such a People's
attending to the practice of those things that are expressive of real holiness
and Obedience to God in conjunction with the duties of God s worship, in order
to that end.

And first let us consider the insufficiency that there is in a bare
performance of the duties of Religions worship separate from the duties of
justice mercy, and humble walking with God, to procure the favor of God to a
People, to comprimise the difference between God and them, to pacify his Anger
and to avert his judgments. And because this People in the text talked so much
of their burnt-Offerings, their Calves and their Rams, I shall to make this
branch of the demonstration more plain and convincing, present you with the
judgment of God in his word concerning these things, whilst this way of worship
was in use and show you of how little account with God these Sacrifices were,
when separated from the duties of justice, mercy and humble Obedience.

The Ancient Sacrifices are to be considered two ways, 1. as they were typical
Representation of that real Sacrifice which our Lord Jesus Christ offered to
God, to make reconciliation for the sins of his offered to when through the
enternal Spirit he offered himself to God. Much of the Gospel, as it was
Revealed in that time, was wrapped up in those Sacrifices. They did all refer to
and prefigure him that was to come. For whereas the holy and righteous Law of
God had threatened Sin with Death, it could not be reasonably, supposed, Heb.
10.4
that the blood of Bulls and of goats should take away sin. And therefore, the
Heathens to supply that defect, Quod pro vita bominis nisrvitd bominis
reddatur, nonposse aliter Deorum Inmortalium numen plat^ arbitrantur.
having some natural, or rather traditional knowledge of the necessiry of
sacrifices to make Atonement for sin, did conclude that nothing less than the
Life of a Man offered in Sacrifice, was sufficient to appease God. But indeed
this man, is no other than the man Christ Jesus, the Psalmist is brought in
speaking to his Father to this purpose, Heb. 10.5. When he comes into the
world, he says, acrifice and offering thou would not, but a body have thou
prepared me.

Or, secondly, they are to be considered as acts of Homage and Worship
performed by that People, to God, and in which they generally rested in a
neglect of the weightier matters or the Law. And however they though to please
God thereby we (...) testimonies in their own Scriptures, which show how highly
God was displeased with them, whilst they took up with these in the neglect of
Judgment Mercy and Humble walking with God.

And I Will begin with that Reproof the Prophet gave King Saul, who bore himself
much upon this business of sacrificing in the omission of a direct command of
God wherein his obedience was concerned, 1 Samuel 15.22. Samuel said, Has the
Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices as in obeying the voice
of the Lord? behold to obey is better than sacrifice: and to hearken than the
fat of Rams. It does appear by the preceding part of this history, that God had
sent Samuel to Saul with a command to destroy the Amalekites, and that with a
total destruction, Man and Woman, ^erse 3.
Infant and suckling, Ox and Sheep, Camel and Ass. Saul applies himself to this
work, but did it negligently and in part only. Agag the King he spares,
supposing it might be for his honor to make him a Prisoner of War to lead him
in triumph. Also the best of the Sheep, ^(...).
and of the Oxen, and of the Fattlings and of the Lambs he saves, and his
pretense for that was, that these Fat Beasts would do well to serve God's
Altar; 'twas not fit to slay them any where else. What? has the Lord as great
delight in sacrifices as in obedience? This was the command of God that all of
Amalek should be destroyed: what means then the bleeting of the Sheep, (...)
4.
and the Lowing of the Oxen which I hear? Oh, says he, they are for sacrifices
to Worship God with. No, the Prophet tells him, God will accept of no such
Worship, as is besides his command, and is founded in a contempt of that. To
obey is better (pleases God more) than Sacrifice. Better thou had thoroughly
obeyed the command of God, though there had not been a Ram left in the Universe
to be offered in Sacrifice.

My second proof for this I take from the 50th Psalm at the seventh verse we
find the Lord addressing himself to that people thus; Hear, oh my People, and I
will speak; oh Israel, and I will testify against thee. God had something to
speak to them, and something to tesitifie against them. That which he had to
say to them is at ver. 8. I will not reprove thee for thy Sacrifices or thy
burnt-offerings continually before me. It seems they were so punctual in their
Sacrifices, they would not rob God of a Lamb, nor fail him of an hour; their
burnt offerings were continually before him. So that he would not tax them for
any remissness or deficiency that way. But though He would not reprove them for
their Sacrifices, he would reprove them for their sins and that to purpose,
ver. 16, 77.
asking them, what they had to do, to declare his statutes, or take his
Covenant in their Mouth, seeing they hated instruction and cast his words
behind them? Come, says God, you load my Altar with your sacrifices, but at the
same time you make me to serve with your sins. You are a sacrificing People,
but you are also a wicked People. You hear, but you hate my word, and when my
commands are set before you, you take them and cast them behind you. Theft and
Whoredom, ver. 18, 19 20.
and evil speaking, you practice, or connive at in others, and you think your
sacrificing should make amends for all No, says the Lord, I testify against
you, that except you Repent and Reform, it is not all your Sacrifices can help
you, but you your selves will become a Sacrifice to my justice, I will deal
with you as with others that are mine Enemies, and live in a total neglect of
me. 2^.
Wherefore, consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and
there be none to deliver. He numbers them with those that forget God, because
they rejected his commands, when yet at the same time they were so exact in
their sacrifices, that He had nothing to reprove them for in that matter.

The Prophet Isaiah in his 1st chapter from the 11th. to the 21st verse, does
at large represent the judgment of God concerning this ancient way of worship
severed from Judgment, Mercy and Faith. To what purpose is the multitude of
your sacrifices unto me? says the Lord; (...) 11.
I am full of burnt offerings, etc, To what purpose, Lord? have thou not
required these things? true, but there is something else too that I require of
you, to do Justly to love Mercy and walk Humbly with me; and where are those
offerings which I most delight in? Bring no more vain oblations. (...) 3.
Lord! they are thy Oblations, ay but they are vain, and altogether
unprofitable to you as you do offer them, Incense is an abomination to me,
There are in these ver. 14. ^xpressions against formality. Burr. on Hose.
it is iniquity even the solemn meeting. Iniquity Lord! it is thy worship, and is
it iniquity to Worship God? No, not in it self, but as you order the matter it
is so; such worship as yours is, is no better than an open affront to me,
whilst you think to put me off with this, and at the same time practice all
manner of leudness and wickedness Your hands are full of blood, you are unjust
and unmerciful, and whilst that blood is in your hand, what matters to me all
the Blood of Beasts that you shed from time to time before my Altar?

Indeed it seems to have been the great burden of the Prophetical Ministry, to
convince that People of the sin and Vanity of their trusting in these
Sacrifices, whilst they neglected the duties of practical obedience, 'I was a
sharp reproof to this purpose which the Lord by another prophet gave them, Jer.
7. where having discovered in the former part of the Chapter their groundless
confidence and trusting in the Temple, ver. 14
which He threatens to do so as He had done to Shilo, He lets them know that
their Sacrifices were of no more account with him at v. 21. Thus says the Lord
of hosts the God of Israel put your burnt-offerings unto your Sacrifices, and
eat Flesh. q.d. keep your Sacrifices to your selves, and dispose of them as you
will; Assem. A^not. Patrick's Epit. page 527.
eat them, do with them what you please. The burnt-offerings were wholly to be
consumed in the fire: The People were not to partake of them, but of the
peace offerings and thank-offerings they might eat; now, says God, you may take
all for me; eat your burnt-offerings as well as your peace offerings, I care
not for any of them. And the Reason, upon which this Conviction is grounded, is
at the 22th v. For I spoke not unto your Fathers, nor commanded them in the day
that I brought them out of the hand of Egypt, concerning burnt-offerings or
Sacrifices, v. 23. But this thing commanded I them, saying, obey my voice, and
I will be your God, and ye shall be my People: and walk ye in all the ways that
I have commanded you, that it may be well unto you. The first word that God
spoke unto Israel was this, Obey my voice: This was that he commanded them,
before he commanded them concerning Burnt-offerings: The ten Commandments which
contain the rule of Moral Obedience, he delivered to them in the first place,
and afterward his statutes and ordinances that were to govern his public
Worship. But, says he, that that was first commanded by me is last and least of
all minded by you. You are for Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices, but not for
obeying my voice. Well! put your Burnt-offerings to your Sacrifices, and eat
them, do with them what you will I will not be concerned in them.

To all which we may add that express testimony that the Lord gave them of his
preference of moral duties to those that were only Ritual and Ceremonial, Hose.
6. He tells them v. 5. That He had hewed them by the Prophets, and every stroke
was to cut down this fleshly confidence of theirs, that they placed in their
sacrifices, whilst they neglected the other substantial duties of Religion, v.
6. For I desired mercy and not Sacrifice, (or mercy rather than Sacrifice) and
the knowledge of God (an obediential knowledge) more than burnt-offerings. I
shall close this with that sentence of the Scribe, Mark 12. Who having asked
our Lord, Which is the first commandment of all? ver. 28
Our Savior answers, to Love God with our whole Soul, (...) 30.
and the Second to it, to Love our neighbor as our selves. (...) 31.
Hereupon the Scribe said unto him, Well Master, thou have said the truth, this
is more than all whole burnt-offerings and Sacrifices. (...) 32
And that he apprehended Christ aright, our Lord's approving him in what he
said does manifest. (...) 34.
When Jesus saw that he answered discreetly he said unto him, Thou art not far
from the Kingdom of God.

And now I proceed to the Second branch of the Demonstration, (...) 11.
to show the necessity of practical Obedience in conjunction with the duties of
Divine Worship for a People to attend unto that would have the Anger of God
appeased to them, And because the text furnishes us with sufficient matter for
the proof of this, I shall present you with three considerations which it
contains and proposes to this purpose. 1. That this is Good, and therefore to
be desired and pursued by us 2. That this the Lord requires, which lays us
under an indispensible obligation to attend thereunto. 3. That this God has
been pleased to show and reveal to us, and therefore we are inexcusable if we
live in a neglect of it.

1. The necessity of practical Obedience in conjunction with the duties of
Divine Worship does appear from the consideration of the goodness of it.
Whatever the Lord requires of man, to be done it is good: Good in it self, good
for him and good for others. It Is Absolutely good, Personally good and
Relatively good. To do justly is good, to love mercy is good, to walk humbly
with God is good. And what an attractive is this to come up to our duty, that
is so good in the whole and good in every part of it*

These things are good in themselves, not only because they are commanded, as
all the positive institutions of worship are good, but they have an intrinsical
goodness, and commend themselves to us from their very nature, they are such
things as flow from the nature of God, as well as bear a conformity to the Will
of God. So that it is impossible they should be otherwise than good, or that
what is contrary to them should be so. Injustice, unmercifulness and
disobedience to God cannot be good, they are Evil, and altogether Evil, and
will be so for ever, Deuteronomy. 30.15. see, I have set before thee this day life and
good, and death and evil. Holiness is good, and sin is evil; and it is
impossible that either of them should be other than what they are. Sin cannot
become Good, holiness cannot become evil: the difference betwixt holiness and
sin is as great as betwixt good and evil; that except good could become evil,
and evil good, the nature of good and evil be altered and confounded, it is
impossible that Holiness thould be any otherwise than good, and sin any other
thing than the worst and the purest evil.

These things are also Good for us, so that we cannot more directly seek and
promote our own good and happiness than in the practicing of them. Is that good
that is amiable and lovely? what so lovely as ho liness? That is the glory of
the Divine Being, and the likeness of God in Man. Is that good that is pleasant
and delightful? the sweetest pleasures are to be found in the ways of God. None
enjoy such peace and tranquillity in their mind, Ps. 119.165.
are so free from fears and offenses as those who have the strictest regard to
God's commands. Or is that good that is profitable? we are assured that
godliness is profitable to all things, having a Promise of the life that now
is, 1. Tim. 4.8.
and of that which is to come. Oh how good is it to walk with God! to awake
with God, and to be in the fear of the Lord all the day! Ps. 4.6.
Whereas many say, Who will show us good? Would they seek it in the way of
God's commands they would assuredly find it.

And these things are good for others too; how advantageous and beneficial to
the World are Justice and Mercy? how much do they conduce to the good order of
it? how sweet are the influences that they diffuse amongst all persons? who is
not the better for them? The godly are refreshed with them, they adorn the
Gospel, and commend Religion to others as a real substantial thing that is
worthy their consideration and choice. The Religion that lies only in forms and
discourse is an airy, unaffecting thing, and gets no ground in the World, but
that that is operative and powerful commends it self to the Consciences of Men;
these things are good for the bodies, and good for the Souls of others, and
that is one Reason of the strict charge that is laid upon the Ministers of the
Gospel to be frequent in the urging and pressing of them, Tit. 2.8. These
things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in
God, might be careful to maintain good works: these things are good and
profitable unto men. And this is further enforced by,

2. A consideration of the will of God, as being that which the Lord requires
of us. It Is His will concerning, and his command to us, who is the Lord, who
has an unquestionable right in us and a supreme power over us, and whose will
is a binding law as well as a sufficient Reason to us; so that it is no
arbitrary or indifferent matter whether we will obey or no, but he that
requires you to perform the duties of his solemn Worship, and in Obedience to
whose command you engage in them, does likewise require you to do justly, to
love mercy, to walk humbly with your God. And as his willing of these things to
be duties incumbent on Man is that that is highly consentaneous and agreeable
to his own glory, that the reasonable creature should be just and merciful as
he is, and be always mindful of that infinite distance that there is between
him and it, and the highest deference that upon that account is due to him; so
the regular subordination that there ought to be in our Wills to His, the
relation we stand in to Him as the Lord, and the entire subjection we owe to
Him in that Relation; lays us under the strictest obligation to observe and
obey all his requirements. Consider then.

The Lord, that is thy supreme Ruler and Governor, He in whose hands is the
disposal of all things, who does according to his will in the Army of Heaven,
and among the inhabitants of the Earth; He that is the one Lawgiver who is able
to save and to destroy, Jam. 4.12
who has the power of Life and Death, and whose power reaches to the Soul as
well as the body, can save or destroy both in Hell. He whom the Angels obey,
and are His Ministers harkening to the voice of his word: He, whose Law at
first impressed upon them, the inanimate creatures do every day fulfill: This
Sovereign Lord who is King throughout the World, requires that you should be
Just and Merciful and Humble. Every act of disobedience to his command is a
high contempt of his Authority. It Is the character of the wicked to say, ^s.
12.4.
Who is Lord over us? and again, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice?
Exodus 5.2.
Oh let us take heed of becoming guilty either in mind or practice of so great
an impiety. Moreover,

The Lord, that is thy Redeemer, that has bought thee with the inestimable
price of his own blood: that laid down his Life to deliver thee from Sin and
Death and Hell, was willing to empty himself of his glory for a time, to be
poor and mean, to be despised and persecuted and suffer the accursed death of
the Cross for your sake: rather than you should dye, He would dye in your
place; rather than you should become a sacrifice, He was willing to be made one
Himself: that out of Obedience to the Will of God, and from the greatness of
his love to the Children of Men traveled with the greatest sorrows, drunk off
the bitterest cup and underwent the Curse for you, He also requires the most
exact obedience at your hand. Cor. 6.9.20.
And ye are not your own, but ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify
God in your body and in your spirit which are God's. Yea,

The Lord, that is thy bountiful Benefactor, that does thee good continually,
that loads thee with his benefits every day, that prevents thee with mercy,
that supplies thee with good, that delivers thee in thy straits, succors thee
in thy temptation, hears thy prayers, and is so ready to appear for thy help:
The Lord in whom them do Live and Move and have thy Being, ^^s. 84.11.
that is a Sun and a Shield, will give Grace and Glory, and withold no good
thing; that has given thee so many tastes of his Love, such frequent experiences
of his goodness, and yet has greater things in reserve to bestow, what is it
that he requires of thee as a grateful return for all these benefits but that
thou do justly and love mercy and walk humbly with thy God. consider then who
it is that requires these things of you; and how reasonable and equitable is it
that we should answer His requirements in the most punctual manner? Especially
if we add,

3. The last consideration that the Lord who has required these things has
showed and made known the same, has promulg'd and declared his will very
plainly and expressly, in these things, to the understanding and capacity of
all persons. He has showed thee, Oh man, what is good, and what the Lord does
require of thee. He requires nothing of thee but what He has showed thee. These
things are common to man as man, and therefore required of every man, He has
spoke them to thy ear, he has made them visible to thy Eye, they are such
things as do approve themselves to thy Rational Faculties: These are not
Mysteries but plain discoveries of the mind and will of God, He has set thy
duty in a clear light, which whosoever attends unto may attain to the
understanding of it. He has showed thee, Oh man.

Partly by the Light of Nature that some of these things, at least, as to do
justly and to Love mercy, are pleasing and acceptable to him. He has ingrav'd
them upon thy very Heart, so that reflecting upon the Original principles of
thy Nature, and by conversing with thy self, asking thy Conscience questions,
and harkning to the Answers and dictates of it, this thou may know and
understand, that to do justly is good; and injustice is evil; to love mercy is
pleasing to God, and the contrary to it as displeasing to him. Did the Heathens
of old, and do they still at this day know it and art thou a stranger to it?
Read what is said of them, Romans 2.14, 15. the Gentiles which have not the
written Law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these having not the
Law, are a law unto themselves, which shows the work of the Law written in
their hearts.

But principally He has showed it thee by the light of his Word that contains
a more explicit and full Revelation of man's duty. All the lines of it are
there drawn at length, all the particulars of it clearly stated. If thou go
to the Law and to the Testimony, thou may have a sufficient direction how to
act in all thy concerns, how to order thy steps in every path, what it is God
requires of thee every day, in every place and in every condition: what thy
duty toward God and what thy duty toward man is. And what cause have we to
adore the goodness of God, that has furnished us with such a clear light to
direct us in our walking with him, that we have not only a Law light but a
Gospel Light that shines so brightly? Jesus Christ is come a light into the
World, He has revealed God unto us, He is the way, the truth and the life,
that both by his Preaching and by his Example has opened the mind of God to us,
and He that follows Him shall not walk in darkness, ^ohn 8.12.
but have the light of life.

And because God has showed it unto thee, thou art inexcusable oh man! who
live in the neglect or contempt of these requirements of His. Thou can not
plead ignorance; or say, when thou do an unjust action, that thou did not
know better; or be unmerciful and say thou did not know it to be a fault; or
be proud and disobedient against God and ask what evil there is in it?oh take
heed that thou do not sin against Light and Knowledge, Jam. 5.17.
for to him that knows to do good and does it not, to him it is sin, sin with
an aggravation, that will be attended with a sorer punishment on them that are
guilty of it, Luke 12.47
even to be beaten with many stripes. So much for the confirmation of the
Doctrine, that which follows is

The APPLICATION.
1. This Doctrine yields, at all times a useful, but on this day a very
seasonable caution to us, to take heed that we rest not in mere outward duties
of Worship, as if that were all that God required; and as it is to be feared
many persons do, to the deceiving of themselves. They are very exact, very
frequent and very punctual in these things, but guilty of a woeful neglect of
the moral duties of Religion, and so are but partial, and consequently
unsincere in their obedience. Let us take heed that we deceive not our selves
in the same way. If we halve it with God in the matter of our duty, He will cut
us short in the matter of his mercy. What if such a Religion should obtain a
temporal reward, it is insufficient to evidence a real interest in the saving
love of God.

There is no doubt but God has required these things of us. All the true
methods, means and ways of Worship are of God's appointment. Praying and
Hearing and Fasting are his Ordinances; but he never intended that we should
rest in these and go no further: To do this and no more: to attend unto these
and neglect other things, is a Badge of loathsome Hypocrisy in the sight of
God, and branded in Scripture as the guise of an unsound Heart. Hypocrites and
unsound Professors know they must do something in Religion. Something they
would do to appease God when He is Angry; something, to continue His favor
when Providence is easy and comfortable to them; something, to keep up a
Credit and Reputation with others for Religion; and something to quiet the
importunities of their own Conscience; but then they resolve to do as little as
they can, and because a slight and heedless performance of the Worship of God
is the easiest part of Religion, and most consistent with their unmortified
lusts, they pitch upon this course.

It Is indeed much easier to confess a hundred sins, than to forsake one: it is
easier to spend a whole day in public Worship, than to deny the enticement of
a Lust, or to withstand a Temptation when it opportunely presents; because the
one is only the labor of the body, the other requires the exercise of the
Soul; the one may be a weariness to the Flesh, but the other is cross and
opposite to the beloved interests of it; and carnal Hearts may make shift to
brook the one, though they cannot bear the other. A little outward Penance and
Mortification of the body they can undergo, but a true Repentance of sin, that
consists in deserting the practice and mortifying the principle of sin is
utterly distasteful to them. Oh then as we would acquit our selves of the
charge and guilt of Hypocrisy, let us take heed of resting in the outward
duties of Worship. Though your Eyes be lifted up to Heaven, if your affections be
fixed upon Earthly objects; tho you bow your knee before God, if your Hearts do
Rebel against Him: if you acknowledge your transgression, but do still retain
and practice it; if you make many Prayers but don't endeavor to live
answerably to 'em; if you vow and promise to lead a new life, but as soon as
you go from this place forget what you have been doing: What is all this but a
mere mockery? Gal. 6.7.
And be not deceived, God is not mocked.

This part of the Worship of God that we are now engaged in is no doubt a very
necessary duty incumbent upon us. God has commanded it, and special providence
call us to it. Who does not see what need there is of Fasting, of Prayer and
Humbling our selves before the Lord? But Remember this is but one part of what
God requires of you. The true Fast does not consist in a bare observance of
those things that outwardly relate to such a day. A man may be very Formal in
them, forbear all servile work, put on meaner apparel, attend the public
duties of God's House, and outwardly seem to be very submiss and serious
therein, and yet if this be all, God does disown such a Fast from being the day
that he has chosen and appointed, Isa. 58.5. Is it such a Fast that I have
chosen? A day for a man to afflict his Soul! Is it to how down his head as a
bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? will thou call this a
Fast, and an acceptable day unto the Lord? No, this is not the day that God has
chosen: And yet this is the only Fast that many keep, that is filled up with
corporal gestures and performances. What then is the Fast that God has chosen?
He himself describes it in the following verses, to loose the bands of
wickedness, ver. 6.7
to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, -- to deal thy
bread to the hungry, to bring the poor that are cast out to thy house, to cover
the naked, and hide not thy self from thy own flesh, i. e. turn not away from
relieving thy poor Brother: This is the true Fast, the Fast that God has
chosen, to break off from our sins, and to do justly, and to love mercy.

And, Oh that this may be the Fast that we may keep, a day that God may accept,
and accept us in it! we seem to be sensible that the Just and Righteous God has
a controversy with this Nation, that He is come forth to plead with England. We
have like the Jews, been unthankful for mercies, do soon forget our wonderful
deliverances and refuse to be reformed by the various methods God has used with
us to that end, and now we think God is Angry with us, and we fly to these
duties of Fasting and Prayer, and hope these will appease God; and is this all
that we will do? God will upbraid us with such Fasts, soon grow weary of them,
and break in through such Fasts with his judgments upon us. He looks for more,
he requires more, and more than this we must do, if we would prevail with God,
and obtain a blessing from Him, and that now leads me to the

2d Use. I would make of this truth, to Exhort and ers uad e you to come up to
the full duty of this day in the several branches that grow upon the text, to
do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with God; which are all of them
such things as all that profess the name of our Lord Jesus should labor to be
very exact in.

1. Do justly: Let justice and righteousness regulate your dealings with Men,
and be expressed in all your concerns with them. The best description of of
justice, (that branch of it that is called commutative,) is that which our Lord
and Savior has ven of it, Mat. 7.12. whatsoever things ye would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them. i. e. so deal with others, as you
would have them to deal with you, if they were in your place, and you in in
theirs. No man would have another to deal fraudulently and deceitfully with
him, to cheat and wrong and oppress him; do you to others as you would have
them to do to you. Be as just in your word, as true to your promise, as exact
in your dealings as you would have others to be? This is the thing that is
just, and that this Justice God does require of you, Appears by the reproof the
Prophet gives the violaters of it in the words that follow the text, Are there
yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, v. 10.
and the scant measure that is abominable? v. 11.
shall I count them pure with the wicked balances and with the bag of deceitful
weights? These uneven balances, deceitful weights and scant measures, that are
the Instruments of unrighteousness, are hateful to God, and though for a time
they may serve a covetous humor, and men may heap up treasures to themselves
thereby, yet there is a curse that attends such persons, and a moth that will
consume their riches; those treasures of wickedness will not always continue in
the house of the wicked.

To do justly is a thing that most persons know, but too few make Conscience
of, but justice is a thing that must be done. It Is not enough to have the
notion of it in our Mind, but the practice of it must be in our hand. To be
just and not to do justly in our particular actions is a contradiction. He that
does Righteousness is Righteous. 1 John 3.7.
And that we may do so, let us consider, how pleasing and acceptable this is to
God, Prove. 21.3. to do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than
Sacrifice. Let us also consider what an Ornament it is to Christianity; to do
justly is to adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior, Tit. 3.10. which does so
strictly and frequently injoin the practice of Righteousness betwixt man and
man. Luke 20.25 Romans 13.7.
And indeed what does Religion teach you if it does not teach you this piece of
morality? Further consider how necessary the practice of this Divine Virtue is
to fit and qualify you for converse and communion with God in his Ordinances;
so that when the Question was put of old, Lord who shall abide in thy
Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill? It Is answered, He that walks
uprightly, and works Righteousness, and speaks the truth in his Heart. He
that back-biteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor
takes up a reproach against his neighbor, Psalm. 15.1, 2, 3. And if this does
not move some of us, let such consider, that the just God, to whom vengeance
does belong, does very often execute his Righteous Judgments upon notorious and
impenitent violaters of Justice, 1 These. 4.6. that no man go beyond and defraud
his Brother in any matter: because that the Lord is the avenger of all such.
You are a trading People that I speak to, and have dealings in the World, I
beseech you to consider these things and have a strict regard to justice and
righteousness in all you do. And so doing,

2. Love Mercy, labor to be of a merciful disposition: show mercy, and do it
from a principle of Love, love to God and love to Man. The object of Mercy are
the Miserable, and the exercise of this grace consists in doing what in us lies
to relieve those that are in necessity, to comfort those that are cast down, to
counsel those to whom our advice may be helpful, to sympathize with those that
are afflicted, to assist those that are tempted, and to help them to bear their
burden: In one word, to do all the good that we can to the Souls and Bodies of
all men, and especially to those that are of the household of Faith. Be ready to
give to them that ask, to lend to them that would borrow of you, and to forgive
those that have offended against you. A merciful man is such a one as Job, who
was Eyes to the blind, and Feet to the Lame, and a Father to the poor, Job
29.15. The all-wise God has so ordered it in his Providence that we should
always have objects and occasions for the exercise of this Grace. Some are
poor, some are sick, some are carried into captivity, some are bereaved of
their relations, that others that are healthful and rich and prosperous in the
World might succor them in their distresses: And some left to fall into sin,
that those that stand by Grace, might restore such with a spirit of meekness.
Think it not enough that you are strictly just, but remember that you must be
merciful too. Yea you cannot be truly just except you be merciful, to deny to
others some part of our own, when the providence of God calls us to give it, is
injustice, as well as not to give them what is their own, and the highest
injustice, injustice to God, in not using the goods of this World, to the end
for which he has entrusted us with them.

7. And as Divine Love is the general Principle of all good actions, so it is
the immediate Fountain from whence all the Streams of Mercy do issue. They that
love Mercy, will be ready to show Mercy, and think it no cost, no burden, no
weariness to do it. That that proceeds from Love we do freely and cheerfully,
and that puts a luster upon every act of Mercy. And to excite this Principle in
you, consider, that showing Mercy to others does assimilate and make you like
unto God himself, who delights in Mercy; who when he does proclaim his Name,
does it especially by the display of his Goodness and Mercy; Exodus 34.
and should we not affect the nearest Union with God, and the highest
Resemblance of him? Luke 6.36. Be ye therefore merciful, as your heavenly
Father is merciful. Also consider that the Love of Mercy is a special evidence
of the Sincerity of your Love to God, to be Merciful for God's sake does
proceed from the love of God: But, whosoever has this worlds goods and sees his
Brother has need, and shuts up his Bowels of compassion how dwells the
Love of God in him? 1 John 3.17. And let us often seriously think of the great
day of the Lord, when nothing but Divine Mercy can stead and befriend us, and
that they are merciful men who are particularly described in Scripture that
shall have the benefit of the Divine Mercy. The Apostle's prayer for
Onesiphorus, 2 Timothy 1. does import so much, v. 16. the Lord give Mercy unto the
house of Onesiphorus for he often refreshed me, Mat. 25.24. ad sin.
-- the Lord grant that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day. And it is
expressly said on the contrary, that He shall have judgment without mercy that
has showed no mercy, Jam. 2.13. How ready and willing then should we be to
embrace all Opportunities of showing Mercy. In which, as well as in the former
duty of doing justly, we should have respect unto God, his glory as the end,
and his command as the reason of all that we do, which is the fumm of the last
duty, that you

3. Walk humbly with your God; endeavoring to approve your selves to Him in
all that you do, which is that that puts an excellency into and a beauty upon
your due ties to men, and makes them acceptable with God through Jesus Christ,
as being ultimately done to him. Endeavor that your whole life may be as much
as possibly you can a continued walk with God. Set him always before your Face,
have your Eye constantly to him: keep up your Hearts with God, in a frame fit
for Communion with God at all times. Observe his Providence, follow the
Guidance of it, receive the Instructions of it, and comply with all the Calls
of it. Be led by the Spirit of God, and be obsequious to all his holy motions:
let your conversation be in Heaven. Be followers of the Lord Jesus, and walk as
you have Him for an Example.

And be very Humble in your walking with God, depend upon him for Divine
assistance and strength in all that you do for his name. Be Humble and Reverent
in your Worshipping of God. Ascribe all the Glory to him of all the good you
receive and do. Be Low, be vile in your own sight, and exalt the Lord in your
Soul: Let him be your first and your last: Begin all your works with God, and
end them in Him. Remember to this purpose, how God has declared Himself as to
this part of your duty, that He resists the Proud, but gives Grace to the
humble. Jam. 4.6. Isa. 57.19.
And has promised to dwell with the Humble. Therefore nip and check all the
buddings of pride when it first begins to shoot. Be not proud of your
clothing, but be clothed with Humility. 1 Per. 5.5.
Be not proud of your Parts and Gifts but use them to Edify one another in
Love. Be not proud of your Riches and Estate, for you must shortly leave them,
and give an account, to Him that lends them you, how you have improved them for
Him. Indeed we do very much forget our selves what we were, and do yet continue
to be Sinful dust, when our hearts do swell with this Vanity. This is the
worst, because (as it is probable,) it was the first sin. And is still the
first that lives, and the last that dies in the heart. Labor therefore through
the Spirit of God to mortify it in all the k^nds of it both Corporal and
Spiritual. And indeed what way soever we look, we may see enough to make and to
keep us humble. If we look up to God how should his Majesty abase us! If we
look to our selves, how low should our sins lay us! If we look to Saints, it
may humble us to see how short we come of many of them in Grace and Holiness;
And if to Sinners, to consider that such we were, and such we should have
continued to be, had not the free and effectual Grace of God made the
difference. You that have most, 1 Cor. 4.7.
have nothing but what you have received.

And for your Direction, as to the whole;

1. Be convinced that your duty lies in these things; that they are not things
indifferent, but indispensibly incumbent upon you: If any thing be necessary
for us to attend unto, the things here proposed to us are so. To make light and
little account of them, is to cashier all practical Obedience, for what remains
to be done by you, if doing justly, and showing mercy, and walking humbly with
God, be not your duty? Yea these are the great and weighty duties of the
Gospel, that claim our primary regard and attendance to them. And yet how many
professing the Christian Religion, act as if Christianity were nothing at all
concerned therein; which is and ought to be for a Lamentation? Persons that are
unjust and unmerciful to men, and disobedient to God, and that oftentimes
without finding any Remorse or Regret in themselves, whose Religion has nothing
of substance in it, but lies in some speculative notions only, 1 Timothy 3.5.
which they have taken up; these have a form of Godliness, but deny the power
thereof; from such, they that would walk with God in a course of Obedience,
must turn away. 2. Make sure of a Being in Christ by Faith, that in him you may
hear and bring forth this fruit unto God. such an Interest in, and Union with
the Lord Jesus by a Faith that is of the Operation of God, is absolutely
necessary to a right discharge of any and every duty. For though some of the
things that God requires, may be done as to the external part, and what is so
done may be materially good, without any such special Grace received and
exerted in the doing of them, yet are they formally defective, as not
proceeding from a pure Heart, and a good Conscience, 1 Timothy 1.5.
and Faith unfeigned, which are the declared Principles, necessary to
constitute and denominate an action Evangelically good. Humane Nature indeed,
refined from the more dreggy and sensual part of it, by Precepts of Morality,
may raise it self to a practice of That that is purely moral in these things.
So some of the Heathens have not only been strictly just, but largely
beneficent, and have done much good both in their public capacities and
private stations. But in as much as our Evangelical Walking and Conversing with
God is concerned in these actions, that they be done through a Divine Strength,
and directed to the Glory of God, this the Mind of Man is altogether ignorant
of, whilst estranged from the Light and Power of that Faith, whereby we come to
be in Christ, and to be one with him: For as it is through his Mediation only,
that we are, and can be accepted in any good we do; so there is a Divine Grace
communicated from him to us, that alone can strengthen us to do, and persevere
in the doing these things, and also direct our hearts to intend the Glory of
God therein: And which is that Qualification that specificates duties of
Evangelical Obedience from acts of Moral Virtue. Thus the fruit ever answers
the species and kind of the Tree it grows upon, Mat. 7.17.
is corrupt or good according as that is; and nothing less than such a
supernatural Grace received in Union with Christ, is sufficient to make this
Evil Tree good, so to alter the Corrupt Nature of Man, to dethrone the Dominion
of Sin, and to bring the Soul under the power of a Principle of Righteousness
and Holiness whereby it becomes disposed, sanctified and meet for the Master's
use, 2 Timothy 2.21.
and prepared unto every good work. Then think it not enough that you are
Christians by Name, by an outward Baptism, and visible Profession, but make
sure of a real spiritual In-being in Jesus Christ, in whom only it is that we
can do any thing that is good, so as to be accepted with God in it; Joh. 15.5.
and without whom we can do nothing, that is a bringing forth fruit unto God.
3. Possess your selves with as lively apprehensions as you can get of the worth
and excellency of the things God requires of you. And these, to do justly, to
love mercy, and to walk humbly with God, are all of them things that have a
real and transcendent worth in them; such things as do approve themselves to be
Good and excellent to an enlightened mind, and a well-disposed heart. They are
such things, wherein the Perfection of our Nature, as it lies in a conformity
to God, and subjection to him, does consist; They are also Lovely in the Eyes
of others, and things of good Report, that cause Religion to be well spoken of.
None but the debaucht, and such whose Consciences are seared as with a hot
Iron, 1 Timothy 4.2.
will open their mouths against them; to all others, that have any sense of
Humanity, and Conscience left, they commend themselves, as things that are good
and excellent, worthy to be practiced and imitated by others. Having such a
lively apprehension of the worth of these things, we shall not look upon them
as a task and imposition upon us, but do them with delight as things that are
most suitable and agreeable to us. 4. Read, study and in all things consult the
Word of God, to regulate your doings to God, and dealings with Men. This
written Word is the Revealed Will of God. This shows us all things we are
commanded, and all we are forbidden. This Word is able to make the Man of God
perfect, 2 Timothy 3.17.
thoroughly furnished unto all good works. And what can more commend it to us to
be the Book of our daily Converse and Meditation? I don't wonder that David
speaks so much in the praise and commendation of it, when he declares it was a
Lamp unto his feet, and a Light unto his path. Whether it were night or day
with him, Psalm. 119.105.
whatever state of Life he passed through, the Word of God was his Rule, his
Counselor, that never failed him, and never misled him. How much is it then
our wisdom to have a constant Regard to this Word, to see that warranting our
actions, guiding us in our difficulties, and reclaiming us when we go astray.
Such is the promise for our direction, consulting with the Word, and seeking
God to enable us by his Spirit to understand it, Isa. 30.21. Thine Ears shall
hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way walk ye in it, when ye turn to
the right hand, and when ye turn to the left. 5. Awe your hearts with the
Authority of God in his Commands, when Temptations would bribe your Affections
to turn out of the path of Duty. We need something to check those inclinations
there are in us to comply with Temptations, which those that are engaged in a
course of Obedience are wont to meet with: And nothing so effectual to that
purpose, as to consider that the Lord who has showed us where our duty lies,
has also Required that we should walk therein. That his Precepts are not only
Counsels, but Commands, which we cannot violate, without being guilty of a high
Contempt of God, and exposing our selves to his displeasure. If the Charge of
an Earthly Superior has so mnch force, as to restrain Men from those things
that their Natural Appetites incline them to, ^er. 35.14.
(as the Rechabites, who would not drink Wine, because their Father had
commanded them to forbear;) how much more should the Command of the Great God
of Heaven and Earth influence us to a vigorous Resistance of all those
Temptations, that would divert us from our Duty to Him? It Is enough to oppose
and silence any Temptation when we are in the way of our Duty, to charge our
selves with this, ^^l. 119.5.
that God has commanded us to keep his Precepts diligently. 6. And lastly; Take
heed and beware of Covetousness, which is that Evil in the heart, from whence
Temptations ordinarily do proceed, or which they strive to work upon, to turn
us aside from doing justly, loving mercy, and walking humbly with God.
Whosoever indulges this Evil in himself, and is governed more by a worldly
Interest, than the Concernments of God's Glory, his own present Peace, and
Eternal Happiness, will often halt in the practice of these things.
Opportunities to be unjust and unmerciful, when they present, will inflame his
Lust, and cause him to break with God. Pray that God would mortify this Evil
in your heart. Arm your self with all the considerations of the vanity and
insufficiency that there is in the greatest worldly affluence to make you
happy, and especially think often of that mortifying Question that our Lord and
Savior has put to us; Matthew. 16.26. What is a man profited if he shall gain
the whole World, and lose his own Soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange
for his Soul? No gains of Unrighteousness can countervail the loss of the Soul.
Wherefore knowing the terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.11
let us take heed that we be not overcome by this Secret Evil in our own bosom.
Mortify the Love of the World in you; and set up the Love of God as the Ruling
and Governing Principle in all your actions.
THE END.

