A LOOKING-GLASS OF HVMANE FRAILTY: SET BEFORE US IN A SERMON PREACHED AT THE
FUNERALS OF Mris. ANNE CALQUIT, Late Wife of Mr. NICHOLAS CALQUIT, Draper, Who
died on the 7. day of April 1659. and was interred the 19. of the same month,
At the Parish Church of Alhallows the less in Thames Street.

By NATH. HARDY, Minister of St. Dionys. Backchurch.

Psalm. 144. 4. Man is like to vanity, his days are as a Shadow that passes
away.

Qui aeternitate Dei perspecta breve and poene ad puncti instar humanae vitae
spatium cogitaverit, ante aculos suos semper habebit interitum, etc.

Hieron. London, Printed by R. D. for Joseph Cranford, at the Sign of the
Castle and Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

To his highly esteemed Friend, Mr. Nicholas Calquit.
I Much fear, lest the perusal of this Sermon prove the reviving of your
sorrow, and cause that wound which the death of your Dear Consort has made,
to bleed afresh.

But I hope with all, that as your love has prompted you to desire a
perpetuation of her memory, so your prudence teaches you to moderate your
grief for her dissolution.

That which especially concerns you, and whereof (I trust) you are not
forgetful, is,

1. Diligently to enquire into the deserving cause wherefore God has deprived
you of so great a comfort so soon, that the shower of your tears for her, may
be swallowed up in the river of godly sorrow for sin.

2. By this sad experience to be so effectually convinced of the uncertainty of
all earthly enjoyments, that it may be a curb to all inordinate affection.

3. Finally, when you contemplate her dust, so to remember your own death,
that it may be a spur to a speedy and constant preparation.

So shall you have just reason to say with David, It is good for me that I have
been afflicted. Psalm. 119. 78.


That these white flowers may (through Gods grace) spring from the black root
of your doleful Loss, That that wise Providence which has made this sore
breach, would be pleased to make it up, That what was (I hope in love) denied
to her, may be (and that in mercy) conferred on you, namely, a long life on
earth, and that which is (I trust) already conferred on her, may (at length) be
given to you, namely, an aeternal life in Heaven, is the hearty Prayer of him
whom you have by many favors obliged to be

Your affectionate Friend, NATH. HARDY.

A LOOKING-GLASS OF Humane Frailty.
Psalm the 39th. verse the 5th. Behold, thou have made my days as an hand
breadth, and mine age is as nothing before thee: verily every man at his best
state is altogether vanity. Selah.


THere are two evils to which the children of men in this world are subject;
namely, of Sin, and of Affliction: the former whereof calls for Poenitence, the
later for Patience: of both these David gives us a pattern, of the one in the
foregoing, and the other in this Psalm, that being (as St. Ambrose has well
observed) forma poenitentiae, a Psalm of Repentance for his Sins, and this
forma poenitentiae, (...).
a Psalm of contentation under his sufferings.

The two great duties of Gods servants under afflictions are, a silent
submission, and a sanctified use of them: The former of these makes
afflictions still-born children, in as much as it shuts the mouth, and
represseth all clamorous cries. This the Psalmist learnt when he said, I was
dumb, and opened not my mouth. The other makes afflictions pregnant Verse. 9.
mothers, in as much as they enable us to the exercise of many excellent graces.

Among the several influences which sanctified troubles have on us, it is not
the least, that it opens our eyes. Schola crucis schola lucis is a known and
experienced saying, the school of the Cross is very lightsome, and though
bitter to the taste, is a singular salve for the eye. Apollonius writes of a
People who see nothing in the day, but all in the night: In the day of
prosperity we forget, in the night of adversity we remember both God and our
selves, as his Sovereignty, so our own frailty. Alexander who was flattered by
the people as a God, having received a wound in his body, confessed himself to
be mortal. This holy man whom you find fancying a stability in the time of his
prosperity, I said my mountain is Psalm. 30. 7.
so strong it cannot be moved; being now under a cross, acknowledges his
brittle fragility in the words of the text: Behold, thou have made my days as
an hand breadth, etc.

Though there is no parcel of holy writ which does not deserve our serious
view, yet some Scriptures have as it were asterisms annexed to them, to
intimate, that they ought to be more especially pondered by us, and such is
this which I am now to handle. The truth is, there is no lesson more
substantial than the nothingnesse of our substance or age, no meditation more
serious and weighty than that of man's lightness and vanity; nor would any
Doctrine be more closely laid to heart than this, that our days are as an
hand, breadth. That this transitorinesse of our lives might not be slightly
passed over in our minds; whereas some Scriptures have one asterisme either in
the beginning or end, and others two, to wit, both in the beginning and the
end, this verse has three notes of attention, in the beginning, in the middle,
and in the end. The first word we meet with, is a Behold, which argues it to
be rem seriam, a serious lesson: the word in the middle of the verse is verily,
which speaks it to be rem certam, a certain truth: and the last is Selah,
which intimates it to be rem magnam, a momentous Doctrine. Behold is a note of
attention, Verily of asseveration, and Selah of meditation: Behold calls upon us
to take notice, Verily requires us to believe, and Selah wills us to
consider it: I hope there will need no more to quicken your he arts and ears
whilst I shall with all possible brevity discuss this delineation of the
shortness of life: Thou have made my days, etc.

The Text you see consists of three clauses; The subject of the first is days,
and those days measured, and the measure short, Thou have made my days as an
hands breadth; The subject of the second is age, and that age being weighed in
the balance, found light, very light, a mere nothing, mine age is nothing
before thee: The subject of the third is man; and that considered not in his
autumn, but spring, who is found to be very vain, every man in his best estate
is altogether vanity.

For our more methodicall proceeding, observe in the text a particular
exemplification of one and the same Doctrine.

The Doctrine is no other than life's brevity, which is,

Particularly exemplified in David himself, and that two ways.

Absolutely in the first clause, thou have made my days as an hands breadth.

Comparatively in the second, mine age is as nothing before thee.

Generally amplified, in reference to the whole race of mankind, every man in
his best estate, etc.

Before I enter upon these severals, it will not be incongruous to observe,
that,

1. The Psalmist thinks it not enough to mention, but ineulcateth this
doctrine of the brevity of humane life; nor is it only here, but elsewhere to
be observed; yea, not only in him, but Job: so that in several places, when
those holy men fall upon this subject, they set it forth with multiplied
expressions both proper and metaphorical.

That which we may well conceive to be hereby intimated, is,

1. On the one hand our dullness and unwillingness to lay this truth to heart.
There is no lesson we are more untoward to learn, and therefore the
Schoolmaster repeats it so often, among all the neiles of the Sanctuary, none
harder to enter into us than this, and therefore the Masters of the Assemblies
fasten it so strongly, indeed it is but reason that what we are so prone to
cast behind our backs, should be frequently set before our eyes.

2. On the other hand our duty, which is not once, but again and again to
consider it; God has spoken once (says the Psalmist) and Psalm. 62. 11.
I have heard it twice: It may admit this gloss, what God speaks but once, we
should hear with twice that attention which we give to what is spoken by men;
and surely if we should hear twice what God speaks once, we should hear often
what he speaks often. That lesson which is so much iterated cannot be enough
conn'd, and what the Holy Ghost has uttered in such multiplied words, is
certainly most worthy our multiplied thoughts.

For both these reasons, no doubt it is, that the Penmen of holy writ do in
their manifold expressions not only use similitudes to represent the shortness
of life, but such similitudes as are most obvious and familiar to us, that
which way soever we turn our eyes, we may be put in mind of it. When we are at
Sea, the speedy sailing of the Ship; when in foreign Job 9. 25. 26.
parts, the short time of our sojourning; 1 Pet. 1. 17. Isay 38. 19.
when on the Road, the quick riding of the Post; and when in Tents, the sudden
taking down and removing of them, do all proclaim to us the passing away of our
life; the vanishing of the clouds, and flight of the Eagle above Job 7. 9.
us; the withering of the flowers, and Isay 40. 6.
cutting down of the grass beneath us; the tales we tell in the day, and dreams
we have Psalm. 90. 4.
in the night; finally, the breath we daily send out of our mouths, and here
the narrow breadth of our hands are all made use of to represent this truth unto
us, that whether we look upward or downward, both waking and sleeping, both by
other creatures, and by our own selves, we may be admonished of our mortality.

2. This good man reflecting his thoughts upon man's frailty, applies it to
himself, in that he says, my days, and mine age, thereby setting us an
excellent pattern of bringing home general truths to our own particulars: We
are all very backward to grant that in hypothesi, which we know to be true in
thesi; that all men are sinners we easily acknowledge; and yet who says in
good earnest, I am a sinner; that every man is mortal none will deny, and yet
who considers, that himself is so. It was St. Hierom's complaint in communi
strage morientium nemo se cogitat Hieron.
moriturum: even at such times when multitudes are taken away by death, no man
(almost) thinks it will seize upon him: So that whereas it is a joyous
promise to the godly man, a thousand shall fall at thy side, Psalm. 91. 7.
and ten thousand at thy right hand, yet it (to wit, the plague) shall not come
nigh thee: It is the impious practice of the wicked man, though a thousand fall
at his side, and ten thousand at his right hand, not to think death shall (nay
to think it shall not) come nigh him.

But surely it is our duty, and will be our wisdom, to bring home both
examples and doctrines to our selves, that what we see verified in others, and
what we confess is appointed for all, we also look upon as impending over our
own heads. They are both intended by God, Oh let them be so made use of by us
as glasses wherein to see our own faces. Do we then see others brought to their
graves? what should our thoughts be but to allude to those words of St. Paul to
Saphyra, Behold, the feet of them who have buried this my brother (or sister)
are at the door to carry Acts 5. 9.
me out. Do we assent to this truth, death is the end of all men? what should
out meditation be, but this, death will be my end? The truth is, universal
propositions include each particular, and therefore the inference is just; so
that David in this verse saying, every man, might also well say, My days; and
withal, universal propositions can have little influence upon the will and
affections, unless every one look upon himself as included in them: To what
purpose is it to believe the Remission of sins, and The resurrection of the
flesh, if I do not also believe The Remission of my sins, and The Resurrection
of my flesh? to as little purpose is it to acknowledge that every man is
vanity, if I do not in particular consider, that I am so. Behold, thou have
made my days, etc.

3. David having particularly asserted his own frailty, goes on to lay it down
as a general maxim.

Probably for his own comfort, in that it was not his case alone: It is a great
alleviation of an affliction to consider that it is common; with this St. Paul
cheared up the Corinthians, There has no temptation taken you 1 Cor. 10. 13.
but such as is common to man: and in this particular of death, when Joshua and
David Josh. 23. 14. 1 Kings 2. 2.
perceived their own death approaching, they reflect on its general extent, I
go the way of all the earth, thereby rendering it so much the less terrible to
themselves.

Certainly, for others warning to make account of the like. Lest any should
think, that though David's days were but an hands breadth, yet theirs may be of
a longer measure, he lets the whole race of mankind know, that they are all
concerned; so that as Christ said to his Disciples, What I say unto you I say
unto all, David seems to say here, What I Mark 13. 14.
say of my self I say of all: It was not so in other things, though David
could say of himself in one place, My Cup runs over; Psalm. 23. 4. 86. 2.
and in another place, I am holy, he could not say so of every man, nay, but a
few men, they are not many who enjoy that measure of prosperity, and fewer who
attain that piety which he had; but there are none who are not under the law of
mortality, and therefore no wonder, if as he says, Thou have made my days, so
he concludes, every man in his best estate, etc.

These things being premised, I shall now proceed to the distinct handling of
the several clauses, and accordingly,

I shall begin with the particular exemplification, Genesis 1.
and that

As it is set down absolutely in those words, Partic. 1.
Thou have made my days as an hands breadth, wherein the Psalmist lays down
a double assertion, the one concerning himself, My days are as an hands
breadth, the other concerning God, Thou have made.

1. David affirms his days to be as an hands breadth, by which metaphor, I
conceive two things are intended.

1. An hands breadth is a determinate measure, The time of life is set. The
Vulgar Latin reads it, mensurabiles, days which Vulg. Lat.
may be measured, that argues Tempus finitum, that this life is finite: our
days are both numerabiles and mensurabiles, such as may be numbered and
measured, as being finite; But dies palmares, which is the true reading of the
original, goes further, in that his days are said to be as an hands breadth,
it notes not only Tempus finitum, but definitum, such a time as shall end, but
the end whereof is fixed, so true is that of Job, Is there not an appointed
time to man upon Job 7. 1.
earth?

2. Chiefly an hands breadth is a short measure, and so is the time of life, St.
Hierome understands it so, and therefore reads it expressly Hieron.
breves: Indeed both the words here used serve to illustrate this truth.

1. The Psalmist does not say, my years, or my months are as an hands breadth,
but my days, which next to hours, is the shortest dimension of time. Those
sacred Annals, the Books of Chronicles are called in the Hebrew, words of
days, for this reason probably, to intimate the short lives of the Kings of
Israel and Judah, which are there recorded. The truth is, the singular number
may serve to represent man's life, which is but one day, the prosperous life a
Sun-shining, the afflicted a rainy day, the long life a summers, and the short
a winters day; some have only a morn and breakefast, others stay till noon and
dine, the eldest live but till evening and sup in this world, all must go to
bed in the grave when the night of death comes.

2. But that which is principally intended, is the measure of those days,
which is not an ell, or a yard, or a cubit, the length of an arm, or an elbow;
no, nor yet the length, but only the breadth of an hand: nor is this affirmed of
one particular day by it self, but of all his days together, the whole time
of his life. Thus as Parrhasius, when he had drawn Cyclops asleep on a little
table, the places Satyrs about him measuring his thumb with a long stalk, to
express the greatness of his stature; so here the Psalmist, to set forth the
shortness of his life, brings in God, as it were measuring it with an hands
breadth.

That you may yet more fully discern the fitness of the resemblance, it will
not be amiss to observe a distinction of a double handbredth.

The one greater, which is the whole space between the top of the thumb and the
little finger when the hand is expanded, it is in account near twelve inches,
and is called a span.

The other lesser, which is only the breadth of the four fingers, and those not
distant from, but closed one to the other.

The former of these is by the Greek called (...), and that is the word here
used by Symmachus: the later is called (...), and that is the word used by the
Seventy. Indeed in some copies it is (...), old days, which may admit of a
good construction to this purpose, as old garments are quickly worn out, so are
our days. But doublesse the best reading (as agreeing with the Hebrew) is,
(...), which signifies, the lesser hands breadth; so that what Anacharsis said
of Seamen is upon this account true of all men, there is but the space of four
fingers between them and death. Indeed this metaphor may very justly take in
the whole latitude of life which men attain in this world, the four fingers
breadth representing the four ages of man, to wit, Childhood, Youth, Manhood,
Old age: the life of a child is scarce an inch, of an old man but a span; of
the one it may be said, his days are but a fingers breadth, and of the other it
can but be said, his days are as an hands breadth.

2. Having taken this view of dies palmares, the measure of our days, which is
an handbredth, it will be requisite to consider the Tuposuisti, who it is that
has made our days such, and the foregoing verse informs us, that it is
Jehovah, the Lord, to whom David directs there his prayer, and here his
complaint. My times (says this holy man elsewhere Psalm. 31. 15.
to God) are in thy hands; that is, at his dispose; so much Abraham intended by
the phrase, when he says to Sarah concerning Hagar, behold, thy maid is in thy
hands, Genesis 16. 6.
do with her as pleases thee: Thus were David's times in Gods hands, to appoint
the continuance of them, according to the pleasure of his own will; yea, Job
(speaking of man indefinitely) says, his days are determined, the number of
his months are with thee, thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass.
He that has set bounds to the Sea, hither to it shall go and no further, has
appointed limits to man's life. Thus long he shall live, and no longer. Our
Savior said to his Disciples, the hairs of your head are numbered, and surely
then the days of our life are numbered; and if the sparrow fall not to the
ground, much less does a man, without the Father, by whose providence all
things are ordered, and consequently, all man's days are appointed; so true is
this of the Psalmist, Thou have made my days as an hands breadth.

To close up this with a double meditation.

1. Since God has made our days as an hands breadth, let us be content they
should be so, not murmuring at the brevity either of our own or others lives,
we are apt (with Jonah) to say, we do well to be angry, when (like his gourd)
our life, or the life of any of our friends quickly withers; but this holy
man's practice is far better, and ought to be our pattern, who says in this
Psalm, I was dumb and opened not my mouth, because thou did it. The more to
enforce this lesson of contentation in this respect upon us, consider,

1. It is not in thy power to make them longer, no not an hairs breadth, then
this hands breadth, which of you (says our Savior) by Luke 12. 25.
taking thought, can add one cubit to his stature? (I may add) or one day to
his life?

Indeed a prudent care of prolonging our days is commendable as because God
requires it so, because the time how long we shall live is unknown to us: but
an impatient anxiety in respect of life's shortness is foolish, since it
makes our life so much the more bitter, and not at all longer.

2. Besides, though God be the efficient, yet we are the meritorious cause of
the abbreviation of our days; God at first made our days of such a breadth as
could not be measured, nor should our life have known death if we had not
known sin: It is very observable what Hezekiah says to this purpose, I have
cut off like a Weaver my life: Isa. 38. 12.
he will cut me off with pining sickness; acknowledging it to be his own act
as well as Gods, yea (as the order imports) therefore Gods, because his, Had
not we our selves cut short our lives, God would never have cut them short, and
therefore let us so acknowledge our deservings as to clear divine justice, and
submit to his dispose.

2. Since God has made our days as an hands breadth let us so account them. No
arithmetic in numbering, nor Geometry in measuring our days better than that
which God himself teaches. But alas it is an usual practice to make our days
far longer in our imaginations than they are in reality. It was the injustice
of that Steward to his Lord, who when the debt was an hundred measures of
wheat, bid the debtor, write fourscore; and when an handred measures of Oil,
to write down fifty: but such is our injustice to our selves, that when our
days are not fifty, we write down fourscore; and whereas they are but an
hands, breadth, we fancy them to be of a far larger size. Indeed, as the
deceitful hour-glasse, having the sand up on both sides, makes a man think
there is a good deal of the hour to run out, whereas by reason of an
hollownesse in the middle it sinketh presently; so do our days, by reason of
strength and health promise us to be many, and on a sudden, by reason of some
ill humor seizing on the vitals in the middle of the body, they prove to be
few. It is a saying in the Civil Law, Praesumitur quilibet vivere centum annos,
Every one is presumed to live an hundred years; the rise whereof is that fond
opinion in the minds of most men, whereby they flatter themselves with
apprehensions of long life, Oh let us remember it is the property of a good man
(according to the Greek Fathers phrase) (...), (...) Naz.
to esteem his life as a Pilgrimage of a short continuance, And this especially
for four ends.

1. To hasten our repentance for our sins. The measure of our days, is the
space of our repentance, since it is narrow, let this be speedy; that cannot be
long extended, let not this be long deferred; One of the days of thy life must
be the day of repentance, and if one, whynot this day? especially considering
the measure (for ought thou know) may be at the utmost extent, and this day
may prove thy last. It is true, At what time soever a finner repents from the
bottom of his heart, God will do away his offense; but then he must repent
whilst he has time: At what time the wind serves the Mariner, he may sail
to the Haven; but then he must sail while the wind serves, which will not be
always, nor long, and therefore let us be so wise, as to take time whilst it
is afforded.

2 To lessen our affections toward this world. Whenas the measure of our days
is contracted to an hands breadth, why should the earthy desires of our hearts
be so much enlarged? Could we at our pleasure add day to day and year to year,
it were good policy to join house to house, and field to field; but to what
purpose are many goods, when (with the rich fool in the Gospel) we have perhaps
but a few hours, whilst thou live, thy days are but as the breadth of thy
hand, when thou die, thou shall have no more ground than the length of thy
body, why so greedy in grasping large revenews and vast possessions?

3. To lengthen our patience under the afflictions of this present life, our
days are of a narrow breadth, a short length, and afflictions can last no
longer, nor be extended broader than our days; Why should not our patience be
as large and long as our afflictions? One Greek reading of this clause is
(...), days of strife and misery; such were David's at this time, and many
times are ours, but the comfort is, they are (...), only an hands breadth: Man
that is born of a woman (sath Job) is of few days, and full Job 14. 1.
of trouble. True our days are full of trouble, I but withal they are few;
the fewness of our days would be a trouble, were it not that they are full of
trouble, and the fullness of their trouble might be a grief, were it not for
their fewness: Neither on the one hand should the pleasure of our days much
elevate us, nor on the other, the sorrows of them perplex us, when we consider,
that those though sweet, are but short, and these though sharp, are but few,
very few, no more than will make up as it were an hands breadth.

4. To quicken us in the practice of good works, They say of the Birds of
Norway, that they fly faster than others, not because Nature has given them
more, or swifter wings, but because the days are shorter there than elsewhere
they make the greater haste, Oh that the consideration of the short measure of
our days might accelerate us in our race to heaven, so as with great speed and
diligence we may learn to work out our salvation. It is said of the Devil, he
is come down to the Inhabitants of the earth, having great wrath, Rev. 12. 12.
because he knows his time is but short; how should we bestir our selves with
great zeal in Gods service, since we know our time is short. Take in the whole
life of man, it is but as the breadth of four singers, sure we had not need to
lose any of them: He that having but four acres to sow with corn (all which is
little enough to supply his family) and should only sow one, and let the rest
overrun with weeds, will he not deservedly be branded for a fool? Oh why then
are we so foolish to mis-spend the greatest part of our days in doing nothing,
or worse than nothing, when as all our days are but four fingers breadth;
Nature, or rather the God of nature, has not given us (to use Seneca's
expression) so large a time of life, as to trifle away any part of it; yea, he
that spends it best will still have cause to say with David in the close of
this Psalm, O spare me, that I may recover strength before I go hence, and be
no more seen.

2. You have heard the brevity of man's life exemplified in David, by an
absolute assertion under the metaphor of an hand breadth, go we on to the
comparative proposition, mine age is nothing before thee.

The subject of this proposition is variously rendered. By the Caldee it is read
body, and indeed it is man's duration in respect of his body, which is said to
be as nothing, since the soul is immortal. Aquila reads it (...), the time of
the souls imprisonment in the body; the Seventy translate it (...), which is
rendered by the Vulgar Latin substantia, but properly signifies subsistentia,
and is so to be understood here, my subsistence. The Hebrew word is most
genuinely translated by aevum, mine age, to wit, in this world; for that is
sometimes the signification of the word.

Concerning his age, David says, it is as nothing: If you compare this with
the former clause, you shall observe a gradation, ascending in the subject,
whereas there days, here an age, which is made up not only of days, or
months, but years, descending in the praedicate, there an hands breadth, (which
is but small) here nothing. Solomon speaking of the comforts of life, seems
to call them Prove. 23. 5.
non entities, Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for this reason
(no doubt,) because their being is a continall tendency to not being. Upon the
same account, the age of David's life is here said to be nothing, because of no
continuance; the word (...) is near a kin to (...), which comes from (...)
cessavit, and so soon does man's age cease, that it is as if it were not at all.

But yet this must be taken with its restrictions. David does not say, mine age
is nothing, but it is as nothing; nor does he say this positively, but
respectively, in reference to God, it is as nothing before thee.

The Prophet Isaiah (speaking of the whole world of mankind) says, The Nations
are as a drop of a bucket, and are accounted as the small dust of the balance:
behold, he Isa. 40. 15.
takes up the Isles as a very little thing; but as if this were not full
enough, a little after he says, All Nations before him are as nothing, and
they are counted to him less than nothing Verse. 17
and vanity: a small dust, a single drop are little things, I but they are
something; the Prophet cannot enough set forth the distance between God and the
Nations unless he go lower, and therefore he says, they are as nothing. Nay,
as if this were not enough, he will strain the sense, and speak a
contradiction, rather than not express his meaning, where he says, they are
less than nothing, then which (to speak properly) nothing can be less. And
surely if this be true of all Nations, well might David affirm it of his age,
and if you would know the meaning of those words before thee, it is explained
in that of the Prophet, when having said before him, he adds, they are
counted to him, that is, in comparison of him. Suitable to this it is that the
Psalmist having set forth Gods eternal duration, and presently after speaking
of man's years, he calls them in the language of the Seventy (...), which
Tertullian reads Psalm. 90. 4, 5.
nullificamina; and it is the same in effect with that which goes before, a
thousand years are in thy sight but as yesterday, which being past, is nothing.
Dei esse est suum esse, say the Schools, from that of God to Moses, I am that I
am, Gods being is of and from himself; yea, it is himself, he is One undivided,
unconfined, simple, eternal, and original being, and as there is no being,
but from him, so all other beings are as nothing in respect of him.

It will not be amiss (for the further illustration of this truth) to consider
the age of David's life in several references.

1. David might truly have said, Mine age is short in respect of Methuselah's:
the Days of Methuselah are said to be nine hundred sixty Genesis 7. 5.
and nine years: the days of David, by a Sam. 5. 4.
computation of the time when he began, and how long he reigned, were not much
above threescore and ten, so that he lived not so many tens as Methuselah did
hundreds. The life of man before the flood, was as a large Volume bound up in
folio, but since it is contracted to a far lesser volume, and is (as it were)
bound up in decimo sexto, so that whereas David says in the former clause, my
days are as a hands breadth, he might have said, they are as a fingers breadth
in comparison of the ancient Patriarchs.

2. David might have said, Mine age is very short in comparison of the age of
the world. St. Paul says of the fashion of this Macrocosm it passes away, but
the age of the Microcosm, 2 Cor. 7. 31.
man passes away far swifter. The World was almost as many thousand years old
as David was scores in his times, that number is now well nigh doubled, but
man's age is rather shortened. How many hundreds of years the world may yet
continue is not known to us, but the ordinary number of the years of man's age
now, compared with the number of six thousand years, is but so much as a week
is to a year, or a minute to an hour, so that whereas he says my days are as
a span long, he might have said they are not an inch long, in respect of the
worlds duration.

3. David might have said, Mine age in this World is exceeding little, in
comparison of the duration of the other world. The age to come is no less than
an aeternity, and though it have a beginning, it shall have no end; so that
whereas the Psalmist says My days are as an hands breadth, he might have said,
they are as an hairs breadth in respect of the continuance of the world to come.

4. Finally, David might have said, Mine age is scarcely any thing before the
Angels, whose duration began with this world, and shall continue in the world
to come, and so is coaetaneous with both the worlds.

But all these are far short of this comparison which he here makes of his age
with God, who is eternal, both a part ante, and a part post, from everlasting
to everlasting. The utmost imaginable extent of Time in comparison of aeternity
is far less than an instant, is in respect of the longest Time. Were it
possible to divide aeternity into parts, a million of years would not be so
much as a ten hundred thousandth part; and what then is seventy or fourscore
years? no wonder if David say, mine age is nothing (a mere nothing) before thee.

It is an excellent lesson which may here be taken forth by us, namely, to
look upon our selves in reference to God, that so we may be vile and little in
our own eyes. There are many exeellencies wherein we are apt to glory, and
whereof to boast, which if they would but compare with divine attributes, would
appear mean and contemptible. Were thou strong as Sampson, yet thou may say,
My strength is nothing before thee, not so much and weak stripling is before a
mighty Giant; were thou as wise as Solomon, yet say, my wisdom is nothing
before thee, not so much as the silly brute is before the intelligent Angels;
the very foolishness of God (to use St. Paul's language) being wiser than the
wisdom of men; Were thou Honorable as Alexander, yet say, mine honor is
nothing before thee, not so much as the glimmering candle is before the
glorious Sun; were thou rich as Cressus, thou must say, my riches are nothing
before thee, not so much as the drop of water is to the Ocean: Finally, were
thou as old as Methuselah, thou must say, mine age is nothing before thee, not
so much as a new born babe to aged Methuselah.

To end this, since Man's age is nothing before God, let it be nothing before
man himself, indeed as for that part of our age which is past, it is so with
us, many years since, being but as a few days, and the time which is gone, is
as nothing, Oh that we would look with the same eye upon that which is to
come. Indeed in one sense we must reckon our age as something, and that
precious, well were it if we would set an higher value upon our time than to
waste it away in folly, but still as to the duration we must account it as
nothing, and then we would have none to spare, but wholly employ it for the
gaining of that which is as something before God, a joyful and happy
aeternity. And so much shall serve to be spoken of the first part of the text,
the particular exemplification, pass we on to the General Amplification, in
these words, Genesis 2.
Every man in his best estate is altogether vanity. A clause wherein each word
is Emphaticall, which will the better appear, if you take a view of

1. The extensiveness of the subject concerning whom this doctrine is asserted,
which is,

1. Not the creeping pismire, the crawling worm, the stupid ass, or any of the
sensitive creatures but Man, who is endued with reason.

2. Not one or a few particular men, in some one part of the world, but of
every man, who either has been, is, or shall live in any part of the world.

3. Not only of mean, poor, and ignoble persons, but of man at his best
estate, Quamvis floreat dignitate, opibus, potentia, as Mollerus glosseth upon
the text, though he flourish in wealth, honor, and power; for though the
Seventy reading be (...), every man living, yet the Hebrew (...) which
signifies constitutus, fixed, or settled, is most properly referred to him who
seems to be in a stablished prosperous estate.

2. The Intensivenesse of the praedicate in that every man at his best estate
is,

1. Not only like to vanity, that is the language of the Psalmist elsewhere,
Adam is as Abel, homo similis fact us est, man is become Psalm. 144. 4.
like to vanity; but he is vanity, as if it were not only his resemblance, but
his substance.

2. Nor is he only said to be vain in the concrete, as Zophars language is,
vain man would be wise; but vanity in the abstract, as Job 11. 12.
if it were not only an accident, but his essence.

3. Nor is it only said, he is vanity, as it is elsewhere in this Psalm, but is
altogether vanity, as if from the crown of his head to the soles of his feet
he were nothing but vanity.

4. Nay, in the Hebrew the Emphasis is yet further, in that vanity is the
subject, and man the praedicate, for so the words are to be rendered, according
to the original, Altogether vanity is every man, as if man were not to be
defined by vanity, but vanity by man; so that if you ask, What is vanity? the
answer is, it is man: No marvel if the Psalmist elsewhere affirm, that man is
lighter than vanity; so that were man put in one scale, and vanity in the
other, man would Psalm. 62. 9.
mount up as being lighter, and vanity it self would weigh him down.

To illustrate the truth of this assertion, know.

1. That there is a double vanity, to which every man at his best estate is
subject, namely, of disposition and condition.

1. Man is vanity in his disposition. The Grammarian in Aulus Gellius makes
vanus and stultus synonimous: vanus quasi mente vacuus, and so every man is
vanity, because a fool, Indeed vain man would be wise, but he is foolish in his
thoughts, projects, desires, and actions. In the very next verse it is said,
they are disquieted in vain, to wit, with Verse. 6.
foolish projects, and fruitless cares. The Lord knows the thoughts of man,
that they are vanity; it is no less true of his words and works: no wonder if
man be compared to a shadow, having no light of knowledge in his mind, heat of
grace in his heart, nor substance or solidity in his actions.

2. But that which is here chiefly intended is, the vanity of man in respect of
his condition; in reference to this it is that it is said in the beginning of
the next verse, man walks in a vain show, as if his residence in this world
Verse. 6.
were but like that of a Player upon the stage, and this is here affirmed of
his best estate and condition.

2. Man's condition at the best is but vanity in three respects, because
inconstant and perishing, empty, and unsatisfying, false and deceiving.

1. Vanum quod evanescit, that which is vain has no solidity, and therefore no
permanency; lightness is the proper adjunct of vanity and inconstancy the
effect of lightness. Such is man's best estate, he seems to be settled as the
earth, but he vanishes with the wind, changes with the moon, and ebeth with
the water, Homo Bulla is true of man, at his best estate he is like the bubble
which swells up by the rain falling upon the water, and falls presently, or which
the child causes with the breath of his mouth at the end of the reed, and
vanishes with the least shaking of his hand. It was not without reason that
man is called by the Philosopher, Ludus fortunae, Fortunes may game, with whom
she sports her self, by putting him as it were into various shapes, in
altering his condition, Man at his best estate, like the Venice glass, is
bright, but brittle; or like Sodoms Apples, golden colored, but mouldring; his
strength a rush, soon shaken; his riches, dust, quickly driven away; his honor
a fancy, presently gone. To day Nebuchadnezzar jets it on the house top, as if
he expected a salutation from the celestial Majesty, and suddenly he is turned
to graze with the beasts of the field, with which agreeeth that of the Poet,

Quem dies vidit veniens superbum, Sen. Trag.

Hunc dies vidit fugens jacentem.
Show me that Rose that will not fade, that fruit which will not putrify, that
cloud which will not vanish, that garment which will not fret, and then (not
till then) expect to find that man who in his best and most prosperous estate
is not subject to mutation and dissolution.

2. Vanity and inanity go together. One of the Hebrew words (...) which is
rendered vain, signifies empty; that which is vain is empty, and being so,
cannot satisfy, such is man's best estate, as not able to give any true
content. Man at his best estate, as he is mutable, so he is unsatiable, his
desires are still larger than his fortune; nor is it any time so well with him,
but that still he would be better. Ahab in the midst of his opulency is sick
for Naboth's Vineyard; Hamon in the height of dignity is troubled at the want
of Mordecay's knee. Health, beauty, wealth, honors, Say of Content as the
depth says of wisdom, it is not in us. Man in his most prosperous
concondition feeds upon wind which cannot fill the stomach, and therefore
like the horseleech he still cries, Give, give.

3. That which deceives our expectation seeming to be what it is not, and
promising (as it were) to do that it cannot, is vain in the worst sense, being
at once both vanity and vexation. This is true of man at his best estate who
promises to himself and others that which he cannot perform, and so is
deceived and deceives.

The rich fool, being in a prosperous estate, promised himself much pleasure,
but was miserably disappointed. Job says of his brethren, they dealt
deceitfully with him as the Job. 6. 15.
brooks do by the Traveller which are dry in the scorching heat, when he is
most thirsty. It is a remarkable passage in the Psalms, Men of low degree are
vanity, men of high degree Psalm. 62. 9.
are a lie: a man of low degree is at his worst, a man of high degree at his
best estate, and yet whereas men of low degree are said to be vanity, men of
high degree are said to be a lie, which is as it were the dregs of vanity,
because it tends to deceive, which yet is most justly affirmed of men of high
degree, who by reason of their place and state in this world, seem to promise
much, and yet are in truth a lie, not performing what they promise, and so
disappointing both their own and others hopes.

The use we are to make of this doctrine, is, in reference both to others, and
our selves.

1. In respect of others, whether enemies or friends.

Are the Churches or our enemies (to outward appearance) in an established
condition of prosperity? let us not give way to excess of grief and fear, or
anger, but rather remember in their best estate they are vanity, and being so,
are set in slippery places. They seem to be fixed stars, but in truth they are
only blazing comets, which appear for a little time and then vanish away.

2. Are our friends for the present in a flourishing estate? take we heed how
we let out either our hopes or love too much toward them, considering that
they are but vanity, and therefore our hope which is placed on them will end in
shame, and our love in vexation: Why so big with expectation of advantage or
advancement from thy rich Ally, Honorable Lord, potent friend? alas, thou do
but set thy foot upon the water which cannot bear thee: Why so inflamed with
affection to thy beautiful Wife, child, or near relation? Alas, thou do but
embrace a shadow in thine arms, which cannot, must not stay long with thee.

2. In respect of our selves.

1. Reflect we with sorrow and hatred upon sin, the true cause of man's vanity.
Man in his first estate was altogether excellency; God saw every thing that he
made, and behold it was very good: surely this was much more Genesis 1. 32.
true of man the masterpiece of the creation, the image and glory of his
Maker, not vanity, but divinity was his nature; he was not envelop'd with rags
of frailty, but enobled with robes of innocence; nor did he walk in a vain
show, but a sacred representation of God himself. And now if you would know how
this flower was blasted, it was by the breath of the Basilisk; how this image
was defaced, it was by the poison of the Serpent; how man became vanity, it was
by reason of iniquity: so true is that of the Wiseman, He that sows iniquity
shall reap vanity. The Hebrew words, (...) vanity, and (...) mourning Prove. 22.
8,
are somewhat near in sound; Oh, let us mourn for that vanity to which sin has
subjected us, and let us abhor sin which has subjected us to it.

2. Provide we for our selves another, a better estate than the best which this
world affords, an estate of glory in the Heavens, Man's best estate on earth is
mutable, but that is durable; empty, but that is satisfying; uncertain, but
that is sure; only for term of years, but that is for aeternity. Philosophers
generally affirm, that the Heavens are in continual motion, and the earth
stands immovable, though there are those who assert, that the heavens stand
still, and the earth moves: This indeed is a riddle in Philosophy, but it is a
certain truth in Divinity, that the things of earth are in a continual flux,
and the things of Heaven in a stable permanency.

And therefore in whatsoever state we are here, let us learn to be content, be
it never so mean, so as not to repine; and let us not be content, be it never
so high, so as to rest satisfied; and whether our estate in this world be high
or low, let the first and best of our desires and endeavors be after that
estate which is not a shadow, but a substance; not a lease, but an
inheritance; not vanity, but foelicity, and shall be far more in the fruition
than it is in the expectation. To the possession whereof he bring us who has
purchased it for us. Amen.

I Have done with my Text, but I must not yet have done. This sad providence
wills us to sit still a while longer, and by taking a serious view, to make a
Religious use of it.

It is not very many months since I was employed to perform a far more welcome
office for this our Sister, namely, the consummating her Nuptials. She being in
the prime of her years, happily matched to a dearly loving and loved Husband,
enjoying a confluence of all outward contentments, seemed as it were (to use
the Psalmists phrase) to be in a settled estate, and (according to our usual
phrase) to be provided for as to this world.

But alas! in how short a revolution of time, how doleful an alteration? This
young, strong, hail, beautiful Gentlewoman in her best estate becomes a sad
instance of the general doctine in my Text; This flourishing flower is blasted
by the wind of a violent disease, and plucked as it were out of her Husbands
bosom, by the rough hand of Death, and I am now called to officiate her
Funerals.

Thus have you sometimes seen the bright Sunshine on a sudden veiled with a
dark cloud, and a serene Sky hung with black.

But yet let not, Oh let not her near and dear friends shed too many tears over
her Grave, remembering the Tu posuisti in the Text, who it is that has made her
days as an hands breadth, even He in whose hands all our times are to prolong
and cut short as he pleases: Besides, why should they weep above measure,
since they do not grieve as without hope of (that which is most truly called)
her best estate, her aeternall welfare.

Her Education was Religious, and her Conversation virtuous; she was well
instructed in, and affected to the best things. The silver Picture of her
comely body had in it the golden Apple of a well disposed soul; the golden
ring of her Soul had set into it the precious Diamond of Virtue. A spotless
innocence, humble modesty, and calm meekness were her choice Ornaments; She was
an obedient Daughter, a loving Sister, an affectionate Spouse, a true friend,
and (I trust) a good Christian.

In the time of her sickness she gave evidence of many graces, a confident
reliance upon her gracious God for deliverance from all her pains, a penitent
bewailing her careless expense of time, with serious resolves (if God should
prolong her days) of more exactness in her Christian course, together with her
patient submission to the good will of her heavenly Father.

When she beheld upon her hands the marks of her disease, she said, These are
Gods Tokens, and I willingly embrace them. That saying of Solomon, Favor is
deceitful, and beauty is vain, but a woman that fears the Prove. 31. 30,
Lord she shall be praised, which was the subject of my discourse occasioned by
her Nuptials, was often in her thoughts; so that she was not at all troubled
with any anxious fears lest the disease should spoil her beauty; and though
the rod were smart upon her back, nay, I may say her face, her whole body, she
resolved to kiss it.

Some few days before her death a drowsiness seized upon her, which continued
(for the most part) to her last hour, when one Brother took (as it were) the
other by the heel, death following her sleep, yea, her death being but a
sleep, and the grave to which she is now going a bed wherein she shall repose
her self till the morn of the Resurrection, when she will (I hope) be married
to the Lamb; nor shall any Funerals succeed those joyful Nuptials.

Weep not then for her who is not dead but sleeps, dry your eyes, and (with
this holy man) open not your mouths, or if you do, let it be in Ely's language,
It is the Lord, let him do what seems good in 1 Samuel 3. 18,
his sight.

And now since the Text and occasion preach to us how vain we are, how short
our lives are, and to what changes we are subject; what remains, but that
every one of us be exhorted to prepare for changes, especially our last, and so
to order our steps, that when these days on earth, which are as an hands
breadth, are ended, we may pass to an aeternity of days without either number
or measure in the highest Heavens. Amen.

FINIS.

