THE Happy Return, OR An Account of his Grace the Duke of MONMOUTH'S
Surrendering Himself
(After his long Absconding) to the Secretary of State at the Secretaries
Office in White Hall, on Saturday the 24th. of this Instant November.
HIS Grace the Duke of Monmouth, upon Notice of his being Impeached as a Party
concerned in the late Design, in order to a Rising, etc. having withdrawn
himself, as not supposing it safe or Convenient at that time, to behold the
angry Frowns of Incensed Majesty, but rather suffer Displeasure to waist, that
Paternal Compassion might in some measure return, and Relenting Goodness, Pity
the frailties of his Youth, and accept of his unfeigned Submission and Sincere
Repentance for his unadvised Rashness, in suffering himself to be drawn into so
many ill Conveniences displeasing to his Father and Sovereign, nor did he
altogether fail in his Expectation, for his most Sacred Majesty, that Fountain
of never failing Pity and Compassion, taking his deplorable Condition into his
Princely Consideration, and being moved by the Incessant Prayers and humble
Supplications of the Duchess of Monmouth, etc. out of his Inate kindness and
tender thoughts, notwithstanding a Proclamation Commanding the Duke to
Surrender himself, and 500 l. for any that should seize him, and upon his not
Surrendering, Process upon a Bill of Indictment, in order to an Out-Lawry, being
made, His Majesty, as the first Token of his Relenting, caused the Proceedings
to be staved when the said Out lawry was about to be entered up, of which as
it is supposed, the Duke being advertised by his Friends and Well-willers, and
receiving some other Encouragements, resolved no longer to Abscond, but
Voluntarily, to lay himself at his Fathers Feet and prevent any farther trouble
in searching after him, whereupon he on the 24th Instant, contrary to the
expectation of most Men, came from the place of his Abode in a Chair, and
carrved by two hired Men, passed through the Centries undiscovered of any till
he came into the Secretaries Office, declairing his Intent to lay himself at
his Majesty's Feet and wholly rely on his Mercy, expressing much sorrow for
offending or Displeasing so good a Father and Gracious Sovereign, or to this
effect, showing both in his Countenance and Gesture much Contrition and a Deep
Sense of his Failings, Answering with much humility to such Interrogatories as
were put to him, when having continued there some time, His Majesty and Royal
Highness came thither; whereupon, he was Commanded to his own Lodgings in the
Cockpit, there to continue till further Orders, not without hopes of obteining
Forgiveness and Recovering ^is M^jesties Favor by his present Submission and
future Obedien^e and Service. On the 25th Instant the Council Sat before whom
it was expected by many, that the Duke would be Convened, but as yet we do not
hear he has been before that August Assembly.

Entered according to Order.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for L C. 1683.


