THE OLIVE BRANCH Presented to the Native Citizens of LONDON, In a SERMON
preached at S. Paul's Church, May 27. being the day of their Yearly Feast.

By NATH. HARDY Preacher to the Parish of S. Dyonis Back-Church.

Psalm. 122. 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem; they shall prosper that love
thee. Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 2. c. 21. Quae harmonia a musicis dicitur in cantu,
ea est in Civitate concordia, arctissimum atque optimum omni in Republica
vinculum incolumitatis. LONDON, Printed by J. G. for John Clark, and are to be
sold at his Shop under S. Peter's Church in Cornhil, 1658.

To all the Native Citizens of London; PARTICULARLY, Those who lately met
together; MORE ESPECIALLY, The worthy Stewards of the FEAST.
HOw good and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in unity, Psalm.
133. 1.
the Psalmist tells us, or rather cannot tell us, and therefore proposes it
by way of Question, and ushereth it in with a Behold of Admiration. Surely
then, for Brethren who dwell together in unity, sometimes to meet and feast
together in amity, cannot be either had in it self, or justly displeasing to
any. At all solemn Feasts Piety ought to be the first, and Charity the last
dish; upon which account it is that they usually begin with a Sermon, and end
with a Contribution.

It was your pleasure (my honored Friends) to whom the care of the late
Solemnity was committed, to put the sacred part of that burden on my shoulders.
A Service which as I did not ambitiously seek, so neither could I ingratefully
refuse; and therefore (according to my slender abilities) have endeavored to
perform; of which weak performance your candid acceptance has laid upon me a
further obligation of gratitude. At your desire the following Discourse
(whatever it is) was conceived in the Study born in the Pulpit, and now
appears to the World in the Printers sheets, not doubting but that where ever
you meet, you will vouchsafe to own it, since it (together with the Author) is
so much yours.

As for you (my Brethren) who were pleased to honor the Stewards with your
presence, I heartily wish your liberality had been so large, that it might have
come abroad into all the land as a pattern for others to follow; that as the
close of the Sermon is hortatory, so the Preface might have been laudatory. But
since I cannot praise, I will pray, The Lord make you to increase and abound in
love toward the poor and needy. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 12.


To all my fellow-Citizens, whether then present or absent, I shall make bold
to commend a double word;

1. As the two Cherubims looked with their faces one to another, Exodus 25. 20.
and both to the Mercy-seat; so let us mind each others welfare, and all of us
the Cities good. Let there be no strife between us Brethren, Genesis 13. 8.
except it be who shall most honor this place wherein we were born, by an
exemplary conversation.

2. As our Savior said in another Case to his Disciples, Luke 10. 19, 20.
Rejoice not that the Spirits are subject to you, but rather rejoice because
your names are written in Heaven: So say I in this, let us not rejoice that we
are London-natives, but rather rejoice if we are Citizens of the Heavenly
Jerusalem. Heb. 12. 22.
Let us not please our selves with the privilege of our natural birth in this
City, unless we are born again from above, so as we may truly say (according
to Beza's Translation of those words of S. Paul) our City is in Heaven; Phil.
3. 20. Civitas nostra in coelis, Beza.
where that we may all meet together, celebrating an Eternal Festival of Peace
and Joy, is the unfeigned prayer of

Your affectionate Brother and Servant NATH: HARDY.

PSALM 122. Ver. 8, 9. 8. For my brethren and companions sake, I will now say,
Peace be within thee.

9. Because of the House of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good.


THis Scripture like a well-made picture which looks every way, or a
well-wrought Key which fitteth every door, has a congruous reference to each
circumstance of this solemn meeting. Jerusalem the Mother City of Judea, is
the Center in which the lines of this text, yea the whole Psalm, meet, and upon
what should our eyes, especially at this time, be fixed, but London, which is
the Metropolis of England? This Psalm (whereof the Text is the close) was wont
to be sung by the Jewish Tribes when they met at Jerusalem, on the yearly
feasts; in that respect very fit to be the Preachers subject, when the English,
particularly the London Tribe is gathered together on their annual festival:
besides, the place in which we are assembled, is no other then the House of the
Lord our God; we who are here met are by our birth and education in this famous
City, brethren and companions; nor is there any thing on this occasion more fit
to be inculcated upon us than (that which is the chief scope of the Text) that
we should seek the good of the City, and now say, peace be within thee. Indeed
what duty more suitable to this place then prayer? for whom should prayer be
made if not for our English Jerusalem? what should we pray for if not for her
peace and good? who should pray for it or seek after it if not we? and when, if
not now on this day of our public assembling? You see how easily the Text is
applicable to the occasion; God grant we may all as readily apply the Sermon to
our consciences, and then I doubt not but with one consent we shall breath
forth David's language in reference to this our Jerusalem, For my Brethren and
Companions sake I ^ill now say, peace be within thee; Because of the house of
the Lord our God I will seek thy good.

The words contain in them a double engagement, and double enforcement.

The engagements are to words and works, devotion and action, prayer and
endeavor: I will now say, peace be within thee, I will seek thy good.

The enforcements are in respect of Men and God, Relations and Religion,
persons and place: For my brethren and companions sake, and because of the
house of the Lord our God.

If you please I shall more punctually anatomize the Text into its several
members, for though sometimes a single view of every particle in a Scripture
may seem a mangling of the meat and crumbling of the bread, yet when every word
affords a distinct material observation, it is a careful cutting of the meat
and breaking the bread, so as it may be the better eaten and more easily
digested.

Conceive then the Text as a River parting it self into six smooth and soft
streams; or like a Tree spreading it self into six choice and flourishing
branches, namely, the Cui, Quid, Quomodo, Quando, and the Quare.

The Subject for whom, in the pronouns, thee and thy.

The Object for what, in the nouns, peace and good.

The Acts whereby, in the verbs, say and seek.

The Agent who, implied in the first person of the verbs, and expressed in our
translation by the Pronoune I.

The Time when, in the adverb now, and the future tense of the verbs, will.

The Reasons why, ushered in by the conjunction, because; whilst the Psalmist
looking both downward upon his brethren and companions, and upward upon the
house of the Lord his God, finds strong obligations laid upon him to
endeavor Jerusalems welfare.

I shall with all convenient speed climb up these branches, staying upon some,
and only touching upon others; pass through these streams, sometimes bowing
down my knees, and sometimes lapping with my tongue, that I may make the more
haste.

And now my Brethren and (if I may be so bold) Companions, remember, I beseech
you, where you are, namely, in the house of the Lord our God, and so after a
more especial manner in his presence: That which I seek is (my conscience
bearing me witness) as first Gods glory, so next your souls good; let me not
miss of my aim, my chief errand is peace, the peace of the City; therefore I
trust you will gladly hear what I shall say. If by reason of the multiplicity
of the Branches and Streams my stay shall prove a little longer than ordinary,
I beforehand beg your pardon and patience; withal entreating the holy Spirit
to sharpen your appetites, that you may eat of the pleasant fruits which grow
upon these branches, and drink of the waters of life which flow from these
streams; and having fed your souls I shall then dismiss you to that love-feast
which is prepared for your bodies.

In the handling of these words (according to the proposed method) my discourse
must be retrograde, Partic. 1.
beginning at the end, and ending at the beginning of the verses: (...) and
(...) which are the last words in the Hebr. are the first we must take into
consideration, as referring to the subject for whom peace and good is desired;
nor need we go further than the sixth verse to find out the noun to which these
pronouns refer, it is Jerusalem, which there speaking of, the Psalmist here
speaks to, ut majorem exprimat affectum, Hilar. in loc.
as a more vehement way of expressing his affection. Not to trouble you with
the multiplied acceptions of this word Jerusalem in sacred Writ, know, to our
present purpose that it may be taken either mystically or literally.

1. In a mystical sense, by Jerusalem is understood the Catholic Church,
whereof she was a type, Aug. de Catho. rud. l. c. 30.
and that in several respects, 1. Jerusalem was the place which God chose
before all the world, so we read, The Lord has chosen Sion, and the Lord which
has chosen Jerusalem. The Caholick Church is that number of people which God
has culled out of the rest of mankind, Ps. 132. 13.
being therefore called by the Apostle Peter a chosen generation. Zech. 3. 2.
2. Jerusalem was an holy City, an holy Mountain, 1 Pet. 2. 7.
it is often so called. All the true members of the Catholic Church are Saints,
for which reason she is styled an holy Nation by S. Peter, the holy City, Isa.
52. 1.
the new Jerusalem by S. John, and in our Creed the holy Catholic Church. Dan.
2. 9.
3. 1 Pet. 9. 16.
At Jerusalem was Gods house and David's throne; Revel. 21. 2.
in the Catholic Church is Gods special presence and Christ's royal scepter,
Jerem. 3. 13.
who was both David's Lord and Son. 4. To Jerusalem was the confluence of all
Judea at the time of their solemn feasts: To the Catholic Church (according to
Jeremy's Prophecy) is the gathering of all the nations of the world. 5.
Jerusalem stood upon hills, especially that part of it which was called the
upper city: The Catholic Church in respect of its divine original is the
Jerusalem which is above, which comes down out of heaven. 6. Gal. 4. 26.
Jerusalem was (as we read in this Psalm) a city compact within it self, Revel.
7. 12. Ver. 3.
in respect of the regularity of its building and unity of its inhabitants: The
Catholic Church is one, all whose members are knit together in the bond of
love. 7. Jerusalem was the mother city of Judea: Gal. 4. 26.
The Catholic Church is matter Christianorum, Aug. de mor. eccl. Cath. l. 1. c.
30.
the mother of us all, of all Christians. 8. Mountains and hills were round
about Jerusalem, Gods protection is round about his Church. 9. Psalm. 121. 2.
Finally, the names of Jerusalems citizens were enrolled in a Register, Heb.
12. 21.
and the names of the members of the Church are written in the book of life;
Romans 20. 11.
so fit and full is the parallel between them.

And now according to this construction, we learn how dear and precious the
peace and good of the Catholic Church ought to be to us, what searchings of
heart for her divisions, what longings of heart for her union. The Catholic
Church in reference to God is his daughter, to Christ she is his spouse, to us
she is our mother, and therefore whilst Heretics and Schismatics, like
unnatural children, as it were, rend her garment, nay tread upon her body, and
viper-like eat out her bowels, let us express a filial love toward her by
using our utmost care to procure her peace and promote her good. It were easy
to instance in Moses, Jeremy, Paul, and others, how as the Marigold opens and
shuts with the rising and setting of the Sun, so those good men's hearts have
been suitably affected according to the different state of the Church, her
miseries have been their sorrow, and her peace their joy, oh let the same mind
be in us. The truth is we are never in a right frame till we come to this
temper, so it go well with the Church it matters not much though it be ill with
us; and if ill with the Church, it contents not, though it be well with us.

And as we tender the good, oh let us study the peace of the Church, since it
can never be well with us unless peace be in her, she is a building which
cannot stand if the stones be not cemented, and a chain which cannot hold if
his links be not fastened, a body which cannot thrive if its members be not
united. No wonder if upon this account there is nothing the Churches
adversaries endeavor more than her disse^io^s, nor is there any thing her
friends should more strive for than her union; oh let it be our earnest vote,
our hearty wish, our daily prayer, that all they who confess Gods name may
agree in the truth of his holy Word, and live in unity and godly love.

2. But though the mystical interpretation would not be excluded, yet the
literal is principally intended, and so at once suitable both with the Text
and the occasion.

In this notion it is the city of Jerusalem, Arist. Polit.
for which David is so zealous, and a City being a society or community, yea
according to Aristotle's character, (...), a perfect association; that which we
hence learn is, what special regard every one of us ought to have to the
public peace and common good. We see in nature how the several parts agree
together for the preservation of the Universe; we may observe in our bodies how
the eye sees, the hand works, the foot walks, the mouth eats, the
stomach digesteth, nor for it self only, but the body: Vid. Macar. hom. 3.
thus ought we to be affected toward the whole, the body whereof we are parts
and members; unum omnibus debet esse propositum, ut eadem sit utilitas unius
cujusque and universorum, Cic. ossi. l. 3.
says the Orator; every man should make the common interest his own. And he
(says St. Ambrose) is the perfect wise man who respects not his own advantage
quaerens non quod sibi sed quod omnibus utile, Ambros. offic. l. 3. c. 3.
seeking rather what may be beneficial to all then to himself.

Thus it ought to be: but how contrary most men's practice is sad experience
testifies. Sen. ep. 59.
Seneca observes of voluptuous persons, quis est istorum qui non malitrem
publicam turbari quam comam suam? they had rather the Commonwealth should be
disturbed, then one of their hairs misplaced: And it is reported of Honorius,
Sidon. de Imper. occident. l. 10.
that he was more troubled at the supposed loss of his Hen called Roma, then
at the real loss of the City called by that name. Too many such there are who
are not for the public, so they may enjoy there quiet, and who are more
troubled for the petty loss of their own, then the public damage. The
Propher, Isaiah complains of men who join house to house, Isa. 5. 19.
and lay field to field, that they may dwell alone upon the earth; this
Generation of men still lives who would grasp all into their own hands, (...)
Arr. Epictet. l. 2. c. 22.
and with whom (as Epictetus truly) their own gain is Father, Brother, Kinsman,
Country, yea instead of God himself.

But oh be this base selfish temper far from ns, let us not be like mineral
grounds, which being barren without keep all their riches within their own
bowels; much less like the Ivy, which hinders the growth of that tree to
which it cleaves, that it self may flourish: rather let us be like the star
which shines to enlighten the world; yea like the candle which spends it self
to give light to the room where it is. Let it not be said of any of us, (those
especially who are in place) what Cato complained of the Senators in his time,
Aug. de Civit. de^. l. 5. c. 12.
separatim vos quisque sibi consilia capitis, that they did every one consult
apart for his own ease and contentment; but let us imitate those Fabii and
Fabritii (of whom Salvian says) omnia studia, omnes conatus suos in communia
emolumenta conferrent, they did bend all their studies to the common good.
Salv. de Gu^. l. 1.
To induce hereunto, consider:

1. In seeking the general, we seek our particular good: it is the Prophets
argument to the Captive Jews in Babylon, Seek the peace of the City, Jer. 29.
7.
for in the peace thereof you shall have peace. Cicero laughed at the folly of
those men, Cic. l. 1. ep. ad Attic. 15.
qui amissa republica piscinas suas fore salvas sperare videntur, who hoped
their fishponds should be safe, though the Commonwealth were lost. Quae rogo
insania, quae caecitas! What a madness, blindness is it (says Salvian) to think
we may preserve our own riches, Salv. ^. l.
when the Commonwealth grows poor. Surely if the tree fall, the branches
cannot flourish; and the good of each part is involved in the whole.

2. If at any time by seeking the public good we endanger our safety, we shall
advance our dignity: gloriosum unicuique ducitur (says St. Ambrose) si
periculis propriis quaerat universorum tranquillitatem. Ambros. l. d.
It is an honorable enterprise to endeavor the common tranquillity, though
with our own danger. Neh^m. 2. 10.
Nehemiah and Mordecay are upon record in Gods book, Ester. 10. ^.
to their perpetual renown, for seeking the welfare of the people.

3. And which yet should most prevail with us who profess our selves the
servants of the most High, is, that, this is very acceptable in his eyes. It is
well observed (by the forementioned Father) that whereas Hannah is only said
to speak, Moses is said to cry; the reason whereof is rendered very fitly to our
present purpose, Ambros. in Psalm. 118. Sermon. 19.
Hannah prayed only for a child, which was a private benefit, but Moses for
the whole people of Israel. As public prayers, so prayers for the public, cry
loudest in Gods ears. How angry was God with Jonah, as chiefly for
disobedience to his command, so withal, for that, neglecting to deliver his
errand which concerned the Ninevites good, he fled to Tarshish to prevent his own
supposed danger? whereas David is called a man after Gods own heart, Act. 13.
22, 36.
amongst other reason, because he was one who served his generation, a man
intent on the public good, and as you may see here, resolved to do his utmost
for Jerusalem; which will further appear by a

Discussion of the Objects for what, in the Nounes, Peace, good. Two words
which are not much different as to their sense; Part. 2.
but yet having their peculiar emphasis, I shall distinctly handle them, and so
take notice of the benefit, and the excellency of the benefit.

The benefit it self is Peace, and that within Jerusalem.

The excellency of the benefit is intimated in that parallel word Good.

1. The benefit is

1. Generally, peace, a word both of a large and extensive, and of a narrow and
restrictive acception, and in both senses it may be here construed.

1. Peace in its extensive notion is a voluminous mercy, a state of prosperity
comprehending whatsoever is requisite to the well-being of a person or a
society. In this sense it is used by the Hebrews in their salutations
answering those 3. words (...), which are used by the Greeks (the first whereof
refers to the mind, the second to the body, the third to the estate) and so
taking in all sorts of blessings. This we may very well conceive to be the
latitute of the word in this place; and perhaps the Psalmist changes the
phrase from peace to good in the next verse, to intimate, that by peace he
means a confluence of all those good things which might conduce to Jerusalems
prosperous and happy estate.

2. But though this notion may be included, yet I conceive the restrained
acception of the word peace as it is a particular blessing, is here principally
intended, both because in the former verse it is contradistinguished to
prosperity, and chiefly because in this verse it is not said, pax tibi, but in
te; peace to, but in thee.

If you shall inquire what peace is, I answer with Gregory Nyssen, it is (...),
a friendly agreement with our neighbor, Gr. Niss. orat. 7 de beatitud. Aug. de
Civit. dei. l. 19. c. 11.
or if you will with St. Augustine, it is hominum ordinata concordia, a well
ordered concord among men. What calmnesse is in the Sea, and clearness in the
sky, what health is in the body and harmony in music, that is peace among
men. Calmeness is a quiet settlement of the waves, clearness a freedom from
black and dark clouds, Health a just temperature of the humors, and harmony a
fit accord of the notes: all suitable emblems of peace, which is the ceasing of
jarres, stilling of commotions, and a sweet agreement of many in one.

2. This peace with men is either extera or civilis, without or within, with
foreign countries or domestic Citizens: the former is that which is called
rest round about, Josh. 21. 44.
which God gave the Jews from the Heathens invasion; the later which her is
desired, is peace within Jerusalem, that which is called civil peace, and is
according to S. Austin, Ordinata imperando and obediendo concordia civium, Aug.
l. d.
an orderly concord among the citizens by commanding and obeying: Petr. Greg.
l. 1. c. 3.
Civitas, says one, is quasi civium unitas, Aristot. Pol. l. 7. c. 7.
a city is a peaceable cohabitation of Citizens; it is (...), says Aristotle,
a communion with one another in regular living; so that without peace and
order, it is not populus but turba, a civil society, but a giddy multi ude.

Now though peace is to be had with all men, Romans 12. 18.
nations, people, if it be possible, and, as much as in us lies, to be
endeavored; yet peace with one another is principally to be sought after, as
being of greatest concernment to the safety of the community. If there be war
without and discord within, nothing can be expected but ruin; Gr. Naz: orat.
32.
it being in this case with a city (to use Greg. Nazianzens comparison) as with
a ship on a tempestuous Sea, when the winds are raging without, and the
mariners railing within, so that in all probability it will sink and perish in
the waters. If there be peace without and discord within, the condition of the
city is still desperate; though the sky be never so clear, yet if a wind be
got into the bowels of the earth, it will shake, if not overturn it. But though
there be war without, if there be peace within, the city may probably be safe.
Unanimous citizens are as Agesilaus said concerning Sparta) the best walls to a
city; Plut. Apothegm.
in which respect it was wittily returned upon Caligulas wish, that the people
of Rome had but one neck, intimating his cruel desire to cut them off at a
blow. Thou art mistaken Caesar, had they but one neck -- fortior illa foret, it
would be the stronger to make resistance: no mervail if the Oracle advised the
Athenians, when they were to wage war with the Sicilians, that they should
carry Minerva's Priest with them, Id. de Orat. Pyth.
whose name was (...), which signifies peace.

It is very observable to this purpose, what great care has always been taken
for preventing intestine commotions. that phrase of the Prophet Zachary, Zech.
8. 16.
Execute judgment in your gates, implies, that the Courts of Justice among
the Jews were in the gates of the city; and why so, say some Satyrically, that
the simplicity of the country might not be poisoned by conversing with the
subtle citizens, say others more suitably to my present purpose, Ut civi^atis
populus esset pacificus, discordes ingredi non liceret, that the city might be
at quiet, suits and contentions at law were to be in the gates. It was
appointed by the people of Rome that the Senate should sit in the Temple of
Concord. Crates the Philosopher made it his business to find out and compose
differences among the inhabitants; and Alexander ab Alexandro tells us of an
officer at Athens, Al. ab Al. l. 4. c. 8.
constituted for this only end, to make up breaches among the Citizens; yea it
was a law among the Troglodites, that if there were any disturbances, upon the
very naming of peace, though but by a woman or a child, all was hushed: no
wonder if David's word and wish concerning Jerusalem, is peace be within thee.

2. Having opened the nature of the benefit, it now remains that we take view
of its excellency, as it is construed in that other word Good; for though
taking peace in its narrow notion, we may construe good in a way of
amplification, as if the Psalmists meaning were, I will not only say peace,
but I will seek all manner of good; yet I rather incline to look upon good, as
Synonymous with peace. Vaiah 45. 7. 52. 7.
To this agrees that Antithesis of peace and evil, I make peace and create
evil; and to this purpose it is, that publishing peace is twice in the same
verse said to be the bringing good tidings. Unum and Bonum in metaphysics are
convertible terms; and here good is, as it were, appropriated to peace; nor is
it without good reason, and that up on a threefold account, in as much as

1. Of all good things, peace, and especially civil peace, is the best, as
health in respect of the natural, so peace in respect of the politic body is
the chief comfort. Plutarch reckoning up those good things which are needful
for a city, Plut. R^ip. ger. pracept.
begins with (...), peace, and concludes with (...), concord. Indeed this
comparison must be limited to things of the same kind, and with this
restriction whatever is said of the excellency of peace is to be understood;
outward peace is not better than inward grace, but it is better than all other
worldly enjoyments: they are as the milk, this as the cream; they are as the
grass, this as the flower; they as the stars, this as the sun; (...) (...),
Chrysostom.
that is S. Chrysostomes phrase, nothing is equal with peace, (...) 116. B^^.
M. in Ps. 28.
(...). So Synesius concordis most excellent; (...). So S. Basil, it is the
most superlative blessing; with which accord that of the Poet -- Pax optima
rerum; and as war being the worst of miseries, is emphatically called evil, so
peace being the best of comforts is (...) called good.

2. Without this nothing is good: Ephesians. 43.
S. Paul resembles peace to a bond, Psalm. 29. 11.
and very aptly, since that which keeps all our comforts together is peace:
the Psalmists phrase is not only the Lord will give, but he will bless his
people with peace, as if nothing we enjoy were blessed without peace; what
light is in the world, that is peace in a city; nothing would be amiable
without light, nor can any enjoyments be comfortable without peace. Very
appositely to this purpose is that of Gregory Nyssen: Suppose (says he) a man
to have all those things which in this world are esteemed precious, G^. Nyss.
(...). 7. de B^at.
wealth, health, wife, children, parents, servants, friends, pleasant gardens,
stately palaces, large parks, or whatever else is invented for delight, (...)
(...); if all these be present, and peace absent, what is the gain of them,
when as war hinders the fruition of, and contentment in them? That prayer of
the Church, Isaiah 26. 11.
Lord thou will ordain peace for us, for thou also have wrought all our works
for us, may very well bear a sense to this purpose, as if she would say,
Whatever works thou have wrought for us will afford us no comfort, unless thou
also ordain peace for us. More than this;

3. Whatsoever is called good may be predicated of peace; it is a little word,
and spelled with a few letters; but within these few letters is to be found all
good; the Hebrew word signifies both perfection and peace, intimating that
there is no good wanting where peace is. The Moralists distribution of bonum is
into honestum, jucundum, utile; good is whatsoever is honest, or pleasant, or
profitable, and in all these respect; peace is good.

1. Peace is honest, as being that which results from the dictates of the
divine law and right reason; Peace is the daughter of truth, the effect of
righteousness, and the fruit of the Spirit; indeed this is not true of all kind
of peace, (...) (...), Greg. Naz. orat. 12.
says the Greek Father, There is as a commendable dissension, so an execrable
union; such was that of Herod and Pilat against Christ; such are all
combinations for the opposing of good, or the accomplishing evil: but otherwise
a friendly agreement with one another in all things that are not absolutely
sinful, is that which is most just and honest.

2. Peace is pleasant, Id. orat. 14. Cic. Phil. 2.
(...), says the Greek Father; and to the same purpose the Latin Orator,
nomen pacis dulce, res ipsa salutaris, both the name and the thing is sweet.
Galat. 5. 22.
S. Paul joyneth peace and joy together, to intimate that peace is joyful. Oh
how good and pleasant a thing it is! So the Psalmist: Psalm. 131. 1.
that which is good and not pleasant may be tedious, that which is pleasant but
not good is vicious; but peace, and chiefly civil peace, is both good, that is,
honest, and pleasant.

3. Peace is profitable; in the forementioned Psalm it is compared to Aarons
ointment and Hermons dew, that for pleasure, and this for profit; Chrysostom.
hom. in Colos. 3.
it is called by S. Chrysostom (...), a mother of good things. This Queen of
Peace has a train of blessings, like so many handmaids to attend upon her; in
peace the merchant traffiqueth securely, the husbandman reapeth joyfully, the
Citizen tradeth cheerfully, all men manage their affairs prosperously; in
peace our garners are replenished with store, our valleys with corn, our hills
with sheep, our shops with wares: the time will not give me leave to set before
you all the flowers which grow in the garden of peace. S. Paul joyneth peace
and holiness together; and what in another place he says of the latter, Heb.
12. 14. 1 Timothy 4. 8.
I may after a sort apply to the former, it is profitable for all things.

Lo what a blessed Trinity here is in Unity; virtue, pleasure, profit, all as
so many jewels in this one ring of peace; and surely peace being so good, may
justly be desirable. It is the Philosophers definition of good, (...), it is
that which all desire; Arist. Esth. l. 1. c. 1.
the Poet says no less of peace. -- Pacem te poscimus omnes, it is that we are
all in love with. St. Austin, has a large discourse to this purpose, and among
other things, observes that even they who disturb, cannot be said altogether
to hate peace, Aug. de. civit. dei l. 19. c. 12.
non ut sit pax nolint, sed ut ea sit qua^ velint, since the reason of all war
and contention, is not that men would have no peace at all, but because they
would have such a peace as they like.

But though peace, is in some sense the vote of all, yet I would to God there
were not just cause of taking up Gregory Nazianzens complaint, Gr. Naz. l. d.
(...). Oh lovely peace, a good which art praised of all, and yet preserevd by
few, whilst the tares of anger, wrath, envy, malice, contention, quarrelling,
evil-speaking, railing, slandering, and sighting, grow up every where, and
which is the more sad, even among them who profess the Gospel of peace, and to
be subjects of the Prince of peace, peace finds few friends. Well my brethren,
what ever others do, I hope we who have experienced the evil of war, will say
of peace as Abraham of Sarah, when among the swarthy Egyptians, Now I know that
thou art a fair woman to look on; Genesis 1. 11.
now we know that thou art good, and worthy to be valued above any earthly
blessing whatsoever. The truth is, next to the peace of our conscience, (which
must be preferred before all) there is nothing we should more highly prize then
peace with all men, and especially with one another, since we cannot be friends
to the good, if we be enemies to the peace of the place, where we live: So much
the Psalmist implies in these parallel words, peace and good. And if you would
know how this peace which is so good, may be attained and maintained, go on to a

View of the acts here mentioned, as done by David, in order to the peace,
Partic. 3.
and good of Jerusalem, namely, saying and seeking; the former whereof is a
word of devotion, and the latter a word of action. Of each a word.

1. That which in the former verse he resolves upon is to say Peace be within
thee. There is loquela cordis and oris, a saying in the heart, and a saying
with the tongue; one word in the Hebrew signifies both meditari and loqui,
(...)
to meditate and to utter; indeed the tongue is but the interpreter, the heart
is the enditer; the heart is the minting-place of words where they are first
coined, and the tongue is as it were the hearts echo to resound outwardly what
is first spoken inwardly. Both these ways no doubt did David say peace, he
said it within his heart, affectionately desiring it; he said it with his
mouth, openly testifying that desire. Thus must it be with us.

1. Our will must say peace; as that is not done which the heart does not, so
neither is that said which the heart speaks not. Too many there are who have
peace in their mouths and war in their hearts; whose words are smoother then
butter, softer then oil, Psalm. 55. 21.
but the thoughts and desires of their hearts are bitter as gall, and sharp as
swords: but far be such odious dissimulation from David, and every good man,
since as the seeming Saint is the most wicked, so the pretending friend is the
worst enemy.

2. Our tongues must say peace: the truth is, as Solomon says, life and death,
so I may say war and peace are in the power of the tongue; strifes which end in
blows begin with words. St. James says of the tongue, it is a fire; James 3.
6.
this is most true of the malicious tongue, it is set on fire of hell, and puts
all in a combustion. But whilst turbulent spirits have fire in their mouth,
let us have water in ours, whilst others curse let us bless, whilst they
bluster with tempestuous language, let ours be the still smooth voice; and
whilst the wretched Edomites say of Jerusalem, raze it, Psalm. 137. 8.
raze it even the foundations thereof, let all true-hearted Israelites say
peace be within it.

But this is not all which is here intended by saying, I called it but now a
word of devotion, and so no doubt it is; say is as much as pray; you find the
very word used a little before: In the immediately preceding verse you meet
with a short form of prayer, Peace be within thy walls, much like that of our
Church, da pacem Domine in diebus nostris, give peace in our time O Lord, and
here David says, that is, prays, peace be within thee. The truth is,

1. Peace is Gods gift; all the Letters of the name Jehovah are literae
quiescentes, quiescent letters, it is he who must give quietness; Heb. 13. 20.
Phil. 4. 7.
God is called the God of peace, and peace is styled the peace of God; and good
reason, since he is the Author of peace, Isa. 57. 19.
and lover of concord. Indeed it is Gods work, and his alone; perhaps for this
reason called a creating peace, creation being the prerogative of a Deity. He
only in whose hands all men's hearts are, can make men of one heart; he only
who stilleth the blustering winds and roaring waves, Prove. 21. 1.
can quiet angry minds and furious spirits. Psalm. 147. 14. 68. 6. according to
the old translation 60. 2. Isa. 26. 11.
Is it foreign peace he makes peace in thy borders: Is it domestic peace? he
makes men to be of one mind in one house; Is the peace broken, he heals the
breaches: Is it made? he it is who ordains and stablisheth it.

2. The effectual means of obtaining peace is prayer, it is the strongest
weapon in war, and the best Orator for peace; if we would have peace on earth,
there is no better way then to dispatch a messenger to Heaven: peace is called
by God himself the fruit of the lips; Isa 57. 16.
it is the fruit of his lips, he has promised it; it must be the fruit of our
lips, we must pray for it: those whom the Psalmist says God will bless with
peace, are his people: and one character of his people is, that they are a
praying people: either God will give no peace, or however, not as a blessing to
them who call not on him for it. Learn we then, as upon all occasions to plead
with men, so especially to beg of God for peace; there cannot be easier terms,
then ask and have; and he will do little for peace, who will not so much as ask
for it. Let then the Psalmists counsel be as acceptable, as in the Hebrew
phrase it is elegant, (...) Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. And since it is to
God we pray, Ver. 6.
let us be sure that our saying be heart-work, as well as lip-labor, for he
understands the language of our hearts, and it is our inward devotion which
speaks loudest in his ears.

2. But is this all that David will act in order to Jerusalems peace, only a
few good words and wishes? No, he will not only say, but seek. A word of a
very large extent: 1. It includes an act of desire, since what we seek is that
we do not only coldly wish, but affectionately will. 2. More then this, it is
an act of design, setting the head on work to contrive the best means of
finding what we seek. 3. Yet further, it is an act of endeavor, making use of
all those means which are afforded. 4. Nay more then this, it is verbum
solicitudinis, and notes an industrious diligence in that endeavor. The
Hebrew word here used (...) is emphatical, and (as the Critics observe) is in
this differenced from the verb (...) used a little before; that whereas that
signifies only to seek by inquiry, this signifies to seek by endeavor. The
verb by which the Septuagint translate it, is (...), a word which has an
emphasis both in the verb and the preposition. The simple verb (...) is more
then (...), and notes a sedulous search; it is used of the Pharisees seeking
to lay hold on Christ, Mark: 13. 12.
who no doubt did omnem movere lapidem, leave no means unassayed to accomplish
their malice against him. The preposition (...) does much increase the
signification, Heb. 11. 2.
and is rendered diligently seek: So that the resolve of this holy man in
reference to Jerusalems peace and good, is not only to send up devout prayers,
but put forth his utmost endeavor.

The truth is, a lazy prayer begs a denial; it is no reason God should grant
what we are not willing to have; and we cannot be said to desire to have that
which we will not labor as much as lies in us to obtain. St. Gregory's Gloss
upon those words of the Church, Lam. 3. 41. Greg. mor. l. 18. c. 3.
Let us lift up our hearts with our hands to God in the heavens, is very
apposite to this purpose; cor cum manibus levat qui orationem cum opere
sublevat, he lifts up his hands with his heart, who assists his prayer with
endeavor: the latter of these without the former is a contempt of God, and the
former without the latter is a tempting him; and therefore let us join both
together. Indeed saying, that is, praying, should have the first place, it is
the first in the Text, and should be so in our practice; but yet it is not the
only thing we must do; all other lawful means must be prosecuted in order to
the peace of Jerusalem; and that you may know who they are that must be thus
devout in saying, and active in seeking, I proceed to a Delineation of the
Agent, Part. 4.
employed in the Hebrew verbs, expressed pressed in the English by the pronoun
I; this I is most rationally conceived to be the penman of the Psalm, and he
most probably supposed to be David. And before I go further it will not be
amiss to observe, that he who at the sixth verse exhorts others to pray for
Jerusulems peace, here makes it his own petition; and as here in reference to
the duty of prayer, so elsewhere in respect of the duty of praise; the Psalmist
as he calls upon others, Psalm. 103. 21, 22.
Bless the Lord all ye his Hosts, bless the Lord all his works; so both in the
beginning and close of the Psalm, upon himself, Bless the Lord O my soul.

Thus does it become all those who crow to others, to clap their own wings; who
admonish others, to be exemplary themselves; Greg.
it is an excellent saying of Saint Gregory, qui alios excitat, seipsum ad been
operandum ligat, our excitations to others, are obligations upon our selves:
Aug.
since (as Saint Austine excellently) Non obedienter auditur qui non seipsum
audit, he cannot expect to be obediently heard by others, who does not hear
himself: that Orator is most likely to prevail, who persuades the people to do
no other then what he resolves to do himself. As here David, I will say, I
will seek.

If you please more particularly to consider who this person was, you shall
find him to be both a King and a Prophet; and so it lets us see that the
public peace and good ought especially to be the care of two sorts of persons,
namely, Magistrates and Ministers.

1. I a King. To whom should the peoples good and peace be more precious then
to their Rulers? It is well observed that the Hebrew words (...) and (...) are
the same Radicals transposed, whereof the one signifies to Rule, and the other
to be Peaceable, Sher. Lex.
intimating, Quod dominatores debent vacare paci, that they who are in
Authority, should especially mind the peoples tranquillity. When Saint Paul
explicitly bids the people pray for Kings and all in Authority, that under them
they might live a quiet and a peaceable life, he does implicitly instruct Kings
and Governors what should be their care, 1 Timothy 2. 2.
that the people may live peaceably under them. Non mihi sed populo, was
Trajans word; and (...) is not unfitly derived from (...) and (...): good
Princes have ever looked upon themselves as constituted, though not by the
peoples power, yet for their good; and that the sword which God puts into their
hands is for the preservation of the peoples peace.

2. I a Prophet. Though the Ministers chief work is to reconcile men to God,
yet his endeavors must not be wanting to reconcile man to man; Jer. 6. 14.
indeed there is a peace of carnal security, which we must strive to disturb;
woe to us if we sooth up men, and say peace, peace to them in their evil ways.
But still the peace of civil tranquillity is that which we must be careful to
promote. Levi had his name in Hebrew from (...) which signifies to join, to
teach the Tribe of Levi, that union not division should be their design. Aaron
the High Priest had Pomegranates and Bells together, Exodus 28. 34.
round about the bottom of his Vestment; the Pomegranate having many kernels
within one circumference, is an emblem of peace and unity; and the Bells being
joined with the Pomegranates teaches Gods Priests, that peace should be a
principal subject of their preaching. We must be (O that too many among us had
not been!) Trumpets of Sedition and contention, but Bells with Pomegranates,
perswaders to peace and love. Alex. ab Alex. Genesis dier. l. 2. c. 8.
Those whom our blessed Savior chose to be his Disciples and Apostles, were
not hollowing Hunters, but still Fishermen. The Priests of Juno were called
Melissae, we must be laborious Bees without a sting of anger, Cant. 4. 11.
except it be against sin; and as Christ said of his Spouse, the Milk of Love,
and the Honey of Peace should be still under, or rather on the tip, the top of
our tongues.

But yet we must not thus confine the consideration of the I David was bound
not only as a King and a Prophet, but as a Servant of God, and a Member of
Jerusalem, to seek its good; and so none is exempted from this duty. Some
Expositors conceive the three last verses of this Psalm to be one continued
form of prayer prescribed by David to all the people; and in this notion the I,
is every one, of what calling and condition soever.

There is no man who is not obliged, according to his place and calling, to
endeavor the common welfare. S. Basil complained in his time, I wish there
were not too just cause of complaint in all ages, that men are wont every one
to withdraw his own shoulder from the public burden, Bas. Mag. in Ep. 62.
(...), and transfer the care of things of general concernment upon his
neighbor, by which means it comes to pass (as that Father well observes)
that whilst each man having the same mind, neglects the public good, before
he is aware, he brings a mischief upon himself. Let no man therefore look upon
himself as unconcerned in the common interest, and if he cannot by any other
way, let him however seek it by his prayers. Any man, though blind as
Bartime^s, lame as Mephibosheth, and poor as Lazarus, may yet say, peace be
within thee; nay, though he be dumb as Zachary, he may say it in his heart,
which is an acceptable prayer to God: it is that which every one may, and if he
will approve himself to be such an one as David was, must do.

But when is it that David will set about this work? Part. 5.
to this the Answer is given in the Adverb and the Tense.

1. The Adverb is now, which may be looked upon in a double reference.

1. To the present state and condition of Jerusalem, concerning which the
Psalmist says, that it was a City compact at unity within it self; and if so,
may some say, why will David say, now peace be within thee? We do not usually
crave what we have, but what we want; nor seek what we enjoy, but what we need.
To this it is justly returned, that we both may and ought to pray for, and
endeavor the continuation of those blessings we already enjoy, non minor est
virtus -- said he of victory, it is true of peace, which we must be as careful
to preserve as to procure; be the days never so Haldcion, we must not think we
have clipped the wings of peace, so that it cannot fly from us; and therefore
must strive to keep it with us. We are deceived if we think our mountain at any
time so strong, that it cannot be moved. When the Sea is calmest, and the Sky
brightest, on a sudden a storm, a cloud may arise; and therefore it is our
wisdom to pray for daily bread, though our buttery be full; for health, though
we are well; and for peace, even when all is quiet.

2. To the present temper and disposition of the Psalmist. Now that is while
his heart was warmed with zeal to Jerusalem, having fixed his meditations on
her, he resolves to engage himself to pray for her peace, and seek her good;
it is no small piece of pious wisdom to watch our own hearts, and not to let go
the opportunities of engaging them to the exercise of any duty. Indeed
whosoever observes his own heart, shall find it very deceitful. It was holy
Bernards complaint, nihil cord meo fugacius, nothing is more slitting then my
heart; Bern.
and therefore at any time, when we find out hearts in a good frame to any
service of repentance, or charity, piety, or prayer, it should be our care not
to let it slip, but improve it to the best advantage.

2. But will he only do it now? nay it is the future tense in both verbs, I
will, which implies a fixed resolution of continuing in prayer, and endeavor
for Jerusalems good. The Septuagint uses the preterperfect tense, I have, the
Adverb Now, is of the present time; and the Hebrew is in the Future, I have, I
do, I will, Yesterday, to Day, and to Morrow, yea, all the days of my life.
Those words which we meet with elsewhere, may very well be annexed here, I will
say and seek as long as I live, whilst I have any being: nay, the emphasis is
yet more, I will say, whosoever gainsay; I will seck whosoever oppose it.

Thus unwearied and undaunted, constant and resolved ought we to be in the
prosecution of Jerusalems welfare, so as no discouragements or dangers should
stop us in the pursuit. As the Spouse in seeking Christ, gave not over till she
found him; so must we in seeking peace, Heb. 12. 14.
till we obtain it. Saint Paul's word is (...), follow peace, persequere donec
assequaris, follow till thou obtain, as the Hound does the Hare, through hedge
and ditch, over hill and dale: the Psalmist doubleth the word, seek peace and
pursue it again and again, by renewed prayers, and repeated endeavors, ever
remembering that it is in vain to begin if we do not go on, or to go on for a
while, if we do not continue to the end. This was David's resolve, I will.

There is only one part of the Text remaining, Part. 6.
namely, what moved David to be so sollicitous for Jerusalems welfare, which we
find to be double. Here is a nether and an upper spring of his affection, for
his brethren and companions sake he will say, and because of the house of the
Lord his God, he will not only say, but seek.

1. The first in order, but second in energy, is drawn from his brethren and
companions.

If it be inquired whom David calls by these titles, Chrysostom. in loc.
let Saint Chrysostom return the Answer, (...), no doubt he principally intends
the Citizens that dwelt in Jerusalem, though he might also include reliquas
urbes, Scultet. Musc. Ibid.
the people of the other Cities and parts of Judea, who came up to Jerusalem,
as he tells us a little before, Eos qui te invisunt and qui te inhabitant; so
Musculus glosseth, both those who visited and inhabited Jerusalem; and thus the
whole Nation of the Jews are those whom he calls his brethren and companions.

But what, may some say, does King David call his Subjects (for such were the
people of the Jews) his brethren and companions? these are words of equality,
and suit not well with that distance which is between a Prince and his People:
Subjects stand in the relation of children rather than brethren to their King,
they are only the Nobles, and but a few of those who are Comites Regis,
companions for the King; and those so his companions, as that they are rather
his attendants. Indeed the Level^ing spirit knows no difference between the
scepter and the spade, looking upon all as fellow creatures. But certainly
superiority and inferiority are of Divine appointment; God is the God of order,
which cannot be where there is parity: It was not then David's design to make
his subjects his equals, but only to express the meekness and humility of
his spirit, verifying that which elsewhere he asserts of himself, not out of an
arrogant ostentation, but by way of a thankful acknowledgement, Oh Lord, Psalm.
131. 1.
my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty.

Well were it if all superiors would take pattern by David. Humility is a
rare virtue, especially in great ones. It is no easy task to keep the heart
low, when the state is high; most men's dispositions commonly ebb and flow with
their conditions, and of the two it is more often seen pride in rags than
humility in robes: But as that is abominable, so this is very amiable: oh that
all Rulers would be like the stars, which being seated on high seem small, or
like the boughs, which being richly laden with fruit, hang down their heads.
Though withal, it is a needful caution for inferiors, that their Rulers
humility be not an occasion of contempt; but let subjects look upon their King
as their Father and Governor, whilst the King in humility calls them his
brethren and companions.

And yet though those phrases did proceed from humility, they are also
according to verity, since though considered under the notion of King and
subjects, they were not; yet in other respects they were brethren and
companions.

To illustrate this, we must take notice of a double brotherhood and vicinity;
to wit, on the left hand of nature, and the right hand of grace, and upon both
accounts was this verified. 1. David and his people were brethren and
companions on the left hand, as men and as Jews.

1. As men, there is a brotherhood and vicinity between all mankind, man and
beast were not made to converse one with another, nor here on earth do men and
Angels associate, only man is a sit companion for man; yea, not only is one
man a companion for, but a brother to another; brethren we are all by the
mothers side, in respect of our bodies, coming originally from the earth;
brethren we are by the Fathers side, in respect of our souls, which are
breathed into us by God; in which respect the Greek Poet says, (...), and the
Latin -- Omnibus ille idem pater, Pind. Lucret. Vid. Lactant. l. 6. c. 10.
according to the Apostolical phrase, the Father of spirits; and yet more, we
are all brethren both by Father and Mother, being descended from the loins of
Adam and Eve.

2. As Jews, so the relation was yet nearer, they were brethren, because all
descended from Abraham; he was the root out of which the whole Nation sprouted;
the quarry out of which they were dug, and rock whence they were hewn; nor
did the term companion less fit then brethren, since God interdicted the Jews
all society with any other nations, and so were only companions to one another.

2. Besides, there is a brotherhood and vicinity on the right hand, Major est
fraternit^s Christi quam sanguinis. Ambrose Ser. 9. de unit.
which S. Ambrose says, and that justly, is greater than that of the left.
Thus David and the Jews were brethren, in as much as they were all Gods
adopted children in covenant with him, had all received the same Sacrament of
Circumcision; and they were companions together in the worship and service of
God, meeting all together at Jerusalem three times a year to offer sacrifice to
him; and in all these respects does David sitly style the Jews his brethren and
companions.

And now to give you the account of this motive, know, that

1. On the one hand, Those whom here he calls his brethren and companions,
were much concerned in Jerusalems welfare. Jerusalem in respect of her
Inhabitants was as the ship in regard of the passengers; if that miscarry,
those must needs suffer damage. Jerusalem, in respect of Judea being the chief
City, was as the head or the heart, in respect of the body, upon whose safety
the rest of the members depend.

2. On the other hand, that they who were thus concerned were his brethren and
companions; by virtue of which relations he was bound to wish well to them, and
for their sakes to Jerusalem. David and the people were knit in a threefold
fraternity, as men, as Jews, and as the people of God; and (as his Son Solomon
tell us) a threefold cord is not easily broken. Eccles. 4. 12.


Oh let us look upon one another under the same relations, that accordingly we
may have endeared affections. The Poet observes of brethren -- fratrum quoqus
gratiarara est, Nobilis haec esse and pietatis rix^ duobus Quod pro sratre mori
velit uterque prior. Matt. Epig.
that love between them is rare; but withal, where it is, it is for the most
part not only true, but intense. Martial tells of two brethren, whose
contention was who should die one for another. That love which the Scripture
commends, as a pattern of fervent charity, is brotherly love; in which respect
that of S. Paul is very observable, Romans 12. 7.
Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love: Hebr. 13. 1.
you know whose voice that was, Am I my brothers keeper? Genes. 4 9.
God (says the son of Sirach) has given every man commandment concerning his
neighbor: Eccles. 17. 14.
and S. Paul would have us look every man on the things one of another: Philip.
2. 4.
nor will there be need of much exhortation to it, if with David here we look
one upon another as brethren and companions.

2. But this is the least and lowest consideration; if you would know what was
the chief wheel that carried David with such affection to Jerusalems welfare,
the beginning of the seventh verse will tell you, it was because of the house
of the Lord our God.

1. It is a question among Interpreters, whether it were the Tabernacle or the
Temple, Aug. Hilar.
which is here called the House of God. The Ancients conceiving this Psalm to
be penned for the Jews returning out of Babylon, in loc. Moll. Musc.
understand it of the Temple. Modern VVriters supposing the occasion of
penning this Psalm to be David's bringing of the Ark of God to have a fixed
residence at Jerusalem, understand it of the Tabernacle, in which the Ark was
placed, to which latter I incline, though withal I see no reason why David
might not have an eye to the Temple, which he knew was to be built in Solomon's
time, and for which he himself made so great preparation.

Whether we interpret in the Tabernacle, or Temple, or both; this appellation
was most justly given to them upon a double account, to wit, of dedication and
habitation. These were the places which by Gods express precept were dedicated
to him, as the places wherein and where alone sacrifices were to be offered up.
These were the places in which by express promise God had obliged himself to
vouchsafe his special residence, whence he gave answer to his peoples prayers;
in which respect he is said to dwell between the Cherubims. 2 Kings 17. 15.
Indeed there were other places among the jews (I mean their Synagogues)
wherein prayers were made, Psalm. 80. 1.
and the law was read, which were set apart only for religious uses; these (as
that learned Scot observes) though they had not Divine institution, Weems.
Christ. synag.
yet wanted not Divine approbation; yea, Psalm. 83. 12.
which would be observed, they are called by the Psalmist the houses of God,
and proportionably every place which is set apart for Gods public worship is
no other than the house of God; but still the Tabernacle and the Temple were
the loci ut sic, the peculiar places of Gods special presence and principal
worship at that time, namely, sacrificing; and therefore to them did this title
especially belong. The house of the Lord our God.

Having found out what David means by the house of God, there are these two
things offer themselves to our consideration:

1. His zealous affection to Gods house; indeed it is that which we find him
often expressing, and that several ways; wh^t was it made his banishment so
tedious to him, but the want of opportunity to go to Gods house? Psalm. 42. 3,
4. 84. 2, 3.
and therefore he tells us, Tears were his repast day and night, when he
remembered how he had gone with the multitude to the house of God: For the
enjoyment of this it was (as he tells us in another Psalm) he did earnestly
long, envying (as it were) the sparrows, who builded their nests there, when as
he was debarred of coming thither; nay, yet more, he presents it to God as his
one, his only thing which he would desire of the Lord, and require of him,
that he might dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of his life, Psalm.
27. 4.
to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to euquire into his Temple. Finally,
when as being settled in his throne, he fetched back the Ark of God from
Kiriath-Jearim, he all all Israel played before God with all their might, 1
Chr. 13. 5, 8. 15. 25, 28.
with singing, and harps, and psalteries, and timbrels: and afterward, when he
brought it to, and fixed it in Jerusalem, what shoutings and trumpets, making a
noise with psaltery and harp, thereby testifying his great joy. No wonder if he
says of himself, Ps. 69. 9.
The zeal of thine house has eaten me up.

And if you shall inquire the reason of all this, it is in the Text, Vide Lorin
in loc.
The Lord our God, or (as some read it) in the singular number, my God. David
having taken the true Jehovah fo: his God, could not but upon several accounts
have a singular respect to his house. Psalm. 118. 28.
1. Thou art my God, and I will exalt thee, says this holy man elsewhere; nor
could he exalt or glorify his God more than by taking care of his house. 2.
Having made choice of the Lord for his God, he had an exceeding delight in his
presence; and where was that but in his house? 3. Finally, having placed his
love upon God as his God, he could not but love whatever belonged to God, his
name, his law, his Priest, his house.

2. His desire of Jerusalems good* because of Gods house; it was now the honor
of Jerusalem, that it was not only Camera Regis, but Domicilium Dei, the place
where was the Kings Palace, but Gods Sanctuary; thither the Ark was brought
there it was fixed, there afterward the Temple was built; and in this,
Jerusalem excelled all the Cities that ever were, are, or shall be, that it was
the only place where God would then put his name, being therefore called the
City of God, and the holy City. Neh. 11. 1.
Upon this consideration, Psalm. 46. 4.
as the house of God was the glory of Jerusalem, so the peace of Jerusalem was
the safety of Gods house; if Jerusalem be destroyed the house of God must lie
waste; if Jerusalem be not in peace, there will be no opportunity for the
Tribes to come to Gods house to sacrifice; and therefore will David seek
Jerusalems good.

Indeed this holy man had many reasons to seek the Cities welfare, for his own
sake, for his peoples sake, for Gods sake; the former he does not mention at
all, in which respect, S. Austin thus glosseth; Non propter honor em meum,
vitam meam, Aug. in loc.
etc. It is not my own dignity or safety I am thus solicitous for, only the two
latter are expressed, of which no doubt the chief inducement was the honor of
God and his house, because of the house of the Lord our God.

The result of what has been said on this part, amounts to these two things:

1. Every good man, especially every good Ruler, is very zealous for Gods
house, for the maintenance and promotion of his public worship, Moller. in loc.
Hoc mu^us cujusvis sidi ac very amici Dei, Dei quaerere hoaorem and proximi
salutem, is Molle^us his note upon the Text, Every true friend of God cannot
but seek Gods honor and his neigbours salvation; to both which the
establishment of the public worship very much conduces; they cannot be with
David, men after Gods heart, who are no friends to his ordinances, wherewith,
his Ministers by whom, his houses wherein his public service is administered.

2. In order to the public worship we ought to endeavor the public peace.

On the one hand, no peace must be entertained, or can be expected without
respect to Gods house; in vain do we look for peace in our houses, if we take
no care that God may be worshipped in his: the Angels Song coupleth together
glory to God, and peace on earth; Luke 2. 11.
and says Saint Bernard excellently, Quomodo stabit pax hominum coram Deo,
Bern. Ep. 127.
si Deo apud homines non potest tuta esso suagloria? If Gods glory be not
maintained by men, man's peace shall not be preserved by God: let Gods house be
well looked to, and there will be no great fear of Jerusalems peace.

On the other hand, Gods house cannot be established if Jerusalems peace be not
maintained; Valor. Sermon. 12.
Quid in vita hominis est bonum nisi pax, sub qua omnia quae sunt honesta
proficiunt ac roligiosa nutriuntur? says an Ancient sweetly; What better than
peace, under which Honesty thriveth, and Piety flourishes? peace is a Joseph,
a good nurse to Religion, especially to the free and public exercise of it.
The Scythians, who did worship many Gods, had neither Altar, Alex. ab Alex.
genial. dior. l. 6. c. 4.
nor Temple, nor Statue to any God, save Mars; intimating that where wars are
predominant, Gods public worship cease. I deny not but as once Paul
preached, so God may be served on Mars hill, Acts 17. 22.
yet his most solemn worship is in days of peace; and for this reason
principally it is that good men are, and all men ought to be studious of
making, of seeking peace, that Religion may shine in its splendour and glory.

To sum up all, if we acknowledge Jehovah to be our God, we cannot choose but
place our affections on him; if we love him, we will love his house, we will
love our brethren; if we love either or both, Gods house or our brethren, we
must needs wish well to Jerusalem, the place where his house is, where our
brethren live; we cannot wish better to Jerusalem then peace, and if we wish
her peace, we will both say and seek it, according to the Psalmists resolution
in the Text, for my brethren and companions sake, I will now say peace be
within thee, because of the house of the Lord thy God I will seek thy good.

And thus with what brevity I could in so great variety, I have dispatched the
severals of this Scripture: but though I have finished my Text, my Sermon is
not done. The Scene all this while has been laid in Jury, I must now change
it from Jerusalem to London, that I may wind up my Discourse with a punctual
and particular application to our selves.

There was a City in Sicily called (...) because of three things very excellent
in it, Namely, Fountains, Vineyards, and an unaccessible Rock, upon which it
was built: but this City (whereof we here met this day are the Native Members)
may well be called (...) for its manifold ornaments. Let me say to you this day
in words much like those of the Psalmist concerning Jerusalem, Ps. 48. 11. 12.
Walk about London, and go round about her, tell her Markets for Victual,
Granaries for Provision, Aquaeducts for Water, Halls for Societies, Tower, and
Gates for safety: Mark well Her Royal Exchange for Merchandise, her Navigable
River with that moving Forest upon it, and that famous Bridge which tieth the
two banks of that River together: Finally, consider her Bridewel for the Idle,
Bethlehem for the mad; Hospitals for the Sick, the Lame, Amm. Marcel. l. 27.
the Poor; Chamber for the Orphans, Churches for Holy Assemblies, and tell me
if She deserve not that name Augusta, of Stately and Magnificent, which was
given her some hundred of years ago, when she wanted much of that amplitude
which now she has.

It would be lost time and labor to make a parallel between this and those
other glorious Cities of the World, especially since it is at once both briefly
and fully done already by that ingenious and laborious Gentleman, Landinopolis
by Jam. Howel, Esquire
whose service and labor of love for, will not I hope be forgotten by this
City.

In few words, as Athens was called the Greece of Greece, so may London be
styled the England of England: if England be an Eden, the Garden of God, London
is the Tree of Life in that Garden: if England be a ring of gold, London is the
Diamond in ring: Finally, if England be a beautiful body, London is the eye of
that body, or rather the apple of that eye.

Sed quo feror? But whither am I transported? Beloved, it is on my Mothers
behalf I have been speaking; my Mother did I say? I, and your Mother surely; I
shall not need to beg your pardon, especially when you consider for what end I
have spoken so much, or rather so little, in honor of this City, namely,

1. In the first place to excite and enlarge our thankfulness to Almighty God,
that our lines are fallen to us in such a pleasant place, that we have had the
honor to be born and brought up and (at least the most of us) dwell in this
City. Charles the fifth was wont to glory that he was by his birth a Citizen of
Gaunt. Plato gave the gods thanks that he was born an Athenian. It is no small
honor among the Italians to be a Roman: why should it not among Englishmen to
be a Londoner?

2. But that which I chiefly design to persuade is the duty of the Text, that
you would seek the peace and good of this renowned City.

A City (says Aquinas in his Politics) is principalissima eorum quae humana
ratione possunt constitui, Aquin. polit. l. 2. c. 1.
the choice and chief of all those societies which can be constituted by humane
reason. Cic. de Somn. Scip. Macrob. Sat. l. 1. c. 8. ^ic. Offic. l. 1.
No wonder if Cicero asserts in one place that it is a very amiable object in
the eyes of the chief God; and in another place that all men are carried to a
City by a certain instinct of nature: surely then the more eminent a City is,
the more it is beloved of God, and the more it ought to be regarded of us.

This City (my Brethren) in respect of Gods affection to it, and care over it,
may well be called (to use the Prophets language) concerning Sion, Is. 62. 12.
sought out, a City not forsaken. Time would fail me to reckon up the signal
favors God has conferred on this City; For these many years continuing, and
of late restoring health to it, even to a wonder, preserving it unto this day
in safety (notwithstanding the wars and battles that have been round about it;
the many Sects and Divisions that have been within it) even to a miracle; Yea,
after our ungrateful barrenness, our unworthy contempt both of the word, and
the messengers thereof, still causing the light of his Gospel in some measure
to shine in it. Thus has our gracious God sought the good, and as it were,
studied the peace and welfare of this City; and shall not we our selves
endeavor it?

Londons prosperity should be the prayer of all her Sister-Cities and
neighbour-Countreys, but much more of her children; all her adopted children
(those I mean who having been born in other parts of the land, have here taken
up their habitation) but much more her natural Children, we that have both our
being and well being, in, or from, should wish well to her. Our blessed Savior
says of him that should betray him, Matthew. 26. 24.
It had been good for that man if he had not been born; it may be said of him
(with a little alteration) who being born in, does not seek the good of the
City, it were good for the City that man had not been born in it. Vives decla.
9.
Vives in one of his declamations, says of some who were born in Rome, that
they were no Citizens of Rome, since it matters not where a man is born as what
mind he bears. I (says he) should rather account those Citizens of Rome who
being born in the utmost Scythia wish well to her, then those who being born in
her, in her chiefest place, the very Capitol, endeavor to spoil her of her
peace, safety, liberty, and glory; Cives tu mihi putas eos qui hanc suam esse
civitatem non putant? will thou have me account them to be her Citizens, who
yet own not her as their City, so as to seek her welfare? But I hope better
things of you Beloved, and methinks you are putting that question to me about
the Cities preservation, which those Jews did to the Apostles concerning their
own salvation, Acts 2, 37.
What shall we do for the good and peace of the City? The Answer to which
Question must be either more special or general.

1. Among the City Natives there are persons of several degrees and orders who
are accordingly capacitated to act for the Cities good.

1. Some of you who have received your first breath in, are now Officers, nay
Magistrates of this City, and it concerns you to seek her good by executing
Justice and judgment. One being asked how a City might be safe, Plut. Apotheg.
answered, (...) (...), where right takes place: let that be your care, that
right may be administered, the good encouraged, the offenders punished, the idle
set on work, the impotent relieved, the unruly curbed, and houses of riot and
disorder suppressed. Certainly execution of justice is of great concernment to
a Cities welfare, when God would have spared Israel, Jer. 5. 1.
had there been a man in her to do it.

2. Some of us who were once new born babes sucking at our Mothers breasts are
now Ministers in, and so in a spiritual sense Nurses of this City; Oh let us
seek her good by giving to the people sincere milk, by preaching the words of
truth and peace; far be it from us to keep up factions or parties, to sow the
tares of false Doctrine and Heresies, of Schism and Sedition in our Churches,
but let us preach the truth as it is in Jesus, proclaiming no war, but only
against the sins of the City.

3. Some of you who were born and live in this City are Merchants trasticking
to the several parts of the world, do you seek the good of this City by
supplying and enriching her with foreign commodities, by increasing and
advancing her trade: yea, let your fair and upright dealings with Turks and
Pagans gain her honor in the eyes of all men.

Finally, the greatest part of you who were once little children, are now
Tradesmen in this City, and if you tender her good, put away far from you lying
and swearing, fraud, and couzenage, the wicked balances, and the deceitful
weights. Let truth sit upon your lips, honesty dwell in your hearts, and
industry appear at your fingers ends.

2. Besides these particulars give me leave in a few words to commend some
general directions which concern us all, in what capacity soever we are.

1. Let every man act for the Cities good in that sphere wherein Gods
providence has placed him. 1 Cor. 7. 20.
Nothing sooner confounds and ruineth an Army, 1 These. 4. 11.
then when the Soldiers break their ranks. It is excellent counsel of Saint
Paul, Let every man abide in the same calling whereunto he is called: and again
Let every man study to be quiet, and to do, (...), his own business, the
Magistrate his, the Minister his, and the private man his.

2. Let us all seek the Cities welfare by our daily prayers at the throne of
grace in its behalf, that God would forgive its crying sins; and though it be
unworthy, that he would still save and defend it for his own sake; Isa. 39. 65.
in this respect let that resolve of the Prophet concerning Jerusalem, be ours
concerning London, for its sake, not to hold our peace, nor rest, till the
righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, Isa. 62. 1.
and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burns.

3. Finally, Let us seek the Cities good by being good our selves: when one
asked the reason why Peloponesus flourished so much, the answer was returned,
Aegina bonos filios nutrit, its chief City Aegina brought forth good children.
Oh that it might be said so of London! Octavius Augustus said of his wanton
Daughters, that they were not his seed, but some Aposthume broken from him. I
would to God London might not take up the same complaint of her profane,
intemperate, malicious, covetous and wicked children, to whom I cannot speak
better then in that language which one used to a debauched Carthaginian, Parce
Carthaginisi non tibi, if you will have no pity on your selves, yet that you
may not bring ruin upon this great City, amend your lives.

The truth is, it should not content us to seek the Cities good by being good,
Quid. in Com.
but its honor by being better then others, Urbs Metropolis ut sit maximae in
toto regno authoritatis constituatur praecipuum pietatis exemplum and sacrarum,
said one justly; A Metropolis does preserve its authority by being a pattern of
piety to the whole land. What a shame is it that the sowrest fruit should grow
upon the uppermost boughs, and the worst Scholars be in the highest forms? What
a reproach is it that the Country should have cause to complain, that her
children coming to the City, lose their goodness, as Rivers running into the
Sea lose their freshness? Oh that all Londons inhabitants might be patterns to
all England, and Londons Natives to all its inhabitants, of holiness,
righteousness, and goodness.

That I may drive this nail to the head, so as the exhortation of seeking the
Cities good may be the better fastened in our hearts, be pleased to consider
these two things!

1. The most glorious Cities are not privileged from ruin, there was never
any City on earth more bravely defended against a foreign enemy then was
Jerusalem against Titus and Vespasian, upon a conceit that that City was
eternal and should never be destroyed; whereas it is only true of the Heavenly
Jerusalem, the earthly City was then taken and ruined: nor is and City, how
populous or potent soever, secured from destruction. The Historian says of
Lions a famous City in France, una tantum nox interfuit inter Civitatem magnam
and nullam, there was only the distance of one night between a great City and
none; Cambdea in Com. Hist. Hieron. in Dan.
so suddenly may ruin come upon a place. Verulam, once a famous City in our
own land, has not now so much as the name remaining: and S. Hierom tells of a
renowned City in which had been a goodly Temple, neque Urbis neque Templi ullum
restat vestigium: both were so perfectly demolished that there was not the
least footstep remaining either of City or Temple, so total, as well as sudden,
may the destruction of a place be.

2. Multiplied abominations in, will bring inevitable desolation on a City. It
was a custom among the Romans, whenever they went forth to war against any
City, by a charm Tutelares Deos evocare, Macrob. Satur. l. 3. c. 9.
to call out the Tutelar Gods, either because they held it an impiety to
destroy the Gods, or because they thought they could not conquer the City
whilst the Gods were in it: the Heathens had many Tutelar Gods for one City;
but the one Jehovah is the Tutelar God of all Cities and Places: and what the
Spaniards boasts of Madrid, that it had a Wall of Fire about it, meaning the
Quarries of Flint which encompassed it, is in an higher sense true of that City
in which God dwells, his protection is a Wall of Fire about it: But alas,
impenitent Rebellion will cause God to depart from, and bring ruin upon a
City: he that makes a fruitful land a barren wilderness, will make a good City
an heap of rubbish for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. Ps. 107. 34.
Believe it a City cannot be safe whilst the Citizens are wicked. Nil prodest
muros munire propugnaculis, Ambros. Sermon. 88. de Bell. tumult.
and Deum provocare peccatis, says S. Ambrose truly, in vain is the City
fenced with walls, guarded with Watches, Troops, Bands, whilst God is provoked
with iniquities, transgressions and sins.

I am loath (Beloved) on this day of joy to call for sorrow, and put you in
fear; but yet withal I must be faithful, and let you know both your sin and
danger: How is the faithful City become an Harlot? said Isaiah of Jerusalem, I
wish it were not true of London; woe to the bloody City, said Nahum of Nineveh;
let London beware. What filthiness is in her skirts, I mean her Suburbs, where
all manner of sin is acted with a brazen forehead? nay, I would to God the
whole head were not sick, and the whole heart faint. In few words, as when I
consider the tranquillity of this City, I wonder at her ungrateful impiety; So
when I consider her impiety, I wonder at her lengthned tranquillity. But Oh let
us not despise the riches of Gods forvearance, let it rather lead us to
repentance: and as we desire that London peace may be preserved, Isa. 1. 21.
Nah. 3. 1.
good promoted, and ruin prevented; let us the Natives first begin to sweep
our own doors, reform our own lives, and be among the number of those who mourn
for the sins of others.

I hasten to an end, only I must not, I cannot forget either the house of the
Lord my God, or my brethren and companions.

1. Among those many eminent Worthies, who by being born in, have been an
honor to the City, the chief was that Noah Father of the new Christian World,
after the deluge of a bloody persecution (as a Reverend Father of the Church
calls him,) Constantine the Great, who among many other excellent virtues, was
and will be famous to all ages for his zeal in erecting Churches for Gods
public worship; See Bishop Kings Sermon at Paul's Cross, on the behalf of Paul's
Church.
and besides the large contributions of his purse (the Story says) to the
building of a Church, he carried twelve baskets of earth upon his own
shoulders. Beloved, there is a fire of zeal within me, which must flame forth,
and that is, to speak a word in behalf of this House of the Lord our God, in a
part whereof we now are; this Church of Saint Paul's once one of the most
glorious piles of building in the world, taking all its dimensions together,
now likely to become an heap of rubbish, the most ruful spectacle upon the face
of the whole earth. Indeed were I silent, yet the tattered rags, dis-joynted
stones of the building speak, nay cry aloud in words much like these, Is it
nothing to you all that pass by? When the body of slaughtered Asahel was left
in the way, not a man went that way but turned aside to look on it: and shall
not we behold with pity the ruins of this dying Church? I do not mention this
as if I thought our shoulders were strong enough to bear the burden of
repairing it; but only since it is the City-Church, has been the Cities
choicest ornament, I think it would well become us who are the City-Natives, to
set on foot a Petition, that at least leave may be granted for a free
contribution throughout the City, the whole Land, whereby it may be preserved
from utter ruin; lest when this Fabric is fallen, that name be given to this
City, which by the Woman was given to her child when Gods Ark was taken,
Ichabod, the Cities glory among all Nations and Countries is departed from her.

2. Having imparted my thoughts (if not with success, yet I hope without
offense) to you concerning this house of God, I have yet another word to add
concerning my brethren and companions.

I may truly say concerning this Congregation, that we are not only in one,
but many respects brethren, in a borrowed, but proper notion companions.

There are fratres natura, brethren by nature, those that have the same
immediate Parents, as Esau and Jacob; and of this sort there are some I doubt
not here present. There are fratres cognatione, brethren by lineage, those of
the same stock, as Abraham and Lot: In this sense the number is far greater,
many of us being kin one to another. Hier. contr. Helvid. c. 7.
There are fratres gente, brethren by country: in this sense all the Jews were
brethren, and thus we are all brethren. florent. l. 3.
Cognationem quandam inter cives natura constituit, nature has constituted a
kind of kindred among Citizens; and Pluto will have all Citizens to be brethren
one to another. Finally, there are fratres religione, brethren by religion, all
those who profess the same faith; in which sense Saint Paul means it, when he
bids to salute the brethren; Saint Peter when he exhorts to love the brethren.
Colos. 4. 15.
And thus I trust we are brethren too, 1 Pet. 3. 8.
for however we may many of us disagree in some circumstantials; yet I hope we
all agree in the substantials of Christianity; and therefore why should we not
be fratres affectione, brethren in affection, as David and Jonathan were, by
entire love one toward another?

And as we are Brethren, so we are Companions. The Hebrew word which is here
rendered Companions, is derived from a word that signifies to feed; and so
properly notes them who are simul educati, brought up and feed together. Thus
have many of us been educated together from our childhood in one family, in
one parish, in one school, companions at the table, at the book, and in the
street; Arist. Eth.
and (...), says the Philosopher, it is a great engagement to love to have
been bred up together.

Since then we are Brethren and Companions, let us all as jointly seek the good
of the City, so mutually the good each of other, that it may be said of us what
was said of the Primitive Christians, Ecce ut se invicem diligunt, see how they
love one another. This is one special cause of this days meeting. It is well
observed by Josephus, that Gods enjoining the people three times a year to come
up to Jerusalem, was, though principally for his own solemn worship, yet
secondarily, that meeting and eating together, their friendship might be the
faster. For this reason is this Annual Feast observed, that once a year at
least, beholding each others faces, we may be the better known to, and beloved
by each other: in which respect, as we will not blame the prudence of those our
brethren who think fit to abstain, so I hope they will not condemn our amity
who think fit to associate and feast together.

And now (my brethren and companions) God forbid that charge should this day be
drawn up against us, which is laid by the Prophet Amos against Israel, they eat
the Lambs out of the flocks, Amos 6. 6.
and the Calves out of the midst of the stall, they chaunt to the sound of the
viol, they drink wine in bowls, but they are not grieved for the afflictions of
Joseph. How greatly defective we have hitherto been in our commiseration and
contribution, I even blush to speak. One that wrote the History of the Grecians
related what worthy acts had been done by the Lacedaemonians and Athenians; and
it being enquired what his Contrymen of Cumin had done, he had no other
answer to return, but that they had done just nothing. I wish there were not
too just cause of the like accusation: we the City- Natives have done nothing
in matter of charity, nothing in comparison of what we might have done, yea of
what others of other Countries have done; yea, I wish, whereas the expense of
our feast is double to theirs, the extent of their benevolence were not double
to ours. But I had rather exhort then chide, encourage future forwardness then
blame former backwardness.

If you shall inquire how the charity which is conferred shall be employed, the
wisdom of the Stewards has suggested to me an answer.

Saint Paul elegantly compares alms to seed, and there is a very fit and large
piece of ground said forth for this seed to be cast into.

The hedge of this field, the confines of our bounty, is to them that have
received their first being in the freedom of London, who since by reason of
their poverty they cannot feast with us, ought by reason of their brotherhood
and vicinity to be refreshed by us.

The Acres of this field in which our seed must be scattered are four, each of
which singly, much more all jointly crave a bountiful contribution.

1. The first Acre is the Distressed Clergy, and if there be an Especially set
upon the whole household of Faith, ^al. 6. 10.
it much more belongs to the chief Officers in that Household: you cannot be
unmindful how ample a recompense is promised to a small dole, when conferred
upon a Minister; He that gives a cup of cold water to a Disciple to drink in
the name of a Disciple, Matthew. 10. 42.
shall in no wise lose his reward.

2. The next Acre is the Widows of such Clergy. Indeed the sad condition of
those who were the wives of able, famous Ministers of this City, deserves not
only pitiful compassion, but a serious consideration, and that by all the
Inhabitants, how some competent provision may be made for them; and in the mean
time I hope the present benevolence will afford some succor to their widows
who had their birth among us.

3. The third Acre is the binding of the poor children of Freemen Apprentices,
whereby being placed in a lawful calling, they may be enabled to get a
livelihood. A work, to which, as I hope none will be unwilling, so I trust
those will especially be forward, who, though now possessed of great estates,
were perhaps at first of mean beginnings.

4. The last, but not the least Acre, is the maintaining of the Sons of
indigent Free-meen, Students at the Universities. Indeed what pity is it (to
use the Prophets allusion) the children should be come to the birth, Isa. 37. 3.
and there should be no strength to bring forth: hopeful Youths should be
trained up in our Grammar Schools fit for, and no means to carry them to, or
maintain them at the University? How sad is it that young Students should be
forced to leave that nest before they are well fledged, after a short stay of
some very few years running into the Country for want of maintenance at the
University? Nor yet is this all; Who so with a sad and serious eye shall look
into the several Churches throughout England and Wales, and observe how many of
those Candlesticks are altogether empty; and in how many of them there are very
dim lights, how many flocks have no speherds at all, and how many have such to
watch them, who though perhaps they may have honest hearts, I am sure have
ignorant heads, altogether unable and unfit for the ministerial charge; I say,
who so truly lays this to heart, will be enforced to acknowledge that Atheism
and irreligion, if not Popery and Superstition, will prevail in succeeding
ages, unless there be some plentiful supply from the Universities. So that as
we tender the honor of God, propagation of the Gospel, and the souls of our
posterity, we are obliged to take care what we may, that there may be a nursery
of young Plants for Gods Vineyard.

Lo here a large field, God send liberal hearts and hands, and then though
there be not so many as heretofore, there will be enough to fill these acres.
Alas my Brethren, had you hearts as well as purses, were your will equal to your
power, the sum of both the former years put together might be equalized, nay
exceeded by the bounty of a few among you, I, and that without any prejudice to
your estates; prejudice did I say? nay with a great deal of advantage perhaps
to your estates, however to your souls. Which way most of the former charity
went, those little ones, though silent, speak; nor do any of you I hope in the
least doubt the fidelity of these worthy Gentlemen with whom the present
benevolence is to be entrusted: and now I am willing to believe that such a
fire of love is kindled in your hearts as will burn at your fingers ends with a
bright and clear flame. I trust there is none among you who can spare Five
Shillings toward the Feast, but has as much to give to the Collection; yea I
hope there are some of you who are resolved to give as many if not more Pounds
to the one, then you have Shillings to the other.

I shall add one thing more in reference to that which verily is a fault among
you, and I believe has been a great Remora to your bounty, I mean to make
Example the rule of your giving; and therefore to stop your hand, and alter
your resolution, because some persons of vast Estates and narrow minds, full
purses and base spirits, throw in slenderly; what account such men think to
give to God at the last day I wonder, when having hundreds, nay thousands
coming in, and perhaps none, or but a few children to leave it to, they scarce
give Pounds upon such a special occasion as this is. But however such men may
do, or rather not do, Remember I beseech you, it is your duty to consider the
ability which God has given you, to weigh the necessitous condition of the
objects set before you, and accordingly to extend your bounty to the honor of
God, the discharge of your consciences, the regaining of your credit, and the
relief of the needy.

I am sorry I have been thus long, and yet I shall not be sorry but glad, if it
may prove successful. My valediction shall be a benediction.

To you (my dearly beloved Brethren in the Lord) peace be in your families,
peace in your parishes, and above all peace in your consciences, peace with
your neighbors, peace with your relations, peace with one another, peace
within your selves, and before all, peace with God through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

To thee Oh London that art highly favored, may there be no complaining in thy
streets, plague within thy dwellings, nor sword within thy bowels; may the
wrath of God be appeased, the rage of man prevented; may thou be a City
compact at unity within thy self, having peace within thy walls, and prosperity
within thy palaces; and let all the Sons of my Mother here present with hearts
and lips, as always, so now that we are together in the House of the Lord, say
Amen, Amen.

The first Sermon preached upon this occasion entitled Zions Birth-Register,
unfolded in a Sermon to the Native Citizens of London, in their solemn Assembly
at Paul's, on Thursday the 8. of May 1656. by Th. Horton D. D. Sold by John
Clark at Mercers Chapel in Cheapside.

ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 34. after quomodo add quis. p. 5. l. 16. del. us. l. 18. for his
r. its. p. 6. l. 16. after who r. care. l. 18. for the r. a. p. 10. l. 15.
after take add a. p. 11. l. 1. r. (...). l. 14. del. ly. p. 12. l. 34. r.
(...). in marg. l. 5. join Phil. 2. with Cic. l. 12. r. Eth. p. 18. l. 5. after
must r. not. p. 19. l. 16. del. d. p. 22. l. 22. before were r. they. l. 37.
for those r. these. p. 23. l. 8. r. tells. in marg. l. 2. add t. l. 3. del. ae.
p. 28. l. 13. before ring, r. that.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of all Mr. Hardy's SERMONS, Hitherto Printed.
1 JUstice Triumphing, or the Spoiler spoiled. A Sermon preached on November. 5.
in the Cathedral Church of S. Paul's, in 4o. 2 The arraignment of Licentious
Liberty, and oppressing Tyranny. A Sermon preached at a Fast before the Lords
in Parliament in the Abbey-Church at Westminster, in 4o. 3 Faiths victory over
Nature. A Sermon preached at the Funerals of Mr. John Rushout Junior, in 4o. 4
The safest Convoy, or the strongest Helper. A valedictory Sermon before the
Right Honorable Sir Thomas Bendish Baronet, his Majesty's Ambassador to the
Grand Seigniour at Constantinople, in 4o. 5 Love and Fear the inseparable Twins
of a blessed Matrimony. A Sermon occasioned by the Nuptials between Mr. William
Christmas, and Mrs. Elizabeth Adams, in 4o. 6 Divinity in Mortality: or, The
Gospels Excellency, and the Preachers frailty. A Sermon preached at the
Funerals of Mr. Richard Goddard Minister of the Parish of S. Gregory's by S.
Paul's, in 4o. 7 Two Mites: or a Grateful acknowledgment of Gods singular and
goodness. In two Sermons, occasioned by his late unexpected recovery of a
desperate sickness, in 4o. 9 Death's Allarum: or, Securities. Warning-Piece. A
Sermon preached in S. Dionis Back-Church, at the Funeral of Mrs. Mary Smith,
November. 4o. 10 The Epitaph of a Godly man, especially a man of God: or, the
Happiness by Death of holiness in Life. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mr.
Adam Pemberton (late Minister of the Parish of S. Fosters, Foster-lane) April
11. in 4o. 11 The first Epistle General of S. John unfolded and applied, The
first part in 22 Sermons, in 4o. 12 A Divine Prospective, representing the just
man's peaceful end. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Sir John Gaire Knight,
in 4o. 13 Safety in the midst of Danger. A Sermon preached in the Church of
All-hallows Barkin, January 4. 1655. Upon the Anniversary Commemoration of that
Dismal Fire which happened in the said Parish on January 4. 1649. 14 Wisdoms
Character and Counterfeit delineated in Two Sermons; and the one on the Epistle
of S. James chapter 3. 17. The other on the 15 Gospel of S. Matthew. chapter 2. 8. 16 The
Pious Votary and Prudent Traveller characterized in a Farewell-Sermon,
occasioned by the voyage of Nathanall Wych Esquire President to the East Indies.

