A REMONSTRANCE OF the present estate of the KINGS ARMY. Being an exact
discovery of his Majesty's strength, with the number of his forces, taken at
the general Muster on Mervill-Heath the 6th. day of October.

With many remarkable Passages contained therein.

1. The two Princes Troops.

2. The Earls in their order.

3. A List of the whole number presented to his Majesty by the Lord Digby,
Commissary General for his Majesty's Army, which is 1950. Horse, and 6500.
Foot.

4. His Majesty's honoring Prince Robert.

5. The effect of two Letters, the one from Marquess Hartford, the other from
the Lord Mohone, touching Plimmouth, and other Forts thereabouts.

6. The releasement of Captain Wingate, upon 500 l. ransom.

London, Printed by Tho: Fawcet October. 12. 1642.

A REMONSTRANCE OF The Estate of his Majesty's Army at this present, being
taken at the general Muster on Mervell Heath, Oct. 6.
SIR, I have, (in liew of your last News). sent you what happened in these
parts concerning his Majesty's Army.

Upon Tuesday last being the 4th. of October. his Majesty came to Shrewsbury
with a Guard of 500. Horse, and according to his summons, dated the 28. of
Septem. Prince Robert and the rest of the Nobles, met his Majesty with their
Forces, being a great company of brave gallants, his Majesty having had a view
thereof, commanded them to depart to their Quarters for that day, and gave
command to Prince Robert, and the rest of the Nobles, that he expected their
attendance the Thursday following, with all their Force of Horse and Foot, for
a general muster, which was consented unto, and so they departd for that day.

Upon Thursday following between 8. and 9. of the Clock, Prince Robert and
Prince Maurice, with their Troops of Horse containing about 500. were the first
that came into the field, and Prince Robert himself put the Horse in Battalia,
and exercised them at least an hour, before any came after him, his Officers
standing by all that time.

Then the Earl of Newcastle was bravely mounted, and brought with him 300.
Horse and 1500. Foot.

The Earl of Lindsey with two hundred Horse, and one Thousand foot. The Earl
of Darby, whose Companies attended his Majesty into the field, came almost with
700. Horse, and 4000. foot, the Earl of Cumberland came only with 250. Horse,
a great number of Horse and foot he has more, which lies near Barwick upon
the borders of Scotland, but by reason the Heath being his Majesty's place of
Rendevouz, and so far distant from the said Earls forces, they were excused,
the certainty of the Earls forces we know not, but the report is he has two or
3. or 5000. foot besides 800. Horse, but what number soever he has, one half
whereof are in several Goals in Yorkshire, for refusing to carry their Arms
and diverse of which were violently rescued and taken out of several Goales up
and down the Country, and brought into Hull by Sr. John Hotham, my Lord
Marquess Hartford is expected hourly from South Wales, who by report comes
with great forces of Welsh and Cornish, there was two Letters on this day
presented to his Majesty, the one from Marquess Hartford, the other from the
Lord Mohone in Cornwall, hereupon there was a great disturbance, so that they
were full two hours before they could rank them in order.

Which when they had accomplished, the Commissaries of each Regiment, mustered
the Soldiers, and gave a list of the names of each regiment to the Lord Digby,
Commissary General of his Majesty's Army who presented the number of Horse and
Foot then in the Field to his Majesty, being about the number of 1950. Horse
and 6300. Foot. This is his Majesty's complete number he has upon all
occasions about him, besides the Earl of Cumberlands Forces near Barwick,
there is at Whitchurch in Shropshire diverse Engines preparing by his Majesty's
Engineere, but they have had little or no good success as yet, for some
persons have spoiled at night, what he has done in the day, diverse of which
have been imprisoned and severely punished.

Prince Robert has had many Titles of Honor conferred upon him in the Field,
and one Mr Moore (or Morris) was made Knight Banneret in the Field, and others
at that present by his Majesty were Knighted, I cannot write you certainly of
the Gentlemen's names till the next Post, but for certain Prince Robert is made
General of all his Army in the North, at which there is no little grumbling
and murmuring thereat, and it is supposed that the Earl of Cumberland and the
Earl of Lindsey will leave their command, if by the way of Petitioning to the
Parliament, they might be received.

I cannot give credit to the two Lords Letters, but somewhat I have heard from
one of the Earl of Darbies Gentlemen, that the Lord Marquess intends to
land 2000. Horse and Foot at Appledore in Devon. where a Knight whose name I
cannot well remember, but Greenvill a Cornish-Knight, has a great company of
Horse and Foot, in expectation of the Marquesses Forces, to march to Plimmouth
and enter the two Forts Plimmouth and Drakesford, or at Mountwise,
Mountedgrombe, or at Lauceston-Castle in Cornwall, and for my Lord of Mohone
his Letter, I cannot understand any thing therein contained, till the next
return, and then I will write it at large, we are greatly burdened with
Soldiers, and shall be we fear it, this whole Winter, about 4. of the clock
his Majesty went out of the Field, and the rest in order. Prince Robert brought
up the Rear, and went with his Majesty to Whitchurch, my Lord of Essex is not
full 15. Miles from his Majesty, and his Majesty has half ways between his,
and the Earl of Essex his Army, a continual guar^ of two Hundred Horse and
Foot, which lies centinell to prevent a sudden onse^.

Captain Wingate is in consideration of 500. pounds ransomed, and on Friday
last the 7th. of this Month, was discharged out of Shrewsbury Goal, and thus
for the present, I rest.

Your loving Cozen, I. H.
Whitchurch, the 7th of October, 1642.
FINIS.

