MAN'S LAST JOURNEY TO HIS LONG HOME: A SERMON Preached at the FUNERALS Of the
Right Honorable ROBERT EARL of VVARVVICK; Who died in London, May the 30th and
was Interred at Felstead in Essex, June the 9th 1659.

By Nath. Hardy, Preacher to the Parish of St. Dionys. Backchurch.

Ec.1. 1. Man geetg to his long home, and the Mourners go about the Streets.
Psalm. 1. 1, 7. I have said you are Gods, -- But ye shall die like Men. --
Aug. l. de Not. and Great. Si de divitiis, and honoribus, and morum nobilitate
jactas, de patria, and Pulchritudine corporis, and honoribus, qui tibi ab
Hominibus exhibentur, respice teipsum, qui mortalis terra and in rerram ibis.
London, Printed by A. M. for Joseph Cranford, at the Sign of the Castle and
Lion in St Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

To the Right Honorable CHARLES Earl of WARWICK, AND BARON of LEEZE.
My LORD:
THis plain Discourse occasioned by the late Funerals of your Noble Brother,
was then Preached and is now Published by your Honors desire, which shall ever
have with me the authority and efficacy of a command.

Since I am sure it was not any thing extraordinary in the Sermon which might
enduce you to desire the Impression of it, I have good reason to believe it was
upon a double commendable design.

The one of Brotherly affection, that hereby you might preserve his memory who
is gone to the Land of Oblivion. Nor do I wonder at your regard of his memory,
when I behold your respect to his Posterity. Those three noble Ladies who (I am
confident) will never want the care of a Father, and the love of a Mother,
whilst your Honor and your thrice noble Lady survive.

The other of Piety and Religion, that this Sermon may be as a continued
memorial of him; so a frequent Monitour to you of your frail and dying
condition. No thoughts or discourses are more unwellcome for the most part to
men in their flourishing prosperity, then those of their perishing Mortality.
Skeletons, Deaths heads, and Funeral Sermons, are rarely to be found at the
Palaces, on the Tables, in the Libraries, of great personages, who being set
upon the Pinnacle of Honor, cannot endure to look downward upon the pit of
corruption. They are but few, very few, Ps. 23. 4, 5.
who when their table is prepared, their head anointed with oil, and their cup
runs over, with David, put themselves in mind, or love to be put in mind of
walking through the valley of the shadow of death.

Of this small number your Lordship may be justly reckoned one; else you would
not have desired to read what you heard. And since you seem to intend the
Sermon as a memento of your death, it will not, I presume, offend your Honor,
that the Epistle be a remembrancer to you of an exemplary life.

The Hebrew noun (...) which signifies glory, comes from the verb (...) which
signifies to be heavy: with which agreeeth that of the Latins, honos onus,
honor is a burden. Of this I trust your Lordship is sensible, that as divine
providence has advanced you to eminent dignity; so divine command requires of
you proportionable duty, that by how much the greater you are, you ought to be
so much the better; and as God has devolved the Honor upon you; you must
endeavor to honor him, your self, your Family, by magnificent and heroic
actions of Religion, Justice, and Mercy, every remembering that Nobles are
placed by God in this world, not as Statues in a Garden, or Pictures in a
Gallery; only to be looked upon, but as Pillars in a house, to support the
Church and State, where they live, and as stars in the Heavens, to let the
light of their good works shine before men, from the several Orbs, wherein
they are fixed.

But I shall not need to enlarge on this Subject, which is (I trust already)
your Lordships study and practice, and therefore after the return of my humble
thanks for your Noble favors; I shall betake my self to my earnest Prayers,
that you may have increase of grace as well as honor, that you may grow in
favor with God and Man, by being a choice instrument of his glory, and the
public good. Finally, That as you have the blessings of wisdoms left hand,
riches and honors, so you may have that of her right hand, length of days,
conferred on your own Noble Person, your deservedly beloved and honored Lady,
your hopeful Son and Heir, with those tender Plants the remains of your
deceased Brother, and all your Honorable Relations, till you all in a good old
age arrive at the fruition of a blessed Eternity. So prays

My Lord, Your Honors most humble and affectionate Servant NATH. HARDY.

MAN'S Last JOURNEY.
Psalm. 146. 4. His Breath goes forth, he returns to his Earth: in that very
day his thoughts perish.
THe Text, a mournful complaint, in which the several Clauses, Non tam verba
quam suspiria, Sermones quam singultus, seem to be made up, rather of sobs and
sighs then words. And no wonder since the matter of the complaint is mortality;
a Theme fit to be commented upon with tears, so much the rather, considering
whose mortality it is that is here deplored. If you cast your eyes upon the end
of the foregoing Verse, you shall find the Antecedent of this Relative, He, to
be (...) the Son of Man, of Adam, and that is every man, all mankind being of
his race and posterity, so that the He in the Text is not singular, but
collective, not some one, but every particular person, (a very few excepted):
And there is none of us here present, but if the Question be asked who is this
he? may return the Answer of our Savior in another case, John 18. 6.
(...) I am he. Nor is this all, but if you go a little backward, in the same
Vease, you shall find this He to be (...) as indefinitely the Son of Man, so
eminently the great Man; 2 Samuel 3. 38.
the Man of Honor, the Prince. Know you not (says David concerning Abner)
that a great Man is this day fallen in Israel; Intimating by that Interogation,
that the falls of high Cedars call for deep sorrw; Not only Man the highest of
visible Creatures, but Princes the highest of men were in the Psalmists eye
when these words dropped from his Pen, His Breath goes forth, etc.

If you take a more particular view of the Text, you shall observe in it a
double dying, the one of the Person, and the other of his purposes; the former
in the two first clauses, His Breath goes forth, he returns to his Earth;
the latter in the last, in that very day his thoughts perish.

That which in the two first clauses is asserted, Genesis 1.
and is most largely to be handled, is the dying of the person, and this is set
forth with reference to his two constitutive and essential parts, soul and
body; the egresse of the one, His soul goes forth; and the regresse of the
other, he returns to his Earth: the one whereof is verified, In ipso articulo
mortis in the very point of death; and the other is most evident, in sepultura
corporis, at the time of his Burial. Both which when I have handled by
themselves, I shall discuss with reference to the quality of the person of whom
especially they are spoken, and then close up this first and main part of the
Text, with a suitable of Application.

1. Begin we with Man's egress in those words, His Breath goes forth. The
Hebrew word (...) being derived from (...) (as also the Greek (...) from (...)
and the Latin, spiritus, from spiro,) most properly signifies breath. In this
notion the Targum and our Translators here render it; nor is it incongruous to
the Psalmists design, which is to give us a Character of death: yea Calvin
inclines to this as the most genuine meaning of the word in this place. And
thus it is a most evident truth, that when a man dies, his Breath goes forth.
Indeed it is not true, that when a man's Breath goes forth, he dies. Since
life is maintained, Calv. in loc.
inspirando, and respirando, by taking in, and letting forth Breath: but when
we can no longer take in breath, we are said expirare, to breath forth our last
and so dye. In this respect man is fitly resembled to a bladder, puffed up with
wind, which being by any prick let forth, the bladder shrivels up; when we
cease to Breath, we cease to live.

Upon how slender a thread does our life hang? it is but a puff and we are
gone; we carry our lives in our hands, or rather in our nostrils; that is the
Prophet Isaiahs Character, Isai. 2. 22.
Man whose Breath is in his Nostrils. How easily, how speedily, is a man's
breath beaten out of his body, so quickly is he deprived of life; our life does
not depend upon the soundness of our parts, strength of our joints, (one dies
says Job in his full strength,) Job 21. 23.
but only upon our breath, which how soon are we bereaved of: no wonder if one
Philosopher being asked what life was, turned himself about, and so went out:
and another resembles it by oculus clausus, and apertus, an eye shut and open,
or rather open and shut; we dye in the twinkling of an eye, James 4. 14.
and St. James putting the Question, What is your life? returns this answer,
It is a vapor which appears for a little while, and then vanishes away. Oh
that as we continually live by breathing; so we would be thereby put in mind of
dying, when our breath shall go forth.

But though this construction be true, yet I rather adhere to Theodorets and
Hieromes gloss upon the place, Theod. in loc.
who by spirit understand the soul, partly because when this word is applied to
man in holy writ; Jerome. in loc.
it is most frequently so to be understood, and where the sense will bear, it
is best to take words in their usual acception, partly because the next clause
is generally referd to the other part of man his body; and therefore it is most
congruous to refer this to his soul, chiefly because in that place of Solomon
the Son, Eccl. 12. 7.
which may very well be looked upon, as fetched from, and parallel to this of
David the Father, by spirit can be meant no other then the soul of man.

If you ask why the soul of man is called by this name of a spirit? the answer
is given both from the Etymology of the word, and the nature of the thing.

1. The word as you have already heard, signifies breath, and the soul of a
man is a breath both Passively and Actively.

1. Passively, Quia spiratur, because it is breathed into us according to that
of Moses in the Creation of Man, God breathed into him the breath of life: Genesis
2. 7.
and however it be a controverted Question whither the rational soul be
propagated and infused, generated or breathed; yet it suiteth best as with the
dignity of the soul, so with the current of Scripture to affirm that the soul
of man is still breathed into the body immediately by God himself.

2. Actively, Quia spirat, because it is the fountain and original of our
breath, which begins with the ingresse, and cease with the egresse of the
soul, upon which consideration the former sense appears to be included in
this latter, since together with the soul, the breath goes forth.

2. The thing which this word spirit is used for the most part to signify,
John 4. 24.
is an invisible, immortal, incorporeall, immateriall substance: upon which
account God is said to be a Spirit, and Angels are called spirits; and in this
respect the soul of man is a spirit, as being not an accident, Heb. 1. 5.
but a substance and that void of gross corruptible matter.

This spirit when a man dies goes forth, for the further explication whereof
it will be needful to inquire the double term of this motion, whence and
whither it goes.

1. If you inquire whence the spirit goes forth, the answer is, out of the
body. Conceive the body as an house or Tabernacle, or rather with St. Paul, 2
Cor. 5. 1.
to put both together, the house of our Tabernacle, the soul as an Inhabitant
or sojourner in this house, into which when it enters, we begin to live, and
out of which when it goes we dye. The second death says St. Austin, A^g^e
civit. de^.
Animam nolentem tenet in corpore, detains the soul against its will in the
body, and the first, Animam d^lentem pellit^e corpore, drives the sorrowful
soul out of the body, when this bold Serpeant comes with a Writ from the
divine Majesty, he enters in, and turns this Tenant out of doors.

2. If you would know whither the spirit goes, the Wise man gives you the
Answer, Eccl. 3. 21.
where he says, the spirit of a man goes upward, and again, where he says,
12. 7.
it returns to God that gave it, as it goes forth, so it ascendith upward,
Sursum eam vocant initia sua, Sen. Epist.
says Seneca, it goes whence it came. To God it goes, and that for this end
to receive its doom, which being past, it accordingly remains in a state of
weal or woe, to the day of the Resurrection.

By this it appears how dissonant both the Epicucuraean and the Pythagorean
Philosophers are to truth, the one whereof affirms that the spirit of a man
goes forth, that is, vanishes away, as the soul of a Beast does; and the
other, that his spirit goes forth from one body to another; whereas in truth
the spirit of man goes forth, so as to subsist, and that by it self, Greg. M^^.
till it be reunited with the body, Tres vitales spiritus creavit omnipotens,
says St. Gregory, to this purpose very appositely, The Almighty has created
three living spirits, the one Angelical, which is neither covered nor
perishes with the body; the second bestiall, which is both covered and
perishes with the body; the third humane, which is covered, but does not
perish with the body, but goes forth. Matthew. 10. 28.
Where our blessed Savior says, Fear not them who kill the body, but cannot
kill the soul. What does he but clearly intimate, that when the body dies, the
soul dies not, for else they who kill the body, Luke 20 38.
would kill the soul too; and where he faith again of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, that they live to God, and therefore God is not the God of the dead, but
of the living: it plainly implies, that though their bodies are dead, Cajet in
^oc.
their souls still live. I end this with the gloss of Cajetan upon my Text, who
conceives that this title of spirit, is here given to the soul in respect of
its going forth. As it is joined with, and gives life to the body it is a
soul, and as it goes forth and exists apart from the body, it is a spirit,
since in this partaking with other spiritual substances, which have a
subsistence without any matter.

2. Having given you this account of the egress of the soul: Eccl. 12. 7.
pass we on to take a view of the regress of the body, He turns to his earth.
Had he only said he returns, it might be understood of the spirit, which as
it gooth forth, so returns: and accordingly this very word is by Solomon
applied to the spirit. Had the Psalmist spoke of the Resurrection, these words,
He returns to his earth, might have admitted a fair gloss in reference to
the soul, it returns ad terram corporis sui, to the earth of its body, to
which it shall then be united: but it is manifest that these words are a
periphrasis of dying. And therefore with St. Jerome and Theodoret, the sense is
best given, that the soul or spirit going forth (...), caro, the body, the
flesh returns to its earth: Suitable hereunto is that note of the learned
Muis, who observes that in the Hebrew, whereas the Verb goes forth, is
faeminine answering with the Noun spirit, which is for the most part of that
gender, the Verb returns, is Masculine, and so not to be referd to spirit,
but the son of man who in respect of his body, returns to his earth.

Returning in its proper notion, is a going back to that place from whence we
came, so that in this clause here is a threefold truth employed, expressed, in
ferd.

1. That which is employed in this phrase of returning, is that man in respect
of his body came from the earth; and as it is here employed, so it is expressed
concerning the first man by Moses, The Lord God formed Man (that is, Genesis 2. 7.
the body of man) of the dust, (or according to the Hebrew,) dust of the
ground, and by St. Paul where he says, 1 Cor. 15. 41.
the first man is of the earth, earthly. True it is, we are formed in our
Mothers womb, but yet inasmuch as we all came from the first man, we are truly
said to come from the earth, only with this difference that he immediately, we
mediately are framed out of the earth. This truth was engraven in full
Characters upon the name of the first man, who is called (...) Adam, from a
word that signifies red earth, and that very word is here used, perhaps to
mind us of that earth whereof man was first made; yea, according to the usual
Etymology, the name homo, which in the Latins is a common name to both Sexes,
is derived, ab humo from the ground. For this reason it is, Ovid.
that the earth is called by the Poet, magna parens, the great Parent of
mankind, and in the answer of the Oracle, our mother: and in this respect we
are said by Eliphaz, To dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the
dust, Job 4. 19.


2. That which is expressed is, That Man (when he dies) returns to the earth,
Phocyl.
(...) says the Poet, We are all dust when dissolved, As the white snow, when
melted is black water: eso flesh and blood when bereaved of the soul, become the
dust and ashes: Phil. 3. 20.
in which respect St. Paul gives this Epithet of vile to our bodies. Indeed,
man's original being from the earth, he had a natural propensity to earth:
according to that Maxim, Omne principiatum sequitur naturam principiorum,
every thing has an aptitude of returning to the Principle whence it comes;
but yet had he not turned away from God, he had never actually returned
thither. It is sin which has brought upon man a necessity of dying, and that
dying brings a necessity of returning to the earth: in which respect it is
observable, that the threat, thou shall dye the death, Genesis 2. 17.
which was denounced against man before his fall, 3. 19.
being afterward renewed, is explained (as to temporal death) by those words,
to dust thou shall return; ^o that now the motion of the little world man, is
like that of the great, Circulare, ab eodem punct^ ad idem, from the same to
the same; and that as in his soul from God to God, so in his body from the
earth to earth. The Rivers come from the Sea, and they return thither. The Sun
arises out of the East, and thither it returns. Man is formed of the earth,
and into earth he is again transformed: with which agrees that of the Poet,
Cedit item retro de terra quod fuit ante. Lucr^^.


3. That which is inferd in the emphaticall Pronoune his, which is annexed to
the Noun earth, is that the earth to which man returns is his; this being
that which arises out of both the former conclusions; since it is therefore
his earth, because he comes from, and returns to it. Earth is man's Genesis
and Analysis, his composition and resolution, his Alpha and Omega, his first
and last, Ortus pulvis, finis cinis; earth is his, both originally and finally.
So that our bodies can challenge no alliance with, or property in any thing so
much as earth. For if we call those things ours, which have only an external
relation to us, as our friends, our houses, our goods, our lands, much more may
we call that our earth whereof we are made, and into which we shall moulder; no
wonder if as here it is said to be his, so elsewhere he is said to be earth, as
being called by that name.

By this time you see how fitly death is described by the spirits going forth
of the body, and the bodies returning to his earth, both which are the
immediate consequents of death, and inform us what becomes of either part,
when the whole is divided, of the soul and body when the man dies. It would be
further observed, that this is here affirmed of Princes and Great men as well
as others. Horat.
Aequa lance necessitas sortitur insignes and imos, said the Poet, death knocks
at Palaces as well as Cottages, and cuts down the Lillies of the garden as well
as the grass of the Field. It is not unfitly taken notice of, That the sacred
Historian mentioning the Kings and Dukes of Esau's race, Genesis 26.
only names the Dukes, but concerning every one of the Kings it is said he
died; indeed it was needless to affirm it of the Dukes, who may well be
conceived mortal, when Kings are so. Even they who are Rulers over men, must
be subject to death, and though they have power to inflict it upon others, they
are no way able to preserve themselves from it. It is reported of Cardinal
Woolesy, that he expostulated with himself what might prevent death: ^f money
could do it, he had enough to buy a Crown; if weapons, he had as many as would
defend a Kingdom; if power, he had sufficient to conquer a Nation; but alas
there is no weapon against death, it cannot be bribed by the richest, nor
conquered by the greatest; dye they must, and when they dye, their breath,
their soul goes forth, and their bodies return to the earth. The souls of the
greatest Landlords are but Tenants at will to their bodies, and that not their
own, but Gods, who many times against their wills, turns them out: according
to that of the Psalmist, He cutteth off the spirit of Princes: Psalm. 76. 12.
In which respect St. Austin thus glosseth upon the Text, Aug. in loc.
Numquid quando vult exibit spiritus, expirat quando non vult? Shall his spirit
go forth when he will? I, and when he will not. The bodies of the highest when
the breath and soul is gone out of them, are but rotten Carcasses, and must be
laid in the earth.

If you look upon their extraction, it is from no better an original then the
meanest, though their immediate descent be noble, yet the first progenitor of
them as well as others, was the earthly Adam. The Prince and the Peazant are of
the same earth, only the one a little better mould, of the same wool, only the
one of a little finer thread; out of the same Quarry, only the one a little
smoother stone; so justly may great men take up those words in Nehemiah, Nehem.
5. 5.
Our flesh is as the flesh of our Brethren. There is common dust and Saw dust,
Pin dust, Golden dust, and the powder of Diamons, and all is but dust. The
Beggar, the Labourer, the Tradesman, the Noble man, the King are all but earth.

If you look upon their end, it is the grave, the house of all living, like
Nebuchadnezzars Image, notwithstanding their gold and silver, their feet are
clay. The rich and the poor says Solomon, Prove. 22. 2.
meet together, sometimes at one board, in one bed, certainly in one Grave. The
Noblest are but as flowers which peep out of the earth, and flourish for a
time, and when the Winter of death comes they return thither; they are but as
dust, which is raised up in the air for a while, but a few drops of rain lay
it presently. It is the language of the French King in his Epitaph,

Terra fui quondam, rursus sum terra, nihil sum; I am again what once I was,
earth. And among the spices of which the ointment for anointing the Kings as
well as Priests was compounded, one was Cinnamon and that is, cinericii coloris,
of the color of ashes, perhaps to tell them what they must one day be.

The Meditation of this doctrine may be of excellent use to Superiors and
Inferiors, and to all sorts.

1. Oh that great men would in the midst of all their enjoyments entertain
these thoughts, That custom of presenting the Emperor on the day of his
Inauguration, with several Marble stones, desiring him to choose one of them
for his Monument, was designed no doubt for this end: and for the same reason,
Johannes Eleemosynarius, and King Philip had their Monitors, to tell the one,
that his Monument was not yet finished, and bid the other, Remember he was a
Man. I have read, that in Biscay there are old ruinous places which they to
whom they belong, often visit though they have else where stately Palaces. Oh
that they who dwell in sumptuous buildings, would frequently visit the ruinous
Graves. It was a curse upon the Serpent, Genesis 3. 14.
that he should creep on his belly, and eat dust all the days of his life; but
surely it were a blessing to the highest in this world, if they would learn to
do it in a spiritual sense, by the consideration of that dust to which they
must return. Happy is that Prince, Qui non minus se hominem esse, quam
hominibus praeesse meminerit, who no less minds that he himself is a man,
then that he rules over men.

More particularly, it is that which would be pondered by them for a double
end, that it may both quell their pride, and curb their voluptuousness.

1. There is no sin to which men are more prone then that of Pride: It is
(like our shirt) that sin we put on first, and put off lost: Nor have any
greater temptations to this sin then great ones. In alto situm, non altum
sapere difficile: Usually men of high estates are high-minded. Nor is any thing
more common, then for the bunch of Pride to grow upon the back of Honor. Among
the many Antidotes against this sin, none more effectual then this to
consider that whilst they live, they are but enlivened clay, breathing dust,
moving ashes; and that when their breath goes forth, they must return to the
earth. They say that the tympany is cured by stroaking the part with a dead
man's hand; Sure I am, the serious thought of death is an excellent means to
allay the swelling of Pride. If you put fire to Gunpowder which is made of
earth, it will blow up Towers. The fire of Meditation put to our earthy
Original and end, will blow up the turret of Pride. It is well observed that
one of the signs which Samuel gave Saul after he had anointed him King, 1 Samuel
10. 2.
was that he should find two men by Rachels Sepulcher: For this end perhaps,
that whereas the being anointed King might puff him up, the sight of Rachels
Sepulcher might humble him. Oh that you who enjoy the Honors and Dignities of
this world would often think with your selves, I must die, and when death
comes, I must exchange my Palace for a Grave, my Robes for Dust; I that am now
atteded on by men, must have worms for my Companions; I that am now so high,
must ere long be laid low; that so you may be meek and lowly in heart.

That which may so much the more advance the efficacy of this thought in
subduing the pride of great men, is that when once they are returned to the
earth; and this dunghill element has set its foot upon their face, there is no
difference between them and others. Job. 3. 19.
There (says Job of the Grave) are the great and small. Nor can we tell which
is the dust of the great, which of the small. To this tended that surcasme of
Diogenes, when he told Alexander that he had been seeking his Father Philips
bones, but could not distinguish between them and others. And for this reason
Alphonsus putting the Question, what it was that did make high and low equal?
answered, Death. Pliny writes of a River in Spain wherein all the fish that
are pnt, are of a golden color, but being taken out of it, they are of the
same color with other fishes. They who whilst they live in this world glitter
with gold and silver, when taken out of it, return to the same earth with the
rest of mankind. Whilst the Counters are upon the Table, one stands for five,
another for ten: while the Chasemen are upon the Board, one is a King, another
a Queen, a third a Bishop, a fourth a Knight, and those have their several
walks, but when put into the bag they are all alike. Thus is it with men who
(though upon the earth they are of different orders and degrees,) are alike,
when they are cast into it. And as the several kinds of herbs which are thrown
into the Limbeck being distilled make one water, so they but one earth.
Epictetus when asked, What was common to the King with the Beggar? answered, to
be born, and to die: they come into, and go out of the world, one as well as
the other. Nor is there any difference between them in the womb, and the tomb.
Let not those that are above, insult over others, since this grand Leveller
Death will one day put them in the same condition with others.

2. This Meditation of the going forth of the soul, and return of the body, is
a no less powerful disswasive from a voluptuous life, then an haughty mind.
Oh that you who have vivendi voluptatem the pleasure of life, would contemplate
moriendi necessitatem, the necessity of death: That you who have the world at
will, would remember you have not death at command. I die (said Esau) and what
good will my Birthright do me? Oh that the voluptuous Epicure would say, I die,
and what good will my vain and sensual pleasures do me! Agathocles when a King,
having been a Potters Son, drank in earthen Vessels. It were not possible men
should surfeit at their Tables, Genesis 25. 32.
carouse it in their Cups, would they eat and drink (as it were) in earthen
vessels, in the midst of their delicacyes remember that they are earth.

Consider this, you who spend your doyer in eating and drinking, in playing and
sleeping, whose whole design is to pamper and feed, to deck and adorn your
bedies to gratify your senses, and glut your selves with the delights of the
flesh. Dic mihi ubi sunt amatores mundi? Nihil ex eis remanet nisi cineres and
vermes: Tell me what is become of those lovers of pleasures, of whom nothing
remains but worms and ashes: What will become of that body of thine which is
so full fed, and richly clod, when it shall be laid in the grave? They say of
Bees, that when they are buzzing and humming about our ears, making a great and
angry noise, if you throw a little dust upon them, they are quiet, and hive
again presently. Surely it would still the roaring Gallant in the midst of his
joviall revellings, were the thoughts of dust frequently suggested to, and
seriously pondered on by him.

And yet were this all that the body returns to the earth, the Epicures plea
might be good enough; Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die. But if we die
to morrow, as our body returns to earth, so our soul goes forth to God to
give an account, to rereceive a sentence, either of absolution or condemnation.
And oh think what fear will possess thy spirit, when it apprehends it self
going forth to be arraigned at the Bar of Divine Justice; yea, how dismal
the account will be, of that time, and strength, and health, and wealth, which
has been expended upon carnal and sensual pleasures.

2. Let those who are in the lower rank of men, learn to look upon great ones
as subject to death and the grave, and that for a double end; so as not to fear
them distrustfully, nor trust in them presumptuously.

1. Their breath goes forth, they return to their earth, fear them not.
Indeed, there is a fear which is due from Inferiors to Superiors. God and the
King are set down by the Wiseman as the joint Objects of our fear, Prove. 24. 21.
and they will at last be found fools, who divide them. Mal. 1. 6.
When God says, If I be a Master where is my fear, he intimates that fear is
due from the Servant to the Master; whilst they live they are above and over
us, and therefore ought to be feared by us, but with a fear of reverence not
diffidence, and that because their power and Honor is soon laid in the dust.
Have we not sometimes observed a Ball tossed up and down in the air, eyed and
observed by every one which way it moves, least it should hit them; yea, and
when it passes by, they ofttimes stoop to it, and yet it is nothing but the
skin of a dead beast filled with wind, which is easily let out: A fit emblem
of Tyrants, who are so observed, and of whom we stand in so much awe, when yet
they are but mortal men, whose breath quickly goes forth. Put them in fear,
Psalm. 9. 20.
oh Lord, (is the Prayer of the Psalmist,) that they may know themselves to be
but men. Indeed this consideration, That the greatest enemies of the Church are
but men, may put them in fear, and us out of fear; no wonder if God bespake his
Church in that vehement Interrogation, Isai. 51. 12.
Who art thou, that thou should be afraid of a man, that shall dye, and of
the son of man, which shall be made as Grass? and therefore as David resolves,
Psalm. 56. 4.
I will not fear what flesh can do unto me, so let us not fear what earth can
do against us.

2. Their breath goes forth, they return to their earth, trust them not. This
is the principal intendment of the Psalmist, as appears by the former
Dehortation, Verse 5.
Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man in whom there is no help:
to press which this is annexed as a reason, namely their mortal condition.
Chryso. in loc.
Excellently does St. Chrysostom here enlarge, He that cannot defend himself,
how shall he deliver another? Do not say he is a Prince, for in this, he has
no greater privilege then the meanest, but is subject to the same uncertainty
of life: nay, that I may at once speak what is true and yet strange,(...), for
this reason especially he is not to be trusted, because he is a Prince, for
these earthly powers are slippery: great men are subject to more casualities
and dangers then private, and when they fall they that trust to them are ruined
with them, as the body of the Church is beaten down with the fall of the
Steeple. How often is it seen that when men think to make great ones their
shadows and shelters, they vanish away and leave them to the scorching Sun, by
which means as Jonah was by the withering of his gourd, they are disappointed
and disquieted, yea, when the Cedars fall, the lower shrubs which might have
stood at a greater distance, being near to, and depending on, are crushed by
them; let therefore the Prophet Isaiahs counsel be acceptable, Isai. 2. (...).
Cease from man whose breath is in his Nostrils, for wherein is he to be
accounted of? so much the rather, considering the curse denounced by the
Prophet Jeremy against him who trusts in man, Jer. 17. 5.
and makes flesh his Arm. The greatest man is but an arm of flesh, which
must rot, nay, a bruised reed, upon which if you lean you fall; say not
therefore to a piece of clay, thou art my fear, or my hope: to be afraid of the
power, or dote on the favor of great men, are alike, not only vain but cursed.

3. Let all of all sorts lay this truth to heart, our breath will certainly,
may speedily go forth; Let good works be in our hands, whiles the breath is in
our Nostrils. Our souls goes forth at the hour of death to be judged, let us
labor for the renewing and sanctifying of our souls, that they may appear with
boldness. We must return to our earth, respice, prospice oh homo; let us look
backward whence we came, let us look forward whither we are going, that we may
be vile in our own eyes. It is our body that returns to the earth, whilst our
souls go forth to be happy or miserable; Let us prefer that part which goes
forth, before that which returns to earth. Merito poseit majora studia pars
melior, the better and nobler part deservedly challenges our best and chiefest
care; nor is any thing more absurd (though it be too common) then to have
regard of our vile body, and neglect our precious soul. Finally, Every son of
man is as sure to return to the earth, as that he came from it, and to breath
forth the breath of his life, as that he received it in: let it be therefore
his endeavor to provide for what he cannot prevent, and so ( by keeping faith
and a good conscience) to work out his salvation, that when death shall come,
he may comfortably say, Egredere anima mea, Go forth oh my soul, go forth to
that God whom thou have served, to that Jesus in whom thou have believed, and
his flesh which returns to the earth, may rest in hope of a joyful
Resurrection to eternal life.

2. There is yet one clause of the Text behind, of which I shall give a very
brief account, namely, the dying of great men's purposes, as it is expressed in
those words; In that very day his thoughts perish.

The thoughts which the Psalmist here no doubt, especially intends, are those
purposes which are in the minds of great men of doing good to those who are
under, and depend upon them. The Hebrew word here used, is derived from a verb
that signifies to be bright: Cogitationes serenae, those candid, serene,
benign, benevolous thoughts which they have of advancing their Allies,
friends, and followers.

These thoughts are said to perish in that day wherein they are conceived;
Trem. in loc.
so Tremelius glosseth: In which sense the instability of great men's favor is
asserted, whose smiles are quickly changed into frowns, love into hatred, and
so in a moment their mind being changed, their well-wishing thoughts vanish.

But more rationally, their thoughts perish in that day wherein their persons
die, because there is no opportunity of putting their purposes in execution.
They perish like the child which comes to the Birth, and there is no strength
to bring forth; or like fruit which is plucked up, before it be ripe. Whilst
they live, we may be deceived in our expectations by the alteration of their
minds; but however their condition is mortal, and when that great change by
death comes, their designs (how well soever meant) must want success.

From hence it follows, which is by some looked upon as a part of the meaning
of the words, Lor. in loc.
that the thoughts or hopes of them who trust in them perish. It is a true
Apothegme, Major pars hominum expectando moritur; The greatest part of men
perish by expectation. And good reason, inasmuch as their expectation being
misplaced, perishes.

How strongly this Argument serves to press the Psalmists Caution against
confidence in man, though never so great, is easily obvious. It is true,
Princes and Nobles being invested with Honor, Wealth, and Authority, have
power in their hands, and perhaps they may have thoughts in their hearts to do
thee good, but alas how uncertain is the execution of those intentions, and
therefore how foolish is it to depend upon them. Trust in the Lord Jehovah (
says the Prophet) Isa 26. 4.
for with him is everlasting strength. I, and with him is unchangeable
goodness. It is safe building upon the rock; trusting upon God, whose thoughts
of mercy are (like himself) from everlasting to everlasting. But nothing more
foolsh then to build on the sand, trust to men, whose persons together with
their thoughts, perish in a moment. And therefore let our resolution be that of
David's; It is better to 118. 8, ^. in the Lord, Psalm. (...)
then to put confidence in man: It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put
confidence in Princes.

To enlarge this a little further.

It is no less true of their thoughts of evil against then of good to others.
Sometimes their minds are changed from malice to mercy, and by that means
their thoughts perish. So were Esau's toward Jacob, and he embraced him in his
arms, whom he designed to tread under his feet. Oft-times they are cut off by
death, so that they cannot bring their wicked devises to pass. Thus Pharaoh
parsuing Israel, with a resolved rage to make them and theirs his prey, is
drowned in the red Sea; and in that very day all his malicious thoughts perish.
In this respect there is as little reason to be afraid of the anger, as to
confide in the friendship of great ones. And therefore M^^athias advised his
Sons; Fear not the words of a sinful man, 1 Maccab. 2. 62, 63.
for his glory shall be dung and worms: to day he shall be lifted up, and to
morrow he shall not be found, because he is returned to his dust, and his
thought is come to nothing.

It is true of great men's, of all men's thoughts, in respect of themselves, as
well as others. The hearts of the Sons of men are full of designs about
worldly things. Apollinarius interprets the word in my Text, (...), careful
thoughts: such says Arnobius, quae cos non sinunt quiescere, which will not
suffer them to be quiet. Thoughts of buying, selling, building, purchasing, and
a thousand such like, which death intervening breaks off, and all such
purposes prove to no purpose. Theodoret upon my text, brings in the Instance of
the rich fool in the Gospel, Luke 1^. 18, 19.
whose thoughts were to pull down his barns, and build greater, and thereto
bestow all his fruits, and his Goods; and to say to his soul, Soul, thou have
much good laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry:
but that night was his soul required from him, and those thoughts perished.
Jam. 4. 13, 14.
St. James speaks of those whose thoughts were, that to day or to morrow they
would go into such a City, and continue there, and buy and sell, and get gain,
forgetting that their life was but a vapor, which appears a little while,
and vanishes away, and together with it all such thoughts. St. Gregory upon
those words, Job. 11. 2^.
The eyes of the wicked shall fail, gives this as the reason; Quia intenti^nes
eorum and desideria occupantur circa transitoria: because their thoughts and
desires are employed about perishing objects. Oh let it be our wisdom to six
our thoughts and designs upon higher and better objects, how we may obtain an
Inheritance among them that are sanctified, and enjoy the beatifical vision!
These are those thoughts which being pursued in life, shall not be frustrated,
but fulfilled at our death. He whose life has been a continued Meditation on
Heaven, and whose endeavoures have been to make sure an Interest there, in that
very day, when his body returns to the earth, his soul goes forth to the
fruition of it, and so his thoughts receive a full, a joyful accomplishment.

Once more, Not only our worldly, but our charitable, our penitential, our
Religious thoughts perish in that day of death. How many have thoughts with
themselves, When I come to such and such years, I will leave my sins, and lead
a new life: When I have got this and that estate, I will give Alms to the
poor: But in the mean time, death has unhappily prevented them. Oh therefore
let it be our prudence to lay hold on the present time, and when good thoughts
are in our minds, if we have ability and opportunity to put them speedily in
execution, lest we too late condemn our own folly, and be forced to say, non
putaram, I did not think death would so soon have seized upon me. I shut up
this with that excellent Exhortation of the Wise man; Whatsoever thy hand
finds to do, Eccles. 9. 10.
do it withal thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor wisdom, nor
knowledge in the grave whether thou go.

THe text is now finished, but my discourse must not yet end: What has been
from the text sounded in your ears, is by this sad occasion fulfilled in your
eyes. We have before us a doleful Instance of great men's mortality in this
Noble Earl, whose breath ( some days past) went forth from him, and whose body
is now returning to this earth.

Indeed, it is that sad Providence which I cannot but mention, as being fit to
be laid to heart, how Almighty God has not only once, but again and again
within a little circuit of time exemplified the truth of this Doctrine in this
Noble Family.

No less then three Persons of Honor, the Father, the Son, the Grandson, have
in less then two years been taken away by death, and that in the three several
ages of life; the Father in the evening of old age, the Son in the noon of
manhood, and the Grandson in the morn of youth.

It seemed good to the wise God, who does not look in the Church-Book to see
who is eldest, and take men out in the same order that they come into this
world, to begin with the youngest of the three, by death lopping off from this
goodly tree a blossoming branch, which might in probability have flourished
long, and brought forth much fruit. But when his surviving relations consider
what has lately fallen out, and is too likely to befall this Land, they may
look upon it as a mercy, in that he was taken away from the evil to come.

Not long after, it pleased divine providence to strike at the very root, the
aged Father of the Family, who having lived many years, was cut off in a few
hours, and is gone to his grave in a full age, like a shock of corn in its
season.

And now one main arm of this tree which first sprung from that root, and from
which that branch sprouted, is hewn down: the Father of that hopeful Son, and
the Son of that aged Father is brought to be Interred, together with them both,
in the Sepulcher of his Ancestors.

It was not my happiness to have either long or much knowledge of this
Honorable Person, and therefore a large Panegyric cannot be expected from me,
nor shall I say any thing concerning him more then truth, as not daring for
fear of the great God to speak false and flattering words of the greatest man.

To tell you how illustrious the Family is whereof he is descended, were
superfluous; you can better tell me, who have for many years beheld its
splendour: nor indeed does that add much to any man's commendation. I shall not
stay long to mind you how happy he was in his conjugall Relations, having been
the Husband of two excellent Ladies, whose memory is, and will be precious,
though their bodies are rotted in the Grave: by the former of whom he was the
Father of that only Son who went before him, and by the latter, of three
Daughters (ingenuous and promising Ladies) which are left behind him.

It will be needless to enlarge upon, what all who knew him, will readily
testify, that he was a Person of excellent natural endowments, of a sweet and
loving temper, affable and courteous behavior, and of a meek and lowly spirit,
not only before, but after he was possessed of that dignity to which he was
born: He was in honor, fine tumore, lifted up with honor, but not puffed up
with pride.

That which I cannot forbear to mention (since thereby he became an honor to
his Family) is, as his untained loyalty to his Sovereign, so his faithful
constancy in adhering to the Church of England, in her Faith and Worship. It
pleased God in his latter days to visit him with many Diseases, which as they
were in mercy intended by God, so I hope in charity they were looked upon by
him, as summons to the Grave, and Monitors of his frailty.

In his last sickness I had the Honor to wait upon, and administer to him in
holy things, wherein my conscience bears me witness, I dealt with him freely
and faithfully, and I trust not without good success. Having set before him the
sinfulness of sin, and the necessity of repentance, he did with tears and sighs
as well as words, acknowledge and bemoane the follyes of his youth and former
life, implore forgiveness of them from God, resolve if God should spare him,
that he would (through Divine Grace) be more careful of his ways. And though
it has not seemed good to divine wisdom to give him opportunity of performing
his Pious and Penitent resolves, yet I hope they were sincere, and being so, I
am sure they are mercifully accepted by his gracious God.

He was indeed willing to have lived longer, but for good end; namely, to amend
his own ways, and see Jerusalem in prosperity, and withal he desired to
submit to Gods will, and did wholly cast himself on Christ's mertts for his
salvation.

If there be any who (like fleas which bite most when we are asleep) shall
speak evil of this dead Lord, I wish they would consider that it was one of
Solons Prohibitions, (...), to stain the Honor of the dead. God ( I trust)
upon his Repentance, has covered his sins, let us do so too: They were his
earthly, dusty, ashy parts, let them be buried with him.

This Honorable Person is dead, and going to his long home. But (blessed be
God) the Earl of Warwick still lives in his succeeding Brother, who will (I
hope) not only continue, but increase the Honor of his Family, by endeavoring
not only to equalize but excel his Predecessors, in being a Friend to the
Orthodox Religion of this despised Church, a pattern to his Tennants, Servants,
yea, the whole Country, of Piety, Charity, Humility and all Virtues. And may
there long long be found one of this line fit to enjoy the Revenue, and wear
the Title of this Earldome. Amen.

FINIS.

