Lamentation, Mourning and Woe. Sighed forth in a SERMON Preached in the
Parish Church of St. MARTIN in the FIELDS, On the 9th day of September. Being
the next LORD'S DAY AFTER THE Dismal Fire IN THE CITY of LONDON.

By Nath. Hardy D. D. D. R. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty, and Vicar of
the said Parish Church.

Lam. 1. 12. Is it nothing to you all you that pass by? Behold and see if there
be any sorrow like to my sorrow which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb for William Grantham, at the Sign of the Black
Bear in Westminster Hall. 1666.

To the Right Worshipful Sir THOMAS ADAMS, Knight and Baronet.
SIR,
I First preached, and have now published this Discourse as a Testimony of my
sorrow for Londons Ruins. If the phrase and composure be (as I am conscious
they are) very defective, my Apology is, That it was a time of Distraction;
besides, broken Language is the best Rhetoric upon a mournful occasion: And
considering those manifold Relations and Obligations I have to that once
illustrious City, it will not (I hope) be looked upon as a presumption, that I
have thus publicly expressed my sorrow; for that cloud of smoke which has
covered her, or rather that flame of fire which has laid her honor in the
dust.

London was the place of my Birth, Baptism, Education, and (excepting those
years which I lived in the University of Oxford) in and about the City, has
been the place of my abode and habitation to this day.

It is now full Twenty and seven years since I entered into Holy Orders,
Eighteen whereof I exercised my Ministerial Function in that one Parish- Church
of St. Dyonis, which together with many more (proh dolor) is now laid waste.
And, though I must confess my self highly obliged as in special to many persons
of Honor and Quality, so in general to all sorts of Inhabitants in this
Parish, where by Gods Providence I now am, and have (according to my slender
ability) officiated well nigh Six years, whose merciful preservation in this
late imminent danger, I heartily congratulate, and praise God for: Yet I cannot
but acknowledge those many and great kindnesses which in those years I
received; and that not only (though chiefly) from that particular Parish, but
several other Citizens, as well of the upper, as the lower sort: So that though
I wanted not some Enemies, I bless God, I found many Friends, with whom if I
should not affectionately sympathize in this their Calamity, I should justly
incur the odious brand of ungrateful and obdurate: Nay, if I forget thee (O
London) let my right hand forget her cunning; if I do not remember thee, let my
tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth.

Being upon these considerations (honored Sir) resolved as to the publication
of the Sermon, I know not to whom more sutably than your self I should make the
Dedication; and that both in reference to my self in particular, and the City
in general.

Among my numerous acquaintance in the City, I have great reason to look upon
you as a singular Friend, as well as a prime Parishioner in that place where I
lived so long: Nor must I forget to own not only that liberal bounty, those
free entertainments, but those sage advices, and forward encouragements which I
received from you in the late perilous times, when it was a Crime to own a
Prelatical Clergyman.

Among the Inhabitants of the City, you are the principal Mourner. The Kingdom
calls the City her Mother, and the City calls you her Father, as being the
eldest among the Aldermen; not only in respect of years, but office; none now
surviving who before you had the honor to have the Sword carried before them:
And who should be chief Mourner at the Daughters Funeral, but her Father? And
though I easily believe your particular losses are great, yet I dare say such
is your compassion, That you are much more affected with the public misery,
than your own damage; and such your devotion, that you are most afflicted with
those iniquities which have procured this misery.

Upon this account, I am confident you often turn aside (in your meditations)
to see this sad fight, and probably have prevented me in what I cannot but take
notice of, how within the revolution of less than seven years, we have lived to
see a most joyful, and a most doleful sight. The one of the Sun breaking forth,
the other of the Fire breaking out. That of the King in his beauty, this of the
City in its ashes. That a representation of Heaven, and this of Hell. That in
the Spring of the year 1660. this in the Autumn of the year 1666.

It cannot be imagined with what gladness of heart all Loyal Subjects beheld
their Native lawful King, after a Twelve years tedious Exile, return to his
Throne; and not in an hostile, but amicable manner pass through His chief City
to His Royal Palace, welcomed with the multiplied shouts and acclamations of
all sorts.

Nor can it be expressed with what sadness of heart all good people beheld the
flaming Fire, as it were a Conqueror, riding upon the wings of the wind from
street to street, with a triumphant rage through that great City, eating up her
Habitations, casting down her goodly Structures to the earth; and not ceasing,
till He that said to it Go, said also to it Stay. Had the sight of that
wonderful and merciful Restoration quickened us (as it ought) to suitable
Returns of Gratitude and Obedience, we probably had never beheld this dreadful
and woeful desolation. And since the former could not allure us to our Duty, I
would to God this latter may yet at length affright us from our sins: Then I
should comfortably hope, what I doubt not we all earnestly desire, a
resurrection of this City out of her Rubbish, to a more glorious estate than
before.

Which (worthy Sir) that (if it be Gods blessed Will) your Age may be prolonged
to see, and thereby prevent the bringing of your gray hairs with sorrow to the
grave; and however, that whenever you go hence, the blessings of Heaven may
rest upon the heads of your Posterity: And as you have been a vigilant,
diligent, prudent and faithful Senator in this Terrestrial City, so you may
(after a long course finished on earth) be a Triumphant Citizen, and have an
everlasting habitation in that heavenly City of the living God, where the Moth
frets not, the Rust eats not, the Fire consumes not; is the uncessant prayer
of,

Sir, Your most affectionate Friend, Nath: Hardy.

Lamentation, Mourning and Woe.
St. Luke, Cap. 19. ver. 41. And when he was come near, he beheld the City, and
wept over it.


I Have no sooner read the Text, but I suppose you all reflect upon the doleful
occasion of handling it; How forcible are right Chap. 6. 25.
words, says Job? and much more when they are suitable. The words Eccles. 12.
11.
of the wife (says Solomon) are as nails, and as goads, to make a deep
impression upon the Auditors, but then especially when they are fitted to the
season. Such is this Scripture I have now read, seasonable; ey (be it spoken
with submission to the Divine appointment) too seasonable, whilst that late
dismal Conflagration of our Neighbor City calls upon, nay, cries aloud to us
all to tread in the footsteps of our Saviors deportment toward Jerusalem, Who
when he came near, beheld the City, and wept over it.

Caesar said vaingloriously of himself, Veni, Vidi, Vici; I came, I saw, I
overcame. Here our Evangelist says of Christ, what he did piously, Venit,
Vidit, Flevit, He came, He saw, He wept: And these three acts of Christ, are
the three parts of the Text.

His Approach, When he was come near, His Aspect, He behold the City, His
Tears, And wept over it.

These three did one make way for the other, He came near that he might behold,
and beholding he weepeth. Indeed the last is the principal, to which the two
other are preparatory; and therefore passing through these, I shall chiefly
insist upon that.

I. The first act here mentioned, is Christ's coming near. Appropinquation is a
local motion, wherein there is terminus a quo, a place from which we depart;
and terminus ad quem, a place to which we draw near, and this is here affirmed
concerning Christ.

Surely then Christ's body (as well as ours) is circumscribed in one certain
place, so as it cannot be simul in utroque termino, in many places at once. To
what purpose else those various peregrinations of our Savior, who, as St.
Peter says, Went about doing Acts 10. 38.
good, if he could at once have been in those several places whither he went.
And if he could not be at once in many places on earth, much less can he be in
heaven and earth together. When he was on earth, he was not in heaven (says
Vigilius) and now he is in heaven, he is not on earth. And if he cannot be in
many, much less can he be in every place; it being impossible that he should
come near to any place, whereas he was there before; or go from it, since he
must be there still; so that it were easy from this Scripture, to confute the
Multipresence of the Romanists, and Omnipresence of the Lutherans: But
Controversies ill befit the Pulpit at any time, especially in such a dolorous
time as this, and therefore I pass it over.

And yet I must not leave this first act of Christ's coming near to Jerusalem,
till I have taken notice upon what account it was, and what might be the reason
of his approach: For,

First, Jerusalem was at this time a very wicked City, a Sink of Filth, a Den
of Thieves, and a Cage of unclean Birds, and therefore (one would think) most
unfit for the holy Jesus to draw nigh to. The voice from heaven said concerning
Babylon, Come out of her (my people) not come near to her; and it is Revel. 18.
4.
St. Paul's question, intending a Negation, and thereby a confirmation of the
Dehortation, What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? what
communion 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15.
has light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with Belial? But we
must know,

1. On the one hand, That as the Historian says of the River Dee in Wales,
that it passes through a Lake called Pimble Mere, but mingleth not with its
waters; or as the Fish, which remains fresh, notwithstanding it does not only
swim, but suck in the salt water: So our blessed Lord drew near to wicked
persons and places, and yet was not defiled or infected by them. He is called
by the Prophet Malachy, The Sun of righteousness; and as the Sun, Mal. 4. 2.
though it cast forth its beams upon the filthy Dunghill, receives no pollution
from it: No more did Christ from those noisome places to which he approached;
and,

2. On the other hand, He was sent by his Father, especially to the Jews, Iis
primo missus quibus promissus; and that among others, to discharge the office
of a Prophet; nay, in respect of the personal performance of that office, he
was not sent but to them. Accordingly we find him in the subsequent Verses,
reproving their Iniquity, and foretelling their Calamity; which he could not
have done, had he not come near to them; for this reason he drew near to, and
suffered Publicans and Sinners in Jerusalem to draw near to him; since, as he
says himself, he Luke 15. 1. Mat. 19. 13.
came to call sinners to repentance.

It is not absolutely unlawful for good men to approach wicked places; and it
is not only lawful, but expedient for men of God to converse with that people
to whom they are sent, though never so wicked. Indeed since it is not with us,
as it was with Christ; He was not, but we are too capable of Infection; and
more apt to receive evil, than do good; we have therefore the greater need to
be watchful and circumspect: But since the whole need not the Physician, Mat.
9. 12.
but the sick; those who are appointed by God to be the Physicians of Souls,
not only may, but ought upon just occasion offered, to draw nigh, and visit the
most desperate Patients: But,

Secondly, Jerusalem was the place where Christ was to suffer. He knew how
maliciously they were bent against him, and how greedily they thirsted after
his blood, and therefore the greater wonder that he should come near such a
people. But the answer is easily returned, He was sent to them, and no dangers
could divert him from the errand about which he was sent.

Thus ought we to run all hazards in the discharge of our duty. It was a great
crime in Jonah to flee to Tarshish, when he was sent by God to Nineveh: Jonah
1. 3.
And it was a singular fortitude in St. Paul, to go to those places whither he
was sent, though he knew that bonds and afflictions did abide him in Acts 20.
22, 23.
every City. We must not needlessly put our selves upon dangers, nor can we take
comfort in such sufferings. Christ gave leave to his Disciples when persecuted
in one City, to fly unto another. And Mat. 10. 23.
wisdom teaches us, not to draw near to, but avoid those places which threaten
our Ruin, except we have an express call from heaven, and then Piety obliges
us not to consult with flesh and blood; but as Luther, when cited to Worms to
answer for himself (though much dissuaded by his Friends) resolved to go
thither, though all the Tiles of the houses were Devils: So ought we to
encounter with all perils, not fearing to follow Gods call, be the danger never
so great; upon which account it was that Christ came near to Jerusalem.

And yet there was more than this in it, Christ did not only approach
Jerusalem, notwithstanding but because he was, and that he might suffer there.
He was as a Prophet, so a Priest, and such a Priest as was to offer himself a
Sacrifice. Now all Sacrifices were to be offered at Jerusalem, that being the
place which God had chosen for that end; and therefore the time of his offering
up being at hand, he comes near to Jerusalem, and coming near,

II. Beholds the City, which is his second act. The Person here spoken of being
God-man, might be said to behold the City at this time with an humane and a
divine eye. Or if you conceive him here spoken of only as Man; He beheld the
City with an eye of sense, and an eye of Prophecy. With his bodily eyes he
beheld the City, as those did, who speaking of the Temple, said, What goodly
stones are here? He Luke 21. 5.
saw a beautiful City environed with strong Walls, adorned with a magnificent
Temple, and other stately Fabrics, replenished with wealthy Citizens, and
furnished with all manner of Conveniences: But with the eye of his mind
enlightened by Divine Revelation, he saw this City encompassed with malicious
Enemies, the Walls sacked, Houses burnt, Inhabitants slain, and not one of
those goodly stones left upon another. Yea, all this, though not to come to
pass till many years after, he saw as certainly and clearly, as if it were then
acted before his eyes.

To foreknow future Contingencies is one of Gods peculiars, to whom all things
past, present, and to come; and those not only (...), but (...), necessary, but
casual are at once obvious: But yet there were men of God to whom he was
pleased to impart the knowledge of what was to come to pass, according to that
of Amos, Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reveals his secrets to
his servants the Prophets. Indeed this light of Chap. 3. 7.
immediate Revelation ceased after the Sacred Canon was completed; and though
God still can if he please, yet it is that which he seldom, if at all, has
done since; and therefore those who pretend upon the account of any
extraordinary inspiration to foresee and foretell the ruin of places, are to
be looked upon either as Subtle-headed Impostors, or at best, Giddy-headed
Zelots. Nor are we to give any greater regard to our Prognosticating
Astrologers, who presume to read that in the Stars, which God never wrote
there; and abuse them to that end for which God never appointed them. How
fallible, conjectural, and uncertain that Fore knowledge is which they have by
this means, appears not only in that the Events which they foretell do
oft-times prove contrary, but that as to the most remarkable accidents which
befall (such as the late dismal Conflagration) they are usually silent. And yet
(my Beloved) God has not left us altogether destitute of means whereby we may
at least probably foresee misery and calamity coming upon the places where we
live.

The prudent man (says Solomon once and again) Prove. 22. 3. 23. 12. Eccles. 2.
14.
foreseeth the evil, and in this respect his eyes are said to be in his head,
the upper part of his body; and as they that are on the upper ground can see
afar off, so does the wise man, whilst the Fools eyes are in his feet; nay, he
is ready-to stumble upon, and fall into danger before he will see it. This
seeing eye, as well as the hearing ear, is that which God is ready to confer;
and therefore if any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God (says St. James) who,
as Solomon assures us, Lays up wisdom for the righteous; James 1. 5.
and upon our asking will lay it out upon us.

If you shall enquire yet more particularly, How Prove. 2. 7.
by the eye of prudence a man may foresee evil to come? I answer,

1. By considering the several threats which God has denounc't in his Word
against sinners; for since Gods Threatenings are no less true than his Promises,
and though the sentence be not speedily executed, yet it can by no means but
Repentance be prevented; the prudent man may foresee, that sooner or later the
Evils threatened, will fall upon them that go on in their sins.

2. By comparing the City, or place where he lives, with those Cities and
places which are recorded in holy Writ, as the instances of Gods vengeance: For
since (as St. Peter says) of the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, it is no less
true of the rest, that they were made an ensample to them who should after live
2 Pet. 2. 6.
ungodly, we may hence infer, That though not the same, yet some Calamity or
other will befall wicked places now, as well as then; and,

3. Lastly, By observing the method of Divine dispensation in his Judgments.
How usually he first striveth with Mercies, then with Judgments; how he gives
warning first, and then strikes; how he proceeds from corrective, to
destructive punishments; we may foresee that that people, upon whom mercies,
and warnings, and lesser judgments have had no kindly influence, are near to
destruction.

And oh how happy were it, if we would thus behold desolation before it come;
for then perhaps we may prevent it, and never behold the desolation: or if not,
in respect of the community, yet according to that of Solomon, The prudent
foreseeth the evil, and hides himself, we may prevent our own ruin, and Prove.
22. 3.
provide for our safety; or if not so, yet according to that known saying,
Praemeditati mali mollis ictus, Evil foreseen is better born; we shall the more
easily sustain it when it comes: But alas, such is our Iniquity, as well as
Infelicity, we will not believe till we feel, nor see till it is too late to
avoid; and then we sigh forth the Fools language, Non putaram, I did not think
this mischief would have come. It is observed of some Creatures which have only
sense, that they foresee evils by a natural instinct; Swallows the fall of a
ruinous House, Cranes the coming of a storm, and such like; and yet we who are
endued with reason, will not take notice of approaching Judgments. Oh let us at
length be wise, and imitate our blessed Lord as far as we can, in foreseeing
those evils which threaten us, though we cannot with that certainty which he
did behold Jerusalem in ashes.

III. And now it is high time to take a view of that influence which this
approach and aspect had upon him, and that is expressed in the last act, He
wept over it.

Christum flevisse saepe, risisse nunquam legimus. It is not unfitly observed,
that we read often of Christ's tears, but never of his laughter. Holcot reckons
up seven times of his weeping, at his Birth, Circumcision, for Judas, Lazarus,
over Jerusalem, in the Garden, and on the Cross. It is not improbable, but
that, as other Infants, he at his birth did salute the World with tears, and
that the pain of Circumcision did extract tears from him; but neither of these
are mentioned in Holy Writ. It is said indeed in respect of Judas, he was
troubled in spirit, not that he wept, though not improbably that trouble might
express it self by weeping. Three times are expressed, John 13. 21.
That for Lazarus by one Evangelist, St. John; This over Jerusalem by another,
St. Luke; The Chap. 11. 35.
other is mentioned by no Evangelist, but the Apostle St. Paul in his Epistle
to the Hebrews, and yet whether Heb. 5. 7.
those tears refer to the Garden, or the Cross, or both, is a question; It is
very likely, he who sweat drops of blood, at the same time shed tears; and it
as likely that his prayers on the Cross were accompanied with tears: it is
certain, in the one place or other, or both, he wept; His tears for Lazarus,
were the tears of a Friend; Those on the Cross, the tears of a Priest; These
over Jerusalem, the tears of a Prophet; for as a Prophet he beheld Ierusalems
ruin, and beholding, weepeth.

It is a good observation of Origin concerning our Savior, Omnes beatitudines
quas in Evangelio docuit, exemplo sirmavit. He confirmed by his pattern all
those Beatitudes which he preached in his Sermon: He was meek, and poor in
spirit, pure and merciful, the great Peacemaker, and a Sufferer for
Righteousness sake; and that he was a Mourner, appears here by his weeping.

For the fuller discussion whereof, I shall desire you to take notice of these
four circumstances, Who, When, Over whom, and for What: And,

1. Who it was that wept, Christ the Son of the living God made man, Indeed his
very weeping bespeaketh him a Man, and that not in appearance only, but
reality. A Phantasm cannot weep, a Picture cannot grieve; so that from hence,
we may infer a strong argument against the Apollinarian Heretics, who
imagined, that Christ had but an imaginary body: Nor does this only argue him a
Man, but such a Man as was (...), subject to the same passions with us. Tears
are not only indices naturae, but doloris, testimonies of humane nature; but of
humane passion, particularly that of grief and sorrow, whence it follows.
That the passions of the mind are not in themselves sinful, else the holy and
undefiled Jesus who knew no sin (to wit, experimentally and practically) could
not have been subject to them. The truth is, they are very apt (like the wind,
to be boystrous, on in a wrong corner) to exceed in their measure, or err in
their object, and so degenerate into sins and vices; love into lust, anger into
rage, and grief into impatiency: But in themselves they are not sinful, as
being the products of Nature, not of the corruption of it. That stoical precept
of putting off humane affections, as it is impossible, so it is not necessary
were in possible. We need not banish, but only imprison our passions; not
extirpate, but regulate them; for Christ himself gave various expressions of
several passions, and here in particular of his grief by his tears.

Besides, this Notion of the Who in my Text as to his being a Man, and that
subject to passion, I must not forget to mind you that he was a Prophet, a Man
of God; and being to utter a sad message, delivers it with tears. The Priests
and Prophets of the Lord are resembled to eyes, and those eyes said to be like
the Fish-pools of Heshbon, to note that they should be watery eyes distilling
with tears, in which respect, Cant. 7. 4.
among the many Ceremonies of the Romish Ordination, an Handkerchief is given
to the person ordained for wiping away those tears which should continually run
down. Indeed tears well become us in all our Offices. Do we pray for the
people? our prayers and tears do well together. Let the Priests weep between
Joel 2. 17.
the Porch and the Altar, and say, Spare thy people, O Lord. Do we instruct the
ignorant, or comfort the dejected, or reprove the sinner, or threaten the
obstinate! we should express our pity by our tears. Many walk (says S. Paul)
of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are enemies
of the Phil. ^^. 18.
Cross of Christ. And here our Savior being to denounce Gods judgments
against, weepeth over Jerusalem.

2. The next considerable Circumstance is the When: And that, as appears by
the preceding context, was inter acclamatioues, in a time of joy. When ver. 36,
37.
the people welcomed him with shouts, he approaches them with sighs. He would
let us see how little he was taken with the pomp and splendour of the world, and
intimates a special act of prudence, namely, to mingle our joys with some
sorrowful thoughts, which may serve as a check to their exuberancy. It is
observable how King David in the very same Psalm where he speaks of his still
waters, green pastures, full cup, spread table, takes occasion to Ps. 23. 5.
mention the shadow of death. Solomon tells us, There is a time to laugh, and a
time to weep; we may Eccles. 3. 4.
carry it further, The time of laughing is a fit time of weeping, lest we
should laugh too much. It is the usual dispensation of Divine Providence, to
make all our earthly comforts (...), bitter-sweets, checker work, black and
white, in our most prosperous estate, sending some cross event, which may be an
allay to our joy; and it is the dictate of humane prudence, to present to our
selves some sorrowful thoughts in the time of our greatest mirth. We may
observe when men laugh most heartily, tears stand in their eyes: we have often
beheld a shower of rain fall in a sunshine; we use to eat our sweet meat with
sharp sauce: Thus let us intermingle something of sadness with our delights,
after the example of our Savior, who wept at a time of the greatest solemnity
of joy, when the multitudes that went before, and followed after, cried,
Hosanna to the Son of David.

3. The next Circumstance to be discussed, is the Whom: and that is expressed
in the Text to be the City, to wit, of Jerusalem. And that which I would here
take notice of, is the enmity which Jerusalem had to him, and the love which he
showed to Jerusalem: Doloris may stand in the Poets Verse, as well Res est
soliciti plena timoris amor. Ovid.
as timoris, and it is as true in the sense, Love is full of grief, as well as
fear: when he wept for Lazarus, the Jews said, See how he loved him; may we not
John 11. 37.
say the same here: See how he loved the City over which he weepeth; And how
much this City hated him, appears by that bloody murder which in a few days
after this, was by them committed upon him: He commiserateth them who had no
compassion for him; nay, he sheddeth tears for them that shed his blood. It was
his precept in the Sermon on the Mount, given in charge to all his disciples,
Love Matthew. 5. 44,
your enemies; and lo, here he practices it, and well does it become us to
follow both his command, and his example. Indeed we read in the Psalms, The
Psalm. 58. 10.
righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance; but that is on the
Churches implacable enemies; otherwise it is Solomon's caveat, Rejoice not when
Prove. 24. 17.
thine enemy falls; nor is there any thing more truly Christian, than not
only not to rejoice, but mourn for our enemies misfortune: And let me tell
you, it is the best way of revenge, when our enemy hungers, to feed him, when
he thirsts, to give him drink; Romans 12. 20.
not only to be sorry for, but to succor him, since hereby we heap coals of
sire upon his head. Thus let our love to our enemy, be the love of the heart,
not feigned, but sincere, not counterfeit, but cordial, the love of the tongue
in praying and blessing, the love of the hand in doing good, and the love of
the eye in weeping for them that hate, that curse, that do evil to us, and that
when misery comes upon them.

4. There is only one question more to be resolved, and that is, For what
Christ weepeth in reference to Jerusalem? and that will appear by the following
context, to be her sins and her sufferings. ver. 42, 43, 44.
Of both a word.

1. He weepeth for her sins, in that she did not know the things of her peace,
as appears in the next verse; nay, as we find in that parallel place, that she
stoned the Prophets, and killed those who were sent unto Matthew. 21. 37.
her with the glad tidings of Peace; nay, not only the wickedness which she
had, but which he foresaw she would commit against himself, in putting to shame
and death, him who was the Lord of life and glory; and that notwithstanding all
her wickedness, she remained secure and obstinate, according as it is said
elsewhere by S. Mark, that Christ Mark 3. 5.
looked round about the people, and was grieved for the hardness of their
hearts.

The wickedness of bad men ought to be the sorrow of good men, and when they
are so wicked as not to grieve for themselves, they grieve so much the more for
them. Lots righteous soul was vexed (as S. Peter tells us) with the unclean
conversation of the 2 Pet. 2. 8.
Sodomites: David says of himself, Rivers of waters run down mine eyes,
because they keep not thy Law. Ps. 119. 136. 158.
And again, I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved: S. Paul, weepeth for
those among the Philippians, whose god was their belly: and S. Hierom said to
an impenitent wretch, Hoc plango quod teipsum non plangis, this I bemoan that
thou do not bemoan thy self. This is that which holy men always do upon a
threefold account.

Of piety and devotion toward God, whose Name is blasphemed and dishonored by
their violation and contempt of his Law.

Of Pity and compassion toward the sinners, who are running headlong to
perdition, and perceive it not.

Of Charity to themselves, in avoiding hereby the guilt of other men's sins;
which the very not grieving, contracts upon those that behold them, and also
escaping the punishment which those sins bring upon the places where they live,
for so we read of a mark set upon the mourners for the abominations in
Jerusalem. Ezekiel 9. 4.


And if upon these accounts we must weep for the sins of others, much more
ought we every one for his own sins; In this indeed we could not have our
Savior for an example, who had no sins of his own to weep for, since he could
not have been a Savior, had he been a sinner. But (he excepted) there was
never any who had not sins enough of his own to bewail; and truly, in vain does
he pretend to be troubled at the faults of others, who yet indulgeth to his
own; nay, how can he bemoan another, who does not pity himself; or will any
man believe that he is offended at the dishonor done to God by others, who
yet vvilfuly dishonours him himself? And therefore, as our Savior exhorts,
first to cast the beam out of our own Matthew. 7. 5.
eye, so let us be persuaded, first to repent of our own sins, and then to
weep over the sins of others.

2. But secondly, Christ wept over Jerusalems sufferings: Whence observe.

1. Others passion should move our compassion, and we should mingle the wine
of their afflictions with the water of our tears. There is no duty to which we
are more frequently exhorted than that of mercy; and what is misericordia, but
miseria ad cor; mercy, but the laying another miseries to heart. It was St.
Paul's precept, Weep with them that weep; and it Romans 12. 15. 2 Cor. 11. 27.
Matthew. 7. 12.
was his practice, Who is weak, and I am not weak. That golden Rule, of doing
to others, as we would they should do to us, holds true, as in many other
particulars, so in this, That since we desire to be commiserated our selves, we
should commiserate others. Thus Job, who cries out, Have pity on me, O you my
Job 19. 21. 32. 25.
Friends, have pity on me; says also of himself, Did not I weep for him that
was in trouble? Was not my Soul grieved for the poor? There is nothing more
humane, than for one man to sympathize with another. It is observed among Swine
and Bees, Una agrotante lament antur omnes; if one be sick, the rest are sorry;
but much more suitable is it to our humane nature, and therefore Cruebty is
called Inhumanity; nay, there is nothing more Divine, more Christian than this;
and therefore St. Paul calls upon us, To put on bowels of mercies as the Elect
of Coloss. 3. 12.
God, chosen to be his Children, and consequently to resemble him; upon which
account, it is Christ's argument, Be you merciful, as your Father which is in
Luke 6. 36.
heaven is merciful: Nor was there any virtue did more illustriously shine
forth in Christ himself, an instance whereof he gives us here in weeping over
the City.

2. Private, but much more Public Calamities require our Sympathy; for such
was this, not over a particular Person or Family, but a City. We use to say,
Bonum quo communius eo melius; Good is the better, by how much more it is
communicated; and Evil, the further it spreads, the worse. It is an undeniable
Maxim, The whole is greater than any part; and consequently, as the safety of
the whole ought to be first preferred, so the calamity of it ought to be most
condoled. Every good man is of a public spirit, and therefore deeply affected
with common miseries: A few drops of water may quench a spark, but many Buckets
will not easily extinguish a great flame. In times of general Calamity, we may
well wish with Jeremy, That our head were waters, and our eyes Jer. 9. 1.
fountains of tears to weep day and night.

3. Not only when we our selves are Fellow Sufferers, but when we are only
Spectators of, we ought to be concerned in others miseries. Our blessed Lord
was to ascend to heaven, and sit down at his Fathers right hand long before the
time of Jerusalems misery, and yet it becomes the object of his sorrow.
Nehemiah was himself in the Kings Palace, a principal Officer, a great
Favorite; and yet by reason of Jerusalems Calamity, He sat down, and wept, and
mourned. When we our selves are at liberty, Nehem. 1. 4.
we must remember them that are in Bonds, as if we were bound with them; nor
must our own prosperity make us forgetful of others adversity.

4. All sorts of miseries, but especially grievous Desolations, call for a
Lamentation; no less was this which befell Jerusalem, when not one stone left
upon another which should not be thrown down. It was Queen Hesters plea to
Ahashuerus, We are sold, I Hester 7. 4.
and my people to be destroyed, and to perish; if we had been sold for Bondmen
and Bondwomen, I had held my tongue. Look away from me (says the Prophet Esaias)
I will weep bitterly; and why so bitterly, for it is a day of trouble (and that
no small Isa. 22. 4.
or slight trouble, but) of treading down, and perplexity, breaking down the
Walls, and crying to the Mountains. It is a doleful sight to behold the Ship
tossed up and down by the boystrous waves, but to see it sink into the Sea, or
dash in pieces against the Rock, may well cause an Outery. The deeper the wound
is, the greater need of washing it with our tears; and the heavier the burden,
the greater need of our hands to help to bear it up.

5. Lastly, If the foresight of misery when yet it is afar off, much more when
it is near; and if when it is near, much more the sight of it when actually
brought upon a person or people, ought to move our 2 Kings 8. 12.
pity and compassion. When Hazael said to Elisha, Why weepeth my Lord? His
answer was, Because I know the evil thou will do to the children of Israel: And
much like was the reason of our Saviors weeping here, who knew the evil which
the Romans would do to Jerusalem: But when the evil is really done before our
eyes, good reason our eye should affect our hearts with sorrow, and our hearts
fill our eyes with tears.

This, This, is that (my Beloved) which I am this day to press upon my self and
you, in reference to that doleful destruction which has actually befallen our
Jerusalem, the once Renowned, but now Desolate City of London; and her
Inhabitants that being near, and having beheld its Conflagration, we would weep
over it.

It is not many Weeks since we kept a joyful day of Thanksgiving for the good
hand of our God upon His Majesty's Naval Forces, in causing their Enemies to
flee before them; and great reason we had to rejoice in so seasonable a
Victory! But alas! the righteous God has now turned our laughing into
mourning, and our singing into sighing, whilst we have been forced to flee
from our Houses. We read of Marcus Marcellus, that having besieged, and taken
the famous City of Syracus, he wept to see such Citizens become his Captives
and Slaves. And it is storied of Titus Vespastan, who was the instrument of
Gods vengeance upon this City in my Text, That he did not invade it without
tears; and truly that late burning of the Ships and Goods, and Houses of our
Enemies, though it was very justifiable, as an act of Military Justice, done by
persons empowred with Royal Authority for the avenging of former injuries; and
very acceptable, as a weaking of our Enemies power to do future: Yet as it was
an act which brought ruin and destruction upon many private persons and
families, some of whom might be in some sort innocent as to the public
quarrel; it was matter of compassionate grief: But oh then what sadness should
sit upon our spirits, whilst we behold so great a destruction at home, a fire
in our own bowels!

True it is, we of these parts have very great cause of joy in our particular
preservation, since we deserved no less than they to have been devoured by the
flame; but to use the Psalmists language, we have cause to rejoice with
trembling, lest the like misfortune Psalm. 2. 6.
befall our Houses; ey, and to rejoice with weeping, because it has befallen
so many of our Friends, Neighbors, and Fellow-Citizens.

Indeed had it been a particular House and Family, or some Village, Hamlet,
Town, or Borough, it would have been deplorable; but magnum momentum est in
Cic.
nomine urbis, says the Orator: There is a great deal of weight in the name of
a City, and consequently the ruin of it most lamentable.

As among Stars, there are of the first and second, and third magnitude; and
among Ships, of the first, second and third Rate: so among Cities, there are
greater and less; and surely by how much the greater the City, the sadder the
loss. What tears then, yea, Rivers of tears (were they like the goodly Thames
which runs by) can be sufficient to bemoan the downfall of this so ancient, and
so eminent a City.

This City was called (when in her Glory) by Ammianus, Marcellinus, Augusta,
the stately magnificent City; but how is she now become angusta? this large
Volume in Folio abridged almost to an Octavo, there being, as is probably
computed, scarce a sixth part remaining within the Walls.

The shape of the City has been observed to be like that of a Laurel, and it
was a good wish of him who desired that like the Laurel, it might always be
green and flourishing: But this sad Fire has spoiled her of her greenness, and
she is now become as it were one Brand, withered, scorched, nay, burnt to
ashes. One of the names anciently given to her was Troja nova, and her Citizens
called Troynovanters; and behold now she is too like old Troy in her
Constagration. I pray God it may not be said, I am seges ubi Troja fuit, Corn
grows where new, as well as old Troy stood. Chronologers tell us, I hat
London was 354 years older than Rome; and Tacitus speaking of her above 1500
years ago, calls her, Londinum copid negotiarum maxim celebre, a very famous
place for Merchants; ever since which time she was rising higher and higher in
splendour and glory: But alas! in a few days she is spoiled of all that beauty
she had been advancing so many hundred years. We have not (I suppose) forgot
that fatal blow by Fire and Gunpowder given to that Ship which did wear her
name; but the Loyalty of many worthy Citizens in one year repaired that loss,
by building a better, now deservedly called the Loyal London. But who can tell
how many years may pass before this City of London attain to her pristine
luster! Though yet I will not despair, but that in Gods good time she may
become more illustrious than before.

A late Writer having first given a full and particular Howels, Land:
account of this City, goes on to parallel it; not only with all the Cities of
these three Kingdoms, but of the whole World, and prefers it before them: For
having reckoned up about twenty several kinds of Ornaments belonging to a City,
he proves by an induction of particulars, That though in some one or few of
those Ornaments, many other Cities outgo her, yet, all taken together, she
surpassed them all. And to all those excellencies which he mentions, I shall
add one, in which I am sure no City could equalize her, the number of her
Learned, Religious and painful Preachers; upon which account, the title which
the City of Quinzie in China attributed to her self (for her high Walls) might
have been given her, she was an heavenly City; or to use our Saviors language
of Capernaum, a City lifted up to Matthew. 11. 23.
heaven. And now who can refrain from weeping, to see this City almost stripped
of all her Ornaments, and her Honor laid in the dust?

Let the Merchants weep for the downfall of that Royal Exchange (where they
used to drive on their mutual Commerce) with the several Wharfs and Keys,
which were so commodious for landing their Goods.

Let the several Companies weep for the ruin of their Halls, where they were
wont to meet each other in love and amity.

Let the poor Orphans weep for the loss of that Hospital, where so many
Thousands of them have been nourished and educated.

Let the Priests weep, not as of old, between the Porch and the Altar; but that
now there are so many Churches, where there is neither Porch nor Altar to weep
between.

Let the Parishioners weep, that they have now neither Churches nor Preachers;
whilst those are so demolished as unfit for use, and these, as well as
themselves, forced to look abroad for shelter.

Finally, Let all the Inhabitants of this City, and her adjacent parts, weep to
consider how many Families have not where to hide their heads, but are
scattered up and down the Fields for want of their Habitations: Yea, how many
wealthy Citizens are very much impoverished, and some of them brought to a
morsel of bread.

Nor do I only call upon the City her self, but the Court, the Country, the
whole Kingdom, to weep over the Cities destruction; and that not only in regard
of the particular losses which several persons throughout the Kingdom undergo
upon this account, but of the Concern which the misfortune of this City is to
King and Kingdom. The City of London was as it were the Dominical Letter, by
which the whole Nation reckoned how the year would go about; or as the Golden
Number, by which we were wont to cast up our Accounts. It was the saying of a
judicious Forreigner, That England might rather be said to be in London, than
London in England. Sure I am, the welfare of England was very much concerned in
Londons prosperity. Some have enviously resembled her to the Spleen, whose high
swelling made the rest of the body lean: But I doubt we shall find, she may
more truly be compared to the stomach, and the Apologue made good; whilst the
stomach wants supply, the rest of the members cannot thrive. If England be as
the heavens, London was as the Sun in those heavens; must not darkness needs
cover the whole heavens, when the Sun is so much eclipsed? If England be as the
Ring of Gold, London was as the Diamond, How little is the value of the Ring,
when the Diamond is, if not wholly lost, yet very much cracked? If England be
as a goodly Tree, London was as the root; and when the root is withered, how
can the Tree flourish?

London was wont to be called Camera Regis, the Kings Chamber; ey, and it might
have been called the Kings Coffer, since besides the great Income which her
Custom, Excise and Chimnies brought to the Crown, she was ready to fill* his
hands with present Coin upon all occasions: well may the King weep, nay, we
need not call upon Him; I would to God all his Subjects were as deeply sensible
of this sad blow as He. London is called in the Law, Cor Reipublicae and totius
Regni Epitome, the Heart of the Commonwealth, and Epitome of the whole Kingdom.
And she is no less justly, than usually styled the (...), Mother-City of the
Kingdom: well may all the Daughter-Cities, yea, all the People of the Land take
up a bitter wailing for this blow, which has as it were stabbed them at the
heart, and killed their Mother. Ey and especially at such a time as this, when,
by reason of our Foreign War, her assistance was so useful. Sad indeed, to
have the Milch Cow dry, when most need of Milk; and the Cloud vanish, when most
want of Rain; yea, as it were, the Fountain to be empty, when most occasion for
water. How stupid is that Man? How hard is that heart, which these
considerations do not affect?

And yet this is not all, since the doleful influences of this calamity, in
some sort, reach not only to the whole Kingdom, but to all the Protestant
Churches. There have not wanted daring Prognosticators, who have presumed to
foretell the destruction of Rome, and the downfall of the Pope this year; no
doubt, if they repent not of their Superstitions and Idolatries, Vengeance will
pursue them; but it is not for us to know the times, nor to build positive
Predictions upon our Interprepretations of dark Prophecies: In the mean time we
sadly behold the most famous Protestant City of the World, become an heap of
Rubbish. I easily believe, our Romish enemies rejoice at this flame, and cry
among themselves, O pulchrum spectaculum! O goodly sight! And perhaps our
Protestant Adversaries rejoice also; but I doubt they will have little cause
for it, when they weigh all things in a right balance. Whither by that Babylon
mentioned in the Revelation be understood Pagan or Papal Rome, I shall not now
dispute; but sure I am, all Protestant Princes and Churches have reason to make
the like Lamentation over London, which is said to be made over Babylon, Alas,
Alas, that great City which was clothed in sine linen and purple, and scarlet,
with gold and Rev. 18. 16.
pearls, and precious stones; for in one hour (at most a few days) she is made
desolate!

All this while I have only set before you the sadness of the Ruin, together
with the doleful effects which attend it; but now give me leave to enlarge, and
increase your sorrow, by minding you of the causes, as well as the effects,
entreating you to consider by whom, and for what it is, that this great
desolation is befallen this great City. We read in the Book of Job, That the
fire of God sell from heaven, Chap. 1. 16.
and consumed his sheep. And God threatens by his Prophet Amos against
Damascus, Gaza, etc. That he would send a fire which should devour their
Palaces. Chap. 1. 4. 7. 12, 16.
And surely no other was this Fire which has laid waste so many beautiful
Churches, goodly Fabrics and Houses, than the fire of God, a fire of his
sending. If there were any sons of the Coal who kindled, or fomented the flame,
yet they were the Rod of Gods anger, and Isa. 10. 3.
the Fireballs in their hand his indignation; and I both pray and hope, that
if there were any such Rods, they may themselves be cast into the fire, and
receive their deserved punishment for so horrid a villainy. If it were an
accidental fire, occasioned by negligence and inanimadvertency, yet even that
casualevent was of divine appointment: Nor was it only the hand, but a special,
signal hand of God, which appears among other things, chiefly in the
concurrent wind by which the Fire was carried on with an impetuous violence,
for who was it but God, who was pleased at once both to stop the Windows of
Heaven that it rained not, and brought forth the wind out of his Treasuries,
that it continued, till the Fire had done that work which he determined should
come to pass. And as we must acknowledge it was the merciful and powerful word
of our God, which said to the Fire (as he does to the Sea) Hitherto thou shall
come, and no further: So it was no other than the angry and revengeful Job 38.
12.
hand of God which caused the Fire (with the wind) to bring upon the City such
a generally destructive Calamity.

Upon this consideration, it will be fit for us, as we look upon the burning to
be the effect of Gods wrath, to bewail the sins which have incensed it, and
thereby procured this Constagration: So that whereas all this while I have
called upon you for tears of compassion, I must now exhort you to tears of
compunction.

I do not design (Beloved) to upbraid London in this day of her calamity, far
be it from me; but I think it a very fit season for London to be put in mind of
her iniquity.

I would not confine the sins which have deserved this devastation only to
London, nay, rather enlarge the accusation against the whole Kingdom; and as
both Prince and People will find themselves concerned in the sad effects of the
flame, so all have reason to charge themselves with the kindling it. But as the
Judgment is fallen more immediately and most heavily upon the City; so
doubtless it concerns the City more especially to remember and bewail her own
sins: And whereas there were several Parties, and Men of various persuasions in
that once populous City, I could heartily wish, that instead of throwing Dirt
in each others Faces, they would throw each the first stone at themselves; and
instead of railing and reviling, they would all of them with weeping eyes
bemoan first their own sins, and then the sins of one another.

We read of Joseph's Brethren, when their Brother had put them in Ward, they
said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our Brother, in that we
saw the anguish of his Soul when he besought us, and we Genesis 42. 12.
would not hear; therefore is this distress come upon us. I would to God it
might be so with all the Inhabitants of this City, now that so great distress
is come upon us, to hear the voice of Conscience, which if not quite seared,
will speak at such a time, and to say one to another, We are verily guilty of
these and these sins.

Now that God has overthrown some among us, as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah, it is time surely for those who have been guilty of Sodoms sins, to
accuse Amos 4. 11.
themselves for their pride, fullness of bread, abundance of idleness, and not
strengthening the hands of the Needy. Ezekiel. 16. 46.


Now that so many houses of God are burnt up, and laid waste in the City, and
their Teachers are removed from them; it is time for those to bethink
themselves, who either out of Profaneness have neglected, or out of Schism
vilified the houses of God; and if not like this City of Jerusalem killed and
stoned, yet disheartened and contemned those who were sent unto them.

Now that many of our wealthy Citizens are much weakened and impoverished in
their Estates, it is time for them to call to mind, how forward they were to
part with their Wealth for raising a Rebellious War against their Sovereign,
which at last most Tragically ended in His Murder.

Now that such a Well-ordered Society (as the City of London was) is broken,
and Neighbors and Friends are scattered up and down in several parts, and that
the Fire has run through, and thrown down her goodly Structures, it is a fit
season for those cursed Incendiaries to condemn themselves, who delighted in
division, made wide breaches in Church and State, between the King and His
People; and when time was, set the whole Kingdom on flames; yea, I fear still
would, had they the like opportunity.

Now that their Shops and Tables, Chambers and Houses are demolished, their
Wares and Goods either removed or consumed, it concerns those to call
themselves to an account, who have sequestered and plundered their Neighbors
Goods and Houses, and Lands, ey, and those also who have kept Houses of Riot,
Chambers of Wantonness, Tables of Surfeit, and Shops of Lying, Deceit and
Perjury.

This, this is that (my Brethren) which the Lords voice cries at this time to
the City, and which he expects from the Inhabitants thereof, that we should
every one so seriously and speedily reflect on his own sins, as to bewail them
with proportionable grief; and so much the rather now, because we did it not
before, not this last year, when his hand of Pestilence was so heavy upon us,
and we so insensible of it. Then he consumed our Persons by the burning Plague,
and now our Houses with the burning Fire. Then he removed us from our
Habitations, now he has taken away our Habitations from us; and because there
was not enough weeping then, therefore there should be the more weeping now.

To draw to an end, I have I think said enough by this time to put you upon
sprinkling your heads with ashes, girding your loins with sackcloth, filling
your eyes with tears, and breaking your hearts with sorrow; but I must withal
tell you, that all is not done, when this is done.

Our weeping of compassion must be attended with a ready contribution toward
their relief whom this Fire has undone. I hope there are not, and yet I would
there were not any so cruel as to exact upon their necessity, who come to hire
Lodgings or Houses of them, this were to add affliction to the afflicted; nay,
rather use them kindly: And to those who are not able to hire, give
entertainment; yea, let us willingly embrace whatsoever Overtures may be
proposed for repairing the breaches and rain of our Metropolis.

Our weeping of compunction must be accompanied with reformation. Oh let the
heat of that flame not only thaw our frozen hearts into tears of godly sorrow,
but melt away the dross of our corruption; that the Fire which was consuming to
our Houses, may be as a Refiners fire unto our lives. Let us pull down the
strong holds of Atheism and Profaneness, Luxury and Uncleanness, blow up the
Turrets of Pride and Ambition, Envy and Faction; burn up the Thorns and Briars
of Hatred and Malice, Covetousness and Oppression, the chafe and rubbish of
all manner of wickedness; that so God may be entreated to spare the remnant of
our Habitations, and make up the ruins of those that are demolished, to give
us beauty for ashes, and the oil of gladness for the spirit of heaviness, when
we shall behold a new London, (like the Phoenix) rise more gloriously out of the
ashes of the old. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

