JUSTICE TRIUMPHING OR, The SPOYLERS SPOILED. Laid forth in a Gratulatory
SERMON For the Miraculous Discovery of, and our Glorious Delivery from the
Barbarous POWDER PLOT: PREACHED, At PAUL'S, November the 5th. 1646.

By NATHANAEL HARDY, Master of Arts, and Preacher to the Parish of Dionis
Back-Church.

Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands
shall be given him,

Isa. 3.11. Who so diggeth a Pit shall fall therein; and he that rolleth a
stone, it will return upon him,

Prove. 26.21. Deus non solum est in praestando benignissimms, sed etiam in
vindicando justissimus.

Aug. l. 2. de lib. Arb. (...).

Chrysostom. in Ps. 7.15. LONDON, Printed by R. L. for Nathanael Webb, and
William Grantham, at their Shop, the Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard, 1648.

To the Right HONORABLE Sir JOHN GAYR Knight, LORD MAJOR: The Right Worshipful
the Sheriffs, and the rest of the Aldermen. Together with the Worshipful
Societies of this Ancient and most Renowned City of LONDON.
Right Honorable, Right Worshipful; Worshipful:
I Should have been well pleased to have kept this scarce plumed Bird in my
private Cage, had not the noise of some virulent Fowlers shot forced her to
fly abroad for Refuge; where to build her Nest better she knew not, then in
the secure clefts of your favorable protection. In your ears she first
sounded her notes, which (though harsh and broken) were attentively heard by
many among you; and I hope will now be entertained no less acceptably.

True it is, she is no soaring Eagle in cloudy Notions, nor gaudy Peacock
beautified with the Feathers of affected Eloquence: only thus much I may
safely say, she is an harmless Dove, free from the Gall of Malicious
Bitterness, bringing in her mouth like that of NOAH'S, the Olive Branch of
peaceful Unity. To the effecting and establishing whereof, that she may prove
in some measure subservient, is the hearty desire and unfeigned prayer of him
who is

A constant Petitioner at the Throne of Grace for yours, and the Churches
safety. Nathanael Hardy.

To the READER.
I Never so much prized my rude conceptions, as to judge them worthy of a
publication; and the just diffidence of my immature years and shallow
judgment, has often caused me to withstand friends importunacy.

I well know to use Ruffinus his expression, non esse absque periculo multorum
judiciis ingenium tenue and exile committere; it were far more safe for my
slender Shallop to be confined within the narrow River of a private Auditory,
then to launch out into the Worlds main Ocean. Besides, I sadly observe the
curiosity of the times, the variety of men's humors; what one approves,
another rejects; one thinks it is too facile; another, too obscure; one says
it is too loose; another, too elaborare. And (which is yet worse) such is the
perverseness of this Age that novell fancies, jangling controversies, (which
like Rebecca's Twins cause a sore struggling in the womb of our Church) nay,
horrid Blasphemies find more acceptance then solid and sacred Verities. So
that might this Sermon have died the common death of others, it should have
been buried out of sight. Psalm. 57.41. Detractoria verba sunt arma and
sagittae* arma prope slantes, saggitae long absentes vulnerant. Ugo Catensis.
But considering how slanderous tongues (sharp as swords that wound near hand,
yea, as Spears and Arrows that hurt further off) have sought to put it to a
violent and ignominious death, I am enforced to revive it, that innocencies
plea may reach as far as Envies accusation. The Adversaries of these weak
labors stand both on the right and left, to wit, furious Novelists and fiery
Papists.

As for the former, I wonder not that they contemn them; Since here are
neither known truths clothed in uncouth phrases, nor (which is viler) old
errors in a new dress, the only fashions that Sectaries are enamoured with.

As for the latter, I less marvel that they should traduce them; the very
subject, and occasion of them being their shame and anguish.

Illis siquidem pudor est audiendi quae faciunt,
Nullus faciendi quae erubescant.
They are unwilling to hear what they were desirous to have acted; it is their
common cry, what, nothing but the POWDER TREASON? But surely Gods undeserved
favor to us, and his deserved punishment of them may well challenge a Marble
Monument; and fit it is our Pens as well as Tongues should annually commemorate
this deliverance.

Let then the Papist read and fret, the Novelist read and scoff, I doubt not
but the moderate, sober-minded Christian will read and accept, at least pardon.
Such I hope thou art; let but this well meant (though mean) discourse find
thee charitable, and thou may perhaps find it profitable, which is his
paayer, who is

Thine in the Lord Jesus, Nath, Hardy.

THE INTRODUCTION.
I Am ascended this sacred Mount with joy and fear. Joy in that blessed occasion
of this solemn meeting; fear of my too too unfit abilities for this weighty
service. Indeed which way soever I look, just causes of solicitous fear
present me; Genesis 28.17.
so that I may use Jacobs words concerning Bethel, How dreadful is this place!

If forward on the difficulty of the business in hand, I fear least through
my steril invention, and stammering tongue, the work should miscarry and prove
abortive. If round about on this numerous Assembly, judicious Auditory, I
fear, as knowing my empty notions cannot satisfy your solid apprehensions. If
backward to those Silver Trumpets which have formerly proclaimed the praises of
God in this Sanctuary, I may well be afraid to sound my cracked pipe and
bruised reed. Last, if upward to that awful Majesty, in whose place I stand, I
desire most of all to fear and tremble, lest either through my dullness or
unfaithfulness I should betray my Masters message. Yet on this last object I
fix my eye. It was his providence, not my desert or desire called me hither. It
is his glory, not my own honor I set before me; in his, not my own strength; I
shall endeavor to perform my task, not meddling with matters of State, but
only the state of the matter; for which purpose I shall entreat you to turn
your eyes to that sage Apothegme of the Kingly Prophet David, and lend your
ears to that sacred Ditty, of that sweet singer of Israel, as you shall find
it penned upon record, in

The Text.
PSALM 9.16. The Lord is known by the Judgment which he executes, the wicked
is snared in the work of his own hands Higgaion Selah.


A Grateful Commemoration is the work of this day; a miraculous discovery the
subject of this Commemoration, an eminent deliverance the fruit of that
discovery; a remarkable judgment the attendant of that deliverance, and this
Scripture a fit parallel of that judgment. Never did story more exactly
demonstrate the truth of this Text; nor can any Text more pithily lay open the
marrow of this story: so that whosoever rightly considers the fullness of Gods
dispensation in the work, must needs acknowledge the fitness of David's
acknowledgement in the words.

If you call to mind the mercy of the day, we may justly apply the Romans
expression of the time wherein Caligula began to reign by decree of Senate, it
was the day wherein England was new built, a day in the Romish Calendar nigro
carbone notatus marked with a black Coal because the fire came not at it to
make it red: but in outs candore notabilis ipso, for the same reason worthy to
be written in white yea Golden Characters.

This Month of November is memorable among others, for two days, the
seventeenth and the fifth; on the one the purity of the Gosp^l brake forth; on
the other the treachery of the Gospels enemies brake out: the one the
initiation of as gracious a Queen* the other the continuation of as wise a King
as ever England enjoyed. And truly should these two days parley, as once
Themistocles fancied of the Holiday and Workeday, and the seventeenth should
say to the fifth, if I had not been so happy, thou had never been; the fifth
may well reply, had not I been, thou had never been so happy, since had not
this day been so gloriously successful that Sun of the Gospel which did
then arise, had probably in our Horizon for ever set. A joyful day then it
was; and that not less for our adversaries destruction then our preservation,
both which were so nearly conjoined in this days bl^ssi^g, that the one could
not have been without the other, their desolation being our consolation, their
corruption ou^ generation, their ruin our resurrection; nor could we have
stood upright had not they fallen. So that if ever any people, we; if we for
any deliverance, for this; and if for this on any day, much more on this, may
well say and sing with the Psalmist in the words of the Text, The Lord is
known, etc.

The Title of this Psalm according to the vulgar reading is pro occultis
filii, (...)
which Hierome and Aquinas interpret of Absolons conspiracy against his father
David, and if so, it well suits our present occasion, which is the detection of
those sons of Belial, who closely contrived the ruin of Father and Mother,
King and Country. Some there are who render it pro juventute candida,
conceiving the scope to be a gratulation for the flourishing estate of the
Church; and if so, it fitly answers this days comfort wherein the Church of
England revived as it were from the dead, and has flourished since more then
before. Our late Translators refer it to some Musical instrument, Junius to
a note which we commonly call the Counter-tenor, and if so, we may learn one
part of this days se^vice, by vocal and isntrumental Music to celebrate
this unparalleld blessing. Not to controvert the Title* if we will believe
Ainsworth, Ains. in Psalm.
as the intent of the former Psalm is the magnifying of God for the
Propagation of Christ's Kingdom, so this for the destruction of Antichrist. And
if so, well may we bear a part in this tune for that fatal blow, which though
to us in the intent, yet to Antichrist in the event proved pernicious. However
some famous example of Gods mercy to David, and judgment on his enemies was
the ground of pe^m^^g this Psalm. Many are the verses wherein David mentions
both these, and among them none so remarkable as this which has Selah annexed
to it a word that is never used nisi ubi valde insigne est quod dicitur, Ribera
in Hab.
unless that which is spoken be of singular concernment, so that what the
Diamond is among Stones, the Sun among Planets, Gold among Metals, that is this
sentence in the Psalm, worthy to be engraven in every religious bosom, and
sung by every pious soul, The Lord is known, etc.

In which words you may observe a Rhethoricall Climax, which we shall climb up
by these steps; Jehovah though in himself incomprehensible may be known;
nothing wherein he is more conspicuous then in executing judgment, no
judgment more palpable then that which snareth the wicked in their own works;
and when this is done, nothing becomes the Saints better then to make it
Higgaion, Selah, our continual meditation.

The Text presents us with three parties, God, the wicked, the Saints; Gods
judgment, the wickeds punishment, the Saints deportment.

Gods severity, the wickeds misery, the Saints duty.

Deus perceptus, God perceived by his executions.

Impius deceptus, the wicked deceived in his intentions.

Pii conceptus, the Saints conceit and meditation of both.

If you please call the Text a Theater of Gods judgments, wherein you have

1 The King of glory displaying himself on the Stage of this world with
Thunder and Lightning, and thereby known in his severe judgments.

2 The wicked acting his part with secrecy and confidence, but his exit
doleful and miserable.

3 The Saints as spectators of this Tragedy, hissing at the folly of the
wicked, applauding the equity of God.

I^ you will* conceive it as a pitched field, wherein you may behold

Isa. 26.21.
1 The Lord of Hosts coming out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the
earth, drawing out of his sword, and doing execution on his enemies, his
Colors red, betokening vengeance, and his Motto this in the Text, The Lord is
known, etc.

2 The wicked adversaries of the Church mustering their forces, lying in ambush
to entrap the Saints, discovered and ensnared; their colors black, bespeaking
malice, but their Motto may well be the second clause, the wicked is snared in
the work of his own hand.

3 The whole Army of Saints triumphing in their Generals honorable conquest,
and the enemies shameful overthrow, their colors white, intimating purity,
and their motto the last words Higgaion, Selah. To speak more plainly, call the
Verse a Sermon; in it are the three usual parts of a Sermon, Doctrine, Reason,
Use; the Doctrine affirming, Reason confirming, Use inferring, in fine observe
these three plain and pithy severalls.

1 A general proposition concerning Gods manifest Justice asserted, the Lord is
known in executing judgment.

2 A particular expo^^tion and exemplification of that assertion annexed, the
wicked is snared in the work of his own Hands.

3 An implicit imposition of a duty to be performed in reference to both the
former Higgaion, Selah. I shall gently strike these several flints, each of
them will afford various sparks to enlighten both the Text and day, in
prosecution of which, let our Prayer be that that God who as on this day was
gloriously known to the wicked in the execution of his real, would now be
graciously known to us in the promulgation of his verbal judgments; and as
the wicked were justly snared in the work of their hands, so our souls may be
mercifully taken by the words of his Mouth, that the lessons which we shall
hear and learn this hour, may be Higgaion, Selah, our meditation, comfort,
and practice for ever, and so I begin with the

First Part.
A general proposition of Gods manifest justice asserted.

The Lord is known by the judgment which he executes.

The first word though not in order, yet nature, to be explained, is judgment,
a word of various significat^on, and large extent, verbum hoc judici utinam
nemo transiret sine ^udicio; fit it is our judgments should be informed in the
nature of Gods judgment, not needlessly to insist on the numerous acceptions of
the word, know to our present purpo^e* Gods judgments are of two sorts,
judicia oris, operis, of his Mou^h and his Hand, of his Words and works.

Psalm. ^9.9.119.7, 13, 20. v.
Judgment is frequently applied by David to the words of God, and that not
without just reason, since by them he commands as a Judge, in them he
requires nothing but what is just, and according to them he will one day judge
us. Most commonly the Scripture applies judgment to Gods works. And that
generally to the whole administration of his Government of the World, the way
of God among men being styled his judgment, Jer. 5.^4. and of these St. Paul
affirms they are unsearchable and past finding out, Romans 11.33. more
especially, and that sometimes for his

1 Corrective and medicinal chastisements on the godly; So the Apostle Peter
tells us, Judgment begins at the house of God, 1 Pet. 4.17. and they are fitly
so called for this reason among others, because God tempers them with
judgment, and manageth them with discretion according to the Prophets Prayer,
Correct me, O Lord* but with judgment, not in thine anger, lest thou bring me
to nothing, Jer. 20.22.

2 Sometimes for his vindictive and exitiall punishments of the wicked, begun in
this World, consummated in the other; of this Judgment God has made a due
preparation* and the wicked have a fearful expect^tion, Proverb. 19.20^ Heb.
10.27. James 2.13.
as being a judgment without mercy; and of this sort is the judgment in the
Text to be understood. The reason of which appellation is well given by
Musculus to be partly, Musv^in locum.
because these punishments are inflicted by God as a Judge, chiefly because
they are most just and right. There is not less verity then severity in all
Gods proceedings against sinners; we are sure says St. Paul, that the
judgment of God is according to truth against those which commit such things,
Romans 3.2. it is observable for this purpose that God compares his destruction
of Samaria to a line and of the house of Ah^b to a pl^mm^t, 2 King. 21.13. ut
ostendat se no^ praecipitem f^^ri, that he might appear not rash but righteous
in his sharpest strokes on the wicked* measuring all his actions by the
straight line of justice. The judgments of his Mouth are sometimes obscura,
always vera, though difficult, yet true, and the judgments of his Hand are
sometime occulta, never injusta, though secret and strange, yet just and equal;
nor is it amor vindictae but zelus justitiae, love of righteousness, not
revenge which makes him to

2 Execute judgment, I form^ Light, and I create Darkness, says the Lord;
Isa. 45.7. Light is put before darkness, but darkness joined with Light, God
the Author of both. Mercy is most natural to God, flowing from him as water
from the Fountain, light from the Sun; but yet Judgment is sometimes squeezed
from him as wine out of the Grapes by our sins. He calls it indeed his strange
Work, but yet it is his work and he will do it. Isa. 28.21.
It is true the instruments of vengeance are called a razor that is hi^ed as
though God had no weapons of his own, Isa. 7.20.
but rather then sin shall want its just merit, and justice her due
satisfaction, God will hire instruments and command execution to be done. I
have read of a Loadstone in Aethiopia which has two corners; with the one it
draws to, with the other it puts the Iron from it. God (beloved) has two
Arms, of Mercy and Judgment, two Hands, of Love and Wrath, with the one he
draws, the other he drives, the one stroaketh, the other strikes; and as
he has a right hand of favor wherewith to lead the Saints, so he wants not
a left Hand of fury, wherewith to dash the wicked in pieces. True it is as
Solomon intimates Judgment is not presently executed against the evil doer,
Eccl. 8.11.
the cause whereof is not negligentia but clementia, inscitia but tolerantia, a
merciful patience, not an ignorant negligence; and however though he have
woollen feet yet his Hands are Iron, his executions may be slow, they will be
sure, Exodus 34 7.
it is one of his choice attributes by no means to clear the guilty, and he is
no less a just Judge, then an indulgent Father. We all like Polyphemus see
with one Eye, with Malchus have but one ear, like the Benjamites cast the
stone with one hand; we love only to suck the Dug of compassion; to be fed
with the Milk of mercy: but let none flatter themselves, we must expect
judgment should grate our Ears as well as mercy tickle them, knowing that if
we will not hear, we shall f^^l; for the Lord is known by executing judgment.

3 The Lord is known. According to the Caldee Paraphraze it is translated,
manifestum est Deo and cum Deo judicium quod fecit Gods judgments are known to
or with him. Lea^ned Muis renders the participle impersonally cognitum est,
(...).
it is a known, tried, experienced truth, God does judgment. Both these seem
too short of the Psalmi^^s meaning, the vulgar Latin reads the words in the
future Tense, cognoscetur dominus, referring to that last and great judgment,
wherein most eminently and universally the Lord shall be known a just rewarder
and avenger. (...). Innotuit. Trem Participium omnibus temporibus accomodari
potest. Lor. in locum.
Hugo makes mention of a threefold day, wherein God is known of Tribulation,
death, and judgment the last and most dreadful day of all. The 70 and the
generality of Interpreters read it in the present and preterperfect tense, he
is and has been known, by executing judgment. That the Saints while they live
may have a breathing time, and the wicked a taste of misery God executes
justice on them now, and when he does so, he is known to be Jehovah.

God though invisible in himself, is both audible in his Word, and visible in
his Acts; and indeed plus oculo quam or aculo, we read him more easily in the
Patent of his works, then Charter of his Scriptures; true it is the noblest
demonstration of things is from their causes, the nearest from their effects
and performances* the former cannot be made of God who is the first cause, the
latter is made by his actions. Sensus assensus sunt, we soonest assent to what
we behold, and we all with Thomas are backward to believe till we see with our
eyes, feel with our hands, and put our fingers in the print of Gods Works.

Now there are three sorts of Acts, by which God makes himself known.

Omnipotent in working miracles.

Gracious in dispensing favors.

Vindictive in executing judgments.

By his Omnipotent he is known to all the World.

By his gracious to the Church.

By his vindictive to his enemies.

Aliter suis, aliter impiis innotescit Dominus, God is in a diffe^ent manner
known to his own, and his enemies; to his, in cond^nation of their sins, and
donat^on of blessings; to his adversaries, modo non solum mirabili sed
miserabili in imputing their sins to them, inflicting his judgments on them;
indeed Judicia indicia, every judgment on the wicked is a character, yea Oracle
to evidence Gods presence. Musc. in locum.
Tunc demum deum cognoscimus cum poenam exigit de impiis, then do all men see
the Majesty of a God, when the wicked feel the stripes of his Rod, Ambrose.
these are paginae authorem suum nunquam tacentes, lines which cannot conceal
the Penman; books that ever speak their Author, and the plainest paths
wherein we may trace the footsteps of a deity. Oleaster derives the name
Jehovah from (...), that signifies destruction; I will not assert the
naturalnesse of the Etymology; yet thus much is true, when God brings calamity
on the wicked, he gains glory to himself, and manifestly appears to be Jehovah.
Whilst God is injuriae patiens, suffering wrong from his enemies, he seems as
it were to be asleep, and the World takes little notice of him: But when he is
vindictam agens doing right he shows himself the Judge of the World. What
full characters of his attributes does God write in the blood of the wicked? to
wit,

The infiniteness of his mercy to the Saints, who are hereby preserved;

The severity of his Justice on the ungodly, which is herein declared;

The integrity of his faithfulness in both promises and threatenings, which are
herein performed.

By his judgments it is that he is known.

In the perfection of his holiness hating all sin.

In the Almightinesse of his power subduing his enemies.

In the Sovereignty of his Dominion ruling all Creatures, so that upon just
ground the Psalmist asserts, the Lord is known by the judgment which he
executes.

To close up this first General.

1 O that you to whom though not the name Jehovah, yet Elohim is given in
Scripture, Use. In special to Magistrates. Psalm. 82.6. Dat veniam corvis vexat
censuro Co^umbas, Ovid.

Not judgment, but oppression; righteousness, but a cry.


of whom this Lord has said ye are Gods, would be like to God, and make your
selves known in your office by executing judgment; be sure it be judgment,
according to the rules of Law and Justice; otherwise you do not execute but
persecute. To pardon Ravens and censure Doves, to pass by blasphemies against
God, and punish misplaced words toward men, to connive at wilful profanations,
and condemn ignorant or passionate miscarriages, is no^ (...) but (...) bu^
(...), as the elegant Prophet phraseth it, Isa. 5.7. But in a way of right and
equity spare not to show your selves resolute, it was a wise saying of
Pythagoras, Qui de malis poenas non sumit, bonos ini urias assicit. Semalle
beneficio nullam gratiam report^re quam maleficio poen^^ non irrogare

Hosea 12.6. Zach. 7.9. Jer. 48.10.


he that does not malefactors right, does the good wrong, and Cato professes
he had rather be ungrateful then unjust. God bids Magistrates keep judgment,
but not as a prisoner; execute it, but not as a Malefactor; keep it* that is*
observe; and execute, that is, perform: Oh remember justice is Gods legacy,
and he has made you his Executors and A^ministrators; be careful to see his
Will fulf^lled; Execution ^n Policy is like Elocution in Oratory, the prime of
all. It was a goo^ Speech of one concerning Nerva his Government, malum esse
eum imperare sub quo nemmi quicquam liceat, sed long pe^us esse sub eo vivere
sub quo omnia liceant, to English it in few words, Tyranny is better then
Anarchy. Saint Augustine pithily says of a remiss Magistrate parcendo saevit,
he is cruel in showing mercy, and that not only to others but himself,
incurring that curse which belongs to him who does the work of the Lord
negligently; that Apothegme of Lewis the thirteenth of France, being most true,
that Prince which can and does not punish, is no less guilty then the offender.

Oh the^ far be that Machiavellian policy from those who have the bridle of
authority in their hands, to lay the reins on every ones neck, and allow the
people to do what they list; That gross Heretics, obstinate Schismatics, or
open prophaners should pass without due censure for fear of losing a party;
no, rather take up that heroic resolution, fiat justitia, and ruat mundus; let
Justice be mayntained, though the World be ruined. But what ever carnal reason
may suggest, we shall find at last no better way to prevent the ruin of the
Camp, raging of the Plague, drowning of the Ship, then the stoning of
sacrilegious Achans, Josh. 7.21. Number. 25.11. Jonah. 1.15.
slaying adulter^u^ Z^mries and Cosbyes, and casting froward perverse Jonahs
overboard, Obedience is the best sacrifice, punishment of disobedience the
next; and were Magistrates more, God would be less known in his judgments.

In general to all.
2 Let the Lord be known, and acknowledged in his wrathful ex^cutions. Better
indeed were it to know him in his liberal collat^^ns as a Donor; but howev^r
let us know him in just visitations as an Avenger, Oleaster.
since as one well, idcirco a Deo fl^gellamur ut cognoscamus iratum; quem
nolumus cognoscere propitium; therefore does God thunder and lighten in his
punishments; that we might own him in th^se, who would not behold him in the
shining of his love; the truth is, we are all too loath to know God even in
those afflictions he infl^cts on us; how long was it ere Pharaoh is brought to
take notice of God? Moses comes with a M^ssage, and he c^yeth out quis dominus?
who is the Lord that I should obey his voice, nay* when not only Gods word in
his mouth, Exodus 7.23.
but a rod in his hand was stretched forth before and against him, he would
never set his heart to it till after ren^wed strokes and miraculous effects a
confession of Gods finger is extr^cte^ from him, and his Magitians; we rather
ascribe cross events to seco^dary then the sepreme cause; Noah's Flood to an
extraordina^y concurrence of watery Planets; the drowning of Phar^ohs Host^ to
an inconsiderate adventure upon too high a^tide, and not to the wrath of God
the sole cause of both; but let us remember though we will not, we shall
against our will know the righteous Judgment of God, and God in his righteous
Judgments. There are two things which Jehovah makes his Enemies know in the
day of his indignation, themselves, himself, their impotence, his might, their
mortality, his eternity, their vileness, his Sovereignty, both in the Psalm,
and both verses attended with a Selah as most observable; themselves, that they
are but men, v. 20. himself that he is Jehovah, in this verse. As for us, let
our endeavor be, though we cannot comprehend, yet to apprehend God; and that
as in the height of his Majesty, lenghth of his patience, breadth of his
benefits, so in the depth of his Judgments; and as in all, so especially those
which snare the wicked in his own work, and so I am fallen on the

Second General.
A special exposition and exemplification of that assertion annexed; the
wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. The wicked, (...) so the 70
peccator so the vulgar; and true it is universally of every sinner, his own
works snare him; it is Lorinus his note the Text, that s^ns are called the
works of our own hands, because nothing is prope^ly our own but sin; the
Merchant in the Gospel sold all he had to buy the Pearl, that is his lusts;
nothing else being ours; and in ^hese sins is the actor snared; every sinner
says Saint Hierome, carries about him ropes, bands, torments to vex
himself, and Saint Austin in his Confessions ipse fibi inordinatus animus
poena est An irregular mind is her own executioner; and he that is wiser then
both, tells us, The Hebrew word used (...) signifies both opus and operis
merces, as a virtuous action is its own reward Psalm. 19.11. So an impious work,
a punishment to it self.

(...) idem quod. (...) commoveri.


His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with
the cords of his sins, Prove. 5.22.

Oh see the folly and deceitfulness of all sin; du^ungit, pungit, with Joab
while she kisseth she wounds us; prop^nit quod delectabile supponit quod
exitiale, by pleasing proposals to flesh and blood she allureth, and ruineth
flesh and spirit; by the mantle of darkness, robe of honor, cloak of
excuse, veil of modesty, yea sometimes cover of Scripture, and habit of
virtue, she deceives and destroys the foolish sinners.

More particularly, the Hebrew word notes an unquiet turbulent, seditious and
mischeivous person, one that is ever working, and accounts not himself well
but when he is doing ill, nay, though it be (...) a laborious and painful
employment, the impiety of his heart speeds the improbity of his labor, for
the accomplishment whereof he uses not only industry but secrecy, the works
of his palms, for so the Hebrew word signifies, and is accordingly rendered by
some opere palmarum suarum; the Palm, says Ainsworth, is a place where
filthiness may be hid, and wicked men are closely industrious to accomplish
their hellish designs. (...) palma.


The locusts in the Revelation are said to have women's hair; the Hyaena a man's
call; the Crododile mourning tears; the Siren Melodious notes; and the where
of Babylon her golden and sugared cup of fornication wherewith she makes drunk
the Kings of the Earth. What Carbo spoke of Sylla, is true of the Churches
Enemies they carry both the Lion and the Fox in their breasts; Apoc. 9.8.17.4
and truly Major metus ex vulpe quam leone; ^he more secret, the more
pernicious; still waters are ever the deepest, and silent counsels thunder the
loudest. But yet neither policy, nor industry, activity of hands, nor subtilty
of wits, can speed the design or prevent their ruin; for he is snared in his
own work.

Corruit he falls, so the vulgar, captus est, so Remigius, ut mus in muscipula,
he is taken as a mouse in a Trap: This work in the former verse is compared to
digging a pit; what more laborious hiding a net, what more subtle? and yet he
falls into the one, and is caught by the other; snared he is in the
disappointment of his intentions to ruin the Saints, yea against his
intentions to his own destruction, and which is more emphaticall, we may read
the preposition (...) not only in but by, the wicked perishing by, and that not
another, no not so much God, as his own hands; there need no trouble of
devising a new stratagem; his own actions are sufficient to undo himself.

The plotting of the wicked against the godly is like the throwing of a stone
upwards, which falls down upon his head that threw it; and whereas the casting
up is violent, the falling down is natural; so true is that of St. Basil, it
is not addit a poe^a, but insita natura, not so much the punishment as nature
of wicked counsels to entrap the owners; that allusion of St. Hierom concerning
the delusion of the Bow is very remarkable to this purpose; then a Bow is
deceitful, Vetus verbum habet, compedes quas ipse fecit ipfus ut geste^ faber.
cum sag^ttas putatur jacere and sauciat tenentem, when instead of sending the
arrow forward, it wounds the Archer, yet such are all the Bows the wicked
bend, and Arrows they make ready to shoot at the upright in heart, St. Austin
excellently represents the perniciousnesse of wicked workings by the kindling
of a fire; that which burns another must first be kindled it self, and as he
excellently proceeds, Malitia ut alterinon noceat fier^ potest, ut tibi ipsi
non noceat, fieri non potest, that thy malice should not prejudice thy brother,
it may be, that it should not prove injurious to thy self can never be, since
what we brew we must drink, the fetters which the smith makes he must wear,
wickedness ever retorts on the owner; and no juster Law then that the workman
should perish in his own impious and injurious Artifices.

Search if you please with Ahasuerus, the Records of time, sacred,
Ecclesiastical and profane stories, Mat. 13.19. In magistros scelera
redierunt suos, Sen. Nec lex est iustior ulla quam necis artifices art perire
sua. Ovid.
you shall find this aphorism verified in all ages upon all sorts of persons.

Begin with him who is emphatically called (...) both the wicked and the witty
one; how was that Sophister of worldly wisdom caught in his own fallacy?
whilst he crucified Christ, he crucified himself: and endeavoring by death
to subdue the worlds Savior, he was his own destroyer.

The disciples must not expect to fare better then the Master, the children
then their Father; nor did they, the Jews (I mean) who were of their father
the devil in the sentence of truth it self. John 8.44. John 11.48.
They murder Christ least the Romans should come by murdering him the Romans
coming is hastened it is S. Austins observation on that parable of the
husbandmen* under whom is meant the Jews, Mat. 21.38.
they say, come; this is the heir let us kill him, ut possiderent occiderunt
and quia occiderunt perdiderunt they slew him that they might gain; because
they slew him, they lost the inheritance. Memorable is the example of Gideons
spurious son Abimele^h who by slaying 70 of his brethren that he might enjoy,
Judge. 9.53.
lost both the rule and his life* and of Saul's putting David on the attempt of
killing 100 Philistims with promise of his daughter, but desire of his life,
upon which St. Gregory well observes, unde succresentis militis vitam se
extinguere credidit, virtuti ejus gloriam inde cumulavit, the means which he
used to bereave him of his life, advanced his honor. Time would fail to tell
you of Achitophels halter, Hamans gallows, Goliahs sword, Nebuchadnezars fiery
furnace, of all which that of Saint Ambrose is verified as the peace of the
Saints, Quemadmodum revertitur pax in Dei servos, ab eis qui non receperant
benedictionem pacis, ita etiam malitia peccatorum qua iusto nocere conantur in
eorum vertitur perniciem, Amb.

Adeo ut ventorum praelia far non possent, and propriis spiculis
flernerentur. Idem.


so the plots of the wicked return into their own bosoms.

The same Father gives a notable example in some of the Churches enemies, who
waging a War* were so mastered by the violence of a mighty wind that their
Bucklers fell out of their hands, and their own darts were driven upon
themselves; what should I tell you of Alexander the sixth, who was poisoned with
the same poison he had prepared for some of his Cardinals? Cardinal Balue who
was made to hansell one of those cruel prisons whereof he had been the
inventor; Pope Hildebrands servant, who stumbling was killed by that stone he
should have thrown on Frederick the Emperor at his devotions; Eutropius the
Eunuch who first stood in need of the benefit of the Church to save his life,
after he had obtained a prohibition against it from the Emperor; and of
Gryphus his mother, who upon just suspicion was made to take that draught
wherewith she intended to poison him. All or most of the conspirators against
Julius Caesar dyed by the same daggers wherewith they stabbed him. Marius was
wounded (being commander) with the sword himself made, when a Cutler. That
Giant who took pleasure in throwing down scrambling mariners from the Rock,
was himself cast down by Theseus. What should I stay to mention Phal^ris his
Bull, Maxentius his bridge, the Romish women^ poisons, the Hetruscan
South-sayers counsel concerning Hora^^us his image, which was so apparently
dangerous to themselves that the children sang in the streets according to the
Greek Poet, (...) the evil counselor is most his own foe. That the wicked
are thus snared, Hesiod.
nothing more frequent; but by whom; the Text implies it and Eliphaz
expresses it, the Lord takes the wise in their own craftiness, Job. 5.13.
The hand of malice makes the pit, and the hand of justice puts in; the hand of
cruelty weaveth the web and the hand of providence snareth the maker in it; God
is known in all his judgments, but especially in those of this nature, which
cannot be ascribed to chance or fortune, but only God; Calv. in locum.
palam est and omnibus manifestum, says reverend Calvin, cum impius
illaqueatur, Deum judicis parts implere, God as a Judge is most eminently
declared when the wicked is unexpectedly snared; by this means above others the
enemies are shamed, and God is honored; clothing with shame and their own
confusion are joined together, Ps. 109.29. indeed what greater shame then to be
blasted in their hopes, outwitted in their policies, and ruined by their own
devices? nor is the honor less to God then the shame to the wicked; it is the
noblest way of conquest to foil an enemy at his own weapon^; what greater
glory to Benaiah then to slay the Egyptian with his own spear, 2 Samuel 23.20.
God never appears so glorious, as when he makes the viperous works of his
enemies, to eat out the bowels of their own Mother^. By these passages of
providence the depth of his wisdom is obvious to the most shallow capacity,
both detecting and defeating, countermining; nay undermining their closely
contrived plots; and not only so, but the height of his Justice in causing them
to gather rods for the punishment of themselves, and making the wicked smiths
to forge the instruments of their own ruin^.

To wind up the bottom of this thread.

Let the wicked tremble, Use. Dan. 5.6.
and their joints like Belfhazzers smite together in the apprehension of this
truth; let it cease their mischeivous works, and cause both their hands to
fall and their hearts to faint; for tell me is there not a cause? when
according to the Italian proverb they are in danger of being taken with the
theft in their hands; Esser colto conil forto in mano. Psalm. 78.30.
While the meat was in the Israelites mouths, Gods wrath overtooke them; and
while the ungodlies designs are acting by their hands, the judgment of God
finds them out. Why so much pains and secrecy to so little, nay to so bad
purpose? know they not that their mischiefs like overcharged Pieces will
recoyle upon their own breasts? Wicked rnd fools are synonimous. Psalm. 5.5.
Prove. 14.9.
that they build the walls of their hopes upon a sandy foundation, which will
fall upon their own heads: fond men to kick against the pricks, nay which is
worse bestial, since like the Boar they run with violence against the Trees of
righteousness, and thereby dash out their own brains. Surely what the Moth is
to the Garment, the Worm to the Tree, Rust to the Iron, that is, a mischievous
work to the Author, fretting, eating, consuming him that acts it. Improbo
homine nihil imbecillius, none weaker then the wicked, whose weapons are so
easily wrested from him, and employed against him. It is hard to say whither is
greater the sin or the punishment, since the malicious man though against his
will is a self murderer. He sows curses like hempseed to make an halter for
himself, and all such sooner or later shall have cause to say -- propriis
configimur armis, our arms are our harms, and our own conceptions the death
of their parents.

2 Let the Saints encourage themselves in the daily accomplishment of this
doctrine, let them make a happy construction of the wickeds miserable
destruction, even to banish immoderate fears far from their thoughts. He that
touches you says God, touches the Apple of mine Eye, Zach. 2.8. of his Eye,
so some read it, it being most true that the dust which the Churches adversary
raise against her, flies in their own eyes. Let not then the Saints look at
their present intents, but their works future event; their machination, but
Gods Ordination; their raging fury, but Gods ruling Sovereignty; their subtle
craft, but Gods sublime wisdom, which both over-powers and over-reacheth them,
and let this be Higgaion, Selah, the last part.

The third General.
A tacit imposition of a duty to be performed by the Saints Higgaion, Selah.

Few words and obscure, but full and important, containing more matter then
could well be couched in so short a compass by any other language.

The word Higgaion is but twice used besides in sacred writ, and that in the
Psalms; Ps. 19. ult. 91.3.
the term Selah according to Athanasius 71 times in the Psalms, and thrice in
Habacuck; both together are no where found but in this verse, a manifest
argument of more then ordinary, both weight and worth in this Scripture. The 70
and the vulgar wholly omit them; upon what just reason I see not. Some only
conceive them as interjections expressing a sudden passion under an imperfect
sense, but if you please to dive into this sacred Sea, you shall find a rich
pearl in the cragged shel of both these Words.

1 Higgaion is generally derived from (...) which signifies locutus est, to
speak, and that properly with the mouth metaphorically with the heart: a word
that notes (says one) such a study and exercise of mind as often breaks out
into voice. Both constructions may afford us instruction, that the judgments
of God deserve, and challenge both our serious meditation and ready
promulgation.

1 They are to be meditated and pondered in our hearts; when God had made an
end of his works he appointed a Sabbath to rest in from his works, and to
delight himself in what he had ma^e, qui Sabbattizavit creando docet nos
Sabbattizare meditando, he that appointed a Sabbath from the Creation, teaches
us to solemnize Sabbaths, yea to spend our days in meditations. The Works of
God may well be resembled to choice hangings: which must be spread abroad by
diligent contemplation, not folded up in oblivion; or to dainty dishes which we
must not deglutir^ but ruminare, swallow down, but chew c^refully, so as we may
taste the sweetness of them. They that go down into the deep, says the
Prophet David, Ps. 107.23, 24.
behold thy wonders, and only those who go down into the depth of sacred
contemplation, can and shall see the wonders of God; every common Star of Gods
goodness deserves our Eye; but chiefly the blazing Comets of his vengeance,
lest while we neglect to set them before our Eyes, they fall down upon our
backs: and as all Gods judgments, so especially his wonderful snarings of the
wicked; this among others it is that Eliphaz calls on Job to mark to wit, that
the steps of a wicked man's strength shall be str^^tned, his own counsel shall
cast him down; for he is cast into a net by his own feet for he walks upon a
snare. This is the only way to make others mise^y our happiness, Job 18.2.
and 7.
their damage our profit, while what they feel we behold, nor yet is this
enough unless to meditation we join

2 Promulgation in publishing with our mouths the Works of Gods hands; this
was David's resolve to spe^ke of Gods Righteousness and his Praise all the day
long. Psalm. 35 ult. And for this end among others, he calls the Tong^e his
glory, as being his best instrument to set forth Gods glory* the extent of this
Word is w^ll expressed to be intenti animi murmur ex grato pectore enarrens
Deilaudem, a ready narration of Gods praise from a grateful breast; thus
Trevetus renders it sonitu and others solemni sono with a solemn sound to
proclaim the Judgments of God. We must neither bury in oblivion, nor smother
in silence Divine Justice in the wickeds ruin. The vowels of GODS works are
not to be joined with mutes; the dumb Devil is as odious to him as the
deaffe; we must not be like Plinies (...) without Lips, Tongue, and mouth, to
show forth his parise; Indeed sermo index animi* the Tongue is the Hearts
Midwife, and as our Hearts indite a good matter, so our Tongues should be the
Pen of a ready writer, Psalm. 45.1. the Psalmist joyneth the words of his Mouth,
and the meditations of his heart together, Psalm. 19. ult. as being insepara^le
companions in publishing our Makers glory. Meditation must not be still borne;
the fire that burns within cannot but flame forth. By serious thoughts we
make an impression of Divine Judgments on our selves, but by our words we
make an expression to others whereby though Gods honor can receive no
essential addition in it self, yet it has a clearer manifestation to others.

(...) gaudebuntiusti.
The Caldee Paraphrase expresses more then both these, to wit, an affection of
joy in meditating and proclaiming the judgments of God; we must not only
think but say, and say but sing, and sing but shout, yea, boast and glory in
the just vengeance of the Almighty. We have all joined together, Ps. 64 at the
8th verse, mention is made of the judgment, in that the wickeds tongue shall
fall upon his own head. In the following, of our duty, to consider wisely
declare faithfully glory joyfully herein, to the end of the Psalm. When the
wicked are brought to and condemned at the bar of justice, it is Hilarie Term
with the Saints. Zechary doubles the exhortation, Rejoice and sing. Zech. ^.10.
Zeph. 3.14.
Zephany trebles it, Rejoice, sing, and be glad. The Church has ever practiced
it, Moses and Mirian, Barach and Deborah, the whole Church of the Jews, all
thankfully rejoicing in their adversaries desturction. So true is that of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 58.1^.
The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, he shall wash his
feet in the blood of his enemies. Not as it is their misery, but Gods glory;
their confusion, but others conversion: a revenging of their own wrongs, but a
satisfaction of Divine justice.

2 To seal up my discourse of the Text with the word Selah, the broad Seal of
David's Hymns, and this verse. A little word, yet I might expend a great deal
of time in explication of its several references to the matter, Music,
Auditors. But I must hasten.

Avennarius says, in all the Rabbis he cannot find a certain signification
of the word; as for the Etymology, some derive it from (...) consternare, and
so it is sometimes a note of humiliation and dejection, Psalm. 79.11.68.7. others
from (...) elevare, and so it notes elevationem vocis ad Psallendum, mentis ad
meditandum, a lifting up of voice and heart in singing that to which it is
annexed. If we consult with interpreters, we find a double sense of the
word, noting eminency and perpetuity, seriousness in and duration of the duty.

1 Seriousness, Ob rem sum medit and am* Trem. res digna quae inimo pectore
reponatur. Our first, nay second thoughts fall short of Gods works; it was
Eliphaz his counsel to Job, that he should stand still and consider the
wondrous works of God, Chap. 34.17. We must not only (as we pass by) take a
cursory view of, but rather stand still, or sit down, that we may draw the
picture of God in his punishments; it is not a transient aspect, but an exact
view, whereby our hearts may be the more affected with them.

(...) Meditatio semper. Hier. (...), Sym. Psalm 111.4.
2 Constancy. The Caldee and Hierome read it, for ever; the Hebrew Doctors say,
that where Netzak or Selah are used, it note^ no end of that thing. The sweet
spices of Divine works must be beaten to powder by meditation, and then laid
up in the Cabinet of our memories. God has made, says the Psalmist, his
wonderful works to be remembered; he gives us the Jewels of deliverances not
(because of the commonness of them) to wear them on our shoes, as the Romans
did their Pearls; much less to tread them under our feet; but rather to tie
them as a chain about our necks. He works strange and glorious judgments,
not to be written in sand or water, but rather in Marble with a Pen of Iron and
the point of a Diamond. The Impressions of Gods mavelous acts upon us must
not be like that which the stone makes in the water, raising circles, beating
one wave on another, and for a time making a noise, but soon after it sinkes
down, and the water returns to its former smoothness: so we while judgment
is fresh, to publish it from man to man, and soon after let it sink into the
depth of oblivion, and we return to our old sins. David was of another mind,
who resolves to remember the years of the right hand of the most high, Psalm
77.11. The Heathen had three graces inseparable sisters; the one to give, the
other to receive, the third to return, and all painted young; to learn us,
that benefits should never wax old in our rememberance.

For this cause the Saints of old composed songs, appointed Days, penned
Chronicles, erected Monum^^ts of Gods goodness and greatness. In this respect
for ever honored be that Honorable Parliament, who made it statum diem and*
statutam legem, enacted it for a Law in Jacob, and an Ordinance in Israel, the
solemnization of this days deliverance.

And deservedly commendable is your practice, my Honorable Lord, and worthy
Senators, who have with joy and triumph presented your selves this day in the
Courts of the Lord. Me thinks your gratitude appears of the same color with
that of the robes you wear, a Scarlet color, dyed in grain; such as length of
time wipes not off. Nor must I forget to encourage you the Tribes of our
Jerusalem, the Heads of those Tribes, who wear the Liveries of praise, and are
come up to the House of the Lord to give him thanks.

The hour I see is expired; but surely what St. Austin said of the Feast of
Pentecost I may well apply to this Festival, Gaudet produc^ haec solemnitas,
it wouuld be extended beyond an hour, nay a day. I could ever wish with Joshua
that the Sun would stand still, the day were twice as long, that we might
enlarge our joy, while the Romish Proselytes gnash their teeth.

What then remains, but that as the Prophet Elijah stretched himself on the
Shunamits dead child whereby it revived; so I the several parts of this Text
to this days occasion, that the dying memory thereof may revive among us?

Having drawn the picture of my Text in its several lineaments, what is
wanting but that I take a review, compare it with the pattern, and let you see
the likeness of the Text to the time, that so it may appear drawn to the life?

Finally, having cut out and made up the garment of this Scripture by
explication, give me but leave to put it on by application, that you may see
how fashionable it is for the time, and beneficial it may be to your souls,
and I shall then dismiss you.

(...) or an Application of the whole to the Gunpowder Treason.
For our cleerer and quicker dispatch, be pleased to walk with me through
these three Stages. The enemies work, Gods work, our work; what they would
have done, what God did do, what we should and ought to do. The work of
mischief in which they were snared. The work of judgment wherein, if ever,
God was known. Our work of duty, now and ever to be performed.

1 The adversaries work. Opus mirabiliter singular, and singulariter mirabile.
Such as the present age may well admire, the future age will hardly believe,
and no former age can parallel. A treason without a reason; yea to use St.
Hieroms expression, of the face of the fourth Monarchy, without a name, quia
crudelitas fine modo, cruelty without measure. A work without a match, though
to have been acted by a Match; in a word, a plot so odious, a Tragedy so
direful, that the actors would not have owned it when effected: but as Nero
fathered the burning of Rome on the Christians, so had they prepared a
Proclamation to cast it on the Puritans.

If you ask who were the authors of this work, the word in the Text well fits
them, they were wicked, seditious, yea traitorous troublers of Israel; the word
is singular in the Text, and it was one wicked incendiary, Faux Orci, a
Firebrand of Hell, that should have put the consummatum est to this horrid
work. But withal the word is taken collectively, and there wanted not a
combination of wicked men in this design; those in the Text are called in the
former verse Heathen; these in the plot were Papists; so much the worse,
because pretending Christians.

We shall do no wrong to that Caiaphas, high Priest of Rome, and man of sin,
not caput, but canda Ecclesiae, if we attibute, at least, the encouragement of
the work to him, as being, though not an actor, yet by his Bulls an abettor of
it; such have their Popes indeed ever been, their Vrbanes Turbanes, Pii Impii,
Clements Inclement, Hildebrand Helbrands.

We shall do as little injury to the Jesuits, Jebusites, Judasites rather, if
we impute to them the contrivement of the work. These indeed are the only
Schoolmen that fetch argumets out of the Shambles, and conclude all their
Syllogismes in Ferio; the best Pulpit men to strike to the heart with dead, not
lively, occisory, not operatory Sermons. They may well be called Cen^iniani, as
having a singer in every State, and know no better way to build up their
Church, then by blowing up Kingdoms. Theirs was the head work, and tongue
work in this plot, to absolve, resolve, pray, prophecy. You have heard their
Psalmody, The memory of novelties shall perish with a crack. That when it had
come to pass, it might have been said, The mouth of the Lord has spoken it.
They were the men who justified as lawful, nay sanctified as pious, yea, would
have glorified as meritorious, this hellish work.

The actual managing of the work, was by a certain number of English
Gentlemen, but with Romish hearts, who drew together like an Impostume to an
head; theirs was the handworke to hire a Cellar, dig through the wall, buy in
the provision, and execute the project; and so the accomplishment of the work
was theirs; the Jesuits as the Poet, and they as Actors in this Tragedy.

If you inquire what moved them to the design, they tell us in their
Confessions, Religion, Necessity, Conscience; wicked men indeed to defend
slaughter with conscience, cover mischief with necessity; patronize Rebellion
with Religion; no wonder their rage was fierce, when grounded on a false zeal.
It is the worst madness insanire cumratione, nay religione; to be mad with
an opinion not only of reason, but religion; men are never more violent, then
when they think God is of their party; and as charity is accounted coldness
of Religion, so a pretended zeal of Religion causes coldness of charity.

But what was the intent, or rather extent of their work? In sum it was a
Parliamentary breakfast, an irrevocable writ of dismission to that high Court;
our Enemies will tell us where our strength lies; it was to have cut off head
and tail, root and branch in one day as the Prophets expression is. Esaias.
9.14. One has well presented the mark these wicked shot their arrows at in
five words.

Rem, Regem, Regimen, Reginam, Religionem. The King apparreld in his Royal
Robe, with an Imperial Crown on his head, holding a Scepter in his hand,
sitting in his Throne* in the midst of all his State, should have been deposed
from his Majesty, nay, exposed to their cruelty.

The Queen his consort in wedlock, should have been his consort in woe, and
the Prince at their knees, heir apparent to nothing but their misery. Briefly,
the hope of succession, oracle of wisdom, Chariots of Israel, butteresses of
strength, guardians of justice, Masters of Assemblies, glory of Nobility, and
flower of the whole Kingdom, should have been cropped, out off, destroyed, had
this work succeeded.

Achitophels Treason against King David, the ^alerian Schoolmasters treachery
against the Noble youth of that City H^mans conspiracy against the people of
the Jews, were short of this; which was to have swallowed up King, Nobles,
Commons, all; So that as Asia was called the grave of Rome, for the many Nobles
buried there, Westminster would have been the grave of England.

A desperate attempt, and no less dangerous the means of atchievment; it was
a work of no small labor, a work of their Palms; no less secrecy. It was
not to be effected by force of Arms, that is manifest, nor by stab of Dagger,
that is visible, but by an insensible element, and that mos^ fierce of all
others, fire, and that most hellish of all fires, Gunpowder, couched in a dark
vault, enclosed in Barrels, invi^oned with Irons, Psalm. 142.3.
invellopt with wood, and coal, all fiery fuel. Insidiantur in abscondito to
use the Psalmists expression, they say to the earth cover us, as fearing least
the whistling wind, or singing fowls of the air should reveal^ it; -- Itum
est in viser a terrae.

Those hellish Pioners spare no pains to dig out the bowels of their
Grandmother, Earth, that they might gnaw out the bowels of their Mother
Country, and this just under the upper house of Parliament; that where the
Laws (said they) received their life, the Lawgivers might their death. A
death never to be painted out to the life, a brewing such as never the like was
tuned up for the destruction of three estates; a design that should uno actu,
tactu, ictu, nictu, with one touch, in one moment have sent those worthies of
our Israel to the Grave, yea, in their intention to hell it self.

See here a cruel intent to shed blood, a brutish cruelty to te^re bodies in
pieces, a devilish bruitishnesse to do it by powder, nay, indeed more then
devilish; for whereas the Devil is said to sweep with his tail the third
part of the Stars of Heaven these would have darkened the Sun, Revel. 12.4.
turned the Moon into blood, yea, swallowed all those gli^tering Stars of this
Horizon, then united in an happy constellation, in obscurity.

That this work of their hands may be the more prosperous, they sow up their
lips, swear a silence, and back that Oath with the Sacrament. Catilines
immanity and inhumanity need be no wonder, who made his soldiers pledge each
other in a draught of man's blood; these drink the blood of God; and, as they
conceive it materially; that they may strengthen their hands in their bloody
design, Paul's enemies vowed neither to eat nor drink natural food till they
had killed him; these eat and drink Sacramental food to speed the slaughter
of thousands; and among the rest of him that was more then ten thousand of us.
What wickedness will not men attempt to atchieve their intended malice?

How near this work of darkness was to have been brought to a fiery light
judge you! It was not according to Jonahs Prophecy 40 days, nor 4 days, nor
scarce so many hours; nox una interposita one night betwixt, and but a part of
that neither, ere the terrible blow had been given, and we destroyed.

The hand of mischief was ready to have done the work, before it was known to
be lift up; the snare on our heels, before it was discovered to be laid; the
poison almost at our throats, before we could see what manner of liquor it was.
We might well say with David, 1 Samuel 20.3. there was but a step between death
and us; and apply that of Anacharsis concerning those that were in a ship 4
fingers from the water; there was but 4 fingers between them and death; a step,
a finger of that Caitiffe of the Cave might have laid all our honor in the
dust.

See, all things are in a readiness, the plot contrived, actors designed,
Cellar hired, Engines provided, Powder hid, a train laid, and that blackbird
of hell at hand, with the match to have put a period to the treason. How do
these audacious confederates applaud themselves in their pregnant hopes; and
promise all their own. The next heir is designed; Proclamations prepared,
Honors divided, Instruments of cruelty* provided; not so much as the garments
of the new Dukes and Earls but are made up. The letter said* God and Man are
agreed to punish the wickedness of the Times; but stay there: Man was agreed,
God was not (blessed be his name) he was at, but not of their counsel: true
indeed there was but a tantum non and the flames had gone over our heads. We
were at the pits brinke in the jaws of destruction, there wanted nothing but
thrusting in of the Falx, sickle to cut us down, or Fax fire to blow us up: a
touch of Guy Faux to have rent us in piecss, but Noct^ pluit tota, redeunt
spectacula mane.

The ungodly were many nights digging a pit for us, and before morning they
fall into it themselves he that was (...) a present refuge, opportune helper,
stepped in, entrapped them in their own snare, and discovered his justice in
detecting their malice, which leads to the second particular.

2 Gods work dignus vindice nodus, a knot fit for a God to untie; not man but
the Devil devised it; not man but God defeated it; (...), it was not in the
brains of men to prevent it, so far indeed from our prevention, that it could
not come into our imagination, it was not in the Arms of men to oppose it; no
band of men could have rescued from the devouring fire, only in the knees of
God, so that in this, if in any thing, the Lord was known as a just Judge.

Be pleased a while to trace the several steps of the discovery, and you shall
plainly behold it was not, it could not be any other but Gods finger that
manacled their hands, and snared them in their work; for tell me

What was it that extorted the means of revealing from his pen, whose tongue
had sworn concealment; that made him, who was acting the ruin of many, to
consult for the preservation of one? not any innate pity in the traitor, but
the over ruling Sovereignty of God; What was it that inclined the heart of that
Noble Lord, to publish and communicate the letter which detected the treason?
Not popery or carnal policy; but the all-disposing providence of God. What was
it inspired (I can call it no less) the breast of that Royal King, other^ise
free from jealousy (as a badge of tyranny) to suspect the danger; and by a
violent unnatural construction of a phrase to find out the violent unnatural
destruction that was hatching; not so much his own prudence (though otherwise
great) but the wisdom of the Almighty. What was it, that infatu^ted the
traitors who (while the plot was but suspected) had opportunity to escape,
that they should try the utmost, and afterward sharpened the edge of all men's
spirits against them where they came to kill some, surprise the rest; even
before a Proclamation could overtake them, but that just severity of God?
Finally, what was it that prevented the surp^ziall of that Noble Lady
Elizabeth, and insurrection of the Papists, when those Rebels whispered the
fear of a Massacre into their ears, but the merciful goodness of God; so
that all the attributes of God were concentred, and met together in this days
deliverance; and which is yet more remarkable in it self, and suitable to the
Text, those Antichristian Mole-warps were taken in their own pit; those Romish
fowlers caught in and by their own net. Was it not a work of one of their
hands and pens that first gave cause of suspicion, and was the means of
discovery; did not their own tongue fall upon them, when the Colloquie
between Garnet and Hall at the Tower proved the clearest Testimony against
them, in a word, did not the Powder sin fly in some of their faces? when
among others two of the Traitors were wounded accidentally by Powder in an
house, and afterward both killed by a shot; so truly was this Scripture
fulfilled in this example before the eyes of all men. And surely, were not our
Romish Proselytes drunk with the wine of Sodom, and nursed with the milk of
Dragons they would behold, believe and repent. The Papists call much for a
Judge of controversies between them and us, but why take they not notice, how
God has time by time showed himself a righteous Judge, pleading our cause and
preventing their plots? but I fear a spirit of delusion is fallen upon them,
and therefore I shall betake my self to that which concerns us to do, the

3 Last particular, our work. I know you have long looked for an end, much
speaking is a wearinsse to the flesh, and long hearing offensive to your
patience, yet spare me but a few Minutes while I teach you your duty, and I
hope you will have cause to say, the latter end of the Sermon is better then
the beginning, let then our meditation continually fix it self on both these
objects.

1 On the Enemies work, and that so long till it have wrought in us an
impression of these following duties; even till it have flamed us wi^h a fiery
zeal, awakened us to a cautelous vigilancie, and engaged us unto mutual
unity; of each a word.

1 Let it inflame us with a fiery zeal and holy indignation against the
scarlet impudent whore of Babylon; who is ever in travel with a Babel of our
confusion; Oh let us detest with a perfect hatred their practices, whose mercy
is cruelty, Religion faction, devotion sedition, whose zeal is fire, Martyrs
are traitors, and Saints devils; and not only their practices, but their
principles, which are the wheels that move them to these cursed executions: I
mean those Jesuiticall Doctrines wherewith men's hearts being once poisoned
they care not what villainy they attempt. Among which I observe three principal
Engines, that are no small enducements to treasonable projects. The Popes power
to dispense with Oaths, the legality of murdering Princes, and a Toleration of
various Religions; observe but the Powder plotters, and you shall find their
despair of obteining a free toleration, their opinion of the lawfulness of
killing Kings, and blowing up Parliaments, were the strong incentives to this
mischief; and that all of these devilish opinions, are the plain assertions
of the Jesuits; I need not stay long to demonstrate.

Gretzer expressly asserts concerning the Oath of fidelity, that the Pope may
free his Catholic Subjects from it when their King rules tyrannously. The
sandy foundation on which he and the rest built it, is the power of binding and
loosing given to Peter, and indeed to all Ministers of the Gospel by Christ, to
wit of sins, not Oaths.

The Mutthering of Princes is a common tenet indeed, these two, Deum comedere,
Regem occid^re, to eat their God, and kill their King are the abhord Maxim of
these unreasonable men. Mariana accounts it a moderate way to poison a Chair,
or garment for the killing of Kings. Francis de Verone commends the act of that
desperate wretch who assaulted Henry the fourth of France, as just and Heroic;
nay, one of their Popes, Sixtus the 5th made an Oration in praise of that
Friar, who murdered Henry the third of France (though no Protestant) saying a
true Friar had killed a counterfeit. Yea, had his Cardinals been as forward as
he, they had Canonized him for a Saint; what need we go farther then this
present business? in Paris, Oldborne and Garnet, that were executed in England
for this Treason, are enrold in the Catalogue of Martyrs, and certain English
Priests censured for praying for their souls, as though they doubted of their
Crown of Martyrdom: as that valiant Papistomastix in his time, Doctor Featly
his Clavis Mystica, p. 574.
Doctor Featly has left upon record that he saw the former, and heard the
latter credibly reported.

As for Toleration, it is true, it is far from their own practice where they
have power; witness their cruel Inquisition, (indeed none are more tyrannous
where they bear rule, then they that plead for this licentious liberty, where
their own way cannot be authorized) but yet they maintain it lawful and
endeavor to attain it where their Religion prevails not. Doctor Featly his
Clavis Mystica, p. 464.
Thus Father Parsons, Cardinal Allen, and William Bishop a Seminary Priest,
do all of them assert both in Thesi that Religions fundamentally differing are
consistant in the same Kingdom; and in Hypothesi that it is not only lawful
and convenient but honorable for the King of England, to permit the free
exercise of the Rom^sh profession. I hope the bare recitation of their damnable
Doctrines is to us a sufficient confutation. All I aim at is to warn us that
while we declare an utter Antipathy against the Romanists; we do not
Sympathize and join issue with them in any of their cursed opinions. Oh far
be it from us to think that any humane power may dispense with, and make what
construction it pleases of the many Oaths and Protestations we have taken;
particularly that Solemn Covenant, wherein we have lift up our hand to the
high God. Far be it from any ^f us to have a malicious thought against our
Liege Sovereign; rather let us make Prayers and supplication for him. And
(which I wish there were not too much cause of) beware we that none of us
defend or endeavor that intolerable toleration of all Religions. 1 Timothy 2.2^
It was the course Julian the Apostate took to root out the very name of
Christianity by setting open the door to all Heretics and Schismatics. I say
no more, but know that Religion is the Soul of the body of a Commonwealth, and
guess your selves what a monster that Kingdom will be that is informed with an
100 Souls; yea, undoubtedly the toleration of many will prove in time the
subversion of the one Orthodox Religion in that Church wherein it is granted.

I have only one request before I leave this exhortation, to you famous
Citizens (it will be a work well becoming your thankful hearts; and a part of
answer to David's question; what shall I render) that now while you are piously
consulting to settle, Psalm. 116* 12.
and advance the maintenance of your preaching Ministers? you would take into
your thoughts, the erecting and endowing a College or Society of able
instructed Scribes, who with their pens dipped in the Nectar of Sacred Writ; may
(as with swords) cut off all superstitious Idolatry, and the head of that Hydra
of Heresy which rises up so fast in this declining age.

The Crocodiles about the Banks of Nilus, if rubbed or but pricked with a Quill
of Ibis, are so stupefied that they cannot stir, and the pens of Orthodox
Writers are the presentest remedy against the poison of errors; how might this
prove as a Tower of David, where the Horsemen of Israel might have Shields and
Targets to fight the Lords Battails.

Secondly, let it awaken us to a cautelous vigilance, we need not a Prophet to
tell us what is spoken in the King of Syria his Bedchamber, 2 Kings 6.12.
I mean, the Popes conclave. Remember the Powder Plot, Garnets aufer to Gentem
perfidam; and you may smell their intentions. True it is that vault of
darkness was discovered, but there is another vault of wickedness in their
hearts; and one depth will call for another; one fire kindle another; and one
like beget another. Equo ne credit Teucri. The Aspe lies in her hole, and does
but wait for the warm Sun. The Giant lurketh in his Den; and watches but a
fit season, the devils Powder-Mils are still doing; store of this Coin is
minted daily at Rome, and new exploits forged on the Anvils of Jesuits
Brains. They had no small hand in our late sad divisions; Oh let us never be
too secure, if we mean to be safe. These Chamelaeons will take any color,
these Proteus like will turn themselves into any shape. Ask among their
friends, what a Jesuit is they will tell you, every man, and with their Father
the Devil, care not to transform themselves into children of light, and
though ravenous wolves to appear i^ sheeps clothing. Oh let us never cry
Peace, whilst our Enemies have their Bows ready bent, and Arrows prepared to
shoot at the upright in heart.

3 Let it engage us to mutual unity; and now, Oh that I had the Silver Oratory
of Demosthenes, or rather the Golden mouth of Chrysostom; nay, yet rather the
heavenly tongue of Angels, that I might charm you into a sweet harmony! But
what speak I of charming your ears unless God persuade your hearts? Oh thou
God of Peace, work in us a love of Peace, and then work for us the blessing of
peace.

Consider I beseech you, could not the wicked works of our Enemies hand be able
to snare us, and shall we snare our selves by our own works? have not their
swords been able to pierce us; and shall we sheath our swords in each others
bowels? do we this day rejoice in their destruction and shall we give them
cause one day to laugh at our divisions? has not Rome and all her confederates
been able to blow us up, and shall we undermine our selves? shall England and
Scotland do that each against other which the Kingdoms round about could never
yet accomplish? Oh let it not be told in Gath, and published in the Streets of
Ascalon; let it never cause a Festival in Rome, and holiday in Ireland, that
they shall hear the two Nations are tearing each other in pieces. Let us
remember whose part it is, even the envious man's, to sow the tares of
dissension. He endeavored a rent between God and Job by that Calumny, Job 1.9.
does Job serve God for naught? Nay, Mat. 4.3.
to make a Schism in that blessed unity between the Father and the Son, by
tempting CHRIST to go beyond his Commission. Oh let not us, who call the
Church our Mother, have the Devil to be our Father; I entreat, I obtest, I
adjure, by all the bands of union between us, the oneness of that faith we live
in, King we live under, Covenant we are obliged to, that we may be one: for
the confirming of this with our brethren* and obtaining it among our selves. Oh
you who are the vigilant Governors and peaceable Inhabitants of this
Metropolis; let your purses freely contribute, counsels maturely act, Prayers
to God, humble Remonstrances, and Petitions to man be still continued; least
otherwise, if we should take up the sword again to fight each with other, we
put such a sword into our Catholic common enemies as will not easily be
wrested out: nay, (which is far worse) a sword into the hands of our God to
avenge the quarrel of his Covenant, and we may justly fear, God will say of
such a crying iniqu^ty* (should it ever be acted, which his mercy avert) it is
revealed in mine ears, and it shall not be purged from us till we die.

Isay 22.14.
2 Let our meditation dwell on Gods work, and that so long till it have
elevated us with a joyful gratulation, encouraged us to a confident
expectation, and strengthened us in earnest supplications.

1 Let it elevate us with joyful gratulat^on to that God who as on this day
mercifully declared himself both a protector of Sion, and a detectour of her
enemies. Indeed whom should we magnify if not God? and for what, if not for
this? I may well use St. Austines words, quisquis non videt caecus est; qui
videt and non g^udet ingratus est; he that beholds not Gods wonderful, both
mercy and severity, in this deliverance is grossly blind; He that beholds and
blesses not, is ungratefully dumb.

Had this monster, which was come to the birth, bin brought forth, this day
would have bin Englands Vespers, and Romes Mattens, our Funeral, their
Festival; instead of this pure worship, these blessed opportunites we now
enjoy, we might either have bin plunged into gross superstitions, such as
cringing to Crucifixes, adoring Images, turning over beads, babbling to Saints,
wandering in Pilgrimage, or else have bin dragged to a Rack or stake, the proper
Engines of that Romish Antichrist.

Oh! let the streams of our thankful joy flow as high, as our sorrows (had
these things come to pass) would have made them to ebb. Since we were not as
on this day made oblatio matutina igne devorationis, an early burnt offering to
that Moloch of Rome, let us make our selves oblationem matutinam igne
devotionis, a morning sacrifice by the fire of devotion to the God of Heaven;
and since that bitter Cup passed from us, let us take the cup of salvation, and
praise the name of the Lord. Psalm. 11.6.13.


Nor let the Law of (...) here take place, though it be (...), let it not be
(...), may this day never be out-yeard, but let all Generations call it
blessed. Aristotle observes of the Ancient Graecians, that they placed the
Temple of Thanks in the midst of the street, that being obvious to all men's
eyes, it might ever put them in mind of their duty: and surely, if we shall
either deprave with malice, bury in oblivion, lessen with envy, suppress in
policy, neglect in security, or reject through a novell fancy of superstition
this days solemnity, we should eminently provoke Divine fury: no rather let
the mercy conferred, judgment executed be graven with a Pen of Iron on the
posts of our doors, tables of our hearts, and horns of our Altars for ever.

2 Let it encourage us to a confident expectation, that he which has bin will
still be known by the judgment that he executes; former experiences are just
grounds of future confidence; Gods infinite love, nec largiendo exhauritur,
Isay 59.1.
nec benefaciendo fatigatur; is a Sun ever shining, and a Fountain always
running; neither is his hand shortened that he cannot save his Church and
destroy his adversaries. What therefore Zeresh said to Haman concerning
Mordecai, Hest. 6.13.
by way of supposition, let us apply in a position; ours is the Orthodox
Religion, before which the Popish faction has begun to fall, and shall so fall
as never to rise again. Though the Romish harlot cry up ignorance as the
Mother of devotion, honor Traitors with Martyrdom, glory in her Bulls, and
Indulgences, make Saints and Angels her Advocates; yet know the time is at hand
that she shall come in remembrance before God to give her the Wine of the
fiercenes of his wrath, Rev. 16.19.18.21.
and she shall sink like a millstone into the bottom of the sea.

Nor let us only be confident in regard of her, but all other enemies of the
Churches Truth and Peace. I mean irreconciliable Sectaries. That how ever they
act strenuously, watch cautelously, plot secretly, compass Cities and
Countries industriously, and by that means increase exceedingly; though they
endeavor by cunning devices, subtle stratagems to retard our Peace, hinder
our establishment, foment our divisions* yet the day is coming when they shall
be snared in their own works, the vizard be plucked off from their face, and it
shall appear to all the World that their wisdom is but craft, humility
baseness, faith faction, zeal contention, and pretended fervor in Religion
formal hypocrisy.

3 Let it strengthen us in fervent supplications, for the full accomplishment
of his works, and our hopes. Let us then end this day of Praises with prayers;
and what shall we pray? even that of Deborah, so (as did these Traitors,
suddenly, surely, gloriously) let all thine enemies perish, O Lord, Judge. 5.
ult. or more sutably to the Text, that of David, with his spirit not of revenge
but zeal, Psalm. 35.8. Let destruction come upon them at unaawares, and let
their net which they hid catch themselves, into that very destruction let them
fall, or as it is, Psalm. 109.28, 29. let them curse, but bless thou; when they
arise let them be ashamed. But let thy servant rejoice, let our adversaries be
clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves with their own confusion as
with a mantle; or if you will in the words of our late solemn League and
Covenant, that all Incendiaries, Malignants and evil instruments which hinder
the reformation of Religion, divide between the King and his people, or one of
the Kingdoms from another, may be discovered, brought to public trial, and
receive condign punishment; In a word, let it be our daily petition at the
Throne of Grace, that all the enemies who rob our Church of her Truth and peace
(between whom as Christ was, his Church is still crucified) may be detected;
That God would make his enemies as a wheel, and always turn their fire-matches
into halters to hang themselves, who will not bow their necks to the yoke of
the Lord, that so God may still be known in that Romish Babylon for an avenger;
and in our English Syon for a refuge, from one generation to another, and let
all true hearted Protestants say, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

