Die Jovis, 25, Febr. 1646.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, that Mr. Hardy is hereby thanked
for his great pains taken in his Sermon preached yester day before their
Lordships in the Abbey-church Westminster, it being the Monthly Fastday: And
he is hereby desired to cause the same to be Printed and published, and that
no person whatsoever do p^esume to print or reprint the same, but by warrant
under his own hand.

John Brown Cler. Parliament.
I do appoint Nathanael Webb and William Grantham, to Print my Sermon.

Nath. Hardy.



THE ARRAIGNMENT OF LICENTIOVS LIBERTY, AND OPPRESSING TYRANNY. IN A SERMON
Preached before the Right Honorable HOUSE of PEERS, in the Abbey-church at
Westminster, on the day of their solemn Monthly FAST, Febr. 24. 1646.

By NATHANAELL HARDY, Mr. of Arts, and Preacher to the Parish of
Dionis-Back-church.

I will get me to the great men, and will speak unto them, for they have known
the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God: but these have altogether
broken the yoke and burst the bonds,

Ier. 5.5. They chose new Gods; then was war in the gates,

Judge. 5.8. Pertinet ad innocentis Magistratus officium, non solum nemini malum
infer, verum etiam a peccato cohibere, and punire peccatum, aut ut ipse qui
plectitur corrigatur experimento, aut alti terreantur exemplo.

Aug. Disciplina est magistra Religionis, magistra verae pietatis, quae non
ideo increpat ut laedat, nec ideo castigat ut noc eat.

Idem. Remota justitia, quid sunt regna nisi magna latrocinia, quia and ipsa
latrocinia quid sunt nisi parva regna.

Idem. LONDON, Printed by R. L. for Nathanaell Webb, and William Grantham at
the sign of the Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard, 1647.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The HOUSE of PEERS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Thrice Noble Worthies:
IF any thing were presented in this subsequent Sermon, meriting your Honors
acceptance; it must be that despised Jewel of plain-dealing. The truth is;
Considering on the one hand, the Auditors dignity to whom I spoke, my desire
was to avoid rudeness of Expression; Remembering, on the other, JEHOVAH'S
Majesty in whose Name I spoke, my endeavor was to use faithfulness in
Admonition.

I well know, Reprehension to Great men must be wrapped up (as we do Pills) in
Sugar, Obiurgationi semper aliquid blandi commisce; sacilius penetrant verba
quae mollia vadunt quam quae aspera. Sen.
that it may more easily be swallowed, and work before they think on it. We
must come to your Lordships byssinis verbis with soft and silken Phrases, as
the Mother of Cyrus charged him who was to speak to the King. But yet withal,
the Great GOD who has advanced you to Nobility, has engaged us to Fidelity:
it is no time for Ministers to be cold or silent, when sins are bold, and
sinners impudent. That commission given to the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 40.1.
Praedicator veritatis tacens confumitur; flagellat con s^ientia usque ad
consumptionem illum qui homines quando opus est vetatis verbere non fl^gellat.
Lyr. Interveteres Philosophos verbum non vulgariter celebratum, tres deform^s
filias a tribus sormosis matribus oriri, a p^ce otium, familiaritat^ contemptum
a veritate odium.
and in him to all Gods Messengers, was never yet revoked: Cry aloud, spare
not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, to tell Judah of her sins, and Israel of
her transgressions. It is true, Preachers by their faithful boldness will
find enemies as Moths to their persons, and Worms to eat up their credits; but
by their treacherous silence they shall procure a worse Moth to their souls,
and Worm to gnaw their consciences. Freeness in speaking truth, may occasion
hatred from men without; but it will certainly procure love from a gracious God
above, and peace from a serene breast within.

My Lords; It was the unhappy lot of this Discourse, when preached, to meet
with many Auditors whose ears were hedged about with thorns, and tongues have
since been sharp as swords: These have branded both it: and the Author,
(probably in your Honors hearing) with the scandalous reproach of Malignancy,
and what else might render the one fruitless, and the other odious: For what
reason I know not, except (that for which St. Paul was accounted an enemy by
the Galathians) telling the truth: Gal. 4.16.
As if flattery were the badge of amity; and they who are faithful to your
Souls, Haec est conditio ve^itatis, ^^ eam semper inimicitie consequuntur,
sicut per adulationem pernitius^e amiciti^e conquiruntur; l^bent^r quod
d^^ect^^ auditur, and offendit omn^ quod nolumus. Hier.

Infoelix amicitia quae illum quem diligit, ta cendo trad^t diabolo. Carthus.
Magis amat obiurgator sana^s, quam ^dulator dissimulans. Aug.


must therefore be reckoned as false to your Cause. But sure I am, in the end,
these seeming Friends will appear your worst Enemies, who would tickle your
Honors with flatteries to the death; whilst your seeming reputed Enemies will
approve themselves your best Friends, who by gentle blows of Reproof on the
ears, endeavor to rouse you out of the swound of Security.

For my own part, I hope I shall ever abhor as well verbal, as real Symony;
and rather choose, proveritate convitium, quam pro adulatione beneficium; To
expose my self to biting Detractors, than incur the just censure of a fawning
Flatterer.

For these envious Whisperers, I shall become an hearty petitioner in my
Saviors words, Father, forgive them: And if by my removal, yea, ruin,
(though too unworthy) any thing may be contributed to the settling of Sions
bound, I shall thank them for doing me such a favor against their wills; and my
hope is, their wrathful calumny poured out like mud to defile my Name, shall
prove like water to cleanse my ways the more.

For your HONORS, I bless God that you were the Eare-witnesses and Judges of
my doctrine; neither doubt I but your Wisdoms will discern malice to be the
spring of those slanders cast upon my self.

As for these Labors, (which if weighed in the balance of a severe judgment,
I confess are too light) it has pleased your Lordships to allow them some
grains of your charity, in a favorable construction; and find them weight, to
set the stamp of your Authority upon them, and make them current Coin for the
Press. Them, together with my self, I lay at your Honors feet, and in
submission to your command have committed to the Worlds eye.

Some illustrations of the Text, which I then omitted, lest I should tire your
patience, I have now inserted, lest I should injure the Sermon.

Give me leave (my honored Lords) to end with one request to You, for GOD; to
GOD, for You.

To you: That however I may deservedly be cast out of your memories, yet the
sacred Truths herein contained may be imprinted on your breasts.

For you. That the LORD of Lords would strengthen your Honors hearts and
hands, to the preservation of Purity and restoration of Unity: That so in your
Noble Persons and Families, you may be the happy Subjects; to the Church and
Kingdom, honorable Instruments, of many choice and precious Blessings. To
which he shall ever say Amen, Who is,

Your HONORS Unworthy, yet Faithful Servant, NATH. HARDY.

THE ARRAIGNMENT OF LICENTIOVS LIBERTY AND OPPRESSING TYRANNY.
HOSEA 5.10, 11, 12. The Princes of Judah were like them that remove the bound:
therefore I will pour out my wrath upon them like water.

Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment, because he willingly walked
after the Commandment.

Therefore will I be unto Ephraim, as a Moth, and to the house of Judah as
rottenness.


A Sharp and harsh Scripture, unsuitable therefore may some perhaps say for a
Noble Auditory, Great men's delicate ears cannot endure scratching expressions,
it is granted, yet their corrupt hearts have need of searching instructions;
and every good Preacher must act the part, not so much of a Cook to dress
savoury meat for the palate, as of a Physician to prescribe wholesome (though
bitter) potions for the soul.

^, but it is a terrible threatening text, unseasonable, may others say, for
these conquering times. Nothing more unwelcome then in days of Serenity, to
sound out woes of Severity; when God seems to open his hand in blessings, that
Ministers should open their mouths in menacing, what more di^^as^full^ it is
true, but yet what more needful? We must not think (with the Athenians) that
we have clipped the wings of victorious prosperity, so that it cannot fly from
us; or with David, that our Mountain is so strong it cannot be moved; that our
Nest^ is made in the stars, and our (...) exa^ted above the Region of
mutability: no, (Beloved) deceive we not our selves with vain dreams; God has
not poured out so many favors upon us like oil, but the sins of Princes and
People may after all provoke him to pour out wrath like water; and though the
violent effusion of blood be ceased, yet the fretting moth of division remayns.
Deservedly therefore does the Magistrate renew these Fasts, and no less justly
ought the Minister facere opus Dei in die suo on these days of humbling to use
means of humbling, both by tart reprehensions of sin, and smart denunciations
of wrath, that the one may be repented, the other prevented: which was the aim
of God by the Prophet, in the words now read; The Princes of Judah, etc.

It is the observation of learned Rivet on this Book that Hosea in its
several parcels puts on the habit of various persons, Vati^, Praeconis,
Patris, (...), Judicis, of a Prophet foretelling, Herald proclayming, Father
chiding, Friend counselling, and Judge censuring; this latter he seems in
Gods Name to take upon him here, not only bringing in as a Plaintiff a bill of
Indictment against, but passing as a Judge an heayy sentence upon both Judah
and Ephraim.

So that the words naturally fall asunder into these two branches: Accusatio
vera. Comminatio severa.


An accusation of Sin. A commination of Punishment. A charge full of Verity. A
doom full of Severity.
The charge is laid against the two Tribes, and the ten: the two under the name
of Judah, the ten under the name of Ephraim, so called Synedochically, because
that was Tribus amplissima and Regia, the greatest and the highest Tribe;
Zanchius.
The Princes of the one, yet so as that the People are not exempted: The people
of the other, yet so as that the Princes are not excused. The former in the
beginning of the tenth Verse, The Princes of Judah were like them that remove
the bound. The latter in the end of the 11th. Verse, because he willingly
walked after the commandment. The doom is as ample as the charge, pronounced
severally against Judah and her Princes in the close of the 10th. Verse, I will
pour out my wrath upon them like water. Against the people of Ephraim in the
first clause of the 11th. Ver. Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment.
Jointly, against both Ephraim and Judah, Verse. 12th. therefore will I be unto
Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of Judah as rottenness.

And now (me thinks) my text like an ingenuous picture looks upon all here
present, in which both Nobles and People may behold their sin and danger
represented. In the description of which it shall be my endeavor to be brief,
and plain; brief, that I fall not into the error of the text, and be like them
that remove the bound of the time; plain, that not the meanest Auditor be
oppressed and broken in his judgment; and let it be the prayer of us all that the
grace of the Spirit may be poured on us like water, so as we may willingly
walk after the commandments which shall from God be delivered to us,
Verbumautem meum erit quasi tinea, etc. Tharg.
and the Word of the Lord (so the Cald^e reads it) may be as a moth to our
sins, and rottenness to our corruptions.

And so I begin with the first general, to wit, the charge, and that as it is
drawn up concisely, yet fully;

First, against Judah and her Princes; the Princes of Judah, etc.

This Prophet was one of the sharpest Preachers that ever God sent to his
people; his commission was primarily intended for Ephraim, yet collaterally
extended to Judah; his Sermons contain plain detections, full convictions, and
impartial arraignments, of all sorts of sinners, none are spared, neither
Prince, Priest, nor People; he summons all three, Verse the first, and
charge the chief in this, even the Princes of Judah.

A pattern worthy of imitation by all Gods Messengers; those who are fishers of
men must catch as well great as small fishes in the net of reproof; faithful
Ministers must not despise the meanest for the sins sake, nor spare sin in the
highest for the man's sake; it is Gods command to Jeremiah, that he should not
be afraid of any of their faces to whom he sent him; Chap. 1.8. the truth is as
Mauritius said of Phocas, Si timidus est homic^^a est, if we fear their faces,
we kill their souls; if we flatter their sins, we murder their persons; of
all places a Parasite worst becomes the Pulpit; for a Minister then to pick
feathers off great men's coats, and sow pillows under their elbows, when he
should be shooting arrows at their sins, and pricking their consciences with
the needle of rebuke, what more odious? Of all persons, Nobles stand in most
need of plain (though humble) admonitions these are the best dainties we can
present them with, Quid deest omnia possi^entibus? ill^ qui verum dicat. Sen.
as being Novelties all the year long, since, whilst they abound in the
confluence of all other things for the most part they want faithful reprovers.
Let therefore the Philosophers resolve be taken up by all Preachers, mori malo
quam simulare, rather to dye then to dissemble, ever remembering that as
Philosophy, so Divinity, Stemma non i^s^icit, must know no man after the flesh;
accept no man's person, but impartially divide to every one their portion,
reproof to whom reproof belongs, yea, though they be Princes, for so does our
Prophet here accuse the Princes of Judah.

But what is the offense that these great Delinquents are charged withal? they
were like them says the text, that remove the bound. Saint Hierom calls Hos^a,
vatem commaticum and per senten^ias loquentem, one whose expressions are both
sententious and aenigmaticall, couching much in a little; such is this, I have
now in hand: I will not waste my precious time, nor tire your Honorable
patience with the various conceits Expositors have upon this clause; give me
leave only to present you with a double construction, the one literal, the
other metaphorical, both probable and profitable for our instruction.

1 Those that literally understand the words, read the particle caph as a note
not similitudinis, but veritatis, of likeness, but truth, as the Greeks sometimes
use for (...) for (...), and so the fault here taxed is Avaritia Principum the
covetousnes of the Princes in that they were, in alienas fortunas invadentes,
unjust usurpers of other men's Rights and possessions.

How heinous a sin this is appears by that strict prohibition which God
himself gives against removing of neighbors Landmarks, Deuteronomy. 19.14. backed
with an execration, chap. 29.17. and that seconded with a woe by the Prophet
Isaiah 5.8. A vice so injurious that it was odious to the Heathen, and
therefore the Romans condemned the meaner sort who were guilty of it to the
metal houses, and banished the better sort with the loss of the third part of
their estates: so that I cannot but wonder with what face our Anabaptists
assert, and I fear if (permitted, would endeavor) a Community of goods. I
grant the primitive Christians had all things common, but that was (...) not
(...) in regard of use, not right, and that by voluntary consent, not necessary
command; the truth is that moral prohibition of stealing must be abolished,
and the Evangelicall precept of Charity is needless, if either men might not
erect bounds of their possession, or others might lawfully remove them at
pleasure.

A crime then it is, and that most incident to Princes, it too often falling
out that potentiae incrementum sceleris occasio majoris, the greatness of
their power seems to warrant the vastness of their desires: Two instances
among others are most remarkable; the one in sacred, the other in profane
story, the one of Ahab who falls sick for Naboths Vineyard, and at last
determines to burn the Bees rather then lose the honey, cruelly writing his
title to the land in the owners blood. The other of Alexander -- cui non
sufficit orbis, whose triangular heart the round World cannot fill, and
therefore weeps that there was no more to conquer, to whom that Pyrate wittily
replied when checked by him for pillaging ships at Sea: and cur tu orbem
terrarum? why do you ransack the whole world? Indeed that Proverb of the Sea is
too often verified of great men, that they are ill neighbors, their covetous
desires being aptly resembled by Saint Basil to fire which burns from house to
house, and Wood to Wood, while there is any materials to feed it.

O beware we of this Caninus appetitus, dog-like greedines to swallow up all we
can; if Dives is tormented quia cupide servavit sua; Quamvis sufficiat homini
privato esse avarum non sufficit tamen principi autiudici sed oportet tam
alienum esse ab avaritia ut oderit ipsam. Cajet.
what shall be his portion, qui avide rapit aliena? if those fists which too
closely keep their own, shall be cut off, what shall become of those hands that
are opened to grasp other men's estates; we see all creatures know and keep
their bounds, fishes the water, beasts the earth, birds the air; let men learn
of them, and especially let Magistrates remember that note of Cajetan upon
Exodus 18.20. though it might suffice a private man not to be covetous, yet it
is required of them to be haters of covetousness.

I end this with one short consectary, if it be a sin with an Anathema to
remove our neighbors, what is it to alienate the Churches bounds? Solomon's
Proverb resolves it fully, it is a snare to him who devoures that which is
holy, chap. 20.25. O take heed of a sacrilegious surfeit, a disease so perilous,
that envy it self cannot wish a worse to an enemy. Cecil Lord Burleigh gave
advise to his son, that he should build no great house upon any
Impropriation, wel-knowing it would be built upon a sandy foundation; surely
for the spoils of the Church, private families, yea the whole Kingdom mourns.
May this Parliament so f^r honor God, rather God so far honor this Parliament
as not to be removers, but restorers of these bounds.

2 The other interpretation, though Metaphorical in regard of the phrase, yet
is most proper in respect of the sense, suitable to the note of similitude, and
generally received by Expositours, for the better understanding whereof we
shall enquire what this bound is, and wherein the sin of removing it consists.

1 For the former we must know that after the ten Tribes revolted from God,
only the two were as his field and possession; the bound of this field
considered as a State, was those rules of equity and justice; as a Church,
those precepts of true Religion and worship which was given to their Fathers by
God: those in the Judicial, these in the Ceremonial, both summarily and
substantially in the Moral Law. Pareus seems to understand it of the latter
only, Zanchius chiefly, yet comprising both, and not without good reason,
Religio a religando. Lex a ligando.
since not only the names (which in the Latin are derived from binding) but
the natures of Religion and Law have Analogy with a bound; for as without
bounds no man would know his own, or if he did know it, not retain it, or if
retain it, not in quiet, so neither can a people without Gods true worship and
good laws.

1 The bound is Segregans distinguishing between meum and tuum, one man's
possession from another; so do wholesome Laws civil Nations from Barbarians; by
them were the Jews severed from all the people of the World. So does the true
Religion; by it were the Jews known from the Apostate Israelites and the
Idolatrous Heathen, in which regard, God says of them, I have severed you from
other people that ye should be mine. Levit. 20.26. and this it is which
separates us Protestants from Papists and Pagans, Heretics within, and
Ethnicks without the Pale of the Church.

2 The bound is conservans, preserving men's rights that one may not injure
another; the Romans esteem Terminus as a God to whom they committed the
safeguard of their Lands, and in honor of whom they kept Feasts; and surely
it is the Law which administers too, and upholds every one in their due, that
might overcome not right, upon which ground the Philosopher was wont to say we
must fight for our Laws rather then cur Walls, Inde datae leges ne sortior
omnia posset. Ovid. Cives non minus oportet pugnare pro legibus quam pro
moenibus; absque legibus nullo pacto possit esse civitas incolumis, absque
maenibus possit. Heracl.
since a City may be safe without these, but not without them. Much more is
this verified of Religion which Plato divinely calls, (...), the foundation of
all Laws, and preservation of all society. Sine religione non princeps officium
suum non subditi facient; it is true devotion toward God that keeps us in
orderly relation one to another.

3 The bound is pacifica^s, that which prevents controversies* and so preserves
peace; it is true of good Laws which end all quarrels, most true of Religion
which as it binds man to God in duty, so man to man in unity: While the Twelve
Tribes continued one in Religion, they remained one in affection and
subjection; peace is both the Nurse and Daughter of Piety. No knot so firm as
that which this ties; so true is that of Saint James, the wisdom from above is
first pure, then peaceable, Chap. 3.17.

You have viewed the bound, now see the fault of the Princes in reference to
this bound, for which I shall make use of a double translation.

First, some read it transferentes or moventes terminum, according to our
English translation, they did remove or take away the Bound, and thus the crime
reproved is socordia prinoipum, the Princes extreme sluggishnesse in not
administering justice and maintayning Gods worship according to his laws, Zanch.
Par. in loc.
neglectis legibus neglectoque cultu divino (...) induxerunt, they cast off all
care of Equity and Piety, quod libuit licuit, every man did what was right in
his own eyes.

And surely the accusation of the Princes for this as an iniquity, is a plain
intimation of the contrary, as a duty, that they ought not only (which few
deny) to uphold Civil Laws but (which many in this scepticall age impugn) to
command Gods Worship. It is the command given to all Kings and Judges of the
earth, serve the Lord in fear, Psalm. 2.11. upon which Saint Augustine well
observes aliter servit qua homo, aliter quarex, A Magistrate must serve God,
not only as a a man, but as a Ruler; and when is that, but as the same Father
excellently, cum bona jubeat, mala prohibeat, non solum quae pertinent ad
humanam societatem, verum etiam quae ad humanam religionem? When they both
command those goods things, and forbid the evils which appertain as well to
divine worship, as to humane society. Among those many offices which Plato
conceives belonging to Magistrates, he mentions this as the chief; (...), to
take care of Gods service. Indeed strange it were that those who are expressly
styled Gods, should have nothing to do in the matters concerning God, Psalm.
82.6.
or that this care should less concern Christian Governors (which some
affirm) then the Jewish Kings. It is prophesied of the Church of the New
Testament, that Kings should be their nursing fathers, and Queens their nursing
mothers, Isa. 49.23. Sure then the child of Religion is entrusted to their
charge. That which S. Paul requires to be the end of the peoples prayer for the
Magistrate, ought doubtless to be the end of the Magistrates care for the
people, namely, That we may lead a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and
honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2. I grant, as Law is the bound of a Commonwealth, so right
Reason is the limit of Law; and as Religion is the bound of a Church, so
Scriptures are the limit of Religion, beyond which nothing ought to be required
as essential and necessary: yet this hinders not but that Magistrates
through their own industry, and the advice of learned Councels or Synods, ought
to find out and establish that Religion which is most consonant to sacred Writ.
It is true, men's consciences cannot be compelled to embrace the faith
professed; no more can their hearts, to the love of moral virtues: yet in
regard of outward conformity, they may and ought to be enjoined the frequenting
of Gods public Worship and Ordinances, the means of both. It is better to be
compelled to a Feast, Luke 14.23.
then run to a Fray; and it is a just Quaere, whether they who would not have
the Magistrate compel them, (had they power) would not compel the Magistrate?
We must indeed distinguish inter violentam conscientiarum coactionem, Gerard.
and publici exerciti^ prohibitionem. That all men's judgments should in every
thing assent to the rule established, cannot be expected; That none should dare
publicly to practice the contrary, ought to be required. The power of Religion
lies in its purity, and purity in its unity: diverse kind of grain in one
ground, of beasts in one yoke, of clothes in one garment, are forbidden in the
Law; and shall diverse Religions be allowed in the Gospel? I have read indeed of
a Turk who resembled the diversity of Religions in his Empire, to the variety
of flowers in a garden; but Christian Magistrates must account them as weeds,
which if not plucked of, will soon overtop the flowers of Orthodox doctrine:
Mars. Ficin. Florent.
so true is that saying Religionem ^vertit, quisquis religionum varietat^m
inducit; Mixtures in, are the undoubted bane of sincere worship. A strict
obligation of weaker consciences ^o things merely indifferent, may prove
injurious: sure I am, a free toleration of divulging errors in matters
necessary, August.
will prove pernicious. Nullum pejus malum libert ate erran^^. What more
dangerous for the ship then to sail with every wind, since it must needs dash
upon the rock? For the sheep, then to wander through every pasture since it
will quickly be devoured of the Wolves? And what then can be more perilous for
the people, then to have liberty, or rather a licentiousness of transgressing
Religions bound, to the eternal hazard of their souls? It is the offenee here
charged upon the Princes of Judah, they were like them that remove the bound.

Secondly, others read it mutantes, as those that change the bound: ^ald.
and so the sin condemned is instabilitas Principum, that not being content
with the worship which God had delivered to, and was received by their
ancestors, they went to the Israelites bounds of Bethaven, yea, to the Heathen
at Damascus, A vera and a^ita religione disc^ssi^uem uotat. Vir bonus est qui^?
Qui consulta patrum, qui leg^s iuraq^e servat. Virg.
and imitated their Idolatry. An heinous and pernicious sin in Magistrates, to
affect novelties in Religion. True it is, the bound of humane Laws is
alterable, and yet not easily; Salvenda, non rumpenda consuetudo; Customs must
be moved, before they be removed: but it is otherwise with Religion. Stand ye
in the ways, and see and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and
walk therein, and you shall find rest to your souls, says the Lord by the
Prophet, Jer. 6.16. St. Paul wills Timothy to avoid (...); 1 Timothy 6.20.
St. Ambrose reads it (...): they are near a kin: Novelties for the most part
prove vanities, not verities. I deny not but the fringe of divine worship may
be variable; and yet in this, venerable antiquity is not to be forsaken for
novell fancy: however, the garment of truth never waxes old. Veritas nunquam
senescit.
Guevara says, a wise man is a friend to old books, and an enemy to new
opinions. Solomon advises his son, not to meddle with them that are given to
change, Prove. 24.21. It is the crime that is here charged upon the Princes,
that they were like them that change the bound.

But was this only the Princes fault? nay, the sin was epidemicall; the
generality of the people disregarded equity, followed Idolatry. Non excusat
populum, Rivet. in loc.
sed ostendit Principes corruptissim^ status fu^sse autores and praecipue reos:
The Prophet does not altogether excuse the people, but chiefly accuse the
Princes as being the authors, and so guilty of the peoples sin. Guilty they
were,

1 Conticendo, by conniving at and suffering them in their Idolatry. Qui
peccata-non corripit aliena, facit sua; He that having power, corrects not
others faults, contracts them to himself. It is a witty and true conceit a
Rabbin has upon these words, taking them in a literal sense: The Princes were
like them that remove the bound, because they did not censure those who removed
their Neighbors bounds. That Apothegme of King Lewis is most memorable: The
Prince who can punish a fault, and does not, is no less guilty then the
offender himself. It was a serious speech a Jester used to the King who
pardoned one of his Courtiers, saying, It was the third murder that he
committed; Nay, replied he, this Petitioner committed but one, the second and
third was thine* had justice been executed at first, he would have done no
more. It is but equal, the fault of the inferiors should be imputed to, when
they are not impeded by their superiors.

2 Praecipiendo, in that some of them did not only permit, but command the
removing of the bound. So we read, that wicked King Ahaz sent a pattern of the
Altar at Damascus to Uriah the Priest, enjoining him to build one according to
it, and offer on it, 2 Kings 16.10, 15. When subjects do evil by precept,
they increase the Rulers sins so fast, as they increase their own. If Saul
charge Doeg to kill the Priests, Jezebel require the Nobles to stone Naboth;
and Ahaz, Uriah to alter Gods altar; they may well be taxed as deeply engaged
in those sins.

3 Praecedendo, by not only conniving, but commanding, nor commanding only, but
practicing themselves the violation of this bound, being like those Kings of
the earth, mentioned Psalm. 2.3. who said, Let us break their bonds asunder, and
cast away their cords far from us. It is the unhappy privilege of greatness, to
warrant by example, as well others as its own sins; whilst the unadvised vulgar
take up crimes on trust, and perish by credit. Actions of Rulers are rules for
the peoples actions; their both good, and ill patterns, become useful, and
hurtful to those that are under them. If the Mountains overflow with waters,
the Valleys are the better; and if the head be full of ill humors, the whole
body fares the worse. Vita Principis censura, Plin. Paneg.
Princes lives are more read then their laws, and their Exmple passes as
current as their Coin: Claud.
Mobile mutatur semper cum Principe vulgus.

If Nero like Music, all Rome will turn Fiddlers: The Egyptians, Diod. Sic.
if their Kings be lame or blind, will maym themselves. Let but a Pharisee say,
Christ ought to dye, the vulgar dare blaspheme themselves to hell. If a Peasant
meet Luxury in a scarlet robe, he dares be such, having so fair a cloak for it:
the common people are like tempered wax, easily receiving impressions from the
seals of great men's vices. The truth is, a wicked Magistrate, tantis obest
quanti^ praeest, injurieth as many as he governs: Qui in conspectu populi male
vivit, quantum in se est omnes se videntes interficit; by licentious living; he
proves oftimes a murderer, little better then a Basilisk, only this kills by
seeing others, He by being seen of others. No wonder then the Prophet puts the
peoples sin on the Princes account, chiefly complaining of them, that they were
like those that remove the Bound.

To end this part of the Accusation, in some nearer Application.

Oh that there were not too just cause of removing the Bound from Judah to
England! Shall we reflect upon the former times? Might we not then have
beheld in the Commonwealth the Bound of Legal rule too much changed into
Arbitrary government; in the Church, the Bound of Orthodox Protestant Religion
grossly invaded and innovated? what else meant the open allowance of Sabbath
profanation, the manifest connivance at preaching, nay printing Arminian, yea
Popish doctrines? the illegal introductions of superstitious Ceremonies,
Tables removed, Crucifixes erected, Adoration toward Altars practiced? So
truly was it then said (by a reverend Divine now with God) England was a little
place, Mr. Jos. Shute.
but a great deal of Rome in it. And oh that Principes Judah, i. e. Ecclesiae,
(so Ribera allegorizeth the Text) the then Governors of our Church, had not
through their allowance and practice been the fautors, yea, authors of these
abuses.

But to come nearer to these days: Is not the Bound still removed in Families,
City, Country, yea, the whole Kingdom? The well compacted hedge of our Laws is
trodden down; so true is that Maxim, Inter arma silent leges, The voice of Law
cannot be heard for the noise of Drums. The well-wrought vestment of our
Religion rent (with Jeroboams garment) into twelve, nay, indeed into a hundred
pieces, by schismatic Sectaries. There were some amongst the Philosophers of
old, qui jactabant solaecismos suos esse lauds and gemmas philosophiae* Who
accounted their rude Barbarismes as the ornaments of Philosophy. Such are our
new Opinionists, who present their vain fancies as the exquisite patterns of
Gods mind. How are our Pulpits made stages, for every man to act his humor
in; and our Presses marketplaces, for men to vent their false wares and
counterfeit doctrines? They all pretend to set the right bound, build the Lords
house; but it is Babel, not Bethel, if we may guess by the division of their
languages; and whilst they pretend to depart from a mystical Babylon, they run
into a literal one, I mean that of confusion: Our women are not more sick for
new fashions, then both men and women are for new Opinions. Shall I sigh out my
sad thoughts in that patheticall complaint of Vincentius Lyrenensis? Vix satis
possumus mirari quorundam hominum insaniam, excaecatae mentis impietatem, and
errandi libid^nem, qui non contenti divinitus tradita and semel accepta fide,
indies nova ac nova quaerunt, and aliquid gestiunt Religioni addere, mutare,
detrahere. Vinc. Lyren.
The raging madness of many men's minds, impiety of their blinded eyes, and
itching humor after errors, cannot be sufficiently wondered at whilst not
content with those beams of Divine truth that have shone among us, they daily
seek for NEW LIGHTS; yea, too many make it their only study how to add, or
change, or detract somewhat from our Religion.

And now, o ye Sons of the Highest, be pleased to call your selves to an
account; Remember you are not now in the House of Lords, but in the House of
the LORD; not sitting to judge others at your Bar, but to judge your selves at
Gods Bar. As for me, I censure you not* lest I be found amongst Judes filthy
dreamers, who despise dominion and speak evil of dignities. Only suffer a word
of seasonable exhortation, That ye would be pleased to set the Bound,

1 To your selves and your own families: Reprehension is most natural, when it
begins with modesty at the Inferiors; Reformation is most effectual, when it
begins with Majesty at the Superiors. Pareto legi, quisquis legem s^nxeris:
Nothing more unjust, than that they who place bounds to others, should exempt
themselves. It was a good answer Solon gave, when asked how a Commonwealth
might be safe, Si populus Magistratui obediat, Magistra^us autem legibus; when
the people are regulated by the Magistrate, and the Magistrate by the Law, You
must not think loosnesse and licentiousness to be the proper fruits of
Greatness, Sanctitas, fides, pietas, privata bona sunt; qua lubet regeseant,
Sen Trag.
to swallow up your sins in your wide Titles, as though Authority did consist
in nothing but giving men liberty to do what they list. It was a profane
speech of him in the Tragedian, That Holiness, Piety, and Fidelity, are for
private men, not Princes: nay, rather, in maxima fortuna minima licentia,
Salvian.
the higher you are advanced, the more you are obliged; they had need go more
warily who ride upon the ridge of a hill, than those that travel on foot
below. That which is a mote in other men's, King Jaemes to his son.
is a beam in your eyes. Quo grandius nomen, eo grandius scandalum; I, and eo
gravius peccatum. The eminency of your Honor aggravates others offenses
against You, and yours against God. As he said of ill Christians, so may we say
of bad Great ones: Ideo deteriores estis, quia meliores esse debetis; Salvian.
they are by so much the worse, by how much they ought to be better: And the
day is coming, when every licentious Nobleman shall cry out (as Leo the
eleventh said to his Confessor, Quam melius fuisset mihi si Mon^st^rii quam
Coeli claves tenuissem? How much better had it been for me to have climbed the
ropes, then sat at the stern? To have been confined to a cottage, then
inherited a palace? O then, though you are exalted above others, be not carried
beyond your selves: consult not what may stand with the might of your
greatness, but the authority of your place. Say to your selves, O ye Princes
of the earth, with Nehemiah, Shall such an o^e as I fly? Nehem. 6.11.
shall I whom God has honored so much, dishonor him by oaths so greatly? who
am placed in an higher sphere then others be either a dim, or a wandering star?
Shall I who am most obliged to God by the bonds of wealth and power, exceed the
bounds of truth and justice? Whom he has made a ruler of the people, not rule
my self and my own family? God forbid.

2 To the Land and Kingdom. Improve your place and power (my honored Lords)
that the bound of Law between people and people may be mayntained, without
which a Commonwealth is but a wild Forest, wherein like beasts one devoures
another; or a Pond, wherein the greater fish swallow up the less; non populus,
sed turba, not a building, but a heap of stones. Endeavor (what lies in you)
that the limits between King and people may be preserved, so as neither Royal
Majesty may invade the Subjects liberty, nor the Subjects liberty entrench too
far on Royal Majesty. But I will not look into Whirl-pooles of State, lest my
head turn giddy: Religion is my errand, that the Bound thereof may be upheld
against Error and Profaneness; those Pyramides which are reared up in the
air, and support nothing, are the vain testimonies of frivolous men's
inventions, but Pillars are raised up to uphold something. O! remember you are
the Pillars of the earth, and Religion can neither be despised without danger,
nor supported without reward.

Right Honorable, our Mother the Church is now in sore travel, you are her
Midwives, the Child she brings forth will be either Ichabod or a Benoni, if
it prove the Ichabod of a Toleration, the glory will depart from her; but if
the Benoni of Reformation, the Father God will call it Benjamin, the Son of his
right hand.

Me thinks (most Noble Patriots) I see Religion like a forlorn Damsel in
ragged attire, with her disheveled hair, weeping eyes, and bleeding wounds lie
prostrate at your feet; crying out like that woman of Tekoah, help O ye Nobles
to rescue me from those Wolves and Foxes, Heretics and Schismatics that prey
upon me; Oh be pleased to take her by the hand, raise her up; Set her upon her
legs: place a guard about her, and drive away her enemies. Far be it from
Christian Rulers, so much as to think what Tiberius said Deorum injurias diis
curae esse, Let God revenge his own injuries; nay, rather do you vindicate his
truth, that he may your honor. Remember I beseech you, you are within the
bounds of a Covenant; for what? a Toleration? No, an extirpation of all
Heresies, Schisms, and profaneness; what if while the Arc was floating on
the waters of strife, you were enforced to entertain Wolves and Lambs together,
yet now that the waters are abated, and the Arc in some measure settled, send
out the Wolves from the fold; Oh let your thankfulness to God for preserving
the bounds of your possessions appear, by your mayntaining the bound of his
worship, suffer not your selves I beseech you by selfe-respects and politic
Principles to be withdrawn from this work* he that pieceth Gods providence
with carnal policy, is like a greedy Gamester who having got all his game in
his own hand, steals a needless card to assure himself of winning, and
thereby loses all. It is an hard question, whether is greater Idolatry to
prefer reasons of State, before Principles of Piety, or to worship a golden
Calfe. Oh let Policy ever give place to Piety, your private affections be
swallowed up in the common cause, as small Rivers lose their name in the Ocean.
That practice of Pompey deserves your observation and imitation, who when his
soldiers would needs leave the Camp, threw himself down at the narrow
passage, and bid them go, but they should first trample upon their General.
Oh let Heretics tread down your Honors, ere you permit them to throw down the
bound of Gods worship; it was the ennobling Epitaph of Rodolphus, Ecclesiae
cecidit; may it be your glory in after ages that you were the Guard of good
Laws, Champions of Justice, Promoters of Peace, and Patrons of Religion.

For the better preserving of this Bound be pleased to

1 Encourage and enlarge the Disciplinary power of the Church; let not her
shepherds want sufficient means to keep out the ravening Wolves, and fetch in
the straying sheep.

2 Effectually prohibit all from entering into the work of the Ministry but by
the door of Ordination; let not those be admitted to sit in Moses chair, who
have not first sat at Gamaliels feet; it is true, the Vineyard of the Lord
wants laborers; But I hope now the Kingdom is in some measure established,
those may be readmitted, whom not scandal, but conscience made incapable for
a time, may it never be the reproach of this once famous Church of England,
that her Priests were made the lowest of the People, and the lowest of the
People made her Priests* that her grave and learned Preachers were forced to
turn Mechanics, and simple ignorant Mechanics entertained to be her Preachers.

3 Speedily appoint due penalties for those who wilfully remove the bound, such
as are odious Blasphemers, obstinate Heretics, and notoriously profane
persons.

My Lords, you have done worthily in appoynting a solemn Fast for that invasion
which Heresies have made of late upon the bound of our Religion, but as you
take with you words, so take to you the sword, and think God says to you as
he did to Joshua, Wherefore lie you on your faces? up and be doing, take away
the accursed ^^^ours from among you? That of Saint Bernard is true, if taken
cum gr^no s^lis, fides suadenda, non imponenda, Faith is wrought by
persuasions, not compulsions; yet that of Tertullian is as true, durities
vincenda non suadenda, obstinacy must be forced, not wooed; it was a Divine
speech of Seneca, Violatarum religionum apud diversas gentes diversa statuitur
peena ^pud^mines aliqua, diverse Nations appoint various punishments, all some,
for those that violate Religion, tell me, I beseech you, It is a capital crime
to speak Treason against the three Estates of the Land, and shall it deserve
less to belch out blasphemy against any of the three Persons in the sacrd
Trinity? Is it an offense worthy of punishment to abuse the Son of a King,
and is it less to dishonor the Son of God? shall they who rob your houses
be condemned, and those that rob your souls escape? are those women which
adulterate their husbands b^ds justly sentenced, and shall those that
adulterate Gods sacred Word go free? Fidem ^e servare Deo levius quam homini?
Is it a more venial offense to break faith with God then man? I speak not
this to cast a blemish upon your Honors; I have learned so much State-Divinity
as to distinguish between voluntas sign^ and beneplaceti, I well know the
by^s'd Boul may fe^ch a compass to touch the Jack; dumb Zach^^y begat him who
was the voice of a crier, neither doubt I but your former silence will end in a
loud decrying of all hetrodox opinions and practices; my only aim is to add
spurs to your pious intentions, that they may appear by such peremptory
actions, as the people may not deceive themselves with vain hopes of
unsufferable liberties. It is to be supposed that as in the sweating sickness
in England, the sick persons, when beaten on the face with sprigs of Rosemary
by their friends* would cry out, Oh you kill me you kill me, whereas indeed
they had killed them in not doing it, for had they slept, they had dyed; so
those whom the sickness of Error has surprised, being suppressed, will
exclaim and say, Oh you persecute them, you persecute them; whereas indeed it
is not a persecution that lets out the life blood, but a prosecution that lets
out the corrupt blood: Oh happy violence which pulls men out of the fire,
blessed bonds that tie men to Christ, comfortable fetters which keep our feet
in the way of peace: Let this work be wisely, faithfully speedily accomplished,
so shall the power of Religion be advanced, the name of God honored, the
mouths of your enemies stopped, the feet of wanderers reduced, the hearts of
the Gospels friends comforted, and Gods Ministers have no cause to complain of
England's as here the Prophet did of Judahs Princes; they were like them that
remove the Bound; and thus I have given a dispatch to this first branch of the
charge, referring to the Princes of Judah, to which as being most suitable to
the Auditory, I have allowed an elder brothers portion of time; I hasten now to
a brief discussion of

The second Branch relating to the people of Ephraim in because he willingly
walked after the commandment. (...). Sept. post sordes. Vulg.
The last word of this clause is variously rendered; the 70 read it as if it
were (...) vanity; the vulgar Latin as if it were (...) a (...) that
signifies filthiness; by both expressions they understand Idols, which the
Scripture thinks worthy of no better names; in regard of the former they are
sometimes called (...) quasi (...) not Gods, without strength, or rather from
(...) nothing, Levit. 26.1.
of no value; so true is that of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 8.4.
an Idol is nothing in the World* in regard of the latter they are elsewhere
styled (...) a stercus, Ezekiel. 22.3. Per contemptum. Iun. qui soetore suo Deum
offendunt.

Job 31.5. 1 King. 17.15. Deuteronomy. 8.19.


dunghill-gods sending up an unsavory smell in the nostrils of the true
Jehovah; and thus the phrase is most usual in Scripture of walking after
Idols, and going after vani^y, in both which constructions the accusation seems
to be framed against the Kings as well people of Israel who were guilty of
gross Idolatries.

The most received reading is (...) a (...) praecepit according to our
translation, the Commandment, and so the fault was the peoples in walking
after it; what this commandment was, you may read 1 Kings 12.28. The occasion
and matter of it was this.

Jeroboam being the head of ten rebellious Tribes, thinks it not safe that they
should go up to Heirusalem to worship; his suspicious heart, no doubt, told him
that Religion is a friend to loyalty, and if they still continued to worship
the true God, they would ere long have embraced their right King; what then?
rebellion against the King must be attended with defection from God; his
politic brain finds out two nearer, and as he pretends, fitter places within
their own territories Dan and Bethel; there he sets up golden Calves for them;
makes woden Priests; and invites the people to worship them; thus one sin draws
on a greater; Cains anger is seconded with murder; Ahabs covetousness attended
with cruelty; Peter's denial backed with an oath; And Jeroboams rebellion with
Idolatry.

But in what posture is the people? the text tells you, they willingly walk
after his command; in the Original there are two Verbs, (...)
the former whereof has a double signification and translation.

1 Coepit, so the Vulgar, he began to walk, the old way of worship was
superannu^ted, and like an old Almanac grown out of date; a new invention is
but presented, and the giddy people begin to walk after it; nor is it any
wonder that ivit follows coepit; having began, they walk on; sin is of a
pleasing nature; especially Idolatry; the Prophet calls Idols delectable things;
Isa 44.9.
which being once embraced are not easily rejected. Ovid.
-- Facilis discensus --
Sed revocare gradum --
It is a swimming down the stream; to stop is difficult; it is good advice
therefore, Principiis obsta crush sin in the egg, and dash these Babylonish
Infants against the stones.

2 Voluit, lubens ivit, the most general and suitable reading; He willingly
walked. [Jeroboam coyns Religion in the Mint of his own brain, sets the stamp of
a command upon it, and it passes with the people for Current, he (...) golden
Calves, and the brutish Vulgar like an herd of Beasts run lowing after them. It
is no marvel, where Voluit goes before, that Ivit comes after; that Ephraim
being willing, resolves to walk: the Hebrews say that this Verb is never
without another at his heels; sure I am, the will ne^ver wants attendance,
(...) semper habet post se verbum.
What the primum mobile is in the heavens, that the Wall is in the soul,
carrying all the faculties about with its own motion: the Brain is a projector,
the Eye an Intelligencer the Tongue an Orator, the Hand a Factor, and the Foot
a Lacquey to the Will: where she commands, the Head plots, the Mouth talks, the
Eye looks, the Hands work, and the Feet walk. He willingly walked.]

The Prophet lays the Accusation against Ephraim in this form, for these two
reasons:

1. Ut omnem excusationem tolleret, Praeoccupatter-giversationem populi. Par.
that their fig leaves of excuse might be plucked off. It is not seldom seen
that People devolve their faults upon the Princes, Subjects on their Kings: so
it is likely did this people upon Jeroboam* and say, it was his invention to
erect ^he calves, his prescription (...) required us to worship. But here the
Prophet silenceth all such objections: True, he commanded; but you soon
embraced* he set them up but you fell down before them. It would not serve
Eue's turn, that the serpent Seduced her; nor Adam's, that Eve beguiled him,
since the true cause in both, was the abuse of their own free will: Nor does it
excuse Ephraim, that Jeroboam chalked out the way, since he willingly walked in
it.

2 Ut duplicatam culpam ostenderet, that they might appear beyond measure
sinful: though it be not essentially the nature of sin, yet circumstantially
it is an high aggravation of sin, (...) significatin requapiam, acquiescere,
eamque tot^ voluntate amplecti.

Mas. in Josh. 7.


when it is committed wilfully; the more sin pleases us, the more it
displeases God, and eo plus malitiae quo plus complacentia, the more
complacency we take in, the more maliciousness goes along with any wicked
action. The word here used notes a fullness of consent to, and acquiescencie in
any object, their obedience was not a mixed act of the will, partly forced
through fear; here was no fiery furnace, nor roaring lions prepared to awe
them, only a bare command, with a plausible pretense of ease, It is too much
for you to go up to Jerusalem; and the people are well pleased with it, rest
satisfied in it.

Learned Zanchius upon the Text makes three degrees of voluntary sins.

The lowest, is when the will consents, but drawn with fear, and forced with
apparent dangers.

The next, when the will consents freely and fully, upon a mere command from
another.

The highest, when the will plenarily consents to what corrupt judgment
dictates only upon diabolical instigation.

The former of these excuses in part, but not wholly; the latter greatly
aggravate. A tanto, non a tot^.


The first was Peter's case, whom carnal fear induced to deny his master.

The second was Ephraims sin, to whom no sooner does Jeroboam hold out his
finger, but he puts forth his feet to follow Idols.

The last was the crime of Jeroboam himself, who through the Devils persuasion
invented and pursued Idolatrous worship. The King goes before, and the people
are not far behind; he was the Father, and they are Nurse of a monstrous
Child, which afterward proved the death of both: the principal blame was
his, yet they are not at all excusable, since it was not compulsio, but
electio; they chose to embrace the Kings command before Gods, and willingly
walked after it.

Oh see how forward the Vulgar are to receive injunctions from their Rulers!
the most (as Themistius says) Purp^^ram pro Deo colunt; are like the Indians,
that worship a rag of red cloth: Every man will be of the Kings religion: if
Governors prove nursing Fathers to Piety, the People will love the Child for
the Nurses sake; and if they countenance a New worship, these care not to sin
by subscription, and damn themselves with authority; thou art my King O God,
says David, thou art our God O King, is the voice, at least the thought of the
multitude.

Oh what heed ought Magistrates to take of what they establish as a law, since
as the first sheet is composed, all the rest are speedily imprinted.

Finally, in Ephraims sin let us see our duty, in matters of Religion, no
further to walk after rulers command, then they walk after Gods; fatherly
power is the rice of all authority; and yet our Savior tells us, he that loves
father or mother more then him, is not worthy of him; Mat. 10.37. Amandus
generator, sed praep^nendus creator, Parents must be honored, but God
preferred; it is as true in regard of Regal as paternall authority; the
instances of the Hebrew Midwives, the three Worthies, and Daniel are obvious to
all. Exodus 17.1* Dan. 3.18. and 6.10.
That Epithete that was given to Bacon of Doctor resolu^us, in this case well
becomes every Christian; it was a just resolve of Luther in divine matters,
cedo nulli, a remarkable speech of Socrates though an Heathen (...) not much
unlike that of the Apostle. We ought to obey God rather then men, Acts
4.19.5.29.
it is true, when the supreme authority injoyns what God inhibits, we must
patiently undergo the punishment inflicted. but not willingly walk after the
Commandment prescribed; it was a pious speech of King Henry the eighth to Sir
Thomas More when he made him Chancellor, look first at God, then at me. Saint
Austins rule is excellent, Contemn potestatem timendo potestatem; the supreme
power has a superior in heaven: for fear of this we must contemn that, that
may threaten the prison, but this hell. In a word, neither must Princes leave
the people to their own will, nor the people conform themselves to the Princes
will, but both to Gods will in matters of Religion, lest other ways both Prince
and people be consumed: which leads me to a compendious discourse of

The second General, to wit, the severity of the doom, 1 Severally.
and that as it is pronounced severally. 1 Against the Princes of Judah, in the
end of the tenth verse, I will pour out my wrath upon them like water. An
heavy burden* (so the Prophets use to call threatenings) non tam verba quam
tonitrua, to use St. Hieroms expression; every word breaths terror into the
bosom of degenerate Princes: whether you look,

Ira metalepticos provindicta abirato Deo inflicta.

(...) a (...) transire.


1 Upon the matter or thing threatened; it is wrath, here taken for revenge,
inflicted by an incensed God; and this not an ordinary, but the utmost degree
of anger: the Hebrew word notes a boundless wrath, quae nullis repagulis
possit contineri, which knows no limits but those of his own mercies. The
Seventy translate it by a word as emphaticall, being a military expression,
(...) ab (...), imp^tus.
noting that violence which the Soldier uses against a City scaling the
W^lls, batt^ring the forts, till he has force^ a passage. Divine wrath is not
lessened, but augmented by opposition: so true is that of the Psalmist, Who may
stand in thy sight when thou art angry? Psalm. 76.7.

It is not unworthy your observation, the fit analogy between the sin and
the punishment; Allusio ad crimen.
No bounds could keep them from sinning, and therefore Gods wrath knows no
bound in punishing; as their transgression was above measure, so Gods judgment
is without measure. It is St. Chrysostoms Note concerning that fiery s^owre*
which God rained upon Sodom: that as the Sodomites inverted the course of
nature, by seeking woman in man; so God changed the order, by showring down
fire in stead of water. Thus does the Almighties justice ever proportion the
smart to the fault: so that here we may at once behold the greatness of the
sin, in the punishment; and the fitness of the punishment, to the sin;
boundless wrath, for boundless transgressors.

Or secondly, on the manner of executing this wrath: I will poure*] Gods
administrations of judgments are various, his justice walks not always in the
same path, nor with equal pace. God has vials and vessels of wrath; out of
them he drops, out of these he poures: Dropping is a gentle successive act;
such is Gods anger to his children when they offend him: Pouring is a violent
and simultaneous act; such is Gods wrath against the wicked.

Nay more; I will pour it like water.] I find one upon the Text, taking the
Metaphor in way of mitigation: Guadulp. in loc.
Aqua est mundare sordes; as though the wrath here spoken of, were not so much
revenging, as correcting; to cleanse their sins, not drown their souls. In
which regard he propos^th this as a pattern to all Magistrates, whose aim in
punishing offenders should be, ut el^^nt, non obruant, to purge them from their
faults, not overwhelme them in ruin. A conceit witty indeed, but not we^ghty.

I rath^r take it by way of Aggravation* further expressing the fierceness of
his anger. Effusio aquae symbolum abuntiae; it is usual in Scripture to
represent abundance by water: When Christ, in the person of David, would
express the extremity of his sorrows, he says, Psalm. 12.15.
I am poured out like water: When the Church would aggravate the cruelty of her
enemies, she says, They shed the Saints blood like water round about
Jerusalem. And here when God would delineate the severity of his wrath, he
threatens to pour it out like water: conceive the allusion to the pouring out
of a vessel; 79 3.
that of water, is the most absolute; Wine poured out leaves a scent, Milk a
color* Honey a taste; but Water, nor scent, nor color, nor taste behind it.
Conceive the allusion to the Flood, when the windows of heaven were opened, the
fountains of the great deep broken up, and the whole face of the earth cover^d
with waters? what more violent? in which neither men nor beasts (but those in
the Ark) escaped, A further demonstration of Gods inevitable and irresistible
wrath: you have sometimes seen a little River stopped for a time by a Dam, never
ceasing till it has got the mastery, and then setting (as it were) its foot
upon the Dams neck, leaps into the channel, not without some noise of triumph:
A petty Emblem of Gods conquering anger, which over-runs all ob^^acles.
Imagine rather you saw, in that universal deluge, the amazed people climbing
to the tops of houses, scrambling up the height of mountains, and yet there
overtaken by the churlish waters, and swallowed in the depth. A fit description
of Gods over-topping wrath poured out on the highest mountains, as well as the
lowest valleys; the greatest, as well as meanest offenders.

To apply this:

1 Oh let licentious Princes tremble at this indignation; they would have
others fear their wrath; let them stand in awe of Gods, though they care not
for the wrath of any man, yet let them tremble at Gods anger. Oh you that have
Danaes golden showers poured into your bosoms, think on Gods wrath ready to be
poured upon your heads; you whose houses are paved with Pearls and walled with
Diamonds; remember you have no roof, but are open to heavens thunder. Artemon's
servants in Plutarch, when he went out, carried a Canopy over his head, lest
the heavens should fall upon him; fond man, no Canopy can keep the showers of
heavens wrath from falling on us; it is the custom of greatness to challenge
to its self impunity; when as indeed potentes potenter mighty sinners shall be
mightily punished; let then the Council of the Psalmist be acceptable to all
Kings and Judges of the earth; Psalm 2.12.
Kiss the Son with a Kiss of affection and subjection; hang at his lips for
the rule of your life, depend upon his word for your Religion; exalt his
Scepter above your own honors least he be angry and ye perish from the right
way; when his wrath is kindled, yea but a little, blessed are all they that put
their trust in him.

2 Let both Princes and People endeavor by all good means to prevent the
effusion of this wrath; to this end: learn we to

1 Pour out our tears like water. Tears of compassion like strong water; to
comfort the hearts of our distressed brethren; our showing mercy to other,
will mittigate Gods fury to us.

Tears of devotion like sweet water in the nostrils of God, when we seek him
weeping, we shall find him smiling.

Above all tears of contrition like clean water, to wash away those sins which
have provoked his anger; that wrath which is here said to be poured out like
water, Dan. 2.4.
is elsewhere said to be poured out like fire and no way to quench it; but by
these tears Artificers use to fasten Marble statues upon their bases with
Molten lead, no better way to fasten our Kingdom, and Cities, Families, upon a
sure foundation, then by melting ourselves into tears of repentance.

2 Pour out our hearts like water in humble supplications at the throne of
grace, both for pardon of sin and preventing of judgment, fervent prayer
keeps the keys of heaven: both opening the treasury of love, and looking up the
Armory of wrath; let us then not only say a prayer, Isa. 26.16. Psalm. 62.8.
but pour out a prayer; and not only our words, but our hearts before God,
that he may not pour out his anger on us.

Saepe Jovem vidi cum jam sua fulmina vellet Ovid.

Mittere thured to sustinuisse manum.
When we open our mouths in humility, God withholds his hand of Severity; it
was the way prescribed the men of Athens by the Oracle for the removing of a
great plague duplare Aram to double their sacrifices on the Altar, indeed
Oration posita est per quamira Dei suspenditur, venia procuratur, Cass.
poena refugitur, and praemiorum largitas impetratur, devout prayers are the
best means of appea^ing anger, procuring pardon, avoiding punishments, and
obteining mercy at the hands of the Almighty.

3 Pour out our sins like water, to wit, speedily, as in pouring, the drops of
water run one upon another. Willingly, as in pouring, the water runs out
without any opposition. Universally, as in pouring, the water cease not till
all be out. Finally, as the water that is poured on the earth can never be
gathered up again, thus let us pour out all our sins, and God will not pour
out all his wrath, let us speedily cast away the filth of our transgressions,
and he will soon stop the current of his indignation; let us cheerfully
reform, and he will not willingly afflict; let us having cast away our sins
never more return to them: and then though his anger have been poured out on
us, he will graciously return to us. In a word, repent we of our provocations,
and he will repent of this commination, to pour out his wrath like water.

I have done with that; and hasten to the second part of the doom, uttered
against

The people of Ephraim. Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment.

The Seventy read the words actively, understanding it of Jeroboams wars with
Rehoboam, in which he oppressed him. Idolatry and cruelty are two usual
companions; it is no wonder that they who offer injury to God use violence to
man: Jeroboam walks after Idols* and therefore oppresses his neighbor King.

The Hebrew participles are of the passive voice, and so better rendered, (...)
70 2 Chronicles. 12.15
Ephraim is oppressed, etc. According to which version they admit of a threefold
reference; to their domestic governors, foreign enemies, and God himself.

1 Ephraim was oppressed by his governors, Oppresserunt ^um reges, and
deceperunt; so Aben Ezra: their Kings by violence oppressed, and fraud deceived
them. It is the Prophet Micahs complaint of the head^ of the house of Jacob,
and the Princes of the house of Israel, that they abhor judgment, and pervert
all equity* chap. 3.9. In this sense the Chaldee reads the whole verse: Inique
premuntur vir^ Ephraim, and apprimuntur judiciis suis, qui^ ^e verterunt
judices eorum, ut errarent post mammona iniquitatis: their Heads judging for
hire, injured the people, being more pleased with receiving rewards, then doing
right. It is the complaint of Israel, in the 16 verse of the former chapter,
That her Rulers with shame do love, [ Give ye*] No marvel if bribes obstruct
the course of justice, and covetousness prove the mother of oppression.

A sore judgment upon any people, when their Princes are not shepherds, but
wolves; Rulers, but ruiners; Bucklers, but butchers of the people; when they
who should support, supplant; underprop, undermine; dress destroy the vines of
the Commonwealth. (...), Injustice is the root of all mischiefs.

The word which we translate broken, notes a crime peculiar to inferior
Officers, (...) Concussus.
who oft-times affright the people with the Magistrates power, that they may
extort money from them for their own profit. Haec vox in usu apud
Jureconsultos. Est au^em concussionis crim^n cum quis ab co quem Magistratus
terrore a^^cit, eius periculi devitandi causa pecuniam extor^uet Riv. (...)
Significat opprimere verbis and factis, vi and fraud.
The other word which we read oppressed, notes a fault in superior Judges: the
signification of it is large referring both to words, and actions; to open, and
secret enterprises, either for withholding from others what is due to them, or
withdrawing what they duly possess: such is the too usual course of men in
autho^i^y, to ma^e the inferior sl^ves to their covetous and malicious wills;
sometimes by stout words and violent practices, sometimes by soft speeches and
fraudulent pretenses, taking from those under them what they have; or detaining
what they ought to have. All which the sins of a people often times bring upon
them. Secundum merita Subdi^orum disponuntur acta Regentum, says Gregory.
Extorting Magistrates are used as whips to scourge the wickedness of the
multitude: And as, for the transgression of a Land many are the Princes
thereof, Prove. 28.2.
so those may become injurious and destructive to the Land.

How much England has groaned under the burdens of oppressions by the violence
of former Courts, and still sighs under the irregular practices of present
Committees, your Honors cannot be ignorant: The number of our Samuels is very
small that can say to the people* Behold, here I am, witness against me before
the Lord and before the Parliament, whose ox have I taken, or whose ^ss^ have
I taken, or whom have I defrauded, whom have I oppressed or of whose hand have I
received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? However, I could wish they
would take up the last clause, and say, I will restore. I am afraid it has
been cause enough to bring many sheep to the slaughter, because they were fat:
yea* some amongst us have been no better then bushes or brambles to tear off
the fleece of innocent sheep, who have come to them for shelter; That complaint
o^ the Prophet Micah being too plainly verified, The best of them is a briar,
and the most upright sharper then a thorn-hedge, chap. 7.4. But let such
oppres^ors know, that as for the present they have been instruments, so one day
they shall be subjects of Gods wrath. The same word in Hebrew signifies both a
wedge of gold, and a tongue; and some say that the wedge of gold that Achan
stole, had the shape of a tongue. Sure I am, bags of gold unjustly gotten c^y
loud in Gods ears against those that hoard them up. As for you, my Noble Lords,
let your ears be open to the cries of the oppressed, let your eyes be open to
take notice of these oppressors: Remember you are the shield of the earth, to
protect the people from injury; Psalm. 47.9.
and let Alfonsus his emblem be yours, A Pelican feeding her young with her own
blood, with this Motto, Pro rege and grege. I say no more, but know, the
acceptable Fast to God, is to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the
heavy burdens, Isa. 58.6.
and to let the oppressed go free, and that you break every yoke.

2 Others refer this oppression to a foreign enemy, to wit the Assyrians, by
whom they were carried captive, used as slaves, Fractis iudiciis, nempehos^ium.
Par.
and omne judicii levamentum periit, and all the doors of justice were shut
upon them. This though it came not upon the Israelites till afterward, is
(according to the Prophetical manner) set down in the present tense, to note
the certainty of the accomplishment. Destruction is inseparably linked to
corruption. Prophetico more participium praeteritum pro futuro ad rei
certitudinem significandum. Rivet.
God is as true in his threatenings, as he is faithful in his promises. Christ
says of the unbeleever, that he is condemned already, to wit in Divine decree,
and the certainty of the execution: And here the Prophet says, that Ephraim is
oppressed; so surely should it come to pass, as if it had then been inflicted.

Captivity is the usual wages of Idolatry: it was so threatened by Moses, that
if Israel would not serve the Lord in abundance, they should serve their
enemies in cold, Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48.
hunger, and nakedness. It was afterward frequently verified upon them in the
time of the Judges; we find God selling them into the hands of spoilers, even
their enemies round about, Judge. 2.13, 14. Chap. 6.1.10.8.13.1.
because they forsook him to follow Idols. The Midianites oppressed and broke
them seven years; the Philistines and Ammonites vexed them 18 years, and after
that they were delivered into the hands of the Philistines 40 years: and in the
time of their Kings, when Ephraim walked after Idols, God often sent the
Assyrians to ride over them. The word oppressed according to the Chaldee, is
read Praedae expositus, Ephraim became a prey; not only their goods, but
themselves were spoiled by the enemy. The Vulgar read it, calumniam patiens:
Indeed what greater disgrace, then that Ephraim, Gods own people, should be
oppressed by Heathen, that were worse and viler then themselves? It is the
height of reproach a father casts on his child, when he commands his slave to
beat him. Of all outward judgments this is the sorest, to have strangers rule
over us, as being made up of shame and cruelty. If once the Heathen come into
Gods inheritance, Psalm. 79.1.105.
no wonder the Church complains, her blood is shed round about Jerusalem, and
she becomes a reproach to her neighbors, a shame and derision to all round
about her. It was not without just cause that David being put to his choice by
God, resolves rather to fall into the hands of God then man. 1 Samuel 24.14.
Strange invaders can never find in their hearts to say that to themselves,
which God did to his destroying Angel, It is enough, put up thy sword: Yea,
Verse 16.
even their tender mercies are cruel; the greatest kindness they show, is but
a lesser kind of cruelty.

To close up this:

1 What singular cause have we then to magnify the goodness of our God, who
in the midst of our home insurrections preserved us from eternal invasions!
That when we were unnaturally tearing each other in pieces, a third party came
not to devour us both, what was it but his mercy? How should we say in David's
words* Blessed be the Lord that gave us not as a prey to the teeth of other
Nations!

2 What a prevailing motive ought this to be against all sin, especially
Idolatry? When the people of Israel had made them gods to go before them, the
Text says, Exodus 32.25.
they were naked among their enemies; wanting the protection of the Almighty,
which is the only garment of defense to any people. Cedren. hist.
When Phocas had built a strong wall in his palace, he heard in the night a
voice thus saying, O King, though thou build as high as the clouds, the City
will easily be taken, for the sin in the City will mar all. Oh let us not
flatter our selves in our strong Castles, mighty bulwarks, potent Navy!
Idolatry and profaneness will weaken all. Barbarus has seges -- Sin will pluck
up our hedges, lay waste our fields for strangers, like ravenous beasts, to
come and devour all. The ruined Monuments, battered Walls of many depopulated
Cities, seem to tell the passengers, Hic fuit hostilitas, here has been an
oppressing enemy; And do they not withal tell, Hic fuit iniquitas, here has
been ruining iniquity. And while our Idolatries (though not so much corporal
as spiritual, in worshipping not Images, but Imaginations) cry loud in Gods
ears what can we expect but that God should lift up an ensign to the Nations
from far, Ier. 5.26.
and hiss unto them from the end of the earth, that they may come with speed
to destroy us? Let us therefore by timely repentance break off our sins, that
we be not broken in judgment; let us suppress our Prophanations, that no Enemy
may oppress our Nation; and let it be our earnest petition to the Almighty,
that however he deal with us, he would not sell us into the hands of barbarous
Turks, or Idolatrous Papists; that he would be a wall of fire round about our
Land, Zech. 3.5.
a Wall to defend us; and a fire to consume those that shall approach to hurt
us. In a word, let us all on our bended knees, with weeping eyes, lift up our
voices and cry* From further civil dissentions at home, and cruel invasion of
enemies abroad, (if it be thy blessed will) good Lord deliver us.

3 Some refer it to God himself, who by the unjust and tyrannical judgments
of men, Judicio Dei iusto. Zanch.
is often times pleased to execute his own justice. But what, may some say, is
oppression no sin? or can the p^re God be the author of sin? I answer: as God
is holy, and therefore cannot authorize sin; so he is wise, and therefore has
a hand in sin; a hand not only in permitting sin to be acte^, but ordering it
for his own most sacred purposes, yea ^ssisting to the action, but not the
evil and maligni^y of it. Thus did God not only suffer the Assyrians to
oppress Ephraim, but gave them that strength that did overcome, appointed the
time how long, and the measure how great their oppression should be, making all
to serve for his own ends, and the manifestation of the glory of his justice in
correcting a rebellious people. Besides, this oppression, though in regard of
the enemies it was a sin, and so to be imputed to their malice, yet in regard
of Ephraim it was a punishment, and so to be ascribed to Gods justice. Saepe
peccatum est poena peccati.
Observe the story of Job: You find God, Satan and wicked men concurring in
his oppression; Res una quam fecerunt, Causa non una ob quam fecerunt; they all
concurred in one action, the taking away Jobs goods, yet upon a different
ground. The Devil instigates the Sabeans, out of malice; they surprised his
possessions, out of covetousness; God permitted and ordered it in wisdom and
justice; so that neither did the enemies partake of Gods righteousness; nor He
of their cruelty. The case is a like here: Ephraim is oppressed and broken in
judgment: the judgment of his Princes, through their covetous desires; of his
enemies, through their inveterate hatred; and of God, through his just severity.

Indeed what more just, then that God should make Princes as Devils to that
people, who set up their Princes as high as God; that they who left him to
serve strange gods, should be forced to serve strangers; and whilst they made a
prey of Gods honor by their Idolatry, God should give them as a prey to their
enemies malignity?

Oh let us remember this in all oppressions we meet with, that they fall not
upon us without divine providence. What Eliphaz says of affliction in
general, Job 5.6.
is true of oppression in particular; it comes not forth of the dust, neither
does it spring out of the ground. Joseph, Genesis 45.2.
though sold by his envious brethren into Egypt, says, God has sent me
hither. David being railed upon by Shimei, said, God had bid him curse. 2 Samuel
16.10. Job 1.21.
Job being robbed by the Sabeans, said, God has taken away: And concerning the
Israelites bondage under the Egyptians, the Psalmist says, He turned their
heart to hate his people, Psalm. 106.25.
and deal sub^^lly with his servants. Let us not therefore with the foolish Dog
bark at the stone, but rather look at the hand, acknowledging GOD in all.

As for oppressing adversaries (whether domestic or foreign) let them not
account themselves safe, because they execute Gods judgment; since though they
act his secret will, they contradict his revealed will, the only rule of our
actions: the truth is, they perform his will against their will, their aim
being to fulfill their own lusts, not his pleasure. So God himself says of the
Assyrian, Isa. 10.7.
He means not so, neither does his heart think and therefore resolves after
he has performed his whole work upon mount Sion and Jerusalem, Verse 12.
to punish the fruits of the stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory
of his high looks. The just reward of unjust oppressors.

Finally, whatever injuries are brought upon us by man, let us acknowledge them
as deserved punishment of our sin, in regard of God. Though we have given no
cause to the one, and so are innocent, yet we have given just cause to the
other, and so are nocent; and therefore as the Athenians, when an Ox was
killed for sacrifice, condemned the sword, but acquitted the Priest; so let us,
whilst we accuse the cruelty of our enemies who are the instruments, excuse
the severity of God who is the efficient of all those evils (as they are
punishments) which fall upon us; ever saying with Mauritius, justa, Domine,
judiciatua, Thy judgments (O Lord) are just and righteous altogether.

2 Jointly.
And so I pass to the last, and fatal doom, which was denounced jointly
against both the Kingdoms, in the 12th. verse, I will be unto Ephraim as a
moth, and unto the house of Judah as rottenness. The Original wants the Verb,
which is easily supplied by Interpreters, only with this difference (which is
not material) some render it I have been; Fui. Rivet. Ero. Par. Intelligi
debet metonymice, cum effectus nomen causae tribuitur. Riv.
others, I will be: Non quod Deus tinea aut putredo sit, sed quod sustinentibu^
poenas talis videatur, says Hierome well: Not that God is, but seems to be
as a moth and worm in his punishment; it is a good note of Pareus, that it is
not only sinam, but ero, I will suffer, but, I will be; since God is not
otiosus spectator, but operosies effector, not an idle spectator or bare
permitter, but powerful worker and wise appointer of those calamities which
befall a people. The 70 much vary in the translation of the words, mistaking
and misplacing, and so read for moth (...), which signifies a trouble; and for
rottenness (...) a prick: Vide River. in loc.
losing hereby the emphasis and energie of the Prophets expressions which
consists much in the resemblances here used, and therefore well rendered by our
translators, I will be a moth, and as rottenness.

The words you see are metaphorical, the one taken from garments which are
subject to be eaten of moths; the other from bones and trees, which are apt to
be rotted by worms: both which do ap^ly represent the qualities of divine
punishments, and in them, many of his choice Attributes; such as are,

1 Misericordia in tarditate, the sweetness of Gods mercy in the slownesse of
his judgments; the moth is long in consuming the garment, so is God before he
destroy a people: cito struit, tarde destruit; He was longer in marring one
City; to wit Jericho, then in making the whole world; Ios. 6.
he finished this in six daye^, he accomplished that not until seven: When he
went to receive the penitent Prodigal, the text says he ran; but when he went
to pass the sentence on our rebelling Parents, he is said to walk: Luke
15.20. Genesis 3.8.
God is swift in showing mercy, but slow to wrath. Oh let Magistrates learn to
write after this copy! The Romans Axe which was carried before the Consul, had
a bundle of rods tied about it, that while it was unloosing he might bethink
himself of the sentence past. The Ancients fained the chariot of Justice to be
drawn by two women, una fractum ensem portabat, altera conto nitebatur; whereof
the one carried a broken sword that that cut but slowly, the other leaned upon
a long pole which is moved but easily; to intimate how slow Judges ought to be
in execution of judgment.

2 Potentia in efficacitate, the greatness of his power in the prevalencie of
his punishments. Trees and bones are of a stronger nature then garments, and
yet the worm eats them out; the stoutest spirit cannot stand before Gods
judgments; He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength; Job 9.4.
who has hardened himself against him and prospered? Let Magistrates remember
this, to be not only tineae, but teredines, Moths to the meaner, but Worms to
the greater sort. Rulers laws should be like Vulcans iron-net, that caught the
gods; censuring the highest as well as lowest. Besides, a Moth is a small
creature, the least touch kills it, and yet it will destroy the garment: such is
Gods power, that by an host of Lice, an army of Frogs, a few poor Worms, he
can subdue the mightiest Princes.

3 Sapientiain vari^tate, the fullness of his wisdom in the variety of his
judgments. The moth consumes faster then the worm. Ephraim sinned before
Judah, and therefore is sooner punished: A good item for Governors, Vari^m
delinquentibus poenam imponer^, pro criminum varie^ate, to make a just
distinction between delinquents out of malice and conscience, principals and
accessaries, ringleaders and followers.

4 Ira in occultatione, the harshnesse of his anger in the insensiblenesse of
the misery. Tinea damnum facit, s^nitum non facit; Greg.
the moth frets secretly, the worm eats insensibly, so does God destroy a
people ( nemin^ observant^ aut cavent^) by those ways and means which they
least think of; Divine justice winks many times, when it does not sleep; and
then gives the greatest blow, when it makes the least noise. What they say of
little sins, that being the less sensible, they are more dangerous; is true
of punishments: Diseases which we least feel, we have most cause to fear;
the silent Arrow does many times more mischief then the roaring Cannon; still
rain sinks deeper then violent showers; and those judgments which proceed
slowly and secretly, strike both surely and sorely.

5 Justitia in aequitate, the clearness of his justice in the equity of his
punishments. The moth is bred of the garments filth which is devoured by it,
the worm of the tree which is rotted by it. The Vulgar read the last clause
of the former Verse, He walked after filthiness; and so very fitly follows the
resemblance of a Moth which is caused by filth, even the filth of that vestment
which it ea^s. Cognatum* imo innatum, omni sceleri soeleris supplicium;
Punishment is the daughter of sin; and sometimes the daughter is so alike the
mother, that you may read ab^ sin in the punishment. God is unwilling to
destroy -- S^d nos per-nostrum non patim^r sce^u^
^racundia Jovem p^n^^e ^ul^^ina.
But we compel him through our sinfulness to deal severely with us: so true
is that of Salvian, A Deo p^nimur, sed ipsi facimus quod p^nimur; He strikes,
but we provoke* he inflicts, we deserve* J^lian gave for his Arms in his
Escuchion, an Eagle struck to the heart with a shaft feathered by his own
wings; and the Motto, Pr^pr^is configimur alis. It is our own iniquities that
prove our ruin. Plin.
The Hedg-hogs (say Naturalists) make that urine which disarms them of their
prickles; Plato.
No man is hurt (says the Morali^t) but by himself. Great States, as
buildings, (say Politicians) are crushed with their own weight; Persons and
Kingdoms are destroyed (says the Divine) through their own wickedness; so
true is that of the Prophet, Thy destruction is of thy self, o Israel, Hos.
13.9.

It is farther observed of the Worm* that it is br^d of juci^ trees,
especially when cut in the Full moon. Jud^hs outward felicity became the
occasion of her misery. Bees are many times drowned in honey, ships cast away
on the soft sands, birds caught in twig-lime, and people strangled by
prosperity; too many of the worlds dar^^^g^ man cry out as the sick woman in
the fable, (...) Woe to us, the good things we enjoy wound ^s by their
embraces: It was Judahs prosperous state occasioned her forgetting God. Agur
seems, in this respect, Prove. 30.9.
to make riches worse then poverty, since this causes to steal from man, but
that to deny God. And no wonder, if her riches cause her to deny God, God be
provoked to forsake her, and so all evil come upon her. By all which
resemblances we may pick out the Prophets meaning to be thus much: That Ephraim
being first in sin, should be first in punishment; yet Judah being like to
him in sin; should be like in suffering: That both Judah and Ephraim*
notwithstanding their prosperity, because of their iniquity, shall by little
and little be secretly and certainly ruined.

And now if any ask when, or how this was verified? I answer, God was as a
moth to Ephraim partly by those many intestine conspiracies among themselves,
and partly by the frequent invasions made upon them by the Ass^rians, till at
the last Samaria was taken, and the Israelites were carried captive by
Salmanasser. God was rottenness to the house of Judah; in the assaults made
upon them partly by their brethren the Israelites, chiefly by the Kings of
Assyria and Babylon, till at length Jerusalem was besieged and taken, the
Temple burnt, and the Jews captivated by Nebuchadnezzar; the stories of both
you may peruse, Kings 2, from the 15th. chap. to the end of the book.

To draw to a conclusion --

Give me leave to change the Scene, from Ephraim to England; and the two Tribes
of Judah, to these two adjoining famous Cities; that we may see how far this
threatening is denounced against, and inflicted on us, That God is as a moth and
rottenness to us.

It is not long (beloved) since God was a Lion, when two Armies were roaring
one against another in the noise of Cannons, ye tearing each others bowels in
pieces: Oh how then did Gods wrath pour put our blood like water! But is there
not yet a secret vein inwardly bleeding, and though the bloody issue be stopped,
are we not still sick of a Consumption?

Consider, I beseech you, is not God as a moth to many Countries, by the
quartering of an Army, who, though friends yet are wasting? is he not as a
worm to the Kingdom, in our renewed Taxations, which though just, yet are
impoverishing? I mention not these, to blame the wisdom of that Authority
which sees cause still to continue both; Reasons of State are without my
sphere; only I am bold, as a Divine, to tell you, that God is by them as a
moth, secretly, and not altogether insensibly* consuming us.

Again tell me, is not God a moth to the State, in the general decay of
Trade, especially that Staple-trade of the Kingdom, by which so many Poor are
mayntained, and Merchants enriched? Is he not as a worm to the Church* in the
impayring and withholding of our Ministers mayntenance? It is hard to say
whether was the worse* Julians persecution, who subtracted fuel; or
Diocletians, who threw on water. The links of this chain are inseparable;
Religion upholds the Commonweal^h, Ministers propagate Religion, and
Mayntenance incourageth Ministers, guess then your selves, whether the
substraction of this will not prove a worm to the Land.

Once more, Who is there that with weeping eyes beholds ou^ bleeding divisions,
in the body of the State* by a too long and unhappy separation of Head from
Members, till the reunion of whom neither can be happy; In the womb of the
Church, by the struggling of her untoward Chil^ren viper-like eating out her
bowels; And not say, that God is a moth and rottenness to us? It is true,
there are some particular persons, Privatins degeneres in public^m exitiosi,
qui nihil spei nisi per discordias habent; Who have weaved for themselves
garments of fair estates, and probably out of the threads that others have spun.
These (no doubt) like a Chyrurgeon more corrupt then the soar he dresses,
would prolong the Kingdoms cure for their own gains: But sure I am, the
garment of the Church, and Land in general, is exceedingly moth-eaten and
ready to fall in pieces. Accept therefore of a word of exhortation.

1 In special. Let not my Noble Lords be angry, and I will speak but this once
more; humbly to beseech, that you would improve ^he utmost of that power God
has put into your hands for ^ebrushing away of these Moths, and killing these
Worms. It is true, these things befall us not without divine providence, yet
God expects our endeavor to remove them by humane prudence.

Be pleased then to consult in your wisdoms, a safe and speedy way for easing
the Country of Quarters, and the Kingdom of Taxes; that our Swords may be
turned into Plough-shares, and our Spears into Pruning-^ooks, Isa. 2.4.

Mic. 4.4.


and every man may sit under his own vine and under his fig tree, and none make
them afraid. Let not Industry be disheartened, when the reward of that, and
Idleness, through the weight of Taxations, shall prove alike* Beggary.

Be sensible of, and apply all good means presented by Petitioners, or
invented by your Wisdoms, to the cure of that wound which the decay of Clothing
has made. Nor let the Church be altogether forgotten; Suffer not any to cut
off the Flesh of her honorable Maintenance, pretending to cure her of a
Timpanie of Superfluities. What if some have turned the spur of Virtue into a
St^^rop of Prid^, yet let not the Bees starve, to punish the Drones. Shall
other Sciences have a portion, and must Divinity be put off only with her
beauty? Nay rather, if it seem not good to allow her her Dowry, afford her a
fair Jointure in lieu of it.

Above all, let your plous thoughts, best wishes, and most serious endeavors
bend themselves to an happy union of our Ecclesiastic, an honorable
Accommodation of our Civil dissentions; so as the purity of Truth may be
preserved, and the prosperity of Peace res^ored. Then shall Milo's lo^ (whose
hand which he thrust in a cleft Oak to make it bigger, by the closing thereof
was caught, and himself devoured of wild beasts) be the portion of all
malignant Incendia^i^s, whilst the whole Kingdom shall build up altars to the
Lord and call them Jehovah Shalom, saying, The Lord has blessed his people with
Peace.

2 In general. What counsel more suitable to the Text or Time, then that of
Repentance? Our sins have been a moth to the Land, let Repentance be a moth to
our sins, every day gnawing our corruptions till they die. Peccatum
^ristitiam peperit tristitia peccatum conteret; Let our sins cause sorrows, and
godly sorrow will kill our sins: This is the best daughter of the worst mother,
the sweet fruit of the root of bitterness.

Oh remember, for this end is God a moth in his judgments, consuming slowly,
that we might repent speedily; and therefore does he retard his corrections,
that we might hasten our conversions. Deus cum beneficia infert, supplicia
offert; while God holds his rod in the one hand, he offers mercy with the
other, desiring rather that we should return and live, then go on and perish.
Oh let us not frustrate Gods expectation, lest we more provoke his indignation.
Say then to thy self; as Caesar did, Mean servare ut sint qui me perdant?
Shall I hug a snake in my bosom, to poison me? nourish Wolves young ones, to
tear me? shall I embrace that in my soul which will be a worm to gnaw my
conscience, and a moth to devour my estate? God forbid. Oh let such
meditations as these work us to holy resolutions, saying of our lusts as the
Philosopher did of his gold, Mergamte, ne mergar a te; we will crucify them,
that they may not damnifie us.

To end all:

I have read of the picture of a Godd^sse in a c^rtain Temple so contrived*
that she frowned on her worshippers as they came in, and smiled on them as
they went out. Such I desire this Scripture may be, that though it has frowned
upon you in its menaces, yet it may end in smiling promises, that it may be a
plaster not only corrosive, but incarnative, (...). Chrysostom.
that it may prove to you like Joseph's coat to his father, wherewith he was at
once both grieved and comforted; or like a cloud which seems to be composed
both of envy and bounty; envy, in hiding the Suns golden beams from the earth;
bounty in dropping down golden showers to refresh it.

Know therefore that in the cragged shell of these threatenings are contained
the pearls of pr^cious Comforts, Mutatus mutatum inveniet: If we change our
sinning into repenting, God will change his thunderbolts of anger into shining
beams of love.

Let our Princes establish Gods bound, and he will maintain their honor: Let
the people prefer his precepts before men's inventions, and he will preserve
their estates from men's oppressions. In a word, let both Prince and people, by
a penitent reformation, be moths to their sins, and worms to their corruptions,
and then He will not pour out his wrath, but his mercy like water; we shall no
longer be oppressed and broken in judgment, but he will break the yoke of our
oppressors; he will no more be a worm to consume, but a Sun to revive the once
flourishing tree of this Kingdom; He will no longer be a moth to consume our
garments, but he will put upon us new garments of joy and praise; When we
shall see Plenty triumphing over Famine in the Country, Riches over Poverty in
the City, Justice over Tyranny in our Courts, Reformation over Toleration in
the Kingdom: Finally, when we shall behold the King rejoicing over danger, in
the loyalty of his Subjects; the People over fears in the fidelity of their
Sovereign; the Parliament over their troubles in the settlement of the Land;
the Church over her adversaries in the unity of her Government; and which is
above and beyond all, CHRIST over Antichrist, in the purity of his Gospel among
us and our posterity for ever. Which GOD of his mercy grant us, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Webb, and William Grantham, at the sign of the
Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. MDCXLVII.


