THE PILGRIMS WISH, OR, THE SAINTS LONGING.

DISCUSSED IN A SERMON Preached in St BENNET GRACECHURCH, AT THE FUNERAL OF Mrs
ANNE DUDSON, (Daughter of Mr Isaac Calf, heretofore Minister of Gods word at
Chatwell in Essex, and late Wife of Mr Edward Dudson of London Draper) who
departed this life the 4th day of January 1658. and was Interred the 11th of
the same Month.

By Nath. Hardy Preacher to the Parish of St. Dionys. Back-church.

Luke 2. 29. Lord, now let thou they servant depart in Peace, according to
thy Word.

Aug. in Joh. Qui cupit dissolvi and esse cum Christo, non patienter ritur, sed
patienter vivit, and delectabiliter moritur.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Joseph Cranford at the Sign of the Castle and
Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

TO My Worthy Friends Mr EDWARD DUDSON, AND Mrs ELIZABETH MAN.
THe near Relation which you both had to the deceased Gentlewoman, the one of
an Husband, the other of an Aunt, moves me to join you together in this
Dedication.

The dear Affection which you both had to her Person whilst alive, and have to
her memory now dead, enduced you to desire this Publication.

After some delay of time, (for which I beg your pardon, as being not
voluntary, but necessitated by multiplicity of emergent occasions) I have at
length fulfilled your desire: by which means her living works, and dying
words, (as they follow her, so) will live still with you, for your Consolation;
and not with you only, but with all unto whose hands this following Discourse
shall come, for their Imitation.

Nothing remains but my Prayers, not for her, she needs them not, but
here is; I mean your selves, and her surviving Children: of whom the one of you
is, I douubt not, a careful Father, and to whom, I trust, the other of you
will be instead of their tender Mother. That you may all enjoy a prosperous
lasting life on earth, and a glorious everlasting life in Heaven, is the
earnest Prayer of

Your affectionate Friend NATH. HARDY.

THE PILGRIMS WISH, OR, THE SAINTS LONGING.
Phil. 1. 23. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and
to be with Christ, which is far better.


DEath is the lot of all men, to desire death the temper of few men; it is that
guest which every man must entertain, and yet scarce any man will bid welcome.
Many are so wicked that they scarce think of it, more, far more are so weak
that they do not desire it. Indeed to desire death aright, argues one more
than a Man, a Christian; nay, more than an ordinary Christian, a strong Saint.
Such an one was he who utters these words; a Star of the first magnitude, a
Christian of the highest form. But yet the examples of Eminent Saints, are set
as Copies for us to write by; and though we cannot presently obtain, yet we
must seriously endeavor, that the same mind may be in us, which was in this
holy Apostle, who says, I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire, etc.

In which Verse are two Generals observable: Namely

Deaths Description, in those words, To depart, and to be with Christ, Where we
are to take notice of

The Nature of Death in General, it is a Depature.

The Consequent of it to the good in particular, and that is being with Christ.

St. Paul's affection toward Death in the rest of the Verse, where is to be
considered,

The Quality and kind of the affection, it is a desire.

The AEquity and justice of the Reason, enducing to it, because it is far
better.

The Energy and strength of it, in the Effect flowing from it, in that he was
in a strait betwixt two. Of each of these in their Order;

Beginning with the Description of Death, and that Genesis 1.


As to its general nature in the word Depart. Among the many acceptions of the
Greek Verb, none Party. 1.
more sutabler to this place than that which is the most plain: namely to
remove or depart, answering to the Hebrew word, (...) whereof the Syriack here
makes use, and with which agree the Latin words, Migrare, abire discedere. So
that the Assertion couched in this Expression, is Obitus, Abitus; Dying, is a
going hence; the time of death is (...), the time of our 2 Timothy 4. 6.
Departure.

A Departure it is, and that both of the soul, and of the Person, of the soul,
out of the body, of the person, out of this world. I find the Apostle Peter 2
Pet. 1. 14, 15.
in two Verses describing Death by two words, which set forth this double
Departure, the one (...), a putting off, the soul putting off the body when we
dye, as the body does its Clothes when we go to sleep; the other (...), a
Decease, or going out of the Egypt of this world.

1. It is a Departure of the soul from the body, when Death comes with its
sharp Edge. the loving knot which nature tied between those two dear Friends
is cut asunder: as darkness is the absence of light when the Sun removes
from our Horizon; so is death the privation of life when the soul removes from
the body. In this respect it is defined by Tertullian to be Tertul. l. de
anima. c. 27. Ambros. de bono mortis, c. 2. Plat. in Phad. Cic. in Tusc.
dis-junctio, by St. Ambrose, to be absolutio, by Plato to be (...), and by the
Latin Orator, to be discessus animae a corpore, a dis-joyning, absolving,
loosing, a separation, migration, and departure of the soul from the body.

Indeed it is but a Departure of the one from the other, not an annihilation of
either, anima absolvitur, corpus resolvitur, the soul is let out of Ambros.
ibid.
the body, and the body is resolved into its first Principles, whereof it was
compounded, but neither returns to nothing. Fully to this purpose St. Austin,
Mors non consumit conjuncta sed divi^ dum origini Aug. l. de spir. and anim. c.
43.
suae utrumque reddit, Death does not consume but divide those parts which were
before conjoined, each returning to its Original; that is as Solomon
explaineth it, the dust to the earth, and the soul to God. I grant when a man
dies he cease to be a man, but not to be; Sic Eccl. 12. 11.
in non hominem vertitur omnis homo, says the Poet and rightly; but not in non
ens, the Materials still remain, though the house be pulled down, and the Fabric
dissolved.

2. It is a Departure of the person out of this world. The Greek word most
properly ad rem nauticam spectat, is used by Seamen, who are said to loose from
the Haven when they depart from the shore, and put forth to Sea; thus when a
man dies, he departs from the shore of this world, and launcheth into an
Ocean of Eternity. Sometimes the word is used of Soldiers, who when they
remove, take down, and unloose their Tents which were fastened to the ground;
thus by Death our earthly Tabernacles are dissolved, and we remove to another
place. 2 Cor. 5. 1.
This world in this respect is compared to an Inn, since as Cicero well,
Natura nobis commorandi, non habitandi locum dedit, God has given us here not
an house to dwell, but only a place to sojourne in. It is said of our Savior
(...), he dwelt among us, but as in a Tent; yea he John 1. 14.
was borne in an Inn, to teach us, that he for his time, and surely then we
for ours, are but so many Travellours still upon Departure. Indeed it is a very
frequent Metaphor, by which our present condition is described, we are said by
the Apostle Peter to be Pilgrims and strangers, Omnis 1 Pet. 2. 11.
homo advena nascendo, and compellitur migrare moriendo, says the Father
elegantly, Every man Aug.
is borne a stranger, and when death comes, he must be gone: in reference to
which is that of Job, Man gives up the ghost and where is he? Job 14. 10.
which is not to be understood absolutely, for to say a Man is no where at all,
is to say he is nothing; but restrictively, he is no where, here upon earth, he
is not among the living, he is vanished out of this world. To close up this:

1. Since we Depart by Death, why do we dote on life? and seeing we must leave,
why do we love this world? If a Man in a foreign Country, where his stay
will be but for some Months, should put himself to a great deal of cost in
Building and Planting for his delight; or one who lives in an house whereof he
has but a Lease for a few years, should lay out a great deal of money in
adorning and beautifying it, would he not be accounted a Fool? Oh what mad Men
are we, who set our hearts, and bestow both our love and care upon this world,
when we must ere long depart? Let me therefore bespeake you in the language of
the Prophet Micah, Arise ye and depart, for this is not your rest; you cannot
fix or stay long here, Mic. 2. 10.
depart before you depart; let your affections depart from the love of, before
your persons depart from their being in this world; and let your souls by
divine love go forth, whilst yet they are in your bodies.

2. When death comes we must Depart; why do we not make ready for our
Departure: when we depart, we must walk through a shady Valley? Oh let us
provide for our journey, having according to our Saviors counsel, Our loins
Luke 12. 35.
girt, and our lights* burning: or rather (the Greek word belonging most
properly to Mariners,) when we depart, we launch into Mare mortuum, the dead
Sea; Oh let us before hand Rigge the Vessel of our souls, that it may be fit
to Sail; let Faith be her Rudder, Hope her Anchor, Sincerity her Ballast, a
profession of the Truth her Sails, Love her Cordage, good Works her Freight,
a good Conscience her Pilot: And being thus provided, whenever the time of
our Departure shall come, we may navem committere, with confidence commit our
Ship into the hands of Christ. And so much shall suffice for the first part of
Deaths Description in that word, Depart, which is as it were the Heart and
Center of the Text, wherein the several Lines meet: Go we on to

The other part of Deaths Character, which is the consequent of it in regard of
good-men, and that is, being Partic. 2.
with Christ.

In every local motion, there is a double term, to wit, a quo, and ad quem;
from whence, and to which; It is so in this Departure whereof my Text speaks,
the term from which is not mentioned, but has been already supplied; the soul
departs out of the body, and the man out of the world: the term to which he
Departs is plainly and punctually expressed, to be with Christ.

Indeed this is not true of every one who departs by death, but only of the
good. Balaam saw so much, which made him wish, O that I might dye the Death of
the Righteous. When we dye, the souls of all go ad Deum Judicem, to God a just
Judge; but only of the good ad Christum redemptorem; Christ a merciful
Savior. It is not a common favor to every man, nor yet is it a personal
privilege of St. Paul. To me (says this Apostle a little before) to live is
Christ; and here, Having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, put them
together, and you may see the just latitude of this benefit: every one who in
some measure lives to Christ, when he dies shall be with him. What here St.
Paul assures himself of, Christ promises to the Thief on the Cross, thou
shall be with me; not only eminent Saints, such as St. Paul was, but penitent
sinners, such as the Thief was, shall be with Christ. Blessed are the dead
(says St. John) who dye in the Lord, all who by a lively faith and timely
repentance die in, are blessed in being with him.

This being with Christ, is that which all true Christians partake of not
before, and in some respect presently after their departure.

1. We cannot be with Christ till we depart hence; This Apostle is express,
Whilst we are in the body we are absent from the Lord. It is 2 Cor. 5. 6.
one thing to be in Christ, and another to be with him; that is by faith, and
is now attainable: this is by sight, and is not to be enjoyed till hereafter;
we must be in him before we dye, else we cannot dye in him; but we shall not be
with him till we are dead. It is one thing for Christ to be with us, and
another for us to be with Christ, that is our comfort in life, but this our
happiness after death: now he walks among his golden Candlesticks, the
Churches; but then it is the Members of his Church shall walk with him; now his
spirit is with us, but then it is, that our spirits shall be with him. It is
one thing to come to Christ, and another to be with him, that is a preparation
for this; it being impossible to be with him, to whom we do not come; but
whereas that is the duty of this life, this is the felicity of that other life.
Finally there was a time when Christ was on Earth, and then his Disciples
whilst alive had the honor to be with him; but now he is gone into Heaven,
and therefore we must leave earth or we cannot be with him.

2. Not till we dye, and withal when we dye we shall be with him: From
henceforth, is St. John's word, Blessed are the dead. To day was our Rev. 14. 16.
Saviors language to the Thief; and here being Luke 23. 43.
with Christ, is set down as the immediate consequent of our departure. Indeed
had not St. Paul hoped to be with Christ before the Resurrection, his desire of
departing had been irrational; it being far better to live, in doing Gods
service, then to sleep in a Grave: or if he had desired to depart, it must have
been only upon the account of being at rest from trouble, not of being with
Christ: nay since, as he says in the next Verse, his abiding in the flesh, was
needful for the Philippians, his desire to dye, and his strait about it, had
not only been irrational, but irreligious, had it not been, that he persuaded
himself, that so soon as he was departed, he should be with Christ.

Only a distinction must be here annexed of being with Christ in our persons,
and in our souls; of the former our Apostle speaks, as not to be till the last
day, when we shall meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall be ever with the 1
These. 4. 17.
Lord; of the latter he is here to be understood; the Union of the soul with
Christ, being that which follows upon its dissolution from the body. St. John
in a Vision saw the souls of them that were slain for the word of God under the
Rev. 6. 9.
Altar, that is, with Christ, who was our sacrifice on Earth, and is our Altar
in Heaven; and when we remember that Christ promised it to a penitent
Malefactor, we must not confine it only to suffering Martyrs. The sum is, At
the Resurrection shall be the reunion of soul and body, and so the complete
glorification of our persons with Christ; but immediately after death, the
souls of all them who were in Christ by faith, are with him by sight.

It were easy to trace the footsteps of this truth in the Writings of the
Fathers, Omnes sanctorum animae cum Christo sunt and exeuntes de corpore ad
Christum vadunt, expectantes Resurrectionem corporis sui; All the souls of the
Saints going out of the body, go to, and are with Christ, expecting the
Resurrection of the body. So Gennadius, in St. Augustine, and in another place
of Aug. l. de Eccl. dogin. c. 79. Id. De consid. mort. Sermon. 2.
that Father, it is expressly said, Recedens anima ab Angelis suscipitur, and
collocatur in sinu Abrahae, si fidelis est; aut in carceris inferni custodia,
si peccatrix est. The departing soul is received by Angels, and if believing,
is placed in Abraham's bosom; if impenitent; cast into the Prison of Hell till
the appointed day of its being united with the body. Were it needful, I could
bring many more Testimonies of this truth, out of Justin Martyn, Gregory
Nazianzen, Macarius Just. M. Quaest. and Resp. Orthod 9. 75. Greg. Naz. in
erat. Caesar. Macat. hom. 12. Chrysostom. in Phil. hom 3.
with others. But let St. Chrysostom suffice instead of all, and that in this
place, where he says, the just after Death are with Christ, (...), or as a
late Writer conceives it should be, (...), Not beholding him through a glass
by faith, but face to face.

The Doctrine thus axplained and confirmed, becomes a strong Argument proving
against.

The Psychopannychists, That the soul does not dye, nor yet sleep with the
body, until the Resurrection; for the souls of the good are with Christ; and
by the rule of contraries, the souls of the bad with the Devil, neither of
them are with the body.

The Papists, that there is no Purgatory after death, through which the souls
of penitent sinners pass before they be with Christ; for if they be immediately
with Christ, it is in Paradise not Purgatory; and if any one should have passed
through a Purgatory, in all probability it must have been the Thief, whose life
had been so flagitious, good works were so few, and conversion so immediately
before his death.

That Opinion (which yet I confess is ancient and harmeless,) of assigning a
place of rest and Iren. adv. haer. l. 5.
felicity, to the separated souls of the just on this side the Heaven of the
Blessed, for if they be with Christ, it probably follows they must be where
he is, and that is far above all Heavens, not only in A, but The place of
happiness.

The Lutherans who affirm the glorified Body of Christ to be every where, for
then it is on earth as well as in Heaven: and what need St. Paul desire to go
hence that he might be with him? But to enlarge in Controversies, befits not
the Pulpit at any time, much less when it is hung with black. My work now is
not the Confutation of Errors, but a Consolation of the Mourners; nor can there
be a better ground of comfort then this Meditation that our godly friends,
being departed are with Christ, (...) Chrysostom. Ibid.
(...), says St. Chrysostom, Let us rejoice over the just not only living but
dying. Why should their departure which is a means of joy to them, be matter
of grief to us? Why so much troubled, that they can no longer continue with us,
whenas they go to be with Christ? To mourn for another happiness is the envy
of an enemy, If you loved me (says Christ) Jobn 14. 18.
you would rejoice because I go to my Father. Docens scilicet and ostendens,
cum chari, quos diligimus, de saeculo exeunt, gaudendum potius quam dolendum,
So St. Cyprian, teaching us rather to rejoice Cypr. de Mortal
then weep at our friends Departure, who seem to say to us, If you loved us,
you would rejoice because we go to Christ. A Consideration, which as it may
take off our unwillingness to part with, so it should make us willing to go
after them; and this leads me to

St. Paul's affection, and therein Genesis 2. Partic. 1.


The Quality and kind of it, namely an affection of desire, Having a desire:
St. Paul was not only content to dye, and willing to live, but content to live,
and willing to dye; nor was it a slender wish, but (...), a fervent desire, and
that not transient but permanent, (...), not only desiring, but having a desire
as it were fixed and settled in his mind.

For the further opening of St. Paul's desire in reference to death, it will be
needful to resolve two Quaeries, the one concerning the possibility, whither
any man can desire death? and the other concerning the legitimacy, whither any
good man may desire it?

1. It may rationally be enquired, how any man can desire to dye? since only
good (either in reality or appearance) is the Object of desire, whenas-death
depriveth us of good, nay is the worst of temporal evils.

But to this it is justly answered, that however death considered in it self is
an evil, and so formidable, yet to a good man it becomes good, and so
desirable. Our Apostle expressing death as the Object of his desire, clotheth
it with a smooth word to depart; and if you please a little more narrowly to
look into the use of the word, you shall find it represents death as
advantageous, and consequently to be desired.

Sometimes it is used of a man's returning to his home or Country: St. Jerome
renders it reverti, Hier. Turtul.
Turtullian recipi, the Mariners going forth to Sea, are said (...), to loose
from the Haven, and when they do this by way of return homeward, (...) a
return from strangers to ones own home is thus styled; Luke 12. 36.
it is applied to Conquerours, coming back from the Wars; and the Lords
returning home from the Wedding, is expressed by this phrase. Whereas all men
are in truth, and good men in their own esteem strangers, by death they go home
to their Heavenly Country, Quis non peregre constitutus properaret in patriam
regredi; What stranger does not long Cypr. Ibid.
to return to his native soil? nothing more natural to a man then to love his
home, death is a departure home.

Sometimes it is used for men's being set free from bonds and Prison; and of
Oxen, when after their labor in the evening, the yoke is taken from off their
necks, The body is as it were the Prison of the soul, yea the whole world is
but as a larger Prison, to a Saint from which death sets him free. Dissolvi
nonquaereret Paulus nisi se proculdubio vinctum videret, Greg* Mor. l. 5. c. 40.
In that St. Paul desired to be loosed, no doubt he apprehended himself a
Prisoner. Was ever any man in love with his Fetters? and what Prisoner does not
groan for enlargement, or captive would not welcome liberty? death is a
departure out of Prison.

Once more, It is sometimes used of going to bed; we are wearied in the day of
our life with manifold labors, at the evening of death we go to our bed; so
the Prophet Isaiah's expression of the Righteous when they perish they enter
into their beds. Does not the weary Labourer long to be in his bed of ease and
Isai. 57. 2.
refreshment? Death is a departure to our bed; and no wonder if under these
considerations of rest and liberty, and returning home, it be the Object of
desire.

To all this it may be further added, That the primary object of St. Paul's
desire, was not the departure, but being with Christ. Suitable to this it is
that else where he says, We that are in this Tabernicle do groan being
burdened, not for that we would be uncloathed, but clothed upon; that which a
2 Cor. 5. 4
Christian so earnestly desires is the state of bliss in the enjoyment of
Christ. Death is only desired in order to that, and that upon necessity,
because there is no going to Christ without a departure hence: otherwise the
best men would abhor it. By this time you see the Resolution of the first
Quaery, which amounts to this, that death was not by St. Paul, is not, cannot
be desired by any one, but only in ordine ad aliud, in order to that which
follows it, and especially the being with Christ.

The Quaere which would next be satisfied refers to the Legitimacy, Whither,
and how far death may Quer. 2.
be desired? To which end be pleased to knew, that that desire of death which
is lawful, yea not only lawful but excellent.

1. Is not Active but Passive, So the Vulgar Latin Vulg. Lat.
reads it, Cupio dissolvi, I desire to be dissolved. In some cases the truth of
our destre is testified by the Exodus 20. 12.
endeavoure but it is not so in this, that command of killing, respects a man's
self as well as others, and forbids not only the act but the endeavor; he that
by neglect of good means shortens his life, or by any evil means attempts
the hastening of his own death, being no other in Gods account, then a
self-murderer. We must not desire death as we desire grace; we ought so to
desire grace, as to use all ways for the obtaining it; we must not so desire
death, as to take any course for accelerating it.

2. Not impatient but submissive, not repining at Gods delays, but waiting his
leisure, if God please, or when God pleases, is the language of a Christian,
as in others, so in this matter. Indeed Simeon prays, Now let thou thy
Servant depart in peace, Luke 2. 29.
but it was as appears by that addition (according to thy Word) because
having seen the Messiah, he knew the time of his dissolution was come. We must
not limit God to this or that season: And whilst we desire the thing, we must
contentedly wait the time. Sapiens e vita non fugere debet sed exire, Sen. Ep.
24.
says Seneca. A wise man must not fly, but go out of life. He learneth
accipere, to receive death willingly, but he hates arripere, to run upon it
desperately: Nor dare he break the Prison doors, though he be ready (when God
sets them open) to go forth. Animus piis omnibus retinendus est in custodia
corporis, nec injussu ejus a quo ille est nobis datus ex hominum vita
migrandum, says the Orator. Cic.
Our Soul must not be dismissed out of, without his leave who infused it into the
body. In this respect the good man has a desire at once both to live and to
die, according to Divine appointment. If God will have him continue longer on
earth to do him service, he is willing, and if he will take him to himself, he
is willing; resolving still to bow his will to Gods.

3. Lastly, Not Carnal, but Spiritual. Many there are, who wish themselves in
their Graves, merely out of discontent at the condition of their life; either
because they have not what they would, or suffer what they would not. Some
there are who desire to die, that they may be in Paradise, rid of misery, and
enjoy faelicity: But the right desire after death, is upon higher and spiritual
Grounds, not so much to be free from sorrow, as sin: to be in Paradise, as to
be with Christ. Indeed, these words to be with Christ, are both Incentive and
Directive to our desire of death. No stronger Argument why we should desire it;
no higher end for which we should desire it. What can make death welcome to us,
if this of being with Christ will not? Nor should any consideration make it
more welcome to us, then this of being with Christ. And thus you have the
second Question answered; the result whereof is, that provided we do not hasten
our own death, but are content to tarry Gods time, and that we do not only or
chiefly wish it for self ends; we may, nay we ought to desire (if God will)
that we may depart and be with Christ: and this is that whereof our Apostle
has here given the Phillipians and all Christians a Pattern.

But oh my Brethren, how does St. Paul's desire upbraid our backwardness, and
chide our fears? It was St. Cyprians complaint of the Christians in his time,
and it is still true: Obnitimur Cypr. de mortal.
and reluctamur and pervicacium more servorum ad conspectum Domini cum
tristitia and maerore perducimu^, excuntes istinc necessitatis vinculo, non
obsequio voluntatis: We resist and struggle, and like peevish servants, must to
our grief and sorrow, be forced into our Lords Presence, going hence not with a
willing obsequiousness, but out of a compelling necessity. Omnes refugiunt
terminum ad quem curunt, said Seneca: Truly, all men would fly from Sen. Ep.
the Goal of death to which they run. I am afraid the most Christians are
unwilling that should be granted for which they pray, when they say, Thy Cypr.
de mortal.
Kingdom come; in which respect the forementioned Father expostulateth. Quid
oramus and petimus ut adveniat regnum caelorum, si captivitas terre^^ delectat?
Why do we daily pray that the Kingdom of Heaven may come, when as we are so
much pleased with a captivity on earth? The truth is, we are so far from
making death the Object of our desire, that it is the ground of our fear; yea,
we tremble at the very thought of it. Indeed, that they should fear death, who
being called Christians lead wicked lives, is no wonder; and well were it if
many of them did more fear it, then they do. But why? oh why this Pusillamous
spirit in good Christians? Let him be afraid Id. ibid.
to die, who is not born again of water end of the Spirit; who looks upon the
continuation of life, as a respite from torment to come, and his first death to
be a passage to a second? But for Belivers, who are the Children of God,
Members of Christ, and Heirs or Glory to be afraid to depart, how incongruous?

Receive therefore a word of Exhortation, Give not over till you have brought
your hearts to this sweet frame. He has not enough con'd Happiness, that is
loath to go to it, though it be through a dead Sea; nor can he be justly
thought desirous of Heaven, who is unwilling to shake hands with earth. It was
justly said to that lame beggar, who refused the offer of his Prince to take
him into his Coach; Optime mereris qui in luto haereas, Thou well deservest to
stick in the mire. And surely, it is but fit that they should live and lie in
sorrow, who are unwilling that Christ should take them up to himself. What is
the Devils great design, but to keep our souls from Christ, and shall we comply
with him in an unwillingnesse to depart that we may be with him? Our belssed
Jesus willingly came down from Heaven to earth, that he might be with, and die
for us: Shall not we willingly go from earth to Heaven, though it be by death,
that we may be and live with him? Especially considering the great advantage
which hereby accrueth to us. And that leads me to

3. The Equity and justness of the Reason enducing St. Paul to this desire in
those words which is far better. The Emphasis of the Greek phrase is very
observable; it is (...), better, nay (...), far better; nay (...), much
rather: or (as our translation) far better. The Arabic seems to labor in
expressing it by two words of the same signification, which is far more
excellent and transcendent, Arab.
withal annexing the Pronoune (for me) which is not mentioned but to be
supplied in the Greek. To die in respect of all, is not better then to live;
but in respect of them who dying are with Christ. For St. Paul to die, though
it were to be with Chriss, was not better for the Philippians; he intimates in
the next verse that it was needful for them that he should live in the flesh,
but for himself it was better, far, infinitely far better, that he should
depart and be with Christ.

And now I am fallen upon a pleasant subject, the transcendent happiness of
being with Christ. But I cannot long insist upon it, nor if I should, am I able
fully to unfold it. We shall never know the bliss of being with him, till we
come to be with him. Only in a few words let me give you a glimpse or taste of
its surpassing excellency.

To this end I shall make use of that threefold good which is the Object of
men's desire in this world, and makes them so much in love with it, namely
Profit, Honor, and Pleasure; in all which respects it is far better to be with
Christ.

1. It is far better in point of Profit. Christ is said by the Author to the
Hebrews, to be appointed Heir of all things: Being now in Heaven, he is in Heb.
1. 0.
possession of these all things, whereof he is Heir: And when we shall be with
him, we shall be (...), Co-heires with Christ; who (though our Elder Brother)
admits us to have a share in the Romans 8. 17.
Inheritance. Whatsoever we enjoy in this world is but a small pittance in
comparison of that Inheritance. Prove. 8. 18.
Christ in the Person of Wisdom, says of himself, With me are riches, yea
durable riches. With him, they are not for himself only, but all that are with
him: Yea, whereas the riches of this world are uncertain, those are durable;
and therefore as to wealth it is better, far better to be with Christ.

2. It is better in point of Honor. To be with Christ, is to sit together with
him in heavenly places; Ephesians. 2. 6.
that is St. Paul's phrase to the Ephesians. More then so it is, To sit with him
in his Throne; that is Rev. 3. 21.
St. John's phrase. The Saints with Christ have a full view of his Glory. So our
Savior prays; Father I will that those whom thou have given me, be Joh. 17.
24.
where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me. Nor do
they only behold but participate of it. (...), we are glorified together Romans
8. 17. 2 Timothy 2. 1^.
with him; yea, (...), we shall reign with him. They are both St. Paul's
Phrases, which latter fully answers to that of sitting with him in his Throne.
Whereas the Servants of Christ in this world, are for the most part in a low
and mean condition, they shall be no less then Kings when they are with
Christ; having Crowns on their heads, and Septers in their hands, far
excelling all secular Dignities. And therefore as to Honor, it is far better
to be with Christ.

3. Once more, It is better in point of Pleasure. To be with Christ, is to Sup
with him, so St. John; and no Dainties so sweet as those which are prepared for
us in that Supper of Glory. To be with Christ, is to be with him in Paradise;
and no delights comparable Rev. 3. 20.
to those of Paradise. It is to be with the Fountain of life; and no waters so
sweet as those which we drink at the Fountain. It is to be with the Sun of
Righteousness; And if there be a great deal of refreshment in the beams which
this Sun M^^. 4. 2.
sometimes darts upon us whilst we are here, oh what content is there in being
with the Sun it self! The Truth is, none of these carnal pleasures which this
world affords, can give the soul satisfaction; so that as the Dove found no
rest till it returned to the Ark; it finds no content till it come to Christ.
Our greatest joy here, is the hopes of being with him hereafter: to whom those
words of the Psalmist may be truly applied; In thy presence is fullness of Joy,
Psalm. 15. 10.
and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. And therefore as to
Pleasure, it is far better to be with Christ.

Indeed, well may being with Christ be better then all enjoyments on earth,
when it is the best of Heavens Happiness. It is true, we shall in Heaven be
with our godly Friends, with all the holy Patriarchs, goodly Prophets, glorious
Apostles, noble Martyrs, faithful Confessors, glorified Saints, and Blessed
Angels; but all this is nothing to the bliss of being with Christ. It is the
presence of Christ which is the Heaven of Heaven: Without him Heaven would not
be Heaven; and with him, even Hell would be Heaven. Whom have I in Heaven but
thee, says David to Psalm. 73. 25.
God. What were these visible Heavens without the Sun? What were the
Empyreyal Heaven without God and Christ.

By what has been said, it appears that St. Paul's desire of death, was not
an extravagant passion, but a well grounded Affection, nothing being more
rational then that every one should most desire that which is best for him. Oh
let us learn to have the same estimation of Christ's presence, and then we shall
have the same affection to death which St. Paul had! The Queen of Sheba said to
Sol^on, Happy are these thy servants which stand ever before 1 King. 10. 8.
thee. But oh how happy are they that stand before, and are ever with thee, oh
blessed Jesus! It was a devout speech of old Bullinger, Socrates gaudet sibi
n^oriendum Bulling.
esse propterea, quod Homerum, Hesiodum and alios prestantissimos viros se
visurum crederet: quanto Magis ego gaudeo, qui certus sum me visurum esse
Christum servatorem meum, etc. Secrates rejoiced at death, believing he should
see Homer, Hesiod, and other excellent men, how much greater is my joy, who am
sure, besides many holy men, to see my Savior Christ, the eternal Son of God
in the flesh? Cercidas Mat. 17. 4.
(as we read in Caelius Rhodiginus) told his Cael. Rodig. l. 21. c. 44.
Friends on his dying bed, He left this life with delight, in an apprehension
of enjoying after his death the company of Pythagoras the Philosopher, Hecateus
the Historian, Olympus the Musician, and Homer the Poet. Oh with what
cheerfulness should we depart in the assured hope of enjoying not only the
Society of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but Christ himself! When the Holy Apostle
St. Peter was upon the Mount with Christ at his transfiguration, he cries out
(...), it is good for us to be here. How much more reason have we to say of
being with Christ in Heaven, It is good, It is best, infinitely best for us to
be There. And therefore as Moses went up to a Mount to die, so we should gladly
die, that we may go up to that Mount where Christ is.

I end this: There want not many Comparisons to be made in this kind, whereby
death See my Sermon called the Epitaph of a godly man.
may be rendered desirable, but none so cogent as this. We should be willing to
depart, because it is better to be at home then in a strange place: To be in a
Palace, then a Prison; in a Paradise then a Wilderness; at rest, then in
labors; and to be free from sin, then to fall into it. But much more willing,
because it is far better to be with Christ, then abide in the flesh.

3. There is only one part of the Text behind, and that is the Energy of this
desire in the Effect flowing from it, which is expressed in the beginning of
the verse, I am in a straight betwixt two. What those (...) two things were, is
easily found out by what has been already said, as also by that which
praecedeth and follows, namely to live, and to die: To depart and be with
Christ, Ver. 21, 24.
and to remine in the flesh. Between these two, St. Paul was straightned; to
wit, which he should make choice of, and according to the signification of the
Greek word (...), was in such a perplexity that he knew not what to do; like a
Beast that is put into a pound, or a People that are beseiged in a City.

There is in every one of us (nor was it extirpated in St. Paul) a natural
desire of life; in which respect it may seem strange that the Apostle should be
in a straight which of these to choose: but as on the one hand St. Paul had
that which was common with him to all men, a natural desire of life; so on the
other, he had that which was peculiar to him, and such as he was, strong
Christians; a spiritual desire of death; nor was this less fervent then that.
No wonder if he were in a straight.

There was in St. Paul (as there is in every good Minister) a love to his
People the Philippians, who were a part of his care, in respect of whom he very
well knew how advantageous his life would be. I but this Holy Apostle had an
ardent love to Christ, which made him (as all perfect Christians do) long to be
with him; yea, as it were impatient of death, and this put him into a straight.
Much like that which would (to use Zanchy his comparison) Zanch. in l^c.
afflict a tender Mother and affectionate Wife, when she is called upon to go
to her Husband in some remote place, and withal to leave her Children behind
her, when yet perhaps they are not able to help themselves. Or (to use St.
Bernards allusion) which would distress a Beggar, Bern. Sermon. 12. in Cart.
when being hungry, she is invitad to come into a rich man's Table and refresh
her self, but she must leave her unquiet Child at the door.

What the result of the Apostles determination was, appears in the subsequent
Verse, namely, to be content to abide in the flesh. And it was Judicious, yea
Religious, since on the one hand the prejudice to him in living, would be only
a retarding of his bliss in Christ's presence for a time: But on the other hand
the danger to them might be great through his dying, by reason of the many
false Teachers which endeavored to subvert their Faith, and so destroy their
souls, by which likewise would accrue dishonor to Christ. So that Charity to
the Philippians good, and zeal to Christ's glory, did at last weigh down the
scale: but still it was not without much ado, many debating and perplexing
thoughts which did arise from his earnest desires of enjoying him whom his soul
loved.

And now that the same desire which was in this holy Apostle may be imprinted
on our hearts, I shall briefly commend these following Counsels.

1. Let our affections be alienated from this world When the entangled Bird
would fly upwards, the snare pulls it back: thus does worldly love hinder us
from mounting Heavenward in our desires to be with Christ. You have oft-times
beheld the sorrowful parting of dear Friends, what delays and tears, salutes
and looking back, so loath are they to leave each other: thus must it needs be
between the world, and him that is a Friend of the world. Ejus est in Cypr ib.
mundo diu velle remanere quem mundus oblectat, says St. Cyprian: He that is
taken with, cannot but desire to continue in the world; and it is a kind of
death to think of parting with it, which he knows must be when death comes.
And therefore said an Ancient truly, The soul can never willingly be separated
from the body, till it be taken off from these Diad^ch.
worldly pleasures.

2. Let no sin have dominion over us. When the sting is plucked out of the
Serpent, it is not terrible, but amiable. St. Paul has told us, The sting of
death is sin; Oh let us pluck it out by repentance! 1 Cor 15. 56.
It is impossible for him who lies in sin to live with Christ: Well may he
be afraid to dye. Indeed, if a wicked man desire to dye, it is out of ignorance
and incogitancy, because he does not rightly apprehend, or at least seriously
consider what follows after death. Alas, it were far better for an impenitent
sinner to live here, though in meannesse and misery, then to go hence, and be
with Devils in torment to eternity. Oh let it be our care in life, to separate
stnne from our souls, and then the separation by death of our souls from our
bodies, will be a means of the union of our souls with Christ, and consequently
an Object rather of joy then fear.

3. Let our Faith grow up to a full Assurance. It was by Faith that Moses
refused Pharaohs Treasures, and chose affliction with the people of God; and by
Faith it is that we are enabled to contemn life, and desire death. Those things
which are so glorious in the worldlings eyes, are to Faith contemptible, and
those things which are so dismal when looked upon with an eye of sense, become
amiable to the eye of Faith: Even death which is the King of terrors, is to a
Believer a Queen of desires. That he who questioneth whether there be a life
after death, or who doubts whether he shall partake of it, should be afraid to
die, is no wonder. He that knows not what shall become of him when he goes
hence, may well be desirous to stay here. And therefore let us strengthen our
Faith in the Promise of eternal life, and make our calling and election sure.

4. Finally, Let our love to Christ be more and more enflamed. Love is desirous
of Union, and if fervent, will break through all difficulties to the enjoyment
of its Object: Friends delight much in each others society. What loving Wife
would not willingly be with her Husband? I, and go to him, though it be over
the boisterous Seas? Oh when shall I come Psalm. 42. 2.
and appear before God, was David's wish; arising from his zealous love to Gods
presence in his Sanctuary. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, is the voice of the
Church earnestly longing after his approach, Rev. 22. 20.
because she dearly loves him. And from this sweet spring bubled up that
affectionate wish of an Ancient: Utinam essem cum Christo meo, Oh that I were
with my Christ! Mori timeat qui nolit esse cum Christo, as St. Cyprian
excellently: Let him be afraid Cypr. ibid.
to die, who would not be with Christ; to which he cannot be unwilling who has
a sincere affection toward him.

Thus let us remove out of the way those stumbling blocks of reigning
wickedness, and worldly love; let us take to our selves the wings of Faith in,
and love to Christ; so shall we make haste in our desire to be dissolved, that
we may be with him.

HAving given a dispatch to the Text, it now remains that I adjoyne a few
words concerning this our Deceased Sister, whose remains are to be laid up in
the Grave. And truly whither you look upon Her in Her Life or Death, in her
Health or Sickness, you shall find Her a Pattern of many graces. She was the
Daughter and Niece of two Reverend Mr Abraham, and Mr Isaac Calfe.
Ministers of the Gospel, now with God; and as I doubt not but She had a
Religious Education; So She retained the sweetness of that Liquor with which
She was at first seasoned. That truly Reformed Religion of the Church of
England, wherein She had been grounded and established: She constantly
professed, and in some measure practiced. She was an affectionate Wife; a
tender Mother; a prudent Mistress; a Friendly Neighbor; a Virtuous Woman; and
a Devout Christian.

It pleased God of late to visit Her with much Sickness, which She underwent
with much Patience, being often heard to say, Shall I kick against my Maker. In
her last Sickness She was full of Heavenly Expressions by which She gave
Testimony of the graces of God conferred upon Her. She renewed Her Repentance
and godly sorrow for Her sins, for though She blessed God who had kept her
from notorious sins, that She could not but accuse Her self for many
neglects and infirmities, being much troubled yet She had spent her time so
ill, and not done that service for God She ought. Ardent were Her longings
after Gods favor; often saying, A Reconciled God is worth all the World. She
testified Her submission to Gods dispose, by that sweet language, If it were
Gods will, I am content to live, but not else. Her affections were much taken
off from the world, for which reason. She said; She was unwilling Her
Children should be about Her Bed, least they should steal Her Heart from God;
and though She had the World at will, yet She accounted all dung that She
might win Christ. It pleased God to suffer Satan to Winnow Her, but Her Faith
did not fail, and after some conflicts She got the Conquest, triumphing over
him, bidding desiance to him, casting Her self in an humble confidence upon the
merits of Her Redeemer. Finally, when She was desired by her Friends to
forbear much speaking least it should exhaust Her Spirits; Her reply was, Can
I spend my self better then for God? with whom I trust She now is, which since
it is far better for Her I hope it will not be too much trouble to her
Relations. Let not Her dear Husband grieve inordinately, Since She is gone to
Her better Husband Christ. Let not her affectionate Aunt mourn immoderately,
because She is gone to Her Heavenly Father. Let none of Her Friends weep much
for Her, who is with Her best Friend; rather let all of us learn to follow Her
in those Virtues which She practiced that we may attain that glory whereof I
hope She is possessed, whither he bring us who has dearly bought us, Jesus
Christ the Righteous.

Amen.
FINIS.

