A Sad Prognostic OF Approaching JUDGMENT; OR, THE HAPPY MISERY OF GOOD MEN IN
BAD TIMES. Set forth in a Sermon Preached at St Gregory's, June the 13th 1658.

By Nathaniell Hardy, Minister of St Dyonis Back church.

PSALM. 12. 1. Help Lord, for the godly man cease, for the faithful fail from
among the children of men.

Philo Jud. (...). (...).

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Joseph Cranford at the Sign of the Kings Head in
St Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

To the READER.
I Have too often (and not without regret) beheld those monstrous births which
have been forced into the world by the unskilful and injurious Midwifry of
Scriblers, Stationers, and Printers, often the death of their pretended
Parents; Indeed, who would not be troubled to see the innocent Names of eminent
Divines made (as it were) to do penance in the Printers Sheets, for the
incontinency of their wanton Auditors, who between the Pen and the Press, beget
and bring forth a Bastard brood of Sermons, which they must Father?

How greatly that Reverend man of God Dr. John Hewit (since his suffering
death) has upon this account suffered from his seeming Friends, is obvious to
every intelligent eye; witness two Books of Sermons Printed and published under
his Name, and (notwithstanding some of them appear to be translations out of
French Authors) pretended to be his; which was done too, both against a
special Caveat entered in Stationers' Hall by his honorable Lady and
Advertisements in print by two of his worthy Friends, viz. Dr. Wild, and Mr.
Barwick, whose Names have been made use of without their privity or consent; to
stand in place and show of Licensers of those Sermons, which they utterly
disown, and desire by this means publicly to disclaim.

This having been the Lot of so many Preachers of the Gospel, and those men
famous in their Generation, I do not much wonder, and am the less troubled that
it is mine; only I must needs resent (yet not without a readiness to forgive)
the impudence of those, who have, as to were, ravished my Sermon before my
face, dealing so injuriously by me whilst alive. By this I plainly foresee
what is to be expected when I am dead: The consideration whereof, has been,
and is one cause enducing me to appear so often in Print, that what is (I
ingenuously confess) but very imperfect at the best, may not however come forth
mangled hereafter.

I hope the Candid Reader will not think his patience abused, whilst I shall
in a few words inform him how much I have been abused in this kind.

Some years ago came forth a little Manual of several Prayers, whereof that, to
which my Name is affixed, is for the most part made up of such expressions,
which (how good soever they may be in themselves) were not wont to be used by
me, as appears by that Prayer, which (for this Reason) I prefixed before the
first part of my Exposition upon St. John's first Epistle.

I met this last Summer with a Book called The Herball of Divinity, upon the
Title page whereof (the Authors Name being concealed) my Name is affixed to
great Letters, to a part of a sentence with which I began a Sermon preached at
St. Gregory's on Low Sunday last, upon that Text which is pla^ed in the front
of that Discourse, namely the 26th of Isaia. and the 19th verse. For this cause
(very probably) that the unwary Reader might believe it to be mine.

Within these few weeks, I have perused a Discourse in part mine, and but in
part (as will appear by the ensuing Sermon) Printed and published without my
knowledge. Indeed, I heard a flying Rumor, and received a namelesse Letter,
threatening the publication of it, but I was not willing to believe any would be
so audacious, till now I see it. It is true, my Name is not expressed; but it is
said to be a Sermon Preached at that place, and on that day, and upon the Text,
where, when, and on which I preached: And which proclaims the insolence of
these Publishers, though they never had any conference with me, either before
or since my preaching, yet they presume to know my thoughts, in that it is said
to be Intended for the solemnization of Doctor Hewits Funeral: whereas in
truth, I was engaged to preach that turn at St. Gregory's before the Doctors
death; yea, when there was some hopes of his life. And though I deny not but
that sad Providence intervening, occasioned me to pitch my thoughts on that
subject; yet had I intended it for his Funeral, I justly could, and certainly
should, have given a far more ample Character of his worth.

If now the Reader shall desire to know what was my real intent in Preaching
this following Sermon at that time, the close of it will inform him, that it
was no other then what ought to be one end of all Preaching, namely, to bring
the People to Repentance. And observing a general sadness of Compassion upon
their spirits, I was willing so to frame my Discourse, that through Gods Grace,
a sorrow of Compunction might accompany it.

What was then Preached, and has been hitherto withheld from the Press
(partly out of a mean Opinion of the Work it self, and partly out of a just
desire not to exasperate) I am now necessitated to publish for my own
Vindication, and that what was the Preachers aim may be effected upon all who
then heard, or shall now read it, is and shall be his earnest and uncessant
request at the Throne of Grace. Amen.

NATH. HARDY.

Errata. Page 31. line 5. for confidence read conscience.

THE Sad PROGNOSTIC OF Approaching JUDGMENT.
ISAIAH 57th Chapt. Verse the first. The righteous perishes, and no man lays
it to heart, and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the
righteous is taken away from the evil to come.


OUr Prophet Isaiah in his two and twentieth Chapter, tells us of a day wherein
the Lord God of Hosts calls to weeping Isa. 22. 12.
and mourning, and though (since every day is a day of sinning) every day ought
to be a day of mourning; yet there are four special days wherein God expects
this duty from us:

The day of any heinous wickedness committed by our selves or others.

The day of any grievous judgment, either national or personal inflicted.

The day wherein the wicked prosper, and the ungodly triumph. And

The day wherein any of Gods faithful and eminent servants are snatched away and
cut off by death.

It is not many days (Beloved) since there was such a day, and of such a day
it is my Text speaks; the want of a due and serious consideration whereof,
moved our Prophet to take up this bitter lamentation, The righteous perishes
and no man lays it to heart, etc.

This sad and sorrowful complaint looks two ways, to the Godly, and to the
Wicked; bewailing the misery of the one, and bemoaning the iniquity of the
other, that the persons of the godly were destroyed, and the hearts of the
wicked hardened. That arises from grief, this from grief mixed with anger;
both very vehement, as appears by the multiplication of several clauses to
the same sense. God grant that I in handling, and you in hearing, may have the
same holy passions which our Prophet had in uttering this doleful ditty, The
righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart, etc.

Begin we with the complaint concerning the Godly, which we find to be both
amplified and mitigated; Genesis 1.
Amplified in two Clauses, The righteous perishes, The merciful men are taken
away: Mitigated in one, they are taken away from the evil to come.

In the enlarging of the complaint, we shall consider Partic. 1.
the Godly man's disposition and condition. That really very good, this
seemingly very bad; both characterizedin two words: His disposition, in those
two, righteous and merciful; his condition in those two, perishes and taken
away: Of each a word.

1. The first thing we are to take notice of, is the Godly man's disposition.
And that

1. As described in the word righteous, a word which being in the Hebrew in the
singular number, and having an Article prefixed, is by some Expositours
peculiarly applied to Christ, as if this verse were a Prophecy Lap. in loc.
(...)
of his death. Indeed, to him especially and primarily does this title of
righteous belong. There is none righteous, no not one, (says the Psalmist.)
Except one, (says the Father;) meaning Christ, Psalm. 14. 2. Aug. ibid.
who is perfectly and originally righteous: in which respect the Prophet
Malachy calls him the Sun of righteousness. Righteousness in us, like light in
the Mal. 4. 2.
Moon, has its spots and imperfections: We at best, are but Stars of
righteousness, which shine with a borrowed light: Christ, like the Sun, has
in himself a fullness of grace, of which we receive grace for grace. Of this
righteous person it is true, Joh. 1. 16.
that he perished in the opinion, and was taken away by the rage of his
enemies: Nay, which too truly answers the text, he died unlamented by the
generality of the people; So that he might well have uttered upon the Cross
those words of the Church, Is it nothing to you all that pass by? Behold Lam.
1. 12.
and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow which is done unto me,
wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger.

But when I observe the other Character to be in the Plural number, merciful
men, I rather incline to understand this word though in the Singular, as nomen
collectivum, refering not to one, but many, and accordingly those Prophets and
Messengers of the Lord, together with the other of his faithful servants which
were slain in the days of Manasseh, who shed innocent blood until he had
filled Jerusalem with 2 King. 21. 16.
blood from one end to the other, are conceived by Expositors Lap. Sanct. Musc.
in loc.
to be those whom the Prophet here bemoaneth.

If it shall be now enquired in what notion this term righteous was attributed
to them, and may be affirmed of every godly man? I answer, they are righteous
in a threefold sense, Really, Interpretatively, Comparatively.

1. Every godly man is really righteous, inasmuch as

1. His person is justified through our Lord Jesus Christ, who is therefore
called by the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 23. 6.
the Lord our righteousness, and is said by the Prophet Isaiah, to cover us
with the robe of righteousness, Isa. 61. 10. 1 Cor. 1. 30.
and by St Paul, to be made of God unto us righteousness. Thus as all men are
sinners in the first, so are all believers righteous in the second Adam. This
is that righteousness which is purely Evangelicall, and is called the
righteousness of faith, because the righteousness of Christ apprehended by
faith: Hence it comes to pass that as the Father elegantly, Quod lex operum
monendo imperat, lex Ambros.
fidei credendo impetrat; that righteousness which the Law requires, faith
obtains.

2. His nature is renewed after the Image of God, which St. Paul tells us
consists in righteousness and Ephesians. 4. 24.
true holiness: in this respect it is that believers are said to partake of the
(or rather a) divine nature by the Apostle Peter, and to be born of God by the
Apostle John, because after a sort they are righteous 2 Pet. 1. 4. 1 John 5. 1.
as God is righteous: well may the name righteous be given, where the new
divine nature is conferred, which makes us of unholy, holy, of vicious,
virtuous, of unjust, righteous.

3. His life is reformed, and in some measure ordered according to the rule of
righteousness, the Word of God; He that does righteousness says Saint John, is
righteous; every good man does righteousness, 1 John 3. 7.
though not exactly, yet sincerely; his aim and endeavor is to give God and
man their due, tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom, fear to whom
fear, honor to whom honor belongs. Romans 13. 7.


2. Every godly man is righteous interpretatively, inasmuch as being justified
by Christ, and sanctified by the Spirit, God does account, accept of him as
righteous. The same word in the Hebrew signifies upright and perfect; to teach
us that upright persons are (for Christ's sake) accepted of God, as if they were
perfect. Well might the Prophet, well may we call them righteous, whom God
calls so; and we find upon record, Noah, Job, with others, Genesis 6. 8. Job 1. 1.
to be commended by God himself as righteous.

3. Every godly man is righteous comparatively, in respect of the wicked among
whom he lives: thus these of whom our Prophet here speaks, being compared
with those voluptuous Epicures mentioned Isa. 56. ult.
in the end of the former Chapter, might well be styled righteous. Look how the
Saints are said to be worthy; so they may be said to be righteous, Quantum ad
comparationem caeterorum, to wit in Ambros. in Apocal.
comparison of others. Indeed on the one hand the most holy man compared with
God and Christ is unjust and impure, and therefore it is when the Saints have
looked upon God, they abhor themselves. But on the other hand compared with the
wicked, they are justly esteemed righteous: when the actions of the good and
the bad are set together, the prayers, tears, fasts, and alms of the one, by
the oaths, jollities, cursings, and oppressions of the other, they become so
much the more conspicuous; and as although silver be far below gold, yet it is
very precious in comparison of lead and iron; so the servants of God, though
infinitely short of his purity and righteousness, are righteous if compared
with the ungodly and profane.

2. Having discovered to you the first Character of righteous; proceed we to a
view of the second, which is merciful. According to the Hebrew, it (...)
may be read men of mercy and good will, and so construed either passively or
actively.

1. In a passive sense, men of mercy and good will, are those upon whom God
will have mercy, and to whom he bears a singular good will, The Lord is good
unto all, and his tender mercies are over all his works (says the Psalmist)
there being no creature so Psalm. 145. 9.
mean and base, which gives not a Specimen of his goodness, but yet his
delights are with the sons of men, and his love to mankind, is greater then
to any of his creatures: upon which account the Psalmist says a little before,
Lord, what is man, that thou Psalm. 144. 3.
take knowledge of him, or the son of man that thou make account of him?
And as God has a more special love to man then any other creatures, so he has
a more peculiar love to the righteous then any other men; in which respect the
Psalmist says elsewhere, Thou Lord wilt bless the righteous, with favor Psalm.
5. 12.
will thou compass him as with a Shield.

In this construction, there is very good use to be made of the word in this
Scripture.

1. Partly to inform us, that they who perish in this world, may yet be Gods
favorites. Men are apt to think that God should not let the wind blow upon his
darlings, but they are deceived, his love is not a Motherly and cockering, but
a Fatherly and prudent love. Benjamin was not the less regarded by Joseph,
because the Cup was found in his sack: We must not infer from the presence of
outward afflictions, the absence of divine affection. When he who was the
righteous one, of whom the Father said, This is my beloved Son in whom I am
Mat. 3. 17.
well pleased, was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs: Yea, upon the
Cross, breathed forth that doleful language, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? as being left by God, to the will of his enemies. Let us not
doubt, but that righteous persons, though they perish by the malice of men, are
yet in favor with God.

2. Partly to comfort righteous ones in the midst of all their sufferings,
considering that while the world frowns, God smiles. Though the cold wind of
persecution blow, yet the Sunbeams of divine affection shines upon them:
Though they are rejected as dross by men, yet they are accounted by God as his
Jewels. What matters it for men's hatred, so we have Heavens love? This may make
the righteous not only contented but cheerful in suffering the cruelty of
their enemies, that they are the men whom God marks out for the objects of his
mercy.

2. But though this construction be pious and congruous, yet I rather incline
to the active notion of these words; so much the rather, because of that
parallel place in the Prophet Micah, where it is said, The good man is perished
out of the earth. In Mic. 7. 2.
this sense, men of mercy, are such as exercise mercy toward them that are in
misery.

Mercy in its general notion, is alienis miserijs condolere easque proviribus
sublevare; a tender condolence with others miseries, and a ready willingness to
succor them according to our ability. Such is the activity of this grace, that
it runs through the whole man.

In the understanding, it is a serious consideration how we may do good. The
liberal man (says the Prophet) devises liberal things. His thoughts Isa. 32 8.
are taken up with consulting for the relief of the distressed.

In the memory, it is a continual setting the miseries of our Brethren before
us. The merciful man forgets the injuries that are done to himself, and
remembers the miseries that are suffered by others; he still thinks he
hears them groaning, and sees them bleeding.

In the will and affection, it is a sweet sympathy, whereby we do nolle malum,
velle bonum, nill the evil, and will the good of another. The merciful man's
heart aketh for his Brethren, and he resents their sufferings, as if they were
his own.

Nor does mercy only retire it self into the chambers of the soul, but looks
out at the windows, and goes out of doors for the succor of the afflicted.
It opens the eye to see and search out the miserable, which, beholding them;
makes report to the heart, and that being affected with sorrow, causes the
eye to drop down tears; it quickneth the ear to attend and listen to the cries
of the calamitous, like the tender Nurse, which hears the least whimpering of
the Child: It unlooseth the tongue to speak a word in season, pleading with God
and man for them: It puts under the shoulder to bear a part of the burden,
according to that Apostolical counsel, Bear you one another burdens. It
unclaspeth the Gal. 6. 2.
hand to relieve, and knocks off the fetters from the feet: so that they are
ready to go, nay run in behalf of the miserable. In one word, the merciful
man's head is full of thoughts, his heart of sorrows, his eyes of tears, mouth
of Prayers, and hands of gifts.

Thus every truly godly man is not only just, but good, righteous, but
merciful: He puts on viscera, bowels of mercy and tender compassions toward
them that are afflicted; he is ready to do opera, works of mercy, according to
his power. By the one, he draws out his soul to the hungry; by the other, he
reaches forth his hand to the needy. Righteous men know that alms is the poor
man's due, and mercy is a debt they owe to the miserable: no wonder if they are
careful to pay it.

And look how far the misery of the distressed reaches, so far the mercy of
the righteous extends; both to the souls and bodies of others. Namely, they
are men of mercy, especially to the souls of others; instructing the ignorant,
confirming the weak, counselling the doubtful, warning the unruly, persuading
the obstinate, and comforting the grieved. Nor are they unmindfull of the
bodies of others, clothing the naked, feeding the hungry, refreshing the
thirsty, visiting the sick, and entertaining the stranger.

Nor is their mercy only confined to friends, but enlarged to foes: They are
men of good will, even to those that bear them ill will: They do good, where
they have received evil: They requite injuries with courtesies, and want not
compassion for those who are the instruments of their passion.

Whilst then the Jesuited Saints wear the red Coat of blood and cruelty, let
Gods holy ones be clothed in the white of innocence and pity, and whilst
their zeal flames in fury, let our love shine in mercy. Whatever they pretend,
they are no other then Sons of Belial, who delight in blood; who slay the
Fatherless and the widow, and make Persons, Families, may Nations, miserable.
He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord thy God requires
of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?
So we read in the Prophecy of Micah, Sow to your selves in righteousness, and
Mic. 6. 8.
reap in mercy, that is the Prophet Hosea his counsel. Hos. 10. 12.
Christ's blessed ones, are such as hunger after righteousness, and withal are
merciful. And here the Characters of a godly man are righteous and merciful.
Mat. 5. 7.
I have done with the first branch, which is the Saints pious disposition, I
now hasten to

2. His Calamitous condition, which is represented in those words, perishes,
and taken away.

The first word perishes, which is of a large acception, may be capable of an
harsh construction, and such as cannot be predicated of a righteous man; in
which respect Eliphaz said to Job, Remember, I pray thee, Job 4. 7.
who ever perished being innocent, or where were the righteous cut off? That ye
may therefore rightly understand the meaning of the phrase, know, that there is
a threefold perishing.

The first belongs neither to the righteous, nor to to the wicked; the second
is proper only to the wicked; the third is common to the righteous, with the
wicked.

1. Perishing in its most strict notion, is transitus ab esse ad non esse, a
passage from being to not being; an utter extinction, a total annihilation.
And in this sense only the beast perishes, which dying, is resolved into its
first principles, and at last into nothing. Though therefore the wicked man is
said to be like the beast that perishes, yet he does not perish like the
beast; Indeed, it were happy for him if he Psalm. 49. 20.
might: For though some endeavor by their Metaphysical notions, to prove a
miserable being, better then no being, yet they must give us leave to say with
our Savior, It were good for that man he had Mat. 26. 24.
never been born. Nor is it to be doubted, but that the damned heartily wish,
not to be at all, but (alas) it cannot be.

2. There is a perishing, which is peculiar to the wicked, and this is two
fold; either perishing in his name, or perishing in his person.

1. Only wicked men perish in their names, whilst their memorial is cut off
from the earth. Though the righteous die, yet their names live: That malice
which takes away their life, cannot extinguish their memory; but the wicked
perish, so as to be wholly forgotten, or remembered with infamy: so true is that
of the wise man, The memory of the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked
shall Prove. 10. 7.
rot.

2. Only wicked men perish in their persons, that is, soul and body. This is
that perishing, which is opposed by our Savior to eternal life; and is
sometimes Joh. 4. 16.
called the second death. In this sense, to perish, is to be eternally
miserable; to be ever perishing, and yet never perished. And thus, Who ever
perished being righteous? Indeed St Peter says, the righteous are scarcely
saved, but there is a great 1 Pet. 4. 17.
deal of differenre between scarcely, and almost: Though he is scarcely saved,
that is, not without great difficulty, yet he is saved by Gods mercy from this
perishing.

3. But lastly, There is a perishing which is common to the rightcous and the
wicked, and thus the righteous as well as the wicked perish, by the miseries of
life, and at length by death.

1. They perish by the miseries of this life; in which sense, perishing is
opposed to prospering: Good men are exposed to dangers in this world, as well
as the bad; nay, more then the bad. That chosen vessel St Paul, reckons a
multitude of dangers which befell him in this life, where he tells us, that he
was in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils of his own
Contrymen, in perils by the 2 Cor. 11. 26.
Heathen, in perils in the City, in perils in the Wilderness, in perils in
the Sea, in perils among false Brethren; and surely what befell him, is
incident to the most righteous persons.

2. They perish by death. In this sense the Disciples meant it, when they
cried, Master, we perish. Thus Elihu expounds it, when he says, All flesh
shall perish together, and men shall turn again unto dust. And this our Prophet
intends, when he says, Luke 7. 7. 24.
the righteous perishes. Joh, 24. 15.


If you shall ask, why dying, which is only a separation of the soul from the
body, not an annihilation of either, is called a perishing? I answer:

1. It is a perishing, though not (...), yet (...), in reality, yet appearance;
though not secundum rei veritatem, according to the verity of the thing, yet
secundum communem sensum, according to the opinion of the vulgar. When any man
dies, whether good or bad, he seems as one that were perished. And though
(as our blessed Savior tells us) all live to God, yet as Musculus glosseth
upon the Luke 20. 38.
text, In mundi judicio, in the judgment of the Musc. in loc.
world, they perish.

2. It is a perishing, though not absolute, yet respective, absolutely yet
respectively; it is a perishing as to this world. When any man dies, as well
righteous as wicked, he so perishes, as that he shall never again live here:
Upon which account it is said, Man gives up the Ghost, and where is he? Yea,
holy Job says of himself, I go whence I shall not return. Job 14. 10. 10. 21.
This is that which is expres't in that parallel Scripture to this, where the
Prophet says, The good man is perished out of the earth. He is not perished,
so as not to be at all, yet he is perished so, as to be no Mic. 2. 2.
more upon earth. And this is all that the Prophet means, when he says, the
righteous perishes.

2. This will yet further appear, if you look upon the other word, where it is
said, That merciful men are taken away. As the providence of God in nature,
has made those members double, which are most useful, as the eyes, ears,
hands, and feet, that if one fail, the other may supply; so the wisdom of God
in Scripture, has coupled Phrases together, that if the one be obscure, the
other may explain; If the one be harsh, the other may molisie it. It is so
here; whereas that phrase of perishing is somewhat dark and rugged, here is
another word, taking away, which seryeth very much to qualisie and illustrate
it.

The Hebrew word (...) has a double Construction, both which are here made use
of, namely to gather, and to take away.

Calvin reads it Colliguntur, merciful men are gathered. Calv. in loc.
Death seems to be a scattering, and so a perishing, but indeed it is a
gathering, when men die, especially good men, they are gathered. So that in
this sense it is a great allay to the bitterness of the other word perishes.

2. Lapide with others-read it auferuntur, with which our translation agrees,
are taken away, and Lap. in loc.
no doubt it is the most genuine rendering of the word in this place, since this
Hebrew word, where it signifies to gather, is usually joined with the
Preposition signifying to, whereas here in the very next clause it is joined
with a Preposition signifying from, and therefore most fitly translated, taken
away.

And now that which the Prophet intends by this phrase, is to note two things,

1. In general, by taking away, is meant dying, obitus, abitus, death is often
called a going away, a departure, and thus it mollifieth the former word,
perishes, letting us see that it is not an extinction, but only a remotion, an
abolition, but an ablation; when we die, we do not cease to be at all, only we
change our place, and are taken away out of this world.

2. More particularly, by taking away is meant a violent death, a dying, when
in course of nature a man might have lived long; it is one thing for a candle
to go out of it self, and another to be blown out by the wind; it is one thing
for a flower to wither, and another to be blasted; it is one thing for a tree
to fall, and another to be plucked up by the roots: Finally, it is one thing
for a man to go away, and another to be taken away from any place; those are
Emblemes of a natural, these of a violent death In this notion this word adds
something to the former phrase, namely, the manner of the death, The righteous
perishes, and that not in a natural way, but is taken away by the hand of
violence.

The result of what has been said on this first general, amounts to these two
things.

1. That righteous and merciful men perish, and are taken away by death.
Indeed it is said of Enoch, God took him that he should not see death, so was
Eliah; Heb. 11. 4.
and had God so pleased, he might have exempted all righteous men from death,
but then neither his power in raising them to life, would have been so
illustrious, nor their faith and hope in believing and expecting a
Resurrection, so conspicuous, in which latter respect the Father says well,
that had good men been privileged from death, Carni Ambros.
quidem faelicitas adderetur, adimeretur autem fidei fortitudo, though it might
have been some kind of advantage to the frailty of our flesh, yet it would much
have detracted from the strength of out faith: In great wisdom therefore has
God so ordered it, that righteous and merciful men, as well as others, should
walk through the valley of the shadow of death. Joh. 8. 51. 1. 26
Indeed our Saviors assertion is universal, He that keeps my sayings shall
not see death, but he means the second death; and so else where he explaineth
himself, when he says, He that believes in me shall not die for ever. True it
is, Solomon tells us, Prove. 10. 2.
that righteousness delivers from death, but it is from the evil, not from
the being of death, death indeed is an advantage to a good man, yet still die
he must: But this is not all which the Prophet here intends, since this
perishing and taking away by death, being that which is appointed for all,
seems not to be a matter of much lamentation; and therefore that which no
doubt is further aimed at in these expressions, is,

2. That sometimes righteous and merciful men perish, and are taken away by a
violent death. Indeed it is that which is threatened by God as a curse upon
wicked, especially bloodthirsty and deceitful Psalm. 55. 22.
men; it is that which Malefactors are sentenced to by the justice of the
Judge; but yet withal it is that which may and sometimes does befall Gods own
servants; nay which is more strange, and yet is many times true, the righteous
are taken away, whilst the wicked remain. Solomon observed it in his time,
There is a just man that perishes in his righteousness, Eccles. 7. 15.
and there is a wicked man that prolongeth his life in his wickedness; yea
which is yet most sad, but very frequent, the righteous perish by the wicked,
and that for righteousness sake, and the merciful are taken away by cruel
hands, and that for pietyes sake: wicked men never want malice in their hearts,
and sometimes (through divine permission) have power in their hands to take
away the liberties, estates, and lives of the righteous. One of the first good
men that was in the world began this bitter cup, which many both men of God and
other godly men have since pledged. It was the complaint of the Church in the
Old Testament, and St. Paul takes it up as most truly applicable to the Church
of the New, For thy Psalm. 44. ^2.
sake we are killed all the day long, and are accounted Romans 8. 33.
as sheep for the slaughter.

This is that which the wise God suffers to come to to pass for many excellent
ends.

That wicked men by such bloody acts, may fill up the measure of their sins,
and thereby at once hasten and heighten their punishment.

That good men may have occasion of exercising and manifesting many graces
particularly, the length of their patience; the height of their courage; and
the depth of their charity. When a man endures to the end, suffering even
death it self, patience has its perfect work. That Is a Resolution indeed which
makes a man faithful to the death, and enableth him to look upon its pale
visage with confidence. There cannot be greater charity then to forgive my
enemy; especially when he persecuteth me to the death. So that when righteous
men perish violently, their graces flourish gloriously.

That hereby righteous men may be fully conformable to the righteous one, the
Messiah, concerning whom this Prophet foretells that he should be cut off (as
the tree is by the ax) from the land of Isa. 53. 9.
the living. And in respect of which the Apostle charge those Jews, that by
wicked hands they had taken and slain him.

Finally, That by so perishing, the Religion which they profess, may be
honored, and the God whom they serve, glorified. Since though both these are
in some measure effected by doing well, and living uprightly, yet much more by
suffering ill, and dying cheerfully in a righteous cause.

And now what should the consideration hereof teach us, but

1. That certainly there is another world besides this, wherein a difference
shall be put between the righteous and the wicked; between him that fears
God, and him that fears him not. Here the righteous perish as well as the
wicked; nay, the righteous perish, and the wicked prosper, and the merciful
are taken away by the wicked. But shall it be so always? Will not the Judge of
all the world do right? Will there not be a Reward for the righteous? Yes
doubtless. And since in this world all things fall alike to all, and for the
most part it fares better with the wicked then the godly, it necessarily
follows that there is a state after death, wherein the righteous judgment of
God in punishing the wicked, who now prosper, and recompensing the righteous,
who now perish, shall be made manifest.

2. That it is a needful prudence, in righteous and merciful men, to improve
their time and Talents in serving God, and doing good to others whilst they
live. They must perish at last by a natural, they may be taken away soon by a
violent death; and when they perish, all ability and opportunity will be taken
away of doing good works, either of piety or pity, justice or mercy. Oh then,
how great industry and celerity is needful in putting forth themselves to the
utmost for God, their souls, their Brethren whilst they live! that they may do
much in a little time, according to that sage advice of the wise man,
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do Eceles. 9. 10.
it with thy might, for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom, in the grave whether thou go.

3. That sowing in righteousness, and reaping in mercy, they would not be
discouraged from the apprehension of this perishing and taking away. I am
afraid such thoughts as these do sometimes arise in the minds of men: How dies
the wise man even as the fool, the righteous as the wicked? Let me live never
so well, I must perish: Nay, my conscientious walking may occasion my ruin.
How much better is it to spend my days in pleasure, and indulge to my lusts
whilst I live, since I can but die at last? But far be such reasonings from
wise and righteous men, especially when we consider how great a mercy the very
perishing of the righteous, and taking away of the merciful is; which will
appear, if we proceed to the

2. Mitigation of the complaint, as it is expressed in the close of the verse,
The righteous are taken away from the evil to come.

There are (according to the known distinction of Quest.
the Schools) two sorts of evil, the one of sin, and the other of punishment;
and it is true in reference to both.

1. When righteous men die, they are taken away Answ.
from the evil of sin, into which they are prone to fall, so long as they live.
Nusquam tuta est humana fragilitas, says St. Herome, Humane frailty is never
Hier. Ep. ad Eustoch.
safe. In this world we are continually assaulted, and sometimes captivated;
but death puts us out of all danger; we shall be tempted no longer, and sin
no more.

2. But no doubt it is the evil of punishment which here the Prophet intends,
and thus it may admit of a double notion.

1. They are taken away from those ordinary personal evils, to which they, with
the rest of mankind, are subject in this world. The best men whilst they live
here, are exposed to a^hes, pains, sicknesses, losses, crosses; manifold
troubles and miseries: But when they die, all tears are wiped away from their
eyes: Fears Rev. 14. 16.
removed from their hearts: They rest from their labors, so St. John. They
enter into peace; they rest Isa. 57. 2.
in their beds, so our Prophet in the very next verse.

2. But that which is here principally meant, is, that the righteous and
merciful are taken away by death, from some extraordinary and publipue evil of
Judgment, which is to come upon the place where they live. Those words of the
Prophet, Come my people, enter thou into thy chambers, shut thy doors about
thee; hide thy self as Isa. 26. 20.
it were for a little moment, while the indignation be overpast; are by some
expounded of the chambers of the grave, in which God is pleased to hide his
people, before he comes forth of his place to punish the Inhabitants of the
world.

Indeed, this is not always the dispensation of Divine Providence. Sometimes
the righteous are taken away in the common calamity, together with the wicked.
The fruitful and barren trees are blown down at once by the same wind of
Judgment. Perhaps, good men, have by sinful complyances, been involved in the
national guilt, and no wonder if they are also involved in the notional
punishment.

Sometimes the righteous are delivered from the common misery, and yet not
taken away by death. Whilst the whole world is overwhelmed with a deluge of
waters, Noah is preserved alive in the Ark. When Sodom is to be destroyed, Lot
is sent to Zoar: And when Jerusalem is to be overthrown, the godly are
admonished to go to Pella. That Promise in the Psalms, has been sometimes
literally and fully verified in a time of pestilential infection, A thousand
shall fall on thy right Psalm. 91. 4.
hand, and ten thousand on thy left, but it shall not come night thee. God sets
a mark upon the mourners, and the destroying Angel passes by them as he did by
the Israelites houses in Egypt. Ezekiel. 9. 4. ^


And then sometimes the righteous are taken away by death, before the general
desolation come. Thus God dealt with Josiah that good King, before the
captivity of Israel: St. Austin (that godly Father) before the destruction of
Hippo; and Luther that eminent Dr. before the devastation of Germany.

Before I go any further, it will not be amiss to take notice how this truth
unfolds the riddle, and clears the seeming injustice of Divine Proceedings.
We ofttimes see, and seeing, wonder; nay, perhaps repine at it, that good men
are taken out of, whilst wicked men continue in this world. But surely this
can be no just cause of casting any blemish upon Divine Dispensations, when we
consider that

On the one hand the wicked are preserved, but it is for the evil to come. They
escape for a time, that some remarkable Judgment may fall upon them. As the
voice told that wicked wretch, when sleeping under a rotten wall, it awaked
him, and saved him from the ruin. (...), I saved thee from the wall, reserving
thee for the wheel.

On the other hand, the righteoas are indeed taken away, but it is from the
evil to come. So that whilst the wicked man's preservation is a curse, the good
man's perishing is a favor. God spares the one in anger, and takes away the
other in mercy.

Indeed, Righteous men are taken away from the evil to come, upon a double
account.

1. Ne veniat, That the evil which is to come upon the place may not come upon
them: God will not have his righteous ones to be spectators of, nor sufferers
in those ruins, which his justice has decreed to inflict upon the wicked for
their sins. This is rendered as the reason why that immature death befell
Josiah who was slain in the battle that he might not see the evil which was
coming.

2. Ut veniat, That the evil may come and be inflicted on the place: for
(Beloved) you must know that whilst righteous men live, they are very
prevalent with God by their prayers and tears to keep off judgment: Unus homo
plus valet orando, quam mill pugnando, one righteous man can do more by
prayer, then a thousand by arms. Let me alone says God to Moses, Exo. 32. 10.
that my wrath may wax hot against this people, Fatetur se Moysis orationibus
teneri, so the gloss: God seems to confess that his hands were as it were
tied by Moses his Prayer, so that he could not punish that idolatrous people. I
can do nothing (said the Angel to Lot) Genesis 19. 22.
whilst thou art here, Good men stand in the gap to turn away the wrath of God
from the Nation where they live: and therefore when God is resolved, and the
time prefixed is accomplished, that he will destroy a people, he suffers the
wicked to fill up the measure of their sins, by killing his servants: or else
he appoints some other means by which they are removed out of this world from
the evil to come.

The Meditation of this truth affords matter of

1. Comfort to the righteous, (...), said the Greek Poet, Whom God loves, he
dies young. Certain it is, that when God cuts off any righteous ones betimes,
or permits them to be cut off by their bloody enemies, though these do it in
malice, he suffers it in love. For (tell me) is it not a mercy to be put into a
safe harbor, before the stormy tempest arise? To get into the House, before
the thunder and lightning rain, and hail fall? This is Gods design in taking
away his Servants, and therefore they have reason to bid death welcome. Indeed,
the strongest consolation against death, is the consideration of the terminus
ad quem, to what the righteous are taken, even that good, and bliss, and glory
to come. They are taken to an innumerable company of Angels, to the spirits of
the just Hebr. 12. 22, 23.
men made perfect. They are taken to a Palace of Glory; a Paradise of Pleasure;
and a Mansion of Eternity. Finally, they are taken to the Beatifical Vision of
the face of God, and the full fruition of his glorious presence. But withal it
is confortable to reflect on the terminus a quo, from what they are taken, from
the evil, misery, and calamity to come, upon the place where, and people among
whom they lived.

2. Terror to the wicked. Nothing more usual with ungodly men, then to rejoice
when the righteous are taken away from among them. They had rather have their
room then their company; as being desirous to be rid of them. Hence it is, that
they are not only glad of, but many times very active in taking away the
righteous. They do not account themselves safe whilst the godly are among them
But oh what fools are they, and how grossly deceived! Rejoice not against me, O
mine enemy, says the Church. So may every Son of the Church. Little cause
have the wicked to rejoice: Nay, instead of laughing they have more cause to
weep, when the righteous are taken away. For if the righteous be taken away
from, it must needs follow that their taking away, is a sign of evil to come.
So that the death of the godly, is a sad Prognostic of the destruction of the
wicked. What a wall is to a Town, an hedge to a Field, a pillar to an House,
that is a righteous man to the place where he lives. And therefore as men,
when they intend to take the Town, batter the walls; to lay waste the Field,
pluck up the hedge; to pull down the House, take away the pillar: So Almighty
God, when he designeth to pluck up, to overthrow, and to pull down a Kingdom or
a Nation, he first removes his own Servants. Wicked men look upon the good, as
thorns and pricks to offend them, whilst they have more cause to account them
as Chariots and Horsemen to defend them. They think themselves most secure and
happy, but indeed they are then nearest to misery and ruin, when the godly are
taken from them. By taking away the righteous, they intend a courtesy to
themselves, but it is in truth, as a courtesy to the good; so an injury to
themselves: Though yet such is the blindness of their minds, they will not see;
and the hardness of their hearts, that they will not consider it. Which leads
me to the

Other part of the text, the Complaint which the Prophet Genesis 2d.
takes up against the wicked in these words, No man lays it to heart, none
considering.

It might be here taken notice of in general, that the sin which the Prophet
declaimeth against, is not positive but negative. Not the bloody taking away of
righteous ones; not the cruel rejoicing at their fall, but the not laying it to
heart. Indeed, to be an Instrument of, or laugh at the calamity of the godly,
making their tears our wine, their ruin our sport, is abominable. But though
we be not in the seat of the scorners, yet if we be not in the posture of
mourners, it is justly culpable. Thus Dives is charged by our blessed Savior,
not with oppressing Lazarus, by taking any thing from him, but not relieving
him; in giving something to him. There are sins of omission as well as
commission. There are breaches of the negative as well as of the afffirmative
Precepts. We sin as well (though not so much) in not doing the good required,
as in doing the evil prohibited. Not only the wastfull Steward, but the
unprofitable Servant, shall be cast out. The Vine that brings sorth no
grapes, shall be cut down as well as that which brings forth wild grapes.
Those whom Christ will at the last day set at his left hand, are not accused
with any evil or unjust acts they did, but only with neglect of those
charitable acts they ought to have done. Oh, let us make conscience of not
doing, as well as doing.

To let this go, the sin in particular reproved, is, not laying to heart, and
considering the death of the righteous: Concerning which I shall briefly
discover three things; the nature, the extent, and the guilt of it.

1. The Nature of the sin, what it is, will the better appear, if we observe
the Emphasis of the words; the one whereof considering, is an act of the
Judgment, weighing things in the balance of Reason: the other, laying to
heart, refers to the affections, Since then any thing is laid to heart, when we
are deeply affected with it. These do one infer the other; since what we
affect, we take into consideration, and by considering, we come to be affected.
Whilst I was musing, the fire kindled, says David. The consideration of any
object, causes suitable Psalm. 39. 3.
affections; If delightful, joy, if hurtful, sorrow, The fault then here
characterized, is, that though the righteous were taken away before their eyes,
yet they did not lay it to their hearts. And though they could not but take
notice, yet they would not consider it; at leastwise not so seriously and
affectionately as they ought

2. The Extent of this sin, will be the more evident, if we observe the several
Circumstances by which it is aggravated.

1. It was not the death of any, but a righteous man; not of one, but of many
merciful men: and some of those, men of God, and yet it was not laid to heart.

2. These righteous and merciful ones, did not die a natural death, but were
taken away, when yet they might have lived (in course of nature) many years
longer; and done a great deal of service for God in their Generation. And yet
this was not laid to heart by them.

3. This taking away the righteous by death, did portend no less then ruin
and misery to come, and that upon themselves: And yet they were so stupid as
not to consider it.

4. And which enlarges the Complaint, their fault was general: None
considered, none laid to heart. That is very few, as elsewhere; There is none
righteous. Psalm. 14. 1.
By which phrase is intimated, though not a nullity, yet a paucity; not one of
many were sensible of the loss, a spiritual Lethargy had seized upon the most,
and the disease was become Epidemical.

3. The Guilt of this sin, how great it is, will be manifest in a threefold
respect.

1. In regard of God, it argues want of Piety. Almighty God has placed us in
this world, as upon a Theater, that we might take notice of the various
passages of his Providence. So that not to regard his works and consider the
operation of his hands, cannot but Psalm. 26. 4.
highly provoke him. Indeed, they are equally bad, not to regard the sounding
of his word in our ears, and not to observe the appearances of his works in
our eyes. Among his many Providential works, none more observable then the
taking away of the merciful. For certainly, if a sparrow fall not to the
ground, much less does a Saint, without Divine permission. If the hairs of his
head are numbered, surely his head cannot be taken off, without a special
Providence. Indeed, the perishing of a righteous man, is a work at once, both
of Gods mercy and Judgment. Mercy to him, Judgment to the wicked. And not to
consider such a work, so as to lay it to heart, must needs be a great sin
against him.

2. In regard of the righteous, it argues want of pity. To him that is
afflicted (says Job) pity should Job 6. 14.
be showed from a friend; And especially to him that is persecuted to the
death. We may observe among beasts, (even swine) a sympathy; so that when one
is killed, the rest are troubled: And shall there not be among men? Didicimus
cum homines simus alienis calamitatibus moveri, nothing more humane, then to be
moved with compassion toward them that are under sufferings. So that it is not
only impiety, but inhumanity.

3. In regard of the persons themselves, it argues want of wisdom. When the
righteous perish, and merciful men are taken away, it is a loss to them who
remain. They loose the light of their good Example, the benefit of their
Prayers. And should not this be considered? Nay, it is not only a loss, but
(as has been already expressed) it is a doleful presage of ruin: And shall
it not be laid to heart? So that it argues a senseless stupidity not to
consider what is so much our own concernment. By all which it appears an
impious, an inhumane, and unnatural sin which our Prophet bemoaneth, when he
says, The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and merciful
men are taken away, none considering that the righteous are taken away from the
evil to come.

Oh then, be we all exhorted to the contrary duty. Solomon the wise, seems to
promise himself, that when the living are in the house of mourning, they will
lay Eccles. 7. 2.
it to heart. And if we ought to lay to heart the death of any, much more of
righteous men: and especially, when either Josiah the King, or Eliah the
Prophet, or Zacharias the Priest, are taken from us. Though the Sun is not much
observed by us whilst it shines, yet if it be in an Eclipse, who does not
take notice of it? Oh, let not the Eclipse, and much less the setting of any
of Gods eminent servants pass by unregarded! Let us then consider and lay to
heart the death of the righteous,

1. Recordando, by keeping a Register of the death of the Godly in all ages,
but chiefly in the age wherein we live; both as to the quality of the Persons,
and the manner of their death.

2. Lamentando, by bewailing their removal from us: Not in respect of them, to
whom death is a favor, but in regard of our selves, who may in their
departure, sadly foretell approaching misery.

3. Imitando, by following the good example both of their life and death, so
far as we are called to it. By which means, their death will not only be their
gain, but ours.

4. Preparando, by fitting our selves for that evil which their death
foretells, that whilst the simple pass on and are punished, we may like
prudent men fore see the evil, and hide our selves: or rather God may hide
Prove. 22. 3.
us, either by preserving us in it, or by taking us away (as he has other of
his servants) before the vengeance come.

And now (Beloved) least I and you should be guilty of the sin, against which
my text declaimeth, give me leave in a few words to put you in mind of the
death of that righteous and merciful man of God, who has been lately taken
from us. Dr John Hewit who died June 8. and was buried in the Church of St
Gregory's the ^^th day of that month.


Titles, which I hope none will envy him, since if we look no further then his
death, we shall find just occasion of applying them to him. As for the cause of
his death, it concerns not me to meddle with it; I shall leave the censure of
it to that day, when all the Judgment of men shall be scanned over. But I trust
none will be offended, if I take notice of the manner of his death; The
righteous (says Solomon) is as bold as a Prove. 28. 1. 14. 32.
Lion. And again, The righteous has hope in his death. And surely, it was the
confidence of a well led life, that made him so meekly bold, humbly confident
at his death; the righteousness of his way, which filled him with cheerfulness
at his end. Of all acts of mercy, none greater then the remitting injuries, and
forgiving enemies: and how great a measure he had of this grace, those
charitable lines which were read at his Funeral, and the sweet words he
uttered on the Scaffold, abundantly testify. I want both time and tongue, to
give you a Narrative of his life, which was a constellation of many bright
Stars, many excellent Graces which were obvious to all that knew him throughout
the whole course of his conversation. This righteous and merciful man is now
perished from the earth, and taken away from us; but so, as that I have good
reason to believe he is removed to that place of bliss, where he enjoys the
society of Saints and Angels; yea, of God himself.

And now (Beloved) let it not be said, Out of sight out of mind. We can no
longer enjoy him, but (I hope) we shall not forget him; especially not you (my
Brethren) among whom he has spent his pains, and exhausted his strength, to
do your souls Good.

Do you (I beseech you) consider and remember how often you have beheld him in
this holy Mount: how many wholesome Reproofs, Counsels, and Comforts you have
heard from him, and withal reflect upon your own unthankfulness for,
unprofitableness under his and the labors of others of Gods faithful Servants
among you. Finally, do you, and let us all seriously lay to heart what a sad
presage the death of this good man is of ruin and destruction, whilst me
thinks he says to us this day in the words of his Savior, Weep not for me
(I am taken away from the evil to come) but weep for your selves, upon whom
evil is likely to come, unless by your real and speedy repentance you prevent
it. And now I am come to the end of my Sermon, and that which was my end in
Preaching it; to stir up both my self and you to consider the death of this
Righteous man: not so, as to be imbittered against the Instrument by whom it
has been effected, but against our selves for our sins which have procured
it; that this doleful loss may be an occasion of our sorrowful Repentance,
and that Repentance may prevail with God to avert those Judgments which hang
over us, to continue his faithful Laborers among us, and restore his ancient
blessings to us; which God grant for his mercies sake in Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

