WISDOMS CHARACTER AND COUNTERFEIT. Deliniated in two SERMONS. The one on the
Epistle of St. James, chap. 3. 17. The other on the Gospel of St. Matthew: chap.
2. 8. By NATH: HARDY, Minister of Gods Word, and Preacher to the Parish of St.
Dionis Back-Church.

JOB 28. 28. Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from
evil, is understanding. PSALM. 111. 10. The fear of the Lord, is the beginning
of wisdom, a good understanding have all they that do his commandments; his
praise endures for ever. LONDON, Printed by I. G. for John Clark, and are to
be sold at his Shop under St. Peter's Church in Cornhil, 1656.

WISDOMS CHARACTER: OR, THE QUEEN OF GRACES. Set forth in a SERMON Preached
at the Assizes holden at Aylesbury, for the County of Buckingham, on Friday
March 21. Anno Dom. 1655. By NATH: HARDY, Minister of Gods Word, and Preacher
to the Parish of St. Dionis Back-Church.

PROVE. 4. 7. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get Wisdom, and with
all thy getting, get understanding. Bern. Sermon. 1. de Nativit. Christi. Sola
quae ex Deo est sapientia Salutaris, qua secundum B. Iacobi definitionem primum
pudica, deinde pacifica est; nam sapentia carnis voluptuosa est, non pudica,
sapientia mundi tumultuosa est, non pacifica. LONDON, Printed by I. G. for John
Clarke, and are to be sold at his Shop under St. Peter's Church in Cornhil. 1656.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL, GEORGE TASH, Esquire. High Sheriff of the County of
Buckingham.
The blessings of Wisdoms right and left hand.
SIR,
AT your command this small Bark was first launched into the River, and is now
put forth to Sea; I know the season is perilous, and perhaps she may meet with
a contrary wind, but her Anchor of truth will preserve her from sinking in the
sharpest storm. She is no man of War, nor intends offense to any, only a
Merchant Man, designed to advance the spiritual traffic, Her outside is
plain, but her lading is rich. The Commodities which she brings are the
incomparable Jewel of Wisdom, the Amber of Purity, the Gold of Peace, the
Silks of Gentleness and Tractablenesse, the Oil of Mercy, all sorts of
precious Fruits, the Diamonds of Impartiality, Sincerity, and these fetched not
from the uttermost Indies, or any places of the earth, but the uppermost Heaven
of Heavens.

To your Coast (Honored Sir) she first puts in, not doubting the Harbor of
a favorable protection, since, though I was the unskilful Carpenter, you are
the Owner; and besides you have a considerable share in her goods, your
prudent, peaceable, gentle, merciful, just and upright conversation, being
evident to all who know you.

Only give me leave (Worthy Friend) to advise, that you would continue and
increase this Heavenly Trade. True, you have experienced through Divine
Providence, blessing your ingenious industry, the advantage of traffiquing in
those remoter parts of the World; since your return to your Native Country,
the same Providence has found out for, and conferred on you an invaluable
Jewel (a Consort decked with all Wisdoms Ornaments) and by her has blessed
you with those pearls (Children) which no riches can purchase. But in the
midst of all these enjoyments, forget not what Solomon says of Wisdom; The
merchandise of it is better then the merchandise of Prove. 3. 14, 15.
Silver, and the gain thereof then fine Gold; she is more precious then Rubies,
and all the things thou can desire are not to be compared unto her.

I have nothing more, but to declare to the World, how much I am engaged to
your self, and virtuous second self, for Multiplied Courtesies; To Supplicate
the Great God, for the accumulation of his mercies both celestial and
terrestrial, on you and yours, and subscribe my self

Your most affectionate Servant, NATH: HARDY.

JAM. 3. 17. But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without
partiality, and without Hypocrisy.


OF all graces, none of more singular worth, and universal extent then that of
wisdom; If you take the altitude of its dignity, you shall find that what the
Sun is among the Planets, and gold amongst the Mettalls, the mind among the
Faculties, and the sight among the Senses, that is Prudence amongst Virtues.
Hence it is not unfitly called, Cardinalium cardo, the hinge upon which the
other cardinal virtues turn, giving rules to justice, setting bounds to
temperance, putting the reins upon fortitude, yea it is the salt which gives
a seasoning to all our graces. If you measure the amplitude of its utility, you
shall find that it observes all seasons, orders all actions, and regulateth
us in all conditions. Some graces are excellent in their nature, but confined
in their use, Repentance to sin. Patience to affliction, Gratitude to mercy,
Obedience to duty: But this grace is that which subdueth corruption, sustaineth
affliction, improveth mercy, manageth duty; In one word, what the wise man's
proverb says of money, may more fully be applied to wisdom, It answers all
things.

This Encomium might very well serve as a Proaemium, Eccles. 10. 19.
both to justify my choice of, and gain your attention to my discourse upon
this Scripture. But besides both the goodness and fullness of this grace,
there is yet another consideration, which may render it very acceptable at this
time, namely the fitness of it, both to the occasion and persons.

The occasion of this present meeting you all know, is to hold a grand Assizes
for the righting of the injured, punishing of offenders, deciding of
differences, and redressing disorders in the County; nor is there any grace
more needful to the accomplishing of these weighty works, then that of
wisdom.

The persons to whom I am now to speak are of seveverall degrees, offices,
vocations, and no grace more useful for them all in their several spheres,
then this of wisdom.

This was King Solomon's choice for himself, and such a choice as God highly
approved of, Give thy servant an understanding heart. This was his Father
David's advice 1 Kings 3. 19.
to all Kings and Judges of the earth, Be wise and be instructed. Finally, this
was Moses his wish for the people Psalm. 2. 10.
of Israel, Oh that they were wise! And surely then it Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
cannot be unseasonable, or unsuitable for me at this time to set before you
this excellent description of Wisdom, which our Apostle has made to my hand
in the words of my Text, But the wisdom which is from above, is first pure,
then peaceable, etc.

The wise man speaking of Wisdom calls her a tree of Prove. 3. 8.
life, and there is one word (fruits) in the Text, which gives a fit occasion
of using that metaphor; conceive then Wisdom here compared by our Apostle to a
Tree, whose root is not (as other trees) in Earth, but Heaven; in which respect
(to use the Philosophers expression concerning man) she is arbor inversa, a
tree turned upwards, her fruits are both wholesome and toothsome, and those of
several sorts: St. John says of the Tree of life, in the street of the new
Jerusalem, It bare twelve manner of Rev. 22. 2.
fruits; Lo here eight several fruits reckoned up as growing upon this tree
of life, nay our Apostle tells us, this tree is full of good fruits, to wit, of
all kinds. It will not then I hope seem tedious to you to sit for one hour,
under the shadow of this tree, and feed upon the fruits that fall from it,
which being eaten and digested will nourish your souls to eternal life.

Again, me thinks our Apostle presents wisdom to us, under the form of a
beautiful virgin. That he may woo and win us to her espousals, he delineateth
both her Parentage and her Person, the Eminency of the one, and the Excellency
of the other. Her Parentage is sublime, she being of a noble, royal, yea
Divine extraction, for she is the wisdom from above. Her person is altogether
lovely in every part. The candor of purity adorneth her breasts, the honey of
peace drops from her lips, an amiable gentleness smileth in her countenance,
the jewel of tractablenesse hangs at her ears, bracelets of mercy and good
fruits deck her hands, and she walks upon the two even feet of impartiality
and sincerity, who can look upon her, and not be ravished with her? if she were
in oculis, surely she would be in osculis, and the true reason why men are no
more in love with her, is, because they do not know her: be pleased then for
one hour to take a view of her picture, as it is here drawn by our Apostle to
the life, in its several lineaments.

Once more, we have Wisdom represented under a double notion, as a Daughter
and as a Mother; as a Daughter, and that of no less then a King, the King of
glory, yea the King of Kings. So Alphonsus was wont to call her filiam Dei,
Gods Daughter, for she is the wisdom from above; as a Mother, fruitful of
many, and those sweet children, the eldest whereof is purity; or to use more
proper terms, here is wisdom set forth as an effect, and as a cause, as an
effect of the best, the first cause; as a cause of the best and choycest
effects; so that the words naturally part themselves into these two Generals:

Dignitas originis, The dignity of Wisdoms original whence it is, it is the
wisdom from above.

Utilitas effectus, The utility of the effects which it produces, in as much
as it is first pure, then peaceable, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and
good fruits, without partiality, and without Hypocrisy.

Of both which, whilst I shall speak, and you shall hear, let us all implore
this wisdom from above, that I may deliver my message without partiality and
Hypocrisy, you may be gentle auditors, and easy to be entreated, so as we may
henceforth lead more pure and peaceable conversations, being full of mercy and
good fruits, and so I begin with

Dignitas originis, The dignity of Wisdoms original Genesis 1.
whence it is, in those words, The wisdom that is from above. Interpreters do
here observe an Ellipsis of the participle, (...), but it is easily supplied
from the 15. verse of this Chapter, where it is expressed. If you enquire what
this means, that it is from above, S. James himself gives the answer, where
he says in general, Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above,
and comes down from the Father of lights, therefore is Wisdom Chap. 1. 17.
said to be from above, because it is one, yea the brightest of those lights
whereof God is the Father. Among other attributes of God in Scripture, he is
said to be the only wise God, both because he alone is perfectly, exactly,
thoroughly, infinitely wise in himself, in which respect the best of men are
rather (...) then (...), lovers of wisdom then wise, and likewise because as
the Sun is the fountain of light, the Sea of water, so God is the original of
that wisdom which is in the creature.

To clear this briefly, be pleased to know there is a threefold wisdom, namely
Carnal, Humane and Divine, of the flesh, of the head, of the heart, the first
is abominable, the second is laudable, the third is admiraable.

Carnal wisdom is the cunning, which is in the children of this world,
whereby they are wise to do evil; this our Apostle divides in the preceding
verses into earthly, Ver. 15, 16.
which is a moth-eaten policy sensual which is a voluptuous provision; and
divelish, which is a mischievous subtilty, all which he plainly denies to be
from above.

Natural is that s^gacity which more or less is in every rational creature,
to discern of natural things, and manage secular affairs, instances hereof
we find at the third and fourth verses of this chapter, the riders skill in
bridling the Horse, and the Pilots in turning about the Ship. This though it be
naturae bonum, yet it is Dei donum, implanted in nature by a divine hand; and
though it is improved by Education, Idustry, Art, yet it depends principally
upon a Divine influence. It is by Men that many rare crafts are found out, but
as Lactantius truly, God gives men the wisdom by which they find them out,
Lact. de fal^a Relig. l. 1. c. 18.
they are Gods own words. Behold I have created the Smith that blows the
coals in the fire, and that brings Isa. 54. 16.
forth an instrument for his work; and the Prophet Isay speaking of the
Husbandman, says, His God does instruct Chap. 28. 26.
him in discretion, and does teach him; and Daniel says of all humane wisdom.
He gives wisdom to the wise, Dan. 2. 11.
and knowledge to them that know understanding.

Sacred is the wisdom either of Science, or of operation, the former is that
whereby the mind is savingly enlightened, to discern the things of God, and
the mysteries of Salvation, sapientia quasi sapida scientia, a savoury, and
cordial knowledge of supernatural objects, does well deserve the name of
Wisdom: The latter is that whereby a man is enabled to fix a right end of all
his actions, and to make choice of the fit means conducing to that end, this
is called by the Latins Prudentia, and though the other be not excluded, yet
doubtless this is principally intended in this Scripture.

Concerning this wisdom, our Apostle says most justly it is from above, in a
peculiar manner, owing its original to God, and that in two respects.

1. In as much as it is no where taught but in Gods Word, the Schools of
Philosophers give many excellent documents of moral prudence, but Religious
wisdom is only to be learned in the school of the Scriptures. To aim with a
single eye at Gods glory, and our own Salvation as the supreme end, To walk in
those paths of faith, repentance and obedience, self denial, enduring the
Cross, and imitation of Christ, which lead to these ends, are lessons only to
be found in Holy Writ, these are they (says the Apostle Paul) which are able
to make wise unto Salvation; no wonder if he exhort the Colossians, Let the
word of Christ dwell richly in you in all wisdom; Col. 3. 16.
this water of life being to be had in no other Well but that of God; Word.

2. In as much as it is a singular gift of the Sanctifying Colos. 1. 9.
Spirit, the Epithet by which Saint Paul characterizeth this wisdom is,
Spiritual, and that for this reason (says Dauen. in Coloss.
the Learned Davenint) Quia per spiritum Christi generatur, non ingenio nostro
comparatur, because it is not acquired by our Wit, but infused by Gods Spirit.
There is a spirit in man says Elihu) and the inspiration of the Almighty
gives understanding; Man's spirit is able to understand Job 32. 8.
much, but to the understanding of Divine things, there must be an inspiration
of the Almighty. The truth is, whereas humane is attained Deo aspirante, God
assisting, this Divine wisdom is only to be obtained Deo inspirante, God
inspiring with an especial grace.

I shut up this with that Counsel or our Apostle, If any James 1. 5.
of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God it comes down from above, let us lift
up our eyes, and hands, and hearts above for it. This wisdom (as Clemens
Alexandrinus elegantly) (...), is not sold on earth Cl. Alpoed. l. 2. c 3.
but in Heaven, and if you will know the price it is prayer. Solomon in his
Proverbs says in one verse, The Lord Prove. 2. 6, 7.
gives wisdom, and in the next, The Lord lays up sound wisdom; the
Treasury wherein he lays it up is his Word, the Treasurer is his Spirit, and
the key that unlocketh this Treasury is prayer; ask and he will give, let our
requests ascend to him, and his wisdom will descend on us; and as the Rivers
that come from the Sea, return thither, so this wisdom coming from God, leads
us back to him; by working in us those graces of purity, peace, mercy, which
resemble him. And so I am fallen upon the Utility of wisdoms effects, It is
first pure, then peaceable, 2. Genesis
etc.

The number of these effects is by some reduced to seven, and so they oppose
them to the seven deadly sins, compare them to the seven gifts of the Spirit,
resemble them to the seven Pillars which wisdom heweth to build the house
where she vouchsafes to dwell. By others the number is enlarged to eight, and
so they observe a fit correspondency in them to the eight beatitudes, four of
which, (to wit) pu^ity, peace, meekness, mercy, are here expressly mentioned,
and the rest may be easily paralleled, as if all the qualifications fitting for
blessedness, were so many maids of honor attending on this Queen of Wisdom.

If you desire a Logical disposing of these effects, you may consider wisdom
in reference to God and men, in regard of God she is pure, in regard of all men
she is peaceable, distressed men, merciful, in her carriage toward enemies,
gentle, love of friends without hypocrisy, toward good men, full of good
fruits, and in her censures of evil men, without partiality.

But I shall in handling them follow the order in the text. And as Printers
first set the several letters, and then clap on the sheets, or as Gardiners
first gather the flowers apart, and then bind them together, so shall I
distinctly unfold, and then jointly apply them with all possible brevity and
perspicuity.

1. That which first occurreth to be handled is wisdoms purity, for so is the
order of the words, the wisdom from above is first pure.

Indeed when we observe what precedeth, we may well infer that which follows,
wisdom being from above, must needs be pure; such as is the cause, such is the
effect; It is impossible the least darkness should proceed from the Father of
lights, and as no unclean thing can ascend thither, so neither can it descend
thence. It is observable in nature, that all things as they are higher, so they
are purer, the water then the earth, the air then the water, the fire then the
air, the stars then the fire; how pure then must wisdom needs be which is
from above the Stars, even from the highest Heavens!

The Adverb (...), first, here prefixed, would not be passed by, as intending
not only a priority of order but honor; indeed purity is the chiefest lesson
in wisdoms school, the richest jewel in her Cabinet, and the sweetest flower
in her Garden; if you observe, you will find it both the a, and the o, the
first and the last of wisdoms lineaments; purity is opposed either to mixture,
so we say pure wine which is not sophisticated, or to filthiness, so we say
pure water which is not mudded: in the former sense it is that which ends, in
the latter it is that which begins the description; because free from mixture,
she is without hypocrisy, because free from filthiness, she is said to be
pure. And truly all the intermediall properties are such, as would be no praise
of wisdom, if purity did not accompany them; without purity, peaceablenesse is
pusillanimity, gentleness stupidity, tractablenesse simplicity, mercifulness
foolish pity, yea our best fruits but Sodom Apples. In a word, purity is
wisdoms best friend, and choycest companion.

The Greek word which we render pure, properly signifies chaste, and
accordingly some refer it to that particular grace; indeed on the one hand, as
uncleanness is folly, and therefore often called by that name, and the Judge.
20. 6.
young man whom the harlot tempts to her wanton embraces; Prove 7. 7.
is said to be void of understanding; Yea Saint Chrysostom compares him to
the mad daemoniack in Chrysest. hom. 29. ^dpop.
the Gospel, who dwelt among the Tombs: so on the other hand, chastity is a
blessed effect of wisdom, and therefore it is the wise man's advice, My Son,
say unto wisdom, Thou art my sister, and call understanding thy kinswoman,
Camana, quafi costae mentes. Prove. 7. 45.
that they may keep thee from the strange woman, from the stranger which
flattereth with her words.

But we must not confine our Apostles meaning; though if you please, with
Brockman, we may make use of the emphasis of the word, and conceive wisdom as
a chaste Brockm. in loc.
virgin, espoused to Christ the King of glory, to whom having plighted her
faith, she proves faithful, renouncing the pleasures of the world, contemning
the dalliances of Satan, defying the lusts of the flesh, that she may approve
her fidelity to her Husband Christ.

That wisdoms purity may the more fully be characterized, observe briefly
these particulars:

1. There is a purity of doctrine, and a purity of practice, the one from
error, the other from sin: Wisdom is both orthodox and orthoprax, maintaining
the one, attaining the other; that which Christ has entrusted with her, his
truth, she keeps pure from Heresy; that which she has dedicated to Christ,
her Soul, she keeps pure from iniquity. Some are Zealous against errors, and
yet slaves to their lusts, other are sober in regard of sensual delights, and
yet intoxicated with erroneous opinions, neither of these are wisdoms
children, who accounts them equally bad, a vain mind and vile affections, and
therefore according to Saint Paul's counsel, she holds the mystery of faith in
a pure conscience. 1 Timothy 3. 9.


2. There is a purity of heart, and a purity of life, both these our Apostle
enjoyneth in the 8. verse of the next chapter, Cleanse your hands you sinners,
and purify your Chap. 4. 8.
hearts you double-minded; and Saint Paul, when he exhorts to cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit: nor does wisdom neglect
either; some pretend to have good hearts, and yet lead bad lives; but what a
folly is it to think the sap in the root can be sweet, when the fruits that
grow from it are bitter? others refrain from impure actions, whilst they
retain sinful affections: but what a madness is it for men to content
themselves with washing the outside of the cup or platter, whilst the inside is
full of filth, nay poison? true wisdom takes care both of the inward
disposition, and the outward conversation. So much is intimated according to
some Expositors by Christ's geminated phrase concerning his Spouse, Behold thou
art fair, my love, behold thou art Cane. 1. 15. Bed. cum. (...).
fair.

3. There is a purity of contrition which looks backward, washing the Soul by
godly sorrow for sin past, and a purity of conversion which looks forward,
cleansing the Soul by a real forsaking of sin for time to come, and wisdom
joyneth these two together. Some resolve to turn from sin, and yet have never
truly mourned for it, and what is this but mere folly, to think of building a
fabric of Reformation, without laying the low foundation of humiliation?
others mourn for their sins, but still return to them; Unwise men, who begin
to build and do not finish it. That is wisdom indeed, which both mourns
for, and turns from all iniquity.

When the sinner with the prodigal comes to himself, begins to be wise,
reflects on his past life, and weepeth bitterly, this is (...), wisdoms after
wit, and having bathed himself in his tears, he walks circumspectly that he
be no more defiled, and this is (...), wisdoms fore-wit. Wisdom opens the
eyes to see the vileness of sin, and seeing the flies from it, as from a
snare that would entangle her, mudde that would defile her, poison that would
destroy her, she makes a covenant with her eyes, sets a watch before the
door of her lips, takes heed to her feet, and keeps her heart with all
diligence, that it may be a place for God, an habitation for Christ, a Temple
for the Holy Ghost to dwell in. In one word, knowing how foolish it is to stop
many leaks in a vessel, shut many gates in a City, and yet leave any one open,
that a short dagger may prove as fatal as a long sword, a small pistol as
destructive as a great Canon; Finally, how expedient it is for him that will
avoid falling into the pit, not to come near the brink, she is careful to
avoid not one, or many, but all sins, as well small as heinous secret as
scandalous crimes, yea not only to abstain from sin, but the occasions that
lead to it, and as the Poet aptly, -- Plurima faelix Iuven.

Paulatim vitia atque errcres exuit omnes
Prima docens rectum sapientia --
By little and little she casts off all those filthy rags of sin and
wickedness. Indeed thus to do, is by the Sons of Beliall accounted folly,
Puritas virtutis fatuitas Greg* M*
creditur, and omne quod Innocens, stultum reputatur; Innocence with them is
reputed foolish simplicity, repentance a peevish melancholy, and
conscientiousnesse a nice scupulofity; but in the end it will be found that
(...), An unblameable life is the best wisdom, according Greg. N^^. Orat. 15.
to this of our Apostle, The wisdom that is from above is first pure.

2. Having thus practiced purity, wisdoms next study is peace, for so it
follows (...), then peaceable, and here both the nature. and the order of
this property would be considered:

1. Wisdom is peaceable. There is pax Numin is, a peace with God reconciled in
Christ. and this wisdom prizeth above all; there is pax pectoris, a peace of
conscience in the sense of that reconciliation of mind in the harmony of the
passions with reason, and this is wisdoms continual f^ast; Finally, there is
pax temporis, a peace with men, and this is wisdoms endeavor, and of this no
doubt here our Apostle speaks.

It was our blessed Saviors advice to his Disciples, Have Salt in your selves,
and peace one with another. Salt Mark. 9 50*
is an emblem of discretion, which leads to peace, for as Salt prevents
putrefaction, so does wisdom, contention. If Salt be thrown into the water, it
kindly melts; if into fire, it crackles till it vanish, so is wisdom
pleased, when in the water among peaceable, but grieved when in the fire among
contenticus spirits. Indeed knowledge too often is contentious, as being
accompanied with pride, quaeinflat, which puffs up, but wisdom is
pacificous, as being attended with charity, quae aedificat, which edifieth. It
is observed of Solomon, that he was both the wisest, and the most peaceable
King, no greater friend to peace than wisdom. The place whence wisdom comes;
Jerusalem which is above, is the vision of peace; the God from whom she is
sent, is the God of peace; Christ the wisdom of the Father, is the Prince of
peace; the Spirit who is the donor of wisdom, is the Spirit of peace; the Word
wherein she is taught, is the Gospel of peace, no wonder if she be a Mother and
nurse to peace.

Peace is music to the ear, honey to the taste, beauty to the eye, sweetness
to the sent, smoothness to the touch, and joy to the heart of a Son of
wisdom; where peace is, it is her care to preserve it, and where it is
wanting, to obtain it; if Peace be hid. she secketh to find it, if it come,
she embraces i^, and if i^ fly from her, she follows it. Her Motion (...)
that of David, I am for peace, in the Church, in the State, in the
Neighborhood, in the Family; nor has it only her tongue, but her hand, using
all means to accomplish and maintain it.

She is studious of Ecclesiastical peace, to that end she knows how to
distinguish between substantialls and ceremonialls; nor dares she rent Christ's
seamelesse coat because the ^ringe is not every way complete. Between
fundamentalls and circumstantialls, matters Fidei Cathol^cae, and scientiae
theologicae, necessary to be believed, and problematically disputed, allowing a
latitude of opinion in some things, to those who hold the foundation; in a
word, she abhors, as to injure the truth of Christ by error, so to disturb
the peace of the Church by schism.

She is solicitous for civil peace, to that end, she resolves to keep the
rank, in which God has placed her, knowing that e sede itio, will prove
seditio, where there is no order, there can be no peace; and if at any time she
be enforced like those Angels, to appear in a military habit, her song is, pax
in terra, peace on earth, and whilst the Sword is in her hand, the Motto upon
her Sword is, sic quaero pacem, by this means I seek for peace.

She is industrious for private peace with, and among her neighbors, yea, as
much as in her lies with all men, and to that end she will not injuriam
infer, offer any the least wrong to others; Though she be like the Serpent
for ingenious prudence, yet she is also, according to our Saviors counsel,
like the Dove for harmless innocence, nay she will injuriam far, suffer much
wrong from others, and put up many affronts, and when she is compelled to
recover a just title, or repair an intolerable loss by Law, it is with a
mind willing to be reconciled; yea, she is so great a lover, that she is a
peace maker among the litigious, and when she sees variance, steppeth in to
make up the breach, though oft-times (to use Gregory Nazianzens phrase) (...),
she incur the displeasure of both parties. Greg. Naz. Orat. 17.


Finally, she is desirous of domestic peace, as she would have her house to be
a Temple for piety, an Academy for knowledge, so an Army for order, and a Quire
for harmony; to this end, she winketh at what may provoke her, avoideth what
may offend others, and teaches every relation to keep its own station.

By all these just and good means, she seeks peace, and if at any time her
endeavors want success among men, she then resolves, Pacem spirare and
suspirare coram domino, to knock at Heaven gates, earnestly beseeching God to
heal breaches, compose differences, settle distractions, saying with the
Church, Give peace in our time oh Lord

2. Wisdom is first pure, then peaceable. You may take the connection two ways;

1. Wisdom is peaceable, because she is pure, the Apostle puts the question,
and answers it in the first verse of the next chapter: From whence come
wars and fighting's among you, come they not hence, even from your lusts? and
that of the Orator fitly correspondeth with it, Ex cupiditatibus, Cic. de
finib. l. 1.
odia, dissidia, discerdiae, seditiones, bella, nascuntur, the bitter fruits of
hatred, variance, discord, sedition, war spring out of the root of evil
desires; indeed Relegion and Reformation are oft-times the pretended, but
ambition, covetousness and revenge, are for the most part, the real causes of
War and commotion. True, there is a purity which is the Mother of Pride, and
so of contention, I mean pharisaicall, self conceited purity, but that is the
fools p^rity; he that is pure in his own eyes, is wise too, but it is only in
his own eyes, and Prove. 16. 12.
so in the wise man's verdict worse then a fool: I shall ever suspect that
purity which inclines to Separation in the Church, and Sedition in the State.
Wisdoms purity inclines to humility, ^mity, unity and concord; yea, therefore
she desires peace, that she may preserve purity, as well knowing, that War
was never yet a friend to Virtue, nor Contention to Religion; the truth is, as
Lusts cause Wars, so Wars cherish Lusts. What purity can be expected from
them whose hands are defiled with blood? Inter arma silent leges, neither Gods
Law, nor Man's can easily be heard, when the noise of Trumpets and drums
prevails; no wonder if wisdom being pure, is likewise peaceable.

2. Wisdom is peaceable, so far as consists with purity, she is a friend to
peace, but only usque ad Aras according Romans 1^. 18.
to Saint Paul's caution, If it be possible, that is, consistent with Gods
glory, and so consequently with the purity of Religion and Conversation; indeed
it is a foolish bargain to venture purity, that we may bring home peace, to
break our peace with God, that we may keep or make peace with Men, no wonder if
wisdom abhor it: She well knows, that that peace which is founded on impure
principles and practices, is built on a sandy foundation, and cannot long
stand, is only the skinning of the sore, not the healing it, which by reason
of its corruption must needs fester and rankle. Hence i^ is that (though she
admit of many inconveniences, yet) she dares not of any sin, no not to make
peace, her maxims are those of Gregory Greg. Naz. Orat. cap. 21.
Nazianzen, (...), A commendable War is better then an agreement which
seperateth from God; and again, (...), A Religious quarrel is better then a
Vicious peace.

In one word, she earnestly desires and endeavors both purity and peace,
purity as wine to make glad the heart, and peace as oil to make the face to
shine; the gold of peace to beautify the Altar of purity, the Altar of purity
to sanctify the gold of peace: But if it so fall out, that these two must be
severed, she prefers the Altar before the gold, she chooses rather to live in
the water of trouble, then in the mud of sin, in one word, she leaves peace
to embrace purity, because she is first pure, and then peaceable; and thus I
have discussed the two principal effects of wisdom, I see the time, and I
know the occasion call for a dispatch, and therefore I shall only give you an
account of what might be said of the rest, and so shut up in a brief but
suitable application.

3. The next effect of wisdom is gentleness, a virtue which is temper in the
mind, tenderness in the heart, calmness in the affections, smoothness in
the language, and sweetness in the behavior: It is opposed to that, (...),
which examineth all things by the rule of extreme right, and is far distant
from that austerity which will bear with nothing. It teaches the Judge an
aequitable moderation of the letter of severe Laws, the creditour a
forbearance of due debts, where there is not ability to pay; as that King did
by his servant in the Gospel, Mat. 18. 27.
the Plaintiff not to prosecute his suit to the utmost, and exact the rigor of
what Law may afford. Finally, it inciteth to a candid interpretation of dubious
words and actions, it persuades to a meek toleration of humane frailties and
infirmities, and restrains from an overhasty provocation by injuries.

This grace of gentleness is the Sister of Modesty, Mother of Patience, and
Daughter of Wisdom. Moses as he excelled in wisdom, so he was the meekest man
Numb. 12. 3.
upon the earth, what the Poet says of the ingenious Arts, -- Ingenuas
didicisse fideliter arts,
Emollit mores nec sinit esse ^eros; Ovid.

may more truly be affirmed of this divine wisdom, she turns Lions into
Lambs, Leopards into Kids, and Hawks into Doves; there is no Vinegar but Oil
mingled with her Sallets, no Crabs but Sweetings grow in her Garden, no
blustering winds but a gentle air breathes in her climate. There is much
spoken of a fools anger in the Proverbs, yea it is called by the name of folly:
every Prove. 27. 3. 17. 12.
man is so far a fool, as his anger domineers, and a fool is never more foolish
then in his anger, but Wisdom gives a check to passion, allaying and
moderating its fierceness with this gentle grace, which whilst the world
counts an effeminate softness, a tame sheepishnesse, our Apostle calls the
meekness of wisdom.

If you shall ask the reason of wisdoms gentleness, the James 3. 17.
foregoing word gives an answer, She is therefore gentle, because peaceable,
she considers, that wrath engendereth strife, and therefore with soft answers
she pacifieth wrath, Prove. 15. 1.
that hard and hard cannot make a wall, and therefore among hard stones, she
becomes soft mortar, and to use Saint Gregory's phrase, concerning Athanasius,
she is (...), An Adamant to them that smite her, and a Loadstone to them that
dissent from her: She is so much in love with peace, that (as Greg. Naz. Ora^.
21. Genesis 13. 3.
Abraham did by Lot) she is oft-times willing to recede from her right, and so
(according to the Etimologie of the word (...) from (...) and (...) cedo)
gently yields when she might rigidly require, that she might preserve amity.

But still this gentleness is to be constrned salva puritate, with respect to
purity, and therefore though wisdom be not furious, yet she is zealous. In
matters of secular concernment she is a yielding willow, but of religious
importance a stiff Oak. Moses, a pattern of meekness, is yet incensed
against the Israelites Idolatry, and will not condescend against Gods
commandment to Pharaoh, so far as to leave an hoof behind. Caesar's
Soldiers were mild in their own quarrels, but resolute in their Generals
engagements, and the wise Christian is bold as a Lion in those things which
respect Gods glory, though meek as a Lamb in his own concernments: So that to
end this in one word. The wisdom from above, that she may preserve peace, and
so far, as is consistent with purity is gentle, not easily provoked, nay which
next follows,

4. Easy to be entreated. It is but one word in the Greek, yet capable of a
double construction, to wit, both active and passive.

1. Wisdom is, (...), in an active sense, in as much as her way of teaching is
not compulsive, but persuasive. Non vi and contentione sed suavitate, and
ratione, and quasi Lor. i^ (...).
blanditiis utitur; She had rather lead then draw, allure then enforce. Romish
policy teaches her Scholars to conclude their Syllogismes in Barbara and
Ferio, but Divine wisdom instructs her children in that of the Poet, Cuncta
prius tentanda -- Ovid.

To use all fair means of persuasion: She well knows that most men are like
the herb Basil, which if gently touched sends forth a pleasant smell, but if
roughly crushed, breeds Scorpions. That ingenious natures are sooner drawn
with cords of Love, then haled with chains of Iron, and many whom reason might
soften, rigor hardens, and therefore (according to S. Gregory's advice) she
does blandimentis non asperitatibus studere, study soft and smooth
blandishments. Greg. M.


2. Our Translators, and most suitably, render the word passively, easy to be
entreated, and thus:

1. If any just or charitable request be presented to wisdom, she is easily
entreated to hear it, and according to her power to grant it; She has not, as
Aristippus said of Dyonisius, Aures in pedibus, Her ears in her feet: She
says not as Philip to the woman, I am not at leisure to hear complaints, but
like Vespasian, who was therefore called deliciae humani generis, she is facile
in accepting requests, and bestowing favors, and no wonder she is so forward
to hear others requests, when she finds her gracious Father so ready to hear
her prayers.

2. If any information be presented to her concerning any truths, whereof she
was ignorant, or controversy about which she was mistaken, she is easily
entreated to receive it. Indeed it is the simple who believes every word,
being led aside with smooth speeches: But a wise man will Prove. 14. 15.
hear (to wit, sound reason) and so increase learning. True wisdom is willing
to learn any, though unwelcome truth, and unlearn any, though darling error,
nor does she think it a d shonour to strike sail to convincing reason when it
is laid before her. That of the wise man, with the lowly is wisdom, may well
be inverted, with the wise Prove. 11. 2.
is lowliness, and the lowly mind will not scorn to light her Candle at
another Torch, and so (as Hugo well) makes Hogo Victor. l. 3. Didose.
that common to her, which before was proper to another. Indeed (according to
Saint Jeromes expression) he is inerudite sapiens, ignorantly wise, or
(according to Horace his phrase which he there quoteth) prudens prave, wickedly
prudent, who will not learn what yet he does Hier! Apol. adv. Ruff.
not know: Divine wisdom is not ashamed to confess her ignorance, acknowledge
her mistake, and when the dictates of right reason are set before her, she is
ready to yield up her Judgment to them.

3. If any good counsel be offered her for the managing of her affairs, she
is easily entreated to follow it, as knowing that Aliquando bonus dormitat
Homerus, and according to our English proverb, Two eyes can see more then one.
This made Jethro's counsel so acceptable to Moses, and taught David not to
despise the advice of Abigail. Ah dictum sapienti sat est, said he in the
Comedian, which Terent.
our proverb well englisheth, A word is enough to the wise, to divert him from
any thing that is evil, or direct him in what is good; yea as venerable Bede
observes, Mos est sapientum, ut dictis majorum auscultent, aliquando minorum,
A prudent man regards the admonition, not only of Superiors, but sometimes
even of Inferiors. And no wonder if wisdom be so tractable, since she is Job
11. 12.
gentle. Man naturally is compared by Zophar to an Ass, a wild ass, nay a
wild Asses colt, as being fierce and so indocible; but when he is spiritually
wise, his heart becomes an heart of flesh, and being mollified by grace he is
easy to be persuaded, the fool is like the stone, of a rough substance,
whereby it is hard to engrave upon, but the wise man is like the soft wax,
easily receiving the impression of the seal.

But withal it is to be remembered that wisdom is first pure, and therefore is
easy to be entreated only to what is good, for which reason the Vulgar here
adds, bonis consentiens, says Justinian. Indeed the fool is (...), easily
(...).
seduced to what is evil, so was the young man by the whor^sh woman, but
hardly drawn to what is good, so that though you bray him in a mortar (as
Solomon's phrase is) yet will not his foolishness depart from him, whereas the
Prove. 27. 12.
truly wise man is deaf to all satanicall suggestions, fleshly solicitations,
and wicked insinuations, but whatsoever things are true, honest, just, or
charitable, he readily hearkens to, and freely complyes with.

That which next follows in the order of wisdoms effects, is mercifulness.

Mercy in its proper notion is a compass onate sense of our Brothers evils,
and this by the Stoics is counted a piece of folly, both because it argues a
man subject to passion; which is by them accounted aliene from a wise man, and
likewise because it renders a man doubly miserable, first with his own, and
then with others misfortunes; but Divine wisdom, as she permits the use of
passion, so she prescribes the exercise of compassion, nor does she account it
an addition to her own burden, if by her pity she may ease another. She well
knows, how infinitely she is beholding to God for his mercy, and therefore is
no niggard of hers; but as she desires to find from God, so she is ready to
show to others mercy and compassion.

And as mercy is the quality, so fullness is the quantity, whilst though it be
chiefly seated in the will, which sympathizeth by willing another good, and
nilling his evil, yet it has an influence upon the mind and memory, by
continual presenting his doleful estate, and contriving the best ways of his
succor: nor does it confine it self to the chamber of the heart, but looks
out at the windows, the eyes by seeing the necessities, the ears by hearing
the plaints; yea goes out at the door by speaking, and acting (according to
its ability) for its miserable neighbor, so that wisdom is mercy throughout
in every faculty of the Soul, and member of the body, and having filled the
inward man, it runs over in the outward.

More particularly, Expositors conceive that the mercy here intended, respects
rather them that do, then them that suffer evil, and accordingly the act of
this mercy is, not donare, but condonare, to give to the indigent, but pardon
the delinquent. Hence it is, that if wisdom dwell in an equal, she inclines
to mutual forgiveness of injuries, Erga non tam egenos quam errantes. Brockm.
in loc.
and if in a superior, she persuades to a gracious remitting of offenses, and
this not once but often, a few, but many, as being full of mercy. Tacitus says
of Agricola, Non paena semper, saepe penitentia contentus fuit, he did not
always exact the punishment, but sometimes accepted an humble acknowledgment.
The like is every wise Christians temper, who as he abhor^eth revenge, so he
delights not in the rigor of justice, but joyneth the rain of clemency with
the lightning of severity.

But yet this mercy is still with respect to purity. Hence it is that wisdom
distinguishes between offenses, some are light stains, and others foul spots,
and though she conniveth at those, yet she punishes these between offenders,
some are bruised reeds, penitents, others like heart of Oak obdurate, and
though she spare those, she will not these. She well knows, that insceleratos
lenitas, is in bonos crudelitas, lenity to he bad, is cruelty to the good, and
to let notorious Malefactors go free, is that foolish pity which spoileth a
City, and therefore if a just power be put into her hand, she will not, she
dares not let the Sword of justice rust in her scabbard, but draws it forth
to the punishment of those who persist in notorious crimes, though in respect
of them who offending in lesser matters, especially of ignorance and weakness,
express remorse and sorrow, she is very compassionate, and if she use her
Sword, it is the flat, not the edge, for correction, not destruction; and thus
according to our Apostles character, she is first pure, then full of mercy.

6. Add to this that which is coupled with it, wisdom is full of good fruits.
Ver. 18.


Fruit is a metaphorical expression, by and it, though sometimes the reward is
signified, according to which notion in the next verse, we read of the fruit of
righteousness, yet usually (and so here) it signifies the work. Thus
thoughts are as the blossoms, words the leaves, and works the fruits: true
wisdom is never idle, nor is she merely speculative, but operative, as she
has an eye to behold, so she has an hand to do, and like the Angels on
Jacobs ladder, she is always either ascending by contemplation, or descending
by action. Indeed sometimes she imposes silence on the tongue, but she never
permits idleness to the hand; she remembers that he who came to the
Figtree, will one day come to Luke 13. 10.
her, seeking fruit, and she trembles to hear that sharp check, Why stand you
all the day idle in the market Math. 10. 6.
place?

Nor yet will every kind of fruit serve her turn, she accounts it as good to
be idle, as to be ill employed, nay better to do nothing, then that which is
worse then nothing, and therefore she looks that her fruits be good,
beautiful to the eye, pleasant to the palate, and nourishing to the stomach,
such as may honor God, and edify man, and so be both acceptable and
profitable.

Nor is it a berry here and there, a few good works will content her; but she
brings forth good works, as the vine does grapes in clusters, she is full in
every branch, of all sort of fruit, which she yields all the year long. She
abounds in works of piety, of equity, of sobriety, and of charity, to which
last our Apostle more especially refers. Divine wisdom has not only pity but
bounty, viscera but opera, bowels, but works of mercy, and as quoad affectum,
in regard of affection, she is full of mercy, so quoad effectum, in respect of
action, she is full of good fruits, ready to perform all offices of love and
mercy to her neighbor. Indeed when she observes how the Sun diffuseth his
beams, illuminating and fructifying these inferior bodies with his parentall
light and heat, and how the earth lays not up her treasures within her
coffers, but sends forth herbs for the use of man and beast, she thinks it a
shame to her, if she should not (according to her abilities) be always doing
good to those among whom she lives, and with whom she converseth.

7. That which our Apostle next affirms concerning wisdom, is, that she is
without partiality. The Greek word (...), is capable of several constructions,
each of which may not unfitly be made use of.

1. Some read it passively, and so it is true of wisdom, She is not judged,
that is, she valueth not what others judge of her ways, and approving her
self to God, she accounts it a small matter to be judged of Men, or else she
is not judged, that is, she is not, cannot be valued by the estimation of our
judgment, according to her real worth and excellency.

2. The most suitable reading of the word is active, and yet this with some
variety, according to the several significations of the verb, (...),
especially those four of wavering, disputing, judging, and making a difference.

1. The late Learned Annotator, accounts the most genuine notion of this word
in this place, to be as much as absque haesitatione, and so the same with that
(...) in the first chapter, James 1. 6.
without wavering and inconstancy. In this sense it is well joined with (...),
inconstancy being the daughter of Hypocrisy, Nil fictum diuturnum, paint is
easily washed off, and that which is fained must needs be fading; besides this
is a proper effect of wisdom, that she is steadfast in her profession, and
maintenance of the Faith, notwithstanding the greatest persecution she
abhors the (...) of the Gnostics, who hold it an indifferent thing to
forswear Christianity in time of persecution, and therefore having chosen the
way of truth, she resolves with David, to stick to Gods Testimonies. Psalm.
119. 30. 31.
Indeed she is deliberate in her choice, and will not fix without just reason,
but she is no less resolute then deliberate, and what she embraces she
retains. Ut luna mut^ri, to be changed as the Moon, is the Vide Bern. de
assumpt. B. V. Sermon. 5.
fools property, whereas you may sooner stop the Sun in its course, then divert
the wise man from his pious purpose, the one like the Ship is tossed up and
down upon the Waves, whilst the other is like the house that is built upon the
rock unmovable.

2. Others conceive the sense of this word to be as much as sine disceptatione,
without disputing, or (as it is in the Margin) without wrangling; and thus it
is a truth, Divine wisdom, though she will admit of calm debates, yet she is
an enemy to brawling disputes, as being fully assured, that jangling
Controversies tend not to edification, nay for the most part end in contention
and confusion.

3. Some render the word by absque dijudicatione, and so it lets us see a
special property of wisdom, to abhor rash judging, and impetuous condemning
of others; Et vere ^i te vigilanter homo a^ten^as ^^^um est s^ ad (...) um
unq^^m in ^nd^ B^^^. ^e g^^d ^umil and de in^er: ^omo cap. 33.
it is one of those three things which wisdom hates, as destructive to humane
society, odious comparisons, malicious contradictions, and censorious judging.
Indeed she is not (to use Saint Bernards ex pression) Aut curtosus explorator,
aut temerar^us ^udex, either a curious inquirer into other men's faults, or a
captious censurer of their actions; a fool is easily induced to condemn all
besides himself, but a wise man is loath to condemn any but himself, he has
so much to do at home, that he has no leisure to look abroad, and when he
sees any thing amiss, he resolves to judge the best he can, yea though he
cannot but censure the sin, yet he dares not pass (at least) a final
sentence upon the person.

4. Once more, Our Translators read the word, as if it signified sine
discretione, without partiality, by having respect of, and putting a difference
between persons. This is that which is directly contrarious to charity and
equity, no wonder if it be odious to wisdom. Indeed there is a different
respect of persons, which civility requires, and prudence allows, namely a
reverence of men according to their place and dignity; but that respect of
persons, which flows from partiality, and consists in aggravating or excusing
faults, extolling or extenuating virtues, according to the qualification of the
person, this she abhors. And hence it is she dares not take part with what
is evil in a friend, no not in her self, nor yet despise what is good in
another, no not in an enemy, she will not commend sin or error in the
greatest, no nor yet the holiest, nor will she condemn truth and virtue in the
meanest or the wickedst. In this notion that expression of S. Bernard,
concerning obedience, may not unfitly be made use of concerning wisdom; she is
Indiscreta licet prudentissima, indiscrect though most prudent, and as that
puts no difference between commands, Bern lib. de vita solitar.
so neither this between persons.

Taking the word in this sense, (...), is fitly joined with it, since wisdom
is therefore without partiality, because without Hypocrisy. Indeed partiality
is the Daughter of Pride and Hypocrisy: Pride ever looks at a man's own party
with favor, and at the opposites, either with envy if they be above, or scorn
if they be below: and how can such a man choose but be partial? Hypocrisy
looks upon it self and party in a flattering, upon the opposites in a
disfiguring glass, baulketh beams in its own, and spyeth motes in another
eye, no wonder if it be partial, ^ut wisdom being both humble and upright,
will not admit this mischievous vice of partiality to dwell with her.

If you please put the two last constructions of (...) together, and read it
without partial judging: That charge which Saint Paul lays upon Timothy may
well strike all both Civil and Ecclesiastical Gevernors with 1 Timothy 5. 21.
awe. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus, and the elect Angels, that
thou observe these things, without preferring one before another, doing nothing
by partiality, and no grace more requisite to the fulfilling of this charge
then wisdom. This it is which teaches a Judge both to have eyes, and no eyes,
whilst she furnishes him with eyes to see and discern the cause, and yet
closes up his eyes that he cannot behold the persons. All sinful respect of
persons in Judging, flows from some sinister affection; especially those of
carnal pity, or carnal fear, the one says, he is a poor man, the other
says, he is a great man, and so the current of Justice is stopped: but Wisdom
is an excellent bridle of all carnal and corrupt affe^tions, and so enableth
to discern and judge aright between person and person, laying aside all
external respects.

8. Finally, that which is asserted in the close concerning wisdom, is, that
she is (...), without Hypocrisy ^he Greek word (...), is properly used de
histrionibus, of Stage Players, and indeed a Stage Player is a fi emblem of an
Hypocrite, especially in two things, both which wisdom abhors.

1. A Stage Player puts on the Shapes of several persons and callings,
according to the part he is to act, so does an Hypocrite take upon him several
forms, according to those times he lives in, and indeed this he accounts his
policy to sail with every wind, and Proteus like, to transform himself into
any shape as occasion requires. But true wisdom, though she be a
Time-observer, is no time server, her figure is not round but square, and her
Motto, Semper eadem, always the same.

2. A Stage Player seems to be what he is not, he appears often times as a
Lord, a King, when he is but Vide Bern. Sermon. 66 supe^: G^nt.
a Servant, a Beggar; so does the Hypocrite personate himself a Saint, when he
is a Devil, a friend when he is an enemy, and indeed he applauds himself in
this his subtilty, to think how he deludeth the vulgar, and with his feigned
sh^wes carries his designs; but Divine wisdom accounts Sincerity the only
true policy, and Hypocrisy a mere folly. Indeed she sometimes forbeareth, to
show her self what she is, namely, when on the one hand Danger threatens, and
on the other Religion requires not an open Declaration of her self, but she
never does, or dares to show her self what she is not; she well knows that
the Hypocrite, though he may cozen the dim sighted world, yet he cannot delude
Gods piercing eye, that whilst he cheats others, the worst cheat is of
himself, and therefore in the end, he must needs appear to be a fool, when
his counierfeit devotion, affection, shall meet with a real hell of torment.

And thus I have showed you Wisdom in the abstract, whence and what she is,
but alas where shall we find it in the concrete? It is our Apostles question
at the thirteenth verse of this chapter, Who is a wise Ver. 13.
man, and endued with knowledge among you? and the questionary proposal
argues, that such men are very rare. Indeed St^ltorum numerus innumerus, the
world is peopled with fools; but truly wise men are Vix totidem quot Thebarum
portae, rarely to be found. Wisdom is said in the Text to be from above, I
would there were no cause to bewail that she is gone, whence she came, and as
he said of Justice, -- terras Astraea reliquit, she has forsaken the earth. If
we may conclude the absence of wisdom by the want of her handmaids, I am sure
there will too just cause appear of this complaint; for tell me I beseech you;

When we see profaneness in the Church, wantonness in the Chambers, cozenage
in the Shops, drunkenness in the Streets; when we hear the vain and cursed
Oaths, which are belched from the black mouths of common swearers, the
damnable positions, and horrid Blasphemies which are uttered by the poisonous
lips of false teachers, may we not conclude there is none of that wisdom which
is first pure?

Again, when we observe what a spirit of division is gone forth into the
Christian world, how many not troubled (would God there were more of them) but
troublous spirits there are among us, who would be accounted Angels, though it
be but for troubling the waters, what betraying, backbiting, slandering and
devouring there is one of another, so that Men are not Men, but Wolves, Tigers
and Dragons each to other, may we not infer there is none of that wisdom which
is first pure, and then peaceable and gentle?

Again, when we take notice how presumptuous and selfe-willed the most are,
how tenacious, some of erroneous opinions, and others of vicious practices;
those shutting their eyes against clear convictions, and these stopping their
ears against moving disswasions, so that you may as well speak to a deaf
adder, or a dead man, it is not manifest there is none of that wisdom which is
easy to be entreated.

Further, is there not a great want of that wisdom, which is full of mercy
among us, when men are so severe to those whom they account offenders, and
heard hearted to them whom they cannot but see necessitous, yea I would to God
there were not many, to whom it is a ^oyfull spectacle to behold men of their
own nation, religion, function, exposed to misery and ruin.

Yet further, is there not a sad decay of that wisdom which is full of good
fruits, when as there are so few good works, either of Piety or Charity visible
among us? Nay, I would to God that the good fruits which our ancestors planted,
were not plucked up, and made sweet ^^^sels for greedy mouths to devour.

Finally, is there not an evident dearth of that wisdom, which is without
partiality and hypocrisy, when as indeed these are become Epidemicall
diseases, and the predominant sins of the age we live in?

It was the charge Almighty God once laid against Israel, When I looked that
it should bring forth Is. 5. 6.
grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? for indeed the question is but a more
vehement accusation, and therefore it is both properly and positively expressed
afterward, He looked for judgment, but behold oppression, for righteousness,
but behold a cry. May not God take up the same complaint against the
Inhabitants of this land? I looked for purity, but behold uncleanness; for
peaceablenesse, but behold contention; for gentleness, but behold fierceness;
for tractablenesse, but lo obstinacy; for mercy, but lo cruelty; for good
fruits, but lo barrenness; for equity and sincerity, but behold partiality
and hypocrisy: so that there is little or no true wisdom and knowledge of God
in the Land.

True it is, there are in this age many (never more) pretenders to this
wisdom, these talk much, nay brag and boast of it, yea they would confine it
to themselves and their own fraternity, as if all others were but fools in
spiritual matters: but their impure, contentious, obstinate, cruel, unjust
and hypocritical lives proclaim them strangers to it, to whom I may justly
say in the words of our Apostle, to the arrogant believer, Show us your wisdom
by your works. Jam^s 2 16.


What then remains, but that every one of us, according to Solomon's counsel,
Cry after this wisdom, and lift up our voice for understanding, that we seek
Prove. 2. 3, 4.
her as silver, and search for her as for bid treasure, and having found her,
let us according to our Apostles advice, show out of a good conversation our
works, even those works which may testify that our wisdom is of the right
stamp, ever remembering that of Gregory Nazianzen, As that Beauty is best, not
which is painted with Speech, but seen with the Eyes, and those VideGr^g. Naz.
Orat. 15.
Riches, not which our dreams fancy, but our hands hold; so that wisdom, not
which glittereth in smooth words, but is evidenced by our good works.

I end all with a more particular and suitable application of this Scripture to
the present occasion.

Justice and Clemency are as it were the Judges two lips, by which he is to
pronounce Sentence, his two hands by which he executes judgment: indeed then
he is in his robes, when he is clad with the rich scarlet of equity, and the
white fur of pity. On the one hand a Judge must be impartial in his
distributions having no respect of persons, saying with Levi to the greatest,
the richest, the nearest, the dearest, nescio vos, I know you not; on the other
hand a Judge must be compassionate, mitigating the severity of the Law, putting
a difference between offenders, being unwilling to punish, where he may spare
without injury. May but wisdom stand at the Judges right hand, and it will
prompt him to both these, as being full of mercy, and without partiality.

The great employments of inferior Justices of the Peace, is, to encourage
godliness and virtue, discountenance vice and wickedness suppress riots, and
tumults, compose differences among neighbors, take care that the Lords day may
be observed, his house frequented, his name not blasphemed, the poor fed and
employed, and that houses of disorder, (the Springs of those filthy waters
which defile the land) may be either wholly stopped up, or thoroughly purged, to
all this does the wisdom in my Text engage, as being pure and peaceable.

Let the Lawyers make this wisdom which is without Hypocrisy their
Counselor, and then I am sure they will not dare either to put a soul gloss
upon a fair Text, or a fair glove upon a foul hand, by calling good evil, or
evil good, putting darkness for light, and light for darkness, bitter for
sweet, and sweet for bitter.

Were but this wisdom, which is pure, and without partiality, Foreman of the
Grand Inquest, and all other Juries, I am sure they would not for fear or
favor connive at gross offenses, or bring in unjust verdicts.

Were this Wisdom which is without Hypocrisy, set as a Watch before the door
of their lips, who are to give Evidence, they would not dare to speak any thing
but what is truth, and be so far from uttering any thing against, that they
would testify nothing, but what is according to their knowledge.

Let the subservient Officers of the Court follow the dictates of this wisdom,
which is, full of mercy, and without partiality; and then they will not either
grind the faces the poor through exacting of fees, not yet take bribes of the
Rich, for expedition of causes.

Finally, would all that are Plaintiffs in any Court consult with this wisdom,
which is, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated and full of mercy, they
would not quarrel de lana caprina, go to Law for every trifle, they would be
willing to withdraw their actions upon reasonable offers, and hearken to
moderate terms of reconciliation, whereby Judge and Jury might be saved a
great deal of trouble.

In one word, may this ointment of heavenly wisdom run down from the head to
the beard, and from thence to the skirts, from the greatest to the least, and
then, not till then, will purity and piety be restored, partiality and
hypocrisy banished, justice and mercy maintained, and peace with truth
established, which Almighty God grant in his good time for Jesus Christ his
sake.

FINIS.
WISDOMS COUNTERFEIT: OR; HERODIAN POLICY. Unmasked in a SERMON Preached at
Oxford on Act Sunday, Ann. Dom. 1654. in the Parish Church of St. Aldats. By
NATH: HARDY, Minister of Gods Word, and Preacher to the Parish of St. Dionis
Back-Church.

PROVE. 21. 30. There is no wisdom nor understanding, nor counsel against the
Lord. Aug. de sanctis Innocent. Sermon. 2. Quam caeca ferit as, quae credebat
quod deprehendere dominum fraudibus posset? LONDON, Printed by I. G. for John
Clarke, and are to be sold at his Shop under St. Peter's Church in Cornhil. 1656.

TO HIS SINGULAR FRIEND, ALEXANDER BURNET, Doctor in PHYSIC; Health External,
Internal, Eternal.
IT is an experienced truth, that the Devil is Gods Ape, and the dissembler a
Mimick Saint; whatever graces Gods children have in substance, Hypocrites (the
Devils first borne) have in semblance. Thus superstition puts on the show of
devotion, faction of Zeal, and subtilty of wisdom. But as the dullness of
Common glass is conspicuous, when set by the transparent Crystal, and a
Bristol stone, when compared with the sparkling Diamond, loses its luster, so
these mock virtues are found too light, when weighed with solid graces in the
balance of the Sanctuary: For this reason it is, that I have annexed this
ensuing to the precedent discourse, that earthly and heavenly wisdom, being
set together, it may the better appear how great a distance and dissonancy
there is between them, notwithstanding their seeming alliance.

And now (Worthy Sir) not either to put my self out of debt to you, which
cannot be without an adaequate retaliation, and much less to put you in debt
to me, which cannot be, without a work of supererogation, but to make a
public acknowledgement, how greatly I am indebted to your goodness, is the
design of this Dedication.

Indeed were I to write of you, and not to you, I should (as justly, I might)
exspatiate in the character of your worth; But, on the one hand, those choice
abilities wherewith God, Nature, Education and Industry, have furnished you for
the discharge of your Vocation, Those moral excellencies of Prudence,
Temperance, Humility, Affability and Charity, which adorn your conversation,
are such, as envy cannot blast, nor need I to blazon. And on the other hand, as
I abhor to speak what is evil (especially if false) of another behind his
back, so I would be sparing to mention what is good (although true) of another
to his face; since as that incurreth the guilt of detraction, so this the
suspicion of flattery.

Only (to avoid the odious blot of ingratitude) I cannot, I must not bury your
many favors in the grave of silence, having so fit an opportunity to publish
them. Indeed that amicable society as a neighbor, cordial fidelity as a
friend, gratuitous care as a Physician, and bounteous love as a Parishioner,
which you have expressed to me, are singly, much more jointly strong
obligations: for all which, Accept (good Sir) my hearty thanks, together with
my earnest prayers, that God would crown your skill with success, your estate
with prosperity, your life with old age, your mind with tranquillity, your soul
with his grace, and that grace with glory.

Yours most cordially to serve and honor you, NATH: HARDY.

MAT. 2. 8. And he sent them to Bethlehem, and said, Go and search diligently
for the young child, and when you have found him, bring me word again, that I
may come and worship him also.


THis Chapter begins with the blessed news Magnifica coeli lingua. Aug. de
Temp. Sermon. 30.
of a newborn Savior proclaimed to the wise men of the East, by a
celestial tongue; and surely this clear Revelation of the Messtah to them, is
no small consolation to us. Christ borne and not known, would have been as a
Book clasped, Fountain sealed, and Treasure hid, no comfort in, nor profit by
him: Or had this light (though come into the world) only shined in Jury, we
must still have sat in darkness, and the shadow of death. But behold (the
Evangelist would have us Ver. 1.
do it, and well we may) behold with joy and wonder, a Star appears to the
wise men in a far Country, and Apparuit stella non volens, sed jussa; on coeli
(...), sed Divini tatis impulsu; non lege syderum sed novitate fignorum. Ch
ysol. Sermon. 156.
this no ordinary, but extraordinary light; not by Natures course, but Divine
appointment, made only for this end, to be the morning Star to this Sun of
Righteousness. This Star proves a Load Star, seeing they follow it, following
they come to Jerusalem, and coming enquire for this Royal Babe. Vae torpori
nostro; Oh our sluggishnesse! one Star is observed and followed by the Magi,
whilst we, instead of following, endeavor to extinguish those many Stars,
with which the Heaven of our Church is bespangled. But how could they be
assured this Star was Christ's? and by its appearing conclude his coming?
Doubtless as they had a Star without, so they had a light within, the
Spirits Revelation accompanied the Stars apparition, upon which they are
resolved on their journey, and emboldned in the enquiry, saying, Where is he
that is born King of the Ver. 2.
Jews?

They asked not whether, but where he was born, not doubting of the thing,
though ignorant of the place; and, which argues the strength of their Faith
and boldness of their Spirits, they enquire of him as a King of the Jews, and
publish their intent to Worship him. Here was Faith of the right stamp; not
suppressed in their bosoms, but expressed to the world: I believed therefore I
spoke, says David; and these wise men, not only believe Psalm. 116. 10.
with their hearts, but confess with their mouths Christ Jesus the Lord.

This strange news of their coming, and stranger erraud is brought to Herod's
ears, and speedily flies through the whole City, whereat both he, and all
Jerusalem is troubled: Herod for fear Ver. 3.
of losing his Kingdom, Jerusalem for fear of new commotions; he, lest he
should be dispossessed of his throne, they, left they should be disquieted in
their peace: But why (O Herod) do those timorous thoughts perplexe thee? It is
true, a King of the Jews is borne, but such an one whose Kingdom is not of
this world, one that here was Joh. 18. 36.
to have no other Crown then of Thorns, not Scepter but a Reed, nor Throne
then a Cross. One that is come, Non Granat. iu loc.
reges destituere, sed constituere, not to depose, but stablish Non cripit
mortalia qui regna dat coelestia. Chemnit. ibid.
King; in their lawful rights, whose commands excite not Rebellion, but
require Allegiance; one whose intent is to purchase an Heavenly, not take away
Earthly Kingdoms. Indeed his false apprehension concerning Christ, was the
true cause of his perturbation. The greatest enmities have for the most part
arose from causeless fears, and groundless jealousies, and mis conceits have
still been guilty of all wrongs and persecutions. But though Herod were
troubled (as Tyra^^ie is ever suspicious, and Guilt jealous ye why Jerusalem?
who had more reason to rejoice at the opportune approach of her Redeemer. Alas
they had already been warn out with changes, and over toyled with troubles, no
worder, if now being somewhat settled in a condition quietly evil, the news of
a better, probably trouble some, prove an welcome. Thus He who was the Angles
song, the Magies joy, and Isreal's consolation, becomes Herod's fear, and
Jerusalems terror.

Yet Herod determines to use Wit in his anger, ubi Leonina pellis non sufficia
assuenda est Vulpina. Lysand.
he suppresseth his trouble, dissembleth his intention, and according to
Lysanders maxim, covers His Lions with a Foxes skin. He conveneth an
Assembly of the Ver. 4.
Chief Priests and Scribes of the people, acknowledges a Christ the Lords
Anointed, and religiously demands Ver. 5, 6.
of them the plate of his birth. Being informed by them Ver. 7.
where this Sun should arise, with the same show of Devotion he enquireth of
the wise men, when the Star appeared, and without any more ado, dispatcheth
them away about search of the person; so it follows in the Text, And be sent,
etc.

The sum of the verse is Herod's politic compliance with the wise men, and
his crafty endeavor by their means to get Christ into his own hands. Wherein
we have considerable these Generals:

1. His ready Mission, And he sent them to Bethlehem. 2. His subtle
Commission, Saying, Go search diligently for the young child, and when you
have found him, bring me word again. 3. His ample Promission, That I may
(which is as much as, then I will) come and worship him also.
These are the plain parts of that Sacred Message, with which God has sent me
to you this day, into which I have labored by Divine light to search
diligently, what profitable lessons are contained in each, I am come by Divine
assistance to bring you word; through each of these, I shall go with speed and
plainness, heartily desiring that the end of our coming hither this day to
worship God, may be glory to him, and profit to our selves. Beginning with,

His ready Mission, And he sent them to Bethlehem. I. Genesis


In which part we have three circumstances observable:

Quo, whither? to Bethlehem. Quis, who? Herod. Quos, them.

1. The Magi, seeking Christ come to Jerusalem, but they are sent to Bethlehem.
Where (might they well imagine) was it more likely to find the Jews King,
then in the Royal City? But alas there is great deceit in Probabilities,
especially when we meddle with Divine matters. God usually goes a way by
himself, neither are his thoughts as our thoughts. Jerusalem was to be the
place of Christ's death, Bethlehem of his birth, that of his Passion, this of
his Incarnation, that of his Setting, this of his Rising, He sent them to
Bethlehem.

The Ubi then where Herod sent them was right, there surely and only was this
newborn King to be found. Bethlehem was the town of David, and this King was
the Son of Luke 2. 11.
David. Bethlehem by interpretation is the house of Bread, and Christ is the
Bread of Life. At Bethlehem was heard the Psalm. 132. 6.
first news of the Temple, and he is the Lord of the Temple. Finally,
Bethlehem was novissima oppidorum, the Mich. 5. 2. Isa. 53. 3. Vulg.
least of towns, and the Messiah was, novissimus virorum, the lowest of men;
what could better fit his humble state, then so mean a place?

And truly to Bethlehem we must still be sent, if we intend to find Christ: as
he made choice of a little Village to be born at, so of lowly spirits to dwell
in; as he came forth of a poor City, so he resideth usually among the poorer
sort. Seek not then for Christ among the great, but little ones of the world,
look not for him on the Mountains, but the Vallyes. In this sorry despised
Village is the Messiah born.

2. He sent them, It would not here be omitted that He, though a wicked person,
directs the wise men to Christ: Bad men may instruct others in good. How often
have you seen a leaden Cisterne convey pleasant water, an iron key open a
golden Treasury, and choice fruit served up in a wooden platter? God sometimes
makes use of a Balaam to point at the Star, of a Raven to carry Eliah his
food, and here of an Herod to send the wise men to Bethlehem.

Despise not then the Honey comb, because found in a Lions carkase, refuse not
the curious picture, because drawn by a crooked Painter; contemn not wholesome
directions, though given by a foul mouth. We like not the Sun the worse when it
breaks through a dark cloud, nor Gold the less, though sent in a leatherne
purse, nor a friends letter the worse, because brought by a dirty Carrier,
though the man be an Herod, yet if he send thee to Christ, follow his advice.

But that which is especially considerable is the serviceableness En rex Impius
pio Magorum studio licet aliud agat bactenus inservit, ut lo^u^ illis nati
regis indicet. Musc; Gullia:
in loc. Musc. ibid.
of Herod, to the Magies design, he resolves their doubt, acquainteth them
with the place, instructs them in the way, and incourageth them to the
journey, so much Beza conceives included in the word (...), blande iter
commonstrasse, that in a friendly manner he furthered their progress, directed
them to Bethlehem, and by this means helped them in their pious endeavors. Ita
etiam impii suis conatibus prodesse bonis coguntur; Thus are the wicked though
against their wills, assistant to the godly. There are two things which ungodly
men are forced to serve, Gods Greg.
Sacred Decrees, the Saints godly purposes. Dei consili^ humana facta etiam
tunc congrue serviunt, cum resistunt. Gods counsels are then effecting, when
most opposed, and though his enemies mean not so, they are full accomplishing
his work. And as Gods ends are always fulfilled, so good men's aims are
oft-times furthered by the wicked. and whilst intentionally they drive on their
own designs, accidentally they are assistant to the Saints enterprises. Those
Carpenters in Noah's time aimed only at their own gain, yet they built that
Arc which saved his life. Lahans, intentions in allotting Jacob the speckled
shee^, were not cordially good, and yet by that means Jacobs labors are
prospered, and his store increased. Little thought Pharaohs daughter of
rescuing the children of Israel from her Fathers yoke, and behold she
chertsheth that child, who proved their deliverer. Pharaoh himself let the
Israelites go out of no good meaning, witness the speedy pursuit, and yet
thereby a passage is opened for fulfilling both Gods promises of, and their
desires after the Land of Canaan.

Oh let us behold with joy and view with wonder the overruling wisdom of the
Almighty, which makes his and his servants adversaries, isntrumental both of
his glory and their good. When a man's ways please the Lord he makes his
enemies, not only to be at peace with, but subservient to him, and as Christ
caused the Fish (though unwittingly) to bring him money in its mouth for paying
tribute; so God makes the wicked (though unwillingly) contribute assistance to
his people in their holy undertakings. So did Herod in the Text, his aim in
sending the wise men to Bethlehem, was to compass his own mischievous
design, of killing, and yet by sending them he furthered their religious
desire of finding and Worshipping Christ.

3. He sent them, I might here take notice of the impiety of Herod, in that he
sent ethers, but went not himself; he shows them the ready way to Christ,
but sets not a foot forward himself. Thus they may lead others to Heaven, who
yet neglect it themselves. The Whetstone that sharpeneth the knife remains
blunt it self, the Bell calls others to hear, and yet is deaf it self,
the Sign shows the passenger an Inn for harbor, whilst it self is
weather-beaten, the Nightingale that is restless her self, sings another into
a sweet sleep, finally, the Statue points a traveller his way, but stirs not
it self, and many who care not for Christ themselves, may be isntrumental in
bringing others to him. Some there are so vile that they will neither go
themselves, nor send others; such was our Saviors just complaint of the
Pharisees, that they would neither enter into the Kingdom Mat. 23. 13.
of Heaven themselves, nor suffer others. The most are so bad that they will
not act themselves, though they are Novar. in loc.
so good, as to permit, yea, excite others to the work of finding Christ. But
surely, non meretur Christum invenire qui per alios quaerit, this sacred
service cannot be performed by a proxy, nor shall he ever find Christ, who
only sets others about it, as Herod in the Text, He sent them to Bethlehem.

But that which is especially observable in this particular of his sending them
to Christ, is, how Herod's policy failed him. Subtilty would have taught him not
at all to have sent them, but others, why did he not employ his own Courtiers,
rather then trust strangers? why did he not rather prevent their journey, then
hazard his own disappointment? or, if his detaining them might have raised a
suspicion, yet since the matter so nearly concerned him, and the journey was so
small, why did he not go himself with them? or if not so, why did he not,
together with them, send messengers of his own, of whose fidelity to his
design, he might have assured confidence? Nothing had been more easy and
plausible then sub officii praetextu, in a way of Complement, under pretense of
Courtesy, Par. in loc.
to have sent some assasinates with them, who might have dispatched the child
immediately; Some say the reoson of all this was to avoid suspicion. But
doubtless herein the wisdom of God was remarkable, who so far blindes him, ne
consilium quod ante pedes erat, arriperet, Par. ibid.
that he did not lay hold on so obvious and probable a way of accomplishing his
design. Divino nutu actun^ Cajet. in loc.
ut Herodes confideret in simplicitate Magorum, Gods providence so ordered it,
that Herod should confide in the wise men's return, and so deceive himself.
Had either Herod or any of his instruments accompanied them, either they must
not have found the child, or these must have found him also; that had been
inconvenient for them, this had been dangerous for Christ. Divine prudence
provideth against both, by infatuating Herod in Non omnia mali^iosa pe^^i^ie
Deus diabolo. Not. Com. in loc.
his plot, in which, whilst he carried it on with various policy, he discovered
a sottish simplicity. Such a fool is the craftiest Politician, when God will
defeat him. The Germans have a proverb, When God intends to destroy any man,
he first closes up his eyes, agreeing with that of the Poet, Quos Jupiter vult
perdere dementat; So he did by Herod, he does oft-times by the wicked, shut
their eyes that they shall not see the things which make for their greatest
advantage.

The verity of this doctrine be pleased to observe in a double parallel, the
one eminent in Sacred, the other in Profane history. Let the one be Jezabell,
a woman of no less politic a brain then haughty spirit, and yet in that
passage concerning Eliah, she at once discovered both 1 R^g. 19, 23.
abundance of fury, and defect of subtilty. How deep her malice was, let the
message speak, wherein she threatens the Prophet with loss of life, and that
with a curse upon her self, if her intent were not performed; how shallow her
wit was, let the sending of a Messenger and her delay of execution speak. What
policy more plain and common then to strike before we speak, and seize on an
Enemy unawares? Whereas she (befooled no doubt by God) warned him both of the
thing and time, whereby he had opportunity, and found means of escape. Let
Andronicus be the other, who though he caused the Royal Blood to be let forth
of the veins of many, to get and preserve the Kingdom, yet suffered it to run
in Isaacius his body, who at length dispossessed him of his usurped Empire.
Thus the most expert gamesters do sometimes oversee, and the most cunning
Politicians are often confounded by God in their own devices.

See then the truth of Eliphaz his assertion concerning God, He takes the wise
in their craft, and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong; so that
what Jethro affirmed concerning the Egyptians insolent carriage Job 5. 13.
toward the Israelites, may be applied to the fraudulent practices of the
wicked against the Church, In the thing wherein they dealt proudly, and those
deal wisely, God is above them. Let not then any divellish Achitophels Exodus
19. 11.
flatter themselves in their dark designs, close contrivances, as if there
were no power to cross their projects, or wisdom to defeat their counsels.
While they conspire on Earth, God laugheth in Heaven; while they sooth up
themselves in their subtilties, God mocketh at their simplicity. The
foolishness of God (says St. Paul) is wiser then men, and the wisdom of men
is foolishness 1 Cor. 1. 25.
with God; nay, when they think all the crannies are stopped, a wide door is
left open for Gods providence to evacuate their policies. We have a common
proverb, When men think to do for the best, it commonly falls out to be the
worst: it may fitly be applied to crafty Machiavelians, when they suppose that
they have done the wisest, they prove themselves stark fools, so was it with
Herod in sending these Magi, (without associates) to Bethlehem. And so I pass
from his ready Mission to

His crafty Commission, Go and search, etc. 2. Genesis


In this part of the Text, two things offer themselves to our consideration. De
quo, and quid.

The person to whom these Magi are directed.

The errand about which they are sent.

Whom the Commission concerns, the young child.

What it requires, Go search diligently, and bring me word again.

1. The person they are sent to enquire after is the young child. And if you
please a while let us leave hunting the Fox, and view the lineaments of this
child. A young child indeed he is called by Herod, but such a child as never
any was before him, nor will be after him, like to him; Consult the Prophet
Isay, and you shall find a glorious Isa 9. 6.
description of this child, such a child as is a Son, Maryes child, but Gods
Son; such a child who is a Father and that of eternity: a child, but of no
mean rank, no less then a Prince of peace: a child indeed in years, not in
understanding, for he is a Counselor; in sum, a feeble child, and yet a
mighty God, well may he be called Wonderful.

O let us admire with thankfulness the gracious condescension of our Redeemer,
who being so high, vouchsafed to stoop so low, qui fecit nos, quantillus factus
pro nobis? he that made us, how little is he made for us? Majesty is clothed
in vileness, Power appears in weakness, the founder of Heaven is rocked in
a cradle, and he that swayeth the world, is swathed in clouts. Was there ever
humility like this? that (...) should become (...), the great God, a little
child, the ancient of days, a tender infant, he who is immense magnus, so
great, as that he fills Heaven and Earth, to be palmaris, a child of a span
long. Finally, that he who is regens sydera, should become sugens ubera, the
governor of the stars to be nourished by a dug. O the depth of this abasement^
the height of this lowliness! Behold and wonder.

But to return to Herod. It is a note not unworthy our Ch^yse Theoph Cy^^ll.
in loc.
observation, that whereas the Magi call him a King, Herod only styles him a
child, (...), he could not bear the thing, not brook the title.

-- Nec Caesar far priorem, Pompeiusve parem, --
Royalty cannot endure a partner, no more then Love a corrivall. No doubt in
his heart he conceived him a King, else why so perplexed at the news of his
birth? why so jealous of the loss of his Crown? had he fancied the wise men's
words as fables, either that no child was born, or if born, not a King, he
would never have harbored so ill a ghest as fear in his breast. But see,
though he know, he will not acknowledge; though he strongly imagine, he will
not express his thoughts, nor give him the title of a King, as fearing, no
doubt, lest by this means he should obscure his own Honor. And truly I am
afraid, we are too many of us of Herod's temper, in this regard, backward to
acknowledge the dignities, and publish the excellencies of others. There are
two things we are loath to confess, our own Infirmities, others eminencies,
our defects and their worth. The truth is, our proud natures think that others
beams darken our light, their excellency staineth our beauty, and their
virtue eclipseth our splendor; hence it is, Peacock like, we spread our own
gay feathers, Pharisee like, we boast of our own perfections, but as for the
dignities of others, we either speak of them with an undervaluing diminution,
or bury them in a neglectfull silence. Oh beware of inordinate self-love, which
makes us speak too highly of our selves, and exorbitant pride, which makes us
speak too meanly of others, as Herod here did of Christ, affording him no other
appellation then this of a young child.

2. The charge he gives them about this child is double, Sedulous Inquisition,
Go and search diligently. Speedy Information, and bring me word again.


1. Go and search diligently, the original words want (...).
not a singular emphasis, the verb signifies such a search as is used,
Examinibus and questionibus, by putting interrogatories, asking questions; the
adverbe notes accuracy in the search, going to the utmost of a thing; it is as
if he (...). Leigh. Crit.
had said, Let there be no delay in your journey, nor default in your inquiry,
leave no stone unrolled, way unassayed, means unattempted to find out the
young child. How zealous Herod seems in a good work, how industrious would
he have the Magi in the search, when as his end in all this was desperately
wicked! Thus may hypocrites be very earnest in promoting, and performing good
actions for bad ends, and self respects: Who more vehement then Jehu in
execution of justice on Baals Idols, Ahabs posterity? but his aim was only to
establish himself in the Kingdom. Who more forward then Absalom to hear
causes, do the people right? but his intention was thereby to thrust his
Father from his throne: Finally, who more zealous then the Pharisees in good
duties? but their end was only to be seen of men.

Oh remember, non actibus sed finibus pensantur officia, our actions are
measured by our intentions; it is not quid agas, but quid quaeras, our doing,
but aim in doing, that is regarded. If the Eye be single, the whole body is
full of light, says our Savior; the Father moralizeth it aptly Mat. 6. 22.
to this purpose, Oculum debemus accipere ipsam intentionem Aug. de Sermon. Dom.
in Mons.
qua recte agimus quicquid facimus, By the Eye we are to understand the
intention, according to which, our performances are either rejected or accepted.

Before I leave this Branch, I cannot omit the significancy of the
praeposition, (...), it is not interrogate puerum, but de puero, seek the
child, but concerning the child, that they should thoroughly inquire all
circumstances about the child, of what Parents, in what Family, after what
manner, the reason whereof is rendered by one to be this, Ut uno Christo
comprehenso reliquae multitudini Musc. in loc.
parceret, that he might surprise him and spare the rest. Rather then his
perplexed mind should not be satisfied, all the children of the Messiahs age
must be sacrificed to his malice. But yet so bloody a design could not but
startle his conscience, Est impiis morsus quidam conscientiae, Ibid.
Even wicked men have sometimes secret bitings, this sacred Monitor will speak
in bad men's ears, though against their wills; a tender conscience scrupleth at
the least sin, and obdurate minds have some kind of remorse at great
sins. It is true, they lull their consciences asleep, at last, as being
resolved to go through with their designs in despite of Law, Conscience, yea
God himself. Thus Herod, when disappointed of his plot, maliciously murdered
all the innocents in Bethlehem; but such mischievous attempts are seldom
brought forth without some throws of conscience, and pangs of terror, these it
is likely this bloody Monster felt, which made him desire so particular a
search, that sparing the rest, he might single out Christ, as the prime object
of his envy.

2. And bring me word again, the word here used is applied to Ambassadors
returning back with their message. About this employment Herod pretended to
send these Magi, with a command to return with an account of their journey, and
it is observable that he says not bring word only, but bring me word, he
would not Renun^iate mibi.
have them divulge it among the people, but first come and acquaint him with
the news; for this reason doubtless, that the child might be slain before it
should be certainly known that he was borne. And now before I close up this
part of the Text, I cannot but present you with a double observation.

1. See how exquisitely Herod lays his plot, he desires them to enquire of
the child thoroughly, and then to inform him privately; which desire of his,
had it been fulfilled by them, his enterprise had in a short time been
accomplished without any hinderance; by their diligent search, mistake would
have been avoided, in regard of the child, by bringing word first to him, all
opposition would have been prevented, in regard of the people. How fitly may
that term be applied to him, which Christ gave another of that name, Go tell
that Fox. Luke 13. 31.
Thus witty and cunning are wicked men to do mischief, hence it is, their
plots are called Devices, a word in the Job 5. 12.
original very significant, noting not only cogitation, but excogitation,
natural but artificial thoughts, its elsewhere used to express the skill and
curiosity of water works, so some translate it pooles artificially made, and
the exquisite Cant. 7. 4. Ainsw. Exodus 28. 8.
embroyderies of the Priests girdle, so that it signifies the very spirits and
quintessence of sinful wit, drawn out for the devising of evil: and as their
plots are called devices, so themselves are styled crafty, being the seed of
the Serpent, the most subtle of all the beasts of the field; for this reason
they are resembled to fowlers, who use both secrecy and subtilty in catching
the birds, and oft-times Psalm. 124. 6.
the snare is so closely laid, that there is no escape, but by breaking
through. It is the expression of Jeremies enemies, Come let us devise devices
against Jeremiah, a significant Jer. 18. 18.
expression, noting more then ordinary skill in the black art, as to work a
work intimates exceeding industry, so to devise a device, surpassing
subtilty; the venomous Spider spins not a finer thread out of her bowels, then
malicious men do out of their Brains. But oh let such remember, that to be
wise in doing evil, is the worst wisdom, it is better to be a mere fool then
so wise; every sinful act, the more skill there is in it, the more sin; and
wit, which sets off other things, makes sin the more ugly.

2. See how dangerously the wise men were ensnared, how cunningly Herod had
almost drawn them into his Vide Chrysostom. i^ loc.
design, so that in all probability, had not a gracious warning by a dream
diverted them, these friends of Christ had betrayed him into his enemies hands.
Observe what a piece of service the wise men were to have done for Herod, they
should have been his spies, in searching out, and his informers in bringing
word; they should have taken a great deal of pains in going, seeking,
returning, and thereby (though ignorantly) have furthered Herod's bloody intent,
and hazarded the childs life.

Thus are the good sometimes abused by the crafty, and pious men apt to be
ensnared by specious pretenses, into desperately wicked designs. Credulity is
the fault of honest hearts, because they are single themselves, they look to
find all so too; nay, the best men are soonest deceived, being apt to think all
gold that glistereth. It is not seldom seen that overmuch charity betrayeth
wellmeaning men into a good opinion of others, and so by being too charitable
to others, foolishly ensnare themselves. Though charity be not with Bartimaeus
stark blind, yet many times with Leah she is bleare-eyed, St. Paul says of
her She bears all things, believes all things, 1 Cor. 13. 7.
hops all things, and in this she sometimes erreth on the right hand,
believing and hoping too much of them, who indeed deserve little credit. These
wise men might very well have suspected Herod in the secrecy of his dealing, in
his negligence to go himself, in the mean title he gave the Messiah, but
their charity too much Eclipsed their wisdom, and so not misdoubting his
intentions, they purpose to fulfill his charge. Nor was this like to have been
their unhappy fate alone, it is too often seen, that through too much
familiarity with, credulity of, charity toward dissembling Hypocrites, persons
really well affected, are not only brought into an high conceit of their
persons, but partnership in their designs. We need not go far for
instances, the sad experience of these times may produce many, and those not
only simple but knowing, whom the fair words of Herodians, and their own
facile belief has involved in mischievous undertakings.

1. To end this, Censure not, as all to be heretical, who may be seduced to
erroneous opinions, so neither all as rebellious, who may be accessory to
traitorous practices. Have thou been preserved from the enchantments of
seditious Korahs? bless God, but be not too unchariable toward those that
have been deluded; some of them may possibly (with these in the Text) be both
good and wise men. Nothing more easy then for those who can make Religion,
Oaths and Laws, the covers of oppression and rebellion, to deceive, and that
the best of men, and therefore while we abborre those, let us pity these, whom
not w^lsuinesse but weakness has betrayed; not badnesse of intention, but
want of consideration has made contributary to, and assistant in violent and
virulent designs.

2. Learn we all that admonition of our Savior, to be wise as Serpents, and
innocent as Doves. Let us earnestly beg of God, that Wisdom from above,
whereby we Mat 10. 16.
may discern of things that differ. Let us not be so simple as to believe
every word, and let us walk circumspectly, that we be not entangled with
specious wickedness, and so much the rather let us fear and beware,
considering how good men have been caught in such snares. Profane story tells
us of Theodorus, a godly and learned Bishop, whom Andronicus a wicked usurper
won by fair shows to be of his party, and the Text of wise men, who receive a
Commission from Herod, and (had not God prevented it) would have executed it,
to the ruin of Christ eventually, though not intentionally, and all because of
their inconsideration, and his fair promise, which leads to

His ample promission, That I may come and Worship him also. 3 Genesis


In which part of the Text, we have two considerables:

1. A racile insinuation of the wise men's Piety. 2. A plain demonstration of
Herod's Hypocrisy.
1. The kind of the Argument here used by Herod, is very observable. How does
he Wo^e the Magi to a return, not by promise of ample rewards upon the
faithful discharge of their Commission, nor by threats of punishment upon
their neglect, either of them might have begot a strong suspicion of the plot,
but Mentitus pietatem, Guiliaud. in loc.
captat Magorum benevolentiam, promising imitation of their virtues, he wins
upon their affections, this being that which would more rejayce them, then any
gifts, to see Herod with them a Worshiper of Christ. It is indeed, next to Gods
glory, and his own felicity the singular desire of a pious soul, that he may
draw others to Christ. Sin is infectious, and Grace is communicative, wicked
men would have others as bad, the Saints others as good as themselves; Paul
wished that all were like him in his Piety, though not in his sufferings: the
Pharisees compass Sea and Land to make a Proselyte, the wise men would
willingly go to Bethlehem, and return to Jerusalem to make Herod a Christian.
The Saints account it their Honor, know it their Duty to gain souls, and
therefore cause the light of their good works to shine before others, that
their feet may be directed into the way of peace.

2. But to let this go, that which in this kind of argument chiefly presents
it self to us, is not the wise men's Piety, but Herod's Hypocrisy. That I may
come and worship him, who could have said better? what could the wise men
desire more? words smooth as Oil, sweet as Butter, if you please we will
enlarge them in this paraphrase; Welcome you devout strangers, whom piety
toward Christ has brought from a far Country to my Territories, your
Devation is worthy not only of commendation, but imitation; acceptance, but
resemblance; and as for my self, I am resolved to tread in your steps, and
write after your Copy, only I would not be mistaken in my Homage, and Worship
I know not whom. In what place to find the child I have been instructed by my
Learned Counsel, it is Bethlehem; which of the children in Bethlehem is he,
let it be your care to know, thoroughly inform your selves, and then acquaint
me, and I shall readily follow your pattern, and though my self a King, become
with you a fellow subject to this child. These were his words, but what was
his aim? cast your eyes on the thirteenth verse, and you shall find the Angel
declaring it to Joseph, Herod will seek the young child to destroy him, Ver.
13.
Nascenti mortem, scelus pio, nudo gladium, soli milites, vagienti necem
praeparat, He intends death to this newborn Chrysol.
Infant, and prepares a Sword for this Innocent child: The words which came
from his mouth, never entered into his heart; yea, while Butter is in the one,
Gall is in the other. Cogitabat Jesulum non colere, sed tollere, non adorare,
sed necare, his purpose was not as a Saint, to worship him, but like a wolf to
worry him, Devotionem promittebat, gladium acu^bat, whilst he promises
devotion, he purposes destruction; Praetendit cultum, praeparat cultrum, he
pretends Homage, and yet prepares a Knife, his aim being not servire, but
saevire, service, but slaughter. Dissembling Herod, hew gross was thy Lie,
odious thy Hypocrisy, and divellish thy deceit? Thou say thou will come,
thou meanest to send; thou say thou will Worship, thou meanest to Murder;
thy pretense is adoring, thy thought abhorring; thy promise is to give him
honor, thy purpose is to take away his life; thy pretext amity, thy design
cruelty; thy expression religious, thy intention impious; thy profession to
fear him as a King, thy resolution to execute him as a Traitor. Thy device was
incomparably foul, thy pretense speciously fair, thy deceit must needs be
unmeasurably great, in saying, Bring me word that I may come and worship him
also.

To draw it forth in a threefold observation:

1. In general, observe how seldom Hypocrites tongues and hearts go
together, Aliud cord tegit, aliud ore simulat, says one upon the Text; Herod
means one thing, Guill. in loc.
faineth another: so do all Hypocrites, Sapientia hujus mundi, cor
machinationibus tegere, sensum verb is velare, Chrysol.
quae falsa, vera ostendere, quae vera, falsa demonstrare; It is esteemed by
wicked men as a piece of policy to use Hypocrisy, and ever to keep a distance
between intima cordis, and extima oris, their inward thoughts and outward
speeches; so that whereas our Savior says, Out of the abundance of the heart,
the mouth speaks: Hypocrites speak not out of, but contrary to the abundance
of their hearts. It was the brand set upon Alexander the sixth, and the Duke of
Valentia his Son, that the one never spoke what he meant, and the other never
did what he spoke, so truly did they, and all dissemblers do, deserve the
Psalmists Epithetes, of lying flattering, and deceitful lips.

There are some indeed who tell us of piae frauds, Psalm. 12. 2. 1^0. 3.
a godly dissimulation, I like well the Christian, but not the Sir name, and I
wonder how any dare join them together, when the parties are not agreed. It
was not Rebeccahs aim, though pious, to obtain the blessing for Jacob, nor
Jehues pretense, though Zealous, to do execution on Baals Priests, will excuse
either of them in their lies, and make the means they used for accomplishing
their designs to be lawful; and surely if officious lies be not warrantable,
pernicious must be abominable, such as Hypocrites usually are, and Herod's was.

Indeed we must distinguish between concealing truth, and speaking falsehood, it
is one thing cum silendo absconditur verum, to keep in a truth, another, cum
loquendo, promittitur falsum, to belch out a lie. I am not bound to say all I
Greg M.
think, and yet I must think all I say; the tongue is but the hearts herald,
and must proclaim the senders message; he that speaks all he knows is not
wise, but he that speaks what he does not mean is not honest. I would not
have my heart too near my mouth, lest I speak rashly, nor yet too far from my
tongue, lest I speak falsely. Indeed were there no God to search the heart, he
were a fool that would not dissemble; but seeing there is, he is a fool that
will. Oh let us take heed of committing this folly with our lips, rather let
them be like the Spouses in the Canticles, which are resembled to Cant. 4. 3.
a scarlet thread, in allusion (say some) to the thread which Rahab hung out at
the window, as a token of her Josh. 2. 18.
fidelity in keeping promise with the spies, such let our words and promises
be. It was good advice which Fredrick gave the Senate, that simulation and
dissimulation should be left at the door when they entered into the Senate house;
far be it from Religion to allow of either. Let good David be our president,
whose mind was the Secretary, and tongue the pen, or if you will, the virgins
Psalm. 45. 1.
that follow the lamb, who have no guile in their mouths, Apoc. 14. 5.
or rather the lamb it self, the young child in the Text, of whom the
Prophet says, there was no deceit in his mouth, not Herod whose expressions
are not only besides, Isa 53. 9.
but contrary to his intentions.

2. More particularly observe, The matter of his promise is a courteous
friendly visit, that I may come, whereas the intent of his mind is a cruel
bloody act to destroy. Such is the usual practice of wicked men, to v^ile
their enmity with a show of amity, to put goodly paint on a rotten post, to
hide then sharp teeth with soft gums, and deadly poison in a gaudy box; Pacis
verba ferunt and caedibus omnia miscent.

their pretenses are a lasting peace, whilst their design is a lingering War,
like Absalom, whose name signifies a Father of peace, and yet his endeavor
was to be a fautor of Rebellion against his own Father. Thus Joab taking
Abner aside, in dolo to talk with him, pulls out dol^nem a dagger to kill him,
and makes a kiss the preface to his stab of Amasa: thus Judas, Dum mulcet,
mordet, by a courteous salute betrayeth his Master, And Nero kisses his Mother
with his lips, when he intends to wash his hands in her blood; so true is that
of all Hypocritical friends, Mel in ore, verba lactis fell in cord, fraus in
factis, whilst honey is in their mouth, gall is in their hearts, and venom in
their hands. Indeed it is the policy of the wicked, though malice boil in their
hearts, to let no scumme run over their mouth, nay to have lips burning with
affectionate expressions, and wicked hearts full of evious cogitations, men's
atra, lingua alba, their tongues flame as the fire in charitable words, whilst
their minds are black as the coal with mischievous plots: What a friendly
proffer was that which Saul made to M^litiose cogitabat ut ad consequendum hoc
Matrimonium David audacius se periculis expon^^et and si^ periret. Lyr.
David of his Daughter, upon the slaughter of an 100 Philistims, and yet his
aim and hope was by that means ^o have dispatched him, and instead of a
Marriage, solemnized a Funeral. Herod in the Text was used to this dissembling
art, he caused Aristobulus to be drowned, after a courteous invitation to a
banquet: and Nicanor whom he received peaceably, to be slain secretly; indeed
in all ages there have been, and will be ravenous wolves Vestem ex lino la^aque
^oni^xunt, qui sub locutione innocentiae, intus sublimitatem celant. malitiae.
Bed.
in sheeps clothing, such as are Neroes within, and Catoes without, such as
according to the moral note, on that of wearing Linsey wolsey garments, under
expressions of civility, hide intentions of cruelty.

What counsel therefore can be more fit in this case, then that of our
Savior, Beware of men, a duty not more Mat. 10. 17.
needful then difficult, it being hard to discern an enemy masked with
friendship: A Dog that barketh may be prevented before he bites, the Serpent
that ^^sseth before he stings, and the Fire that smoaketh before it burn; it is
easy to avoid a known enemy, but difficult to discover a seeming friend.
Learn therefore the advice of Solomon concerning such, When they speak fair,
believe them not, for there are seven abominations in their heart; fair speech
is Prove. 26. 25.
often times a strumpet, and makes belief as light as her self; but remember
that as too much suspicion is a badge of fear, so overmuch credulity is a
sign of folly. Many there are whose words speak them viros, men, affable men,
who in their thoughts harbor virus, deadly poison; and believe it that hatred
is most venomous, which is covered with deceit, aperta malitia is hurtful, but
operta most dangerous; no malice so cutting as that which is smiling. Pessimum
inimicitiae genus (says Cassiodorus) it is the worst kind of enmity to be an
adversary in heart, and a friend in word, nothing so much to be abhorred, as
inimica amicicia, this envious amity, and therefore when such say ave, think
on cave, when their salute is domine, remember it is but nomine; Fistula dulce
canit, volucrem dum decipit auceps,

if the Fowler play sweetly, it is but to deceive the silly bird; the Panthers
skin is fair, but his breath infects; and the friendship of Hypocrites is
fatal. I shut up this with that short and fit prayer; A Joabi eloqui^,
Thyestis convivio, Iscariotis Ave, Herodis redite, libera nos domine, From
Joabs conference, Thyestes his banquet, Iscariots salute, and Herod's promises,
good Lord deliver us.

3. Most especially observe, This worship which Herod here promises, was not
only a civil reverence, but a religious adoration: it cannot be imagined,
Herod would have gone to worship another King of the Jews, whilst himself
sat upon the throne, unless as apprehending him more than a King. The worship
which here he professes, is probably the same with that which the Magi
practiced, and that was no less then Divine. And herein was the height of his
Hypocrisy, that while mischief was his errand, Religion is his messenger, and
piety is made the mask of his cruelty. The act he intends is bloody, no less
then the babes life will cure his jealousy, and bloodshed is a crying sin,
it was plotted against no other then a King, and that highly aggravateth the
offense; and that there might be nothing wanting to complete his wickedness,
Religion shall be the cover, and under the show of worshipping, he resolves to
destroy him.

As Spiders suck poison out of the sweetest flowers, so wicked men abuse the
best things to the worst ends.

Salus populi, the public good, then that, what more fit to be endeavored?
and yet Caiaphas the high Priest, made this a pretense for murdering the Prince
of life, It is Joh. 11. 4^.
expedient that one should dye for the people.

Execution of justice on offenders, then this, what work more acceptable to God
and good men? yet under this color Jezabel falsely accuses and condemns
innocent King. 21. 15.
Naboth to death.

Liberty of the people, a pleasing pretext, and then just liberties, what more
desirable? but under this vizard a Family in Florence raised a mutiny against
their lawful governor.

Charity toward the poor, then this, what more commendable? and yet under this
mask, Judas hides his covetous desire of that ointment, which the woman poured
John. 12. (...)
on Christ's feet.

Piety toward God, then this, what more amiable? and yet Luther tells us of
the Anabaptists in Germany, that abusing the name of God, and pretending the
sincere Doctrine of the Gospel, they conspired the overthrow of Magistracy.

This last, is doubtless of all others the most odious, and yet no less
usual then the rest, to make Religion a pander to all vices. Consult either
sacred or profane stories, and you shall find Pride and Ambition,
Covetousness and Oppression, Malice and Revenge, Bloodshed and Murder,
Conspiracy and Sedition, have still shrouded themselves under a religious babit.

How often has Ambition caught hold of Religion, and made it a stirrup whereby
to mount into the saddle of honor? Absalon has a great mind to graspe the
scepter, makes himself strong by popular insinuations, assuring the people of
Justice, if he were ruler; and finding it expedient to retire for a while from
Court, that he 2 Samuel 15. 7.
might look better at a distance, he calls in a religious pretext to his aid,
the performance of a vow at Hebron. Anastasius being suspected of Heresy by
Euphemius, Patriarch of Constantinople, seemingly turns Catholic, through
which means he advanced himself; and afterward cast out the orthodoxe
Patriarch; and it is a known story of the Monk, who being a fisher-mans Son,
had a Net still spread over his Table, in a pious remembrance of his mean
original, till at last hereby advancing to the highest dignity, he threw away
his Net, saying, the fish was caught; the moral is verified by too many, who
only spread the Net of Religion, to catch the fish of Preferment.

And as Ambition has advanced, so has Covetousness advantaged it self by a
seeming Religion; Demetrius the Silver-smith becomes Zealous for Diana, but it
was to Acts 19. 34.
prevent the decay of his trade; and Simon Magus, though he seem very desirous
of the gift of the Holy Ghost, by the imposition of hands, that rather then
miss, he will Acts. 8. 18.
give money for it, yet it was but that he might make money of it.

Nor has Covetousness only, but Oppression, marched under the banner of
Religion. Jezabel makes use of a Fast to feed her Husbands humor, of getting
Naboths Audit a religio sis^imi sceler^^ ratione discessi. Salv.
v^neyeard: the Pharisees under pretense of long prayers, devour widows
houses: and Salvian tells us of an oppressor, who scrupled the restitution of
ill-gotten Mark. 12. 40.
goods, because of the obligation of an Oath.

Will you see Rebellion wear the livery of Religion? observe Corah, Datha^ and
Abiram, murmuring against Moses his dignity, under pretext of pleading for the
peoples sanctity. Numb. 16. 1.


Will you see revenge in a religious habit? view Simeon and Levi, who upon
condition of Circumcision, offered the Marriage of their Sister to Hamor, when
they Genesis 34. 15.
intended a bloody Sacrament, and a deceitful Marriage, hiding their cruelty
with policy, and their policy with piety.

Finally, Will you see murder the extremity of malice, and bloodshed the height
of oppression, washed over with a zealous paint? call to mind Jezabels taking
away Naboths life, under the show of vindicating Gods honor; Horod making John
Baptists head pay for the liberty of his tongue, with a pretense of keeping his
Oath, Mark. 6. 26.
and this Herod endeavoring through the fained promise of worship, to make
this young child a bloody sacryfice.

Thus has this grave Matron been made prostitute to all villainy, as if she
were a common strumpet, this beautiful virgin been defloured, and made to
serve every base design; so true is that common saying, In nomine domini
incipit omne malum. What sin has not been masked with Religion? and what part
of Religion has not been used as a cover for sin? Let Jezabels Fast, Herod's
Oath, Absaloms Vow, Simeon and Levies Sacrament, the Pharisees Prayers, and
Herod's Worship here abundantly testify.

And truly no wonder they are such proficients in these black Arts, who have
the Devil to be their teacher; Satan's best trading is by Metamorphoses, and
mutations, he once changed himself from an Angel of light to a Devil, and now
many times he transformeth himself from a Devil to an Angel of light, it was
the course he took with Christ, endeavoring to make him tempt and dishonor
God, under pretense of manifesting himself to be God, If thou be the Son of
God, cast thy self down, and no wonder if wicked men being of the Devil,
both learn Math. 4. 5.
his skill, and fulfill his lusts.

Besides Hypocrites well know, that this is the surest way to speed their
designs, G^liah his Sword lies wrapped up in an Ephod, no Sword to that, no
cruelty to an Hypocrites, whose sword lurketh in an holy Garment, and malice is
clothed with seeming devotion; indeed this is that which both renders them in
accomplishing more successful, and when fulfilled the more plausible.
Sedition, Oppression, Murder, are so foul faced and ugly in themselves, that
every one who sees them, would cast a stone at the actors of them, and
therefore they never appear but in the borrowed shapes of Religion, and a
seeming Zeal of Reformation.

But surely no Devil to the white Devil, and if it be possible for him to be
worse then himself, it is when he comes in Samuels mantle. And let all such
complexionmakers who daub over, not withered faces, but deformed vices with
false colors, know that Jezabels paint makes her the more ugly: sin the
better it shows, the worse it is, and so much the more odious in Gods sight,
by how much the more it is adorned. And however vain men may think by these
pretenses to cozen the purblind world, yet they can never stop the mouth of
conscience, when God wak^neth it, no^ blind the eyes of Heaven before whom all
things are naked, and the day is coming when all these vizard, shall be pulled
off, this paint melt away at the fire of that great day, and all their
villainies be laid open to the view of Men and Angels.

To wind up this discourse with this threefold Consectary:

1. Let not Religion be despised, because she is thus abused, nor all that
profess it, contemned, because some have perverted it. It is a bad
consequence, Many professors are Hypocrites, therefore I will be Profane; I
confess it is a sad stumbling block in wicked men's way to Heaven, when they
see men seemingly Religious, abhominably vile, and under the pretense of
Reformation, contemn all divine and humane Laws; but oh remember it is not
Religion, but the show of it, which such men take up, since true Religion would
learn them better lessons. Let this therefore be the conclusion thou make
from such praemises, abhor to be pious only in appearance, hate to make a show
without reality, let thy actions and thy profession accord, and (as Paulinus
told Severus, when he sent for his picture, Erubesco pingere quod sum, non
audeo pingere quod non sum) be ashamed to appear what thou art not. It was an
excellent reply of Livius Drusius to the Architect, who said he would build him
an house free from all men's sight, nay rather, says he, make it such as every
man may see into it: Oh let us so order our words, according to our thoughts,
our professions suitable to our intentions, and conversation answerable to our
religion, that we need not care though all men see, as being sure that God
sees into our inmost thoughts.

2. What Christ had found from Herod, but that God prevented it, persecution
under the show of adoration, let the Church expect from her adversaries, both
on the right and left hand; It is the note of Musculus upon the Text, speaking
of the wicked one, Cupit nocere Ecclesiae, simulat profectum Ecclesiae, cupit
extinctam gloriam Musc. in loc.
Dei, and simulat studium gloriae, cupit e medio sublatum cultum dei, and
simulat promotionem cultus. The Devil and his instruments are so politic,
that when they endeavor the ruin, they pretend the purging of the Church, and
when abolition is aimed at, reformation is professed. Indeed as Pirates hang
out their colors whom they intend to surprise, so Heretics and Schismatics,
when they would destroy, lay the greatest claim to Religion. The adversaries
of Judah and Benjamin, Ezra. 4. 2. Ecclesiae nomine armamini and contra
ecclesiam dimicatis. Aug.
say, Come let us build the house of God with you, when as their design was to
pull down. Celsus and Amtiphon writing against the truth, set forth their
treatise cum titulo veritatis, and Conradus Vorstius entituleth his book De
Deo, which is full of Atheism and Blasphemy against God. The Papists under the
name of the Church, fight against the Church; the Brownists, whilst they gather
Churches into a seemingly purer communion, spoil the Church of its union, and
scatter it with division. It is a sad complaint of Dr^go Hostiensis, how many
are there that say they are of the house of Christ, and the Church, and yet are
of Caiphas! Quod Petrus negando, hoc illi faci^nt affirmando, they dishonor
Christ, by professing him, God is in their mouths, and the Devil in their
hearts; under the name of Christ's Spouse, they act the part of a filthy harlot,
and Herod like, they pretend to advance Religion, that they may more closely
and effectually destroy it.

3. What Herod promised, let us perform, what he said deceitfully, let us act
really, Come and worship Christ. Oh let us have high thoughts of this little
child, accounting him a great God, and therefore to be honored and adored by
us. We read of a child an 100 years old, this child is as old as Eternity,
born in time, but begotten before all time. Oh let us all reverence in our
thoughts, embrace with our affections, serve with our souls, and adore with
our bodies this holy child Jesus.

Let us worship him, not as Herod, but as the wise men, go we with them to
Bethlehem, the Temple where the bread of life is distributed, follow we the
Star of Gods Word, and finding him let us fall down before him. Let us offer
with them the gold of charity, Frankincense of devotion, myrrh of contrition,
In auro regem, in thure Hil^^.
deum, in myrrha hominem confitentes, Gold as to a King, Frankincense as to a
God, Mirrhe as to God-Man. Let our care be adorare corporibus, venerari
officiis, honorare muner^bus, to honor him in our gifts, serve him Aug.
in our worship, adore him with our bodies, glorify him with all; so shall we
demonstrate our selves, not Foxes but Sheep, not subtle Herodians, but wise
men, not verbal, but real servants of Christ, every one of us saying from the
bottom of our hearts, To this child of Mary, yet Son of God, little Babe, but
great Jehovah, together with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be honor, glory,
praise, service and obedience yielded of us, and the whole Church throughout
all generations.

Amen.
FINIS.

