For the Magistrates and other Officers in Huntingtonshire, who have been
concerned in the Spoiling the Goods of the Innocent, who meet together in
Obedience to the Requirings of the Good Spirit of the Lord, to Worship him in
his own Way.
COuntrymen, unto whose Consciences my Life and Conversation, with many more of
my Friends, has been manifested to have been peaceable, and seeking the Good
of all People, and our Assemblies to have been peaceable, and our Meeting
together to edify one another in that which is good: And now, what have you
against us saving the Law and Worship of our God? Unto the Light of Christ
Jesus in all your Consciences I do appeal for Justice herein.

It is not unknown unto you, how that I, with many more of my Friends, have
been deep Sufferers in our Estates under Pretense of Virtue of a late Act to
prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles; but wherein I and my Friends are
guilty, does not yet appear farther then it is the Wills of Men it shall be so.
Now Friends and People, I do acknowledge; it is and has been my Practice ever
since I was convinced of the precious Truth as it is in Jesus, to meet with the
People of God, and to sit down and wait upon him in his Fear, and to worship
him in Spirit in Truth, and to draw near unto him, from whom I have often felt
Spiritual Refreshments, unto whose Honor and Glory my Soul ascribes the Praise
forever and evermore. But now, as to that Act which you pretend to act by, 1st,
It is entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles; which I
do deny being guilty of frequenting any Seditious Meeting; it is those Rude
Drunken Informers, who have often disturbed our Peaceable Meetings, and therein
shown themselves Seditious and Violent against us, who were always found and
known to be Peaceable in our public Meeting places, until they have broke the
Peace, and made a Disturbance: And it should have been the Magistrates place to
have punished those Rude Informers, who have so often disturbed our Peaceable
Meetings, who meet together for Good, and not for Evil. 2dly, The Act s;aith,
Who under Pretense of Tender Conscience, have or may at their Meetings contrive
Insurrections (as late Experience has shown) Now I do appeal to God's Witness
in your Consciences, whenever had you any such Experience of us? But I do
affirm, that you have had large Experience to the contrary for Twenty Years and
upwards, where our Meetings have been established by the Light and Power of the
Lord Jesus. But if you say, We know not but in time we may, and therefore we
would prevent you: Herein will not both Nature, ancient Laws and good
Conscience witness against you? Who will punish a person or people who does
well, because you are jealous that in time to come he or they may do Evil?
Besides, Does not God's Witness in your Consciences witness for us, that our
Principle leads to Good, and not to Evil; let God's Witness in your
Consciences be judge in this and of other Matters, and then Righteous Judgment
assuredly will be given. 3dly, That Act forbids the number of Five or above,
besides those of the Household: Now I say, if five or four, three or two, meet
for Evil, they ought to be punished according to the Nature of the Evil acted:
but if two, three, four, five or five hundred meet together for the Good and
Edification one of another in the Lord, they ought to be encouraged, and the
Magistrates ought to preserve them therein; and for this End pay we Tribute,
that we might be preserved in Body and Estate, and live a peaceable, Godly and
quiet Life, in all Honesty under the Government, but if otherwise, we must
suffer for our Obedience to God, it is our Principle patiently to suffer under
them that are set over us, and so commit our Cause unto the Lord; and this was
the Practice of Christ Jesus our Lord, and his faithful Followers, when he was
in that Body prepared to do his Father's Will, and his faithful Followers after
his Departure, when they were endued with Power from on high. And so I would
that all our fellow Creatures, male and female, did rightly know us and our
Principle, that so they might come and sit down with us, and receive an Earnest
of that Inheritance and Riches which no Evil Instrument can take away, and a
Place in that Habitation, which is Everlasting.

Friends and People, if we were but only Pretenders to worship God, we were
then of all People most miserable, but Thanks be to God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, he has given unto us, not only that Knowledge, that we can say it is
the Truth, but Praises to his most holy Name, he has also given us to feel,
taste and handle of the Word of Life, whereby we know sensibly all things in
this World to be of no Value, in Comparison of the Riches of his Love to our
Souls, even to as many as walk before him with a perfect and upright Heart.
Christ Jesus our Lord who was numbered amongst Transgressors, above Sixteen
Hundred Years since, as you may read in the Scriptures of Truth, he set up this
Worship in Spirit and in Truth, which we bear Testimony unto, and suffer for,
when he testified the End of the Worship in the Mountain, and the Worship at
Jerusalem, and said, Not in this Mountain, nor at Jerusalem, but they that
worship the Father must worship him in Spirit and in Truth; for the Father
seeks such to worship him. Friends and People, we were Strangers as well as
others, but Christ Jesus the Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls sought us out,
and by the Arm of his Almighty Power has brought us to be a People, who were
in Days past not a People to God, but Strangers and Aliens, and wandering upon
the barren Mountains and desolate Hills of diverse Professions, seeking Rest,
but found it not, until the compassionate Creator, who beholds the secrets of
all Hearts, beheld us in our Blood, laden with Sin and Iniquity and had
Compassion on us, and did reach forth a Hand of Help unto us, and by the Light
of his Son Christ Jesus did show unto us the Way in which we should walk,
wherein we have and do find Rest to our weary panting Souls, praises to his
most holy Name for evermore!

So Friends and People, there is great need of our Faithfulness in so weighty a
Concern as this, wherein so great a ^tress lies of our Eternal Happiness by
being faithful unto him that has called us; for if we deny him before men,
then will he deny us before his Father which is in Heaven, and whosoever loves
any thing more then him, will not be found worthy of him.

And now be it known unto you our Country Folks, that it is our Rights to enjoy
our outward Estates, which the Lord has lent unto us, and made us as Stewards
of amongst you, where the Lord has cast our Lots, but rather then violate the
Law of God in our Consciences, we are contented to part with them for his Name
and Testimony Sake; but what will you do in the Day of Account, or how will you
appear before so dreadful a God, who will reward the Evil doers with sore
Vengeance? Oh People who have had any Hand in spoiling the Goods of the
Innocent! Repent, Repent, yea I say seek a Place of Repentance before it be too
late. It is the Earnest Desire of my Soul that every one of you our Persecutors
might find a place of Repentance, that so your Iniquities might be blotted out,
and not be your Ruin. So whilst the Spirit of the Lord strives with you or any
of you, and shows unto you your Evil Deeds, turn you unto it, that by it you
may come to be purged from that Guilt and Transgression which otherwise will be
your sore Distress in the Day of Account, which will shortly overtake you.

I do justly complain of your cruel Proceedings and Actings against me and
others, by Pretense of the said Act. In short, I have had Goods spoiled to the
worth of near forty Pounds, and now at this time there are two Warrants issued
out against me, one for fifty Shillings, the other for Ten Pounds Ten
Shillings, and they that have been Witnesses against me, are men of the basest
Sort, who for their Pains have had Part of the Spoils, or money that has been
made of the Goods distrained, for which they have thus sworn and informed. And
is it not contrary to Law that a man's Oath should be taken, when it is for his
own Mercenary Ends, in his own Cause? And is it not the Informers own Cause,
when they have Part of the Money for their Swearing and Informing? whether true
or false it has been little notice taken of, but if two men will but swear to
it, we must suffer, and they for their Injurious Work have a Reward: And is not
this unreasonable to be encouraged? I leave it to your Judgments who are
knowing in Law. At our late general Meeting at Earith, where we were peaceably
met together, according to our usual manner, to wait upon and worship the Lord
God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth (for which I stand fined Ten Pounds Ten
Shillings, upon the Oaths of these Informers or some of them, viz. Stephen
Perry of Cambridge, Thomas Gilby of Blunsham, John Pottal of Somersham, who
came into our peaceable Meeting in a very rude, distracted, outrageous manner,
being so in Drink they could not give a sober Answer, nor some of them speak
plain, having been several Hours in an Alehouse to fit themselves for that
Service, yet these and such like Instruments, have and do serve to make
sufficient Witnesses for the spoiling the Goods of the Innocent. Whether true
or false they speak and swear to is not the Question, nor are we so much as
heard Face to Face, which Privilege Fellons and Murderers have in their
Trials, but if the Informers will swear it shall serve to send out Warrants to
destrain our goods. Were it an Offense to be at a peaceable Meeting at Earith,
yet they that were not there, were not Offenders for being there, as for
Instance, Thomas Cook of Earith who was not there that Day, and yet a Warrant
out to destrain and take his goods! was ever the like heard of in any professed
Christian Nation, or is this the Spirit of Christ think you People that thus
acts in these men? unto the Just Witness of God in every Conscience, I do
appeal for Justice.

Further your Act is made against such as meet under Color or Pretense of
Exercise of Religion, in other manner then according to the Liturgy and
Practice of the Church of England. Now I do deny that ours is but a Pretense,
but I do confess it is in Reallity and Truth to worship God that made me: And
does not your Liturgy allow and exhort, at all times and in all Places to pray,
lifting up holy Hands to God, then I hope it is not a Transgression if we pray
in a Barn, House or Yard or Backside. Your Liturgy has many good Words and
Exhortations in it, which if they were practiced by the Hearers thereof, there
would not have been that Spoil and Havoc made upon the Goods of the Innocent,
as has been these six Years last past. Now according to the real Words of that
Act, I do not understand that we are the People, neither ought we to suffer by
it.

But if any say, it was intended against us and all other Sectaries, and so is
left to the Justices to construe most largely and beneficially for the
suppressing Conventicles. Our peaceable Meetings are not Conventicles, nor
ought in Justice to be suppressed; for no such Experience late or early have you
ever had, but if you will construe it so, be it upon your Heads in the Day of
Account, when the Just God shall reward every one according to his Deeds done
in the Body.

And now come Persecutors of all Sorts, from the highest to the lowest, let us
reason together a little, A little while and you and we must be gone unto our
long Homes, and then what will the Glory of this World and the Riches of it
avail us. Remember Dives who had his portion in this Life, and had not
compassion on his Fellow Creature, although I do not read that he took away
that which was Lazarus's yet his Hard-heartedness was his Burden, when in the
Flames, and then he would have had his five Brethren warned that they might not
come into that Place of Torment, and would have had Lazarus sent from the dead
to warn them, But if they will not believe Moses and the Prophets, they will
not believe though one rise from the dead (it was answered him) Oh how this
poor Dives pleaded, for then he was so desirous to have his Brethren warned
that they might not come to be his Companions! But how many Warnings this
Nation of England has had, it is hard to Number, even by Witnesses, who have
been raised from Death, which is in Sin, and from the Grave of Iniquity, to
bear Testimony to the Everlasting Truth, as it is in Jesus, and for the turning
of People from Satan's power to the Power of the Lord Jesus, the Light of the
World, tha^ by it People might come to know a being washed, purified and
sanctified: And what has been the Reward from the Rulers? These Witnesses have
received Prisons, many till Death, others Whipped as Vagabonds, some stocked,
sometimes others Stoned by the rude tumultuous People; yet he that sent them
forth has been with them, and supported them through all these Sufferings, and
been a sufficient Reward unto them even as in days past, and in Generations
that are gone; he has been a sufficient Support in all Trials and Exercises
which any has met withal, as they have abode faithful to the Light of the Lord
Jesus* So People, it is in vain to strive against the Lord; for he is stronger
then you: therefore submit unto him, that he may break you, that a New Lump you
may become; for, if he fall upon you, you will be ground to Powder. Therefore
whilst you have Time, prize it; for the Time past none can call again, neither
Time to come can any truly promise to themselves.

Lawmakers, did you intend this Act for a Snare for the Feet of the Innocent?
God, that Judge of all Secrets, knows your Intents therein, and our Innocence.

Informers, did or do you intend or think to make your selves Rich by the Spoil
of the Innocent, who have no Helper in the Earth? A Curse will follow you, you
Vagabonds.

Justices, so called, did and do you think to save your great Estates by giving
out your Warrants to Distrain us, and take away ours, who had small Ones, and
yet God's Blessings upon our honest Labors, if you would have let it alone
with us? God has, does and will plead with you in secret.

Constables, Church wardens, Overseers of the Poor, etc, who have had a hand in
taking away and spoiling your Neighbors Goods, contrary to the Light of Christ
Jesus in your own Consciences, for fear of suffering your selves; will your so
doing bring you Peace in your Latter-end? With the Light of Christ Jesus search
yourselves, and see how it stands with you; for you must give an Account hereof
unto the great God, that made Heaven and Earth.

Covetous Earth worms, who have bought our Goods, which we have truly labored
for, at an under Value, sometimes three penny worth for one Penny; what do you
think they will enrich and enlarge your Estates? No; they will be as a Moth in
a Garment.

Persecutors with Tongue, and Speakers Evil of the Light which you could never
comprehend nor in your carnal wisdom never shall; what do you think to possess
by killing the Right Heir? No, the Lord of the Vineyard will come and
dispossess you; such shall be established in the lasting Possession, as will
with Gladness of Heart yield unto him of his Fruits in due season: Praises be
given unto the Lord, many can say of a Truth, The Sun is risen that shall never
set more, and it is in vain for the Night Fowlers to spread their Nets: And so,
in that Habitation that God has prepared me, where no Wicked Informer nor
Instrument of Satan can come, I rest; who am a true Lover of Magistracy and
Justice, and a Well-wisher to all People,

Feneystanton, the 13th Day of the 4th Month, commonly called June, 1676.

Tobias Hardmeat.

THE END.

