CHRISTIAN Geography and Arithmetic Or a True Survey of the WORLD: Together
with the right Art of numbering our days therein. Being the Substance of some
SERMONS Preached in Bristol:

By THOMAS HARD CASTLE Minister to a particular Congregation there.

1 Cor. 7.29. (...), opportunity is furled up as a sail.

Psa. 39.4, 5. Lord make me to know mine, end and the measure of my days what
it is, that I may know how frail I am

Behold, thou have made my days as an hand breadth, and mine age is as nothing
before thee; every Man at his best Estate is altogether vanity.

London, Printed for Richard Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in Paul's Church
Yard. 1674.

To my Honored and worthy Friends, Mr. John Smith, and his beloved consort,
Mrs. Anne Smith at Battersee.
BY prefixing your names, the World will easily suppose me under great
obligations to you, though it is as far from my design, to give, as I know it
is from your desire, to receive flattering expressions. A few Weeks ago I
thought my self far enough from making use of your Names, or any ones else in
this kind. The sense of that Providence A dangerous fall at a Trap-door
which you met with, when you were last at Bristol (which did so suddenly bring
you even to the Gates of Death, and almost as speedily restored you again) did
give conception to the most of these Psa. 90.12.
meditations: and because your urgent affairs prevented you of the opportunity
of hearing them Preached, I was willing you should have a sight of them, that
they might be your monitor and keep you company; the best stand in need of
their Memento Mori's: for whichpurpose I began to transcribe them, intending
nothing more than your, private view; but continually and Bramham Toulston
Oglethorp Ceeds Shadwel Wakefield
sternuously followed with these considerations which daily increased upon me,
and would not be avoided, viz. That I had many Friends in Yorkshire, Pontefract
Hull Beverly Langlon Thoraby York Barwick in Elmet etc.
where I drew my first Natural and Spiritual Breath, for whom I have endeared
affections, and whom I have daily in my remembrance; that the first fruits of
my Ministry was sown among them; that I had spent some years there in several
Places, Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, the Lord having made my poor
Endeavors useful to some: and especially that I ought not to forget, how Satan
envying the Conversion of Souls, and that the Lord Jesus should have any
Public Worship, did stir up some of his Instruments (Persecutors and
Apostates) several times for some Years together to Molest us, Fine us,
Imprison us, and Impoverish us; also how Graciously the Lord was pleased to
manifest himself in our Assemblies, and so by his Spirit wonderfully to
support, strengthen and encourage us under losses and long confinements, that
through Divine assistance we were enabled to hold on in the Lord's way to the
last; those that gave us trouble being in the issue, either weary of their own
Work, or convinced of the honesty of our's, and the integrity of our Hearts
therein: that these my Fellow Sufferers together with all the rest that did
sympathize with us, and remember us in our bonds, as bound with us, should be
under some visible Character of my cordial Love, and seeing the Providence of
God had for the present set me at so great a distance from them, that I was
utterly disabled from doing or receiving good among them, I should put
something into their hands, which might stir up their pure minds by way of
remembrance. I knew no more Useful Lesson to recommend to them, 2 Pet. 3.1.
than this of Right Numbering their Days, which may put them upon a serious
consideration of their days past, a due improvement of the present, and an
Holy preparation for those few and evil ones that are remaining.

I am also made in this small undertaking, to have a sincere respect to the
Members of that Ancient and Honorable society (whereof you are now a member)
formerly walking with Mr. Henry Jessy where for some time; Now under the care
of Mr. Jam. Fitten my old Friend and Fellow sufferer and and Mr. Hen. Forte
I did enjoy Comfortable Communion, till the Providence of God removed me
thence.

And now I know that you will not be troubled, that you have been the occasion,
and made way for me, that I might discover some of that true Love I have for my
old Friend (and Native Country) whose Souls I hope I could serve with laying
down my own Life. But that I may not grow tedious to you, I shall only further
tell you what I latly heard of you, from the mouth of a Judicious Christian, who
has many years been intimately acquainted with you, both before and since your
(signal) Conversion: Mr. Smith is an honest Man with all his faults.
more need not be said of the, best Saint in the World, and less cannot be said
of the weakest; I confess I was much taken with the expression, and therefore
mention it not only, because it is inoffensive (having neither flattery nor
reflection in it, both which I loath) but because it may be of use to some; if
he had said you had been an honest Manwithout faults, or but with a few; or if
he had said, that he is a Man blessed with rare accomplishments, admirable
endowments, he can speak with the tongue of Angels, he has the gift of
Prophecy, and understands all Mysteries, and all Knowledge, he is willing to
bestow all his goods to feed the Poor, and is ready (if need be) to give his
Body to be burned etc. 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. But he has one Fault, I should have
liked it leaft of al, for, it would have looked like that in 2 Kin. 5.1. Now
Naaman Captain of the Host of the King of Syria, was a great Man with his
Master, and honorable, because by him the Lord had given deliverance unto
Syria; he was also a mighty Man in valor, but be was a Lepert: Or like the
young Man in the Gospel, whom Jesus kissed, and his Neighbors applauded, but
he lacked one thing, Mark 10.21. It seems the Righteous Man with his seven
falls a day remains an upnight Man; for, he does not fall willingly, he rifeth
again speedily by Repentance, and he mourns daily over his many humane
frailties and infirmities: David, and Job, and peter, Were honest men with all
their faults, though if the least iniquity be allowed and indulged, no Man can
be an honest man with all his good Works, and Religicus performances. But
Sincerity is a Grace of that excellent Nature, and universal inflaence, that it
gives Life, reality and a beautiful complexion to all other Graces; it unstings
infirmities in the sight of men; and ( through the merits of Christ) gives
boldness to transgressing Sinners, to draw near to the King of Heaven, not only
with expectation of acceptance, Pro. 11.20. Heb. 10.22
but of complacency and great delight.

Lastly, For you ( Mrs. Smith
my dear Friend) I have only this to say to you, that I am persuaded your
Soul's in a good state for all your fears and complaints of a treacherous and
unbelieving Heart, which are incident to the best of Saints, and which the Lord
sometimes for reasons suffers them to be attended with more than some weaker
Christians. That you both may grow in Grace, and especially in the Life of
Believing, and be found still in the exercise of those good Works, (as the Lord
shall enable you) of Gospel Hospitality, of entertaining Prophers and Saints
(though strangers and exiles) with your liberality and bounty to the poor
Saints and People of God, and that under that very consideration and
denomination without more private and narrow respects: that you with all your
faults, and you with all your fears may be presented blameless at the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ; and When your little time is expired in this
troublesome, restless Earth (whereas a Man uncannot find a place to set his
foot easily) be safely landed in unconceivable and immense Eternity, shall be
the constant Prayer, whilst time lasts, of

Your Faithful true Friend in Him that is true. T. H.

To my loving Friends the Members and Hearers of that Congregation, which I
stand related to as Minister:
Dearly beloved Friends,
IT would seem strange if I should leave you out in this affair, since what is
here published was Preached among you, and they were your Sermons in the
Preaching. I have not much to Communicate to you in this manner, having so many
sfeasons of speaking to you, (blessed be God or the continuance of them) only
meeting with this fair opportunity, I cannot but make mention of that Universal
and continued Affection, I have met with from you, since the Lord by his
Providence brought me among you, I cannot likewise but take notice,(to the
praise of our Lord and your encouragement) of that union Love and moderation
there is among you: notwithstanding some difference in apprehension, your
soundness and stedfastness in the Faith of the Gospel, Mat. 28.20 * (...) 1
Cor. 11.26.(...)
your zeal and Love to the Name, Honor, Offices and standing Ordinances of the
Lord Jesus in this Age, wherein he has so many sorts of Enemies appearing
against him; your peaceable dispositions, together with your readiness to
suffer for, rather than run from the discharge of your Duties and Consciences
toward God, when Persecution and trouble threatened you, etc.

Let me exhort you to Bless the Lord for, and improve your present liberty;
pray that those whom the Lord has made to see it their interest not to fall
out with Religion, may come to see it their chief concern to fall in with it
prepare for worse times, and endeavor to see your own sins to be the procuring
cause of them; make trial what influence the right measuring and spending of
time will have upon the power of Godliness which is so much decayed. Be careful
to grow in Grace, and go on as it is your true desire, to strengthen
Christianity yet more in its more principal and vital parts, keeping up
Communion with God in serious meditation and servant Prayer giving Religion an
honorable and chief respect in your Families; daily renewing Acts of Faith and
Repentance, watching carefully over the Tongue: looking well to the Hand's that
they overreach not, nor withhold more than is meet; to the feet and
conversations that they be preserved without grieving and offending slips and
falls, etc. Finally, pray for me earnestly that I may approve my self a
Workman that need not be ashamed; If you would feel my Sermons, let me feel
your Prayers, and be helped by them. I shall conclude with that needful
admonition, Revel. 16.15. From which I have lately Discoursed largely to you,
Behold I come as a thief, blessed is he that watches and keeps his Garments,
lest he walk naked and men see his shame. That you may stand complete in all
the will of God and be kept by his Power through Faith unto Salvation, is the
constant prayer; and through Divine assistance, shall be the Hearty Endeavor of

Your faithful (though unworthy) Servant in the Work of the Gospel. T. H.

To Young Men.
THis little piece may be of use to you to carry in your pockets, and read a
few lines in it every day; you that think your time is before you, may yet have
outlived, and left your season behind you. You have had many powerful Sermons
Preached to you, many excellent Treatises dedicated to you, many servent
Prayers put up to the Lord on your behalf, many loud calls and grave
admonitions from God, your Parents, Masters and Relations; and if you could but
see your time to be precious, it would make all effectual for the welfare of
your Souls and Bodies, your true Honor here and Glory hereafter. Are not you
found sometimes in the practice of some things, for which the Lord of time
never created any time save a reckoning time? can you rationally conceive that
God ever made any time for Idleness, for Drinking, for Gaming, for vain
sporting and pleasure, for dancing, for frothy, (or filthy) communication, for
unruly passions, or any uncomely behavior? I shall only recommend those two
known words of Solomon, Rejoice (at your utmost peril) and Eccl. 11.9. Eccl.
12.9.
Remember (for your unspeakable benefit.) The Lord help you to give to him your
early and morning time and strength, he will take it kindly, and reward you
Honorably.

Farewell.
A PREFACE TO THE READER,
Christian Reader,
IF the shortness, swiftness, and importance of time were well weighed, what a
change should we see in the World! That Men may make truer and better measures
of it, than they have done is the honest design of this small Treatise. I have
sometimes thought that if persons would consider their words before they speak
them, and view their Actions before they do them, and value their time before
they lay it out, what examplary Christians would they be found! Thou will find
herein some account of that expression of Job, Man that is born of a Woman is
of few days and full of trouble, Job. 4.1.
some discoveries of that large influence, the right numbering of our days has
upon true Godliness in all the parts of it: the Discourse is calculated in an
special manner, for such sincere Souls as more affect matter than phrase who
desire to know only that they may practice, and place happiness not in
speaking, hearings, or knowing, but in doing; and therefore I have gone in a
plain and familiar way, consulting the weakest capacities. What good fruit
should we bring forth if we laid this ground, that the pleasures of sin, and
worldly grievances are but for a season! what good seed would be sown for our
Eternal welfare and being in the World to come! I could tell thee of strange
effects, which the true consideration of the transitoriness of this Life, the
certainty of Death, together with the duration of Eternity, has had upon Men,
to put them upon laying up a good foundation for time to come. I would take the
liberty to recommend unto thee, one or two passages of a story made use of by
an eminent Minister long since with God, Mr. Gar. Minister at Leea's Author of
the Demonstration of the Resurrection of Christ. Mr. Mansfield castle
which together with some other remarkable observation and hints of his, which
I have quoted in the following work were communicated to me by a good old
puritan one of his hearers. One story relates the conversion of King Edwink
about the year 600 together with his Kingdom, which contained especially
Yorkshire. Thus a wise Courtier of his, when he heard of a Christ, that
promises Eternal happiness was preached unto him, reasoned with him: This
present life of our's, O King, says he, in regard of the uncertain time that
was before us and shall be after us, is but like the flying of a Bird here,
through your entry in at one door and presently out at another, whilst you and
your Nobles in a stormy blustering day sit warm here about your Hall-fire; the
poor bird for small moment of time whilst she was in your entry felt not the
cold and stormy weather, but that was for a very short moment and presently she
did but as it were dart through from storm to storm: so this present life of
our's, is but a very short thing, but a Bird's flight through your entry, what
went before and what follows after we utterly know not, and therefore if this
new Doctrine bring us any more certainty, and after a short flight through this
entry, can tell us how and where we shall live happy for ever: by all means let
us embrace it, this was a great motive to his conversion as also of his People.

The other passage is of the Son of an Heathen Emperor, whom his Father, for
fear he should turn Christian, labored by all means to keep from entertaining
a thought of future happiness, or of Death, or of the shortness of this
Worldl's pleasures, lest hereby he should be driven to embrace the Christian
Religion, that promises after this Life, an Happiness Inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled and that, fades not away, reserved in Heaven for
us. The Emperor that his Son should never think of any such future happiness,
cansed him to be brought up in a most Glorious Palace, and attended there with
gallant attendants, fresh and comely and youthful, and that he should never see
nor 'bear of the miseries of this Life, as Death, old Age, Sickness, Poverty
etc. to the end that he should think of nothing but the present happiness;
afterward the young Man desiring to recreate himself with going abroad, his
Father appointed that the officers should take order that all things irksome
and unpleasant should be removed out of the way, and that there should be
nothing but Song, and Music, and Danceing, and delightful sights in his way;
but upon a time through the negligence of his Officers, he espied an old
decayed writhen Man ready to drop into his Grave; whereupon being somewhat
moved, he demanded what would become of that Miserable Creature? Answer was
returned that he should shortly Die, and be Buried in the Earth, and what shall
all Men Die likewise says he, or some only? nay all say they, all must Die;
and within how many Years? Eighty or an hundred at most, and when he had heard
this, it would never out of his thoughts but still he was mourning out these
Words, and what shall Death also seize within such a time upon me, shall I
within such a time bid sarewel to all my pleasures? why then Laughter than art
mad, and Mirth what do thou? and why should Madness be in my Heart whilst I
live, Et me more me a-liquando corripiet.
and after that go to the Dead, and then to have a Living Dog to be better than
I a Dead Lion? and thus his troubled Heart coursed him with these thoughts, and
would never let him res till Christianity brought him to a lively hope of that
other Happiness: Now it were good, as this made him of a pagan a Christian, so
our Hearts would course us thus to make same of us that are Christians only in
show to be Christians in Power, And the Earthy house of this Tabernacle shall
be dissolved.
and to be Sanctified by the Spirit of Regeneration that when we fail we may be
received into Everlasting Habitations: what a Madness is it counted in the foot
in the Gospel (...)
to say Soul set up thy Rest, when he was removed before he bad well, warmed
his seat! One of the Ancients tells a Story of one whom the World did strive as
it were to make Happy, he had an Healthful Body, he had pleasant Friends,
fruitful Grounds, good Succes;s in all things and what else might make for his
pleasure; and yet was miserable because he feared still, left all these might
quickly have an end: now he was well but he could not tell whether he might not
be Sick ere to morrow, now his Friends were Faithful, but etc. The Sea is not
to be trusted no not when it smiles upon us, in a moment it is all in a Storm,
and the same Day Ships are swallowed up there where they played at Anthor
before. How much does it concern us to learn the meaning of that, Eccles. 7.2.
Eodem die lusrunt navigia sorbent. sen.
It is better to go to the House of Mourning than to the House of Feasting, for
that is the End of all Men, namely Death, and the Living will lay it to Heart!
At the sight of the Spectacle of Mortality we will happily begin to consider
how vain all the Hopes and Purposes and Desires of Men here are, that now at
Death will have an End, and thereupon begin to think of some more solid and
enduring Heppines how should we Prize the Gospel andour Religion that teach us
how in this small pittance of time we may make good Provision for an Eternal
and Everlasing state! how should our Faith and Repentance, and Holy Meditation
and Communion with God, and Heavenly Mindedness be furthered by this, and
whatever it is that has a tendency to our well-being in the World that is to
come which shall never have an End! Consult Heb. 11.8, 9, 10. In the 32. Jer.
45.4, 5.
of Ezekiel there are reckoned up the flourishing and mighty Kings and Kingdoms
of the Earth, Egypt and Elam, etc. and still it is added and expressed of them,
that though they cause their terror in the Land of the living, yet they are
gone into the Nethermost Parts of the Earth; though by our Greatness and Riches
we may cause a little envy in the World, by our Parts of body or mind, beauty,
wit, strength or policy, cause a little admiration in the land of the living;
yet one Day ere long we shall go down into the nethermost parts of the Earth:
It Is said in the 27 ver. of, that Chapter, That the mighty Men are laid in
their Graves, and their Swords Under their Heads; the phrase (as a Learned Man
observes) is borrowed from the Heathenish manner of burying their Warriors and
great Worthies with their Weapons or Conquering Swords under their Heads; the
Wealthy ones that buy and sell and get gain, shall be laid in the Grave with
their Bags and Bonds and Evidences under their Heads; they that Glory in Titles
of Honor shall be laid in their Grave with their Coats and Scutcheons laid
under their Heads; the fair and beauteous that now rejoice in their fresh and
lovely complexions shall one day be laid for Worms meat in their Graves with
their Washballs, their Spunges, their PaintBoxes, and their Looking Glasses
under their Heads; the wise and learned shall ere long be laid in the grave
with their books and papers under their heads; finally the Men of appetite that
now delight themselves in their Drinks; and dainties shall in a very little
while be laid in their Graves with their revelling Cups, and service Dishes
under their Heads: think but of this phrase of laying thus one Day all these
things under your Heads, and lay them not now too near your Hearts. Mark our
Savior's Answer to those that showed him the Temple, and how it was adorned
with goodly stones and gifts; Are these the things ye look upon and admire? The
days shall come wherein there shall not be one stone left upon another which
shall not be thrown down; the Day will come that thy Riches shall be but a poor
winding sheet, and thy pleasures to have the clods of the valley sweet unto
thee: Jon. 3.4.
yet 40 days and Nineveh shall be overthrown) yet 40 days (it may be less)
and all thy Glory and Prosperity with thy Life shall have an end, and yet thou
art Jolly and Frolic and never thinks of that time, or the length of Eternity;
that theresore thou may not when it is too late cry out, call time again,
call time again, learn to make good Use of it now.It Is easier for to lose than
find a Day; there are time-servens, and there are time-savers and redeemers;
the errand of this piesce is to make thee one of the latter sort; if God will
bles;s this to any ones Soul, I shall think my self abundantly satissied for my
pains, and my great Design is answered: I expect no Praise; and for censure if
it be deserved it will come too late, for I have already placed the defects to
my own account; if undeserved and errata's, I shall gain by it; let me have the
benefit of thy Prayers, whoever thou art that reads these lines. To conclude,
this is no Point of Controversy, but rather an effectual means to reconcile
Differences; those that cannot now join together in Prayer, will in a very
little while if they be true Saints sit together Praising God, Rejoicing in and
Loving one another in a langer measure than ever they Loved their most Dear
Relations or intimate Friends upon' Earth. The shortness of time there is to
differ in, the absolute necessity, and incomparable Excellency and Sweetness of
mutual Love bear and full Communion hereafter, I desire may sway with me to
watch over my own Heart, that I stand not at a distance in Spirit from any
Saint of God upon the account either of apprehension or injury; as for the
Former I do not know that I was ever under a Tentation to Love any one less for
his True Conscience though not of my size. That thou may be fully instructed
in the right Art of numbering thy days, and prepared for the Evils and
Afflictions which thou must of necessity meet with in them, is the Hearty
desire of,

Thy Friend willing to serve thee in time about thy Everlasting Concerns. T.H.

CHRISTIAN Geography and Arithmetic.
Matthew. 6.34. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.


THere are two things which we find in the course of the Evangelists to lie
with much weight upon the heart of Christ, and which he seems to press upon his
followers, with a more than ordinary seriousness argumentativeness, and
affectionatenest: The one is, holy carelessness about the things of this life;
The other is, holy watchfulness and preparation for his coming: for this, read
over at your leisure these Scriptures, Mat. 24.42. to the end, and 25.13. Mar.
13.32. to the end, Luke 21.36. The former is that which at present falls more
directly, under my Consideration; having already treated of the latter in
diverse Sermons. That I may make way to my Text, be pleased to take notice of
our. Savior's general Dehortation, Ver. 25. Take no thought, etc. Observe how
particular he is, as if he designed to answer all the secret Objections and
Surmisings of an unbelieving heart; if I have Meat, what shall I do for Drink,
and if I have both, how must I get Clothes? why says he, be not careful about
any of these, and he gives us several weighty Reasons for what he says.

1. In the latter end of Ver. 25. Is not the life more than meat, etc. It is an
Argument from the greater to the less; he that has given life, will he not
maintain it? It Is less trouble and charge for him to make a Coat for thy Body,
than to frame thy Body which was curiously wrought, rare Embroidery, curious
Needlework; Ps. 139.19 acupictus sum.
a skin will serve for the Back, and the slesh will serve for the Belly, but
the placing of the Bones was not so easily done.

2. Argument lies in Ver. 26. From God's care of the inferior Creatures, the
Animals, the Fowls of the Air, and this is an Argument from the lesser to the
greater, It Is your heavenly Father that feeds them: The Master of the house
will not feed his Cattle without, and suffer his Children to perish for want of
bread within; If God cares for Oxen, then much more for Saints. Are ye not much
better than they?

3. Ground, ab inutili, from the unprofitableness of this anxious and
perplexing care, in Ver. 27. Which of you by taking thought, etc for neither if
you be solicitous, are you the better; and if you be not, are you the worse.

4. Reason lies especially against taking care for Raiment, from the
consideration of the Lillies of the Field, the Vegetables more inconsiderable
than the the Fowls, for they have life and sense, these only life; but Men have
Life, Sense and Reason, and Christians have more, for they are made partakers
of the Divine Nature and the life of God. If your Reason will not help you
here, one would think your Faith should help you; can you think that immortal
souls, for whom God has prepared such glory, shall be slighted here, and yet
the fading, withering, perished Grass be so much regarded! which way soever a
Christian looks, he may find Food for his Faith ^ When I see the Fields so
adorned, can I think that God will suffer me to go naked for want of a Covering.

5. Inducement is, ab absurdo, in the beginning of Ver. 32. It Is not ingenious,
not at all becoming you to be so carking and caring, it is a Gentilish
property, poor Heathens that know of no better things, may be allowed to seek
after these earthly matters; but it is not suitable for those that have been
acquainted with things of an higher nature, and of Eternal duration; it is not
worthy, not Christian; your Education and Expectation should teach you better
things, and spirit you to a more Noble and Honorable search and endeavor.

6. Incitement is, a non-necessario, in the latter end of Ver. 32. For your
heavenly Father knows, etc. He that made you, knows what you stand in need of,
what your Constitutions do require, how much will serve, how little Nature
requires, and how much less Grace needs, if you have but little, do not call it
Poverty, but Discipline; he is your Father.

7. Motive is, a proprio medio, from the proper and most effectual way and
means to secure a competency, and that is by seeking first of all the kingdom
of God, Ver. 33. He that would make Earth sure, must first of all make Heaven
sure; shall I be taking thought what to eat and drink here, and never fear
begging a drop of water hereafter? shall I be solicitous for Clothes, and do
not know but my Soul and Body may lie naked in the scorching flames of the
wrath of God to all Eternity? besides, I have a Promise of God for outward
things, if I make it my business to seek after Heavenly; it is a very needless
care; God provides meat for me that I may not be taken off my work to seek
after it.

8. Ground lies in my Text, and it is taken from the Consideration of that
sufficient trouble that each day is filled with; you need not fetch the misery
of another day unto this day, it has enough full enough of its own; some read
it, The day has enough with his own grief.

I now came to the Observations.
Doct. 1. Which is employed, The life of a Christian is to be reckoned by the
day: Sufficient unto the Day; not to the Week, or Month or Year, but to the
Day. I need not insist upon the proof of the Point. What says old Jacob, Fen
and evil have the days of the years of my life been. It is observable that
(days) Genesis 47.9.
is four times repeated in that verse. Job 14.1.5, 6.
So Job, Man that is born of Woman is of few days; His days are determined.
Turn from him that he may accomplish as an Hireling his day. Take a third
witness of this, and it is no other than a King and a Prophet; David; Psalm.
90.10
The days of our years are threescore years and ten, etc. But a greater than
all these is our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who tells us in the
Parable of the Laborers in the Vineyard, Mat. 21.2
that they were hired for a day, which is the time of life; and he calls his
own life a day: Abraham rejoiced to see my day. There is a Natural day, and
there is a Metaphorical day, a day of time, and a day of opportunity, season,
and dispensation; mark the expression of our Savior, I must work the works of
him taht sent me, whilst it is Day, the Night comes when no man can work,
whilst I have time, time, and whilst I have opportunity. So we read of the
days of his flesh; I might make this further appear by showing to you; Heb.
5.7.


1. That we are taught to beg our Bread for the day, Give us this day our daily
Bread, and forbid to take thought for to morrow; for why should I take thought
for Meat, when I know not whether I shall have a Mouth to put it in, or for
Clothes when I know not whether I shall have a Body to put them on.

2. We are to beg our pardon for the day, and to forgive our Brother to day;
forgive us our Trespasses this day: for as Jacob says, Thou may seek me in
the morning, and I shall not be; and for our Brother, Job 7. last Ephesians 4.26.
Mat. 5.2, 3
The Sun (which is the measure of the day) must not go down upon our wrath: And
if we come to the Altar, and there remember that our Brother has ought against
us, we must leave the Gift before the Altar, etc. we must not say that we will
do it to morrow.

3. Every night is a resemblance of Death; Death is called a Sleep, and the
Grave is called a Bed; the Sun rises and sets, which measures time.

4. The Commands and Promises in Scripture run for the present day, and none
for to morrow, Heb. 3.7. To day if ye will hear his voice. Ver. 13. Exhort one
another daily, whilst it is called to day; now is the accepted time: But to
conclude the Proof of this Point, I shall and this, that our whole lifetime is
very fitly compared to a Natural Day.

1. As a day is but a short space of time, so is our life; what is a day to a
thousand years? what is our time to Eternity?

2. As a day is cut off by the night, so is our life cut short and cut off
sometimes sooner sometimes later, some days are longer than others, but none
very long; some men's lives are longer than others, but never a long life among
them, all of them cut short, all of them cut off.

3. The day is succeeded by the night, so is this life by the darkness, the
days of darkness which shall be many. There is a day which shall not be
succeeeded by night, and there is an evening which shall be succeeded by light,
but it is not this day.

I now come to the Reasons of the Point, Why must our lives be reckoned by the
day; and they are principally these four.

Reason 1. Because our Breath is in our Nostrils, our Lives hang by a small
Thread, how soon are our Countenances changed, and we sent away? how many that
have been well in the morning, have been dead before evening, gone out in
health, and a dead Carcass brought home? or else they have died and been buried
abroad, and never came within their own doors more? how many ways may a man's
breath expire, and how quickly is it done? Ah, my Brethren, how little is this
considered, though nothing is more ordinary than to say, I little thought such
an one would have been gone so soon, what an healthful lusty Man was he, it was
but such a day I saw him, and I thought he never looked better since I knew
him, I thought I should have died long before him; was not he at such a place,
at such a Meeting but a few days ago? etc. Oh Friend!. Know his Breath was in
his Nostrils; and so it is with thee; there may not be a step between thee and
Death for any thing thou knows; a lurking Distemper in thy Body may rise up and
pull thee by the Throat, and all thy friends stand about thee, and none be able
to rescue thee, and save thee from that deadly Hand: A slip, a fall, a cross
accident, a Surfeit, etc. presently the health is gone. As it is with a
Venice-Glass very useful whilst it is whole, but one fall upon the ground
breaks it, and than it is good for nothing, but the broken pieces are thrown out
to the Dungbild So whilst breath is there, thou art very useful for many
things, can walk, and work, and advise and manage Affairs; but when once thy
breath is gone, and thy life like water spilt upon the ground which can not be
gathered up again thy dead Carcass must be taken up and carried out, and laid
in the ground.

Reason 2. Our times are in God's hands, and in our own, and we have no
assurance of another day, therefore no reason why we should reckon of it; My
times are in thy Hands: Psa. 31.15 Job. 17.1.
and so Job, Is there not an appointed time to Man upon Earth? are not his
days like the days oftan Hire ling? the dise of Man is measured; by the will
of God; hitherto shall ^iy time come, and not further. As thou can not add
one Cubit to thy Stature, so not one Minute to thy Days. It Is well observed by
one, as Christ is the Lord of the Sabbath, so God is the Lord of time; and they
who dye in a time when God forbids, yet dye in a time that God appoints. Some
men, nay most men, live as if they were Masters of their own time, as if they
had made a Covenant with Death, and Articles with the Grave. How does the
Apostle James reprove and cheek with all sevrity this great Pride and Arrogandy
in Men, that would be cutting out snippets, large threeds of time, when it was
not at all in their own power, but was another Right and this they would do
without asking any leave, we say leave is light: see Jam. 4.13, 14, 15. Go to
now ye that Jay, to Day or to Mrrow we will go into such a City; and continue
there a year, and buy and sell and get gain, Where as ye know not what shall be
on the Morrow, for what is your Life, it is even a Vapor that appears for a
little time, and then vanishes away. For that ye ought to say, if the Lord
will, we shall live and do this or that. After the like manner does the Prophet
Esaias Tax the Wretchedness of this Temper: To Morrow shall be as this Day, and
much more abundant. Isa. 56.12.
Time is God's peculiar and if he will not hold them Guiltless that meddle with
his Name, and Worship, and People, etc. no more will be those that take his
time and spend it upon their Lusts: Friend, who gave you leave to promise and
Design and contrive and lay Trains for so long a time? did you come and ask me
for my advice both about the thing and the time? I Will cut you short, I Will give
a nick in your time, and all your thoughts with all the links of them shall
perish and fall to the ground.

Reason 3. Because Satan and his Instruments are so Malicious and Bloody, and
are so bent against the Lives of Christians: that is a markable Expression in
Job 24.22. He rises up and no Man is sure of his Life; Wicked Men's Lives are
cut short by the Lord's just Hand, so that do not live out half their Days,
and Righteous Men's Lives are cut off by evil Men's unjust Hands, so that they do
not live out half their days, nor a quater; witness the many Bloody Massacres
that have destroyed the Lives of Thousands of Men, Women, and Children, Infants
and Sucklings. The Devil and his Instruments would not have you Live a Day if
they could help it; if Satan were let loose in a few minutes there would not be
a Person alive in this Congregation, and if the rage of the wicked was
permitted to do its utmost, none of us could easily escape long with our Lives,
whilst we are in this world. Among the Men of the World, we should walk with
our Lives in our Hands; Its Dangerous Traveling in some places because of
Wolves, and Bears, and Wild Beasts: I know no place in the World but is
infested with such Creatures as the Scripture calls Beasts, Lions, Wolves,
Dogs, Foxes, destroyers of the Earth; every Saint of God may safely say, that
he is afraid of Bodily harm whilst he lives here. Let me tell you God has
Wonderfully curbed the Egyptian Dogs, that no more Lives have gone than there
has; the Curs have been still barking, their Tongues have kept moving, but
their Hands have been pretty well tied up; Blessed be the Name of our God, but
that by the way. Observable to this Purpose:is that Passage of Cain and Abel;
And Gen 4.8.
Cain talked with Abel his Brother and it came to pass when they were in the
Field, that Cain rose up against Abel his Brother and slew him. There is the
same rising at Heart the same murdering Humor; and Sprite in every Cain against
every Abel, though there be not the same rising up: see for this and mark
diligently, 1 Job. 3.12.15. The ground of the hatred will always remain whilst
there are good and bad upon Earth, and therefore we may be expecting the
Fruits, he that hates is a Murderer, hatred is the Embryo of Murder. But
further, Jobs Sons should have reckoned their Lives by the Day upon this
account; whether they were good Men, or only a good Man's Children, needs not be
discoursed here, if only the latter it was enough to entitle them to Satan's
malice; who having a little lether-length given him, presently brings the House
about their ears, and Kills every Man and Woman that was there: see Job 1.19.
He was not long of doing it, he smote the four Corners of the House, he did it
to purpose.

Reason 4. The Irruptions and Inundations of the Ocean of Eternity, which once
in an hundred years overflows the whole Country, and carries away every living
Creature. Exo. 12.30
It was said upon that great Judgment of the Death of the firstborn in Egypt,
that there was not in House where there was not one death: not to mention those
great inundations of the Plague and Pestilence, which sometimes sweep away an
Hundred Thous and out of our City in one Year; London.
not yet those eruptions of the Sword which in a very few hours sinks Thousands
into the Deep, War and Sea Fights
and sends them into the great Gulf of Eternity: do but take notice of those
over flowings that are usual and common, which do not cause wonder, Oh that
they might procure more Observation than they do! what Day is there especially
great Places wherein there is not one or more found Dead? how frequently is the
Passing Bell founding in thine Ears? how many Spectacles of Mortality Old and
Young daily carried to the Graved? yet who lays it to Heart? Burials are so
frequent in Cities that they are not regarded, and so seldom in the Countries
that they are not taken notice of. How many has thou known Buried out of the
House where thou lives; if none, be sure thou Reckon of one every Day, and that
is of thy self, as well as of other: go over the city into every House, and set
whether you can find the same Persons sitting by those fire-sides, and lying in
those Beds, that sat and lay there twenty Years ago; thou will not find many
Houses from whence some have not been snatched; where Death has not crept in at
Windows, and carried away an Husband, a Wife, a Child, a Servant, a Friend: if
thou find a free house, bid them look to it, for the next stood that comes, the
Water may flow in at their Doors, and carry some of them as way into Ocean of
Everlastingness; there is no fenceing against Death, no capitulating with it;
it is usually, (though not always) so civil as to knock before it comes in,
but it seldom stays till you open the Door to let it in, and say welcome
Death, now Lord, let (...) thy Servant depant in Peace: it will not be
prevailed with for the least delay pray thee suffer me to go and bury my Father
to set my House in order, to give some directions about my Children and Estate,
no I cannot stay, come away; ay but let me first Pray to God, and deal with him
about my Soul, no, thou must come now as thou art: this is the fourth and Last
Reason why the Life of a Man, is to be reckoned by the Day. I now come to the
Application.

Use 1. Is it so then that our Lives must be reckoned by the Day, I note in the
first place, that every Christian is to do all he can do, and all he has to do,
upon the present Day, and leave nothing to be done tomorrow. What says
Solomon: Whatever thine hand finds to do, do it with all thy might, Eccle.
9.10.
for there is no Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom in the Grave
whither thou go; be sure thou even accounts daily, do every thing thou do
as if it were the last time thou should do it; how heartily, how carefully will
thou do it then! let me pray now as if I should never have time to pray more,
hear now as if this were the last opportunity of hearing: leave nothing to do
to morrow that possible can be done to day; what true Christians should we be
if we did not reckon of a Morrow. To Day is God's Day, to Morrow is Satan's
Day, how many would have been good to Day if they had not though of being good
to Morrow: Mr. F.
but see what a grand Deceit lies here; by putting it off till to Morrow we
gratify Conscience in this that we intend to do it hereafter, but most of all
please Corruption in this that we do not do it to Day. Consider then thus with
thy self, I will set all right with God now, I may be gone before Morning, I
may be taken away in my sleep and awake in Eternity; Nulla Dies sin^ linea, we
have been many Days but we have lived but few: well then this is the first
Use, do all thou can do, and all thou have to do Day, (...)
and leave nothing undone till tomorrow.

2. Let this put a check to the Cares and Pleasures of this Life; my Life is
but short why should my Care and Delight be long; it is not much we need nor
long that we shall need any thing, we have but a Body, a piece, and that is a
small one, and a Mortal one; long Reaches and Designs are very unsuitable to a
Man that has but a Days time. Famous is the Instance of the Fool in the
Gospel; Luke 12.19, 20. I will pull down my Barns, says he, and I will build
greater, and I will say to my Soul, Soul thou have goods laid up for many
Years, Eat, Drink, and be Merry; (...)
But God said unto him, thou Fool, this Night shall thy Soul be required of
thee etc. If he had only reckoned of this Day, he had not heard that dreadful
Word of, this Night, or at least would not have been dreadful to him to have
heard it.

Use 3. Hence we see what little cause we have either to fear or envy any man
in the World, any wordly great Man's what says the Psalmist, Surely thou did
set them in slippery places, how are they brought into Destruction as in a
Moments, etc. Psa. 73.18 19.
For this matter consult further those places, Job. 21.13.30. and 24.19, 20,
24. Rev. 18.10.17.19. Ezekiel. 34.27. etc. We use to say of some Men in a way of
Reproach and Scron, that they are but Yesterday-Men, and we may say truly of
the Greatest and Highest and Happiest in this World, that they are but Men of
to Day, no Morrow-Men; come to seek them in the Mornings and they may not be
Persecutors and Oppressors many threaten what they will do, but it may be to
Morrow they may be Sick, the next Week you may find them. Cold in their Graves,
I remember a Passage in Story of one Libanius, a great Favorite of Julian there
Apostate; Julian was gone in an Expendition into the East, against some that
had made an insurrection against him, and resolved at his returned destroy all
the Christians, and utterly to root them out; said this Libanius to one the
Christians in a Scoffing manner; where is now your Carpenters Son, meaning
Christ, what will he now do for you, to save you from the Emperor? to whom the
Christian replied Boldly, this Carpenter, as you call him, made the World; a
Work above any Carpenter, and he is now making a Coffin for Julian; and so it
proved, for Julian was slain before his return: I will pursue, I will overtake
says proud Pharaoh, the next News we hear of him, he is in the Bottom of the
Sea as Mute as the Fishes that seed upon his Dead Carcass; Oh that Oppressors
would consider this!

Use 4. Let this teach us Patience under the Greatest Afflictions; they are but
for a Day, or if you will but for a Night, no Man ought to think that he shall
be miserable to Morrow: our Days are but few: and therefore our Days of
Sorrow cannot be many. It is an hour of Temptation, if it grieve you that your
Comforts stay with you so little a while, they are but Day-Comforts, you cannot
prevail with them to Lodge with you; Why, let this relieve you that your
Troubles are but Night-Troubles, they will be gone in the Morning, they will
not abide in your House why should I complain much of that, which for any thing
I know may be ended before my complaint be at an end: For a Conclusion, let us
Labor to live under the Power of this Doctrine; if this Truth were Believed as
it should, Oh what abundance of thoughts, and Cares and Fears would be getting
out of the meeting before you, and you would never feel them more! how would
the Face of your Affairs and Families be changed! you would let alone and lay
by a great many things that you were very busy about before, and set upon
doing some things you never did before; or if you did them before; you would do
them so now as you never did them before: you would say, this thing must be
done and done to day too, or else I may be undone for ever: for other things if
I have time I may do them; but if they be never done it will be no great loss
to me: resign up your Lives into God's Hand's every Evening, and take them
again from him by a new Lease every Morning.

I come now to the second Observation, which is this.
Doct. 2. That every Day has its proper evil and peculiar Trouble attending it,
and enough of it. I need not stand much upon the Proof of it, every ones
experience bids me save my self this Labor, our daily complaints discover our
daily troubles! where is the Person that ever could say, this Day have I lived,
and met with no Cross, no Trial, no Disappointment, no Grief, no Perplexity,
every thing, every circumstance has been to my Hearts desire, I could not have
wished it otherwise; but however take a taste of Scripture-Judgment in this
matter: Old Jacob that tells you his years were few, tells you with the same
Breath, Genesis 47.9.
that they were Evil too; Job that says that Man that is Born of a Woman is of
few Days, does at the same time say that they are full of Trouble; Job 14.1.
and indeed seeing they are so full of Trouble its well for us they are so few;
and David that speaks of the shortness of our Days, added this, yet is their
Strength Labor and Sorrow; Psa. 90.10.
the best of them have Trouble enough in them. I shall endeavor further to
make it appear and evident to you in four Instances.

1. Daily Temptations cause daily Troubles; how can thou expect to be quiet
one moment, that has such an active and diligent Enemy, who goes about night
and day seeking whom he may devour? he sleeps not in the night time, much less
on the day time; he is upon thee continually either as a Tempter, or a
Troubler: what a quiet World should we have if it were not for the Devil and
his Instruments! what brave living will there be when they shall be chained up.
There is no place but the Devil is there; he is constantly at Meetings, and is
one of the first there, who-ever come late, he is there betimes; how should
this shame you for your late coming? what comes he for, but to disturb and
distract: with vain; unruly, worldly, wandering thoughts? if thou go into thy
closet, thou can not shut him out thence for he is there before thee, and
as soon as ever thou have shut thy Door, down he sits with thee, and presents
thee sometimes with one sort of thoughts, sometimes with another sort;
sometimes he bids make haste, get thee down, get thy Chapters read, and thy
Prayers said, such a business stayed for thee, such an one is to be spoken
with, and you must not fail, your Family wants you, a Customer waits, etc. be
but shout now, you may be longer another time: God is a God of mercy, if thou
be indisposed now, God is a God of pity, he will pass it by, he knows the flesh
is weak, etc. Sometimes again with other thoughts, if he sees thee sit down to
consider in good earnest about thy Soul; why, Soul, what do thou mean to make
thy; life so uncomfortable? Godliness is a cheerful thing, thou comes into thy
Closet, and thou thinks many a sad thought, and weeps a great many tears, and
puts up so many Petitions, and spends so much time, and thou art never the
better; this is but to turn as a Door upon the Hinges, this life is not to be
led, this is not to be endured, here comes no fruit at all; it might even be as
well not to make so much ado, and make Religion a burden, you may do your duty
to God, and please him as much with a great deal less trouble to your self; how
comfortably does many a good Christian live that do not spend so much time
alone, nor so many sorrowful thoughts, and yet are careful not to neglect their
Duty; put away these troubled thoughts, and try how it will be etc. This is
Satan's Language, and by the way let me observe four Deceits, Fallacies and
lies in these few Words he has spoken. First, It is a most false insinuation as
if too much time and care could be spent in good service. Secondly, The good
Christian he means, is the careless formal Professor, that is much a stranger
to the Power of Godliness. Thirdly, Here is a means to make thy thoughts more
sad and perplexed than they should be, that so he may provoke thee to throw all
away, all seriousness, all Godly Sorrow, as a Temptation. Fourthly, He would
put this quite out of thy Mind, that the Soul that diligently waits at the foot
of Christ Weeping and Mourning, though for a while Sorrow may rather seem to
increase than abate, yet shall certainly at last meet with full assurance, with
abundance of comfort, peace and satisfaction; they that sow in Tears shall reap
in Joy. But yet a little further, Satan is in the shop, in the Ware house,
counting house; meddling with buying and selling, egging on to lying
Equivocation, bad Wares, false Weights, Overreaching, Defrauding, and presently
after to anger and discontent with Servants; and it may be at last to
murmuring, this Trade will not do, we cannot make both ends meet, so many bad
Debts, so much Damaged Goods, such bad Markets; but if he be on the increasing
and thriving Hand, then he Tempts to a self-pleasing proud humor, Esa. 57.10
Thou have found the Life of thine Hand, therefore thou wast not grieved: and
now thoughts come crouding in how to keep up and enlarge Trade; Satan sits down
with thee at thy Table, and there he is Tempting to forgetfulness of God,
drawing fear off, keeping down thankful Spirit, prompting to sensuality and
gratifying appetite, etc. He lies down with thee, and is impatient whilst thou
art bidding God good night, and has other Work for thee, other Meditations than
those of the Name and Word of God; and as soon as ever thou awakes in the
Morning; he is with thee to distract thee and trouble thee: say now whether
Satan alone be not enough to fill every day with trouble. Secondly, No
condition free from temptations, the rich and the Poor, the high and the low;
Satan is in Kings Courts, and Beggars Cottages; he is with the sick Man, and
the Healthful, the Freeman and the Imprisoned, the Honored and the Reproached;
no place free, no Condition free.

2. Daily wants cause daily Griefs, to want is an Evil, a Misery, now the Body
and Mind are always wanting something: consider the restlesness of the Body in
a kind of tedious wearisomness stealing upon us in the very Reflections, the
interchangeable Reflections of the Body, we must Sleep a while till we be Weary
of that, and then we must Wake another while till we come to the former again;
we must Eat a while till we be weary of that, and Fast another while till we
come to the former again; we we must stand etc. Whatsoever we turn to for our
Ease, there again we find our wearying; these Bodies of ours are like wayward
crying Children, that are no sooner quieted with one thing but presently
complaining again; so I must walk, I must sit, I must cool, I must warm my self
again; like the Nurses toil, dress and undress, how long the very same things?
Again, consider the trouble of Laborious toiling and moiling in several
Callings and Vocations to get a little supply for the wants of the Body: since
the time it was said, in the sweat of thy Brows thou shall Eat thy Bread, the
World is become a great Correction of Workhouse, a General Bridewel to task us
all to our Labors; the very Bread we put into our Mouths, the very Clothes we
put upon our Backs, the very Houses we put our Heads into, what are they but
evident Arguments of Man's great labor and pains? As for the House, consider
what a deal of labor must needs come between the Timber standing uncut in the
Mountains, and the Stones unhewn in the Quarry, and the making of them now in
the form of a fit House to dwell in; as for thy Clothes thou put on,
consider but all the labor that comes between the Sheeps wearing them on their
Backs, and thy wearing them on thine; As for the Bread also which thou put
into thy Mouth, consider (besides the Plowing up the Ground) the great labor
that comes between the Seed-Mans hand casting it into the Ground, and thy Hand
putting it into thy Mouth; consider well but these, and then thou will
acknowledge many great labors every Day. I might add likewise the great
Trouble that comes in regard of Sores, and Sicknesses and Infirmities; they
know well what this trouble means, that tell the Clock whilst others sleep,
that have wearisome Days and Nights appointed for them, that are seldom free
from Pains and Weakness and griefs as much as they can well bear. Consider also
the manifold troubles of the Mind by reason of disappointments and discontents
from Friends, from Enemies, from Children, from Servants etc. will you now say
that our daily wants and troubles that flow from thence are not sufficient to
fill every Day with as much Affliction as ever it can hold?

3. Daily fears bring daily perplexities; have you a Day without its fears,
fears about the state of your Souls, whether your Faith be right, your
Repentance unfeigned, your Duties accepted, your Works wrought in God? whether
you have savingly closed with Jesus Christ upon Gospel-terms? whether you have
brought all to him, and take all from him? whether you are truly Married to
him, and can groundedly say, my Beloved is mine, and I am his; I hare every
false way, I have respect to all God's Commandments, so far as I am acquainted
with his will? Again, fears about holding out, my Corruptions are strong, my
temptations are pressing, I shall one Day fall by the Hands of my strong Lusts
and unruly Affections; if Persecution should come I should do as Peter did, I
should want Courage, I should dishonor God, I know not how to suffer
Imprisonment or be a Martyr for the Gospel and Ways of Christ: Again Fears of
Death, which keep some in Bondage all their days, every day they do uprise;
what shall I do when I come to Dye? I cannot think of it but with amazement, I
cannot look that King of Terrors in the Face, I neither know how to part with
my Comforts, nor yet how to endure the Pains and Pangs of Death, and least of
all to meet with God, who I have caufe to Fear is not at peace with me; and
then what will become of me to fall into the Hands of a Living God who is a
Consuming Fire? Again, fear of outward Want; how the World will hold out? how I
shall maintain my Family and bring up my Children; such Fears as these are
daily companions to some: though by the way let them consider that fear Want,
that they want nothing so much as Faith; a little more Trusting God, and a
little less sinful; foresight and needless care would do very well: Now tell me
whether all these Fears and a great many such like, be not enough to spoil the
comfort of our Day.

4. Daily defects and disappointments procure daily Misery and Vexation. The
shortness that is in every Creature-comfort, and which the Soul cannot but be
every day sensible of, must needs cause Trouble; I thought to have had such an
easy seat, and the stool breaks under me, I promised my self so much comfort in
this Child, How are my hopes, and expectation frustrated! I reckoned that this
design would have prospered and have done my Work, and I see it has failed me;
I see these Worldly enjoyments are but dreamish things, they are but shadows,
they can feed the hunger of the Soul, but they cannot feed the hungry Soul; I
have been Laboring for the Wind, I never plcased my self in any thing, but to
be sure I met with a Cross in it: these outward enjoyments promise more than
they can perform; I never leaned upon them, but they deceived me, I never
trusted them but they failed me, Riches, and Friends, and Relalations make
themselves Wings and they flee away; I was at the merry meeting but some things
were wanting, and some passages did not please me: and thus you have the proof
of the Doctrine, I now come to give you the Grounds and Reasons of the point,
(...)
how it comes to pass (as you have already heard how it does appear:) that
every day should be so full of Trouble, What is the matter? why will God have
it so?

Take these three Reasons in special.
Reason 1. The Lord does it for Correction of Sin; daily Sins must have daily
chastisements, there is a necessary connection between Sin and Punishment, as
between sowing and reaping, we are fowing and reaping every day. It is worthy
your observation, that some kind of grain comes up sooner a great deal than
others; but the Husbandman does so order his sowing, that commonly he reaps
all together: some sins that are committed, are not punished till a great while
after, again some sins are reckoned for immediately upon the Commission; some
sad sinful seed comes up quickly, sown in the morning and reaped the same day,
some not till a Week or a Month, or a Year, or many years after: but it is so
ordered that there is reaping work for every day; I may be reaping this week
what I sowed the last, and sowing this week for the next; I may this year be
teaping what I sowed last, Or twenty years ago, as Joseph's Brethren did their
cruelty to their Brother; I may in old Age be reaping the Sins of my Youth;
Thou writest bitter things against me and makes me possess the Sins of my Youth
says Job. The Fathers sow for the Children, Job 13.26
God punishes the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children: and I may be
reaping the Fruit of my Forefathers transgression, and I may now be sowing
that seed that my posterity may taste the bitter fruit of, and set their teeth
on edge. When I meet with any remarkable Affliction more bitter than ordinary,
then should I be thinking with my self, what seed was this of, what is the name
of the seed that this Fruit came from, what is the name of the Apple, it is a
very sour one, it wrings me by the Bowels and causes me to make Faces, and
groan and cry out; What is the Sins name? what do you call that Iniquity of
mine that has laid me under this great distress? is not the name of it
Self-Love, Backsliding, falling from the Fear of God, decay of love to God,
unprofitablness under the means; I have heard that such kind of seed does use
to bring forth Friut with such a taste or may not the Name of it be Love of the
World Covetousnes, or may it not be Idolatry have not I set up something or
other in my Affections and esteem above God have not I made an Idol of some
comfort? for I hava read that God is very jealous of his Glory, and cannot
endure that any thing should be in the throne of the Heart equal to him, much
less above him; and upon this account I have know a him sometime Kill a Child
in the Mothers bosom a Wife in the Husbands bosom, an Husband in the Wifes
bosom to the amazement and astonishment and even overwhelming of the survivor;
and all this because he was robbed of that love he ought to have had, and he
will not give his Glory to another: if the living have been the Idol, the Dead
shall he thy punishment. Those that have trusted in their Wealth and the
abundance of their Riches, that have pleased and prided themselves in them, he
has all on a sudden sent his Sergeants and distreined and recovered all from
them, by Fire or Water, or Thieves, or that little moth his secret curse and
blasting; those that have lived carelessly and wantonly he has brought them to
Pinching and Peverty; some the Lord paies with ready Money, and lets them see
their Fruit assooh as ever they have sown their seed: let me not think
therefore to want my troubles daily while I am committing sin daily; there is
none that lives and sins not, the Righteous Man falls seven times a day into
sin, and let him not wonder if he get as many hurts as falls: Moses and Aaron
were Men as holy as the most, Psalm. 98.9.
yet what sais the Psalmist? Thou wast a God that forgavest them, though thou
tookest vengeance on all their inventions; they had their crooked Affections,
their daily Infirmities, their continued Irregularities, for which the Lord
thought fit to give them daily correction and chastifement, and this was
consistent enough with his forgiving them; for therefore they were chastned
that they might not be condemned with the World, and so instead of a daily
correction have incurred Eternal destruction. To conclude this, wonder not at
Suffering, whilst you see sinning: They that Plow Iniquity and sow Wickedness
reap the same; if you see the Corn come up in rank clusters, you conclude the
seed has fallen too plentifully there.

Reason 2. The Lord fills our days with trouble for Discipline and the
Exercise of Grace; if the Sea was not rough, Grace would be becalmed, there
would be no motion; Faith, Hope, Self-denial Mortification, etc. cannot live
but in hard and rough, and stormy Weather; the more tempeltuous the Sea is, the
better Faith works; Faith has but little employment, where there is much
enjoyment: No Grace honors God so much as Faith does, and the exercise of it;
and nothing gives Faith that exercise as trouble does. The Ships are safest in
the Harbor, and the Seamen quiet and out of danger in their Beds at home; But
there is nothing to be gotten, and they may starve at, home, unless they
venture forth to Sea: How can thou trust God when thy Cupboard is full, thy
Barns and Garners full? it is true, thou may and ought to exercise Faith then
in acknowledging God, and depending upon the goodness and blessing of God in
the enjoyment of them, and using them in his fear; but the exercise of Faith is
much more difficult, and much less visible in such a condition: Faith that is
seen, is not Faith; till the Stream be dried up, thou can not so well take
thy fill of the Fountain: When the water in the Bottle is spent, then the Well
is best seen and discovered, see Hab. 3.17, 18. No such rejoying in God, as
when we have nothing else to rejoice in, no such Grape as the Wilderness-Grape;
God tastes the sweetest, when the World is the most bitter: so Repentance and
Mortification will go on the most prosperously, when the occasions, and means,
and supports of Lust and Corruption are removed; Sensuality is sooner curbed by
want than by plenty, and Pride better checked by disgrace than Honors; and a
wandering, vain, perverse Spirit sooner brought down by sickness and pain, than
by health; and the love of the World, delight in it, designs for it are more
easily mortified by continual losses, and crosses, and fastings, than by
successes, increase, and prosperous returns; we shall more readily be brought
to believe on God alone, when we can see nothing but him; the life of Sense and
the life of Faith are quite contrary the one to the other. Take a Christian
that has lived in a quiet, serene, calm, and undisturbed condition for some
years, never meeting with any considerable trouble; Take another that has
still been exercised with variety of afflictions, almost never without some
great distress upon him in one kind or another; let them both have been under
the same means of Grace, and advantages in that kind; compare these two
Christians together, and you will find how much the Weather-beaten* Saint will
excel the other in Liveliness, Fervency, Zeal, Faith, Humility, yea, even in a
Spirit and expressions of thankfulness, there will be no compare between them.
Prosperity is clogging, Adversity is cleansing; it is an harder matter to
endure, than to enjoy, any one can lie upon a Featherbed, but every One cannot
lie under an Hedge; it is more easy to love a Child, than part with a Child, to
seek and possess than part with an estate, to love a good Wife or Husband than
to bury them: all Honorable things are difficult things, difficilia quae
pulcra; Wisdom is Honorable, the experienced man is the Wise Man, and he
cannot be an experienced man that was never tried but in one conditions; he
that has traveled through all quarters, that there is scarce a Country but he
has been in, hardly an Affliction but he has been under, that is the Man that is
Company for a Prince; it is worth sitting by such a Man to hear him discourse of
his travels, how he passed from one Region to another, from one condition to
another, how loath he was to enter into it, with, what amazement he was received
into it, with what difficulty, distress and anxiety of Spirit he passed on
under it, how many times he had almost fainted, how wonderfully good and kind
the Lord was to him, how seasonably supports and supplies came in once and
again, what ebbings and flowings he passed through; how when he vehemently
cried out, save me Master I perish, presently the Lord Jesus appeared and said,
be not afraid, it is I; this dispensation has Love in it, it is for thy good,
it will not hurt thee, be not so afrighted, not an hair of thy Head shall perish
by thy affliction, thou shall lose nothing but what would, have done thee harm
to have kept; how afterward the Lord quieted, composed and satisfied his Soul,
made him see how much need there was of such a severe Providence, such a sharp
Passage, such a bitter Dispensation; as also how much Love and Goodness there
was in it, which at first sight carried so much of the Face of enmity,
disturbance and destruction; so that he comes to say, this Affliction, this
Loss, this great Trial, though I thought at first I could not have born it, yet
I now see I could not have been without it; as he said once, I had been undone
if I had not been undone, periissem nisi periissem.
I had perished if I had not perished; and lastly, how he no sooner had got
through one Affliction, but the Lord brought him to the borders of another; he
was no sooner Landed, and safe in his Harbor, but God bids him prepare for
another Voy age; in those days was Hezekiah seek unto Death, see Isa. 38.1.
comp. with 3 last verses of 37. cha. To hear him tell you how gladly now he
would have taken a little rest, and was thinking, surely he should now meet
with no more Troubles so dismal, when presently another messenger came to tell
him, that the Lord did intend to try him again, (the first chapter of Job did
not conclude his combat,) and bid him make ready for a new onset either in
the same or another kind; how he treated the Messenger and spoke wisely and
kindly unto him in such language as this; it is but lately that my Lord laid an
heavy and an amazing Affliction upon me, it found me much unready and
unprepared, I did storm and rage at it, I was as a Bullock unaccustomed to the
Yoke; I was cast down and dejected, I did murmur and repine, many an hard
thought had I of my maker, and several unhandsom and unbecoming expressions came
from me, some that favored of despair, Oh I shall never have a comfortable day
more, my good days are gone, better for me that I had never been Born, than to
live to see this Trouble; why does the Lord let me live, why does he not
destroy me, it would be an happiness for me if some would come and take a Knife
and cut my throat, its happy for them that are Dead, they endure no such
tormenting pain, they sustain no such losses, they know not tht meaning of such
piercing, Heartbreaking Sorrows etc. But it plesed the Lord by degrees to bring
me to more sober expressions, he began to convince me that I had deserved a
great dealmore, it is a wonder I was out of Hell, he set my sins in order
before mine eyes; and then I saw that he had Puhished me less than mine
Iniquities did deserve, that if I had my Due I should be in Endless, Easeless
and Remediless Torment; and then I came to acknowledge him, his Justice, his
Mercy, and to fall down at his Feet; he then began to speak some comfortable
Words to me, to give me a little reviving, a little Faith and Hope in himself,
and to let me see his end and design ih Afflicting me; he showed me my work,
Job 36.8.9.10.
and my transgressions wherein I had exceeded, he opened my ear to Discipline,
and commanded me to depart from Iniquity: and now he has recovered me and made
me to live in his sight, if it be his pleasure to bring me into the fire again,
I know it is for the purging away of my Iniquity; I desire I may not dishonor
him, and then let him do with me what he pleases; I hope he will lay no more
upon me than he will enable me to bear, and then his will be done: thus you see
what great experience is to be got by Affliction, how needful it is for the
exercise of Grace.

Reason third,

The Lord fills our day with trouble for distinction sake, that we may know
Earth from Heaven and God from the Creature. To Know the meaning of that text,
there remains therefore a rest for the People of God; if it were not so we
should be apt to say, it is good being here. There are two things the World is
hardly brought to Believe. First, That quietness and peace and rest cannot be
obtained here: And Secondly, That it is to be enjoyed hereafter, and in
himself. Now it is impossible that we should ever meet with any full contentive
good under Heaven; if one could show me that which the Tempter showed our
Savior even all the Kingdoms of the World and the Glory of them, they are too
beggarly a good to give content: excellently to this purpose, one of the
Ancients; O Lord says he, thou have made us for thy self, Fecisti nos ad te
and cor nostrum inquictum estdonec re quiescat in te versa and reversa in
tergum andin latera and in ventrem, and dura sunt omnia! tu solus requires
Austin
and our Hearts cannot be at quiet, till they come to rest in thy self; I
tumble and toss this way, and that way, upon Back and Belly, this side and that
side, and every way to get a little ease, and yet I find every thing to be
hard, and God is the only true Rest.

No satisfaction to he had from any thing here below; look but upon the several
Conditions of Men in City, Court and Country, and see if every one would not be
a little higher, a little Richer, and a little bettered in estate; or else what
means their endless carking and caring? what means so many hands working and
Heads hammering about this thing and that thing? there is not the veriest frock
and apron but by little and little it would hirstle up to the Rob and Purple;
Mr. G.
not the poorest Friars cowle but by step and step have at the Popes mitre.
This unsatisfied desiring of one thing after another (which Is very troublesome
and grieving) the Preacher elegantly calls the walking of the desire; Eccles.
^.9.
better, says he, is the sight of the Eyes, that is, the comfortable beholding
and enjoying these things we have, then the walking of the desire, the rambling
of it after the things we have not, or as some render it, the walking Soul: a
walking Soul is very uncomfortable, to be haunted night and day with a Spirit
of greediness and unsatisfiedness, to have its company going out and coming in,
lying down and rising up; nay, to have disturbing and troublesome dreams too.
The Lord never intended that the world should be a quiet place; do you know any
place upon Earth that a man may go to have one day of rest, and freedom from
care, and trouble, within and without? I would go many miles to see that place,
and enjoy such a Day: he that kept the key of such a place would quickly heap
up Treasures; what flocking would there be thither from all quarters, of all
sorts of People! you would see great numbers of Great-one and Noblemen posting
thither. The Apostle dehorts us from seeking things that are upon the Earth,
and the reason is, because they are things upon the Earth, it is a bad soil,
it is a troublesome air. Men may save themselves a lobour of shiting from one
condition to another, for till they shift out of the World, let them never
expect to sit easily; no rest to be found in any part of the Earth, no
restlesness in any mansion in Heaven. I might still prosecute this matter of
the wandering of the desire, which is in all conditions of men upon Earth: Does
not he that is just within the presence Chamber door, wish he were a little
nearer the chair of State? and he that is the third Man to the chair, wish he
were the second? and he that is the second, wish he were the first, that he
might have the Princes ear? the first grieves because the chair is not his, and
he that has the chair wishes it were advanced a step higher, that whereas he
has but one Kingdom, he had two, and he that has two wishes he had more, and
he that has more, wishes he had all, and he that has all, is not content
because he has all a strange thing! at first he was not content because he had
not all; and now he is much less content, because he has all for then he had
some hope to obtain his desire, when he aimed at all, but now he has no hope to
obtain his desire, because all will not suffice; but he complains there are no
more Worlds. And now I am fallen into this Discourse, give me leave to answer
an Objection.

Object.
Are there not many that will say, that had they but so much, they would be
content, ay that would they with all their heart, and never desire more; does
not this contradict your Doctrine, and that which you are designing to prove
all this while; that he that lives upon Earth in any part of it, or in any
condition in it, must expect trouble every day, all their life time and enough
of it?

Answer.
1. Perhaps they know not what they say; are there not many that thought before
they had no great stomach, that when good victuals are set before them, they
find a stomach, and desire there to taste of one dish after another? are there
not many that designed to buy no great matters, that when they are in the fair,
in the midst of so many pretty commodities, desire this thing and that thing?
are there not many that when they put off from shore, thought to go but thus
far to Sea for recreation, that the Wind arising are afterward carried away
into the deep God knows whither? So these unexpected Winds rise as often by
Land as by Sea, the wind of Affection, of too much Love and desire toward the
World and joy in it; and carries Men a way into the wide World God knows
whither.

2. This that they say, that if they had so much they would be content, fully
content and not desire a whit more; this is only out of a ground of
unlikely-hood that ever they should come to more, or scarce to that, and not as
though that same would absolutely satisfy and content them; as sickly Men, or
old Men, that in likelihood cannot live long, will say perhaps, that were they
certain to live but so many years, they would never desire to live longer, not
as though simply that would satisfy them (for every man naturally has an
infinite desire to live for ever) but because considering their present state
in all likelihood they cannot go beyond, or scarce attain unto that period of
time; and therefore they say that were they but certain to live so long they
would even desire no more; but restore to the sickly Man his perfect health
again, and to the old man his former youth; and try my parties then if so few
years will content them, if they will be so moderate in their desires: just
thus many men, because in all likelihood they can never attain to greater
matters, and scarcely to those they instance in, therefore they seem to have
moderate desires, and such, and such things will content them; but give them
all the opportunities and means that others have, and then see if their desires
be not the like: there are many would climb higher, if they had but a ladder,
and he that laid 38 years at the Pool of Bethesda, if he had had any to help
him in, he would not have laid there any longer than the others.

3. And lastly, if there be any that when they had got so much or so much, be
truly for Worldly matters content, and neither seek for nor desire more, then
this contentedness arises not out of the nature of the thing, but out of the
moderation of their own minds; that seeing their bodies about which all the
toil is, are neither so great, nor to last so long, therefore there is not need
of much. Again, it arises out of the ground of the Apostle; That Godliness is
great gain with contentment, 1 Timothy 6.^
necessarily drawing contentment with it, because any thing will serve as
present to him that has the reversion of Heaven, any place will serve him that
looks at last for God's right Hand, any fare will serve him here in the
daytime, that looks at night forth Lamb's Supper; and therefore it remains
still good, that of themselves these things cannot satisfy any man, and give
content: but still let him have never so much, yet like the Assyrian Monarch, he
cannot keep at home, Hab. 2.
enlarging his desire as Hell, and as Death, but gathers unto him all Nations
etc. I have been the longer upon this point, because it is so hard a thing, as
was hinted, to persuade even Professors, that his World has no true comfort in
it, nor can it possible have any. Trouble and enough of it ^ the genius of the
World and the infeparable companions of every Man's Life in it, and thus God
will have it to distinguish Earth from Heaven, that Men may be as it were
driven to seek after that happiness that is above. Give me leave to add one
thing more before I come to the Application, and that is this; I would ask no
plainer evidence that there is no satisfaction to be found upon Earth in any
part or place of it, but trouble and enough of it; because your greatest Men
with whom, if with any, some fair Halcyon peaceable quiet Days should have
been found, have complained so of discontents that they have been weary of
their fortunes. De brev.^^t.
Augustus Caesar, as Seneca has it, that was so great a Monarch; yet often and
often, again and again entreated the Senators that he might lay down his
Empire, and become a private Man's and never thought more joyfully of any day
than of that wherein he should lay down his greatness; he knew by experience
what a deal of toil and trouble his greatness cost, and felt how heavy the
Crown was on his Head, whose glory and glistering others admire. And Tisberius
after he could find no content in his Empire, nor could tell how with safety to
turn private man, complained that fortune had set him a Cock-height, and then
took away the ladder that he could not come down when he would. And above all
Solomon that had so flourishing a Kingdom as the best, and sought good so
accurately and universally, what might be that good, for the Sons of Men, which
they would so fain lay hold of under the sun; and what can the man do that
comes after the King: yet after all this search: the sum is this, all is vanity
and vexation; this is proof enough of my Doctrine if I had no other: He went
about to cause his Heart to despair of all the labor which he took under the
Sun, King's Palaces say, Eccl. 2.20
that peace and quietness is not in them, the Crown and Purple say they have not
heard of it; (but on the contrary, trouble and vexation, and anguish and sorrow
and, enough of it;)why should we then not think, that it is nowhere to be
found? if great Men that have so many fences against Affliction cannot escape,
how shall poor, infirm, naked Men avoid the dint of it? I remember an answer of
one Apollonius Thyaneus to one who asked him, whether he believed the story of
the Cup made of an Unicorns-horn, that he who should drink out of it should be
privileged from all Diseases, wounds and poisons? I will believe it, says he,
if I shall know that the King of the Country where the Unicorn lives shall be
immortal and escape Death: Mr. G.
he thought if any then the King would procure that Cup and enjoy the Benefit;
so if there be any that could free their Days from trouble, or so much trouble
as others may have, King's and Great-ones would surely hit on it; but we find
it is quite otherwise. The Doctrine standing thus clear with the grounds and
reasons of it; I come now to draw some Inferences from it.

Use. 1.
In the first place I note this; that every man thinks he has trouble enough,
and would not willingly bear more than he has; take any man in the World, and
come to him, what day you will choose, and what time of the day you will, and
say to him: Sir, do you want any trouble? no, says he, I have trouble enough;
if it be a duty, I must take it though troublesome, but cares and crosses I
want none; come to the King, and say, Sir, do you want any trouble? he will
tell you, he has enough of his own; the Crown of gold has thorns in it, every
man you meet with, if you would sit down and hear him, he will give you a large
catalogue of his griefs; and tell you either of some inward trouble from the
fear and sense of the wrath of God, from the temptations and bufferings and
assaults, suggestions and injections of the wicked one, or else arising from
the corruption; and deceitfulness of his own Heart; or he will acquaint you
with some outward trouble, full of discontent, it may be, from Superiors, by
putting up many a wrong and injury at their hands, from inferiors by
backbiting, slander, and detraction; from equals by much unsociable fallings
out, or being in every thing our rivals or emulous copemates to give us the
check at every turn, from Friends by unkind falling away, or treacherous
disclosing of secrets, or failing in the time of need, like Jobs friends: For
now ye are nothing, says he, ye see my casting down are afraid. Job 6.15.21.
My Brethren have dealt deceitfully with me as a brook, and as the stream of
brooks they pass away: From enemies also by doing us (as we look for no other)
all the despite they can: from Wife or Husband by many frowns or unkind fits
between them; from servauts by common negligence and unfaithfulness etc. And as
from all sorts of People, so in all sorts of conditions; in the married estate,
discontents sometimes for want of Children, but much more for having unthriving
Children, and little less from having good and hopeful ones sometimes untimely
taken away, or that they must leave such to the wide World, without leaving any
thing to such pretty Babes. The married body has discontents in being put to
care for others, and the single person is not without it, that he has none to
care for him; Masters complain of bad Servants, and Servants think that Masters
are very cross and froward; see the Apostle Paul's Catalogue of his Troubles, 2
Cor. 11.23. etc. There is trouble in getting the World, trouble in keeping it,
and trouble in parting with it. I shall conclude this with that of the Wiseman
who spoke by experience, and there is nothing like it; Eccles. 2.22.23.
What has Man of all his labor, and of the vexation of his Heart, wherein he
has labored under the sun? For all his days are Sorrow, and his travel
grief; yea, his Heart takes not rest in the Night; This is also vanity.

Use. 2.
I note the goodness of God, that seeing the day has trouble enough, he has so
ordered it, that trouble is but for a day; if many days, and many troubles met
together it would be sad; its well that Days of trouble and extreme misery are
shortened. Mat. 24.22.
In Hell there is a Life without end, and trouble without end; seeing it is
sharp, it is a comfort it is so short.

Use. 3.
I note the great difference between this life, and the Life to come; many
Days and full of joy, for few Days and full of troubles. Psalm. 16.11.
In thy Presence is fullness of joy, at thy right Hand are pleasures for
evermore.

Use. 4.
The great mistake of promising a better morrow; if you have not the same
trouble to morrow which you had to day, you shall have another in the room of
it, and full as bad; to morrow may not be, and if it be, it will not be better;
it is looked upon as great vanity and wickedness in them that said, to Morrow
shall be as this day and much more abundant.

Use. 5.
The great Mercy of God that has been pleased to order suitable support, and
sufficient supply for the day. Deuteronomy. 33.25.
As thy day is, so shall thy strength be.

Use. 6.
There is comfort in this, that we cannot expect a worse morrow; more than
enough cannot be, fear of a worse makes this the worst. The Lord will lay no
more upon you, than he will enable you to bear: if thou shall have burden
enough for thy bearing, so thou will have strength enough for thy burden; if
thou have but little trouble, thou has but little strength, and the burden is
enough for thy strength; so if thou have great troubles thou have
proportionable strength, and so the strength is enough for the burden. To
conclude this Text, my care will not make to morrow's trouble less, and
therefore why should it make this day's trouble more; I am resolved to part
with a great many thoughts and cares, which have been very chargeable to
maintain, have eaten up my strength and comfort, and I have got nothing by
them, they shall now all be banished, let the morrow take thought for it self,
each day has enough with his own grief.

Christian Geography and Arithmetic.
Psalm 90.12. So teach us to number our Days, that we may apply our Hearts
unto Wisdom.


TO omit what might be spoken of the Penman, Scope, Division and principal
matter of this Psalm; I come presently to draw out the Observations and
Doctrines which may be raised from the Text.

Doct. 1.
The days of Men are numbered, it is appointed for all Men once to Die.

I shall endeavor to open the point and then apply it: for the opening of it,
I shall enquire into the import of the phrase of numbering Days, or what is
implied in this expression of numbering our Days.

1. This, that our Days are numbered does denote the shortness of them;
pauperis est numer are pecus.
Eternity cannot be numbered, what ever is in God is incomprehensible and
innumerable, the Days of God are not to be numbered. We say he is a Poor man
that can number his Flock, that can tell how many sheep and cattle he has, the
Days of a Man are soon told they are quickly reckoned up, he that has but a
little skill in Arithmetic, may cast up the number, he that is but newly
entered into the Table of Numeration may count them, if he know Units and Tens
he may do it, he need not go as far as hundreds. David tells us how the account
went in his Days, and since his time, the number is not increased, Sin has
rather shortened them, and cut them off. The Days of our Years are threescore
years and ten, Psa. 9.10
and if by reason of strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength
labor and sorrow, for it is soon cut off, and we stee away.

2. It holds forth the fixedness of the bounds of them: the time of their
ending is set and fixed, and there is no passing beyond those bounds which the
Lord has made; there is no altering, no removing of them, God is exact to his
numbers, he will not upon any consideration revoke his decree and determination
in this kind; Seeing his days are determined, Job 13.5.
the number of his Months are with thee, (purely in thy power) thou have
appointed his bounds that he cannot pass. The time of the Israelites captivity
was out in the Night, and though in 430 years, as we use to say, a Day would
break no square, much less a piece of a Night; yet, that the Lord might be
exact to his own prefixed time, he will be at the charge to light them out
rather than stay till the morning. So Belshazzar was slain in the night,
because, as some think, then the Captivity was out. If a man could give all the
World, he could not purchase one hour beyond his appointed time; Death's not to
be delayed, it will not be bribed, it will fetch a Man out of his bed at
Midnight, and not stay till Morning, it will seize upon a Man, when he is
abroad, and not suffer him to go home, and take his leave of his Family, and
set his House in order; it will not give a Man time to make his Will, nor to
speak a few words which might prevent abundance of trouble, and Lawsuits that
fall out about the division of his Estate; wherever thou art, what ever thou
art doing, when the minutes of thy Life are expired, Death strikes thee, and
there is no avoiding it.

3. It sets forth the transitoriness, the slipperiness, the swiftness of our
Days. How does the Scripture labor for similitudes to set this forth!
certainly to know and believe this is of very great importance to our Faith, or
else the Spirit of God, would never gather so many illustrations from sense; it
would be worth while to gather them up, and open them, but they are frequently
done by others, and ly so obvious to your search, that I need not spend so much
time about it; only give me leave, seeing it is a business of so great
consequence, and so very little minded, to deal a little plainly and
pathetically with you. Alas, alas, where is that Professor, that sits down and
seriously thinks with himself, how swiftly his time passes away? who knows not
that time is short, and passes swiftly away away it is a theme for
School-Boyes; ay but let me tell you, few consider it, or live under the power
of it; it is a Meditation fit for the best Saint upon Earth, and without
dispute to live in the right belief of it, would be an especial and principal
means to recover the power of Godliness which is so much decayed in this last
age.

Do you think that Professors could be so Formal, and Secure, and Worldly, if
they lived every day as their last, and performed every Duty as their last?
would there not be more Zeal, and Life, and Love, and Heavenly-mindedness? Do
you believe that we spend our years as a Tale that is told, as a Word, as a
Meditation, swifter than a Weavers Shuttle; That our life is as wind, and
vanishes away as the Cloud: That our days are swifter than a Post, You know
how swift a Post is, he passes by so fast, you can take no notice of him, you
get but a glimpse of him, you could not know him again if you saw him; so do
our days post away, how are we hurried in haste, haste, post-haste from one
thing to another! post to Bed at night, put off your Clothes, post-hast, post
up in the morning and put them on again; pst to your Meals, and post from them
again; post to your business, and post from it; how do Sabbaths; and Sermons,
and Opportunities post by, and that in such have, that you cannot remember them
when they are gone! it may be in twenty four hours you have forgot all. How
many Sermons that you have heard have lived a month with you? What was the
Message of God to you this day month? the Matter as it was passing by did much
affect you, you were much taken with it, and thought you should have known, and
remembered that matter as long as you had lived; but it seems it went by in such
haste, the time of the Meeting passed away so swiftly, that it has happened to
you, as to a man that looks his natural Face in a Glass, Jam. 1.24
he beholds himself, and goes away, and straight way forgets what manner of
man he was; so you have forgotten what manner of matter it was that you heard,
that you were so affected with, and melted under, that your Soul did so fully
close with, and you could so evidently witness to the truth of it; how lively,
it was represented to you, how experimentally you did receive it, what goodness
you tasted in it and thought that taste would have never gone out of your
mouth; now no impression remaining, the Text and every word of the Sermon so
posted away, so far gone that they cannot be recalled or recovered. If a
Painter would take the Picture of a Man, the Man must sit in a steady posture,
but our Comforts perish in the using, they are not sitting Comforts; we are so
interrupted, crowded, that we get little of the company and enjoyment of them
Solomon had a mind to have the comfort of Wine, and he got it alone, for he
acquainted his heart with Wisdom, and was freed from those excesses,
extravagances, and disturbances which commonly keep company with the drinkers
of Wine, but he concludes that all was vanity and vexation of Spirit, and there
was no profit under the Sun. A man can have no time to sit with his comfort and
enjoy them, but he is either interrupted, or the comfort is gone. But to leave
this Similitude, he says, his days are swifter than a Post: It is well
observed by Mr. Caryl, that a Post stays to change Horses, but the Chariot of
the Sun, which is the natural measure of time, never stays, but is in
continual motion: I might add this also, that the Artificial Measures of Time,
which are continued by men, are in continual motion; the Sands in the
Hourglass are always running, or else it is of no use; the Wheels in the Clock
and Watch are always moving, or else they are of no use at all; if the Watch
be down, it is good for nothing, for it is only use lies in motion. You may see
this Similitude of a Post excellently laid open by Mr. Caryl upon the place, as
also those two more which they find in Job 9.26. My days are passed away as
the swift ships, and as the Eagle that hastes to the prey. Ships upon the Sea
under sail before the Wind pass away very swiftly, and leave no impression: The
Eagle is a Bird of the strongest Wing, the swiftest Fowl, and a greedy Fowl;
she soars alost, and is quick-sighted, and soars down upon her Prey, as a
Thunderbolt, as a Bullet, as an Arrow, and she leaves no impression in the Air.
Now, says Job, My days are passed away as the Eagle that hastes to the Prey.
I shall forbear the Prosecution of other Similitudes; our days are compared to
Smoke, to a Dream, to a Shepherds Tent, to a Vapor, to a Shadow, to a Flower,
etc. the aptness of which Similitude I leave to your own considerations.

4. This, that our days are numbered does likewise imply thus much, that our
work is numbered to our day, our work is cut out for the day; God makes no empty
days, as every day has its trouble, so every day has its work. To every thing
there it a Season, Eccles. 3.1.
and a time for every purpose under the Sun; and it is as true, that there is a
purpose for every Season, as well as a Season for every purpose; and happy is
that man that knows his Season for his purpose, and his purpose for his season,
that knows his day for his work, and his work for his day, and does his days
work upon his day; when our work is finished, then our days shall be ended:
But alas for wicked men, their days end before they begin their work; they do
work that God never allotted, or allowed any time for: There is a time to
build, and a time to plant, and a time to morn, etc. but there is no time to
sin. Some know their work yet do not do it, and these will be beater with many
stripes: The great Correction-house of Hell is prepared for those that would
not work whilst they had day, and time, and light, and opportunity, and
assistance, and whatever might have an influence upon the promoting of their
work; Be sure thou examine the work thou art about, and ask thy self strictly
these two Questions.

1. Is this work for any time, is it to be done at all?

2. Is this work proper for this time; does the work and the time correspond
and suit one another? it may be sinful thoughts arise when thou art at Duty,
let them know there is no time allotted for them, much less at such a time; it
may be worldly thoughts come in about thy family and calling, let them know
there is a time for them, but they must keep their place and due distance at
such a season; perhaps some good thoughts may come in, which yet are not
suitable to the work which thou art engaged in, tell them, they shall be
encouraged in their proper time; God is a God of order and not of confusion and
distraction; there is a time to Read, a time to Hear, a time to Meditate, a
time to Pray, a time to confer about good things, and these duties help one
another in their place and order. But it is not unusual for him that sometimes
transforms himself into an Angel of light to inject even good things in an
unseasonable manner which tend only to distraction, and not to edification and
promoting Communion with Gods and he is a Wise Christian that knows how to
manage himself, that there may be no interfering of duties. I cannot but break
out and tell you, how hard a thing it is to be a right Christian, a Chriitian
indeed, even-squared according to Gospel-rule and proportion. The misery of Man
is great upon him, because he knows not his work and his time; the Devil takes,
great advantage of poor Christians that have strong affections and but weak
judgments, and does so bewilder them and cast such mists in their way, even
upon this very account that we are speaking of, that I begin not to wonder at
the many complaints I daily hear from Christians of unbelief, unprofitableness
under ordinances and the means of grace discontentedness and falling out with
their conditions; they are much unacquainted with their proper, work in its
proper season; Satan is a Spirit of disorder and confusion, and he knows how to
entangle the belt duty thou do, and perplex the most regular exercise of thy
Graces: the only way thou have to help thy sely is seriously to consider,
whether this and the other notion and suggestion comes from God; is this
according to rule, does the Gospel bid me think this, and speak this, and do
this; to the Law and to the testimony. Let me take my Bible into my hand, and
see whether I can find a fixed, a stated rule for such imaginations, for such
perplexities, for such becalmings, for such expressions and actions; what faith
the Scripture; and how read thou; my Lord and Savior answered the Devil
still, with a Scriptum est, Mat. 24 22.
it is written; if I cannot tell him, it is written? I may ask him the
question, is it written? Do thou speak from the Word of God? Do not thou
wrest the Word of God? Do not thou add nor diminish? Does the Lord indeed
require and call for this thing at my Hands? is it any part of that work that
he has appointed for me in my Day, that I should at any time distrust him, or
look upon his care as insufficient either for my Soul or Body? are not the
alsufficient merits of the Lord Jesus tendered to me without any exception, but
what I make within my self? Does not he command me to believe, and is not this
my proper work that I shoud be found laboring in? is there one in the Book of
God that does encourage me to question either his ability or willingness to
save me? it is the work of Satan to make obstructions in a Man's own self, and
then to lay them at God's door; but is it any part of my work to believe him of
regard him? it is thy every days work to believe with all thy Heart; and if
thou can say, that thou art willing to give up thy self to the Lord Jesus be
saved and sanctified by him, to be pardoned and purged by him, to bring nothing
to him, to keep nothing from him, to deny thy sinful self, thy righteous self,
and (if he call for it) thy natural self; thou may conclude thou art in thy
proper work which is suitable for every season, and that thou art observing the
order of God, and appointment the Lord Jesus; Job. 6.29.
for, This is the work of God, says our Lord, that ye believe on him whom he
has sent. And what ever it is that does obstruct and hinder this work, comes
from Satan and not from God; it is a work that was never numbered out by God for
thee to do for it is according to his mind and pleasure, that every one should
say as his Apostle Paul did, the Life that I live it is by Faith in the Son of
God; and the work that I do, is to be always exercising and putting forth Acts
of Faith upon the Lord Jesus. And as for the concerns of my Body, is it any
part of my work or duty, according to Gospel-rule, to be carking, and caring,
and vexing my self, how I shall maintain that; what I should Eat and Drink, and
wherewithal I should be Clothed? has not he engaged his Providence for me? is
not his express word, and is it not my proper work to believe it? be content
with such things as ye have. Heb. 13.5
For be has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. Has he given me a
Kingdom, and will not he give me a staff to walk to that Kingdom? as I have
heard it well observed by a worthy Minister, will he give me Heaven, and will
not give me Earth? will he give me an inheritance and will he not give me
spending money? can I trust him for my Soul, and can I not trust him for my
poor frail Body? Is not food and ralment within the Covernant as well as life
and Salvation? Did he ever put me upon such work as this, as to get my own
Breads, and leave me to my own Hands. Its true, as he has told me, that in the
sweat of my Brows I must eat my Bread; but he never said I should do it in the
care and trouble, and grief of my Heart, I must work indeed, but the care of me
lies with him, he is bound to maintain me, it is not my labor, but his
blessing that must do it.

I am but a journy-man, the work is not mine but his; I must be at his
allowance, he has: set me my dimensum, my task; and it is purely in his
disposal how I must be maintained, what he will give me of these outward
things, whether much or little: he knows best my constitution; what I can bear,
what may be convenient for my passage; what may be helping and not clogging in
my journey to Heaven, and if I have but little of the present World; I must not
call it Poverty, but Discipline. I conclude therefore, it was never intended by
the Lord to be any part of my work, or to take up any part of my time, to sret
and perplex my self, how I should have provisions to carry me or my Family
through the wilderness of this World. But to proceed, this very thing of not
numbering the work to the day, and so answering the design of God in giving the
day, is that which proves fatal to Persons and People, and becomes their utter
ruin.

How does our Savior weep over Jerusalem and breaks out into these mournful
expressions. Sayings, If thou had known even thou at least in this thy day,
the things which belong unto thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes.
For the day shall come upon thee, that thine Enemies shall cast a trench about
thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side; and shall lay
thee even with the ground, and thy Children within thee, and they shall not
leave in thee, one stone upon another. Good Lord, what is the cause of all this
misery? why will thou deal so severely with thine own and only People? surely
there is some great things in the bottom; What have they done? Do thou ask
what have they done? It, is for something they did not do when they had an
opportunity on purpose given for doing of it. Because thou knew not the time
of thy visitation. God gave them his Ordinances, the means of Grace, he waited
a great while upon them, to see whether they would profit under them, and prove
an holy and reformed People; but they not minding the Lord's end in being at
such charge with them, continued a careless, formal, worldly, contentious, and
a very unholy sinful People; yea, grow worse and worse, therefore etc. The Lord
help us, my Brethren, to know the day of our visitation, our tranquillity is
lengthened out, our liberties continued, we enjoy Sabbaths, and Sermons, and
Ordinances, one Exhortation and Admonition after another, precept upon precept,
warning after warning; we have also some lesser corrections and chastisements
intermingled, and what is all this for? Eccles. 2.1.3
that we should bring forth fruit to God, that we should become an heavenly and
serious People, that our Faith might grow exceedingly, and the charity of every
one of us all toward each other might abound.

But if we go on as we do, bringing forth so many truits of the flesh, remain
carnal, frothy, so lukewarm, and indifferent in the things of Religion, dead
under the opportunity of life, with so much formally in Duties and under
Ordinances, turning as a door upon the hinges, neither well with the means of
Grace, nor well without them: with so much outside in our services and
performances, so little presling after inward communion, with God with so
little zeal for the Name and Honor, and Truths of God, so little sense of the
sins of others, to mourn over them reprove them, of the suffering of others, to
mourn with them, and bear their burdens; so great lovers of the World, so
desirous of having much, so little contented with our conditions; (what, never
an Heart moved yet at the hearing of all this, is there none cry guilty) so
unjust, equivocating, overreaching, and unwatchful over our tongues in trading
and bargaining; so little thinking of the Royal rule, to do as we would be done
by so vain in our Discourses, so upcircumspect in our Conversations, so sensual
and unmortified, such giving liberty to the flesh, indulging and making
provision for it, so comformable to the World, with such Symptoms of Pride in
Heart and habit, with so much envying one another, backbiting and evil
speaking, so little true Hearty Gospel-love amomg Professor and Christians,
that all pretend to be followers of the same Christ, and hope to live in one
Heaven, with so much carnality; in having the Faith of Christ with respect of
persons, in being factions and making parties and sidings, and keeping up
Nicknames in Religion, (a sore evil) so sparing and niggardly in your
Almsdeeds: and which is the ground of all the former, so little in your own
Hearts by self-reflexion, self-examination, self-humbling, abhorring and
abasing; and lastly; so little delight and joy in God, and a continual eyeing
and looking up to the person of Jesus Christ who is at God's right hand, at the
Glory he is in, the work he is there doing for his Saints, intercedeing and
preparing; together with the great Power and Glory he shall shortly appear in,
Heb. 9.28
when he comes the second time to Salvation and judgment. I say, if we shall
continue thus guilty, as you have heard in the particulars mentioned, and many
more I might add, together with the daily grieving the Holy Spirit of God by
not praying for it, not watching, obeying, and quenching its motions; you may
very suddenly expect such sharp and astonishing dispensation as make me even
tremble at the very thoughts of them; read over the Book of the Lamentations,
and weep as thou reads: I remember what the Prophet said to Hazael, you may
turn to it, 2 Kings 8.11, 12. Take another Text or two to show of what concern
it is, that men should know how to number their works to their time and season,
Rev. 2.21, 22. And I gave her space to repent of her Fornication, and she
repented not, bebold I will cast her into a bed; and them that commit Adultery
with her into great tribulation, except they repin of their deeds, and I will
kill her Children with Death, and all the Churches shall know, that I am he
which searches the reins and Heart; and I will give to every one of according
to your work. Do you English and apply this Text, you have heard it read to
you; but hold sits before you leave it, pray tell us what should be the
meaning, of that expression: and all the Churches shall know etc. God forbid
that there should be any Churches or members that should not be right in this
principle, to acknowledge God to be the searcher of the Heart.

The Omniscieney of God is confessed by all that are not professed Atheists;
but cannot tell what to make of that expression, that all Churches shall knows;
if it had been thus, and all the World shall know, or all the wicked of the
Earth shall know, or, and all the Enemies of God shall know, we should not have
wondered at it; give us your thoughts about it truly, Friends, I cannot but be
troubled at what my present apprehensions are will tell you what the Lord sets
upon my Spirit, his Blessing go along with in there is in Churches so much
lukewarmness, such resting in forms and external services, such sinful
tolerations, and hearing with sin, such keeping and covering iniquity in the
skirts of Churches not making use of Gospel-rule; to keep themselves clean and
pure, and to purge out Iniquity; as here the Church of Thyatira suffered that
Woman Jozabe which called her self a Prophetess to teach and seduce my Servants
to commit Formcation, and to eat things sacrificed to Idol I say there is such
failings in member of Churches, so little exercise of Discipline, such
Hypocrisy, so little love to and care of one another, so little of the Power
and Life of Godliness that it makes it too apparent, that the Lord is not so
acknowledged and owned to be the searcher of the Heart, so as he ought to be;
external privileges are so trusted to without eyeing God in them, such things
are done and suffered in short; so little fear, reverence and delight and so
much show, officiousness, outside, external pomp, as if the Lord were indeed
like one of us, taken with appearance and looked to no more than barely the
work done; nay, indeed as if he were like one of the Idol gods of the Heathens,
that had eyes and saw not, ears and heard not; as if things might be concealed
and kept from him. There is no respect of Persons with God, when he comes into
the Church, he has not regard to him, that wears the goldring, or him that that
fits in the highest place, or her that wears the best gown; but to him or her
that is of a pure, holy, contrite, humble Heart, that fears God, and trembles
at his word: not has he laid down one rule for the rich, and another for the
poor; no Man's greatness can compound for him to have abatements made to be
connived at and little notice taken of him, if he do make a trip, or prove a
little slack in his place and duty. And now observe what follows in the very
next words; and all the Churches shall known etc. And I will give to every one
of you according to your Works; I will deal with you not according to your fair
shows, and fine appearances, and specious pretenses, and good language, and
honest expressions: trust ye not in lying Words, Pro. 7.4
Saying, the Temple of the Lord the Temple of the Lord etc, the Church the
Church Priviledges. I will examine your ways and your doings, whether they be
suitable to your Profession, your practice answerable to the Principal you
hold, then I will bless you and dwell with you, and make you my rest and
habitation; but if I find you to be such as are evil doers, that commit
iniquity, that fail in the weightier matters of the Law, in the execution of
Judgment and Justice and Mercy. See ver. 5.6, 7. if you are worldly and carnal,
and do not make straight steps for your feet, then I must punish you as
Sinners, I must be just; I must respect my own Name. You only have I known of
all the Families of the Earth, therefore will I punish you for all your
Iniquities. I must not be partial, to allow sin in a Child, and punish it in a
stave, to judge sinners and let Saints go free when they transgress: your
relation to me, your privileges cannot save you from the rod. I have heard it
excellently observed by one, that the Temple of the Lord was never intended to
be a Sanctuary for the profane and unholy, to save them from the hand of
Justice; Mr. W.
let no wicked Person from hence take occasion (as the Lord knows they are too
apt in this loose corrupt Genetation) to blaspheme the waise and Saints of God;
because the People of God have their sailings, and there are Hypocrites among
them (as there was one Judas in Christ's Family) therefore they make a mock of
Holy Profession; and Saintship; and please themselves to play upon the borders
of that unpardonable sin; they do deride the very Actings and Breathings of the
Holy Spirit of God, because of some that are but pretenders to it, but never
had it; let me tell thee, O thou that draws such consequences and conclusions,
that the Gospel is an Holy Gospel, Religion is a real and substantial thing.

There are Ordinances of Chirist, which we must be walking and waiting upon God
in; and if we that profess the Gospel do not walk according to it, we must
repent and sue out our pardon; God will scourge and correct us severely, as he
has done in all Ages, and we must justify him in it; and he will make us know,
that it is an evil and a bitter thing to depart from God, and to bring reproach
upon Religion and the Name of God, and to open the mouths of such as thou art.
I will not name thee, but would willingly know by what name thou conceives thy
self to be called in Scripture and would desire others that they would likewise
consult Scripture, and find out thy Character there; but I would tell thee
further before we part that if we do transgress, we pay dear for our sin;
Repentance is too great a rate to be given for the most profitable Corruption
upon Earth; we are chastened of the Lord, that we might not be condemned with
the World: Besides, know this, that if we be true Saints, though we may have
our infirmites, and must repent of them consequently; so antecedently, we must
be such as do sincerly resolve against all sin, that do not allow, or indulge
our selves in the least evil, that carefully avoid and shum the occasions of
sins, that hate every false way; We must be such as must have respect to all
Gods Commandments according to our Light in them, and Knowledge of them, not
be found neglecting any thing that we know to be a Duty; we should be very
careful of our words, how we spend our time, and be continually preparing for
our dying hour. And if there be such as are indeed very Hypocrites among us, as
there has been in all Ages; and will be to the end of the World, and no
avoiding it; (for we cannot know men's hearts; and for external Worship and
Holiness, a wicked man may do them as well as a Saint nay, a Hypocrite may
possible do them better than a Saint, because he does not carry weight with
him, he takes no heed to the heart, which is the principal thing in a Duty) I
say grant there be such, if they discover themselves in gross impieties, and
prove obstinate; the Gospel has given Rules for Admonitions, sharp and cutting
Reproofs, even to the quick for withdrawing from them, Titus 3.(...)
for casting them out of the Society of Gods people, and Gospel-Professors, and
delivering of them up to Satan; and if they do remain covered and concealed
till the Judgment of the great day, then the Lord will discover them, and them
a portion in the lowest place in Hell.

The Scripture seems to make them the freeholders and firstborn of Hell, Mat.
24.51. He will appoint him his portion with the Hypocrites, there shall be
weeping and ganshing of teeth. Well therefore, thou might spare thy self the
expense of a great many words; for business is quickly summed up; either thou
calls a true Saint an Hypocrite, because of his infirmites, and some Hyporisite
which discovers it self in him, which he repents of, which the Lord gives him a
pardon for, cleanses him from, and at last receives him to his Glory; and if
this be thy Case, I am much afraid thou will come under the last of that
Scripture, which I will take the pains to turn to; it is in the Epistle of Jude
ever. 14, 15. Behold, the Lord comes, with ten thousand of his Saints, to
execute vengeance upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of
all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their
bard speeches which ungodly sinner have spoken against him; But

Secondly, If this be thy Case, that thou calls those Hypocrites that are
indeed so, what need thou be so concerned, both God and Man are against them,
they have shame here; however, the Lord does most severely tourment them to all
Eternity; thou might spare thy bad Language, they are punished enough without
it. But

Thirdly, If this be thy mind, to take occasion hence to speak evil of
Religion, and holy Profession, the Graces and Fruits of the Spirit, and make a
mock and derision of all these, that because many men that pretend to Religion,
are very wicked men, therefore to cast off all Religion, and Zeal, and Love to
God, and Faith in Christ Jesus, and the workings of the Spirit, as Fancies and
Shadows having no substance or reality in them; then I must needs say, that
thou art in the high way to Atheism; and I do nor know how I am fallen upon it,
but I cannot possibly avoid it, according to my casting up the Account, it
amounts to neither more nor less, thou art a downright Atheist: I did not
think I should have had occasion to have used this word, for I do not love
words that carry reflection with them; I have been studying the ninth Verse of
the Epistle of Jude, railing Language does not become my Mouth; I confess I may
be mistaken in my casting up, and I should be glad to see where my Error lay,
that I may rectify it; I can say I love Truth better than Opinion, or my own
Conception and Imagination. Methinks I hear thee disowning the name and thing,
and pleading for Righteousness; and Honesty, and Worship, and Sacraments; etc.
The truth is, thou have now confimed me fully in judgment of thee; for the
Scripture is not more express in any thing than in discovering a sort of people
that plead for a Form of Godlinese, that they may more effectually oppose the
power of it; that use the name of God, that they may fight against the Nature,
Word, and Works of God; that pretend to set up Christ, that they may destroy
his Person and all his Offices; Men of corrupt minds, Tim. 11.3. Titus 1.16
Phil. 3.19.
reprohate concerning the Faith; That profess they know God, but in works deny
him, being abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate; Enemies
to the Cross of Christ. If so be then that thou art an Atheist, the Scripture
in plain terms calls thee a Fool, Psalm. 14.1. Thou have read the place, but I
will read it to thee again, The Fool has said in his heart, there is no God;
He has no fear of God no awe of the great God upon, his Spirit, no sense of his
Holiness, Power, Justice, Omnisciency his Word, his Will, his Works, what he
has done, what he will do; what joy he has laid up for the Serious, Sincure,
Humble seekers of him, and that truly believe on the name of his Son, and are
careful to maintain good Works; what torment he has prepared for the wicked,
and disobedient, and those that believe not and obey not the Gospel, which he
has revealed and sufficiently made it evident to be his will. But I must leave
thee and answer thee no more having respect to both those Rules of the Spirit
of God, given forth by Solomon; Prove. 26, 4, 5. Answer not a fool etc. What I
have more to say about thee, shall be only to God, so as I am taught Jude 9.
the last words of the verse. I now return from whence I have digressed beyond
my purpose and intention, but sometimes we may be most in our way when we seem
to be out of it: the Lord has various methods; a word out of course, a word by
the way, sometimes does more good, as God can bless it, than that which seems
to lie most direct and in order, intended and prepared: I am an admirer of
Method, and am no friend to Foolish Preachings to impertinencies, and
repetitions that proceed frorn emptiness and barrenness of matter, but, I must
confess, I have often thought what there might be in the foolishness of
Preaching; it pleases God by the foolishness of Preaching, to save that do
Believe. When a gust of the Spirit comes, when zeal and Affections are
stirring, and transport a Man, he is driven out of his road.

But to the points I was telling you the great danger Men were brought into,
when they did not lay hold of their season and opportunity, did not number
their work for their day, were not wise but foolish, in letting time go and
leaving work undone. I have one Scripture more which I have promised you, and
that is in Romans 2.4.5. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and
forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads
thee to Repentance? But after thy hardness and impenitent Heart, treasurest up
unto thy self wrath, against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous
judgment of God. The Lord did spare thee, and continued thy life to thee, day
after day: thou had much time, and many advantage, and thou did not
consider for what end God did this to thee: he laid out time for thee, and thou
should have laid out work for that time, have filled the vessel of time with
good actions, the fruits of Righteousness that thou might have said with the
Spouse, Here are all manner of pleasant Fruits new and old, which I have laid
up for thee! O my Beloved. But instead of this, thou art laying a foundation
for everlasting misery by thy hardness and impenitency; thou art doing a work
which thou will find wages for, the wages of unrighteousness. Because to every
purpose there is a time and judgment, Eccles. 8.6, 7, 8, 9.12
therefore is the misery of Man great upon him; For he knows not that which
shall be, for who can tell him when it shall be? For Man knows not his time,
as the Fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the Birds that are caught
in the snare; so are the Sons of Men snared in an evil time, when it falls
suddenly upon them.

I now come to the Application.

Use 1.
Are our days numbered in this sense as you have heard, then it affords matter
of Humiliation to Saints, and Churches, that they have not numbered their Days
and their work better; truly my Brethren we had better confess our own sins,
than have other folks to confess them, to charge our selves is the way to be
discharged both by God and Man. I have sometimes thought that if the People of
God had been more in condemning themselves, they would not have been so much
condemned by the World; let us say as the Church of old, As for our
transgressions we know them. I remember what I have met with in a learned
Author, who writing freely of the faults and miscarriages of Ministers, comes
to answer an Objection which Ministers, comes to might make against his
publishing their failings to the World, who were so ready to be offended with
them, and to stumble at every thing; or if he would have discovered them, he
might have writ in Latin, and so they might have been concealed from vulgar
notice; he answers to this purpose, says he, if we had sinned in Latin, then
our Sins might have been reproved in Latin; but seeing our failings have been
obvious, let out acknowledgements, Confessions and Repentace be so too; it is
no disparagement or lessening to any Man that is guilty, to make confession,
but an effectual way to remove Reproach and Scandal, and to silence accusers:
accusations have little place either with God or Man, where persons are willing
to accuse themselves; though there are some that are come to that height of
Wickedness in this Age, which is so fruitful of Monsters; that take occasion
from the confessions of sin which God's People make to him, to charge them, as
it were out of their own Mouths as the vilest Creatures on Earth; to draw out
an accusation against them out of their own Confessions; a Bill of indictment
against them, from what they do acknowledge of themselves: but these Men are
little acquainted with the Scriptures, and the Mystery of Godliness. The Lord
tells us that his ways are not as our ways, nor his thoughts as our thoughts.
He that confesses and forsakes his sin shall find Mercy; by God's own
appointment confession is clearing. Indeed I grant that among Men, confession
of the party is evidence in Law; but in the Court of God, at his Tribunal,
confession of the party takes away evidence: there is no more danger of our
confession of our sins to God, in the World's hearing, than of doing it; in
private in Satan's hearing. Its against all reason to charge a Man that is
charging himself; if you would take a way sins testimony, join testimony with
it; among the Latins two Negatives make an affirmative, but among the Greek's,
two affirmatives make a Negative; if the World accuse us, let us accuse our
selves too, and this is the way to be cleared; a Christian is never so much in
his Glory, as when he is justifying God, and condemning himself. It will
silence the railing Rashakehs of this Age, for professors to charge themselves
deeply and particularly before God; we have sinned, we have done foolishly, we
have broken thy Covenant, we have sinfully complied, we have been too much
partakers with wicked men of their wickedness, we have been unprofitable,
careless, worldly, covetous, greedy after the World; with our tongues have we
dishonored God, and our Conversations have been such as have but given too
much occasion to the Wicked to blaspheme; we have given them just cause to open
their mouths against Religion for our sakes, we have not discovered that
humility, meekness, impassionateness, weanedness from the world, mortification
of fleshy lusts, that might have been attractive and alluring of others to a
good likeing of the professing of the Gospel and Christianity; we have been
seeking our selves, and setting up our selves, when we should have been seeking
and setting up the interest of the Lord Jesus; we have practiced that in our
selves which we have condemned in others; and never any People had more
precious opportunities and improved them less; we have put Death far from us,
and lived as if this world would never have an end, and as if the World to come
would never have a Beginning etc.

Now for others to lay these things to our charge, makes us odious and ugly;
But for us to charge our selves will make us look lovely and Beautiful: there
is a vast difference between others speaking of us, and our own speaking of our
selves though the words be the very same. The story of Jonah if another had
writ it, would have made Jonah appear very deformed; but as he writes it
himself, it rendershim a true penicent: let us lament our not doing our work in
our day, our not minding our work and season and making them meet; what a deal
of work might we have done more than we have, if we had forted, and counted,
and numbered our work aright! we have been confounded as the Builders of Babel.
We have done much that needed not have been done; and we have been doing of one
thing when we should have been doing another; we have been repenting when we
should have been believing, and believing when we should have been repenting;
we have been caring when we should have been trusting; we have been weeping,
when we should have been rejoicing, and rejoicing when we should have been
mourning, we have been doing and undoing; and as a Man that has lost his way,
travels hard, but is no nearer his journeys end, may it may be comes to the
place, whence he first set forth. I assure you it is matter of trouble to
consider what confusion we have brought our selves into, and upon our Spirits,
for want of this wisdom to number our work-daies; we have been a disorderly
People; we have not put our general and particular callings into good method,
we do things in the first place which should be done in the second, and that in
the second which ought to possess the first; let me tell you Earthly cares,
will not sit comfortably and thrivingly in the first, nor Heavenly thoughts in
the second, because the one will be too high, and the other too low for their
elevation; it is a deslowring of early morning-time to; lodge the world with
it, and it is a disgraceing of the things of God, to present them with the
small relics, and stale afterlings of your time, I am persuaded this is the
very thing the Psalmist aims at in this Text, that he might have wisdom to
know his time and his work, and the proper work for the day; that time might
not be done before the work was done; and that work might not be misplaced and
mislaid; it must needs therefore be our great folly and loss, who are guilty of
so much misplacing: why must worldly thoughts come in, in the morning as soon
as thou art awake, and defile, blast, and canker thy Soul, when good thoughts
would have edged it, prepared it, and put a savor, upon it which would not
have worn off all day? why must thy counter come up stairs into thy closet, and
the concerns of thy calling look upon thee whilst thou art praying and
meditating and conversing with God, and about the condition and state of thy
Soul, and its Everlasting well-being? we should be Heavenly-minded in Earthly
employments, and we are Earthly-minded in Heavenly employments; get as much of
Heaven as ever thou can to attened thee in thy wordly matters, it will
wonderfully facilitate and preosper thy work, it will make it go on with ease
and pleasure; a Bible upon a loom or shop-board never hinders work; Meat and
Morning Prayer never hinder work; holy ejaculations, and good discourse, will
not weaken the hands that labor, a serious thought in the midst of thy worldly
business never causes interruption or disorder.

And as you must take heed of misplaceing your work, so be careful you do not
misplace the dispensations and providence of God to you, for this belongs to
the numbering of your days: for you are apt to call your good days your bad
ones, and your worst days, your best. The account will never come even when
receipts are placed as disbursments do not expect a right balance; you have
had many days of Affliction and Sorrow and pain, your hands have been, always
full; now if you reckon all these days as bad days, you do not number right.
Again, you have had a few Sunshine days, you have enjoyed prosperity, and you
call these good days: whereas it may be these have been ensnaring and
straitning to your Souls, and the former have been quickening, purging,
cleansing, and inwardly comforting; the days which the Children of Israel
spent in the Wilderness were not their worst days, for there the Lord fed them
with manna, bread which came down from Heaven. The wilderness-grape is the
sweetest grape, the best vineyards from thence; Rock-water is the purest water,
and no honey so sweet as that which came out of the Lion; though no affliction
for the present seems joyous but grievous; Heb. 12.11
but the peaceable fruits of Righteousness which it yields afterward to them
that are exercised therein, make amends for all: it may be when thou considers
it well, Job 29.4.
those days of thy youth when the secret of God was upon thy Tabernacle; thy
Children about thee, when thou washed thy steps with butter, and the Rock
poured thee out rivers of Oil etc, will not be accounted and numbered for the
best days; thou will see cause upon due reflection to confess, that thy Spirit
was more dull and heavy, and slothful, thou was not so lively in duty, did
not enjoy so much Communion with God, as thou have done in some other days
that were more dark and cloudy, and at great deal more pinching, and painful to
go through: thou may remember in those shining days what expense thy
watchfulness put thee to. How thou was continually upon thy guard, lest thou
should be ensnared, and thy affections be carried beyond due bounds; it is
difficult case, where we are so desirous to drink much and yet can but bear
little; to resist is troublesome, to yield is dangerous; to love the Creature
no more than it should be, and to love God as much as he ought to be: thou
can tell likewise that in those other daves of straitness and want, and
sicknese, and disgrace, and perplexity; though they were very ungrateful and
unpleasing to the outward man, thou had frequent visits from God, corruption
did not so work and stir in thy heart, Satan was not so busy to defile thee
with his temptations; thou had many a comforable half-hour which no body saw
or took notice of; thou could pray then, thou could pour out Prayer, thou
wast all Prayer; thy Prayers came from thee like hot burning sparks out of a
flaming furnace, or like darts out of a Giants Hand, with such a jerk of the
Spirit after them that they fell not a whit short of Heaven; what wrestling was
there then of Faith, what struggling then of hope, what working and striving of
patience! then thou came to know effectually the meaning of those Scriptures,

Hope makes not ashamed, we are saved by hope, in patience possess ye your
Souls; thou then felt more charity, more bowels, more compassion, more
fellows-feeling of others troubles; then thou came to know better the meaning
of that Text, which perhaps in thy fair Days thou never considered so much;
Remember them that are in Adversity, Heb. 13
as being your selves also in the Body, having paslible, weak Bodies subject to
all the like miseries, which you see in others; and what the Preacher intended
when he exhorts to give a portion to seven, and also to eight, for thou know
not what evil shall be upon the Earth; whether such evil may not be in the
World that, may bring thee to like need.

How was thou then weaned from the world, how did thou contemn it, the
pleasures, honors and riches of it! thou did experience the mutable and
tranfitoty Nature of them, thou gave earnest heed to our Savior's Counsel,
Mat. 6^
Lay not up for your selves treasures on Earth where moth and rust corrupt, and
where thieves break through and steal, but lay up for your selves treasures in
Heaven where neither moth nor rust can corrupt nor thieves dig through and
steal; and then thou conned over the Apostle Paul's hard lesson, 1 Cor. 7.29
and got it pretty perfect That they that had Wives should be a though they had
none, they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not, they that buy as though
they possessed not, for the fashion of this World passes away. Thus though
there was a decay upon thy outward-man by reason of Affliction, yet the inward
man was renewed day by day; those days which helped thee nearer Heaven, and
made thee more fit and more willing to die, were good days now painful and
tormenting so ever they were in the passing through them; and those days which
delighted thy fleshly desires and carnal part, which were very pleasant to the
outward-man, but did make thee neglect duty or slubber it over, did deaden thy
Spirit in it, and caused a decay in thy zeal, and Love and delight in God, and
made thee less mindful of the great concerns of thy precious Soul; those days
though seemingly happy and blessed in their spending, were not so good days:
be careful therefore of reckoning and numbering right about your conditions, and
out ward states and beings in the World, and mourn over the disorder thou have
put thy self into, by not placing thy condition right, and placing thy self
aright in it; but by bustling and quarrelling at some times with thy state, and
thy over pleasedness again another time with it. Thou have been still
disturbing and doing harm both to thy self and others; what hard and loud words
have passed between thee and thy adverse state? have hot some overheard thee
saying, that thou thought no Bodies condition was worse than thine; none so
straightened, none so perplexed; what sickness thou did undergo what pain thou
went through, what poverty and pinching thou endured, what crosses every way
thou met with; and wishing thou had had not been born, or that thou might
quickly die, and be removed out of this troublesome World, or that God would
but be so kind to thee, that thou might but live as such and such do, though
their conditions are not looked on as the best etc?

And to answer this chiding temper, has not that witness for God in thy own
Conscience, and of his kindness to thee in every condition, made this smart
reply? Oh what a murmuring unbeleeving Creature art thou! What, nothing but
complaints: look about thee, can thou find nothing to thank God for? is thy
case so bad, that all comfort is shut out of it? thou art out of Hell, which
thou deserves every moment, that is a Mercy; art not thou in health? many would
give thousands to enjoy as much of that as thou do; art thou harbourless and
knows not where to have a lodging to night? that is the condition of many a good
Soul where cruelty and persecution Reigns; art thou hungry and knows not where
to get bread this day? it is a great Mercy to have bread for the day, and a
greater to be able to beg and believe on God for bread for the day, a lesson
which I heard a worthy Minister say, Mr. B
the Lord had taught him, and an high piece of Learning it is. The Apostle knew
what he said, and that it was a great degree he had attained to, when he
professed? I have learned in the things wherein I am, Phil. 4.1.(...)
therewith to be self-sufficient; there is a kind of self-sufficiency in every
good contented mind, he is rich not that has much, but that does not desire
much. Art thou thirsty and knows not where to get some good water? art thou
cold, and knows not where to get a covering to keep thee warm?

But for thy Spiritual estate, art thou tempted? so was Christ, who was in all
points tempted, likeas we are, that we might come boldly to the Throne of
Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find grace to help in time of need, and
has promised, that he will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are
able; and is it your misery that you are called to follow the Captain of your
Salvation in the honorable path of suffering the highway to peace, and rest,
and Glory? Art thou under the tidings of his love? did not the Lord Jesus cry
out, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Art thou unwilling that the
Lord should make a trial of thy Love, and faithfulness to him, whether thou
will abide for him; and that by endear himself more to thee, and prepare thee
for fuller manifestations, and them for thee? Do thou complain of an hard
unbelieving Heart? its a mercy thou feels it to be so how many hard Hearts in
the World that are not felt! they that can say and cry out, save us Master we
perish, shall never sink; if there be sense there is life, though that life may
be a very sickly Life: thy condition is sase though it it may be very uneasy;
where there is the root of the matter, where there is the living substance, if
circumstances be a little troublesome it may be born: better a little crying
here than weeping and wailing hereafter; pains and pangs, and gripings here are
kindly, and not at all dangerous. To conclude this, will thou for the future
keep a better account of thy condition? will thou number and place the
Providence of God toward thee in better order? this right reckoning will
reconcile thee to all the difpensations of God, and make you long Friends; this
will be your Wisdom, and, this is your way to true Wisdom; and so much for this
Ufe of Lamentation, and Humiliation, It is much to be bewailed, and that
because of bad consequences, that Christians do not number their days, their
duties and their dispensations better. The exercise of such Wisdom as this.

How lovely would make Professors to look, and how peaceably would it make them
live! it would make Religion look very beautifully and put an attractive and
alluring virtue into the Conversations of Men; but we may cry out of our folly,
our Childishness, our weakness of judgment in the things of God; our walking by
sense, and reckoning by that, and leaving out Faith, without which there is
nothing but disorder; it is that which sets all right, puts every thing in its
proper place, and keeps Time and Eternity in their due conjunction,
distinction, and necessary aspects one upon another: I now come to the

2. Use.
An Use of exhortation, that we would learn this blessed Art of numbering our
days, this Christian Arithmetic; I shall endeavor to lay down some Rules of
direction for our better numbering of them.

Rule 1.
Of Arithmetic: number the days that you have past, and what of that?

1. How many they have been, some of you have passed a great many Days, and
Weeks, and Months, and Years; it is a long time you have been in this World,
are you yet weary of it? how many days would you live longer, and how would
you employ those days? or do you consider that you cannot live always?

2. How many changes you have seen and passed through in those days; How many
conditions and places you have been in, how many removes you have made, what
tossings to and fro, how many ups and downs, what observations you made in your
passage; how much your paths you have walked in resemble the journeyings of the
Israelites in the Wilderness; how, that which is, is that which has been, and
there is no new thing under the Sun; how many in thy time have come into the
World, and grown up, and grown old, and gone out of the World, some at one age,
some at another, and very many that lived never to see thy years; how many
Friends and intimate acquaintance thou have buried, with whom thou have Eat and
Drunk and Lodged, and now thou walk over their Graves; how many relations of
thine have left this World; Husband or Wife, or Children, or Father, or Mother,
(and do thou hereupon enjoy thy present Relations in any of those Kinds as if
thou had none;) How many of thy own Neighbors, and School-fellows living; how
time has hurried some to their Graves, others at a great distance from thee,
others to beggary and a mean condition, though some are got to great estates,
and set an inch above their Neighbors; How many great ones thou have
our-lived, and how many changes of Government thou have seen in thy time.

Governments are heavy things, and as it were unmovable, guarded both by the
Laws of God and Men, and are as the Mount that might not be touched; yet an
ordinary Man of an ordinary age does ordinarily outlive four or five Governors
or Governments, so that thou observes changes in Public, and changes in thy
Private state. What a change did Job see in his Condition (take him either as a
Public or as a Private Person? time was when he could say. Job 21.7.
He had his Children about him, he washed his steps with Butter, and the Rock
poured out Rivers of Oil; when he went out to the Gate of the City, when he
prepared his Seat in the street, the young men saw him and hid themselves, the
aged aged aged arose and stood up; The Princes refrained talking, etc. But now
all on a sudden he becomes as low as he was high, and in a moment as it were,
the case was altered with him that he complains that they that are younger than
he had him in derision, whose Fathers he would have disdained to have set with
the Dogs of his Flock, they spared not to spit upon him, etc.

3. How quickly they are gone; many years even among men, are but as yesterday,
when they are past, but as the other day. It is but a little while me thinks,
said he, since that so many years ago I lived in such a place, conversed so
and so, did this and the other thing, how fast does time pass away; It is but
as yesterday since I was a Child and went to School, and now I am grown old, I
can remember it as well as if it were but yesterday: My life has ever been
posting, as a Dream, as a Tale that is told; the Dream ends, and the Tale is
concluded insensibly before we are aware. The whole time of this World is but
as a Dream; The proper time of awaking will be at the Resurrection; then Men
will know whereabout they are, and what they are, then they will be out of the
hurry of time, and have leisure in Eternity (which is a fixed now wherein they
shall stand still) to behold themselves, and understand themselves, their state
and way. Just as in a Dream, a man seems to be very busy, hard traveling, in
the midst of a crowd of people vehemently pursuing an Argument, driving on a
Bargain (...) solemn Funeral, pleasant at a M^^^^ge, cast down under a sad
Providence befalling him, much refreshed with good News, telling great sums of
Money, sat at a good Banquet, etc. but when he awakes, all is vanished away as
a conceit, and the man is naked in his Bed, very still and quiet, and it may be
finds himself hungry, and knows not where to get sixpence: Even so it is with
Men in the World, they are much in agitation and motion, cumbred about many
things; but when they come to dye, which is the time of awaking, then they are
seen naked, their state and condition is known; no more to do with the World,
or worldly things, no eating, or drinking, or buying, and selling, or
converting; if they have Christ their Friend and Advocate, and be found
upright, and lovers of God? then to glory with them, and everlasting joy; but
if they be found wicked and Hypocrites, then to everlasting confusion: But to
conclude this Similitude.

A Man when he is dreaming, by some noise or jog may be a little awakened, and
come to himself, but may quickly go to sleep and fall a dreaming again the same
Dream: So dreamish Professors that are very busy w^^^^g to and fro in the
Earth in a sleepy condition, and minding the things of it, may by some
awakening Ordinance or Providence, by some amazing Judgment, come to
themselves, and sit down, and think other thoughts than they did before, let
the World stand still, and have to do with God; but as soon as the noise is
over, they fall to dream again.

In the great Plague and Fire in London, there was such a noise, that I believe
there were very few but were awakened, and for the present, left off dreaming;
but how quickly did security and sleepiness creep on, and they fell to dreaming
again one after another, to building, to buying, and selling, etc. (which at
the best are but dreamish things, and may prove much worse, if you do them as
they did them in the days or Noah, and Lot;) I wish with all my heart, the
next Jog be not so hard, and the cry so loud, that instead of being kindly
awakened, they be not mazed, and stunned, and deaf, and disabled from getting
up, and putting on their clothes.

4. How irrecoverable they are, and lever to be recalled; If I would give all
the World I cannot call yesterday back, nor be placed where I was yesterday
morning. He that cries out, Call time again, call time again, is as unlikely to
be heard, and answered as any man I know; ^ay, but cannot you set me one day or
two backward, place me where I was but the other morning, that I may pass over
those three or tour hours as I did then, No, I cannot do it; And this is the
first Rule in this Christian Arithmetic; Number the days that yon have past,
this will make you wise.

Rule 2.
A second Rule in Arithmetic. Number the days that you have lost, this will
be a special means to lead you to Wisdom. What have your past days been filled
with? have not you lost weeks, and months, nay years? Consider this well, and
you will be able to tell me, I need not tell you what thoughts it will work in
you, and what wise Counsels it will put you upon; have not many of thy days
been filled with nothing but vanity? some men do nothing at all, many worse
than nothing, the most do something that is not their proper work to do, but
belongs to others; can thou say that any day of thy life has been as well
filled with good as it ought to have been, or as it might have been? if thou
had thy best spent days to spend over again, could thou not spend them a
great deal better? no such cause of mourning as for lost time: was not thy
Childhood, and thy Youth vanity? has not the World had many an hour that God
and Christ should have had, and should have been improved for the promoting of
thine eternal welfare? How many idle days, and play-dayes have thou made? how
many needless Journeyes, Visits, Walks, and Discourses have thou made? How many
unnecessary designs and unprofitable labors? May it not be said of much of thy
business thou have been employed in, as some said of the Woman's pouring the
Ointment on Christ's Head; Mat. 14.4.
why was this waste of time, might it not have been made better use of?

Rule 3.
Third Rule of Arithmetic; Number the work you have done, and how you have
don't it; what will this do? you will tell me what it will do, if you observe
it; you will find upon Examination, that put all your good works together, and
allow for damage, for the Hay and the Stubble, the Dregs and the Dross, and
they amount but to very little; you will see how much mending all your work
needs; what mourning over, and begging pardon for the defects and failings
about it; time runs, and work sticks, and that which we thought we had done
well, must be done over again: how should this awaken us, and quicken us; when
we have done all we can, we are but unprofitable servants! when we have done
the best we can, we have not done that which is our duty, when we have done the
most we can, we have not done all we should, still some work lies before us,
and it may be very little time; will not this consideration to make men make
much of time, and not prodigally throw it away as they have done? because so
much is required to survey and mend old done Deeds.

Rule 4.
Number the Sabbaths, the Sermons, the Opportunities which you have enjoyed.
This a fourth Rule in Christian Arithmetic; and what will this tend to? You
will tell me when you have well considered it. Reckon how many of Gods
Ambassadors have been sent to thee with several Messages, and with the same
message over and over again; how many years of the days of the Son of Man you
have seen: how long you enjoyed such a Ministry in such a place, and such a
powerful Ministry in another; and now what am I the better: God will expect an
account of me; is it not high-time for me to consider what return I can make:
what profiting, and progress I have made in the knowledge and fear of God, and
Faith in his Son Jesus Christ; to what degrees and measures of patience,
Meckness, Hope, Love, Heavenly Conversation, crucifying the flesh, looking for
the appearing of Christ, and aiming at his Glory in every thing I do etc.

Many an exhortation and motive and direction and encouragement have I had
about all these and much more, many a time, and that with a great deal of
pressing: God may call me to even accounts with him, the very next hour for any
thing I know, and how ready am I for it! Oh for a little time for this work! I
have cause to be afraid, that I shall be found much in arrearages to God, and
that there are some hundreds of Sermons I have heard, that I can remember
neither Text, Doctrine, Reason nor Use; nor have any real impression remaining
upon me from them, a dram of habitual virtue or strength by them: Oh that God
would not clap me up, and make me bankrupt, that have taken up so many goods of
him, and am not able to make him any payment, the goods are embezeled; Oh that
I had time to make my composition with him, to sue out a release and discharge
from him! I am undone if I be arrested before this be done, for I cannot pay
twelve pence in the pound; Lord spare me a little time that I may repent in,
and make money of all that I have that I may bring to thee; I will not keep or
conceal one peniworth from thee, I will give thee a true account in whose hands
they are, whom I have traded with; how I have been cheated by Satan, by the
World, and most of all by a deceitful heart of my own that was bred up with me,
and which I have given much trust to: I could no sooner have any of Heavens
commodities come in, but presently they were purloyned from me by the means of
my deceitful, hard, vain, idle, foolish Heart; for whilst I slept and was
careless, Mat. 13.19.22, 25.
the wicked one came and catched them away, or the cares of this World, and the
deceitfulness of Riches spoiled them, and so I got no profit by them; my base
Heart did betray me to all this mischief and loss: and now Lord be pleased to
spare me a little, that I may mourn over and bewail my great losses, that I may
call my treacherous wicked Heart to an account; that I may seriously and
severely examine and search it, that I may bring it to confession, and
acknowledgment, to deep sorrow and repentance, to sincere and holy resolutions
of a faithful improvement of any opportunity and season of Grace, that he shall
hereafter be pleased to put into my hands; and now consider, beloved, whether
the making up accounts do not require some time, how needful it is to be done,
considering how large our receipts and credits are, and lastly how little
assurance we have of time to do it in.

Rule 5.
The fifth Rule of Christian Arithmetic is, number and compare your days with
the days of those that lived in the first age of the World; compare the length
of thy time with the Patriarchs lives; and what will this do? thou will see it
will have very good influence on a wise improving of time; they lived six,
seven eight, or nine hundred years; and thou will never reach one hundred, it
may be not half an hundred: a serious meditation of this will work in you, one
of those two useful considerations.

1. How long a time had they to glorify God in, in comparison to what I have;
how did they live to his praise and honor in proportion hundreds of years as
it were before I had a being, and hundreds of years after my being ended; how
many opportunities had they of serving God more than I have, how much work did
they do in their generation for God more than I what large returns did they
make from Earth to Heaven above what I do; what need have I to ply my work,
that have not one day for their seven to work in; time is short with me, for
though they had much, yet, they had none too much, and how should I look to it,
that I have not too little for my business.

2. How long a time were they kept in this World and out of Heaven, above what
I shall be; how tedious was their journey, and how was their pilgrimage
lengthened out: they had but as it were newly set forth in the time that I am
got to my journeys end in; their work was much greater, their stay in the
vineyard protracted and drawn out, their sitting in Heavenly places adjourned,
prorogued and suspended; one generation of Saints in these latter days after
another passes to Heaven, even fourteen Generations in the time that some of
them got thither; how did they expect the accomplishment of the promise one
hundred years after another! their days were many and evil, they were sinfully
evil, and they could not choose but be penally evil. The flood came upon the old
World and drowned it because of ungodliness; how long were they made to wait
for the inheritance: now in our days the World is soon weary of us, and we are
soon weary of it, and we are quickly gone out of it; we ride Post through it,
from one stage to another, through Childhood, Youth, middle Age, old Age; some
ride but one or two of them, and are presently caught up to Heaven.

Rule 6.
The sixth Rule of Christian Arithmetic, is this; number and compare the
certainty of your works with the uncertainty of your time: I am sure my work
will last as long as my time lasts; but I know not whether my time will remain
as long as my work lasts; and therefore I have no need to spend time without
work, seeing, I have work enough to spend my time in; but may not have time to
finish my work in.

Rule 7.
The seventh Rule in this Christian Arithmetic is; number and compare thy
days with Eternity, an age breaks no square in Eternity: for a moment of time,
is more unto all that time that has been since the Beginning of the World, Mr.
G.
and shall be unto the end of it, than all that time is unto Eternity; because
a moment by repetition will measure all that time; but all that time will never
by any repetition whatsoever measure Eternity: it is not the least part of it;
a Man that should have sinned the first moment of the Worlds Creation, and
should have had his punishment deferred till the last moment of the Worlds
duration, his punishment should have been swifter in regard of Eternity; than
his punishment in regard of all that time of the World's continuance, that
should have sinned the first moment of time, and have been punished the very
next or second moment. Observe that expression of Peter, 2 Pet. 3.8.
Beloved says he, be not ignorant of this one thing; and what is this one
thing, that is so special a thing, that of all other they should not be
ignorant of, namely this, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years,
and a thousand years as one day; in the point of Eternity, a day and a thousand
years are all one, and that which happens in a thousand years, is all one as if
it happened within a day; and so on the contrary, to him that stands upon the
pinnacle of Eternity, and loooks down thence below upon the shreds and snippets
of time: and therefore mark but that the Prophet Ahijah says in regard of the
festination of God's Judgment upon the house of Wicked Jeroboam. 1 King. 14.14.
The Lord, says he, shall raise up a King over Israel, who shall cut off the
House of Jeroboam that day; but what ^ even now. He stood upon the pinnacle of
Eternity; and therefore that snippet of time which seemed to the World a great
while, was nothing to him: which made him when he had spoken of cuting off the
House of Jeroboam that day, to use the revocation, but what? even now, that day
and even now is all one to Eternity. And the seeming contradiction of the
Preacher tending to illustrate this very thing, is well worth the observing: He
had spoken of the not speedy executing sentence against an evil work, that it
encouraged sinners to go on in their sins, but in the next verse he answers
thus: Though a Sinner do evil an hundred times, Eccl. 8.12.
and his days be prolonged; yet, surely I know it shall be well with them that
fear God, but it shall not be well with the wicked neither shall he prolong his
Days, which are as a shadow? How is it true that he may prolong and not
prolong his days? How but only that though they may be prolonged in regard of
us, that have but a few ends of time, yet they are nothing in regard of the
Ball of Eternity, which is always winding and never unwound, in this regard he
shall not prolong his days, which are as a shadow, as as mere vanity to this
Eternity, and answerable to this is that like place of the Prophet Habbakuk:
Hab. 2.3
The vision says he, is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall
speak, it shall not lie; though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely
come, it will not tarry? How! but only that which is a long tarrying to time is
no tarrying to all Eternity: and this is the seventh Rule, which if it be well
observed will make us quickly remove our dwellings out of the hurry of time,
unto the borders of Eternity, still waiting every hour when we shall lanch forth
into that Sea, and be swallowed up of that Ocean.

Rule 8.
The eight Rule in Christian Arithmemetick is this; number and compare your
days with the age of the World: if the whole Age of the World be so little
compared with Eternity, and thine Age so short compared with the Worlds age,
How small a thing is thy life compared with Eternity! see Eccles. 1.4. One
generation passes away and another comes, but the Earth abides for ever; add
to this what is read Psalm. 102.25. etc. Of old have thou laid the foundation of
the Earth, and the Heavens are the works of thy hands, they shall perish but
thou shall endure: yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment, as a vesture
shall thou change them, and they shall be changed, but thou art the same, and
thy years have no end. If thou should have been born in the beginning of the
World, and have lived to the end of it, it is but a moment, and yet how narrow
a space of the World's age do thou live.

Rule 9.
Number the obscurity of thy days; and see what influence this will have, and
what advantage to true Wisdom: the World knows little of thee, and thou but
little of it, how many thousand years passed in the World, and millions of
People acted upon the stage before thou came into it; Now thou art in being,
what a poor obscure Creature art thou, little acquainted with what is done out
of thy sight, it may be thou art a stranger to him that lives next door to
thee; Oh my Brethren, if this thing well considered, taking in the thoughts of
the acquaintance and knowledge which the Saints will be privileged with in
Eternity, they shall see as they are seen; and know as they are known, face to
face, behold all things in God, sit down with Abraham etc. I say, the comparing
of those things, how inconsiderable would it make this pitiful life to appear,
and what cloudy obscure, scanty days would these seem to be: the greatest
Monarch in the World in all his Glory is no more to be compared, for splendour;
interest and excellency to the lowest Saint in Heaven, than a Beggar in a
dungeon is to be compared with such a Monarch; what a vast compass will every
Saint have in his Eye? what reflections of joy and glory from an innumerable
company of Saints and Angels! what true esteem and unparalleled Affections from
Thousands and Millions of Glorious Creatures! What constant and eminent
discoveries and manifestations of Love from the Father of Glory, the Lord of
Glory, and the Spirit of Glory: much more happy than the Servants of Solomon,
Kin. 10.
for they stand to hear the Wisdom of of one that is greater than Solomon may,
Solomon himself in all his glory is not to be compared to one of these. If
perhaps through thy parts and Worldly advantages, thou come to be seen a little
above thy Neighbors, and to be talked of by a whole Country by the Generality
of the People there, how many are there even in that Country that never heard
of thee, take no notice of thee, how many Enemies have thou and envious ones
that hate thee, and would if they could overturn thy little honor: what
watchfulness and circumspection had thou daily need of because of thy
observers; how hard it is not to give a slip, harder not to have it taken
notice of and hardest not to have it magnified and multiplied and made use of
by censurers (most of whose Religion lies in observing the failings of the
Godly) to reflect upon thee, and the profession it self that thou art under;
what flatteries and pretended Friends, what troublesome visits, what variety of
occasions and diversions; what necessity continually of displeasing some, and
an utter impossibility to please all: many have complained that they have set
up more sail than they could keep up, and wished with all their Hearts they
might walk upon the ground again safely and silently, and never more be carried
upon the uneasy and uneven shoulders of popularity: Again, what sollicitousness
to improve rightly so large advantages and opportunities of service, and to be
found faithful stewards of the manifold gifts of God.

Consider now in how much greater excellency and infinitely higher place thou will be in Heaven if thou be a Saint; and freed from all the forenamed
inconveniences, and a thousand more; and then say it may well stand for one
Rule about numbering days, to reckon the obscurity of them.

Rule 10.
The last Rule in Christian Arithmetic, is this; Number thy days to Eternity,
duly consider what mutual aspects Time and Eternity have upon each other. All
the use of days is for Eternity; whatever is looked upon as a means to an
end, is upon that account less excellent than the end, and if it be not
employed in order to that end, it becomes of no use; all that time that has not
a fair and favorable look upon Eternity, is lost time, whatever use it was
put to; that day is a Cipher, and stands for nothing in the Calendar, wherein
nothing is put that has respect to another World. He that considers how great a
change his last day will make with him, will have something to do for his last
day in every day.

The whole life is but a Contemplation of, and should be a Preparation for a
dying day. He is a Fool that is merry, and makes much of himself in his Inn,
and knows not that he has any thing when he comes at home; whatever pleasure
thou might take here in eating, and drinking, and visiting, and
entertainments, and riches, and relations, and raiment, and estate, etc. as
soon as ever thy breath is out of thy nostrils; Good Lord, what a change is
here all on a sudden! now no more Meats nor Drinks talked of, no more use of
Wine, and reviving Liquors, not a word more of Discourse, not a dram of Mirth;
Friends depart, Relations go out of the room, no more Visitors, his dearest
Companions give over thoughts of having any more to do with him, and greatest
Dealers will have no more Accounts with him; his dear Relations that a quarter
of an hour ago would have parted with their own lives to have saved his now
begin to consult to have his Body removed out of sight, and put into the cold
ground, a Companion for Worms which they so friendly embraced and kissed a
little while ago, and there it may rot, and at the Resurrection go to Hell, for
any thing they can help it; his Soul immediately goes to God, and appears
before his Tribunal, where there is no talk of, no profit in Gold or Silver, or
thousands by the year; nor coming in here as Agrippa and Bernice came into the
Common Hall, (...).
with great pomp and fancy, no respect to him that wears the Goldring; no
discourse of Trades, or Feastings, or Houses, or Apparel, or Children, or
Relations, but of a good Conscience; how thou stood affected toward a person
thou will see there, The Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God; what Communication
thou hadest with him, during the time thou wast upon Earth, what Apprehensions
thou had of him, what Adresses thou madst to him as a Mediator, an Advocate,
and Savior; what Faith thou have had in him; whether there was an agreement
made between him and thee whilst thy days were in being, that thou, would
give up thy Soul, and Body, and Sins to him, thy Unrighteousness, and
Righteousness, and that he would undertake to satisfy the Justice of God, and
appease his Wrath for thee, and reconcile thee to his Father, that he would
cloth thee with his Righteousness, and sanctify thy Nature by his Holy Word
and Spirit, that he would make thee meet to be a partaker of Glory, and present
thee blameless and unreproveable in the sight of God, and give thee a full
possession of an everlasting Kingdom, and Glory with himself; what fear thou
had upon thy Heart in thy days of the Great God; whether in every thing thou
did in Natural, Civil, and Religious Actions thou did design and aim at his
Glory; How thy Affections were placed, and what kind of love passed between
thee and the World, during their abode there; what acts of Self-denial, and
Mortification thou put forth, what exercise of Heavenly-mindedness; what Duties
thou did, and how they were done; how thou did honor God in the Conditions
he placed thee; what patience and contentedness in a low condition; what
humility, meekness, and repentance in an high condition; how thou bore
sickness; and straits, and how thou used thy riches, and how honest thou wast
in thy dealings. There will be no discourses there of such vain matters as are
here below, but as Paul discoursed of Temperance, and Righteousness, and the
Judgment to come, of Uprightness, and Sincerity, and unfeigned Repentance, and
a true and full closing with the Person of Christ, the Son of the Living God,
equal with the Father, the Mediator for poor Sinners, the Savior of all that
truly believe on his Name and come to him; what Obedience thou manifested to
his Laws, how thou loved him and kept his Commandments, how thou loved the
Brethren and there by manifested thy being passed from Death to life, how
fruitful thou wast in all good works, and thereby did justify thy Faith to be
sound and true, and of the right kind; how willing and desirous thou was to do
much for God, and how little thou did esteem thy self the better for what
thou did, but how much thou did abhor thy self and hate thy self, for thy
daily defects, manifold infirmities, and much unsuitable carriage to such great
goodness, and loving kindness and unworthiness of such rich Grace, and Mercy
etc. Of this Nature will be the Discourses then, and the more thou have been
exercised in these thing, the greater will be thy consolation: Oh my Beloved
where is that Professor that lives under the serious frequent and powerful
meditation of these things; this and the other work I am employed in, this and
the other thing I am discoursing of; if God should now cut off the thread of my
Life, what should I be advantaged hereby, would it turn to my advantage when I
come in the presence of the Great God, shall I be glad that I was exercised, or
rather wish that I had never meddled or been concerned in such affairs and
matters? our days are not intended to be the days of Noah and Lot wherein Men
built and planted, and bought and sold, and married and were given in Marriage,
(all these Lawful things and not one of them sinful) that is, that did do all
these things as the work of the day, for themselves and rested in them, and
rejoiced themselves in them; and did not do them with respect: to another Life,
with such fear, regularity, moderation, righteous principles, and designs as
would have yielded them comfort: (when those days had been cut off) in another
world; Luke 17.28.
and are we not fallen into such days as Noah's and Lot's were eating and
drinking etc. Eating and Drinking is an unlawful thing if you do not do it to
the Glory of God, and honor God in it: observe it, as there is no time
allotted for sin, so neither are there any days allowed for the doing of
lawful and good actions, if they have not a reference to Eternity; thy Prayers
and Alms and duties are not numbered aright, if they be not numbered for God and
another world; if they be numbered for thy self and thy present interest, they
are quite lost, and which is worse do become sin, and so prove mortal and
damning: Mr. G.
you see how necessary it is to number every day for Eternity; if thou mindest
this Rule, thou will reap much fruit hereafter from thy common and worldly
actions, because hereby those actions which otherwise are but common and
worldly actions, as the actions of our ordinary and homliest callings, we shall
sanctify them, and translate them out of themselves, and their own base
Element, into an higher Orb and Element, viz. to go as for actions, truly holy
and Religious, and parts of God's own worship before him, and rewardable as so
at his hand's, what a comfort might this be to Men in going about worldly
callings, to the very Shuttleman and Sheersman, Spinster and Carder, and the
veriest drudge and droil in the servilest condition? what a comfort this, to
consider, that if they do but honestly and faithfully, in obedience to God that
has set them in those callings go about them, they might sanctify those, and
the like actions, and translate them, out of a Worldly into an Heavenly Orb and
Element, and Glorify God (and by that thou providest for Eternity) as well in
their proportion by those actions, as the Angels that stand continually before
God, do by their standing and praising and singing Hallelujahs to him. The poor
Servants that in obedience to God do faithful and honest service, (be it in
never such drudgeries) to their Master, are said to adorn thereby the Doctrine
of God; Titus 2.10. And is not this a working? a numbering time, and work for
Eternity? those that honor him and his Gospel, he will honor them another day.

What a comfort is this, that mere drudgeries, and Worldly Actions that, might
seem only to smell of the World, and this present life and time, that these
being gone about in the Obedience and Fear of God, baulking iniquity and
injustice in them, may go for Holy and Heavenly actions; The actions of the
virtuous Woman, Prove. 31. a Man would think were the actions only of a mere
worldling, V. 13. etc.
she seeks wool and flax etc. yet those and suchlike, are all the actions
for which, she is called a virtuous Woman in the Beginning, and to have done
virtuously above all in the latter end: Many Daughters have done virtuously, V.
29.
but thou excellest them all; and the next verse shows the reason, because she
did these in the Fear of the Lord; A Woman that fears the Lord she shall be
praised: V. 30.
shall have praise at the end of days. Another Woman there may be that may do
the same things, may seek wool and flax, and work willingly with her hands, may
rise early, put her hand to the wheel etc, and yet may be a mere scraper, a
mere worldling, a mere progger for Earthly trash and subsistence for these
days, a mere vicious and not a virtuous Woman; Why? Because she does them not
from the same ground out of obedience and fear of God, and respect to another
World; but from a profane heart, greedy of the world: so how many precepts are
there in Proverbs that might seem to smell of mere worldliness, as that of
taking heed of suretiship, and that of diligently looking after the state of
their flocks and looking well to their herds: Prove. 6.1.
And yet no Worldliness that Solomon meant in them, C. 27.23.
but rather Heavenliness: mark his General rule in the Begi(...) the Fear of
the Lord is the Beginn(...) Wisdoms; 1.7.
all other precepts are to be performed by virtue of this general precept, and
guided by it.

Let this lastly be added, that you may see how necessary it is to number time
and days (and whatever fills them) for Eternity; if we do not do it, we shall
lose the comfort of our best and most specious Actions.

To be painful in the Ministry, to be forward in Works of Charity etc. How
goodly and how good are these Actions in themselves; and yet spend my Spirits I
may, consume and wait my strength I may, in the Ministry, and yet if I do this
as a task only that the world looks I should discharge, or to get my own
maintenance, or to set up my own credit, and not chiefly in all this, my labor
be guided by that which he I that was so laborious in the Ministry was guided
by. To me to live is Christ, (the honor of Christ) and to die is gain; (here
is Eternity in the case) I lose all the comfort I might have in this so good an
Action, and the reward I might expect from Christ in the other World. So (...)
Works of charity, I may do many things, I may feed the hungry, (...) the Naked,
entertain good Ministers and good People, build Hospitals etc. and yet if
by-respects (which supposition, I put not that the world should in such cases
where Good appears be suspicious, but that Man that does Good should look still
to his own Heart which is deceitful) if I say, by-respects sway too much, and
these things be not done chiefly in obedience to God that he might be
glorified, and that we might lay up a good Foundation for the time to come, 1 Timothy 6.19.
that we might lay hold upon Eternal Life; and that we might make to our selves
Friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that when we want they may receive us into
Everlasting habitations; We lose the great comfort that we might expect from so
good actions. To conclude this Point, if you be careful observe this rule of
making all thy time, all thy days and actions, look with their Faces directly
upon Eternity, and the World to come; thou will meet with wonderful advantage
and benefit by it; thou will bring all thy works into a narrow compass, into a
single channel, into constant view and observation? Thou will render all thy
Duties and performances, all thy labors under the Sun to be more sweet, more
easy, unperplexed, and affording much peace, rest, and tranquillity to the
Soul; by a perfect removing the fears of future evils, (public judgments,
poverty etc.) and especially of the day of thy Death which by this means will
be so facilitated and familiarized, that it will become rather a day
desirable, than formidable, nay, thou will look upon the day of thy Death, as
better than any of the days of thy Life; these and other things, I might
enlarge upon, and they do indeed deserve a serious discussion: but I design
brevity, and therefore hasten to the second Observation, which I shall but
touch upon, and that is from this consideration, that the Psalmist prays for
teaching, and instruction in this point of numbering Days; which is so plain,
so common, so ordinary, so obvious a thing; besides that he had numbered them,
in ver. 10. The Days of our years, etc.

Doct. 2.
Let the Observation hence be this, that Christians may be much unacquainted
with the Nature and power of those Truths, which are known and confessed and
acknowledged by them: the hinge of this is, that Truths that seem to be best
known are least known; things best seen are least understood; I shall briefly
give you a fivefold Instance, and so pass on to the next.

1. The Doctrine is evident in things relating to sense.

1. The shortness of time. 2. Certainty of Death. 3. Uncertainty of Riches.
2. In things obvious to Reason, and most acknowledged, as

1. The deceitfulness of Man's Heart. 2. The necessary connection between Sin
and Punishment. 3. The universal and particular Providence of God.
3. In things known by Revelation, as, First, Joh. 4.23, 24.
That Christ Died, and was Buried and rose again, see 1 Cor. 15.1, 2, 3, 4. And
ascended into Heaven. Secondly, That he sent down his Holy Spirit to convince,
guide, comfort, and rule in the Hearts of the Saints. Thirdly, That the Lord
Jesus will come again in Power and great Glory, with his Saints and Angels, to
Judge the World in Righteousness.

4. In matters of absolute and plain precept, as First, Loving the Brethren,
and being, found in all the Acts and exercises of Gospel-Love. Secondly,
Well-ordering and governing the tongue. Thirdly, Walking circumspectly and
redeeming time.

5. In approved Actions concerning Worship, as First, That God is to be
Worshipped and Loved above all; which is the first and great Commandment; Is
this observed diligently and constantly by all Christians? is there nothing at
any time steps before God? Secondly, Joh. 4.23, 24.
Divine and Gospel Worship must have Divine and Gospel-warrant. Thirdly, That
Gospel Worship must be Spiritual, and not formal and carnal.

I might give you the Reasons of the point, from the commonnesss of them, few
considering seriously, what is obvious and plain; from Man's curiosity, still
willing to find out some new thing; and from Satan's subtilty, who knows by
experience, that there is no such Robbing as by the high way side; the great
road, the known path: he Will let men alone in by-ways, and more private
paths, in Truths of lesser concernment and influence; but dees the great spoil
in known confessed practical Truths and Doctrines. But I hasten to what
remains, it may be the Lord may stir up some more able Pen, to show the
professing World their great errors and mistakes herein, that the Spirits of
the power of Godliness, which have been long uhder decay, may be recovered, and
the great arteties filled with good Blood; that the Truths, and the things of
God may have their due consideration and observation by the pretenders to them
according to their nature, worth, weight, necessity and excellency of them.
There are two Observations behind, in the prosecutioh of which I shall be a
little more large.

Doct. 3.
The third Observation is this, That the right Art and Skill of numbering Days,
is a point of Divine teaching: one have the wisdom to number their Days aright
but those that have it from above, and are taught it by God; you must go to God
and beg of him, that he would teach you this lesson. This appears from the
Text, that we have it expressed in the form of Prayer; as if he had said,
though I have cast up the acount of my days in the 10th verse, yet there is a
further Mystery, which I cannot discern without thy teaching, without that
Spiritual light and knowledge which must come from thee; and here you have the
Emphasis of the particle (10:) I have been taught this lesson many a time, and
can say it over; but I have not been so taught as they said of Christ that
never man spoke like him, so never any Man taught as God teaches; I have often
considered the 14. Acts comp. v. 1. with 27. Where it is said, that Paul and
Barnabas so spoke, that a great multitude of the Jews and also of the Greeks
Believed. But when they came to give an account to the Church, the Text says;
that they rehearsed all that (God) had done with them, and how (he) had opened
a door of Faith unto the Gentiles. If the Lord had not opened the door of the
Heart, all their knocking would have signified nothing, if the Lord had not
spoke with them, all their so speaking would not have procured belief from our
Souls; it was God that so spoke with them that made the door of the Heart to
open.

If the Lord Jesus had only cried, Lazarus come forth, and had not by a
Powerful Hand communicated Life to him, he had never stirred out of his Grave.
We read in Luke 24.27. That the Lord Jesus beginning at Moses, and all
theProphets, he expounded to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning
himself; but observe is said in ver. 45. then opened he their understanding
that they might understand the Scriptures: It is not enough, to, have the
Scriptures opened, but we must have our understandings opened too; If you had
the knowledge, of an angel, and could discourse of Divine Truth with undeniable
Evidence and Demonstration, yet this will not amount to right Teaching, without
Divine Blessing and Influence. I need not insist much upon the proof of this,
take that Text, Psalm. 39.4. Lord make me to know mine end, and the measure of
my days, what it is; that I may know how frail Iam. When once he is taught
this by God, then he can say with sense and experience, as it follows, Behold
thou have made my days as an hand-breadth, mine age is as nothing before thee,
V. 5, 6, 7.
verily every man at his best estate is vanity, Selah. Surely every man walks
in a vain show, surely they are disquieted in vain, he heapeth up riches, and
knows not who shall gather them: And now Lord, what wait I for, my hope is in
thee, deliver me from all my transgressions, etc. You see that when he is
taught this Lesson of God, how feelingly, and sweetly he breaks out; its only
Faith and the Teachings of God that can give us to Heb. 11.
be under the power of things of Sense: as by Faith we understand that the
World's were made, so by Faith we must be taught that our time is short, that
our days are numbered, that we must dye: though we see persons daily carried to
the Grave, that never reached our years, and we know we are made of the same
Corruptible Materials, subject to the same Diseases and Distempers, to the same
Casualties and Dangers, that our Breath, is in our Nostrils, and may as soon be
stopped as theirs.

Again, The Apostle Paul when he comes in so with his But, But this Isay,
brethren, 1 Cor. 7.29
the time is short; shows plainly that it was a Point that was not so well
understood; I shall endeavor to Demonstrate this further to you in these
following Particulars.

1. None can know the use of time without Divine Teaching; and none can number
his days aright, unless he know what use they are for: this has been already
spoken to; I shall only add this, that as it is with a Merchant who Prepares
his Ship for Sea, he provides only so much Victuals as may serve for the
Voyage, he does not provide the Seaman soft Beds to lodge in, but only makes
such preparation as may serve the end of his sending his Ship to Sea, the less
burden she has, the swister she sails, and the swister she sails, the less she
will need: Just so it is in this Case; We are sailing through this World, our
Port is Eternity, our business is only to provide our selves for quick sailing,
and lay in so much Provision only as will serve us for so many days Voyage as
we shall be out: the less Cumber of the World we have, the sooner we shall be
sit for Heaven; and the faster we move thither, the less we shall need.

2. None can know the end of time, ( sc. that it will end) but by Divine
Teaching: And none can number his days aright, that does not know their end.
What made David pray, as you have heard, Lord, make me to know mine end, etc.
Every one thinks he may live a day longer. When a man comes to dye, and to be
just within the view of Eternity, then he sees what is the proper work for
time, and wishes he had his time to spend over again, he would spend it
otherwise then he has done. Mr. F.
Now it is strange that Faith should not do what Sense will do; we pretend to
believe that we shall have a last day, and why should not this Faith have such
Effects as Sense and Feeling will have.

3. None can know the Seasons, Nicks, and Opportunities of time without Divine
Teaching; and certainly none can number his days aright, that understands not
his Seasons; that knows not that Sabbath days are Seasons to be improved, that
the present time is a Season that the Morning of the day is a Season, that the
time of youth is a Season, that a time of affliction is a Season, that times of
Conviction are Seaons, etc. Now there is no Man can rightly know, and make of
these Seasons without Divine Teaching.

4. None can know the excellency of time without Divine Teaching. And sure I
am, that he that knows not the worth and preciousness of time, Exodus 29.19.
never knew how to number his days aright. Let us a little consider the
excellency of time. We read in the Old Law, that if one man smote another, he
should not only pay for his Cure, but for the loss of his time: But more
particularly;

1. Days and times are such things as cannot be bought; did you yet ever know
any days to be sold, or understood what a day might be worth if it were to be
sold; we count those things rare and excellent, that though some Men have them,
Job 3.21.
yet there are none of them to be got for Money. Let me therefore make much of
my day; for if I lose it, there is not one to be had if I would give all the
World for it; a Man need not desire more wealth than would by some be given him
for one day if he had it to sell. This puts me in mind of a passage concerning
a worthy and Religious Lady which I do well remember; The Lady Barwick of
Toulston in Yorkshire, to whom I had the happiness to be Chaplain for several
Years, and must ever own my self to bemuch obliged, and no less to the Right
Honorable the Lord Henry Fairtax her Son in Law, and my constant and Faithful
friend in my sufferings for Christ.
she had for several years been exercised with a sore distemper of shortness of
breathing, and did for a great while long to be dissolved and to be with
Christ, which she did from that assurance of his Love to her Soul, which the
Lord had been pleased graciously to give unto her. A Person coming to the Gate
that had several Wares to sell, desired that the Lady might have notice of it;
she very gravely and seriously asked if he had any Graves to sell; for faith,
she, I know nothing I want in this World so much as a Grave, and I have been
long seeking for one, but cannot yet get it.

It is true, Graves are dear Commodities at some times, as Job tells us
plainly, There are some that long for death, but it comes not, Job. 3.21.
and digg for it more than for bid Treasures, which rejoice exceedingly, and
are glad when they can find the Grave. But Graves are not so dear as Days, for
a Grave may be found, and will be found at last, but a day can not be
purchased: Thus time cannot be bought.

2. Consider the singleness and smalness of it, for those that have it; Pearls
are called Unions for their rarity and scarceness. It is but the present time
we have, and that is so little, it can hardly be discerned, for it is gone as
soon as present. Time is such a piece, such a precious Commodity, that there is
not any man in the World has two of them to show, that if he lose one time, he
can say he has another, or if he lose one day, he can say he has another. Time
past is not our's, that is gone irrecoverrably, time to come is out of our
reach, it lies always in God's hand; time present is only ours, and that is so
little that a man must have a quick Eye that can behold it; and I never heard
of more forts of time than that which is past, present, and to come.

3. For the excellency of time and days take notice of the absolute necessity
of it; whatever is done for God, or for a Man's own Salvation, must be done in
time; Many Graces cannot have either Being or Exercise, but in time; what need
have we of the Apostle Peter's advice, Pass the time of your sojourning here in
fear! 1 Pet. 1.17.
What would have become of thousands that are now in Heaven, but for time, if
they had not had time! see Rom 2.4. Or despisest thou the riches of his
forbearance and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God that
leads thee unto Repentance. So Peter, alluding, as it is very likely, to this
very place; Account (says he) that the long-suffering of the Lord is
Salvation, 2 Pet. 3.5.
even as our beloved Brother Paul also, according to the Wisdom given unto him,
has written unto you.

These two Apostles, Peter and Paul were very good accomptants; and it seems
they both were of this mind, that there was much forbearance and giving a
little time, toward the working out of a Man's Salvation, and setting his
matters right with God; and indeed they might say something by experience,
especially Paul; for where had he been, if he had been taken away, when he was
persecuting the Church, and breathing out threatenings against it? and for Peter
he would have been in no good case, if he had been taken away, when he was
cursing and denying his Master: where had Mary Magdalen been but a for little
forbearance and time, if she had been taken away when she was a Prostitute and
playing the Harlot? Where had Austin been but for the patience of God, if he
had been taken away, when he was both a perverse Manichee and a dissolute young
Man? Whither should I have gone then, Quo irem s^^tunc obtrem, nisi in ignem
and tormenta digna factis mcis etc. Cont. 5.
says he, if at that time I had been removed hence, but into everlasting
flames and torments, which my wicked deeds had justly deserved at the Hands of
God? Where also had many of your selves been, who now with Hearty thanksgivings
can laud and praise the goodness of God in giving Time, and Patience that has
led you to Repentance; if you had been taken away in your Sins, before the work
of Grace had been wrought in you? finally, where had most of those been, who
now have their Crowns in Heaven, but for Time and a few days Patience? had not
long-suffering waited for their Conversions, they had been smoking firebrands
in Hell, that are now shining lights, and glorious Saints in Heaven: Nisi primo
Deus per miscre cordiam parceret non inveniret ques per Judiesum c^iona ret.
unless the Lord, says one of the Ancients, should first a long time spare the
wicked in his Mercy, he should not find any Righteous whom he might afterward
Crown in his justice. Without Divine Teaching, we shall never come to
understand what that clause of the Apostle means, which many a time I have sat
down and admired; Rom 3.25.
Whom God says, he, has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his
Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the remission of Sins that are past,
through the forbearance of God. (...)
Those last words, through the forbearance of God cannot be known without
teaching from above, what need there is of a little time for Men that would
would go to Heaven, that it was God's great forbearance that they were not
taken away in their past sins, till they came to believe in Christ, for the
remission of their sins that were past. Go and learn what that means of the
good Vineyard-dresser; Lord let it alone alone this year also: Luke 13.8.
he that gets a Reprieve, time may work him a pardon also God is not willing
that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance. 2 Pet. 3. 2
Timo. 2.25.
How many are called and saved at the sixth hour, which had they been taken
away at the third hour where had they been? Mr. G.
How many at the ninth which had they been taken away at the sixth hour, where
likewise had they been? How many at the eleventh, which if they had been taken
away at the ninth, where also had they been? the good Thief upon the Cross, had
he been taken away when he was robbing by the highway side, what had become of
him? in stead of, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise, that very day and
hour be had been in Hell with the Devil and the damned. And here let it not
seem an impertinent solly, if I hence take occasion to reprove a Spirit of
murmuring and discontent; because of the Lord's Patience toward wicked Men,
and suffering them to continue so long in their rebellions against him, and
injuries toward their Fellow Creatures: consider thou had benefit by the
Patience of God, was not thou once wicked, and it may be so wicked that others
murmured at thee, as now thou murmurest at them? if thou art light in the Lord,
remember thy former darkness: thou would have God be hasty with others, and
little thinks what danger thou escaped by God's Patience toward thee; because
thou art got over the Bridge, thou would therefore have it drawn: but if
thou thy self did not put God to the expense of much time; and have been
sanctified even from the womb; yet have thou not some Son or Daughter, or
Friend, or brother, whose wicked lives thou bewails? and would thou have God
to destroy them, to begin with them, to make them the first examples of his
present revenge? Thou says, why does God bear with the wicked so long? Why
does God bear with thy Son, with thy Brother, with thy Kinsman? Thou would
desire a little more time for them, and further forbearance in hope of
amendment; that he would forbear them when they are young, for hope of
reclaiming when they come to Man's estate, that he would forbear them then for
hope of reclaiming when they grow old, that he would forbear them when they are
old, yet one year longer, for hope of reclaiming the next, and so on; and
therefore look either upon thy self who once were darkness, but now art light
in the Lord, or upon Child or Friend who now are darkness, but happily one day
may be light in the Lord, and then cease to be offended at any patience of God
toward the wicked whatsoever. To conclude this particular; how many damned in
Hell if they had had the time and the forbearance that others have had might
have been in the places of some that are in Heaven and they in their places,
but for God's Patience? see Mat. 11.21.

4. For the excellency of Time, consider the sweetness of it; how comfortable
do we reckon it, when we can get a little time with a friend to enjoy him
without interruption, and not be called away! how sweet to get a little time
for retirement, a little time to hear a little time to pray, to read, to
meditate a little time for business, a little time for business! we are so
posted from one exercise to another, from one duty to another, from one posture
to another, that we look upon it as a great happiness, to get a little out of
the hurry of time, and that the Chariot-wheels of it seem to stand a little
still and quiet, that for a little space they do not drive on: what a rest is
it to a poor tossed hurried Soul? a little communion with God, a little freedom
from the cares, the noise, the distractions, the diversions, the interruptions
of the World; to be able to sit down, and be a little at quiet, and take ones
breath, and if a Man be in sickness, as Job speaks, to have a little time to
swallow down his spittle.

5. The fifth particular is this, none can know the Lord of time without Divine
Teaching, and certain it is, that none can number his Time aright that does not
understand this, that our Time is not our own; God is the Lord of Time, we are
but stewards of it; we must be accountable for it, we are not proprietors, and
for us to make bold, (as untaught Popple we too often do) with that which is
the Lord's peculiar is high presumption and sawciness: it is injury and stealth,
for thee to meddle with thy fellow creatures property without his leave; what
is it then at will and pleasure to dispose of thy makers right? what Conscience
or prudence is it for thee to say, I will go to such a place such a day, and
buy and sell, or meet with such a company and be merry? who gave either you or
them power to name the day? you should say if the Lord give leave, God
permitting, if God grant Life and Health: Ah my Brethren, if we asked leave of
God about the day, we should also he brought to acquaint him with work we
intend to do that day, and how many ill-done deeds and misspent time might this
prevent! you see what an interest the right considering of time has in every
thing, and how great an influence it has upon all actions and affairs. What has
thou to do to cut thongs out of another Man's hide, or carve at another Man's
table without his license? What Prodigals are we of that which is none of our
own? can thou say that thou was ever worth an hours time of thy own in all
thy life, and how is it that thou have spent so much and wasted so much? thou
have no authority to appoint days or hours let me come closer to thee, thou
have not only robbed God of that time which he has lent thee for thy own
business, but thou have taken from him that time which he has separated and
enclosed and reserved for his own work and Glory; review thy Sabbaths, and
think with thy self, how much holy time thou have spent upon thy own thoughts,
thy own words, thy own actions; what great snippets of time thou have cut out
of the Lord's holy days; can thou justify all this? is this the fruit of the
Divine Teaching? No such matter: our times are in God's hands and power, our
times are not our own any more than our tongues; God is the Lord both over them
and us; let us therefore when ever we have occasion for any time be it never so
little, or seemingly never so near at our hand, not dare to reach it and use it
without first going to God, and asking his good will; by this means we shall
not only please him, but likewise engage his assistance and direction in,
together with his blessing upon, that work we have to do in that time: but if
our work be naught them I confess we should be unwilling, to go to him for time
for it, lest he ask us how we will employ it, and we shall be afraid and
ashamed to tell him, nor indeed has he allotted any time for bad deeds, but let
us know this that if we steal time for works of darkness, the Lord will
severely reckon with us both for our works and our time.

6. The sixth particular is this; none can observe the wasters and devourers of
time without Divine Teaching, and it is an undoubted truth, that no Man can
number his Days, well, that is not an observer of these; these are Thieves and
Robbers, these are eaters and consumers of time, that do very much perplex
Christians; and many times put them besides right numbering: I Will name some of
them to you.

1. Unnecessary cares; those are very great intruders upon time, and will be
cnotinually claiming a share in it, though our Lord and Savior has given
positive order that no room should be lest for them; Mat. 6.34.
take no thought for to morrow; and why take ye thought, etc. How many cares
have you in a day come in to your minds that might well be spared, and indeed
Ought not to be admitted you cannot pray in quiet for them, you cannot eat and
sleep in quiet for them; you ought to watch against them, and beg of the Lord
divine Teaching how you may suppress them.

2. Unprofitable discourses are great devourers of time, that tend to no good
at all, neither to information, nor reformation, nor to prepare or fit the mind
for work and business; much talk about others Men's affairs and matters that we
are not concerned in, and are forbid to meddle with: 1 These. 4.11.
study to be quiet and to do your own business; and yet you cannot but observe
it with half an Eye, How much time is spent among Christians when they meet
together about other Men's Actions, Trades, Shops, Families etc. and its strange
if there is not mixture or backbiting, envy, uncharitableness, and evil
speaking throughout such discourses.

He that considers time rightly and knows how to number his Days, as he
should, will see cause to wave such needless chat, and fill his time with
better conference, that may leave a more sweet savor and relish upon his own
heart and the spirits of the company. The Lord knows how much we are to blame
in this matter, that we cannot fit together, or meet together, but with
Augustus Caesar we must be taxing all the World; especially such as it may be
differ from us a little in some smaller circumstances, we cannot have a good
word for them, nor hear a good word of them, but can be greedy and gape at half
a word that is reflecting and disparaging at a semblance, at an appearance,
true or false. My Brethren, these things ought not to be, I profess I often
think of that place, James 3.2. In many things we offend all, but if any Man
offend not in word, the same is a perfect Man, and able also to bridle the
whole Body; and let me tell you, he that can manage his time aright, will
quickly order his tongue aright: Oh that I could persuade you and my self, that
redeeming time lies at the very bottom of the power of Godliness; Again, how
much needless and unprofitable talk about future events and contingencies,
about the Lord's matters, his dispensations and providence, what may come to
pass in the World, besides murmuring and discontented speeches about them; it
does not become us to sit in consistory upon God's providence, to judge and
pass hard censures upon them; no time appointed by the Lord for it. It was no
small impiety in Pompey to rail against the god's, and condemn the Providence
that suffered him to be soiled by Caesar, his cause being, as he thought, far
better than Caesar's was, he standing for the defense of the Commonwealth like
a good; Patriot, De Net. Deor. 3.
and Caesar like an Usurper aiming at a Monarchy; and those Queries in Tully
are but the symptoms of Atheism; That if God govern the World, then Why should
persidious Hannibal be suffered to slay Marcellus? why the barbarous
Carthaginians to torture Regulas? why bloody Cinna to slay so many Citizens?
why Marius to command and Catulus his head, a man far better than himself? etc.
This was a thing that much displeased God, Mal. 2. in that some there said (and
wearisome words they were to God) that because the wickedest were suffered to
play such (...)icks, and domineer over others, that either God favored the
wicked or was no Judge of the World; ye have wearied the Lord with your words,
yet ye say, wherein have we wearied him? when ye say, every one that is evil
does good in the sight of the Lord, and where is the God of Judgment? as if God
could not make his Judgments good, if he suffered the Wicked to be such Judges
of the Earth, to slay whom they would, and whom they would to keep alive, to
fit up whom they would, and whom they would to pull down, Dan. 5.17 Mr. G.
as Daniel said of wicked Nebuchadnezzar. When Anthony the great was troubled
with this and the like questionings about the Providence; It is said that he
heard a voice, saying, Anthony, Anthony, look thou to ^hy self, and to thy own
duty, and let God alone with Governing the World, he (...) wise and just, and
powerful enough to do what is to be done, Gersoh. And Austin well answers the
questionist asking him; Why God suffers the Wicked to slay the Innocent? see,
(says he) whether in the first place it be not your duty, to consider such
plain Texts as these that more concern your self, Vide prus ne illud
debeas-frange esurienti panem tuum etc. Psalm. 61.
Break thy Bread to the hungry, and bring the poor that are cast out to thy
houfse; when thou see the naked cover him, and hide not thy self from thy own
flesh. That would be time well-spent, and God would allow for it.) Wash you,
make you clean, Esa. 58.7. Esa. 1.16, 17, 18.
put away the evil of your doings from before your eyes, cease to do evil,
learn to do well, seek Judgment, relieve the oppressed, Judge the Fatherless,
plead for the Widow: come now, and let us reason together; Disputare vis
anrequam facias unde dignus sis disputare etc.
you would be disputing (says he) with God about Providence, before you have
made your self fit to dispute with him: Come now and let us reason together,
now, when you have done all the former that more nearly concern you; and it
were good that many of the questions of this overcurious age were also thus
answered: But besides this answer, he goes on and tells him, that perhaps the
party whom he thought was innocent was not so, for how could he pry into his
Heart, or search into all his Life to know whether he had not thought, or done
any thing amiss; wherefore God might justly suffer him to be put to Death? But
again, suppose he were innocent indeed, what then? Christ was innocent, and yet
we know God's counsel to have been good and just in suffering him to be put to
Death by the wicked; seeing therefore by God's revealment, thou have found out
his counsel why he suffered the unjust to slay that just one, and such counsel
as thou likest of very well thy self, believe also that in others, God does the
same upon good counsel, but it is perhaps concealed from thee: lay aside
therefore such Discourses about God's Transactions, or if thou will discourse,
do it as the Prophet Jeremie does chap. 12.1. Who lays down this for a ground,
that God is righteous in them all; if thou does thus thou will easily light upon
this solution, v. 3. pull them out lihe sheep for the slaughter, and prepare
them for the day of slaughter. I might add in the last place, vain and foolish
talking and discoursing with jesting which is not convenient; which has nothing
but frothines and unsavouriness in it, ministers no edification but tends to
put the Soul in a careless posture and set it at a greater distance from the
fear, of God, which should always be maintained as the Souls watch and
overseer.

3. Confused musings and dark reasonings, spending much time holding a parley
with Satan's suggestions and objections; God has allowed no time since Adam's
fall to spend in conference with Satan, his plain rule is to resist him and
then he will flee from us; how are poor Souls bewildred, and spend much
precious time in hearing what he has to say against them, their State, their
Duties, their Comforts! betake your selves to the strong hold of Scripture, and
there you will find safety, rest and peace; time spent in searching the
Scriptures, and meditating upon them is well-spent time, and will cause Satan
to depart from thee.

4. Callings and necessary diversions and avocations take up much time; a
gracious Soul many times does begrudge the time he spends in eating, and
drinking, and sleeping, and in the necessary duties and labors of his calling;
he could wish with all his heart he had more time for God, and that his
business did not ly so hard upon him though this he cannot do without Divine
Teaching; the Men of the World (and I fear many Professors too) think their
time well enough spent in the forementioned affairs.

5. Idleness is a great feeder upon time, doing nothing, or next to nothing;
though no Man can be idle, for the Devil imployes every one whom he finds idle,
and he that is employed by the Devil, he may be sure it shall not be about
building of chapels, and hearing of Sermons, not about any good and godly
employment. The old Monks of Egypt were wont to say, that the working Monk had
only one Devil haunting and tempting him, but the idle Monk had a number of
Devils still about him to tempt him; the idle body is haunted and followed with
a Kennel of Hell Hounds still about him to tempt him to naughtiness, the
unclean Devil to tempt him to uncleanness, the prodigal Devil to tempt him to
wastfulness, what wastfuller than Idleness? Queritur Egystus quare sit factus
adulter; in promptu ratio est desidiosus erat.
two of the best laborers would have much to do to maintain one loyterer, one
drone would devour more honey in a day than two Bees could gather; the proud
Devil to tempt him to Pride, for what Prouder than Idleness, that has nothing
to do but to trick and prick up it self, the slandersome detracting Devil to
tempt him to slander and detraction, for who runs over all their neighbors in
passing consures on them, but they that talk away time, they are so, idle; see
1 1 Timothy 5.13. Where the idle, the tattlers and busybodies are ranked
together; the ristous drunken Devil to tempt him to drinking, and who so faulty
that way as they that must drink away time? the sins of Sodom are made to be
fullness of Bread; and abundance of idleness; why is fullness of Bread, and
abundance of Idleness such great sins? no; but he mentions these as causes and
occasions of a great many sins; give me a place where there is abundance of
Idleness and I will not doubt to say there is abundance of naughtiness too;
thus for the sixth particular, the wasters and devourers of time.

7. The seventh particular is this; none can know the periods of time without
Divine Teaching; and none can number his natural Days aright, that does not in
some measure understand Metaphorical and Mystial days; he cannot perform his
duty aright that does not understand what dispensation he is under in some
degree, see Revel. 13.18. Here is wisdom, let him that has understanding count
the number of the beast, for it is the number of a Man and his number is six
hundred threescore and six. Our Savior blames the Pharifees that they did not
discern the sings of the times: Mat. 16 3.
the Men of Issachar are commended that they were men that had understanding of
the times. We read of seneral number of days and times in Daniel 9.25, and
12.11, 12. and Revel. 11.3.11. ans 12.6, 14. and its true that several have
been guilty og misses and mistakes in their calculations; but all argee that we
are fallen into the very last days of Antichrists reign, perilous times,
wherein the Devil is come down in great rage, and that the signs of the times
recorded Mat. 24. and Luke 21. are upon us; and therefore we come to understand
what our duties are that are required in such times, as watchfulness, Prayer,
etc. which are likewise clearly laid down in both the forenamed chapters; now
to take out these lessons and live in the practice of them, and not fall into
that fatal security, unbelief sensuality, and: those other sins which make the
last times dangerous, does require Teachings from above. None can know the
successor of time without Divine teaching, and it is impossible for a Man to
number his days aright that does not know time's successor.

1. That time will certainly have a successor, and that it will cease and be no
more.

2. What kind of successor it will be, not of the same Nature with time,
Eternity is quite differing from time; in the Resurrection there will be no
eating, nor drinking, nor marrying nor giving in marriage, nor buying nor
selling; no Turkish Paradise to entertain us with carnal plasures, nor yet a
Popish Purgatory to cleanse us from sins unrepented of in time.

Use. 1
For Application, I note this in the first place, how few there are that are
under Divine Teachings in this point of numbering days aright; We live bySense
and not by Faith; Oh what is time to endless conceiveless Eternity! but alas,
alas, where is the Soul that sits down and thinks of Eternity for half an hour
together? David's History of the Men of his day, is a Prophecy of the Men of
our day, Psa. 49.11. Their inward thought is, that their Houses shall continue
for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations; Ver. 12.
though Man being in honor abides not but is like the beasts that perish.

Use. 2.
Beg of God this blessed skill and art of numbering your days aright; do not
think it a needless Petition, thou does not know that thou shall die, unless
God reveal it to thee, thou does not know that time will end, that there is an
Eternity; thou lives in this World very forgetful how transitory the state of
all these things are; the vulgar Proverb bears witness to vulgar practice, I
thought as much of it as of my Death, as of the day of doom as of the worlds
end. I was much pleased with what I met with lately in the Book of wisdom, chap
8.9. which though it be Apocriphal, yet it is Canonical truth; For I was a
witty Child (says he) and was of a good Spirit; nevertheless when I perceived
I could not enjoy her (that is wisdom) except God gave her (and that was a
point of wisdom also to know whose gift it was) I went unto the lord and
besought him, etc. Witty Men, Learned Men, Old Men, Holy Men, unless they be
all taught of God will be at a loss in the point of numbering their days, of
living under the powerful persuasion of the shortness, swiftness, and
determination of days and times. Let me add one thing which was slipped in the
proof of the point, when your bagging of God this holy Wisdom to number your
daise aright, be sure you be earnest with the Lord, that when you number your
days he would still help you to make the number come even; what is that? that
that you may see your good days to be as many and as long as your evil ones,
and your days to be full as good as any of your neighbors; thus to number
will exceedingly conduce to give you content in your days which the Lord
numbers out to you in this World, and keep you from inordinate desires after
the changing of them, and having some other days in the room of them. The
Wisdom of God in ballancing Men's conditions in the World is much to be
observed, though it is but little taken notice of; every day has it is suitable
good as well as sufficient evil, every Man may see in his own condition, if he
has but his eyes open, as much cause of rejoicing as of mourning; and he may
likewise see his own condition, take it all together, to be as good as any
other Man's: what is the reason no Man is contented With his Lot and Portion?
it is; because they do not reckon right, they do not stand in right places to
take a view and an estimate either of their own or others conditions; you stand
on the inside of your own, and on the outside of another Man's, and by this
means, your own seems to be much worse, and his much better than indeed it is;
do but change your stand, and go into the inside of his, and the outside of
your own, and then you will set cause to change your Opinion; we may see the
neatness of the show but we little know where it pinches, and others at a
distance will judge your state very happy, which it may be you do not sit so
easily in, but might, sit more easily if thou would not sit always in one
place and posture. I am persuaded the Lord has in his Wisdom so ordered Men's
conditions in this world, that there is no ods, not one better than another if
we could but see the ends and sides of them, no room left for choice, and that
condition which every Man is in, ought to be concluded, the best for him of any
in the World, the Beggar's condition is as good as the King's take it all
together: no state in the World can be an object either of mere pity or mere
envy, none so bad but a great deal of good is to be seen in it, none so good
but a great deal of misery is to be found in it: the Lord in Wisdom and
Goodness has fitted every Man's condition for him (that another would not fit
him so well) and it will be our Wisdom (if the Lord will give it us) to see our
selves fitted to our conditions, and to observe in every point how well they
fit us, Here a bunch of pride is growing, straighten and check there says God;
there sensual delight would come in, stop that place; here strength is ready to
be running over to be employed in vanity, pinch there with a little sickness;
there a grace or two want employment, send a cross or two to give them some
work and exercise: here the Soul is ready to faint; slacken a little and give a
cordial, and there the Soul is like to fall, clap an hedge or a wall quickly in
the way, etc. What happy lives should we lead in comparison of what we do, if
we did but know how well every thing we meet with fits us; what fitty days we
enjoy: there is not the most cross crooked thing comes to thee, but there is
some part of thee that it will fit exceeding well; now the skill lies in
putting it to the right part, a Man's shoe will not fit his head, nor his
glove his leg; do not turn thy back to thy cross when thou should take it in
thy arms, nor yet take it up at arms end, when thou should bear it upon thy
back; a little weight is heavy at arms end, which will be scarce felt upon the
back which is a fifty place for a burden: we must take up our Crosses, as the
Man did his sheep upon his shoulder and away with it, trudging after the Lord
Jesus; some men lead their crosses gingerly as a Man leads his young Child by
the hand, and so make no way; some take them by the wrong end, and are not able
to lift them up; some leap over them, some fall upon them, and many fall under
them, and all for want of this blessed Teaching of the Lord: let us therefore
never leave this out of our Parayers, that the Lord would teach us the even
numbering of our days, and give us to see that every day we live, whatever
falls out in it, is a fitty day; and that our condition, take it all together
is at any time of the day as good as any Man's living, and take his all
together too: If he have money, I have health; if he have Children, I have
wealth; if he have power, I have peace; if he have prosperity, I have grace
etc. And so much for the third observation; I come now to the,

Doct. 4.
Fourth and last Observation in which I shall be brief, That the right numbering
of our days is a special means to obtain true Wisdom; I shall endeavor to
give you cle^^ demonstration of the point in these following particulars.

1. He is a wise Man that minds his greatest concern, in the first place; now
he that numbers his days aright, that reckons of shortness, of time, he makes
it his first business to seek the Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof,
he will take Mary's part, and leave Martha's till afterward if there be time
for it: Luke 10.38
Our Lord Jesus in his travel, comes into a certain Woman's House named Martha,
and falls a Preaching: her sister Mary, considers with her self that she might
have time to provide food, when she could not have an opportunity to hear a
Sermon and therefore she sat Jesus feet and beard his Word; Matha was very
busy in serving and providing entertainment, and complains of her Sisters
slight and disrespect to his person, and unkindness to her to suffer her to
serve alone; our Savior gives her a check, and commends Mary's, entertaining
his Doctrine, before Martha's entertaining his person; Christ loves that Man
should look after their Souls, and not make such a bustle about their, outward
cordions to make them easy, and splendid and delightful, but be content with
such things as you have, such things as the house affords; as Christ would have
been well enough, and have been better pleased with Martha, if she had sit down
with Mary to hear the Sermon: if Christ gave such a check to Martha for her
great love to his outward Man, because she neglected the good of her own Soul;
What a severe censure will he pass upon many one day, whose care and cumber,
and pains, and time, and strength has been mostly employed about their own
outward Man, and their Families, and Children, how to get them Bread, and
Livings, and Portions; and in the mean while have made no provision for their
long home, for Eternity, for their precious Souls, but let them lie at sixes
and sevens, hunger'd, starved, defiled, naked and bare. He that reckons of the
fewness of his days reasons and resolves thus; let me secure an interest for
my Soul in the Lord Jesus, let me be assured of a kind reception beyond the
Grave, and a mansion in Glory, and then if I have time, I may look a little
after the World, but if I leave the former undone, I shall be undone for ever;
I may leave the latter undone and no great loss, God will take care of my
Children, he is bound to it; and for my self, if I be in the meaner condition
here, as we use to say to Children, no body will ask them, or tell them, when
they come to be Men, what clothes they did wear when they were Children; so
when I come to Heaven, it will be all one then whether I had two coats here, or
never a whole one, whither I lived in plenty here, or sometimes was in such a
strait that I did not know where to get my dinner; let my Soul be once in a
safe condition, and then I am sure there can be nothing much amiss in other
things.

2. It is a Point of Wisdom to foresee an evil, and to avoid it; the Wiseman
foreseeth the evil and hides himself; but the simple pass on, Prove. 22.3
and are punished. He that numbers his days aright, that knbws the shortness
of time, the certainty and suddenness of Death, does prepare himself
accordingly, he gets himself hid in the rock the Lord Jesus; he has got an
hiding place, so that when Death, comes to strike, and Satan watching for the
Soul, and the Grave (which can never have enough) gapeing for the Body; all on
a sudden, the Soul is carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom, and the Body laid
as seed in the Earth, (not detained as a Prisoner under the grave's power) to
be raised again a Glorious Body at the Resurrection of the Just; the Soul is
continually whilst here fortifying it self, by Faith and Repentance, and
humility and self-denial which are Armor of proof in every evih day.

3. He is a Wiseman that knows how to carry himself suitable to his condition.
The right numbering his days conduces much to this, as you have already heard,
and therefore I need not enlarge upon this Head; only this, he reckons his time
is so short that it never concerns him whether he be in an high or in a low
condition; it is no matter where or how I fit, I am not like to fit so long; no
matter what part I act, I shall quickly be gone off the stage, I can take any
part that is allotted me; it is no matter how I buy and sell, or pofesess, for I
must do all as though I did it not, because of the shortness of time: so that
in short, as numbering our days aright is the fruit of Divine Teachings; so it
is the way and means to obtain Divine Wisdom.

4. He is a Wiseman that is wellread in ancient Records and History, and has a
good reach with him about what things may fall out hereafter and manages
himself accordingly. Now to number our days aright will put us upon a search
of the days that are past, what times have been before; and that which is, is
but what has been, and is gone and past, and so must what lies before us top;
and therefore we shall be looking after something that is lasting, and not so
flitting and fading as these earthly things are: a Man that knows no more than
the present day, will mind nothing else but the present things; will be always
muddling, and moyling, and scraping in the World, and never looks about him, to
see what has gone before him, or what will come after him, which if, he once
did he would quickly come out of his muddy hole, and shake himself, and seek
about for some surer foot-hold, some better standing, some other employment
than what he is now engaged in, and taken up with.

5. He is a Wiseman what knows things of deep reach and search, of profound
enquiry, things that are out of other Men's thoughts, that never enter into
their head's; the right numbering of our days will much help to this knowledge,
for he that considers that time will quickly end, and Eternity presently begin
which will never end, will begin to inquire what things are conversant and in
use in the other world; and when he finds that Communion with God, beholding
Christ in his Glory, freedom from all sin, the society of Saints, etc, is the
condition of the place; he presently turns out, Worldly thoughts and designs,
and discourses about Houses, and Lands and Money, and Pomp and Glory and
Pleasures; and dives into the Mystery of the Gospel, the Word of
reconciliation, a Life of believing, the work and sealing of the Spirit, the
privileges of God's People etc, and falls upon studying the work of
repentance, of self-denial, of mortification, together with all those works of
meekness, love and charity, by which Persons are made meet to be partakers of
the inheritance of the Saints in light, and are prepared for an Eternal state
and condition: alas, faies he, why do you trouble me with these trifles as
Eating, and Drinking and Trading etc. It Is true they are of use in, and are
calculated for this present infirm state, and must have their place; but the
main work and business is quite another thing, the usages and customs of this
World are quite differing from, and contrary to those of the next; and
therefore I must begin the life here that I expect to live in the next, and
must be practicing Nonconformity to, and living above this present evil World,
I must come out of it, I must be out of Love with it, I must keep it at due
distance, I must use it as not abusing it, as if I used it not, that I may be
ready and fitted for the condition and company of the World to come, whenever
the messenger of Death comes for me, Luke 12.35, etc.
which I am to expect every hour: For I am commanded to watch always with my
loins girt about, and my light burning, that when my Lord comes and knocks I
may open to him immediately.

6. We count him a Wiseman who is willing to be taught, and nothing like the
numbering of our days will further that, it cures trewantry; he that does a
thing as his last will be willing to do it the best way he can, and will be
glad of any help persons that have difficult business to do which must be done
in such a time, are ready to receive advice and take it kindly, and this does
argue them to be wise, for willingness to learn is a sign of Wisdom, he is a
fool that thinks he knows enough; how glad is a serious Christian that values
time of an opportunity of receiving good, of being helped on his way, of a
little cordial in time of fainting, of one that will take him by the hand when
he gives a slip; he that knows the most is the most receptive of knowledge, and
the ablest Christian readiest to take in more strength.

7. He is a Wiseman who is able to give advice and counsel, and nothing does
so much enable a Man in that as to number his days aright: what is the reason
that we go to the Ancient for counsel but because they have had the experience
of many days past, and they reckon but of a few to come, they look upon all
the years they have lived, but as yesterday, and they reckon to Die to morrow;
were I to choose a Man for my Life to give me counsel, it should be one that
makes Conscience how he spends his time, that will not trifle and idle away his
time. The diligent good Schoolmaster does first of all teach the well-using of
time, when he is very severe if his Scholars do not come in the morning exactly
at the time appointed.

8. We count him a Wiseman that is of few Words, for even a fool when he holds
his peace is counted wise; now he that values time and knows the pretiousness
of it is always very thoughtful and studious, what he must do in the next
place, he is not for talking but for doing, his words are weighty and always
spoken in due place and season; he has no superfluous time for supernumerary
words.

9. He is a Wiseman that loves and keeps Wise-Mens company; he that measures
time has none to spare to spend with fools; he that makes conscience of
redeeming his time, finds that he has not so much time as he would have with
Saints, he has none at all for sinners.

10. We count him Wise that minds his own business and meddles not with other
men's, he that numbers his days; sees that he has time little enough to manage
his own matters in: It is observable that walking wisely toward them that are
without, and redeeming time are put together, Col. 4.5. Ephesians. 5.16. of all Men
he gives the least offense: Two things offend the World, First, When they
observe your failings: Secondly, When you observe their's; Now the Man that
spends his time conscienciously, minds his own Paths, looks directly forward,
he neither stumbles, nor looks on side to take notice of the falls of others;
he looks to his own place and work that the Lord left him to do, Mark. 13.34.

11. He is a Wiseman in Scripture-sence that fears God. Prove. 1.7.
The fear of the Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom; Job 28.28. The fear of the
Lord that is Wisdom, and to depart from evil that it understanding. Now none is
so prepared for the fear of the Lord as he that numbers his days, it keeps the
Soul in the continual awe and dread of the Almighty God: and the reason is
evident and plain; for he looks upon the Lord as his Landlord, and himself as
his Tenant at will, the rent he pays is but small, and he is very careful to
please his Landlord, turning out is troublesome at the best, and upon short
warning it may be somewhat dangerous, and therefore he judges it very
reasonable that he should continually stand in awe of him in whose power he
absolutely is as to his being and wel-being, as to his stay here, and his
dwelling place hereafter; and thus much briefly for the proof of the point, one
word of Application, and so I conclude this Text at this time.

Use.
One General exhortation from the whole; let us learn this Wisdom of numbering
our days that we may be Wise: has it been our evil that we have lost much
time, and have not put a due value upon it, let us now redeem it, repurchase it
at any rate; the word signifies to buy some things back, a Metaphor taken from
one that mortgageth his land and redeemeth it again, or from the practice and
custom of Wise Merchants, (...), Ephesians. 5, 16.
who use to buy their commodities whilst fit time of buying serves, and whilst
the market holds, and having happily had great losses, or formerly spent their
time idly or unthriftily do by their diligence seek (as it were) to buy back
again the time that is past. The truth is, my Brethren, we have been great
unthrifts, have squandred away a great stock and portion, of time; time is now
grown a scarce commodity, the price of it is risen; we are fallen into those
hard times mentioned, 2 Timothy 3.1. (...), Dura, molesta.
hurtful, heavy, damaging times; that as the Sea being infested by pirates, the
Earth being followed with male-influences from the Heaven, make times hard for
the Body; so the scarcity of opportunities together with their ensnarements and
molestations, adding the great suspension of Heavenly influence, renders the
seasons of receiving good very difficult, hard to come by, and harder to be
improved: besides this, the swifter motion of time now (because nearer to its
center) meeting with an old, crazy distempered World, (all Persons and Things
being grown worse than they were every way) does cause much detriment and spoil
to both, as the speedy motion of a Coach in bad ways makes the passengers
knock their Heads together, and fall heavy upon one another that never intended
it; the hurry of this last time does wear and weary out Person and Things,
throws Men and breaks them one over another, casts some into the grave, and
leaves others I know not where, and causes such commotions, mutation, and
inflammations that it is much to be feared that the axletree of the World may
catch fire which may not so easily be quenched but increase to the general
conflagration of that great day mentioned, 2 Pet. 3.10. But the day of the Lord
will come as a Thief in the Night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away
with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with servent heat, the Earth
also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. I shall conclude my
exhortation in the words of the same Apostle that immediately follow, seeing
then all these things shall be dissolved, v. 11, 12, 14, 17, 18,
(that time will bring matters to this pass) What manner of Persons ought we to
be in all holy Conversation and Godliness, looking for, and halting unto the
coming of the day of God wherein the Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved,
and the Elements shall melt with servent beat, wherefore (Beloved) seeing ye
look for such things be diligent that you may be found of him in peace without
spot and blameless, and seeing ye know these things before, Beware last ye also
being led away with the error of the wicked fall from your own stedfastness;
but grow in Grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

To him be Glory now and for ever AMEN.
FINIS.

