THE SAFEST CONVOY, Or, the Strongest HELPER.

Declared in a Valedictory SERMON, Before the Right Honorable Sr THOMAS
BENDISH Baronet, His Majesty's Ambassador, now resident with the Grand
Seigneur at Constantinople.

Delivered in Dionis Back-Church, By NATHANAELL HARDY, Preacher to that Parish.

They shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee, for I
am with with thee, says the Lord, to deliver thee,

Jer. 1.19. And he said, My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee
rest,

Exo. 33.15. Non plus valet ad deijciendum terrena poena, quam ad erigendum
divina tutela,

Cyp. Ad omnem tribulationem, ad omnem cujuscunque modi necessitatem aperta
nobis urbs confugii, sinus matris expansus est, parata sunt foramina petrae,
patent viscera misericordiae Dei nostri,

Bern. LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Web, and William Grantham, at the Sign of
the Black Bear in Paul's Churchyard, near the Little North-door, 1653.

TO The Right Honorable Sir Thomas Bendish Baronet, His Majesty's Ambassador,
resident with the Grand Seigneur at Constantinople. and TO The right Virtuous
and most worthy Lady, the Lady Anne Bendish, his affectionate Consort.
Increase of Grace, Length of days, and Eternity of Glory.
My Lord,
THat abundant experience you have had of Divine protection, is no small cause
both to you of gratulation, and your friends of congratulation.

Had it not been the Lord who was on my side (may your Honor now say) Had it
not been the Lord who was on my side, the waters had overwhelmed me, and the
proud waves had gone over my soul. There needed no more, and it could be no
less then a powerful providence which has made your passage prosperous, and
settlement glorious.

How truly then may you take up that expression of holy Job, I have heard of
thee by the hearing of the ears, but now mine eyes sees thee, Since that
amiable promise of Gods favorable presence with his people, which you heard
with comfort imperfectly explained in this Sermon, you have seen with joy fully
accomplished in your own experience: and I doubt not but you say to God with
adoration in words, not much unlike those the Queen of Sheba spoke to Solomon
with admiration, The one half of the goodness of thy presence, O Lord, was not
told me, so far do all verbal Discoveries come short of Gods real
manifestations.

And surely what should move your Lordship to desire a representation of this
weak Discourse I know not, unless that you might see how that Doctrine which is
here darkly illustrated, has been to you superabundantly verified.

I little thought such an unpolished piece should ever have been exposed to
public view; but Gratitude has taught me rather to undergo the Worlds harsh
censure, then incur your Lordships just displeasure.

And indeed, though it greatly troubles me that in publishing these rude notes
I must set forth my ignorance, yet withal it much rejoices me that I have an
opportunity by these lines to acknowledge your Muneficence. What a bountiful
Mecaenas your Honor has ever been to the Tribe of Levi, those who have had
the happiness of your acquaintnnce, and my self the meanest among them, cannot
but testify with gratefullnesse: But I well know you love not that either your
virtues or favors should be openly proclaimed, and like the fixed stars, the
higher God has set you, the less you desire to seem. I shall therefore turn
Praises into Prayers, and endeavor to pay my manifold obligations to you, in
devout supplications for you.

May that gracious presence of the Almighty, which has hitherto gone before
you, still accompany you, to make your troubles few, comforts many, abode
quiet, return safe, life long, death happy, election sure, and salvation
certain. For all which he shall still implore the Throne of Grace, who is,

Madam,
YOur goodness accepted this Sermon from the Pulpit, and your pleasure has
now commanded it to the Press; as being desirous often to view, with a
Religious eye, what once you heard with a reverend ear; such as it is I here
humbly tender to your Ladyships acceptance.

The box indeed is mean, but the Jewel precious; the fashion homely, but the
stuff rich; the chest iron, but the treasure gold: The manner of handling
plain and despicable, but the matter therein contained Divine and comfortable.

The truth is, the most reviving Cordial to a fainting spirit, and effectual
Antidote against the deadliest afflictions, is the operative presence of a
propitious God. It is only the assurance of Divine favor toward us, can
sweeten every condition to us; and as the observing eye of an Omni-present God
is a just Ground if awful reverence, so the preserving aspect of an Omnipotent
Father, is a sure foundation of a joyful confidence.

A familiar Demonstration of this Doctrine is the subject of this ensuing
Discourse, the sight whereof I am confident was so much the more desired by and
will be welcome to you, by how much your own observation can plentifully attest
its undoubted verity.

Indeed though faith must believe above, nay, against sense: yet sense is a
singular support of faith. Divine Promises are then most plainly understood,
steadfastly believed, and joyfully perused, when we have beheld them graciously
fullfilled.

May your joyous experiments of the Almighties presence with and for you, be
still multiplied: your pious Assurances of his Favor be more enlarged, and by
the casting in of this mite into your Spiritual Treasury, a further addition
to your comforts be vouchsafed.

What a sweet odor your Honors virtues have left behind you, I must pass
over in silence, as knowing, your discreet Zeal, sincere piety, courteous
affability, and benign charity, are all crowned with that modest humility,
which will not endure a Publication.

How much I am your Ladyships debtor by those liberal respects your favor has
cast upon me, my slender Quill cannot express. All the return I shall or can
render is, first to make mention of you and yours in my Prayers to God, next to
engrave your beneficence in the Table of a thankful memory; and withal in real
complement to subscribe my self,

Your Honors greatly obliged, and humbly devoted Servant, NATHANAELL HARDY.

THE SAFEST CONVOY, OR THE STRONGEST HELPER.
ISAIAH the 43. the former part of the second verse.
When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the
rivers, they shall not overflow thee.
A Comfortable Scripture written like Ezeckiels Scrole, intus and a tergo,
without and within; without, in verborum foliis; within, in radice rationis,
without in the history, within in the mystery; without in the letter, within in
the Spirit: that is as the golden Pot, this as the hidden Manna; that as the
shell and mother of Pearl, this as the Margarite contained in it.

If with some we read the Verse in the Preter perfect tense cum transieris,
and understand them literally, they refer to that miraculous presence of God
with, and preservation of his people Israel, when they passed through the
waters of the Red Sea, and the River Jordan, both which were wonderfully
divided, that so the Israelites might have a passage to Canaan, and thus they
are a seasonable comfort to all those who either on public emploiments, or
their own lawful affairs, pass the great waters, as being from hence
warranted to expect, though not such a miraculous; yet a gracious presence of
God with them.

If with others we read the words in the Future tense cum transieris, Lap.
Calv.
and conster them Allegorically, they refer to the Babylonian Captivity; in
which God promises to be with them, and thereby to deliver them; and so they
are fitly applicable to the Church of God, and every member thereof in all
ages, assuring her of Gods powerful assistance in her passage through the
waters of tribulation to the heavenly Jerusalem; this later construction is
doubtless most consonant to the Text, and therefore shall be chiefly insisted
on, yet withal I shall in the close touch upon the former, as best agreeing to
the present occasion.

But to unlock the Metaphor of the Text, conceive the World as a Sea full of
waters, the Church as a Ship sailing in this Sea, passing through those waters,
persecutions as the winds that raise the waves, and endanger the overwhelming
of the Ship; notwithstanding which, having the Cross of Christ for her main
Mast, the sacred promises to be her Cablas, the graces of Faith, Hope, and
Patience as her Anchors, pure and holy affections as her Sails, and the gentle
wind of the Spirit to favor her; finally, having the Word for her Helm, and
God for her Pilot, she sails securely, and at last arrives safely at the haven
of heaven; When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, etc.

The words you see are dulcissima promissio, a sweet and gracious promise,
Scult.
wherein you have considerable, 1. The excellency of the blessing promised, I
will be with thee. 2. The seasonablenesse of the time when it shall be
accomplished, when thou passest through the waters. 3. The felicity of the
benefit procured by it, they shall not overflow thee.


Nothing more amiable then Gods presence, his presence is never more
comfortable then when we pass through the waters, and the power of that
presence in those waters appears most admirable, in that they do not overflow
us.

If you please to call the Church a Ship, you have observable her Voyage, her
Pilote, her Success; the Voyage perilous, the Pilote glorious, the Success
prosperous; the Voyage full of danger, the Pilote full of skill, the Success
full of comfort: there is a necessity of the Voyage, we must through the
waters, there is a certainty of the Pilote, God will be with us, and security
in the Success, the Rivers shall not overflow thee.

Or if you will, take notice in the Text of these three generals.

Periculi suppositio, an imminent danger supposed, When thou passest through
the waters.

Anxilii promissio, eminent help promised, I will be with thee.

Beneficii positio, permanent safety assured, they shall not overflow thee.

Yet once more, and in this method I shall handle the text: here is 1. The
Churches outward condition, that is dolorous; When thou passest through the
waters, and through the rivers. 2. Her safe preservation in that condition, and
that is joyous, they shall not overflow thee. 3, The effectual cause of her
safe preservation in that afflicted condition, namely Gods gracious presence: I
will be with thee.


It cannot be but the Saints of God should pass through waters, though they
pass through them, yet they shall not be plunged into them: and the reason of
this safety is, because God is with them, those are the three rivulets into
which the fountain of this text powrs it self, through each of which, whilst
my discourse and your attention shall pass, let our prayer be, that Gods
gracious presence may so be with us, as the water of life may overflow our
hearts and fructify our lives to his glory and our comfort, and so I begin with

The 1. Genesis
The Churches dolorous condition expressed in those words, When thou passest
through the waters.

There are two sorts of waters through which every Saint must pass, the waters
of contrition and affliction, of inward sorrow end outward trouble, those we
may call the waters of Marah, repentant tears being full of bitterness, and
yet sweetened by casting in the tree of the cross; these the waters of Meribah
caused through the spirit of contention in wicked men, Exo. 15.23.
which makes them strive with, and set themselves against Gods people, Numb.
10.13.
to pass through those is our duty, through these our misery: to the one we
are invited, for the other we must be prepared: those the Prophet Jeremy makes
the matter of his desire. O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain
of tears, Jer. 9. these the Prophet David makes the object of his complaint,
Hear me O God, Psa. 126.5.
for the waters are come into my soul, Psalm. 69. Finally, those God promises
as a mercy to his people, Jer. 31.6. They shall come with weeping, and I will
cause them to walk by the rivers of waters: indeed, no coming unto God for
mercy, but by the waters of godly sorrow for our sins. These are supposed in
the text as a danger, to which the Church has always been exposed in this
life, when thou passest through the waters.

Many are the resemblances to which the Scripture compares the afflictions of
the Church, but none more common then this of waters; in the thirtieth of this
Prophecy, we find bread and water joined together, Isa. 30.20.
the one whereof is eaten, and the other drank, to teach us that afflictions
are as needful for us as the food by which we are nourisht, in this Verse we
find fire and water joined together, through both which the Church is forced
to pass, sometimes materially, however analogically.

It is the observation of one upon the Text, that the greatest dangers of life
come to us from those things which are most needful for us: A^^ar. in text.
without water and fire life cannot be preserved, and yet by them it is often
endangered, and surely as a man cannot live without these, so neither can the
Saints without affliction. Nor only are afflictions in general, but
persecutions in special represented by these waters, so the Church groaning
under the fury of her enemies, cried out, that the waters flowed over her, Lam.
3.54. and Sions adversaries are called by the Psalmist, proud waters, Psalm.
126.5. Nor do these waters only exp^^sse ordinary or easy, but violent and
outrageous persecution. Nullum elementorum aqua and igni ad nocendum potentius.
Scult.
Of all Elements fire and water are the most merciless, and the water is more
vehement then fire; since fire may be quenched by water, but waters cannot be
resisted by any humane force: thus are wicked men's oppressions full of cruelty.
The Wiseman says, That their tender mercies are cruelty, how much more then
their cruelties? Prove. 16.10.
And as we find mention of waters, so rivers of waters noting the variety and
perpetuity of the Churches troubles. Multitudes of drops concur to make up a
River, and yet not one but many Rivers must be passed through: standing pools
are soon dry, but Rivers run continually. Sorrows seldom come alone, it was
Jobs complaint that God brake in upon him with breach upon breach, and David,
that one deep called upon another, at the noise of the water-spouts; and Paul,
Job 16.14. Psalm. 42.7. 2 Cor. 11.25, 26.
that he was in perils often by Sea, by Land, in City, in Country: that
complaint of Megara in the Tragoedian justly befits the Church: Nulla lux
unquam mihi secura fuit, Sen. Trag.
finis alterius mali gradus est futuri, wicked men's malice is boundless, no
wonder, Sions troubles are lasting, and the end of one misery proves the
forerunner of another: so true is that of the Apostle, through many
tribulations we must enter into Gods Kingdom. Act. 14.2^.


But whence, may some say, are these waters and rivers? I answer:

Partly from the bottles of Heaven above, which being opened, pour out waters
upon the earth, affliction comes not out of the dust, nor befalls us by chance,
but by divine providence, those cruelties to which the Saints are exposed, by
whomsoever acted, are by God disposed, Job 5.6.
both the abundance and continuance of those waters are at his appointment:
true it is, the waters that fall from the clouds above, are bred of the vapors
that ascend from the earth below, and it is our sins that are the cause of all
troubles, which are sent by God upon us, we deserve, he inflicts, we provoke,
he chastises, our iniquities are the meritorious, his equity the efficient
cause of all calamity.

Partly, as many Rivers are fed by Springs out of the bowels of the earth; so
these waters arise out of the depths of hell; it is Satan that opens the
fountain of malice in wicked men's hearts, whence the streams of oppressions
flows upon good men heads; it is the wind of diabolical instigation which
raises the waves, increases the water, augments the rage of Zions
adversaries; thus both heaven and hell concur to the sending forth of these
waters, but on a different ground, and to a different end; God justly, Satan
unjustly; God for our sins, the devil for our righteousness. Finally, Gods end
is to cleanse our filth, and wash away our pollutions, the devils to overwhelm
our persons, and sink us into the depth of misery.

Use.
To apply this. Oh let us be wise to look for and provide against these slabby
steps in our Christian race, he that goes to Sea must resolve beforehand to
meet with many a cold blast, dashing wave, rolling tempest ere he come to his
harbor: let all who engage for heaven do the like, sit down and consider what
pains and sufferings it must cost them ere they come thither, by this means we
shall the less fear, and the better bear troubles when they come, praemeditati
mali mollis ictus, that evil which is forethought of by us, will prove the
more easy to us: They say of the Basilisk* that if it first see a man, it kills
him; but if the man first see it, he is safe: let it be our prudence to foresee
evils ere they come, that we may the better undergo them when they come, and
surely if we consider things aright, we have no reason to be discouraged at
these waters: for

1. It is an Argument we are in the direct way to our Country, the path to
hell is miry through corruptions, to Heaven watery through afflictions: Saint
Paul's assertion is universal, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall
suffer persecution. 2 Timothy 3.12. Christianus non est, qui non crucianus:
Christianity entitles her professors to the cross, the way to bliss is not
strewed with Roses, but hedged with thorns: he that lives in pleasure and
enjoys the worlds favor, may well suspect himself as a wanderer in the broad
way; but he that finds hatred and persecution from ungodly Samaritanes, may at
least probably conclude himself in favor with God, and a Traveller in the way
to Jerusalem.

2. It is but a passing through, not a dwelling in, the waters. Afflictions may
be violent, they shall not be permanent. Athanasius said of the persecution in
his time, it was Nubecula cito transitura, a cloud that should soon vanish, a
shower that would quickly cease. The wicked are said to dwell with devouring
fire, the faithful only pass through; Isa. 33.14.
the Scriptures usual Metaphor resembles Saints to strangers and pilgrims, 1
Pet. 2.11.
who only pass through or sojourn for a time, but make no long stay, why
should they wonder at or be troubled with that ill usage they find in their
passage? The world is fitly compared to a Sea, and the Sea is no place to
continue in; dangers we must expect to meet with so long as we are sailing but
that sailing, will not be long. And

3. Consider not so much through what, as whither thou passest, look beyond the
waters to the shore, the passage is calamitous, the Country where thou art
going glorious; it is to possess thy inheritance, and receive thy crown. O let
the sweetness of the end mitigate the badnesse of the way, and the
pleasantness of the Country make amends for the tediousness of the journey.
Finally, know to thy comfort thou shall pass through these waters, no remora
shall withhold, nor contrary winds impede thee, though thou may be molested,
yet not overflown by those waters: which leads to the second General.

The Churches preservation in her afflicted condition, they shall not overflow
thee, The 2. Genesis Musc. in loc.
habet unumquodque periculum unde timeatur; every thing threatens its peculiar
danger, which makes us fear the fire burning, the water drowning; but quod
aliis exitio ipsis innoxium, that which is destructive to others shall not be
hurtful to the Church, let persecutions be as fire yet the Church is like
Moses Bush, which was burnt but not consumed: let them be like waters, the
Church shall be as Noah's Ark, which still arose higher as the waters increased,
these waters may arise from the ankles to the knees, from the knees to the
breast, from the breast to the chin, but they shall never overflow the head:
collo licet tenus mergaris non patior te omnino demergi, premendus es non
perimendus, we must be washed, we must not sink, crushed we may be, killed we
shall not be. The boul or bladder may be dipped, cannot be drowned; the house
that is built upon the rock may be shaken but cannot be overthrown, and they
that trust in the Lord, says the Psalmist, shall be as mount Zion that cannot
be moved; Psa. 125.1.
Excellent to this purpose is that of S. Paul, we are troubled on every side,
yet not distressed; perplexed, but not in despair; perscuted, but not forsaken;
cast down, but not destroyed, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. And again in the Chap. 6.9, 10. As
dying, and yet behold we live; as chastened, and not killed; as sorrowful, yet
always rejoicing. Thus have the Saints found life in death, comfort in sorrow,
safety in danger, and though the waters have been about them, yet they could
not come over them; true it is, we find the Prophet complaining, that the
waves and billows were gone over him, Psalm. 42.7. And the Church uses the like
expression, where she says, the waters flowed over my head, Lam. 3.54. So may
you have sometimes seen the surly waves over-topping the ship, and yet at last
the ship arising above the waves, or a skillful swimmer diving into the River,
but coming forth again; and thus, the Church though she be not only wet in the
shallow but cast into the deep, bound in the prison but thrown into the
dungeon, yet all this is only for a time; and after all, she shall come forth
gloriously: indeed like the palm tree, the more she is oppressed the more she
spreads, like the Camomil the more she is trod upon she grows the faster, and
her greatest sufferings prove not exitiall but medicinal. Nor is this less
true of every Saint in particular then of the Church in general, In the floods
of many waters they shall not come nigh him, says David of a godly man, Psa.
52.7. And surely if they shall not come nigh him, much less shall they
overflow him, they may come nigh his, but not him: these waters may sink his
state, his goods, his comforts, nay, his life; but not his soul which is
himself. Anaxarcus told the Tytant, Tunde tunde, Anaxarcum non tundis.
when he beat him in a mortar, it was only the casket, he could not touch the
pearl; such is all the power that wicked persecutors have over ours, not us,
the body not the soul, they are but flesh and can do nothing but to the flesh,
our better part remains secure, so that though they may sometime foyl, yet they
shall never wholly overthrow the Saints.

To apply this, Hence then all carnal fears, Use.
distracting thoughts, and despairing terrors, afflictions may rise high but we
shall still rise above them, nay, let us know to our comfort, that when the
night is darkest, the daybreak is nearest, and when the waters flow the
highest, they will begin to ebb. What need the Mariner fear the greatest
storm, when he knows it shall not split his Ship? Why should the Soldier be
dismayed at the sharpest combat when he is sure to win the field? Why should
any the greatest dangers distract the Saint, when he has a promise they shall
not overtop him. True it is, the rod of the wicked may be painful to the
righteous, but it shall not rest upon him: Exercemur sed eripimur, Calv.
impetimur non obruimur; God may suffer tribulations to exercise our graces, he
will not suffer them to overwhelm our persons. To end this, O see the happy
condition of the godly. Wicked men are drowned in sweet honey, while the
righteous escape through the bitter waters, the prosperity of the fool slaies
him, the adversity of the wise betters him: good things prove offensive to the
bad, the worst things shall not be destructive to the good. Well might Saint
Paul say in the name of himself, and the rest of the Saints, Nay, in all these
things we are more then conquerours, Romans 8.37. and if we will know the reason
of all this, he adds in that verse, through him that loves us, and the Text
speaks not much unlike, God is with us, which leads to the

The 3. Genesis
Third and main part of the Text, Gods gracious presence, the effectual cause
of the Churches preservation, I will be with thee.

There is a double presence of God, the one general, the other special; the
one with the world, the other with his Church; the one quatenus immensus, by
the immensity of his Essence; Mendoz.
the other quatenus benevolus, through the benevolence of his love; the one is
a Monitor to duty, the other a cordial against misery. In the former sense God
is not only with the good but the bad; yea, all his creatures. According to the
latter, he is only with his Church, to her its only promised, and on her it is
only conferred; it is the name which the Prophet gives the holy City, (...)
the LORD is there; Ezekiel. 48.35.
and JOHN saw Christ in a Vision walking in the midst of the seven
Candlesticks, the Church being always the place of Gods peculiar residence:
Rev. 1.13.
and according to the double consideration of the Church, God vouchsafes a
double presence, she is either triumphant or militant, reigning or warring, and
God accordingly is present by glory and grace, majesty and mercy, that he
manifests to her in heaven, this on earth, that in the caelestiall Country,
this while she is sailing on the tempestuous Sea; When thou passest through the
waters, I will be with thee.

The end of Gods merciful presence with his people, is not to be as a bare
Speactator, but as an active worker, and he so looks on as that he acts for his
peoples good, when they are under evils. Adest omnibus suis ex aequo, verum
operationes praesentiae diversimode se habent, Musc.
The operations of this presence are various and excellent, according to the
determination of his wisdom, for his own glory and our good, the several
acts, which by being present with, he exercises toward us, may be justly, and
are fully enumerated in these five particulars. He is with us in these waters,
cohibendo, conservando, consolando, dirigendo, eripiendo.

What the banks are to the Sea, that his presence is to these waters in
bounding them, what the plank is to the shipwrackt Mariner, that is Gods
presence to the Saint, carrying him safe to shore. Finally, what a Convoy is
for the guarding, a Pilote for the guiding or the Ship, and a faithful
friend to comfort in a storm, all this is Gods presence to the Church in her
afflictions.

1. God is with us in the waters cohibendo, to bridle the rake of these waves,
and bound the fury of these waters: he that sets bounds to the sea, saying,
Hitherto it shall pass and no further, restrains the power, Job 38.11.
quiets the rage of wicked men, and says, Thus much they shall do and no more.
These waters ebb and flow at Gods pleasure, he keeps the Sluice to let them in
and out as he will. So true is that of the Psalmist, Surely, the wrath of man
shall praise thee: and the remainder of wrath shall thou restrain, Psalm. 76.10.
Persecutors are a rod, but in Gods hand; they are Lions and Wolves, but chained
by his Providence; swelling waters, but bounded by his commandment. The
accomplishment of this, as an effect of Gods presence, is plainly intimated by
the Psalmist, Psalm. 46.9, 11. In the 9. verse he assures the ceasing of wars,
the breaking of the bows, the burning of the Chariot, that is, to weaken the
strength, and bridle the malice of Zions enemies, and if we would know how this
should be effected, the answer is given at the 11. verse, The Lord of Hosts is
with us; and yet more fully, the Church acknowledges this truth. Psalm. 124. If
it had not been the Lord had been on our side, when men rose up against us,
they had swallowed us up quick, and the waters had overwhelmed us. Indeed, it
is only an Almighty presence can command and stiil the ptoud waves. The Story
of Canutus once King of England, is very memorable, who sitting at a low water
upon the river Thames, commanded the water it should not come nigh him, but the
Tide returning, ceased not to rise higher till it wet his feet: whereupon he
went home, and set his Crown upon the Crucifix at Westminster. It is none but
God can stay the course of the water, and it is the same hand must stop the
current of wicked men's fury against his people: thus God was with the three
Worthies to quench the violence of the fire, with Daniel to stop the mouths of
Lions, and with Jacob to bridle his Uncles envy.

2. God is with us in the waters, conservando, as to bridle them, so to
preserve us; Gods presence does not secure from the water, but in the water:
fond nature thinks that God should not let the wind blow upon his darlings,
and it was Gideons argument, If the Lord be with us, why has all this befallen
us? Judges 6.13. Admirabatur quod simul starent haec duo, Caj^t. in loc.
viz. Deum esse cum eis, and pati eos tot mala. He thought the presence of God,
and outward evils, to be inconsistent: he could not imagine that God should be
nigh, and trouble near too; herein he showed himself not skilled, tam Art quam
Mart; and though a valiant soldier, yet a bad Logician: though God be with
us, yet the waters may come in upon us, but not over us, If God be with us, who
can be against us? says Saint Paul: Romans 8.31.
indeed, who will not be against us, but who so against us as to hurt us? thus
God is with us? as Christ was with Peter, when ready to sink into the Sea,
stretching forth his hand to uphold him. The Lord is with us, says the
Psalmist, and what follows, The God of Jacob is our Refuge, Psalm. 46.7. Divine
presence exempts not from, but is a refuge in the storm. Moses expression is
yet fuller, The eternal God is thy Refuge, and underneath are the everlasting
arms, Deuter. 33.27* A man's hand put under the chin keeps him from sinking into
the water; much more can the arms of a God uphold us in troubles; and
therefore these two are fitly joined together, Fear thou not, for I am with
thee, I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help, yea, I will uphold thee with
the right hand of my Righteousness: Isa. 41.10.

3. God is with us in the waters, consolando, to co^^^^t our hearts, and
refresh our spirits in the midst of (...) ^^^^ictions. When the coldness of
the (...) with flaggons of wine to revive us; when (...) ^ainting under trials,
he is at hand with (...) cherish us; this David found verified in his own
^xperience, when in the midst of the shadow of death he resolves to fear none
ill, because God was with him, and his staff did comfort him, Psalm. 23.4. Thus
God stood by Paul, when accused wrongfully by his enemies, and breathed a word
of comfort into his ears, s^ying, Be of good cheer, Acts 23.11. We read
Genesis 1.2. that the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters; the
Hebrew word is Emphat^call, (...)
being a M^taphor from the Dove that sits upon her eggs, ch^^ishing them by
her heat, producing out of them a living creat^re like to her self, Verbum
tr^^statum ab ar^bus pulliti^^ (...). Jun. in (...). Par. ibi^.
ther^by signifying Praes^ntiam non qual^mcunque, s^d amabilem and peculiarit^r
(...), that ^miable and ^fficacious pres^nce of Gods Spirit which wrought so
glorious a Fabric out of that ^^de Ch^^s, a ^it Emblem of the truth in hand,
it being the same Spirit that moves powerfully and comfortably upon the waters
of affliction, producing joyful effects out of the saddest calamities that
befall his people.

4. God is with us in the waters, dirigendo, to steer our course, guide our
passage through the troubl^some waves; what the cloud by day, and the pillar of
fire by night was to the Israelites when they passed through the desolate
Desert into Canaan, the same is Gods presence to his people while they wander
through the wilderness of this world to heaven. David tells us God was with him
by his rod as well as by his staff, the Shepherds rod guides and governs the
sheep: Psa. 23.4.
so does God in troubles direct his people. When Jehoshaphat knew not what to
do, God was with him to advise and counsel what course he should take, 2 Chro.
20.11.
and when Elisha's servant saw no means of deliverance for his master and
himself from the encompassing enemy, God was with him at the Prophets prayer to
open his eyes, that he might see his succor. 2 Kin. 2.6.17.
How often is the Mariner (when through the darkness of the night, or the
strangeness of the coast at a loss) directed to steer his course by the
appearing of a Star, thus when Gods people are so environed about with waters,
that they can see no Land, and darkened by clouds that they can see no light,
then does his presence like a Star appear, directing them in the way of safety.

5. God is with us in the water, eripiendo, to deliver out of present trials,
and restore former, or add better comforts; Friendly majesty is present to
rescue oppressed innocence. Chrysostom. Adest amica majestas ut innocentia
liberetur.
It is the promise which God himself makes to the believing soul, I will be
with him in trouble, and what follows, as the blessed effect of his presence,
but liberation and exaltation, I will deliver him and honor him, Psa. 91 15.
It was the experience which the Church had of Gods falthfulnesse in
accomplishing this promise, we went through fire and water, but thou broughtest
us out into a wealthy place, Psalm. 66.12. Thus is God with his people, not only
to comfort them in, and support them under, but to rescue them out, and reward
them after all their troubles, according to that of the Prophet, Jer. 30.11. I
am with thee says the Lord, to save thee: various and miraculous are the means
which God uses to deliver his people out of the water.

Genesis 7.1.19, 20. 1 Kin. 18.4.
Sometimes he provides an Ark as he did for Noah, a Zoar, as he did for a Lot, a
Cave as he did for the Prophets, hiding his people from the raging waves, the
fury of their enemies.

Sometimes he sends a Nurse as he did for Moses to take him out of the waters,
Exodus 2.7.
he provides boards, as he did for Paul, and the rest of his company, Act.
21.44. Jonah 2.17.
when the ship was split whereby they escaped safe to land: he prepares a
Whale, as for Jonah to swallow him that the Sea might not devour him* and as
Arion in Plutarch, being cast into the waters by the cruel Mariners, was
brought to shore on a Dolphins back; so he when thrown overboard by Gods
justice, was through his mercy conveyed to land in a Whales belly: thus does
God prosper weak and small means, yea, find out strange and unexpected ways
for the rescue of his Saints.

Sometimes he divides the waters, Evo. 14.11. Jud. 2.22.
as he did the red Sea for Israel; he sets the Churches enemies one against
another, and by dividing, both weakens them, and preserves his: So he did for
Gideons small Army to the Midianites mighty host, setting every man's sword
against his fellow.

Sometimes he turns the streams of the waters, changes the winds, that
whereas before they were contrary, they become favorable to the Church, and
serviceable to her passage. Thus was Esau's heart mollified toward Jacob, who
in stead of a devouring enemy becomes an embracing friend, and meets him with
kisses; Genesis 33.4.
to whom he had intended blows. Thus did Joseph, having God with him, Genesis
39.22.
find savor in the fight of the Jailer, to whom he was committed: indeed,
what Solomon says, of the Kings heart, is true of all men's, Prove. 21.1.
that they are in the hands of the Lord as the rivers of waters, and he turns
them whithersoever he will: no wonder then, if sometimes he mollifies the
obdurate, qualifies the malicious, and melts the frozen hearts of wicked men
unto love and compassion toward his servants.

Finally, Sometimes he abates, and wholly dries up these waters, so that the
Sea becomes a dry Land, when he lessens the power, takes away the sting, breaks
the horn, and dashes out the teeth of the ungodly, so that they are not able to
hurt his Saints; the heat of the Sun dispels the clouds, and dries up the
overflowing waters, and the presence of God is many times pleased to vanquish
his enemies, scatter their forces, thereby commanding deliverances for Jacob,
however if he deliver nor out of, he will by these waters; if he save not from
trouble, he will make the very trouble a means of safety, and when they may
perish temporally in the waters of distress, he will yet be with them to save
them eternally in the mansion of bliss.

You have seen the extent of this comfortable promise, and if any shall demand
a reason of Gods effectual presence with his Church in danger, I answer:

1. Partly, the Churches near relation unto him obliges, So much is intimated
in the close of the precedent verse, thou art mine, no wonder, we read in the
next verse, I will be with thee, Psa. 80.1.
the Church is a flock, God is the Shepherd: So the Psalmist, Hear thou
Shepherd of Israel, which leadest Joseph like a sheep: What more needful then
the Shepherds residence with his flock, especially in a time when Wolves
approach? the Church is a house, and God the owner, so Saint Peter calls her the
House of God: ^ Pet. 4.17.
where should a man's dwelling be but in his house? and especially his presence
is required when robbers invade it. She is his Spouse, and he her husband: no
relation engages to nearer union and fuller communion then this; one house,
one board, one bed holds the man and wife. Who should defend the woman when
assaulted but the husband? and will God that is spiritually married to his
people withdraw himself, or withhold his succor from them? Finally, she is the
Ship, and he her Master; and though while the Ship is in harbor, the Masters
absence may be dispensed with, yet by no means when she is sailing in the deep.

2: His deer affection to his Church inclines him, Animus non ubi animat, sed
ubi amat: the soul is not so much where it lives, as where it loves: indeed
love is affectus unionis, a desire of union, it was the wish of two friends to
Vulcan, that he would new make them into one: and surely Gods love to his
Church infinitely surpassing the love of any creature, must needs unite him to,
and make him one with her. The Psalmist speaking of a righteous man, renders
this as the reason of Gods being with him, because he has set his love upon
God, but doubtless the reason holds far stronger in the other way, Psa. 91.14,
15.
because God has set his love upon his Church, therefore he will be with her;
such is Gods tenderness toward his people, that were it not for his own honor
and their good, he would not suffer them to pass through the waters; sure then
he cannot but be with them when they are in the waters, yea, for this cause he
is pleased to bring them into depths of misery, that the glory as of his power,
so love, may be heightened in their delivery.

To close up this truth in a useful application.

I might from hence take occasion, and that justly, Use.
to bespeak these waters which encompasse the Church.

O ye proud waves why do ye roar in impetuous words? why do ye rise in insolent
actions against Sion, and her friends? Know ye not that all your rage will
prove but vain and cursed? Can you overtop heaven? then you may overthrow the
Church; Can you pull God out of his Throne? then you may root his people out of
the world, and not till then; Nemo nos laedit nisi qui Deum vincit, August.
ye cannot injure the Saints, unless ye strike through God; God is so with us,
that he is in the generation of the just, Psa. 14.5.
qui Ecclesiam impetunt, Deum petunt, you cannot wound them but you must wound
God; yea, he is so with his people, that they are said to be in him. Psa. 91.1.
It Is David's Character of a godly man, that he dwells in the secret of the
Most High, you must destroy God ere you can destroy them. God is said to bear
his people upon Eagles wings, Exodus 19.4. It is observed of the Eagle, that she
carries not her young ones in her claws, as other Birds do, but being laid upon
her shoulder, she covers them with the spreading of her wings, so that the
Fowler who shoots at them, must first wound her; truly they that will injure
the Church, must first fight against God, and how vain all such attempts are,
even Balaam was convinced of, when he told Balak, How shall I curse whom God
has not cursed? Numb. 23.8. and therefore it was his devilish policy to
separate Israel from God by sinning, for then he knew he might conquer them by
fighting: the like thought, no doubt, possessed David's enemies, when they said,
God has forsaken him, persecute him, and take him, Psalm. 71.11. tacitly
acknowledging, that while God is nigh his people, their enemies may pursue, but
they shall not overtake them. Nor is your rage only fruitless, but cursed; you
cannot wrong them, but you will destroy your selves. Gather together, oh you
waters, but you shall be dispersed, it is the Churches triumph, Associate your
selves, O you people, but you shall be broken in pieces; Isa. 8.9, 10.
for God is with us. Know you not that you dash against that rock which will
scatter you? Consider you not, that God has said of Zion, Non saxcus, non
ahe^eus sed igneus, qui and comminus arceat and eminus terreat. Theod. Psalm.
77.16.
I will be the glory in the midst of her, and a wall of fire round about her,
Zech. 2.5. Every dart you throw against this wall will retort upon your selves,
and the fire will flash in your own faces; tremble then, oh tremble to think,
that those whom you are against, God is with. The waters saw thee, G God, the
waters saw thee, they were afraid. Oh that you would take notice of Gods
powerful presence, and abate your swelling waves; but alas! what do I spend my
breath upon these waters, which is likely to prove but as a contraty wind, and
make them rage the more. I leave them therefore, and betake my self in a word
of comfort and counsel to the passengers through these waters. And

1. See hence what a faithful God ye have to stand by you, one that will not
fail in greatest need; no such trial of a friend as in the time of trouble, it
is the too usual course of the world, to deal with their friends, as men do
with Sun-Dials, only look upon them while the Sun of prosperity shines; or as
women do with flowers, while they are flourishing they put them in their
bosoms, but when once withered, cast them to the dunghill: but the Almighty
deals not so with his friends, yea, when our danger is greatest, his help is
nearest; often times the case is so desperate, that friends society can only
afford pity, not succor; they may look on, they cannot take off; but the
presence of God is ever active and powerful, and whereas toe most faithful
friends part at death, this friend will not then leave us; David knew he would
be with him in the shadew of death; and Saint Paul assures us, neither death,
nor life, shall separate his love; not only when we walk through the pleasant
meadow of prosperity, but when we go through the salt waters of affliction,
nay, when we pass through mare mortuum, the Sea of death, he will be with us;
it is the deriding question which the Saints enemies put to them in affliction,
Vbi Deus, where is now their God? Psalm. 79.10. Josh. 1.5.
but they may return a confident answer, hic Deus, our God is here nigh to us,
round about us, in the midst of us, It was his promise to Joshua, and is
repeated by Saint Paul, as belonging to all the faithful, I will never leave
thee nor forsake thee; Heb. 13.5. (...).
a double negation among the Greeks denies more vehemently, much more a
five-fold negative, and yet so emphatically does the Original express it, to
assure us, that there is no time, nor place, nor want, nor straight, nor
affliction, wherein God will leave or forsake his people.

2. Learn hence the blissful state of a Saint, who has Gods presence ever
with him; nothing makes affliction truly uncomfortable but the want of Gods
face; indeed, the most prosperous estate without God, is a curse, and the
greatest affliction with God is a blessing; Cum Dei sint omnia, habcut^ Deum
nihil d^erit si Deo ips^ non desit. Cyp.
the Saint when he wants most, he wants nothing, because he has him that has
all things; not the brightest star can make it day when the Sun is set, not
the thickest clouds can make it night while the Sun shines. Oh Divine presence,
thou turnest night into day, stones into bread, and dross into gold; thou
make the Wilderness a Paradise, the Cottage a Palace, and the Prison a
Mansion; thou art riches in poverty, wealth in want, a cordial in sickness,
an antidote against poison, light in darkness, and life in death. Show us the
Father, Joh. 24.8.
says Philip* and it suffices: give us thy self Lord, and it is enough, hell
would not be hell if God were there, much less can these waters make the Saint
miserable while God is with him.

3. Say to thy self with David, Oh thou distressed Saint, Why art thou cast
down O my Soul, Psa. 42.11.
why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God, and that not only when
the waters are low, but when they rise to the height, Thy way, O God, is in the
Sea, says the Psalmist, not only in the shallow River, but in the deep Sea,
Psa. 77.19.
not only in the lesser troubles, but in the greatest exigences, Saeviat mare,
conturbentur montes, Deus in Ecclesia non dimovebitur, if you please, the
Psalmist will English it; Though the waters roar, Psa. 46.5.
though the mountains shake, God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved.

(...). Isid. Pel.
If God be with us, all in God is for us; favor ^ffecting, power effecting,
wisdom directing, providence protecting, and faithfulness perfecting
deliverance for us.

If God be with us, all the creatures are for us; what Jehoshaphat said to
Ahab, that God says unto his Church, I am as thou art, my people as my people,
and my horses as thy horses, 2 King. 3.7. It was the comfort Saint Paul gave
the Corinthians, and in them all believers. Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas,
or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are
yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. The Angels are
ours to guard us, the Ministers to comfort us, all creatures to serve us, and
surely he need not fear the waters, that has the wind and tide on his side:
what trouble should dismay a Christian that has heaven and earth to support
him? no wonder then that we find the Scripture so often dissuading from
carnal fear upon this ground of Gods spiritual presence. Not to multiply
instances, view Isa. 10.15, 14. where no less then four times God calls upon
his Church not to fear, upon this argument, because he was with her and would
help her.

Cheer up then thou disconsolate soul, doubt not of the Churches safety in
general, The Lord in the midst of her is mighty, he will save, he will
rejoice over her with joy, Zeph. 3.17. Despair not of thine own preservation in
particular, Cyprian.
Mayor est Dominus ad protegendum, quam diabolus ad impugnandum, God is more
powerful to protect, then Satan and his instruments can be malicious to
destroy. So true is that of the Psalmist, The Lord on high is mightier then the
noise of many waters: yea, then the mighty waves of the Sea, Psalm. 93.4. In
persecutionibus nemo cogitet quod periculum Diabolus importet, sed consideret
quod auxilium Deus praestat, nec mentem labefactet humana infestatio, sed
corrohoret fidem divina protectio. Consider not so much thy distress, as thy
deliverer, and when men's malicious combination may affright thee. let divine
association support thee; the danger may exceed thy resistance, but not Gods
assistance; the enemies power may surpass thy strength, their subtlety out-wit
thy prudence, but neither can excel the wisdom and might of God that is with
thee. Oh learn, therefore, to try God in his strength, to trust him in
difficulties, and when the merciless waves are ready to swallow thee, commit
thy self to his custody. Mos est naucleri coelum aspicere. The Mariner in
straights looks up to heaven, do thou so, and remember that when the waters are
about thee, the Sun shines upon thee.

But now (me thinks) the despairing soul replies, were I sure God was with me,
I should not fear, but the clouds are so thick that I cannot see the Sun, my
troubles so great that I cannot believe God is present. But stay thou drooping
Saint and know

1. God may be with thee though thou see him not, presumptuous sinners uhink
God is near them when he is far off, doubting Saints think God far off when
he is nigh them. I remember Jacobs Speech, Surely God is in this place, and I
know it not: and God may be with thee, though thou art not aware of it.

2. God is with his people diverse ways, and though in one kind he be absent,
yet in another he may be present; if he be not with thee to remove the
distress, yet he may be with thee to support thy strength; though not to give
outward deliverance, yet to afford inward comfort; though he does not presently
take away the burden from thy shoulders, yet if he enable thee with patience to
bear it, and dependence to wait on him, it is an undoubted argument he is still
with thee.

3. Gods with-drawments from his people in dangers, are rather seeming then
real; Deus suos non negligit, cum negligit: when God seems most to neglect his
people, he does not forsake them, and his end in withdrawing his sensible
presence from them, is that they should run the more swiftly after him.

4. And lastly, though God withdraw for a time, yet he will return at last,
For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather
thee; Isa. 54.2.
says the Lord thy Redeemer. I have read a story of a poor man that served God
faithfully, and yet was oppressed cruelly, having all his goods taken from him by
an oppressing Knight, whereupon he persuaded himself that God was dead, but
going about to make a funeral for his God, who had formerly been so faithful
to him, and now (as he thought) left him; an old man met him and desired him
first to deliver a Letter unto the hands of his oppressor: upon receipt and
perusal of which the Knight was so convinced, that immediately he confessed his
fault, and restored the goods which made the poor man say, now I see God may
seem to sleep, but can never die: with this meditation, comfort thy self, O
Christian, in the saddest desertions, that though God in wisdom may for a time
hide his face, yet at last he will in mercy lift up the light of his
countenance upon thee to thy joy, and make bare the arm of his power for thy
succor.

4. Since God will be with thee in the waters, do not forsake God for fear of
the waters, let no tribulation make thee disclaim him who is ready to own thee,
it is not seldom seen that persecution causes men to forgo their profession,
and which argues as little policy as piety for fear of a storm they run from
their shelter: but why O man, do thou by' indirect ways seek to save thy
self, when by cleaving to God thou may be sure of his defense? Oh remember
that sacred Aphorism of Azariah to Asa and his people; 2 Chro. 2.15.
The Lord is with you, while you be with him, but if you forsake him, he will
forsake you: let no distress fright thee from God, and then no distress shall
keep God from thee.

5. What Is the matter of Gods promise, let it be the subject of thy prayer, and
when the waters may encompasse thee, beg of God that he will be with thee: it
is the efficacy of troubles that they drive us to prayer, and it is the
excellency of prayer that it brings GOD to us: the truth is, God is never so
far off, Hos. 5.15.
but he is within call, when God threatens to go and return to his place, it is
but till they seek his face: oh, then by prayer in all straits let us go to
God, and God will come to us: so true is that of the Psalmist, The Lord is nigh
unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth, Psalm.
145.18. Indeed his own tender mercy is the impulsive cause, but our humble
address is the procuring means of his gracious presence; neglect not then so
facil a duty which will procure so needful a mercy, and be sure in thy
approaches to God that it be his face thou seek, before and above all other
blessings, a carnal heart when under affliction only begges deliverance from
trouble, and regards not the presence of God, his prayer is that God would send
help for him, he cares not whether he come to him or no; oh, let thy prayers
flow from higher principles, beg the presence of his grace, and leave the
disposal of thy deliverance to his wisdom, what our Savior says of the
Kingdom of God, seek that first, and all these shall be added, that may I apply
to the face of God, seek first his face and all other things that thy
necessities call for, shall be conferred: only let me add one word more, As
thou cravest Gods presence with thee, put sin far from thee, distress inviteth
him to thee, but sin separates him from thee: let not any iniquity rule over
thee, and then God will be with thee, nor shall any calamity prevail against
thee.

To end this, we all either are or may be called to sail through the waters of
tribulation, and surely what will be more fit then that, what God here
promises, we should pray for; to beseech him, who of his great mercy did save
Noah and his Family in the Ark from perishing by water, and did safely lead
the Children of Israel through the Red Sea, that he would be pleased so to
behold us with his favor, be with us by his grace, and refresh us with his
presence, that we being rooted in faith, joyful through hope, and steadfast in
patience, may so pass the waves of this troublesome would, as finally we may
come to the land of everlasting life, where being exalted above all the waters
of sorrow, and set down at the right hand of the Majesty on high, we may be
with him, beholding his face in glory to all eternity.

And now to close up all in a literal application of this Scripture, to those
who go down into the deep, and more especially to you my honored Lord: being
now to take a long voyage, and transplant your self with you fruitful Vine and
Olive-plants, for a time into a far Country. What God said to Abraham, Gen
12.1. he seems to say to you, Get thee out of thy Country* and from thy
kindred, and from thy Fathers house to a Land that I will show thee. The way
you are to pass is through the great waters, and therefore cannot but be
perilous. Anacharsis being asked in what number he should put those that went
to Sea, whether among the living or the dead, was doubtful, An inter vivos
habendi, qui vitam undarum ac ventorum arbitrio commississent, whether they
should be reckoned among the living who commit their lives to the mercy of
winds and waves, he spoke in that like an Heathen, Christians know better, who
recommend themselves into the hands of God, that rules both, but however,
Sea-voyages are doubtless attended with many dangers; it was a true saying of
the same Philosopher, to which the Apostle alludeth, who being told the
distance of the Ships deck from the water was four fingers, answered. Tantillum
absunt a morte qui navigant, there is but so much space between death and
Seamen; Confisus ligno digiti a morte remotis, quatuor aut septem, Juven.
indeed Soldiers in the Wars, and Passengers in the Sea, always carry their
lives in their hand, but yet this is not all, as your passage is dubious, so
the place where you are to go probably dangerous; likely it is you may meet
with difficulties at your ingresse, and being to live amongst, and converse
with a barbarous people, troubles will renew themselves during your abode: so
that having past through the waters in a literal sense, and come to land, you
must still expect to pass through worse waters, I mean, the furious rage of
unreasonable men. But let this golden word Emmanuel be your support; let that
precious sentence, If God be for us who can be against us, be your continual
meditation; a Scripture, with which Maximilian the Emperor was so much in love,
that he caused it to be wrought in Checquer-work upon his Table, let it rather
be imprinted in your Honors breast to your solace and comfort. Your calling is
just and full, having the stamp of Royal Majesty upon it, the consent of the
honorable Senate to it, and the election of that worshipful Society, whose
affairs you are to manage, concurring with it. The Service you undertake is not
only Lawful but Noble, to be an Ambassador from Englands Monarch for his
Subjects Trade and Commerce with the Turkish Empire; and surely going about so
needful a work with so good a warrant, you need not doubt of the Almighties
assistance to make the success happy.

If then the parting with your Native soil, near allies, and familiar friends
trouble you, remember when these are far off, God is at hand. Is was the
Psalmist comfort, When my father and mother forsake me, then the Lord will take
me up, Psalm. 27.10 give me leave with a little alteration and inversion to
apply it for your encouragement, when you must leave mother, kindred and
acquaintance, God will take you up, and stand by you.

If the peril of the Seas or storms affright you, engage by faith and prayer
divine power to, and for you. It was the proud speech of Caesar to his Mariner,
who was afraid in a desperate storm: Quid times? Caesarem vehis and fortunas
ejus, Why do thou fear? thou carriest Caesar and his fortunes with thee; with
better confidence may your Honor say in the midst of a violent storm, Why
should I despair who have God and his strength with me; it is observable of the
Heathen, whithersoever they went they would still carry their gods with them,
so Aeneas advised his father, Tu genitor cape sacra manu patriosque penates.
Virgil.
A practice well befitting Christians to make choice of the true God for their
convoy through the troublous Seas, Ps. 107.23, 24
They that go down into the deep (says the Psalmist) see the wonders of the
Lord, indeed, as he is mercifully present in all places, so he shows himself
wonderfully present in the waters; there it is he ofttimes works potenter and
patenter, with power and glory; so that the finger of a Deity evidently
appears: of him it is that may be most truly affirmed which the Poets feign of
Ulysses, that he carried the winds in his hand, and could command them at his
pleasure, he can rebuke the stormy winds, still the raging of the waves,
having in his hands as well the deprhs of the Sea, the winds of the air, as
the corners of the earth.

Lastly, when the long inquity of the place, inhumanity of the people, whither,
and among whom you are going may perplex you; think God says to you, as in
another case he did to Jacob, Fear not, I will go down with thee into Egypt,
his power, prudence, Genesis 46.4.
and providence shall stand by you to remove all difficulties, and prevent all
designs, he will command his Angels to pitch their tents about you, and keep
you in all his ways.

I end my consolation from God to you with an invocation on God for you, that
your egresse may be cheerful, your progress successeful, your regresse joyful.
When you put forth to Sea, may the Almighty be with you, and shut you into the
ship, Genesis 7.16, 17.
as he did Noah with his family into the Ark, to save you from the raging
waters. When you shall arrive safe at your desired haven, Genesis 39.24.
May the Omnipotent be with you as he was with Joseph, show you mercy, and give
you favor in the sight of all with whom you shall have to do. And when the
appointed time of your return shall come, may the same powerful presence still
accompany you as it did Jacob in his return from Padan Aram, Genesis 28.20.33.20.
that you may come again with your dearest Consort and children, to your
fathers house in peace, and there build an Altar to the God of your mercies.

FINIS.

