A BRIEF VIEW OF THE State of the Church of ENGLAND, As it stood in Q.
ELIZABETH'S and King JAMES his Reign, to the Year 1608.

Being a Character and History of the BISHOPS of those times. And may serve as
an Additionall Supply to Doctor GOODWINS Catalogue of Bishops.

WRITTEN For the private use of Prince Henry, upon occasion of that Proverb,
Henry the eighth pulled down Monks and their Cells.
Henry the ninth should pull down Bishops, and their Bells.


By Sir JOHN HARINGTON, of Kelston near Bath, Knight.

LONDON, Printed for Jos. Kirton at the Kings Arms in Paul's Churchyard. 1653.

TO THE NOBLE LADY, and his honored Friend, the Lady JANE PILE, The sometimes
virtuous Consort of the late worthy Baronet, Sir Francis Pile of Colingborne in
the County of Wilts, deceased. The publisher of these Relations wishes all
presperity in this world, and the world to come.
Most honored Madam,
I Had fully designed another Discourse, viz. concerning the Nature and Work of
Conscience for your Ladyships Patronage. But understanding of preparations by
an abler judgment, on that subject, I have for some time suspended the
publishing of my own conceptions. And therefore, though at present I shall not
entitle your Ladyship to my own, yet make bold to prefix your name to the
labors of another, viz. This following supply to a former Catalogue of
Bishops: A work that calls him Author, whom my mother called father, and in
which I presume your Ladyship with delight will read the duly merited
Commendations of that Reverend Prelate Dr. John Still, whom your Ladyships
children call Great Grandfather. This Anthor styles his acquaintance, his
Friend, his Instructor, his Diocesan, whom the Diocese of Wells once knew
their worthy Bishop, and the poor of the Almes-house of Wells still remember
their bountiful benefactor. Now as this Author in the following relations
has avoided the needless multiplying of words, and has industriously studied
a compact brevity: So I shall not widen the entrance to them by rarifying these
dedicatory lines into any large compass, either by an importunate craving your
Ladyships acceptance, that were to wrong your goodness, or else by any ample
declaring the reasons that guided my thoughts to the publishing this tract, or
entitling your Ladyship to it. Yet that I may somewhat satisfy the Reader, I
shall give a brief account for the one and other. And thereby let the World
know, that an equitable gratitude to the dead Authors memory, and a good will
that aims at the pleasure and profit of the living has engaged my desires to
lend a helping hand to midwife this discourse, which has layen ready for the
birth above 40 years, now at last unto the public view; It being the
ingenious offspring of his brain who was a remote instrument of my being. And
indeed the discourse it self is so full of profit and delight mixed together,
as acquainting us with many and choice occurrences of former men and times,
that it would have engaged the greatest stranger to greater labor. And
therefore prevents a needless commendation from my related Pen, since it will
abundantly commend it self to the ingenious Reader. To whom it likewise will
sufficiently be justified even in those passages that seem most likely to
offend: Since such that are ingenious are supposed duly to consider,

The nature of the Discourse: A History, the greatest commendation of which is
impartial truth.

The quality of the Author: A Courtier, that writes to a Prince, the son of
that King who held that Prophetic Axiom as a sure truth, and we see it
fulfilled, No Bishop, No King.

The time when, and the subject of whom this Tract is.

So that if any should take, what is not intended, offense at the honor he
gives those, that have been since less honored, or at the zeal he shows
against some whom he supposed their adversaries: The Publisher desires such to
consider, that in those days when this discourse was penned, those principles
which now ap pear publicly as the Sun, and have burnt as a flame, were then
but a small Candle newly lighted, and that carried in a dark Lantern, not to
be seen by all, or in all places, and not at all to be seen in the Court, where
the Author lived; Which considered, the most displeased Reader, if any such
be, must impute those heats to the Authors zeal, if not according to truth,
yet according to his knowledge, and the then apprehended true principles of
Ecclesiastical Policy.

And as for my prefixing your Ladyships name to this discourse, I shall only
add, That as I conceive it not incongruous to entitle one of those Bishops
grandchildren to the relation of the lives of those Bishops, so am I exceeding
glad by such an opportunity to have the advantage of letting your Ladyship
know, That in what soever may fall within the compass of any capacity to be
any way serviceable to your Ladyships concernments, your desires or command
shall not meet with a readier or more industrious compliance from any, then from
him, who craving pardon for this boldness, takes the liberty to write himself,
without complement or vanity,

Madam, Your Ladyships most humble and respectfull servant, JOHN CHETWIND.
Wells, May 1. 1652.
A Supply or Addition to the Catalogue of Bishops to the Year 1608.
And first of Mr. PARKER.
WHen I consider with my self the hard beginning, though more prosperous
success of the reformed Church of England, me thinks it may be compared to a
foughten battle; in which some Captains and Soldiers, that gave the first
charge, either died in the field, or came bleeding home; but such as followed,
putting their enemies to flight, remained quiet and victorious. Or I may more
fitly (without offense) liken that to the success of them of the Primitive
Church, wherein the Apostles and their immediatc Successors were one while
honored and magnified, by their followers the Christians; As St. Peter, at
whose feet the believers laid down all their goods; and St. Paul, who was
received as an Angel of God; another while tormented, and persecuted, by Jews
and Heathen; as the same Apostles, whipped by Jews; hanged and headed by the
Romans; sometimes (I say) a Centurion, a Lieutenant^ a Proconsull favoring
them; straight a Priest, a Scribe, and a Lawyer promooting against them. A few
of Caesar's household wishing well unto them, and believing them. But the Caesar's
themselves for 300 years (except a very few) detesting and suppressing them.
For in such sort Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, Rogers, Coverdale, and many
others enduring great conflicts in those variable times of King Henry the
Eighth, King Edward, and Queen Mary, suffering by fire, by imprisonment,
banishment, loss and deprivation, with many fights, many flights and many
frights for their conscience sake; those that died had the glory of valiant
Soldiers, and worthy Martyrs; such as survived, have since in a long and happy
peace, enjoyed the comfort of their victory, and are like still to hold the
same, if some mutinous soldiers of their own camp, do not by disturbing the
peace at home, give heart to the enemy abroad. Among the surveyors of these
first Leaders, that past so many pikes, the first in time, and the highest in
place, was Doctor Matthew Parker, (who, as by this Author is noted) having lost
all his Livings for his marriage, now being made Archbishop of Canterbury,
dissembled not his marriage, as Cranmer in King Henry the eighths time, was
found to do; which, because some have taken occasion to note with too black
ink, to exclude him from the reputation of a rubricated Martyr; and have cited
the testimony of his sons widow yet living, that she was carried in a trunk,
and by misfortune almost stifled, by being set by an ignorant Porter with her
head downward; which tale goes very current among the Papists. I can truly
affirm, that this is a mere fiction, for I have examined the Gentlewoman her
self (being of kin to my wife, and a Rogers by name) and she has sworn to me,
she never reported, nor ever her selfheard, of any such misfortune.

But now though this Archbishop (Parker) dissembled not his Marriage, yet
Queen Elizabeth would not dissemble her dislike of it. For whereas it pleased
her often, to come to his house, in respect of her favor to him (that had been
her Mothers Chaplain) being once above the rest greatly feasted; at her parting
from thence, the Archbishop and his Wife being together, she gave him very
special thanks, with gracious and honorable terms, and then looking on his
Wife, and you (says she) Madam, I may not call you, and Mrs. I am ashamed to
call, you so as I know not what to call you, but yet I do thank you.

It is true, she misliked Marriage in Bishops, and was not very forward to
allow that, in some of the Layety; for I knew one of good place about her, that
had contracted himself to a rich Widow, and yet would not adventure to marry
her, till he had gotten the Queen to write, for that, which he had obtained
before, to the intent, that the Queen reputing that as her benefit, might not
dislike with her own act. But for Clergy men, caeteris paribus, and sometime
imparibus too, she preferred the single man, before the married.

Of Archbishop Edmond Grindal.
Of Mr. Edmond Grindal, whereas my Author writes he was blind, I have heard by
some (that knew somewhat in those days) that he kept his house upon a strange
occasion, the secret whereof is known to few, and the certainty is not easy to
find out, but thus I was told; that

There was an Italian Doctor (as I take that of Physic) that having a known
Wife a Liar, yet bearing himself on the countenance of some great Lord, did
marry another Gentlewoman, (which to do now, is by most godly Laws since made
felony.) This good Archbishop, not winking at so public a scandal,
convented him for that, and proceeded by Ecclesiastical censures against him;
Letters were presently written from this great Lord, to the Archbishop, to
stop the proceeding, to tolerate, to dispense, or to mitigate the censure; but
the Bishop remained still unmoved and unmovable: when no subjects entreaty
could be found to prevail, they entreat the Sovereign to write in the Doctors
behalf; but this John Baptist not only persisted in his Non licet habere eam,
but also in a reverent fashion, required an account of her Majesty's faith, in
that she would seem to write in a matter that (if sh. were truly informed) was
expressly against the word of God. The Queen in a gracious disposition, was
purposed to have yielded an account in writing; but the great Lord not only
dissuaded her from that, as too great an indignity; but incensed her
exceedingly against him; whereupon, he was privately commanded to keep his
house; where because he was sometime troubled with sore eyes, his friends gave
out he was blind. But if he were blind, that was like to the soothsayer
Tiresias that foresaw and told Pentheus ruin as Qvid writes.

Et veniet, nec enim dignabere numen honor, Meque sub his tenebris nimium
vidisse quereris.

For that Lord, that so persecuted this Prelate about his Physicians two wives
dying twenty years since, left two Wives behind him, that can hardly be yet
agreed which was his lawful Wife,

and so much for Archbishop Grindall.
Doctor Whiteguift.
Upon the decease of Archbishop Grindall, the State desirous, to have a
learned and discreet person, in so eminent a place; and the Queen resolved to
admit none, but a single man; choice was made of Doctor Whiteguist, then Bishop
of Worcester, a man in many respects very happy, and in the best Judgments
very worthy. He was noted for a man of great learning in Cambridge, and he was
grown to his full ripeness of reading and judgment; even then, when those that
they called Puritans (and some merely define to be Protestants scared out of
their wits) did begin by the plot of some great ones, but by the Pen of Mr.
Cartwright, to defend their new discipline.

Their endeavor as was pretended was to reduce all, in show, atleast to the
Purity, but indeed to the poverty, of the primitive Churches.

These Books of Mr. Cartwright not unlearnedly written, were more learnedly
answered by Doctor Whiteguift. Both had their reward. For Mr. Cartwright, was
by private favor placed about Coventry, where he grew rich, and had great
maintenance to live on, and honored as a Patriarck, by many of that
Profession. Doctor Whiteguift, was made Bishop of Worcester, and there having a
great good report of Houskeeping, and governing the Marches of Walls, he was
(as my Author has told, called unto Canterbury. While he was Bishop of
Worcester, though the revenew of that be not very great, yet his custom was to
come to the Parliament very well attended, which was a fashion the Queen liked
exceeding well. It happened one day Bishop Elmer of London, meeting this Bishop
with such an orderly Troop of Tawny Coats, and demanding of him, how he could
keep so many men, he answered, it was by reason, he kept so few women.

Being made Archbishop of Canterbury, and of the privy Council, he carried
himself in that mild, and charitable course, that he was not only approved
greatly, by all the Clergy of England, but even by some of those, whom with his
pen he might seem to have wounded; I mean these called Puritans, of whom he won
diverse by sweet persuasions to conformity. In the Star Chamber, he used to
deliver his sentence in a good fashion, ever leaning to the milder censure as
best became his Calling. He was a great stay in Court and Council, to all
oppressions of the Church, though that current was some time so violent, as one
man's force could not stop that.

He founded an Hospital in or nigh Croyden, and placed poor men therein, in
his own life time, and being grown to a full age, that he might say with St.
Paul. Bonum certamen certavi, cursum confeci, etc. he was so happy, as to give
to his Sovereign and preferrer, the last spiritual comfort she took in this
World (I hope to her eternal comfort) and after that, he not only joined with
the other Lords, for the proclaiming of King James, but on St. James his day
following, did set the Crown on his head, and anointed him with Oil, and so
having first seen the Church settled under a religious King, and the Crown
established in a hopeful succession, he fell into a Palsy, to which he had
been formerly subject, and with no long or painful sickness, he yielded to
nature, deserving well this Epitaph, written by a young Scholar of Oxford, who
was with me at the writing hereof.

Candida dona tibi Whyt^gifte, sunt nomen, and omen,
Candidior a tuis (...) (...) dedit.
Nomen habes (...) inscriptum nunc ergo lapi^^o,
Et sto^^ pro meritis redditur alba (...).
Doctor Richard Bancroft.
Upon the death of Archbishop Whiteguift, diverse worthy men were named in the
vacancy. His Majesty not after the manner of some Princes, seeking to keep that
vacant, but rather hastening to fill that. The Bishops of Durham and Winchester
were as it were, voce populi made competitrs with the Bishop of London, rather
by their eminence of merit and Learning, then by any known desire, or endeavor
of them or their friends. Wherein methinks by the way, envy it self cannot but
gratulate the Church of England, that is so furnished with learned Bishops, as
if choice had been to be made, not by a judicious Prince, but by the fortune of
a lot among those three, and many more beside, that could not have fallen
amiss. But his Majesty had long since understood of his writing, against the
Genevising, and Scotizing Ministers: and though some imagined he had therein
given the King some distaste, yet finding him, in the disputations at Hampton
Court, both learned and stout, he did more and more increase his liking to him;
So that although in the common rumor, Thoby Matthew then Bishop of Durham was
likest to have carried that, so - learned a man, and so assiduous a Preacher,
qui in concionibus dominatur as his emulous and enemy wrote of him, yet his
Majesty in his learning knowing, and in his wisdom, weighing that this same
strict charge Pasce oves mes feed my sheep, requires as well a pastoral
courage of driving in the stray sheep, and driving out the infectious, as of
feeding the sound, made especial choice of the Bishop of London, as a man more
exercised in affairs of the State. I will add also my own conjecture out of
some of his Majesty's own speeches, that in respect he was a single man, he
supposed him the fitter, according to Queen Elizabeth's principles of state:
upon whose wise foundations, his Majesty does daily erect more glorions
buildings.

But I lose labor to repeat these things to your Highness better known, then
to my self. I should only speak of the former times.

Of his beginning therefore, and rising, I will boldly say that, which I would
I might as truly of all that follow in this Treatise, viz. that he came to all
his preferments very clearly, without prejudice or spoil of his Churches.

He was Tutor in Cambridge, to the Lord Cromwell, who had cause to wish, and
(as I have heard) has wished, he had staid with him longer, though he were
sharp and austere. My Lord Chancellor Hatton made special choice of him, to be
his Examiner.

Est a liquid de tot Graiorum millibus unum a Diomede legi. By his means Queen
Elizabeth came to take knowledge of his wisdom and sufficiency. He both:
wrote, as I touched before, and labored earnestly by all good means for the
suppressing of the fantastical Novellists. After the strange and frantic
attempt of Hacket and his fellows; which practice, though the branches thereof
were easily cut off, yet was it thought, to have a more dangerous and secret
root. But for these his travels, as the Queen and State favored him, so the
seditious Sectaries (to use Judge Pophams word, that would not have them called
Puritanes) they, l say, no less maligned-him in Libels and Rimes; (for they
were void of reasons) laying the imputation of Papistry unto him; some of them
were punished in the Starchamber, namely one Darling, the last. Starchamber day
in Queen Elizabeth's time, was sharply censured. And it is no wonder, if they
loved him not, for indeed he had stoutly opposed their chiefest darlings. As
for the imputation of Papistry, which they lay on all men that cross their
designs, he is so free from it, that I can truly affirm the greatest blow the
Papists received in all Queen Elizabeth's time, came from his hand, or at least
from his head: For having wisely observed the emulation, ambition; and envy,
that lurked in the minds of their secular Priests, and the Jesuits one against
another, he found the means by the same policy, and with the like spirit, that
St. Paul set the Pharisees against the Sadduces, to set the Priests against the
Jesuits, Watson against Parsons (Impar congressus) but yet thereby he so
divided their languages, as scantly they can understand one another as yet.
These things acted, before the King your fathers happy entry, I thought good to
touch, though more sparingly then my particular affection and his just deserts
do give me occasion. Of his late employments of his great care, in setting;
forward and setting forth all his Majesty's godly proceedings, though I know
much, yet if I should say all I know, perhaps it is less then your Highness
knows; therefore I will conclude with that which the truth, rather then my
kindness enforces me to say, that no Bishop since I can remember has been
counted more vigilant in looking to his charge. Ne quid Ecclesia detrimenti
capiat.

Of the Bishops of London,
and first of Bishop ELLMER.
MY purpose in this work from the beginning, and my promise to your Highness,
being to add to this Author, a supply of some matters that he purposely
omitted writing in the latter years of Queen Elizabeth, and my relation being
to write plainly, without fear or favor of those I do write, I will proceed
confidently, as I have begun; in which, I persuade my self I have some
advantage of the Author himself, for freedom of speech, both in the time, and
many other circumstances. For he was no fool that gave that rule,

Mitissima sors^est Regnorum, sub Rege novo. Again, I being a Layman; am not
so obnoxious to their apprehensions; that may be offended with that I shall
say, as he was being a Churchman.

Thirdly, I lived in a place, where I might know many things without enquiry;
which had been scarce safe for him, in that time to enquire after.

Lastly, he writes to the world publicly, and I but privately to your
Highness. Therefore I will proceed quoad sciam, poteroque.

The first Bishop of London I have to write of, is Mr. John Elmer, of whom my
Author has spoken-too little, and I perhaps shall seem to say too much; yet
once I thought to have said somewhat of Bonner, because I may remember him
living in the late Queens time unbishopped, and went sometimes abroad; but I
was so young then, as I could judge nothing; and he was so hated, that every
ill-favored fat fellow that went in the street, they would say, that was
Bonner. But me thinks now, by that I have heard of him, I could liken him to
Dionysius the tyrant of Syracuse, who being cruel and peremptory in
prosperity, was both patient and pleasant in adversity. For example, that
Tyrant being expelled his Realm, and living a poor pedant, was one day with
men of mean sort drinking in a Tavern, some Diogenes espying him, came to him
with reverence, opening, and shaking his upper garment (for so they used in
those days, that came into the Kings chambers, to show they had no weapons.)
Dionysius perceiving the scorn, was nothing troubled, but bad him come and
drink with him, and shake his clothes at the going out, that his host might see
he carried nothing with him. So Bonner having twice lost his Bishopric,
walking with his Tippet in the street, one begged it of him (in scoff) to line
a coat; No (says he) but thou shall have a fools head, to line thy cap. And
to another, that bad him good morrow Bishop quoudam, he straight replied,
Farewell, Knave semper. I have been told also, that one showed him his own
picture in the Book of Martyrs, in the first edition, on purpose to vex him;
at which he laughed, saying, a vengeance on the fool, how could he get my
picture drawn so right? and when one asked him if he were not ashamed to whip a
man with a beard, he laughed, and told him, his beard was grown since; but
(says he) if thou had been in his case, thou would have thought it a good
commutation of penance, to have thy bum beaten, to save thy body from burning;
but this is too much of this sloven.

I come now to Bishop Elmer, whom in my own particular I loved very well, and
yet performing truly the task I have undertaken, I shall show perhaps no great
sign of it. He was a^ man but mean of stature, yet in his youth very valiant,
which he forgot not in his age. When he first became a preacher, following the
popular phrase, and fashion of the younger Divines of those times, which was to
inveigh against the superfluities of the Churchmen, he is remembered, namely to
have used these words in a Sermon, before^ a great Auditory, Wherefore away
with your Thousands, you Bishops, and come down to you: Hundreds, etc. but this
was but a heat of his spirit; of which not long after, by reading and
conference, he was thoroughly cured; in so much as being asked by one of his own
rank, after he was Bishop of London, what he meant, to preach of the brainsick
fashion, he answered with the words of St. Paul, Cum essem parvulus, loqu^bar
ut parvulus, sapiebam ut parvulus.

But certain it is, no Bishop was more persecuted and taunted by the Puritans
of all sorts, then he was, by libels, by scoffs, by open railing, and privy
backbiting. It is vulgar, yet a passage not unworthy remembering, that past
between one Mr. Maddoxe, and him: For when the Bishop had recovered him about
some matter concerning Paritanisme, and he had answered the Bishop somewhat
untowardly and thwartly; the Bishop, (as he was ingenious ever) said unto him,
thy very name exprefseth thy nature, for Maddox is thy name, and thou art as
mad a beast as ever I talked with. The other not long to seek of an answer, by
your favor, Sir, (said he) your deeds answer your name righter then mine: for
your name is Ellmar, and you have marred all the Elms in Fulham, by lopping
them. He used for recreation to bowl in a Garden; and Marton Marprelate thence
takes this taunting scoff^, that the Bishop would cry, Rub, rub, rub to his
bowl, and when it was gone too far, say, The devil go with it; and then,
quoth he, the Bishop would follow. Thus they rubbed one another, till they were
all galled sometimes; and the Bishop was so weary of the place, that he would
gladly have removed to Ely, and made great suit for it, and was put in some
hope of it. I have seen a Letter or two of his, to his friend, subscribed thus,
Yours in love, but not in London; yet would he not take it with those hard
conditions that were proposed, lest Mr. Maddox, and his like, might call him
Ellmarr; so as it was noted as an ill fortune of his, to have died Bishop of
London, which eight before him in an hundred years had not done, but been
either preferred, or deprived. He was diligent in preaching at his cure, where
he was first beneficed; and when his Auditory grew dull, and unattentive, he
would with some pretty and unexpected conceit, move them to attention. Among
the rest was this: He read a long Text in Hebrew, whereupon all seemed to
listen what would come after such strange words, as if they had taken it for
some conjuration. Then he showed their folly, that when he spoke English,
whereby they might be instracted and edified, they neglected, and hearkened not
to it; and now he read Hebrew, which they understood no word of, they would
seem so careful and attentive. When there was talk of dangers, rumors of
wars, and invasions, then he was commonly chosen to preach in the Court, and
he would do it in so cheerful a fashion, as not only showed he had courage,
but would put courage into others. Here is much doubt, says he, of Malum ab
Aquilone, and our Coleprophets have prophesied that in exaltatione Lunae Leo
jungetur Leaenae, The Astronomers tell of a watery Trigon.

But as long as Virgo is in that Ascendent with us, we need not fear of
nothing; Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos, and for this, the Queen would much
commend him, yet would she not remove him. But though he were stout, and wise
and rich, yet had he beside his conflicts with those called Puritans, also some
domestical crosses. He had a Daughter, a modest Gentlewoman, and very well
brought up, whom he gave in marriage to one Mr. Adam Squire, a Minister and
Preacher, and learned, but a very fantastical man, as appeared partly the
first day; for as I have heard, he would needs preach at his own Marriage, upon
this Text, It is not good for Adam to be alone. This Text he so pursued, after
he had been some years married, that though his Wife were away, yet Adam would
not be alone. This course bread jealousy, jarrs and complaints, and the Bishop
as he had good cause, reprehended his Son in Law, he thinking to defend, or at
least to revenge himself, by recrimination, accused her to have received a love
letter from a Knight (but the Squire himself had indicted that) and this was so
cunningly handled by him, and with such probability, that her fault was as
suspicious, as his was manifest, falsehood will out at last. The Bishop that
feared never a Knight, nor Lord in England, sends for the Knight (contrary to
the Squires expectation) boults out the whole matter, finds there were
treacherous tricks put on his Daughter, but no Meretrix, and being too wise to
publish his own disgrace, and too stout to endure that; I have credibly heard
(and believe that to be true) that with a good waster, he so mortified this old
Adam of his Son in Law Squire, that he needed no other penance but this, which
was according to the old Canon per Disciplinam, and verbera. In his Sons he was
more fortunate, than many Bishops in England have been thought to have been;
his eldest being a civil Gentleman, and well left, another an excellent
Preacher, that has preached often before the King, and namely one Sermon on this
Text out of the 2d of the Canticles, verse 15. Take us the Foxes, the little
Foxes that destroy our Vines: for our Vine, have small Grapes: which Sermon so
pleased his Majesty, that besides other approbations of that, he said to me,
that if Mr. Ellmer had not had his Fathers collections and notes against
Puritans, he could never have made so good a Sermon,

and so much of Bishop Ellmer.
Of Bishop Fletcher.
There succeeded in less then one years vacancy, as has been already told, Mr.
Richard Fletcher, a comely and courtly Prelate, but I may say, as Tully- said,
when he had commended King Dejotarus to Caesar, by the name of Rex frugi, a
frugall, or thrifty King, he straight adds this parenthesis, quanquam Reges
hoc verbo laudari non solent, although said he, Kings are not accustomed to be
praised with this word thrifty, so I might say, that comely and courtly, are no
fit Epithetons for the true praise of a Prelate. I remembered before how Ely had
been long vacant, almost 20 years, and Bristol and Oxenford though both new
erected Bishoprics (saved as it were out of the ruins and ashes of the
Abbeys) were thought in some danger again to be lost, for Bristoll was held in
Commendam, and Oxford not much to be commended; wherefore about the year 88.
that same annus mir abilis, some of the zealous Courtiers, whose devotion did
serve them more to prey on the Church, than pray in the Church, harkened out
for fit supplies to these places, and sent their Agents to find out some men
that had great minds, and small means or merits, that would be glad to leave a
small Deanery to make a poor Bishopric, by new leasing out Lands, that were now
almost out of Lease, but to free him from the guilt of it, the poor Bishop must
have no part of the fine. There was then a Deane whom I may not name; but to
give the story more life, I will name his place for names sake of Coventry, a
man of great learning, but of no great living. To him was sent one of these
Foxes, the little Foxes that destroy our Vines, and make small grapes with this
favorable Message, that his honorable Lord, had sent him to him, to let him
know, how much he respected his good gifts (in which word also, there might be
some equivocation) and though that was hard in those times, to pleasure men of
his worth, according to their merit, yet my Lord in favor of him, has
bethought him of this course, that whereas Salisbury was then like to be void
by a Remove, if this Dean would for the present take the Bishopric of Oxford,
which was then in a long vacation also, and make Leases, etc. ^he should the
next year be removed to Salisbury: the honest Dean that in his soul detested
such sacrilege, made this mannerly and ingenuous answer. Sir, I beseech you
commend my humble service to his honorable Lordship; but I pray you tell his
Lordship, that in my Conscience, Oxford is not my right way, from Coventry to
Salisbury: what became of Oxford I shall touch, and but touch hereafter, I come
now to Bishop Fletcher, that made not so much scruple to take Bristol in his
way, from Peterborough to Worcester, though that were wide of the right way,
upon the sinister or bow hand many miles; as the Card of a good Conscience,
will plainly discover. I fottuned to be one day at the Savoy with Mr. Secretary
Walsingham, where Mr. Fletcher was then upon his dispatch for Bristoll, a
familiar friend of his meeting him there, bad God give him joy, my Lord elect
of Bristoll, which he taking kindly and courtly upon him, answered that it had
pleased indeed the higher powers, so to dispose of him; but said his friend in
his ear, do you not lease out tot and tot to such and such. He He clapping his
hand on his heart, in a good graceful fashion, replied with the words of Naman
the Syrian. Herein the Lord be merciful to me, but there was not an Elizeus to
bid him go in peace. What shall I say for him? Non erat hoc hominis vitium sed
temporis? I cannot say so, for your Highness knows I have written otherwise in
a Book of mine I gave you Libro 3. numero 80.

Alas a fault confessed were half amended, but sin is doubled, that is thus
defended,
I know a right wise man says and believes where no receivers are, would be no
thieves.
Wherefore at the most I can but say Dividatur. He was a well spoken man, and
one that the Queen gave good countenance to, and discovered her favor to him,
even in her reprehensions, as Horace says of Mecaenas. Rerum tutela mearum,
cumsis, and prave sectam stomacheris ob unguem; for she found fault with him
once for cutting his beard too short, whereas good Lady (if she had known that)
she would have found fault with him for cutting his Bishopric so short. He
could preach well and would speak boldly, and yet keep decorum. He knew what
would please the Queen, and would adventure on that though that offended
others. Once I remember there had been two Counselors sworn within compass of
one year, and neither of them had a gray hair at that time, whereupon he
glawnc't in his Sermon at it with a sentence of Seneca.

Which Mr. Daniel upon a better occasion did put into English verse in this
sort,

That we may truly say, these spoild the State,
Young Council, private gain, and partial hate.
The Queen as I said, found no fault with his liberal speech, but the friends
of these Councellers taxing him for that, I have heard he had this pretty
shift, to tell the friends of either of them, he meant it by the other. Being
Bishop of London, and a Widower, he married a gallant Lady and a Widow, Sister
to Sir George Gifford the Pensioner, which the Queen seemed to be extremely
displeased at, not for the by-gain of a Bishop (for she was free from any such
superstition) but out of her general mislike of Clergy men's Marriage: this
being indeed a marriage that was talked of at least nine days, yet in a while
he found means to pacify her so well, as she promised to come, and I think did
come to a house he had at Chelsey. For there was a stayre and a door made of
purpose for her, in a bay window, of which pleasant wits descanted diversely,
some said that was for joy, to show he would (as the Proverb is) cast the house
out at window for her welcome, some more bitingly called it the Impresse or
Emblem of his entry into his first Bishopric, viz. not at the door, but at
the window. But certain it is that (the Queen being pacified, and he in great
jollity, with his fair Lady and her Carpets and Cushions in his bedchamber)
he died suddenly, taking Tobacco in his chair, saying to his man that stood by
him, whom he loved very well, Oh boy, I die; whereupon many bolts were roved
after him, and some spitefully fether'd, which both for charity sake, as well as
brevity, I will omit; but this blunt one, not knowing out of whose Quiver it
first came; but fitting a gray goose wing, I will produce as his most vulgar
Epitaph:

Here lies the first Prelate made Christendom see,
a Bishop, a husband unto a Ladee,
The cause of his death was secret and hid,
He cried out I die, and even so he did.
He was buried in the Church, the Dean and Chapter of Paul's not being so
scrupulous, as they of York were, the 9. of Hen. 1. who because their
Archbishop died suddenly, buried him without the Church Porch, notwithstanding
he had been their great benefactor.

Bishop Vaughan.
Mr. Richard Vaughan is the next I have to speak of, being the last man named
in my Authors Book, and of him he has but two lines, only declaring him to
have been the Bishop of Chichester.

Upon the remove of my Lord of Canterbury that now is^ he succeeded him in
London, as is not unknown to your Highness.

His beginning of preferment was under the Lord Keeper Puckering, being his
examiner, of such as sued for the benefices in my Lords gift; in which, though
some complain he was too precise, yet for my part I ascribe to that one of his
greatest praises. For this I know, that a Preacher being a Noblemans Chaplain,
and therefore qualified for two Benefices, came to him ^recommended in good
sort, and brought with him a Gentleman of both their acquaintance, that
sometime had been an University man, to speak for his approbation. Mr. Vaughan
examined him of no very deep points, and found him but shallow, and not very
ready in the Roman Tongue, his friend having been fain to help him up in two or
three foul stumbles, both of language and matter; whereupon he dismissed him,
without all hope of the Benefice, and after told the Gentleman seriously, that
if he would have it himself, he would allow him sufficient, but the suitor by
no means. He was in those days very prompt, and ready in speech, and withal
factious; he was an enemy to all supposed miracles, insomuch as one arguing
with him in the Closet at Greenwich, in defense of them, and alleging the
Queens healing of the Evil for an instance, asking him what he could say
against it, he answered, that he was loath to answer arguments taken from the
Topic place of the Cloth of estate; but if they would urge hi^ to answer, he
said his opinion was, she did it by virtue of some precious stone in possession
of the Crown of England, that had such a natural quality. But had Queen
Elizabeth been told, that he had ascribed more virtue to her Jewels (though she
loved them well) then to her person, she would never have made him Bishop of
Chester. He grew heavy and corpulent of a sudden, not so much with too much
ease, as with too little exercise. Corpus quod corrumpitur aggravat animam,
soon after his remove to London he fell into that drousie diseas^, of which he
afte died, growing thereby unfit for the place, that requires a Vigilantius,
and not a Dormitantius. He was held a mild man, and was well spoken of in the
City, which sometime happens not to them that deserve the best. To conclude,
being taken with an Apoplexy, he may be properly said to have slept with his
forefathers.

Doctor Ravis.
Within a few months there succeeded him Doctor Ravis Bishop of Gloucester,
who is not formerly mentioned in this book, because Mr. Goldborow his
predecessor in Gloucester was then living. His preferment to Gloucester makes
me remember a story that some record of Scipio, who being made General of the
Roman Army, was to name his Questor or Treasurer for the wars, whom he thought
fit; being a place in those days, as is now in these, of great importance, one
that took himself to have a special interest in Scipios favor was an earnest
suitor for it, but by the delay, mistrusting he should have a denial, he
importuned him one day for an answer. Think not unkindness in me (said Scipio)
that I delay you thus, for I have been as earnest with a friend of mine to take
it, and yet cannot prevail with him: Noting hereby, that offices of charge and
conscience, are fittest for such as shun them modestly, rather then such as
seek them greedily. And even so did my Lords of the Council deal with Mr.
Ravis, who being then Dean of Christ-Church, which lightly is not held, but by
some choice man of the University, being a place of good value and reputation,
was requested by them to take this Bishopric, when many that sued to have it,
were put by. But as he was not willing to go thither, so they of Gloucester
were more unwilling he should go thence, he was in a short space in so good
liking of all sorts, insomuch as some that can scaut well brook the name of a
Bishop, yet can be content to give him a good report.

For my part, I have observed a great change in Gloucester, from that it seemed
nine years since, about the Earl of Essex going: into Ireland; for at that
time neither their Bishop seemed to care for them, lying at a Prebends in
Worcester, which methought was very inconvenient; nor they seemed much to care
for themselves, all their buildings both public and private looking old and
ruinous: whereas of late years, their Bishop keeping his house near them, and
being daily with them, they have built them a new Marketplace, and are now
building a fair Hall for justice; which commendable and comfortable
disposition of the people, there and elsewhere, though it be principally
ascribed to the joy and comfort that all well affected persons took of his
Majesty's happy entrance, and peaceable government, and of the succession
established in his hopeful issue; yet is not the leaft to be imputed to the
discretion and diligence of the Pastors that waken and stir up their charity,
and make them more sensible of Gods good blessings bestowed on them; and the
rather by this good Bishops means. The Lord of Shrewsbury has very Nobly, and
like himself contributed to this so great and necessary work, giving a large
portion of Timber toward it.

Now, as I said, it has pleased his Majesty to place him in London,
Magistratus indicabit virum. This public place (for I count the other was
almost private to this, will show what is in the man, I need not prognosticate,
but I can wish and hope, that as he is for his perfon comparable to Mr.
Fletcher, so he may equal Doctor Ellmar in courage, Doctor Bancroft in
carfulness, and Doctor Vaughan in his mild demeanor, to win the love of the
people; and thus much be said concerning the Bishops of London.

Of the Bishops of Winchester.
HAving past Canterbury and London, both Neighbors to the Court, and as it
were within the verge; I thought the greatest part of my task passed over.
Howbeit Winchester I find also will afford some variety of matter; and as it
has been a place that has had many learned men, and bred many, both Divines,
Philosophers, and Poets, so I shall take occasion in speaking of some of these
that ensue, to produce some Poems both Latin and English; some made at
Winchester, some of Winchester, some against Winchester: not digressing herein
much from the method and manner of my Author; who, as your Highness may see,
produces good old riming verses of Friars, both in praise and dispraise of
some of the Bishops, for my purpose from the beginning, though it were chiefly
to inform your Highness, knowledge, with a faithful report of some things
passed in Queen Elizabeth's time, overpassed by my Author; yet was it also to
sauce it in such sort with some variety of matter, not impertinent, to cheer
your spirit, lest a dull relation of the Acts of grave gray-beards to a young
Prince might grow fastidious.

First therefore of the first Bishop Wickham,
whose life my Author has set out so amply and orderly, as I need add nothing
thereunto; only, because a man that has made so many good scholars deserves
a better verse then that on his Tomb.

Willelmus dictus Wickha^ jacet hic nece victu^
Jugiter oretis, tumulum quicunque videtis.
And such like stuff, which a Winchester scholar now would be scourged, if he
make no better. I having this pretty Poem of his whole life, made by Doctor
Johnson, thought I could never do it or him more honor, then to present it to
your Princely view, for as Sir Philip Sidney curses all despisers of Poetry,
with this Poetical Anathema: First, that they may be in love, and lose their
love for lack of a Sonnet; next, that when they die, their memory may die for
want of an Epitaph: so, I would wish such as wrong good Poets, no worse
punishment, then to have some vile Verse written of him, whose reading (as
Martial says) might make a man's Physic work the better with him; such as for
the most part those lazy Friars were were wont to write; for my part, though
Wickhams Epitaph be but seven or eight lines, and this Elegy (I think) about
twenty times seven lines, yet I must confess, it were less tedious to me at
this present to read the seven score, then the seven; and hoping it may seem so
to you, I have here annexed them.

Ortus and vita Gulielmi de Wickham olim Episcopi Wintoniensis, and conditoris
istius Collegii.
Qua capit australes comitatu Hamptona Britannos
Wickhamia est vicus nec nisi parvus ager;
Vixit Johannes illic cognomine longus
Cui fuit in Casti, part Sibilla tori
Hanc habuit patriam Gulielmus and hosce parents
Wickhamus augurio, nec tamen absque bon^.
Namque loci ut nomen, sic vim matrisque patrisque
Haud dubie in vitam transtulit ille suam.
Longus enim ut longo duraret tempor a caute
Ut been prospiceret cuncta Sibilla dedit
Ergo sub Edvardo natus regnante secundv
Tunc ubiter sceptri, sexta cucurrit Hyems
Vinginti primos studiis and moribus annos
Wickhamiae patris cura ea summa dedit.
Nec tamen hic omnes, nam parte^ temporis hujus
Venta and Edingdoni praesulis aula tulit:
Potinus Edwardi translatus tertius in aulam
Non fieri nullo caepit and esse loco.
Namque bis octo annis recte and feliciter actis
Rem fidei plenam consiliique subit;
Winde^ora a suit pagus celeberrimus illic
Rex statuit castri maenia magna sui:
Wick^amus huic operi praeponitur atque probatu^ est
Ingenio quantum polluit art fide
Ergo fit Edvardo charus custo sque Sigilli
Non ita post multos incipit esse dies.
Nec tamen optati meta haec fuit ultima honoris
Crevit adhuc regi charior usque suo:
Usque adeo ut sexto sit factus Episcopus anno
Jussus ventana pascere in urbe gregem
Hic mihi vaniloqui minuenda est fabula vulgi
Fabula de tanto non been ficta viro
Namque nec Estmeonam petiit fallaciter unquam,
Sed tulit auratum rege sciente pedum
Nec fuit indoctus doctos facturus ut illum
Fama refert Regi verba dedisse suo.
Consule quae in tanti gessit molimine regni
Prudentem dices palla diumque virum.
Consule quae in sacri scribuntur calce statuti
An faceret doctos addubit ass scies:
Add quod Chistorici si pagina vera Frosarti)
Rex Intercessor Praesul ut esset erat.
Missa igitur vulgi facimus verba prophani
Quaer at and exactam nostra Thalia fidem:
Wickhamus ad summos evectus praesul honores
Edwardo inque dies charior inque dies
Jam patriae Lumen, jam Cancellarius idem
Summus er at Regi presidiumque suo;
Cum subito (sic magna ruunt summisque negatum est
Stare diu) ex tanto decidit ille gradu:
Namque per invidiam regi dilatus ab illo
Pellitur e patria missus ut exul humo.
Hoc factum est potius regem stimulante sonatu
Quam quod erat culpae conscius ille malae
An tamen exiret regno non convenit and sunt
Qui paenae summum displicuisse putant.
Interea moritur Rex hic Edvardus and ejus
Opportuna Nepos sceptra Richardus habet:
Hic jubet exilio revocetur praesul ab isto
Utque locumrursus quem tulit ante fer at;
Quin etiam census cereales reddit ad annos
Tres minus exilii quod puto tempus er at.
His opibus dives, mentemque per omnia versans
Non male quo servet tam been parta modo;
Sed quid agat virtute sua quid praesule dignum
Quidve Deo tantas cui reserebat opes
Post a lia Oxonii (quod longum duret in aevum
Possit and a memori posteritate coli,
Constituit pulchros studiis Phoeboque penates
Atque sacram Musis aedific are domum.
Septima crevit Hiems post fundamenta locata
Ingreditur Custos and sua turba larem;
Turba atque his pue^is famulisque decemque ministri
Otia discentum qui been semt er alant.
Magna quidem sunt haec tamen haec tam magna
Lector adhuc tanto non potuere viro
Namque opere exacto hoc vix proxima fluxerat placere
Cum parat alterius tecta locare domus
Quae prope Ventanae been caepta Palatia sedis aestas
Crevit and in sexto vere parata stetit;
Ergo illic totidem studiosos esse jubebat
Queis and rectores pedonomosque dedit.
Qui simulac primos complerint fortiter annos
Musarum in studiis rhetoricisque tropis,
Altius inque novas diducta colonia terras
Oxonium semper lecta juventus eat:
Haec duo Pieriis collegia condita mistis
Sunt in tutela diva Maria tua;
Id^irco nova dicta puto quod nulla vetustas
Nulla dies morsus tentat in illa suos
Hic potuit credi finem fecisse struendi
Wickhamus and sumptus jam tenuisse suos.
Non tenuit divi nam quicquid in aede Swithini
Nolari occiduam spectat ab arce plagam;
Concio qua festis celebratur sacra diebus
Quaque suo in tumulo conditus ipse jacet.
Totum hoc tam vastam molem tantasque columnas
Impensis struxit restituitque suis;
Regis opes dicet propius qui spectat and idem
Vix regum tantas esse putabit opes.
Forsitan and Gallis (nam sic and fama Monastis
Quos rex a regno jussit abire suo.
Reddidit aequali praetio quaecunque recepit
Parisiiis fundos Parisiisque lares.
Non tamen hoc sumptu minor esse domestica caepit
Cura, sed and famulos pavit ut ante suos.
Pavit, and ipsius testatur script a sepulchro
Littera gustavit dives, inopsque cibum
Huic it a viventi cum jam longaeva senectus
Corporis effaeti debilitasset onus,
Grata quies venit vitae non discolor actae,
Ultima curarum linea grata quies.
Annus erat vitae decies octavus and illis
Henrici quarti sceptra diebus erant;
J am testamentum quaeris si fecerit ullum,
Fecit; si fuer at quod daret ille? fuit.
Quod suerit factis reliquu^ tot sumptibus? ohe
Inveniet nullum pagina nostra fidem.
Et tamen hoc dicam regales vincere gazas
Quae dedit in scriptis ultima dona suis
Extat opus Craesumque putes scripsisse vel illum
Cujus facta haeres Roma superba fuit:
Vel cujus digitis mutatum fertur in aurum
Quicquid in aurifluas contigit ire manus;
Nec tame^ ignavos bona tanta reliquit in usus
Successusque bonus propositum gresuit.
Namque diocesin ditavit templa per omnem
Multaque cognatis, pauperibusque ded it:
Multa quoque and regi non fidis pauca ministris
Sed neque gimnasiis muner a pauca suis.
Haec sunt ergo viri monument a perennia tanti
Cujus dum vixit gloria tanta fuit.
Nec dubito qui sic vixit sic mortuus idem est,
Quin sit apud superos nobilis umbra deos.
Est etenim nam si caelestis clauditur aula
Tot meritis, nobis illa patere queat?
Hactenus ire libet de Magni laudibus, Hosce
Suscipe conatus, Lector Amice meos.
And hereby your Highness may observe how vain that foolish tradition is
which my Author discreetly omitted, as not believing that some will still
maintain that Wickham was unlearned, and only a Surveyer of buildings, and by
a kind of fraud deceived King Edward 3. (no likely Prince to be so deceived)
beging the Parsonage of Eastmeane, to which by like Authority they will have
the Bishopric of Winchester annexed as unseparably as the Earldom of
Arundell to Arundell-Castle, for who could think that such a King as Edw. 3.
would make Sir John Laclattin, first his Secretary, then Privie-Seale, then
Master of the Wards, and Treasurer of France, and lastly Prelate of the Garter,
and Chancellor of England,

and so much of the first Wickham.
Of Stephen Gardener.
Because I will not be always be praising, but sometimes when just cause is
given, reprehend men's demerits, as well magnify their merits, I will take
occasion to speak somewhat of Stephen Gardener, twice bishop of Winchester;
and therefore may challenge to be twice remembered, though for some things of
him that were to be wished they were ever forgotten, my Author derects this
Reader to Mr. Foxes book of Martyrs, for a more full Relation of his doings;
but that is so full (though I assure my self it is very faithful) that I
doubt your Highness will find it over tedious to read; my purpose is therefore
but to note some important observations out of this Story, and after, as I did
of Wickham in Latin, so to add some English poetry written of him, and to
him, which is not to be found in Mr. Fox, though some of it helps to confirm
something concerning him, affirmed by Mr. Fox, and called in question by
others. Mr. Fox therefore first greatly prayseth his natural gifts of mind,
his sharp wit, his excellent memory, which is indeed the storehouse of all
learning and knowledge, for tantum scimus quantum meminimus. But to these
(says he) he had great vices, as pride, envy, and cruelty, flattering to his
Prince, submisse to his superiors, envious to his equals (namely to Cromwell)
and haughty to his inferiors, these or the like are Mr. Foxes words. It seems
further in relation of his Life and Death, he was a Catholick-Protestant, or a
protesting Catholic, for as he shows at large out of his Books and Sermons,
though he received the Popes authority in Queen Mary's time; Yet his opinion
was as his writings before declared, and as the wiser sort I think, do still
hold of it, that it is but a temporal constitution of Men, and agreement of
Princes, to allow the same, which upon just occasions they may restrain or
exclude, as they shall find cause; but yet I observe this, that although it was
necessary for Queen Mary, in respect of her Birth to admit of the Popes
Authority, as the contrary was as necessary for her Sister, yet this so
Catholic Queen, and this so popish Prelate could keep out the Popes Legate out
of England by her royal Prerogative when he would have sent a Legate hither not
to her liking; again, he was earnest against Marriage of Ministers, yet he
confesses frankly, that a married man may be a Minister: he defended the real
presence, yet he allowed the Communion under both kinds, he writ in defense of
Images, yet he publicly approved their pulling down when they were
superstitiously abused. Finally he said at his Death, that that would mar
all, to teach the people, that they are freely justified by the blood of
Christ, and yet even then, when he could not dissemble, he confessed it to be
true Doctrine.

Lo how far this stout Prelate, Cedere nescius, (as Mr. Fox says of him)
did yield in those many points of Popery. 1. Supremacy. 2. The marriage of some
Ministers. 3. The Sacrament in both kinds. 4. Removing Images. 5.
Justification. But now for his sharp persecuting, or rather revenging himself
on Cranmer and Ridley, that had in King Edwards days deprived him, his too
great cruelty cannot be excused.

Lastly, the plots he laid to entrap the Lady Elizabeth, his terrible hard
usage of all her followers, I cannot yet scarce think of with charity, nor
write of with patience.

My father, only for carrying a Letter to the Lady Elizabeth, and professing
to wish her well, he kept in the Tower 12 months, and made him spend a
thousand pounds ere he could be free of that trouble. My mother, that then
served the said Lady Elizabeth, he caused to be sequestered from her as an
heretic, insomuch that her own father durst not take her into his house, but
she was glad to sojourne with one Mr. Topcliff; so as I may say, in some sort,
this Bishop persecuted me before I was born.

Yet, that I speak not at all in passion, I must confess I have heard some as
partially praise his clemency and good conscience, and namely, that he was
cause of restoring many honorable houses, overthrown by King Henry the eighth,
and in King Edwards minority. The Duke of Norfolk, (though Mr. Fox says, that
Gardener made him stay long for his dinner one day) yet both he, and those
descended of him were beholding to him: with the house of Stanhops, and the
Lord Arundell of Warder; and I have heard old Sir Matthew Arundell say, that
Bonner was more faulty then he, and that Gardener would rate at him for it, and
call him ass for using poor men so bloodily; and when I would maintain the
contrary, he would say, that my father was worthy to have lain in prison a year
longer, for the saucy sonnet he wrote to him from out of the Tower; which
sonnet, both because it was written in defense of Queen Elizabeth, and because
(if I be not partial, it is no ill Verse, for those unrefined times, and
touches the matter I enforce) I will here set down; presupposing that in the
eleven months before, he had sent him many Letters, and Petitions full of
reason, (that could not prevail) for his liberty. The distressed prisoner
writes this Rhyme.

1.
At least withdraw your cruelty,
or force the time to work your will;
It is too much extremity,
to keep me pent in prison still.
Free from all fault, void of all cause;
Without all right, against all laws.
How can you do more cruel spite,
Then proffer wrong, and promise right?
Nor can accuse, nor will acquight.
2.
Eleven months past, and longer space,
I have abid your divellish drifts,
While you have sought both man and place,
and set your snares, with all your shifts;
The fault less foot to wr ap in wile,
With any guilt, by any guile;
And now you see that will not be,
How can you thus for shame agree,
To keep him bound you can set free?
3.
Your chance was once, as mine is now,
to keep this hold against your will,
And then you swear you know well how,
Though now you swearve, I know how ill.
But thus the world his course does pass,
The Priest forgets a Clerk he was;
And you that then cried justice still,
And now have justice at your will,
Wrest justice wrong, against all skill.
4.
But why do I thus coldly plain,
as if it were my cause alone?
When cause does each man so constrain,
as England through has cause to moan,
To see your bloody search of such,
Whom all the Earth can no way touch.
And better were that all your kind,
Like hounds in hell with shame were shrind
Then you had might unto your mind.
5.
But as the stone that strikes the wall,
sometimes bounds back on the hurlers head,
So your foul fetch, to your foul fall,
may turn and noy the breast that bred.
And then such measure as you gave,
Of right and justice look to have;
If good or ill, if short or long;
If false or true, if right or wrong,
And thus, till then I end my Song.
But to show a pattern, what partiality can paint in his praise, and what ill
will can pervert to reproach, I will add an Elegy in English also, written by
one Mr. Prideaux, in commendation, and the same answered in execration of the
same Bishop.

1.
THe Saints in Heaven rejoice, this earth and we may wail;
Since they have won, and we have lost the guide of our avail.
2.
Though death has loosed life yet death could not deface
His worthy work, his stayed state, nor yet his gifts of grace.
3.
As Gardner was his name, So Gardned he his life
With justice, and with mercy both, to 'stroy the weeds of strife.
4.
A Steven in Religion stout, a Bishop by his acts,
A faithful man most free from fraud, as witness be his facts;
5.
A Judge most just in judgment seat, of parties no regard;
An Eye to see, an Ear to hear, a hand that shunned reward.
6.
A heart to help, and not to harm; his will was wisdoms law,
A mind that malice could not move, such was of God his awe.
7.
A faith in friendship firm and fast, a mount the right to raise.
A Spright 'not palled with slanderous bruits nor puffed with pride by praise.
8.
Not light of credit to reports, revenge he never sought,
But would forgive, and did forget the wrongs that were him wrought.
9.
A truth, so tried in trust, as tongue could never taint.
Nor erst was heard in guilefull wise, a lie with lips to paint.
10.
Though Natures child by birth, yet virtues heir by right,
Which held his height so madestly, as measure mastered might.
11.
Ambitions climing cliffe could never move his mind,
Nor fortune with her fawning cheer, his heart did ever blind.
12.
Nor Misery which most he felt, or prison might him pall,
But bare his mind in level so, as change could be no fall.
13.
In all these turns of joy and woe, he turned to the best;
And held him to the tried truth, which now has won him rest.
14.
From foes deface, and envies bell, his end has made him free,
And plucked him from this wicked world, too worthy here to be.
15.
Who can give tears enough to plaino the loss and lack we have;
So rare a man, so soon bereft, when most we did him crave.
16.
When age and years had made him ripe, and surely had him set,
To know himself and weeld the world and right with mercy met.
17.
And when of envy, and of hate, the conquest he had won,
And falsehood forced to fly his fort, and right his race to run.
18.
And when of glory and of grace, he won the palm and price,
And conquered all affections force, with wisdoms good advice.
19.
And in the office that he bare. and service of his Queen,
So choice a man to serve her call, scarce any where was seen.
20.
Then death, that fatal fce, the line of life did lose,
And in the belly of the earth as earth she did him close.
21.
The Prince may plain his death, the Realm his lack may rue;
All men may say, O Winchester, most worthy wight adue.
22.
The poor may plain and pine, whose lacks he did relieve;
His Servants may lament their Lord which Lordly did them give.
23.
The Bishops may behold a Bishop then berest,
A perfect Priest, a shield of faith, a mirror of them left
24.
His foes if any were, that first did wish him gone
In length of time and lack of life too late his loss will moan.
25.
O Pastor past this Pilgrims pain in earth thine Acts do live,
In skies thy virtues written are, all penns thee praise shall give.
26.
Which after all these heaps of kap a happy life have led,
And in the happiest hap of all in fame and love art dead.
The same answered verse for verse by an Ill-willer of the said Bishop.

1.
THe Devils in Hell do dance, this Realm and we may joy
Since they have got and we forgone the cause of our Annoy.
2.
Though death has wipt out life, yet death cannot outrace
His wicked works usurped state nor faults of his deface.
3.
A Gardner such he was, as spoiled so our plants,
That Justice withered, mercy died and we wrong by their wants.
4.
A Stev'n in name, a Fox in fact, a Bishop but in Weeds,
A faithless man full fraught with frauds as deem him by his deeds.
5.
A partial Judge in Judgment seat, of parties great respect,
A blinded eye, a closed ear, a hand with bribe infect
6.
A heart to harm and not to help his lust was laid far low,
A mind with malice overwhelmed of God nor man no awe.
7.
A fained fickle friend and false that right could never bid,
A courage every storm cast down and praise puffed up with pride.
8.
Of foul reports and slanderous bruts he nourisht up the brood;
His wrongs to pardon or to pass revenge and rage withstood
9.
A tried untruth in trust, As tongues well tried have told,
A mouth that breathed more odious lies then It' upbraid am bold.
10.
Scant Natures Child by birth sure Satan's son in right
Which rule maintained with sword and fire, and measured all by might.
11.
Ambitious clyming Cliffe had ravished so his mind,
As he was sotted drunk therein, and fortune made him blind.
12.
The smell of prisons misery felt his pride did greatly pall
He bare his staff so staggeringly, as each change seemed a fall.
13.
In all these turns of joy and woe he turned with the best,
And never left the surer side till breath did leave his breast.
14.
From Widow course and Orphans cry his end him cannot save,
Though that have rid kim of his reign unworthy rule to have.
15.
Who can give thanks and joy enough that we have escaped this sire,
This monstrous man this bloody beast, when most we did desire.
16.
When years had framed him fit for Hell and pride so high had set,
As God nor man nor self he knew and might with mischiefmet.
17.
And when the envy and the hate he wan of every wight,
And falsehood florisht in his Fort, and wrong had wrong outright;
18.
And when he gloried most in pomp, in honor and in health,
And by affection conquered all, and wallowed all in wealth;
19.
And in the Office that he bare to rule above the Queen,
So cruel and so merciless, scarce ever man was seen;
20.
Then God that most just Judge life's line to part was pleased,
The Earth his Carrion corpse has caught* the Devil his soulhath seized
21.
The Prince his death may please, this Realm his life does rue,
All men may well his birthday, ban this cursed wretch that knew.
22.
The poor may plain and pine; for none be would relieve,
His men may joy his death was such his Goods were his to give.
23.
Good Bishops may beware this Ravener them bereft,
This popish-priest this shield of wrong, a warning for them left.
24.
His friends if any were, that wished him longer ruigne
With length of time might cause have caught too late his rule to plain
25.
O thou devourer of the good thy wrongs in earth do dwell,
Thy cruel thirst of guiltless blood now must thou quench in hell.
26.
Which in the world of deadly hurts most burtfull life did lead,
And now with Englands common jay in shame and hate art dead.
Which of these wrote truest I will not take upon me to judge, left I should be
thought partial; but that saying appears true: Scribit in Marmore laesus.
Therefore I will conclude against all partial Poets, with two verses of

Horace, Falsus honor juvat et mendax infamia terret
Quem? nisi mendosum and mendacem.

Doctor John White.
He was born of a worshipful house, and in the Diocese of Winchester, and
became after Warden of Winchester, thence for his great learning, and virtuous
life preferred to the Bishopric of Lincoln, and after upon the death of Stephen
Gardner, made Bishop of Winchester; wherefore of him I may say, his fame did
well answer his name, and so would all men say (how contrary soever to him in
Religion, but for one black Sermon that he made; yet for the color is may be
said he kept decorum, because that was a Funeral Sermon of a great Queen both
by birth and marriage, I mean Q. Mary. But the offense taken against him was
this. His Text was out of Eccles. 4. 2. Laudavi mortuos magis quam viventes,
and faliciorem utroque judicavi qui nec dum natus est. And speaking of Queen
Mary her high Parentage, Her bountiful disposition, Her great gravity, Her
rare devotion, (praying so much as he affirmed that her knees were hard with
kneeling, Her Justice and Clemency in restoring Noble Houses to her own private
loss and hindrance. And lastly her grievous yet patient death: He fell into
such an unfaigned weeping, that for a long space he could not speak. Then
recovering himself, he said she had left a Sister to succeed her, a Lady of
great worth also whom they were now bound to obey; for says he melior est
Canis vivus Leone mortuo, and I hope so shall reign well and prosperously over
us, but I must say still with my Text, Laudavi mortuos magis quam viventes; for
certain that is, Maria optimam partem elegit: thus he, at which Queen Elizabeth
taking just indignation, put him in prison, yet would proceed no further then
to his deprivation, though some would have made that a more heinous matter. He
was a man of austere life, and much more mortified to the World, than his
Predecessor Gardener, who was noted for ambitious, but vet to his Prince very
obsequious. But if Doctor White had had a true prophetical spirit, he might
have urged the second part of his Text. Sed faeliciorem utroque judicavi qui
nec dum natus et; for that may seem verified indeed in the Kings Majesty that
now is, who was then unborn, and has since so happily united these Kingdoms;
yet least that which I would make in him a Prophecy, others will take in me for
flattery; I will proceed to the next, or rather I should say to another, for of
the two next I need add nothing, my Author having testified by both their
Epitaphs, that they lived and died well.

Doctor Thomas Cooper.
I intend therefore to speak next of Dr. Cooper, because of Bishop Herne, and
Bishop Watson, I cannot add any thing upon sure ground, for of the former
times, I have either Books of stories, or relation of my Fathers that lived in
those days; but or these that lived in the first twenty years of the Queens
Reign when I was at school, or at the University, I could hear little, yet at
my first coming to the Court, I heard this pretty tale, that a Bishop of
Winchester one day in pleasant talk, comparing his Revenue with the
Archbishops of Canterbury, should say, your Graces will show better in the
Rack, but mine will be found more in the Manger, upon which a Courtier of good
place said, it might be so in diebus illis; But says he, the Rack stands so
high in sight, that it is fit to keep it full, but that may be, since that
time, some have with a provideatur swept some provender out of the Manger: and
because this Metaphor comes from the Stable, I suspect it was meant by the Mr.
of the Horse. To come then to Bishop Cooper, of him I can say much, and I
should do him great wrong, if I should say nothing; for he was indeed a
reverent man, very well learned, exceeding industrious, and which was in those
days counted a great praise to him, and a chief cause of his preferment, he
wrote that great Dictionary that yet bears his name, his Life in Oxford was
very commendable, and in some sort Saint-like; for if it be Saintlike to live
unreprovable, to bear a cross patiently, to forgive great injuries freely: this
man's example is sampleless in this age.

He married a Wife in Oxford, for that special just cause (I had almost said
only cause) why Clergymen should mary, viz. for avoiding of sin. Melius est
enim nubere qu am uri, yet was that his very hard hap that she proved too light
for his gravity by many grains, or rather many pounds. At the first he winkt at
that with a Socraticall and Philosophical patience, taking, or rather
mistaking the equivocating counsel of Erasmus Ecchoe. Quid si mihi veniat usu
quod his qui incidunt in uxores parum pudicas parumque frugiferas? Feras. At
qui cum talibus morte durior est vita? vita; wherein I observe in the two
Ecchos, how in the first Feras signifies either the verb, suffer, or that Nown,
wild beasts, or shrews. In the latter, vita signifies the Nown life, or the
verb shun or eschew: so he (good man) construed Feras, Vita. suffer during
life, and I should take that vita Feras shun shrews. But this Fera whom his
Feras made Feram, committed wickedness even with greediness, more then was in
power of flesh and blood to bear: wherewith being much afflicted, having warned
his Brother privately, and born with him perhaps 70. times seven times. In the
end taking him both in a place and fashion (not fit to be named) that would
have angered a Saint, he drove him thence, (not much unlike) as Tobias drove
away the spirit Asmo^eus, for that was done with a Roste, and this with a spit.
It was high time now to follow the Counsel. Dic Ecclesiae, so (as all Oxford
knows) her Paramor was bound from her in a bond of one hundred pound, but they
should rather have been bolts of an hundred pound.

The whole University in reverence of the man and indignity of the matter,
offered him to separate his wife from him by public authority, and so to set
him free, being the innocent party. But he would by no means agree thereto,
alleging he knew his own infirmity, that he might not live unmarried; and to
divorce and marry again, he would not charge his conscience with so great a
scandal.

After he was Bishop, mad Martin, or Marprelate wrote his book or rather
Libell, which some (playing with Martin at his own weapon) answered pleasantly
both in Ryme and Prose, as perhaps your Highness has seen, or I wish you
should see, for they are short and sharp. But this Bishop with authority and
gravity confuted him soundly; whereupon Martin Madcap, (for I think his cap and
head had like proportion of wit) replying, and anabaptized his bastard book by
the name of Work for the Cooper; and had not the wisdom of the State prevented
him, I think he and his favorers would have made work for the Tinker.

And so much of Bishop Cooper, though I could add a report, that a great Lord
dying in his time bequeathed him a great Legacy, but because I have not seen
his last testament, I cannot precisely affirm it.
William Wickham.
This Bishop my Author professes to reverence for his names sake, and his
predecessors sake; and I much more for his own sake, and his virtues sake.
About the year 1570. he was Vice-provost of Eaton, and as the manner was, in
the Schoolmasters absence would teach the school himself, and direct the
boys for their exercises (of which my self was one) of whom he showed as
fatherly a care, as if he had been a second Tutor to me. He was reputed there a
very mild and good natured man, and esteemed a very good Preacher, and free
from that which St. Paul calls Idolatry, I mean covetousness; so that one
may say probably, that as the first William Wickham was one of the richest
Prelates that had been in Winchester a long time, and bestowed it well; so this
was one of the poorest, and endured it well. He preached before the Queen at a
Parliament, I think the last time that ever he preached before her; and indeed
it was Cygnea vox, sweetest, being nearest his end, which if I could set down
as he delivered, were well worth the remembering. But the effect was this, that
the Temporalities of Bishoprics, and Lands of Colleges, and such like, were
from the beginning for the most part the graces, gifts, and Alms of Princes,
her Majesty's progenitors, that for some excesses and abuses of some of them,
they had been and lawfully might be some quite taken away, some altered, some
diminished, and that accordingly they were now reduced to a good mediocrity;
for though there were some far greater Bishoprics in France, Spain, and
Germany^, yet there were some also less and meaner even in Italy. But yet he
most humbly besought her Majesty to make stay of them at least in this
mediocrity; for if they should decay so fast in thirty years to come, as they
had for thirty years past, there would hardly be a Cathedral Church found in
good repair within England; which inconvenience (he said) would soon spread
from the Clergy to the Temporalty, that would have cause with Hippocrates Twins
to laugh and weep together. This, as he spoke zealously, so the Queen gave ear
to it graciously, and some good effect was supposed to follow it, for which
they both now feel their reward;

and thus much of Wickham.
William Day.
It was said that a pleasant Courtier and Servitor of King Henry the eighth, to
whom the King had promised some good turn, came and prayed the King to bestow a
Living on him, that he had found out, worth 100 li. by the year more then
enough; why, says the King, we have none such in England: yes Sir, said his
man, the Provostship of Eaton; for (said he) he is allowed his diet, his
lodging, his horsemeat, his servants wages, his riding charge, his apparel,
even to the points of his hose, at the College charge; and 100 li. per annum
besides. How true this is, I know not, but this I know, that Mr. Day having
both this and the Deanery of Windsor was persuaded to leave them both, to
succeed him (that had been once his Vice-provost of Eaton) in the Church of
Winchester. He was a man of a good nature, affable and courteous, and at his
table, and in other conversation pleasant, yet always sufficiently containing
his gravity. When he was first Deane of Windsor, there was a singing man in the
Quire, one Woolner, a pleasant fellow, but famous for his eating, rather then
his singing; and for the swallow of his throat, then for the sweetness of his
note. Master Deane sent a man to him to reprove him for not singing with his
fellows; the Messenger thought all were worshipful at least that did then
wear white Surplices, and told him Mr. Deance would pray his worship to sing;
thank Mr. Dean (quoth Woolner) and tell him, 1 am as merry as they that sing;
which answer, though it would have offended some man, yet hearing him to be
such as I have described, he was soon pacified. He brake his leg with a fall
from a horse, that started under him; whereupon some waggish scholars, of
which my self was in the quorum, would say it was a just punishment, because
the horse was given him by a Gentleman to place his son in Eaton, which at
that time was thought had been a kind of sacrilege, but I may also say, Cum
eram parvulus sapiebam ut parvulus. He had in those days a good and familiar
fashion of preaching not mincing the word, as some do, with three words to
feed 3000 people, that go away all sometimes as empty as they came; nor as
others, that are Nodosi drawing their auditory with them into deep questions
and dangerous passages; that howsoever they suppose they come of themselves
much admired, they leave their auditors many times more then half mired; but
this was a good plain fashion, apt to edify, and easy to remember; I will
repeat one lesson of many, that I remember out of Sermons of his, which I can
imagine yet I hear him pronouncing, and it was concerning prayer: It is not
(says he) a praying to God, but a tempting of God, to beg his blessings,
without doing also our own endeavors; shall a scholar pray to God to make him
learned, and never go to his book? shall a husbandman pray for a good harvest,
and let his Plow stand still: the Pagans, and the heathen people would laugh at
such devotion. In their fabulous Legion they have a tale of Hercules, whom for
his strength they counted a God; how a Carter (forsooth had overthrown his
Cart, and sat in the way crying, help Hercules, help Hercules; at last
Hercules, or one in his likeness came to him, and swadled him thriftily with a
good cudgel, and said, thou varay lazy selly fellow (so he used to pronounce)
call thou to me for help and do nothing they self; arise, set to thy
shoulder and heave thy part, and then pray to me to help thee, and I will do
the rest. And thus much of our good old Provost, who being made a Bishop, and
of a Register of the Garter becoming now Prelate of the Garter, enjoying this
dignity a very short time, turned his day into night, though no night can
oppress them that die in the Lord. By the way, I think this worthy the noting,
that whereas in Anno Dom. 1486. being the first of King Henry the seventh, it
was found that three Bishops successively had held this Bishopric six score
years save one, namely, Wickham, Beauford, and Wainfleet. Now in Queen
Elizabeth's reign, there had been seven Bishops in forty years, five in
seventeen years, and three in four years.

Doctor Thomas Bilson.
My Author, following his own resolution of forbearing to speak of men now
living, or but lately dead; and I holding my purpose to speak frankly and
truly, as far as my understanding will serve me, both of dead and living; I
am now coming to speak of the present Bishop of VV inchester, of whom I find
in this book but four lines; and if I should give him his due in proportion to
the rest, I should spend four leaves. Not that I need make him better known to
your Highness, being (as on just occasion, as I noted before) one of the most
eminent of his rank, and a man that carried prelature in his very aspect. His
rising was merely by his learning, as true Prelates should rise. Sint non modo
labe mali sed suspicione errantis, not only free from the spot, but from the
speech of corruption. He ascended by all degrees of schools; first, wherein
to win knowledge himself, next whereby to impart it to others, having sometime
taught the school that does justly boast of the name of Winchester, where, if
I mistake not, he succeeded the excellent scholar and schoolmaster Doctor
Johnson, that wrote that forecited Poem of Wickham; and having praised all his
predecessors in pretty Disticks, he wrote this at the last in modesty of
himself.

Ultimus hic ego sum, sed quam been quam male nolo
Dicere, de me qui judicet alter erit.
And accordingly his successor gave this judgment,

Ultimus es ratione loci, re primus Johnson,
Sed quis qui de te judicet aptus erit.
Tam been quam nullus qui te praecesserit ante
Tam male posteritas ut tua pejus agat.
Wherein Mr. Johnson became truly fortunate, according to the saying, Laudari a
laudato viro, laus est maxima. Him fame does raise, whose praiser merits praise.

From Schoolmaster of Winchester, he became Warden, and having been infinitely
studious and industrious in Poetry, in Philosophy, in Physic; and lastly,
(which his genius chiefly called him to) in Divinity, he became so complete,
for skill in Languages, for readiness in the Fathers, for judgment to make
use of his readings, as he was found to be no longer a soldier, but a
Commander in chief, in our spiritual warfare, being first made Bishop of
Worcester, and after of Winchester. In the mean season a crew of mutinous
soldiers (a forlorn hope) untertook to surprise one of the twelve fortresses
of our faith, I mean one of twelve Articles of the Creed, and ere men were
aware they had entered by a Postern corrupted, a Watchman or two thrown down a
battlement and set up their Colors of white and black (black and blew had been
fitter for them) publishing a book in print, that Christ descended not into
Hell. The alarm was taken by many faithful servitors of the Militant Church,
but many were not found fit for this enterprise, for that was whispered, (nay
rather published in the enemies Camp, that some cowardly soldiers of our side
had made a motion to have this Fort, or part thereof rased, because there was
thought to be peril in defending of it; for so Campian writes confidently,
that Cheyney Bishop of Gloucester had affirmed to him, how it had been moved in
a Convocation at London, Quemadmodum sine tumultu penitus eximatur de symbolo;
how without many words it might be taken out of the Creed wholly. But I leave
Erasmus echo to answer it, oly. True it is, there was a hot shot one Mr.
Browghton, no Cannonere, for he loves no Cannons, but that could skill of such
fireworks, as might seem to put out hell fire; this hot brain having with a
Petard or two broken open some old door, took upou him with like Powder out of
some Basilisk (as I think) to shoot Hades quite beyond Sun and Moon; such a
Powder-work against all Divinity and Philosophy, as was never heard of, always
excepting the powdertreason. Then this learned Bishop, like a worthy leader
(that I proceed in this metaphor) with a resolute Troop, not of loose shot, but
gravis armaturae, armed to proof out of Christ's armorie, the old and new
Testament, Fathers, Doctors, Schoolmen, Linguists, encounters these
Lanzbezzadoes, casts down their Colors, repaires up the raines, beautifies the
battlements, rams up the mines, and makes such ravelings, and counter-searfes
about this Fort, that now none of the Twelve may seem more impregnable. Their
great Inginere, before mentioned, upon grief of this repulse, is gone (as I
hear) to teach the Jews Hebrew; God send him to escape Hades at the end of his
journey. Yet in the heat of these skirmishes there happened an accident worthy
to be remembered, and I think by the very devise of the devil. This Bishop
preaching at Paul's Cross, upon this Article of the Creed; and there proving by
authority irrefragable, that hell is a place prepared for the Devil and his
angels; that it is beneath in cord terrae, and that Christ descended into it.
Satan, that knew all this to be true, and was sorry to remember it, and wished
that none of the Auditors would believe it, raised a sudden and causeless
fear, by the fraud or folly of some one auditor. This fear so incredibly
possessed not only the whole multitude, but the Lord Major and other Lords
there, that they verily believed Paul's Church was at that instant falling down,
whereby such a tumult was raised, as not only disturbed their devotion and
attention, but did indeed put some of the gravest, wisest and noblest of that
assembly into evident hazard of their lives, as I have heard of some of their
own mouths. The Bishop not so dismayed himself, sympathizing in pity, rather
then fear of their causeless dismay, after the tumult was a little pacified,
finished his Sermon; upon which accident, some favorers of that opinion make
themselves merry with this story, that at least that which they could not
confute they might seem to contemn.

Of EELY.
Doctor Martin Heaton.
OF Eely I have not much to say, yet in a little I may be thought by some to
say too much; which I will adventure, rather then your Highness shall blame me
for saying nothing. I was among others at Bishop Cox his funeral, being then
either Batcheler, or a very young Master of Arts; but some years after we
thought it would have proved the Funeral of the Bishopric, as well as of the
Bishop. Something there was that had distasted the Queen concerning Bishop Cox,
in his life time; either his much retiredness, or small hospitality, or the
spoil he was said to make of woods and Parks, feeding his family with powdered
venison; all which, I know not how truly, was suggested to her against him, in
his life time, and remembered after his death. For our opinion of him in
Cambridge, we held him a good scholar, and a better Poet then Doctor Haddon,
who called him Master; whether as having been his scholar or servan't I know
not; but among his Poems, is extant a Distick written to B. Cox.

Vix Caput attollens e lecto scribere carmen.
Qui velit is voluit, scribere plura, vale.
which Verse being but even a sick Verse, he answered ex tempore, as they tell,
with this,

Te mag is optarem salvum sine carmine fili,
Quam sine te salvo carmina multa. Vale.
As for his Church of Eely, it seemed he had no great love there, to have his
monument defaced within twenty years (as this Author writes) so as remembering
his good beginning, one may say of him, coepisti melius quam desinis.

But to let him rest, I must confess that it was held for one of the blemishes
of Queen Elizabeth's Virgin reign. First, to keep this Sea of Eely vacant so
long after Bishop Coxes death, and after to take away so large a portion from
it, as is generally spoken; yet that I may both speak my conscience, and show
my charity as well to my deceased Sovereign, as to the reverend Bishop yet
living, I will say this: First, I could wish it had not been so, and that the
occasion of such a scandal between the Crown and Miter had been taken away.
Secondly, I do say for the Queen, she did no new thing; and it is held a
principle of State, that whatsoever there is a president for, is lawful for a
Prince. I consider further, that Eely was a Bishopric of none of the first
erections, but many years after the conquest; so as England stood christened
without a Bishopric of Eely srom Augustine the Monk above five hundred years.
It was a place also that the Crown had been jealous of for the strength of it,
having sometime held out the Conqueror, as our writers affirm; and King Henry
the third, a wise and fortunate Prince, said, it was not fit for a Cloister
man, and of late years Mooreton undertook to hold it against Richard the
third, for Henry the second. Add hereunto, that though it was vacant in name,
yet the profits thereof may seem to have been perhaps more charitably and
honorably employed then before, to relieve the poor distressed King of
Portugal, who was called by some Scholars Bishop of Eely, which is less
scandalous then for Jeffrey Plant agenet to hold the Bishopric of Lincoln for
seven years, without consecration, the Sea being kept void seventeen years;
and for Ethelmare to hold Winchester in like manner nine years in Henry the
thirds time; to omit how Stygand in the Conquerours time, and Woolsey in Henry
the eighth his time, both held Winchester in commendam. As for changing or
abating the possessions of it, the laws then in force allowed it (though a most
godly law since restrained the like) and I would all the Bishoprics in England
were but so well left. Now to come to Doctor Heaton, he was compelled in a sort
so to take it (for potentes cum rogant jubent) and as long as there was not
quid dabis, but haec auferam, the more public it was, and by authority then
lawful he may be thought the more free from blame. But were Eely as good as
ever it was, that could not find the mouth^s bread that find fault with his
taking it in that order.

Before his Majesty's coming to Oxford, I was in Oxford Library, and some of
good quality of both the Universities; and one of their chief Doctors said
merrily to a Cambridge man, that Oxford had formerly had a good Library, till
such time (said he) as a Cambridge man became our Chancellor, and so cancelled
or catalog'd and scattered our Books (he meant Bishop Cox in King Edwards time)
as from that time to this we could never recover them. The other straight
replied, then are you even with us, for one of your Oxford men has sealed so
many good deeds of our good Bishopric in Cambridgeshire, that till they be
canecl'd, it will never be so good as it should be. By his christen name also
many take occasion to allude to this matter, which whether for brevity sake he
writ Mar or Mart, or at full length Martin, always by adding Eely unto it, it
sounds to the like sense, that either he did Mar it, or Mart it, or Martin it.
But he is too wise to be troubled with these.

Sapientis est nil praestare praeter culpam. If any fare the worse for this
now, it is himself. And as for his learning, nd other good parts belonging to a
Bishop, he is inferrour to few of his rank, as your Highness can tell, that
have heard him preach before the Kings Majesty, who said of him, that fat men
were wont to make lean Sermons; but his were not lean, but larded with much
good learning.

And so much of the Bishopric and Bishop of Eely.
Of LINCOLN.
Of Doctor Chaterton now living.
Following my Authors method, I am next to speak of Lincoln, a very large
Diocese, yet not so great a Bishopric as it has been, which I suspect by the
often removes from it, as Bullingham, Cooper and Wickham in Queen Elizabeth's
time; and White in Queen Mary's time. I'note also, that one of these removed to
Worcester, namely Bullingham; of which I can imagine no reason, except the
largeness: of the Diocese make it more painful, as indeed it would, if the
decree made in a Synod held by Saint Cuthbert in England were duly observed.
Of which the third, as Mr. Fox has it is, that every Bishop once every year
should go over all the parishes of his Diocese; with which Decree by what
authority men dispense, I know not, but sure few do keep it.

This Doctor William Chaterton, now Bishop of Lincoln, and before of Chester, I
may remember in Cambridge a learned and grave Doctor; though for his gravity
he could lay it aside when pleased him, even in the Pulpit, it will not be
forgotten in Cambridge while he is remembered, how preaching one day, in his
younger years, a wedding Sermon (which indeed should be festival) as the
Merchant Royal was at my Lord Hays marriage (with which being now in print
many a good husband does endeavor to edify his wife.) I say, Mr. Chatterton
is reported to have made this pretty comparison, and to have given this
friendly caveat: That the choice of a wife was full of hazard, not unlike as
if one in a barrel full of Serpents should grope for one Fish; if (says he)
he escape harm of the snakes, and light on a fish, he may be thought fortunate,
yet let him not boast, for perhaps it may be but an Eele, etc. Howbeit he
married afterward himself, and I doubt not sped better then his comparison. He
was well beloved among the scholars, and the rather for that he did not affect
any sour and austere fafhion, either in teaching or government, as some use to
do; but well tempered both with courage and courtesy. Being made Bishop of
Chester, he was a very great friend to the house of Darby. Preaching the
funeral Sermon of Henry Earl of Darby, for some passages whereof he was like
to be called in question, though perhaps himself knew not so much; I was
present when one told a great Lord that loved not Ferdinando the last Earl,
how this Bishop having first magnified the dead Earl for his fidelity,
justice, wisdom, and such virtues, as made him the best beloved man of his
rank (which praise was not altogether undeserved) he after used this
Apostrophe to the Earl present; And you (says he) noble Earl, that not only
inherit, but exceed your fathers virtues, learn to keep the love of your
Country, as your father did; you give, says he, in your Arms, Three Legs;
know you what they signify? I tell you, they signify three shires, Cheshire,
Darbishire, and Lancashire; stand you fast on these three legs, and you shall
need fear none of their arms. At which this Earl a little moved, said in
some heat, not without an oath: This Priest, I believe, hopes one day to make
him three Courtsies. But the two Earls I trust are friends now, both being
since departed this world, (though neither as I could wish them) the one dying
of a Yex, the other of an Axe. The Bishop was removed to Lincoln, where he now
remains in very good state, having one only daughter married to a Knight of
good worship, though now they living asunder, he may be thought to have had no
great comfort of that matrimony, yet to her daughter he means to leave a great
patrimony; so as one might not unfitly apply that Epigram written of Pope
Paulus and his daughter to this Bishop and his grandchild.

Cum sit filia Paul, cum tibi aurum,
Quantum Pontifices habere raros.
Vidit Roma prius patrem non possum,
Sanctum discere id sed possum beatum.
Which I thus translated, when I thought not thus to apply it.

Thou have a daughter Paulus, I am told,
and for this daughter store thou have of gold.
The daughter thou did get, the gold did gather
make thee no holy, but a happy father.
But if the Bishop should fortune to hear that I apply this verse so saucily,
and should be offended with it, I would be glad in full satisfaction of this
wrong, to give him my son for his daughter, which is a manifest token that I
am in perfect charity with him.

Of COVENTRY, and LICHFIELD.
Doctor William Overton, now living.
OF this Bishopric may be observed, that which happened (I think) to no other in
all Queen Elizabeth's reign, that from the first year of her entrance (what
time she made them all new) she never after gave this Bishopric, but once, and
that was to Doctor William Overton, the one and twentieth year of her reign,
he being then of good years; so as one may probably conjecture, that he
honored his parents well, because he had the blessing promised to such, viz.
that his days have been long in the Land. I can make no special relation
concerning him, but the general speech as I have heard traveling through the
Country, which is not to be contemned; for, Vox populi, vox dei est. Two
special things are commended in him, which very few few Bishops are praised
for in this age: One, that he keeps good hospitality for the poor; the
other, that he keeps his house in good reparation. Both which I have seldom
heard a married Bishop commended for; and I will be bold to add this further,
that if they would do both those, I think no man would take exceptions either
for their marriage or bigamy. The Churches also are very well kept; and for
those of Coventry, they are (of Parish Churches) the fairest I have seen,
though (as I partly noted before) they have had sometimes another kind of
superintendency, for the Bishops keep most at Lichfield.

The pavement of Coventry Church is almost all Tombstones, and some very
ancient; but there came in a zealous fellow with a counterfeit commission, that
for avoiding of superstition, has not left one pennyworth, nor one
pennybredth of brass upon the Tombs, of all the inscriptions, which had been
many, and costly.

Further I note this, that whereas in Bishop Langtons time there were many
Parks belonging to the Sea, in which the Prince committed some disorder in the
time of Edward the first, now it is much altered, for he has not past one, the
rest being perhaps turned to pastures, and the Dear into tamer beasts.

Of SALISBURY.
Bishop Jewel.
OF how great antiquity this Bishopric had been in former times, two things
do especially declare. One, that ever since the conquest Ordinale secundum
usum Sarum was received over all England; another, that the Clergy of Salisbury
were able of their own charge to erect such a goodly Church, and stonesteeple,
as that is which now stands, which at this day a subsidy were scarce able to
perform.

To omit how Sherborn Castle, and the Devizes were both built by one Bishop of
Salisbury, and in this State that continued till the year 1539. what time
Doctor Capon was translated from Bangor thither, a man for learning and wit
worthy to be of Apollos crew; but for his spoil and havoc he is said to have
made of the Church-land, more worthy to be of Apollions crew, for he is noted
to be one of the first that made a Capon of his Bishopric, and so guelded it,
that it will never be able to build either Church or Castle again. The place
being in this sort much impoverished, Bishop Jewel was preferred unto it the
first year of Queen Elizabeth, a Jewel indeed, as in name, Re gemma fuit,
nomine gemma fuit. He, though he could not maintain the Port his predecessors
did, finding his houses decayed, and Lands all leased out, yet kept very good
hospitality, and gave himself withal much to writing books, of which diverse
are extant, and in many men's hands, viz. His Apology of the Church of England;
His challenge, answered by Harding; His Reply to the said Answer; all in
English, and all in such estimation, even until this day, that as St. Ofmond
in William the Conquerours time, gave the pattern for form of service to all
the Churches of England, so Mr. Jewels writings are a kind of rule to all the
reformed Churches of England, and hardly is there any controversy of
importance handled at this day, of which in his works is not to be found some
learned and probable Resolution. One thing I will specially commend him for,
though I shall not be commended for it my self of some, and that is, whereas
he defended the marriage of Priests, no man better; yet he would never marry
himself, saying, Christ did not counsel in vain, Qui potest capere, capiat.
He had a very reverent regard of the ancient fathers writings, and especially
St. Augustine, out of which books he found many authorities against some
superstitions crept into the Roman Church. Why he had such a mind to lie by
Bishop Wyvill, I cannot guess, except perhaps of his name he had taken a
Caurat, to keep himself without a wife. For the whole course of his life from
his childhood, of his towardliness from the beginning, and how he was urged to
subscribe in Queen Mary's time, and did so, being required to write his name,
saying, they should see he could write; (which showed it was not ex animo)
Doctor Humphrey has written a several Treatise.

Doctor John Coldwell, Doctor of Physic.
Though Doctor Guest succeeded Bishop Jewel and my Author makes him a good
writer, yet he shall not be my guest in this discourse, having nothing to
entertain him with, or rather your Highness with in reading of him. But how
his successor Doctor Coldwell of a Physician became a Bishop I have heard by
more then a good many (as they say) and I will briefly handle it, and as
tenderly as I can bearing my self equal between the living and the dead. I
touched before how this Church had surfeited of a Capon, which being heavy in
her stomach, it may be thought she had some need of a Physician. But this man
proved no good Church Physicians; had she been sick of a Plurisey, too much
abounding with blood as in ages past, then such bleeding Physic perhaps might
have done it no harm. Now inclining rather to a consumption to let that bleed
afresh at so large a vein, almost was enough to draw out the very life blood
(your Highness will pardon my Physic metaphors, because I have lately looked
over my Schola Salerni) I protest I am free from any desire to deface the dead
undeservedly, and as far from any fancy to insult on the misfortunes of the
Living uncivilly, and in my particular the dead man I speak of never hurt me,
and the Living man I shall speak of has done me some kindness; yet the
manifest judgments of God on both of the^ I may not pass over with silence.
And to speak first of the Knight who carried the Spolia opima of this
Bishopric, having gotten Sherborne Castle, Park and Parsonage, he was in those
days in so great favor with the Queen, as I may boldly say, that with less
suit then he was feign to make to her e're he could perfect this his purchase,
and with less money then he bestowed since in Sherborne in building and buying
out Leases and in drawing the River through rocks into his garden he might have
very justly and without offense of the Church or State have compassed a much
better Purchase.

Also that I have been truly informed he had a presage before he first
attempted it, that did foreshew it would turn to his ruin, and might have
kept him from meddling with it (Si men's non laeva fuisset) for as he was riding
post between Plymouth and the Court, as many times he did upon no small
employments, this Castle being right in the way, he cast such an eye upon it as
Ahab did upon Naboths Vineyard and once above the rest being talking of it, of
the co^modiousnesse of the place, of the strength of the seat, and how easily
it might be got from the Bishopric, suddenly over and over came his horse,
that his very face, which was then thought a very good face, plowed up the
earth where he fell. This fall was ominous I make no question, as the like was
observed in the Lord Hastings, and before him in others, and himself was apt
enough to construe it so; but his brother Adrian would needs have him interpret
that not as a Courtier but as a Conqueror, that it presaged the quiet
possession of it. And accordingly for the present that fell out, he got that
with much labor and travel and cost, and envy, and obloquy to him and his
heirs Habendu et tenendum but e're that came fully to gaudendum; see what
became of him. In the public joy and jubilee of the whole Realm, when favor
and peace and pardon was offered even to offenders, he that in wit, in wealth,
in courage was inferior to few, fell suddenly I cannot tell how into such a
downfall of despair, as his greatest enemy would not have wished him so much
harm, as he would have done himself. Can any man be so wilfully blind, as not
to see and to say, Digitus Dei est hic, that it is Gods doing and his judgment
which appears? yet also more plain by the sequel, for by St. Augustines rule,
when adversity breeds amendment, then that is a sign it is of Gods sending,
who would not have our correction turn to our confusion: so happened it to this
Knight being condemned to dye, yet God in whose hand is the heart of the King
put into his merciful mind against man's expectation to save his life; and
since by the suite of his faithful wife both to preserve his estate and to
ease his restraint in such sort as many that are at liberty, taste not greater
comforts then he does in prison, being not barred of those companions (I mean
books) that he may and perhaps does take more true comfort of then ever he
took of his courtly companions in his chiefest bravery. Neither is he without
hope, that upon his true repentance, God may yet further add to incline his
Majesty (e're seven times go over his head) to a full liberty. Now to return
to the Bishop that was the second party delinquent in this Petilarceny, or
rather plain sacrilege, what was his purpose, to make himself rich by making
his Sea poor? Attained he his purpose herein? nothing less: no Bishop of
Sarum since the Conquest dyed so notorious a Beggar as this, his friends glad
to bury him suddenly and secretly. Sine Lux, sine Crux, sine Clinco, as the old
by word is, being for have be-like clapped into Bishop Wyvills grave, that even
at the Resurrection, he may be ready to accuse him and say, I recovered
Sherborne from a King, when that had been wrongfully detained two hundred
years, and thou did betray it to a Knight, after that had been quietly
possessed other two hundred years. Some might imagine this a presage that
Sherborne may one day revert again to the Bishopric. But there is a sign in
Hydromanti against it. For in digging your grave (notwithstanding all the have
was made) so great a spring brake into that, as filled that all with water, and
quite washed away the presage, so as that dead Bishop was drowned before he
could be buried, and according to his name laid into a cold well before he was
covered with the cold earth.

Doctor Henry Cotton.
This Bishopric being now reduced to a Mediocrity more worthy of pity then
envy, her Majesty (as I have heard) made a special choice of this her
Chaplain, being a gentleman of a worshipful house, and her God-sonne when she
was Lady Elizabeth, whereupon it is reported that she said, that she had blessed
many of her God-sonnes but now this God-sonne should bless her; whether she
were the better for his blessing I know not, but I am sure he was the better
for hers. The common voice was Sir Waltcr Raleigh got the best blessing of him
(though as I said before) I rather count it a curse to have his estate in
Sherborn to be confirmed that before was questionable. But it was his wisest
way rather then to have a potent enemy and a tedious suite. He married very
young; for I was told some years since, he had nineteen children by one
woman, which is no ordinary blessing, and most of them sons. A man that had
three sons or more among the Ancient Romans enjoyed thereby no small
privileges, though the later Romans make it not a merit in a Bishop. His wifes
name was Patience, the name of which I have heard in few wives, the quality in
none. He has one son blind (I know not if by birth, or accident) but though
his eyes be blind, he has an understanding so illuminate, as he is like to
prove the best scholar of all his brethren. One especial commendation I may
not omit, how by this good Bishops means, and by the assistance of the learned
Deane of Sarum Doctor Gourden, a seminary called Mr. Carpenter, a good scholar
and in degree a Batchelour of Divinity, was converted and testified his own
conversion publicly in a Sermon upon this Text, Acts 9. 18. There fell as it
were Scales from his eyes, saying that three Scales has bleared his sight,
viz. Antiquity, Universality, and Consent, but now the Scales being fallen
away, he saw plainly, their Antiquity Novelty, their Universality a
Babylonicall Tyranny, and their Consent a Conspiracy. And thus much be said of
my god-brother, and (be it said) without presumption your Highness
god-brother, Doctor Henry Cotton.

Of the Bishops of BATH and WELLS,
and first of Dr. Oliver King.
Concerning Bath I have such plenty of matter to entertain your Highness with
(I mean variety of discourse) as I study rather how to abbreviate it, then how
to amplify it: I should have begun at Bishop Barlow, but I respect so much
the very name of King, as I could not let him pass without some homage; and
because the chief Bath of which the Town has the name is called the Kings
Bath, I shall add somewhat also, either omitted, or but slightly touched in
the Precedent book by mine Author, but somewhat more largely handled in the
Latin Treatise mentioned by him page 307. in the life of Stillington out of
which I will cite a passage or two as occasion shall serve.

First therefore for the City of Bath, to omit all the Antiquities noted by Mr.
Camden and other good Authors, as also seen by my self, I observe this, that
amongst all our old Traditions and Legends thereof, that seems as it were
purposely left in suspense and not yet fully determined, whether the Crown or
the Miter have more claim to the virtue that all men see and say to be in
these waters. Some affirm that King Bladud a learned King, brought up at
Athens long before Christ's time, either by his cunning in Magic did frame it;
or rather by his search did find it, or at least with his cost did first found
it: others believe that King Arthurs Uncle St. David a Bishop of Wales, that
lived longer with Leekes then we do now with Larkes and Quails, by his Prayer
procured this virtue to these Springs, but this is manifest by most credible
Histories, that Offa King of Mercia built a goodly Abbey there, where before had
been a Temple of Minerva and Hercules, whom they feined to be Presidents of hot
Bathes. This Monastery built by Offa 775 was destroyed by the Danes being then
no Christians about the year 900. Then it was reedified by Elphegus a Bishop
of Canterbury 1010. and continued in great estimation for a place of holy and
strickt life, but had not yet the Title of a Bishopric, till John de Villula,
a French man borne and a Physician by profession, being made Bishop of Wells,
which was in Latin de Fontibus, admiring the virtue of these Bathes and the
Cures they wrought, for which it had been long before by the Saxons surnamed
Akmanchester, that is sick man's Town. This John de Villula thinking this place
de Fontibus, more honorable then the other called Wells, bought this City of K.
William Rufus and translated his seat thither. And finding that both that Town
and Abbey had been late before defaced with fire, he new built both about the
year 1122 and was the first Bishop was buried there.

Then was that again burned in the year 1132 and repaired again by Bishop
Robert, and remained still the Bishops seat and inheritance, till that Bankrout
Bishop Savaricus for covetousness of Glastenbury, In mercedem bujus unionis
(to use my Authors word) for recompense of this Union of Glatenbury to Wells,
gave Bath again to King Richard the First, and yet notwithstanding these two
so huge Revenues, he spent so prodigally and unprovidently in his many
journeyes to the Emperor, that it is written he had a Legion of creditors, and
for his wandering humors he had this written for an Epitaph, though not set on
his Tomb at Bath.

Hospes eras Mundo, per Mundum semper eund^
Sic suprema die, fit tibi prima quies.
Thus Bath again after 100 years, became the Kings, and ever may it be so.
But the Church was not so sufficiently repaired as it ought in so much that in
Henry the sevenths time it was ready to fall, what time that Oliver King about
100. years since built it again with so goodly a Fabric as the stone work
stands yet so firm, notwithstanding the injuries of men time and tempests upon
it. Here I may by no means omit, yet I can scarce tell how to relate the
pretty Tales that are told of this Bishop King, by what visions, predictions he
was encouraged and discouraged in the building of this Church, whether some
cunning woman had foretold him of the spoil that followed, as Paulus Jovius
writes how a witch deceived his next successor Hadrian Bishop of Bath, or
whether his own mind running of it gave him occasion to dream sleeping of
that he thought waking, but this goes so current and confirmed with pretty
probabilities. That lying at Bath and musing or meditating one night late after
his devotions and prayers for the prosperity of Henry the seventh and his
children (who were then all or most part living) to which King he was
principal Secretary and by him preferred to this Bishopric; He saw, or
supposed he saw a vision of the holy Trinity with Angels-ascending and
descending by a ladder, near to the which there was a fair Olive Tree
supporting a Crown, and a voice said, Let an Olive establish the Crown, and
let a King restore the Church. Of this dream or vision he took exceeding great
comfort and told it diverse of his friends, applying it to the King his master
in part, and some part to himself. To his Mr. because the Olive, being the
Emblem or Hieroglyphick of peace and plenty, seemed to him to allude to King
Henry the seventh, who was worthily counted the wisest and most peaceable King
in all Europe of that age. To himself (For the wisest will flatter themselves
sometimes) because he was not only a thief Councellor to this King, and had
been his Ambassador to conclude a most honorable peace with Charles the
eight, who paid (as Hollinshed writes) 745. Ducats, besides a yearly tribute
of 25000 Crowns, but also he carried both the Olive and King in his name; and
therefore thought he was specially designed for this Church work, to the
advancement of which he had an extraordinary inclination. Thus though (as St.
Thomas of Aquin well notes) all dreams be they never so sensible will be
found to halt in some part of their coherence; and so perhaps may this: yet
most certain it is, for the time he was so transported with this dream, that
he presently set in hand with this Church (the ruins whereof I rue to behold
even in writing these Lines) and at the west end thereof he caused a
representation to be graved of this Vision of the Trinity, the Angels and the
Ladder, and on the North side the Olive and Crown with certain French words
(which I could not read) but in English is this verse taken out of the Book of
Judges chap. 9.

Trees going to choose their King,
Said be to us the Olive King.
All which is so curiously cut and carved, as in the West part of England Is no
better work then in the West end of this poor Church, and to make the credit
of all this more authenticke, he added this word to it, De sursum est, it is
from high. Thus much the stones and walls (though dumb witnesses yet credible)
do plainly testify. But in midst of all this Jollity having made so fair a
beginning to his own great content, and no less to the Kings, who came into
this country at that time, and lay at the Deane of Wells his house nine days;
I say in all this joy and comfort, that happened the Kings Primogenitus, the
Noble Prince Arthur, having lately before married a great Infanta of Spain to
depart this life. This so daunted the heart and hopes of this good Bishop, that
he doubted now his Vision would prove but an illusion, that his Oliva would be
but an Oleaster, which melancholy thoughts were increast in him by the
predictions as I touched before of some wizards (to which kind of men that age
was much affected) concerning the new Prince who was after Henry the 8th, of
his incest ious marriage, of the decay of his offspring, that he should pull
down what the Kings had builded, which no marvel if the Bishop being by
Surname a King mistrusted to pertain also to his buildings. I heard by one
Flower of Phillips Nortor, who said he saw Henry the seventh in this country,
that this Bishop would wish he paid above the price of it, so it might have
been finished, for if he ended it not, it would be pulled down e're it were
perfected. As for the later predictions or rather postfictions (fince this
Bishops death) I willingly omit concerning the Successors of this Bishop, as
things worthier to be contemned then condemned, written by Cole-prophets upon
whited walls, which the Italian calls the paper of fools. Muro bianco charta
di matio, of which sort many have been made as well by our own Country men as
others; but the best I remember was this written by an English gentleman since
the three and fortieth year of Queen Elizabeth on the Church wall with a
Charcole.

O Church I wail thy woofull plight,
Whom King nor Cardinal, Clark nor Knight
Have yet restored to ancient right.
Subscribed Ignoto.

Whereunto a Captain of an other Country wrote this for the comfort of this
Church, and I wish him to prove a true prophet (though perhaps he dyed rather a
Martyr.)

Be blythe fair Kirk when Hemp is past,
Thine Olive that ill winds did blast
Shall flourish green for aye to last.
Subscribed Cassadore.

But to proceed in this sad story, and leave this pleasant poetry, to pursue
truths and eschew fictions to embrace reason and refuse rhyme, it is most
apparent that after the death of this Oliver King, his Successors Cardinal
Adrian, Cardinal Woolsey, Bishop Clerk, and Bishop Knight, all succeeded in
five and thirty years, of which the first two were supposed to poison
themselves, the third to be poisoned by others, the last survived to see the
death, or at least the deadly wound of this Church; for while the builders were
ready to have finished it, the destroyers came to demolish it; yet to give the
Devil his right (as the Proverb is) it is said that the Commissioners in
reverence and compassion of the place, did so far strain their Commission, that
they offered to sell the whole Church to the Town under 500 Marks. But the
Townsmen fearing they might be thought to cousen the King, if they bought it so
cheap, or that it might after (as many things were) be found concealed, utterly
refused it; whereupon certain Merchants bought all the glass, Iron, Bells and
Lead, of which Lead alone was accounted for (as I have credibly heard) 480 tun,
worth at this day 4800!. But what became of these spoils and spoylers.

Desit in hac miki part fides, neque credit factum;
Aut si credetis facti quoque credit paenam.
For I may well say Non possum quin exclamem. But in a word, soonafter the
sellers lost their heads, the buyers lost their goods, being laid up in the
great Treasury of Antichrist, I mean drowned in the Sea, from whence (as some
write) by the Devils power, he shall recover all lost treasures for the
maintaining of his unmeasurable guists. Thus speedily it was pulled down, but
how slow it has risen again, I may blush to write. Collections have been made
over all England, with which the Chancel is covered with blew slate, and an
Alms house built ex abundantia, but the whole body of the Church stands bare ex
humilitate. The rest of the money never coming to the Townsmens hands, is laid
up as I suppose with that money collected for Paul's Steeple, which I leave to a
melius inquirendum. And thus the Church lies still like the poor Traveller
mentioned in the 10 of Luke, spoiled and wounded by thieves. The Priests go by,
the Levites go by, but do nothing. Only a good Samaritan honest M. Billet,
(worthy to be billited in the new Jerusalem) has powered some Qyl in the
wounds, and maintained it in life. In so much as a wealthy Citizen of London,
has adventured to set his Tomb there, whom I commend more worthily then the
Senate of Rome did thank Karra at his return from Cannas, quod de salute
reipublicae non desperasset; for it seems this honest Citizen did not despair
of the reedifying this Church that gave order to be richly entombed therein,

and thus much be said of this last Church of Bath.
Bishop Barlow.
The next I am to write of is Bishop Barlow, of whom my Author in this Book
says little in the Latin Treatise: there is somewhat more, and I will add a
word to both. Bath (as I have noted before) is but a title in this Bishopric,
so as for many years Bath, had the Name, but Wells had the game: but yet that
one may know they be Sisters, Your Highness shall understand that this game I
speak of which was one of the fairest of England, by certain booty play between
a Protector and a Bishop (I suppose it was at Tictak) was like to have been
lost with a why not, and to use rather another man's word then mine own to
explain this Metaphor: thus says the latin Relation of him. He was a man no
less godly then learned, but not so markable in any thing as in his fortunate
offspring, for which Niobe and Latona might envy them, happy in his own
Children, more happy in their Matches (to let pass his Sons, of whom one is
now Prebend in Wells, and esteemed most worthy of such a Father. He had five
Daughters whom he bestowed on five most worthy men, of which three are Bishops
at this hour, the other for their merit are in men's expectation designed to the
like dignity hereafter. Howbeit (says he) in one thing this Prelate is to be
deemed unfortunate, that while he was Bishop his Sea received so great a blow
losing at one clap, all the Rents and Revenues belonging to it. Thus he, and
soon after he tells that for his Marriage, he was deprived, and lived as a man
banished in Germany. Here is his praise, here is his dispraise. If he were
deprived for a lawful Act, no marvel if he be deprived for an unlawful: since
then my Author compares his felicity with that of Niobe, I will also compare
his misfortune with Peleus, making Ovids verse to serve my turn in changing but
a word or two.

Faelix and Natis faelix and conjuge Barlow,
Et cuisi demas: spoliati crimina templi
Omnia contiger ant; hoc tanto crimine sontem accepit profugum patria Germanica
tellus.
But God would not suffer this morsel to be quite swallowed, but that it
choked the feeders; to say nothing in this place, but how the Protector was
foretold by a Poet, that he should lose his head.

Aestatis seeds qui sacras diruis aedes,
pro certo credes quod Cephas per dear debes.
I speak now only of the spoil made under this Bishop scarce were five years
past after Baths ruins, but as fast went the Axes and Hammers to work at
Wells. The goodly Hall covered with Lead (because theRoof might seem too low
for so large a Room) was uncovered, and now this Roof reaches to the sky. The
Chapel of our Lady late repaired by Stillington a place of great Reverence and
antiquity, was likewise defaced, and such was their thirst after Lead (I would
they had drunk it scalding) that they took the dead bodies of Bishops out of
their leaden Coffins, and cast abroad the Carcases scarce thoroughly petrified.
The Statutes of brass, and all the ancient Monuments of Kings, benefactors to
that goodly Cathedral Church, went all the same way, sold as my Author writes
to an Alderman of London, who being then rich, and by this great bargain,
thinking to have increast it, found it like auruin Tholosanum; for he so
decayed after, no man knew how, that he brake in his Majoralty. The Statues for
Kings were shipped for Bristoll, but disdaining to be banished out of their own
Country, chose rather to lie in St. Georges Channel, where the Ship was
drowned. Let Atheists laugh at such losses, and call them mischances; but all
that truly fear God will count them terrible Judgments.

These things were, I will not say done, I will say at least suffered by this
Bishop; but I doubt not but he repented hereof, and did penance also in his
banishment in sacco and cinere. But some will say to me, why did he not sue to
be restored to his Bishopric at his return, finding it vacant, but rather
accepted of Chichester: I have asked this question, and I have received this
answer, by which I am half persuaded, that Wells also had their prophecies as
well as Bath, and that this Bishop was premonstrated (that I may not say
predestinate) to give this great wound to this Bishopric. There remain yet in
the body of Wells Church, about 30 foot high, two eminent Images of stone set
there as is thought by bishop Burnel that built the great Hall there in the
Reign of Ed: I. but most certainly long before the reign of H. 8. One of these
Images is a King crowned, the other is of a Bishop mitred. This King in all
proportions resembling H. 8. holds in his hand a Child falling, the Bishop
has a Woman and Children about him. Now the old men of Wells had a tradition,
that when there should be such a King, and such a Bishop, then the Church
should be in danger of ruin. This falling Child they say was King Edward, the
fruitful Bishop, they affirmed was Doctor Barlow, the first married Bishop of
Wells, and perhaps of England. This talk being rife in Wells in Queen Mary's
time, made him rather affect Chichester at his return than Wells, where not
only the things that were ruined, but those that remained served for records
and remembrances of his sacrilege.

Of Bishop Thomas Godwin.
Of Bishop Gilbert Bourn I can add nothing, and of the other Gilbert but a
word, that he was a good Justicer, as says the same Author (nisi quatenus homo
uxoris conjugis importunitate impulsus a very ac recti tramite aberravit)
saving that sometimes being ruled by his Wife, by her importunity he swarved
from the rule of Justice and sincerity, especially in persecuting the kindred
of Bourn his predecessor. The fame went that he dyed very rich, but the same
importunate woman carried it all away, that neither Church nor poor were the
better for it. But for Doctor God win of whom I am to speak, I must with my
Authors leave add a word of mine own knowledge. He came to the place as well
qualified for a Bishop as might be unreprovably without Simonie, given to good
Hospitality, quiet, kind, affable, a Widdower, and in the Queens very good
opinion, Non minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri, if he had held on as
clear as he entered, I should have highly extold him: but see his misfortune
that first lost him the Queens favor, and after forced him to another
mischief. Being as I said, aged, and diseased, and lame of the Gout, he married
(as some thought for opinion of wealth) a Widow of London. A chief favorite of
that time (whom I am sorry, to have occasion to name again, in this kind) had
labored to get the Manor of Banwell from this Bishopric, and disdaining the
repulse, now hearing this intempestive Marriage, took advantage thereof, caused
it to be told the Queen (knowing how much she misliked such matches) and
instantly pursued the Bishop with letters and Mandats for the Manor of
Banwell for 100 years. The good Bishop not expecting such a sudden tempest, was
greatly perplexed, yet a while he held out and endured many sharp Messages from
the Queen, of which my self carried him one, delivered me by my Lord of
Leicester, who seemed to favor the Bishop, and mislike with the Knight for
molesting him, but they were soon agreed like Pilat and Herod to condemn
Christ. Never was harmless man so traduced to his Sovereign, that he had married
a Girl of twenty years old, with a great portion, that he had conveyed half
the Bishopric to her, that (because he had the Gout) he could not stand to his
Marriage, with such scoffs to make him ridiculous to the vulgar, and odious to
the Queen.

The good Earl of Bedford happening to be pr^esent when these tales were told,
and knowing the Londoners Widow - the Bishop had married, said merrily to the
Queen after his dry manner, Madam, I know not how much the Woman is above
twenty, but I know a Son of hers is but little under forty; but this rather
marred then mended the matter. One said, Majus peccatum habet. Another told of
three sorts of Marriage, of Gods making, as when Adam and Eve two young folks
were coupled, of man's making, when one is old, and the other young, as Joseph's
Marriage, and of the Devils making, when two old folks marry not for comfort,
but for covetousness, and such they said was this. The conclusion to the
premises was this, that to pacify his persecutors, and to save Banwell, he
was fain with Wilscombe for 99 years, (I would it had been 100.) and so
purchased his peace. Thus the Bishopric as well as the Bishop were punished,
who wished in his heart he had never taken this preferment to foil himself in
his decrepid age, with that ftain, that all his life he had abhorred, and to be
made an instrument of another man's sacrilege, and used like a leaden Conduit
Pipe to convey waters to others and drink nothing but the dreggs and dross
and rust it self, wherefore right honesty and modesty and no less learnedly
writes his own son of him in the forenamed Treatise. O illum faelicem si
faelix mane^e maluisset, quam Regi ^inis ecclesiastici labo is tum susciper,
cum laboribus i^par fractus senio necessu n illi fuerit aliorum uti auxilio,
etc. O happy he if he would rather have remained happy (where he was) then to
undergo the labors of Ecclesiastical government when he grew unable to
travel, broken with age constrained to use the help of others, who though
their duty required a care of so good a natured old man, yet they proving as
most do negligent of others good, and too greedy of their own, overthrew both;
For my part, though I loved him well and some of his, yet in this case I can
make no other apology for him, nor use no other plea in his defense but such as
able debtors do, that when they are sued upon just occasions plead per minas,
or rather to liken him to an husbandman, that dwelling near a Judge that was
a great Builder, and coming one day among diverse other Neighbors with
carriages, some of Stone, some Tin: The Steward, as the manner of the Country
was, provided two Tables for their Dinners, for those that came upon request,
Powdered Beef and perhaps Venison, for those that came for hire, Poor-John and
Apple Pies, and having envited them to fit down in his Lordships name, telling
them one board was for them that came in Love, the other for those that came
for Money, this husbandman and his Hind sat not down at either, the which
the Steward imputing to simplicity repeated his former words again, praying
them to sit down accordingly, but he answered (for there is craft in the
clouted Shoe) he saw no Table for him, for he came neither for love nor money,
but for very fear; and even so I dare answer for this Bishop, he neither gave
Wilscombe for love, nor sold it for money, but left it for fear.

How strangely he was intrapt in the unfit marriage: I know not if it may be
called a marriage.

Non Hymenaeus adest illi, non gratia lecto.
Himself protested to me with Tears in his eyes, he took her but for a guide
of his house, and for the rest (they were his own words) he lived with her as
Joseph did with our Lady. Setting this one disgrace of his aside he was a man
very well esteemed in the Country beloved of all men for his great hospitality,
of the better sort for his kind entertainment and pleasant discourse at his
Table, his reading had been much, his Judgment and Dcctrine sound, his
government mild and not violent, his mind charitable, and therefore, I doubt
not but when he lost this life he won heaven according to his word, Win God,
win all. This I say truly of him which his Son was not so fit to say for fear
perhaps of the foolish saying, yet wise enough if it be well understood. Nemo
laud at patrem nisi improbus filius.

Doctor John Still.
But what style shall I use to set forth this still, whom well nigh thirty
years since my reverent Tutor in Cambridge styled by this name Divine Still,
who when my self came to him to sue for my grace to be Batchelour, first he
examined me stricktly, and after answered me kindly; that the grace he granted
me was not of grace, but of merit, who was often content to grace my young
exercises with his Venerable presence, who from that time to this has given me
some helps, more hopes, all encouragements in my best studies. To whom I never
came but I grew more religious, from whom I never went but I parted better
instructed. Of him therefore my acquaintance, my friend, my instructor, and
lastly my Diocaesan, if I speak much, it were not to be marvelled, if I speak
franckly, it is not to be blam^ed, and though I speak partially it were to be
pardoned, yet to keep within my proportion, custom, and promise, in all these
I must say this of him, his breeding was from his childhood in good literature,
and partly in Music, which was counted in those days a preparative to
Divinity, neither could any be admitted to primam tonsuram, except he could
first been le been con been can, as they called it, which is to read well, to
conster well, and to sing well, in which last he has good Judgment and I have
heard good music of voices in his house. In his full time more full of
Learning, he became Bachelor of Divinity, and after Doctor, and so famous for
a Preacher, and especially a disputer, that the learned were even afraid to
dispute with him, and he finding his own strength could not stick to warn them
in their Arguments to take heed to their answers, like a perfect Fencer that
will tell aforehand in which button he will give the venew, or like a cunning
Ches-player tha will appoint aforehand with which pawn and in what place he
will give the mate; and not to insist long in a matter so notorious, it may
suffice that about twenty years since when the great Diet or meeting should
have been in Germany for composing matters in Religion, Doctor Still was
chosen for Cambridge, and Doctor Humphrey for Oxford, to oppose all comers for
the defense of the English Church, for this his known sufficiency he was not
long unfurnish't of double honor. The Puritans in Cambridge wooed him, and
would fain have won him to their part; and seeing they could not, they
forbear not in the Pulpit after their fashion to glaunce at him among others
with their equivocations and epigrams. There was one Mr. Kay that offended
them, and one said in a Sermon, that of all complexions the worst near such as
were Kay-cold, and in the same Sermon and the like vein he said that some
could not be contented with a Living worth 100 l. a year, another worth 120 l.
but Still will have more. But howsoever they snarl'd, this Still was counted
worthy of more, so as in the year 1592. being the 34 of the late Queen he was
preferred to this Sea after it had bin vacant well nigh three years; during the
vacancy I can well remember there was great enquiring who should have it, and
as if all Bishops should now be sworn to follow usum Sarum, every man made
reckoning that the Manor house and Park of Bamvell should be made a reward of
some Courtier, it encreast also this suspicion that Sir Thomas: Hennage an old
Courtier, and a zealous Puritan was said to have an ore in the matter, whose
conscience, if it were such in the Clergy, as that was found in the Duchy,
might well have disgested a better Booty then Banwell. But when it was notified
once who was named to it, I had better conceit, and straight I wrote to him as
of old Cambridge acquaintance, and in such rusty Latin as I had left, gave him
warning of this rumor, which he took exceeding kindly at my hands, though
some others frowned on me for it many months after. So that for his entry to it
I may boldly say that I said before of his Predecessor, that he came clearly to
it without any touch or scandal, that he brought a good report from the places
where he had lived, showed himself well natured and courteous to the kindred
of his Predecessor, had a far greater fame of Learning and Merit, and which
the Queen liked best of all, was single and a widdower. Nay I may compare them
yet further, he married also soon after he was settled, and the Queen was
nothing well pleased with his marriage. Howbeit in all indifferent censures
this marriage was much more justifiable then the other for age, for use, for
end; he being not too old, nor she too young, being daughter to a worshipful
Knight of the same Country and a great Housekeeper, and drawing with her a
kind of alliance with Judge Popham that swayed all the temporal government of
the Country. These respects though I will not strive greatly to praise in a
Bishop, yet the common sort will allow no doubt for wise and provident, so as
the Queens displeasure (your times being somewhat more propitious and
favorable to Bishoprics since Bishop Wickbams Sermon) was the easier pacified
without so costly sacrifice as a whole Manor, and she contented her self
only to break a jest upon the name of the Bishop, saying to Sir Henry
Barckley, it was a dangerous name for a Bishop to match with a Horner. Since
which time he has preached before her more then once, and has received good
Testimonies of her good opinion, and God has also blessed him many ways very
greatly to see his children well brought up, well bestowed, and to have an
unexpected Revenue, out of the Entralls of the Earth (I mean the Leaden Mines
of Mendip greater then his Predecessor had above ground, so as this Bishop
seems to be blessed with Joseph's blessing, Benedictionibus caeli sur sum,
benedictionibus Abyssi jacentis deorsum, benedictionibus uberis and vulvae,
with blessing from heaven above, blessing from the deep that lies beneath,
blessings of the breasts and of the womb, which fortunate increase of living
happening to a provident Man that was ever Homo frugi, it is supposed has
brought him to a great ability. In so much that his Church of Bath seems to
conceive some hope that he will have have compassion of her ruins at the least
(as Sir Arthur Hopton a good Knight of the Bath was wont between earnest and
sport to motion unto him to give toward it, but the Lead to cover it which
would cost him nothing, but he would reply again, well said gentle Sir Arthur,
you will coffe me as you scoff me, which is no great token that he likes the
motion. Yet at his being at Bath he promised them very fair, which they are
bound to rem ember to remember him of sometime by their friends. One trifling
accident happened to his Lordship there that I have thought of more consequence,
and I tell him that I never knew him Non plust in Argument but there. There was
a crafts man of Bath a Recusant Puritan who condemning our Church, our Bishops,
our Sacraments, our Prayers, was condemned himselse to dye at the Assizes, but
at my request Judge Adderton reprieved him, and he was suffered to remain at
Bath upon Bail The Bishop conferred with him in hope to convert him, and first
my Lord alleged for the authority of the Church St. Augustine; the Shoemaker
answered Austin was but a man, he produced for antiquity of Bishops the fathers
of the Council of Nice, he answered, they were also but men and might err;
why then said the Bishop thou are but a man and may and do err. No Sir,
says he, the spirit bears witness to my spirit I am the child of God; Alas
says the Bishop thy blind spirit will lead thee to the Gallows: If I dye
says he in the Lords cause I shall be a Martyr. The Bishop turning to me
stirred as much to pity as impatience; This man said he is not a sheep
strayed from the Fold, for such may be brought in again on the Shepherds
shoulders, but this is like a wild Buck broken out of a Park, whose pale is
thrown down, that flies the farther off the more he is hunted. Yet this man
that stopped his ears like the Adder to the charms of the Bishop, was after
persuaded by a Layman and grew comfortable; but to draw to an end (in one
question) this Bishop whom I count an oracle for learning would never yet give
me satisfaction, and that was when I asked him his opinion of witches. He says,
he knows other men's opinions both old and new writers, but could never so
digest them, to make them an opinion of his own. All I can get is this, that
the Devil is the old Serpent, our enemy that we pray to be delivered from
daily; as willing to have us think he can do so much as to have us persuaded
he does nothing. To conclude of this Bishop without flattery I hold him a rare
man for preaching for arguing, for learning, for living; I could only with
that in all these he would make less use of Logic and more of Rhetoric.

Of EXETER.
Doctor William Cotton.
WHen I reflect my thoughts and eye upon that I have written formerly, and see
that I am like to equal or rather exceed my Author in quantity of Volume,
taking the proportion of the longest Kings reign to that of Queen Elizabeth, I
am the less troubled to think, that for lack of sufficient intelligence, I
shall be constrained to do as he also has done with diverse of those former
Bishops, namely, to obscure and omit the good deserts of some, and to conceal
and hide the demerits of others, which if I fortune to do, yet will I neither
crave pardon of the one, nor thanks of the other, being to be excused of both
by an invincible ignorance. Howbeit, if in these I have or shall treat of, I
have been so plain and liberal, as thereby I may move the spleen of some
Bishop to write against me, as Bishop Jovius did against Petro Aretino, whom
notwithstanding some Italians call Unico and divino, whose Epitaph Paulus
Jovius made thus, the man being long after alive.

Qui giace l' Aretino l' amoro Tosco,
Che besthemia ognivno fuor che dio,
Scusandoi con ill dire non lo cognosco.
Which one did thus put into English:

Here lies Aretine, that poisonous Toad,
Whose spightful Tongue and Pen (all Saints beshrew him)
Did rail on Priest and Prince, and all but God,
And said (for his excuse) I do not know him.
I say, if any should follow this humor of Jovius, yet shall he not thereby
put me into the humor of Aretine, that answered him. For I reverence all their
places, and many of their persons. I know how high their calling is, that may
say, pro Christo legatione fungimur. I know that next to Kings, Bishops are
most sacred persons, and as it were Gods on earth; howbeit also some of them
have the imperfections of men, and those not prejudicial to the acts of their
office. For my part, I would I could speak much good of all, and no ill of any,
and say (for mine excuse) I do not know them.

Accordingly of the Bishopric and Bishop of Exceter, I can say but little,
namely, that it is since Bishop Harmans time (as my Author noted, page 337.)
reduced to a good mediocrity, from one of the best Bishoprics of England; so
as now it is rather worthy of pity then envy, having but two Manors left of
two and twenty; and I will add thus much to your Highness, that as in
public respect, your Highness should specially favor this Bishop, in whose
Diocese your Duchy of Cornwall, and your Stanneries are; so the Duke may
uphold the Bishop, and the reverend Bishop may bless the Duke.

Of NORWICH.
Concerning Norwich, whether it be the praise of the Bishops, or the people, or
both, I know not, or whether I have here a partial relation. But by that I
have heard, I shall judge this city to be another Utopia: The people live all
so orderly, the streets kept solemnly; the Tradesmen, young and old, so
industrious; the better sort so provident, and withal so charitable: that it
is as rare to meet a beggar there, as it is common to see them in Westminster.
For the four Bishops that were in Queen Elizabeth's time, I know nothing in
particular, but that they lived as Bishops should do, Sine querela, and were
not warriors, like Bishop Spencer their predecessor in Henry the fourths time;
nor had such store of Gold and Silver, as he had that could leavy an Army. But
for the present Bishop, I knew him but few years since Vicechancellor of
Cambridge; and I am sure he had as good Latin as any of his Predecessors had,
and accounted there a perfect Divine; in both which respects he is to be
thought very fit for the place, being a Maritine Town, and much frequented with
strangers, very devoutly given in Religion, and perhaps understands Latin as
well as English.

WORCESTER.
Doctor Gervase Babington.
WOrcester has been fortunate in this last age to many excellent Bishops; of
which but two in an hundred years have died Bishops thereof, the rest having
been removed. Also in less then fourteen years that had one Bishop became
Pope, namely Clement the seventh; another that was a Protestant, as Hugh
Ladymer. Of the seven therefore that were in Queen Elizabeth's time, I shall in
this place speak but of one, and that is him now living, who by birth is a
Genman of a very good house; for Learning inferior to few of his rank. He was
sometime Chaplain to the late Earl of Pembrooke, whose Noble Countess used
this her Chaplains advice, I suppose, for the translation of the Psalms; for
it was more then a woman's skill to express the sense so right as she has done
in her verse, and more then the English or Latin translation could give her.
They first were means to place him in Landaffe, near them; where he would say
merrily his true Title should be Aff, for all the Land was gone thence. He came
back over the Sea to the Sea of Exeter, and thence on terra firma to Worcester;
a place where both the Church and Town are at this day in very flourishing
estate, and the Church especially in good Reparations, which I take ever for
one good argument of a good Bishop; for where the sheep be ragged, and the
folds rotten, there I straight suppose is no very good shepherd: yet, as every
general Rule, has commonly some exceptions, so has this in some places in
England, and many more in Wales, of which I shall in their due place note
somewhat in the ensuing Treatise. And thus much of Worcester.

Of HEREFORD.
John Scory.
OF this twice Bishop Scory I have heard but little, yet it has been my
fortune to read something that will not be amiss to acquaint your Highness
with, that you may see how Satan does sift the lives and doings of English
Bishops with the Quills sometimes of strangers and Forraigners. For whereas
this our English modest writer only reports how he was first Bishop of
Chicester, being but Batchelour; of Divinity, and deprived for no fault but
that he continued not a Bachelor whereupon he fled for Religion (as the phrase
was) till coming home in the year 1560 he was preferred to Hereford: the
French writer stays not there, but tells how that being settled there,
though he professed to be a great enemy to Idolatry, yet in another sense
according to St. Paul, he became a worshipper of Images (not Saints but Angels)
belike he feared some future tempest, and therefore ^his h^ to provide better
for himself then he had at Chichester, so as what with pulling down houses
and selling the Lead, and such loose ends, what with setting up good
husbandries, what with Leases to his Tenants, with all manner of viis et modis,
he heaped together a great Mass of wealth. He that has store of mettle must
have also some dross, and no marvel if this Bishop then according to his
name had much Scoria with this Treasure. A Noble and Honorable counselor and
thenLord President of Wales, hearing so frequent complaints made of him for
oppressions, extortions, symonies, and the like, caused a bil to preferred into
the Star Chamber against him; in which bill was contained such matter as was
enough not only to disgrace him, but to degrade him if it had been accordingly
followed. His Sollicitour of his causes brings him a Copy of the bill, and in
reading it with him seemed not a little dismayed in his behalf much, like to
the servant of Elisha that came trembling to his Master, and told him how they
were beleagred with a huge Army. But this Bishop though not indewed with the
spirit of a Prophet, yet having a spirit that could well see into his profit,
bids his Sollicitour (who was his kinsman, perhaps his sisters brothers son)
to be of good comfort; adding it may be the very words of Elisha, for there are
more of our side then against us. But when his Gehezi (for the comparison suits
better to the man then to the Master) could see as yet no comfortable vision;
The good Bishop did not open his eyes to let him see as Elisha did the Chariots
of fire on the tops of the mountains: but he opened his own bags and showed
him some legions or rather chiliads of Angels, who entering all at once, not
into a herd of Swine, but into the hoard of a Lady that then was potent with
him that was Dominus fac totum, cast such a Cloud into the Star Chamber, that
the bill was never openly heard of after. This or the like and much more to the
like effect writes this French Author of the said Bishop of Hereford, though
the Treatise it self was not specially meant against the Bishop, but against a
temporal Lord of a higher rank that was not a little netled with the same. In
so much as many traveling Gentlemen, and among other this Bishops son was
called in question for the publishing of this book, belike because some
particularities of this matter were discovered that could come from none but
him. But to come again to this Bishop; I hope it shall be no just scandal to
other good Bishops, Judas will have Successors as well as James, and Simon
Magus as well as Simon Peter (and sometime perhaps both in one chair. This man
indeed had been brought up in the age of the Friars that made much of
themselves, and relinquisht their Cells, that read in the old Testament laetare
and fac, but left out bonum; for so he followed the Text in the New Testament,
Make you friends of the wicked Mammon, but left out that part that should have
brought him to everlasting Tabernacles. For if Gods mercy be not the greater, I
fear his friend and he are met in no pleasant mansion, though too too durable,
if the vision of Henry Lord Hunsdon were true, as an honest Gentleman has
often reported it. But all this notwithstanding, his posterity may do well,
for God himself forbids men to say, That the fathers eat sour grapes, and
the childrens teeth be on edge; and if the worst be, the English Proverb may
comfort them, which, lest it want reason, I will cite in rhyme.

It is a saying common, more then civil,
The son is blessed, whose sire is with the devil.
After his decease a great and long suit was held against him about his
dilapidasions, which makes the former report to eem the moreprbable.

Doctor Herbert Westphaling.
There succeeded him a learned and famous Doctor indeed, Dr. Westphaling, who
after he had been a Bishop diverse years, yet to show that good Bishops do not
quite discontinue their studies, but rather increase their knowledge with their
dignity, came to Oxford at her Majesty's last being there, and made an eloquent
and copious Oration before her, for conclusion of the Divinity disputations:
among which one special question, that bred much attention, was this, whether
it be lawful to dissemble in cause of Religion? and one Argument more witty
then pithy, produced by an opponent was this, it is lawful to dispute of
Religion, therefore it is lawful to dissemble, and urging it further, he said
thus, I my self now do that which is lawful, but I do now dissemble. Ergo, it
is lawful to dissemble; at which her Majesty, and all the Auditory were very
merry, I could make a rehearsal of some of the Bishops oration concerning this
question, how he allowed a secrecy, but without dissimulation, a policy but not
without piety, least men taking too much of theSerpent, have too little of the
Dove, but I am sure in all his speech he allowed no equivocation. Howbeit, if I
should-insist long hereon, I might commit the same fault to your Highness, that
the Queen at that time found in him, which was that she thought him too
tedious. For she had sent twice to him to cut short his Oration, because her
self went to make a public speech that evening, but he would not, or as some
told her, could not put himself out of a set methodicall speech, for fear he
should have marred it all, and perhaps confounded his memory. Wherefore she
forbear her speech that day, and more privately the next morning, sending for
the heads of Houses, and a few others she spoke to them in Latin, and among
othere she schooled Doctor Reynolds, for his preciseness, willing him to follow
her Laws, and not to run before them. But it seemed he had forgotten it when he
came last to Hampton Court, so as there he received a better schooling. I may
not forget how the Queen in the midst of her oration, casting her eye aside,
and seeing the old Lord, Treasur er Burleigh standing on his lame feet for want
of a stool, she called in all have for a stool for him, nor would she proceed
in her speech till she saw him provided of one, then fell she to it again, as
if there had been no interruption: upon which one that might be so bold with
her, told her after, that she did it of purpose to show that she could
interrupt her speech, and not be put out, although the Bishop durst not
adventure to do a less matter the day before.

But this Bishop was every way a very sufficient man, and for such esteemed
while he was of Christ-Church. Trifling accidents show as good proof of times,
as the waightiest occasions. Such a one happened this Doctor while he was of the
University as a Scholar of that time has told me, and it was this. There had
been a very sharp frost (such as have been many this year, and a sudden rain or
sleet falling with it from the South-East, had as it were candied all that side
of the Steeple at Christ-church, with an ice mixed with snow, which with the
warmth of the Sun soon after 10. of the clock began to resolve, and Doctor
Westphaling being in the middle of his Sermon, it fell down altogether upon the
Leads of the Church, with such a noise, as if indeed it would have thrown down
the whole Church. The people (as in sudden terrors is usual) filled all with
tumult, and each man hasted to be gone^ so fast that they hindered one another.
He first kneeling down, and recommending himself to God, as in the apprehension
of a sudden danger, straight rose again, and with so cheerful, both voice and
countenance, encouraged them as they all returned, and he quietly finished his
Sermon. But his chief praise I reserve for the last, which was this; for all
such benefices as either were in his own gift, or fell into his hand by Lapse,
which were not few, and some of great value, he neither respected Letters nor
commendations of Lords nor Knights, nor Wife nor friends in preferment of any
man, but only their sufficiency and their good conversation, so as to sue for
a benefice unto him, was rather a means to miss then to attain it.

Doctor Robert Bennet.
This Bishop was preferred to this place since my Author wrote his Catalogue,
so as he is not therein specified; yet must I not do him that wrong to omit in
this relation. This is he (if your Highness do remember it) of whom his Majesty
said, if he were to choose a Bishop by the aspect, he would choose him of all the
men he had seen, for a grave reverent and pleasing countenance. Concurring
herein in a sort, though by contraries with the judgment of Henry the fou^rth
Emperor, who coming from hunting one day (as Malmesbury writes) went for
devotion sake into a Church, where a very ill-favored faced Priest was at
service. The Emperor thinking his virtues suited his visage, said to himself,
how can God like of so ugly a fellows service. But it fortuned at that instant,
the Priests boy mumbling of that versicle in the hundred Psalm, Ipso nos fecit
and non ipsi nos, and because he pronounced it not plainly, the Priest reproved
him, and repeated it again, aloud, Ipse nos fecit and non ipsi nos, which the
Emperor applying to his own Cogitation, thought the Priest to have some
prophetical spirit, and fromthat time forward esteemed him greatly, and made
him a Bishop. Thus that Bishop, though he could not set so good a face on it,
yet perhaps he got as good a Bishopric. But to come to our Bishop whom my self
knew in Cambridge, a Master of Art, and a proper active man, and played well at
Tennis; and after that, when he came to be Batchellor of Divinity, he would
toss an Argument in the Schools, better then a Ball in the Tennis-court. A
grave Doctor yet living, and his ancient alluding to his Name in their
disputation, called him Erudite Benedicte, and gave him for his outward, as
well as inward Ornaments great commendation. He became after Chaplain to the
Lord Treasurer Burleigh, who was very curious, and no less fortunate in the
choice of his Chaplains, and they no less happy in the choice of their Patron,
as Mr. Day after Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop I now speak of Doctor Neale
now Dean of Westminster, and diverse others.

Chichester.
I Find in former ages many unlearned and unfit men, by favor recommended to
Bishoprics, but of a man recommended by the King, and refused by the Clergy,
only for his want of Learning, I think there is but one Example, and that was
one Robert Paslew in the time of Hen. 3. which Prince is no less to be
commended for admitting the refusal, then they for refusing; but yet in
speaking of learned Bishops, this Church may say their last have been their
best. Doctor Watson your Highness can remember his Majesty's Almoner, he was a
very good Preacher, preferred by the Queen first, to the Deanery of Bristol,
where he was well beloved; and after to Chichester, where he was more honored,
if not more beloved, for the course of his life, and cause of his death, I
might in some sort compare him to Bishop Vaughan, late of London, he grew
somewhat corpulent, and having been sick, and but newly recovered, adventured
to travel to wait in his place, and so by recidivation he dyed.

Doctor Andrews.
His Majesty having a great desire to prefer Doctor Andrews, then Dean of
Westminster, made special choice of him to succeed him as well in the
Bishopric as the Aumnership, and I suppose if Hen. the 3d his Chaplain had
been so good a Scholar, he had not been refused for his Learning. This Bishop
your Highness knows so well, and have heard him so often, as it may be you
think it needless to hear more of him. But I will be bold to say your Highness
does but half know him, for the virtues that are not seen in him, are more and
greater then those that are seen, I will therefore play the blab so far, that
your Higlmess may know him better. He was born in London, and trained up in the
School of that famous Mulcaster, and for the special towardness was found in
him in very young years, he was not only favored, but had liberal
exhibition given him by a great Councellor of those times, as I shall note
hereafter. The course of his study was not as most men's are in these times, to
get a little superficial fight in Divinity, by reading two or three of the new
writers, and straight take Orders, and up into the Pulpit. Of which kind of men
a Reverent Bishop yet living said as properly as pleasantly, when one told of a
young man that preached twice every Lords day, beside some exercising in the
Week days, it may be (says he) he does talk so often, but I doubt he does not
preach. And to the like effect the late Queen said to the same Bishop, when she
had on the Friday heard one of those talking Preachers much commended to her by
some body, and the Sunday after heard a well labored Sermon that smelt on the
Candle, I pray said the, let me have your bosom Sermons, rather then your
lip-Sermons; for when the Preacher takes pains, the Auditor takes profit. But
to come to Doctor Andrews that gathered before he did spend, reading both new
Writers and old Writers, not as tasting but as disgesting them, and finding
according to our Saviors saying. (...) the old to be more profitable, at last
his sufficiency could be no longer concealed. But as an industrious Merchant
that secretly and diligently follows his Trade with small show, till his
wealth being grown so great, it can be no longer hidden, is then called on for
Subsidies and Loans, and public services: so did this man's excellencies
suddenly break forth. His Patron that studied projects of policy, as much as
precepts of piety, hearing of his fame, and meaning to make use thereof, sent
for him (as I have credibly heard) and dealt earnestly with him, to hold up a
side that was even then falling, and to maintain certain state points of
Puritanisme. But he had too much of the (...) in him to be scared with a
Counselors frown, or blown aside with his breath, answered him plainly, they
were not only against his Learning, but his Conscience. The Councellor seeing
this man would be no Friar Pinhie (to be taught in a Closet what he should say
at Paul's) dismissed him with some disdain for the time; but afterward did the
more reverence his integrity and honesty, and became no hinderer to his ensuing
preferments. Of these one was a Prebend in Paul's, belonging to him, they call
the Confessor or Confessioner, a place notoriously abused in time of Popery by
their tyranny and superstitition; but now of late by a contrary extreme too
much forgotten and neglected: while he held this place, his manner was,
especially in Lent time, to walk duly at certain hours, in one of the Isles of
the Church, that if any came to him for spiritual advice and comfort, as some
did, though not many, he might impart it to them. This Custom being agreeable
to Scripture, and Fathers, expressed and required in a sort in the Communion
Book, not repugning the 39 Articles, and no less approved by Calvin in his
Institutions, yet was quarreled with by diverse (upon occasion of some Sermons
of his) as a point of Popery. The like scandal was taken of some, though not
given by him, for his reverent speaking of the highest Mystery of our Faith and
heavenly food the Lords Supper, which some are so stiff in their knees, or
rather in their hearts, that they hold it Idolarry to receive that kneeling.
But whatsoever such barked at, he ever kept one tenor of life and Doctrine
Exemplar and unreproveable.

Two special things I have observed in his Preaching, that I may not omit to
speak of. One to raise a joint reverence to God and the Prince, to spiritual
and civil Magistrate, by uniting and not severing them.

The other to lead to amendment of Life, and to good works, the fruits of true
Repentance.

Of the first kind, he made a Sermon before the Queen long since, which was
most famous of this Text. Thou leddest thy people like Sheep by the hands of
Moses and Aaron. Which Sermon, (though courteous ears are commonly so open, as
it goes in at one ear, and out at the other) yet it left an Aculeus behind in
many of all sorts. And Henry Noel one of the greatest Gallants of those times,
swear as he was a Gentleman, he never heard man speak with such a spirit. And
the like to this was his Sermon before the King, of two silver Trumpets to be
made of one piece. Of the second kind I may say all his Sermons are, but I will
mentition but his last, that I heard the fifth of the last November, which
Sermon I could wish ever to read upon that day. When the Lord turned the
Captivity of Sion, etc. And I never saw his Majesty more sweetly affected with
any Sermon then with that. But to conclude, I persuade my self, that whenever
it shall please God to give the King means, with consent of his confederate
Princes to make that great peace which his blessed word Beati Pacifici seems
to promise, I mean the ending of this great Schism in the Church of God,
procured as much by ambition, as by superstition; This reverent Prelate will be
found one of the ablest, not of England only, but of Europe, to set the course
for composing the controversies, which I speak not to add reputation to his
sufficiency by my judgment; but rather to win credit to my judgment by his
sufficiency. And whereas I know some that have known him so long as I have, yet
have heard and believe no less of his Learning then I speak, find fault that
he is not so apt to deliver his resolution upon every question moved as they
could wish, who if they be not quickly resolved of that they ask, will quickly
resolve not to care for it. I say this Cunctation is the mean between
Precipitation and Procrastination, and is specially commended by the Apostle
St. James, as I have heard him allege it, Sit omnis homo (...) tardus ad
loquendum, tardus ad iram.

Rochester.
Doctor Barlow.
THis Bishopric having been noted in Hen. the 3d his time, to have been one of
the poorest of England, has I suppose the less been impoverished in the
spoiling times. The grand spoylers being of the mind of some Tailors, that when
their allowance of stuff was most scant, they would make the Garment the
Larger. ThisCity in these last 100 years, has had 14 Bishops, of which one was
a Cardinal, two were Archbishops, and I take it but one has dyed Bishop, and
that was the last before this whose Name was Young, but lived to be very old,
and desired not to remove. His Successor Doctor Bar low is one of they oungest
in age, but one of the ripest in learning of all his predecessors, since Bishop
Fisher that had ill luck with his learning, to die upon Tower Hill. There are
so many printed testimonies of his sufficiency, as I need say the less of it;
but it is like he shall not abide there long. Of all his Sermons he preached
before Queen Elizabeth, which were many, and very good. One that she liked
exceedingly was of the Plough, of which she said, Barlows Text might seem taken
from the Cart, but his talk may teach you all in the Court. He made a Sermon
not long after that at Paul's, which man, especially Puritans, did much mislike,
and for that cause call it (alleging to his name) the Barley Loaf, not marking
how much honor they give it in their scorn, by example, both of the old
Testament and new. In the old Testament, the Barley Loaf signified Gedeons
sword, ordained to destroy the wicked. In the new, by the blessing of our
Savior, that fed more thousands of honest men then this offended.

Of OXENFORD.
Doctor Underhill.
FRom Rochester I should go a long pilgrimage to St. David's in Wales, save I
must bait a little out of my way at four new Bishoprics erected by King Henry
the eighth of famous memory, and therefore I hope not ordained to be dissolved
of a Henry the ninth of future and fortunate expectation; I say I will but bait
especially at Oxford, lest I be baited, if I stay too long, for I know this
discourse is to some as Unguis in ulcere. This Bishopric being but 66 years
since erected, had two Bishops in 26 years, and then continued void 21.
years, what time of pure devotion to the Leases that would yield good Fines, a
great person recommended Doctor Underhill to this place, persuading him to take
it, as in the way to a better; but God knows it was out of his way every way.
For ere his First Fruits were paid, he died (as I heard at Greenwich, in much
discontent and poverty; yet his preferrer to seem to do some favor to the
University of Oxford, for recompense of the spoil done on the Bishopric of
Oxford, erected a new solemn lecture there at his own charge, which Doctor
Reynolds did read, at which Lecture I happened, once to be present with the
Founder, where we were taught, Nihil and non,. as elsewhere I have at large
showed to your Highness. But though the many-headed beast, the multitude was
bleared with this bounty; yet the Scholars that were more Nasuti, oculati and
Cordati, did smell, and see, and say, that this was but to steal a goose, and
stick a feather. And indeed this was the true Theorique and Practique of
Puritanisme. One impugning the authority of Bishops secretly, by such Lectures;
the other impoverishing their Livings openly by such Leases.

After the Bishop Underhill was laid under the earth, I think the Sea of Oxford
would have been drowned in the Sea of Oblivion, if his Majesty, whose soul
abhors all sacrilege had not supplied it with the good Father that now holds
it, Doctor John Bridges, a man whose Volumes in Prose and Verse give sufficiend
testimony of his industry, though for mine own part I am grown an unfit praiser
of Poetry, having taken such a surfeit of it in my youth, that I think now, a
gray head and a verse do not agree together, and much less a grave matter,
and a verse. For the reputation of Poetry is so altered by the iniquity of the
times, that whereas it was wont to make simple folk believe some things that
were false, now it makes our great wise men to doubt of things that be true.
When the Creed was first put into English verse, as it is now sung in the
Church, the descending of Christ into Hell, was never questioned, but since it
has been sung 50 year or more,

His Spirit did after this descend into the lower parts
To them that long in darkness were, the true light of our hearts.
The doubt that was made of the latter of these two verses, has caused the
truth of the former to be called in question.

Wherefore though I grant that Psalms and Hymns may, and perhaps ought to be in
verse as good Linguists affirm, Moses and David's Psalms to be originally, yet
I am almost of opinion that one ought to abjure all Poetry when he comes to
Divinity. But not derogating herein from the travels of my betters and the
Judgment of mine Elders I proceed or rather post to my next stage.

OF GLOUCESTER.
Dr. Thomson.
AT Gloucester I shall at this time make a very short bait, the last Bishop
thereof being but lately removed to London, and the present Bishop scant yet
warm in his seat; yet this I must say, that I have heard some students of good
judgment that knew him in Oxford affirm, that in his very young years he
gave a great hope and good presage of his future excellency, having a rare gift
ex tempore in all his School exercises, and such a happy wit to make use of
all occurrents to his purpose, as if he had not taken the occasions, as they
fell out by accident, but rather bespoken such pretty accidents to fall out to
give him the occasions. I have often heard him before Queen Elizabeth, and it
was not possible to deliver sounder matter nor with better method, for which
cause he was greatly respected and reverenced at the Court. But for his latter
Sermon before the two most magnificent Kings, your Highness Father and Uncle,
I cannot praise him; no, for I am a Cambridge man, but I can envy him, that in
two judgments, omni exceptione majoribus* did carry the commendation of the
pure Latin Language (peculiar as I thought unto Cambridge) to her younger
sister of Oxford; and thus much for him whose virtues no doubt will give matter
for some further Relation under some other title hereafter.

Of PETERBOROUGH.
Dr. Thomas Dove.
I should do both this worthy Prelate and my self much wrong, if I should not
commend him for many good parts, being one whom I have long known to have been
greatly respected and favored by the late Queen; and no less liked and
approved in the more learned judgment of his Majesty. How beit the ground on
which I would build his chief praise (to some of the Aristarchy and sour
censures of these days, requires first an Apology. For I remember that even
in Cambridge, about twenty five years since, and I am sure he remembers it too)
a question arose among the Divines scarce fit for the Schools, less fit for
the Pulpit, yet was it both handled and determined in the Pulpit, whether
Rhetorical Figures and Tropes, and other artificial ornaments of speech taken
from profane authors, as sentences, adages, and such like, might be used in
Sermons, and not rather the plain naked truth delivered out of the word of
God. The precise fort, that would have the Word, and Church and all go naked,
saving some Apron perhaps of Fig Leaves, were not only earnest but bitter
against the use of all such humane, or (as they call them) profane helps,
calling them paintings fitter for Strumpets, then for chaste Matrons. But the
graver and more Orthodox were of the other opinion, and namely my learned Tutor
Doctor Flemning, by appointment of the heads of the Colleges in an excellent
Sermon determined the controversy. That seeing now the extraordinary gift,
first of tongues, then of miracles was ceased, and that knowledge is not now
Infusa but Acquisita, we should not despise the help of any humane learning,
as neither St. Paul did, who used the sentences of Poets, and has many
excellent Tropes, with exaggerations and exclamations in his Epistles; for
chastity does not abhor all ornaments, for Judeth did attire her head as
curiously as Jesabel, etc.

About twelve years after this, the very same question in the same manner was
canvased at Oxford, and determined in the Pulpit by Dr. House against Doctor
Reynolds, who held the other opinion. But upon occasion of this Sermon, at
which my brother (that had been his scholar) and my self happened both to be
present; he retracted to us his opinion, or rather disclaimed, as my Lord of
Duresme that now is (but then Dean of Christ-church) does well remember. This
opinion then being sound, that Eloquence may serve as an handmaid, and Tropes
and Figures, as Jewels and Ornaments to this chaste Matron, Divinity; I must
say as I began, that his Sermons are as well attended and adorned in this kind,
and as plentifully as any of his predecessors have been, or his successors are
like to be; and that they were wont so to be long since suffices this
testimony, that her Majesty that last reigned when she first heard him, said,
she thought the holy Ghost was descecded again in this Dove.

Of BRISTOL.
Dr. John Thornbury.
BRistoll being a Bishopric of the later erection, namely but 66. years since,
no marvel it never had any Bishop thereof Cannonized for a Saint, yet it
cannot be denied since to have had one Holyman; and if copulation with a Bishop
might make them holy, it has had also in his short time more then one holy
woman. Ispent a roving shaft on Fletchers second Marriage, I would I could as
well pluck out the Thorn of Doctor Thornburies first Marriage out of every
man's conscience that have taken a scandal of his second. For my part
whatsoever I think in my private, it becoms us not to Judge our Judges, the
Customs and Laws of some Countries differ from other, and sometimes are
changed and mended in the same, as this case of divorce is most godly reformed
in ours, and as Vincentius Lirinensis says well of St. Cyprian who had before
the Council of Carthage defended rebaptizing. The Author of this error, says
he, is no doubt in heaven, the followers and practifers of it now go to hell,
so I may say of this Bishop, his remarriage may be pardoned, Et in hoc saeculo
et in futuro, but he that shall so do, again may be met with in hoc saeculo.
But it was the Bishop of Limbrick in Ireland and not the Bishop of Bristoll in
England that thus married; what? does this lessen the scandal? I suppose it
does. For I dare affirm, that most of that Diocese are so well catechized, as
they think it as great a scandal for their Bishop, (yea rather greater) to
have one wife as to have two, and though for Lay men's Marriage, their Priests
tell them it is a holy Sacrament in them (which they count a Sacrilege in a
Bishop) and they confer to them out of St. Paul (...), there is a great
Sacrament, yet their people and some of their Peers also regard it as slightly,
and dissolve it more uncivilly then if it were but a civil contract, for which
they draw not only by their bastardies and bigamies many apparent scourges of
God the heavenly Father, but also a peculiar penance unto their Nation of one
fasting day extraordinary from their holy father the Pope. But setting aside
this misfortune rather then fault, which is God and the King pardon him for,
who shall impute to him? for other matters, I have reason to think him and his
in Gods and the Kings favor. He and his whole family had a miraculous escape
in Ireland, which I would all our Bishops did know* that they might remember to
keep their houses in better reparations. Lying in an old Castle in Ireland in a
large room, partitioned but with sheets or curtens, his wife, children, and
servants, in effect a whole family; In the dead time of the night, the floor
over head being earth and plaster, as in many places is used, overcharged with
weight, fell wholly down together, and crushing all to pieces that was above
two foot high as cupbords, tables, forms, stools, rested at last upon
certain chests, as God would have it, and hurt no living creature. He did many
good services in Ireland for our Queen and State, for which he was thought
worthy of a better aboade, then in that Purgatory.

He has very good understanding of that Country, and if some others, who are
since gone out of this world, had been as willing as he to have reported to his
Majesty the diseases of that Country and the fittest cures, it may be it would
not in long time have needed those desperate remedies of Secandum and Vrendum,
as sharp to the Surgeons oftentimes as to the Patients. But to conclude, of
this Bishop, whom I love more then I praise, he is not unfurnisht of Learning,
of Wisdom, of Courage and other as well Episcopal as temporal panoplia or
furniture beseeming a gentleman, a Dean, and a Bishop.

Of St. DAVID'S,
and the present Bishop, Dr. Anthony Rudd.
OF this ancient Bishopric or rather Archbishopric of St. David's (as the old
true Brittans do call it) in latter called Menevia, and the Bishop Menevensis,
I was told of an old indulgence granted by Calixtus the second, of a very
special note, ascribing thereby great holiness to this place, viz. that two
pilgrimages to St. David's should be equal in merit to one pilgrimage to Rome,
expressed since for brevities sake by some Friar in a ryming verse, Roma semel
quantum, Bis dat Menevia tantum. This place has yielded many excellent
Bishops, as well for good Learning as good life, and for abstinence miraculous,
if we believe stories that 33. Bishops successively did eat no flesh. I can
add little of the Bishops save of him that now lives whom if I knew not, yet
by his Look I should guess to be a grave and austere man, even like St. David
himself, but knowing him as I do, he was in more possibility to have proved
like to St. John Baptist in my opinion. There is almost none that waited in
Queen Elizabeth's Court and observed any thing, but can tell, that it pleased
her very much to seem, to be thought, and to be told that she looked young.
The Majesty and gravity of a Scepter borne 44. years could not alter that
nature of a woman in her; This notwithstanding, this good Bishop being
appointed to Preach before her in the Lent of the year 1596, the Court then
lying at Richmond, wishing in a godly zeal, as well became him, that she
should think sometime of Mortality, being then 63. years of age, he took this
text fit for that purpose out of the Psalms, Psalm. 90. verse. 12. O teach us to
number our days, that we may incline our heart unto wisdom, which Text he
handled so well, so learnedly, and so respectively, as I dare undertake and so
should I if I had not been somewhat better acquainted with the humor, that it
would have well pleased her, or at least no way offended her. But when he had
spoken a while of some sacred and mystical numbers, as three for the Trinity,
three times three for the heavenly Hierarchy seven for the Sabbath, and seven
times seven for a Jubilee; and lastly (I do not deliver it so handsomely as he
brought it in) seven times nine for the grand Climactericall year; she
perceiving whereto it tended began to be trouled with it. The Bishop
discovering all was not well, for the Pulpit stands there Vis a vis to the
Closet, he fell to Treat of some more plausible numbers, as of the number 666.
making Latinus with which he said he could prove the Pope to be Antichrist
also, of the fatal number of 88. which being so long before spoken of for a
dangerous year, yet it has pleased God that year not only to preserve her
but to give her a famous victory, against the united Forces of Rome and Spain;
and so he said there was no doubt but she should pass this year also and many
more, if she would in her meditations and Soliloquies with God, as he doubted
not she often did, and would say thus and thus. So making indeed an excellent
prayer by way of Prosopopeia in her Majesty's person acknowledging Gods great
graces and benefits, and praying devoutly for the continuance of them, but
withal interlarding it with some passages of Scripture that touch the
infirmities of age; as that of Ecclesiastes 12. When the Grynders shall be few
in number, and they wax dark that look out of the windows etc. and the
Daughters of singing shall be abased: and more to like purpose, he concluded
his Sermon. The Queen as the manner was opened the window, but she was so far
from giving him thanks or good countenance, that she said plainly he should
have kept his Arithmetic for himself, but I see said she the greatest Clerks
are not the wisest men, and so went away for the time discontented. The Lord
Keeper Puckering though reverencing the man much in his particular, yet for the
present to assuage the Queens displeasure, commanded him to keep his house for
a time, which he did. But of a truth her Majesty showed no ill nature in this,
for within three days after she was not only displeased at his restraint, but
in my hearing rebuked a Lady yet living for speaking scornefully of him and his
Sermon. Only to show how the good Bishop was deceived in supposing she was so
decayed in her limbs and senses as himself perhaps and other of that age were
wont to be; she said she thankt God that neither her stomach nor strength, nor
her voice for singing nor fingring Instruments; nor lastly, her sight was any
whit decayed, and to prove the last before us all she produced a little Jewel
that had an inscription of very small Letters, and offered it first to my Lord
of Worcester, and then to Sir James Crofts to read, and both protested bona
fide that they could not, yet the Queen her self did find out the Poesy, and
made her self merry with the standers by upon it; and thus much for St.
David's. Yet I have been told of a strange story of a huge weight and bigness
that has a pretty quality, namely, that with one finger you may stir it, yet
twenty yoke of Oxen cannot remove it; but I rather think it is mistaken, for
the stone Mr. Cambden writes of is near Pensance in your Country of Cornwall,
called Mam amber, of which he writes page 136. has the very like quality.

Of LANDAFF.
Doctor Francis Godwin.
It is doubtless a wonderful antiquity that my Author produces of Landaff,
that it professed Christianity, and had a Church for Christian Religion in the
year of our Lord 180. But alas, for a man to boast of great Nobility, and go
in ragged clothes, and a Church to be praised for great antiquity, and make
ruinous shows, is in mine opinion according to the vulgar proverb, a great
boast and a small roast. But by this Authors relation it appears, this roast
was so marred by an ill Cook, as by a worse Kitchen; for in the year 1545.
being the 37 year of Henry the eight, Doctor Kitchen being made of an idle
Abbot, a bufie Bishop, and wading through those hazardous times that ensued
till the first year of Queen Elizabeth, to save himself was content to
spoil his Bishopric; Satan having in those days more care to sift the
Bishoppricks then the Bishops, else how was it possible for a man of that rank
to sing, Cantate domino canticum novum four times in fourteen years, and never
sing out of tune, if he had not loved the Kitchen better then the Church.
Howbeit, though he might seem for name sake to favor the Kitchen, yet in
spoiling that sea he was as little friend to the Kitchen as the rest, spoiling
the woods and good provisions that should have warmed it, which gave occasion
to Doctor Babbington, now Bishop of Worcester, to call it Aph without Land, and
Doctor Morgan after to remove to Saint Assaph, from thence not for name sake,
but for his own name sake, that is More-gaine: At what time the present Bishop
I now speak of, being then Sub-Deane of Exeter, Doctor Francis Godwin, having
that year newly published this work, she gave him presently this Bishopric,
not full two months vacant, and would as willingly have given him a much
better in her own disposition, as may well appear in that she gave Doctor
Cooper the Bishopric of Lincoln^, only for making a Dictionary, or rather but
for mending that which Sir Thomas Eliot had made before. Of this Bishop
therefore I may speak sparingly, yea, rather spare all speech, considering
that every leaf of his worthy work, is a sufficient testimony of his virtuous
mind, unfatigable industry, and infinite reading; for even as we see commonly,
those Gentlemen that are well descended, and better bred, are most careful to
preserve the true memory and pedigree of their Ancestors, which the base and
ignorant, because they could not conserve, will seem to condemn: So this
worthy Bishop, collecting so diligently, and relating so faithfully the
succession and lives of so many of our Christian most reverend Bishops in
former ages, does prove himself more by spiritual, then carnal birth, to
come of those Ancestors, of whom it was long before prophesied by the princely
Prophet, In stead of thy Fathers, thou shall have Children whom thou shall make
Princes in all places. Though the policy of these latter times has sought to
make our Fathers all but Children, and younger brothers (as they say) and to
disinherit them of their patrimony; he deserves therefore a pen much better
then mine, and equal to his own, to do that for him he has done for others.
Before his going to Ex eter, I had some acquaintance with him, and have heard
him preach more then once at our Assizes and else where, his manner was to be
sharp against the Vices most abounding in that time, Sacrilege Symony,
contempt of God in his Ministers, and want of Charity. Amongst other of his
Sermons, preaching once of Dives and Lazarus, ^he said, that though the
Scriptures had not expressed plainly who Dives was, yet by his clothes and his
face he might be bold to affirm, he was at the least a Justice of Peace, and
perhaps of Oyer and Terminer too. This speech was so ill taken by some guilty
conscience, that a great matter was enforced to be made of it, that it was a
dangerous and seditious speech; and why? forsooth because it was a dear year;
but see how a man's enemies sometimes do him as much good as his friends: their
fond accusation and his discreet justification made him both better known, and
more respected by them that were able to do him most good. Since this he has
lived in so remote places from my occasions, first at Exeter, and then beyond
sea in Wales, that I am become almost a stranger to his person, but yet I am
grown better acquainted with his writings both in Latin and English, and
namely by this his Catalogue, which having read first with great contentment to
my self; I have since for your Highness pleasure perused again, and presumed to
add some notes, and a table, by way of Alphabet, for the more ready finding
of most memorable matters, beside a supply of such as were in his edition
wanting; of whom finding himself to be one, that coming in so worthily was
unworthy to be left out. I give him here in his due place his more due
commendation, which if I should fortune upon some envy to have forborne, or
upon judgment to have omitted, as a praise needless where the whole work is
his praise, he might worthily have said as much of me, as I wrote of a certain
Poetaster some years paft, who left me out of the bead-roul of some riming
paper blotters that he called Poets.

Of Poets Balbus reckoning up a table,
does boast he makes their names more honorable,
And nere vouchsafing me to name at all,
he says he knows he grieved me to the gall.
I galled? simple soul; no, thou art gulled
to think I prize the praise of such a dull-head,
Whose verse (...) guilty of some b^dge or blame,
Let them seek testimonialls of their fame.
Then learn untaught, then learn ye envious Elves,
No Books are praised, that praise not most themselves.
And thus much be said for the Province of Canterbury and the Bishops of the
several Diocesses thereof.
There follows now to say somewhat also of the Province of York, which I shall
endeavor to accomplish with like brevity and fidelity.
Of the Archbishops of York,
and first of Doctor Thomas Young.
Concerning the Archbishops of York that have been in the former ages, whose
lives are particularly-related by this Author, it seems to me a matter worthy
some note, that there have been of them, for devotion and piety, as holy, for
blood and nobility, as high, of wealth and ability as huge, as any not only
of England but of Europe. Now that every age may have his excellency, I will
say of this our age, I mean for some fifty years past, in which there has
bin seven Archbishops of York, that these have been as excellent in courage,
in learning, and eloquence; for Doctor Nicholas Heath whom her late Majesty
found both Archbishop and Chancellor (though she did take or rather receive
both from him) yet did she ever gratefully acknowledge both his courage and
fidelity showed in her cause, and used no man of his Religion so graciously. Of
Archbishop Grindall I have spoken before, and in his due place given him his
due praise; now I am to add a word or two of Archbishop Young, that in the
third year of Queen Elizabeth was made Archbishop. He was first Bishop of
Saint David's, and either next or very soon after Bishop Farrar, who among other
articles that were alleged against him, had one that I think was never
alleged against Clergyman or Layman before, and that was for riding on a
Scottish saddle; but this Bishop walked more warily then that Bishop did ride,
so as this came to live in a state when the other died at a stake: and how great
soever his honor was in being both Archbishop and President, he left one
president that too many are apt to follow, which was the pulling down of a
goodly Hall, for the greediness of the Lead that covered it. Plumbi faeda
fames. A drossie desire and unworthy part, with which he stained the reputation
of learning and religion, that was before ascribed to him, and although by
means of some great friend this was less spoken of in his life time then
after, yet if I have been rightly informed, even by that he was made no great
gainer. True it is, he purchased great things of the Earl of Arundell, and how
his heirs thrive with it, I do not hear, but there is a perilous verse,
Demale quaesitis vix gaudet tertius baeres. For my own part I must confess,
that where I find that same destroying and reviving spirit, that in the
Apocalypse is named in Hebrew Abaddon, and sounds in my English care and heart,
a bad one, I suspect there is little true virtue or godliness harbored in that
breast. But if he were finely beguiled of all this Lead by his great friend
that would be bold with him, I imagine that none that hears it will much lament
it; at a venture, I will tell your Highness the tale that I heard, from as
good a man as I tell it of, only because he named not the parties, I cannot
precisely affirm it was this man, but I dare affirm this man was as worthy of
it. A great Lord in the Court in those days sent to a great Prelate in the
North to borrow 1000 li. of him: The Prelate protested on his faith (I think
not a justifying faith) that he was not able to do it, but if he were, he
would be very willing, acknowledging great favors of the said Lord, and
sending some present enough perhaps to pay for the use of 1000 li. The noble
man that had a good espyall both North and South, hearing of a certain Ship
laden with lead, belonging to this Prelate, that came to be sold at London,
even as it came to land, sends for the Prelates Agent, shows him his Lords
Letter and Protestation under his hand, proves the ability demonstrable by the
Lead, and so by treaty or terror, or treachery of the servant, made him betray
his Master for 1000 li.

Doctor Edwin Sands.
As those that sail from Flanders or Ireland, to London or Bristoll, being
past the tempestuous and broken seas, and now in sight of the Harbor, yet even
their fear to miscarry sometime by mistaking the Channel, are often so perplexed,
as one bids to set sail again, another advises to cast Anchor; so is it now
with me, drawing toward the end of this my short and voluntary voyage: I
remember a ship of London once that having past the Goodwin Sands very safe,
and sailing on this side Black-wall to come up to Ratcliefe, struck on the
black Rock at the point below Greenwich, and was almost cast away. I have, as
your Highness sees past already the Godwins, if I can as well pass over this
E'dwin Sands, I will go roamer of Greenwich Rock, not forgetting to veil as
becomes me in passing by, and if the spring Tide serve, come to Anchor about
Richmond. For I am entering now to write of an Archbishop, who though he dyed
twenty years since in that Anno mirabili of 88. yet he lives still in his
offspring, having a son of his name that both speaks and writes admirably,
whose profession, though it be not of Religion as his fathers was, yet never
did his fathers preaching show better what to follow, then his writings show
what to shun; if my Pen therefore should wrong his father, his Pen no less
might wrong me. I must appeal therefore for my justification in this point to
the most indifferent censurers, and to yours especially sweet Prince, for whose
fake I write; for ifI should let pass a matter so notorious as that of this
Archbishop of York and Sir Robert Stapleton, it were so wilful an omission
as every one might accuse me of; and if I should speak of either partially and
against my own conscience and knowledge, I should much more accuse my self.
Here then is the Scylla and Carybdis that I sail between, and if I fail of
my right course, I shall be driven to say as a filly preacher did upon an
unlike occasion, and much less to his purpose when he happened unawares to have
a more learned Auditory then he expected.

Incidi in ancillam cupiens vitare Caribden.
But the Story that I make this long introduction unto is shortly this. About
25. years fince there was great kindness, and had long continued between
Archbishop Sands and Sir Robert Stapleton a Knight of Yorkshire, whom your
Highness has often seen, who in those days for a man well spoken, properly
seen in Languages, a comely and goodly Personage, had scant an equal, and
(except Sir Philip Sidney) no superior in England: for which Reasons the
Archbishop of all his Neighbors and Countrymen, did make a special account
of him. About the year 83. also he was High-Sheriffe of Yorkshire, and met the
Judges with seven score men in suitable Liveries, and being at this time
likewise a Widdower, he wooed and won, and wedded soon after, one of the best
reputed Widows in the West of England. In this felicity he sailed with full
sails, but somewhat too high, and no less the Archbishop in like prosperity
of wealth, and friends and Children, yet seeming above all, to joy in the
friendship of this Knight, who answered in all good correspondence, not only
of outward complement, but inward comfort; but well said the Spanish Poet,

Nulli te facias nimis sodalem,
Gaudebis minus and minus. dolebis.
Too much Companion make your self to none,
Your joy will be the less, and less your moan.
These two so friendly Neighbors and Consorts swimming in this Calm of
content, at last happened to fall foul one on another by this occasion. The
Knight in his great good fortunes, having as great defigns among other things,
had laid the foundation of a fair house, or rather Palace, the model whereof he
had brought out of Italy, which house he intended to name Stapletons stay; and
for that cause invited the Archbishop in good kindness to see it, and
requested him for the more credit, and as it were, blessing to the house, that
his grace would give it the foresaid name. But when the Archbishop had fully
beheld it, and in his Judgment found it fitter for a Lord Treasurer of
England, then for a Knight of Yorkshire. He said to him, would you have me
call this intended House Stapletons Stay. Nay rather let me say to you, stay
Stapleton; for if you go forward to set up this House, it will pull you down.
How often a man loses a friend with a jest, and how grievous it is for a man's
vanity to be crossed in the humor. This speech of my Lords that I should think,
intended friendly, uttered faithfully, and applied even fatherly unto him, he
took in so deep disdain and despite, that howsoever he smothered it for the
present, from that time forward he sought a mean to revenge it. And wanting
neither wit to devise, nor courage to execute his design, he found out, or at
least he supposed he had found a stratagem, not only to wreak this scorn on
the good Bishop that mistrusted nothing, but also to make the old man's purse
pay for the finishing of the new house. He acquaints him with an Officer in my
Lords house, some malecontent that had been denied a Lease. These two devise,
that when my Lord should lie next at Doncaster, where the Hostess of the house
having been (formerly I suppose) Mistress Sands Maid, was bold sometimes to
bring his Lordship a Cawdle to his Beds side (for in charity I may surmise no
worse) Sir Robert should also by chance come and host at the same house. This
bad Wife and her good man are made partakers and parties of this stratagem, her
part was but a naked part, viz. to slip into my Lords Bed in her smock, mine
Host must suddenly be jealous, and swear that he holds his reputation, though
he be but a poor man, more dear then that he can endure such an indignity, and
thereupon calls Sir Robert Stapleton, brings him to the Bishops Chamber in his
Nightgown, takes them in bed together with no small exclamation. The Knight
that acted his part with most art, and leaft suspicion, takes great pains to
pacify the Host, conjures all that were admitted to secrecy and silence, and
sending all to their Lodgings without tumult, asks of my Lord how this came
to pass. The Bishop tells him with a great Protestation, that he was betrayed
by his man and his Host, little suspecting the Knight to be of the Quorum. The
Knight sooths him in all he said, condoles the great mischance, is sorrowful
for the danger, and careful for the honor of the Bishop, and specially the
Church.

Proh superi quantum mortalia pecior a caecae Noctis habent? ipso sceleris
molimine (Miles) Creditur esse pius. The distressed Archbishop distrusting no
fraud in him, asks his advise in this disaster, and following his counsel
from time to time, gives the Host a piece of money, the false Officer a Farm,
and the Knight for his travail in this matter many friendly recompenses. But
when he found after all this smoothing and soothing, that he grew so bold at
last to press him beyond all good manner, for the good Manor of Soothwell,
then he found that in sooth all was not well, and was even compelled too late,
to that he might much better have done much sooner, viz. To complain to the
Lords of the Council, and to his ancient and dear friend, the Earl of Leicester
(for whose Father he had almost lost his life) by whose help, he got them
called to the Star Chamber. Ore tenus, where they were for this conspiracy
convicted, fined and imprisoned. The fame, or rather the infamy of this matter
specially before their conviction was far and diversely spread, according as the
Reporters favored or disfavoured either: and the friends of each side had
learned their tale so perfect, that many long time after, held the first
impression they had received, notwithstanding the censure and sentence in the
Starr-chamber. Part whereof being, that the Knight should publicly acknowledge
how he had slandered the Archbishop, which he did in words conceived to that
purpose accordingly, yet his friends gave out, that all the while he carried a
long Whetstone hanging out at the Pocket of his sleeve, so conspicuous, as men
understood his meaning was to give himself the lie, which he would not in
another matter have taken of any man. But thus the Bishop had a Conquest which
he had no great comfort of, and lived but few years after it, and the Knight
had a foil that he would not seem much daunted with, and lived to have part of
his fine releast by his Majesty's clemency; but yet he tossed up and down all his
life without any great contentment, from Wiltshire into Wales, and thence to
the Isle of Man, a while to Chelsey, but little to Yorkshire where his stay
should have been, so that of this story I could collect many documents, both
for Bishops and Knights, but that I shun prolixity in a matter no way pleasing.
Howbeit because one P. R. or R. P. for he can turn his name as Mountebank turns
his Capp, in his Epistle before the Resolution (a Book much praised by Sir
Edwin Sand, has a scoff after his manner at this Hostess of Doncaster; I
would pray him but to peruse the Life of St. Bernard, not that of their lying
Legend, but that which unworthily perhaps goes among his most worthy works,
written by William Abbot in five Books. There he shall find in the third
Chapter of his first Book, how that same maidenly Saint was subject to the like
manner of scandal: first, of a young woman lying by him in naked bed, half a
night when himself was not 30 year old, and yet we must believe he touched her
not; and next of his Hostess also offering three timesin one night to come to
his Bed, and he crying out each time, Latrones, Latrones, Thieves* Thieves,
which our Bishop had much more cause to have cried, and had he but remembered
it, as I doubt not but he had read it, he might peradventure have dissolved the
pack with it. To utter mine own conceit franckly, if Parsons conjecture were
true, that by humane frailty this Prelate had in his younger days been too
familiar with this woman, which is said to pass but as a venial sin among
those of his Profession, yet was the Knights practice very foul, and the Lords
censure very just that condemned him: for I heard Judge Anderson, a learned and
stout Judge, condemn one for a Rape, upon the Oath of a Woman (notwithstanding,
the man affirmed, and the Woman denied not, but she had often in former times
yielded her self to his lust) because it seemed she had repented that course of
life, in betaking her to a Husband. So my Lord, if he had once such a fault,
yet now that the fault had left him, as well as he the fault, had just cause to
complain, and the Knights practice was blameworthy to seek to entrap him
thereby to the spoil of the Church and disgrace of his calling. And the
Archbishop did much noblier to hazard this obloquie of some idle tongues then
to have incurred the greater scandal of betraying his Church. To conclude
therefore, I wish all Squires and all Knights to be fuller of reverence toward
Bishops and Archbishops, and not to oppose or contest with them. The play at
Chess, a Game not devised for or by fools may teach, that the Bishops due
place is nearest the King, and though some Knight can leap better over the
pawns heads, yet ofttimes he leaps short, where the Bishops power, if you
cross it, reaches the length of the whole Province.

Doctor John Piers.
Of this Doctor John Piers, who lived and dyed a moft reverent Prelate, I must,
to give him the greater commendation, do like those, that when they will
enforce them to leap their farthest, go back the contrary way some part of the
ground, and by little and little amending their pace, at laft over-leap the
mark themselves had designed, so shall I look back into some part of his life,
and show first how unlikely he was to come to such high honor and place as he
dyed in. For although he was a Scholar towardly enough in his youth, of good
wit, and not the meanest birth, having a Gentleman of good sort to his Brother:
yet hasting to a competent ftay of life, he accepted of a small Benefice in the
Country, as I take it near Oxford, and there was in great hazard to have
drowned all those excellent gifts that came after to be so well esteemed and
rewarded in him: there first he was enforced to keep mean and rusticall
Company, that Company enticed him to the German fashion, even then grown too
common in England, to sit whole nights in a Tippling house at Ale and Cakes, as
Ennius and Cato are noted, of the former of whom Horace says, Ennius ipse
pater nunquam nisi potus ad arma prosiluit dicenda, and of the latter Martial
says,

Quod nintio gaudes noctem producere vino
Ignosco vitium forte Catonis habes.
Howbeit this Gentleman never met with such a disgrace by such company as the
Parson of Limmington had, whom our Countreyman Sir Amias Pawlet about a drunken
fray set in the Stocks, and yet after he proved both Archbishop of York, and
one of the greatest Cardinals of Christendom. Neither do I bring these examples
to lessen this fault, as if I were to leave some aspersion hereof upon him, my
purpose is nothing less, for I am rather of that Gentleman's mind, that having
by Fatherly indulgence tolerated the humor of gaming and wenching in his
Son, disinherited him for drinking, saying of the first, if he had wit he
would not lose much by it: of the second, that in time for his own ease he
would leave it; but of the third he said, he would prove the elder the viler,
and hardly ever amend it. Now therefore that I have showed you how this Bishop
was in danger by this fault, let me also show how he was freed from it. Being
once against preparing, as well himself as others for receiving the holy
Communion, and making choice of a discreet Confessor, before whom he might
power out his soul, a custom as pitifully abused in those days, as disused in
these, he declared to him by the way this disposition of his to company and
drinking. The Preacher like a true spiritual Father indeed, no less* learnedly
then zealously, laying before him the enormity of such a Custom, did earnestly
dehort him from it, affirming to him, that though every particular excess in
that kind, did not reach to a habit, or height of mortal sin, as one act of
Adultery, murder, or false witness does, yet if it should grow to a habit, it
were not only an ugly scandal in that profession, but would draw also as bad
sins as it self with it. Behold a comfortable example, how where nature is
weak, grace can strengthen it; upon this grave admonition, he left first the
vice, and after the Company, and following his study more industriously then
before at the University, he ascended worthily the degrees of Doctor and Deane,
and Bishop and Archbishop, and lived all his life not only continent, but
abstinent: of his continence, my Author has said sufficient, of his
abstinency this may be one proof, that being sickly toward his end, he was so
fearful to drink Wine though his stomach required it, that his Physician
being a pleasant man, and loving a cup of Wine himself very well, was wont to
fay to him sometimes, now if your Grace will call for a cup of Wine and drink
to me, I warrant it will never hurt you.

Doctor Matthew Hutton.
I no sooner remember this famous and worthy Prelate, but me thinks I see him
in the Chapel at White Hall, Queen Elizabeth at the window in the Closset, all
the Lords of the Parliament spiritual and temporal about them, and then after
his three courtsies that I hear him out of the Pulpit thundering this Text: The
Kingdoms of the Earth are mine, and I do give them to whom I will, and I have
given them to Nebuchodonozor and his son, and his sons son: which Text, when he
had thus produced, taking the sense rather then words of the Prophet, there
followed first so general a murmur of one friend whispering to another, then
such an erected countenance in those that had none to speak to, lastly so
quiet a silence and attention in expectance of some strange Doctrine, where
Text it self gave away Kingdoms and Scepters, as I have never observed either
before or since. But he, as if he had been a Jeremiah himself, and not an
expounder of him, showed how there were two special causes of translating of
Kingdoms, the fullness of time and the ripeness of sin, that by either of
these, and sometime by both, God in secret and just judgments transferred
Scepters from kindred to kindred, from Nation to Nation at his good will and
pleasure, and running over historically the great Monarchies of the world, as
the Kingdom of Egypt and after of Israel swallowed up by the Assirians, and
the golden head of Nabuchodonozor, the same head cut off by the silver breast
and arms of the Medes. and Perfians. Cyrus and Darius this silver consumed by
the brazen belly, and this of the Graecians and Alexander, and that brass
stamped to powder by the Iron legs of the Romans and Caesar. Then coming
nearer home, he showed how often our Nation had been a prey to forreiners, as
first when we were all Brittans subdued by these Romans, then, when the
fullness of time and ripeness of our finne required it, subdued by the Saxons,
after this a long time prosecuted and spoiled by the Danes, finally conquered
and reduced to perfect subjection by the Normans whose posterity* continued in
great prosperity till the days of her Majesty, who for peace, for plenty, for
glory, for continuance, had exceeded them all, that had lived to change all her
Councillors but one, all officers twice or thrice, some Bishops four times,
only the uncertainty of succession gave hopes to Forreiners to attempt fresh
invasions and breed fears in many of her Subjects of new Conquest, the only
way then said he that is in policy left to quase those hopes and to assuage
these fears were to establish the succession. He noted that Nero was specially
hated for wishing to have no Successor, that even Augustus was the worse
beloved for appointing an ill man to his Successor, and at last insinuating as
far as he durst the neernesse of blood of our present Sovereign, he said
plainly, that the expectations and presages of all writers went Northward,
naming without any circumlocution Scotland, which said he, if it prove an
error, yet will it be found a learned error. When he had finished this Sermon
there was no man that knew Q. Elizabeth's disposition, but imagined that such a
speech was as welcome as salt to the eyes, or to use her own word to pin up her
winding sheet before her face, so to point out her Successor and urge her to
declare him, wherefore we all expected that she would not only have been
highly offended, but in some present speech have showed her displeasure. It is
a principle not to be despised, Qui nescit dissimulare nescit regnare, she
considered perhaps the extraordinary auditory, she supposed many of them were
of his opinion, she might susspect some of them had persuaded him to this
motion, finally she ascribed so much to his years, to his place, to his
learning, that when she opened the window we found ourselves all deceived; for
very kindly and calmly without show of offense (as if she had but waked out of
some sleep) she gave him thanks for his very learned Sermon. Yet when she had
better confidered the matter, and recollected her self in private, she sent
two Councillors to him with a sharp message, to which he was glad to give a
patient answer. But in this time that the Lords and Knights of Parliament and
others were full of this Sermon, a great Peer of the Realm that was then
newly recovered of an impediment in his hearing (I would he did hear no worse
now) being in great liking of the Archbishop for this Sermon, prayed me to
prove my credit with his Grace to get a Copy thereof, and to use his name if
need were, alleging that impediment which caused though he were present, that
he carried away little of it, I did so and withal told how my self had stood
so incommodiously by means of the great press, as I heard it not well, but
was feign to take much of it on trust on others men's reports, who varyed so, as
some I was sure did him wrong. The Archbishop welcomed me very kindly, and made
me sit with him a pretty while in his Lodging, but in fine he told me plainly
he durst give no Copy, for that Sir John Fortescue and Sir John Wolley (as I
remember had been with him before from the Queen with such a greeting as he
scant knew if he were a prisoner or a free man, and that the speech being
already ill taken, the writing might exasperate that which already was
exulcerate so he denied my suit, but in so loving a fashion as from that time
to his end I did greatly honor him, and laid up in my heart many good lessons
I learned of him, and it was not long ere the Queen was so well pacified, that
he went down with the Presidency of York in the vacancy (half against his
will) committed to him. Till afterward the Lord Burleigh now Earl of Exeter,
of whose courage fidelity and religious heart the Queen had great assurance,
was made the Lord President.

But to return to this Archbishop; as he was in place, so was he in learning,
and especially in reading, not second to any in his time, insomuch as in
Cambridge long since, he was one of the chosen disputants before the Queen, and
a Jesuit 26. years since disgracing our English students, as neglecting and
not reading the fathers, excepts this Matthew Hutton, and one famous Matthew
more, and of this Hutton he says, Qui unus in paucis versare patres dicitur,
who is one of those few that searches the fathers: for matters of the world I
can say but that that is known to the world; his eldest son is a Knight of
fair living, and now or lately Sheriff of Yorkshire, and a man of very good
reputation. One other Son he had, that had an ill life, brought to a worse
end, his name was Luke Hutton, so valiant that he feared not men nor Laws, and
for a robbery done on St. Lukes day, for names sake he died as bad a death, I
hope with a better mind then the Thief, of whom St. Luke writes, that he bad
our Savior, if he were Christ to save himself and him. The Archbishop herein
showed the constancy and severity worthy of his place; for he would not
endeavor to save him (as the world thought he easily might) deserving herein
the praise of Justice, which Eli wanted, that was too indulgent of his Sons
voices, and having hereby no blot, but such as may sort him with the great
Monark of this last age, King Philip, with two famous Warriors of the old
Romans, Manlius and Brutus, and with the highest Priest even Aaron. His own
death was more happy then his life, to die Satur annorum, full of years, and to
see and leave peace upon Israel.

Doctor Thoby Matthews.
The praises of a friend are partial or suspicious, of strangers uncertain and
not judicious, of courtly persons complementall and mannerly, of Learned and
wise men more precious, of a Prince most cordial and comfortable; but of an
adversary, though often dangerous, yet never undeserved: what exceptions then
can be taken to his just praises, whom friends commend, strangers admire,
Nobles embrace, the Learned affect and imitate, his Sovereigns have advanced,
and even his enemy and emulous cannot choose but extol and approve. For Edmond
Campion in his Pamphlet of the ten reasons, which the Catholics count an
Epitome of all their Doctrine, laboring to prove, that the Fathers were all
Papists, to give the uttermost credit he can to his assertion, says, that
Thoby Matthew confessed to him so much. Pertentavimus (says he) aliquando
familiariter Thobiam Mattheum, qui nunc in concionibus dominatur, quem propter
bonas arts and virtutum semina dileximus. We did once in familiar sort sound
Thoby Matthews opinion, he that now domineers in your Pulpits, whom for his
good learning and seeds of virtue, we esteemed etc. This then is the
testimonial of their Champion concerning his excellent gifts 27 years since;
if this commendation were then due, as indeed except it had been very due, that
Pen would never have given it, what may we think of him now, that for preaching
may say with St. Paul, I have labored more then ye all, for reading lets no
Book pass, which for Author, matter, or wit has any fame, who has so happy
a memory that no occasion slips him, whether premeditate or sudden, either in
public or private, to make use of that he has read. But it is worth the
hearing, which he answers to this calumniation, as well as commendation, which
answer being in a long and learned latin Sermon, Ad Clerum, I will not wrong
so much to abbreviate in this place, but only for that same point. Qui in
concionibus domininatur, his sharp and modest return, I could not let pass
being but a line. Neque enim nostru^ ministeriu^ est dominatio, neque dominatio
vest: ministeriu^. For neither is our Ministry any Lordly Authority, nor your
Lordly command a true Ministry. But his Reading, Learning and preaching is so
well known to his Highness, as I do but lose labor in recounting either
general or particular praises thereof. I will descend now to some personal
matters, which though commonly they are more captious for the writer, yet are
they withal more pleasing and acceptable to the Reader. He was born of honest
rather then honorable parents in the City of Bristol, which City, standing in
two Counties, Somerset and Gloucester, might move both Counties hereafter to
challenge him for their Countreyman, as diverse Cities of Greece did Homer, if
himself would not sometime clear it, by saying that he is a Somersetshire man,
or to write it as he spoke sportingly a Zomersetshire man, showing a
towardliness in his very infancy to learning, he was set very young to school
at Wells; but overrunning his Schoolmasters Doctrine with his docility, he
went quickly to Oxford, yet ere he went, he had a mavelous misfortune; for
even as if Satan had foreseen that he should one day prove some excellent
instrument of his service that must bruise the Serpents head, he forgot not to
attempt his part Insidiari calcaneo, procuring him in a plain easy way so
terrible a fall, as brake his foot, and small of his leg and ankle almost to
pieces. But if the strong man procured this harm, a stronger granted the
remedy; for he was soon after so soundly cured, as there remained after, no
sign or scar, no effect or defect. either for fight or use of this rupture.
After his coming to Oxford, he took all his degrees so ripe in learning, and so
young in age, as was half a miracle. There it seems also the Colleges strove
for him, he removed so often, till he rested in that for which he was ordained a
principal Vessel, Christ's Church; during his abode, there being Dean of
ChristsChurch, it was hard to say, whether he was more respected for his great
Learning, Eloquence, Authority, countenance given by the Queen, and the great
Ones: or beloved, for his sweet conversation, friendly disposition, bounty,
that even then showd it self, and above all a cheerful sharpness of wit, that
so sawced all his words and behavior, that well was he in the University, that
could be in the Company of Thoby Matthew, and this name grew so popular and
plausible, that they thought it a derogation to their love, to add any title of
Doctor or Deane to it; but if they spoke of one of his men, as he was ever very
well attended, they would say Mr. Matthew, or Mr. Thoby Matthews man, yea even
since he was Bishop, and Archbishop, some cannot leave that custom yet. Among
some special men that enjoyed, and joyed most in his friendship and company in
Oxford, and in remembrance of it, since they were sundred, was Doctor Eedes,
late Dean of Worcester, one whose company I loved, as well as he loved his
Thoby Matthew. He for their farewell, upon his remove to Durham, intending
first to go with him from Oxford, but one days Journey, was so betrayed by the
sweetness of his Company, and their old friendship, that he not only brought
him to Durham; but for a pleasant penance wrote their whole Journey in Latin
verse, which Poem himself gave to me, and told me so many pretty Apophthegmes
of theirs in their younger years, as might make a Book almost by it self. And
because I wrote only for your Highness pleasure, I will hazard my Lords
displeasure to repeat one or two of his, of one two hundred, that Doctor Eedes
when he lived, could remember, being Vice Chancellor in Oxford, some slight
matters and men coming before him, one was very importunate to have them stay
for his Council: who is of your Council says the Vice Chancellor, (says he)
Mr. Leasteed, alas said the Vice Chancellor, no man can stand you in less
stead, no remedy says the other, necessity has no Law. Indeed quoth he, no
more I think has your Councellor. In a like ruatter another was to be bound in
a bond very like to be forfeited, and came in have to offer it, saying he would
be bound if he might be taken, yes says he, I think you will be taken, what is
your name, Cox says the party, and so pressed as the manner is to come into the
Court, make him more room there said he, let Coxcome in. Such facetious
passages as these that are as delightful to the hearer, as a fair course at
tilt is to the beholders, where the staff breaks both at the point, and
counterbuffe even to the hand, such I say a man might collect a volum of, not
at the second hand but at the first, that had been so much in his company, and
so often at his board as I have been, but that I must keep good manners,
remembering the Greek Proverb, (...) Odi memorem compotorem. And if your
Highness had a fancy to hear more of them, Mr. Doctor Dromond can as well
relate them as my self, both of us having met in his graces dish sometimes, and
tasted of this sauce. Yet this kind of pleasantness that I repeat as one of his
praises, himself will most seriously check in himself, sometime as his fault
and infirmity, which he confesses he is enforced to use, sometime as a
recreation of his wearied spirits, after more painful and serious studies, and
though in these conceits, the wit might seem to labor, as much as in these
gravest, and had need to carry as it were, a good bent to send them so smartly
as they come from him ordinarily: yet methinks it may be fitly compared to a
bow that will endure bending the contrary way, and thereby come to cast the
better in his right bent, or by a more homly comparison, to a true and tough
Laborer in our Country, that having sweat at hard labor all the week, asks
no better refreshing, then to sweat as fast with dancing about the May Pole, or
running at Base, or wrestling upon the Holiday. Wherefore let himself call it
his fault, as I have heard him often, and say he knows such nugacity becomes not
his place, and lament that nature and custom have so framed him, that when he
ceases to be pleasant at his meat, he must cease to be; for my part, IN speak
frankly, I will love this fault in him, if it be a fault, and be glad if I can
follow it, having learnt an old rule of my mother in law, At meat be glad, for
sin be sad; and I will say hereafter for my self,

Haud metuam si jam nequeo defendere crimen
Cum tanto commune viro.
Or, as upon no unlike occasion, I wrote ten years since to Dr. Eeds.

Though M^s love men's lines and lives to scanne,
He says he thinks me no dishonest man;
Yet one great fault of mine he often rehearses,
Which is, I am too full of Toys and Uerses:
True (...) true it is, my fault I grant;
Yet when thou shall thy greatest virtues vaunt,
I know some worthy spirits one might entice
To leave that greatest virtue for this Uice.
But if any will be so Stoicall, as to make this confession of my Lords grace
(which is indeed of grace) to serve them for an accusation, to give him thereby
the nickname of Nugax, given 500 years past to Radulphus Archbishop of
Canterbury, and successor of the great Anselme, as is noted in the Catalogue
p. 38. I should think them unjust and undiscreet to stir up new emulation
between Canterbury and York; but rather I might compare him with one of his
own predecessors in Durham, Cuthbert Tunstall, p. 532. of the same book, well
worth the reading and remembering. In the mean time let me lay their censorious
mood with this verse.

Qui sic nug atur tractantem ut seria vincat,
Hic tractaturus seria quantus erat.
But to draw to an end, I will tell one act of his of double piety, done not
long since. He made a journey, accompanied with a Troop, fit for his calling,
to Bristol, to see his mother, who was then living, but not able to travel to
him; after much kindness showed to her, and much bounty to the City, he went
to visit his other mother of Oxford, and coming near the Town with that troop
of his retinue, and friends to the water, it came into his mind how that time
40 year, or more, he past the same water, as a young poor scholar, going to
Oxford, remembering Jacobs words, In baculo meo transivi Jordanem istum, etc.
with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I pass over again with these
troops, he was so moved therewith, that he alighted from his horse, and going
apart, with devout tears of joy and thankfulness, he kneeled down and used
some like words.

It may seem pity that a man of so sweet and mild disposition should have any
cross, but he that sends them knows what is best for his. He has had one
great domestical cross, though he bears it wisely, not in his wife, for she
is the best reported and reputed of her sort I think in England, and they live
together by St. Paul's rule. Uientes hoc seculo.

But I mean such a cross as David had in his son Absalom, for though he
gave both consent and commission to prosecute him, yet nature overcame
displeasure, and forced him to cry, Absalom my son, my son, I would I might
suffer for thee or in thy stead my son, my son. For indeed this son of his whom
he and his friends gave over for lost, yea worse then lost, was likely for
learning, for memory, for sharpness of wit and sweetness of behavior to have
proved another Thoby Matthew, neither is his case so desperate, but that if he
would belief Matthew better then Thoby, I would think yet there were hope to
reclaim him.

Of DURHAM,
and the present Bishop thereof Dr. James.
It is noted of Dionysius of Sicily that he had no care of any religion that
was professed in his country, as neither had his father before him, making but
a sport to rob their Gods, taking away Aesculapius Beard of Gold, because his
father Apollo had no Beard, and Jupiters golden Cloak saying that it was too
heavy for Summer and too cold for Winter, yet used he to confer sometimes
with Philosophers, and have the choysest of them and give them honorable
entertainment, which honor at last bred him this commodity, that losing his
Crown he learned to bear poverty not only without dismay but with some
disport. The like I may say of a late great Earl of this Realm, Son of a
great Duke, who though he made no great conscience to spoil the Church livings
no more then did his father, yet for his reputation and perhaps for his
recreation, he would have some choice and excellent men for his Chaplains of
both Universities, as Doctor Thoby Matthew now Archbishop of York, Doctor John
Still Bishop of Bath and Wells, and this Prelate that I am now to speak of
Doctor James then Deane of Christchurch and this hope of comfort came to his
Lordship thereby, that if it pleased God to impart any mercy to him (as his
mercy endures for ever) it was by the special Ministry of this man, who was
the last of his Coat that was with him in his sickness. Concerning this
Bishopric it is formerly noted by mine Author, that it was once dissolved by
Act of Parliament in the Minority of King Edward the sixth, what time the two
new Dukes of Sommerset and Northumberland like the Soldiers that cast lots for
Christ's garment divided between them Patrimonium Crucifixi, namely, the two
good Bishoprics of Bath and Durham, one being designed as a seat for the
Western Duke, the other for the Northern; and whereas by an old Metamorphofis
the Bishop of Durham had been Earl of Northumberland, now by a new Apotheosis
the Duke of Northumberland would have been Bishop of Durham: But qui despexit
de coelo deribedat eos. That visible hand that wrote in the wall while
Balthazar was quaffing in the holy Vessels, that hand though invisible weighed
these petty Monarks in the balance of Gods judgments, found them too light;
and because they should not grow too long, they were both cut shorter by the
head: the Bishoprics restored to what they now are by Queen Mary, one being
in substance, the other by accident of leaden Mines, two of the best
Bishoprics of England, and as worthy Bishops they have had, especially these
two of them, namely two Matthews are spoken of in the Title of York. There
remains now this third, who having had yet scant a year and a day as they
say, I have the less to speak of as of a Bishop. But that examining by the
infallible square set down by St. Paul to Timothy chap. 3. for choice of a
Bishop he will be found as worthily chosen as any: For his Learning it may be
sufficient to say he was Deane of Christchurch, which as I have said formerly
attaines not to but choice men, and there are sermons of his extant in Print
that testify no less. For hospitality which is a special praise of a Bishop,
he showed in Oxford his disposition thereto in that less hability, and for
both at once at the coming of diverse great States, and lastly fifteen years
past of the Queen her self before whom he preached, and to whom he gave so good
entertainment, as her Majesty commended the order and manner of it long after;
which commendation of well setting out and ordering a feaft, I should have
thought of the less moment, if I did not find in Plutarke in the life of
Paulus Aemylius a great Captain and Conqueror, and otherwise a man of much
virtue and temperance, the well ordering of a feast to be esteemed not one of
his least commendations. But I will conclude with a greater and more worthy
commendation; and which I could wish, as it is exemplar, so it might be
followed by all ensuing Bishops. For whereas Durham house had been granted to
Queen Elizabeth only during her life, when few thought that such a house would
have proved too little for her estate. It fortuned after she was Queen this
house to be neglected according to the proverb not unfit to be applied to his
Learning that first built it: Praestat esse caput asini quam cauda leonis.
Among other rooms the Chapel was not only profaned but even defaced This
good Bishop the first thing he does at his coming repaires this Chapel, and
and furnishes it within in comely and costly sort; for which good mind and
act, I doubt not but God will build him a house, toward which he shall ever have
my best wishes.

Of CARLISLE,
and the Bishop Dr. Henry Robinson.
THis Bishopric, as my Author has touched page 540. and 543. has been so
fortunate to have yielded two singular examples of fidelity and loyalty of
Prelates to their Sovereign, one of especial mark worthy to be cannonized
with the Patron of Venice. St. Mark was also named Merks commended here by my
Author, and no less worthily extolled by Mr. Samuel Daniel, in his excellent
Poem of the civil Wars of Lancaster and York. The other was Bishop
Oglethorpe, who when all the Bishops of England refused to Crown Elizabeth
because of her Religion, yet he being himself of a contrary Religion performed
it, neither of these received their reward in this world that they were worthy.
Merks being removed from Carlisle to Samos in Greece, viz. out of Gods blessing
into a warm sun as the saying is, Oglethorpe enduring deprivation because
even at the Coronation he would not omit the ceremony of elevation, howbeit it
is supposed if he had not so suddenly after dyed of the grief, her Majesty
would have had some special respect of him above all fellows, which I speak
not upon mere conjecture, but upon some speech of her Majesty used to the
present Bishop that now is, for when she received his homage, she gave many
gracious words to him of her good opinion, for his learning integrity, and
sufficiency to the place, concluding that she must ever have a care to furnish
that place with a worthy man; for his sake said she that set my Crown first on
my head, and many words to like effect, as the Bishop himself has partly told
me. He seems a man of great gravity, and temperance very mild in his speech,
but not of so strong a constitution of body as his countenance does promise;
but having seen his Sea never, and himself but seldom, I must content me of
him with this short relation.

Of CHESTER;
and the present Bishop, Dr. Flood.
OF this new Bishopric, and new Lord Bishop also I have very little to say,
and I need say the less, because your Highness has heard him Preach often,
and very well; I call him a new Lord Bishop, because though he were a Bishop
before, yet was he not thereby a Lord of the Parliament House; howbeit his
Title before sounded to the vulgar ears more universal then either Rome or
Constantinople, namely Bishop of Man: but from thence he was translated to
Chester the chief City of that Shire, that some call chief of men, which
Shire having a special temporal blessing (to abound) not with milk and
honey, as the Land of Promise, but with milk and salt, a matter more necessary
in sacrifice; I wish it may also flow in spiritual blessings, and doubt not
but that by the irrigation rather then inundation of this Flood they shall
increase in them, and as our Savior commands to join peace with salt, and
especially I wish that blessing to their Neighbors beyond the salt water, I
mean in Ireland, who though they have milk, and are so weak in faith they
cannot yet digest hard meat, yet for want of this salt and peace, they make
many go of Pilgrimage to Westchester against their wills from both Realms,
some of whom the Bishop of Chester was wont to entertain in kind sort, as my
self can testify, and this Bishop I hear does herein succeed also his worthy
Predecessor Doctor Vaughan.

THus have you, most highly esteemed and most entirely beloved Prince, this
unworthy supply of mine to the worthy work of a more worthy man. It is grown
into greater length then I expected, by reason I took some kind of pleasure
with the pain of writing hereof, supposing I was all the while telling a story
as it were in your Highness presence and hearing. Now if any that favor not
the persons I write of, nor the purpose I write for, happen to sport at this my
fashion of writing to your Highness, as Tigranes jested at Lucullus Army,
saying, if he came as an Ambassador his Train was to great, if as a Warrier,
his Troop was too small. So if they say this Treatise for an Epistle is too
long, for a History too little, I will also hope that this whether long Epistle
or short relation, shall have like success in your Highness approbation, as
that contemptible Army had to conquer their contemners.
FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table according to the Sir-names of those Bishops who are
discoursed of in the foregoing Relation.
Bishops Names. Place. Page. Andrews Chichester 140 Babington Worcester 128
Bancrost Canterbury 10 Barlow Bath and Wells 106 Barlow Rochester 147 Bennet
Hereford 138 Bilson Winchester 71 Chatterton Lincoln 81 Coldwell Salisbury 70
Cooper Winchester 34 Cotton Salisbury 93 Cotton Exeter 124 Day Winchester 67
Dove Peterborough 153 Elmer London 14 Fletcher London 22 Flood Chester 209
Gardener Winchester 42 Godwin Bath and Wells 110 Godwin Landaff 164 Grindall
Canterbury 5 Heaton Ely 76 Hutton York 186 James Durham 203 Jewel Salisbury 85
King Bath and Wells 97 Matthew York 169 Overton Coventry and Lichfield 85
Parker Canterbury 1 Piers York 182 Ravis London 31 Robinson Carlisle 206 Rud St.
David's 159 Sands York 172 Scory Hereford 130 Still Bath and Wells 118 Thompson
Gloucester 152 Thornbury Bristoll 156 Vaughan London 29 Underhill Oxenford 148
Watson Chichester 140 VVestphaling Hereford 134 Wickham Elder Winchester 35
Wickham Younger Winchester 65 White Winchester 59 Whiteguist Canterbury 7 Young
York 169

FINIS.

