A BANQUET OF Essays, Fetched out of Famous OWENS CONFECTIONARY, Disht out, and
served up at the TABLE OF MECOENAS.

By HENRY HARFLETE, sometime of Grayes-Inne, Gent.

London, Printed by T. R. and E. M. and are to be sold by Joseph Barber, at the
sign of the Lamb in the New-buildings in Paul's Churchyard. 1653.

To the Right WORSHIPFUL, And my much honored Friend and Kinsman, SIR,
CHRISTOPHER HARFLETE, Knight.
Sir,
YOur former favors oblige me to a votal, if not total requital, at least to
an acknowledgement, though it be but in this slight Commemoration, and so near
alliance may command this Dedication. I might have elected some titular
Protector to cherish this weak Infant of my Brain; but I content my self with
an inferior choice, desiring your self my tutelar Patron. Accept of these my
poor labors, which were the selected object of my Meditations, on purpose to
keep me from idleness, the mother of all mischief. That excellent saying of St
Hierome egged me on to these Meditations: A liquid operis facito, ut te
Diabolus inveniat occupatum; non enim facile capitur a Diabolo, qui bonovacat
exercitio: Be always doing something, that so the Devil may find thee
employed; for he is not easily caught in the Devils snare, who is well busied.
Sir, were there not Lectores who be Lictores, or could all my Readers be free
from the aspersion of critically censorious, I could well afford to imitate my
Author; Commend my book to the Reader, and my self to you: however let it be
so, I'l^ expose my self to charitable judgments, and venture it.

Inveniat noster Patronum ut ubique
libellus,
Librum Lectori dedico, meque tibi.
Your Worships affectionate Friend and Kinsman to commend, HENRY HARFLETE.

A BANQUET OF Essays:
Upon these verses. Ex. lib. 1. Ep. 2. Qui legis ista, tuam reprchendo; si mea
laudas.
Omnia, stultitiam: sic nihil, invidiam.
ESSAY. I.
Of Reading, Understanding and Practicing.
[Qui legis.] THE World is now so laden and larded with Learning, 1. Qui legis*
Worldly men account learning a b^^den.
as that its not only fatigated with the burden of it; but also its fascinated
(shall I say fatuated) with such a supposed felicity, as that it loathes the
life of it too* that is action. Reading is like the body, Understanding like the
apparel, and Practicing like the soul. The body of reading being mortal,
cannot but quickly meet with a dissolution, did not the soul of Practice
animate it, the apparel of the Understanding keeping it from the frigid, and
defending it from the torrid air; that from obscuration, this from
oblatration. For Writings might quickly espy a Momus, did not the backbiter eye
an understanding MECOENAS, ready to defend the Authors quarrel, forcing him to
praise, if not practice what he reads, though he never read to praise or
practice, but to traduce.

[Qui legis.] Well may the World be reported Spherical, in that it is vertical,
even so cloyed with a number of giddy-headed readers, as that it surfets with
their issue, doctrine; so that they loath that which they should love,
Preaching. Ever since our Bacchanalian tospots have scorned our Ecclesiastical
despots, obliging their devotion to the temple of Baccus, the Pulpit with them
has been counted a reproach: and no marvel; for they have turned the current
of their devotion another way making their belly their god; The late book to
tolerate plays and pastimes upon the Lords day liked them well.
the Drawer or Tapster, their Priest; the Bar, his Pulpit; the Tavern or
Alehouse, their Temple; their Wine or Ale, their Spirit; their Stomach, their
Altar; their several sorts of Drinks, their Graces; their belchings or
spewings; their prophecies or knowledge; and the best book they delight to lay
open before them to read in, is their Hostess or her fine Daughter.

[Qui legis.] Time was, when the Church had many Practisers, but few Readers;
time is, that a contradictory position being laid in the balance of the
Sanctuary makes up this proposition, That this now Church has many Readers,
few Practisers.

The Primitive Catec^umenists heard, and practiced; but our Modern
Mythologists hear and read, but practice not*

The Church in her Infant-cradle might glory in the number of her Rockers (if I
may so term them,) but in this her Maturity she may well condole the plenty of
her lazy rackers* and who be they? but her learned Readers The World now does
boast in Knowledge, and scorns to take the pains to make a double journey to
the Temple on the Sabbath, unless it be either for customs sake, or as the
women came to the Theater, according to the Poet, Spectatum veniunt, veniunt
spectentur ut ipsae.

So these come to be seers, not to hear their Seer, or perchance to be seen,
rather then to be taught; and why? either 1. Self-conceit persuades them, that
they know already as much as the Preacher can tell them; or 2. Else blind
devotion strikes in them this opinion, that they have done God good service to
visit his Temple once a day; or 3. Their learned ignorance would conceive that
for an undeniable Orthodox, which graver judgments have censured for a
palpable Paradox, even that Reading is better then preaching. What though St.
Augustine was converted by reading some part of the thirteenth chapter of St.
Paul to the Romans? Will thou therefore conclude that the word read does
out-poise the word Preached in the balance of profit? Thou read the proverb,
and believe it, that Una hirundo non facit ver: One swallow makes not Summer:
In all this conceive me aright, though I commend Preaching, yet I condemn not
Reading; for both be excellent. It is a rule in Rhetoric given from that great
Orator Cicero concerning comparisons, that Necesse non est in rebus
comparandis, Tull. lib. ^ ad He^on.
ut alteram vituperes si alteram lauds. The law of reason cannot impose this
necessity upon comparisons, that the praising of one part should derogate any
thing from the worth of the other. N^y let me ground this position upon the
rock of truth fetched out of the quarry of great St. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. Hom.
3. in 2. Thessal.
Negligentia legendo eget diligentia praedicando; because the Reader is
negligent he wants the Preachers diligence. I cannot but admire at the
foolishness of some in the managing of their states, who neglect Preaching,
and buy damnation with Reading: For what is it available for a man to be
accounted learned and judicious, and then after death go to hell for want of
Practice?

He that reads and understands not, is like the Parrot, who may utter a perfect
Orthology, yet is ignorant of the true A^tiology, or true meaning of the words
spoken; and surely no wiser is that man, qui legit and non intelligit, who
reads and understands not: would you spell a reason for it, then put them two
together, and you have it, legere and non intelligere est negligere: To read
but not with the intellec^, is to neglect: But he that understands and
practices not, is like that proud Silke-worme, who enrobes himself in gorgeous
array, rather to attract personal reverence, and worldy esteem, then to
protect his naked corpse from the fury of the frigid element, Hic seipsum
vestit, ut sciatur: ille legit, ut tantum sciat and sciatur. The one is
gorgiously invested, that he may be known; the other reads only to know, and
that is curiosity, and that for knowing he may be known, and that is vanity; his
aim is to inform his mind, not to reform his manners. Science is a labor,
to the accomplishment of which both the Theorick and Practick must (like
Hippocrates's twins) both hand and heart, both head and bed together: This
Theoretical labor may be thus bimembred, in laborem 'Disciplinae and
exercitii. 1. Disciplinae, ut quae nescit, discat. 2. Exercitii, ut quae
didicit, a ^ usum ducat: There is the labor of, 1. Discipline; and 2.
Exercise. 1. Of Discipline, that he may learn what he knows not; and of, 2.
Exercise, that he may practice what he has learned.

This World is a Sea, Rev. 4. 6.
upon which the theoretical reader floates in the pinnace of self-opinionated
pride, driven with the wind of vainglory; in which the Practical
understander is surely drowned: for he never returned home, since he hoisted
sail for New England: Mistake me not! I know there be many true and zealous
Professors in England. who have not in these corrupted times bowed the knee to
Baal; but I speak this as bewailing the loss and misle of those Pastors and
zealous Professors, who (I know whilst they lived amongst us) were both Luces
and Duces, pure lights, and sure guides; lights for Discipline, guides for
Practice,

ESSAY. II.
Of Books.
Qui legis ista.] ^. Ista.
GOod Books should be the Object of every good man's eye: idle and lascivious
pamphlets are correspondent to the life of idle Christians: For those Books
which handle a subject, whose doctrine is far remote from the use and practice
of a Christian life, are a true token of an idle Author, and the readers of
them are like to common ^idlers, who undertake the use of an Instrument, onley
to keep them from a trade more laborious and profitable; laborious in the Work,
profitable to the Workers.

[Ista.] The Printers Press is like unto the World, where are bad men as well
as good? And

Invenies paucot hic, ut in orb, bonos. Where I find some good Books, many
bad; what do I then? I do (like good men in choosing their companions) elect the
good, reject the bad: I use that, refuse this. Good consorts are worth my
acquaintance, and good Books my perusal; my pains may countervaile my profit,
if I read them, through-read them, re-read them.

Does a man delight in reading vicious and lascivious Authors? I wrong him not
if I style him an Astronomer, who chiefly sixeth the eye of his meditation upon
the wandering Venerean Planet; but now adays a man may easily find out the
greatest Students in this science. Young men and maids are grown studious
Scholars in LOVES School: Amorous pamphlets make up their Library, who having
their Love-songs ad unguem, long to be graduates in the University of Ven^^;
they account themselves already Masters in this Art in actu designato, and
think long till they be so in actu exercito; nothing now in their judgments is
wanting to complete their degree, but a Pone manum in manum maritae.

The reading of such Authors is the true embleam of their vicious minds.

It is a received opinion, that Vultus est index animi: The countenance is the
discoverer of the mind; and it is as true, that the reading of Books may
anatomize the heart; Lascivious Books may call their Readers lascivious without
the least aspersion of a wrong.

Does a man fix the heart of his delight upon good and godly Books, and make
them the delight of his heart, it is an invincible argument of a virtuous
mind. An humble and a lowly heart loves Books which teach the lesson of
humility; and by Augustines leave a man may, August Ep. ad Paulinum; he says
there, Homines plus proficiunt cogitando, quam legendo.
(nay if he do not first) profit legendo, by reading, he can scarce gain any
thing cogitando, by meditating; and though there be profit to be sucked out of
both, yet I must confess, that the greater fruit is gathered from the Tree of
contemplation, though not always the fairer. Rachel was more fair then Leah,
but yet (to make some amends,) Leah was more fertile then Rachel.

Contemplation has a twofold access: unus in intellectu, Bernard in Cant.
Sermon. 49.
alter in affectu: unus in lumine, alter in favore: unus in acquisitione, alter
in devotione: The one in the intellect, the other in the affect. The order of
Nature ^^lls up the Intellect in the first place: for a man can never love that
which he know^s not, and how comes he by the knowledge of it? but by one of
these three means, either by 1. Hearing, 2. Seeing, or 3. Reading.

Shall I go yet further, and persuade you that Reading is a kind of
Meditation? if not I, then Hugo, Hugo in Medit. suit.
who says that there be three kinds of Meditations, viz. in 1. Creaturis. 2.
Scripturis. 3. Moribus. Primum surgit ex admiratione. Secundum lectione.
^ertium circum spectione.

Admiratio generat quaestionem, quaestio in^estigationem, investigatio
inventi^nem. Lectio ad cognoseendam verit atemmateriam ministrat, meditatio
coap^at, oration sublevat, operatio componit, and contemplatio in ista exuliat.
Thus Hugo.

A Meditation in the Creatures. Scriptures. Manners.

Shall I call these three, three several Books, in which a man may read Heaven?

The first arises from Admiration, Meditatio in 1. Creaturis.
whose posterity proclaims her fruitful; for Admiration begets a question; and
asking, seeking; and seeking a finding.

The second arises from Reading, 2. Scripturis.
and that is not steril too: for it is a trusty guide to bring us to the
knowledge of the truth.

The third arises from Circumspection, and that is fruitless neither: for it
plays two ways in and out; Discurrit intus and for as intus ad conscientiam,
for as ad famam; that is, in upon the conscience, out upon the good name of a
man.

Of all companions Books be the secretest, there a man may solace himself, and
yet hears nothing but the Echo of his own words.

Of all Glasses Books be the best; for they being inspective, are both 1.
Prospective, 2. Reflective, and 3. Illuminative. Three chief uses for Glasses.

First Prospective, BOOKS (like glasses) are, 1.
making things afar off, 1. Prospect.
seem near at hand; and therefore we say, that a learned man sees farther then
an ignorant; sees farther, though not oculo (...), though not with the eye of
his body, yet with the eye of his mind: so he sees farther, because he knows
more.

Secondly, Reflective; 2. Reflect.
were not the Reader blear-eyed he might quickly espy the lineament of his own
soul in these Glasses by reflection; let him be but intentive in reading, and
he may quickly collect the disposition of his own soul, and the disease being
once known puts the patient in hope of a cure. In these Glasses the proud dame
may see her painted face, and supersficialized soul; her envious eye, and
contumelious tongue; her impudent forehead, and immodest countenance. In these
Glasses the Altar-Priest enrobed in his vestry vestments may see is own
picture, 2 Kings 10. there he may see the worshippers of Baal attired in Baals
vestments, and at last their idolatrous vestments (by the command of Jehu) hewn
off their shoulders with the edge of the sword. In these Glasses the Persecutor
may see the Whore of Babylon surfeited with the blood of the Saints, Rev. 17.
6. and at length the righteous GOD avenging the blood of his servants at her
hand, Rev. 19. 2.

In a word, in these Glasses every sinful man may see the Anatomy of his own
sinful soul, and GODS definitive judgment for the same without timely
repentance, Rev. 21. 8.

Thirdly, Illuminative. 3. Illuminative.
Good Books (like Glasses) do 1. Enlighten the house of the heart, and keep out
the 2. Dust of Pride and Hypocrise* 3. Wind of vainglory.

Qui legis ista.] The Printers Press is like unto a Garden, where are stinking
weeds, as well as sweet smelling flowers; what do I then? I do (like
fine-handed dames) pick up the flowers, kick at the weeds. I grace my hand with
the one; but I can scarce afford, that my eye or foot should grace the other;
mine eye by a a speculation, or my foot by an inculcation.

ESSAY. III.
Of Application.
Qui legis ista, tuam. 3. Tuam.
] APplication is the life of Doctrine: It is a strong persuasion to conversion.
It was a Symbol of Aurelius Numerianus, Esto quod audis, Be what you hear. To
which I may add, Esto quod legis; Be what thou read: or lead thy life
according to that rule given in thy Book-Doctrine, and thou will (shall I say
work a miracle?) put a living soul into a dead body, revive the dead letter by
the spirit of Application.

In vain is Reprehension without Application; how fitly have the Greeks fitted
it, calling it (...) from (...) apto, to fit; for harmony is a sweet and
pleasant Music, consisting of many notes, yet none discord, but sweetly close
together. If the Reader or Hearer apply not that which is read or heard by a
religious life and conversation, there is a jarre or discord between the
Confuter and Confuted, who denies the truth of the Doctrine in his irreligious
practice; how sweetly then do the Writer and Reader, Preacher and Hearer
accord, when the work of the one attends the word or pen of the other, when
Obedience makes the Epilogue to the Writers Catalogue, when the one gives a
Practical Amen to the others Theoreticall Doctrine?

[Tuam.] Application is a kind of Adaptation, and the Doctrine must be fitted
for Application, as Tailors fit apparel for the body, neither too wide nor too
strait; if it be too wide, it may draw the Reader or Hearer to a presumption or
obduration; if it be too strait, it may persuade him to desparation.

[Tuam.] Men write, because men are vicious, and vicious men should read to
mend, that is the end of writing and reading too; but we do like Tailors, we are
mending all the week, all the year, yea all our lives long, and yet not
mended. We sit mending upon the Sh^p-board of this World, and forget that Hell
is so near us, as under the Board; every time we commit a sin, we throw a
shred to Hell.

Our good actions are forgotten, as soon as gotten. The Worldling makes a
journey to Church every Sabbath day, and sometimes hears the Word with the
^ares of attention, but could never ^inde the heart of retention; the Preacher
may reply, but he never intends to apply: and sometimes Gods House may be a
continent for his body, but his Counting House shall be a repository for his
mind; and so leaves his Religion where he found it; so that he ties Religion
altogether to time and place, nay to his Holy-day-apparel too; he s^r^ps
himself of his Holy-day-cloathes, and (...) his Soul of devotion altogether.

Thus runs he posting to his native rest,
Forgets the Word, and takes it for a jest*
ESSAY. V.
Of Reprehension.
Qui legis ista, tuam reprehendo. 4. Reprehendo.
] ETymologies may sometimes instruct, and without offense of me essayed to
initiate an Essay of Reprehension.

The Latins call it Reprehensio, 1. The ^atines.
from re and prehensio, a taking or pulcking back. Experience daily objects to
our sight the untoward carriage of the homebred or countrey-horse; who being
altogether in the extremes, is either too dull and slow, or too quick and
hasty; either too forward, or too backward; wherefore his Rider provides him
both calcar and fraenum, a spur and a bridle; a spur to prick him forward,
when he is too backward; and a bridle to keep him back, when he is too forward*
Me thinks the refractory will of man is like this untoward Horse, who wants the
spur of exhortation to prick him forward to the performance of good, when he
is dull and defective, and the bridle of dehortation or reprehension to
refrain his forwardness, when he runs headlong into exorbitant courses.

[ -- Reprehendo. -- ] The Greeks likewise challenge an instruction by an
Etymon in their verbal significations. 2. The Greeks.
Reprehension by them is expressed by three significant words.

Viz. 1. (...). 2. (...). 3. (...).

1. 1. Observ^
(...),] or else (...), which word signifies, plaga, ictus, or vul^^is, a wound
or stroke. It Is true in^eed, that the words of the reproover must be cutting to
make them curing: (...) is derived from (...) super, and (...) percussio, a
wounding or striking upon the conscience.

The powerful words of some Ministers have stricken such strange effects into
the consciences of some weak Christians, 2. Observe.
as that they have been no small provocation to despair; and desperation must
have some pleasing object, though it work to the confusion of the weak subject,
unless the power of Gods hand in his Majesty prevent the intended mischief of
Satan's head in his malice.

2. (...),] which word signifies querimonia, expostulatio, or accusatio, a
complaint, expostulation, or accusation, uttered in some querimonious dialect.
The Latin may enable the word to bear the burden of this sense; expressing it
to be the same with accusare, and incusare making some difference in respect of
the personal object of reprehension (only) according to the old verses of
that ancient Grammarian, JOHANNES (...) GARLANDIA.

Dicitur accusans aequales at que minore^
Dicitur incusans majores and meliores. Johanues de Garlandia. in l. de Synonim.

The Commentary expounds it thus, Galfrid: Comment. in lib. Synon.
accusare est culpare, incusare est reprehendere; we accuse, and thereby blame
our equals and inferiors; Johan. de Ga^landia.
we incuse, and thereby reprehend the crimes and faules of our superiors, and
those who are of a greater estate and higher degree: so that the Commenter
himself would acknowledge some difference between the two words, a part
praepositionis, which is pars secundaria, but none at all a part verbi, which
is pars principalis; they be the very words of the Commenter.

The real object then of a reprehensory complaint or accusation, is crimen, a
fault or offense, and the personal object is reus, or the party offending, who
is the party transgressing, or the party accused, to whom must be added a third
person, and that is the person offended. Now the offense or sin being committed
against God, the reprover by his reproof does tacitly complain of the
reprehended to God, the reproved therefore without amendment, is inexcusable.

In the reprehensions of some vices, some have been facetious, where they might
have been more querulous, bewailing the unhappy estate of those, who have been
so corrupted, that they need correption; but indeed such is the ridiculous
nature of sin, as that derision best fits the seat of conviction. The Devil
sports withhat which man acts with pleasure; for when man sins, the Devil sings.

3. (...),] from (...), which signifies to dispraise, blame, or reproach, as
well as to reprehend. Object.
(...) you will say, s Re roof a Re^roach? Answ.
I answer, It is so effective, non entitative: eff^ctively, because it reproves
sin, whose effect is reproach; not entitat vely in it self; for it reproaches
not the reproved, but labors to abrogate the reproveds reproach.

Thu for the Etymology: the Tropology must follow, showing the true nature of
this Psogology.

-- Reprehendo. -- The meanest apprehension can never be expert in the right
learning of Reprehension. Humane discretion blushes not to acknowledge it a
great difficulty, to know how to reprehend aright. Ignorance may be a proud
controuler, but never a good counselor; yet reproof is opus citius notum quam
factum, a work sooner known then done: so defective is the nature of man in
this duty, if known.

Reprehension therefore must have a 1. Guide, and 2. Companion.

1. A Guide, that is discretion.

2. A Companion, that is meekness of spirit.

First, 1. A Guide.
it must have a guide, lest it run into error; discre^ion must moderate
reprehension: and it so orders it, that it be uttered in amor, not rancor, in
love, not in malice. Malicious enmity must not reveal that which Christian
amity obliges to conceal.

Malice was ever a good informer, but ever a bad reformer.

Love is a great mover, she commonly speaks and speeds to effect. Love must rub
up the conscience of the Delinquent, touch it to the quick; it may be quickened
by being twitted; but care must be had, lest haste makes waste; lest the
reprover puts unguem in ulcere, (in Plautus his phrase) his singer into the
sore, which he does when he makes a matter worse, which is bad enough already;
which he does either by a long and circumstantiall recapitulation of that which
should be silenced, which is against the law of charity, or else by an addition
of some new matter, which is against the rule of verity, which commands a man
to speak nothing but the truth.

Discretion likewise brings the reprover to a fit time and place, when and
where conveniently to reprove the offender; it must be no street-check, nor a
high-way-broile.

Rash in discretion should not call a whole heap of neighbors to be
eare-witnesses to that which should be private. A temperate and timely
^aciturnity is equivalent to an oration, which tacitly implies, that
unseasonable silence is consonant to (if not wore then) a mute, and sometimes
connivency may match with religious policy; but if this connivence become
habitual* it is as bad as indulgence, worse then caecity. Not to reprove, is
to approve, (yea to partake) of the others enormity; permittere malum, est
admittere, a continual permitting of sin is no better then a consenting to it.

Discretion likewise brings reproof to be acquainted with a brevity. A short
speech commends the action, prolix and impertinent is the livery of a babbler.
When Philip of Macedon wrote to them of Lyconia, that if he entered their
country, he would utterly overthrow them; he had a short answer returned to
him in this one word, if; briefly reproving his bold supposition of victory
depending upon the incertainty of his entry.

Secondly, 2. Companion.
Reprehension must have a companion, G^. 6. 1.
and that is meekness of spirit. It must be mitis, non aspera, affable* not
satirical. Envy and Fury must not transport the reprover beyond the bounds of
discretion, lest he turn mel amoris into fell amaroris, the honey of love into
the gall of bitterness; his words may be sharp, yet pleasant. Discretion must
be involved in a tartnes, lest he become corrosor rather then corrector, a
batterer not betterer by his words; he must not be like Herodotus, who never
spoke well to any nor of any; he must beno clamorous Stentor, reproving with
such eager sierceness and impetuous violence, as that there is omnis correptio,
nulla consolatio; omnis clamor, nullus amor: all correction, no consolation;
all speech, but no love in it, whose behavior bewrayes the want of charity,
having zeal without knowledge, or knowledge without discretion. Reviling and
railing must not be mistook for refuting. Sharp rebukes must be ushered by
discretion. Entreaties, (which in their own nature amount to mild checks, 1 Timothy 5. 1.
) suite best to inferiority: that must be their subject, whose object must
challenge authority. My close shall be by application to the married. Gentle
entreaties must be the wives best oratory instead of sharp rebukes, Good
counsel for the wife.
sweetly closing them to a delinquent husbands heart, with so wise an
application, as that no glozing flattery may seem to be inveloped in a kind
supplication. 1 Timothy 5. 1.
An exhortative invasion may compel an errors evasion, then she may gain the
praise, and he the profit: But if sometimes the heat of passion usher an
invective, let an instructive be its attendant, that may somewhat allay the
heat, though not altogether abolish the hate. The reprover must not movere,
when monere, not move to displeasure, when monish to profit, therefore to
prevent this danger, some sweet instruction should tread upon the heels of a
sharp Reprehension. In a word, Let every thing be done decently and in order,
says Paul. Now a Chr^stian is said to do a thing decently and in order, when
he does a Christian work in such sort as becomes a Christian, and after such a
mnaner as rightly corresponds to such a Christian act or duty; so reproof is
done decently, when done 1. Discree^ly. 2. Meekly. And in order, when it is
done according to our Saviors order and direction for brotherly correction; so
that it must have a guide to usher it, and a companion to uphold it, lest it
turn into furious malice, or into invious folly.

Whatsoever a man does, being guided by discretion, he does it not rashly, but
with mature deliberation and serious preconsideration. Reprehension then must
have a discreet guide, lest it run into folly; and a meek companion, lest it
gad to fury.

ESSAY. V.
Of Writers and their Works.
Qui legis ista, 5. Si mea.
tuam reprehendo, sin mea. -- THe industrious writer is like the Be, who gets
sua, but not sibi.

Sic vos nonvobis mellificatis apes. So Bees do work, but for themselves work
not.

Both work for others benefit, and many times both are rewarded with cruelty
for their pains; the one per manus violentiam, the other per linguae
virulentiam; the one suffers by the violence of the hand, the other by the
virulence of the tongue. The object upon which their cruelty works, is the
life, corporal of the one, civil of the other: for the one loses formam, even
life it self, which is forma corporis, called anima, the soul, quae dat esse
corpori, which gives being to the body, say Philosophers; the other loses
famam, his good name, being most despitefully traduced by the tongue of the
critical detractour. Lastly, the mediate instrument by which they exercise
their cruelty, is by fire upon both, Physical or Natural upon one,
Meraphorical upon the other; for St. James calls the tongue a Fire.

-- Si mea. -- The censorious Reader is so prejudicate in his opinion, as that
being sick of the spleen, envy shall teach him to call that aelienum, which the
industrious Author may justly in his conscience christen meum. I should think
my time very ill spent to step over my threshold to desire such envious
Critics to Godfather any child of mine own brinae.

-- Si mea. -- I cannot but brand that envious censurer with the name of an
ignominious detractor, who refuses the work, because he knows the Author a
man in the world no way famous, and therefore presently spits forth that verse
of Virgil, Hos ego versiculos feci, In vita Virgil^i.
tulit alter honores.

Another took the pains, and this man assumes to himself but only the name of
the work. Such a one will protect, it is alienum, of another man's writing; and
why? but because he does not think it is suum, part of his own meditations; but
let such a one remember his Grammar instance, Insipientis est dicere, Non
putaram: It is the part of a fool to say, I had not thought; and thus
sometimes his pains and industry is neglected with a scornful Tush: and why?
but because the world does not so much honor the man, as to whirle him about
in the chariot of fame. The world frowns upon the man, and the Readers^ (the
true borne children of the world) do so upon his matter, his works too; the
father's rejected, small hopes then that his child should have any better
welcome.

-- Si mea. -- Me thinks the same word [ mea] does enforce into my Meditations
(as it were) an immortality inveloped in a mortality. For [ mea] the issue of
my brain may be a visible, audible, when as [ meum] my corpse (being curtain'd
by the earth,) may (until the general Resurrection) be bedded in dust and
ashes; Littera scripta manet, the brains issue may survive the father, yea
after he be converted into nihilum, into his Materia prima, in the Philosophers
term, even into that in which Job repented, into dust and ashes: and this
comes somewhat near to the Politics, who say, that a man is (as it were)
eternized in that golden line of life, the line of his posterity.

-- Si mea. -- Mea, not aliena.

It shames that an industrious Student should behave himself so ill in his
premeditated exercises, as that a former Writer should have just occasion to
sue him (as it were) in a trover and conversion, as the Lawyers speak.

It is a token of great pains and industry in Writers to make those things [
sua] their own, which they write.

That Writer who steals here a piece out of one book, and there a piece out of
another, is like unto a botching Tailor, who to patch up his broken clothes,
opens his hell, (a place well known to unconscionable Tailors) and there he
finds this piece which he stole from such a customer, and that piece from
another, with which parings he makes his torn suite serviceable; but yet
herein they differ, the one takes new shreds to mend an old garment, the other
collects old meditations to patch up his new.

-- Si mea. -- Omnia. --

If [ Mea] be not [ Omnia mea,] Discretion wills me to margent my Authors,
that so the judgment of the Reader may distinguish mea from omnia mea, and I
hope that may free me from the censure of thievery, and may almost persuade my
self, that I shall not be arreigned at the bar of rash judgment before Judge
Zoilous and Momus his brother-assistant, if I chance to borrow an antic
author, either to confirm my assertion, or to confer some grace upon my
conclusion, and promise to pay him again with an acknowledgement, though it be
in a landscape, even as far off as the margent-room will reach.

ESSAY. VI.
Of Praise.
Qui legis ista, tuam reprehendo, 6. Laudas.
si mea laudas. PRAISE not fitted to a right object, is like that wind which
deceitful butchers use to blow into their lean, ill-favored meat, it may
puff up, and make it show fairer to the eye, but it cannot better the taste.
Praise my work or labor thou may; it may prove my humility, but it shall
not pride my humanity.

-- Si mea laudas. Mea, not me.

Praise not my person. Personal proportion cannot be the true object of Praise:
A small fall may soon dash that. The world could never yet promise an enjoyment
by a perpetuity; a new devise in law unknown, and therefore unpractised by the
old world, because impossible to be obtained: for a broken leg, a broken arm,
or a broken back may disjoynt thy praise, and then thou may be compelled to
pause at that which before thou did praise; now thou may have just
occasion to condole that which before thou did applaud.

-- Si mea laudas. Mea, not quae mei.

Natural endowments should neither be the objects of Praise. Eccles. 11. 2
It Is for the fond over to praise such things in his beloved.

Forma bonum fragile est. -- Such endowments are given of God, ^ut only to
grace the temple of the Holy Ghost, and may be but of a small conti^iance; or
else the conceit of men may ^iffer in the judgment of an external ^ilchritude;
Quot homines, tot sententiae; As many men, so many minds, faith our English
proverb; for she may be fair in oculo placili, who is not so in oculo populi;
the Lover can praise his Mistresses beauty, when perhaps his friend knows
she is black, yet notwithstanding may be comely.

Amorous Poets mistake themselves, who in some curious Elegies and Sonnets
praise their Mistresses beauty and perfections, on purpose to pride their
natures, to prove their manners, and to procure their loves. This is to woo
Venus with Cupids quiver, carrying the fan of Praise before their Mistresses,
to keep the Sun of Humility from their painted faces.

-- Si mea laudas. Mea, not quae mihi.

Riches do not make a man praiseworthy; they be dona Dei data, not
homin^innata; they be quae mihi, not mea propria; things given to me, not
properly mine own: Man indeed enjoyes them but ad volunt atem Domini. God is
hi^ Landlord, and man his Tenant (but) a will.

An opifical repute is correspondent to ta^ite, but yet worldly applause; and I
wonder much, why fine clothes and a full purse (which perhaps may be a shroud
to vice) should be more honored then Virtue, Grace and Learning covered under
a ragged vestment.

It Is folly to praise in homine aliena, and even mad folly to elevate a man
upon the Pinnacle of Admiration, quia dives est, because he is rich. Riches are
but man's servants, yet no covenant, no statute-servants: man is not sure of
them a year, no, nor a day; he cannot indent with them for a certain Diary
enjoyment; for they (like the Indian Bird) have wings to ^lie away, no feet to
stand still.

I cannot here but commemorate that worthy saying of an ancient Father to this
purpose in hand: Quid est quod dicis, Ego dives, ille pauper? Sarcinam tuam
commemoras, pondus tuum laudas; taceas laudestuas, qui miserationes tuas n^n
consideras: What Is thou say, I am rich, he is poor? thou do but
commemorate thy heavy charge, and commend thy weighty burden. If thou did but
consider, that thou (though moneyed) deservest rather to be pitied then
praised, thou would be silent in thine arrogant praises.

-- Mea laudas. Not mea laudo.

A man must not praise his own work, that is self-praise in an arrogant opinion
of his own worth; how boldly then does self-conceit shroud in the frontispice
of his own work an implicit commendation in a Commend me, or amend me?
-- Si mea laudas.


Mea, yet not mea mala.

My evil actions are not praiseworthy.

My evil acts must not be praised abroad,
For they (like smoke) do stop the breath of laud.
So says the Greek Sententionist.

(...).

If the actions of man may be compared Turpitu^o and s^^^us laude^^ sussocat.
to Fire, surely the evil in (or the deformity of) his actions may be the smoke
which stops the mouth, or furs up the throat of charity, so as it cannot,
(nay it may not) chant the praises of a friend or neighbor, because by vicious
acts degenerate, and ill-deserving.

-- Si mea laudas. Mea, yet not mea amatoria.

Praise not my amatorious and wanton pamphlets; these indeed may gain a little
popular applause, and windy praises amongst Satan's lecherous posterity, because
pleasing to their carnal desires; nay with some (it seem) the fish is already
caught, one would think then it is time to hang aside the nets; it is confessed in
plain terms, in the very frontispice of some lascivious stage-pamplets,
vaunting that 'twas acted with much applause.

These bastard-meditations are begotten between Mars and Venus; when Fancy has
helped Venus to deliver them, then does the Printer wrap them up in their
swadling-clouts, and then are they to some great Lord or Lady to God-fa --
honor them (I mean) with an acceptance; I, (and that which the Author
implicitly prays for in his Epistle Dedicatory is) to owner them so as to
make them their adopted children; for (no doubt) they strive what they can to
make them their honorable Patro^s pictures, and therefore may suite best with
my Lord or Ladies fancy; for Simile similiga^det, Like joys in like; and
therefore they will not loath them, but love them, highly extol and praise
them, and their Authors industry and ingenuity for them; whereas books of great
power to imprint either the Theological or Moral Virtues in the soul, being in
like manner presented to some honorable view, may for the titles sake,
especially for the subject matter, be both unregarded, and unrewarded. And
what is the reason of this? Surely it may quickly be apprehended, the Author
forgot his Patrons humor, and in it he is afraid he shall not find his own
picture, if he should vouchsafe to give it a perusal, no marvel then if it be
rejected: For Omne simile nutrit sibi simile, Like loves to nourish its like.
Theological and Moral discourses then should be presented to Patrons of more
settled and diviner spirits, lest the Author should cast pearls before swine.
But such discourses which do (as it were) dissect or anatomize the body of
fair Venus, and her blind son Cupid, are of right to be patronized by
amorous and lustful gallants: but I am afraid, that such discourses may be
ominous to the Writers, if not the Readers, being begot when Mars and Ven^s
were in a conjunction. Did they not prove an ominous tempest to Ovid, when for
them his punishment was no less then banishment? The Astronomers say too, that
this conjunction of Mars and Venus enforces rain and tempest; and I am sure
that these lascivious pamphlets and idle ballads cannot aff^rd either to the
Writer or Reader any true comfort; carnal pleasure for the present they may,
but at the last they cause (as it were) a tempest in the conscience, and work
in the mind, trouble, vexation and grief, and that in two respects.

In respect of the 1. Time. 2. Matter.

1. In respect of the time, because 'twas lost in penning or perusing such
libidinous toys, for which time an account shall one day be given at the
tribunal of Heaven, though it was not spent nihil agend^, yet 'twas male
agendo; not idly, yet evilly.

Object. Object.
Yet you commonly say that these meditations (though on Cupids proportion) keep
me from many worse exercises.

Answ. Answ.
By your own confession they are bad in gradu positivo, so that your own mouth
does excuse you ^ tanto, but not a toto. I have read it written in the
discommendation of that great Politician VIVES, that he did spend his whole
life, part in scanning, whether he should pronounce Vergilius or Virgilius,
Carthaginenses or Carthaginienses, Primus or Preimus, and despising all worthy
sciences and orderly course of government or ru^^iments; he spent the rest of
his time in making filthy and lascivious Epigrams. It would be more commendable
and praiseworthy both in the sight of God and man, to spend thy time upon some
more serious exercises, which may tend to Gods glory, the good of thy Country,
and the benefit of thy neighbors, and all this may end with comfort to thine
own soul. Non nobis sol^m nati sumus, says the Orator.

2. In respect of the matter, these lascivious pamphlets and wanton ballads may
become a grief and trouble to the soul; for such works in the subject matter
are but folly: and would it not grieve and trouble a wise man, especially upon
his deathbed, that he has spent his precious time upon folly? Such amorous
meditations are Satan's snares, in which he catches the fleshly dotterels; they
be that grand Impostors waters which quench the fire of zeal, which perhaps
was scarce discernable before. Rob. Green
That great Writer of lascivious folly, styles his own meditations no better;
and therefore writing his last work, (as he then intended) wherewith he
resolved to solace the minds of young men and maids, calls it GREENS Farewell
to Folly; sure then unworthy of praise, because Folly: so he terms it, and so
I leave it.

-- Si mea laudas. Mea, yet not mea meritoria.

Praise not thy works m^ritorious.

Merit, Suff^it ad (...) scire, qu^d non sufficia^t (...) ita. Bern. s^per
Ca^t. Ser. 6
and my sins are (as it were) contradictories. Did I merit per opus operatum,
I must then have wages for my work, and I never read in the Scripture of any
wages allowed in spiritual duties for the work done, but death: The wages of
sin is death. Could I be sinlesse, I could merit; had not my Savior been so,
he could never have merited Alstedius distinct. c. 23. d. 31.
ex merito condigni, in which my faith does challenge an interest per viam
applicationis only, no way per viam proprietatis; those merits are not mine
own, but my Saviors by faith applied to my sin-sick soul.

My Faith must labor and be fruitful, and my Quum bo^^^o; ^ra nostra remunerat
Deus, no^ merita nostra, sed dona sua coronat. August. Quisquis tibi enumerat
merita sua, quid tibi enumerat nisi munera tua? August. lib. Confess.
reward shall be Heaven, yet my small endeavors cannot counterpoise that great
reward; for what Datua, sed quae non debes, proportio and adsit. Non aliter
meritum dixeris esse tuum.
proportion is there betwixt a thing finite and infinite? So far would the
one outpoise the other in the scales of Justice, as that there would be betwixt
them an unutterable disquiperation. Man has Heaven ex Merita habere cures,
habita data noveris. Pe^n super Cant.
dono, non ex perquisito, as the Lawyers speak, by gift, not by purchase; he
has it at the end of his labors (...) (...) signifies both munus and pramium,
and not barely munus, but munus honorarium.
(...), not (...), as a voluntary gift to reward his temporal labors, not as
wages which then should be due to him from God his Master, having deserved it
for the works which he has done for his benefit in his service.

With what face then can I pride my self up in a self-conceit of merit? I must
confess that all my merit is Gods mercy, Nec tu elegis^i me, sed ^go elegi te,
nec ut te ^liger^m tua merita inveni, sed praeveni: hoc est autem judicium
inter me and te, ut tua merita non extollas, non praeferas opera legis. Bern.
Ser. 67. super Cant.
and so I cannot be poor in merit, as long as GOD is rich in mercy; for which I
must have a tongue of Praise, whose object must be God; but I desire not the
praise of man's ^ongue, because I have done ^onum, a good work; Non bona tam
pensat quam been facta Deus.
yet I may have praise of God, if I have done bonum been, Deus author est
meriti, qui and voluntatem applicat operi, and opus applicat voluntati. Aug.
that good work well. It is Gods work, not mine; I know no reason why mine own
good works should puff me up, having perhaps no other ground to persuade my
self that they be so, but the praise of men, (when as sordet in distinctione
judicis, quod fulget in opinione operantis,) when as those good works may be
fordid in the sentence of him who should be the rewarder, which are splendant
in the sight of the worker.

-- Si mea laudas. Mea, yet not mea moralia.

My moral actions or virtues in some sort, ought not to be the object of
praise and commendations.

Object. But ere I proceed, me thinks I hear the plain or right Moralist
intercepting me in my Meditations with his Contradictory Cavil, objecting
authority to refel my position, syllogizing thus: That which makes a man
blessed, is worthy of praise;
But Virtue makes a man blessed;
Therefore Virtue is worthy of praise.


The proposition or Major Cicero proves for him. C^cero, in Parad^x.
Quicquid est laudabile (says he) idem and beatum videri debet: Whatsoever is
laudable, the same ought to seem blessed; and that which is blessed entitative,
may be so effective; that which is blessed, (no doubt) may make blessed, which
is apparent in the summum bonum.

The assumption or Minor has a Theoreme of a Modern Philosophical Methodist
to back it (as it were) with armor of proof, Scheib^er. Philos. Compend. l. 8.
c. 1. Non absurd dici^ ur, virtutis habitum, (sitamen talis fit, ut non adsit
impedimentum, prohibens actum) reddere hominem Politice beat^^m, adeoque in co
summum bonum consistere*
who thus writes: It is no absurdity to say or hold, that the habit of virtue
(which cannot be hindered in the act) makes a man Politically blessed, and
concludes, that in it consists the chiefest good, the summum bonum.

To which I answer; First, That this position or theoreme is not absolute, but
conditional, which condition stands upon two feet, a nisi and an it ^; the
first respects the thing, the second the person; there is an obstante in the
first, and a secundum quid in the second. The first condition is, That the
habit of virtue does not make a man Politically blessed, unless it be such an
habit, as that there be no obstacle, which may hinder the reduction of the
habit into the act, whereby the habit is exercised; Now how does Vice stand
like a Lion in the way to hinder the actual operation of the habit of Virtue?
whence it happens that many times the habit of Virtue lies like glowing coals
raked up in embers.

The second condition is, That though the habit of Virtue be no way hindered in
the act, yet it makes a man blessed; but Politice tantum, Politically only, and
that Political perfection of Felicity the Philosophers bound only upon this
life, and specifice upon the civil life only; which Felicity is so placed in
contemplatione primi boni, in the contemplation of the first good, as that the
externe good things of the world, which may fitly add to the complement of a
civil life, must not be severed from Felicity; because man's nature is not
Arisl. 1. 10. Eth. c. 8.
((...)) sufficient to contemplat without an enjoyment of the outward worldly
good things; so that a man may be happy, and yet unhappy; a seeming felicity
may be an ^nmate in the house of his soul with a being misery, which may not be
public and apparent, till rifler death makes an ent^y. Just-meale-mouth'd
Absalom, and wife-politick Achitophel were applauded, praised, beloved, and
respected for their morals, and in the vulgar judgment were deemed happy and
blessed, because the intended justice of the one, and the pretended policies of
the other were devoted to the service and good of the Weale-Publick; but really
to demonstrate a seeming blessedness, the hair of the head made one
miserable, and a rope the other unhappy. Or,

Secondly, Resp. (...)
I answer, that I deny not ^ut that true Virtue, secundum essentiam, is
praiseworthy; which being en^o^ed in Morality only, was the object of praises
amongst the ancient Heathen. See how Horace commends the just and constant man:
Iustum and tenacem propositi virum, Carm. l. 3, Ode. 3.

Non civium ardor prava^ubentuam,
Non vultus instantis Tyranni
Mente quatit solida: ^equ^
Aust^r.
Dux inquieti turbidus Adriae,
Nec fulminantis magna Iovis manus,
Si fractus illabatur orbis,
Impavidum ferient ruinae.
Nor Citizens zeal commanding wicked things,
Nor threatening brow of wrathful Tyrant-Kings.
Nor the South-winde, the chief disquieter,
Of the Adriatic waves, nor Jupiter,
Whose potent hand moves thunder from above,
The just resolved, and constant man can move.
Though the worlds fabric Heaven quite demolish,
Its fearful fall would not his heart astonish.


Thus this best of Lyrick Poets does almost unbreath himself with the praises
of Pollux, Hercules, Bacchus and Romulus, who were of Mortals made even
immortal by two virtues especially, Constancy and justice; Such for their
Moral virtues, were by Heathen writers praised and raised up ad astra, but we
who are Christian readers know what they were. Carm. l. 3. Ode. 2.


And see what an excellent commendation this same Poet gives Virtue but a
little before in his second Ode.

Vi^tus repulsae nescia sordidae,
Int aminatis full get honoribus,
Nec sumit aut ponit secures
Arbitrio popularis aurae:
Virtus recludens immeritis mori
Coelum, negata tentat iter via:
Coet usque vulgares, and udam
Spernit humum fugiente penna.
Virtue, Repulses or affronts^
who ne'ere did base repulses know,
Does shine, beset with taintlesse honors show,
She public honors does nor take, nor will,
To get applause, or please the vulgar will:
She opening Heaven to men, who endless days
Deserve, seeks passage through obsessed ways:
She, scorning things which taste of earthly leaven*
Does swiftly rear her slight from earth to Heaven.
I deny not (I say) but that Virtue in it self is praiseworthy, but many times
the object of praise is blotted, being placed in a most vicious subject, who
for one or two virtues may be noted, but with twenty vices may be tainted; so
that the viciousness of the person or subject may obscure the luster of his
virtues, and so (though not cut off, yet) may curtaile (if I may so speak) that
praise which of right is due to them, and to him for them. And it is now become
a gross error in earthly men, to make him a pattern of imitation in all
things, who deserves to be followed but in one; he being the subject of one or
a few particular virtues shall be made by the mop^ey'd ignorant the object of a
general encomium. Absalom was affable, An instance in Absalom, who was praised
for his affability.
but yet a ^latterer, a traitor, a disobedient wretch, a rebellious caitiffe,
he was indeed (as Aechines and Polycrates reporced of King Philip of Macedon)
facundus and formosus, fairetongu'd, and fair-fac'd; was he therefore worthy to
lead the people by the eyes, as Hercules did by the ears?

But to draw nearer to my former assertion; neither the Moral, nor the
Intellectual virtues can make a man the true object of praise absolutely, and
in all respects, and that for these four reasons.

First, Reas. ^.
because the enjoyment of them alone without the Theological virtues, cannot
assure a man of future eternal felicity. Though they be hominis ^
bona, and Dei dona, man's goods and Gods gifts, yet they do not bring a man to
the crown of glory; their possessors and open professors may be, yet
notwithstanding but natural men, who are enthralled, and do homage to these
three Tyrants, The 1. World, 2. Flesh, and 3. Devil. to whom they are no better
then bondslaves as long as they live in the state of Nature. (...).
The best of the Heathen, yea and the best of the Jews are no better how
glorious soever they be; Amongst the Heathen Aeneas was counted the most pious,
Plato the most divine, Aristides the most just, Aristotle the most learned,
Socrates the most virtuous, Lucretia the most chaste; And amongst the Jews the
Essees and the Pharisees were most devout; Phil. 3.
and amongst these, Paul was reputed the most servent in zeal, unblameable, the
pattern of Perfection, as erroneously he judged of himself before his
conversion, being blinded by the God of this World. But afterward he saw that
his fervency was but fury. All these men were admired for their virtues; but
being without Christ, they were the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 12.

The civil and moral worldling will praise some for their good husbandry, some
for their good hospitality, some for their temperance, and the like, and for
these, honor them for perfect Christians; These only in the sight of the
bleare-ey'd Civilian are virtues sufficient to hurry a man about the World in
the chariot of Praise. Paul sums up a catalogue of many Worthies in an
explicit commendation of their worth, yet not for any of their Moral virtues,
but for one of their Theological, Heb. 11.
nominated, their faith.

The second reason is; Reas. 2.
because man may be an Aretist, and yet an Atheist; he may enjoy these virtues,
and yet live without God, Ut anima est vita corporis, sic Deus est vita animae.
and therefore but dead, ( ut corpus sine anima, sic anima sine Deo) his body
is but the sepulcher of a dead soul. If the body of man be the temple of the
Holy Ghost, his heart must be the sanctum sanctorum. Industry and Action may
adorn the Temple with the Moral and Intellectual virtues; but if divine grace
does not prepare the sanctum sanctorum, it will never be fit to entertain the
King of Kings.

A man may be in outward judgment completely virtuous, and yet he may walk but
in the night of ignorance, (as it were) by the Starre-light of the Moral, and
Moonlight of the Intellectual virtues, until the Sun of Righteousness
appear upon the Horizon of his heart, and then he will persuade himself, that
all his before he was but pur-blinde, and do we honor the sight of a
pur-blinde man with an absolute and perfect praise?

The third reason, because these virtues alone may puff up the enjoyer, Reas.
3.
and make him proud and vainglorious. Moral virtues cannot be exercised
without the Intellectual, because they are blind without these; And it is not
now to be noted for some new thing, that these make some arrogant, though not
all. Holy writ does inform us that knowledge puffs up; ^ Cor. 8. 1.
and indeed this Iron age has so wrought with a lofty generation, as that the
Learneder are not commonly the Lowlier; nay is not the proverb verified by the
learned Sophist, which is, The poorer the prouder? Let him who was once (as it
were) a Carter become a Scholar; mark how stately he 'l carry his body, like a
swollen Turky-cock ruffling through a yard, and see how haughtily he will shore
up his eyelids, gogling upon his ancient poor acquaintance, as though they
never knew his father; glorying so much in his breeding, as that he has quite
forgot his beginning. Such a one is like to Paulus Samosetanus, who went
through the marketplaces, streets and highways, vaunting publicly of his
learning; or like unto Rhemnius Palemon the Grammarian or Pedant, who was wont
to glory, that Learning was borne, and came into the world with him; and also,
that with him it was like to perish.

Fourthly, Reas. 4.
because the virtues of the praised may deceave the judgment of the praiser;
for superficial virtues only may be the objects of real praises: Vice
sometimes becomes virtues coat, and it is not discernable in the action, until
justice does disrobe him.

Hypocrisy is a cunning craft^master, he can make vizards for the vices to
personate the virtues without a sudden discovery. Hypocrisy can easily fit a
man with a Linsey-woolsey garment; intus linum subtilitatis, extra lanam
simplicitatis demonstrat; whose subtle thread of deceit is within side, but
the plain web of simplicity without side; thus a man may be ovis visu, but
vulpes actu; his outside may be of Lambes-woole, when as his inside may be
lined with Foxefurre.

-- Si mea laudas. Mea, yet not mea titularia.

A man is not the more praiseworthy for his greatness and high titles, for
good and great are not voces convertibiles, and commonly the higher the
haughtier.

Exeat aula,
Qui volet esse pius, virtus and summa potestas,
Non coeunt; -- says the Poet: Indeed the favorable aspect of a King may
wring out of the inferior an unwonted respect, though the promoted deserves
this honor; just as Haman merited his promotion, whose pride strangled desert,
before ever justice advanced him to the rope. Desert of praise does not always
wait upon promotion.

-- Si mea laudas. The Philosophers reckon praise amongst the goods of Fortune,
whose object must be either man or man's, either me or mea conditionally that it
may vindicate the title of good. The love of praise is malum, an evil, a vice;
but the object of praise must be bonum, a good, a virtue. Evil men and their
wicked works demerit the evil of disgrace, they can never be so much beholding
to humane repute, or godly esteem, as to grace them with good words.

The Apostle directs a man how to attain true praise; Romans 13. 3.
Do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same; it is not the
knowing, but the doing of good which reapes the benefit of praise.

Those goods which are necessary to true felicity, should be the true object of
praises.

There is a twofold good: Bonum 1. Natural. 2. Spirituale.

Natural and Spiritual; the first is gotten by man's industrious endeavors, the
second cannot be obtained but by the help of divine grace. The first the
Philosophers divide into the goods of 1. The Mind. 2. The Body. 3. Fortune.

1. The goods of the Mind are Virtue and its actions.

2. The goods of the Body are Health, Strength, Beauty, the integrity of the
external and internal senses, and such like endowments which do concurte to the
^ucrasy or good temperature of the Arist. l. 1.
body. Rhet. c. 5.


3. The goods of Fortune, are nobility, honor, glory, a good name, the
fruitfulness of the womb, friends, liberty and riches, etc.

These goods (they say) are necessary Arist. l. 1.
to the enjoyment of felicity in this life, Eth. c. 1.
the goods of the mind (...), as essentials to happiness; the goods of the
Body and of Fortune do secundarily only pertain to Felicity, non ad
foelicitatis essentiam, sed integritatem, the one be its instruments, the other
its ornaments. But the Spiritual and Theological goods of a man are those three
divine Sisters, viz. 1. Faith, 2. Hope, and 3. Charity.

These three work a man into the true and eternal happiness. The natural goods
may and ought to be praised in a man, but any (...), as we commend him who does
bonum, a good thing, in respect of him who does an action indifferent, we
approve of it with a So, So: But the supernatural good things may and ought to
be commended (...), because the Agent has done bonum been, a good thing well.
The essence of Felicity does consist in the habit of Virtue (...), but in the
operation of it (...), Loco supradicto.
says Aristotle; and this is as true of the Theological, as of the Moral
virtues; for it is not the having, but the doing which crowns; not he that
can, but he that does run, obtains the prize and praise too, if he be
faithful unto the death, hold out to the end of the race. These divine virtues
make a man like Genesis 6.
Noah, to be just and perfect; and like Job 1.
Job, to be perfect and upright; and like Luke 1.
Zacharias and Elizabeth, to be righteous before God, walking in all the
Commandments of the Lord, blameless; blameless sine querela, non sine culpa;
without cruption, not without corruption; blameless before men, yet not
sinlesse before God. The Saints perfections are not so full, but they may fall;
as long as dust and ashes are clothed with mortality, they may be mundi, yet
are still mundandi; clean, yet to be cleansed. The Saints are in this world
partially, but not gradually perfect; perfect secundum inventionem, non
secundum perventionem; in regard of intention, contention, or endeavors; but
not in regard of pervention, or performance; and therefore the foot of it does
rest upon Earth, but the height of it is reserved for Heaven.

This is but one degree of their encomium, that they were just and perfect; the
very height of it was, that they were so in their generation: Noah was a just
man in his generation; not a just man as just men went in those days, (that
were a poor praise for so worthy a Patriarch, but he was a just man in that
generation, wherein the world was over-growne with wickedness, so he was just,
non juxta consummatam justitiam, Quaest, in Genesis
sed juxta justitiam generationis suae, says St. Hierome:

Hesiod describes five sorts of ages, and that which is the last and worst, is
that we now live in, the Iron age.

(...) Hesiod. (...). 1.


Iron indeed corsidering the people who live in this age, John 9. 5.
a wicked, perverse, and crooked generation; Phil. 2. 5.
and for a man to shine as a light in thd midst of this naughty and perverse
Nation, is worthy of praise indeed. Esse malum inter bonos culmen pravitatis,
esse bonum inter malos culmen pietatis; as to be dissolute amongst the good, is
the height of pravity; so to be good and upright amongst the wicked, is the
height of piety: so that I may say with Seneca that in this age Magna pietas
est nihil impie facere: It is great piety to refrain from impiety. Martial
highly commends Nerva, that he could (nay that he dared to) be godly and good
in a wicked Court: Nunc licet and fas est, Mart. 1. 12.
sed tu sub principe duro, Epig. 6.

Temporibusque malis ausus es esse bonus.


Thus you see what Virtues ought to be the absolute objects of humane praises;
but before I leave the object, I Will give the foundation upon which praises are
to be built, and that is justice, according to Cicero's testimony: Fundamentum
perpetuae commendationis and fame est justitia, fine qua nihil esse potest
laudabile: The foundation of perpetual commendation and fame is justice,
without which nothing can be laudable. The object must be that good which is
worth commendations, 1. whether it be in 1. Amicis. aut 2. Inimicis. in friend
or foe, the end is to give to God, his glory. Man, his due.

-- Si mea laudas. Omnia. --

Men must be so praised, as that their vices be not approved; so was 1 Chronicles.
15. 14.
Asa, 2 Chronicles. 25. 2.
Amazia, and 2 Chronicles. 27. 2.
Jotham commended. To praise mea is charity; but to praise mea omnia, may be
slattery, and that may puff up, and a puffing up precedes a plucking down.
Herod's eloquent Oration forced that, euphemy or faustam acclamationem from the
people with a vox Dei non hominis, the voice of God, and not of man, which
swelled him with pride, giving not the glory to God by punishing those
Sycophants, of whose vanity he complained, when he was even ready to yield up
his body to dust and ashes, (as Josephus reports;) but the worms took
possession of his body, before time came, that sins Attorney, death did deliver
it to them in the grave. Ignatius took care, lest he should be taken with
slattering praises, Flagellantes enim me flagellant. Ign. in Ep.
lest they should inflare, puff him up, and that was but Flagellare, to wound
him.

-- Laudas. Laudas tu, but Qualis tu?

No great matter, for Quis tu? The quality of the praiser is more to be
regarded then the person; for good men will praise good men, and bad men will
praise bad men, and therefore Antisthenes the Athenian being told that he was
praised of certain wicked men, said, Vereor, ne quid imprudens fecerim mali I
fear, lest that I have unwittingly done some evil; thinking that none are
praised of evil men, but for evil actions.

-- Laudas. But Quomodo?

Euripides says, (...), Virtue shines in good men when they be dead; and
therefore Pescennius Niger being called from the Army to the Empire, said to
one who wrote a Panegyric in his praises for his worthy acts, Write the
praises of Marius, and of Hannibal, and of some other worthy deceased Captains,
whom we imitate; and as for my self, placere vivus, mortuus etiam laudari voso;
I will (whilst I live) please; when I am dead be praised, and good reason too:
For, Pascitur in vivis livor, post sata quiescit:
Tune suus ex merito quemque tuetur honos. says Ovid.


Wicked sure is that man, who sticks not (yet the worlds custom it is, though
wicked,) to praise his neighbor being dead, whom he sought to spoil being
living; so prone to mischievous dissimulation is man's mind, as that he who is
now ( in humo) shrined in dust, shall be the object of praise; who when he was
( homo) clothed with mortality, was the object of malice. It is the complaint
of a modern Poet: Ledimus insontes vivos, laudamus eosdem
Defunctos: O mors candidal vita nigra!
We praise them dead, whom without cause in breath
We hurt; Thou 'rt black, O Life! thou 'rt white, O Death!


Thus Death makes him precious in our tongues, whom Life esteemed percicious in
our thoughts.

-- Laudas. But Cui?

To whom do thou praise a neighbor? if to his enemy, he will hate him the
more; if to his friend, perhaps self-conceit may make him so jealous of his own
reputation, as that he thinks, that does derogate from his own worth, which is
attributed to the worth or merit of his friend. Indeed Envy now adays is the
greatest, and frequenrest enemy to Worth's preferme^t: It is deaf to all
praises, but now to its own; if praise do not flatter it, it will please it
self with self-praises: Laus in ore proprio sordescit.
Malice, especially chaired in honor has no ears to hear the praises of an
inferior, nor yet Charity to excuse the unadvised errors of the (otherwise)
well-deserving; nor yet patience to bear with the weakness of inferior
Worthies. An instance in this we have in the Roman Tribunes; for when Caeso
the son of L. Quintius, surnamed Concinnatus, had incurred the hatred and
displeasures of the Tribunes, by carrying himself as a professed enemy to
popular proceedings, and thereby had endangered his life; They would not hear
of his worthiness and knowing deservings, the alleging of which incensed them
the more, whereby they became the more cruel, like a Bear robbed of her
whelps; they hunted the more eagerly after his blood, which his father
perceiving, and being directed by a better discerning wisdom, (as it were)
then the rest of his Advocates, he chooses out a path (for his sons safety)
contrary to that which they had trod, omits the recital of his merits, as
things not fitting to be seen of a distempered sight, and indeed not to be
endured of Envy; acknowledges a fault, and in that regard with great instancy
desires the people (in humble and submissive terms) to bear with the weakness
of his years, and not to urge the forfeiture of his unadvised error. Thus
better it was to confess an error, then to allege merit. A man therefore
ought to beware and consider to whom he praises a neighbor. Quid de quoque
viro, and cui, dicas, saepe caveto: Is a remembrance to a praiser, as well as
to a detractour.

Observe what man thy hearer is, and see,
The nature of thy praises what they be.
-- Laudas.
We must honor our neighbors by the Apostles injunction, 1 Pet. 2. 11
and that ore, by our mouth; and so by praising their real worth we honor our
deserving neighbors by our lips: Rhet. lib. 1 c. 9.
Praise is honor, qui oratione fit, or according to Aristotie, (...), a speech
showing the greatness of Virtue, or an honor which is given to a man of worth
by words Panegyrical, or encomiastick speeches; and we must honor them too by
defending their reputation against the malevolous aspersions of the venomous
tongues of detractours, who endeavor to derogate somewhat from their worth by
calumny. Satan who is called (...), an accuser or slanderer, is an expert
seeds-man, he takes great pleasure in sowing the seed of Envy in man's heart,
which bears the black-rotten fruit of detraction.

If the fire of passion do but once smother under the wet straw of malice, time
will stay but the drying; occasion shall fire it, opportunity shall find a
tongue to vent it, a calumnious aspersion shall be a requital of a received
affront, or (but) conceived displeasure; so proclive to revenge is the mind of
man, and sometimes so insatiable, as that it cannot quench its thirst, no not
though it be drunk with blood; a man then who can truly vindicate the title of
a friend, will vindicate the cause of his wronged absent friend, by a defense
of his reputation against the malicious and viperous brood of back-biters.

-- Laudas. Nay we must be praisers, or we shall be detractours; if we
maliciously conceal the good which is in our neighbor, we do detract from his
fame and worth F^na hominis diminuitur vel 1. Direct. 2. Indirecte. 1.
Direct, vel per 1 Impositionem falsi. 2. Aggravationem peccati. 3. Revelatio.
occulti. 4. Relationem boni, vel very mala intention. 2. Indirecte, vel 1.
Bonum alterius negamdo. 2. Malitiose bonum reticendo, vel minuendo. Aquinas.
indirectly, though not directly, according to Aquina.

-- Laudas. The Greek word for praise may afford us a point of learning, which
may not be baulked or overpassed without notice; (...) they derive from (...),
suscipio, to undertake. Indeed praise does undertake two things very happily,
and a third by the by, viz. 1. Animare. 2. Honorare. 3. Onerare.

1. Animare.] To hearten and encourage the praised, or the auditor to an
imitation of the praiseds virtues, or to a cheerful progression in that good
which is so commendable; Laudare est acerrimus stimulus movendi, says Pliny.
Praise is a sharp goad, which rouseth up the dull spirit to an agility in
action: So the Poet, -- Immensum gloria calcar habet.

Glory (which is consentiens laus bonorum de excellent virtute been
judicantium, Cicer. Tusc: Qu. lib. 3. Aug.
as Cicero says; or frequens de aliquo fama cum laud, (as another has it,)
which is always joined with praise, is like a spur which stirs up the
spirits to operation, when they begin to be defective in the exercises of good.

2. Honorare.] Praise does honor the well-doer; and honor is pramium
virtutis, a reward of virtue, which is given to a good man, that others by his
example may be stirred up to the practice of virtuous duties.

3. Onerare.] To burden a man with pride and vainglory, and that is the worst
office that praise can do. It was part of Ignatius his studies to find out a
means how to beware and eschew his praises, ( ne temere inflarent,) lest they
rashly swell him with the tympany of pride.

-- Laudas. What profit is it for a man to be bandied up and down in the
Tennis-Court of this World with the Racket of Praise? sure none to the praised;
all the the benefit lights upon the praiser. Praise like a stone thrown against
a wall rebounds upon the head of the caster; Bonum laudare non tam laudato,
quam laudantibus prodest; the good of praise profits the praiser more then the
praised.

As praise and worldly applause should not transport a man out of himself by
access of joy, and excess of self-conceit; so neither should dispraise and
mundane disgrace deject him so much as cause him either to torment his mind
with restless fancies, or careless choler, or melancholy passions, or to
period his resolves by desperation; for another dispraise cannot annihilate
the object, neither can praise coronize the praised. Praise follows Virtue,
but as the shadow does the body.

Contemnit laudem virtus, Owen. Epig. lib. 3. Epig. 13.
licet usque sequatur
Gloria virtutem, corpus ut umbra suum.
Est etenim virtus aliquid, nil gloria, sicut
Est aliquid corpus, corporis umbra nihii.
Virtue does praise contemn, though it does embrace.
Its steps, as shadow does the body trace.
Like as man's body, so substance Virtue's deemed;
But like the shadow, praise is naught esteemed.
The consideration of this may move a man to recollect his saddest thoughts and
troubled spirits, even in the midst of melancholy dumps, and worldly troubles,
and so meditate on the worlds inconstancy.

To conclude then: I have little sought to wind my self into the worlds
favor, since I have experienced its fickleness; they only who are its
white-boyes, temporizers now adays are the most deeply imprinted in its books,
and are in the most esteem and repute with worldly men. Let the world frown
upon a man, and it shall be a sure attractive for flatterers and praisers; but
let it once frown, and that is as sure an instructive for detractours; then
away haste friends, whose place is soon possessed with fiends, tormentours,
gibers, flowters. Experience taught Ovid the brittlenesse of a friends love,
which directed his Muse to warmble out this disciplinary distich: Donec eris
foelix, multos numerabis amicos,
Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes.
Friends are not scarce, as long as riches hold:
When wealth is ^led, no friends can then be told.
To the very same purpose too writes a Poet of our days. Owen.

Te bona dum splendet ^ortuna, sequuntur amici,
Vt te, dum lucet sol, solet umbra sequi:
Quam p^tmum liquidus nebul is offunditur a^r,
Ecce repent tuum deserit umbra latus.
Whilst Fortunes Sun does shine, thou'st friends good store,
When Sun is set, thy shadow's seen no more;
When as dark clouds from sight obscure the Sun,
Behold, how soon thy shadowe's sled and gone.
ESSAY. VII.
Of Errors in Readers.
And therein somewhat of Flattery, Envy, or, Detraction.

Qui legis ista, 7. Omnia stultitiam, si nihil, invidiam.
tuam reprehendo, si mea laudas
Omnia, stultitiam, si nihil, invidiam.
I am now fallen upon the tongue.

Nobile lingua bonum, mobile lingua malum. IT was both the best and worst dish,
which Aesop could present to his Master; It is my fortune now to present you
with one bad enough, an unfit dish to intrude it self into a banquet; I must
dress, yet am no curious Cook; but it is my comfort, many a palate-pleasing
dish has been cook't by a sloven.

-- Si mea laudas Omnia, stultitiam, si nihil, invidiam.

To praise Omnia ex paucis, that is folly, and that folly is flattery; but to
praise nihil ex omnibus, that is envy. To free the Reader then from the
suspicion both of flattery and envy, he may praise a few of all, not all of a
few; for what man can be so exquisite in his meditations, as that every word
should (like the least filings of Gold,) have its weight.

-- Si mea laudas. Omnia. --

I may liken our flattering Readers to our flattering Churchwardens, for as
these put in their bills, so they in their Censures thrust in an Omnia been.

There is an herb called lingua pagana, horse-tongue, or double-tongue; the
devil that crafty gardener has got a slip of it, and has set it in the heart
of the Gna^honical Reader; the effects of it are dangerous, for the juice of it
being drunk by the honest Reader, may be as hurtful to him, as hemlock is to
the chicken. Bilinguis was none of Gods making, it waa the devils marring, he
loves to make that double which God made single.

The Readers cloven tongue has a great relation to hi^ polt-footed judgment,
and that makes him so unsettled in his opinion, as that he will disallow of that
in the Writers absence, which before he did approve of, and commend in his
presence; such an one is worse then a Zoilus or a Momus; for like a cowardly
curre, he will fawn in a man's face, but bite him by the shins, when his turned
back has given the farewell.

He is like the Swan; for his words, like her feathers, are as white as the
glorious Lilly; but his heart, like her flesh, is blacker then quenched coals.
If for this cause the children of Israel were forbidden to feed on the Swan,
Jev. 11. 18
shall I be so greedy of praise as to choke my self with the tickling, glorious
words of her Embleam.

-- Si nihil, invidiam. Envy is mother to detraction; no marvel then if the
daughter be entertained, where the mother has her welcome, The envious Reader
is now become the Writers rider, he rides like death upon a pale horse, called
Envy, who knows no other pace then a false gallop. Envy comes to the Reader
(like a lover) with a present in her hand, to woo him to a censure; Detraction
is her present, and Malice stirs up the hand to receive it. She does
Metamorphose the Reader from Lector to Lictor, a beast which Gesner never heard
of; who like the butchers dog, so long ^narles at the Writers credit,
Bon^^^^ture calls the Detractor, ^ariosus canis, the Butchers Dog.
as that at length he bites off his good name; like the Peloponnesian Physician
at Rome, he may be called Lanius vulnerarius, a killing butcher, so near is
(...) to (...), in sound, Envy to murder, as that they would equivocate
without a Schematical Epenth^sis. The detractour is borne (as one said of
Dionysius) to pride and cruelty; pride makes him to insult over the Writers
labors, and to condemn them to the fire; and cruelty makes him commend his
judgment, and cast them into the ^lames.

It Is a quaint conceit of one, yet true: That the word Detractio begins with a
D, and ends with O; it begins with the Devil, for he is the first mover or
instigatour to Detraction; but it ends with O, Orcus, Hell is his end. When
Jezebel took away her neighbor Naboths vineyard, little did she think that her
blood should be the price of it, and that her body should ere long give the
dogs a breakfast; and when a man does take away a neighbors good name by
vilifying his person, or the labor of the person with ignominious words; he
little thinks (it seems) that without repentance and restitution, eternal
^lames in hell shall one day banquet both with his body and soul. Now as
Augustus Caesar spoke of Galba's crooked back, so say I to my envious
censorious Reader: Ego monere te possum, corrigere non possum; Admonition, not
correction belongs to me, but if he amends not, the Lord will plague him,
because he has not (...), good will toward his neighbor: for the Lord (like
that Roman Emperor) Odit pallidos and macilentos, he abhorres such as are
lean with envy, and pale with malicious wickedness. The Lord keep me from such
malicious and uncharitable Readers; wherefore I pray with our Church: From
hatred, malice, and all unchartablenesse, Good Lord deliver me.
-- Si nihil invidiam.


Can a man be (...) yet (...), Detractio est de^igratio alienae famae per
occulta verba. Aquinas.
can he be mouthlesse, and yet an uncharitable detractour? Indeed he is not
reproved so much, because he does nihil dic^re, but because he does nihil
laudare. It is not the silent Reader, but the silent Praiser who is the subject
of Envy, and thesefore the worthy object of Reprehension; it is true that the
silent Reader, if lie harbor Envy in his bosom, though ^e utter it not* is a
Politic though tacit, and yet secret detractour; Gravis est rapacitas, cum
veram alterius gloriam, and si me dacio non corrumpis, silentio tamen
prae^eris. He is an envious thief who passes by the true worth of another in
silence, as well as he who falsely corrups it with lies, and therefore this
silenth Detractor does peccare in Dei 1. Bonitatem. 2. Gloriam. Sin against
Gods 1. Goodness. 2* Glory.

1. Against the goodness of God; quia omnia hominis bonasunt Dei dona; because
all the graces, good things and virtues which are in a man, are Gods gifts, and
sparks of the infinite treasure of his bottomless bounty; now to seek by our
silence to suppress the same, what is it else but to offer injury to God, and
to raze out his goodness, and so much as is possible to obscure his Godhead,
who is altogether and nothing but goodness?

2. Against Gods glory; quia opera bona hominis sunt pars Dei gloriae; because
the good works of man are part of Gods glory, Matthew. 5. 16. Let your light so
shine before men, that they seeing your good works may glorify your Father
which is in Heaven.

Therefore to seek by silence to obscure the virtues of any, what is it else
but to labor to put out the light which God would have to shine unto the
world, and so to show our selves enemies to Gods glory?

-- Si nihil, invidiam. I may very well reckon the turbulent Schismatic
amongst these si nihils, secro^ detractours; who do Ecclesiae famam detrahere,
give the Church an ill report; they hold fanum to be profanum, because in it
assemble n^fandi, as well as fandi, a parti-colored Congregation like Joseph's
coat, and therefore they serve it as Joseph's brethren did his garment, ^ent it
asunder by foul-mouthed detraction; for this purpose serves their private
conventicles, they love Aedem better then Aedes, a Chamber better then a
Church; and therefore a private conventicle more then a public convocation.
Find a Parish in England free from these detractours, and it may well be
chronicled.

-- Si nihil, invidiam. I may very well commemorate an Epilogue written some
few years since by an ancient divine, to such scholars amongst us, who by
their places in our Church, (and in respect of the treasure they receive out of
her dowry) ought to defend our writings against Schisms and Heresies, and not
underhand, and in corners to suggest evil against us, for strengthening the
hands of the factious, their private favorites.

In Seignior Ambo.
Sir Ambo takes a pension of his mother,
But fees the fugitive that calls her whore,
To us one hand, to him he gives the other
A proditor behind, a friend before.
But mark whilst he thus does himself delight.
Both sides do damn him for an Hypocrite.
In Seignior Dry-pate.
Sir Dry-pate reads and carps, and hems and spits,
No marvel though he have purged out his wits;
For little 'twas when will was at the full,
And yet it is true, he has no little skull.
In quendam Fig-fag.
See, see how Fig-fag stirs, and moves and strouts,
Hark, hark the silly Sire how trim ^e flouts;
Boys, girls and fools applaude him for some body*
But yet his carps do prove him but a noddy.
In homunculum Snuff.
Sniffe-snuffe must judge, not knowing what it meant,
For barley broth is Snuffs chief element;
Put him besides the cushion of his cup,
And all his liquid sense is dried up.
But lance no further busybodies tumor,
For every fool must needs be in his humor.
-- Reprehendo, si mea laudas
Omnia, stultitiam, si nihil, invidiam.
To conclude, I may not unfitly compare my Readers brain to a Sea, in which
the little pinnace of his judgment will be floating; but he has two dangerous
rocks like Sylla and Charybdis to pass through, between which the passage is
but narrow, and against which he may easily suffer shipwreck, if discretion do
not guide him to entertain a sober and steady Pilot; on his right hand is
descried the Rock of Flattery, on his left hand the Rock of Envy; if he keep
the Channel of Charity, he shall be possessed of the Mean, which may challenge
a Golden Epithete.

Kind Reader, keep a Mean in thy censures, and I blame thee not; if otherwise,
if thou be either envious or adulatorious, I must check, though it be by the
leave of this my Poet, applying his own words to thy curious Critical judgment.

Qui legis ista, tuam, reprehendo, si mea laudas
Omnia, stultitiam, si nihil, invidiam.
Reader, if thou do praise what e're I'ave writ,
I must (perforce) rebuke thy flattering wit;
If thou approv'st of naught in all my book,
I must reprove thy heart, it is envies crook.
FINIS.

