The Royal Commonwealths man: OR, King DAVID'S Picture, Represented in a
SERMON Preached at the Solemnity of the Funeral of Sir Tho. Adams Knight and
Baronet, and Alderman of London. In St Katherine Creechurch, On the 10th of
March, 1667.

By Nath. Hardy, D. D. D. R. Chaplain in ordinary to His Majesty, and Vicar of
St. Martins in the Fields.

David fortis in bello, patiens in adversis, in Jerusalem pacificus, in
victoria mansuetus, in peccato dolens, in senectute providus, rerum modos,
vices temporum, per singularum sonos servavit aetatum: ^t mihi videatur non
minus vivendi genere, quam canendi suavitate praedulcis moralem Deo sui fudisse
meriti cantilenam.

Ambros. de officiis, l. 1. cap. 24. In the SAVOY. Printed by Tho. Newcomb, for
William Grantham, at the Sign of the Black Bear in Westminster Hall. 1668.

To the Right Worshipful Sir WILLIAM ADAMS, Baronet.
AS it is not only lawful, (...), Greg. Naz.
but (in Gregory Nazianzens opinion) a most due debt, to publish the praises of
Gods eminent servants (especially when dead;) so it is expedient that the
publication should be extended as far, and perpetuated as long as may be.

It is the advantage which all discourses (particularly encomiastical) have by
being printed, above that which they have by being only spoken; that whereas
these are like pictures hung in a private Gallery, those are as statues set
upon an high hill, every way conspicuous; these are as pictures drawn in fading
colors, those are as Imagery wrought in lasting Arras.

Upon these considerations (worthy Sir) I suppose it is, that you desired this
following Discourse might (by the Printers help) become legible, and though I
am very conscious of its manifold defects, upon the same reason I have
fulfilled your desire.

It were too great pity, if such a rare and precious Jewel as he was should
have been locked up in a Cabinet; yea, pity it is, that a more skilful Lapidary
was not made choice of to have set him forth in his luster. But the best of it
is, his native luster was such as needed not the help of Art; and so far is
this Discourse from adding to his splendor, that in truth it receives
whatever worth it has from him.

Such as it is, I tender to you by this Dedication, and justly, since you have
the greatest right to it, as being an Inventory of your Dear Fathers best
goods, and choicest riches, which he has at once carried with him and left
behind him, in as much as the good works of them who die in the Lord follow
them, Rev. 14. 15.
to wit, for their own remuneration; and yet stay here to be paterns for others
Imitation.

An Inventory I call it, and that such as I dare own to be so far true, that
there is nothing said of him which does not belong to him; and therefore let
none think that I do nimis adulari, at all flatter him, though on the other
hand I ingeniously acknowledge it is far short of what might have been said of
him: and therefore your self with the rest of his relations may think that I
did frigide laudare, coldly commend him: The Truth is, though I will not use
Saint John's hyperbolical expression concerning our Savior; John 21. 25.
There are many other things which Jesus did, the which if they should be
written every one, I suppose that the world it self could not contain the books
which should be written: yet I dare say, the several Passages of his excellent
life could not be contained in an hours discourse, but justly require a large
Volume.

And now (Honored Sir) though it grieve you to have lost, it is no small
comfort to you that you had such a Father, so far excelling in all virtue, nor
will, I hope, the reading afresh what you have heard before, discompose you,
since you will find more white of your deceased Fathers gracious life, than
will checker the black of his dolorous death: nor is it only a Comfort, but an
honor, a great honor to you to have had such a Father, who was greatly and
highly (yet no more than deservedly) beloved and honored, both living and Dead
in City and Country. But withal, give me leave to mind you, that the having
such a Father, lays upon you a strong obligation of duty to walk in his steps
and conform to his Pattern, which I trust, in some measure you do, and will do
more and more. May you (if it be God's will) equalize his years, and as you
grow in years, grow in grace, that you may if not equalize, yet come near to
his righteous Pattern.

I doubt not but whilst he was on earth, he put up many devout Prayers for you,
your Consort, your Posterity, and not for you only but your sisters with their
Relations, whereof you all have and will experience the benefit, nor can I
close with a better Prayer than that all those blessings ghostly and bodily
which he implored for you, may by divine bounty, be continued and multiplied
upon you: I subscribe my self,

Apr. 7. 1668. Sir, Your affectionate servant, Nath. Hardy.

Acts 13. 36. David after he had served his own generation, by the will of God
fell asleep and was laid to his Fathers, and saw corruption.
I Am at this time to preach upon a Double text, the one whereof I have now
read in your ears, and the other is here presented to your eyes: both of them
so copious that the scantling of an hour is too narrow for each. And therefore
waving all Prefaces and without enquiring into the context or occasion of the
words: I shall immediately address my self to a short discourse upon the text,
and so proceed to give an account of the sorrowful occasion of this solemn
Assembly. And if in performing this double task, I shall exceed the limits of a
single hour, my Apology shall be in the language of Salust, Salust.
Praestat tacere quam pauca loqui, It were better to say nothing at all than
too little upon two such pregnant subjects.

The former whereof is St. Paul's narrative concerning David, as it is set forth
in these words; David after he had served his own generation, by the will of
God, etc.

Which Narrative plainly parts it self into the life and death of David.

The Character of his Life is but one, but that unum aggregatum such an one, as
(by the handling it will appear) has many involved in it, He served his own
generation by the will of God.

Those of his Death are Three, by which the state of the dead is represented to
the life. He fell asleep, and was laid to his Fathers, and saw corruption.

I begin with the Character of David's life, Genesis 1.
He served his own generation by the will of God.

And before I proceed further, it will not be amiss to observe, that the
Apostle speaking of David though but collaterally gives him an excellent
Encomium. It had been sufficient as to the scope of St. Paul's discourse only to
have said, David after he fell asleep, saw Corruption. But he being an eminent
person not only in place but grace must not be mentioned without an honorable
character, nay though he wanted not his faults and those great ones too, yet
they are buried in silence and only his worth proclaimed. Prove. 10. 7.
It is the saying of Solomon, The memory of the Just is blessed, Exodus 33. 11.
the Vulagar Latin from the LXX read it, James 2. 23.
cum laudibus, Gods faithful servants ought to be remembered with praises. Josh.
1. 2.
Upon this account we find God himself adorning those who were eminent in
their generations with the amiable titles of servant and friend, Job 1. 8.
as Abraham, Heb. 11.
Job, Moses, Josua, and others; for this reason St. Paul enumerating the
Worthies of the Old Testament, gives them their due Characters; as Abel,
Enoch, Noah, with others: and here though it were but by the by and in a few
words, he bestows a very high commendation upon David, that he served his own
Generation by the will of God.

Which words in the Greek are capable of a double translation whilst (...) may
be rendered in the Dative and (...) in the Ablative case, and so have our
Translators construed it, he served his own Generation by the will of God, or
(...) may be rendered in the Ablative case, and (...) in the Dative, and so it
is translated in the Margin, in his own generation he served the will of God.

Those two words (...) and (...) are also capable of a double interpretation in
this place and accordingly the sense of the clause may be variously explicated;
(...) among other acceptations, is sometimes and most usually taken for the men
of one age, or, sometimes for the age of one man; and so here* either he served
his own generation, that is, the men of the time wherein he lived, or, he
served in his own generation, that is, during the time of his own life: (...)
which we render will, signifies counsel which cannot properly and strictly be
applied to God: for whereas counsel supposes imperfection of knowledge, and
requires time of Deliberation. To God all things past, present, and to come,
are at once and altogether manifest: but, yet inasmuch as when the Will acts by
counsel, it acts most rationally and prudently, it may serve to mind us of the
equity, and wisdom of the Divine will. And whereas there is the Will of Gods
purpose and decree; and the will of his precept and command; both of these may
fitly be understood in both the translations, all which I shall accordingly
make use of, since every way the words serve for the commendation of David, and
consequently instruction unto us: And

1. First of the translation which we have in the text, -- he served his own
generation by the will of God, It here we understand the will of God's Command,
it must be referred to served; and the meaning is, that David in serving his
generation, did not follow his own fancy, nor yet the humor of the times, but
God's will made known to him in his Word. And this restriction must still be
taken in, as we ought to be another's friend, so a servant to our generation,
but usque ad aras, and no farther; so far as may consist with a conformity to
God's will. There is a time serving, which is, though too usual, yet
detestable, when we sail with every wind, and comply* with every humor of the
age we live in. Too many such have been in our times, who change not only their
fashions but opinions according to the mode, men that can swear and forswear,
and will be sure to side with that part of the generation that is uppermost,
but far be this from the conscientious man who according to the double reading
of (...) and (...) will serve the time, Romans 12. 11.
but no further than withal he may serve the Lord according to his Will.

But I rather adhere to that Exposition which understanding the Will of God's
Decree, referrs it to generation, and gives this sense, that David served that
generation upon which he was cast by the Will of God: According to which
construction here is something implied and something expressed in this
Character.

1. That which is implied is, that that generation in which every man lives,
is, allotted to him by the Will and counsel of God. We come not into this world
by chance but Providence, and that we are born in this or that place, in this
or that age, is the wise appointment of God, Acts 17. 27.
according to that of St. Paul, he has made of one blood all Nations to dwell
upon the face of the earth, and has determined the times before appointed, and
the bounds of their habitation. And therefore, if the Generation in which we
live be virtuous and prosperous, we must thankfully acknowledge the goodness of
Divine dispensation; and if it be vicious and calamitous, the days and times
evil, we must not repine nor murmur, because it is no other than Divine
determination which has cast us upon the one or the other.

2. But secondly, That which is expressed is, that it is our Duty, whilst we
live in this world to serve our generation. Cic.
It is a known saying of the Orator, Nemo sibi natus, No man is born for
himself, nay more, no creature is made for it self; but all that they may be
serviceable to each other, and every one to the community. We may observe in
the several parts and members of our natural body, how that their several acts
and operations are in reference to the whole, The eye sees, the foot moves,
the mouth feeds, and the stomach digesteth not for it self only, but all the
rest of the members. Thus it ought to be in Church and Commonwealth; 1 Cor.
13. 5.
St. Paul says of Charity, that she seeks not her own, to wit not only, nay,
in some cases not principally. It is the same Apostles counsel to the
Phillippians, Philip. 2. 4.
Look not every man on his own, but the things one of another, to which may be
added and all upon the things which concern the Public. The truth is, for this
end has God bestowed upon men several gifts of nature, of art, of fortune, and
of grace, that with these they may serve their Generations. Yea, for this
reason, as he has enriched several Countries with different Commodities; so he
has furnished men with several gifts, to one in this kind, to another in
that, that so they may every one stand in need of, and be helpful to each
other: nor are we only Cisterns to retain but Conduit Pipes, to convey that
Water which is bestowed upon us: Treasurers to lay up, but Stewards to lay out
the Talents which are communicated to us for the common good.

This is that Duty which is incumbent upon every man according to his capacity
and Ability, but more especially such as David was, who had riches and honor,
men of wealth and estate, men of power and authority.

True it is, there is no man though never so mean and poor but may serve his
Generation, if he have a family, (as most men have) he serves the Public by
well ordering his household, especially educating his children in the fear of
God, it being not imaginable how great an influence that has upon the
commonwealth. If he has a Calling (as no man ought to be without) by his
industry and diligence in that he does not only maintain himself and family,
but serves the Public; Finally, if he be a pious man, by his good example to
those among whom he lives, and both by his mourning for the public enormities
and prayers for the public welfare he is greatly useful to the community, and
therefore let no man think himself excused or disobliged from this service. But
yet to make use of our Saviors words, Luke 12* 48.
To whom much is given, of them much is required, and consequently, by them
much ought to be performed in the service of their generation. Rich men with
their gold and silver by works of Piety and Charity; Great men with their power
and honor, by restraining and punishing evil doers; and by encouraging and
rewarding those who do well, since as it is their Privilege that they can, so
it is their Duty to be serviceable to their Generation above others. It is the
difference which Aristotle makes between a Tyrant and a King, Arist. Ethic.
lib. 1* cap. 10.
that a Tyrant (...) minds his own Profit, but a King (...) the benefit of
them whom he governs. And though that be a rebellious Principle Rex minor
universis, which makes the King inferior to the whole body of the People: yet
it was an excellent motto of Trajan the Emperor, Non mihi sed Populo; who
looked upon himself as a servant to his People: It is very observable how that
the Sun is called in the Hebrew (...) which signifies a servant, in as much as
it shines not for it self but the world, serving all Creatures with its light,
heat and influence; and such ought Kings and Princes to be, yea as all the
Stars in their several Spheres are useful to the Public, so ought all that are
set on high in any kind of Power and Authority at once both praesse and
prodesse aliis, to go before and be beneficial to others.

Nay such has been the temper of public spirited men in public places that
they have impoverished themselves to enrich the community; like the clouds
which empty themselves to water the earth. One of the German Princes had for
his Device, a candle burning in a Candlestick with these Letters, A. S. M. C.
Aliis servio, meipsum consumens, I consume my self to serve others. Plutarch
reports an excellent saying of Pelopidas -- a valiant Commander, who when going
out to the wars he was desired by his wife to look to himself returned this
answer, It is for private soldiers to be careful of themselves, they in
public places must have an eye to other men's lives. Though there be more
Danger to a man's self by standing in the gap than getting behind the hedge, yet
every good man will stand in that place to which his office obliges him,
saying with Pompey when a storm threatened the Ship which was going to fetch
corn for Rome, It is not necessary that we live but it is needful that Rome
should be relieved.

Thus ought all to be as stones, and great men as corner stones and pillars in
the building whereof they are a part, contributing to their utmost for the
support and preservation of the whole; nay they ought all as soldiers in their
several ranks, and great men like the chief Officers in the front adventure
themselves to get the field and win the Day.

Nor is our zeal to the Public to be confined to that which is called in the
Text (...) -- (...) our own generation but extended to the generations which
are to come, that when we are perished from off the earth, those that follow
after us, may be the better for us; for since according to that known Maxim,
Bonum quo communius eo melius, Good is so much the better by how much it is the
more common, the further our service extends, the more acceptable. It was
matter of Joy to the blessed Virgin that from henceforth (to wit from her
conception of Christ in her womb) All Generations should call her blessed, Luke
1. 48.
and it is no small cause of Joy to every good man when he can, yea his earnest
desire and endeavor that he may be a blessing not only to one but many, to the
present but future generations, doing and promoting those things which may
procure and preserve piety and tranquillity to the places where he lives in
after ages.

How fully all this was verified in David may appear from the several Passages
of his history, which because time will not give me leave to enlarge, I shall
contract in a narrow compass. He served his Generation as a good man by his
grieving for the notorious transgressors of Gods Law, insomuch that Rivers of
tears ran down his eyes; Psalm 119. 137. 158.
by his praying for the peace and prosperity of Jerusalem; by walking in his
house with a perfect heart, and by Doing that which was right in the eyes of
the Lord, Psalm. 122. 6. 7.
not turning aside from any thing that the Lord commanded him save in the
matter of Vriah the Hittite: Psalm. 101. 2.
insomuch that his Successors are commended and discommended according as they
were like or unlike in their practices to David. 1 Kings 15* 5.
He served his generation as a great man in wealth, 2 Kings 16. 2. 18. 3.
by consecrating a considerable part of his gold and silver for the Temple
which his son built, 2 Samuel 8. 11. 15
in honor by executing Justice and Judgment for all the people, Psalm. 78. 72.
He fed them (says the Psalmist of David) according to the integrity of his
heart, and guided them by the skilfulness of his hand. He says of himself and
accordingly he performed it, when I shall receive the Congregation, I will judge
uprightly; 75. 2.
and again, mine eye shall be upon the faithful in the land; 101. 6. 8.
and again, I will early destroy all the wicked of the land, then which no
ruler can do a greater service for his generation. How many Adventures did he
engage in for his Country, witness among others that notable encounter with
Goliath: 1 Samuel 17. 19.
and by his zeal in preparing for the house of God, and establishing the
worship of God, he served not only the present but future generations, nay by
these excellent Psalms which he has left upon record, penned upon several
occasions, and useful for all conditions of life, he has and will serve the
Church of God, as well Christian as Jewish, and that in all ages, to the end of
the world.

Thus did David and thus proportionably ought we in our several Stations. But
alas how few such are to be found? There are too many lasy debauched persons
(the Chronicle of whose life was long since summed up by the Poet, Nos numerus
sumus and nati consumere fruges) such as are the very drones of the hive,
telluris inutile pondus, Barren trees fit only to be cut down, like wooden
legs, and glass eyes, nay not so good, for these are of some use at least to
fill up a vacuity, but these are like Ciphers in Arithmetic which signify
nothing, nay not so good as these neither, for these are serviceable in
conjunction with Figures, but they do no good alone, and by their society with
others much hurt. They are the Wens and tumors, yea the botches and scabs of
the Body to which they belong, a reproach and dishonor to their generation.
The Romans appointed their Censours to inquire into every man's course of life,
and nigro carbone notare, to mark them with a brand of infamy, who could give
no good account of their life, as adjudging him unworthy to be a member of a
society, by whom the society is not bettered nay dammaged, and such are all
idle vagrants and dissolute libertines.

Yea well were it if among the rich and mighty men there were not many who like
mineral grounds, which have a great deal of gold and silver in their bowels,
but bring forth no fruits upon their furface; or like mountains that are of a
great height, and yield but very short grass, notwithstanding their high places
and full purses do little or no good in their generation. Nay which is yet far
worse, there are some and these too of the upper rank, nor is it so long since
there were such among us, I pray God there be none such still who in stead of
serving their generation serve themselves upon the generation where they live,
raising there own fortunes upon public spoils, warming themselves at those
flames which consume the community, not rulers but ruiners, not governors but
oppressors, who in stead of feeding, feed upon the people.

And though I hope the number of these is small, yet I fear the most are of a
mere selfish spirit, not caring for their generation whither it sink or swim,
flourish or wither, be happy or miserable, provided they may save their own
stake, or advance their own interest; whereas in truth would we weigh things in
the balance of right reason, we shall find that serving our own generation is
the best way to secure our own interest and that both as to matter of profit
and honor.

It was God's Command to his people in Babylon, seek the peace of the City,
Jerem. 29. 7.
for in the peace thereof you shall have peace, every particular is involved in
the general, if the tree wither, the branches cannot flourish, if the ship sink
the Cabin cannot be safe, and therefore, by serving our generation, we serve
our selves.

Nay, in this sense to be a servant is an honor, else sure St. Paul would not
have made choice of this as the fittest Character he could give King David in
my text, nor indeed is any Prince more honored in the sight of God and man,
then he who most serves the Public by well governing them. Among all the
creatures which God made, the Angels are the most glorious and yet of them it
is said, that they are ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who
shall be heirs of Salvation. Nay of our blessed Savior it is said, Hebr. 1. 11.
he came not to be ministered unto but to minister; Matthew* 20. 28.
and surely then it is no dishonor, no not to the greatest Potentates: nay
shall I say, It is the grand reason why they are entrusted by God with their
power and authority that thereby they may serve the generation. And let this
suffice for a dispatch of the translation which we meet with in the text.

2. But there is another in the margin namely that David in his own generation
served the will of God, which seems best to correspond with that which is
said of him at the 22th verse of this chapter that he was a man after Gods own
heart, and did fulfill all his will, and therefore must not be passed by.

In the handling whereof, I shall again make use of that forementioned
distinction of the will of Gods decree and command.

1. David served the will of Gods Decree, and that both actively in respect of
the Church and her enemies in his time, and passively in respect of himself.

1. He served Gods decree actively, in as much as he was a special instrument
in the hand of God for bringing great things to pass in order to the
Deliverance of his people and the Destruction of their enemies, for so we find
in his history, how once and again he subdued the Philistines, recovered the
Ark out of their hands, and brought it into the City of David with gladness. 2 Samuel 6. 12* 8. 12.
What victories he obtained over the Amalekites, Ammonites, Edomites, Moabites
and Syrians, by which means the people of Israel enjoyed plenty and
tranquillity. This is that which is observable in all ages how God has found
out, or rather, made some persons fit for eminent service, and stirred them up
to do noble and Heroic acts for his Church, The book of Judges affords
plentiful instances of this kind, where we read, that God raised up Judges
which delivered them out of the hands of those that spoiled them such as were
Othniel, Judge. 2. 16. 3. 9. 12.
Barak, Deborah, Gideon, Jephithath, Samson, with others who from time to time
served the will of God in rescuing the Israelites from their enemies, Time
would fail me to tell you of Hezekiah and Josiah, Nehemiah and Zorobabel
together with those many worthies we find in the Histories of others and of
our own kingdom in former and latter times. Among which I should be very
injurious if I should forget to mention him whose memory will be precious to
all Loyal English men so long as the sun and moon shall endure. The thrice
Noble Duke of Albemarle to whom the Character of this Text in both translations
so justly belongs, having served his own, nay succeeding generations, yea,
having most eminently served the will and counsel of God in his generation, by
being the happy instrument of delivering his Country from slavery, and settling
his King in his Throne, together with the reestablishment of our laws and
liberties.

The word in my Text (...) is according to its derivation primarily applied to
Mariners at sea, who by rowing with the Oar, Ex (...) and (...), metaphora a
renavali sumpta Beza.
or in any other way serve the Pilot in the safe passage of the Ship to the
Haven. What is this World but a Sea, the Church a Ship, God the Pilot, by whose
providence, the Ship is steered, and those whom he in a more especial manner
makes* use of to preserve the Ship of his Church whilst it passes through
this world, are as it were his under-rowers? We read of a memorable vision in
the Prophecy of Zachary, Zach. 1. 18. 20.
of four horns by which are meant the Churches enemies, and four Carpenters
which are the instruments raised by God to break these horns; when God has any
great work to do, either to pull down Babylon or build up Sion he will send
Carpenters to accomplish it, and surely thus to be employed by God in the
accomplishment of his Will, is no small Honor: Yea, for this end does that God
(who can when he pleases do his own work without means) vouchsafe as it were
to single out some persons in several ages to be serviceable to his Decrees in
the protection of his Church, that he may clothe them with renown; and
consequently we ought to fulfill this design of God by giving them all respect
and honor which they are capable to receive and we to give.

I cannot close up this without taking notice that this is no Apology, no nor
so much as the least excuse for those egregious persecutors, oppressors,
usurpers, which have in their generations been destructive to the places where
they lived, (among whom Oliver Cromwell the late cursed Monster of men deserves
to be looked upon as a nonsuch) I say this is no plea for them that in some
sense it may be said of them they served the will of God, for they only serve
his permissive not his effective will, and besides what is said of the Assyrian
king, Isai. 1 c. 7.
howbeit he means not so, neither does his heart think so, is fitly
applicable to them, they design not to serve the will of God but their own
covetous, ambitious and revengefull Lusts; only God is pleased to suffer and
make use of those horrid Wickednesses and Violences which they act upon others;
and for the bringing about of his own most just Counsels and righteous Decrees,
so that howsoever some of them adding hypocrisy to their villainy have
pretended the Glory of God, yet by their abominable actions they have
discovered their intentions to be nothing less, and though they have after a
sort served the will of God, yet it was besides nay against their will, since
at the same time, and in the same thing whereby unwittingly and unwillingly
they have fufilled Gods secret will of decree they have wittingly and wilfully
violated his revealed will of command. And therefore in a far other Notion is
this of David's serving Gods will to be understood in the Text; namely, his
ready accomplishment of of Gods decree in saving his Church and destroying his
enemies, by these warrantable means which his word allows, and his providence
has offered to him which as it was highly commendable in him, so justly
imitable by us upon the like occasions. But

Secondly, he served Gods will of decree, and that passively in respect of
himself by his willingness to suffer whatsoever evil God allotted to befall him
in his Generation; he was a man who experienced both conditions of life, namely
prosperity and adversity, nor was he more thankful for the one than patient
under the other, and that because it was Gods will, for so runs his own
language, Psalm. 39. 5.
I was dumb and opened not my mouth because it was thy doing; very observable
to this purpose is that expression of his humble resignation, where he says of
his return to Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 15. ver. 25. 26.
If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord he will bring me back, but if
he thus say, I have no delight in thee; behold, here am I, let him do to me as
seems good to him. And in this notion this character belongs to every good
man, whose name like that of a Deacon to whom St. Austin writes an Epistle is
quod vult Deus what God will, he is willing to be any thing or nothing, as God
shall dispose of him.

This says St. Chrysostom, is the property of a servant of God to be well
pleased with his severe as well as gracious dispensations (...)* Chrysostom.
not only when he smileth but when he frowneth, when he delivers but when he
afflicts, as to say with Ely, Dominus est, 2 Samuel 3. 18.
It is the Lord let him do what seems him good, and as that Nobleman answered
his king when he said, You must go on hunting with me, non oportet nam Lubens
volo, It is not I must, but I will with all readiness: so did David, Psalm. 57.
7.
saying, Oh God, my heart is ready my heart is ready; and let the same frame of
spirit and temper of heart be in every one of us.

2. Besides this notion of serving Gods Will, that is, his Decrees both by
doing and suffering (since so far as consists with the Analogy of faith, and
the reason of the context, it is best to expound Scripture in its largest
sense) I must not omit the notion of serving Gods will, that is, his
Commandments which are the signification of that which God would have us to
avoid and perform.

We find in the 119th Psalm David often praying to God, Psalm. 119. 12. 33. 35.
ver.
teach me thy statutes, and teach me the way of thy statutes, and make me to
understand the way of thy precepts; and accordingly he professes that Gods
testimonies were his meditation, and that all the day; nay, ver. 97. 99. 148.
his eyes prevented the night-watches that he might meditate in Gods word; nor
was this only that he might know but do them, and therefore he prays, Teach
me good Judgment and Knowledge (and a good understanding have they that do his
commandments;) v. 66. 5. 35. Psalm. 111 10.
and again, Oh that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes, and again, make
me to go in the path of thy Commandments. Thus like a good servant he desired
first to know his Masters will, and then to do it.

And as he served the will of God so he performed that service.

1. Cordially, rejoicing in the way of Gods statutes, making his testimonies
his delight. Psalm. 119. 14 24.
Yea, and in another Psalm he says, Psalm. 40. 6.
I delight to do thy will, oh my God yea thy Law is in my heart.

2. Speedily, his resolve is not only to go but run the way of Gods
Commandments, in his practice he made haste and delayed not to keep Gods
Commandments; Psalm. 119. 31. 60.
as well knowing, that though in other cases haste makes waste, yet in this
delay breeds danger.

3. Universally, not that he was without particular failings, and those gross
ones too; but as he says himself, Psalm. 119. 6. 104.
he had respect to all Gods Commandments, not wilfully living in the breach of
any; and again, I hate every false way, so that the bent of his heart was
against all sin, and the course of his life was conformable to all virtue; Acts
13. 22.
and accordingly it is said of him at the 22 verse of this Chapter, he did
fulfill (...) all Gods will.

4. Constantly, in his generation or age; that is, Psalm. 119. 30. 31.
to the end of his life, and therefore he says not only I have chosen the way
of truth, but I have stuck unto thy Testimonies; and again, Thy Testimonies
have I taken as an heritage for ever, and I have inclined my heart to perform
thy Statutes always, 111. 112.
even unto the end. All which considered well might he not only say but
ingeminate it, Oh Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant.

Thus did David, and thus ought we; but do we thus? we all profess our selves,
the servants of God, and what is the proper notion of a servant, 116. 16.
but one who is ad alterius nutum, at another man's command, and therefore
serve God we cannot if we serve not his Will. 1 Timothy 2. 26.
But alas how many of us according to Saint Paul's Character, are taken captive
by the Devil at his will: and like the Centurion's soldiers, Matt. 8 9.
he bids us go, and we go, Titus 3. 3.
come, and we come, do this and that, and we do it* we serve diverse lusts and
pleasures following (as our Church teaches us to confess) the devices and
desires of our own hearts. 1 Pet. 4 3.
And like those of whom Saint Peter speaks that wrought the will of the
gentiles* we conform to the humors of wicked and ungodly men, so far are we
from being what we profess to be servants, to the will of God.

Oh, therefore let us sit down and consider with our selves. 1. What the will
of God is, which we are obliged to serve and according to Saint Paul's
exhortation, Romans 12 1.
Prove what is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God. He has
showed thee, oh man, says the Prophet, Micah 6. 8.
what is good, and what does the Lord thy God require of thee. Whatsoever God
wills and requires is good, just and equal: and that were it for no other
reason but because he wills and requires it. David speaking of the will of
God, says, The Law of the Lord is perfect. Psalm. 19. 7. 8. 9.
The Statutes of the Lord are right. The fear of the Lord is clean. The
Judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether: good reason we should
serve his will which is so just, pure, right and perfect.

2. Whose will it is, namely the Will of God, who is,

1. Supremus in imperando, most supreme in commanding, having an absolute
Sovereignty over all his creatures; Wherever the Supreme power on earth
resideth, Whither in one or many, it is and must be arbitrary, but, surely much
more in him who is without a solaecism or hyperbole, most highest king of
kings, and lord of lords, and therefore his Will ought to be our Law and the
rule of our actions.

2. Benignissimus in adjuvando, most gracious in assisting; who as in Justice
he may command what he will, so in mercy will enable us (if we seek to him) to
do what he commands; upon which account it is that the yoke and burden of Gods
law is said to be light and easy. Matthew. 11. 29.


3. Indulgentissimus in condonando, most merciful in forgiving the defects and
imperfections of our service for so the promise runs, I will spare them as a
man spares his son that serves him accepting the will often for the Deed,
Mal. 3. 17.
and pardoning the imperfections that usually accompany best deeds.

4. Munificentissimus in remunerando, most bountiful in recompencing those who
serve him. Indeed, there wants not profane Atheists who say, 3. 15.
It is in vain to serve the Lord; but Saint Paul has assured us, Hebr. 11. 6.
He is a rewarder of them that seek him diligently; nay he is not only a
rewarder, but he himself is the reward: Genesis 17. 1.
they are his own words to Abraham, I am thy exceeding great reward.

And surely upon all these considerations, we shall conclude that nothing is
more reasonable than after David's pattern in our Generation to serve the will
of God.

From the Character of his life, Genesis 2.
proceed we more briefly to the threefold character of his Death, by which is
described the state of the Dead.

1. He fell asleep, that respects the person.

2. Was laid to his Fathers, that respects both his soul and body.

3. And saw corruption, that only respects the body.

1. He fell asleep, Those words which precede, The will of God, are by some
intepreters referred to this clause he fell asleep; in which construction they
afford us a good instruction; namely that death befalls us not by chance,
Erasm. in Cor.
but by the will of God. It is appointed (says the Apostle) for men once to
die, and not only the thing it self in general, Hebr. 9. 27.
but the circumstances as to individuals; namely, the means, manner, place,
time, are all appointed by the will and counsel of God, we are all in this
world as so many Tenants to God, the great Landlord; and this not for any
certain term of years, but durante beneplacito, during his good pleasure we
come in, and stay, and go out of this world: so much that prayer of Simeon
imports, Lord, let thou thy servant depart in peace, Luke 2. 29.
we can neither stay longer nor go sooner than God pleases. A consideration
which ought to be an argument of contentation both in respect of our selves and
others whenever or howsoever they dye, since it is by the will of God, to
which we must necessarily and ought voluntarily to submit.

2. To let this go, I might further observe that it is said of David, he fell
asleep after he had served the will of God in his generation, or, served his
generation by the Will of God not before, nor does any of Gods servants dye
before they have fulfilled the work for which God sent them into the world. It
is said of our blessed Savior that though the Jews sought to take him, John 7.
30. 9. 4.
yet no man laid hands on him, for his hour was not come; yea, he says of
himself, I must work the work of him that sent me into this world, whilst it is
day; not did the day (to wit of his life) exspire till he had done that work.
The time of my departure says St. Paul is at hand, but what follows, I have
finished my course, then, and not till then, was the time of his departure,
Tim. 4. 6. 7.
when he had finished his course. It is that which may very much comfort us
whenever death seems to, or really does approach that as we dye not before
the time which God has allotted us to live, so neither before the service be
done which he has appointed for us in our generation, and if that be done, we
have reason to be willing to ly down to sleep as here David, after he had
served his Generation, fell asleep.

3. But that which I here especially take notice of is, that Death is resembled
to a Sleep. It is observable among profane writers both Greek and Latin Poets
and Orators, that sleep is said to be the image, the kindred, the Sister, the
brother of Death, and this metaphor is frequently used in the holy scriptures,
in the Old Testament promiscuously of both bad and good, in the New, especially
of the good, who are said not only to sleep, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14.
but to sleep in Jesus: and to sleep in the Lord. John 11. 1*
And thus Christ uses it of Lazarus, St. Luke of Stephen, Acts 7. 60.
and here St. Paul of David; and this more particularly in a double respect.

1. Sleep is a levamen laborum, a quiet repose and a cessation of all pain and
labor; thus they that die in the Lord, Rev. 14. 13.
rest from their labors. It is a saying abundantly verified, Omne quod vitae
praesentis miseria, This life is a wilderness of troubles, wherein our bodies
are exposed to pains and pain, and our souls suffer sometimes by sympathy with
the body, and sometimes by its own immediate sorrows, cares, and fears; but when
we die we are freed from all these. Valerius expresses it by 4 letters, H. R.
I. P. hic requiescit in pace. Petrus Diaconus by three, D. M. S. dormiunt
mortui securi, the dead sleep in safety, and rest in peace. This is that which
in respect of the body is common to the wicked with the righteous; but in
regard of the soul peculiar to the righteous, for whilst the soul of Dives is
tormented, the soul of Lazarus is comforted says Abraham. Luke 16. 25.
True, the soul does not as the Psuchopannuchists fondly asserted, sleep with
the body, nor yet as the body, for though by the separation of the soul from
the body, there is cessation of those organical actions which the soul
performs by the help of the body, yet its immanent and immaterial acts are
performed by it in that State of separation, and if (as we observe in our own
experience) the soul is active in dreams and fancies whilst the body sleeps,
we may very well conceive that the Soul has its proper acts which it
exercises whilst it is without the body. But as to a cessation from all
disturbing passions, the Souls of the good may be said to fall asleep. In this
respect they are said to be in Gods hand, a place of safety in Abrahom's bosom
a place of refreshment, Wisd. 31.
and under the Altar a place of refuge. The Greek word here used (as has been
already intimated) referrs to the oar, Luke 16. 22.
and tugging at the oar is a laborious employment. Rev. 6. 9.
How Sweet is sleep to the weary labourer, and so was death to David who had
labored more abundantly than others in serving his generation. The Churchyards
are (...) sleeping places, the coffin a couch, and the grave a bed, so says
the Prophet, They enter into peace, they rest in their beds, so the Poet, Isai.
57. 2.
Somnus ut est mortis sic lectus imago sepulchri, and such a bed, quo mollius
ille dormit qui durius in vita se gesserit, wherein he sleeps most sweetly
who has suffered most bitterly; for which reason Saint Stephen dying under a
shour of stones, is said to fall asleep.

2. When we ly down at night to sleep, we hope to awake again in the morning:
and therefore is death a sleep to the Godly, ob spem futurae Resurrectionis,
for the hope of a future Resurrection. Sleep is a short death, and death is a
long sleep; but though long it is not perpetual, we shall arise again, and as,
though a man sleep many hours, it seems when he awaketh but a few minutes, so
though we ly dead many years, it shall seem at the Resurrection but as it were
a few hours: nor do we with so much ease awake any man out of his sleep, as
Divine power shall raise us from the dead, Yea, as usually we awake men by our
voice, so shall the dead at the last day, hear the voice of the Son of God, and
come forth. This notion of deaths being a sleep, in reference to the
Resurrection is true, both in respect of bad and good, since all shall be
raised at the last day: but whereas sick men awake disturbed, but healthy men
refreshed; so shall it then be with the wicked and the righteous, those shall
arise to sorrow, these to Joy, those shall awake and sigh, but these shall
awake and sing. And therefore says David of himself, Isa. 26. 20.
my flesh shall rest in hope, and again, Ps. 16. 7. 17. 15.
When I awake, I shall be satisfied with thy likeness.

So that, to close up this, seek not consolation against Death, but let death
it self be our consolation. True it is, Death it self is very terrible, yea,
the king of terrors, and the thoughts of it so dreadful that we are very
unwilling to entertain them. But lo, here it is reprefented to us in a
mollifying Phrase, and that which is familiar to us: and why thus? but to
mitigate our fears of death, upon which account Christ's crucifing is called a
lifting up, Joh. 3. 14.
and the afflictions of Gods servants instructions, Psa. 94. 3.
to smooth the roughness and asperity of them, and withal to render death
familiar to us, that every evening when we put off our clothes, ly down in our
beds, and fall asleep, we may call to mind our Death, and our grave, looking
upon this as a bed, and that as a sleep.

2. The next Character of death David is, that he was laid to his fathers,
which I have already told you, may be understood in reference either to the
Soul or the Body.

1. To the Soul, and so the meaning is, that when he fell asleep, his soul went
to the nest of those holy Patriarchs which were gone before him. Ps. 39. 12.
I am a stranger upon earth, and a sojourner, says David, as all my Fathers
were: because as they so he, had but a short continuance upon earth, and looked
upon themselves as going hence, and when he went hence, he went to those his
Fathers, which had gone before him: What that place was, I shall not stay to
dispute, most certainly it was not a Limbus subterraneus, prison under ground,
on this side hell, where their souls were detained till Christ's resurrection:
most certainly it was the bosom of Abraham; and that a place of comfort: yea,
most probably (by our Saviors words) the kingdom of Heaven. Matthew. 8. 11.
And it is no small comfort to consider, that when we dye, we shall be gathered
to our godly Ancestors and Progenitors.

2. To the body, and so it may be taken in a narrow or an enlarged sense, in a
narrow sense: those are laid to their Fathers, who are buried in the same Grave
or Vault with their Progenitors: but in this sense this was not true of David,
for where it is said, He slept with his Fathers, it presently follows, 2
Kings 2. 10.
and he was buried in the City of David, which City of David was not Bethlehem,
the place of his Fathers, but Sion the place where the Kings were buried; so
that it must be taken in an enlarged sense, inasmuch as the grave being the
common receptacle of all men, Ps. 16. 10.
any one being buried, is laid to his Fathers, because in a grave, which is the
place for all mankind: and so gathered quasi in tumulum and cumulum, to the
heap of dead bodies.

It is that consideration which should render the grave so much the less
dreadful to us, because it is no more than what is common to our Fathers, nay,
to the whole race of them that dwell upon the earth.

3. The last Character referrs only to the body, which is that he saw
corruption. Seeing (according to the Hebrew Phrase) is as much as experiencing;
so we read else where of seeing death, what man is he that lives (says the
Psalmist) and shall not see death? Psalm. 89. 48.
there were never any but two, Enoch and Elias, and I may say, What man is he
that dies, and shall not see corruption? there was never any but one, the (...)
holy one of God: But otherwise all that lie in the grave, rot; for which
reason the same word in Hebrew signifies both the grave and corruption; I have
said (says Job) to corruption, Job 17. 13. 14,
Thou art my Father, and to the Worms, You are my Mother, my Sister, and this,
as appears by the foregoing words in reference to the grave, wherein though
some by embalming are preserved longer than others; for so say some, was
Alexander's body kept from putrefaction above an hundred years: yet sooner or
later all rot, for which cause our body is called by St. Paul, vile body, Phil.
3. 21.
or according to the Greek, body of humiliation.

A consideration which may very well be matter of abasement to the strongest
man, and beautifullest woman, that their strength must degenerate into
weakness, their color into paleness, and both at last into rottenness, though
withal, let it not too much discourage us, since as the rotting of the grain
in the ground makes way for its springing up and fructifying, so shall the
corrupting of our bodies in the grave. And therefore let us in the multitude of
our thoughts within us touching the grave, look beyond it, at that day when (as
St. Paul assures us) our Lord Jesus shall change our vile body, and when (as
the same Apostle tells us) Mortality shall put on immortality, 1 Cor. 15. 53.
and corruption shall put on incorruption.

ANd thus I have given you an account of Saint Paul's narrative concerning King
David. But another narrative is, and that justly, at this time, expected from
me concerning the Life and Death of the Right Worshipful, and Right Worthy
Knight, Sir Thomas Adams, Knight and Barronet.

There is no less than a threefold obligation, to wit, of Piety, Equity and
Charity laid upon us of publishing the excellencies of those who have done
worthily and been famous in their Generation, since (as Saint Basil) hereby
(...) we glorify the Lord in and for his servants and that is Piety, Bass. Mag.
(...) -- we honor the dead in their memory, and that is equity, (...) we
rejoice and benefit the People by their examples, and that is Charity; As
Physicians and Chirurgians do very much advance their knowledge by Anatomising
the bodies of dead men, so we either are, or may be much bettered in our
practice by a delineation of the graces of dead Saints: and therefore though
this eminent servant of God, and of his generation being taken out of this
valley of Bacah and carried to that mount of Joy (where beholding the glorious
Deity, he sings eternal Halelujahs) stands in no need of any praises from us.
Yet it is needful, very needful for us, who are left behind that we may be
stirred up to follow his choice example.

And now what Paterculus says of Aemilius Paulus, Paterc.
he was vir in tantum laudandus in quantum virtus ipsa intelligi potest, I may
fitly apply to him, the circumference of his Encomium, may very well take in
all the lines of virtue, which meet in him as in their Center: and I could
heartily wish that as those Confessors truly said in their epistle to Saint
Cyprian, Cypr. cp. 26.
Vigorous expressions were correspondent to the glorious actions or rather
Passions of those Martyrs whom he commended, so I could now draw the Picture of
this Worthy, not only at the length, but to the life. But alas my Pencil gives
so rough a draught, that I am afraid I shall but disfigure him whilst I go
about to commend him, so that I am ready to draw back my hand, whilst I am
drawing his lineaments, and therefore shall desire as he did, who wrote the
life of Saint Cyprian, that quicquid minus dixero, (minus enim dicam necesse
est.) If I shall say less, as less I must needs say than he deserves, it may
not derogate from his honor, but be imputed to my unskilfulness; and if any
shall think I say too much, I shall ascribe it to their ignorance since none
who knew him but must needs have a high value for him, nor shall I say more of
him than what not only very credible information but for the most part my own
personal knowledge will warrant me; having had the honor of more than 20 years
acquaintance with him, 15. whereof, he was the chief inhabitant of that Parish,
wherein I was an unworthy Labourer.

The truth is as Titus Vespasian was called deliciae generis humani, the
delight of mankind, so was he the Darling of the City, so generally well
reputed and reported of, that I suppose it will be said of this Panegyric
concerning him, what one said, who met with a book called Herculis encomium,
The praise of Hercules, Quis Lacedaemoniorum unquam vituperavit, who ever
dispraised him, to wit, that knew him.

His very outward aspect was amiable nay venerable and his presence as the
appearance of some benign Star having a pleasing influence upon all that looked
upon him. But could you have viewed his inside, behold that virtuous soul,
which inhabited his comely body, how would it have ravished you, and yet though
we could not directly, we might reflexively and that both from his words and
works.

The Tongue of the Just (says Solomon) is as choice silver, of which the
Trumpets under the Law were made, Prove. 10. 20. 21
because of its sweet sound, and again, the lips of the righteous feed many, to
wit, with wholesome counsels and comforts, keeping as it were open table for
all comets; such was his tongue, frequently tip'd with silver, nay golden
sayings, which he brought forth out of the treasure of his memory, such were
his lips with which (as well, nay better, then with his bountiful table) he fed
not only his children and servants, but all who conversed with him, among whom
I can truly say, I never went to him, but I did, or might come away from him
bettered by his gracious and prudent discourse: Nor was he only, as I doubt too
many are, a man of words, his goodness was not only at his tongues, but his
fingers ends. That of our Savior concerning himself, Joh. 5. 36.
my works testify of me, is, though in a far inferior way verifyed of him; at
least, we may make use of what Solomon, says concerning the virtuous woman,
His works did praise him in his gates, Prove. 31. 31.
so that he was not only in respect of his words, a sweet and pleasing voice,
but of his works, a burning and shining light.

It is said of David, that he died in a good old age, full of riches and
honors: 1 Cor. 29. 28.
The age to which this worthy Patriot attained was old, elder then David,
exceeding it eleven years, for whereas David lived but 70, he was above 81.
years old when he died; and if David's were a good old age, his was better,
being more hayle and lusty at 80. than David was at 70. That Promise in the
Psalm, Thou shall see thy childrens children, Psalm. 128. 6.
and peace upon Israel, was abundantly made good to him, as to Childrens
children, and though he lived to see both domestic and foreign wars, yet
before he died, he saw peace upon our English Israel, which God of his mercy
long continue.

And as he was full of days, so he filled these days with all sorts of good
actions, he well knew the worth of time, which we for the most part undervalue:
and accounting every minute precious, took care to spend not only his days,
but his hours well; so that his gray hairs being found in a way of
righteousness were a crown to him: and what Scaliger said of Strisset, may no
less justly be said of him, it was pity, ut aut senium senem faceret, aut lex
naturae vita privaret* either that age should have made him old, or the law of
nature bereaved him of life.

As to Riches and honor, it is true, he came far short of David, yet he wanted
not his share of either; God was pleased so far to bless his honest endeavors
in that Calling wherein his Providence had placed him, that he enjoyed a
liberal portion of this worlds goods, nor did he want those honors which were
suitable to him: David indeed was a King, and so the supreme person in his
kingdom. He was, whilst Lord Mayor, chief officer of this City, during his
continuance in which Place, he did by virtue of his office, represent the
King's person. Whatsoever honor in the City, he was capable of, he was chosen
to: Master of his Company; Alderman of a Ward; President of St. Thomas his
Hospital; several times Burgess in Parliament, though the iniquity of the times
would not permit him to sit: Sheriff, and Lord Mayor. After which he at length
became and so continued for some years (as Benazah was said to be a mighty man
among the 30.) 1 Chronicles. 27. 6,
the first among the 26. the eldest Alderman upon the bench that had served in
the Office of a Lord Mayor, to whom is given that honorable title of the
Father of the City: nor had he only all this honor from the City, but his King
also gave him the greatest honor he was capable of in his station, making him
not only a Knight, but a Barronet, which descends upon Posterity.

I mention these, not as if riches or honors or both were abstractively
considered Topics of Commendation, but in as much as they are conferred by God
sometimes upon good men, as the encouragements and made use of by them as the
Instruments of virtue, and so they were to him he being a bountiful steward of
his riches, nor did his dignities so much honor him as he them.

I cannot say of him, as Christ said lo a greater than Solomon, He was greater
or richer than David, nay, much inferior; no, nor yet better than David, nor
yet so good: But thus much I dare say, it was his laudable ambition to be as
good, he endeavored to tread in David's footsteps, and what is said in my Text
concerning David, I shall confidently affirm of him, and that in both
translations, He was one who served his own generation by the will of God; and
who in his own generation served the will of God.

Throughout the age of his life, he was through God's Providence instated in
manifold Relations, entrusted with various offices, conversant in several
employments, in all which he had no cause to complain with him who said, Omnia
fui, nihil profui, I was every thing, and profited nothing. All of them, being
as so many Cutts and Channels, through which did run his several virtues and
graces.

And now as he said of St. Cyprian, Onerosum enumerare, It would be a
burdensome task to enumerate all particulars, since Inopem me copia fecit,
Plenty makes me poor; and I have so much to say, that I know not where to begin.

If you please, I will begin with that which is (in Solomon's language) the
beginning of wisdom, namely, the fear of the Lord. He was eminent for Religion
and Devotion: That Orthodox Religion which is professed in the Church of
England, he faithfully adhered to, cordially owning her Doctrine and
Discipline, Hierarchy and Liturgy: and though he lived in an inconstant age
(wherein it was the mode to change Religions, as women do fashions) he proved
not a reed o^ a willow, but an Oak, steadfast and immovable. Great was his
respect to the Orthodox and Orthoprax Clergy: Those who were Sufferers he
charitably relieved: Those who were Laborers, he bountifully encouraged. The
very feet of them that served at the Altar were beautiful in his eyes; and I
should be very ungrateful, if I should not acknowledge my self (though most
unworthy) to have had a Benjamen's share in his Favor. Schismatical
Conventicles he ahhorred, but duly frequented the Church Assemblies: I was for
many years an ocular witness of his attendance on the Public Ordinances,
where he was a Joint Petitioner at the Throne of Grace, a Judicious Auditor of
God's word, a diligent receiver of the Lord's Supper, from the monthly
administration whereof I do not remember he was absent, if in Town and in
health: and though it was an age wherein irreverence was in fashion and
Devotion decryed as superstition, he was exemplary for his reverent behavior
in God's house, seldom at Prayers but upon his knees, unless want of room
hindered him, his head still uncovered at the reading and preaching of Gods
word, and always kneeling at the Holy Communion: nor was he only (as I fear
too many are) Religious in the Church, but his Family, praying with and for
them, and giving wholesome Counsels to them. That Character which Almighty God
gives concerning Abraham, Genesis 18. 19.
for I know him, that he will command his Children, and his household after him
to keep the way of the Lord, did justly belong to him, whose care it was to
bring up his Children in the fear and instruct his servants in the ways of the
Lord, and his resolve was that of Joshua, Josh. 24. 15.
I and my house will serve the Lord. Finally, trace him not only from God's
house to his own, but from his chamber to his closet; and there you might have
found him, daily setting time apart for his meditations and devotions: nor
could any secular affairs divert him from God's Service, and therefore when his
occasions called him forth sooner, he would still rise the earlier, that he
might begin the day with God, with whom he always also closed it up.

Thus during his age and generation in this world, he served his God; and no
less careful was he to serve his King, remembering, that Fear the Lord and the
King are joined together by Solomon. Prove. 24. 21.
He was a strenuous asserter of Monarchical Government. Nor can I pass by one
argument which he often used upon that account, where Almighty God by his
Prophet Ezekiel reconing up the manifold blessings he had conferred upon his
People Israel, Ezeck. 16. 13.
mentions this among the rest, as none of the least, thou did prosper into
a Kingdom; by which is clearly intimated, that those nations are most
prosperous which are under Kingly Government; nay that Kingly Government is a
prosperity to a people. He was, I dare say, among the number of the mourners in
Sion, for all the Abominations which were committed, and especially for that
execrable treason in murdering the Father, and banishing the Son; nor did he
cease to be an importunate Petitioner at Heaven gates for the restoration of
King and Church. Upon the account of his Loyalty to Charles the first, of
blessed memory, When Lord Mayor, his house was searched by the rebels then in
power, supposing there to have found the King: the year after he was cast into
the Tower, and there kept a Prisoner, and for several years put by all Public
offices and employments, they finding him a man that would not be molded into
their several forms, nor make shipwreck of his Conscience to serve their
interests. Upon the account of his Loyalty to Charles the Second (Whom God
Almighty prosper) during his Exile, he hazarded his estate and life, by sending
him considerable sums of money beyond sea; and when the Blessed time came of
his joyful Return to his Throne, though he was in the 73. year of his age,
which might have been a just excuse for his staying at home, this aged
Banzillai went not only over Jordan river, but crossed the Sea to attend his
Sovereign home.

Next to God and the King, I dare say, the City of London was written upon his
heart, wherein he spent by far the greatest part of his life, and has now
breathed his last. Here, through God's blessing, he got, and here he spent a
considerable part of his estate in the Citie's service. He was of so public a
spirit, that when his Son in Law brought him the first news of his being chosen
Sheriff of London, he immediately dismissed the particular business about which
he was, and never after personally followed his trade, but gave himself up to
the City concerns. It was his study to know the Customs and usages, the
liberties and privileges of the City, and accordingly his endeavor in his
several capacities to preserve and maintain them. He was not only in word but
in deed an Assistant, a Guardian, yea a Pillar of the Right Worshipful Company
of Drapers. He was a vigilant President of Saint Thomas his Hospital, which
probably had been ruined before this, but that his sagacity and industry
discovered the fraud of an unjust steward. In the Court of Aldermen he was as
an Oracle, very subservient by his grave and prudent counsels to the Cities
Government. He was so far from self-seeking, that when he was Lord Mayor, he
did not make those advantages (which usually are) by selling the vacant places.
Whilst a private tradesman, he was exact (so far as I ever heard) in
commutative Justice, in his bargains and contracts of buying and selling: and
when a public Magistrate, he was no less conscientious of distributive Justice
between man and man, so that what Lampridius, said of Alexander Severus, he was
Virbonus and reipublicae necessarius, a good man and very needful for the
Common wealth, may be affirmed of him in reference to the City, he was not only
a good man, but exceedingly useful by his Justice and prudence for the Cities
welfare.

I must not forget to tell you how he served the Town where he received his
first breath, by building there and endowing a Free School with a considerable
maintenance for the education of Children. How he has served the University of
Cambridge by erecting an Arabic Lecture, and settling upon the Lecturer 40 l.
per annum for his pains in reading it; hereby testifying himself to be a lover
of learning, to which, indeed, none is an enemy but the ignorant: and therefore
he could not, having himself a very competent measure of knowledge: Nor were
these munificent works to bear the date of their beginning from his death, but
the one began 20 and the other 30 years ago, nor is their maintenance only
settled for some term of years, but (as we usually express it) for ever: by
which means he has not only served his own, but succeeding Generations; nay,
in that Arabic lecture he has served those remote Eastern parts of the world,
upon which account (at the desire of the Reverend Master Wheelock, now with
God) he was at the charge of printing the Persian Gospels and transmitting them
into those parts: yea, by these ways he endeavored to serve the Lord Christ
promoting the Christian Religion and (to use his own Language) throwing a stone
at the forehead of Mahomet that grand Impostor.

Thus he was serviceable in his Generation to the will of God. Honor of Christ,
Welfare of the City, Benefit of Country and University: nor was he awanting to
serve the Poor neither by his Charity: his hands were frequently open whilst he
lived upon all occasions, and notwithstanding many late great damages to his
estate, he has given considerable legacies to the poor of several Parishes, to
Hospitals, to Ministers widows, and such like at his death; all which I cannot
now stay particularly to enumerate.

Finally, let me not tire your Patience, if to the rest of his graces and
virtues, I add his Patience, whereby he served the will of God in suffering.
To serve the will of God in doing good was his meat and drink: to submit to his
will in suffering evil was his Antidote and Cordial. The truth is, this good
man's coat (like Joseph's) was parti-colored, his wine mixed with water, nay with
gall and wormwood; many doleful losses he met with, as to his worldly goods,
some disastrous crosses in his near Relations, such (as himself said) he could
not have born, were it not for this Book, pointing to the Bible which lay
before him, but there he met still with that which comforted him: frequently
(among others) making use of that Passage of Job to his wife, Job 2. 10.
Shall we receive good at the hands of God, and shall we not receive evil. The
latter years of his life have been years of Pain to him, by reason of that
Disease of the Stone in the bladder, whereof at last he died: A stone so
weighty, that it exceeded 25 ounces, so grievous, that a little before his
death it made him roar, but yet not murmur: God graciously supporting him under
the weight, and sustaining him under the pain of it, and indeed the Providence
of God was singularly remarkable, in that having a stone of so vast a bigness
in his bladder, his pain was comparatively so little, and his life so long, for
had there not been as it were a way paved, or rather a channel cut through the
stone for his Water to pass* the stoppage of it, must of necessity have very
much added to his smart and lessened his days.

He has now taken his leave of this world, and truly, Ambros.
I may very well say of him in St. Ambrose his Language, in illo uno non unum
sed plures amissos requirimus, in this one person there is a manifold loss;
whilst passing by private losses, The King has lost a loyal Subject, the
Church a faithful Son, and the City, a prudent Senator: indeed, he was so
eminently useful every way, that his loss would have been insupportable, did
not this Consideration quallifie it, that he died in so old an age, that
according to course of nature he could not have lived much longer: nay,
considering his disease, it is a wonder that he lived so long. He is departed
from the Inn of this world, to the long home of his grave, of which, I am sure
he was many years before mindeful, it being his frequent language upon several
occasions Sclum mihi superest sepulchrum, I have nothing to make account of but
only my grave: where he shall sleep in the dust, till he awake and arise to
glory.

I end all with a threefold word of Admonition.

1. The first, to the Rt. Honble the Ld Mayor with the rest of the worthy
Senators of this City, who out of their great (yet due) respects to this
excellent person have attended the solemnity of his Funeral, and that to
beseech you, that you would endeavor (as much as in you lies) to make up this
invaluable loss, by your double diligence for the public good: that as every
one of you by his office is as a City built upon an hill. You would help to
raise this City out of its ruinous heaps. Oh let there be no cause of taking up
that complaint of any of you, which Cicero did of the Senators in his time.
Cic.
Vos separatim quisque consilia capitis, you every one take counsel apart, for
your Particular interests; but rather like the Fabricii and Patricii, or rather
like David in the text, and this worthy Patriot whom you have so well known,
make it your design to serve your generation.

2. The second to the hopeful heir of the Family, that as you inherit your
Fathers honor and estate, you would his graces and virtues also, that so
though he be dead, he may still live in you.

3. To the rest of his children, kindred, friends, acquaintance all here
present, yea, the whole City, that though we cannot come up to his pattern, we
would follow as hard after him as we can, and learn of him the best way to live
long on earth, and eternally in the Heavens.

AMEN.

