NOAH'S DOVE, OR, AN EPISTLE OF PEACE, DIRECTED To his entirely affected
Brethren, The Presbiterians, and Independants.

As a probable means, for their Agreement and Union.

From Sir JAMES HARINGTON, Knight.

Imprimat.

JOSEPH CARILL.



LONDON, Printed by T. W. for ED. HUSBAND, Printer for the Honorable House of
Commons. 1645.

Noah's Dove, or an Epistle of Peace, directed to his entirely affected
Brethren, the Presbiterians, and Independants: As a probable means, for their
agreement and union.
Sincerely Beloved,
I Read of two Children contending in the womb of their Mother, Genesis 25. 22.
the one beloved, the other hated, Malach. 1. 3
but ye are both Jacobs, both the Israel of God. O far be it from such
Brethren to rend and lacerate their Mothers bowels, or to fall out in the way.
Genesis 45. 24. Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6 Romans 12. 1. 1 Cor. 13. 4. Galat. 5. 22.
Are we not one Body, and have we not all one spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in
you all, I beseech you by the mercies of God, by the excellent effects of
Charity, by the Fruits of the spirit, Math. 11. 29. John 13. 34, and 35.
by the examples and command of the Lord Jesus, and the character of his
Disciples, be meek and lowly, and love one another; so shall the plots of
Rome and Hell be prevented, and all Malignants shut their mouths. 1 Cor. 6. 5,
Why should it be spoken to our shame, 6.
that there is not a wise man amongst us? No, not one that is able to judge
between his Brethren: but Brother asperces and declaimes against Brother, 7.
and that before the Antichristians. Now therefore there is utterly a fault
amongst you, 10.
know ye not that Revilers shall not inherit the kingdom of God? But some
will answer, that they have received a new light, O be cautious that noveltie
eclipse not truth, since the last days foretold and fore-warnd of by our
Savior, are at hand, wherein iniquity abounds, and the love of many waxes
cold, hence, Math. 24. 12.
Father against son, and son against Father, betraying one another, and
hating one another; Verse 7. 10.
Hence the judgments of Famine and Pestilence; Nation rising up against
Nation. So that the whole world seems to be on fire before its time; These
days not I, but the Lord Jesus, the great Prophet of his Church, dictates and
points out to be the time, when many false Christ's, Verse. 11. and 24.
and Prophets (or teachers of Christianity) shall arise; who by their applause,
excellency of parts, and external holiness, by which they shall show forth,
as it were, signs and wonders, and gather a multitude of Disciples, declaring
that in such a meeting, Verse. 26. and 24.
be it in woods, or deserts, or in secret chambers, the true way of Christ is
to be found, deceiving if it were possible, the very elect. Our Lord teaching
us from hence, how near a similitude, these new Doctrines shall have to truth,
and true holiness. But be they as Paul, Verse. 27. Gal. 1. 8. 2 Cor. 11. 13.
or Cephas in the Church, or as Angels from heaven, believe them not; for as
the lightning comes out of the East, and shines even to the West, so shall also
the glorious coming of the Son of man be; that is, (as I humbly conceive) that
his Gospel which at first broke out like lightning in the East, shall in this
last age, upon the ruins, and through the clouds of spiritual Babylon, dart it
self, and shine gloriously in our Western Churches even to the Indies; that
the other parallel prophecy may be fulfilled, by the subjecting, and uniting
the Kingdoms of the Earth, unto the Kingdom of the Lord, and of his Christ.
Rev. 11. 15.


Let us not then be carried about with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 14.
but hold fast the Gospel delivered to us by Christ, and his Apostles, in the
unity of the spirit, Ephesians. 4. 3. 1 Cor. 3. 11. Romans 14. 23.
and the bond of peace, since other foundation can no man lay, it being a
sin, so much as to doubt, much more to defend, that the fundamentalls of our
Religion, some of which are mentioned by the Author to the Heb. 6. 1.
Hebrews, and received by the Church in all ages, are not to bind, as de
futuro, 2.
as having a possibility upon new notions, to be nuld or changed, which is to
make God a liar, to undermine his Church, and to pull down the Pillars
thereof; For if the foundations be destroyed, what shall? Psalm. 11. 3.
Nay, what can the righteous do? Wherefore my humble suit unto our master
Builders is, to keep the Foundation unmovable, not permitting a resurrection
to ancient heretics before their time, 1 Cor. 3. 12.
that so whatsoever men build thereon, whether it be gold or stubble, may be
brought to the Test, in this Fiery trial.

Stand fast therefore Brethren in that liberty, wherein Christ has made us
free, Gal. 5. 1. and 13.
not making your liberty a cloak for malitiousnesse, not for an occasion to
the Flesh, but by love serve one another, judging thus of one another that he
that loves his Brother, abides in the light, but 1 John 2. 9. 1.
he that hates his Brother ( whatsoever he may boast of new discoveries,)
walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes, because that darkness
has blinded his eyes, and that whosoever seems to be religious, and yet
bridles not his tongue, he deceives his own heart, and his Religion is vain.
Jam. 1. 16.


But that I may not only persuade, but offer my Mite, I shall in all humility
propose a medium, which if found agreeable to the word of God, may through the
blessing of the Almighty make up the Breach, and reconcile your greatest
difference.

I conceive you both agree in these particulars. 1 Cor. 14. 34. 1 Timothy 2. 11. 1
Cor. 5. 11. 2 Cor. 6. 14. 17.
That all that shall be Members, and have right to Vote in your Churches, (from
which Votes Women are excepted) shall not only be free from just scandal, that
is Prophannesse, and the impenitent practice of any known sin, but be endued
with a sufficiency of knowledge, to which end (since you accord in the
Principles of Religion) I hope there will speedily be set forth, and established
one short Catechism for information, and examination. Next in condiscention to
the Independants, I hear it is mutually resolved, that the government of their
respective Members, reconciling of Inferior differences, and ordering their
conversations, even as far as Ordination, and the censure of Excommunication,
(respect being had in Appeals to the advice and results of the Classes and
Provincial Synods, and saving to the Presbyterians their right) be ordered by
their paricular Congregations.

Thus far we are knit together in one spiritual building and temple of God.
Ephesians. 2. 21.
The great difference if I understand it, is in the Tegument and covering,
which is indeed, the ornament, coupling, and strength of the whole Aedifice: As
where shall rest (as to us) under the same Scepter, the determinative and
concluding power, the end of Appeals, the regulation of that unlimited Plea,
and overmuch extended liberty of conscience, Joh. 17. 21.
that so we may be one, as Christ and his Father are one; this, some of you
fix in a general Assembly, others, limit to a particular Congregation; The
first pleads not only Scripture analogically, but prudence for preserving
union, and preventing of Tumults, as also Antiquity, from the parallel in
general Counsels and Parliaments, affirming that the other way, has no
grounds in Scripture: since Churches were necessarily Independent, no State
being then Christian that this way (by reason that our corrupt nature has no
check) is destructive to the unity of Religion. Since according to the number
of the Congregations will be their opinions, as also pernicious to
Commonwealths; their being no feuds so bloody and irreconciliable, as those
that break out about points of Faith, instance, in the wars between the Turk
and Persian, Papists and Protestants, in the Lutheran contestations, and Arian
persecutions. Lastly, they conclude an inconsistencie in this way, with
relations and callings, disaffection and departure from Bed, Board, Families,
and Employments, being experimental consequences of Religious differences.

On the other side, the contradicting party affirm, that a general Assembly
differs but in name from a Conclave of Cardinals, or Prelaticall Synod, that
every member of the Church is free, and ought not in matters of Faith, to
conclude himself by Proxy, that no Church has power over another, or
Brethren (since the Apostles,) have Dominion over the Consciences of their
Brethren, that their Platform of Church Government ought to be, and is jure
divino, that the Eavngelicall Scripture sets forth theirs, and no other.

Now dear Brethren, give me your pardon and leave with Moses, to step in
betwixt your Combatings, with his and Abraham's words, Exodus 2. 13. Genesis 13. 8.
why do ye contend being ye are Brethren, it may be God giving a blessing, and
each of you in his hand, I shall in my Proposition be a medium to unite you,
(only despise not my endeavors,) since the Lord hides many things from the
wise and prudent, Mat. 11. 25.
and reveals them to Babes.

But to proceed, I observe neither of you arrogate to your selves an
infallability but piously seek, an Orthodox and Prudentiall way of Government,
for the attaining and preserving, Gods truth; blessed are your endeavors, yea
they shall be blessed. Wherefore I ask the Presbiterians why do ye extol and
lift up a general assembly, above the rest of the flock of Christ: To the
Independants I say why do ye prefer the judgment of one particular
Congregation, before the joint votes of all the refined Christian Churches of
the Kingdom, surely the first will yield to me, that where most of Gods People
are in their judgment, there is the greatest measure of his spirit, and to
such Assemblies principally, and to their votes, are made all those gracious
promises (I need not coat the places) concerning Christ's spirit and presence
I mean to such a Multitude not of Men only, but of purged and visible believers.

The other I presume both from grounds of Scripture and reason, will grant,
that could the votes of all the reputed and received Members of Christ, of
their several Churches, be jointly taken and in one place, they must be
accepted, and are but as the vote of one great Congregation, which though it
have an increase of Ministers and Elders, yet according to a true difinition
for essence is a Church, and that more eminently, though not more truly then
the particular Congregations of whom it consists, even as an Assembly made up
of many Families, called by the Colos: 4. 15. Romans 16. 5.
Apostle Churches of God, is more excellent, then its subdivisions.

But that I may make good by Scripture, this incorporating of Churches,
conjuncture and union of votes, I shall remember you of those three chief
proofs, and lights of Church Governmrnt, both for Doctrine and manners. The
first shows the Primitive and Apostolic way, of ending controversies in
Doctrine, by the summoning of that great Assembly, of the members of the
Churches of Jerusalem and Judea of which Churches, read. Acts. 11. 1. and
Galat: 1. 22. Therefore called a Multitude. Acts. 15. 12. in which the
Apostles, (although endued with an infallible spirit,) and the Elders of the
Churches did not alone vote, and decree matters (though that in many cases,
wherein the People consents, such votes, may be and are necessary expedient and
lawful) but the whole Church. verse 22. which compared with. Acts. 2. verse
41. Wherein three thousand are said to be converted, and with Acts. 4. verse 4.
Wherein five thousand, were by one Sermon converted, clearly demonstrates,
that this Assembly was composed of many Congregations, as further appears from
the Apostles teaching and preaching in every house. Acts. 5. 42. How else could
eight thousand Men, besides Women and Children, be taught and edified.

The like is proved, from the election and choice of the seven Deacons by the
vote of the Multitude. Acts. 6. 5. Where the Apostles, and Elders also were
present, yea those whom the holy Ghost. Acts. 2. 47. Calls a Church in a
National respect, he calls Churches. Acts. 9. 31. In a Congregationall
consideration, And lastly in Corinth there more then probably appears to be
many Compare Romans 16. 16. with the postscript of that Epistle.
Congregations, else whence or where, were these discentions, and divisions
some saying, I am of Paul: others I am of Apollo, of Cephas, 1. Cor. 1. 12. All
the Members of which were commanded to meet in one Assembly for the
excommunication of the incestuous person 1. Cor. 5. 4. Where note they were to
meet, to whom the Epistle was directed, and who are admonished to mourn: But
the Epistle and exhortation was directed to the whole Church of Corinth, and
not to the Elders only* ergo the whole Congregation, when they shall desire it,
have a right to vote, and censure.

Having thus fully proved by Scripture, that in Cities and Provinces, and
consequently in Kingdoms, the Members of particular Congregations may and were
by command to meet for the deciding of any great difference, yea the Apostles
though of an infallible spirit, did not contradict, but give both approbation
and institution to that liberty. Acts 1. 15. 23. Act. 21. 22.
. I shall with humblest submission, offer this following Proposition, as a
right and fit medium of reconciliation. That in all great scisms and heresies,
over spreading whole Churches, if the breach cannot be made up by advice,
argument, and subordinate discipline either Congregationall or Presbiteriall;
an appeal be made to a General Assembly, who after the stating, disputing and
voting, such points in difference together with the merit of the offense (the
recusant Church or Churches, notwithstanding continuing unsatisfied) that then
the Assembly adjourne that sessions for three months, in which time, the
Assembly, members of each Congregation, to be ordered after fasting and prayer,
to state the Question and declare the Arguments and Judgment of the general
Assembly to their particular Churches, and so accordingly at that meeting
receive, and bring up each Churches vote and sentence with the number (because
of the disproportion of Parishes) sum'd up of those that affirm, and those
that descent, that so at the next Session the Question may be decided and
concluded, by the Major vote, both of Churches and Members which Scripture way
will not only by a religious Policy from time to time discover the temper,
pulse, and inclination of the whole Kingdom, and consequently administer a
great help and direction to Government, but will give full satisfaction to all,
(unless to obstinate heritickes) as being the judgment and vote (even by the
Poale) of all the visible and individual Christians of the Kingdom
politically united, as in one Congregation, yea the disobedient will be left
without excuse, and justly liable to their sentence of excommunication.

But put the Question a considerable number of the Churches in the Kingdom,
give in their vote with a new opinion, hazarding a rent and division in the
Nation.

I answer, that upon so sad an occasion our Church (in imitation of the ancient
callings of General Counsels, upon the over flowing of heresy,) ought to
desire the judgment and assistance, and that by additionall votes (if it may
be) of all the reformed Churches in the world, which comes nearest to the
judgment of the holy Catholic Church, the body of Christ, to which he has
promised his presence, and spirit of truth to the end, Math. 28. 20
and therefore must as to each particular State or Church, though not
infallibly, yet prudentially, end and conclude by obedience either active or
passive the discenting Churches, whom the civil Magistrate after the Churches
excommunication, is to order by banishment or lesser punishment, according as
their doctrines, shall be more or less prejudicial to the State, wherein they
live. 2. Chro. 15. verse 12. 13. 14.
Which since they suffer as evil doers, is (as to that Commonwealth) a civil
and necessary act of preservative Justice, not an enforcing of Conscience or
persecution. Matthew. 18 verse. 17.


Thus fervently beseeching the blessing of the all-wise God, upon my poor and
weak endeavors, trusting that in the bowels of love, and charity, I have in
sincerity and plainness declared unto you the mind of Christ, in all humility
I conclude.

The unworthiest of the servants of the Lord Jesus. J. H.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

Joseph Carill.


