portrait of Sir James Harrington View here his face from the Jngravers mint
And in his works his life and Soul in Print
The True Effigies of Sir James Harington Knight and Baronet.


HORAE CONSECRATAE, OR Spiritual Pastime.

CONCERNING Divine Meditations Upon the great Mysteries of our Faith and
Salvation.

Occasional MEDITATIONS and Gratulatory Reflections upon particular Providence
and Deliverances, vouchsafed to the Author and his Family.

ALSO A SCRIPTURE-CATECHISME Dedicated to the Service of his Wife and Children.

AND NOW Published, together with other Treatises mentioned in the following
Page for Common Use.

By Sir JAMES HARRINGTON, Knight. and Baronet.

London, Printed for the Author, 1682.

The Contents of the Six Treatises
I. Treatise. THe Vision, Exercise, and Triumph of Faith; In which is
discovered from the Elevated and Holy Mount of Divine Contemplation. 1. The
shadows of Faith, 2ly. The true Faith and its Object, God in Christ; more
particularly: The Lord Jesus Christ in his Incarnation, Life, Death, Passion,
Resurrection, Ascension, and coming to Judgment, with the Benefits accruing
from them, to every true Believer. 3dly, The lost and miserable condition of
every man by Nature. 4ly, The Restoration of man by Grace; considered as
accomplished by Christ, in and by his Priestly, Prophetical and Kingly Offices.
5ly. A Prospect of Eternal Life, considered in the Glorification of the Soul
and Body; particularly, as to the Faculties and Affections of the Soul; and as
to the Senses and Members of the Body, in the new Heaven and new Earth, during
Christ's personal Reign upon Earth for a thousand years. 6ly. A Prophetical
Vision of Faith, holding forth twelve great works of God, which will shortly
begin to appear, and shall be fulfilled in their Respective Seasons; and to be
ended in the Translation of the Saints to Heaven: The Compleatment of Scripture
Prophesies; the particulars of which Twelve Magnalia Dei, View in the next
page; all which is intermixed with Holy Soliloquies, and Divine Ejaculations,
applicable and profitable to every true Believer. II. Treatise. A
Scripture-Catechisme, contained in an Epistle, sent by the Author in the Name
and Person of the Lord Jesus Christ, to his Wife and Children; wherein, in
Scripture-phrases only, is held forth the Doctrine, and Duty of a true
Christian; A work of excellent use for private Families, as an Appendix to
Catechizing. III. Treatise. Divine Meditations upon the Creation, Man's Fall,
and Redemption by Christ; presented by the Author to his Parents, in the one
and twentieth year of his Age. IV. Treatise. A Pillar of Praise, or Occasional
Meditations upon many Remarkable Mercies and Deliverances vouchsafed by the
Lord, to the Author and his nearest Relations. V. Treatise. The Lords days
Preeminence above all other days held forth in an humble answer to a paper, or
Quere given to the Author, by King Charles the First, concerning the
Observation of the Lords day and Easter day. VI. Noah's Dove, or an Epistle of
peace directed by the Author to his Fatherly affected Brethren, the
Presbyterians and Independents, as a probable means for their Agreement and
Union.
TWELVE MAGNALIA DEI: Or Heads, of the wonderful Works, and Actings of God on
Earth, by the Lord Jesus Christ, during his Mediatorie Kingdom, (not yet
Accomplished;) All which are Treated of, in three Tracts of this Volume.
I. THe Raising of the Witnesses, Rev. 11.3. unto the 13th. II. The Victorious
Kingdom of Christ, appearing in the Burning of the City of Rome, Rev. 18.8, 9.
III. The Total and Final Ruin of the Papacy, and of the Papal Kings of the
Earth, her Popish Supporter, Rev. 19.19, 20, 21. IV. The Return to Canan of the
Ten Tribes, and the Jews, and their Conversion, Romans 11.25. to the end. V. The
total Overthrow of the Turkish Empire, by the Israelites, and the subduing of
all open Enemies of the Saints, by the reformed Nations, Ezekiel. 38, 39.
Chapters. Dan. 2.44, 45. VI. The Binding and Casting of Satan, and his Angels
into the Bottomless Pit, the Local Hell, for one thousand years, to begin (as I
humbly conceive) about the six thousand year of the world, according to a true
Chronology and Account, Rev. 20.1, 2, 3. VII. The Conversion of the whole
World, to the profession of Christianity, Psalm. 67. to the end, Rev. 11.15.
VIII. The Peaceable Kingdom of Christ, to be exercised by his Saints in this
World, for one thousand years, (the time of Satan's Imprisonment,) which will
begin (as I humbly conceive) in the year of the World, six thousand and one,
being Daniels first Monarchy, Rev. 2.44, 45. Chap. 7.17, 18.26, 27. Rev. 20.4.
And the Churches Sabbatisme upon this Earth, Heb. 4.9. IX. The Loosing, and the
Re-casting Satan and his Angels into Hell, after the destruction of Gog and
Magog by Fire, Rev. 20.7, 8, 9, 10. Together with the Consuming and Renewing of
the whole Elementary World, at our Lords coming the second time to Judgment by
the same Fire, 2 These. 2.7, 8, 9. X. Christ's coming to Judgment, under which,
is comprehended the Change or Resurrection of all the Elect to Glory, 1 These.
chap. 3. v. 13. to the end; And Christ's Remunerative Act of Justice to them in
their Reigning with him upon the Renewed Earth a thousand years, Rev. 2.4, 5,
6. XI. The Raising of all the Wicked to Judgment a thousand years after the
Elect, Rev. 20.5. and the Sentenceing them and the Wicked Angels, Rev. 20.11.
XII. The Translation of all the Elect to Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.1. and the delivering
of Christ's Mediator Kingdom to his Father, 1 Cor. 15.24.28.
A Synopsis of the General Heads of this Treatise.
THe Definition of Faith Page 3 Diverse sorts of Faith, viz Historical 4
Temporary 8 Miraculous. 15
The Means of Faith 21 The Object of Faith, Christ 22 Christ Born of the Virgin
Mary 24 Persecuted by Herod ibid. His Agony 27 His Condemnation by Pilate 28
Crucified 30 His Death 33 His Burial 34 His Victory over Hell 35 His
Resurrection 36 His Ascension 38
I. Man by Nature miserable, in his Soul, viz. in his Mind in general 41
Understanding 42 Conscience ibid. Will 44 Affections 45
The disorder in them, namely, in Joy, which cannot be in Riches 48 Honors
ibid. Pleasures ibid. Wisdom 49
Fear 50
II. Man's misery in body In general 51 In particular, the sinfulness in his
Eyes 53 Ears 54 Smell ibid. Taste 55 Touch ibid.

Christ's Priests Office in general 57 Intercession in particular 60
Satisfaction by both 61
Of Justification 62 Forgiveness of sins 63 Imputative Righteousness 63 The
Definition thereof 64
Proofs of our right to Christ's Imputative Righteousness by Scripture
Demonstrations 65 General Questions and Objections, answered 67 A Dialogue
between Christ and the soul 74 The souls particular eompalint Against the mind
and understanding 74 Christ answ. 75 Against the Conscience 75 Christ answ. 75
Against hardness of heart 76 Christ answ. 77 Against the memories 78 Christ
answ. 79 Against the will 80 Christ answ. 80 Against the affections viz. Love
81 Joy 81
Christ answ. 83
Her general complaint of her Universal unworthyness 84 Christ answ. 86 In
particular respect of her Senses, Tongue, and Body 88 Christ answ. 89 Of
Christ's Kingly Office. Christ's present Kingly Office, 93. viz. His Government
99 His excellent person 99 His Laws 101 commended from the Author God 102
Antiquity 102 Holiness 103

His Protection 106 particularly from Satan 107 Sin 108 viz. Adams sin 109
Original 110 Actual 112
World 116 from Its 1 Dart-lust 117 2. Riches 118 3. Honors 119 4. Persecution
120

His conduct and encouragement against Coveteousness 123 Sensual pleasures 124
Honor 126 Persecution 128 Death 130 Fear of Death 132 The pain and separation
of soul and body 133 Comfort in the Resurrection 135
Christ's Kingly Office at the last Judgment 139

Of Eternal life, and Glorified state of Man in general 143 and 149 In
particular 1. In Soul
The Understanding glorified 148 The Will glorified 149 The Memory glorified
150 The Affections in general 151 In particular Love glorified 151 Fear
glorified 153 Zeal glorified 156 Anger glorified 160 Joy glorified 169

2. In Body
In general 164. In special Its Spiritualness 169 Its Swiftness 169 Its
Splendour 171 Its Incorruptibleness and Immortality 175

3. In the Senses
In general 188. In particular The Sight glorified 195 The Hearing glorified
199 The Taste glorified 205 The Smelling glorified 210 Touching glorified 215
Of the Tongue the Organ of several senses 222


Twelve wonderful Actings, or Works of God to be fulfilled 239 Namely 1. The
raising of the Witnesses 239 2. The ruin of Rome 239 3. The ruin of the
Papacy 240 4. Isreal's Conversion 240 5. The destruction of the great Turk 241
6. The binding of the Devil for a thousand years 241 7. The Conversion of the
World 241 8. The destruction of all Christ's enemies 242 9. The Saints peaceable
reign for a thousand years 243 10. The destruction of Gog, and Magog, and of
the World by fire 243 11. The day of Judgment begun with reward to Saints, ends
with judging the wicked 244 12. Christ's Mediatory-Kingdom ends, the Saints are
translated to Heaven for ever. 246

Errata.
IN the Titles of the Fourth and Fifth Pages, for Death, Read Faith Page 17.
Line 25. f. Nebuchadonazzer, Read Nebuchadnezzar p. 26. in the mergine, for
James r. Lamentations. p. 27. l. 29. f. thus, r. this, p. 29. l. 6. f.
affliction r. affection. p. 33. l. 34. f. brawl r. crawl p. 39. l. 38. after
the word Stephen, add ^ye. p 40 l. 28. leave out which. p. 42. l. 32. f. Lunary
r. Lunacy, and l. 40 f. are r. were p. 48. l. 33. f. pleasure r. play sure. p
49. l. 8. f. Philosophers r. Philosophies. p 53. l. 12. for those excess r.
whose excess. p 54. l. 30 f. inordinate r. inordinacie p. 64. l. 30. f. Nature
r. Natures p. 66. l 28. f. halt r. half p 85. l. 30 f. Joshua r. Josiah p. 87.
l 31. f. be thy r. be to thy. p. 89. l. 4. f. peculiarly r. in part. p. 90. l.
17. f. exhautasting r. exhausting. p. 92. l. 11. f. England r. Israel. p. 105.
l. 1. f. of my mind r. of mind p. 116. l. 26. add i^, before descends. p 119.
l. 33. f a^centing ^. accepting. p. 130. l. 5. f. their r. these l. 40. f meat
r. meal p. 134. l. 19 f. ^^nding r. bending, l. 40. f. yellowed r. Gellied, p.
153. l 19. f. lights r. light, p. 155. l. 15. f. eye r. eyes, p. 157 l. 6. f.
preservd r. preserd, p. 159 l. 31. f. a spring r. asp^ring, p. 161. l. 4. f.
but its lip r. but in that life: l. 22 f. Beasts r. B^ats: l. 24 f. thought r.
thoughts: p. 169 l. 20 f. Locamotion r. Locomotion: l 28 f. Port r. Part: p.
173 l. 12 f. immund r. immured: p. 181 l. 9 f. the r. their: p. 189 l. 3 f.
substraction r. substratum: l. 8 f. Elixa r. Elixar: p. 193 l. 15 f. so what
use r. what use: p. 210 l. 17 f. Na^al r. Nadab: p. 214 l. 26 f. with r. which:
p. 235 l. 30 f. to r. so. p. 249 l. 13 f. I can proceed r. I cannot proceed.

DIVINE MEDITATIONS ON FAITH: OR, The Vision, Exercise and Triumph of FAITH.
WHere the Treasure is, there is the Heart, the thoughts, the affections also.
Matthew. 6.21.
A judicious mind is virtuously ambitious, only being inamored with that, whose
true worth invites most its Contemplation, glaneing over inferior things with
a superficial and general surview.

The Soul of Man is never un-imployed, though often mis-imployed, resembling in
the perpetuity, though not in the quality of its motion, the ever and
all-moving Creator; who as he ever was, so was he never idle, as being a most
pure act.

Is this true? Is the mind of Man never vacant? Art thou never idle O my Soul?
Strive then not to be idely employed; that both in acting, and in acting well,
thou may be more like thy Maker. And let the riches on which thou placest thy
love, be Heaven and heavenly things: Where neither Moth nor rust corrupt, nor
Thieves break through and steal; Matthew. 6.20.
so shall such Treasure be, not the Prison, but the Paradise of thy heart.

Amongst all those precious Graces heapt up in the boundless Storehouse of
Gods mercy, though each particular is to be admired, yet are there degrees of
pre-eminence. For like as the beautiful Stones set in Aaron's Vestments; the
Planets amongst the lesser Stars: So these three Divine Graces, Faith, Hope,
and Charity, outshine the rest, attracting the eye of my Soul, and as much
invite my Contemplation, as they necessitate my fruition.

These, these are the Fundamental Graces, Superior to all other, both in
respect of the Excellency of their Object, Christ Jesus, and of their Subject
wherein they reside, a true Christian. The other, viz. Temperance, Fortitude,
etc. being oftentimes bestowed by God on many natural Men, in whom they shine
with a dim Light, never with a Sun-like splendour. They (like the Indians)
possessing those Treasures, which Christians know best the right use of: Such
Diamonds being then only truly placed, when set within a foil of Humility.

Thus my Soul, through the free Grace of thy Heavenly Father, have thou
exhibited to thy view, and enjoying a Mine of Treasure, a Heaven of Happiness,
Riches which exclude not, but command thee to covet. O follow thy Saviors
Counsel, be a joyful Man, and industrious Merchant. Matthew. 13.44.
Part with all thy sinful Lusts, Sell all thy worldly Vanities; purchase this
Field, and Trade for these Pearls. Thy affections are the price; which that
thou might disburse without delay, look more seriously into their worth, so
shall thou at once affect, and possess them.

As the optic faculty is both weak, and useless to us, in the Discovery of
things that are either too near, or too far distant, and so out of the command
of its Power: so also if we suffer it at once distractedly to wander over
several species (though within the strength of its speculation) it cannot give
a true judgment, or description of any particular. The same Rules bound our
understanding, the perspective of our Souls. For look we on God, that Infinite
being, further then our limits in his gracious revelation, our sight is
cataracted and dimned with ignorance. View we him too near in the attribute of
his mercy, we grow presumptuously blind. Or place we terrene vanities in our
affections as worthy to be equally gazed on with him, our reason will prove
both purblinde, and false-sighted; rendering an untrue and unprofitable
discovery to our Souls. The last of these Rules let me first apply; then follow
here the objects proposed to my present Meditation, which are the Principal and
Evangelical Virtues. Shall I then at once superficially glance over them? No,
rather view thou my Soul each grace apart, that so thou may better discern
the dignity of each particular. And as Faith has the pre-eminence amongst
them, and the first place in us, at our regeneration; so in thy Contemplation.

Philosophers are beholding to Aristotle for most of their Definitions; the
Christians to the Scripture, as being the truth, and so no error in it; as
being the Foundation, and therefore no building without it. Would thou know
then O my Soul what Faith is? Search the Scriptures and thou shall find, Hebr.
11.1.
that Faith is the Substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not
seen. O perfect figure, O true Effigies of that Heavenly Grace, drawn even to
the Life by that only great Arts-Master, the Spirit of God! Frail Mortals that
we are, extraordinary need have we of such exact Descriptions; since like
weak-sighted Men, we multiply our object, grasping frequently the shadow in
stead of the substance. Thus being often times deceived in our judgments, by
the many counterfeits of Faith, Let us upon some Professors thereof (that even
falsehood may not want a witness) cursorily gaze, as Passengers use to do, on
executed Traitors; learning wisdom from others harms, rather pitying their
folly, than following their example.

The Sun may rise gloriously, and yet suffer an Eclipse, before it mount the
Meridian. Good beginnings may make us expect, cannot assure us of good
proceedings. Many run in a race, 1 Cor. 9.2^.
but he which perseveres to the end obtains the prize. Mankind does commonly
ascend one degree toward Heaven, where frozen with ignorance and folly, they
afar of, with the Owl, wonder at the Light, not caring by their approach to
enjoy its heat, or to be enlightened with its brightness; like silly Birds
hovering over the Devils blaze, N. B.
(that fowler of Souls) or with ignorant Travelers, eying and following that
false and wandering Light of Worldly Vanities, until they be plunged in their
own destruction. Historical Faith. Ezekiel. 49.3. Genes. 28.12. Genes. 3.1.
Amongst these, give me leave to point out the Historical Believer, who has
waded, and in the deep, in Ezekiel's River; has ascended one step of Jacob's
Ladder; yea, with the Serpent in Paradise (that Devil incarnate) has found out
the Tree, of whose sweetness he shall never be a happy partaker.

O the folly and madness of rational Souls! who having spyed out the good Land
of Canaan, choose rather, with the murmuring Israelites, Numb. 13.
to wander in the Wilderness of Vanity, the Deserts of Evil, not only Forty
Years, but their whole life time, then to go in to possess that fruitful
Soil, with faithful Joshuah. Tell me, O Man, why the affection does as it
were loose its appetite, change his Channel, and dissent from that Rule in
Heavenly things, which in terrene objects it both allows, and follows. The
Covetous Man having begun but to taste of Riches, continues a Midas, ever after,
wishing to touch and feed on nothing but Gold. The Voluptuous Man having had
but an Airy view of Pleasure, is enamoured with it, and devotes his strength,
his time, his life to its service. And the Ambitious Man having once kneeled on
the Footstool of honor, never rests, until he has ascended the Throne. On the
other side, change we but the Place, Earth for Heaven (although the objects
differ much in worth) and our minds change also. The Historical Believer, by
his general knowledge and observation of the Principles of Nature and Justice,
cannot but confess a God; next, that his Eternal Being is only the unexhausted
Ocean, from whence all Rich Streams of Graces, Revel. 22.1.
and Rivers of Life proceed. The everlasting Mine, and Treasure of Treasures,
which are as infinite in their quantity, as their value. Yet for all this
proficiency in the theory of Divinity, he still remains a drone, like a lazy
Mathematician, only viewing upon his Globe, those magazins of wealth, (the
Indies) without endeavoring, or taking pains to enjoy them. He knows that
Princes are but Vice-royes, Tenants at will, Commissioners, whose Power lasts
not beyond Gods will, or the date of their life; The Almighty only being the
Fountain of Honor, according to that of the Psalmist, Promotion comes
neither from the East, nor West, nor from the South, but God is the Judge, he
puts down one, Psalm. 75 6, and 7.
and sets up another. Notwithstanding this knowledge of Gods pre-eminence,
he either like the Barbarians exchanges Gold for Glass, his golden Hours for
frail and glassy Titles, terrene and empty favors, which are but the
counterfeits of true honor, a row of Characters, by which we should spell out
Heavenly things, the substance of these shadows.

All Earthly honors are either mediately, that is, by course of Blood, derived
from our Parents to us, or else immediately by the present favor of the
Prince, conferred upon Us; the worth of them consisting in the height of Title,
Place or Privileges above others not so dignified. Look then O Glowworm
toward Heaven, and thou will soon confess how infinitely all Earthly vanities
are overmatched; they being but rude Patterns, helping us to judge of the
Original; degrees to raise, not weights to depress our Meditations; a Mount
Nebo to view Mount Sion. Have we on Earth Kings to create us honorable?
Behold, their Breath is in their Nostrils; whereas in Heaven, the Lord is King
for ever and ever, Psalm. 10.16.
who has said and verified it, that though they are Gods, Psalm. 82.6.
yet they shall die like Men. Further, the World gives to its favorites, large
and magnificent Titles, adorning them with splendid Robes, which are (as it
were) the Superscription of their Place and Estimation. Pharaoh named Joseph,
Genes. 41.45.
Zaphnath Paaneah, which signifies Prince. Daniel is named Belteshazzar,
according to the name of the Caldeans God. Dan. 1.7.
David must be styled the Kings Son in Law. 1 Samuel 18.21. Esth. ^.15.
Mordecai goes out from the presence of the King in Royal Apparel, of blew and
white, and with a great Crown of Gold, and with a Garment of fine Linen and
Purple. We see here how liberal Earthly Kings, yea Kings of the Earth, have
been in the expression of their favors: and can any conjecture, the eternal
God, the only Jehovah, and King of Heaven and Earth, can, or will be wanting to
his favorites? No, his Word, which is truth it self, shall be our assurance;
Fear not little Flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you the
Kingdom. Luke 12.32.
Nor are we only Kings, but dignified above such expressions; the Image of the
only true God being renewed, and imprinted in us. For through our Lord Jesus
Christ 's most great and precious promises are given unto us, 2 Pet. 1.4.
that by them we should be partakers of the Divine Nature. Has Saul chosen
David to be his Son in Law? yea, and he esteemed it an honor worth the
hazarding of his life? But behold what love the Father has given to us, that
we should be called the Sons of God. 1 Ep. Joh. 3.1.
Was Mordecai so publicly honored by Ahasuerus? God does far exceed in his
free favors toward his: Witness St. John, saying, Rev. 4.4.
I saw round about the Throne four and twenty Seats, and upon the Seats four
and twenty Elders sitting, clothed with white Raiment, having on their Heads
Crowns of Gold.

Come hither O thou loytering Soul, that carest not to ascend the Mount with
Abraham, and Isaac, but stayest below with his Servants, and Asses: that
choosest rather to stand still, and become a barren, and unmovable Pillar of
Salt, with the faithless Wife of Lot, then with no less have than good speed to
travel toward Zoar, a place of safety, with her righteous Husband. The Poets
tell us a Fable of one Tantalus, whose hunger-starved Mouth covetously gasped
after Golden Apples, which continually fled from him. I would (O half Believer)
thou had his hunger, his thirst, then would our Saviors loving invitation be
joyfully obeyed: John 7.37.
If any Man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink such living Waters which
shall not fly from, but into the longing Soul. Art thou Adam's Son? O here
behold a Tree of Life, whose Root is only transplanted from Paradise to Heaven;
that so the Fruit might hang down to Earth. Here is now no prohibition, to
restrain thy ambition, but a commission to warrant thy affection: ( Take and
eat:) O take it, even Christ in his Word, and Sacraments; not carnally as Adam,
but spiritually, with the hand of thy Soul, which is a saving and applying
faith. Next relish it by Meditation, and digest it by prayer. Then shall thine
eyes be enlightened, and thou shall perceive thy nakedness, that so Christ may
cloth thee with his righteousness here, and his glory hereafter. Then shall
thou behold the vanity of earthly pleasures, riches, and honors; confessing
that God is all these, yea all in all unto thee. That the happiness of Divine
knowledge, consists most in fruition. That it is better to acknowledge God to
be Immanuel with Isaiah, then Daniel's God with Darius. To embrace Christ in
our arms by faith with Simeon, Esa. 7.14. Dan. 6.26. Luke 2.28. Number. 23.17.
Luke 1.47. Mark 5.7.
than to see his Star afar of with Balaam. To rejoice in God our Savior with
the blessed Virgin, then to confess Jesus to be the Son of the most high God,
with the Legion of Devils. Then shall that virtual and spiritual Figure of God,
which according to our capacity, the holy Spirit has shadowed out by
attributes in his Word, and Works, be appropriated unto us by Faith. That so
those glorious rays of his, to wit, his Holiness, his Justice, his Power,
which (before our Souls were Eagle-fighted, our minds illuminated) rather
scortcht, than cherished; dazzled than enlightened us; meet all in the center of
his mercy, Jesus Christ; and from him as it were by reflection, powerfully work
upon us, and comfortably refresh the whole Man; renewing, justifying, and
sanctifying thee here, and glorifying thee hereafter.

All this while, O my Soul, thou have been viewing the first draught of Faith,
rudely painted after a Landscape fashion, and therefore ever beheld at distance.
Now observe a second model, limbed out more exactly, having in every part a
seeming perfection. O that the Colors would be but as lasting as lively. The
defect then of this Pourtraiture is a false ground, manifested and proved by
its short continuance. The truth of which, since it cannot aptly, or charitably
be demonstrated, or discovered by any extant piece I know, lest I should seem
to be my own Judge, or judge my Brother, I will with reverence look into our
Ark, the sacred Scriptures; wherein, as there is the two Tables of the Law for
our instruction, so there is a Pot of Manna to encourage and strengthen our
obedience. An Aaron's Rod to tell us what we have been, are, and should not be.
There I doubt not but to find some Antiquities of the infant Age before the
Law, or the middle Age under the Law, and some in the old Age of the World,
that last measure of time under the Gospel. Which, although dusted by death,
survived in those living characters for instruction, and our purpose.

All humane judgments may err. Neither is there any Seat of Judicature upon
Earth, Temporary Faith.
no not Peter's Chair, altogether free from injustice and false opinions. If it
be the certain condition of Man to be uncertain in all his ways; Nam humanum
est errare, it is his Custom to err; How can he then which is a stranger at
home, make a true discovery abroad? He that stumbles in a known and even path,
cannot choose but fall headlong, if he ascend craggy passages. He that is
ignorant of earthly things, cannot be spiritually judicious. The best oft-times
are deceived by their own hearts. (For the heart of Man is deceitful above all
things, who can know it?) much more by others. Those which in the false
Balance of our understanding have seemed down weight, being placed in the
Scales of the Sanctuary, have been found wanting, as may appear in these
following examples. Who, although they out-went the prospect of Men in the
right way toward Heaven in the outward acts of Faith, yet afterward either
stood still, or wanting Oil for their Lamps, were benighted and strayed in the
broad Paths of prosperity. Cain the first draught of humanity that ever Man
drew; Genes. 4.3.
the first born to whom hereditarily belonged the blessing, and the double
portion; the fourth part of the then visible Church, and a sacrificing Priest
before God; viz. by his birth, education, and offering, proved to be a Member
of the Church; a Professor, by his Prayers; (employed as the inseparable
Companions of Sacrifices;) the fruits of that profession are manifest; so that
to the superficial view of Man, he seems not only practically Religious, but
also to parallel faithful Abel. Yet behold, in process of time, his want of
perseverence, shows his defect of Sincerity; the murder of his Brother, his
former Hypocrisy; and afterward concluded of, and punished with the Curse of
God; the Hatred of good men, and his self Despairation.

Lots Wife was a member of the apparent Church, Genesis 19.1.
and as it is probable, forsook her native Country, her Fathers Gods, to be a
sojourner, a stranger in a remote Land with Abraham. And no doubt (while she
lived in that sinful Sodom) was a frequent Hearer of that Doctrine of
Repentance, which her Righteous husband Preached with so unhappy success. Yea,
in conclusion, she forsakes Sodom, being not only aided by the presence, but
led by the hand of an Angel toward Zoar, that Type of Heaven. But no sooner did
the Angel leave her, but her eyes reversion, discover her minds aversion. Which
her self would have seconded, had not the Almighty, in Favor to her Husband,
and in Mercy to Us, made her an examplary Monument, in a Pillar of Salt.

Next, under the Law, behold Saul, not only a Member, 1 Samuel 10.1.
but chosen of God to be the Captain over his Church. A man every way well
qualified; first, for his Body, his Proportion was so excellent, that there was
none like him amongst all the people. And for his Mind, 1 Samuel 10.24.
it was endowed (it seemed) both with Divine and Moral Virtues; witness his
joining in Prophecy; 1 Samuel 10 10. 1 Samuel 11.15.
his performance of many Pious Duties, as his Sacrifices at his Coronation, his
asking Counsel of God, and inquiry after Sin; 1 Samuel 14.38. 1 Samuel 15.24. 1 Samuel 10.21. 1 Samuel 10.27. 1 Samuel 11.6. 1 Samuel 28.3.
confession and humiliation after Samuels Reproof; his humility at his
Election, his patience and mercy at his Rejection and Defamation; his Fortitude
against the general and open Enemies of the Church the Ammonite; his Zeal
against the private and secret Enemies of Religion, 1 Samuel 28.7.
viz. all Witches and Wizzards.

Here then is a spring of Piety; a profession, and expression of Religion; a
Gourd, whose glory may not only serve as a Canopy of state to Saul, but as a
shade to one of the Prophets. A gourd indeed, and so it faded. For the eave of
his last day ruined that frontispiece of Virtue, which his whole life's best
Actions had raised toward Heaven. For, had he been with the Prophets, and
joined with them in Prophecy? His ignorance and wants now send him to enquire
of the Devil. Did he Sacrifice before to God? Now behold, the reward of
Divination and Witchcraft are in his hand. He whose custom was to ask counsel
of God, now seeks after a Witch; and he whose seeming Zeal condemns his
Righteous Son, for tasting of an Honeycomb, although ignorant of any
restraint; now, contrary to his Oath and Covenant made with God, without
humiliation and judging of himself, or confession of his fault, willingly and
wilfully swallows down the very gall of Sin. His Humility did not more grace
him, when he lay buried in the peoples Stuff, than his Pride did debase him,
when he presumed to be one of Gods Council. That patience, fortitude, and mercy
which abounded, yea, was extended toward others, is now deficient to himself:
For, he falls all along upon the Earth, becomes sore afraid; no strength is
left in him, and yet he refuses to Eat. For, having no conscience toward God,
no wonder if his Body wants the charity of Nature: When the Creature abuses the
Mercy of the Creator, he must expect to taste of his Justice: And when he
ceases to know Himself, he shall be made to know his Punishment. Saul has
forgotten both his God and himself, and therefore justly is he now forgotten,
and hears his Funeral censure pronunced by him who never spoke nor wished
better to man, To morrow shall thou be with me. 1 Samuel 28.1^.


Forewarning fore-armes not Sinners; he that doubted of his Choice, though from
the mouth of Gods Prophet, credits his refusal and death from the Devils
Oracle. Extraordinary Blessings are the free and voluntary gift of God, and not
believed of Sinners before enjoyed. But his punishments are the due Burden of
sins desert, and therefore are expected before divulged. The Soul being
oftentimes aforehand sensible of that which the Body afterward endures. None
but a false, or temporary Faith has a final cessation; but such is this of
Saul, he now believes only that he might despair. The first degree of a true
Faith, being usually, the false ones last step. God lifting up the one from the
sense of judgment to the faith and sight of Mercy. Sin dragging the other from
the belief of punishment into the gulf of Despairation.

Though Saul has his last day marked out, even the morrow; yet neither the
love toward his Sons (whose Lives bore the same date with his) nor care for
himself, begets the least endeavor, by delay, or otherwise, to outlive the
foregoing Prophecy (inevitable are the Judgments of God); nay rather, he
hastens it, shortning his flight, that he might shorten his life. And, that sin
(according to its nature) might have a companion, he moves his Armor-bearer to
be a traitor to his own Soul by example, whom his precept could not force to
be a traitor to his Prince. For, he falls upon his Sword, which, instead of
Defense, becomes a weapon of Offense. So oftentimes God deals with the Wicked;
who, as in life, themselves are their worst Enemies, so in death they prove
their own Executioners. Thus the Sacred Annals, before and since Moses, has by
the Deads example, given most lively arguments to prove this falsehood, of the
deadness of this seeming life of faith. O admire here the infinite extent of
the Mercy of God! who out of the carcass of this Lion (Sin) this Eater (Death)
brings forth both meat and sweetness for his Sampsons, his Nazarites; making
the Downfall of the Fathers, the Rises of the Children; their Ignorance our
Knowledge; their faults and blindness, apt spectacles to help the weakness of
our sight! It now remains, that the holy Records of the faithful and powerful
Gospel, as the Echo of the Old Testament, consort in the like precedents; that
by so consonant an Harmony, the dissonant, and ungrounded judgment of the most
hypocritical and temporary Believer, may be convinced, if not converted.

The purest Gold has its Dross; the best Wheat its Tares: Yea, the Moon is
then most full of Spots, when least empty of Light. The Church of God in the
Primitive times, in its Infant Age, had many, who although they were deemed
Members of Christ, had not yet put off the Old man, The Old Adam. Many, whose
Image and outward Superscription seemed to be our Cesars, yet proved to be
false, and unvaluable Coin, when they came to their test, or exchange. Witness
Ananias and Sapphira, Acts 5.1.
(a pair doubly united, by Sin and Wedlock) who, before their trial, were
esteemed as Members of the True Church, as Believers of the Apostles Doctrine,
and no doubt baptized in that Faith; the effects of which seemed to lead them
on to forsake the world; for, they sold their possessions to works of Charity
and Piety, And laid it at the Apostles feet. Who would not here have paralleled
these with sincere Joses, since both parties did the same duty, though not with
the same heart; the one acting truly that Christians part, which the other only
played.

Man's natural light is comparatively darkness, and the height of his Knowledge
advantageth him only with a larger prospect of his ignorance; he knowing most
that confesses to know nothing. The conscience of our want being the perfection
of our science. Only thou, O Lord, art the Fountain of Knowledge and Wisdom;
thou triest the Heart and the Reins, and see not as man sees. Shall not thou
who planted the Ear, Psalm. 94.9.
hear? Thou that formed the Eye, see? Thou that teach man Knowledge, know?
Thou, O Lord, know the thoughts of man. For what end therefore, O Ananias,
tends the subtle compact with thy Wife? The strength and ripeness of Sin,
hastens the harvest of Judgment, wherefore then this bare notion of Religion?
Matthew. 24.51.
This worst Sin, has Hells worst Punishment. What serves for, O Sapphira, the
impudent defense of this act, which is as lightning before the thunderclap of
Justice; since the spirit searches all things, 1 Cor. 2.10.
yea, the secret things of God? He knew thy untruth, thy lie, and therefore at
once pronounced and executed the truth of thy Judgment. Behold the feet of
them that have buried thy Husband, are at the door, and shall carry thee out:
Whereupon she fell down at the Apostles feet, and yielded up the Ghost. Justice
depriving those of life (Gods gift) which any way detain man's gift to God, to
wit, their Offerings; or whatsoever else is set apart for an Holy employment.

The indulgent Parent fears that the life story of that child, will prove but a
compendium, whose Infant years are an Abridgment of Man's stature. The like
observation will be proved true (if doubted) in many preposterously forward
Christians, who are like to Childrens Bubbles, which, while they last, are but
Topographies to the Beholders: Or, like Lightning; which, though it invelop
Heaven, has naught remaining; yea, scarcely time and place to bear witness of
its glory. So these hypocritical and temporary Professors, seem a perfect Map
of Christianity, the splendour of Religion. Yet at the appointed time they
vanish, becoming so much further off, by how much nearer they seemed to Heaven.
View the experiment of this truth in the Scribes and Pharisees, (from the
opinion of whose Righteousness, the Jews drews this Maxim, That if any two on
Earth should be glorified in Heaven, the one must be a Scribe, the other a
Pharisee.) That their Purity was but a Blaze, this vulgar conceit a Falsehood.
Hear and believe the Word, yea, the Word of Truth, Matthew. 23.13.
concluding these Wise men, Fools; these Guides, Misleaders; these Patrons of
the Commonwealth, unnatural Vipers; sealing them up with a seven fold Woe, for
manifest an hypocrisy, to eternal Damnation.

Our Savior was many times guarded with troops and multitudes of Disciples,
whose momentary affections proffered Him an Earthly Crown. Yet he, which knew
all Hearts, knew the unconstancy of theirs, and therefore committed not himself
to them. For, had they been as Powerful as Willing, had their affections been
as sincere and durable, as they were fervent, yet could not any earthly
Monarchy allure him to Reign, who lest his Heavenly Throne to Suffer;
exchanging a crown of Glory for a Crown of Thorns, that his Humiliation might
be be man's Exaltation. O here behold the Unchangeableness of Gods Love, the
Vanity and Unsteadfastness of Man's best Resolution. Those Disciples, which even
now would have Crowned him, those which traced him through Sea and Land, and
having found him, said, What should we do that we might work the Works of God;
yea those, who, as it were filled with a passionate desire of possession, John
6.30.
prayed, Lord, evermore give us this Bread; these now, instead of honoring him
with a Diadem, deny his Regal descent, saying, Is not this Jesus the son of
Joseph. These whose appetites desired evermore to enjoy this Bread of Life,
John 6.42.
think there is now no living with this Food; as being too hard for their
digestion, their tongues testifying their distate, saying, This is an hard
saying, who can hear it? To conclude, they that so fast followed him, now as
fast depart from him; Witness our Saviors question to his Chosen ones, Will ye
also go away? John 6.60.
O blessed Savior, Let my Soul be a follow respondent with Peter, and say,
Lord, to whom shall I go? John 6.68.
Thou have the Words of Eternal Life.

My Meditations have spent much time in the discovery of this outside of
Faith. I should now proceed, did not the hateful example of Apostating Demas
stand branded in Holy-Writ, for my observation and conclusion of this Point.
Knowledge is the foundation of Faith, but God only is the Master builder of it.
Christians are Priests, imputatively and derivatively from our Savior, as
offering up the Evangelical sacrifices of Prayer, and Praise; but the Ministers
of the Gospel, in a more especial manner. Demas was a Priest, because a
Christian; Learned, as being without doubt, a Teacher; Paul's scholar and
companion, one whose eyes were daily witnesses of Signs and Miracles; whose
ears were frequent auditors of Gods Word: yet this man wanted the witness of
the Spirit in his Conscience. Therefore no marvail if his actions were
destitute of its power. The Wisdom of this world is Foolishness with God, 1
Cor. 1.20.
and proves at length so to Man. Demas's worldliness discovers his Folly; and
his second choice shows the Hypocrisy of the first. That affection which
toward Christ has an end, had never a beginning. The Love of God is Lasting.
And though our weak understanding, through the interposition of some great
Afflictions, may conceive it to be extinct; yet, that eclipse past, this
overture of falling out, proves the renewing of Love. He that perseveres to the
end, shall endlesly be Beloved. But he that grants God the Major, his youth and
strength; and of his full age the Minor, the lesser part of that time, and yet
at last does in fact deny the conclusion, is as little a Christian as a
Logician.

The Word of God, as it is the great luminary of Divinity; so likewise the Sun
of our Souls, which discovers unto us those glittering counterfeits, which the
false and weak lights of our depraved understandings, would present as
blameless. This is that Star which guides all Wise men to Christ. A Pole Star,
directing only all Heavenly Observers; being either unknown, or else not useful
to worldly Stargazers. This Word, as it makes us know our selves, which is the
principal of wisdom, so it makes us discern (in some sort) others, which is the
Divinity of Knowledge. Which of the Devout Jews would have thought the Scribes
and Pharisees hypocrites, had not the Word of that All-creating Word, Christ
Jesus, anatomised their shameful Corruption? Who amongst us would have judged a
Miraculous Faith, less than a Saving; had not the same Verity assured us, That
many which have Prophesied, cast out Devils, Matthew. 7.22.
and done many wonderful Works in his Name, should be excluded Heaven with a
Nunquam novi vos; Depart from me ye workers of Iniquity? Miraculous Faith.


That a man may be a Conduit-pipe to convey Water of Life to others, and yet
prove a vessel of Dishonor, the Religious care of Paul witnesses, who
subjected his body, lest when he had Preached to others, 1 Cor. 11.27.
be himself should become a Reprobate. But that they, whose Word aided by the
power of Faith, was mighty to cast Satan out of others, should be possessed
themselves, is both Lamentable and Wonderful. These indeed have cropped the
Leaves of Faith, leaving the Fruit and Root behind: seeking therewith, like
Adam, presumptuously to hide their Nakedness, and want both of Application and
Justification. Thus these, whilst they think to deceive others, the Devil
deceives them.

Charity, the most fruitful, lasting, and most eminent Grace, begins first at
home. The affection which we bear to our selves, being the best pattern for
direction of our loves toward others. Witness the approbation of our Savior
Christ, whose abridgement of the whole Law being Charity; the Rule of it was,
To love our Neighbors as our Selves. Matthew. 22.39.
From this Expression, or short Paraphrase, who concludes not a primary and
most natural Duty, necessarily to be employed and commanded, [ a self-loving]
though not a self-love as being the manner, quantity, and just weight of all
our external actions. Of this want, are those guilty, reproved by our Savior;
who (too publicly officious) offer to pull out their neighbors Mote, not
being sensible of the Beam in their own Eyes. Also the unhappy Miracle-worker
must here plead Guilty, of whom that Jewish saying, falsely applied to our Lord,
may be truly verified, He saved others, himself he cannot save.

Gods Power is the chiefest agent in effecting Miracles; an Attribute most
necessary to beget Fear, Admiration, and Humiliation. But alas, the Knowledge
of Gods Omnipotency, shall rather affright, than comfort us, without the
apprehension and self-application of His love toward us, in Him, for whose
Name sake he wrought such Signs. Yea, our Fear will prove slavish, and
servile; our Admiration frightful and terrible; our Humiliation distracted and
desperate, without the sense and feeling, promise, and assurance of his
merciful Love. For God is Love, John 4.16.
and works by Love. His Love being the only cause of ours to Him, and to
others. The truth of this, made Paul account all Faith, though able to remove
Mountains, 1 Cor. 13.2.
nothing without Charity; further intimating, that how glorious soever such
outsides might seem, they would prove empty shells, void of the kernel, the
substance, and true essence of Faith. Charity being the left hand of Faith, as
Faith the right eye of Charity.

There needs no other witness of this Faiths insufficiency than Judas Iscariot.
Who was elected to be one of the Select Disciples, and dignified with the
Highest of Callings, even to be the Apostle of Jesus Christ. One who, both
under the Law and Gospel, had participated of those initiating Sacraments,
Circumcision and Baptism, as also of that which was for Confirmation, the
Passover. Further, he was a Preacher of the Covenant of Grace, by Word as well
as by Name, by Deed as well as by Word; as appears by our Saviors large
Commission. He gave them Power, Matthew. 10.1.
viz. his Twelve Disciples against Unclean Spirits, to cast them out, and to
Heal all manner of Sickness, and all manner of Diseases. The Execution of this,
the joint Confession of the Twelve, and of the Seventy Disciples, does
manifest, saying, Lord, even the Devils are subject unto us through thy Name:
Luke 10.17.
Lo, here Judas miraculously casting out Devils. Will it not be a wonder, yea,
and seem an untruth, that this Saint is become a Devil? No. John 7.6.
Such a Faith to have such an End, is but natural; a stinted Faith wants
enlargement to continue. Through Faith in His Name we may do Miracles; but
through Faith in His Blood, Acts 4.30.
we and Judas only can be Saved.

The light and fruit of Faith, and all other good Works must shine, not to me,
nor to others alone, but to both: Men may be instruments of Heat to others, and
yet Cold themselves. Many are made Executioners of Gods Power, which never
enjoy his Grace. Nebuchadonezzar was his Rod, Cirus his Servant: Neither his
Son. Yea, Miracles and proofs are not wanting in our days; there being those
(I fear) whose words have powerfully cast Satan out of others, their own Souls
being not delivered from his Tyranny.

Stories, the monuments of Art, preserve in black and white, what once was done
in Colors, by a Grecian Painter; whose Skill was so much an Ape to Nature,
that his lively Draughts deceived the double senses of Birds; causing them to
prefer the shaddows of Fruits, before the fruitful Substance. The Devil in his
subject is not less void of Art, although they both differ in their ends; the
one Deceiving, but to show his Skill; the other being Skilful to deceive Birds
who have not reason to correct their Sense, nor to discover the Shadow of
Shaddows; one is only a Laughfing-stock of that Artists innocent Craft; But
Man, whose incorporeal parts parallel the others Essence, yea, now transcend
it, (by how much a positive is better than a depravation) is the stage which
Satan's derision tramples on. The least of Scorns, is not the least of
Injuries; the height of it, the greatest of Cruelties. Such is his, for it
wounds the wounded, seeking to deprive those of Heaven, whom he has already
defrauded of an earthly Paradise.

O my Soul, thou art one of this worlds Commonwealth, to whom this busy
Impostor, variously disguised, offers his service. Each mind at first, whiles
unhabituated, is in that respect an empty Tablet, on which some portraiture
must be drawn. A good and a bad Artist, strive for the Employment. Diverse
excellent beginnings are there Blurd by the one. Diverse bad ones amended by the
other. The good Models having only this advantage, that once dry, and fixed,
they may suffer a Blot, never an utter Defacing. Death lastly brings to light,
the work, which challenges the Master, and the Master it. Would thou then
know what is Drawn, and whom thou have Employed? Let thy following Meditations
search out, and observe the Original; which (the shadows withdrawn) most
opportunely, and in order, meets thy next Contemplation. The pleasingness of
Objects, begets a Delight; the delight, an affection; the affection courts an
enjoying. Eve, the Mother of Sin, and of Mankind, before ^he took that
Forbidden, and Sacramental Fruit, or tasted the Bitter-sweet, saw that the Tree
was good for Food, and that it was pleasant to the Eyes. Genesis 3.6.
The Scripture thereby intimating, that had not the Flesh afforded
entertainment to the Temptation, nor the Eyes been windows to let in the
superficial beauty of that knowing Fruit, nor the mind brought forth, and
nourisht desires so rebelliously ambitious, no powerful assault, nor subtle
stratagem of Satan, could have prevailed, or been sufficient, to enter a
Citadel so perfectly framed, and strongly fortified. As the Body, so the Soul
has its several Objects; according to which diversity, it may be capable of a
threefold sight; in all which, the cause, medium and instrument of seeing, with
its object, is most considerable. In the first, the sight of sense, there is
the Light proceeding from the Sun, occasioning the operation: 2. The fleshly
nerves which contein the optic faculties, employed about all objects, and
visible substances. In the second, the sight of Reason, there is the light of
Nature: 2. The luminary o^ instrumental receptacle, the mind of Man: 3. The
things obvious, which are chiefly, moral Justice, Virtue, and earthly Wisdom.
In the third, viz. the spiritual and supernatural sight: There is first, the
Light of Grace; ^. The Eye of Faith, whose object is the only begotten,
infinitely Glorious, and merciful Son of God, Christ Jesus, with all his
faithful Promises, numberless Merits, saving and incomprehensible Graces.

This then, O my Soul, is that Sight and Light; in comparison of which, all
other is but Darkness, or as Torch-lights to the Sun. By this alone, a true
Christian shall as much transcend the rational, as the rational the sensual
Creature. Does the momentary splendor of terrene things entice us to affect
and prefer them? And shall the everlasting, and perfectly glorious Vision of
Heavenly things; even of Him, who gave Beauty, Form, and Being to thee, and
all things, prove less deserving, less effectual? Was the carnal eyes of my
First Parents so over-pleased with the transitory Beauty of an earthly Fruit,
that they forgot their Creator, whose Image they bare, and entered the death,
threatening the breach of his Commandment, though open to the fury of a double
Curse; exchanging the eternity of Happiness, for a momentary taste? And shall
not the Pearless splendor of Heavenly things, animate me to prepare a hand, a
heart, to receive, and taste, the Manna of Souls, the Fruit of a Tree of Life,
not guarded with a Cherubs Fiery sword, but obvious to all; not rooted in
Earth, but sprang from Heaven; being grafted into Humanity, that his Living
Fruit might become the saving and eternal nourishment of Man? O Lord, I
earnestly cry out with those at Capernaum, Give me evermore of this Food. John
6.34.
Have mercy upon my Infirmities; for, being Adam^ son, I have a withered hand,
a carnal heart; Romans 8.7. Psalm. 51.10.
which carnality (...) enmity with thee. Therefore, Create in me a clean Heart,
and renew a right Spirit within me. Relieving my Spiritual wants with this
apprehensive Grace, by which supernatural gift I may be made able to apply thy
saving Promises* with all their dependances.

O Adam, I cannot blame thee for the loss of this Grace; since thou deprivest
thy Posterity of those Treasures only, which thou was possessed of. But in thy
Innocence this thou had not, yet were thou not therefore defective; for thy
created purity needed not any imputative righteousness; being of it self
sufficient, because accepted. The beauty of thy first Purity was so far from
Leprosy, that not the least Stain was then apparent to deface its Candor. Thy
Innocence, void of Sin; and therefore required not a Savior. Thy Soul was the
Resemblance of thy Creator; and therefore a pleasing, and most proper object
for his All-glorious sight. There was without Wrath; Atonement; without
Enmity, Mediation; without Debt, satisfaction; without Jesus, Application is
unnecessary.

Infidelity was the first means of Death, Faith is the only instrument of Life.
By the one, came our Descent to Hell; through the other, our Ascent to Heaven.
That made us Fly from God offended, this makes us Run unto Him appeased. Man
had his first Spring in the Creation, his Summer in Paradise (which should ever
have continued, had not his meridianal height suffered a declination. So
shortning his happiest days* he changed both Place and Season. As after the
Fall, Winter ensues, so did his. For, what are our untimely times, but as a
Winter quarter; wherein every Tree is Fruitless; we being not seemingly, Ephesians.
2.1.
but really dead in Sins and Trespasses. And if there be any Sap in the Root,
or Understanding, Romans 1.20.
it serves for no other use, nourishment, or comfort, but to leave us without
excuse. If any Leaves, as Moral actions, and outward Professions; alas, these
may hide from men, our Nakedness, producing a supposition of Fruitfulness, but
cannot deceive God, who shall cause such Leavy Fig Trees to wither.

Mat. 21.19.
O Savior Jesus Christ, my Years increase, my Life decreaseth; neither know I
how soon thou will visit me by Death, or Judgment, when if only as outwardly
glorious thou sendest me, my Portion is with Hypocrites; if defective of Fruit,
thy sentence has already awarded me, fit for the Fire. Lord, Mat. 7.19.
I am a stem of sinful Adam, sprung from a barren Root, and therefore a Plant
which but Cumbers this Ground. O thou which only art Lord, and Husbandman of
Souls, Luke 13.6. Joh. 13.1.
so shine on me by thy favor, mould and manure me with thy Grace, prune me
with thy Fatherly chastisements, that the old Man may be rooted up, and the new
Man spring up, and grow: that so the Winter of Sin past, a Spring of Faith may
ensue, which in thee being only fruitfully perfect, I may with a happy
certainty, expect an Autumn of Glory.

Whosoever believes in me has everlasting life, Joh. 6.47. The means of Faith.
are the words of our Savior: from whose graciousness every Soul may receive
infinite encouragement to pursue the condition, or instrumental means of so
unvaluable a gift. For what is more desired than life? What more abhorred than
deprivation? Let this offer therefore of Immortality, the height, and
accomplishment of Man's happiness, like the streams of Paradise, direct thee (O
wandering Soul) unto the Eden of Glory. In the midst whereof thou shall find
the Spring of Faith, the Fountain of Life, even God himself: From whom alone,
all Graces have their right ebulition, and procession: for God deals to every
one the measure of Faith. Romans 12.3.
As in the first Creation, he gave a Being to what was not; so in Man's
Regeneration, his immediate Word wrought the one, his written Word the other.
Pulpits are Heavenly Conduits from whence by Earthy Vessels, the Ministers
Voices, (as in smaller Pipes) the Waters of Grace are conveyed into every open
Ear. Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17.
and hearing by the Word of God. The life of the Body is the Soul, the Soul of
the Soul is Faith. As the Infant lives not till God has infused a Soul: so the
Christian lives not without his gift of Faith.

O thou whose gifts are the effects of thy free Mercy, Ejaculation.
not our Merit, and therefore without Repentance or Changeableness, thou being
Wisdom it self, and therefore Unalterable; Omnipotent, and therefore above all
contradiction, and resistance; give to me this Seal of thy love, this first
fruit of thy favor, and my Conversion. O bestow on me the Grace I ask; because
thou have given unto me Grace to ask. For thy bounty is not closed up, because
thou have been liberal, like to Man; since thy love is without measure; thou
therefore give me, because thou have given. Thy former favors being but
earnests of thy future mercies.

The Body of Man, like to the Pool of Bethesda, has five Porches, or senses,
through which all external pleasure and delectation enters, as it were to
comfort the imprisoned Soul. They being as so many Cranies dimly enlightening
her Dungeon, that so their poor and weak expressions might make her ambitious
of a perfect liberty. Amongst these, the seeing faculty in comparison of the
rest, may be styled the beautiful Gate, for its Grace, and Ornament; and the
Bodies mirror, wherein with delight it views the perfection of it self, and
others. So that indeed, the better half of Man's temporary felicities consists
in outward objects. O have these fleshy eyes of ours, such various
presentations of pleasure, to delight these Bodies of Clay with! and can we
imagine Faith (the eye of the immortal Soul) can be destitute of a subject
worthy its view and contemplation? O no, my Soul. The weakest-sighted Faith
enjoys a far better, and more excellent prospect; viz. with Eagles eyes looking
abroad upon the glorious Son of Righteousness, and Son of God Jesus Christ.
Christ the object of Faith and Son of God.
The Life of the Body gives the first power, and motion to the Eye, but this
Heaven-aspiring sight gives the Soul its first Life: Hear me, says God, that
is, believe in me, Esaias. 55.3.
and your Soul shall live.

The Earthly Sun suffers sometimes an Eclipse; so did ours once for all. An
interposition caused the one; the other, not any defect in his own Body or
Light, but a condense Darkness; an Orb of Sin, for a time obscured his
brightness. Women and Children, whose shallow reach fathom not the depth of
Natures works, may with a flying fear hide themselves, not daring to behold the
laboring Sun; when a learned Artist by Water, or reflection searches out the
cause and greatness of an Eclipse. Worldly and carnal Men may mask their
understanding with a wilful ignorance. But do thou, O Lord, Ejaculation.
which hides these things from the Wise, Matt. 11.25.
and revealest them unto Babes, make me to apprehend the reason, and admire the
infiniteness of thy suffering.

Earth affords not a nearer Union or Relation than friendship. That mysterial
incorporation, and perfect conjunction of Wedlock, is but an inclusive of this;
that being more particular, this more general. Society is the happiness of Man's
life, this is the height of that Conjunction, and the perfection of that
happiness. He is either most miserable, or undeserving, that has not had some
taste of this reciprocal foelicity: Since vice, and virtue have both their
favorites, the one exceeding in number, the other in worth. Thus far has my
Meditations roved on Earth, ascending this height of temporary delight, that
from such a rise, my Soul may take a quick flight to Heaven. The friendship of
the World and all things else in it eminent, or praise^worthy, are but dark
shadows of Heavenly things; beams derived from that eternal Light, to give
Light to Man. Does not the Holy Spirit express the exceeding love of the
eternal Father to us his Children by the tenderness of Earthly Parents? His
infinite and free mercy, Esaias. 49.15.
by the charity and friendship of the Samaritan stranger? The ardent and
unparalled affection of our Savior Jesus Christ, to us his Church, Mark
10.33.^
by a Matrimonial and espousal love? O all ye that have any illumination of
Faith, Canticles.
come, and witness with me if there were ever, or can be any love, amity, or
affection like unto this, which God has showed toward us. Lord, I would fain
express thy acts of mercy, the witness of thy love, and object of my Faith, but
who is sufficient for these things? or able to express what he cannot
sufficiently conceive of? How, or where shall I begin? when Lord my beginning
was from thee? Yea, from all beginnings have thou chosen me, and in time have
thou called me, void of love, desire and freedom of will, or any other
congruity, remote, or sufficient to answer thee, calling; being the servant of
Satan, and Bond-slave of Sin, and therefore an Aliene from thee and the common
wealth of Israel. One not only sick, Ephesians. 2.2.
but dead in sins and trespasses, and therefore unable to move toward thee. A
natural Man perceiving not the things of God, and therefore ignorant of thee.
Thy love alone was the cause of mine, Ephesians. 2.1.
for herein is love, not that we loved thee, but that thou loved'st us first;
Nor foreknowledge of my after works or willingness to receive grace, Ephesians.
2.2. 1 John 4.10.
occasioned this free Election: For not of works, which I had done, but
according to thy mercy, did thou elect, and save me. From thy free and
gracious predestination my faith with a devout affection makes haste to behold
the Foundation, Titus 3.5.
thy dear Son Jesus Christ my Savior.

O wonder, O infinite Love, O admirable friendship! He whose glory and
greatness the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain, Christ was born of the Virgin
Mary.
was enclosed within the Womb of a poor though pure Virgin. God descends in
humility from Heaven, that Man might ascend Heaven in Glory; becoming like to
Man, that Man might be like to him. Not Rome the Metropolis of the World, nor
Jerusalem the glory of Judea, must triumph in the birth, or be made more
honorable by the first presence of Emanuel; but Bethlem, the least of the
Cities of Juda. Which poor place, either ignorant, or regardless of so high a
favor, was not only void of thankfulness, and common courtesy; but of
neighbourly hospitality. A Stable, a Manger, and brute Beasts being the Palace,
the Cradle, the company, it prepared for the entertainment of the Worlds
Savior. Behold here a mystery of mysteries; He who knows no beginning, now
begins to be, that his being in nature might give us a being in grace, in
glory. And in his Infancy did our gracious Redeemer begin to suffer; the
entrance of his life being but the Prologue of his sorrow, and the total
thereof a continued passion.

His innocent Childhood is, made the subject of treason; Persecuted by Herod.
and naught but his slaughter must allay the Tyrants suspicion. What needed
any, unjustly, or violently to have sought his Death, who willingly came to
Dye; only living the life of Man, that for Man he might be capable of Death.
This Herodian cruelty has a deeper dye than Nero's Tyranny. For he destroyed
the World only in his wish, but this Man by one act would have made not our
Bodies only, but our Souls mortal. O sweet Jesus, thou fleddest into Egypt, not
to preserve life, but to die daily; avoiding his merciless Power, that thou
might declare thy powerful mercy. Thy Death, by which we live, must not be
constrained, least ungrateful Man should esteem it no gift. The strength and
policy of Herod are unable to wrest that per-force from thee, which thou
purposest freely to give. Infancy must not suffer for Manhood, since the
greater includes the less; but the lesser cannot comprehend the greater. That
perfection of Age, that made Man's rebellion, and sin more full, more hateful,
must make thy obedience and sufferings more complete, more acceptable. Not
Bethlem, but Jerusalem the center of the World, must be the Theater of infinite
mercy, of merciless cruelty; that thy passion being acted in the place, wherein
the Legal Ceremonies were celebrated, the Types and Figure might more clearly
point out the substance. All those bloody Sacrifices being abolished by one
Sacrifice of blood.

After this escape of danger in his Childhood, and reprieved of his life for a
time, did not the increase of his years multiply his sorrows? No doubt he
suffered, as well as fulfilled the Law for us, during those thirty years he
obscured himself. At twelve years of age we find him disputing in the Temple,
Luke 2.46.
when surely he wanted not opposition; that time of his Youth being a
gradation, and introduction into a height of suffering, and a private
preparation to a public Office and Ministry. Which he no sooner enters, but he
is encountered by Temptations, Mat. 4.1.
and those none of the least, they being fortified with the greatest subtilty
of Satan, which over-blown, Man seconds the Devil; heaping upon him whatsoever
injuries humanity can possible be capable of; beginning with his good Name,
which they seek to scandalize, and make approbrious with their blasphemous
tongues; reporting him to be a Glutton, a Wine bibber, Mat. 11.19.
a friend of Publicans and Sinners. Disparaging his birth, and calling him the
Carpenter's Son, affirming his miraculous power to be the effects of a
Satanical confederacy, saying, that he cast out Devils, Mat. 12.24.
by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils.

Poverty to all, is a misery full of miseries, yet not alike to all.
Circumstances alter much the state of things. He is poor, that is born so; but
he is truly poor, that is made so; since the one knows most of his misfortune
is from, and by reason of others. When the others woeful experience makes him
more sensible of his woe. A Man's own censure, more than the judgments of
others, makes him more or less unhappy. Deprivation and loss is the extremity
of poverty, and most grievous to humanity. But, who can lose what he never had?
In nature, want is as it were a part of Man's nature, and therefore less
wretched. The first works most upon the body, this last upon the Soul; and
therefore far more unsufferable, by how much that purer substance has a deeper
apprehension of pain, than the more gross and outward senses. O my Soul, is
this outward indigency, so full and overflowing with sorrow, how infinite bound
art thou unto him, who being rich, became poor, that thou through his poverty
might be made rich. 2 Cor. 8.9.
The greater the height, the more miserable is the dejection. The more eminent
the state, the more unsupportable the humiliation. O behold, James 1.12.
and see if there be any sorrow like unto this sorrow, wherewith the Lord
afflicted him in the day of his fierce Wrath. Was he rich in beauty? had he the
dew of his youth from the Womb of the Morning? Psalm. 110.^.
Behold, for our sakes he is become as a Root springing out of a dry ground, he
has no form nor comeliness. And could we now view him as he was then, Esaias.
43.2.
there would be no beauty that we should desire him.

What thing so without measure glorious, and unexpressible, as the simple, and
infinite essence of the Godhead? what Element more vile, and base than Earth,
the principal ingredient of our bodily substance? O miracle of love! behold,
God is made Man, the Word was made Flesh, John 1.14.
and dwelt amongst us: Immortality putting on mortality, that mortality might
become immortal. A King of Caesar pays tribute to Caesar, and will be subject
to his Subjects. The Master of all, as a Servant to all, washes the Feet of all
his Disciples. Is there any comparison betwixt Heaven and Earth; a Crown of
glory, and a Crown of Thorns? yet how willingly does this, not to be equaled
love, accept of this unequal change. Such Lord were the honors which the World
gave thee.

The story, and contemplation of my Saviors sufferings, leads my Soul into a
Garden, not fraught with joy, Christ's Agony in the Garden.
pleasure, and delight, but with grief, sorrow, and perturbation. O who can by
a true faith look upon his humbled Savior, and not be humbled in Spirit? Who
can behold the clodded drops of blood falling from his blessed Body, with a
dry Eye; not sorrowing for the sin that caused this sorrow; not shedding
plenty of tears, in apprehension of his love; who shed plenty of blood in the
imputation of our sin? If his external parts were thus pressed, and oppressed with
pain, how painful were the pressures of his Soul, the internal cause of this
outward Agony? Surely, as the Power was infinite which sustained him, so the
Passions were infinite which he endured, and are as far above the height of
Man's expression, as above the height of Man's sin. In a Garden Adam sinned, and
Christ suffered: Satan in the one deceiving our first Parents by a Serpent; in
the other betraying our blessed Savior by a Judas. The unsupportable wrath of
God, the immense weight of Man's transgression, and the ebb and flow of his
humane will being all expressed in that significant, and passionate Prayer of
his. O my Father, if it be possible, let thus Cup pass from me. Mat. 25.39.


He had now thrice bowed his blessed Knees to Earth (to whom all knees do bow
in Heaven and Earth) when a wicked traiterous crew, under the conduct of a most
ungrateful Leader, enter the lists, adding affliction to his affliction; and
becoming a party against him, took their parts. Thus merciless, and unthankful
is the disposition of ignorant Man; thus free and undeserved is the mercy of
God. Lord Jesus, shall my faith lose sight here, forsaking thee with thy
Disciples? No Lord; I will yet follow thee, even to the high Priests Hall, not
denying thee with Peter, but confessing thee.

Can any, better or more lively express thy cruel usage there, Esaias. 50.6.
than thine own spirit does in the mouth of the Evangelical Prophet Isa? I gave
my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that pulled off the hair, I hid
not my face from shame, and spitting. Lo, how this Heavenly Chronologer, by
Divine Inspiration, even as an Eyewitness, describes the several cruelties
inflicted on our Savior. Although the judgments of the Lord are unsearchable,
Romans 11.33.
and his ways past finding out, yet such is his goodness toward his People,
that he reveals these his secret decrees before they come, that when they are
come, we might, with a more firm assurance, believe them. A Christians Faith
has a double confirmation, as from the uncontrol'd truth of History: so from
the Divine testimony, and presage of prophecy. Some hundred years before his
passion, our Savior, by the mouth of the Prophet, told us what he would do.
Now behold, in the fullness of time, his own Person, and Act, makes good his own
Word; Mat. 26.67.
Witness the true Relation of his sufferings. Then did they spit in his face,
and buffetted him, John 19.1.
and others smote him with the palms of their hands. Then Pilate took Jesus,
Esaias. 53.5.
and scourged him; thus by his stripes we are healed.

I am now in Spirit before the Judgment Seat of Pilate, where I view the Judge
of the World arraigned before a Judge of a Province; Christ's Condemnation by
Pilate.
and hear at once an unheard of injustice; the most righteous of Men accused,
acquitted, condemned. If there be any power, as well as form of godliness; any
lively, and applying faith, besides a bare Historical belief in you, let the
patient Perusers of these my thoughts (unworthy this subject) read no further,
before ye have called with me a private Sessions in your souls. Where a
diligent search and enquiry being made after sin, and the whole Man arraigned,
and found guilty: Our own consciences (although our Judge) will censure us, and
our transgressions, as the occasion of our Saviors sufferings will inform us;
that this his arraignment is the reason of our acquittance, his unjust
condemnation the cause of our pardon, and salvation. O let not the infinite
passions of our Savior, the privation, and actual offenses of our Souls, which
made him obvious to the wrath of his Father, the malice of Men, and Devils,
inflicted on his blessed Body, be remembered without a flood of tears, to wash
his Feet, without a thunder of groans to pierce his Ears, without an ecstasy
of admiration, a fervency of affliction to meet the liberality of his mercy,
the immensity of his love.

Though I have somewhat digressed, yet am I not out of the way. They that
appear before God in Sion, Psalm. 84.6.
must pass through the Valley of Baca, making it a Well. My faith has now
again overtaken my Redeemer, hurried to his Execution, by the fury of the Jews;
but more swiftly carried by the wonderful efficacy of his love; which makes
him not to fear his torment, but to bear it. Blessed Christians! behold your
General, your Standard, your Vocation. Whosoever follows Christ, must take up
his Cross with Him. Mat. 10.38.
What though the Circumcision mock us with our crucified God? He, of his own
free will, suffered this only, and by his own Power overcame it, and lives to
Judge their lives, who thus contemn his Death.

The place assigned for this unparalled impiety is Calvary, a place of
Sculls. What was the whole World before this act of mercy, but a Golgatha, a
Mansion of dead Men? the Sphere of this Center, a large Field like that of
Ezechiel, Full of dry Bones. Ezekiel. 37.1.
O thou who gave power to the dead Body of Elisha, to revive a breathless
Corpse, be merciful to us dead in sins, and trespasses, admit us to touch thee
dead, by faith, that so we may arise here to the first Resurrection of Grace,
hereafter to the other of Glory.

The second Adam must resemble the first, that the one might gain what the
other lost. For as through the first offense many be dead, Romans 5.15.
so much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace has abounded unto many
by the last. As they were alike in the publickness of their Persons, and extent
of their actions, so also in many other respects; that by so lively an
assimulation, our faith might have a more firm assurance, and quick
apprehension of the truth of our Redemption and Redeemer. Adam was a Man, and
the workmanship of the blessed Trinity; Christ conceived by the Holy Ghost.
so was Christ according to his humane nature. He was endowed with a complete
innocence and purity* So was our Savior, although in a far higher degree of
perfection; it being requisite that that righteousness, which must justify
many, should much exceed that which only was sufficient for the preservation of
one. This excelling plenitude, is clearly to be observed from St. Paul's
comparisons, about the same subject. Not as the offense, so is the free gift,
Romans 5.16.
For the judgment was by one to Condemnation, but the free gift is of many
offenses* unto justification. The salvation of one sinner is a far greater
Donative of grace, then the perseverance of a World of Righteous; as may be
deducted from that Celestial Jubilee, expressed in the Gospel. There is more
joy in Heaven for the repentance of one sinner, Luke 15.7.
than over ninety nine just Persons, which need no repentance. We read that
Adam was naked when he eat of the forbidden Tree. And do we not find our
Savior naked upon the accursed Tree? Those impious Soldiers, which in
derision unclothed him in the City, excited by covetousness, again disrobe him
in the Field: Christ's crucifying.
Adam's naked innocence ushers in his fall, Christ precedes his rise, his
victory.

O gracious Savior, thus did thou suffer thy self to be divested of thy
Raiment, Ejaculation.
that we might be invested with thy merit; willingly putting off the covering
of this body, that thou might put on the covering of our Souls; which
invisibly did enclose and over-whelm thy whole Man, benighting for a time thy
apprehension, and clothing both thee and the whole World with a hideous
darkness. Well might the Worlds great eye close it self, as being ashamed to
carry light to such impiety. And no marvail, if the Sun of God's favor was not
perspicuous to the Son of his love, whilst the little World, Man, interposed
its dark shadow of sin betwixt thee, and thy Fathers rays.

Misery is usually the parent of Pity. That body which in some measure is not
sensible of compassion, when others suffer, has naught from Christianity, but
a name; from Nature, but a Carcass. Yea, so unmanlike is such a disposition,
that it deserves not the society of Dives Dogs. Charity, the most durable and
amiable grace of the mind, is commonly moved by pity; which, Luke 16.21.
Musitian-like, produces that sweetest harmony of Souls. The one would soon
freeze, did not the others condoling, melt us both into passion, and action.
That Patient is most miserable, yea, doubly afflicted, that, destitute of
friends, finds not a hand to relieve, a word to comfort, a tear to bathe, a
groan to echo forth and keep time with his sorrows. But how unsupportable is
that grief, which meets with Job's comforters, who instead of balmes, apply
corrasives; of ease, reproach; of consolation, derision? Job 16.2.
O blessed Savior! as thou endurest more pain, so thou foundest less
friendship than any other. Those that cried heretofore Hosanna, Luke 19.38.
and would have made thee their King, even now roar out a Crucify; and will
have no other King but Caesar. Those Elect Disciples, Luke 23.21.
which heretofore accompanied thee in all thy Persecutions, are either fled, or
dumb for fear. Like as the sense, life, and feeling, is as it were fled and
banished from a stupifyed, and over-burthened member; so did thy Godhead, the
Pillar of thy strength, (a ready help in time of trouble) seem now to sleep,
hide, and separate it self from thy humanity. Witness that loud Ejaculation, O
my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matt. 27.46.


Lastly, the Devil, with all the infernal Spirits, did now triumph over thee,
as their captive; supposing that all our hopes were crucified with thee. Yea,
to aggravate thy endurings, his agents, the chief Priests, Scribes, and Elders,
at once deride, and tempt thee. Their mocking is expressed in the first part of
their Sarcasme; Matt. 28.42.
He saved others, Himself he cannot save: Their temptation, in the conclusion;
If He be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the Cross, and we will
believe in Him; He trusted in God, let him deliver him now, if he will have
him, for he said, I am the Son of God. How many dangerous Darts are at once
delivered from these blasphemous mouths, against the Resolutions of our
Savior, the welfare of our Souls. His humane will (which from the fearful,
and deadly apprehension of the bitterness of his Cup* did in the Garden, rather
express an excess of pain, than an unwillingness to suffer: rather declare his
Humanity, than contradict his Divinity) might by these Speeches, have been
afresh molested and invited to a self-deliverance, even in this entrance of
death. Further, they might also thus suggest, that he should not only by such
(...) giversation be freed from the present and unsupportable torment; rescued
from the all conquering Monarchy; but also without controversy be received,
and acknowledged the Son of God, the King of Israel. Yea, which is more
miraculous, than all the rest, those that even now were impious Traitors, will
instantly become obedient Subjects; those that ere while were execrable
blasphemers, will presently be changed into righteous converts; those whom John
rightly styled a Generation of Vipers, our Savior, a faithless Generation,
will in a moment be metamorphosed into believing Christians. O blessed
Redeemer, had not our lives been more dear unto thee, than thine own, these
Diabolical charms might have raised up such a self-love, as would have forced a
repreeval from death. But thou O Lord searchest the heart; yea, thou know
how exceeding full of hypocrisy the minds of these Men were. So that if thou
should have descended from the Cross, or sent unto them one from the dead,
they would neither have trusted in thee, nor credited the other, since they
believed not Moses, Luke 16.31.
nor the Prophets.

Three hours, measure out this last act of our Saviors sufferings. That mass
and full measure of sin, which many thousand of years had treasured up, must
not be abolished, or annihilated in an instant. Why was not the infinite
sufferings of Man deified, though dated but for one minute, of more rate,
price, and estimation, than the offenses of Man mortal? yea, surely. Wherefore
then this overplus? O it is the overflowing of this Fountain of love. The
immense disparity betwixt the offender and satisfier, the Creature and Creator,
causes this disproportion betwixt the debt and satisfaction. Man cannot sin,
but finitely, God cannot love but infinitely; Man's actions, to which his sin
cleaves, are finite, God's Attributes (one of which is his love) are infinite.
Romans 11.33.
O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom, and knowledge of God! Lord
grant that I being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with
all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; Ephesians. 3.18,
19.
and to know the love of Christ, which passes all understanding, that I may be
filled with the fullness of God.

The friendship of Man is momentary, fickle, and unconstant, as wanting
measure, perseverance, and a true foundation; But the mercy of God, expressed
to Man, his most unworthy Creature, is the very quintessence, compleatment, and
perfection of all other loves, being not defective in quantity; for in him does
all fullness dwell; nor in quality, for it is the love of God; nor in stability,
for he is Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end; the great Jehovah, who is
not changed; James 1.17.
With whom is no variableness, nor shadow of turning. And lastly, the cause of
it is his own free grace; the ground of it Jesus Christ. So that the Foundation
of God stands sure, as having this seal: 2 Timothy 2.19.
the Lord knows who are his. The glorious and infinite Attributes of the
Almighty, are so many glasses, through which, at distance, the Creature in some
sort may perceive the Majesty of the Creator. Amongst which, none is more
usefully transparent, than that of his love. The mirror of which mirror, is
the passion of our Savior. The Center of all which is this very point of his
death. Of Christ's Death.
O gracious Lord, was it not enough that thou forsookest the Heaven of Heavens,
thy Throne of Glory, to live amongst Worms, on this Dunghill, Earth, the
unworthy footstool of thy greatness? Nay further, was it not sufficient that
thou endurest the stings and persecutions of those Muckworms, suffering such
insects, (even the corruption of nature) to brawle and triumph over thee, but
that thou would also pray, forgive, and dye for thy Persecutors? For a
righteous Man perhaps some would suffer, Luke 23.34.
but thou dyest for sinners, the just for the unjust. Lord Jesus, let the
apprehension of thy wonderful affection be as delightful to the taste of my
Soul, as thy last draught of Gall and Vinegar was displeasant to the relish of
thy palate. As thy sense of my sin, and thy Fathers wrath made thee cry aloud
for assistance; so, let the sense of thy mercy, my happiness, make me lift up
my voice in thankfulness. Yea, let me conclude my hours each day of my life,
with that comfortable, and Swan-like ditty of thine; Father, into thy hands I
commend my Spirit; Luke 23.46.
Death is swallowed up in Victory; O Death where is thy Sting! O Grave where is
thy Victory! the Sting of Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law. 1
Cor. 1^.54, etc.
But thanks be unto God which gives us the Victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Finis coronat opus, the last acts of our Savior are not the least. Christ's
burial.
In the foregoing encounters he was a Combatant: In these following actions, a
glorious and peaceful Conqueror. The account cast up, the compleatment
concludes the operation, He was buried. O my Soul, should thy faith be so
weak-sighted, as to make thy Saviors Death the utmost extent of thy prospects,
thou might then as one without hope, uncomfortably weep with the Marys, at
the Foot of his Cross. But thanks be unto God, thou may overlook that fear,
being assured that the Grave of thy Champion is not his Prison, but his resting
place; the conclusion of the fight, being the beginning of his victory. Upon
the Cross, our blessed Savior accepted the challenge of Death; fulfilling that
of the Prophet, O Death I will be thy Death. And here in the Sepulcher
begins his Triumph. Hosea 13.14.
For, No Man can enter into a strong Man's House, and spoil his goods, except
he will first bind the strong Man, Mark 3.27.
and then he will spoil his House. The Grave is the Metropolis of Death, which
our General enters, that so the place might both assure us of his Combat, his
Victory, and add glory to his Triumph. Had thou (O blessed Savior) been led
into this Cytadel of Death, as his Captive, the Gives of corruption would soon
have made thee his bond-slave. But behold the greatness of thy Power, the
innocence of thy Person tramples on this last Enemy, that is to be subdued; and
makes thy Tomb, his Grave, Death being swallowed up in Victory.

As the Suns Eclipse makes us the more acknowledge the brightness and benefit
of his light, so the clouding of our Savior by death, teaches us his
Disciples at once, the felicity of his presence, the uncomfortableness of his
absence, and the perfection of his Person. The descents of Man's misery are the
degrees to Christ's victory. As we in this World inherited sin, so he upon Earth
merited righteousness. As we in the Grave, are subjects to death, so he in the
Sepulcher makes death his subject. And lest Hell should triumph over us in
punishment, he in Person tryumphs over it with Victory.

In Person I say. Christ's victory over Hell.
Although his Body lay still in the Grave, since its local absence, contradicts
not his personal presence, the inseparable union of the Godhead, with his Body
and Soul, even in Death, permitting only a separation in nature; not of
natures, a mutation of order, no disunion. If the Devils fear, forced his
Prince to supplicate, when our Savior sojourned on Earth, what unexpressible
terrors did then possess them, when the Worlds Great Monarch reigned over Hell?
If in his humiliation they doubted his sudden judgment, How did his exaltation
assure them of their certain execution? Here behold acted, that Vision
figuratively, after manifested unto St. John, of Satan's imprisonment for a
thousand years, Revel. 20.1.
although literally it was to be fulfilled many ages after. For who has the
Key of the bottomless Pit of Heaven, and Hell, but he to whom all power is
given both in Heaven and Earth? He who opens, and no Man shuts. Or when
should these Principalities be subdued, if not at this general and most
glorious Conquest? Can any imagine this great Victory to be maimed, or
imperfect, since he then led Captivity captive, trampling over all those, that
resisted either his Power, or our Salvation? So conclude this; what time since
his coming does so evidently demonstrate this truth to be by our Head in part
fulfilled, as the after events. I mean the tranquillity and delight of the
Church amongst themselves, those hundred years immediately succeeding his
suffering. What though the ten Persecutions did exceedingly rage against the
Saints, according to the 4th. verse of that 20. of the Revelations? The blood
of the Martyrs is the Seed of the Church. Yea, they did even then reign most
gloriously with Christ. As the Kingdom of our Savior, and the brightness of
the Church, shined most perspicuously, when the purity thereof brake forth in
their profession and constancy; so the miseries of Christians, and the liberty
of Satan is never more apparent, then when the damnableness, and obscurity of
capital Heresies Eclipse the visible face of the Church. For in the first, we
may truly be said to live, and triumph even in death: in the last, their
supposed freedom is the greatest slavery; and their seeming life, but a
cursed, and eternal deprivation.

Three Days continued, though not complete, was the proportion of time
allotted, to measure out my Saviors last sleep. Had he dyed, and presently
revived, unbelieving Man would have termed such a Death but a Transe. Yea, the
scandalous Rulers would have blasted the wonderful Miracle of his
Resurrection, with an accusation of self-contradicting, and not performance of
his former protestation; Destroy this Temple, and within three Days I will
build it up again. Wherefore O my Soul, that thy faith might be confirmed in
the sure belief of his dying; The Jews convicted, by the truth of his
performance; and his own Power, magnified by the Divinity of the act; he is
content to lodge, (as it were) in a second Womb, viz. of Clay; that all things
being perfected; the third Day, he might lead his the way, to a birth of Glory.

The victorious Soul of my Savior, after the reliction of his Body, having
trampled upon Death, tryumphed over Hell, and took a full possession of Heaven;
that his actions, as they were the means, so they might be (as it were) the
story, and prophecy of our succeeding. All the Souls of the faithful, when
they part with this hollow Clay, in like manner (though through his right)
conculcate Death, and Hell, enjoying the new Jerusalem. Of Christ's Resurrection.
Behold, he now proceeds by the raising of his Body, to assure us, that our
Bodies shall be like our Souls, immortal; as our Souls shall be made like unto
his most glorious, through the re-creation of his beautiful Image in us.

The object of my Faith has hitherto been a Night-piece, full fraught with
Persecution, and suffering, tears, and strong cries, dying, and burial; but now
the all-flourishing Rays of the Immortal Deity, personally in the Son of
Righteousness, at his rising, breaks forth, changing that Darkness into Light.
To this may be applied that of the Psalmist. Mourning may continue for a Night,
but joy comes in the Morning. Noah's Ark, the true Figure of a Christians
faith, must be drenched in the Waves, and driven by the Wind, a long time,
before it shall rest dry, and safe upon the Mountains of Ararat. The
humiliation of my Savior, was his night, wherein the humanity did most
manifest it self: So his exaltation, in which his Resurrection has a part, is
his Day, wherein the brightness and power of his Godhead did show it self most
apparently. Adam (the destroyer of Man) first enjoyed a blessing, a Paradise,
before he merited a Curse, a Hell. But the Messiah (the restorer of Man) must
first be made an execration, before he can purchase for us a re-possession. Not
long since, I besought all true believers to weep with Christ, who wept not for
himself, but for them. But now my Soul breaths forth a more pleasing request,
which I prefer not to all, but to those only which are mourners in Sion. That
as they have grieved with Him, and for themselves in him, so now they would be
filled with his solace, and triumph in his Victory. That as they have sowed in
tears, they may now reap in joy.

Every Man was a debtor unto the Almighty, until Christ our surety paid the
mortgage, and redeemed our Souls. He satisfied the debt on the Cross, least we
should doubt of the sufficiency of his satisfaction. For, behold here our
acquittance, and the Bonds rent, even the Bonds of Death, torn asunder in, and
by his Resurrection. Have we not then cause to rejoice for so great a
deliverance? The mirth of Moses, Myriam, and the Israelites was expressed in a
Song of thanksgiving, when the Egyptians were entombed in the Sea: The joy of
Barak and Debora was proclaimed in an Anthem of praise, Judge. 5.1.
when Sisera and his Chariots were discomfited: The Virgins of Israel were not
silent, when David overthrew Goliath: And shall we that are delivered from the
slavery of a spiritual Pharaoh sin; from the tyranny of a hellish Sysera; a
strong Goliath, Satan, the Prince that rules in the Air; and over all the
Children of disobedience, be empty of gladness, and gratefulness? when all the
Creatures land, and praise, our Moses, our Barak, our David, our Jesus, shall
not all the People, especially the redeemed of the Lord, say Amen?

Let us now walk forth with those of Emmaus, to meet our Savior, after the
Resurrection of his Body; Praying earnestly, that through the Power of his
Spirit, he would open the eyes of our faith, that we may believe, confess, and
rejoice in his Resurrection. The infinite affection of this Savior of ours, is
apparent in every action. His love made him depart from glory, when he
descended from the bosom of his Father; his love made him conceal his glory,
when he maskt it with humanity; and the same love makes him as it were
dis-esteem his glory, that he might confirm his Disciples. The Rulers lie,
(saying his Disciples came by Night and stole him away) might perchance have
been received generally as a truth. Or else the believers might have proved as
incredulous as Didimus; Had not his bodily presence Non-plust falsehood, and
controuled unbelief.

Christ's Ascension.
Forty Days, the time appointed for his last sojourning on Earth, being now
expired; Let my faith, as it has followed Him from Heaven, so ascend with Him
to Heaven. The Angels that questioned the Disciples, with a Why stand ye
gazing, Acts 1.11.
did not intend the closing of the Souls eye, but the bodies. No act of Christ
ever wanted a Witness; the Foundation of Christianity thereby being as it were
semented for ever. Whereas all other fabulous Religions, moulder away, as laid
with the untempered Mortar of Man's devices. The Wisemen, and Sheepwards are
Witnesses of his birth; John, and the multitude of his Baptization and
Circumcision; Pilate of his Innocence, the Centurion of his Deity, and
Crucifixtion, the Soldiers of his Resurrection, and his Disciples of his
Ascension.

The affection of Christ toward Man, is like himself, always the same. That
free and good will of his, that brought Him down to suffer, lifts Him up to
mediate. The unspeakable comfort and truth of which office, since I am both
unable, and unworthy to express, I refer my self, and others to the Scripture
of God. Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It
is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea,
rather that is risen again, who is even at the right Hand of God, who also
makes intercession for us. Whilst the glorious Sun is clouded or eclipsed* Man
may with an open and undazled eye behold its luminous Orb; But when free from
all interpositions, it shall re-ascend the top of its Meridian. What seeing
Organ is there, that can behold it, without being bleard with a review, in sign
of weakness; or incombrance within it self, as incapable of such brightness?
The eternally begotten Son of the everlasting Father, our Son of Righteousness,
and the only Son of Glory, has been made manifest to the eye of my faith,
whilst veiled with an unglorified Humanity, he continued his unchangable
course, through the darkness of suffering; Cloudiness of Persecution, and
Eclipse of Death. But now that he has remounted his solsticial of Glory, weak
faith, thou must with a humble and closed eye, endeavor to admire (which is
thy homage to his Divinity) what, thou can not conceive of; not being
discouraged, as though thou had lost all, with his bodily presence. For as we
possess light, though the Sun be not visible, his brightness being conveyed
unto us in his beams: So thy Savior, though corporeally absent, he in his
glorious rays, shines forth unto thee, that thou might enjoy light, warmth,
and comfort. O how am I ravished with this Vision! 'Twere the worst of
unthankfulness to conceal such unspeakable favors. With David, therefore I
must proclaim Man's Jubilee; Come hither all ye that fear God, and I will tell
you what he has done for our Souls. But I beseech you bring with you Stephens
as well as David's Ear, Acts 7.56.
else you may (perhaps as blind Men) know my happiness, not see it: that is,
not to receive and apply it as your own.

As in the Divine Essence, there is three Persons, each of which is God, yet
not three, but one God; so in the Person of Christ, there is a Trinity of
offices, each of which is proper to whole Christ; as to be King, Prophet, and
Priest, not many of them; the Manhood being separated from the Godhead (as
some would.) But in all, Christ being one, the same, and all these* O these,
are those solacing rays, (I before spoke of) so beneficial to pernicious Man.
O suffer not (O Lord) the Bodies middle Region, my Heart, to be cold and
uncompact, like that of the Air; lest thy beams shine thorough, and not warm
me. But purify it, and create in it such a solidity and soundness by faith,
that it may be capable of their virtue; and inflamed with zeal and
gratefulness, for, and to the glory of thee the giver.

Christ Jesus is the Christians Sanctuary; and these his offices, the three
precious, and unexhaustible Fountains, from whence Ezechiel's healing Waters
plentifully flow. Ghrist Jesus is our Physician; Ezech. 47.8.
and these three are those beautiful Boxes, in which the pure balm of Gilead
(which cures all putrified sores) is enclosed. Is here a Physician? Is here a
mundifying River? Is here a most approved Balm? O my Soul, thou must also
find out, and that by Faith, a diseased Patient; a deadly wound; a corrupted
Cancer; for, The whole have no need of the Physician, but the sick. O my
Savior, is there any Man living so sound, Mat. 9.12.
that he has no need of thee? yea sure, there are some, whose stinking
soars, which the Devil, and their own pride have skinned over. Others, whose
wounds he has too deeply searched, pouring into them, instead of comfortable
Balsome, the deadly corrasives of desperation. O Lord, the nature of every one
of us, at the first is to be Satan's Apothecary: ayding him with ingredients,
even from our own corruption, to stupifie our sense of sin, and mortify our
Souls. O thou which art the only skilful and spiritual Cheru^gion, search with
thy spirit, and tent with thy Law, my gangrened and ulcerated Soul, that I may
live, though with an issue. For, though the stopping of Bodily issues, often
times procure death, yet my death shall stop my issue. The noblest knowledge of
things, is from their causes, not from their effects. Lord make me know the
state, and danger of my Disease, from both, but from the first, even my fall in
Adam.

This self-inspection, is a grace by faith, conveyed to us from the Prophetic
office of Christ. And ought, Ezekiel. 36.31.
according to my method, there to be handled. But the agreeableness of the
Meditation to this place, and the profit which by Gods grace will flow to me in
the Meditation, to others in the perusal, makes me insert here this Anatomy of
a dead Man, which cannot be too large, since none can enough know himself. In
the profundity of a Well, even at midday a Man may view the Stars. And in the
Sunshine of prosperity, (if our Souls fathom this our depth of misery) we
shall, free from all impediments, more perfectly apprehend our Lucifer, Christ
Jesus.

God, the universal Creator, being perfection it self, it must needs follow,
that the beauty and happiness of the Creature consists in being like to him. It
being always remembered, that what in them has its measure, degree and
proportion, in Him is boundless, unexpressable and infinite. If the impression
of Gods Image, in his Creatures, as the Kings Image upon their Coin only makes
it Royal, and gives it pre-eminence, and excellence; it must needs be granted,
that whatsoever piece of his workmanship has this glorious stamp, or
pourtraiture erazed, or defaced, must needs remain useless, naked, and without
honor.

To apply this to my own Soul. Is it thus? How miserable then and deformed is
the Person of every Man by Adam, with, and in whom we have lost our God, Man's
misery by nature.
our selves* and all our perfections. Have thou heard O my Soul of that
material, 1. In his mind.
and obscure darkness which the Egyptians felt? On thee there was, and upon all
natural Men there is, the like obscurity, Only they differ in this, Man feels
it not. That darkness being no more empty of light, than the mind of Man is
vacant of the knowledge of God, the worship of God, and his own eternal
happiness: witness that of the Apostle; The natural Man receives not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto Him; 1 Cor. 2.14*
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned; that is, by
the light of the Spirit. In Egypts deficiency of light, no doubt it was a part
of their torment to mistake one thing for another; so in this sinful
deprivation; such is the vanity of the mind, that it calls good, evil; and
evil, good; It takes sweet for bitter, and bitter for sweet* Salvation, the
contrary to damnation, being in his understanding in the end only, free from
its mistake or fruition.

Noah was not more drunken with the strength of Wine, than the understandings
of wretched Men with the strength of sin; 2. In his understanding.
to which the Prophet alludes, saying, They are drunken, Esaias. 29.9.
but not with Wine; they stagger, but not with strong Drink. Acts 20.9.
Neither was Eutichus more dead asleep, when he fell even into Death, then the
prodigal Sons, to whom justly God has given the spirit of slumber, Romans 10.8.
Eyes that they should not see, Ears that they should not hear: Sin, as sleep,
deprives Man of the true use of all those senses, which should serve for the
use of his Soul.

The Man possessed in the Gospel, is the miserable, and true Figure of an
unregenerate Soul. 3. In his Conscience. Mark 5.2.
We find him possessed with a Devil, and tormented with a Legion of Devils. And
is not the accusing conscience of a wicked Man, as a thousand Witnesses? We
read that he only lived unto himself, avoided society, the Tombs being the
fittest mansions for such unsociableness. His actions there, were, to be his
own Executioner, and enemy, Night and Day, crying, and cutting himself with
stones. O my Soul, proceed but to bring the substance to the shadow, and thou will confess how lively this Satanical lunary acts the tragical part of a
depraved conscience. Cain, the first that received, and took away life from
Man, affrighted with the terror of his bloody conscience, was forced to fear,
and fly the face of Man, his own tongue bellowing out his own misery, in that
tormenting Exclamation, Genesis 4.13.
My punishment is greater than I can bear. The distempered, and melancholy ^its
of Saul, (which the Holy Ghost calls an evil spirit) we are partly occasioned
without doubt) by the barking fury of his conscience; 1 Samuel 18.10.
Such Hell of mind, being seldom without a Devil, to add fuel to the flame,
and torment to the tormented. Let Judas conclude all, and by the conclusion of
his life ( who went out and strangled himself) preach to all the conclusion, of
that Soul; which spurd with guilt, Matt. 27.5.
thinks to fly from its self, and from the uppermost Hell of despair, leaps
into the nethermost Hell of pain. Bearing still about him, what he shunned; even
that only immortalized Worm, of insect, sprung from corruption, which then
shall gnaw more furiously; Eternity, and despair of remedy, doubling the
unmeasurableness of the torture.

Should my thoughts now pass from the conscience, some consciences would (at
least in their own conceits) account themselves like those of Laodicea, to be
rich, and increased with goods, and to have need of nothing, when as they are
indeed wretched, and miserable, and poor, Revel. 3.17.
and blind, and naked. Therefore, that we may all know that we are miserable,
the better to confess Gods mercy, the more to thirst after his salvation, we
must know that there are hardened Pharaohs, as well, as a despairing Judas. As
that Body is most dangerously diseased, whose external parts (the vital and
animating spirits having, as it were, made a recess) are left insensible, and
without feeling. So that Soul is in a deadly (that is, damnable) estate, whose
conscience (the quickening power of the holy spirit, being utterly withdrawn)
remains speechless, and cauterized. Of this condition were many before the
Flood, notwithstanding the preaching of righteous Noah. After the Flood, the
Sodomites. Under the Law, Pharaoh, and some of the Israelites in the
Wilderness. Under the Gospel, the Scribes and Pharisees; of whom our Savior
observes, that God had blinded their eyes, Matt. 13.14.
and hardened their hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, and be
converted, that he might heal them. He is no friend that is not an eye, a hand,
a tongue unto his friend, to foresee his peril, and to fore-warn, and assist
him in danger. Nor can that conscience be a faithful inmate to the soul, whose
searching sight the sunshine of the World has bleard; whose awakeing touch,
custom in sin has deaded; and whose sharp point and wounding edge, the Devil
has rebated; the delights of the Flesh prooving a Sibyls sop unto this
Cerberus, a Dalilah unto this Sampson.

That part which the Chyrurgion intends to cut off, he first benums. And those
Persons whom the Lord determines to rescind from the visible Body of his
Church, he commonly hardens: as were those, spoken of by the Apostle, whose
Consciences were seared as with an hot Iron. Lord, let my conscience be,
neither like Nabal's heart, dead as a stone within him; Nor yet like Dives
tongue tormented in merciless flames. But like Peter's Cock, never ceasing to
crow, until I weep bitterly. Yea, let it be my Nathan, who am as David, a
sinner: my Samuel, who am disobedient as Saul. So shall my conscience be unto
me a happy copesmate, one whose words are better unto me as a friend, than her
kisses as an enemy.

Of all the faculties of the Soul, the will is most dependent; In his will.
its act and operation being moved by the determination, or suggestion of the
rest; viz. the mind, understanding, and affections. For, before any thing is
done by Man, there is a consultation had in the Soul; where, after a
disputation pro and con, at length, this thing, or that, is agreed of to be the
bonum, which in due season the will (as the ^ouls agent) puts in execution. Now
there is Gods bonum, such a one as we shall find in holy Chronology, expressed
in the Frontispiece of every good Kings life. Instance in Hezechiah. He did
that which was right or good in the sight of the Lord. 2 Kings 18.3.
And there is Man's bonum also, so called, not because positively, or simply so
in it self; but in relation to purblinde Man, who so esteems it. Witness that
sacred and historical annotation. That when there was no King in Israel, every
Man did that which was good in his own eyes. Judges 17.6.
In this last Scripture, the truth of my former discourse is observable, and
confirmed: as that a natural Man's will usually attends his judgment; so that
the mind, and understanding being totally depraved, and corrupted (as before
has been declared) it must consequently, yea, impulsively follow, that the
activity of the will keeps the same position.

In Adams Sons there is a continued Earthquake. The debauched faculties of the
Soul being as so many pestilent, and tumultuous Airs within the Bowels of this
wretched Microcosme; which, together with the impetuous violence of the will,
rends us; belching forth continually Man's actual sins; which are not only dead
in themselves, but also to others, by example. Does a ^ountain send forth at
the same place sweet Water, and bitter? Can the Fig Tree bear Olive-berries, or
a Vine, Jam. 3.11.
Figs? They cannot. Neither can an unsanctified mind be f^llowed with a will,
free, and full of good resolutions. Hence therefore, O my Soul! with all
ability in thy self, lessen not thy loss, and poverty, lest by such a proud,
and presumptuous bragging, thou lose thy gain, Jam. 1.13.
and forestall Gods charitable benevolence.

Lord, I account my self to have no will, because not a good one. Therefore let
thy own will anew beget me, with the word of truth; that I may be a kind of
first fruits of thy Creatures: Lord, it is thou which workest in Men, both to
will, and to do, of thy good pleasure. Therefore let me rather, in an humble
ignorance bury what proud Men say is Man's right; (for love it I cannot, if
mine. Thy perfect justice giving to every one his due) then for the nothing of
my merit, to lose the infiniteness of thy mercy. To derogate from my own desert
(had I any) is a plausible error, a commendable humility; But to detract or
steal from thee, horrible sacrilege, and abominable heresy. Let my humility
strive to make proud natures something, nothing, rather than to suffer any vain
boasting, to arise from such imaginary abilities, worth nothing. So that though
both shall as (in themselves they are nothing) end in nothing, yet the company
of a virtue shall in thy sight make the one to me something, when the other
shall be by thee adjudged as full of sin, as it is wanting in worth.

Man, in his first Creation, The affections.
was like to a strong and beautiful Cyttadell, whose external and carnal part,
I may term (and that not unfitly) a defencible Rampire, or Earth-work, his
senses the Cinque Ports of this fortification, his Soul (an incorporeal part)
methinks resembles the habitable, and innermost part of the Fort; or to speak
more plainly, the Palace of the Governor, the Court of the Prince; for so
indeed it was, even of the King of Kings, before its unhappy and accursed
defection. Herein the principal faculties, as so many expert Commanders, did
exercise their several offices. The affections also (the subject of my ensuing
thoughts) had their places of eminency, and authority. Love being the Leader of
the Band, or the Ensign-bearer; and Fear the Sentinel, to prevent sudden
surprisals. In this happy order, freedom, and condition, was Man at first;
until the Apostate-Angel, Satan, envying that felicity in others, which
himself had lost, unlocked the senses by the beauty of the forbidden Fruit, and
after parley with the Guardians of the Soul, tempted them with the fair promise
of Dii eritis, to be Traitors to their Sovereign* that had made them little
less than so: For In his own Image created he them. This beautiful structure
being become the Cage of unclean Birds; Genesis 1.27.
no wonder, if the Holy one of Israel refuse to dwell there. If the glory of
Israel departed, when the Ark was taken from amongst them, sure I am, the glory
of Man vanishes, when God forsakes him.

Histories and Politicians have observed the misery (...) that Country. I dare
not call it a Government, (...) the Hydra-headed multitude give Laws unto
themselves* Experienced Soldiers can bear witness, what Floods* Tragedies, and
Disorder follows the unheading of (...) Army, and the Regiments. Such Men (for
only he th^^ has been delivered from such calamities, can best judge of them)
will confess, that both these are but weak de^scriptions of the wretchedness of
the Soul, deprived (...) the life of God. Nay, the small remainders of those
dis^orders, and corruptions, which in comparison are but (...) scars of those
great wounds, will enforce the best, daily with Holy Paul to cry out, Romans 7.24.
O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

This misery of Man, this his civil War, has been briefly touched and
discovered already in the former faculties of the Soul. It now remains, that I
observe, Of the disorder in the affections in particular.
and that with brevity, how the affections particularly stand affected.

O Love, which weart once the Spirit, the fervor, the marrow of the Soul. Its
Ambassador to her Creator, Of Love.
lying Ledger in the Court of Heaven, as long as that happy, and mutual amity
remained unviolated. How art thou now degenerated? yea, how wretchedly have
thou lost thy happiness, by changing thy object? There is no whit of life,
spirit, or freedom in thee now. For thou art dead, and entombed in Earth: nor
neerness, or relation to God; no not in the least degree; for the wicked (says
the Apostle) are haters of God.

Thou art now so far from being Man's Agent to God, that if God, in the
infiniteness of his mercy, would renew his peace with Man, he must be his own
Agent, and thou his Patient; witness St. John, We love Him, because he first
loved us. How comes it to pass, 1 John 4.19.
that thou have forsaken the living Fountain, and hewn out unto thy self
Cesterns, that will hold no Water? Jerem 2:13.
Is Earth to be compared with Heaven; or the Creature with the Creator, that
thou have forsaken the one, to embrace, and marry the other? The Mole, that of
all other Creatures delights to undermine, and root within the Earth, wants the
Organ of sight, thereby illustrating this truth; that where a carnal, earthly,
or sensual love is, there must needs be a blind and ignorant understanding.

O Lord, is this affection of love, being rightly placed, Contemplation.
the Prince of all other our affections? Is it the sum and compendium of thy
whole Law? Is it that which gives life to the actions of the Soul? Matt. 22.37.
Is it the trial of our Adoption? That by which faith works? Is it an old
Commandment, as being from the beginning; a new Commandment, as being
renewed, 1 John 2.7.
and straightly enforced in the Gospel? Is it the mark of our perfection, John
3.11.
and of the truth?

O give me sighs, give me words, yea give me those unutterable groans of my
Spirit, raised by thy Spirit, wherewith I may daily importune thy Majesty for
the right fixing, and direction of this affection of my Soul: That so my love
inflamed by thee, may not henceforth be sub-lunary, but like the Sun, sending
forth beams upwards toward thee, and rays down-wards amongst my Brethren. Then
shall thy will be done by me on Earth, as it is done in Heaven.

Of Joy.
The ground and occasion of all true joy, is either assured hope, or a present
fruition of some extraordinary benefit. Now no natural Man can be said to
possess this affection aright, as being deficient in the ground thereof; Sin
making him incapable to receive any thing as a blessing or benefit either from
God, or Man. It Is true, wicked Men spend their Days in Wealth, In riches Men
cannot joy.
heaping up silver as the dust, and preparing Raiment as the Clay. But observe,
Job 21.13.
their riches cannot be properly termed their goods. These may possess
treasures, but shall never enjoy them. Job 27.16.
For, The innocent shall divide his Silver, and the just shall put on his
Raiment. Job 27.17.
It Is as certain, that the wicked walk on every side, Nor in honors.
when the vilest Men are exalted. Eccles. 10.7.
That Servants ride on Horseback, and Princes walk as Servants upon Earth. But
note also, that honor is to them, as the Hebrew word signifies, weight,
heaviness, not rejoicing; producing, as the Greek word (...) imports Fear,
which excludes joy: God giving worldly Men preferments, Non ut honoraret, sed
ut onoraret. Nor in pleasures.
Have they not pleasures also? Yes verily, if we understand them according to
their acception, or Etymology, (that is) things pleasing them. Look upon the
description of them in Job, drawn to the life; and we shall view them, Job
21.12.
Taking the Tymbrell and Harp, and rejoicing at the sound of the Organ. This
their pleasure (to be bold with that word pleasure, that it may be the more
bold with them) is a pleasure, wherein things seem what they are not. The word
delight, methinks is very significant; teaching us that true pleasure, only
springs from that true light, and only does give light, life and joy to the
Soul. That so empty are all voluptuaries of these ingredients, that I may say
of them, as St. Paul of the wanton Widows, They that live in pleasure are dead
whilst they live. 1 Timothy 5.6.
Now death excludes joy, therefore it is impossible that Man so dead, should
rejoice.

Lastly, To silence all Objections, and to conclude; the Earthly minded Man is
the only melancholy Man. Not in wisdom.
The very subject and object of Lamentation. Take the height, and learn the
nature of those that blaze like meteors, being placed in the highest region of
carnal Men; I mean those, that are second Adams in the knowledge of the
Metaphysics, and both Philosophers; Machivels in Policy, and Solomon's in the
generality of humane Learning, and see what they are. But least it should seem
presumption in thee (O my Soul) to censure, or detract from such shining Lamps
of the World; Let the King of Israel, who excelled in wisdom all the Children
of the East Country, and all the wisdom of Egypt, for he was wiser then all
Men, give up his experimental judgment; 1 King. 4.30.
proving by an undeniable argument a Majore ad minus, what I formerly laid as
my ground, That no natural Man can possess a genuine joy. Hear his own words; I
gave my Heart to know wisdom, Eccl. 1.17, 18.
and to know madness and folly; I perceived that this also is vexation of
spirit: For in much wisdom is much grief, and he that increases knowledge
increases sorrow.

O gracious Creator! Contemplation.
with what a deluge of misery is wretched Man overwhelmed? In how deep an
abyss of sorrow is he plunged? Cannot riches, honors, pleasures, wisdom, the
content and compleatment of the whole Worlds felicity, excite or beget one true
smile of joy in the Soul? Nay, do they not with Man stray from the end of their
Creation, administering (instead of sollace) vexation, and infelicity. O who but
Man has ruined Man! who but himself is the Thief, and betrayer of himself!
Matt. 16.11.
what occasioned the parting of this good from the Creature, but the departing
of Man from thee his Creator? O thou, In whose presence is fullness of joy, and
at whose right hand are pleasures for ever more; Psalm. 51.12.
Restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation, that in thy light I may see light.
Then shall those streams of gladness accompany thy many benefits, and
continually and plentifully flow into my Soul; when to others they shall be
dried up, as being separated from thee the Fountain. Be thou my Sun, and let
thy blessings, as so many beams proceeding from thee, irradiate and rejoice my
Soul; that so I may see thee in them, and them in thee, and by such a double
aspect of thee, be moved to give a double praise unto thee of Glory in thy
self, of mercy to my Soul.

Fear is now become a continual Palsy of the Soul, an Earthquake of the Body.
Of Fear.
The object of it is commonly either some eminent danger, or unresistable force
in a Superior, particularly apprehended, with such a fear, as did the
Creatures observe Man, before his own hands cancelled his large Pattent of
Dominion. And with the same affection (though much more enlarged, and in a far
greater measure, as looking through the perspective of reason) does natural Man
adore and tremble at the feet of his Creator, armed with the thunder of
Omnipotency, and breast plate of Righteousness, crowned with Majesty and
arrayed with Glory. Who can behold the Lord God thus, and live? Let Belshazar's
thoughts, Cain's words, and Judas last action express the terror of those
Souls, Dan. 5.6.
that thus apprehend God. Look upon the preying Claws of the Lion, Genesis 4.13.
the Stubble in the midst of the Furnace, Mat. 27.5.
the Malefactor quaking at the Bar of Justice; and in them my Soul view thy
fearful estate by nature.

If any Soul (as a sinner) was ever endowed with so perfect an Organ, as it
could look abroad upon God, as a Judge, or discover one smile in the face of
anger, or mercy in the midst of incensed justice, surely the first and second
Adam would have done it; one of which had the strength of nature, the other of
grace.

But alas! even the Son of God, (when in the place of sinful Man, Hebr. 5.7.
he stood before the Justice of God feared. Witness the Apostle; witness his
exclamation, though his astonishment and fear were temporary, the wickeds
eternal. His occasioned by a recess of the Divinity, and paternal comforts,
beyond the reach of his present sense; Theirs is a cursed effect of sin, and
utter privation of that infused love from God, that begets a love to God; which
indeed is the very form of a filial fear. If then the second Adam, which came
from Heaven, having put on our transgressions, conceived that God had forsaken
him; No marvail if the first Adam of the Earth, Earthy, together with his
offspring, personally, and by nature sinful; 1 Cor. 15.47.
forsake, and hide themselves from God; flying from him, Genesis 3.8.
to whom only they should fly; fearing him as a Judge, whom they should
reverence as a Father; perfect love casting out fear.

O my God! is there a necessity of fear? Contemplation.
must all the Creatures tremble before thee? as being all witnesses externally
or internally of thy essential, and judicial power. Psalm. 2.10. and 114.7.
Is the fear of the Lord the beginning of wisdom? and will he withold no
good thing from him that fears him? Psalm. 34.9.
O let my Soul bear a comfortable part in this affection. Let my flesh tremble
for fear of thee, because thy Creature; and let my heart be enlarged in love
toward thee, Psalm. 119.110.
because thy Son. Let my manifold sins humble me, as beholding thee a righteous
Judge; and let my faith raise me, as apprehending thee a merciful Savior. Let
me work out my salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12.
as considering my weakness, and mutability; and let me press toward the mark
with confidence, and assurance, as believing thy free election, omnipotency,
and immutability. Lord, if thou do know me by name, Romans 11.29.
if I also have found grace in thy sight, show me now thy way, Exodus 33.13.
how to know and see thee. There is a place by thee, O do unto me, as thou
did unto Moses, set me upon a Rock, even my Rock Christ Jesus; that so my
life being hid in him, through the Clists his wounds, I may see thy glory
passing by; and hear, and apply this thy loving Proclamation, The Lord, the
Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness, and
truth, Exodus 34.6.
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquities, transgressions and sins.

I have now made a short progress through the Soul, once a Paradise, Of the
Body.
as being watered every where with grace, even as the Garden of the Lord. But
now being like Sodom and Gomorrah, which the Lord destroyed, even a furnace of
brimstone, and a vail of tears: It now remains, that I take a general view of
the Body, which is as it were the superficies of Man, the Palace, the Shell,
the Garment of the Soul. That so having observed their union in sin, as well as
in nature, from the joint, and voluntary acquired curse of imperfection, I may
be the more enlarged to magnify Gods free gift of perfection.

As the Lord in the Creation made Man after his own Image, as concerning the
Soul, that he might be capable of Divine Visions, and enjoy a communion with
him: So also he made Man like himself, as considering the Body, in respect of
Dominion, and Majesty; no Creature being like God, but himself. That according
to the present Commandment, one Man might love another as himself: such a
similitude of parts, inducing a communion of hearts, love being the fulfilling
of the Law, since the fall. Because there needed not Law when love was perfect;
before the fall, the defect of the one necessitating the constitution of the
other. Every member of the Body in the state of innocence, being made willing,
and ready to perform all good actions, respecting either God or Man, by the
quickening and agitating Power of this predominant affection in the Soul. But
what have I now to do with the state of Innocence, that am now discoursing of
Rebellion? Our self-love in Adam has depraved us of that true love, which
(seated in the Soul) moves the Body to act any goodness. Of which miserable
loss of ours, that we may be more sensible, it is necessary that as the Souls,
so the Bodies defects be particularly meditated on.

The curse and judgment of the Body is, that it should be a ready instrument to
execute the sinful commands of the Soul; these two parts constituting, Man,
being as it were Master and Servant, Husband and Wife. Yet observe, as in the
happiest unions amongst us, we shall find, that though the Nobler Sex has the
Superiority and Power of Rule, yet so prevalent is the nature of conjugal love,
that it sweetly allures the superintendents will to join issue in many actions
by that which is subjected. So in Man, though the Soul be the Head, the
Monarch, yet (by reason of the near conjunction) the Body oftentimes inclines
the Soul to be active, according to its disposition; making good that
Phylosophical maxim. Mores animi sequuntur temperamentum corporis. By this it
appears, that the Body is not only instrumentally, but also in a kind
potentially evil, since the Fall; being then changed in an instant of time,
from its beauty to deformity, from its perfect composition (which was equal ad
pondus) to an unequal mixture of the Elements and humors. Hence followed
termination of life, millions of Diseases, and Death, the malady of Diseases.
Hence the necessity of daily nourishment, and the peccancy and abounding of
humors (descryed in the four Complexions) and those excess, aided by the
constant bent of nature to do ill, do cause that aptness, and proclivity of
several Men to particular Vices; as the choleric to malice, blood, and anger;
the melancholy to desperation and discontent; the sanguine to lust; the
phlegmatic to sloth and idleness. In this cursed depravation of our erring
nature, Of the Eyes sinfulness.
the senses (which are the Bodies Pentarchie) have no small proportion. For
what is the Eye, the seat of the optic faculties, but an open Window, apt to
give entrance to theevish lusts. A two-leaved Door, prepared by treacherous
nature to receive in deadly Enemies? The life of Man would be far calmer, did
not these ri^ts let in tempests of pride, and vanity. The presumptuous opening
of these, made Eve open her hands to receive, her mouth to taste, the forbidden
fruit. For, when the Woman saw, that the Tree was good for food, Genesis 3.6.
and that it was pleasant to the Eyes, she took off the fruit thereof, and did
eat. Mark here, what assistance this sense gives to the temptation. Had not the
Sons of God, made their Eyes Floodgates, Genesis 6.2.
to let in the deceitful beauty of the Daughters of Men, (an Idolatrous union)
could not so soon have procured a disunion from God; which moved the Lord to
an effective repentance, changing the Globe of Earth into an Orb of Water. Genesis
9.22.
Ham's mocking, and curse, proceeded from a carnal discovery. Sem and Japhets
blessing, from a dutiful and willing blindness. Lastly, David's heart had never
been his concupiscencies Captive, 2 Samuel 11.2.
had not Bathsheba bathed in his Eyes, as well as in the Fountain. O thou which
illuminates Man's darkness, and have the oversight of my sight, suffer not that
sense, which thou have made to give my Body light, to be the inlet of my Souls
obscurity. But if I cannot see, but I must sin, Lord, let me cease to see
carnally, and be enabled to see spiritually; that so the one may be swallowed
up in the Vision of the other.

In the next place, what are the Ears, but the roads of Blasphemy, Of the
Ears.
the Labyrinths of obscenity, an open passage to the mind, through which,
Traitors, as well as true subjects pass without examination, or controulment.
Proud Herod had never been a God in heart, had not he willingly consented to be
one in Ear. Acts 12.23.
Had not Joash hearkened to the Princes of Judah, when they made obeisance unto
him, he had never left the house of the Lord, and served Groves and Idols. Had
Aaron heard the People, 2 Chro 24.17.
as the three Children heard Nabuchadnezzar, the one had been as free from
Idolatry as the other. Exodus 32.1.
Could Pilate have given the like attention to the Jews persuasions, Dan. 3.14.
Matt. 27.24.
that David gave to Abishai, the Lords anointed had not been crucified. 1 Samuel
26.8.
To conclude, had Solomon's Gallant entertained the Harlots allurements, no
further then Joseph his Mistresses enticements, Prove. 7.21.
Adultery would not have proved his ruin. Genesis 39.7.
Lord, though evil words by reason of the commonness of sense, will perforce
enter my Ears, O suffer them not to Inn in my heart, Contemplation.
lest they make thy House of Prayer, a Den of Thieves.

To proceed, though this sense of Smelling next to be searched into, has no
objects which properly in themselves considered, Of the smelling.
can be said to be evil, yet has it (since the Fall) a sinful property and
inordinate, which is always ready to assist the pride and inward corruption of
the heart. As he is as well a Traitor that lets in the Enemy, as he that fights
for him; So this sense, by an excessive admission, is oftentimes guilty of as
much evil, as the others, by a depraved and actual commission. The Pride and
immoderation contracted, by this sense, is to be gathered out of the judgment
pronounced by the Lord in the Prophet Esaias, against it, where he threatens
thus, That it shall come to pass, Esaias 3.24.
that in stead of sweet smells, there shall be stink; and in stead of a girdle,
a rent. Lord, since thou have created this sense for pleasure, Let me not, by a
depraved use thereof, gain thy displeasure: But let me by the fragrancy of the
Creature, be made sensible of the excelling sweetness of the Creator, that so
by joining Heaven and Earth together, I may enjoy thee here, and hereafter,
now, and ever.

The taste (which next ensues) was given to Adam in his Innocence, for two
respects. First, Of Fasting.
for a distinguishment of the Creatures. That as the Eye, so the Palate in
such a rare diversity, might glorify the Creator. Secondly, for pleasure sake,
and to prevent loathing. The regulated Appetite being thereby harmlesly incited
to perform (and that with a temperate delight) the charitable act of
nourishment. This was the gift, and the use thereof in the state of Innocence,
until Adam by tasting too much, so extended, and wracked this sense, that it
could never since be well set, or find a mean. The taste now enticing the
appetite, and the appetite again encouraging to taste, the whole Man is by this
means irrecoverably plunged in intemperancy. Ezekiel. 16.49.
Instance in the People of Sodom, Luke 12.16.
one of whose capital offenses was fullness of bread: In the rich Glutton, whose
immoderation hatched by this senses provocation, caused the one to forget their
end, the other his brother. O Lord, is this sense thus propense to ill? Luke
16.19: Contemplation.
O let my Soul be fed with thy grace, and taste thy sweetness, that so my
spiritual appetite being unmeasurably enlarged, it may (like Moses Rod) devour
the carnal.

Lastly, Of the Truth.
that I may conclude with that ubiquitary sense the handmaid of life, I mean
the touch; Know O fallen Man, that this is no less friend, than the rest, to
wickedness. Nay, to give it the due, it is not only a constant Conductour of
sin in all actions, (wherein the Body is an Agent) but also is a nourisher of
sin, until it grow exceeding sinful. Instance this, in the long-continued, and
tall-grown lusts of Holy David. 2 Samuel 11.2.
For no sooner had Pride, Security, and Idleness lulled asleep the graceful
warders of his Soul, and let in through his wandering Eyes, lust, and beauty;
but the will captived by such Potent Enemies, obeys and enjoys. What
Sathanisme, Hypocrisy, Murder, and Impenitency, succeeded his touch; as being
hatched and pampered by its sensual fruition; is known to all that are read in
the Scriptures. As lust, so covetousness, is much assisted, and has a secret
confederacy with this sense. There being in such Midasses a certain
con-naturalness betwixt their Fingers, and the Gold; which so forceably moves
the affections of the Soul, that a real fullness seems with them a want; their
gross Arithmatick consisting only of Addition and Multiplication. Contemplation.
O merciful Creator, are my Eyes become skillful perspectives, and
representative Mirrours to bring sin near unto my Soul? Are my Ears set wide
open to feast lewdness? Does my Nostrils (Spider-like) suck Poison from the
sweets of thy Creatures? Is my taste the Cook to drunkenness and gluttony? And
my touch the bedfellow and companion of all uncleanness? To conclude all, is
my whole Body con-natural with sin; an abettor and open friend to all iniquity;
a Lodestone, cleaving rather to the base metal of sin, than to the pure and
tried gold of grace? Clay it is indeed, both in substance, and quality; as
being hardened, and not mollified by the rays of thy mercies, pressing always
to its own Element of Earth, though never so often elevated by the motions of
thy good Spirit toward Heaven? Lord, what is Man that thou art mindful of
him, Psalm. 8.4.
or the Son of Man that thou visitest him? Is it not Chaff, and therefore to be
blown to and fro with the tempest of thy wrath? Psalm. 1.4.
Is it not stubble? and therefore apt fuel for that unquenchable Fire; yea,
undoubtedly it is this; yea, Luke 3.17.
worse, and less then all this; being not only vanity, but lighter than vanity;
so vain is every Man. O wretched Adam that I am, who shall deliver me from this
Body of sin, Romans 7.24.
and death? I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Lord, my Soul, guided by a Pillar of Fire (thy spirit) has now with faint
paces passed through a Vale of misery, a Wilderness of sin, full of
temptations, murmurings, and rebellions. It now remains, that having received
the Law in Mount Sinai, even the sentence of Death, in, and against my self, I
now with the same Moses from Mount Nebo view the Land of Canaan, the Gospel of
Peace, that promised possession, of every true Israelite. Lord, let my misery,
though not my merit, Luke 10.30.
provoke thee to this mercy, as being a Man naked and wounded, and fallen among
Thieves; as being a wretch, Ezekiel. 16.4.
whose Navel conveying original corruption, was not cut, neither was my fleshly
appetite suppled with the Water of Sanctification in the Day of my Nativity. O
pour into my gaping wounds the Oil of consolation, and the strengthening Wine
of thy promises; and bind them up with an humble assurance. O have compassion
on me, and say unto me, live. That is, forgive all my offenses, that am cast
out into the open Fields, to the lothing of my Person. Cloth me also with
broadered work. Put a Jewel on my forehead, and a beautiful Crown on my Head,
even the righteousness, and merit of thy Son. That so I may be practically
enabled to meditate of these next objects of my faith, viz. Satisfaction and
intercession, the two parts of my Saviors Priesthood; which according to
order, requires my succeeding thoughts.

No sooner was Man created in the Image of God, Of Christ's Priestly office.
but he became a Priest unto God, not to offer up for himself, or for others,
expiating Sacrifices, because sin then was not; for God saw every thing that he
had made, and behold it was very good. But his sweet incense, Genesis 1.31.
was Prayer, proceeding not from want, but from love, and duty: his Kids were
the Calves of his Lips, inflamed with praise, and sparkling with admiration
from the Altar of a pure heart, (an un-bloody Sacrifice.) But this Jubilee
continued not a Year, a Month, a Week, I think scarcely a Day. God's first
Sabbath of rest (I suppose) was the utmost date of Man's freedom from sin. For
no sooner had temptation voluntary leave to enter through the senses, into this
holy Temple, but the ambush of sin rushed out of Satan's imposture, as the
Grecians from their Horse, and overthrew and polluted the Priest, the
Sacrifice, and the Altar. If the Clay works not according to the mind of the
Potter, no marvail if he bruise it to powder. And if the Creature honor not
the Creator, it is Justice in him to destroy it. When the House of God is become
a Den of Thieves, the Priest of God an Idolater, and servant to sin, and the
Altar of God dedicated to Satan; It must needs follow that the curse of God
fore-threatned, shall now be executed, Ye shall surely die. Genesis 2.17.


O wretched Man, has God pronounced that thou shall die? Be ascertained thou
must die, since his unchangable Decrees are shaddowed out unto us by the Laws
of the Medes, Dan. 6.12.
and Persians, which alter not. Must Man die? and has God enacted it? who then
can deliver us from this Body of Death? Be of good comfort, we have mercy for
our Esther; the Son of God for our Mordecay; who has, without reversing,
qualified, and fulfilled the decree of his Father. Who now can lay any thing to
the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifies, Romans 8.33.
who is he that condemns? it is Christ that dyed, yea rather, that is risen
again; who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for
us, being the only Mediator betwixt God and Man. 1 Timothy 2.5.


All Priests, since the fall, within the Church of God were the Types of our
high Priest, Christ Jesus. For no sooner was there a breach made betwixt God
and Man; the Creator and the Creature, but mercy pleaded for a reconciliation;
and that reconciliation in Justice required a Mediator, which is the Lord
Jesus. A principal part of whose Mediatorship is this his office of the
Priesthood. Before the Law typified in Melchizedeck; in the Law pre-figured by
Aaron and his Sons; and in the Gospel really executed and fulfilled by himself.
The acts of this his office are chiefly two, as being proportionable to the
defect and necessity of Man the offender; viz. To satisfy, to intercede. Go
forth now my Soul, and bid defiance to all thy Enemies. For the Shield of thy
faith shall receive all their darts, without any danger to thee; retorting them
back, even into the adversaries faces. Appear now with confidence before the
judgment Seat of God; bringing with thee to the Bar of Mercy, thy Advocate
Christ Jesus: Thither summon Sin, that Tyrant; Romans 6.23.
whom whilst thou weart a Traitor to thy Maker, thou did serve; together with
those Homicides, Death, and Hell; Let him bring his Parent with him also, even
Satan his Agent, thy Accuser; yea, let thy own conscience be called as a
Witness; Lastly, let the Law be preferred as thy Indictment. Against all those,
let thy Savior oppose himself and maugre their objections and accusations
plead thy innocence, that so thy righteousness may break forth as the light,
Psalm. 37.6.
and thy judgment as the Noonday: For, he shall trample thine, and his Enemies
under his feet, and destroy them with the two-edged Sword of his Word.

Does Sin challenge a right on thee? Our Savior answers, That the old Man is
crucified with him, Romans 6.6.
that the Body of Sin might be destroyed, that henceforth thou should not
serve Sin. Does Death and Hell cry out, we are thy wages? The Almighty
Conqueror replies, O Death where is thy Sting. O Grave where is thy Victory?
And that thou may never hereafter fear, 1 Cor. 15.55.
it is added, Rev. 20.14.
Death and Hell shall be cast into the Lake of Fire. Does Satan accuse thee?
behold thy Michael shall chase this malicious Dragon from the judgment Seat;
witness that voice of triumph, that the Accuser of our Brethren is cast down,
which accused them before our God, Day and Night. And as for thy conscience,
Rev. 12.10.
fear not its testimony, since it ceases to accuse, when Sin is not imputed.
For, whosoever is born of God, sins not. John 5.18.
Again, a spotless, and blameless conscience, cannot be a blaming and
condemning conscience. But, Christ through the eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14.
has offered himself without spot to God, Heb. 10.21, 22.
that he might purge thy Conscience from dead works: Wherefore, having such an
High Priest over the House of God, draw thou near with a free Heart in full
assurance of Faith. Lastly, does the severe justice of the Law threaten to
swallow thee up? strengthen, and comfort thy self in Christ, Gala. 3.15.
who has redeemed thee from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for thee:
for it is written, cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree, etc. Yea, let
this following immunity ( The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, Romans
8.2.
having made thee free from the Law of Sin and Death) dismiss thy fears, and
silence all thy adversaries.

O my Savior, who art only the true Melchizedeck, the compleatment of Aaron's
Priesthood, Contemplation.
and the end of the Law: Romans 10.4.
How much praise is thy due from me, thy redeemed; since to me is thy saying
verified, Blessed are those Eyes that see those things that I see. And the
Ears that hear those things that I hear. Luke 23.20.
Abraham saw thee in Isaac; David saw thee in Solomon; but I see thee in thy
self; yea in these, and in all other thy Types. I see thee also, and that with
much comfort and confirmation in Heb. 5 6.
thy Calling, Exo. 30.30
Unction, Heb. 9.7.
Bloody Sacrifice, Heb. 9.14.
Sanctification, Redemption, Heb 9.12.
Ascension, Heb. 9.24.
and Intercession, which were heretofore mysteriously bound up in the Levitical
Priesthood, are now fulfilled, and to me graciously manifested. Lord Jesus,
since of thy free mercy thou have made my deafness, to hear, and have given me
sight, that was blind, for the strengthening of my faith; As I have seen thee
in thy types, so let me see thee also in that eternal decree of thy Father: So
shall salvation appear, Gods act, and not Man's fantasy, viz. Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee; Thou art the Lamb slain, Heb. 1.5.
that takes away the sins of the World. Rev. 13.8.
Lastly, let me behold the execution thereof, wherein the Lord is both offered
to me, and accepted for me. viz. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. Mat. 3.17.
O my Soul, what can thou now more desire; as having the Decree of God for
thy Foundation; the merit of God for thy Salvation, and the voice of God for
thy acceptance? Who, but an experienced Christian, can express the sweet of
these? yet how far short are his expressions of these streams of comforts,
which flow through the Priestly Office to every true Believer, from the
unexhaustible Fountain of Gods mercy? What spots does not this wash off? What
soars does not this Jordan heal? Yea, what lameness, and imperfection does not
this Bethesda cure?

O the consolation of Christ's intercession, in this imperfect state of grace!
Of Christ's Intercession.
Is my love weak, and unstable as Water? This love O Savior, is stronger than
Death. Is my obedience imperfect? John 3.16.
By thy obedience, many are made righteous. Romans 5.19.
Is my zeal defective? (Lord) Thy zeal of thy House has eaten thee up. Is my
Faith small, John 2.17.
and subject to doubting? O Savior, thou will give a blessing, even to a grain
of Faith, as of Mustard Seed. Luke 13.19.
And have promised not to quench the smoking Flax, nor to break the bruised
Reed. Is my Prayer full of weakness, Mat. 12 20.
ignorance, and imperfection? Romans 8.26.
Thy Spirit it self makes request for us, with sighs which cannot be
expressed. Yea, thou art entered into the very Heaven of Heavens, to appear now
in the sight of God, Heb. 9.24. Heb. 7.25.
ever living there to make Intercession for us. To conclude, Is my inherent
righteousness imperfect? And am I a transgressor of the Law? Thy imputative
righteousness is perfect, and thou art a fulfiller of the Law. Romans 10.4.
For thou art the end of the Law for righteousness unto every one that
believes. Yea, that all further objections may be answered, that all other
defects may appear supplied; behold here a gift, as large as Man's wants, and as
full of mercy, as he of sin: Christ Jesus of God is made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30.
and sanctification, and redemption.

Our Savior Jesus Christ is the way, the truth, and the life; that Jacob's
Ladder, John 14.6.
whose foot (as expressing his humanity) touches the Earth; and whose top as
respecting his Divinity, reaches unto Heaven. This threefold* office may be
considered, as the parts of this Heavenly ascent. Upon whose first degree, my
faith, which is the eye, the hand, and the foot of the Soul, has begun to
ascend. It remains now that I mount the next staff, belonging to his Priestly
office, which is satisfaction* the inseparable consequent of which is
Justification. Of Christ's Satisfaction.
The parts of which, forgiveness of sins, and imputation of righteousness, do
necessarily follow the former. Our merciful High Priest and Redeemer
satisfying by suffering, that our sins for which he suffered might be forgiven,
fulfilling the Law is continually interceding, that his righteousness might be
to us imputed. So that to our comfort and confirmation, be it spoken, that,
when faith has gaind footing upon satisfaction, and intercession, it must
needs have hand-hold on remission, and imputation. Can the Lord be less
righteous, than Man? Does not the cancelling of the Bond, succeed the absolving
of the debt? The satisfaction, and releasement of the Prisoner follow the not
guilty of the Jury. O the perfection of all the ways of God, especially of this
his great work toward the Children of Men! wherein mercy and justice do
sweetly kiss each other; He being just toward Man, in his fall into Death,
that he might be merciful, in raising him to life. And that he might spare his
adopted Sons, he spares not his only begotten Son. O what is Man that thou art
mindful of him, or the Son of Man that thou visitest him? Psalm. 8.4.


Of Justification.
To proceed, Justification (by some Divines made an act of Christ's Kingly
office) is that merciful, and yet just, sentential act of God the Father,
whereby a believer is absolved from sin, and death, and the inherent
righteousness of Christ is imputed unto the faithful applyer, for the
attaining of life everlasting; Hereby, waving our debt, and supplying our want,
at once, delivering us from guilt, and corruption. Behold, here is an Olive
Branch, which faith, the Dove of the Soul, brings home, unto it in the time of
Gods vengeance, and in the midst of the great Waters of Sin. Here Is a Golden
Scepter held forth by the incensed King of Kings, to every faithful, and
humbled Esther. Now I may say to my Soul, as once the multitude to the blind
Man; See, he calls thee. Not in his strong Wind, by which he rents the
Mountains of pride; 1 King. 19.11.
Not in his Earthquake, by which he shakes secure and presumptuous sinners:
No, nor yet in his consuming Fire, with which he devours unexcusable
Hypocrites: But in his mercy, even with a still, small voice of compassion and
pardon. O my Soul, Thou art not come unto the Mount that burnd with Fire, and
that might be touched; Heb. 1^.18.
nor unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest; nor to hear the voice of those
words, which voice they that heard, entreated that the Word should not be
spoken to them any more; Verse 19.
But thou art come to Mount Sion, and to an innumerable company of Angels, and
to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, Verse 22.
and to the blood of Sprinkling, that speaks better things than that of Abel,
and to God the Judge of all, whom thou may hear with comfort, Verse 24.
proclaiming Himself unto thee, as once before Moses, thus, The Lord, the Lord
God, merciful, Exodus 34.7.
and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping
mercy for thousands, Verse 8.
forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin.

Forgiving sin? O what good news is this unto my Soul! Forgivenesses of Sins.
How truly is this called the glad tidings of the Gospel? Tell me, ye which
shall hereafter read my thoughts, even from the testimony of your own Souls
(For only experience can make you fit Judges in this case;) If there be any joy
like to the joy of a justified sinner? Any blessing like that of David? Can I
consider into how fearful an estate sin has cast me, and unto what punishment
Justice has condemned me, and not from thence proportion out, Psalm. 32.1.
and acknowledge the greatness of this deliverance? Does not the truth-speaking
Word of God, which is neither cruel, nor partial, tell me that I am a sinner?
For there is no Man that sins not. That I am a debtor? Since we must all
pray, 1 Ep. Joh. 1.8.
forgive us our debts; That I am a condemned Person? For by the offense of one,
Mat. 6.12.
judgment came upon all Men to condemnation. That I am a bond-slave to death,
Romans 5.18.
and to him that has the Power of Death, the Devil; all my life time being
subject to bondage? Heb. 2.15. Ephesians. 2.1. Romans 5.10. Ephesians. 2.3.
That I am a dead Man; For, We are all dead in sins, and trespasses. That I am
an enemy to God, and Christ, and lastly by nature a Child of Wrath? And shall I
account remission of all my offenses, Satisfaction of all my arrearages,
Liberty from servitude, Life in stead of death; Nay more, resurrection from
death, no mercy? Can my powerful Enemy be made my friend, and Father? my
irefull Judge, become my Mediator and Savior, and I not highly favored,
graciously, yea, wonderfully delivered, O thou which have wrought all these
things for me, work in me an experimental, and sensible knowledge, a continued
and enlarged thankfulness. So shall I give to thee the praise, Psalm. 32.1.
and receive from thee the comfort of that benediction; Blessed is he whose
transgressions is forgiven, and whose sin is covered.

No sooner had the power and wisdom of God pulled off the Visard of the Chaos,
Of imputative righteousness.
and discovered the form of Heaven and Earth, but he adorned and clothed them
with beautiful Creatures; all his works having not only in their Being a
naked existence, but a fullness of goodness, which is their perfection. If these
things (which God made for the use of Man) were exceeding good? Surely Man,
Genesis 1.31.
whom he made for his own use, and glory; was in his first Creation in Nature,
and shall be in this second of Grace, endued with a plenitude of excelling
graces. To be, and not to be good, is to be evil; as wanting the Character of
the Creator. Who is a most pure Essence, there is no mean betwixt good, and
evil: every Soul being either conformed to the Image of God or deformed after
the similitude of Satan. Now to them upon whose foreheads the Seal of the
living God is placed, is given a twofold righteousness; the one inherent and
imperfect; not (if simply considered) as the work of the Spirit, but as it is
accompanied, and mixed with the corruptions of nature. Our best performances,
being like unto those strange births which receive their life and being from
God, their deformities from some defect or vice in nature. But of this in
another place.

The other is, that infinitely perfect, legal super-errogating, Definition of
imputative righteousness.
and inherent righteousness of the Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ, which God
the Father beholding his Sons sufferings* and fulfilling the Law together with
his own promise, and Covenant, which is a due debt in Justice, imputes to them,
to whom in his unspeakable mercy he gives faith to receive, Exposition.
and apply it. This I call infinitely perfect, as being the righteousness of
God, as well as Man, by reason of the communication of properties, from the
union of nature. I call it legal, because the Law was the object, and rule
thereof. Super-errogating, because it super-abounds, and is made the sole
merit of Saints. Lastly, I term it inherent, as being the actual
righteousness and obedience of the Man Christ Jesus. All his sufferings, by
reason of the spontaneous and loving offer of himself, being also the acts of
his will, as well as the passions of his nature. O wonder of love! O miracle of
mercy! O divine charity! which in the lowest depth of our misery, and swelling
height of our Rebellion, clothed not only our Bodies nakedness, but our Souls;
as that first hid our outward pollutions from our selves; so this our inward
corruptions from God.

For ever blessed be thou O Lord, Proofs of our right to Christ's imputative
righteousness.
for that union of thy Spirit and gift of faith, by which I put on, nay more,
am made one with Christ. What suggestion of Satan, or contradiction of
depraved nature (granting me a member of this Head, a branch of this Vine) can
make it difficult to prove, or dares deny my right to possess, this spotless
Robe? As the union of Soul and Body, of Head and Members, produces a
sympathizing property, and joynt-propriety to every thing; so my union with
Christ, as being the Soul of my Soul, the Head of his Church, entitles me to,
and gives me whatsoever is his. And (no doubt) as it is horrible blasphemy to
account any part of the Lords humane Body, as sinful and unclean: So it is
unreasonable infidelity, and shameful impiety to think any true member of his
mystical Body can be (as in him) unrighteous and defiled: his perfect, and
abounding righteousness, being like to that precious, and sacred anointing
Oil, Psalm. 133.2.
which according to the Psalmist was poured on the head of Aaron, and went down
to the skirts of his Vesture.

This, O this his innocence, and merit, Revel. 6.11. Demonstrations from
Scripture. Revel. 12.1.
is that white Robe which was given to them that were slain for the Word of
God, and the testimony which they held. This is that glorious Sun which clothes
the Church, that Woman in travail. Yea, this is that beautiful wedding
garment wherewith Christ our Bridegroom, Mat. 22.11.
invests every true invited and elected Guest.

The Linen Vestments of the Jewish High Priest were comely enough to minister
in at the ordinary and daily Sacrifice. But they were accounted too mean and
poor, Exodus 41.28.
when he entered into the holy of holiest. The Raiment of Joseph a Prisoner
(though good enough perhaps for that place) must be changed, Genesis 41.14.
when he is presented before Pharaoh, a King. Yea, the Prodigals Rags may serve
him, whilst he serves the Devil, Luke 15.22.
and feeds with the Swine of the World, upon the husks of vanity. Every true
Christian is a Priest unto God, the Sanctum is the Church militant, wherein we
minister, and that but for a year; Man's whole life being but a revolved year.
Again, we are all Stewards to the World, to whom our flesh in nature, our
Mistress, has plighted her troth; so that if we once became Joseph's, in
denying her lusts, we must with Joseph undergo slander, affliction, and
imprisonment. Lastly, we are naturally Prodigals also. Our portion is the
common goods of the mind, of the body, of education. The waisters and
consumers of this our first patrimony, are the Dallilahs of Sin. Now though we
may minister on Earth amongst our brethren, clothed in the white Garments of a
good report and profession (though whilst we are imprisoned in affliction, or
spoiled by sin, and Satan, the tattered Rags of sorrow and lamentation may
serve us) yet when we are converted, and ascend afterward into the Sanctum
Sanctorum, the Heaven of Heavens, when we shall appear before the Lord Jesus
our King, and return unto God our Heavenly Father, we must be clothed with the
Golden Garments, the clean Vestments, the best Robes, even that meritorious
righteousness of our loving Savior, which being the Raiment of our elder
Brother, may assure us (with Jacob) of a blessing and acceptance here, of Glory
hereafter.

Away then from (my thoughts) that perfection and merit which some dream of, in
renewed nature. That scant sacrilegious and unthankful opinion, of our
Saviors active and passive obedience, such Tenants (as it were) halt, and
disgracefully curtaile, the ample and large Garments of our Lord, that so vain
pride might patch it up with the old Rags and rotten performances of Man's
desert. Lord, thy Word teaches me, and my own infirmities inforces me, to
another, yet better Plea. Can Man be justified in thy sight, or how can he be
clean, that is born of a Woman? Job 25.4, 5, 6.
Behold, even the Stars are not pure in thy Sight, how much less Man, that is a
Worm? We are all thy Creatures, thy servants. The observance of thy commands is
the work we are made and hired for. Luke 17.7.
Now could we (as thou know we cannot) perfectly obey thy will, (there being
no Man that sins not, 1 King. 8.46.
whose best self-righteousnesses are not as filthy rags:) Would we therefore as
our due, Esaias 64.6.
presume to sit down with thee in thy Kingdom? Lord, let such pride be far
from us, and do thou cause us in an humble acknowledgment of our wants, and
merit, readily to confess, that we are unprofitable Servants, Luke 17.10.
having done that which was our duty to do. Now if of Servants we are made
Friends, of Bastards we are Adopted Sons, Luke 15.15. Romans 8.16, 17.
of Bondslaves we are appointed Heirs, shall we not cry out, that our merit is
thy grace, and that thou O Jesus Christ art the Lord our righteousness? Jerem.
33.16. 1 Cor. 1.30. Romans 10.4.
Art made unto us righteousness? And art the end of the Law for righteousness,
to every one that believes?

Question not here my Soul, General questions or objections answered. 1 Quest.
why God does not by his omnipotent, and supreme Power, in one and the same
instant Call, justify, sanctify, and glorify his Elect; since as he did not
condemn us, so he will not save us without our selves. Saves us without our
merits, indeed, not without our work. He has therefore in his infinite
wisdom, annexed conditions to his Covenant, and ordained faith, repentance,
John 15.16.
and all other good works to be as so many degrees, in our ascent to happiness.
That so Earth might be our School, to fit us for Heaven, and the life of grace,
which is imperfect glory, might prepare us for the life of glory, which is
grace in perfection.

Neither be thou too curiously inquisitive, 2 Quest.
to ask the reason why the Lord God, in this his gracious looking back upon us,
does not again build up that wide breach which Sin has made in Man's nature;
That so according to our first beginnings in Adam, we might have continued that
course, enjoying happiness here, and attaining after translation, glory
hereafter? Since that the Lord, the great Architector, suffered this specious
(yet brittle building) of unstable Man to fall down flat, that upon its
foundation he might raise up, to the glory of his grace, a more beautiful
edifice, in which admirable structure he uses the same matter, and that it
might be stable for ever, he Himself becomes the Head of the Corner. Further,
the Builders of this spiritual Temple are Gods Spirit, and Ministers; the
cement, Mat. 21.42.
faith and all other graces; the Buttresses or Pillars, his Election; and the
tegment or covering, his Providence. In all this, Man as of himself has no
work, other ways grace would be no grace. Romans 11.6.
The perfect work of Redemption (like that of the Creation) being as above the
resistance, so without the assistance of the Creature.

Again, had Man been only placed in a renewed estate, there would have been a
possibility of falling, and of plunging Himself into a double curse, whereupon
Satan and evil Men would have taken an occasion to derogate both from the
mercy, and power of God, according to those Objections of the Heathen,
rehearsed by Moses; That because the Lord would not, Exodus 32.12. Numb. 14.16.
Object.
or could not save them, he suffered them to be destroyed; But some will say,
he might have confirmed them, as he did the Elect Angels; I answer, that if it
should have pleased God thus to have bestowed his mercy toward us his
Children, yet the Devil and wicked Men (if in these days of our weakness, much
more in those of our perfection) would have derogated from Gods grace, that
they might have attributed all, or the best part to Man's merit. Lastly, in this
our Justification by Christ, mercy counterpoises justice; yea, in these there
are, to the eternal praise of our all wise God, an admirable and due
proportion. The spirit of God observes it, and shall not we, in whom it is
wrought, with unspeakable joy, and thankfulness remember? That as by the
offense of one, judgment came upon all Men to condemnation: ^^m. 5.18.
Even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all Men unto
justification of life.

O the miserable necessity of our nature, the boundless compassion of God's!
Does Man want holiness, merit and obedience, and will his Lord confer purity,
and offer up his own Life for him? will no other security but himself,
Necessity of Justification.
be accepted for the payment of sin? Surely this will serve, not only to
express his love, but to inform our judgments, how impossible it was,
(considering Gods holiness, the Laws rigor, and the least imperfection) for
Man to be justified before God. This work belongs to the Creator, not to the
Creature. If in our first being, the glorious Trinity were in an especial
manner sole Agents, much more in this our Eternal well-Beeing; Wherein God the
Father imputes and accepts, God the Son becomes Man, obeys, and fulfills, and
God the Holy Ghost calls and sanctifies. That Man in the last place, may apply,
and put on by faith, this spotless Robe, and Imperial Crown of Righteousness.
To whom it may be said, as of Mordecay, Thus shall it be done to him, whom the
King of Kings delights to honor. I should now proceed to observe what streams,
and blessed effects flow from this Priestly Fountain, did not the near and
inseparable relation of the Prophetical Office, unto it sweetly invite me to
unite them also in my Meditations.

I am assured, that every true Christian Soul that has followed me hitherto in
my weak, yet sincere Meditations, is here together with me ravished in the
apprehension of these infinite Privileges, and in tasting of these Waters of
Life, which flow from the Throne of God, and of the Lamb. Is any so welcome to
the poor indebted Widow, as merciful Elisha? 2 Kings 4.1.
Is any so to be esteemed of rebellious Israel, as interceding Moses? Exodus
32.11.
Was there any Speech so pleasing to the Paralitique, as Man thy Sins are
forgiven thee? Or any vesture so needful, and acceptable to those naked
Beggars in the Gospel, Luke 5.20.
as the Wedding Garment? And is not Christ, Mat. 22.10.
who unto us is all these (even the welcome Man, the only Intercessor, the
Word, remitting Sins, the Royal Clo^thing,) our Wish, our Aim, our Crown, our
Glory? No doubt but he is. Why go we not then on to possess him?

O Lord, we are all like unto those unbelieving Israelites, that are over joyed
with the good report of the Land of Canaan, and delighted with the taste of the
pleasant Fruit thereof; and yet stand still, even at the border, discouraged.
As they cried out, because of the Sons of (...), so we of our Gyant-like
corruptions; those opposed them, the^e us. Thou have showed us, and we have
read this thy gracious Covenant, and we know thee both willing, and able to
perform thy part thereof. But alas, when we descend to the conditions on our
part, what have we, or what can we do? Thou requirest faith in us, but behold
doubting* Repentance, and behold hardness of heart. O wretched Men that we are,
who shall deliver us from this Body of Death? Romans 7.24.


O let all that have such hungry Souls, thank God for our Lord Jesus Christ.
Prophetical Office.
Who is a Joshua to overcome all these our mighty adversaries, an Angel
pointing out a living Fountain, to all thirsty Hagars, even that Spring of
grace, his Prophetical Office. Thirsty I say, for none but such taste present,
and perfect comfort, and refresh^ing, from hence. Encouragement indeed all
others may have from this Office; which are not yet called to en^deavour, and
exercise themselves in the means, which beget faith, and repentance,
notwithstanding the resisting impossibility of their nature, as beholding the
free promise* and enabling gift of God in Christ. But the Covenant and the
blessing, belongs, and is effectual to those, sensibly and chiefly, That hunger
and thirst after righteousness: Mat. 5.6.
For they shall be filled.

To proceed then; let all Men observe with me two spiritual streams, or works,
flowing from this Office. The first is the Divine Revelation of the will of
God, (so far as it was necessary for his Church) by the Mouths and Pens of the
Prophets, and Apostles, and that through the immediate inspiration, and
instinct of the third Person in Trinity, his most Holy Spirit* All which
issuing from the living Fountain* the Lord Jesus, (who is in the midst of his
Garden the Church) as so many Rivolets, do make glad the City, and water the
Paradise of God. This is that work, that is w^ought without us, yet with an end
to work within us, and upon us; all being, according to St. Paul, that
Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, upon which the Church is built, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone. Ephesians. 2.20.


O Eternal Being, who art as merciful as great, a Father God, Contemplation.
to me thy unworthy Creature, should I in this prospect of my weak faith,
carelessly, o^ silently, pass by so high a favor, so gracious a work of thine
as this, toward my Soul: Thou might justly take my object, or my sight, or
both from me, for such unthankfulness? Is the revelation of secrets the
greatest expression of friendship? And to be of the Kings Council the chiefest
honors? And shall not I as a Christian, apprehend, apply, and be grateful,
for such ^avours as these, conferred by a far greater Person, in a far greater
manner, and measure; upon a far unworthier object, than ever they can sample?
If the Letters and mandates of Princes are received with so much reverence,
preserved with so much care, esteemed, honored and obeyed: How much more the
Words and Scriptures of God, the Prince of Princes? Are Books but the Soul in
Print, the Beams of Man's wisdom, what is this but the life of the Soul, the
Book of Wisdom, and the Book of Books?

Here is the height of Metaphysics, as revealing what so ever can be known
either of God, or Angels. The use and sum of both Phylosophies, in the
Creation, and Decalogue. The knowledge of Astronomy in Job. The exactest
Geography, and truest Chronology in Genesis, and Chronicles. The mystery of
Numbers in the Levitical Ceremonies, Daniel and the Revelations. The exercise
of Rhetoric, throughout the Prophets, especially in Esaias; The marrow and art
of Logic, in Saint Paul's Epistles, and in all, which is above all, as the Sun
amongst the Planets, the whole Body of Divinity. Here are Politics for the
Statist, in Ecclesiastes. Oeconomicks for the Housekeeper, in Proverbs.
Instruction for the Woman, from Solomon's Mother. And David's Poesy for the
Poets. Lastly, here is wisdom for the ancient; for, it makes wise unto
Salvation. 2 Timothy 3.15.
Here Is a beautiful Spouse, and love Canticles for the youthful and religious
Amorist. And here is Milk from the Sacramental Tea^s, for the newborn Babe.
Yea, what can my heart seek, (Lord) which thou have not placed in this Book of
Life; in this library of my Soul. It remains n^w only that I beseech from thee
the true use thereof, viz. the knowledge and worship of thee. So shall I be not
only a hearer, and Reader, but a doer of thy Word, not deceiving my own Soul.
From this work of Gods Spirit i^ the Word without us, I proceed to that second
work of the Spirit, wrought within us, viz. (Sanctification) being a
conformation of our will^ unto his. O my Soul, here is that thou seek for.
The knowledge of the greatest happiness, without possibility of fruition, is
not the least of torments. And to behold the Crown, Robes, and Privileges of a
Christian, without either visible means to obtain, or a true propriety of
wea^ing them, makes but our misery more miserable, Thou weart even now lifted
up, and cast down, exalted with joy, and humbled with sorrow. For looking
upward, thou beholdest with holy Stephen, Heaven open, and the Lord Jesus
Christ standing at the right hand of God. But alas! whilst thou weart ravished
with this Vision, a multitude of thine Enemies, (not much unlike, nor less
cruel than his Persecutors) thy original Corruptions) have blind-folded thy
eyes, and manacled thy hands, separating for the present, both it from thee,
and thee from it. But now be of good comfort, though thou lie dead in sin,
and intranc'd in astonishment, the Lord of life is come down unto thee. Who
(manger all these Hell Hounds that watch over thee) will give thee part in the
first Resurrection. 2 Kings 4.34.
He is thy spiritual Elisha, and the Prince of the Prophets, who will lay his
Mouth to thy Mouth, that so thou may praise and confess him; his Eyes to thy
Eyes, that thorough faith thou may behold him; his Hands upon thy Hands, that
in deeds thou may obey him; yea, his whole and living Body upon thy dead
Body, that so thou may revive and live in him. Behold there, Him, of whom his
own saying concerning John the Baptist, is evidently verified, A Prophet, yea,
and more than a Prophet even the God of the Spirits of all Prophets. Numb.
27.16.
Who, least thy weak and sinful nature should fear to approach unto, or lend
an Ear unto his Word, has veiled his glorious Deity, with humanity, therein,
being typified by Moses when he covered his shining Face, as well as prophesied
of him, saying, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you amongst
your Brethren like unto me. Acts 3.22.
Like unto Moses indeed, as being a Man, an Israelite, a Prophet, full of
Miracles, meekness of the Spirit; yet with this difference of degrees, the one
was comparatively, the other perfectly full: the one a Vessel, the other a
Fountain: the one the Servant, the other the Son; according to that of the
Apostle, This Man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses, Heb. 3.3.
in as much as he who has builded the House, has more honor than the House,
Moses being faithful as a Servant, but Christ as a Son. Next, whereas (O my
Soul) thou objectest the deadness of thy nature, thy sleeping in sin; I confess
indeed thou art so. But hearken unto thy Saviors Triumph, which does not only
pierce, but give thee Ears, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead,
Ephesians. 5.14.
and Christ shall give thee light. The hour being come, and now is, Joh. 5.25.
when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall
live. Object.
O but say thou I am spiritually dead, how then can I hear? Know poor wretch
that thy Saviors Ephata, works as powerfully on the Soul, as upon the Body.
Yea, the Apostle, reciting the prediction of Moses, says not, him may you
hear; But him shall ye hear. Even so be it Lord Jesus Christ, that so loving
me a Lazarus, thou may raise me though a Lazarus, and be unto me a Jesus.

Notwithstanding these saving and comfortable promises, methinks I feel my
Soul still heavy, and sorrowful within me, Object.
Objecting that these indeed are favorable and sweet expressions; but they are
too general, considering her several defects; grievous soars, and Ulcers.
Requiring not only external, and powerful Baths, and washings, but particular
application of Remedies, and Medicines. She confesses that from these, she is
assured of the abilities and sufficiency of her spiritual Physician; but she
desires to have experience of his skill, and to apply his several Medicaments,
unto her special infirmities. Is this thy further request, O my Soul? Be
strong, and of a good courage. Lo he calls thee; Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
Again, I came not to call the righteous, Mat. 9.13.
but sinners to repentance. For, The whole need not a Physician, but the sick.
Mat. 9.12.
Nay, that thou might not have the least doubting, or fear, hearken to the
voice of his Prophet, seconded and expounded by himself, and that in a full
Auditory; The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, Luke 4.18.
because he has anointed me (there is his calling) to preach the Gospel to the
Poor, (there is his Office). He has sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to
preach deliverance unto the Captives, and recovery of sight unto the blind, to
set at liberty them that are bruised; to wit, thee O distressed Patient, with
all thy Diseases.

Well, thou art now, even by his own most gracious Call, admitted into his
presence. Be not ashamed, but with boldness, approach unto his Throne of Grace,
un^bareing thy soars, and discovering all thy spiritual wants* That so* the
two estates in Adam fallen, and in Christ risen, being compared; all may behold
with thee a revival from death, even that first resurrection, spoken of in the
Revelations* As also the difference, and disproportion that is betwixt a Man in
grace, and a Man in sin. And lastly be ravished in the apprehension of such
infinite mercy, which administers Plasters to every soar; and in the
conclusion works a general cure, effecting in a good measure, though not in
absolute perfection, those two great works of mortification and vivication in
us.

For the more accurate perception, and meditation of which great works, I
presume in all humility of Soul to speak Dialogue-wise unto my Savior; and
according to my weak ability, to describe him answering, in, and according to
his Word. That so both my self, and others may the better understand, how
excellently, and powerfully, a true faith (begotten and strengthened by God's
Spirit) does apprehend, and apply the saving and spiritual promises: Does
mortify our corruptions, silence all objections, and overcome all kind of
temptations; by degrees, perfecting holiness, in the love and fear of God.

A DIALOGVE betwixt Christ and the Soul.
O Gracious Savior, and skillful Physician, seeing thou calledst me, I come,
although ashamed to come. I have brought, if not a dead, yet a deadly sick
Soul, unto thee. The Souls complaint against the mind and understanding.
If illumination be the antecedent of faith, and faith the eye of the Soul, and
seeing a symptom of life, in how dangerous an estate am I, who walk in the
vanity of my mind, having my understanding darkened, being (in my own
apprehension) alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in
me, Ephesians. 4.17.
because of the blindness of my heart.

Poor Soul, faint not, nor despair, thou wast once dead, but now thou art
alive. I find no signs of death, Christ.
but of life in thee. A Trunck, or senceless Corpse, perceives not, nor
complains of its misery, as thou do. Neither art thou hopelesly sick; for in
thee (witness these strivings) there is the strength of a renewed nature, to
co-act with the work of Grace. Take then these receipts out of my Book, and
apply them; Joh. 1.9.
I am the true light that lights every Man that comes into the World, and am
come for Judgment into this World, John 9.39.
that they which see not might see; and they which see might be made blind; 1
Cor. 1.30.
I am made unto thee wisdom, and will enlighten thy darkness; yea, if thou
criest after knowledge, Psalm. 18.28.
and liftest up thy voice for understanding, thou shall understand the fear of
the Lord, and find the knowledge of God: For I the Lord give wisdom, and out
of my Mouth comes knowledge, Prove. 2.3.
and understanding. Again, faith is the gift of God. O then ask and thou shall
have, seek and thou shall find, Ephesians. 2.8.
knock and the treasury of all good and perfect gifts shall be opened, and
bestowed upon thee: Mat. 7.7. Jerem. 31.33.
Even the holy Spirit whom thy Heavenly Father will give to them that ask Him.
Luke 11.13.


The voice of my beloved! Thy Mouth is most sweet, Soul.
yea, thou art altogether lovely. Cant. 5.16.7.9.
The roof of thy Mouth is like the best Wine, that goes down sweetly, causing
the Lips of those that are asleep to speak. But alas Lord, Against the
Conscience.
how can I be delighted in these thy gracious promises, or take comfort in this
cure, as long as the tormenting worm of Conscience, feeds upon my entrails,
inditeing bitter things against me; Job 13.26.
and making me to possess the sins of my youth; being both my Judge, and
Accuser.

O my Patient, Christ.
I confess this thy pain and grief is unsupportable, for the Spirit of a Man
may sustain his infirmity; But a wounded Spirit, who can bear? Prove. 18.14.
Yet for thy comfort, know that there is balm in Gilead, for all wounds; and a
Physician there, for all Diseases; Deuteronomy. 32.39.
And I, even I am he, and there is no other God with me; I kill, and I make
alive; I wound, and I heal; yea, I will restore health unto thee, and will heal
thee of thy wounds. And as for this gnawing Worm, Jerem. 30.17.
which thou complainest of, know that it as other infects are, generated, of a
putred matter, even thy sin, and corruption. Yea, it is nourisht therewith. If
then this cause of thy torture, be withdrawn, the effect will undoubtedly
cease; For, I will forgive thy iniquity, and will remember thy sins no more;
making them, Jerem. 31.34.
though as red as Scarlet, to be as white as Snow. Esaias 1.18.
Through my blood thou have redemption, even the forgivenesses of Sins. If the
Blood of Bulls and Goats, and the Ashes of an Heyfer, Colos. 1.14.
sprinkling the unclean, Sanctified to the purifying of the flesh; How much
more shall my Blood (that through the eternal Spirit offered my self without
spot to God) purge thy Conscience from dead works? Heb. 9.13, 14.


Soul. Against hardness of heart.
O my spiritual healer, as thy Word assures me of thy ableness to cure, so it
also informs me of my uncapableness of cure. In the sickness of the Body, so of
the Soul, there are some conditions, and estates so vitiated, and overcome with
maladies, that they are forsaken of the Physician, and left as desperate* and
past remedy. In such a condition methinks I seem to be, of whose heart (by
reason of festred corruption) it may be said, as Job of Leviathan, That it is
as firm as a Stone; yea, as hard as a piece of the nether Millstone, Job 41.24.
of whom also thine own speech to the Jews may be verified, That my heart is
waxed gross, and my ears are dull of hearing, and my eyes are closed, least at
any time I should see with my eyes, and hear with my ears, and should
understand with my heart, Mat. 13.15.
and should be converted, and thou should heal me. Is then (Lord) my heart
such a Rock, and the imaginations thereof wholly and continually evil? How can
then the pure streams of Repentance, Genesis 8.21. Genesis 6.^.
flow from thence? (which is the condition on my part in thy Covenant of mercy
and pardon) witness thy own words delivered by the Prophet, Repent, and turn
your selves from all your transgressions, Ezekiel. 18.30.
so iniquity shall not be your ruin. And that in thy Gospel preached by thy
Apostle, Repent ye, Acts 3.19.
and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out.

Fear not my redeemed, nor be dismayed, as though any thing was impossible unto
God. Christ.
What seems difficult because of thy nature, shall be made easy through my
grace. Think not my Word (which is the word of life) shall become the savor of
death unto any of mine. Thou complainest that by it, thou have found thy
hardness of heart, which thou say excludes repentance, and consequently
pardon. O be not deceived, here is no cause of despair, but of hope, and
thankfulness: since my Word has wrought that blessed work upon thee, for which
I ordained it. Having not only selected, but prepared thee for my cure. There
is a reprobate and sick sort of Men, I confess, Romans 2.5.
Who after their hardness and impenitent Hearts, treasure up unto themselves
wrath against the Day of wrath. Such were those Jews, whose insensibleness did
sufficiently prove their deadness. But thy Ears are bored, to give my Word
entrance. Thy Eyes are opened to behold therein, as in a Mirror thy spots, and
many defects. And thy Heart is agil and willing to know, and accuse thy self.
Therefore thou shall be converted, and I will heal thee. If there should be
impossibilities imposed on thee in my Covenant, how could I then be just? And
shall not the Judge of all the World do right? Or if thy work should either
precede or assist mine, should not that act of thine (though the least) detract
from my free mercy, and make my grace no more grace? O cursed be such
Sathan-like pride of dust and ashes, that thus lifts up it self against my
omnipotency, mercy, and all other my attributes; aspiring even unto my Throne
of Glory. O know that those commands proclaimed in the Old Testament by my
Prophets, were given as preparatives to the New. What I require of thee, is my
due: why I require it of thee, is my mercy; that so running from me as a Judge,
thou might run to me as a Savior; Who grants both to Jew and Gentile
repentance unto life. Which conversion, [Acts 11.18.
since it has wrought it on thee; receive, and apply, what my mercy out of the
same word has extracted for thee. Are thy thoughts only evil? Ezekiel. 36.25.
I will sprinkle clean Water upon thee, and thou shall be clean from all thy
filthiness. Is thy Heart a Stone, which cannot relent? I am he that turns the
Rockie Heart into a Well, Psalm. 114.8.
as the Rock in Horeb into standing Water, and the Flint into a Fountain of
Waters. Yea, a new Heart also will I give thee, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.
and a new Spirit will I put within thee; and I will take away thy stony Heart
out of thy Flesh, and I will give thee a Heart of Flesh. And I will put my
Spirit within thee, and cause thee to walk in my Statutes. For I dwell with him
that is of a contrite and humble Spirit, Esaias 57.15.
to revive him. That so all my Enemies with shame here, and torment hereafter,
may be enforced to confess, that it is I, that works in thee both to will,
and to do, Phil. 2.13.
of my good pleasure: quickening those that were dead in sins, Col. 2.13.
and trespasses. As also that I am Lord Paramount over all my Creatures, Having
mercy on whom I will have mercy, Romans 9.15.
and whom I will, I harden.

O my Lord, Thou art my refuge, and strength, a very present help in time of
trouble. Souls complaint of its unfaithful memory. Psalm. 46.1. Psalm. 119.103.
How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than Honey to my Mouth. O
that they were so fixed in my mind, and imprinted in my memory, that they might
remain with me for ever. But blessed Savior, this is my misery, that though
for the present, I may rejoice with David, yet for the future, I cannot
promise, and say with him, I will not forget thy Word. For whereas in my
Primitive nature, thou did indue my Soul with a serviceable and faithful
memory, Psalm. 119.16.
to be as it were, her treasury, or magazine; from whence, like that wise
House-holder in thy Gospel, she might upon all occasions bring forth things new
and old. Matthew. 13.52.
I find that Cyttadel battered, and possessed by my corruptions. Who have
fore-closed and lodged themselves therein. So that the complaint of Jeremy is
verified of me, as well as of that People, that have forgotten Thee, Days
without number. Jerem. 2.32.
O Lord, if the Cistern be broken, where shall the thirsty be refreshed? my
barrenness watered? what does it avail that my Ears, as Buckets, do
continually draw up, and are filled from thee the Fountain of life, with
quickening promises, and saving directions, if the receptacle and Cistern my
memory be faulty, and faithless? As the Body which wants the retentive faculty,
and vomits up its sustenance, giving neither time of Chilefaction to the
Stomach, nor of making blood to the Livour, can receive little nourishment; So
that Soul which retains not the spiritual Manna (thy Word) in the memory, that
there it might be disgested by Meditation, and converted into practice, can
never thrive in holiness, and live spiritually. It may be for the present, I
may say of thy Word, as Shimei of Solomon's, Thy saying is good, When as soon
after, 1 Kings 2.38.
it will be forgotten, and without thy mercy prove to me, as that to him, death
and bitterness in the end. Further, this holy retention is not only of
excellent and necessary use in thine, but also highly by thee commended,
required, and commanded. Luke 11.28.
Thine own Mouth pronouncing Him to be rather blessed, that bears thee in his
heart, than her that bore thee in her Womb; a spiritual enjoying, being far
above a corporal. Yea, for this cause, and to help this dangerous defect, did
thou ingrave thy Law upon Tables, and commanded it to be written upon the most
perspicuous places of the House. Deuteronomy. 6.8, 9.
And in the glorious and holy Decalogue it self, thou did place a Memento, in
the midst, and as it were in the front thereof. Further, Exodus 20.8.
thy holy Spirit in the Prophet does brand, and note this privation, as the
root and cause of all Rebellions; Because (says he) my People have forgotten
me, Jerem. 18.15.
they have burnt Incense unto vanity. Lastly, which adds to, and most
aggravates this my languor; wicked Men are in thy Word thus described and
painted out. To be without God in the World, Ephesians. 2.12.
and not to have thee in all their ways, to cast thy Laws behind them, and to
forget thee, as I have done. O Lord, Psalm. 50.17. Job 8.13.
since I have lost this precious gift in the first Adam, let me receive it
again in thee, the second, that my Soul being adorned with holy impressions,
may become the Temple of thee my Savior.

Strengthen thy self in Me, O dejected Soul, Christ.
and in these thy wants, Look unto me, Phil. 2.13.
who works in thee both the will and the deed of my good pleasure, and will my
self also freely give thee all things. As I am not ignorant of thy defects, so
I am not to seek of thy cure. Romans 8.32.
I know there is a double forgetfulness in corrupted nature, the one of thy
sins, to repent, the other of my Word and Laws to practice. But know thou this
also, that although for a time my Elect may forget me, yet they shall never be
forgotten of me. Can a Woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have
compassion on the Son of her Womb; Esaias 49.13.
yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee; for I will remember my
Covenant with thee, and will establish unto thee an everlasting Covenant. Ezekiel.
16.60, 62, 63.
And (because I will do thus) thou shall also remember thy ways and be ashamed,
and thou shall loath thy self, in thy own sight, for all the evil which thou
have committed. And as for the other defect, Ezekiel. 20.43.
be assured, that the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom my Father will
send in my name, he shall teach thee all things, John 14.26.
and bring all things into thy remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto thee.
For, This is the Covenant that I will make with thee, I will put my Law into
thy inward parts, and write it in thy Heart, Jerem. 31.33.
and will be thy God, and thou shall be my Servant.

O my Lord, I can never sufficiently admire thy power, thy free Love, Souls
Complaint against her will.
and the healing virtue of thy sacred and refreshing word; But what sweetness,
or relief, what hope of remedy, and recovery, can my diseased Soul receive from
it, that wants a will to receive, or apply thy comfortable Plasters unto my
festred sores? Can the knowledge and sight of Meat feed the hungry? Can the
beholding of riches satisfy the needy? or the Physicians Medicament cure
without application? No Lord, they cannot. How then can thy Holy Word work upon
me any gracious effects, that have a wretched will, refractory to hearing,
reading, meditation, or any good use thereof? If the mind and understanding be
evil, the will, which is their servant, and agent, must needs be so also. And
if it has its work in all evil actions, it must not be left out (nay cannot be
idle or wanting) in those that are good. But my will is continually opposite to
thine, which is the rule of equity and justice, and therefore cannot work the
works of God.

It is true, thou can not. For as I said before, I work in thee both to will
and to do. Christ. Phil. 2.13.
But because thou can not, will thou limit my power also? Cannot I that at
first gave thee a will, now at the last give thee a good will? Is it not as
easy for me, to bend, move, and change thy nilling will into a willing one, as
to enlighten and quicken the other dead faculties of thy Soul? Or, is my free
grace and love, less benevolent unto it, than unto the rest? No surely. It is
not for my honor, nor is it in thy power, to be primarily and voluntarily
assistant in this work. For of my own will I beget my Children, James 1.18.
that those that glory may glory in the Lord; humbly confessing, that it is not
of him that wills, nor of him that runs, 1 Cor. 1.31.
but of God that shows mercy. Romans 9.16.


Merciful Savior, I know thou can cure dangerous, yea desperate diseases.
But Lord, Souls complaint against her affections.
I fear that I am too far gone, that I have lost and let slip my opportunity,
and time of grace, even that Day wherein thou will speak, and be spoken to. So
that now I may justly expect, that thou will swear in thy wrath, that I shall
not enter into thy rest. And that this my fear may not seem groundless, be thou
pleased to feel the Pulses of my corrupted Soul; and thou shall find that they
beat not at all; or if they do, their motion is either exorbitant, Against Love.
or full of intermissions. Is it not thy command, that I should love thee, love
my God with all my heart, with all my soul, with all my mind? Mat. 22.37.
For thou will love them that love thee. Is it not negative also thus, Deuteronomy.
11.1, 13.
Love not the World, neither the things that are in the World; For if thou
love the World, Prove. 8.17. 1 John 2.15. John 3.16.
the love of the Father is not in thee. What then Lord will become of me, who
have loved darkness rather than light, and have been a lover of pleasures more
than a lover of thee, my God? Further, 2 Timothy 3.4.
if at any time I be in love, or ravished with thee, as beholding that excellent
beauty, which streams forth from all thy glorious attributes, especially thy
mercy, how weak, and of what short continuance are these flashes? being like
lightning, which gone, make but the night the darker. So that in their so long
absence, I have just cause to fear their return; doubting lest thou will say of
me, as once of the Laodiceans, that because I am neither hot, Rev. 3.16.
Against Joy.
nor cold, but lukewarm, thou will therefore spite me out of thy mouth.

Romans 4.17.
Again, does not thy Kingdom within us, consist in righteousness, in peace, and
in joy of the Holy Ghost? which kind of joy, for the excellency thereof, thou
call thine; John 15.11.
as also because of its procession from thee, and from thy spirit; it being
that unparalled, and unconceivable mirth which admits no mixture of sorrow,
no higher pitch of solace. This, this was it which so ravished thy holy ones,
making them breath forth seraphically with Habakkuk, I will rejoice in the
Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation; Habac. 3.18.
with the Spouse we will be glad and rejoice in thee; Cant. 1.4.
with David, in thy presence is fullness of joy; Psalm. 16.11.
and with Peter, we rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious. Now O Lord, in
what rank shall I place my self, who being carnal, and sold under sin, savours
not the things that be of God, but those that be of Men; Mat. 16.23.
not rejoicing in thee, but in my own vain and sinful imaginations; proudly
boasting and rejoyceing with those reprehended by the Apostle, in those few
gifts thou have endued me with: as though I had not received them? 1 Cor. 4.7.
Further, as thine have many objects of holy joy within them, so have they many
also without them; David preferred Jerusalem above his chiefest joy. And the
spiritual prosperity and welfare of the Church, Psalm. 137.6.
was St. Paul's hope, joy, glory, and Crown of rejoicing. But such O Lord, 1
These. 2.19.
is the natural depravation of my affections, that instead of wishing well unto
Sion, I am ready (did not thy grace restrain me) to persecute thee with Paul in
thy members, and to cry with those wicked, concerning thy Jerusalem, Raze it,
raze even to the Foundation thereof: Psalm. 137.7.
rejoicing on the contrary part with those reproved by Job, and the Apostle,
who make Gold their hope, and whose God is their Belly; hungring, and thirsting
after momentary honors, Job 31.24.
like Balaam, and Haman; taking the Timbrel, Phil. 3.19.
and the Harp, and rejoicing at the sound of the Organ. Lastly, as within, and
without, so also above themselves, Job 21.12.
they have their objects of joy; even thy glory. What else made that royal
Prophet so piously nimble? and so cheerful and public a dancer before thy
Ark? what caused the Songs of Moses, Myriam, and Deborah? yea, what occasioned
those joyful expressions of thy blessed Mother, of Simeon, Zachary, and Anna?
together with those two transcendent and affectionate wishes of St. Paul, and
Moses? I say what, but the joyful magnifying of thy glory, in vouchsafeing thy
presence, in destroying thy enemies, in fulfilling thy promises, and in the
Salvation and Conversion of thy People? But in me Lord, instead of this
lightsomeness, in seeking of thy glory, there is naturally the sinful
popularity of Absalom; yea, the hypocritical zeal of Jehu; the vainglorious
formality of Magus; and the self-seeking pride of Herod. So that (considering
these wants, and disorders in my affections) no wonder if I distrust my self,
and cry out to thee, with the Publican, Lord have mercy upon me a sinner.

Poor Soul, let not these fears, and doubts, Christ.
discourage thee, they make thy state the better, not the worse. Ignorance of
want, is the more dangerous, Luke 1.53.
when stomachless and silent; as being thereby disabled both to ask, and to
receive relief. Thy many complaints of defects, are the true effects of those
graces thou desire. Neither can thou mourn, because of no affection,
without some affection. But to answer all thy objections; weart thou emptiness
it self, am not I he that made Heaven and Earth of nothing? Do I fill all
things with my Essence, and cannot I fill thee with my grace? Can I be love it
self, (for God is love, 1 John 4.8.
) and not be both willing and able to impart some rays thereof to thee my
Creature? The fruits of my Spirit is love and joy, which Spirit I give unto all
that are mine. Gal. 5.22.
What though the Chaos of thy corrupted nature, yields no such fruits; Romans 8.9.
The Paradise of God, in which thou art replanted, does, as being watered with
those Rivers of love, which flow from me, the Fountain. Thou therefore loving
me, 1 John 4.19.
because I loved thee first: as I am the only cause of thy love (for I loved
thee freely) so I am the continuer. For, Hosea 14.4. John 15.10. John 13.1.
thou shall abide in my love; yea, I will continue to love thee: for whom I
love, I love unto the end. Wherefore fear thou not the Eclipses thereof.
Natural Men do not more certainly expect the one, than all my Saints the other.
As their Sun is not extinct, no more is thine: I thus ordaining it, that in my
absence, thou might have a longing for my presence, and in my presence
might lovingly fear my absence; these intermissions preceding the increase,
not the dimunishment of affection. And since thou can cry with David, Restore
unto me the joy of thy salvation, Psalm. 51.12.
doubt not, but thou shall also confess with him, that my anger endures but a
moment, weeping may endure for a Night, but joy comes in the Morning.

Psalm. 30.5.
Again, whereas thou objectest, and bewailest, the want of the true spiritual
mirth; Be not discouraged, for this thy humble craving, argues that thou art
free from pride, and self-conceitedness, which usually so swells the hearts of
natural Men, that no place is left for grace. Further, it assures thee of a
present possession, for thou could never have heartily longed for that,
which thou never tasted; nor have hated this false joy, had not thou had some
experience of the true. Lastly, thou have an interest in my promise; for I fill
the hungry with good things. As I am always filling, so my servants are always
hungry. A good Archer is not by thee condemned for sometimes missing his Mark;
neither will I reject thee for some miscarriage, since thy affections are bent
toward me, and thy constant aim is my glory.

To conclude, Longest thou for the joys of Habakkuk, David, and the rest of my
Saints? continually petition me to be endued with the same Holy Spirit, which
my Father will give to them that ask him; Luke 11.13.
and to support thee in thy Prayers? Remember, and rely upon these my promises,
John 16.14.
Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. For, I am sent to
comfort all that mourn, to give unto them beauty for ashes, Esaias 61.3.
the oil of joy for mourning. The ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come
to Zion with Songs, and everlasting joy, and gladness, and sorrow and sighing
shall fly away. Esaias 35.10.


Soul.
Lord, Kiss me with the kisses of thy Mouth, for thy love is better than Wine.
But O diseased Creature that I am, Cant. 1.2.
what shall I do? or what will become of me? The uncovering of one malady
discovers more; and my infirmities, like the Oil in the Widows Cruse,
multiplies upon me: So that in me is verified, the complaint of thy Prophet,
The whole Head is sick, and the whole Heart faint, from the sole of the foot,
even unto the head, there is no soundness in it, but wounds, bruses, Esaias 1.5.
and putrified sores. I had no sooner bewailed my want of love, but my
misgoverned hatred torments me. No sooner I accused my self for worldly and
exorbitant mirth; but carnal sorrow and servile fear overwhelms me. Whereas
those that love thee, hate evil; yea, every false way, with the workers
thereof, and that with a perfect hatred. Psalm. 97.10.119.104.139.22.
My cursed nature, with the fool, hates knowledge. Yea, and him that rebukes,
being like to those wicked Israelites, Prove. 1.22. Amo. 5.10. Micah 3.2.
the Prophet Micah speaks of. That hate the good, and love the evil. Whereas I
should be humbled, and penitently chatter, thus with David, I am troubled,
Psalm. 38.6.
I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long, neither is there any
rest in my Bones, because of my sin. And also be so much affected for thy
glory, as to cry out, yea to die with Phineas his Wife, 1 Samuel 4.21.
because the Ark of God was taken. Or be able to say, that Rivers of Waters
have run down my Eyes, because Men keep not thy Laws? Psalm. 119.136.
My carnal and sinful disposition is ready to make me mourn, and hang down the
head with Haman; Esther 6.12.
to be sick and heavy with Ahab; yea, to grieve and die with Nabal, and
Achitophel, for being crossed in momentary honors, 1 Kings 21.4. 1 Samuel 35.27.
2 Samuel 17.23.
in covetous desires in my estate, or any other my designs. And whereas the
filial fear of God should be continually in my heart, and before my eyes, (for,
Happy is the Man that fears always) following herein the blessed example of
holy David, whose daily Song was, Prove. 28.14.
Fear the Lord all ye his Saints; of pious Joshuah, whose tender Heart feared,
and trembled at the words of the Law; 2 Kings 22.11.
and of Religious Nehemiah, who was zealous for the Commandments of the Lord.
I have, Nehe. 13.8.
with those Collonies of strangers planted in the City of Samaria, 2 Kings
27.33,
Feared the Lord, and served my Gods, that is, My pleasures and vain lusts. Or
if at any time I have dreaded thee, or been humbled, it has been either whilst
thy Judgments have been threatened with the numerous Ninivites; or, when they
have layn sore upon me, Jonas 3.5.
with the Philistines; or, 1 Samuel 5.12. Exo. 10.17, ^0
until they were removed with wicked Pharaoh. Thus (dear Savior) do all my
affections degenerate, and err from that end for which thou have placed them
in my Soul. O thou which by thy omnipotency did convert Water into Wine; work
the like miracle in me also. So changing me in quality, relish, and use, that I
may both now, and hereafter, be thought worthy to be admitted unto thy Table, O
spiritual Bridegroom.

Christ.
Raise up thy dejected Spirits, and disconsolate Soul. For such is the goodness
of my nature, and the infiniteness of my mercy, that these thy grievous
maladies, instead of provoking my displeasure, move me unto pity, and convert
my justice into compassion. I am the Physician of the Soul, and come to heal,
not the whole, but the sick. Mat. 9.12.
I am he that grants Resurrection to the Dead in Sin, as well as to the dead
for sin. And am as able to give Manasseth newness of life, as Lazarus a new
life. Therefore be not faithless, but believe. Thou complainest to me of an
evil and degenerated hatred, that is ready upon all occasions to take up arms
against God, Good-men, and goodness. Indeed this is dangerous, but not
incurable. Was not my Servant Paul a cruel Persecuter before a zealous Martyr?
yea, and thousands of the Jews, my Murderers, before my Converts? Be confident
then, that my love is also able to swallow up thy hatred, and to perfect this
grace of love in thy life, which it has begun in thy desires. Further, whereas
thou art troubled and molested with the frequent inundations of carnal, and
worldly sorrows; Know that the reason thereof is the want of depth or scowring
of the lower watercourse, even that Channel of thy Repentance, which is as it
were the drayn of this filthy Lake, and muddy affection. Acts 5.^1.
To the performance of which duty, that thou may be enabled, and assured,
Know it is I that gives Repentance unto life, Acts 11.18. Ezekiel. 33.11. 2 Pet.
3.9.
not willing the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent and live.

Lastly, Let not thy former slavish fear discourage thee; since all things
(even these thy corruptions) through my mercy shall work together for thy good.
Romans 8*28.
My Law having by these terrors prepared thee for my Gospel, which, seeing by
my grace, thou have received, be assured, that that perfect love which it
produces, casts out fear, and will free thee from all such base
affrightments; 1 John 4.18.
possessing thee of that legitimate fear, which flows from duty, and adoption.
In further assurance of which, receive, and apply this my promise; They (namely
thee, and all my faithful) shall be my People, Jerem. 32.38, 39.
and I will be their God, and I will give them one Heart, and one Way, that
they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and their Childrens children.

O thou my spiritual Elisha! what shall I render unto thee, for this thy great
cure wrought upon my Soul? Soul.
for this thy miraculous cleansing of my sinful Leprosy? Are the Talents of
Ophir, the fruit of my Body, of my ground, or of my Flocks, a fit Sacrifice for
thee? No, Thine is the Earth, and the fullness thereof. Psalm. 24.1.
I will therefore imitate that religious Proselite, Naaman, and give Glory to
the Lord God of Israel, 2 Kings 5.15.
I will offer unto thee thanksgiving, and pay my vows unto thee, O most High.
Yea, my understanding which thou have enlightened, Psalm. 50.14.
my mind which thou have instructed, my conscience, which thou have pacified,
my memory which thou have strengthened, my affections which thou have ordered,
and my stony heart which thou have mollified, and all things else that are
within me, shall bless thy Holy Name. Yea, Psalm. 103.1.
I will invert the speech of thy Servant David, and say who am I, and what is
my poor Soul, 1 Chro. 29.14.
that I should be able to offer unto thee thus willingly? and after this sort
(Lord I confess) all things come of thee, and of thine own have I given unto
thee, wherefore let what is mine of grace, and thine of merit, be thy only
glory. And now since I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord which am but
dust and ashes, Let not the Lord be angry, Genesis 1^.27.
and I will speak yet again. Thou have been pleased to give unto me light, in
darkness, and to make known unto me thy great Salvation; Thou have filled me
with thy goodness, and mercy, and laid up in my heart the infinite treasure of
thy promises; But what avails all this (Lord) when as the Thief (Satan) may
break through and steal, the Moth (my in^bred corruptions) may devour and
consume these my spiritual riches; there being no defense nor power in me to
resist. The Souls complaint of her senses, tongue and members of her body.
For those Cinque ports, and Windows of my Soul, my senses, stand wide open,
not only admitting, but inviting my cruel Enemies to enter. Yea, every Member
of my body is not only assistant, to my adversaries, Sin, the World, and the
Devil; but also takes up arms against me, and seeks my destruction. My eyes,
which from outward objects (even thy beautiful works) should be instruments of
begetting admiration, praise and worship to thee in my heart, are full of
vanity, lust, and adultery. My ears which should only be open to thy Word, are
thereto deaf, and receptacles, of oaths, blasphemies, lies, slanders, and all
obscenity. And those other senses of tasting, smelling, touching, which thou
have given to be helps in piety, and thanksgiving, through the more ample
fruition of thy Creatures, are become the factors of pride, covetousness, and
epicurisme. Further, my Tongue, which should speak of thy praise all the day
long, Psalm.. 35.28. Psalm. 51.14. Psalm. 10.7. Psalm. 12.3. Psalm. 5.9. Psalm.
50.19. James* 3.6.
and sing aloud of thy righteousness, has mischief under it, and speaks
proud things. Is full of flattery, and frames deceit. And is fraught with
naughtiness, and lying. Yea, it is a Fire, a World of iniquity, setting on Fire
the course of nature, and is set on Fire of Hell. So that, that Member which
was once my glory, is now my shame.

Lastly, my hands and feet which ought to be Barnabasses, and Barjonasses,
Brethren, and Sons of consolation, in respect of righteousness, and charity,
toward my poor Brethren, are rather like Simeon and Levy, Brethren in cruelty,
full of iniquity, and ready to shed blood. So that O Lord, having so many wide
breaches in this Bulwark of my Soul, through which mine Enemies continually
enter, how can I with quiet, and comfort of heart, relish, and feed upon thy
promises, obey thy Commandments, and cease to grieve thy holy spirit? May I
not justly fear the miserable lot of that wretched back-slider in thy Gospel,
into whom the unclean Spirit which was gone out, Luke 11.24.
returned, bringing with him seven other Spirits worse than himself; So that
the last estate of that Man was worse than the beginning? Wherefore, sweet
Jesus! since thy Body as well as thy Soul suffered for me, let thy Consolation,
Sanctification, and Salvation be extended to both in me also, that being not
particularly, but wholly thine, and at one in my self, and with thee, I may
wholly and only praise and serve thee.

That sin has miserably metamorphosed thy Body, Christ.
and shamefully deformed, mislead, and corrupted thy Members, is true, (O my
well-beloved:) And no marvail; For thou wast shapen in iniquity, Psalm. 51.15.
and in sin did thy Mother conceive thee. And, Who can bring a clean thing out
of an unclean? Not one. Yet be not thou discouraged, Job 14.4.
nor dismayed, for though thou art a Naaman, I will be thy Elisha. Yea, to save
such sinners am I come. What though thou be even white over with Sins
Leprosy, 1 Timothy 1.15.
I am thy High Priest to heal thee, and pronounce thee clean. Have I cured thy
Soul, doubt not the cure of thy Body, since all my works are perfect. And if I
gave freely, and unaskt, forgiveness of sins, together with health of Body to
many, whilst I walked upon Earth, shall I not much more give thee spiritually
both also? When as I raised up Lazarus, I could have left his Soul, still
spiritually dead; for I give many health of Body, to whom I deny Salvation. But
to whom I grant spiritual life, Mat. 6.33.
(as unto thee) I bestow all lesser things, as included in the greater. So that
having said unto thee, as once unto the Cripple, Thy Sins are forgiven thee,
thou may be confident that thou art healed of thy spiritual lameness, Mat.
9.2, 6.
strengthened to arise from thy couch of Sin, and enabled to walk in the ways
of godliness, toward thy heavenly home; as having the Image of holiness
imparted upon all thy members, and the marrow thereof running throughout all
thy bones: The Trees root being quickened, the Body thereof must needs
flourish: And thy Soul being sanctified, all the parts of thy outward Man must
needs wax green in an holy conversation, and bring forth fruits unto
righteousness. Jam. 3.12.
As a Fountain at the same place cannot send forth sweet Water and bitter, no
more can the members, and consequently the actions, which as streams proceed
from a regenerate Soul, be polluted, and impure. Notwithstanding what has been
said, that thou may be firmly established, and assured of this truth,
receive, apply, and lay up these my gracious and particular promises.

Have thine Eyes been full of Sin, vanity and Idolatry? Esaias 17.7.
thou shall now look to thy Maker, and thine Eyes shall have respect unto the
holy one of Israel. Art thou spiritually blind, and can make no good use of
outward objects? Revel. 3.18.
I will anoint thy Eyes with Eye salve, that thou may see my goodness. Are
thine Ears closed up to my Word? Now shall the Deaf hear the words of my Book,
Esaias 29.18.
and the Eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and darkness. Yea,
thine Ears shall hear a Word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk thou
in it, when thou turnest to the right hand, Esaias 30.21.
or to the left. Further, have thy Nostrils been inlets, and entertainers of
vanity? Exhautasting the sweet of my Creatures for the serving of sinful
pride, and voluptuousness? Henceforth thou shall make them serviceable to thy
Soul, not thy sense only, but thy mind also, being by them delightfully
recreated; imitating herein my beloved Spouse in the Canticles, Who from the
natural perfumes of Spices, and sweet Flowers, Cant. 5.13.
and the distilling sweetness of fragrant Lillies, does affectionately meditate
of, and set forth the excellencies of my Word, and Ordinances, and the
mellifluousness of my promises and instructions. Yea, thou thy self also shall
be sweet unto me in thy obedience, and good works, which are an odor of a
sweet smell, Phil. 4.28.
a Sacrifice acceptable, and well-pleasing unto God.

Next, thou complainest that thy Palate is naturally the Cook, and factor of
Epicurisme, Drunkenness, and Gluttony; be of good cheer, for thou shall now
experimentally confess, That Man lives not by Bread only, but by every Word
that proceeds out of the Mouth of God. Mat. 4.4.
Neither shall thou labor any more for the Meat which perishes, John 6.25.
but for that Meat which endures unto everlasting life, which I the Son of Man
will give unto thee; for my Flesh is meat indeed, and my Blood is drink indeed.
John 6.55.
But in this spiritual nourishment, remember, that it is the Spirit that
quickens, the Flesh profits nothing. Have thou formerly pleased and glutted
thy self with dainties, even to my dishonor, John 6.63.
and the abuse of my Creatures, Thou shall now hunger and thirst after
righteousness, and be both blessed, and filled: Mat. 5.6.
For I am the Bread of Life, he that comes to me shall never hunger, and he
that believes on me shall never thirst. Yea, thou shall be able to make a
spiritual, John 6.35.
as well as a natural use of my Creatures, cheerfully, and tastingly, saying
with my Espoused Church, that in respect of my delightful, and all-surpassing
graces, Cant. 2.3.
I am as the Apple Tree amongst the Trees of the Wood, and that my Fruit is
sweet unto thy taste. And with my Servant David, that my words and judgments
are sweeter than the Honey, Psalm. 119.103. Psalm. 19.10.
and the Honey Comb.

Further, has thy Touch been a snare unto thee? and administered fuel to thy
corruption? Have thy Hands and Feet been slow in my ways, but swift to commit
iniquity? Has thy Tongue been silent in my praises, and a ready Advocate, and
Pleader for Sin? Know, my command is gone forth, and my gracious Decree is now
efficatious, to strengthen the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees, to
make the lame Man leap as an Heart, Esaias 35.3, 6.
and the tongue of the dumb to Sing, and say, Praise the Lord, call upon his
Name, Esaias 12.4.
declare his doings amongst the People, make mention that his Name is exalted.
Now shall thy hands with my Spouse in the Canticles, drop with the precious and
sweet smelling Myrrh of holy and fervent endeavors; shaking off their former
sinful sloth, Cant. 5.5.
and drowsiness. Now shall all those Members which thou have heretofore yielded
as Servants to uncleanness, Romans 6.19.
and to iniquity, be Servants to righteousness unto holiness. For, whilst thou
weart in the flesh, The motions of Sin, which were by the Law, did work in thy
Members to bring forth fruit unto Death; Romans 7.5, 6.
But now thou art delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein thou weart
holden, that thou should serve me in newness of Spirit, and not in the
oldness of the Letter, as being a Member of my Body, of my Flesh, and of my
Bones. Lastly, Ephesians. 5.30.
Art thou ashamed of the nakedness of thy Body, as being the Mirror, yea, the
effect of thy Souls wants? Know that thou (in the loins of thy first Parents)
weart not more willing to lose and cast off that robe of righteousness, than I
am to restore, and give thee a better. As I then clothed thy naked Body, so I
will now cloth thy naked Soul. Have thou been a Prodigal? behold thy Heavenly
Father (for my sake) does embrace thee, in the arms of his mercy, Luke 15.22.
and covers thee with the best robe of my righteousness. Have thou been a
vagrant, and wanderer in the Highways of sin, and bypath of iniquity, an
Alien to the Commonwealth of England? Mat. 22.9.
Lo now thou art an invited Guest unto my Heavenly Palace, Eternal Feast, and
endless Nuptials, being arrayed with the Wedding, and glorious Garment of my
Immaculate Holiness. These are those Garments, whose smell is like the smell of
Lebanon, and whose sent is Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia. Cant. 4.11.
Whose excelling sweetness does overcome the stench of thy sins; Psalm. 45.8.
perfumes thy best actions, and make thee an acceptable Sacrifice to God.
Yea, it makes thy Body like Moses, and Stephen's face, glorious upon Earth.

Esaias 52.1. Psalm. 132.16.
Is it not I that gives beautiful Garments to Sion, and that cloth her Priests
with Salvation? That council Men to buy of me white Rayments, that they may be
clothed, and that the shame of their nakedness do not appear? Revel. 3.5, 18.
That have promised to Him that overcomes, The same shall be clothed with
white Raiment, That appoint unto them that mourn in Sion, Esaias 61.3.
to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the Garment
of praise for the Spirit of heaviness. Wherefore O my redeemed, be thou no
longer solicitous and doubtful of thy blessed estate, only believe, and thou
shall see the Salvation and glory of God. John 11.4. Psalm. 51.1.


O Lord thou have opened my Lips, therefore my Mouth shall show forth thy
praise. Soul.
I will greatly rejoice in thee O Lord, my Soul shall be joyful in thee my
God; for thou have clothed me with the Garments of Salvation, thou have
covered me with the Robe of Righteoousness: Esaias 61.10.
Even as a Bridegroom decketh himself with Ornaments, and a Bride adorneth her
self with Jewels. Therefore as thou have freely given me all, so I desire
thankfully to enjoy all to thy glory. To which end, assist me with thy grace,
that these Eyes which thou have enlightened, may always devoutly behold, and
admire thy works. That these Ears which thou have opened, may be for ever
dutifully attentive to thy words. And that these other senses which thou have
rightly disposed, and ordered, may continually obey thy will, and exalt thy
praise? Yea, these my weak hands which thou have lifted up, my feeble knees
which thou have strengthened, my sliding feet which thou have kept from falling,
shall readily observe thy precepts, and run in the way of thy Commandments,
because thou have enlarged my heart. Finally, Psalm. 105.1.
Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory. For of thee,
through thee, and to thee, Romans 11.36.
are all things, to whom be glory for ever, and ever, Amen.

I have here Dialogue-wise (for the more profitable and particular handling of
things) briefly and plainly showed, how many rare and precious gems are
treasured up in this Ark of the Covenant, the Prophetical office of our
Savior, as also how graciously, and comfortably, they are offered to, and
received by the hand of faith, to the benefit, and Jubilee, of every true
Believer.

It remains now, that according to my former method, my Meditations pass on
unto the last object and foundation of faith, the Kingly office of our Savior;
which is as it were the tegment, and compleatment, of our salvation. For we are
therefore reconciled, and justified by our Priest, taught, and sanctified by
our Prophet, that we may obey, and be protected, and governed, in this life, by
our King, and be for ever glorified with him in the life to come.

If Men enter the presence of Earthly Princes with much civil reverence, with
what divine worship, honor, Of Christ's Kingly Office.
adoration, and admiration, O my Soul, ought thou to enter the presence of
the King of Kings; and meditate upon his wonderful acts, and office? This is
one of those glorious mysteries, which the Holy Angels desire to look into,
yea, with which their sublime understandings are, and shall be for ever
delighted, busied, and ravished. How fervent then, should thy thoughts be, yea,
in humility how earnestly should thou like Jacob, strive with God by Prayer,
to give thee this blessing also; that with the Eye of thy faith (together with
those blessed spirits) thou may pry into this Supreme, and perfect Monarchy
of the Prince of peace and righteousness.

A King is the desire of most Nations; yea, those Barbarians which are ignorant
of all other rules of life, and civility, do notwithstanding acknowledge the
Maxim of a Sovereignty, and (as bound by a Cannon Law of nature) do willingly
subject their Necks to this Yoke* Is rule and dominion then necessary? so
desirable, and profitable in civil societies? So much conducing to the
flourishing of a Commonwealth? Surely it is much more requirable, and
beneficial for the well-governing and flourishing of the Church. In which as in
a Kingdom, there is a mixture of good, and bad; Enemies within, and without;
and those the most powerful, pernicious, and malicious of all others. As also
many Laws to be observed, rewards to be conferred, corrections and punishments
to be inflicted. Granted then it must needs be, (for these respects sake) that
the Universal Church which is a Body; a spiritual, holy, and glorious
Monarchy, must have a glorious, a wise, and omnipotent King, and Protector.

Would thou now, O my Soul, see him, and know him? Lo thy Mother, and his
Spouse, calls thee, and all other longing Souls, to view his tryumphs, in these
words: Go forth, even with fervent affections, O ye Daughters of Zion, that
is, all ye pure and fruitful ones in the Church of God; and behold, that is,
apprehend with a lively faith, King Solomon; that is, the Lord Jesus Christ,
Cant. 3.11.
the true Solomon; with the Crown wherewith his Mother crowned him in the day
of his espousals; that is, in his glorious state, wherewith his Father has
invested him; after that by his death, and resurrection, he has redeemed, and
married us unto himself in holiness and righteousness. And that thou may have
further knowledge, assurance, and testimony, of this thy King, and Savior,
hear the joyful Predictions, and unerring demonstrations, of the Prophets. In
the life of old Jacob, we have that he spoke at his death, these faithful
words, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between
his Feet, until Shilo come, Genesis 49.10.
and unto him shall the gathering of the People be. Heb. 7.14.
Now it is evident, that our Lord sprang out of Juda. Further, Moses drawing
near to his dissolution, Prophesies, and that from the Mouth of God, That God
will raise them up a Prophet like unto him. Deuteronomy. 18.18.
Now Moses was not only a Prophet, but a King. He was King in Jesurun. Deuteronomy.
33.5.
In the next place, hearken to the mellodious and foretelling Hymns of the
royal Psalmist, David; who knowing that God had sworn with an Oath to him, that
of the Fruit of his Loins, according to the Flesh, Acts 2.30.
he would raise up Christ, to set on his Throne; At once beholds his Seed, his
Savior, and becomes the Herald of his King, Psalm. 132.11.
his Son, thus Proclaiming; I have set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion. And
again, The Lord said unto my Lord, Psalm. 2.6.
set thou on my right hand, Psalm. 110.1.
until I make thine Enemies thy Footstool. Of him also the Prophet Esaias, thus
Prophesies, Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the
Government shall be upon his Shoulders, Esaias 9.6.
and his Name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the
everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; of the increase of his Government, and
peace there, shall be no end. Zachary also remarkably points him out, and that
not only verbally, Zac. 9.9.
but by certain actions of our King; Rejoice O Daughter of Sion, behold thy
King comes unto thee, he is just, and having Salvation, lowly, and riding upon
an Ass, and upon a Colt, the Fool of an Ass. Lastly, lest the testimonies of
Men should seem weak, the premulgation of Angels shall conclude, and that
undeniably, this holy and comfortable truth: Behold says the Angel Gabriel to
the blessed Virgin, Luke 1.31.
Thou shall conceive in thy Womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall call his
Name Jesus, he shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest, and
the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David, And he shall
reign over the House of Jacob for ever; Mat. 2.2.
And of his Kingdom there shall be no end. Again, as his Birth and Kingdom
over the Jews, yea, over the whole World, was foretold by the Angel, Luke 2.11.
so correspondently they were proclaimed by an Angel, and seconded by a
multitude of the Heavenly Host; saying, unto you is born this day in the City
of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord.

O my Soul, I have hitherto like John by the finger of the Prophets, pointed
out unto thee, thy King, thy Savior, John 1.36.
The Lamb of God which takes away the Sins of the World. It is expedient, and
time now, that with Andrew thou follow him home, and by the eye of thy faith
take a particular view of his excellencies, administrations, John 1.39.
and government: That thy heart being bedewed with those many comforts,
benefits, and blessings, which descend therefrom, may with those ravished Jews
in the Gospel, Mark 11.9, 10.
cry out, Hosanna, blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord; Blessed
be the Kingdom of our Father David, that comes in the Name of the Lord;
Hosanna, in the highest. And also sing with that Heavenly multitude, Salvation
unto our God, which sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb; Blessing, and
glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, Reve.
7.10, 12.
be unto our God, for ever and ever, Amen.

Proceed then O my Soul! and diligently consider, first, how thy King governs
amongst his Subjects; Secondly, how he rules and reigns over his Enemies; and
lastly, how in that great Assize, he shall execute his last Judgment, and
translate his Kingdom on Earth to Heaven; there establishing, and fixing, a
glorious, and tryumphant Monarchy, even for Eternity.

The wisest Heathen (whose choicest flowers of learning and knowledge were
gathered out of our Paradise of God, the Scriptures) styled their Kings,
Pastors of the People. That the Spirit of God uses the like Metaphor, and that
it might well be, that they stole it from thence, may be supposed from these
places amongst others. The Psalmist glorifying God for the deliverance of his
People out of Egypt, concludes thus: Thou leddest thy People like a Flock by
the hand of Moses and Aaron. Psalm. 77.20.
And the same Moses, near the ending of his life, desires God to appoint his
Successor, Numb. 37.17.
That the People be not as Sheep which have no Shepward. Michaiah Prophesying
of Ahab's death, and the overthrow of his Army, says; That in a Vision, he saw
all Israel scattered, a Sheep that have no Shepward. And the Lord, by the
Prophet Esaias, 1 Kings 22.17.
promising his People a deliverance from their Captivity by the means of Cyrus;
even many years before his birth, ^aith thus of him, He is my Shepward, and
shall perform all my pleasure. Esaias 44.28.


Surely, as there is good cause to commend the Heathens choice and application
of this Metaphor: So aabove all, to admire the infinite wisdom of the Spirit
of God, as the Original; who under this similitude comprehends and discovers
the whole duty of a religious Prince, and Governor; as that like a Shepherd,
he is to feed his People, to lead them, to fold, and keep them from straying,
and to protect them from those Wolves, and wicked Enemies that seek to destroy
them. See all this expressed in that woe pronounced, by the Spirit of God against
the Shepward of Israel, that do feed only themselves. Should not the Shepwards
feed the Flock? Ezekiel. 34.2, 4.
The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have you healed that that was
sick, neither have ye bound up that that was broken, neither have ye brought
again, that that was driven away, neither have ye sought that that was lost.
But with fierceness and with cruelty have ye ruled them. Seeing then that the
Lord himself commends unto us this humble vocation, offering it as a Glass unto
Princes, his Viceroys upon Earth, therein to see their duties; It will neither
be unfit, nor unprofitable, to meditate and consider the office and actions of
the Lord of Lords, even our Lord Jesus Christ under the same Metaphor. And the
rather, 1 Peter 2.25.
because St. Peter gives us a Precedent; who styles him the chief Shepward, and
Bishop of our Souls; and more especially for these reasons: First, because God
the Father so calls him often in Scripture; witness that Prophecy of Ezekiel,
saying, Ezekiel. 34.23.
I will set up one Shepward over them, he shall feed them. Secondly, he so
names himself, and with abundance of affection, and delight, and prosecutes and
applies the similitude, saying, I am the good Shepward, and know my Sheep, and
am known of mine. And lastly, whatsoever he in that Chapter, John 10.14.
or elsewhere applies to himself, in the office of a Shepward, does most aptly
agree with his Kingly administration. But to make this more clear, Is it the
duty of a King to govern, and direct his People by good Laws? Which though
written, yet are as it were his lively, fixed, and continued voice. And is not
this verified of our King, the Shepward of Israel? Who says, that to Him the
Porter opens, and the Sheep hear his voice; John 10.3.
that he calls his own Sheep by name, and leads them out. Is it the duty of
a King to protect his subjects, to reward them, as well as to restrain, and
overcome their Enemies? And is not this true of our good Shepward, Who gives
his life for his Sheep? being not like the hireling, John. 10.12.
who seeing the Wolf coming, flies, and leaves the Sheep. Yea, all blessings
temporal, and spiritual, abound to them that are admitted into his Fold. For he
promises, that if any enter therein, he shall be saved, John 10.9.
and shall go in and out, and find pasture. Lastly, is it the office of a King
to see and judge of the actions of inferiors; to give dignity and honor to
the well-meriting, and obedient; and to inflict punishment, and death, upon
rebellious offenders? See this also made good by Gods promise unto us, under
the rule of our only Shepward, Christ Jesus; Saying, Behold, even I will judge
betwixt the fat Cattle, Ezekiel. 34.20, 25, 26.
and the lean; and I will cause the evil Beasts to cease out of the Land. And I
will make with them a Covenant of Peace. And I will make them, and the places
round about them, a blessing. And I will cause the showers to come down in his
season; there shall be showers of blessings. And as concerning the last, and
General Judgment, our Savior speaking of the ordering of Persons before his
Trybunal; and the parting of his true Subjects, from Rebels, the good from the
bad, still alludes to the office of a Shepward; and says, that he will
separate them one from another, as the Shepward divides the Sheep from the
Goats. Mat. 25.32.
Having, for the better and more comfortable illustration of our Saviors
Kingly Office, thus far traced this similitude; let us now O my Soul, by faith
take a nearer and more serious view of this his glorious function, as it
manifests it self in the excellency of his Person; and in the uprightness, and
perfection of his Laws; as also in all those gracious effects which flow from
so divine a dispensation. That from them (God assisting in the application)
thou may reap that saving fruit which grace offers, and thou expectest.

As the Basis, and Pillar of Peace, and tranquillity, Of Christ's Government.
in a Commonwealth is good Government, consisting of upright Magistrates, and
just Laws: So the defect of either ushers-in present ruin, and destruction.
This position is not only verified in civil estates, but in the spiritual
Regiment of the visible Church. Which whilst it was governed by the Spirit of
Christ, and was obedient to his injunctions, attained to a Meridional height of
quiet and glory; witness the times of Solomon, Hezechiah, and Josiah. But on
the other side, when that there was no King in Israel, and every Man did what
was right in his own Eyes, how was their Land and Church filled with
bloodshed, Idolatry, and vanity? witness the Book of the Judges. O let their
miseries, make us beware, and let us learn wisdom from their destruction. ^et
their ill-succeeding rebellions, incite, and hasten us to do Homage at his
Footstool, whom the Lord has set King upon his holy Hill of Sion. Psalm. 2.6.
And to kiss him with the kiss of reverence, obedience, and worship: Let us
meditate of him all the day long, and let our Mouths be filled with his praises.

O how truly are we happy in thee O Lord Jesus! according to that of the wise
Man, Meditation of the excellency of his Person. Eccles. 10.17.
blessed art thou O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles. Is there any
Nobility like unto thine, will any boast of, or derive his Pedigree with thee,
who art the ancient of days? the dew of the Morning? the Morning Star, and in a
word, ^he Fountain of honor? what are the greatest of earthly Princes, but thy
Viceroys? Conduit-Pipes to convey any favors unto the Children of Men? For,
Prove. 8.15.
By thee Kings Reign, and Princes Decree justice. And from thee pro^^eds the
sentence, which makes poor, and makes rich, 1 Samuel 2.7.
^rings low, and lifts up. For thou art that only begotten Son of the
Father, before all beginnings, who then can declare thy generation, for thy
Birth is hid in Eternity?

Nor art thou not only glorious in thy Father, but in thy self also? for thou
art God of God, equal with God, and therefore art not only a wise, merciful,
just, and holy King over us: But wisdom, mercy, justice, and holiness it self
unto us. Witness this, in that thy gracious invitation to thy spiritual Feast,
where wisdom has builded her an House. Prove. 9.1.
As also in the former Chapter, I am understanding, I am strength. Further, thy
Spirit, in the Mouth of thy beloved Apostle, 1 John 4.8.
testifies, that thou our God art love. Jerem. 23.6.
And thy Prophet Jeremy foretold to us, that the Name whereby thou should be
called, is the Lord our righteousness. As for the last, the Prophet David
styles thee so in many of his Psalms, Psalm. 13.4.
singing thus, O ye Saints of his, give thanks at the remembrance of his
holiness. To whom the Saints in the Revelation answer, and second with this
triple acclamation, Revel. 15.4.
Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabbath.

O my Savior, my King, my beloved, let me feed a while here amongst these
Lillies. Cant. 2.3, 5.
Let me sit down under this thy shadow, and let thy fruit be sweet unto my
taste! O stay me with Flagons, comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of love?
Who is like the Lord our King on all the Earth? Is there any People, or Nation
alike happy with us Christians, whose God and King is the Lord?

I should now proceed to view and admire that golden Scepter, those his
righteous Statutes, by which he governs and directs us his People. But that my
Soul possessed with a holy fear, lest any thing should nullify my right unto my
Sovereigns protection, stops me with these objections; As that I am not only
the Son of rebellious Adam, but also an Alien to the Commonwealth of Israel;
as being not sprung from the loins of Abraham, nor from any of the Sons of
Jacob, but from the unbelieving Gentiles. Lastly, that I am outlawed by my own
actual transgressions; and therefore may rather expect punishment, than any
favor, happiness, or privilege by his Government. As to these, I answer with
the Apostle; The Jews, because the Seed of Abraham are not all Children: But
the Children of the promise, Romans 9.7, 8.
are counted for the Seed; Wherefore Abraham is called the Father of the
faithful; Neither is he a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that
Circumcision which is outward in the Flesh: But he is a Jew which is one
inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart, in the Spirit, Rom 2.28, 29.
not in the letter: Also he is a light to enlighten the Gentiles, as well as
the glory of the People Israel. Again, my being a sinner, is so far from
disabling my right to the Lord Jesus, that by the hearty and penitent
confession thereof, I am entitled unto his pardon, and mercy; witness his own
Proclamation, He came not to call the righteous, Mat. 9.13.
but sinners to repentance: as also that Prophecy of his Office, That he
should be a light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death,
Luke 1.79.
to guide their erring Feet into the ways of peace?

Since then my Lord the King, I have ten parts in thee, and thou art Bone of my
Bone, and Flesh of my Flesh. Since thou tookest not on thee the nature of
Angels, Ephesians. 5.30.
but the Seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.6.
that thou might be as a merciful High Priest, so a true and natural head
of thy Body, the Church; that King that shall reign in righteousness, Esaias
32.1. Psalm. 2.6.
and whom God has set upon his holy Hill of Zion: Let me find favor in thy
sight, and be enrolled as one of thy Servants. Let thy glorious Scepter
moderate me, and let me be acknowledged one of thy Subjects. Then shall I sit
under my own Vine, and my own Fig Tree, then shall I be truly happy, yea, my
Soul shall be filled as with marrow and fatness, for what King is like unto
thee in all the Earth?

The Walls and Rampires of a Commonwealth are good Laws, by which, as by a
fortified horn-work, Gods Laws comm^nded.
or Cyttadel, the good are preserved, and the enemy hindered, and repulsed. Is
this an approved truth? How happy, and how safe then is the Flock of Christ,
the Monarchy of the Messiah, the Commonwealth of Christians, the spiritual
Jerusalem, to whom that promise is made good, as signifying the presence, and
righteous government of our Emanuel: That the Lord will be unto her a Wall of
Fire round about, and will be the glory in the midst of her. Zac. 2.5.
The Statutes of other People are but the weak inventions of Men. But the
Ordinances by which we are swayed, are the words of holiness, of wisdom, even
of the Lord himself. From God the Author.
So that no desirable quality can be wanting, in such Laws, wherein exact
justice, and religious policy, kiss each other. So that to us now, made one
Church with the believing Jews, may those gracious speeches of Moses be
applied, Surely this great Nation is a wise and understanding People; For what
Nation is there so great, Deuteronomy. 4* 6, 7, 8.
that has statutes, and judgments so righteous, as his Laws, which he has set
before us; or who has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all
things, that we call upon him for? Yea, he loved his People, all his Saints are
in his hand, they sat down at his feet, every one shall receive of his words;
For the Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir, unto them he shined forth
from Mount Paran, and he came with ten thousand of Saints; Deuteronomy. 33.2, 3.
from his right hand went a firery Law for them.

From their Antiquity.
The Heathen gave no small honor to Antiquity, as supposing it had something in
it of Divinity; and therefore they would willingly forget the Original both of
themselves, and of their Laws, that to after Ages they might set upon them the
stamp of a Deity. What they affected vainly, we must affirm truly, both of our
selves, and Laws: For the proof of the first, we have not only a sure word,
viz. that God made Man of the dust of the Earth, Genesis 2.7.
after his own Image, and breathed into his Nostrils the breath of life; But
also the witness of their own Poets, Aratus.
honorably backed by an Apostle. In Him we live, Acts 17.28.
move, and have our being, for we are his offspring. For the other, I will not
only say what Laws, but what Learning expressed in characters can be voucht so
ancient as the Penteteuch of Moses? Wherein observe not only our Laws of
venerable Antiquity, but also most clear, manifest, and undeniable proofs, and
demonstrations of their Divine fluence and constitution. As the burning, and
quaking of the Mount Sinai, the summons of the Heavenly Trumpet, Exodus 20.18.
the visible presence of the Lord God, like consuming Fire on the top of the
Mount* But above all, the audible voice of God, pronouncing those ten words, by
which we are governed, as containing his whole will, and our whole duty.
Lastly, all these wonders, are not confirmed unto us by the bare witness of
Moses only, (although he being Gods Penman had been sufficient;) but as then
six hundred thousand souls were Auditors, and Spectators, so ever since, that
whole Nation, and now the Universal Church do receive, believe, and reverently
obey them; as the undoubted truth of God, and rule of holiness.

Now that these happy Laws, From their Holiness.
recorded in the whole Book of God, are not only the first, ancientest, (and
therefore the foundation, original, and fountain of all other constitutions)
but also the best, and holiest, as being the lively Oracles of prudence, and
sanctify it self, appears first by the matter which is perfect, according to
that sweet Psalmist, The Law of the Lord (that is the whole Word of God) is
perfect. If perfect, Psalm. 19.7.
then free from all carnal imperfections. Here Is no Political winking at the
least, or at some commodious offenses; nor hiding places for any sinner, nor
exception and prerogative for Kings and Princes. The wilely head of Man cannot
invent sins, without its precinct, neither can the critical wits of Atheists,
or worldly wretches, blemish it* with the least aspersion of injustice, or
severity. So that as there is in them no defect, so no redundancy, being
profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for instruction in
righteousness, 2 Timothy 3.16.
That the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good works.

Further, as they are perfect, so are they sure; so that holy Singer, The
Testimonies of the Lord are sure, Psalm. 19.7.
making wise, the simple. The Ordinances of the World are subject to change,
as being the inventions of unconstant Man, and not only in their frame and
substance, but also in their number, construction, and execution. So that true
experimental wisdom can never be learned from them. But the Laws of God, as
flowing from an everlasting, and wise essence, who is without change, or shadow
of change, admits of no alteration, mis-interpretation, sleeping, or repeal.
And therefore teaches a Man wisdom, Prove. 23.3.
a priori, in the cause of punishment (Sin.) So Solomon; A prudent Man
fore-sees the evil, and hides himself. Again, The Commandment is a Lamp* and
the Law is light, Prove. 6.23.
and reproofs of instruction, the way of life. In the last place, let holy
David, as he began to prove this truth, so conclude it, even upon his own
experience; Through thy Commandments thou have made me wiser than my Enemies,
Psalm. 119.98, 99.
for they are ever with me, I have more understanding than all my Teachers, for
thy Testimonies are my Meditation.

Again, as the Laws of God are sure and perfect, so they are right; as sings
the same Prophet, The Statutes of the Lord are right. Psalm. 19.8.
And can there be a greater excellency; since the justice of a Law, is the
sinnues thereof, they binding but so far forth as they are righteous? Who is
there then amongst the Rulers of the Earth,) that in a proper sense dares give
this title to their Ordinances? Comparatively indeed, and as paralleled with
others, they may boast of their equity. But none in a superlative height, in
the abstract, and truth of perfection, can be said to be just, but the
Commandments of God; which by common consent are the best rule, and touchstone
of all others. To prove the indirectness of humane constitutions, reason it
self demonstrates. For Man cannot be righteous, Job 15.14.
that is born of a Woman; much less his actions, his behests, as being also the
offspring of a sick brain, and streams flowing from a most impure Fountain. If
we desire examples to confirm this, we need not wander out of Divine History,
where we shall read of the cruel edict of a Pharaoh, Exodus 1.22.
to drown the innocent males. Of a Nebuchadnezzar, to burn to Ashes religious
Idoll-haters. Dan. 3.6.
Of a Darius, to devour with Lions the frequent worshippers of God. Dan. 6.7.
Matt. 2.16.
Of a Herod, even a second Pharaoh, to offer up by death those Lambs, the happy
Proto-Martyrs, and Contemporaries of our Savior. Should I convert my
Meditation into an History, as I could never want examples of Man's unjust
Decrees, so never Incke for my tears would supply that defect.

O if the bare Relation, move to pity, and to mourning? how great is the
sorrow and anxiety of my mind, that oppresses those Souls, which lie under the
burden of such a tyranny? surely it is ineffable. From hence, by the rule of
contraries, I conclude the exceeding mirth, and happiness of that People, whose
Laws are Maxims, and Patterns to all others; whose God and King is the Lord,
whose judgments are true, and righteous altogether. So that if happiness can be
separated from joy, then may joy be devorc'd from such a Government. Wherefore
as the Prophet extolls the divine quality, the Statutes of the Lord are right,
so he omits not to point out unto us the no less gracious effect, Psalm. 95.1, 3.
they rejoice the heart. O come therefore, and let us sing unto the Lord, let
us make a joyful noise unto the Rock of our Salvation, for thou Lord art a
great God, and a great King above all Gods; thy Throne is for ever, Psalm. 45.6.
and the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a righteous Scepter.

Thus O my Soul, passing by, thou have taken a view of the beauty of those
divine Laws, by which Christians are governed. If the Heathen Ptolomy accounted
them the Jewel of his Library, and at their translation into the Greek Tongue,
was even ravished in the observation of their supernatural wisdom, and Majesty:
How ought we Christians to be affected, who by more than an Historical faith,
(as I have proved) look upon them as the Statutes enacted, pronounced, and
engraven in lasting Tables, by God himself, and also confess them. As for
antiquity, to be the ancientest, and most venerable; so for their matter, the
perfectest, purest, and most righteous of all others. It remains now, that thou
glance over some of their effects, and so proceed. I have observed already
their work upon the understanding. They make wise the simple; as also upon the
affections. They rejoice the heart. I will note only three affections more
which they beget in us; Love, fear, and hatred of all wickedness. That they
frame in us even an ecstasy of love, the Psalmist proves by that his Pathetical
expression, O how I love thy Law, Psalm. 119.197, 127.
I love thy Commandments above Gold, yea, above fine Gold, they are sweeter
also than the Honey, or the Hony-Combe. That they create in us an holy filial
fear, appears, in that the holy Spirit makes it a chief motive to stir us up to
the hearing of them, Psalm. 19.10.
Psalm. 34.11.
Come ye Children, hearken unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
As also the confession of David, My Flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am
afraid of thy judgments. As fear, so hatred of all wickedness, springs out of
this Seed-plot of grace; As the offer, and fruition of a most beautiful Wife,
is the best remedy to make a Man hate an unclean strumpet, so the discovery of
the pure splendour of Gods Law, unvailes the nakedness, and pulls off the Visard
of Sin. So the same Psalmist, Through thy Precepts I get understanding, Psalm.
119.104.
therefore I hate every false way? Lastly, as these powerful Statutes of God
are thus effectual in the illumination of the understanding, and the inflaming
of the affection; So also in the subjecting, and changing the will, making it
of a nilling, a willing will. But here forget not (as also in all the rest)
that the Law works only these effects in us, as being the Scepter of Christ's
Government (and linked with the Gospel.) Which considered, we may confidently
aver, that the Prophecy is fulfilled; That the Lord shall rule (by his Law) in
the midst of his Enemies, Psalm. 110.1, 2, 3
and the People shall be willing in the day of his Power.

Thus having viewed by the eye of faith (according to the weak measure of grace
given unto me) my gracious Sovereign in his presence Chamber of the Prophets,
and also learned out of that Magna Charta, that Royal Statute-Book, Gods Word,
not only what is his revealed will, and rule of Government, but also the
unparalled and excellent properties thereof; I proceed to meditate of, and to
be instructed in those three principal actions of our King toward his natural
and true subjects, viz. his Protection, and victory over their Enemies;
Correction and Remuneration; Of our Protection.
of which, severally and succinctly.

Man once the Lord of Earth, a favorite of Heaven, traveling from the
peaceful Jerusalem of Gods gracious instructions, to the accursed Jericho of
his own sinful lusts, and appetite; and in that way destitute of the
All-mighties guide, and protection, fell amongst these Thieves, the Devil, the
Flesh, Sin, the World and Death, who having spoiled him of his greatest
treasure, his Graces; and divested him from all his former honors, leaving him
not half dead, but altogether: Left him, did I say? I would to God they were in
this so Thief-like; But alas! such is our misery, that our loss concluded not,
but began our wretchedness; and our Enemies, Haman-like, slaughtering us not
out of gain, but out of envious malice, are so far from leaving us, that they
are always vigilant to smother even the least motions of life in us. But
blessed be the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has sent his only begotten
Son into the Wilderness of this World, clothed with our flesh, and made like
unto us, a merciful High Priest; who (like that good Samaritan) finding us
thus wallowing in our own blood, has not only restored us to a new life, but
poured the Sovereign Oil of his comfortable promises into our wounds. Making us
safe all the time of this life's sickness, under his own royal, and gracious
protection; until his next return to our glory, and all our Enemies confusion.

Fear not then (O my Soul) the strongest of thy Enemies: No, not that
Leviathan, that great Dragon* A Protection from Satan.
that crooked Serpent, King over all the Children of pride. For, The Seed of
the Woman has broken this Serpents Head: And the Devil shall be cast into
Hell. Genesis 3.15.
What though he be the Prince that rules in the Air? for his number, Legions;
for his strength, a Principality, a Power, a Lion; and for the depth of Policy
and malice, styled the Ruler of Darkness, and also the accuser of the Brethren;
yet know, he is but a Creature, and thy Saviors Vassal. For, By Him were all
things created, Colos. 1.16.
that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible, or invisible, whether they
be Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, or Powers. And he that made him, can
make his Sword approach unto him. And though the number of fallen Angels be
great, yet the number of the Elect Angels, its likely are far greater, at
least, their Power greater, as the issue of that great battle in Heaven, if
literally taken, Rev. 12.7.
illustrates. So that thy eyes being opened by faith, there are more that are
with us, than against us. Rev. 5.5.
Christ is that Lion of the Tribe of Judah; 1 Cor. 1.24.
our Sampson, to destroy that roaring Lion the Devil; the wisdom of the
Father, and the light that not only enlightens our darkness, John 1.5.
but dissipates, and puts to flight the darkness, and subtilties of Satan; 2 Timothy 2.5.
the only Mediator betwixt God and Man; the Son of God, Col. 1.13, 15.
the lover, and friend of Men; The Brother of the Brethren. To conclude, he it
is (to thy comfort) whom the Father has set at his own right hand in heavenly
places, Heb. 2.11, 12, 13.
far above all those Principalities, and Powers, Ephesians. 1.20, 21.
and all might, and dominion: Who has spoiled these Principalities, Col. 2.15.
and Powers, and made a show of them openly, tryumphing over them, even on his
Cross. Therefore rejoice ye Heavens, and ye that dwell therein; for now is
come salvation, and strength, and the Kingdom of our God, Rev. 12.10, 12.
and the Power of his Christ: For, The accuser of our Brethren is cast down,
which accused them before God day and night.

From Sin.
Do I expect thee O my Soul, to be a companion of this Heavenly Quire? Why then
do I hear thee utter nothing but mourning, and as it were keep time with sighs?
Such a Song admits not of a burden, I will not bear a part with thee, since in
thy tears, (as in a mirror) I see Hanibal ad portas, another Enemy at thy
Gates. At thy Gates, did I say? nay entered, and within thee; so that now thy
sobs methinks are vocal and articulate, groaning out nothing, but such sad
captive complaints as these, I am carnal and sold under sin; O wretch that I
am, Romans 7.14, 24,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? O my Soul, though thy fear
questions, yet let it not make thee despair of a Deliverer; say, I thank God
through Jesus Christ our Lord, 25.
whom he has sent to be thy Savior, even in the midst of this fiery Furnace.
So that like those Votive Martyrs, though with the Flesh thou obeyest, and art
environed with sin, yet with the Mind thou servest the Lord. I am not
ignorant, that like to the City of Ai, Josh. 8.9.
there are behind thee ambushes of thy first Parents transgression; before
thee, the Armies of thy many actual offenses; on both hands of thee, the wages
of sins, of commission, and omission; yea, that the Infantry of thy inbred,
and original corruptions; have not only taken, but begun to Fire thy outworks:
Yet fear not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, Exodus 14.13.
for these spiritual Egyptians, thy Enemies, which thou have seen in this short
day of thy life, and travail, thou shall see no more for ever; since the
Chariot-wheels of their strength shall be taken off, and in conclusion, their
selves shall be drowned, and hid in that red Sea of thy Saviors precious
blood. Wherefore, armed with a holy and Jehu-like severity, command, 2 Kings
10.25. Josh. 10.22.
as Joshua once the five Kings, so these, the heads, and chief of these thy
Enemies to be brought forth, and let them be slain with a Christian
magnanimity, even with that two-edged Sword which proceeds out of the mouth of
the Lord. Revel 19.15.


Fear not with Gedeons stripling, Christ ove^comes Adam^ sins Judge. 8.2^.
that Goliah-like transgression of Adam, though as a second Briarius his many
Armies of Pride, Blasphemy, Rebellion, Unthankfulness, Discontent, Curiosity;
yea, all manner of wickedness seem to threaten Heaven. Neither quit thy ground,
though he brandish against thee that curse, that Cherubs flaming Sword, in the
day that thou eatest thereof, Genesis 2.17.
thou shall surely die. Let him strike, yea, let the stroke wound thee, and
bring thee upon thy knees; yea, let the wound send forth floods of penitent
tears, for this thy fall shall be thy rise; this thy humiliation, thy greatest
exaltation. This is that Weapon that gives both death, and life. For this thy
misery is become the object of that infinite mercy, which not only rescues
thee, but sheathes this his mortal Sword in this thy Enemies bowels. Since by
Man came death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the dead. For, as in Adam
all die, 1 Cor. 15.21* ^^.
even so in Christ shall all be made alive: And lest he should again revive, as
Joab did to rebellious Absalom, He again pierces his heart with these three
Darts; As by the offense of one, 2 Samuel 18.14.
judgment came upon all to condemnation; Romans 5.18.
even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all unto
justification of life; for as by one Man's disobedience, many were made sinners;
so by the obedience of one, Verse 19.
many shall be made righteous: That as sin reigned unto death, even so might
grace reign thorough righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord.
Verse 2^.


From Original Corruption.
That Cloud is dispersed. But behold a greater storm arises: even such a one, as
not only shakes, and endangers the Battlements of a Christian conversation, but
blows up the foundation. When an Enemy besieges, he ever is within view; But
if he take a Bulwork, he gains possession, and the loss seem irrecoverable.
Adams sin imputed, like a furious adversary surrounds, beleagures, and shatters
the whole Fort of Man. But that Original corruption, that holy David complains
of, as conceived, and born in, by propagation, makes nearer approaches, and
undermines the Mud-walls of our Flesh, taking possession of the Tryangular, and
chiefest Cyttadel; which once yielded, he fills every sconce of the sense, with
Armed Lusts, and mounts through every Loop-hole, a murdering piece, which
continually roares against Heaven. And as for the Chief Commander, Colonel,
and Mustar-master, the understanding, will, and memory, having put out their
Eyes, it makes them in the Dungeon of Ignorance, grind (like Sampson) at the
Mill of Lust, and fleshly desires.

Thus miserable, and seemingly irrecoverable, is our estate in Nature, whilst
our inbred corruption, that strong Man, keeps the hold. But let us not be
discouraged, for the Lord Jesus, who is stronger than he, is come upon him,
Luke 11.22.
and has overcome him, taking from him all his Armor wherein he trusted, and
dividing his spoils, being sent by God in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and
for sin, Romans 8.3.
to condemn sin in the Flesh; which Victory He obtained by his Death. For in
that he dyed, he dyed unto sin once; Romans 6.10.
so reckon we also our selves, as being baptized into his Death, to be dead
indeed unto sin, but alive unto God, Romans 6.3.
through Jesus Christ our Lord; Thus being made free from Sin, Romans 6.11.
we are become the Servants of righteousness; Romans 6.18.
neither has Sin any more dominion over us, as being not under the Law, (which
is the strength of Sin) but under Grace, Romans 6.14. 1 Cor. 15.56.
the moving cause of our Salvation.

Further, this total and spiritual Leprosy is in Scripture termed a general
pollution of the whole Man. Ezekiel. 16.6.
In which sense, how many sweet and gracious promises, does the Old Testament
offer to the faith of every true Believer; poynting out unto us (with the
Angel) when in a far more despicable, and desperate estate than Hagar's Ismael,
a Spring, a Well of living Water. Zacha. 13.1.
In that day (which is the day) there shall be a Fountain opened to the House
of David, and to the Inhabitants of the Spiritual Jerusalem, for sin, and for
uncleanness. And lest with that Cripple in the Gospel, we should be unable to
make trial of the Virtue; nay, because we are with that miserable Infant in the
Prophet, Dead in sins, Ezekiel. 16.6. Ephesians. 2.1.
and trespasses. Therefore he adds, he will say unto us, live, which agrees
with his immediate Word, in St. John's Gospel, The dead shall hear the voice of
the Son of God, and they that hear, shall live. Nay, which is more, John 5.25.
he will become our spiritual Physician, and Chyrurgion to heal, to wash, to
cleanse, to circumcise, to anoint us; witness this his own promise, Ezekiel. 36.25.
viz. Then will I sprinkle clean Water upon you, and ye shall be clean, from
all your filthiness, Verse 26.
and from all your Idols will I cleanse you; a new Heart will I give you, and a
new Spirit will I put within you; and I will take the stony Heart out of your
Flesh, and I will give you an Heart of Flesh; and I will put my Spirit within
you, Verse 27.
and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do
them.

O thou which art my Joshua, my Jesus, and have cast out, and destroyed my
Cananitish lusts; Ejaculation.
leaving only some few tributaries to try my obedience, and to be as pricks in
my sides, that I might not sleep to death in security; grant me thy strength of
grace, more and more to prevail over them, though they have Chariots of Iron,
Judge. 1.19.
as being strong corruptions, and inhabit the Valleys, as being ambushed in a
deep, and deceitful heart. Enable me O Lord, either to destroy them, or to
make them Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water to the House of my God; that is,
serviceable to thy spiritual Building, and Temple, which I am. Let Avarice be
turned into a coveting of spiritual things; Excess in thy Creatures to a
repletion with thy Spirit; Worldly sorrow, which works death, unto godly
sorrow, not to be repented of; Love of Earth to a love of Heaven. O my gracious
Physician, what ^ee have I, or is great enough for this spiritual cure, or
rather miracle? a resurrection from the dead; Lord thou have given me all,
therefore I have nothing to give. Yet though I cannot give, I will do right,
and render as to Caesar, so unto God, what is his. My Soul bears thy impress,
thy Image, and is therefore passant in Heaven. Wherefore when thou please,
embanck it there in glory.

From actual Sins.
The greater an offense is, the more severe, and weighty the punishment. This
rule of proportion giving both a being, and splendour to distributive Justice.
Whisperers and murmurers against a State, are not prosecuted with so much
rigor, as the openly rebellious; Nor according to the judgment of truth it
self; Luke 12.47
shall the ignorant Servant be beaten with as many stripes as the presumptuous
offender. Blessed Savior, even in this maxim of humane Justice, there is
(though in weak and faint shadows) a glimpse and representation of thine,
(Man's well doing and best of action, being but an imperfect imitation of thee,
a most pure and universal act) which balances our faults, and retributes to
each, his due weight of punishment. Thus righteously judging, that if causeless
anger, be in danger of the judgment, then approbrious, and disgraceful
speeches, such as thou fool, Matt. 5.22.
being a further degree, and an accursed fruit of the former, shall be in
perril of an Hellfire. So Paul, because a Persecutor through ignorance,
received mercy, when as Julian an Apostate, and wilful sinner, died a
Blasphemer. Lord, I have laid this train, to blow up my self. O let thy
conviction in justice, (like a storm before a calm) forego thy absolution in
mercy. Righteous Judge, if that thy mortal sentence has already attached me,
as Adam's Son, as Adam's Image, yea, I have pleaded guilty; shall not my
numberless actual transgressions, meriting that other curse of thy Law, make me
therefore as deserving thy double curse, liable to a double punishment? Yes
surely, unless miserable wretch, infiniteness, and eternity, will not admit of
an addition. If one single act, the breach of one Injunction, that which the
Papists, and others (though erroneously) would have no sin, or at the most a
venial sin, that which is mine, not by personal commission (as not then in
esse) but as it were by consanguinity, by imputation, from Adam, my root,
fountain, and transactor; If this O Lord, as formerly it is sufficiently
evinced, has not only arraigned me at the Bar of Justice, but cast me as
guilty of high Treason, and worthy of eternal punishment; and not only me, but
those without the Pale of the Church (unless God be merciful to them) who have
not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgressions, that is, Romans 5.14.
as some interpret) actually; How ponderous and excessively weighty, shall my
judgment appear in Justice scale? How shall her Rods be converted into
Scorpions? How shall the same hand, and power that inflicts, in respect of
durance, an eternal, yea, in all respects (if we measure by the Creatures weak
apprehension) an infinite suffering, magnify it self in the augmentation of
pain, according to our increase, actuality, and agedness of sin; adding as it
were infinite, to infinite, and making me to be unhappily so also, that is
capable of it, and able to subsist under its just pressure.

O my God, I walk in this my vale of misery, like the Egyptians through the red
Sea, before me is thy clouded countenance, and wrathful indignation, ready to
give the watch word to my execution. On the right hand, and the left, stand the
towering, and threatening Waves of my sinful omissions, commissions, and
deficiencies, ready (as the Psalmist speaks to swallow up, and flow over my
Soul; and behind me the pitchy darkness of horror, and punishment waits to
entombe me for ever. O my Savior, being thus like Abijah, 2 Chronicles. 13, 14.
encompast with the Ambushes of my Enemies, like fallen David, immurde within
his triangle of judgments, what shall I do, but imitate them, in their crying,
and conversion unto thee, saying with him, I have sinned, 2 Samuel 24.14.
I am in a great straight, let me fall into the hands of thee, O Lord, for thy
mercies are great.

O faith, as thou have an eye, so thou have an ear too; wherefore give
attention. For thy King named thy Jesus, because he shall save his People from
their sins, even he who only on Earth has power to forgive sins, Matthew. 1.21.
makes his answer in the mouth of the Psalmist, Matthew. 6.6.
even to be the echo of thy submissive Petition: The Lord forgiveth all thine
iniquities, Psalm. 103.3, 4.
and heals all thy diseases, and redeemeth thy life from destruction, and
crowns thee with loving kindness. O miracle of goodness! how experimentally,
and thankfully ought I, with that penitent Saint, to publish thy excelling
mercy, since I had no sooner said, Psalm. 32.5.
(that is intended) I will confess my transgression, but thou forgavest me the
iniquity of my sin.

Come hither, come hither all ye true Israelites, whom the sight of these
Philistines, and their armed Troops (ready for the Battle) have made you to
tremble, 1 Samuel 14.1.
and to hide your selves; Behold your Standard-Royal, your Prince, your true
Jonathan; for him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince, Acts
5.31.
and a Savior; for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins; who
has trodden the Wine Press of Gods wrath alone, and of the People, there was
none with him: And Jonathan-like, with incredible pains has assaulted the
Adversaries, our sins ruining their Fort, Isa. 63.3.
viz. the curse of the Law, for the strength of sin is the Law, 1 Cor. 15.56.
being made a curse for us: where by dying, he has put to death, all our
Enemies, according to that of the Apostle, in whom we have redemption through
his blood, Gala. 3.13.
even the forgiveness of sins, Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.20.
having made peace through the blood of his Cross, in the likeness of sinful
Flesh, and by sin, condemning sin in the Flesh. Romans 8.3.


Further, he is not only the God of the Valleys, but of the Mountains also;
having not only overcome for us our infirmities, but all, even our Mountainous,
our scarlet transgressions; witness his promise; though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow. Again, I will be merciful to their
transgressions, Isa. 1.18.
and their sins, and their iniquities, Heb. 8.12.
will I remember no more. To conclude this point, this his great Victory, as it
tryumphs over all sins, so it is not confined to some times, or Persons, as he,
so it, being the same in efficacy, yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8.
as testifies St. John; If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous, he is the propitiation for our sins, 1 Ep. Joh 2.1.
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole World.

O all powerful Victor, Contemplation.
upon whose thigh is written King of Kings, Lord of Lords; who art gone forth
conquering, and to conquer: leading captivity captive; Revel. 19.16. Rev. 6.2.
and receiving gifts for Men; forgiving all our trespasses, and blotting out
the handwriting of Ordinances, Psalm. 68.18.
that was against us: taking it away, and nailing it to thy Cross; who have
spoiled these Principalities, and Powers, Colos 2.13, 14, 15.
and made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it. My Soul! thy
offspring like Jephtha's Daughter, Acts 17.28.
with the melodious harmony of gratefulness, and praise, runs forth to meet
thee, my Father, my Savior; Judge. 11.34.
earnestly desiring to be offered up unto thee, as a thanksgiving: Judge. 13.20.
and with Manoah's Angel to ascend to thy presence in the flames of pious
affections. Did Moses, Miriam, Exodus 15.21.
and the rest, with Timbrels, and dances, magnify their delivery, and thy
Conquest over the drowned Egyptians; and shall not my Music of gratulation be
tuned to an higher key? my Song be raised to a loftier pitch; whose numerous
Enemies thou have drentcht, not in a red Sea of Water, but of thy infinitely
precious Blood? Did the Virgins of Israel, by their penetrating acclamations
(as it were) engrave this glorious Inscription on their Champions forehead,
Saul has slain his thousands, 1 Samuel 18.7.
David his ten thousands? How ought my ejaculatory Prayers to pierce the
Heavens, and meet thy ears, who for my sake, have slain not thousands, but
millions of thousands, yea millions of millions? Those protections were
corporal, these spiritual; those by mediate Instruments, this by thy Self;
those were temporary, this eternal. O omnipotent goodness! since my finite
being, cannot extend, nor proportion an acknowledgment requisite to thy
infinite merit, accept (as in other duties thou art pleased) my desire, which
continually sigheth for an infinite expression. And as thou have (O thou which
art that Stone cut out without hands, Dan. 34.44.
that Cornerstone of thy Church) by thy self bruised the Head of the Serpent,
that Goliath, Satan; Pet. 2.4, 6.
slain and disbanded all his Troops, my sins; yea, Genesis 3.15.
choakt them in the Sea of thy blood: be further pleased, that their gall being
broke (that is their guilt, and bitterness extracted) they may for ever be
covered with those crimson waves, and be sunk down deep, and entombed into that
gulf of mercy, that the eye of justice may never view them, nor its power raise
them again to my destruction.

How fitly and consonant to the word of truth is the Church upon Earth, Over
the world.
called militant; her Children Soldiers, Isa. 40.2.
their life a warfare, and their spiritual graces the armor of God? Amongst
which, how aptly is faith made our Shield, 2 Cor. 10.4. Ephesians. 6.16.
and preferred before the rest, in the Apostles Discipline? Above all, take the
Shield of Faith* For whereas the breast plate, safe guards that part, the
Helmet secures the Head, the other pieces the inferior Members, the Shield of
Faith is a moving, an ubiquitary defense. Sometime it interposes it self (as
you have formerly heard) to save the Head, that is, the understanding, and the
rest of the Superior faculties, from the fiery darts, which those spiritual
wickednesses in high places throw down upon us. Ephesians. 6.12.
Sometimes it is opposed breast high in defense of the affections, against the
deceitful allurements and assaults of the World; as shortly shall be showed.
And in the conclusion of this spiritual combat, when the Enemy grovelling under
our Feet, puts forth his mortal sting of death, etc. descends and receives it,
where fixed, it carries it in triumph, to our spiritual home; so that, O death
where is thy sting? O Grave where is thy victory? 1 Cor. 15*55,
But of this in its place.

The particular Church of Israel in her transmigration into Canaan, is a type
of the Church Universal, seeking an Heavenly Canaan, and warring for her
spiritual inheritance. As it was with them, so with us. There is, during our
whole lives peregrination, no intermission of Arms; every true Christian being
environed about with implacable, and malicious Enemies; being in respect of
malice, as well as local position, in the midst of the World: so that every one
of us has cause to groan out David's Lamentation, Woe is me, that I sojourn in
Mese^k, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar, Psalm. 120.5, 6.7.
my Soul has long dwelt with them that hate peace; I am for peace, but when I
speak, they are for War.

Further, this our adversary the World, is not only numerous, but politic, and
treacherous; not only using open hostility, and giving forcible assaults, by
the power and persecution of wicked Men, but it lays many invisible ambushes of
pleasures to entrap us; and by her plenty of riches, and large offers, and
mundane honors, causes oft-times defection, and treason, in the leading, and
chief commanding faculties of our Souls. This is the civil Christians Dallilah,
which lulls him asleep, on the Pillow of security, afterward degrades him of
his strength, and glory, his excrementitious, and formal performances; and then
delivers him up to shame, and destruction. The Poets Bellona, is but a fiction,
a representation of this Monarchess. They ascribed wisdom and arms to their
Goddesses. And are not both these (I mean carnal sensuality and Devilish
wisdom) backed and seconded with the power and malice of Hell, James 3.15.
and wicked great ones, with the glittering Scepter, and bloody Sword, with
which she awes her Empires? The Lord knows, and we are not ignorant of this. O
let humility be chief mourner, and our pity write in tears how many of Gods
Worthies have either been betrayed by her treachery, or over-prest, and borne
down, by her persecuting power.

To give life to Meditation, I will add some few authentic examples, that our
hearts being awakened with the fearful thunder of their falls, may watch and
pray, lessening, if not wholly preventing the danger. The Worlds 1 Dart. The
Lust of Uncleanness.
O Solomon, how do I, admiring thy excellencies, want words to measure or
express them. O thou which wast the Son of a Prince, as good, as royal, and in
truth, as well as in name a Jedidiah, the beloved of God; whose large and
divinely inspired wisdom extended far beyond thy Empire, though great; yea, 2 Samuel 12.24.
beyond the Worlds circumference in thy Metaphysical heights, prying into the
secret excellencies of spiritual Essences; yea, of God himself, that unbounded
and unsquared Circle, without a Center; who wast a Pillar in the House of God,
yea, a most lively Figure of the Son of God; as in thy knowledge, so in the
peace, riches and glorious splendor of thy Kingdom. I might add more, but
that this makes thy precipice thy downfall sufficiently, yea, miserably and
fearful: Thee did this Sorceress, this gorgeous Strumpet, the World,
fascinate, and cause to drink a deep carouse, even to the Dregs of her
poisonous, and sinful fornications. Where drunk with Idolatry, and libidinous
sensuality, thy bright Sun had set in the black Cloud of shame and damnable
Apostasy, had not the unchangeable, 2 Samuel 7.14.
and free love of the Father of mercies, raised thee from that deadly Lethargy,
and made thee to the comfort of all Elect ones, even in thy lives declination,
shine bright to the whole Church, in thy Ecclesiastes, thy recantation.

2 Dart. Riches.
Thus far, by way of experiment, and discovery of the dangerous, and bewitching
quality of this our Circes first potion; the second follows. I mean that truly
and properly aurum potabile, with which she not only benums the Souls superior
faculties; but as being the heaviest of metals, depresses it to the Center (if
Hell be there) without repentance. I will instance but in one example of many;
and that no mean one; even a Child of the Prophets. O unhappy Gehazi, the more
unlucky, because once most happy; 2 Kings 5.20.
who amongst the Sons of lapsed Israel, though free born, were blessed like to
thee? A servant, yea, a fellow Servant, with Kings and Angels: What Eye in that
Infancy, 2 Kings 3.13.
and twilight of the Church, was glutted with so many Miracles, like thine?
What Ear entertained and devoured so many heavenly Sermons? 2 Kings 6.17.
Nay, what Soul had its Wings stronglier impt by holy Instructions, better
advantaged in its rise to take a flight from Earth to Heaven, from holy
example, then thine? O unworthy proficient! Thy Master unyoakt himself from his
Oxen, 1 Kings 19.19.
for Gods service; and will thou forsake thy God, and Master, for the yoke of
covetousness? Thou did, O bewitched wretch; and therefore justly did an
hereditary, and visible Leprosy, witness thy inherent and invisible
hypocrisy; 2 Kings 5.27.
a formal Hypocrite, and a white Leaper, being very like and fit concomitants.

Although all Mankind consist of one, and the same matter, and constituting
parts, yet do not all, yea, few of many, by reason of the defect of Organs, or
general grace, attain to a like sublimity of mind and ayriness, of affection.
For there be some few, who well*wing'd with natural abilities, and moral
virtues, become Creatures of a middle Region, and delight not with the Ant, and
Mole, the covetous, and more sensual sort of Men, formerly spoken of; to dig
and delve, and crawle upon the Earth; to live to feed upon her gilded
entrails. These high soaring Larks may seem at the first view to be free from
the danger of our Fowler, did not experience and example show us them taken in
her day-nets, whilst they stoop at her ever turning and falsely shining Glass
of honor.

Oh Naman, blessed wast thou in thy Bodies sickness, 3 Dart. Honors. 2 Kings
^.1.
because the occasion of thy Souls health. The mercies of the Lord never go
single, or alone. Behold Twins: The Prophet undertakes thy Body, the Lord
heales both, and makes thy liberality, and valor shine more splendently, as
being fixed in the highest Sphere, Religion: Elisha's God, Jehovah, Verse 17.
being now preferred before thy Kings, thy Nations Idols; and the dirt of
Israel petitioned for, yea, more esteemed, than the Gold of Syria. Yet the Lord
has a few things against thee, and this strumpet the World, has given thee a
blemish at parting: witness the record transcribed from thy mouth, wherein thou
coveted'st (which agrravates thy offense) not the conferring, but the
continuation of mundane honors, by a dispensation, to be present at Idolatrous
service. The Prophet prayed for thee, as respecting thy Infancy, and God I
doubt not was merciful unto thee, as ascenting thy affection, giving thee
either a better resolution, or repentance unto absolution.

My Meditations might now lead me through some thousands of years, and both
from the word of truth, as also from Ecclesiastical and civil Histories cite,
many worshippers of this royal Idol. I might point out two eminent and worthy
Counselors, Nicodemus, John 3.2. John 19.3^.
and Joseph of Arimathea, who both were Night-disciples to our Savior, for
fear of the Jews, and losing their terrene preferments. As also many other
Rulers, and great Men, who the Evangelist taxes to have loved the praise of
Men, more than the praise of God. John 12.43.
But one trial, as well as many, is sufficient to prove the virulency of this
poison, of whose enmity and antipathy to salvation the Lords own words shall
both conclude and confirm: How can ye believe, which receive honor one from
another, and seek not the honor that comes from God only. John 5.44.


Having now laid honor in the dust, the utmost date of her Pattent; I should
proceed to speak of our last and general Enemy, Death; but that even in the
chaws thereof, the World has laid a fourth ambush, of blood-thirsty and
persecuting Hamans, and unbrotherly Amalekites, to assault every true Christian
in his peregrination to our Heavenly Canaan. Of these therefore next in our
Meditation. 4* Dart. Persecution.
Were the Soul of a Christian corporeal, or could force bend her knees, and
elevate her hands, with their Bodies to Idolatry; could it determine, and have
an end by the Sword, Gibbet, Fire, or chawes of wild Beasts: or be blasted and
defaced by the scandalous reproaches of slanderous tongues: surely the Israel
of God had been as Sodom, and Gomorrah; a byword, a nothing, without
succession, upon the Earth. And as once the old World, so it; these Waters had
overwhelmed it, Psalm. 124.3,
these streams had gone over our Souls. They (even the wicked of the World)
had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. Then the
proud Waters had gone over our Souls: Verse 4.
But blessed be the Lord, Verse 5. Verse 6. Verse 7.
who has not given us as a prey to their Teeth; The Snare is broken, and we
are escaped; escaped did I say? yet (the Lord knows) many not without a fall,
without loss, sometimes of their stuble-works; sometimes of some gems,
ornaments; and degrees of grace, and spiritual comforts; sometimes of their
good name, precious time, and glorious professions.

Blessed Peter, as thou were the first of the Apostles, so the first of
Professors, that denied thy Master. Glorious was thy confession, Mat. 16.16.
Mat. 26.74.
thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. Ignominious thy denial, I know
not the Man. Oh that the apprehension of Death should make thee deny thy life!
that thou should more fear a Cross, John 14.6.
than value a Crown! Yea, the most Orient of Diadems, that of Martyrdom. But
when the Lords back was toward thee, and thy self-love had maskt his
beautiful Image in thy heart, I wonder not at thy tergiversation, and counter
motion. As these spiritual desertions obscure Christ, so they discover Man. The
same back-friend that would have counseled the Master, Mat. 16.12.
persuades and obtains in Peter, to save himself. From what, an incarnate
Devil? from Death? No, for who so will save his life, shall lose it; and thus
to dye, is to live for ever. What then causes this excentrical motion? Surely
self-love which declines that Center of all things, God, and his glory. This
Daughter of the Philistims, our flesh, Judge. 14.15.
rather choosing to betray her Spouse, her Sampson, than she, and her Fathers
House; this Cottage of Clay, should be destroyed with the Fire of Persecution.

Satan, that Prince of this World, is an exact Tyrant; and therefore has not
only seeming rewards to inveigle some, but racks, and tortures to compel
others, to subject to his thraldom. Such are those several sorts of
Persecutions, which for a time have made many of the Lords Worthies to seek
quarter. Peter fell not alone, though as most eminent, most eminently.

Blessed Savior, was not this the fury, Expostulation.
the Wolf that scattered the Sheep from thee the true Shepward of our Souls?
Where were the other ten Apostles, Mat. 26.56.
when thou wast condemned and crucified? I find none, but John, present at thy
Passion; and he there, rather as a Brother, and Kinsman, than as a Disciple.
For surely had he professed thee, thou had not suffered alone innocently, Isa.
63.3.
as it is written of thee. Where were the seventy Disciples, to whose faith,
and preaching, thou gave testimony with so many Miracles? Luke 10.11, 17.
Where those many thousands which are said to believe, which they themselves
also testified by their acclamations, confessions, and frequent attendance?
Were they not all reduced to a few, and as it were, metamorphosed into the
weakest Sex; Mat. 27.55.
a few Women, yea, and those thine at distance too, they stood afar off? Sweet
Jesus! did the faith fail of these ocular witnesses, these Champions of thy
truth? Yea, after thy glorious ascension in the Apostles age, do we find a
Demas? 2 Timothy 4.10.
In the Primitive, and in succeeding times, many holy Professors? yea, in this
our age, a devout Cranmer, and others? Who for a time shrunk from thee, or
rather from the chawes of this Devourer, this opposite to nature, this highest
Pin of Satan's wracks, this last and worst Enemy, Death; Disgraces, slanders,
loss of goods, yea, all other bodily tortures included, being but the
attendants and degrees to this. The Devil often in the Church makes his
observation good, that skin for skin, Job 2.4.
yea, all that a Man has, will he give for his life. What need then have we, O
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, which have not seen, yet believe, being therefore
destitute of the senses testimony, and want that Christian magnanimity, that
measure of grace and faith, which those first Combatants enjoyed, to fly unto
thy Standard, and to invoke thy assistance, and strength, against these worldly
Enemies? Which though invincible by nature, and the flesh, yet shall lie
headless, and vanquished under the Sword of thy Word, and Spirit. Witness these
holy Darts drawn out of that sacred Quiver, thy most Holy Word, already thrust
through the sides, and heart of this Absalom, this Rebel and Traitor to our
Souls; so St. Peter most sweetly, God has given us exceeding great and
precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4.
that by these we might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the World through lust.

Our Enemy, the World, marching against us in four battalions, as has been
formerly showed; three of which also the Apostle St. John, as God's sentinel
for our safety, has faithfully given us warning of, by this his discovery;
that all that is in the World, 1 John 2.16.
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of
the Father, but is of the World. It is time for us now, not only to prepare
for, but to begin the fight, and that with courage and cheerfulness; the Alarm
and onset being given by Gods own Spirit, animating and stirring up the
affection of our godly zeal, and anger, thus; Love not the World, neither the
things that are in the World; If any Man love the World, the love of the Father
is not in him. 1 John 2 15.
Know ye not that the friendship with this World is enmity with God? James 4.4.
whosoever therefore will be a friend of the World, is an enemy of God. Behold
also a Banner, even that which we have vowed to fight under, in our Baptism,
even the victorious Cross of Christ triumphantly displayed by that great
Christian Champion St. Paul; who thus encourages us by this his pious
exclamation, and example; God forbid that I should glory, Gala. 6.14.
save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the World is crucified
unto me, and I unto the World. See also our Leader, the Spirit of God, which if
our faith second, will make us trample upon the flesh, and all the volptuous,
and carnal desires thereof. For, Gala. 5.18.
if we be led of the Spirit, we are not under the Law, (viz. under the curse,
irritation, and condemnation thereof) for, they that are in Christ have
crucified the Flesh, Gala. 5.24.
with the affections and lusts. Yea, this our victory and deliverance is
assured to us, in that it was a special end of that great and acceptable
sacrifice offered to God by our Lord, and great Captain, Jesus Christ. Who as
the Apostle witnesses, gave Himself for our sins, Gal. 1.4.
that he might deliver us from this present evil World. Have thou such
encouragements O my Soul! On then, and assault the glittering front, the
foremost batallion of thy Enemy. Let this Arrow, taken out of the Apostles
quiver, give him the first encounter. The love of Money is the root of all
evil. Against Covetousness. 1 Timothy 6.10. Luke 12.13. 1 Cor. 6.10.
Let thy Saviors words be a trusty Scout to prevent ambushes; beware of
covetousness. Yea, let the victorious Sword of the Spirit give the deadly
wound; be not deceived, not thieves, nor covetous, etc. shall inherit the
Kingdom of God.

Here be not discontented O my Soul, nor stain the glory of thy Christian
Victory, by a worldly sadness, as though an ignominious poverty must be the
necessary consequent of forsaking the World, and conculcating her trash. No,
Christians have riches, which the Men of this World know not of; for they are
infinite, Ephe. 3.8.
and unsearchable. viz. The riches of faith, James 2.5. Of good works, 1 Timothy
6.18. Of liberality, 2 Cor. 8.2. The true riches of grace, of glory, Luke
10.11. Romans 9.23. These unvaluable treasures, God who is rich in mercy, and
Christ Jesus the Conduit of his mercies gives unto us, Ephe. 2.4.
Romans 10.12. 2 Cor. 8.9. For his mercies sake, Ephesians. 2.4. Sometimes immediately
by his Spirit, most frequently, mediatly by his Ministers. Yet, not without
this Spirit. Who as the Apostle speaks, though poor in the esteem of Men, yet
make many rich. 2 Cor. 6.10.
Thanks be to God for these his incomparable gifts.

Against sensual pleasures.
The next Troop of the Worlds Power, that faith proceeds to encounter with, is
led by voluptuousness. These (its true) as it were besiege the Christian Soul,
and encompass it. And if at any time by her pious force, she break through, and
discomfit their thickest rancks, even then, by asking quarter, they oft-times
obtain victory, crying out unto the zealous and lust-destroying Warrior, as
once the Tribe of Judah to David; thou art near of Kin unto us; 2 Samuel 19.13.
and as David to Amasa, thou art of my Bone, and of my Flesh; and with the
Syrian King, thy Brother Benhadad. 1 King. 20.33.
Therefore spare us, let us live, behold we are the delight of thine Eyes, the
Mistresses of thy Ear, the darlings of thy Palate, the Paramours of thy touch,
the perfumes of thy Nostrils. We are linckt in consanguinity with thy nature,
age, complexion, and calling. We are thy beloved, thy life, the life of thy
life, thy bosom companions. Thus, if they gain by these syrene Songs, but a
respit of execution, they shortly presume to become Counselors, advising in
the words of the Preacher; Rejoice O young Man in thy youth, and let thy Heart
cheer thee in the days of thy youth, Eccl. 11.9.
and walk in the ways of thine Heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes.

Thus these wicked, and subtle lusts get possession. But does the faithful
Champion here want courage, strength, or Weapons? No, animated with divine
assistance, (the regal Power of Christ) he advances the shield of faith, and
makes his Enemies feel the edge of that Sword, which they even now wounded him
with; viz. But know thou, for all these things, God will bring thee to
Judgment. Yea, he further adds, inverting the words of the Prophet, should I
let go out of my hand, 1 King. 20.42.
you that God has appointed to utter destruction; my life should go for your
life: for that she, or whosoever else, lives in pleasure, are dead whilst they
live; yea, 1 Timothy 5.6.
in their estates, as well as in their Souls. So witnesses the wise Man; He
that loves pleasure shall be a Beggar, and that spiritually, as well as
temporally; Prove. 21.17. Luke 8.14.
the good Seed being choked therewith. Further, as Israel to Adonibeze^h, so
the Christian Victor, as it were, cuts off the Fingers, and Toes, the speed and
power of his concupiscence; by instancing the multitudes of Gods own People,
that were overthrown in the Wilderness, which were for our example, as the
Apostle speaks, to the intent, 1 Cor. 10.6.
that we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted; by calling to
remembrance the recantation, judgment and repentance of wise King Solomon. Who
having enjoyed not only a common, Eccles. 2.10.
but an experimental and moral use of all the delights of the Sons of Men, yet
condemns them all as vile, and nothing worth; vanity of vanities, Eccles. 1.2.
all is vanity and vexation of spirit. Lastly, Eccles. 2.11.
by foreseeing the evil, and unseparable consequents, and Copesmates of
inordinate delights, James 5.5.
by the Apostle St. James his light, ( viz.) wantonness, riotousness, and
cruelty.

To conclude, every true Christian-Warriour is unconquerable; as being
entrenched, and fortified within the promises of omnipotency it self. Who thus
assures us, that they that walk in the Spirit, shall not fulfill (that is,
shall not be overcome by, or yield to, Gala. 5.16.
) the lusts of the Flesh.

Here some Laodicean, some lack-warm Professor, Object.
will perhaps sigh; and with Lot's Wife, be ready to look back toward their
pleasures, the Sodom of this World; complaining that Christians (by reason of
so rigorous a prohibition) are of all Men most miserable; and (as the World
esteems them) a sad stoical and melancholy generation of Men. Answ.
Let such mount their Meditations with holy David, and they shall enjoy with
him a Heaven upon Earth. Witness this his testimony, and assurance, applyable
and proper to every faithful Israelite* Thou will show me the way of life; in
thy presence is fullness of joy; Psalm. 16.11.
at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. My Soul here closes up this
second triumph, with a gratulatory Hymn of that blessed Psalmist, How excellent
is thy loving kindness O God! therefore the Children of Men put their trust in
the shadow of thy Wings; Psalm. 36.7.
They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy House, Verse 8.
thou shall make them drink of the Rivers of thy pleasures; For with thee is
the Fountain of life, in thy light shall we see light. Verse 9.


The Worlds third Squadron, viz. Mundane honors, renews and continues the
Fight, Against Honor.
with which the chief General, Satan, lays ambushes on the right hand, by
glorious Visions and Dreams of Signiories, with large promises of rule and
dominion; tempting us, as once our Savior, Mat. 4.9.
All these things will I give thee: and as he did Balaam in the mouth of
Balack, I will Promote thee unto very great honor. Numb. 22.17.
On the left hand, he assaults us by threatening, as also actual divesting; and
degrading us of our hereditary, or acquired titles, and preferments. So he did
to Moses. Who as the Apostle witnesses, refused to be called the Son of
Pharaohs Daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the Children of
God. Heb. 11.24.
So also to Daniel and the Three Children, Dan. 3.6.
who were deprived for a time of their Principalities, for their refractoriness
to Idolatry. In defense against the first assault, the pious Christian marching
under Christ's royal Standard, victoriously opposes his Shield of faith, with
which, and the Sword of the Spirit, he disorders and puts to flight his
Enemies; reverberating, and expulsing Satan's temptations, with the blessed
Virgins Antheme; God scatters the proud in the imaginations of their hearts,
Luke 1.51, 52.
and pulls down the mighty from their Seats, and exalts them of low degree.
With the curse of the holy Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 28.10.
Woe to the Crown of Pride. Yea, he concludes the Victory, with that holy
Maxim of St. James, God resists the proud. Jam. 4.6.
Now, who amongst us shall be able to dwell with everlasting burning? If the
Lord condemns, who can justify? Isa. 33.14.
In pride, in all these places, the Spirit of God includes ambition, which
essentially differs not, being connatural, and concomitant with her.

As for the temptation on the left hand, the loss of any temporal dignities:
The valiant Christian poyses them with the glorious promises of Gods faithful
word, whereby judging of their lightness, he concurs with holy David, that
surely Men of low degree are vanity, Psalm. 62.10.
and Men of high degree are a lie; to be laid in the Balance, they are
altogether lighter than vanity. And therefore returns this or the like
counter-buff: Get thee behind me Satan, for I value not thy threats, Mat.
10.30.
since thou boasts of that which is not in thy power. The hairs of my Head are
numbered, the Lord makes poor, and makes rich; 1 Samuel 2.7.
he brings low, and lifts up. But, say the Lord should suffer thee, as he
did in Job, to be the Instrument of my debasement; I will kiss Gods Rod, even
in thy hand, and say with that holy Man, The Lord has given, Job 1.22.
and the Lord has taken; blessed be the Name of the Lord: and with that
tryumphing Apostle, In all these things ( viz. disgraces, and losses, Romans 8.37.
of what kind soever) I am more than a Conqueror, through Christ that loved
me: For what things were gain to me, Phil. 3.7.
those I count loss for Christ; yea doubtless, I count all things but loss, for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus, my Lord; Verse 8.
for whom I will suffer the loss of all things, accounting them but dung, that
I may win Christ.

The highest favors of Princes, from whom flow Earthly dignities, are but
shadows of true honor. Shadows; for they weakly express them, and vanish
when their Sun is set, or clouded. Psalm. 107.40.
He that pours contempt upon Princes, commands me not to rely upon them; Psalm.
146.3.
Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the Son of Man, in whom there is no
help. (If not in them, much less in their gifts.) For in that very day (in an
instant) they, Verse 4.
their gifts, and thoughts perish. My happiness is a better hope. My honor is
more surely fixed, than by Man, Verse 5.
or Devil, to be extirpated, or extinguished. Can all thy power, O Enemy of Man,
frustrate my Election, whereby from Eternity, I am enrolled a Peer of Heaven?
Can all thy policy, or force, dim the splendor, or annihilate that title of
being called, and truly adopted the Son of God? Can thou disrobe me of my
honorable red and white Garments of Justification, and Sanctification, in my
Savior? O Father of lies, can thou turn light into darkness, 2 Timothy 4.8.
and truth into falsehood? Deprive me of my Crown, and nullify these glorious
and infallible promises? Fear not my little Flock, Luke 12.32.
it is your Fathers will to give you a Kingdom. Those that honor me, I will
honor. If any Man serve me, 1 Samuel 2.30. John 12.26.
him will my Father honor: Glory and honor, Romans 2.10.
and peace to every one that works good: I am assured, and conclude thou
can not. And therefore I trample under foot, thy power, and vilify thine and
the Worlds menaces, and offers, as believing in the royal might and truth of my
Savior; Romans 8.38.
That neither life, nor death, nor Angels, Principalities, Powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, shall be able to separate me from the love of God
which is in Christ Jesus, my Lord.

Verse 39.
Having thus routed, and discomfitted the Wings and first Squadrons of the
Enemy; From Persecutions.
we must not rest here; losing both our hopes, and advantage. A Christians
whole life we have heard is a continued warfare. To live unto the Lord, and by
self-denial, to overcome former temptations, is a happy progress toward our
Victory. But to persevere to the end, to dye for the Lord, is the conclusion,
the Crown, the triumph of the Christian. By how much the Enemy is more
powerful, and terrible; by so much is the service more honorable, and the
conquest more glorious. This last Phalanx of the Worlds force (Persecutions)
are her Janissaries, her Pretorian bands, her last refuge, in whom she puts her
chiefest confidence; led and marshalled by Satan's Lieutenant General,
described and set forth in the Revelations, by him riding upon a red Horse,
destroying the fourth part of the World; Rev. 6.8.^
who may be also, (as expressing its mortal effects) figuratively called Death,
whom Hell it self follows and attends.

Well, is this the last and strongest of our worldly adversaries? Yea, have
they begun already? or will they shortly, certainly assault us; and
notwithstanding our former Trophies, contend with us for our Palm? For all,
that will live godly in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.12.
must suffer persecutions; Let us, like our English Martyrs, with courage,
leaping, and rejoicing, run to kiss the Stake, to meet our Opposers, yea, (as
the Apostle) our tortures: Heb. 11.35.
not accepting deliverance, that we may obtain a better resurrection. Are we
hated by the World? It is the surest mark of our Election, by God. So the word
of truth; Because ye are not of this World, Joh. 15.19.
but I have chosen you out of the World, therefore the World hates you. Have we
mourning here? It ushers in, yea, accompanies, an unutterable, and inseparable
joy. Ye shall be sorrowful, says our Savior, John 16.20.
but your sorrow shall be turned into joy, and your joy shall no Man take from
you. Yea, Verse 22.
do we so far suffer for well doing, that we are delivered over to Death, as
Malefactors? Remember, we are not without a companion in our sufferings: our
blessed Savior was Crucified, John 15.20.
and reckoned amongst the Transgressors; Now the Servant is not greater than
the Lord; if they have persecuted him, they will also persecute you. To
conclude, if we be conformable to Christ, in his Death, we shall also be like
him in his Resurrection; we shall have a change, rather than a loss. For, He
that loses his life for his sake, shall find it, Luke 17.33.
(viz.) Immortality, which is only the true life. This is a faithful saying,
If we be dead with him, we shall also live with him: 2 Timothy 2.11, 12.
If we suffer, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he will also deny
us. Thus then have I made good my proposition, 1 John 5.4.
that this is the Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith. Thanks be
unto God, who gives us the Victory, through our Lord Jesus. 1 Cor. 15.57.


Blessed Savior, and Sovereign! Contemplation.
Now I am assured that thou art a Rock, upon which Man being built by faith,
becomes impregnable; so high, that he is far above Honors battery; so strong,
as not to be taken by the assaults of bloody Persecutions; so firm, as not to
be betrayed by covetousness, nor undermined by voluptuousness. The Siege of
Troy, one of the longest we read of, continued but ten years, and then she was
buried in her ashes; whereas the Christians, lasts a life, an age, and even
then ascends a tryumphant Throne of Glory, upon the Necks of his Enemies. Every
Christians life is a Book of the Battles of the Lord, thou being as well, nay
more, the Lord of Hosts, in respect of our spiritual Fights, and Victories, as
of our corporal; those Enemies fl^shly, these spiritual; those weak, and
mortal, their Principalities, Powers, immortal; those below, and numerable;
these from above, and innumerable. O thy mercy in thy assistance! O thy power
in thy resistance! Divine Monarch, as it is thy sole act, and gift, our
victory; so let it be ours, to retribute to thee alone the Glory.

The last Enemy that is to be destroyed, is Death, says the Apostle; Over
Death. 1 Cor. 15.26.
so in these Meditations. But why a double, death to death? Has not the
Martyrs Sword mortally wounded this Serpent? Yes, but yet he hisses still. And
therefore lest he may fright the fearful, we will add more wounds, that so the
weakest Christian may with Moses, take this Serpent into his hand. Yea more
(which is the Miracle) it shall become a Staff; an assistant in his Heavenly
Journey. Exodus 4.4.
As there is a violent, and enforced death, such is Martyrdom; so there is a
natural, and timely dissolution. In the one, we dye in, and for the Lord, as
has been showed; in this other, we dye in, and to the Lord; the one is
ordinary, the other is extraordinary; the one common, the other particular;
with both these Heads, our Enemy Death plays the Tyrant, and Sin the
Executioner. The Sting of Death is Sin.

1 Cor. 15.56
It Is an Observation, that things common, and universal, are less admired, or
feared. But what more general, and frequent than Death; what more frightfull,
and astonishing? This is the Coloquintida, that imbitters all humane pleasures.
So that oft-times the burden of Man's sweetest Song, is that doleful
complaint of the Children of the Prophet, 2 Kings 4.40.
Mors in olla, There Is Death in the Pot. This is the Water of Marach, which the
Children of Men murmur to taste of; Exodus 15.23.
which will they, nill they, they must drink, and dye. But O my Soul, behold a
City of refuge for thee, and all that are Children of the Prophets, the Israel
of God: behold thy true Moses have cast Lignum Vitae into this Spring of Sin,
to sweeten thy draught; Thy spiritual Elisha has cast Meat into this boiling
Pot, (even himself, broken, and grownd by Gods justice) that so he might
correct the cursed effects of this wild Wine, which God created not. For, He
is the Bread which comes down from Heaven, John 6.50.
that a Man may eat thereof, and not dye.

Would thou have this more illustrated and proved? Hear then thy Champions
challenge to this all^conquering Enemy, O Death, I will be thy death; Hos.
1.14. Joh. 19.28. John 18.11. Luke 12.50.
view also his courage before, and in the conflict, I thirst; The Cup which my
Father has given me, shall I not drink, it? Again, I have a Baptism to be
baptized with, and how am I straightened, until it be accomplished. Farther,
concerning the conflict it self, hear the Psalmist in the Person of our
Savior, The sorrows of Death compast me, and the pains of Hell gat hold upon
me; Psalm. 18.4.
I found trouble and sorrow. Lastly, in the conclusion of this truth, Psalm.
116.3.
that thou may know that Christ being raised from the Dead, dies no more.
Death has no more dominion over him, that he has abolished Death, Romans 6.9.
and has brought life and immortality to light, for thee, and all believers, 2 Timothy 1.10.
through the Gospel; according to the Apostle. Hear his Conquest, and triumph,
first Proclaimed by St. Paul, Death is swallowed up in victory; O Death where
is thy Sting, O Grave where is thy Victory? 1 Cor. 15.54.
Then published and revealed by himself. I am he that lives, Rev. 1.18.
and was dead; behold I am alive for ever more, Amen; and have the Keys of Hell
and Death. Lastly, view his right conveyed to thee in that large and royal
Pattent of his Word; Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the World, 1 Cor.
3.22.
or Life, or Death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, and
ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods; Verse 23.
Again, God shall wipe away all tears from your Eyes, Rev. 21.4.
and there shall be no more Death, neither sorrows, nor crying; neither shall
there be any more pain, for the former things are passed away.

Having thus strongly, under the royal Standard of Christ Jesus, entrencht thy
self (O my Soul) against this mortal, and heart-torturing adversary; Let thy
faith, placed even upon the Platform of sanctified reason, wait for to make a
challenge to the stoutest assailants of the Enemy. From the fear of Death.
The van-curriers, of whom is fear, and its concomitants. Pompa mortis (says
one well) magis terret, quam mors ipsa. Against these Light-Horsemen, discharge
this murdering piece of the Apostles; Forasmuch as the Children are partakers
of flesh and blood, Heb. 2.14.
Christ also himself took part of the same, that through Death, he might
destroy him, that had the power of Death; that is, the Devil. Verse 15.
And deliver them, who through fear of Death, were all their life time subject
unto bondage. Examples of worthies, invisibly conveighs courage, into
magnanimous minds: wherefore, if fear renew its force, and reassault thee;
interpose, as a strong Barracado, the ejaculation of dying Jacob. O Lord, I
wait for thy salvation. Genesis 49.18.
The Meditation of patient Job, All the days of my appointed time will I wait,
Job 14.14.
until my change come. The fervent supplication of devout Paul, whose desire
was to depart, Phil. 1.23.
and to be with Christ.

The next assaylant and assistant of Death, is grief to part with things of
this life. The beauty, goodness, and love of a Wife: The youth, numerousness,
and hopefulness of Children; The fidelity, affection, and society of friends;
The hundreds, thousands, yea Ingots of treasure, now to be left; together, with
all the pleasures, honors, and pomp of the World; being as so many arrows to
pierce through, with sorrow, the heart of the natural Man; so many racks to his
distracted Soul; yea, so many deaths in Death, if we respect its enforced
disunion. But the devout Soul, having not only a natural, but a supernatural
affection, has, if ever, then the spirit of Heavenly wisdom, and spiritual
discerning, concerning things that differ. And therefore willingly, cheerfully,
and resolutely, with Mary, chooses the better part; forsaking her earthly
Spouse for a Heavenly; the Impes of nature, for the Fruits of Grace; for her
works follow her. She voluntarily exchanges Earth, for Heaven; even for the
City of the ever living God, Heb. 12.22.
the new Jerusalem; her Earthly associates, for the beatifical vision and
presence of the glorious Trinity; those many Myriads of Angels, the general
Assembly of the Church of the firstborn, Verse 23.
and the spirits of all just Men made perfect. As for the overplus of her
treasure, uninherited, she has, and does take order by good works, as by so
many Bills of Exchange, for the receipt of them above; herein obeying the
precept and counsel of our Savior, to lay up treasure in Heaven. Mat. 6.20.
Lastly, a Scepter is not a Bar, neither does the massy weight of a Crown, nor
felicity of terrene things, depress the high-soaring affections of this
Christian Soul. King David's choice is hers, rather, Psalm. 84.10.
To be a Doorkeeper in the House of God, than to dwell in the Tents of
wickedness. Neither is there fear of loss, where it is The Fathers will to
give; a Kingdom. For, The Lord God is a Sun, Luke 12.32.
and a Shield; the Lord will give grace and glory, Psalm. 84.11.
no good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly. O Lord of
Hosts, blessed is the Man that trusts in thee. Verse 12.


Man being a compositum, a sensible Creature, is naturally deeply apprehensive
of pain; 3 dly. From the fear of Death, pain and separation.
therefore impetuously an abhorror of separation. Hence a third fearful, and
violent assault of Death; so powerful and prevalent, that it has brought the
strongest of Gods Warriors upon their knees, and to a marvailous astonishment.
Hence (as some interpret) the reiterated and strong cries, the wonderful and
bloody sweat of our great General, Christ Jesus. But because his apprehension
and suffering are mysterious, unconceivable, and extraordinary; see the
conflict, and hear the complaint of a dying sick Man, Holy, therefore truly
royal, Hezechiah. I shall go, Isa. 38.11.
says he, to the Gates of the Grave, I am deprived of the residue of my years;
I shall behold Man no more, with the Inhabitants of the World; Isa. 38.12.
God will cut me off with pining sickness, from Day even to Night, will thou
make an end of me. I reckoned till Morning, that as a Lion, Isa. 38.13, 14.
so will he break all my Bones. Like a Crane or Swallow, so did I chatter, I
did mourn as a Dove. I might further instance here the mournful Lamentation of
Job and David, upon the like occasion. But what need I, when every one of us in
our healths, can witness, that in our Meditation of our dissolution, we have
often felt strong sits of this dead Palsy: I will therefore have to the Allay,
or Antidote them.

O my Soul, I confess I have undertaken a hard task, to persuade against
Natures prescription, and sense. For, what more universal, more common, more
necessary, and therefore more natural, than the marriage of Soul and Body? What
amity more ancient, or more diffusive, than this, betwixt these two friends?
Yea, what expresses the glory, and regal Power of the one; what gives an active
being, and lively existence to the other, but this mutual communion, and
effectual union. Neither wants there negative arguments, to dishearten, and
weigh thee down, my Soul, in this thy Eagle-like flight, as being the unwelcome
concomitants, fearful consequents, and direful defects, of this unwilling
separation. Such the darkning of the Sun, Moon, Light and Stars (I mean the
Eyes; Eccles. 12.
) the obscuring of those that look out of the Windows, Verse 3.
viz. the receding of the Soul, by reason of the debility of the optic Nerves,
as the holy Ghost elegantly expresses; such the palsyness of our hands, the
keepers of our house of Clay; the weakness and binding of the Legs, the
strong guard thereof* the want of motion in the Teeth, Verse 4.
the mills and grinders of our food; such the bringing low of the Daughters of
Music, by deafness in the Ears, and hollowness of voice; Verse 5.
such thy many and present fears, equal (if thou be ancient) unto thy gray
hairs, white like the blossoming Almond-Tree; The losing of the silver Cord
(viz.) the evaporating of the natural, Verse 6.
and vital Spirits, the drying up the marrow, and the relaxing of the Nerves,
and sinews, the ligaments of the Bones; such the breaking of the golden Bowl,
Pitcher, or Wheel, at the Fountain, or Cistern, viz. the rending in two of the
heart-string, those last pangs, disabling it to force the blood (extracted from
the Liver, as being the Fountain) into the Veins; and to perform its circular
motion. But all these are but the associates, and symptoms of Death; the
followers, they are far more terrible, and distractive; such are the privation
of life: the Palace of the Soul, being now a dungeon of corruption, the pale
hue of the Face, and Body, the breathless Carcass, now, as it were, mourning
for her Spouses departure. Such the strange deadness of the late sparkling
Eyes, yellowed now like unto a fallen Star. To conclude the whole Microcosme of
the Body, deprived of her created light, and of that Spirit, that moved in her,
and informed her, the Soul, becomes nothing less than a motionless lump, an
obscure, and deformed Chaos.

These considerations, O my Soul! at the first sight, I confess, render Death a
terrible Goliath; before whom, most of the Armies of Israel turn their backs.
Yet do not thou fear; for a stone, or two, chosen, and taken out of those
running, and pure streams, of Gods Word, from that Rock hewn out without
hands, shall from the Sling of every faithful David, not only pierce his
forehead, but also swallow up, terminate, and intombe Death in death. Is thy
Sickbed, through the fury of this adversary, as full of torture, as the hot
glowing Gridiron of holy Lawrence? yet such a Metamorphosis will thy
high-soaring Contemplations, and the power of faith work in thee, that the full
sense, and influx of Heavenly joys, and raptures, shall make thee senseless of
thy pains, and sufferings. Thy feavourish fits being but Eliah's Chariot, thy
cold sweats, but thy passage through Jordan, into the Heavenly Canaan. Have
thou not seen a fierce flame in thy Chimny suddenly to damp and recoyle, when
the Sun shines full upon it? Did any Conqueror feel, or regard his wounds, when
about to ascend his tryumphal Chariot? And can the weak blaze of Deaths
consumption, outvie the shining of Gods face, and not be swallowed up of
glory? Can Deaths wounds be felt in the near apprehension, nay, fruition of
Immortality? Surely no. Thou may (as being in nature) mourn a day or two
with Mary, but when thy Christ approaches thus near, doubtless thou will forget
thy grief, and run, not out of thy Doors, but out of thy Body, to meet him,
Swan-like, singing with David; As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks,
Psalm. 42.1, 2.
so pants my Soul after thee, O God: my Soul thirsts for God, for the
living God, when shall I come and appear before God?

Wherefore O my Soul, Of Proofs and comfort in the R^surrection.
or whosoever thou art that read these Meditations, amidst thy great pangs
(as the Apostle exhorts) Look unto, Heb. 12.2.
yea follow the example of Jesus, the Author and finisher of thy Faith; who for
the joy that was set before him, Ephesians. 2.6. Rev. 3.21.
endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the Throne of God. Where also we shall sit together with him and be then
perfectly changed into the same Image, from glory to glory. 2 Cor. 3.18.
Thus reckoning that the sufferings of this present life (even Death it self)
are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us. Let
us not faint, Romans 8.18.
for though our outward Man perish, yet let our inward Man be renewed Day by
Day, being confident, that our light affliction, which is but for a moment,
works for us a far more exceeding weight of Glory. 2 Cor. 4.16. Verse 17.
Looking (as has been showed) not at the things that are seen, Verse 18.
but at the things that are not seen: for the things which are seen, are
temporal, but the things which are not seen are Eternal.

Dread not then O my Darling, this Lion. Is not he faithful who has promised,
that he will never leave thee, Heb. 13.15. Psalm. 48.14.
nor forsake thee? That he will be thy guide, even unto Death? Or do thou
doubt his Power, to whom belongs the issues from Death? and at whose voice all,
that are in the Graves shall come forth? Psalm. 68.20. John 5.28.
Behold a Tree of Life, indeed the spiritual Manna, which, do but feed on, by
faith, and thou shall not dye; For, He that eats this Bread shall live for
ever. John 6.58.
Was it with blessed Paul, to live, Christ; and to dye, is gain; and shall thy
cowardice and recoyling insinuate, and imply a loss? No, let such thoughts (as
Impes of Sin) first dye, Phil. 1.21.
yea, be annihilated, since every true Believer is assured of a glorious
change, and an ineffable reward; Corruption putting on incorruption, and
mortality immortality; we dying no more, but being made equal to the Angels: 1
Cor. 15.55. Luke 20.36.
For, as we have been planted together in the likeness of Christ's death, so
shall we be also in the likeness of his Resurrection. Romans 6.5.
Did many Worthies under the thunder of the Law, and in the twilight of the
Gospel, as the Apostle witnesses, undergo, the exquisitest tortures, not
accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection? Heb. 11.35.
And shall we in this open day, and Evangelical Revelation, when by faith, like
Stephen, we behold our Lord Jesus Christ, standing at the right hand of God,
ready to receive us, and having as he promised, taken possession, and prepared
a place for us, stand back, like Saul? 1 Samuel 10.22.
And being near our Coronation, seek still to hide our selves under the rubbish
of our Earthly Tabernacles? No, what was humility in him, will be esteemed
shameful, and distrustful pusillanimity in us; yea, which is worse,
disobedience to the Almighties summons. Let the wicked hang down their heads,
and cry to the Mountains, and Rocks, Luke 23.30.
to cover them, but let all of us that have obtained grace, be faithful, be
faithful unto the death, Rev. 2.10.
and he shall give us a Crown of Life; lifting up our heads, because the time
of our redemption draws near; Luke 14.14.
even that day of recompense, when the Lord shall say, well done good and
faithful Servant, enter into thy Masters joy. Mat. 25.23.
Not it into us, because not enough capable, but we into it, that so we may be,
as it were swallowed up in that infinite Ocean of Glory.

What though the Soul and Body have been unseparable friends, contemporaries in
life; and being, associates in joy, sympathisers in sorrow; two in nature, one
in affection: Do we not read of Jesse, and his Darling David? Of an Eliah, and
his beloved Elisha? Of an Hanna, and her long desired Samuel? Of a Mordecai,
and his entirely affected Hester? All which cheerfully consented to a disunion,
and separation; that so the conjunction of hearts, might appear inviolable;
which seeks not so much the presence, as the happiness of each other. And shall
thy Soul O Earth, 1 Samuel 16.17.
be summoned not to play before a mortal King, as David before Saul, Rev. 15.3.
but to sing the Song of the Lamb; even spiritual Hymns, before the Throne of
Glory? Not to serve before the Arc, 1 Samuel 2.18. Esther 2.15. 2 Kings 2.11.
and 21. 2 Cor. 12.2.
as Samuel, or to be the Paramour of an Assyrian Monarch, as Esther, but to be
ravished up with Eliah, and Paul, into Paradise? To be the Eternal Spouse of
Jesus Christ, and to behold the splendor of God, not veiled, 1 Cor. 13.12.
and in a type, as under the Law; but face to face, as being changed into the
same Image, from glory to glory? 2 Cor. 3.18.
shall it I say be sent for by Gods Sergeant, and thy Servant Death, once
unprofitable, as Onesimus to Philemon, but now most profitable to thee, Phil.
1.11.
and all Saints; and will thou delay and be unwilling to part? entreating with
the Levites Father-in-Law, Judge. 1^.7.
for one Day, nay one Month, or one Year longer? exile, from thy Heavenly
home, thy Crown of Glory?

O let such unwise, and such unthrifty, prorogations, be far from thy thoughts,
farther from thy practice. Rather let both Soul and Body unanimously sing the
Song of Simeon, and sigh out the vote of Paul, crying out. Oh how we desire to
be dissolved. Luke 2.29. Phil. 1.23.
That thy incomplete holiness (O my Soul) might be perfected, and become
complete glory. That thy faculties being not only unimprisoned, but heightened,
may approve thee according to thy Saviors promise; Luke 20.36.
like, yea, equal unto the Angels in all spiritual excellencies, and Heavenly
Prerogatives. Again, how do I desire (O sinful corrupted and mortal lump of
Clay) thy reduction into thy first Atoms, and matter, that so sin which has
possessed, and accursed thee, may dye, and be entombed with thee, as having no
longer work or nourishment in thee. That Heavens great Chemist, the omnipotent
Spirit of God, may cherish, encircle and hover over thee, (as once upon the
Waters) separating the pure, Genesis 1.2.
from the impure: and producing a body spotless, perfect, and immortal, even
like unto the glorious Body of thy Savior. That so being made a
proportionable, Phil. 3.21.
and capable Palace for thy Soul, thou may enjoy an eternal reunion with
it; and both, an everlasting communion with God. To conclude, O Man, Death is a
necessary, absolute, and unchangable decree of God. Therefore it is thy wisdom
to make it voluntary. Heb. 9.27.
For, It is appointed unto Men once to dye, says the Apostle; and then comes
the Judgment. Comes the judgment did I say? at the mention of this word
judgment, my Soul recoyles again, not daring to peep out of her earthly Cabin.
For she knows, that this general Assize is an undoubted truth, an Article of
her Creed, annexed to that of the Ascension, and Session of our Savior, at the
right hand of his Father; At which we left when we first entered upon the three
Offices of our Lord. And therefore now it fitly, and in order comes, to be the
practical object of our faith; as being also the last act of our Saviors
Kingly Office, in the Kingdom of Grace. This being his total victory, and
destruction of all his corporal, and spiritual Enemies, his Day of Triumph,
reward, and recompense to all his faithful Saints, and Servants. For there, as
my Meditations must cease, because faith shall be then fruition, so also the
Kingdom of Grace and Mediatorship shall determine, according to that of the
Apostle, Then comes the end, 1 Cor. 15.24.
when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father; when he
shall have put down all Rule, and all Authority, and Power; Then shall the Son
also Himself be subject unto Him, that puts all things under Him, Verse 28.
that God may be all in all.

To proceed then; Christ's Kingly Office a^ the last Judgment.
the Christian Soul being about to take her Heavenly flight, upon the
apprehension of her particular, together with the General Judgment, starts
back, and trembling with a sudden fear, thus revolves, and laments; Alas, why
haste I so fast unto the dreadful Tribunal of a just, and sin-revenging God?
Am I not an infinite offender, indicted by Satan, witnessed against, by
conscience, yea, found guilty, and convicted by self-confession? Why fly I
then so speedily to hear that sentence of condemnation, Go ye cursed into
everlasting Fire? Mat. 25.41.
Is not this that terrible day of the Lord spoken of? A Day of trouble, of
distress, Zeph. 1.15.
of wastenesse and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, of Clouds, and
thick darkness; The day of Battle, Joel. 2.2. Rev. 6.17.
the great Day of Gods wrath? Surely if it be not, it is the parallel, the
preludium thereof; for, 16.
as the Tree falls so it lies. As Death leaves, Judgment finds. Oh, Eccl. 11.3.
how am I astonished, when I but think of the horror, and torment of that
Hellish Tophet; those everlasting burnings, Isa. 30.33. Isa. 33.14.
merited for me by my sins, roomthy enough for Worlds of sinners. For God has
made it deep, and large, never ceasing in its fiery vengeance for want of fuel;
as (sometimes the burnings of Aetna) for the Pile thereof is Fire and much
Wood, ever abounding, and continuing in its fury, and rigor of punishing. For
the breath of the Lord does kindle it. Isaiah 66.24. Mat. 13.42. Jude 6. Dan.
12.2. Mat. 25.41.
There Is weeping, wailing, and gnashing of Teeth. The Worm that gnaws, the
Chain that enthrals, the contempt that vilifies, the Fire that torments and
burns, is without consumption. All which therefore are infinite, because
everlasting; Justice requiring, that our deficient nature, should for our
infinite debt, be thus eternally extended. Nor is this Paena sensus, this
positive misery, although endless, easiless, remediless, all. Is there not a
far greater; because more spiritual, and intrinsical; 2 These. 1.9.
that Paena damni, that death of the Soul; the banishment, separation, and
privation, of Gods blessed face; and of all hope of happiness for ever? O the
torture of these premeditations! Lord, if the thoughts of Hell, be a Hell, what
will the infliction be? Blessed Savior, John 12.27.
which once prayedst to be saved from this hour, as being in all things tempted
like us (sin only excepted) be my merciful high Priest, Heb. 4.15.
and royal Champion, to deliver me in this hour, and from this temptation; yea,
let my faith, in this her last act, and motion, be swiftest, and strongest,
because nearest to thee, her Center.

O my Soul! have not I often seen one small Cloud to hide the Sun from our
Eyes? and find I not it true spiritually also? that one dram of sorrow
embitters a great measure of joy? A few doubtings, to eclipse, and for a time,
obscure the bright beams of true believing? But no wonder, for this is the hour
of darkness, therefore the fittest time for the power of darkness to act its
part; Corruption, and infidelity are now to bid adieu, and to raise their Siege
from the Soul, and therefore give the sharpest assault, and battery to the
Bulworks of thy faith. Wherefore let not thy vain fear betray the succors
which both faith, and reason offer; but recollect thy self, and consider, Is
not thy Savior and King, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever? Are not his
promises, yea, and Amen? Are not his gifts and callings without repentance?
Has he loved thee, and will he not love thee to the end? Has he begun, and is
he not able to perfect? Will he even at the point, and in the height of his
triumph, be overcome, in thee, one of his Members? Has he made thee, yea,
new-made thee? Has he paid thy ransom with his precious heart-blood? Yea,
with infinite sufferings, preserved thee all thy life past, from many-fold
dangers and Enemies, by his gracious providence? And will he now, to the
dishonor of his omnipotency, deliver up his glory, his prize, to his expiring
and almost vanquished adversary? O far be from thee such weak and groundless
imaginations! but because infidelity and temptation, are oftentimes deaf, and
seem to be of proof, even against undeniable arguments, and demonstrations,
mount against all thy scruples and timorous unbeliefs; the Canon of Gods word,
which will quickly level all impediments, and through the strongest barrocadoes
of Satan's suggestions, make way for a safe, a happy passage, and exit, to thy
Soul. As an Introduction to which, let these holy Lights, and examples of
departing Saints be premeditated of. Such as that speech of dying Jacob; Lord I
wait for thy salvation; such the obedience, Numb. 20.28.
and cheerful dissolution of those two unparalleld Levites, Moses, and Aaron,
they went up to the tops of the Mount, Hor, and Nebo, and dyed there; Deuteronomy.
34.5.
such the cruel and voluntary Martyrdom (though inspired by an extraordinary
Spirit) of valiant Sampson; Judge. 16.30.
such also the last words of royal David, He has made with me an everlasting
Covenant, ordered, and sure, 2 Samuel 23.5.
for this is all my salvation. The expressions also of Job, Paul, and others,
might be instanced; but I will conclude with pious Simeon's devout wish, Lord,
Luke 2.29.
let thy Servant depart in peace, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation.

Further to thy establishment, and comfort, in that day when God shall judge
the secrets of all Men by Jesus Christ, according to the Gospel; Romans 2.16.
consider what firm assurance thou have of the favor, and how near relation,
thou have to the Person, of thy Judge. For herein as the Apostle speaks, is our
love made perfect, 1 John 4.17.
that we may have boldness in the day of Judgment, because as he is, so are we
in this World. Is not the same Lord Jesus Christ, that sole, and universal
Tribune, John 5.22.
to whom the Father has committed all Judgment? and to whom all power is
given, both in Heaven and in Earth? Mat. 28.18.
As being that Man whom God has, ordained, Acts 17.31.
to judge the World in righteousness, even the Quick and the Dead? And before
whose Judgment Seat all must stand? Romans 10.42.
Is not he, I say, by the witness of his own word, and undeniable truth, Romans
14.10.
so nearly allied, and endeared to thee, that the strongest ties of nature are
by him figuratively taken up to shadow out, rather then to fully express his
indissoluble affection? As that he is thy Master; Romans 6.22.
nay, more (O infinite love and humility) thy servant; Luke 22.27.
That he is thy friend; yea, more (O ineffable honor and exaltation) thy
brother; mat. 28.10.
yea more, if this be not enough, Heb. 2.11.
he has adopted thee his Son, and esteemed thee, John 1.12.
and styled thee his Sister, and Mother. To conclude, lest these foregoing
degrees may admit of a division, he vouchsafes thee this high favor, Luke 8.21.
to call thee the branch, He the Vine; John 15.1. 1 Cor. 11.3. Cant. 5.1.
thee a member, He thy Head; He the Husband, thee the Spouse; that so a union,
yea the perfectest of unions might be expressed, and that sweetest of Petitions
be fulfilled, That all may be one, as thou Father art in me, John 17.21.
and I in thee: that they also may be one in us. 1 Cor. 6.17.
Those that are joined unto the Lord, being one spirit, Romans 12.5.
and one body in Christ.

Tell me then O my Soul, can such a Lord, whose love to thee, Short application.
made him serve thee, become a cruel Inquisitor to condemn thee? Will thy
friend, thy brother be an Achitophel, a Cain to thee? Is it a thing possible,
that thy everlasting Father, instead of the Bread of Life, will give thee to
the torments of Hellish Scorpions? Isa. 9.6.
No, though Parents may forget the Sons of their Womb, Isa. 49.15.
y^^ will He not forget thee. Is it unnatural for the Root, to suffer the
Branches to wither for want of sap? For the Head to deny animation to the
Members? yea, cannot there be a true conjunction in Marriage, without the
cement of affection? And will thou dare to think, that that Root of Jesse, thy
Head, thy Spouse, the God of Order, and Nature, will destroy the Principlse of
nature, and withold the sap of his Grace, and Mercy; his all-quickening
Spirit of Life, and Glory; his Eternal, free, and unchangeable love, from thee
a branch, a member, a beloved? No, account it impious Infidelity, to give such
a thought, the least entertainment. Rather, if thou will meditate of that day
(which indeed is a Christians duty) all being commanded to watch, mat. 24.42.
because we know not at what hour our Lord will come; pitch thy thoughts upon
the Resurrection, and that happy and blessed assumption of thy Soul and Body
reunited to meet thy Judge, and Savior. The Apostle testifying, 1 These. 4.17,
18.
that we shall be all caught up together in the Clouds, to meet our Lord in the
Air, and that then we shall be ever with the Lord: For, wheresoever the
Carcass is, mat. 24.28.
there will the Eagles be gathered together: Wherefore, as the same Apostle
exhorts, Comfort both thy self, and others with these words. Rely also upon,
and apply those golden, and royal declarations of thy Judge. Psalm. 37.33.
As that he will not condemn thee, when thou art judged: That he that
believes on him, is not condemned, but has everlasting life; John 3.18.
and shall not come into condemnation, John 5.24. and 29.
but is passed from death to life. That there is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus. Since God does justify thee, Romans 8.1. and 33.
who is he that condemns thee? That we are often times corrected here, 1 Cor.
11.32.
that we should not be condemned with the World. Further, is it possible that
thou should be saluted with so sweet an invitation, and denomination, as
Come thou* blessed of my Father, and be accursed? mat. 25.34.
Can thou be the Heir, yea the Possessor of a Kingdom, and also the Slave,
and Prisoner of Satan? Will the righteous Judge give to them Torments of Fire,
and Brimstone, to whom he has promised a Crown of Glory? 2 Timothy 4.8.
Art thou commanded to pray for, to long for, to wait for, thy destroyer? No
surely, but for him that has promised to deliver us from the wrath to come. 1
These. 1.10.
To conclude, even amongst Men, none that is a Delinquent, must presume to
possess the Bench, the Seat of Judicature. But know you not, says the Apostle,
1 Cor. 6.11.
that the Saints shall judge the World, yea Angels? Wherefore doubtless they
must be just; yea, are acquitted and made innocent both imputatively and
inherently in their own Persons.

Further, if this be not sufficient, to animate, Of eternal life.
and strengthen thy hope, let thy faith make the last Article of the Creed, thy
object. Where thou believe everlasting life; to take its beginning, or
rather, begin its perfection immediately after death, and the last Judgment:
The time appointed for the full reward, and coronation of the Saints. I know*
there are many gracious promises of temporal blessings, and those oftentimes
fulfilled, and conferred upon the Saints in this life. Some whereof, though few,
of many, as being a remunerating act of Christ's regal, and judicial Office, I
will by the way recite, not impertinently; as being earnests to them of future
glory, sensible tokens of Fatherly love, a Pilgrims Staff for our Faith to lean
upon, in our life's peregrination. This maxim being first undoubtedly to be
believed, that the same promises made to perfect obedience under the Law, had
at the first, a respect, and are now truly applicable to faithful sincerity,
under the Gospel. Such that Magazene of blessings, in the 28. of Deuteronomy,
where to the largest, and several appetites, every true believing and sincere
obeying Christian, (as well as to the sacrificing Jew) a most plentiful feast,
and satisfaction is offered. Deuteronomy. 28.3.
Is thy calling in the City, or i^ the Field? thou shall be blessed in them
both. Desire thou riches, and plenty of all the fruits of the Earth, and a
numerous posterity, and a blessed use, and enjoying of them? Psalm. 12.8.
Thou have a Pattent, a great Seat for these also. Art thou a Man of action,
and great employment, for the Church, Deuteronomy. 28.4, 11.
or the Common wealth? yea, has thy virtues splendor, a shadow of envious and
malicious adversaries? If thou hearkenest unto the voice of the Lord thy God,
Deuteronomy. 28.6, 7.
thou shall be blessed, when thou come in, and blessed when thou go out,
and the Lord shall cause them, thine Enemies, that rise up against thee, to be
smitten before thy face. Would thou have thy forfeited Charter, renewed, and
all the Creatures, yea, the most honorable, serviceable unto thee? Behold the
Lord shall give his Angels charge over thee; Psalm. 91.11.
yea, they shall pitch their Tents about thee, and the Heaven shall give Rain
unto thy Land in due season. Deuteronomy. 26.12.
Do thou wish for (to the further glory of God) a long life, and an
honorable place, and esteem amongst Men? The Lord has promised, that he will
set thee on high, that he will make thee the head, Psalm. 91.14.
and not the tail, and with long life will satisfy thee. Deuteronomy. 28.13. Exodus
20.12.
Yea more (which is the compleatment of all) he will show thee his Salvation.
But a long life, if imbittered with sickness, is but a tedious Death. True. But
if thou fear the Lord, and depart from evil, Prove. 3.7, and 8.
it shall be health to thy Navil, and marrow to thy Bones. Yea, thy light shall
break forth, as the Morning, and thy health shall spring forth speedily.
Further, Isa. 58.8.
do thou desire wisdom, beauty, strength? The righteous have promises of all
these, so far forth as they still perfect their happiness. Whose Daughters so
fair as Jobs? Job 42.15. Isa. 61.3.
Those that mourn in Sion, have assured unto them beauty for ashes. If the Feet
of the Saints are beautiful, Romans 10.15.
surely no part else is deficient. But to make all good in few words, hear thy
King, by the Prophet Isaiah: Isa. 28.5, and 6.
The Lord of Hosts will be for a Crown of glory, and for a Diadem of beauty
unto his People, and for a Spirit of Judgment to him that sits in Judgment; and
for strength to them that turn the Battle to the Gate. But this World is a Bed
of Vipers, a bundle of snares, a stage of dangers. True; yet if thou trust in
him, Psalm. 91.3, 13.
he shall deliver thee from the snare of the Fowler, from the noisome
Pestilence. Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder, the young Lion and the
Dragon shall thou trample under feet. O read ye faithfully, and digest this
whole Psalm, which I may truly style the City of David, for strength, and
beauty; the fortress, yea Paradise of every true Christian. But the godly have
but a few friends. I answer, Comparatively they have but a few Enemies; the
whole Creation (except Satan, and sinners) being at peace with a reconciled
Soul; such as Job speaks of, Job. 5.23.
being in League with the very Stones, and Beasts of the Field. And the malice
of the malignant, turns all to their good. Yea, Romans 8.28.
more; if a Man's ways please the Lord, he will make even his Enemies to be at
peace with him. Prove. 16.7.
But to conclude, a good Wife, and good Children, are amongst the chief
blessings upon Earth. They are so, and have not the Saints strong and
comfortable evidences for them, if the Lord see them good? witness those
twine-like Psalms, Psalm. 117.118.
the 117. and the 118. which for their excellency and comfort sake, deserve the
Readers more full, and perfect Observation. I will not be further tedious: for
the Lord God is a Sun and a Shield, the Lord will give grace and glory, Psalm.
84.11, 12.
no good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly. O Lord of
Hosts, blessed is the Man that trusts in thee.

Having given my Soul, by faith, a taste of some few of those many temporal
promises treasured up in the Scripture, being they are to be but as Sallets to
provoke my spiritual appetite; I will return to feed upon Eternity.

O my Soul! what surer Antidote, against the apprehension of the last Judgment,
Of eternal life.
(whose sting is Eternal Death) than the Meditation, and assured hope of
Eternity of life? which is Glory in grain; and the deifying of Humanity. Surely
if there be any Spiritual weight that depresseth the Soul, it is Judgment. If
there be any Heavenly Magnes that attracts, and quickens it, it is Immortality.
For, touched with this, though encircled with corruption, thou shall continue
moving with the Needle, until fixed upon the lines of life, thou constantly
adhearing to the true Flower-de-luce, Christ Jesus. Amongst Moses unfeigned
Metamorphoses, we find the Rod changed to a Serpent, a devourer of the
Magitian delusions. So this hope, a branch of the Tree of Life, springing from
the Root of Jesse, swallows up Death in victory, in Eternity. What seems, yea
is a fearful truth to all unbelieving Egyptians, becomes a Chimera, a
Phantasme to every true Israelite. If any word is expressive, or an Epitome, of
God, of Heaven, of Glory, and consequently of all felicity, it is this of Life.
I am the way, the truth, John 14.6, 8, 11, 25.
and the life. I am the Resurrection, and the Life, says our Savior; and he
that has the Son (that is, believes in him) has life, says St. John. Since
then, God is life, 1 John 5.12.
he that has life, has God; and he that has God, has all things; even the
conflux of simple, and unmixt happiness. And therefore most wisely, and
succinctly, those holy Men, Penners of the Creed (called the Apostles) have
coucht, and expressed, the excessive treasures, and immense pleasures, of the
Heavenly Paradise, under that one word, life everlasting. Herein O my Soul! is
included, and assured unto thee, the sublimest of Heavenly fruitions, (called
by the Schoolmen) the beatifical Vision. Which, so far as I am able to express
it, is the Souls full repletion, and apprehension of the excellencies of the
Divine Essence; not by the back-parts only, and mediately, as Moses, but
primarily, and immediately, in himself. Yea, also the Body, being in the very
moment of its resurrection spiritualized, 1 Cor. 15.44. 1 John 3.2.
(as witnesses the Apostle) shall there, with open face see, and look upon,
the word of life, receiving fullness of pleasure, and satisfaction, by those
senses which now are unprofitable, and incapable of such glorious
manifestations. Here, since this last act of our faith, and last Article of our
Creed, is so full of comfort, and unspeakable animation, after the hearty, and
humble acknowledgment, of my ignorance, and fervent supplicating the assistance
of the only illuminating Spirit, I will more largely and particularly eye this
Crown, this unvaluable price, even so far as my faith has visual beams from
Scripture, or consequent demonstration.

If the Soul of Man in this state of her nakedness, and deformity, has been by
some Christians (though therein Heretical) deifyed, and by most of the Heathen
Magi magnifyed, even to the height of created excellencies; surely in her
renovation, and perfect reassumption, of that her first Image, and those first
created Ornaments, she must needs be more splendid, and more to be admired. But
is this beauty of the first Adam, in his innocence, the height of a Christians
hope? No. As our second Adam, in his divine descent, and generation, infinitely
transcends our first Parent in Nature; so he has prepared a far more excellent
weight of glory, for his Children, by Adoption, his Members by Spiritual,
mystical, and supernatural union. Witness his own Oracle, and declarative,
rather than necessary Petition; John 17.22.
The glory which thou gave me, I have given them. Blessed Lord, what a word
is this? What a communication? my mind is entraunced, and my weak Meditations
swell, even to an Impossibility of expression. Can I not now know my Soul in
her humiliation, in the weakness of a Creature? How can I then describe and
conceive of her in her exaltation, in the glory of her Creator? Let this be
sufficient for me to believe hence, that that glory with which she shall be
filled, according to her Spiritual Nature, is for quality infinitely excellent,
because Gods, yet allayed, and fitted to be received for quantity, finite, and
limited as in her. Not as divided from the Divine Fountain, but by virtue of
Inhabitation, in a gracious, real, and inseparable union, communicated to, and
made hers, according to our Saviors Prayer, That we all may be one, as the
Father is in the Son, John 17.21.
and the Son in the Father; that we may be one in them; John 17.26.
as also, that the love wherewith the Father has loved the Son, may be in us,
and he in us. Thus then the Souls of the Saints before the Resurrection, and
both Souls and Bodies after the Resurrection, according to their several
measures of grace here, shall then have their divine plenitudes of Glory; every
Vessel being filled, that is, thrown into that Ocean of Life and Glory.
Further, as a Wedge of Iron cast into the Forge, is, as it were converted into
Fire, and the body, and substance of the Sun, is, as it were hid, and changed
into the light, that possesses it: so shall the Soul and Body, as being in God,
and God in it, be absorpt, and as it were transmuted into his Glory. Thus much
concerning the Souls external glory. The internal, if it be possible, is yet a
Sphere in altitude above this, as bringing the Soul nearer, to the
assimilation, apprehension, and fruition of God. The understanding, will,
memory, and affections, in the Soul, being as it were Impresses (to speak
improperly, and according to the understanding of Men) of the like infinite
essentials in God.

For then, the understanding faculty, according to its created capacity, Of the
understanding glorified.
shall be wonderfully elevated, and enlarged, and be repleat, with a sufficient
and complete knowledge, of all Creatures, yea of God himself. Which shall not
then be acquired, and gathered, as now, by a Retrogradation, from the effect to
the cause; but then primarily, by immediate Vision, and mutual possession of
God, the cause of causes. Be not then disconsolate, O my Soul! nor set thy
Bodily Organs upon the Rack, in the study of the Metaphysics, Mathematics,
and Physics; farther than thy special calling requires; mispending thy hours,
and neglecting that one thing necessary, The knowledge of God, and thy self.
The degrees of learning on Earth, are reversed in Heaven; begin here with God,
the beginning of all things, and proceed to be Bachelor of Divinity on Earth,
and fear not, but be assured, that thou shall commence a true Master of Arts,
yea, a Doctor of Divinity in Heaven. Then shall thou know perfectly, and not
(as now) by supposition, the essentials, spiritualities, and supreme
excellencies, and attributes of God, and Angels. The magnitudes, altitudes,
motions, and influences of the Heavenly Planets, and fixed Stars. Tradition of
secundary and probable Arguments.
There shall be no disputing Copernicans. No ignorant Empedocles, nor
Aristotle's. The causes of the Aetnaean Fires, the Flux, and reflux of the Seas,
the Polaramorousness of the Loadstone, and all other the Magnalia of Nature,
shall there be discovered to the Souls eye. For, as a Man placed in the Center
of the Sun, having an Eye or Organ proportionable, must needs see whatsoever it
enlightens; so the Soul of every Saint, being fixed in God, the Center from
whom all operations, as so many lines, or rays are emitted, must needs know
all (being finite, and within his enlarged capability) the whole frame, and
work of Nature; perfection of knowledge, being necessary to the perfection of
Glory.

As the understanding, so the will, The will glorified.
shall be replenished with Glory also; being made then co-voluntary with God's,
and answering his, in every particular, as the impression does the Seal, or as
the Image in the Glass, the Original; being according to its created, and
limited measure and proportion, perfectly just, and holy; yea, freely and
constantly willing good, without the least constraint, or necessity. This being
no thraldom, but a divine perfection of the will, to will nothing, but what is
good. The understanding, which is the Leader, and incliner, as a Spring in a
Watch, the internal mover of the will, being not left to it self, and created
sufficiency, as in Adam, but by an irrevocable, merciful, natural, and
therefore necessary consequence, and decree, in Christ, is doubly confirmed;
First positively, as being for ever enlightened, privatively, as being in such
a state of perfection, glory, and happiness, as admits not of any temptation,
or inclination, to mislead the one, and thereby to defile the other. From this
ground also springs the Eternal station in goodness, and consequently in
blessedness, of all other the faculties of the Soul. Which like so many Stones
in an Arch, are unmovable, because every Stone is unmovable; Jesus Christ
being the Head-Stone, upon whom the whole Building depending, becomes immutable.

O my God! I cannot pass this thought of Eternity without a Selah,
Contemplation.
a note of admiration, as seasonable; although in respect of the benefit, but a
temporary acknowledgment. Behold, how wonderful is that mercy, which in
Christ, has not deprest, but elevated, not extinguished, but inflamed, not
diminished, but increased Man's excellency. Innocent Adam, being neither in his
perfection, nor duration, so happy, as we sinful Adams by Regeneration. Shall
I therefore commend sin? God forbid. I extol grace, even that Miracle of thy
love, O Lord; whose Mercy has made Man's Sin, Oil, to inflame thy love; which
in its own nature, and ours, was Water to quench thy pity, and drown a World.
Let it work one wonder more, and turn my Rock into Springs of Tears, to wash
thy Feet in humble Repentance, and Thankfulness; that so my seldom falling
here, may be a Preludium of my never falling hereafter, and Glory begun on
Earth in Grace, may be in thy Kingdom perfect and Eternal.

But to proceed, and not to forget that faculty, which makes me to remember, Of
the memory glorified.
viz. Memory: that Magazine, and Treasury of the Soul; (I wish I could say not
of evil also.) Wherein now many things lie confused, and obscured by latter
Occurences, unless discovered by external objects and circumstances; or raked
out by help of discourse. Out of whose Postern, many things are crowded out by
trifles; or fallen, through its rifts, and deficiencies; or else worn out by
time, and age; or stolen away by that arch Thief* Satan; this faculty, I say,
though now thus decayed, and imperfect, shall in that never-ending day of
happiness, be repaired, and made Gods Ark, over which, not Cherubins, but the
Almighty shall hover; filling it by means of the Souls divine, and continued
Vision of the Glass of the Trinity, with a present sight, and apprehension of
(the great glory of God, and in it) all things. I will not call these kinds of
actings of the Souls remembrance; for those imperfect ways of its operation, by
recollection, and recordation, with other medial helps, shall be then absorpt,
in this act of the understanding, as being unnecessary, and only fitted for the
state of Corruption; the Apostle teaching us, that we shall then know as we are
known, not remember as we are known. The chief Power of the Memory (the
retention) remaining, and becoming by this continual beatifical Revelation, and
Inspection indefatigable and invincible. Yea, in this Ark shall be always kept
the Tables of Gods holy will, the Manna, of all his past and present mercies;
the Rod ever budding and flourishing, with all his righteous Judgments, and
Declarations of his Justice.

As the Memory, so each Affection, Of the affections glorified.
except what habits, or inmates, sin and corruption have introduced, such (as
the servility of fear, the dolorous passion of sorrow) shall then have, not
their part only, but their full of Glory. Then excesses, though of the right
hand, while in this life, prove the Soul a Prisoner, and make both Soul, and
Body, suffer; being therefore properly styled passions; shall in that life,
comparatively exceed, but not subjectively; the full, and lasting gale in that
Ocean, filling the Sails, not sinking the bottom.

O my love, which art now full of repentings, Of love glorified.
and unconstant, because unsatisfyed, wishing with Alexander, more Worlds to
marry thy affections to: which had thou beyond Arithmetical progression, thou
would still prove a Harlot, and they insufficient. For though a Creature,
thou art fitted only for an infinite object; not to comprehend it, but to be
comprehended of it. Wherefore nothing finite can be adequal, or proportionable,
to thy extension. Hence, even the Worlds darlings, the wicked, have this
Monument of their lost happiness, and primitive Creation, remaining; viz. they
live and dye seeking and unsatisfyed. But the Elect, as they are restless in
their search, with the Spouse in the Canticles, so at length they find him
whom their Soul loves. Cant. 2.9.
But as yet, He stands behind our Wall, he looks forth at the Window,
showing himself through the Lattess. With him they enter into a mutual contract
in Baptism, and receive continual pledges, and love tokens by his Spirit. In
this life, by reason of seeming absence, clowdings, and intermissions, our
loves are violent, yet pleasing passions. But in the other (that day of our
Nuptials) they shall be swallowed up in excelling fruitions. Then shall we
affect, and enjoy in one, the all of goodness, and loveliness. The love which
is here different, and divided, according to the diversity of opinions, and
objects; shall be in God, one, and concentred in him, we both affecting, and
possessing, the eminency of beauty, the height of honors, the Elixar of
pleasures, the perfection of wisdom. So that the then glorified senses, the
Windows, and ports of the affections, (though inconceivably enlarged) shall
then continually receive in, even, to overflowing, spiritual, and ravishing
object of love and delight. For, In his presence is fullness of joy, and at his
right hand, Psalm. 16.11.
pleasures for evermore. Lastly, which ought most to ravish us, neither this,
nor any other affection, or faculty of the Soul, shall be limited, or at their
height of glory. Not but that in the first entrance, they shall have a present
sufficiency, and fullness; for even in Heaven there shall be no Vacuum; but as
we have seen a Bladder, filled with Wind, afterward by a second influx, far
more extended, yet at all times full. And as our Savior is said to increase
more, and more, in knowledge; yet from his conception full, according to his
organical reception; so the glorified Saints, like the Angels, on Jacob's
Ladder, according to their several degrees, shall mount, and continually
increase and ascend to higher steps of Glory: the influxe of all divine
excellencies, incessantly, and at once both enlarging, and filling all their
faculties, all their affections. So then desire of more, shall never torture
us, because ever full; nor satiety cloy us, because our joys shall be ever
new, and increasing. The grounds of this Celestial and Eternal growth of
happiness, excellency, and glory, arises both from Gods Word, and Nature. The
Prophet telling us, that those which are wise, Daniel 12.3.
shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament. Our Savior yet higher. The
righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father. Let
Solomon expound both; Mat. 13.43.
the Path of the Just, is as the shining light, which shines more, and more,
unto the perfect day. They as the Sun, Prove. 4.18:
mounting toward their Meridional height, God; to whom they shall be
perpetually approaching nearer, and more and more like in glory, but never
shall, nor can reach, or equalize; he being, and dwelling, in infinite and
inaccessable lights. Farther, our Savior teaches us that in Heaven we shall be
like the Angels. 1 Timothy 6.16.
Now the Angels have accidental joys, in the repentance of sinners; Luke 20.36.
Accidental knowledge, by the Church, Luke 15.10.
of the mysteries of our Redemption; and no doubt, if their joys, Ephesians. 3 10.
1 Pet. 1.12.
and wisdom have an accidental increase, through the Creature, then much more
from God the Fountain: This being, I conceive, one means, (as respecting them)
subordinate, and cooperating, with Gods high, and eternal decree, for their
confirmation, in Christ; it being impossible, for that essence, to fall away,
that is, continually intent upon, and replenisht with, new fruitions, and
manifestations of Gods glory. This being a blessedness both to Angels, and Men,
that the Wings of Cherubins and Seraphins, though, they are without labor, and
wearisomness, and with delight, ascending; yet, they can never out-soar the
infinite heights of the divine Majesty, and incomprehensible fullness.

If the affection of love, O my Soul, Of the affection of fear glorified.
shall be perfect in Heaven, as has been declared, and perfect love casts out
fear, as says the Apostle, 1 John 4.18.
what place is then left for the affection of fear in glory? I answer, our
divine love, both now, and then, shall exclude all servile, and slavish fear,
but not our filial Espousal, and Reverential fear; which if found in our
sinless Mediator, who was heard, in that he feared; Heb. 5.7. Isa. 6.2.
and a duty of the glorious Angels, that with this reverential fear, serve and
praise him, and exhort all others to do it; Rev. 14.7.
then also of glorified Saints, Jerem. 32.39. Psalm. 72.5.
who if commanded to fear God for ever, and as long as the Sun and Moon
endures, shall doubtless thus fear him everlastingly, and in Heaven, as well
as here upon Earth. For as love without this fear would be presumptuous; so
fear without love, would be painful, and discouraging. But both together, are
to the sanctified Soul, as Ballast to a Ship, to keep it steady, and does
grandize, elevate, and enlarge each affection, from the awful apprehensions,
and adoration, of so super-excelling an object, of infinite glory, as is the
Trinity in Unity, Jehovah, God blessed for ever.

Further, if this saving grace, and sanctified affection of holy fear, Prove.
9.10.
is by Solomon commended to us as the beginning, Eccles. 12.13*
and end of divine wisdom, in the Saints on Earth, Acts 9.31.
shall they be denuded of it, and excluded from it, in Heaven? Is it held forth
in Scripture, as the sum and implication of all religious duties, and
worship, and the condition, or rather qualification, of those holy ones, that
have right to temporal, spiritual, and eternal promises, Prove. 10.17. Prove.
19.13. Prove. 22.4.
in the Word; and shall this grace then cease, when with other graces it is to
be Crowned with Glory? Is this pure affection, the Salt, to preserve from
corrupting, not only in the Marriage-state amongst Men, but in the conjugal,
and spiritual union, betwixt Christ, and his Spouse, the Church; and shall it
not be as lasting as that Union, which is everlasting? I conclude, it shall;
though with this difference, according to our differing condition, not a fear
of offending, because we shall be then in a sinless condition; Rev. 21.27.
Cant. 5.6.
Not such a fear as was in the Spouse in the Canticles, because of sin, and
infirmities, nor of Gods hiding his face, and withdrawing his presence; Rev.
21.4, 5. Mat. 25.21.46.
for former things are past away, all things are made new, we are entered into
life, and shall be ever with the Lord. 1 These. 4.17.
But this glorified fear, is the most bright reflection in and from us, of Gods
glorious Sovereignty, according to that of the Prophet, If I be a Master, where
is my fear; a fruit and an effect of Gods ravishing and transporting
excellency: Mal. 1.6.
and therefore this heavenly affection, being so necessary a requisite in our
heavenly condition, is so far from lessening our perfection in glory, as that
without it, it cannot be perfectly glorious. O my Soul, shall thy affections,
of love and fear, Soliloquium.
be thus glorious in thy Heavenly state; Let them not have a lesser, or lower
object than the most high; let not such Highborn Princesses, be enamoured with
their Slaves. Use the World as not abusing it, and as though thou used it not.
Neither fear any but him, 1 Cor. 7.31.
that only can cast both Soul and Body into Hellfire; Let these two graces,
Luke 12.5.
be as Jethro to Moses eye in the Wilderness of this World; Numb. 10.31,
to admonish, and to keep thee from losing thy way, when thou art turning to
the right, or to the left. And like the Lords Pillar of a Cloud by Day, Exodus
13.21.
and of Fire by Night, to direct thee, according to his holy will, in thy
Journey toward thy Heavenly Canaan. Converse with these two Royal Virgins,
continually. So shall thou have Communion, and fellowship with the Father and
the Son, in the Spirit; be partaker of the Divine nature; and begin to enjoy
Heaven, here upon Earth. Prepare, 1 John 1.3.
and so enlarge these Divine Vessels by a pious use, 2 Peter 1.4.
and continued Exercise, that they may be the more capacious of Glory. For
according to the measures and proportions of graces in this life, shall be
their repletion, in the life to come; where, of Apprehensors, the Saints shall
be made Comprehensors, according to their several enlargements. For as one Star
differs from another in glory, 1 Cor. 15.41.
so shall it be at the Resurrection of the Just, 1 Cor. 13.12.
when we shall see God face to face, and know him as we are known, 1 John 3 2.
and be made like him in Glory.

O my God, my Father, are these two sanctified affections of love, and fear,
the two Eyes, Ejaculation.
the two Arms of the Soul, with which the Saints behold, embrace, and enjoy
thee, in all thy glorious excellencies? Are they the two Sentinels, and Guards,
by which every true Christian, discovers, and repells, all sinful thoughts,
looks, words and actions? Does that root of all saving Graces, Faith, work by
love, in the application of what the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost has done for
us? Turning our Hearts of Stone, into Hearts of Flesh, and melting them into
tears of Gospel-Repentance? Does love oil the wheels of our universal
obedience, so that they run swiftly in the paths of thy Commandments, when
thou thus enlargest the heart? And is fillial fear, the whip, in the hand of
zeal, the holy Chariteer, to drive and carry us, manger all stops of Sin,
Satan, and the World, to the end of our race? Is this divine love to thee, and
thy Saints, the sum, and the fulfilling of thy Law? The more excellent way?
Romans 13.10. 1 Cor. 12.31. 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3, 11, 13. 1 John 4.16.
The completing, continuing, and the greatest grace, as most like unto thee?
For God is love, and who so dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him?
Shall these twin-like graces of love, and fear, not leave the Soul, when it
leaves the Body, and accompany both Soul and Body at the Resurrection, to the
Marriage-Supper of the Lamb, and to the Marriage Bed of Glory? yea, shall they
be the measures, and completing of our Glory? O holy Father, who art the
essential love, Isa. 8.13.
my fear, and my dread, be thou pleased to sanctify, enlarge, and inflame these
my affections, that of sinful passions in the old Adam, they may be changed,
and Heavenized into active and holy graces in me, thy new Creature. Let them, I
beseech thee, be effectual, and useful to all the aforementioned ends. And
since it is no sin, but a duty, to be ambitious of, and to covet spiritual
things, let them be enlarged and heightened like Heaven, even to the utmost of a
created capacity, that I may be, as thou have promised, thy dwelling place upon
Earth; and thou may be my inheritance; and my Heaven; in Heaven: Even so,
Amen: Lord Jesus come quickly.

Of zeal glorified.
The sanctified affection of holy zeal, in the glorified Saints, deserves our
next Meditation. This to speak properly, is not a simple grace, but the highest
and intense degree of every grace, and holy action; which if so famous, Exodus
32.19, 26, 27.
and resplendent, in the Saints upon Earth, as in Moses, in his exemplary
Justice upon the false worshippers of the Golden Calf; In Phineas, his
executing judgment upon that Idolatrous and adulterous pair; Numb. 25.7, 8,
10, 11.
Zimry and Cosby, in David, who declares, that the zeal of Gods House had eaten
him up; In Elijah, Psalm. 69.9.
when he put to death four hundred of Baals Prophets in one Evening; In Paul, 1
King. 18.40.
who preserved the glory of God, in the Redemption of his Countrymen, the
Jews, before his own salvation; Romans 9.3.
and in that highest example of our dear Lord and Savior, in his purging of
his Temple. Then this Heavenly grace shall undoubtedly not only continue, John
2.15, 17.
and have then a Being in each glorified Saint, but shine forth, and act in
them, much more gloriously. Is that only infinite and pure Essence, our
Omnipotent God, who is happiness, blessedness, and life it self; so often
declared in the Scripture, to be zealous for his name, and glory? Isa. 9.7. and
59.7.
And shall not his Saints, his Image, be like him? Is this grace exercised, by
glorious Angels; as when one Angel destroyed all the firstborn of Egypt in one
Night; Exodus 12.23, 29.
Another destroyed a hundred fourscore and five thousand Assyrians, at the
command, and in zeal for the glory of God? 2 King. 19.35.
Yea, Luke 2.13, 14.
did an whole Host of Angels descend from Heaven, and with a holy zeal
Celebrate our Lords Nativity, and Man-kindes Redemption, in an holy Hymn? And
shall not the glorified Saints, overflow, and express upon all occasions, to
Gods glory, the like zealous, and inflamed affections? assuredly they shall.
For, though Sin, Satan, and the wicked World (which by a kind of spiritual
Antiperistasis, made their zeal here burn the hotter) shall be cast out, and
banished thence. Yet the glorified Saints shall not want, nor be without
constant objects, and continual occasions, (according to every ones measure, to
exercise this grace.) To instance only some successive ones, Gods unparalled
flaming Justice upon Gog and Magog, and all wicked Men, Rev. 20.9*
at our Saviors second coming, with ten thousand of his Saints; Jude 14.
Christ's Crowning, and rewarding every Elect Member in righteousness, according
to their works; Math. 16.27.
together with all his glorious Administrations, in that his holy, righteous,
and personal Reign in the new Heaven, and new Earth, for a thousand years; His
powerful raising of the wicked, Rev. 20.4.
after the thousand years, and curious Inquisition into, and perfect discovery
and bringing to Judgment of all their evil thoughts, Rev. 20.5, 12, 13.
words, and actions; and his righteous sentence pronounced upon them, Rev.
20.12.
and the Apostate Angels; Mat. 25.41.
and his translating his Saints from this Paradise of Earth, to the Heaven of
Heavens; These objects, and occasions of holy hatred, 1 Cor. 6.3, 15, 24.
anger and indignation against Satan, and Gods Enemies, the wicked, of
unexpressable love, John 17.24.
joy, delight, praise, and glorious tryumphing, the holy Scriptures holds
forth, shall be in the state of glory. And can we conceive holy zeal, which is
the height, and crown of all these graces, can be absent, or unnecessary? I
shall further add, that after our Lords yielding up his Mediatory Kingdom to
the Father, all the service and everlasting praises of the Saints in the
remembrance of all Gods wonderful works from the beginning unto Eternity, in
the Heavens, Earth and Hell shall be heightened and winged with this holy zeal.
I shall assert this truth* and conclude this ravishing Meditation, with
pointing at, and refering the Reader to the frequent, and zealous hallelujahs,
of the crowned Elders, and glorified Saints, in the Visions of Saint John, set
forth to us as the types, and lively figures of our Heavenly and glorified
condition. Revelations Chapter the 4 th. Verse the 8 th. And the four Beasts
rest not Day and Night, Rev^ 4.8.
saying, Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty, which was and is, and is to come;
Rev. 4.10
And the four and twenty Elders fell down before Him, that sat on the Throne,
and worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast their Crowns before the
Throne, Verse 11.
saying, Thou art worthy O Lord to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power; for
thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were Created.
Like to this, are their zealous Songs and Thanksgivings upon diverse occasions,
Rev. 5.8.
Chapter 5. Verse 8. until the end of that Chapter; Chap. 7.9.
and Chapter 7. Verse 9. unto the end thereof; and Chapter 11. Verse 15. unto
the end of that Chapter; Chap. 11.15.
and Chapter the 14. Verse the 1. unto the end of the 5. Verse; Chap. 14.1.
and Chapter the 15. Verse the third and the fourth, Chap. 15.3, 4.
besides many more to the end of that blessed Book, which for brevity sake I
omit. These being sufficient to prove the use and exercise of this Seraphical
grace of holy zeal by the Saints in their state of Glory.

O my Soul, Is this most Heavenly grace of zeal, so illustrious, and exemplary,
Soliloquium.
in the Saints that have lived upon Earth? Does it shine forth with a Heavenly
light here, in the actings of holy Angels, of our for ever blessed Savior, and
of our Almighty Father and Creator? Yea, shall this grace outlive thy hope,
and thy faith, be the Crown, and compleatment, of thy divine love, and the
height, and perfection of all other thy graces, in glory? Endeavor then to
follow their famous examples. Rest not in the cold, and middle Region, Acts
18.17.
of bare profession, with the careless Gallioes of the World, 2 Timothy 4.10.
and frozen Church-professors. The Demasses, of this last, and worst age, but
let thy holy zeal upon all occasions for the glory of thy God, and purity of
his Worship, and Doctrine, mount up even to the Fiery Region, and In his cause
be Boanerges, and like Gods Angels, Mark 3.17.
and Seraphins, a Cole, a flame of Fire. So shall thou excel and exceed,
others in this grace, in thy glorified state; Isa. 6.2.
as far as thou have gone before them in this life: Psalm. 104.4.
And as thou have been more gracious here, so thou shall be more glorious
hereafter. The larger thy Vessel, the larger thy Receipt. Every Vessel shall be
full, 1 Cor. 15.41.
and overflow, although much different in their measure. All shall be Stars,
although not of the like Magnitude. mat. 16.27.
The Saints at the first Resurrection being rewarded according to their works;
although not for their works. Ejaculation.
O Lord my God; is divine zeal, a holy flame, a Pyramid-like Fire, a Spring
toward Heaven, as to its own place? Is my heart my Souls shop, where it forges
affections, and this middle Region of my Body, like the middle Region of the
Air; cold, and naturally void of this thy heavenly Fire? Be pleased, I humbly
beseech thee, Acts 2 3.
to cause the same holy Spirit, that once sat in the likeness of Fiery
Tongues, upon the heads of thy Apostles, to rest upon, unthaw, and inflame, my
frozen heart, and affections; Then shall not its earthly, and sinful
qualities, of coldness, hardness, and ponderousness, chill, resist, or smother
the fervency, and intensness, of any of thy graces in me: since thy Almighty
Power, that produces lightning, in the cold middle Region of the Air, that
melts the Rock, and causes the Mountains, Aetna, Vesuvius, and Hecla to breath
forth flames of Fire; can, yea will (because thou have promised it) bring forth
and create in me a greater wonder, Ezekiel. 11.19.
even a new heart, and a new spirit; a heart of Flesh, instead of a heart of
Stone. Then shall I be not only zealous in all my actings for thee; but
frequent, and zealous, in my praises to thee, in this life of Grace, and that
of Glory, to Eternity; Amen.

Of the affection of holy anger glorified.
All affections in this life, as love, fear, zeal, and the rest, (although
sanctified) in their heighths, and intensiveness, by reason of the weakness of
the Organ, and our decayed nature, may put the whole Man to pain, and in that
respect, are called Passions; yet it shall cease to be so with us in our
glorified condition. Where, whatsoever that flows from Infirmity, or
Imperfection, shall be done away. In the new Jerusalem, there shall be neither
sorrow, Rev. 21.4.
nor pain. We shall then be as the Apostle exhorts, not only (when occasions
shall be offered) not to be angry without sin; Ephesians. 4.26.
but without passion, or disturbance. Being herein like to God, and the holy
Angels, (whose Image shall then be perfectly renewed in us) and who in the
Scripture (although I grant it to be meant not properly, Ezekiel. 13.13.
but Anthropopathos) is often declared, to be angry. But as to the Elect
Angels, I conceive they may, as truly be said to be angry, (witness that famous
opposition of Balaam) and that action of the Angel, Numb. 22.22.
that with his drawn Sword was ready to destroy Jerusalem, for David's Sin) as
to rejoice greatly for the conversion of a sinner. 2 Samuel 24.16.
Luke 15.10.
If then such accidental affections, are testified to be in glorious Angels,
why not much rather in glorified Saints? unless by cessation of so eminent a
grace (as holy anger) we should irrationally conceive, the Saints less perfect,
in this new life, than in the other. Especially, since the sole object of this
holy affection, the Sin, Blasphemy, and Rebellion of wicked Souls, and Devils,
to the dishonor of God, shall continue, and in that great and long day, or
time of their Judgment, be more universally manifested to their view, than
ever, as also afterward in Hell to Eternity. Anger here (though for Gods cause)
may possibly inflame the Eyes, distort the Visage of a Saint, but its lipe, as
the modest blush of a Virgin, does add beauty to her Face, so shall this
zealous flaming Grace of holy anger, add light to light, and glory to the glory
of a Saint,

O my Soul, Soliloquium.
is holy anger a saving and gracious affection? a part of the glorious Image of
God in a Saint? Do the holy and blessed Angels (as the Scriptures witness) in
their zeal to Gods glory, and hatred of Sin, express it in their constant
oppositions, and inflictions of Gods Judgments upon wicked Men, and Devils?
Yea, is it an Apostolical Precept, and Duty, to be angry, and sin not? Shall
this grace have (even in Heaven) continual objects and occasions to exercise it
self to Gods glory, and thy own? O write after this Copy, and endeavor that
this grace may not be seldom, and casually, but habitually in thee here upon
Earth. Let it be one of the Mortifiers, and Crucifiers of thy lusts, as they
were the Murderers of thy Savior. Let it dash out the brains of all these
Babell Beasts, against the Stones of holy reproofs, Psalm. 137.9.
even the accursed issue of thy sinful thought, words, and actions. Let this
God-like passion resist the Devil, in all his subtle and powerful temptations,
and he shall undoubtedly fly from thee. Yea, let this grace imitate, and
second the holy Spirit, John 16.8.
in reproving, and convincing the ungodly World of Sin. So shall thou be
preserved from the Commission of all evil, triumph over all thy worldly and
spiritual Enemies, and be prepared by thy more full extent, and acting of this
grace here, to be of an higher form in the blessed exercise thereof in Glory. O
All-mighty Creator, Ejaculation.
who have made my heart the seat of my affections, and placed it in the Center
of my Body, that it might affect, and influence every part alike; Let it not, I
humbly beseech thee, be any longer like the middle Region of the Air, the
coldest part of this Micro-cosme, and void of this Heavenly heat of holy anger.
But let this sanctified affection, flash forth like thunder, and lightning, and
burn up, and destroy every crude and evil thought, word, and action, as soon as
they appear; and purge this Element of my Heart, and Soul, from all the
infectious, noxious, and sinful vapors of vain and sinful thoughts, that
arise from this Earth, this Body of Death, and Sin, that incompasses me about,
Romans 7.24.
that they may never come to the maturity of wicked actions; or if they do,
they may be as it were Thunder stricken, and torn up by the Roots, and not
able to stand before this flaming grace: Heb. 12.29.
so shall I be like thee, who art as a flaming Fire, consuming all Iniquity.
That so being renewed, and fashioned according to thy Image, in this World, by
such holy affections, I may be assured of theirs, and my greater perfection in
the World to come, when I shall be made like thee, i^ thy Image of Glory; Amen.

As the light of the Sun to the World, so is the affection of joy to the Soul:
Of Joy glorified, etc.
when it arises, there is day* when it sets, an uncomfortable night. Man in his
innocence, enjoyed a polar day, a continued presence thereof; but having lost
God its cause, and object, the effect ceased; not that the Soul is disrobed of
the affection, but of the true use of it: hence the distinction of a spiritual,
and carnal joy. The first is the true, only found, and beginning afresh to bud,
in the renewed Saints and favorites of God, (for a stranger shall not
intermeddle with their joy) but the other is momentary, and illegitimate; as
being begotten in the Soul, by false objects; and is as it were the Moonlight
of the wicked. The object then of true joy is God, and that in this
consideration, as he is inclusively and exclusively the complete happiness of
the Creature. Whereby it comes to pass that the godly, and reprobate, may both
rejoice in the same things, as Wifes, Children, Honors, Estates, etc. And yet
the joy of the one, be holy, and spiritual; of the other, carnal and wicked.
Leaving then the sensual mirth, which is deceivable, sinful, and temporary, my
thoughts pitch upon the Solace of the Elect, which the Scripture styles the joy
of the Holy Ghost, unspeakable, and glorious, the first fruits, Ezekiel. 9.3. 1
Pet. 1.8.
and earnest of their future happiness. By these glimpse (O ye Saints) of God's
may ye judge of that full light you shall there enjoy. Which if unspeakable
here, shall surely be there unconceivable. Alas, what can I then think, and
meditate of it* chiefly negatively thus, that there shall be no cloudings, nor
intermissions there, no measure of our joy; for we shall continually behold
God, and in him see all the grounds of rejoicing. If here excesses have proved
mortal, their exceedings shall make us more immortal; this being an increasing,
and reviving, not a surfeiting fullness. The capacity of the affection being
gradually and continually augmented according to the plentiful infusion; our
joys multiplying there, even to Eternity. The growth of our graces here,
although God be seen of us, through the cleft of the Rock, as to Moses,
teaching, discovering, and evincing; a continued and far greater augmentation
in glory hereafter. O blessed and happy estate, which is not diminished by
Eternity: but is as unlimitable, as lasting. O happy place wherein all joys
meet their objects in one Center. There shall we possess, and enjoy, not
guttatim, but according to the fullness of each Vessel, God our gracious Father,
Christ our merciful Savior, the Holy Spirit our everlasting Comforter, the
glorious Angels, and Archangels, our Fellow Servants, the Holy Patriarchs and
Prophets, our Tryumphant Leaders, the pious Apostles and valiant Martyrs our
victorious Champions; together with the many millions successively of religious
Professors. There shall we meet and rejoice in the like felicity of all our
virtuous Parents, Brothers, Sisters, Wifes, Children, Kindred and Friends.
There shall we inherit unvaluable and incorruptible riches; Be installed in
Thrones of unchangeable and incorruptible honors; and be filled with all
unspeakable and Soul-ravishing delights. To conclude, whatsoever things either
in conception, or possibility, can affect, or rejoice the glorified Soul, are
there; not interchangeably, but contemporarily, and continuedly obvious, and
present. And on the contrary, all things whatsoever that may lessen, or offend
in the least degree this divine ecstasy, have an impossibility of subsistence
in this Eternal Paradise. And that not only in regard of the presence, but of
the decree of God himself. Therefore needs must this joy be ineffably complete,
Rev. 21.4.
to which all things concur for its perfection. O Divine condition, which shall
thus sweetly impe, and restore these mouldring and broken Wings of my Soul. O
blissfull Paradise, and Chrystaline Sea, upon which these now maimed Feet of my
affections, Rev. 4.6.
shall walk, or rather evenly slide, free from all rubs, thorns, and sinful
interruptions. O how melodious will the harmony of these Strings be, when
mounted to the highest Key, not to Ela, but to Eli! Methinks the very
Contemplation of this life, should so ravish my Soul, and actuate these Wings,
these Feet, that they should not only brake Prison, but carry her up in an holy
ecstasy to these glorious Mansions. O that this pious love, and holy joy, fixed
to the Fiery Chariot of a true zeal, moulding this Dust, burning up this Chaff,
at least letting fall this fleshly Mantle, would make me a second Elias* in a
speedy ascent, and present fruition of my God. But alas poor Soul, how are thy
Wings limed, thy Feet lamed, thy Chariot-wheels clogged, with Earth, and Sins? O
by way of preparation, since certainly Elias shall be parted from Elisha, thy
Soul from thy Body, let the sharp beak of the Law, pick and prune thy Wings;
the healing Oil of the Gospel, supple thy Feet; and thy Heavenly Conversation
of a Christian, disburden thy motion, that when the Whirlwind of Death, shall
make a separation, thou may cheerfully and swiftly, go up alive unto the
Heavens.

Of the Body glorified.
The Body has, during these my last Meditations, seemed to sleep in the dust.
But since the Body (as has been showed) shall have a glorious Resurrection at
the last Day; so it must be raised here also, by my weak thoughts, as the fit,
and next object of a Christians faith. I believe then, 1 Cor. 15.52.
that at the shrill sound of the last Trumpet, which is no other, than the
mighty, and powerful voice of our Archangel, Christ Jesus, the innumerable
Atoms of my Body shall incorporate, Dan. 12.2.
and after the reunion of my Soul, stand up a most glorious substance;
mortality putting on immortality; 1 Cor. 15.53.
and corruption, incorruption. This Worm-hill, this mouldering Hutt of white,
and red Sands shall then inherit the name of an eternal mansion, and become not
as now a little Cage, a loathsome Dungeon, but the glorious Palace of the
Soul. O surpassing glory of this re-animated Phaenix! So excessively radiant,
that the Holy Spirit, (who is eloquence and truth it self) pitches upon the
most illustrious of visible Creatures, the Sun, the light, to be the
resemblance of this divine transfiguration. The righteous shall shine like the
Sun, Mat. 13.43.
in the Kingdom of their Father: Dan. 12.3.
They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they
that turn many to righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever.

The Jewish Temple seems to be a resemblance of this Temple of God; Man
glorified; in which the Body may be styled the Sanctum, the Soul, through the
inhabitation of the Holy Spirit, the Sanctum Sanctorum; Oh, if that Earthly
Temple transcended others, and Heaven be Heaven, because of the more special
manifestation of Gods glorious presence there, shall not each glorified Saint,
be a Heaven of Heavens? It being a necessary and consequent Truth, that the
great God will more declare his excellency in his living members, then in his
inanimate works, in his adopted Sons, than in his inferior Creatures, and
Mansions. If an humble heart, Esaias 66.2.
contrite for Sin, be now Gods dwelling, shall not a sanctified heart purified
from Sin, become then his Throne of Majesty. Our Bodies which now Imprison and
Eclipse the Soul's luster, shall then not only be coagile, but like a
Chrystaline Lanthorn transparent, and coruscant, not hiding, but by a radiant
concomitancy, augmenting the others splendor. For as in the Sun there is the
containing, and the contained, the sphere and the light, yet both conspire, and
meet in a height of brightness; or as in sounds, strings apart musical, being
struck together, produce a harmony; so though the Body, and Soul are two
distinct excellencies, yet being united they shall mutually conveigh and
reflect their beauty, conducing to and effecting a joint perfection of Glory.
Further, whereas the Creator is now but in part magnified in Man, because of
the partial knowledge of our selves, as concerning the admirable secrets and
excellent curiosities of the humanity: Then not only our understanding but our
Eyes, and other bodily senses shall coadjute to make each Saint a most exact
Anatomist, a most divine Philosopher. O let not then that better covetousness
of secular knowledge, make us bankrupts in spirituals; Let not imprudent
pursuits after the shadow, make us overrun the substance. Being confident of
this, that a true Christians life, shall not prove then as it is now by the
World accounted of, a devourer of time, folly, and madness, but a Tree of Life
in the midst of Eternity. Yea, a Tree of Knowledge, whose fruits shall be fully
ripe in Heaven. Perplex not thy self then, vain Sophister, in those
scholasticals, and endless labyrinths; I mean those difficult, and so much
controverted Questions, whether the Soul be ex traduce, or immediately from
God? whether it be confined to a Throne, or Tota in toto, and tota in qualibet
part? Whether there be three distinct Souls in Man, or only the rational? How
the Soul sees, hears, smells, tastes, touches by those senses? Whether we see
Intra mittendo, or extra mittendo of the species? Whether the course of the
blood be circular, or direct? whether odours nourish, or only refresh? with
many others of the like stamp. Rather, O wandering Disputant, let thy chief
study, be to resolve these questions thus, that in our Saviors sense, thou art
born of God; that thou art wholly holy in every part, both of Soul and Body;
that he the incomprehensible, three in one, is Soul of thy Soul, and sees,
hears, tastes, smells and touches, in thy chaste looks, devout attentions,
spiritual relishes, faithful imbracements, and in the sweet savor of a pious
conversation. That thy holy love, the blood of action, and the life of
practice, is circular, and endless, having God to be its Center, that from him
it may receive daily, new Spirits, and new fervor. That thy Prayers, which the
learned, call Gods perfume, his incense, do not only revive* but by the
powerful attraction of saving grace feed thee to Eternal life.

Such thoughts as these O Man, if practical, shall make thee transcend the
natural, and become a divine Philosopher: These exercises, which are the study
of Angels, and the liberal Arts of Heavens Academy, end in the perfection of
knowledge. But to proceed, O my Soul, thou now groanest under a Body of Lead,
made up of corrupted flesh, and stuffed full with noisome humors, either so fat,
as it sweats under its own burden; or so lean, and weak, that it needs wooden
supports. In its motion, is so Worm-like, that its contemptible, if compared
with the pace of most four-footed Creatures. But in this thy melioration, it
shall become thy winged Chariot, and be as swift as thy thoughts can imagine,
or thy wish desire, even like lightning (then which it shall be far more
sprightfull) passing in an instant from one end of the Heaven to the other, thy
whole body shall be then all feet, not moving, as now, but incredibly, swiftly
guiding through those immeasurable spaces of the Empyrean Heavens. These
Locomotive Mussels, if at all useful shall then only serve for the graver
measures of Glory: for our Bodies shall, as the Apostle speaks, be made like
unto Christ's glorious body, not only in its splendor, but in its voluntary
motion, and other glorified qualities. Now as he ascended* so (said the Angels)
shall he descend; not step, by step, but as it is most like, with inconceivable
celerity; else could not the first Century, have confessed him to be at the
right hand of his Father, in the highest Heavens a hundred of years, not being
sufficient according to Astronomical discoveries, to have ascended so many
millions of miles. Nor could the Saints, after the Judgment past, under the
expense of many years, attain those Heavenly Mansions. The glorified Soul being
now to re-enter, reassume, and to be reunited to its own body, cheerfully takes
possession, and finds it raised, filled and prepared by the Almighty Power of
the Creator, for its habitation. Not as formerly, a Prison, hindering and
streightning its faculties, and their enlarged operations, by reason of
Organical deficiencies; but made in every part, member, and sense, capacious
and proportionate to its utmost activity. Not as formerly a natural, weighty,
dull, and earthly body, but a Celestial, Heavenly and spiritual body. Not as
formerly (occasioned by the curse of sin) corruptible and mortal, Genesis 3.19.
but incorruptible and immortal. Not as formerly weak, and infirm, especially
at Death, pale, noisome, filthy, and dishonorable, but powerful, and shining
with glory, according to the Word of Truth, declared by the Apostle. 1 Cor.
15.42, 43, 44,
It is sown in Corruption, it is raised in Incorruption, it is sown in
dishonor; it is raised in Glory, it is sown in weakness, it is raised in
Power, it is sown a natural Body, it is raised a spiritual Body; As we have
borne the Image of the Earthly, 49,
so shall we bare the Image of the Heavenly; 50,
for Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does
corruption inherit incorruption, 53,
for this corruptible, must put on incorruption, 54,
and this mortal must put on immortality; Then shall be brought to pass the
saying, that is written, Hos. 13.14.
Hosea the thirteenth, Verse. the fourteenth, Death is swallowed up in Victory.
From the preceding Scripture, is evidently proved, that the glorification of
our bodies shall principally consist; First, in being raised spiritual, and
heavenly bodies; Secondly, in being made shining and glorious; Thirdly, in
their being incorruptible, and immortal; of all which more particularly, and
first of their spirituality, and heavenliness.

Our present bodies, although they are compounded of the four Elements, yet are
made up in an unequal mixture, the proportion being much less of Water, than of
Earth, and much less of Air, than of Water, and of Fire, than of Air.
Therefore our Bodies have the denomination from Earth, and not from any of the
rest, and are called in the foregoing Text, 1 Cor. 15.34.
Earthly Bodies. And much different in their mixture from the Bodies of Fishes,
Fowls, Meateors. This also our natural motion declares. For being placed in
any one of the three other Elements, and left at liberty, by reason of our
Earthly ponderousness, we violently move toward the Center of the Earth, of
which we were formed, and upon which is our habitation. 1 These. 4.17.
But our state, place, and condition being to be changed, at the resurrection
of the just, our bodies (that shall be a live at the Lords second coming) shall
be changed. 1 Cor. 15.51. Job 19.26, 27.
And though the same bodies for matter, and substance, (as says holy Job)
shall be raised, yet much differing from what they were before, as to their
mixture, and qualities. And therefore are said to be raised Spiritual, and
Heavenly Bodies. A further proof whereof the Holy Spirit gives us in that Text,
wherein he says the Lord Jesus Christ shall change our vile Body, that it may
be fashioned like unto his glorious Body, Phil. 3.21.
according to the working, whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto
himself. The same witnesses the beloved Apostle, in that his blessed gradation,
and comparison, of our present, 1 John 3.2.
and future more glorious condition; Beloved, now we are the Sons of God, and
it does not yet appear what we shall be; But we know, that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. Whence note, this
Apostle, or the rest, did not, yea could not, with their then bodily eyes,
behold him, as he was then risen from the dead, he vailing his glory in
condescension to their present state.

A second Heavenly, and Spiritual quality of the Saints glorified Bodies, is a
swift and speedy local motion prophesied of (as many interpret that place) in
the Prophet Isay, They that wait upon the Lord, Isaiah 40.31.
shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with Wings as Eagles, they
shall run, and not be weary, and they shall walk and not faint. Which I cannot
better manifest to our weak apprehensions, than by comparing it to a flash of
lightning; which in an instant, passes from the East, to West, and from one
Port of the vast Canopy of Heaven, to the other. This quality, also, was
manifested to be in our Saviors glorified Body upon Earth, (like to which we
shall be raised) by his swift passage from Jerusalem, 1 Cor. 15.5, 6, 7, 8.
(being many score miles) to a Mountain in Galilee, when he was seen of five
hundred Brethren at once. And from Jerusalem to the Sea of Tiberius, John 21.1.
when he did eat with Peter and the rest, after the great draught of Fishes.
And from thence to Jerusalem again, Acts 1.9, 12.
at his Ascension from Mount Olivet; And which is also most demonstrable, by
his descent from Heaven to the Air, when he spoke to, Acts 9.5.
and was seen of Paul in the way to Damascus; which, without doubt, was a
personal, not a visional appearance; since the Apostle adds, that to his other
personal appearances, 1 Cor. 15.8.
saying, last of all, he was seen of me; which had not it been real, had been
but a slender proof of our Saviors Resurrection. To which end, Mat. 22.30.
he there vouches it. As our Souls are now like the Angels, yea, Angels in the
Flesh, so then, our Bodies, as to this Spiritual quality, shall be raised, like
our Souls. That so their future union may be lasting, and complete, and this
Marriage may continue, and be indissolveable. In which respect the Apostle
says, they shall be raised not only spiritual, 1 Cor. 15.50.
but heavenly bodies, as fitted to dwell in that place; 2 Cor. 12.2.
which for the matter Philosophers call a Quint-essence, far more refined, than
any, or all the four Elements; Psalm. 68.33.
and which the Scripture calls the Heaven of Heavens, Col. 1.12.
and the Inheritance of the Saints in light.

O my Soul, shall thy Body at that great change, and resurrection of the just,
Soliloquium.
be raised, heavenly, and spiritual, like the body of our Lord, be pure as the
Essence, of Angels, as speedy, and quick, as to motion, as the lightning, and
fitted to inhabit Heaven? Have a high value, and esteem of it, and make not
this Vessel of honor, by sinning, a Vessel of dishonor, the Members of
Christ, the Members of a Harlot; the Image of God and Christ, the Image of
Satan; the Temple of the Holy Ghost, a Stie, yea, a Hell of unclean lusts. But
labor as much to be like Christ in holiness, and righteousness, as thou
hopest, and desire, to be like him, in glory. Let thy Members be
spiritualized, and heavenized, and made Members of holiness unto righteousness.
Col. 3.3, 4.
And let thy conversation be in Heaven, where thy habitation shall be. For our
life is hid in Christ with God; 1 These. 4.17.
and when he appears, we shall appear also with him in glory, and be ever with
the Lord.

Ejaculation.
O omnipotent God, and gracious Father, in my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; who
in the beginning, made Man after thy own Image, in holiness, and in
righteousness of body, and soul, as having from everlasting decreed, that thy
only begotten Son, the Eternal Word, should be made Flesh, John 1.14.
and become Man; And therefore thou saidest, let us make Man in our Image,
after our likeness; (for to thee all things past and future, are as in their
present being*) in thy great goodness, pity, Genesis 1.26.
and with infinite compassions, behold what a sad, and miserable change,
Satan, and Sin, have made in thy Image, and Creature. Thou have made Man
upright, Eccles. 7.29.
but they have sought out many inventions. Yea, every imagination of the
thoughts of Man's heart, are only evil continually. Genesis 6.5.
Their hearts are deceitful above all things, Jer. 17.9.
and desperately wicked, who can know them? Their bodies are become so like
Satan, that they may well be called Devils incarnate. Psalm. 36.4.
Their Heads imagine mischief continually; their Eyes are altogether set upon
vanity; their Ears are soon set open to let in all verbal uncleanness; their
Smell is fumed with pride; their Pallates are fur'd with gluttony, and excess;
and their touch is the pander of lust, and lasciviousness; their Mouths,
Tongues, Psalm. 5.9.
and Throats are open Sepulchers; their right hands are full of bribes,
iniquity, and oppression; and their Feet walk in the way of sinners, Prove. 6.18.
and are swift in running to mischief. In sum, the whole Body is a Cage of
unclean lusts, and the wicked Instruments of all ungodliness, and
unrighteousness. O merciful Creator, this is our sinful condition by nature.
But thou have promised to change these vile bodies, and to make them glorious
bodies, like the body of our Lord. O begin, I beseech thee, this change, and
new Creation, upon my body here; since they only that are sanctified, and made
new Creatures, shall be glorified; Rev. 20.6.
They only that are raised and have part in this first Resurrection from sin,
shall be raised, and have part in the second Resurrection, to Glory. Let it
appear that I am born again of Water, and the Spirit; and that Christ is
already formed in me; John 3.5.
and let all those senses and Members, Gal. 4.19.
which have been the Members of uncleanness, and to iniquity, unto iniquity, be
now the Members, and Servants of righteousness, Romans 6.19.
unto holiness; so shall my glory begin here in holiness, and righteousness,
and be completed hereafter in the perfection of Glory, Amen.

I proceed next to the second excellency of our Bodies at the Resurrection. Of
the glory of our bodies.
They shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, Dan. 12.3.
and as the Stars, for ever and ever. Yea, our blessed Savior far transcends
these expressions of the Angel in Daniel, Mat. 13.43.
and says, The righteous shall shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of
their Father. Yea, far higher, yet They shall partake of the Glory of God,
(which is far above all created Glory) he declaring, John 17.22.
that The glory God has given him, he had given them. All which is
comprehended in the fore-recited Texts. He shall make our vile Bodies like unto
his glorious Body. Phil. 3.21. 1 John 3.2.
And that when he shall appear, we shall be like him. To this great truth, the
Apostle Paul further bears witness, saying, Romans 8.17, 30.
Whom he justifies, them he also glorifies. That those that suffer with Christ,
shall also be glorified together with him. 2 Cor. 4.17.
And that our light affliction, which is but for a Moment, works for us, a
far more exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory. Colos. 3.4.
That when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall we also appear
with Him in Glory. Of this excelling, and blessed state of the People of God,
(in the darker times of the Church, under the Law) the Psalmist gives
testimony, saying, Let the Saints be joyful in Glory. Psalm. 149.5.
And of himself in particular, Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, Psalm.
73.24.
and after receive me into Glory. I shall conclude the proofs of this most
comfortable encouraging, and ravishing Doctrine, with the evidence of blessed
Peter, 1 Peter 5.4.
When the chief Shepward shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of Glory, that
fades not away. The God of all grace has called us into his Eternal Glory, by
Jesus Christ. Our blessed Savior in his great love to us, and for our
encouragement in his service, has not only from his own Mouth, and by his
Spirit in the Mouths of his Ministers, (as has been showed) verified this
precious truth, and illustrated it, by sensible similitudes; such as the Sun,
Stars, and Firmament* but became himself (even in his state of humiliation) a
Sign, Figure, and example of this glorious shining condition, and change of the
Bodies of his Saints, at the Resurrection, in that his wonderful, and
miraculous transfiguration, in the presence of Peter, James, and John, upon the
Mount; mat. 17.2, 4.
when his Face did shine as the Sun, and his Raiment was white, as the Light. A
sight so ravishing, and delightful, that it made Peter, although but a
Spectator, to forget Wife, and Family, and to look upon this World, as a
Dunghill, saying unto our Lord Jesus; Lord, it is good for us to be here, if
thou will let us make here three Tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses,
and one for Elias. Consider then, was this glorious change in our Savior so
superlatively delightful to Peter to behold? What shall it be to us in the
fruition? Certainly true is that Word of the Lord, 1 Cor. 2.9.
Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart
of Man, Isa. 64.4.
the things which God has prepared for them that love him. Our Souls are now
immund, or rather imprisoned with in a fleshly Wall, or Jaile, of whited Earth,
and like a poor Prisoner, has only the liberty to peep, and look out at the
Cinque Ports, or windows of the senses. Neither is it, or can it now be seen,
or truly known by our selves, or others. But then that Image of God, that
Angel-like Spirit, that most rich and inestimable Jewel, Acts 20 28.
purchased with the infinite precious blood of the Son of God, and valued by
him to be more worth than the whole World, shall dwell, Mat. 16.26.
and be housed in the body glorified, as in a shining, pure, and transparent
Crystal Cabinet. And shall be seen, and known, by Saints, (our selves, and
Angels) as to its form, to its glorious operations, and perfect beauty. The
resplendent body, like a Concave Mathematical Glass, not deminishing, but
magnifying, and adding to its excellent glory, and brightness. And moves
according to its will, from place to place, like an Angel, with incredible
swiftness. The Soul, acting with a more enlarged, and excellent advantage, as
to all its faculties, and operations, by the subserviency, union, and
concomitancy of the Members, and senses of our glorified bodies, than it could
do without them. Of which in their due place (with Gods assistance) I shall
treat more particularly.

O my Soul, shall thy frail fleshly body, Soliloquium.
be shining like the Stars, and the Firmament, in all its brightness; glorious
like the Sun, yea, like the brightest Son of Righteousness, and be replenisht
with the glory of God? mal. 4.2.
Shall it be thy radiant Garment, and super-excelling Ornament? Thy Chariot of
Triumph? Yea more, the completion of thy excellency, and Celestial happiness?
O give it now its due honor, and inslave it not to Satan, and to sinful
lusts. Thou shall shortly be thine, and the Angels glorious companion. Debase
it not so much, as to put it to dig and delve in the Earth, Hab. 2.6.
like a blind Mole. Nor to cloth it self with thick Clay, nor to feed upon
white, and yellow dust, which is the Serpents Meat, and curse; Genesis 3.14.
which shall, within a short space of time, shine like the Stars and Sun in the
Heavens.

Yea, suffer it not to be bespotted, and defiled, with uncleanness. Nor to be
joined, or united to an Harlot; which conjoined with thee, shall be a perfect,
and glorious Image of God incarnate, 1 Cor. 6.16.
and for ever the Spouse of Christ, 1 Cor. 6.19.
and the Habitation and Temple of God the Holy Ghost. What though as yet thou
art in a state of humiliation, ascend thou with our Lord, into the Mount, into
the high Mountain of Divine, and Heavenly Contemplation; being both in Body and
Soul raised from above the vanities of this low, and evil World. Let thy
converse be with Moses and Elias, the Law, and the Prophets; and by so doing,
thou shall be transformed, and transfigur'd, yea, thy face shall shine, and
thou shall be changed into the Image of God, from glory to glory, by the Spirit
of the Lord.

O Lord, my God, who art infinite in free grace, and mercy, Ejaculation.
in goodness, bounty, and liberality; and have abundantly manifested thy self
to be all this, to me (a poor and miserable sinner) in my Lord, and Savior,
Jesus Christ; whom thou have sent in my nature, to purchase for me, not only
salvation, from everlasting death; but such a shining, and glorious state, and
condition, of Soul, and Body, with thee, unto Eternity: give me a grateful
heart, and an obedient life, which is the real thankfulness of thy Children.
Yea, let the Meditation and application by faith, of this blessed and
transcendent change, not only ravish me in Spirit, as Peter was, at the sight
of the representation thereof, at our Lords Transfiguration; but let me with
holy Paul, follow after it, that I may apprehend that, Phil. 3.12.
for which, also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus, as counting my self not to
have apprehended; and therefore through thy grace, 13.
Let me forget, those things that are behind, and reach forth to the things
that are before, pressing toward the mark, for the price of the high calling
of God, in Christ Jesus. Verse 14.
Let me so run, not as uncertainly; so fight, 1 Cor. 9.26.
not as one that beats the Air, but keep under this my Body, and bring it
into subjection, least by any means, 27.
when I have instructed others, I my self should be a cast away. Gracious God
in order to this glorious, and new life, Romans 6.4, 5.
grant me to walk in newness of life, that I being planted together with my
Savior, in the likeness of his Death, (as to sin) I may be also raised with,
and by him, in the likeness of his Resurrection to Glory; 2 Cor. 7.1.
and having these precious promises, let me through faith in them, be by thee
enabled to cleanse my self, from all filthiness of the flesh, Heb. 12.14. Phil.
3.20. Eccles. 8.1.
and spirit, perfecting holiness in thy fear; for without holiness, none shall
see thy Face. O Lord, let my conversation be in Heaven, although my body be on
earth. And since thy Word says, Jam. 3.17.
a Man's wisdom makes his Face to shine, give me that true wisdom that is from
above. And since thou have, in infinite mercy, given me this blessed hope, that
even my body shall shine, and be glorious, like the Stars, and Sun, after this
life; Joh. 5.35.
give me grace in this life to be a burning, and shining light, with John the
Baptist, and to be harmless, and blameless, Phil. 2.15.
a Son of God without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation. Amongst whom, let me shine as a Light in the World, that they
seeing my good works, may glorify thee my Heavenly Father, Amen. Matthew. 5.16.


I proceed now to the third Heavenly excellency of our Bodies glorified, after
the Resurrection; viz. Of the incorruption and immortality of our glorified
bodies.
Their incorruptibility and immortality. In order to our more clear
understanding, of this so wonderful a change, in which, as says the Apostle,
This Corruptible, 1 Cor. 15.53.
must put on Incorruption; and this mortal, must put on immortality, I shall
from the ground of right reason, and natural Philosophy, humbly offer these
considerations: First, that the body of Man is compounded (although unequally)
of the four Elements. And that at Death, which is the dissolution of the Soul,
Eccles. 12 7.
and Body. The Spirit returns to him that gave it; and the Body returns to the
four Elements, the first Principles of which it was compounded. This is
illustrated, and proved from Scripture, which witnesses, Revel. 20.13.
that at the Resurrection, The Sea gave up her Dead; that is, that part of the
substance of the Bodies that were in it; and Death and Hell (that is, the
Earth, or Grave) delivered up the Dead that were in them. Further, this must be
granted, as an undeniable maxim, that as none but God, our Almighty Creator,
can make something of nothing; so none but he can annihilate any Creature, or
any Atom of a Creature, so as to make that something nothing. If this be a
certain truth, (as assuredly it is;) and that the Lord has declared in his
Word, that the same Bodies in which the Soul lived here upon Earth, shall again
appear, and be raised at the Resurrection, (as inspired Job attests) saying, I
know that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall stand at the latter Day upon
Earth, Job 19.25.
and though after my skin Worms destroy this Body, 26,
yet in my Flesh, shall I see God. 27.
Whom I shall see, for my self; and my Eyes shall behold, and not another,
though my Reins be consumed within me: Then certainly, at, and after death,
that part of our Bodies that is a part of the four Elements, from a Principle,
sympathy, law, and instinct of nature, (the compositum and structure being
dissolved, and separated) shall return to that Element, of which it is a part;
where it shall be kept, and preserved, by the all-governing Power, and
providence of God, as in a Womb, or Treasury, until its new birth, at the
Resurrection.

2 Peter 3.13.
In the next place, consider, that when the Lord makes a new Heaven, and a new
Earth, according to his promise; Genesis 7.11.
(which I humbly conceive) only extends to this Orb of Earth, and Water, and
to the Regions, and Elements of the Air, Genesis 8.2.19.24.
and Fire; these two last, are most frequently in Scripture, called Heaven.
That flaming and Aetherial Fire (not Elementary) in which the Lord Jesus shall
descend, Job 1.16.
and appear, with the ten thousands of glorified Souls, 2 Kings 1.10.
and Angels, and which shall consume all the wicked that are then in the World,
2 These. 1.8.
and burn up their works; shall accordingly, as it is the nature, and true
effect, and property of Fire, Jude 14.
to purge and purify each of the four Elements, from all that dross and
corruptible quality, that has intermixed, and cleaved unto them, by the
righteous Judgment, and curse of God for Man's sin. Whence shall proceed that
admirable change, as to their qualities, (although not of their substance)
deserving the name, in the Scripture promise, of a new Heaven, and of a new
Earth; As it is most excellently set forth by Saint Paul in these words; Romans
8.19,
For the earnest expectation of the Creature, wait for the manifestation of the
Sons of God. For the Creature was made subject to vanity, 20,
not willingly, but by reason of him, who has subjected the same in hope;
Because the Creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, 21,
into the glorious liberty of the Children of God. For we know that the whole
Creation groaneth, 22.
and travelleth in pain together, until now. The Elements then, are made like
unto the Heavenly supreme Orbs; pure, lucid, and incorruptible. Hence I infer,
that these four Elements being thus wonderfully changed in their qualities, and
made incorruptible; in which, respectively, the several parts, and ingredients
of our Bodies are laid up, and reserved, as being naturally a part of them;
There must necessarily follow, the same and the like change, and alteration, in
the matter and substance of our Bodies also. Whence it will follow, that
although the first change, in the Elements, is supernatural, and wonderful;
that, in our Bodies will naturally follow, as an effect from that cause. Our
great God, as in the first Creation, caused the production of all things, out
of their first matter, as so many streams from that Fountain; so in this new,
and second birth of things, he as a rational, and natural Agent, produces this
excellent change in the forementioned qualities of our new-raised Bodies, to
be a necessary, and certain effect, flowing from the change of the principles,
out of which they are compounded. It being more than probable, that the
Resurrection of our Bodies, shall immediately succeed, the making of the new
Heaven, and the new Earth, the Saints habitation; as it was in the first
Creation; when the Lord made the Earth, and all the Creatures, first, before he
made Man, the Lord, and Possessor of it, Genesis 1.26.
and them.

The premises being granted; I thence conclude, that as Mortality, is a
necessary effect, and consequent, of corruption, so the immortality of the Body
(to use the Apostles phrase) is as necessary an effect, and consequent, of
incorruption. For that substance that can never more be corrupted, may truly be
said to be everlasting, and according to the Apostles expression, immortal:
Death signifying, either in sensible, or vegitable Creatures, a putred and evil
change, or alteration; as also a debasing, diminishing, and deforming
separation; as being the curse, and fruit of Sin, and abhorrent to nature.

Having hitherto discoursed of this mavelous change of our Bodies at the
Resurrection, and given some natural reasons thereof, as a Philosopher; I must
now as a Christian, ascend higher, and prove this eminent change, to proceed
also from a far higher and nobler cause, than mere nature; even from the
spiritual, real, and mystical union, of our Persons, through faith, and the
Eternal Spirit, as Members to our Head the Lord Jesus, who is God-Man, blessed
for ever.

As since sin, God has enacted this to be one of the Statutes of Nature, It is
appointed to Men once to dye; And by another Law of Nature, after Death, has
dissolved this Microcosme of Soul from Body; Every part of the body (as has
been showed) returns to its proper Element: John 1.14.
so by the Law of Christ, God-Man, the Eternal Word, that was made Flesh, it is
decreed and affirmed, John 6.47.
as an indubitable truth, That he that believes in him has everlasting life.
And though he were dead, yet shall he live. John 11.25.
Whosoever lives and believes in him, shall never dye. John 11.26.
From hence it is most clear, that in a spiritual sense, the death of the
Saints, is no death; they being so united by faith, that although the Soul be
divided from the Body, and each Elementary part of the body, be divided from
the other; yet neither Soul nor Body, or any grain, John 14.6.
or part thereof, can be separated from our head the Lord Jesus, in whom (who
is eternal life) is our life. Though we are dead in a natural sense, Colos. 3.3.
yet we live spiritually in and by his Spirit. In which sense also the whole
mystical body of Christ, the universal Church, and every Member thereof, is
said to be joined to the Lord, and is one Spirit; 1 Cor. 6.17.
as being by the Holy Ghost (the ever-living God, that fills all things, the
Spirit of the Father, and the Son) as by an unmeasurable, 1 Cor. 12.13.
and everlasting Ligament, tied, and united to the Lord Jesus, our head. So
that, like as it is said of the Soul, That it is tota, in toto, and tota in
qualibet part: So it may be said, that the for ever blessed Spirit of God the
Father and the Son, in and by this ineffable union, and in dwelling, is wholly
and spiritually, both before and after death, in our Souls, and in our Bodies,
and in every part of them, although never so far (by reason of a natural death)
separated one from another. Here note, that although the Scripture declares,
that in God all things live, move, and have their being, as he is their
Creator, and Preserver, and in whom, Acts 17.28.
and by whom they act, and have their subsistence, yet the difference is very
great, betwixt that life of the Creatures on Earth, and this life of the
Saints, both as to the nature, and duration of it. That flowing from his
Almighty power, and goodness, as a Creator; this from his Eternal love, as our
Father in Christ; that life, being temporary; this life Eternal; as flowing
from the highest Principle, our spiritual, and real union unto God in Christ.
For the further clearing, and proof of which immortality, as well of our
Bodies, as of our Souls, consider the words of our blessed Savior, As the
Father has life in himself, John 5.26.
so has he given to the Son, to have life in himself. John 14.6, 19.
I am the way, the truth, and the life; because I live, ye shall live also.
Thou have given me power over all flesh, John 17.2.
that I should give Eternal Life to as many as thou have given me. My Sheep
hear my voice, and I give unto them Eternal Life. Joh. 10.27, 28.
To these let us for further testimony add the expressions of the Apostle Paul;
Gal. 2.20.
The life which I now live in the Flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God.
Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. Our life is hid with
Christ in God. Colos. 3.3, 4.
When Christ, which is our life, shall appear, then shall we appear with him in
Glory. The first Man was made a living Soul, 1 Cor. 15.45, 46.
the last Adam was made a quickening Spirit. That was not first which is
spiritual, but that which is natural, and afterward that which is spiritual. 1
Cor. 12.13.
By one Spirit we are Baptized into one Body, whether we be Jew, or Gentile,
whether we be bond, or free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit.
He that is joined unto the Lord, 1 Cor. 6.17.
is one Spirit. By these bright Scripture-lights is evidently discovered, and
manifested to us; that as the head in the natural body, contains the animal
spirit, and conveyeth, and gives animation to all the Members of the Body; so
the Lord Christ God-Man in one Person, is the head of his Spiritual, and
mystical Body, the Universal Church; and that from him alone, not only that
spiritual life consisting in holiness, and righteousness; but also that
eternal, and immortal life, in which, both in Soul, and Body, we shall live in
him, and with him at the Resurrection for ever, and for ever, is given and
communicated into every Member of his body, the Church united to him, in this
life, by a true faith, and by the animation and in-dwelling of the Holy Ghost;
who is the life and spirit of God the Father, and of God the Son. Therefore in
these, and other Scriptures, God the Father is sometimes called our life;
other-times, Christ and the Holy Ghost is said to be our life; thereby
evidencing, that this eternal life of the Saints, has its immediate rise, and
Original from the Trinity in Unity, God blessed for ever. Not by participation
of the Essence of the Godhead, but by the real, and spiritual union, of their
Persons, as Members of Christ's mystical Body, unto the Person of Christ;
through faith, and the inhabitation and vivification of the Holy Ghost. The
first of which ( viz. Faith) shall cease, and be swallowed up (after death) in
fruition. But the other shall continue to Eternity.

From what I have here offered, although in great weakness, (for who is
sufficient for these things?) I hope it is abundantly cleared, that the eternal
life of the Saints, and the glorious incorruptability, and immortality of their
Bodies, flows from a far higher Principle, or cause, than from only mere
nature, made new, refined, and incorruptable. And that though the Elements
through their incorruptability, are become Eviternal, like the Superior Orbs;
and are in a natural possibility (if God please) so to continue, without
change, or alteration, Everlastingly; yet in all this, they fall far short of
the Eternal duration, of the glorified Souls and bodies of the Saints; which
have not only a perpetuity, arising from the refined, and incorruptible nature,
but an Eternity, flowing from the spiritual, real, and inseparable union of
their Persons through faith, and the Holy Ghost, to the Person of the Lord
Jesus Christ God-man, as Members united to their Head. In which respect,
besides the declared positive, and unchangeable decree, and promises of God,
(who cannot lie) as these Scriptures witness amongst many others formerly
mentioned, viz. Joh. 3.16.
God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal life. Who so eats my
Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the
last Day. The Saints I say are placed and fixed in such a blessed and certain
state and condition, as living spiritually in God, Joh. 6.54.
Joh. 14.19, 20.
and God in them, as has been proved, that it is as possible for God, who is
Eternal Life, to perish and dye, Joh. 17.22, 23.
as for any of his Saints to dye or perish, John 6.56.
that live by and in his life; according to that unanswerable Argument of our
Lord and Savior. John 6.57.
As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father, so he that eats
me, even he shall live by me; Because I live, ye shall live also. John 14.19.
To conclude, I humbly conceive that this Eternal Life of the Saints, as to the
reason and nature thereof, far transcends the Eternal Life of the glorious
Angels, in that as far as is revealed in Scripture, their life was given them
by an act of Gods goodness, will and power in their first Creation, and is
preserved, continued and confirmed, to the Elect Angels, by an act of his
grace. And therefore, those of them that kept not their first state, Jude 6.
are forever separated from God, (who is life) and swallowed up into Eternal
Death; whereas the life, even to the Saints, proceeding from Gods spiritual
inhabitation, and communion, with them, is undeterminable, unchangeable,
inseparable; and is therefore Eternal.

O my Soul, shall this thy impure, mortal body, immediately after the making of
a new Heaven, Soliloquium.
and a new Earth; the refining of the four Elements, of which it was formed,
and out of which it shall again be raised, and reassumed, appear at the
Resurrection of the just, as having its substance purified, and made
incorruptible? Therefore according to the Scripture Phrase, immortal, and
everlasting, like as are the bright and superior Orbs? Yea, which is much more
wonderful; shall this incorruptability, everlastingness, and immortality of
thy soul, and body, be unchangeable, and eternal, because thy Person is
spiritually, and really united, by the indwelling of the Holy Ghost, unto the
Person of Christ thy Head, and unto God in Christ, who is Eternal Life? yea
lastly, does this life excel and transcend, as in respect of the cause, and
nature of it, the life and being of all other Creatures, even of the ever
blessed Angels, as being built, not only as theirs is, upon the Basis of Gods
creating power, and goodness, which gives a being to all things, but is
established upon his declared promise, and eternal truth; and has its
unalterable duration from our dwelling, 1 John 1.3.
and living in God, and he in us, and from that inseparable fellowship, we have
with the Father, and the Son, in the communion of the Holy Ghost?

O my Soul, are these things true? Have they been evidenst to thee out of the
Scripture of truth? O how ought thou in all humility, and enlarged
thankfulness, to prostrate thy self at the footstool of thy infinite, good,
gracious, and merciful God, and Father, in the Lord Jesus Christ, admiring,
and adoring him; First, for the Revelation, and manifestation by his Word, and
holy Spirit, of so high, ravishing, and stupendous a mystery, the wonder, and
praise of glorified Saints, and Angels, and the miracle of divine love. Psalm.
42.7.
Next, let, (as the Prophet speaks) one deep, call unto another, and from the
sight of the bottomless Pit of Hell, Death, and Sin (out of which eternal love
in Christ, free grace, and infinite mercy, has taken thee) Call upon, and
bless God for this infinite depth of mercy. Yea, exalt and magnify the height
and depth, the breadth and length of this love, which passes knowledge. O my
Soul, Ephesians. 3.18. Jude 6.
the mighty Angels leaving their first state, as ambitiously seeking a greater,
(as the learned conceive) were cast down for their pride, and discontentedness,
from the highest Heaven, into the deepest abyss of Hell. And our first Parents,
for the like ambition, Genesis 3.22, 23, 24.
and desire of bettering their condition, were cast out of Paradise. From which
examples, I have reason to think, should Man have had a thought, or design, of,
or by himself, to be possessed of so glorious a life, prerogative, state, and
condition, as our gracious God has freely given us in Christ; It had been so
high, and unwarrantable a sin, and ambition, as would have justly deserved as
great a curse and punishment. O from this experience of infinite love, 1 John
4.16.
(for God is love) pray incessantly in return thereof, not only to be enlarged,
and raised to the highest, and greatest love, and thankfulness, that a Creature
can be made capable of; But that thou may henceforth have no will, but his,
(which shall be thy great wisdom) in all things, submitting all thou have, and
thy whole Man, solely to his most gracious, and All-wise dispose: whose free
gifts, bounty, and unconceivable liberality, are not such, as Creatures bestow
on their favorites; but such as becomes the Majesty and immensness of a God,
who gives to his Saints, benefits and blessings temporal, spiritual and
eternal; not only above their prayers, hopes and expectations; but as the
Apostle expresses, Ephesians. 3.20.
above what we can either ask or think.

O my Soul, shall thy body be incorruptible and immortal? defile it not with
lust any more, neither let sin abound, because grace has abounded. Romans 6.1.
Since thou must know that thy incorruptability and immortality must in a true
Scripture and spiritual sense, begin in this life, although they are to be
perfected in the next. Therefore our Savior says, John 3.36.
He that believes on him has everlasting life; And the Apostle affirms,
Ephesians. 2.6.
that we are made to sit together in Christ, in Heavenly places. And Saint John
declares; 1 John 5.12. That he that has the Son has life; and he that has
not the Son has not life. And blessed Paul affirms, Romans 8.10.
If Christ be in us, the Body is dead, because of sin; but the spirit is life,
because of righteousness.

1 Cor. 6.19.
Again, do thou live in Christ, and Christ in thee? Art thou even as to thy
body, the Habitation and Temple of the Holy Ghost? and spiritually and
inseparably united to God in Christ? Colos. 3.3.
and is thy life hid with God in Christ? Romans 6.14.
Dally no more with sin; for there can be no communion betwixt light, and
darkness. And know this, although thou can not dye eternally, yet thy
backslidings in wilful, Cant. 5.6.
and presumptuous sinnings, may, through thy Spouse his righteous withdrawing
and desertion, cast thee into such a swoon, and transe, that thy life, peace,
and Heaven here, may as to thy feeling, be turned into emnity, death, yea, and
to an Hell upon Earth. Give not that subtle destroyer, Satan, occasion, or
advantage, by spiritual adulteries, and reiterated Rebellions, to sue out a
divorse, in the Court of thy Conscience, betwixt thy Spouse and thee. For know
this, that although, Whom Christ loves, John 13.1.
he loves to the end; And his gifts and calling are without Repentance; Romans
11.29.
and that though thy Husband has loved thee, with an everlasting love; yet
such a suite, Jer. 31.3.
will be very troublesome, and chargeable, and may cost thy Spirit many and
unexpressible sighs, groans, and lamentations. And may, as it were, break thy
bones, or make thy Body a very Sceleton, Psalm. 51.8.
only fit for a Grave.

Psalm. 102.3, 5.
Lastly, for as much as the Children of God were partakers of flesh and blood:
Did the Son of God himself likewise take part of the same, Heb. 2.14.
that through Death, he might destroy him that had the power of Death, 15.
viz. the Devil; to deliver them, who through fear of Death, were all their
life time subject unto bondage; 16.
And did not take on him the nature of Angels, but took on him the Seed of
Abraham; from which hypostatical union of the two natures, in one Person, and
the union of thy Person, to his Person, by the Eternal Spirit, is given unto
thee eternal life, in a far higher, and more excellent way, and manner, than to
the Elect Angels? Did the Lord of Heaven and Earth, the Heir of all things, not
only marry himself to thy nature, but also unto thee? For, Jer. 3.14.
I am married unto you, says the Lord, in the Prophet, and is the honorable
Ordinance of Marriage, therefore called by the Apostle, a great Mystery, Ephesians.
5.32.
because even in Eves formation, and in its first Institution, it was to be a
Type, and lively Figure of this thy spiritual Marriage, and union to the second
Adam? Cant. 2.16.
Have thou through infinite mercy received assurance hereof, that thou art thy
Beloveds, and that thy Beloved is thine? Is the Marriage Day, and Supper
appointed, and declared? and in the interim, Rev. 19.7, 9.
have thou an Espousal contract, subscribed to, by thy faith, and by his
Spirit? O be exceeding watchful, and careful of offending such a loving
Spouse, and glorious Bridegroom, by any sinful relapses, and backslidings,
into any sin, that may move him to jealousy. Prove. 6.34.
For as jealousy is the rage of a Man, so the anger and jealousy of thy God,
is said to burn like Fire, Cant. 8.4.
against such unfaithful, and spiritual Adulteresses.

O, as thou tenderest the love of thy God, and of thy Spouse, and thy peace of
Conscience, and thy Heaven upon Earth, venture not to blot or blur so blessed
an assurance, and evidence of thy Eternal happiness, union and life in him, by
sin, or any presumptuous iniquity, and rebellion. Nor to crust it over by
customary sinning, or delay of repentance. But by an holy, chaste, and religious
walking. Keep it so fair written and legible, that all other Saints, but
principly thy self, at all times, but especially in the time of trouble,
temptation, and hour of death, may read it. Then, though thy Eye-strings are
broken, the eye of thy faith shall behold it, and see thy Name written in
Heaven, Rev. 21.27.
and in the Lambs Book of Life.

O blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Ejaculation.
who art the Resurrection, and the Life, John 11.25.
and have declared in thy Word of Truth, that this my vile Body shall be
raised, and made a Heavenly and spiritual Body, like to thine; 1 Cor. 15.44, 49.
give me to behold this wonderful change, continually by faith, the eye of my
Soul: then shall I not be abashed or dismayed at the baldness and
gray-headedness of old age; at my hollow Eyes, wrinckled Cheeks, blindness,
deafness; my toothless Gums, and pale countenance; nor at the Palsiness,
lameness and decrepitness of my Hands, Feet, and other Members; as looking upon
this weak, diseased, and aged Body, as upon an old and weather-beaten Tent. 2
Cor. chap. 1.
Knowing, that If the Earthly House of this my Tabernacle were dissolved, I
have a building of God, an House not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens;
Verse 2.
Groaning earnestly, and desiring (with the Apostle Paul) to be clothed upon,
with my House which is from Heaven; Verse 3.
with which, if I be clothed, I shall not be found naked; Verse 4.
That this Mortality may be swallowed up of Life. Let me not, O Lord, with the
Worldling, who has his Portion only in this Life, Psalm. 17.14.
be troubled, at the Knell of every passing Bell, sigh at every striking of the
Clock; nor be afraid, or unwilling to number my Days, or to cast up the account
of my years: but greatly rejoice at the end of every hour, day, and year, as
hastening my approach to, and the enjoyment of Eternity: Being most willing to
have my Body interred, that after a long time (like the matter of China
Vessels) it may be raised, and made lucid, transparent, and a Vessel of honor,
2 Timothy 2.21.
fit to be made use of, in the Palace of Heaven.

Shall my Body be shining, and glorious like the Sun? let it not now O Lord be
spotted with sin, and changeable, and inconstant in its motion, and
conversation, like the Moon. Shall it be bright like the Firmament, and Stars?
Revel. 12.4.
O Lord, let it be a fixed, and not a falling Star; nor cast down to the Earth
by the Tail of the old Serpent the Devil; neither let me be a Meteor, and seem
to outshine others in a Religious profession, and in a short time vanish, only
leaving behind me an hypocritical, and pestilential stench; like those
wandering Stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. Jude
13.
O gracious, and merciful Redeemer, shall this corruptible put on
incorruptibility, and this mortal put on immortality? Let this supernatural
change begin here, as it does in all thy sanctified ones; 1 Cor. 6.16.
and let even my Body, as well as my Soul, be thy dwelling place, and the
Temple of thy holy Spirit; 1 Cor. 6.19.
in which, let no unclean lust lurk, or wicked Spirit enter. Make me holiness
unto thee, (O Lord) and perfect holiness, in thy fear. Jer. 3.3. 2 Cor. 7.1.
Give thy Angels charge over me, to keep me in all my ways. Let them bear me up
in their hands, lest I dash my Foot against a Stone; Psalm. 91.11.
cause me to tread upon the Lion, and the Addar; 12,
the young Lion, and the Dragon. Yea, let them, 13.
according to thy promise, be shortly trampled under my Feet. Let sin dye in
me, by virtue of thy Death, Romans 16.20.
and let the life and immortality of holiness spring up and flourish in me, by
virtue of thy Resurrection. Have thou O Lord styled thy Church, thy Dove, thy
undefiled one? Cant. 6.9.
And declared that she is fair, and that there is no spot in her? And is that
which is spoken of thy Church, Cant. 4.7.
applyable to every living Member thereof? John 14.6.
O thou that art the Eternal truth, make good this thy Word unto thy poor
Servant, thy Spouse, although most unworthy to wash the Feet of the Servants of
my Lord. And since thou have promised that all things shall become new; Revel.
21.5.
And declared that those that are in thee, are new Creatures; and have
covenanted, to give me a new Heart, and a new Spirit, 2 Cor. 5.17.
and to take out my Heart of Stone, Ezekiel. 11.19.
and to give me a Heart of Flesh; to pour clean Water upon me, and to make me
clean; Ezekiel. 36.25. 1 John 1.7.
and have testified that thy blood does cleanse me from all sin; and that by
thy righteousness alone I am justified.

O let all these true and precious promises be fulfilled in me, and to me. Gal.
2.16.
So shall the incorruptibility of my Person, as in respect of sin, usher in,
and assure me of the incorruptibility of my Soul, and Body, in glory. 1 Cor.
15.31.
Let me dye daily with blessed Paul, as to all the evil lusts of the Flesh,
that I may not dye Eternally, but live everlastingly in glorified Flesh. O
Lord, who art the life, and my life, let my sinful mortality, even here, John
14.6.
put on a spiritual, and heavenly immortality. For thou have proclaimed it,
whilst thou were upon Earth, That the Day comes, yea now is, John 5.25.
when the Dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear,
shall live, even to Eternity; For, He that believes in thee, has (already)
everlasting life. John 5.24.
Let my union and communion with thee through faith, and the in-dwelling of thy
holy Spirit, begin to make my Face to shine here, Exodus 34.20.
as did the Face of Moses, and thy Proto-Martyr Stephen; since thou have
declared, Acts 6.15.
that a Man's wisdom makes his Face to shine. Yea, Eccles. 8.1.
we are said to shine here also, in a holy conversation, Mat. 5.16.
since thou command us, To let our light shine before Men. And have held
forth in thy Word, that the path of the just, Prove. 4.18.
is as the shining light, that shines more and more, unto the perfect Day; and
have promised in thy Book: That if we let not wickedness dwell in our
Tabernacles; our Age shall be cleerer than the Noonday, and we shall shine
forth, Joh 11.14, 17.
and be as the Morning. Lord although I now live in the Flesh, yet let me not,
I humbly, and with importunity beseech thee, live unto, or after the Flesh; 1 Timothy 5.6.
since such are said to be dead, while they live; yea, twice dead, and plucked
up by the Roots. And thou have justly threatened, Jude 12.
that those that live after the Flesh shall dye, Romans 8.13.
and that Eternally; But they that live in, and after the Spirit, shall live,
and that for ever and ever. But since after this life, there shall be no Devil
to tempt, no World to allure, or persecute; nor Sin to entice, or corrupt: Let
me with mortified Paul, desire to depart, Phil. 1.23.
and to be with thee, which is far better. Yea, since to live is Christ, Phil.
1.21.
and to dye is gain; Let me with perfect Job, all the Days of this my
appointed time, humbly, Job 14.14.
patiently, and believingly wait, until my glorious change come, Amen.

Of the senses glorified.
Having exercised my faith, and contemplation, upon this ravishing, and pleasing
subject, the glorification of the Bodies, and Members of the Saints, in
general, and in the Gross; I shall now lastly proceed, beseeching the
assistance of his most Holy Spirit, John 1.4.9.
who is my light, the light of Men, and he who alone enlighteneth every one
that comes into the World, to speak particularly, though with much brevity, of
the glorification of the Five Senses. I shall go so far, as I shall receive
light from the Scriptures, and right reason; taking that sober, and lawful
liberty, (that is granted to all those that have meditated upon the like
subjects; where some things are more obscure than others, and not so clearly,
and fully held forth in Gods Word) humbly to offer, what probably and
rationally (although not positively) may be the truth, as not repugnant to
Scripture, right reason, or the Analogy of Faith. As an Introduction and
substraction to what follows, I shall premise; First, Job. 19.25, 26, 27.
according to Scripture, as has been showed, Job* chap. 19.25. That the same
Bodies shall be raised, that the Saints lived in here upon Earth; as to their
substance. If so, then the same parts, members, and senses, shall then be
raised, and have a being also, of which the Body consists, and without which
the Body is imperfect, and incomplete, and cannot be truly said to be the same
Body. Secondly, that if necessarily, and certainly, they shall then have an
existence in the Body, then without doubt, they must be for some most noble
use, and end. For this is both a Scriptural and Natural Maxim; That God, and
Nature, made nothing in vain. Yea, the Scripture is clear, and express, as to
the glorious employment of some of them, in this Heavenly life; as of our Eyes,
and Ears, as shall be showed hereafter. What reason then is there that we
should exclude the exercise of the other? Thirdly, it is clear and manifest,
that the glorified Soul, when again united to the glorified Body, shall not
then act singly, and by it self, but organically, as now it does, in, and with
the Body, as having its seat and operation, as to the understanding, will, and
memorative faculties, in the head, and brain; and as to the concupiscential
appetite, and affections in the heart; and as to its external Instrument of
expression, and manifesting it self, and mind, to God, Men, and Angels, in
praises, or otherwise, it shall be with the Tongue, as is proved by the
discourse betwixt our Savior, and Moses, and Elias; Math. 17.3:
and from many places in the Revelations, and other Scriptures. So also the
Soul, shall make use of the Feet to walk with, Acts 1.3.
although the whole Body, as has been showed, Acts 9.4.
like the Wheels in Ezekiel's Vision, shall swiftly descend, or ascend, Revel.
4.10.5.11. Ezekiel. 1.20.
according to the will, and motion of the Spirit, or Soul within them. I say
then, its now most truly, as properly said, that not the Body, but our Souls in
our Bodies, see, hear, taste, feel, and smell. Can it be rationally believed,
that the body that shall be raised in perfection, shall be deprived of either
the being, or use of any one of its senses? that the Soul should, in respect of
the want of them, be less perfect in glory, than it was in its state of misery?
yea, be deprived of those actings or senses by its reunion, to the body, which
it made use of in glory, before its re-entry into the body? Angels, and
therefore Souls, after their manner, have their seeing, hearing, feeling,
smelling, and tasting, when they took bodies, and eat with Abraham. Genesis 18.8.
Which senses they make use of at other times also, (for ought we know, or are
taught in Gods Word to the contrary; The Scripture-allusion, when it calls the
Israelites Manna, Psalm. 78.25.
Angels food, making more for it, than against it; as also when it says, that
some things, (as wise Observers know) yea many things on Earth, Heb. 9.23.
are figures and patterns of things above in the Heavens) from all which, I
conclude, that should not the Soul, reunited to the body, have organically the
use of all the senses, it would be in that respect, not so perfect in the
glorified body, as when it was in the corruptible body; and straightened and
deprived of so much of its freedom, excellency, and activity, as it had, and
does without doubt exercise, as to most of the senses in the state of Glory,
before its reunion. Fourthly, if at the Resurrection of the just, the
glorified Saints shall then enter into the joy of their Lord, Math. 25.21.
and into their first degree of Glory, and shall Reign as Kings and Priests,
with our Lord Jesus Christ, Rev. 5.10.
personally, upon the renewed Earth, Rev. 20.4. 2 Pet. 3.13.
which he will then create, according to his promise: And if it be more than
probable, that the old furniture being all consumed, the face, and superficies
of the Earth, and Rivers (for there shall be no Sea) shall be beautified, Rev.
21.1.
and adorned anew, with such several kinds, of vegetative, and sensitive
Creatures, as shall be for the delight, and benefit of the glorified Saints;
All which Creatures shall be new made, and produced, as they were in the first
Creation, out of the several refined, and incorruptible Elements; that so they
may have a possibility, if God please, Romans 8.20, 21, 22.
like them, to be everlasting; and be delivered from the curse, vanity, and
bondage of Corruption (that the first Adams sin had, though unwillingly
subjected them to) into the glorious liberty of the Children of God, by the
second Adam, the Lord Jesus Christ, the restorer of all things, lost by the
first, unto their primitive, though far better condition: And if so; shall the
great glory, goodness, wisdom, and other excellencies of Christ declared, and
held forth, in the sweet smelling Air, and in the odoriferous, and most rare
perfumes, breathed forth (as being an Elixa compared with what they were) from
Spice, and fruit-bearing Trees, Plants, and Flowers, be clouded, and as it were
lost, for want of the sense of smelling, to conveigh them to the understanding,
that so it, and the whole Man, may therefore, and in these his wondrous works,
praise, adore, admire, and worship God? especially, since at this time, this so
greatly heightened, and meliorated Book of Nature shall be a glorious, if not
(the Scriptures being now fulfilled) the only Book of God. Again, Mark 14.25.
shall the new Wine spoken of by our blessed Savior, in the Kingdom of God,
and the promise of eating and drinking with him at his Table in his Kingdom;
The Tree of Life, the sweet Springs, Crystal Rivers, and Waters of Life, Luke
22.30. Rev. 22.1, 2.
or living Waters, (for so Springs are called) spoken of and alluded to, in the
22. of the Revelations, and in many other Scriptures (wherein I exclude not
high and mysterious Allegories also to be held forth;) I say, shall these be in
vain, and signify nothing? Shall also all those most mellifluous Roots, Fruits,
and Plants, that in this blessed, and new birth of things, shall be delivered
from corruption; and therefore shall not as now they do, defile the body, and
turn into putrefaction, nor leave, after all the Concoctions of Nature, a
remainder of stinking dregs, which since Sin, Nature, by an instinct of
self-preservation is forced to expulse and exonerate it self off; shall they I
say want this pleasing and distinguishing sense of tasting, to glorify all the
attributes and wonderful name of God, in the use, benefit and enjoyment of
them? If the delight and use of this, and all other of the senses now, is not
only lawful, but commanded; and the Saints may, and do greatly glorify God in
the fruition of them; And these deligh^^ are only in a Scripture-sence become
sinful, and sensual, to the wicked, whose sin, and mixture of corruption,
adulterates, defiles, and turns the use and exercise of the senses, upon their
several objects, or subjects into sin; shall they not be much more useful, and
necessary to the Saints glorified, in their sinless condition; when the whole
Soul, Body, Members, and Senses, shall all cooperate in their several
functions and offices, to Gods great glory, and their own? Further, it is not
improbable, that although the Root, Fountain, Confirmation, and Eternity of the
Saints life, flows primarily, from their spiritual union and communion with
God in Christ; yet as a medium, or a secondary, and natural means (for our God
is Natura Naturans) this way as it was, Genes. 1.29.
and should have been made use of in Paradise, may be still continued to
nourish, delight, and be subservient (as the Rain is to the Plants, although
the Earth is their great Mother) to Eternal Life in the Saints. And such no
doubt, was the Tree of Life (not excluding it to be of a Sacramental nature
also) to our first Parents, before their Fall. All which is evident, from the
reason God gives, of their speedy exclusion, from their continuance, or return
into Paradise to eat thereof, Genesis 3.22, 24.
Lest they should eat thereof, and live for ever. Now that Paradise was a
Figure, and Pattern, none I conceive will deny this of the Saints, unto which
the Lord Jesus was sent to restore us. Although this is much better and higher,
as to the degrees of our happiness, and condition; by how much the second Adam,
and public head of the Saints, is much higher, and more excellent than the
first Adam, or common Head, and Root of Mankind. Fifthly, if no use of the
sense of gust, or tasting; or that in this our glorified state, in the new
Heaven, and the new Earth; there shall be no eating, or drinking; For I presume
not to give here any judgment, as to the exercise of these two senses of
tasting, and smelling, in the highest degree of the Saints Glory, in the Heaven
of Heavens, when the Mediatory Kingdom of Christ, shall have an end, and shall
be delivered up to God the Father, 1 Cor. 15.24, 28.
that God may be All in All, I having much less light from Scripture, or
reason, probably to know, or guess what shall be the exercise and object of
these senses in those super-excelling, and glorious Regions, than in this new
Earth, which is to be renewed and restored to us, by our Lord Jesus the second
Adam: I say, if the Saints glorified shall not eat, nor drink in that new
Heaven and Earth, what shall become of, or what use shall be made of most of
the internal Members, or parts of the Body? Of which, as to their most
excellent frame, great number, and use, skillful Anatomists, have written large
Volumes, to the glory of the wisdom, power, and work of God, in them. Shall
the glorified Bodies be like an empty Trunck, void of a stomach, liver, guts,
bowels, bladder, and the rest? If so, as it is contrary to the Scripture, which
says, The same Bodies shall be raised; which includes all the internal, as
well as the external parts of the Body; so what use shall be made of these, of
the Teeth, and the rest; if there be no eating, or drinking, nor employment of
them, as a natural and secondary means, still ordained of God, for the
nourishment and continuation of a healthful and equal temperament, called by
Philosophers Temperamentum ad pondus aequale, and as for the everlasting
Well-being of the Body? Sixthly, It is a Maxim in nature, and made good by
experience, that all animate and compounded Creatures on Earth, are nourished
and preserved in their being, by feeding upon such things as are compounded of
the like Elements, of the which they partake. And is it not more than probable,
that the Saints glorified bodies, the time they continue on the renewed Earth,
shall as by a natural and middle way, be delighted, nourisht, preserved and
continued, as to their Bodies, by drinking the simple and refined Water, and
juices of the Vine, and other the then incorruptible fruits (as before in
Paradise?) And by eating the super-excelling fruits, Plants, Genesis verse 29.
compared with Genesis 9. and 3.
and Roots (the subject of our Fathers nourishment before Noah's Flood) being a
mixture and composition, even of the same repurged matter and Elements of which
our new-raised and glorified bodies consist, may therefore both in reason and
nature, (God according to his former Method, so ordaining it) be most proper
and subservient to the end aforementioned? Which end being finished, these
compounded substances being in the body, as in a limbeck separated, may by
insensible transpiration, or otherways, revert each part of them again, to its
proper Element, and by a circulation (as now) without annihilation, continue
and preserve the being of the whole new Heaven, and new Earth, without the
least diminution. But it may be objected, that our blessed Savior declares, in
his answer to the Sadduces, that the glorified Saints, shall at the
Resurrection, be as, and equal to the Angels; Math. 22.30.
but the Angels neither eat nor drink. To which objection, Luke 20.36.
I give this double answer, that first, he says not we shall be like, but as,
and equal to the Angel: And besides, it is unknown to us, (as I said before)
how their life and being is continued and preserved. We know they live, and
believe they shall live ever, and that they are spiritual substances; but what
their forms are, whether they can be circumscribed, as our Bodies are, or only
defined to be in such or such a place, this is discoursed of, but not
ascertained. The curious learned, yea, some possibly too curious, have in their
writings affirmed, that they have conversed, seen, and spoken with Angels. That
they have bodies, although so spiritual, and like the light, that they cannot
be seen, but when they please themselves; and that they have a nourishment,
conducing to their being, of an etherial nature, connatural and agreeable to
their spiritual substances. From all which, I infer, that unless our Saviors
expression, that we shall be like the Angels; or any other Scripture, had
excluded the Angels from eating, or drinking, or receiving any nourishment, by
which in their manner their substances are refreshed and continued, (for
nothing but God subsists of it self, and from its self) the Angels may be
nourished as aforesaid. And as for seeing, hearing, and touching, the Scripture
testify the Angels exercise them all; although in a more excellent manner than
we do. That expression of our Savior [ ye shall be like the Angels] excludes
not, nor proves any thing against the eating, or drinking of the glorified
Saints, during their abode in the new Heaven, and the new Earth. My second
answer is, that this speech of our blessed Lord, is a proper, full, and
positive answer, to the question of the Sadduces, whose Wife should the Woman
be that had seven Husbands, at the Resurrection? That since the Saints then
shall neither marry, nor be given in marriage, but shall in that respect be
like the Angels, that their invincible Argument (as they conceived it) was
void, and proved nothing, against the Doctrine of the Resurrection. Therefore
it is to be limited, and restrained, and not to be extended, as to exclude the
eating, and drinking of the glorified Saints: which was not at all in the
question. For if so, it may be brought as well to prove, that they shall in all
things else be like the Angels: which I humbly conceive, no Man will, or has
asserted; since, in many things (were it proper to be treated of upon this
subject) I could show a manifold difference betwixt the Angels, and the
glorified Saints. This being sufficient, and a clear and full answer to that
objection, I shall now proceed to speak more particularly, although very
succinctly, as having in the six foregoing reasons, or preliminaries, spoken
more than I intended, and given sufficient satisfaction to my self, and I hope
to others, both from Scripture, and reason, as to this Subject.

First, as to the sight, or sense of Seeing; the Eye, Of the sense of seeing
glorified.
(although by Oculists, Naturalists, and Anatomists, it is now placed in the
first rank of the bodies parts, or members, as a subject wherein the most
excellent, and wonderful wisdom of God is greatly manifested, and that not
only, as in respect of its curious fabric, but admirable way, and manner of
conveighing, and representing objects, to the Soul, whether Extra, or intra
mittendo, or by both, is not my work now to dispute, or determine; yet then it
shall, as to its optic use, and faculty, be much more wonderfully bettered,
heighthned, and enlarged; and that, first, as to its objects. Now, the best
Eye, cannot immediately behold the Sun shining in its brightness, any time,
with fixedness, without twinkling, trouble, and danger of blindness; Ezekiel.
1.28. Dan. 8.17, 18.
and as though it was ashamed of its weakness, is presently veiled with a tear.
Now a Daniel, an Ezekiel, cannot look upon, or behold an Angel, without
astonishment, Dan. 8.9.
and falling to the ground upon their faces, as being not able to behold their
created glory. But after the Resurrection, we shall with these Eyes (as Job
speaks) not only behold the glorified Saints, that shine as the Sun, and are as
so many millions of Suns; but the glorious Angels, and our Redeemer the Lord
Jesus Christ, Malach. 4.2. Revel. 22.4.
the brightest Sun of righteousness; and shall see God, as he is; yea, we shall
see him face to face, and live. This is that everlasting and glorious
beatifical Vision of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the for ever blessed Trinity
in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, so much spoken of by the ancient Fathers; in
which, as in a most bright clear mirror, the Saints shall behold (their Eyes
being herein assistants to their Souls) all things God is pleased to reveal,
and so far as a created nature is capable of past, and present, and to come. As
also the natures, virtues, and qualities of all the Creatures; not as now, by
their effects, but in their cause, Idea, and truth: yea, the high, 1 Cor. 2.10.
and deep things of God.

The second excellency of this glorified sense of sight, as to its strength, in
respect of objects, that are far distant, is, That whereas now our Eyes,
without the help of Perspective-Glasses, cannot discern, or clearly
distinguish, and inform us of the things upon Earth, some few miles off, and
are much inferior to Eagles, and Vultures; of whom Naturalists report, That
when by high flying, they are so lessened, as not to be discerned by our Eyes,
yet they can behold a little quarry upon the ground, and their prey, although
many miles distant from them: and that now, through the imbecility, and
weakness of our sight, in a clear day, we judge the sky to be of an azure
color; whereas truly, it has no color, but is only so represented; being
only by a vaster distance, and the intermediate Air, enlightened by the Sun;
and that distance, beyond the extent of our weak Eyes, upon the level of the
Earth, seems to be dark or black: But hereafter at the Resurrection, the Eye
being the Instrument and Organ, through, and by which, the Soul beholds all
things, shall be so strengthened, that it shall thereby behold, things very far
distant. Else it should lose by union with the body, that excellency of sight,
it had as a Spirit before it re-entred into the Body; It being clear, and
evident that the Angels and Spirits excel all other living Creatures, as to
the activity and extent of seeing; That evil spirit the Devil, being able to
behold, Math. 4.8.
and represent to our blessed Savior, from the top of a high Mountain, all the
Kingdoms of the World (that is of that Hemisphere, Genes. 21.17.
and semicircle of the Earth) and the glory of them (a most vast view and
prospect;) so also the Angel of God called unto Hagar, Genes. 22.11.
and afterward to Abraham, out of Heaven.

A third admirable excellency of the Eye glorified, is the wonderful life and
beauty of it. Now, it is the chief Ornament, and grace of the Face, in Men, or
Women; but then it shall super-excell, what it is now, as much as the Eye of a
living Man transcends the Eye of one that is dead. Which life, splendour, and
beauty, does not only proceed from the glorification of the Eye, as apart, and
member of the glorified body, but from those spirit-full and sparkling rays,
sent forth from the within glorious Souls: which like the Sunbeams shining
through, and upon the purest Crystal; shall cause the Eye to shine with a most
delightful, and unexpressible radiancy and splendour; much like to that
wonderful and visional appearance of our Head, and sample, the Lord Jesus, to
Saint John, of whom it is written, Revel. 1.14.
That his Eyes were as a Flame of Fire.

O my Soul, shall thy sense of seeing, Soliloquium.
attain to such a height of perfection, as to be able not only to behold
glorified Saints, and Angels, but the much more resplendent face of thy
glorious Savior, yea, of God himself; shall it be so greatly fortified, as to
surveigh like the Angels, things remotely distant; shall thy eyes be so
beautiful, and radiant, as to shine and sparkle like the Stars of the first
magnitude; O resolve and endeavor by the assistance of Gods free grace, not to
vassalage and debase them, by beholding Earthly vanities; much less to make
use, and employ them, as the Pandors of Satan, and the Dung-ports of sinful
lusts, and lasciviousness; like the Men of this World, Whose Eyes are full of
Adultery, and uncleanness. But let them, according to the end, for which they
were created, be wholly employed, in beholding and admiring the glory of God,
in his wonderful works, held forth in the bright-shining Stars, and Planets,
and in the splendour of the Moon, and Sun. Let them be also helpful
Instruments, to conveigh unto thee continual matter of praise, and admiration,
as to the wisdom of thy Creator, in the consideration and meditation, not only
as to the excellent, and universal frame of Heaven and Earth, but as to the
great variety and beauty of each particular Creature; so shall this their
Heavenly and holy exercise prepare thee and them for a greater measure of
perfect Glory.

Ejaculation.
O blessed Spouse, and dear Savior, who have said to thy Church, and to each
true Member thereof; Behold, thou art fair my love, Cant. 1.15.
behold thou art fair, thou have Doves eyes; as holding forth by that meek
spleenless, and loyal Bird, the sweetness, revengelesness, and purity of thy
Saints; Be graciously pleased, I beseech thee, to Create in me a clean heart,
Psalm. 51.10.
and renew a right spirit within me, that my Eyes may be Dove-like, chaste, and
faithful to thee, my spiritual husband; remembering thy Word, that whosoever
looks upon a Woman, to lust after her, has committed Adultery with her already
in his heart; Math. 5.28.
O give unto me therefore such a measure of grace, as thou gave to thy
Servant Job, to make a Covenant with my Eyes, Job 31.1.
why then should I think upon a Maid? Shall I in my Flesh see God, Job 19.26,
27.
whom I shall see for my self, shall these mine Eyes behold thee my Redeemer,
and not another? O make me now careful and watchful, not to defile them, with
any vain, or impure objects; But since I cannot now immediately behold thee,
let me mediatly contemplate, and view thee, and all thy excellencies, and
attributes, in the Glass, and mirror of thy Creatures; for by thee all things
were made; John 1.3.
and without thee, was not any thing made, Colos. 1.17.
that was made, and by thee all things consists. So shall my Eyes by this help,
and perspective of nature, look into Heaven, and be in a kind, and degree,
glorified; and enable my mind to behold thee, so vastly distant from me. Yea,
they shall be the two Wings of my Soul, and carry it with happy Paul, into the
third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2.
and behold thee there in thine unutterable, and inconceivable glory. Lord
shall my Eyes at the Resurrection, be so lovely, beautiful, and radiant,
suffer them not now I pray thee, to be purblinded by unlawful, or unsatiable
lust; nor to be put out by bribes, which make blind the Eyes of the wise; nor
bleared, Deuteronomy. 16.19.
nor deformed by excess, or drunkenness. For, Prove. 23.29, 30.
Who has redness of Eyes? They that tarry long at the Wine; they that go to
seek mixed Wine. Let them not be blood-shotten with malice, nor stormy with
pride, and ambition, nor squinting after the things of this vain World; not
fiery with passion, and sinful anger; nor dull, and heavy, through sloth,
idleness, and an evil melancholy; nor winking through subtilty, and deceit. But
let my Eyes, Prove. 6.13.
O Lord, be enlightened by thee, and be chaste, and loving like the Dove. Yea,
Ezra. 9.8.
let me through Justice scatter away all evil with my Eyes, and shut them from
seeing evil. Let my Eyes through faith, wait upon thee, Prove. 26.8.
even as the Eyes of Servants look unto the hand of their Masters, Isai. 33.15.
Psalm. 123.2.
and as the Eyes of a Maiden unto the hand of her Mistress; yea, give me pure
Eyes like thee, who can not behold iniquity; so shall not my Eyes betray my
Soul, but watch over it; not poison it, but enliven it; be beautiful in thy
Eyes, and in the Eyes of thy Saints, and shine here with holiness and purity,
hereafter in Glory, Amen.

As the Eyes are the Espials, Of the sense of hearing glorified.
so the Ears are the Intelligencers of the Soul; by which it receives a
general information of all things, and are very useful in this miserable life,
wherein sin, ignorance, and all manner of troubles abound; for its reproof,
instruction, and consolation. But this is not only their use, together with
that grace, and Ornament, they add to the Head, they being in the rank of the
principal Members of the Body; For they are not only the common receipt of all
vocal sounds, and so of great profit, and emolument to the Soul; But they are
the curious ports, inlets, and artifice of nature, to conveigh unto the Soul,
all other sounds; whether they be such as are pleasant, and musical, for the
delight thereof; or of such noises as are of use* to premonish, and give
warning; or of such sounds also, which are wonderful, terrible, harsh, and
unpleasant, and ought to raise a holy fear, reverence, and admiration in the
Soul; to wit of God, the cause and Creator of them: Such as are the out cries,
and skreeking of Creatures, rational, or unrational; the hideous bellowings,
and terrible roarings of wild Beasts; the hissing of Serpents, the Cataracts
of Waters, the raging of Seas; the blustering of Winds, and Tempests; and the
Worlds astonishing and affrighting noise, of all kinds of Artillery,
Earthquakes, and Thunder; besides many other sounds of like nature. Having
observed and declared the principal uses and exercise of the sense of Hearing
in this life, I shall with the greater clearness hold forth, and distinguish of
the much differing use, and far more excellent exercise thereof, after the
Resurrection in the glorified body, upon the renewed Earth. Now our sight is
far more quick, and extensive, than our hearing, as is demonstrable, in our
beholding the flame of the Powder, and the flash of lightning, some time before
we can hear the report of the Cannon, or the clap of Thunder, although the
light in both is contemporary with the sound. Now, we cannot hear the Voices
and Hymns of Angels, by reason of their spiritualness, and the groseness, and
earthliness of our sense; unless they in condescension to our weakness, as they
did to the Shepwards, Luke 2.13.
at the birth of our Savior, imitate a humane voice; But then I humbly
conceive, that sense shall be so strengthened, heightened, and spiritualized,
that it shall be as perfect, and quick, as the sight; and by it we shall both
hear, and understand the Angels heavenly Language; that we may join in one
consort with them, in the praising of God; And in holy Alleluja's, as the
Apostle John seems to imply, Revel. 19.6.
in his Visions; I heard (says he) as it were the voice of a great Multitude,
and as the voice of many Waters, and as the voice of many Thunders, saying
Alleluja, for the Lord God Omnipotent reigns; Revel. 5.11.
And again, I heard the voice of many Angels round about the Throne, and the
Beasts, and the Elders, and the number of them was ten thousand times ten
thousand, and thousands of thousands, saying with a loud voice, worthy is the
Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength,
and honor, and glory, and blessing. The like con^unct praises and acclamations
of glorified Saints; and Angels, Revel. 7.9, 10, 11, 12.
we may read also in the Revelations, Chapter the 7. Verse the 9, 10, 11, 12.
which for brevity sake I omit.

Now, this sense administers terror, as well as pleasure to the Soul, as has
been showed by tremendous sounds. Yea Adam, after his fall, for fear, Genes.
3.8.
hid himself amongst the Trees of the Garden, when he heard the voice of God.
And the Children of Israel said, Exodus 20.19.
let not God speak with us, lest we dye; and holy Paul, and John could not hear
the voice of our Lord Jesus Christ without falling to the ground, and
astonishment. Acts 9.4, 5.
But in the new Earth, Rev. 1.17, 18.
(where there shall be no more curse) there shall be no sounds that are harsh,
and affrighting, Revel. 21.1.
but such as shall be exceeding ravishing, and delightful, Revel. 22 3.
and as Music to the Soul; even such unspeakable words, as blessed Paul heard,
when he was caught up into Paradise. 2 Cor. 12.4.
Then shall we, being placed in glory, at the right hand of our righteous King,
and Savior, hear with boldness, and without fear, or astonishment, that most
joyful sentence, Come ye blessed of my Father, Mat. 25.34.
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the World. Then
shall we hear that great voice of God, the Father, Revel. 21.3, 5.
who sits upon the Throne, saying, Behold I make all things new, the Tabernacle
of God is with Men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his People,
and God himself shall be with them, and be their God. Then shall these words
which are faithful and true be fulfilled, God shall wipe away all tears from
their Eyes; Rev. 21.4,
and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying; neither shall
there be any more pain, for the former things are passed away; I am Alpha, and
Omega, the beginning and the end; I will give unto him that is athirst, 6,
of the Fountain of the Water of Life freely; he that overcomes, 7.
shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my Son.

To conclude, I shall not say any thing as to the Music of the Spears, as
esteeming them to be only groundless dreams, and fantasies of Heathens, and
Philosophers. I humbly conceive, that as far as the glorious Heavens and Angels
transcend, and excells the n^w Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof; so far shall
the ravishing, and musical voices, and sounds, in this glorified state of the
Saints, excel all the pleasures and delights of this kind, in this our low and
corruptible condition.

O my Soul, shall the sense of Hearing in the next life, be as comprehensive
and perfect, Soliloquium.
in its kind, as the sense of Sight? Shall it be made capable, not only of
Hearing, and that with understanding also, the Music of Heaven, the
all-ravishing Hymns, the mellifluous speech and voices of Angels, the Language
of Glory; as also to hear him, Rev. 1.10, 1^, Hebr. 12.23. Rev. 19.16. Revel.
15.3. Jerem. 10.7. John 1.1.
whose voice is as a Trumpet, and as the noise of many Waters; of him who is
the Judge of Heaven and Earth, the King of Kings, the King of Saints, and the
King of Nations; the Eternal Word, the Lord Jesus Christ, God-Man, blessed for
ever? Yea, shall thou then O my Soul, by the assistance of this glorified
sense, hear, not as now the dreadful, and killing, but the all delighting,
reviving, exalting, and transporting voice of the ever glorious Trinity, even
of the Eternal God, Himself? O let not this so excellent, and useful a sense,
be deboist so much, as to be the Gate, or inlet of vain, and unprofitable
discourses; of wanton and lascivious words; or of any kind of false,
slanderous, or evil speeches; all which are as so many Traitors to thee, and
Enemies unto thy God, and Sovereign. Nor let thy Ears be ^urfeited, and
excessively glutted, with any kind of earthly Music, or with the pleasing
sounds, or voices of any of thy Fellow Creatures; which although lawful,
delightful, and refreshing to the natural and animal Spirits, as being near a
Kin to them, yet by the subtilty of Satan, the World, and thy Flesh, do
frequently become snares, and an undiscernable, flattering, and therefore the
more dangerous Enemy, and means to pollute thee with sin, or to introduce some
kind of fleshly lust, or other. But begin (even now) O my Soul, to exercise
every sense, and member, upon such objects, and in such employments and
actings, as come nearest to those of Angels, and glorified Saints. This is, to
make this Earth a Paradise, and to have, even whilst thou art in this World,
(as the Apostle exhorts) thy conversation in Heaven. To this end, let thy
delight be with holy David, in the converse of the excellent ones upon Earth,
yea, watch daily at the Gates of Wisdom, and wait at the Posts of her Doors;
Prove. 8.34.
yea, with attention hang upon the Lips of her Teachers. Be much in the
exercises of the Church Tryumphant, in praising God, in the Assemblies of his
Saints; in Psalms, Psalm. 111.1.
and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing with grace, Ephesians. 5.19.
and making Melody in your heart. So shall thou, O my Soul, by a sanctified,
spiritual, and internal sense, he^e frequently, even in this thy state of
humiliation, the counsels, and instructions of blessed Angels, the voice of
God* and of his holy Spirit, viz. thy Father, and Comforter behind thee,
saying, This is the way, walk thou in it; Isay 30.21.
And the loving expressions, and invitations of thy most sweet and gracious
Spouse, and Savior; Cant. 2.9.
who standing behind the Wall of thy Flesh, and looking forth at the Windows
of several Providence, and showing himself through the Lattess of thy
intervening, and impeding weakness, and infirmity, will often speak unto thee,
saying, Arise up my love, my fair one, and come away; For lo the Winter is
past, of thy doubts, fears, sufferings, Cant. 2.10.
and temptations; The rain of thy tears, and mourning is over, and gone; The
Flowers of my saving gifts, 11,
which evidence the Spring of my Grace, appears on the Earth, 12,
of thy renewed nature. The time of the singing of Birds, the earnest, and
witness of my Spirit, and of thy conscience, assuring thee of my love, and
salvation, is come; 13.
and the voice of me the true Turtle, is heard in the Land, even in thy Soul,
my Habitation; The Fig Tree puts forth her green Figs, and the Vines with
the tender Grapes, give a good smell, viz. thou art fruitful in all holy, and
good works; Now therefore arise my love, my fair one, and come away; and
inherit the Kingdom prepared for thee before the Foundation of the World.
Math. 25.34.


O my gracious Lord, and Savior, Ejaculation.
who when thou were upon Earth, in the zeal of thy Spirit, cried out unto thy
Auditors, math. 11.15.
He that has Ears to hear, let him hear; and did declare and expound the
Words of thy Prophet; Ezekiel. 12.2.
That there should be many that hear, but understand not, intimating to us,
thereby, that there is a spiritual, and internal sense of hearing, that many
want that have the bodily sense, and Organ; O thou which openedst the heart of
Lidia, Acts 16.14.
as well as her Ears, when she gave attention to Paul's preaching, and said to
the deaf Man in the Gospel, mark 7.34.
Ephtata, and his Ears were opened, give me an understanding Ear, as well as
thou have given me an Ear of Flesh, that I may both hear, and understand, know,
and obey thy will, declared unto me by the Ministers of thy Word. Yea, let my
Ears be always open, to receive, entertain, and retain the holy instructions,
consolations, reproves, and encouragement^ of any of thy faithful Servants,
and my fellow members, and Brethren. But let them through thy grace be turned
away, sealed up, and guarded against the Syrene Songs of all Sin, and Sinners;
And if by force, or surpri^e, oaths, cur^ing, lying, slandering* blasphemies,
vain, lascivious, or any other evil speeches, enter, let my heart and Tongue,
hate, scourge, and execute thy Law, upon them, by a zealous and holy reproof,
(if the Speakers be not Dogs or Swine) giving them a pass, and sending th^^
packing. math. 7.6.
O blessed Lord, let not the delightful sounds of Music, nor the natural, or
artificial pleasing voices of any Creature, be thy rival, steal away in the
least my time, or heart from thee. Nor let me with the Whore of Babylon, and
her Imitators, carnally, legally, and only outwardly, give thee an
unwarrantable, and un-Gospel-like Ear, and service, without my understanding,
and without my heart. But give me to join with, and delight to hear the Music
of the lower Heaven, the Songs, Psalms, and praisings of thee in the
Congregations of the Saints. That being trained up to have a Child's place in
this blessed Chore upon Earth, I may be fitted and preferred to have a Man's
place, in the glorious Quire of Saints and Angels in Heaven. O Lord, let me I
beseech thee, not only externally, but internally, hear thy voice, for it is
sweet, Cant. 2.14.
that my Soul may be inwardly acquainted with the Dialect of Heaven; so shall
my Soul speak and answer thee, in the same Angel-like Language, in mental, and
Ejaculatory Prayers, and praises here, (a service not only required, but most
acceptable to thee) and with Ear, and Heart, hereafter, hear thee, and return
unto thee in Soul, and Body, praises, and glorify thee Eternally in the
Heavens, Amen.

Having in the six foregoing preliminaries, Of the sense of Tasting glorified.
in all humility, declared my Opinion, answered the chief objections, and given
the reason and ground thereof, both from Scripture, and the light of Nature; As
also showed the necessary, happy, and spiritual use and end of the Saints
exercise, of all the Five Senses; as tending much more to the glory of God, and
the increase of their innocent, and spiritual delight, complete happiness and
blessedness, both in Soul, and Body, in that their glorified state: I shall not
need to add much more, as concerning the sense of Tasting, which undoubtedly
shall, as well, as that of Seeing, and Hearing, be much meliorated, and
heightened in this life of Glory: It being clearly evident, and agreeable to
right reason, that as the objects and subjects, upon which this Sense shall be
frequently exercised, (be they things potable, as Waters, Juices, and Liquors;
or things edible, as Roots, Flowers, Plants, Herbs, and Fruits) shall much
excel, not only in their powers, virtues, and beauty, but also in their juice
and relish, the choicest of that kind, now in being, as has been formerly
evinced, and illustrated, by reason of their new birth and incorruptible
nature: so shall our senses, and particularly this of the Taste, be wonderfully
enlarged and raised, and proportionably fitted, and enabled accurately, to
distinguish and discern of the different, and innumerable excellencies, as to
their taste (by which, even now, a skillful Naturalist can give a right
judgment, as to their virtues) of such a multitude of simples, and individuals,
that so, by the exquisitness of this sense, our Souls and Bodies may not only
be made the more happy and blessed, but delighted in the use of Gods good
Creatures, as the medium and conveighance of nourishment, ordained of God (as
formerly in Man's innocence) to be useful, and subservient, although not
absolutely necessary to our glorious and Eternal Life; (we having a far more
virtual, and higher Root of Life, for our life is hid in Christ with God):
Colos. 3.3.
And also that by the testimony of this sense, both Soul and Body may be the
more enlarged, and lifted up in the praises, admiration, and adoration of the
wisdom, power, mercy, and goodness of our God, the Creator, giver, and free
restorer of such manifold, and wonderful blessings, in and by his Eternally,
begotten, and only beloved Son, our Head, and Spouse, the Lord Jesus Christ. As
for the killing or eating of the Flesh of any of the sensible Creatures, (I
humbly conceive) and that upon good grounds, there shall not then be any such
use of them; they being now made incorruptible, and in their nature as
everlasting, as the Elements, out of which they are taken; and so shall
continue, by virtue of this new Creation, so long as it pleases God. The food
of the Saints, in this new Earth, being only a lightning, and exonerating the
fruit-bearing vegitives, that so they may be continually bringing forth new
harvests to the glory of their Creator, not a bringing in bondage, or unto
destruction any of the Creatures, now delivered and admitted to enjoy the
glorious liberty of the Children of God. Romans 8.21.
This blessed state being as it were Paradise revived, a new Creation, and
restoration of all things, in this new Heaven, and new Earth, (by the
obedience, merit, and righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ, the second Adam,
although much more transcending) of what was lost by the fall, sin, and
disobedience of the first Adam. That last Paradise, being intended in the
Eternal wisdom, and decree of God (as I humbly conceive, and seems to me now
to be clearly manifested) to be but the Type, John 1.3. Colos. 15 16.17.18.
Heb. 1.2. 1 Cor. 15.23. Revel. 3.4.
shadow, and figure of this; all things being made by, and for him, who is the
Heir of all things, the Head, and Spouse of his Church, the first fruits of
them that sleep; the beginning, and the firstborn from the dead, and the
firstborn of every Creature, and the beginning of the Creation of God. I shall
now conclude this subject, with this monition to all true Christians, not to
suppose or dream here of the Poets Elysian Field, or of a Turkish Paradise, in
this glorious state; nor to be so sinfully carnal, as to imagine that the
sinless Souls, and Bodies of the new raised, and glorified Saints, either
shall, or can abuse this Sense, by any excess, and make it instrumental, as
now, to sensuality, gluttony, and drunkenness; nor on the other extreme, let no
Christian be so unbelievingly spiritual, as contrary to Scripture, (that
affirms the same Bodies shall be raised) to deny what it asserts, as an object
of our faith: nor so absurd, and irrational, (as the Papists in their Doctrine
of Transubstantiation) to deny to our Bodies raised, the properties, parts, and
senses, of which a true Body subsists, thereby to destroy the true nature, and
essence of the Body; all that are truly Saints, being practically and
experimentally assured, that if in this life, wherein we are incompast about
with a Body of Sin, and Death, this sense, and the rest, may be, and is
spiritually made use of, by us, in the enjoyment of Gods good Creatures, to his
great praise, and admiration; then, much more, will they be beneficial, and He,
be honored in them, by us, in that our sinless condition, and life of Glory.

O my Soul, shall thy sense of Tasting, Soliloquium.
be not only retained, but exceedingly perfected, greatly enlarged, and
elevated, at thy Bodies Resurrection, and glorious living with thy Head, the
Lord Jesus Christ, upon the renewed Earth? Shall thou eat, and drink, as our
Savior did thrice after his Resurrection, probably to show, Luke 24.30, 43.
Joh. 21.12, 13.
not only that his Body was truly raised, and that his stay upon Earth, was a
figure, and pattern of his Saints first degree of Glory, here, after their
Resurrection, as his, was his first degree of glory, and exaltation, after his:
but also, that they should accidentally, and at pleasure, as he did, although
not out of a positive, and natural necessity, eat, drink, and make use of the
Creatures? Shall thy body, not only have a kind of secondary nourishment, (as
our first Parents had in Paradise) conveyed unto it, with a far more
exceeding, and extraordinary delight that they had, because of the excelling
transcendency of the subjects, and their much more sanctified, and
spiritualized condition; But shall the Taste also administer to thee,
continually much delight and knowledge from the unexpressible sweetness, and
wonderful variety of innumerable Vegitives, as to their admirable natures and
qualities, to thy great content and ravishment, and thy Creators glory? O do
not therefore now vitiate, and pollute it, with gluttony, or drunkenness; nor
make it a slavish Handmaid, Prove. 23.19.
to any fleshly and inordinate appetite: Be wise, and guide thy heart in the
way; be not amongst Wine-bibers, 20,
amongst riotous eaters of flesh, for the drunkard and the glutton shall come
to poverty. 21,
Who has woe, who has sorrow, 29,
who has contentions, who has babbling, 30,
who has wounds without cause, who has redness of the Eyes? They that tarry
long at the Wine, they that go to seek mixed Wine. 31,
Look not thou upon the Wine when it is red, when it gives its color in the
Cup, when it moves it self aright, at the last it biteth like a Serpent, 32.
and stingeth like an Adder; Thine Eyes shall behold strange Women, and thy
Heart shall utter perverse things; Prove. 23.33,
yea, thou shall be as he that lies down in the midst of the Sea, 34,
or as he that lies upon the top of a Mast; 35,
They have stricken me, shall thou say, and I was not sick; they have beaten me,
and I felt it not; when I shall awake, I will seek it yet again. O my Soul, in
that new life thou shall only eat and drink (as the Apostle exhorts) to the
glory of God, and more for pleasure and delight (and that as to spiritual ends)
than for necessity; Prove. 23.2.
but in this sinful life, if thou be given to appetite, put a Knife to thy
throat, and watch over thy gust, eating and drinking more for necessity, than
for pleasure, as one that eats to live, not lives to eat; not making (like
those wicked ones reproved by the Apostle Paul) thy Belly thy God; But like thy
for ever glorious and blessed Savior, Phil. 3.19. John 2.9.
at all seasonable Feastings, do thou turn Water into Wine, that is, be a holy
and Christian Philosopher or Chemist, extracting Life and Spirits out of every
thing, thou eatest or drinkest, as tasting in the various gusts, sweetness and
virtues of the Creature, the super-excelling sweetness, wisdom and goodness of
thy God, the bountiful giver, and the wonderful Creator; Do not with the
Swinish and dropsical Drunkard, turn Wine into Water; but in thy Nonage so
train up this Childish sense, in all holy temperance and sobriety, that it may
be prepared and fitted for its sublimer exercise, in thy Manhood of Glory.

O my Lord and Savior, who art both our example, Ejaculation.
and our Lawgiver, and therefore have commanded us not to labor for the Meat
that perishes, John 6.27.
but for that Meat which endures unto everlasting life; and does exhort, and
precaution us, to take heed to our selves, that our hearts be not overcharged
with surfeiting, Luke 21.34.
and drunkenness, lest that Day (either of Death, or Judgment) come upon us
unawares; and have also declared, by thy Apostle, that Meats are for the Belly,
and the Belly is for Meats, but God shall destroy them both; 1 Cor. 6.16.
and therefore did exhort and teach us, how to purify, and spiritualize our
fleshly gust, and appetite by faith; offering thy self to be drunk and eaten by
us, when thou saidest, My Blood is Drink indeed, John 6.54, 55.
my Flesh is Meat indeed; affording to us such an excellent nourishment, that
who so by faith spiritually eats thy Flesh, and drinks thy Blood, shall not
dye, but live to Eternity: Yea, further thou hold forth to us, John 6.58.
that thou art that Bread that came down from Heaven, (of which the Manna in
the Wilderness was but a Type) which whosoever eats (by faith) that is, by
believing in thee, shall not dye, but live for ever; as also that thou art that
Water of Life, of which whosoever drinks, shall thirst no more: John 4.13, 14.
O Lord, I cry unto thee with the Emauites, Lord, ever give unto me to eat of
this Bread, and to drink of this living Spring; then shall I be so fully
satisfied, that I shall never hunger or thirst more after any of the things of
this World; The lusts of the Flesh, the lusts of the Eyes, 1 John 2.16.
or the pride of life: yea Lord, I shall not only have enough for my self, but
such plenty, as therewith to feast others also, as being enabled to say with
thy beloved Apostle, That which was from the beginning, 1 John 1.1.
which we have hea^d, which we have seen with our Eyes, which we have looked
upon, (yea that which we have tasted) and our hands have handled, of the Word
of Life, declare we unto you, that ye may have fellowship with us, 3,
(and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and his Son, even with thee O
Lord Jesus Christ:) Lord give unto thy Servant an internal taste, as well as
thou have given me an external sense; that I may with holy David, both taste,
Psalm. 34.8.
and see, how good the Lord is; and bind the one Apprentice to the other,
making it serviceable to my Soul, and unto thee; Then shall I enjoy a double
relish, and sweetness, in every drop of drink, and bit of meat, as being a
love-token from thee, and an earnest of Eternal Life, and nourishment in thee;
so shall my Earthly Palate, at no time injure, deceive, or pollute, my
spiritual sense; as Noah's, and Lot's did, by ignorance surprise, Genesis 9.20,
21. Genesis 19.33.
and the sweetness of the Grape; but be kept in order, and in obedience;
sharpning, not blunting the edge of my Meditation, and Charity, as the full
Meats of Nabal and Dives did; 1 Samuel 25.36. Luke 16.19.
watering, and enlivening, not drowning my piety, and obedience, as it is
probable, Wine, and strong Drink did Nabal and Abihu. O Lord, it is true, that
the Beasts of the Field, Numb. 3.4.
partake, and have the use of this sense, as well as Man; O that they might not
one Day, shame, and rise up in Judgment against the Ep^curisme of many Men!
Does nature moderate the Horse, and the Oxen, as to their eating, and drinking?
O let the addition of thy grace, so order and sanctify my taste and appetite,
that in their sweetness I may admire thy delectableness, mercy, wisdom, and
goodness; so shall this sense begin my glory here, and be perfected in glory,
hereafter, Amen.

Whether odours, and sweet smells, nourish, is a great question amongst the
learned Naturalists; Of the sense of Smelling glorified.
but that they do greatly preserve, refresh, and delight nature, is denied by
none; because sense and experience cannot be contradicted, or deceived. For my
part, since it is most clear, and evident, that noxious, and poisonous scents,
vapors, and pestilential Air, (the effects of Comets, and Earthquakes) as
also minerable, and sulphurious breaths, and damps in Mines, and Cole-pits, and
in the Caverns of the Hill Vesuvius, of Dragons, and Serpents, yea of long
immured, and unaired Prisoners, have infected, suffocated, and suddenly killed
Persons, in the perfectest degree of health: I conclude, that if venomous and
malignant smells, and spirations, have demonstrably, and undeniably, a secret
and virulent Power, to destroy life and nature; Then assuredly, by the rule of
contraries, and according to right reason, (not to spend time in the vouching
of instances, as of that Maid that was preserved in health, strength, and life,
many Months, (without taking any other nourishment) by the constant smelling
of a Rose; and in Moses, Eliahs, and our Savior, Exodus 34.28. 1 King. 19.8.
Math. 4.2.
living 40. Days without any visible Meat, or Drink; which although miraculous,
because extraordinary, and above the customary course of nature; yet not so
totally miraculous, as to exclude Gods making use of the Air, or same other
invisible means of nourishment, for the preservation and comfort of their
natures; such, as I am assured was then partially, if not totally, their
smelling, and in-breathing of the sweet and wholesome Element of Air: I say
again, then assuredly, by the rule of contraries, and according to right
reason, redolent, fragrant, cordial, and spiritual odours, scents, aires, and
smells, do not only refresh, and exhilerate, but fortify, preserve, and
nourish our life, and beings; although subtly, and invisibly, as being thin,
and airy, and therefore more agreeable, and suitable to feed, strengthen and
increase our natural, and animal Spirits, the innate life of our Bodies, and
the medium, and conjugal Bonds, and Ligaments, with which our Souls, (whilst
these Spirits continue) are as it were bound and married, to our flesh) as
seeming to be in love with them, because of their likeness, and of a spiritual
nature, like it self; This secret and mysterious acting of nature, and yet so
necessary, as without the vehiculum of all scents, a sweet air, our bodily
life, cannot long continue, I conceive, has occasioned these doubts, and
disputes, which I have the longer insisted upon, to manifest what a useful,
and necessary Organ, this sense of Smelling is, of life to the Body, as well as
delight to the Soul, in this state; and therefore rationally must continue, and
have an exercise, and a Being in our glorified Bodies hereafter.

From what has been said, of the sense of Tasting, and of this of Smelling, in
order to our nourishment, and as a Medium ordained of God, as it was in
Paradise, for the more delightful, and necessary continuance of life; I infer,
that it is probable, that this sense of Smelling, shall not only continue, but
have the same use, and exercise, although in a far more excellent way, and
manner, after the Resurrection of our Bodies, in Glory.

Secondly, I argue the probability thereof, from the many most excellent
objects, and subjects of this sense in the new Heaven, and new Earth; the
blessed habitation of all the new-raised Saints; such as the four refined, and
then made incorruptible Elements, of Fire, Air, Water, and Earth; together
with the most odoriferous Plants, Herbs, Flowers, Fruits, and sweet smelling,
and Spice-bearing Trees; the beautiful furniture, constant, and natural
perfume of this new Creation, whose most excellent end, Gods wisdom, and
glory, and use, the Saints delight, health, and nourishment, would be lost, and
to little purpose, should this sense of Smelling not then have a being, and be
exercised by us.

The Levitical and Ceremonial Ointments, Perfumes, and Incense, commanded by
God, to be made, used, and offered, Exodus 37.29. Psalm. 141.2. Cant. 4.12, 13,
14.
under the Law, as principal Sacrifices, and as Figures of saving Grace, and
Prayer, and Types of our blessed Saviors most pleasing and acceptable Merits,
and Mediation, show, of what high esteem, odours, spice, and perfumes, had
then, even in Religious Services; If so, it is most likely, they shall have the
honor, to have a being, and to be a special Ornament of this new Earth, and
of civil use, for the delight and benefit of the Saints. If such Creatures, as
the curse for sin, has made noxious, and destructive to Mankind, shall after
their Purification by Heavenly Fire, have still a being, or a re-existence,
such as the Elements, yea, ravenous, and devouring Beasts, as the Prophet seems
to insinuate in those expressions, (wherein I exclude not a spiritual sense
also) that the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down
with the Kid, and the Calfe and the young Lion, and the fatling together; And
the Cow and the Bear shall feed, and their young ones shall lie down together:
The Lion shall eat straw like the Ox: how much more shall the harmless
Creatures, aforementioned, which under our innocence, were innocent, comforts,
and allayes in our misery, have then a being, and by the goodness of God, be
made concomitants, and sweet increasers of our happiness. From all which, I
infer, that more than probably, these Creatures shall have a being in this new
Creation; and consequently the necessary existence, and exercise of the sense
of Smelling, in this our glorified condition.

O my Soul, shall the sense of Smelling, Soliloquium.
be not only continued, at the Resurrection of thy Body, but most excellently
rarefied, perfected, and glorified? Shall it be then as now, though in a far
more inexpressible manner, not only refreshing, and delightful, but probably
an additional, accidental, and invisible delighter, preserver, and nourisher of
the life of the Compositum; thy glorified Soul and Body? O let it not now be
vitiated, and corrupted by sin, and made the usherer in of lust, curiosity, and
pride; let not thy treasures be exhausted, nor thy charity be impoverisht,
sinfully to please this sense, by any too costly excess, in the perfuming of
thy body, house, meats, or garments; after the vain and profuse fashion, use,
and custom of the prodigious, and prodigal great ones of this World; That by
the Devilish witchcraft, and accursed sorcery of Sin, (a true Circes) are
transformed into Beasts and Swine; and who with the venomous Spider, suck and
gather a sinful poison out of the choicest Flowers, and sweetest Creatures,
abusing them to wantonness, uncleanness, and voluptuousness. But let this so
pleasing and useful sense, even now, in the enjoyment of all the excelling
sweets of nature, not only delight, refresh, and cherish thy outward Man; thy
natural and animal Spirits; but let it be a curious, and heavenly Limbeck, to
draw forth, raise up, and extract, out of the fragrant Redolencies of the
numerous kinds of sweets, such a Celestial Spirit, as may perfume thy whole
Man, with the Divine ravishing contemplation of the infinite Power, and Wisdom
of thy Creator, manifested in the multiplicity, variety, and unexpressible
excellencies of smells, and odours; as also of his wonderful mercy, love, and
goodness, in making them, and communicating them to thee, for thy use, and
benefit; that as in a clear mirror, and by this blessed medium, thou may
behold, and enjoy him, who is essentially sweetness: and by whom through faith,
in the Lord Jesus Christ, (which grace, as a spiritual, internal, and common
sense, and Architype of all thy Bodily senses) beholds, hears, tastes, smells,
embraces, and possesses him: thou may, I say, in God alone be delighted,
refresht, and nourisht unto Life Eternal.

O infinite, holy, ever glorious, and Eternal Spirit, who art the power,
Ejaculation. Genes. 1.2. Romans 1.4. Psalm. 103.10. 2 Corin. 6.6. 1 Pet. 4.14.
Joh. 16.14, 15. Gal. 4.6. Joh. 15 20. Rom 8.9. 1 John 5.7.
and love; the goodness, holiness, and sweetness of the Eternal Father, and the
Son, as proceeding from all Eternity, from them; and who art coequal,
coeternal, and co-essential with them, in the unity of one Divine Essence, and
Godhead; who art the Comforter, Counselor, Preserver, and Sanctifier of all
the Elect, and Children of God; give me a new heart, and a new spirit, and make
me a new Creature, according as the Father has promised, Isa. 11.2. Joh. 16.7.
John 10.13. Romans 15.16. 1 Pet. 1.5. Jud. 24. Ezekiel. 11.19.18.31.
in the new Covenant of grace; so shall not only my Soul, with all the
faculties, and affections thereof, but my Body also, with all its Members, and
Senses, be meliorated, renewed, and sanctified; and this rare, wonderful, and
curious sense of Smelling; with the sinfulness of pride, voluptuousness,
excess, curiosity, and vanity, has made not only unprofitable and destructive
to me, but of ill savor, offensive, and dishonorable to thee; become, like the
laborious Be, a gatherer of sweetness, out of every object thereof. Of which
various mixtures, my Soul shall compound, and make up an holy Incense (in
resemblance of that under the Law, prefiguring this) of love, as in return for
thy goodness of admiration, in the acknowledgment of thy wisdom of adoration,
as declaring thy Omnipotency of praise, and thanksgiving, as glorifying thee,
for these thy manifold gifts, and blessings; and be not only Adamiz'd, and like
him, as in Paradise before the Fall, but Angeliz'd; yea, like my Lord and
Savior, who from every object, Creature, and occasion, observed, and raised,
matter of honor, and glory to God his Father, and mine: yea, by such an holy
exercise of this Sense, my Soul, as well as my Body, shall be refresht,
delighted, and nourisht, in its Eternity of Life, begun here, and to be made
perfect, together with this sense, at the first Resurrection of the Just in
Glory.

I need not prove, Of the Sense of Touching glorified.
that the Sense of Feeling shall continue, and have existence in the Saints
glorified state, since to deny it, is tanto-mount, as to affirm that their
Bodies shall not have a being; or which is equally absurd, that they shall in
this new life, be sick of a dead Palsy: This Sense being now, and so without
doubt, shall be then one of the clearest signs, and demonstrations of the life
of the Body; and has in one respect, a singular preheminency, and difference,
above the rest of the Senses. For, whereas every other Sense has its proper
Seat, and Organ; This may be truly said, to be like the Soul, and to Organize,
and reside in every part and member of a living and perfect Body. Neither is
this Sense less necessary to motion, than to life; insomuch, as that when a
Body is totally deprived thereof, it is insensible, and moves not, and is
accounted no better than a dead Trunk, and inanimate Corpse. I shall add
further, that this Sense, as it is now, (so certainly it shall be then) the
Souls chief Instrument, and Inquisitor to discern by, and give Judgment, with
much pleasure and delight, of those four principal Elementary qualities, that
are respectively inherent to, and in all created things, and bodies, that
consist of matter, and are made up, and compounded of the four Elements; as to
heat, or coldness; dryness, or moisture; or of those remoter qualities, and
adjuncts; soft or hard, smooth or rough, arising from them: So that, as the
Soul united to the new-raised Body, without Eyes, and the Sense of Sigh^, may
truly be said to be imperfect, and blind, as to all visible objects; so, should
the Body want this Sense of Feeling, the Soul may as truly be said, to be
incomplete, and ignorantly dark, as to its knowledge, and understanding, as to
all Tangible subjects.

From what has been said, I assert, that the Saints at the Resurrection, shall
in their glorified Bodies, have both the continuance, and exercise of this
Sense of Feeling, and that in an incomparable perfection, as to what it is now.
I will not positively affirm, that spiritual substances, as Angels, may be
subjects of this glorified Sense, that shall be spiritualized with our Bodies;
which though now a Natural Body, 1 Cor. 15.44.
shall then according to the Word of Truth, be raised a spiritual Body: If so,
is it not probable, that as now, to our natural Bodies, natural things are
touchable, Luke 24.39.
so to our spiritual bodies, spiritual substances, as Angels, may be Tangible:
Our Saviors expression to his Apostles, not at all contraducing, or excluding
this inquiry, or inference, he affirming only, that a spirit has not flesh,
and bones, as he had: not denying that a spiritual glorified body, may touch
and feel a spiritual Being, and Essence: But should this not be, I am assured,
we shall both touch, and embrace him, and be embraced by him (I speak this
according to the Scripture Phrase, with all due and humble reverence) who is
far above all Creatures, and Angels, our Head, our Spouse, our Savior, the
most glorious Lord Jesus Christ, God-man, in one Person; as also Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob; the Holy Patriarchs, Kings, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, and glorified Saints; as also our formerly near and dear Relations;
which then shall be known of us, in that perfection of knowledge, and in this
our exaltation; that so their salvation may add such an accidental joy to the
augmentation of our blessedness, as the Holy Angels are said, by our Savior,
to have now super-added to their happiness, at the conversion of a sinner.

To these, I shall annex and subjoyn other more inferior subjects of this
glorified Sense; the then refined and well-tempered Air and Elements; the
delightful contact of Fowls, Birds, and Beasts, now willingly subject and
obedient to Man; the super-excelling, and numerous Trees, Fruits, and Plants;
the Arbors of soft and sweet smelling Roses, the banks of Lillies, the beds of
Violets, the Carpets of all manner of rarest Herbs and Flowers; with which this
new Heaven, and new Earth, this renewed Paradise, shall be (even to perpetuity)
plentifully garnisht, and adorned with, to the great glory of God, the Creator,
of Christ the Restorer, and of the Holy Ghost the Efficient, and to the
unexpressible pleasure, and delightful use, and benefit of the Elect and
glorified Saints. As the blessed Canticles, that Song of Songs, has been, and
is reproacht, and abused by wanton Amorists; and a learned Man was declared an
Heretic, for holding there was an Antipodes, or a new World before its
discovery; so may possibly these my weak notions, and contemplations, (although
of a Divine subject) because not heretofore searched into by others, that I know
of; and therefore if the Lord in his providence shall order them to come to a
public view, I only recommend them to the devout perusal, and judgment of
holy, humble, regenerate, and practical Christians; who although in the Body,
do by divine Meditation, as it were live out of the Body, and have been so far
changed into the Image of Christ, and taught, and renewed by his holy Spirit,
that they have brought their Bodies, and Senses unto such a spiritual frame,
and exercise, as is declared, and exhorted to, in the foregoing discourse;
These will rightly judge of this personal Reign of Christ, with his Saints upon
Earth; and how uncharitably, and unjustly, and I may add ignorantly, many (in
other respects, learned, religious, and to be honored) have ignominiously, and
falsely branded this Doctrine, as though it was New, Epicureal, and Sensual;
whereas the truth is, it is Vide Doctor Homes, Resurrection Revealed; and many
others on this Subject.
a most ancient and Primative Doctrine, and nothing else, but the declaration
and affirmation of that glorious condition of Christ, and his Saints; that he
himself, the Holy Scriptures, and Prophets, indicted, and inspired by his Holy
Spirit, have throughout witnessed to, and promised, as by the Scriptures quoted
in the Margin, Rev. 21.1, 5. 2 Pet. 3.13. Isay. 65.17. Acts 1.6. Acts 3.21.
Math. 17.11.
besides many others, is sufficiently proved. That he, the second Adam, should
come to renew, and restore all things, in this lower Creation, (freed from the
curse of sin) to as good, yea, a far better condition, than they had before the
Fall; When God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good.
Now, Genesis 1.31.
did not God make this so excellent a work, for his Glory? and for his Creature
[Man] to enjoy, and to serve, praise, and glorify him, in the fruition thereof;
and in the admiration of him in this its excellency, and goodness? But did any
of Mankind, but only two, Adam and Eve, enjoy the Earth, and the Creatures
thereof, in their Primitive, and created excellencies, and that but for a Day,
or two? How then shall God have his end, the Glory of his Power, wisdom, and
goodness; and Man, the enjoyment of all his liberality and bounty; and be
Trumpets and witnesses of his excellencies in the Creatures? How shall Gods
promise be fulfilled, Of making a new Heaven, Isay. 65 17. 2 Pet. 3.13. Acts
3.21.
and a new Earth; and restoring all things by his Son, the Heir of all things.
If Man, I mean all the Elect, in his Soul, Body, and Senses, shall not be
renewed, and live personally with Christ, at this Renovation of all things,
Revel. 20.4.
for a thousand years, according to the Scriptures, to enjoy what God has
made, and Christ has purchased for them: and to admire, adore, and glorify him
in the Primitive end, use, and enjoyment of them; These then that deny this,
and in a fervent (I forbear to say ignorant have, because every Age has its
measure of light) would seat the raised Saints in the highest Heavens, before
their time, and before Gods promises, and great designs be fulfilled; what do
they else, in the declining of this great truth, but force themselves upon
false, and Allegorical expositions of clear, and literal Scriptures, making
ineffectual his promise? yea, do they not affirm, contrary to that undeniable
maxim, that God made these Heavens, and this Earth, and all the wonderful
Creatures, and admirable Ornaments thereof, in vain; as not known, nor made use
of by them, for whom at first he created it, and again renewed it? I might here
add many more Arguments, for the defense of this truth, but I shall at this
time, no further digress, but return to my former Method of Meditation, upon
this glorified Sense of Feeling: Referring the Reader to those most excellent
Treatises of Dr. Homes, Mr. Archer, and many others upon this Subject.

Soliloquium.
O my Soul, shall this Sense be not only continued, but exercised upon such
excellent subjects, in Glory: shall it with thy Body be spiritualized, and as
to its sensability, incomparably exceed, what it is now: O be careful not to
effeminate, or pollute it; disdaining to vassalage it to pride, covetousness,
lust, or vanity: But, as it more than all the other Senses, declares and
manifests thy living in the body; So let it, by an innocent, sober, chaste, and
holy acting, testify Christ's living in thee. The Lord Jesus has taken off all
legal impositions, Colos. 2.21.
such as Touch not, taste not; but not his Gospel, and Spiritual restraining.
Therefore abuse not, nor make use of this Christian liberty, which he has
purchased for thee, to fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh; For, if thou live
after the Flesh, Romans 8.13.
thou shall dye; but if through the Spirit, thou mortifiest the deeds of the
Flesh, thou shall live. Take heed of covetousness, which has not only its seat
in the Eye, but in the Hand; desire not with Mydas (in the Poet) that every
thing thou touchest, may become Gold; but remember the issue, and moral of the
Fable, his starving and perishing in his enjoyments. Neither embrace thou the
bosom of a strange Woman, Prove. 5.20. Prove. 6.29. Prove. 5.5. Prove. 23.27.
for he that touches her shall not be innocent; for her ways draw near to
death, and her steps take hold of Hell; she being compared by the spirit of God
to a deep Ditch, and to a narrow Pit, out of which very few get out, and are
delivered. For although as in the Poet, Ixion-like, in the height of thy
lustful pleasure, thou think to infold in thy Arms, a Juno, a Goddess: The
conclusion will be, but the grasping of an Airy Cloud; nay, which is far worse,
a Pestilential vapor, an inflamed and killing Granado. O my Soul, since whilst
thou art in this vain World, and in this sinful body, thou art incompast
about, with Legions of evil spirits, with innumerable snares, and with secret,
and subtle temptations; which (with those in the Prophet) call good evil, and
evil good; Isai. 5.20.
which put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter; which call light, darkness,
and darkness, light; abusing lawful things, and turning them out of their
right Channel, by excess, that so they may overflow, and drown the Earth again,
with a far more dangerous Flood, than that of Water, (which destroyed only a
temporal Life) even a deluge of sin, and of flaming Fire, 2 These. 1.8. 2 Pet.
3.7, 12.
(long since foretold, the cause of that Fire, and without true repentance of
Eternal Death) watch thou therefore, and pray, lest thou fall into temptation,
and this sense be adulterated by thy pride, excess, and luxury, and made
instrumental, to cause those good Creatures, the soft Silks of Persia, the warm
Furs of Muscovia, the fine Wools of Britan, and Segovia, given thee by God, to
cover thy sinful nakedness, to become a covering of sin, and a Banner of
pride, and vanity.

Take heed also, that this sense be not bewitched, and overcome through
voluptuousness, and corrupt thee by an excessive, idle, and inordinate use, of
the Down-beds of England, of the hot Springs of Bathe, of the fresh, but wanton
Air of Hide-Park, of the cool Baths, and Aquaducts of Italy; Remember that
ancient, but true Proverb, Latet anguis in Herba; made good, literally, and
vitiously, in the Egyptian Cleopatra, whose lusts, even her unclean, and
immoderate indulging of this sense, procured her Soul and Bodies destruction. O
my Soul, let this sense fulfill the end, for which it was made, and become (as
before has been observed) thy Instrument, and diligent Investigator to inquire
into the wonders, and bounty of God, in the Elements, other natural things, and
in all thy enjoyments; That in the pleasing, and sober exercise, of this sense,
both thy body may be delighted, and thou may be assisted, and instructed
therefrom, to glorify thy great and good God, in all his mercies, and
attributes, and in all thy liberal fruitions; so shall thou be like the blessed
Angels, who by their spiritual sense, beholding and apprehending God in all his
works; are thereby enlarged, and unwearied in his praises; and be also a
Companion with them, hereafter, in their Heavenly Hallelujahs, and Celestial
Glory.

O Lord, my God and Savior, who has said in thy Word; Ejaculation. John
17.17. Revel. 21.5.
which Word is truth; Behold, I make all things new; fulfill that promisary
Word, I beseech thee in me; renew both my Soul and Body, that this sense of
senses, this universal sense, that possesses every part and member, may not
seem to be alive, and yet not alive, as being by nature, and from my birth,
taken with, and under a dead Palsy of Sin; and in danger to be made past
feeling, through customary offending, and the frequent strokes, and sharp
launcings of thy Judgments; the gnawings, and bitings of Conscience, and of my
dangerous condition. Is there no Balm in Gilead? Jerem 8.22.
Is there no Physician there? Lord Jesus, thou alone art my Physician, thou
have undertaken my Cure, thou have begun it, and wilt certainly perfect it; For
thou art the Author, Hebr. 12.2.
and finisher of my Faith; a God of perfection, and immutable, Romans 11.29.
therefore thy Gifts and Calling are without Repentance. O be thou graciously
pleased, to wash both Soul, and Body, in that Fountain, Zach. 13.1.
opened in the House of David, for Sin, and for Uncleanness, even in thy own
most precious, healing and purifying blood: For thy blood, O Lord Jesus Christ,
cleanses from all sin, 1 John 1.7.
and iniquity, and that not only from the guilt, as to Gods divine justice: But
from the filth of sin, this my body of death, and corrupt Lusts: so shall I
have a pure, tender, and feeling Conscience, to avoid, and eschew all evil; and
the like Sense of Feeling in my Body, shall be so sanctified, and regulated by
it, that neither costly pride, nor penurious covetousness, lustful, and
itching concupiscence, wastfull voluptuousness, nor deceivable vanity, shall
vitiate, corrupt, or disorder it. O my Lord, since thou have made a firm
Covenant with me, in Baptism, even an everlasting Covenant, the sure mercies
of David, Jerem. 50.5. 2 Samuel 23.5. Isay. 55.3.
and have contracted thy self to me in the Communion of thy Body, and Blood, I
will now presume to say, as thy Spirit has taught me, My Beloved is mine,
Cant. 2.16. Cant. 1.2. Cant. 2.4.
and I am his* Kiss me with the kisses of thy Mouth, for thy love is better
than Wine. Bring me into thy Banqueting House, and let thy Banner over me, be
love: Stay me with Flaggons, comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of love; let
thy left Hand be under my Head, and let thy right hand embrace me. Now I have
found thee, Cant. ^.4.
whom my Soul loves, I will hold thee, and will not let thee go; O set me as a
Seal upon thy Heart, as a Seal upon thy Arm; Cant. 8.6.
so my love, in thy strength, is as strong as death; Many Waters, (through thy
grace) shall not, 7.
nor can quench my love; neither can the Floods of Tentations, Tribulations,
and Persecutions for thy sake, drown it. O let me be in thy Eyes, 10.
as one that has found favor; so shall this Sense, my Touch, be
spiritualized, by thee here, and glorified with thee hereafter; and be the
Handmaid, and assistant to my Soul, to distinguish and discover unto her, thy
bounty and goodness, and all other thy excellencies, in thy wonderful works in
nature; and cease to be, as in its unregenerate state, Gal. 5.10.
a Pander to lust, and Satan: For the works of the Flesh, are Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Rev. 22.15.
Lasciviousness; and without the new Jerusalem, are Dogs, and Whoremongers.
Lord do thou touch me with the Finger of thy sanctifying Spirit, and let me lay
hold, and embrace thee in the Arms of Faith, and love; and then this bodily
sense shall be so metamorphosed, by such a union, and communion with thee, that
it shall be a real augmentation of my happiness and delight, in this life, and
through thy free grace, who proportionably rewards thy Saints, receive from
thee, by the holy exercise of it here, at the Resurrection, an answerable
increase of Glory, Amen.

Of the Tongue Glorified.
Having through Gods gracious assistance, (although in much weakness) meditated
and discoursed of the glorification of the Five Senses; I shall conclude, with
the blessed, and excellent use, and exercise of the Tongue; (under which I
comprehend the voice, and articulate speech) at our Resurrection in Glory;
which although not numbered amongst the Senses, yet is not inferior, but
transcends them all; as being the Souls Orator, and Interpreter, to the glory
of God, of what is seen, heard, tasted, smelt, or touched by us; And therefore
it is styled by David, His Glory; Psalm. 30.12. Psalm. 108.1.
as being that sweet, and most melodious Instrument, that utters, and declares
the wondrous works of God, to his great praise, and honor, which is the
principal end of our Creation, Redemption, and Glorification. To this member I
annex, as necessary assistants; the Air, Lips, Teeth, Throat, and Lungs. And
as to the Speech, Language, or Dialect, solely to be used, by all the Saints,
at the Resurrection. I humbly conceive, it shall be the Primitive Hebrew
Tongue; as being certainly, the Original Language of Adam, in the Creation; and
before his Fall, when he gave names to the Creatures, according to their
natures, and in which God spoke unto him; and therefore is to be restored to
us, by Christ, the second Adam. The rise of all other Languages, being a curse,
punishment, and an effect of sin, in their Original, and the confusion at the
building, of the Tower of Babel. Besides, this Tongue had the great and special
honor, to be the Language of the Holy Ghost, in the old Testament, and in St.
Matthew's Gospel, and of our blessed Savior, the Eternal Word of God; and of
the blessed Angels, in all their several missions, and appearances throughout
the Book of God. So that in fine, this Tongue has the privilege and
prerogative of all other Languages, and may be called the Language of the
glorious Trinity; Holy Angels, and inspired Saints, and Prophets, yea, the
Language of Heaven. I proceed next to the Persons, with whom the Saints shall
speak, and frequently converse in this new life, on the renewed Earth, (O let
it be contemplated by us, with a ravishing, and admiring reverence, and
thankfulness). Since it shall be with the most glorious Trinity in Unity, God
blessed for ever, with the King of Kings, Rev. 19.16.
the Lord of Lords; The Mediator, Spouse, and Head of his Mystical Body the
Church, now perfect and complete, redeemed, and raised in their Bodies also, to
Glory: If now the Apostle witnesses, 1 John 1.3.
We have fellowship with the Father and the Son, How much more then, when We
shall Reign with Christ personally, as Kings, Rev. 5.10. Rev. 20.6.
and Priests upon Earth. Further, in this Heavenly Jerusalem, this City of the
living God, Heb. 12.
We shall have communion with an innumerable Company of Angels, 22,
and with the general Assembly, and Church of the firstborn, 23.
even with all the Elect, from Adam, unto the last Convert: yea, then shall
that great truth, in the Psalmist, be fulfilled in this Restoration, by the
Lord Jesus Christ; Psalm. 7.5.
when the Saints shall be Crowned with Glory, and Honor, and made with, and
under him their Head, 6,
to have dominion over the works of his hands. Then shall all things be put
under their Feet; all Sheep, and Oxen, yea, 7.
and the Beasts of the Field, the Fowls of the Air, and the Fish of the Sea,
8.
and whatsoever passes through the Paths of the Seas.

I come now, to the use and exercise, of this glorious, and glorified Member,
the Tongue, speech, and voice; which I humbly conceive shall be then, Musical,
and Laudatory, and also precatory, as, and with respect to God, and Christ.
Secondly discursive, declarative, and communicative, as in respect of Angels,
and their fellow-Saints; as also gubernative, and mandatory, as, and in respect
of all inferior Creatures.

As to the first, that the chiefest duty, and highest service of the Saints, in
this new life, shall be the Loqual, Musical, and melodious singing, praising
and worshipping of God, and Christ, is in many Figurative Visions proved, and
held forth, in the Revelation; as Chapter the Fourth, from Verse the 8 th. unto
the end of the 11 th. Verse; and Chapter the 5 th. from Verse the 8 th. until
the end of the 14 th. Verse; and Chapter the 7 th. from Verse 9 th. unto the
end of the 12 th. Verse; and Chapter 11 th. from Verse 15 th. unto the end of
the 18 th. Verse; and Chapter 14 th. from Verse the 2 d. unto the end of the 3
d. Verse; and Chapter the 15 th. from Verse. the 2 d. unto the end of the 4 th.
Verse; and Chapter 19 th. Verse the 1. unto the end of the 8 th. Verse; I am
not ignorant, that the places above cited, do most of them respect the
providential actings of God, and Christ, in the Church Militant, before the
Resurrection of the just; and the Churches returns of praises, and worship for
them; yet as I think, none will deny the truth I assert, so none but will
confess, these to be Types, and Patterns of what is done now in Heaven, by the
Church tryumphant, and shall be done, by the Saints after the Resurrection, to
Eternity; which I prove from Revelations, Chapter 21. Verse the 22. which
speaks directly of the time I write of, even of the glorified state of the
Saints, upon the new Earth, under the type of the holy City, or new Jerusalem;
And I saw no Temple therein, for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the
Temple of it; and Chapter the 22. Verse the 3 d. And there shall be no more
curse, but the Throne of God, and the Lamb shall be in it; and his Servants
shall serve him. To these, I will only add the expressions of the Psalmist; In
God we boast all the day long, and praise thy Name for ever; Psalm. 44.8. Psalm.
115.18.
we will bless the Lord from this time forth, and for ever more. And that of
the Apostle, By Him (meaning the Lord Jesus Christ) let us offer the Sacrifice
of praise to God continually; that is, Heb. 13.15.
the fruit of our Lips, giving thanks to his Name.

As to the second particular, that the Saints after the Resurrection, shall
converse, and have communion with the blessed Angels, and with the rest of
their fellow members, that Scripture before-cited out of the Hebrews Chapter
12. Verse 22, and 23. does sufficiently evidence; for if we have communion with
them, in this our militant condition, (as is there asserted by the Apostle) how
much more shall we have our Conversation with them, in this state of Glory. If
the glorious Angels are now our Guardians, and were often visible, present, and
discoursed, with Abraham, Jacob, Lot, Joshua, Gideon, Genes. 18.1, 2. Genes.
19.1, 2. Genesis 32.1, 2. Joshua 5.13. Judge. 6.12. Judge. 13.13. 2 Samuel 24.17. 2
King. 6.17, 18. 1 King 19.5, 7 Dan. 9.21. Luke 1.28. Luke 2.9. Revel. 1.7. Mark
12.25. Revel. 21.22.
Manoah, David, Eliah, Elisha, Daniel, the Shepwards, the blessed Virgin, John,
and others of the Saints on Eearth, shall they not be much more intimate, and
conversant, when glorified together with them? shall we be as the Angels, and
not with the Angels? shall we have a fellowship with the infinite and
incomprehensible Trinity? shall God and the Lamb be our Temple, in this period
of our reigning with Christ upon Earth, as has been before proved; and shall
any think us then below the society of the Elect Angels? or that the Angels
delight not to be present with them, with, and in whom, the God, and Head of
Angels, dwells, and inhabits? Did not Angels declare most of the holy mysteries
to the Prophets, and to Saint John, and when through infirmity, Revel. 19 10.
and the 22. chap. verse 9.
he fell down twice to worship them, did they not both times say, See thou do
it not, I am of thy Brethren the Prophets, that have the Testimony of Jesus,
worship God? As for the communion of Saints, both here, and hereafter, it is
one of the Articles of our Faith, and asserted in many places of the Scripture;
As that, matthew. 28.28.
where the Karkass is, Math. 28.28. Luke 13.28.
there shall the Eagles be gathered together. That at this time, the wicked
shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of
God, That we shall be taken up in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air. 1
These. 4.17.
And that then we shall be ever with the Lord: as also throughout the Book of
the Revelations: especially in the two last Chapters, where this time, and
state, is prophetically, and evincingly set forth, and declared; That the
Angels, and Saints exercise, is, and shall be then laudatory, and precatory; a
melodious singing and continual praising, adoring, admiring and worshipping of
God; I think none doubts; and I have already sufficiently proved. And as to the
blessed matter, and subject of their discourse, and communication, one with
another; I humbly conceive, it will chiefly respect, and inspect, as to time,
(in imitation of our God) things that are past, present, and things that are to
come, so far as are promised, and shall be revealed to them. And as to the most
excellent matter of their discourse, I humbly conceive it will be, to keep in
remembrance, declare and communicate to, and with one another, in lesser, or
greater Assemblies, the glorious, fearful, and wonderful Name of the Lord our
God; that is, his infinite, and incomprehensible Attributes, by which he is
made known to his Creatures; for every Attribute is God in the abstract, as his
Omnipotency, wisdom, holiness, justice, love, mercy, truth, goodness, life,
glory, eternity, and the rest; As they have been, are, and shall be declared,
in his works of Creation, then fully understood, and revealed to us; as to the
causes, and effects, nature, virtues, influences, and uses of all things, that
God has made, and that have a Being in Heaven, or in Earth: to the glory of
our God their Creator. Which is to me a strong reason, and a great help to
interpret many Scriptures; as setting forth the great wisdom, and justice of
God, in appointing a certain time for his Saints, for whom he made the Earth,
and wherein they have so greatly suffered, and been persecuted for his sake,
and to whom, he has redeemed, and restored it; shall with their Head the Lord
Jesus, in this new Heaven, and new Earth, before their second, and ultimate
Glory, in the highest Heavens, possess, and enjoy, know, and understand this
his lower Creation, in its Primitive excellency; That so they may sing to his
praise, and speak thereof one to another, to the exalting God's Name, and
Glory, as being the Chief end, for which he Created it and them.

The second Chief Head of the Saints exercise of speech, one with another, will
be concerning the wonderful providence of God, especially in respect of his
Church, from the beginning of the World; a History never to be blotted out,
obliterated, or forgotten, by his Saints; but to be frequently remembered, and
mentioned to the glory of his power, wisdom, love, and faithfulness, and of
the rest of his Attributes.

A third and principal subject, will be that which now, and ever shall be, the
wonder of Heaven, and Earth, the admiration of Saints, and Angels, that Miracle
of Divine love, the Redemption of Mankind, by the Lord Jesus, God-Man in one
Person: In which, above all other his works, the Lord has been pleased to draw
near, and to manifest himself in all his glorious Attributes, both to Saints
and Angels. This is that mystery of mysteries, of which the Apostle witnesses,
That without controversy, 1 Timothy 3.16.
great is the mystery of Godliness; God manifested in the Flesh, justified in
the Spirit, seen of Angels, Preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the
World, Ephesians. 3.18.
received up into Glory: This is that breadth and length, that depth and height,
the knowledge of the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, even the fullness
of God, and the riches of his Glory. But I must return where I left off, 19.
lest I be swallowed up in this Ocean of Divine love, Ephesians. 3.16.
which both now and then shall far transcend, not only the expressions, but the
Conceptions of Saints and Angels.

The fourth Subject, about which the Saints Tongues shall be exercised,
respects their several employments, and activities, under their glorious Head,
and King, in this transcendent Kingdom and Universal Empire, which by way of
allusion, I may term their Callings or degrees of Office under him, and in
Relation to one another; For, if the Holy Scriptures hold forth, that in the
highest Heavens, there is the most excellent Order, and Government evidenced,
by the gradual denominations, and titles, given unto those Aetherial subjects:
as Archangels, and Angels, Jude 9. 1 These. 4.16 Revel. 5.11. Philip. 1.16.
Colos. 1.16. 1 Pet. 3.22. Ezekiel. 10.1, 3, 20. Isay. 6.2, 6.
Principalities, and Powers, Thrones, and Dominions, Cherubins, and Seraphins;
All which have their several Offices, Employments, and Governments, according
to the appointment, and establishment of our great and all-wise God, in those
vast Regions, and innumerable starrified Orbs; yea, if in Paradise, (had our
first Parents not fallen) as they, so also their Progeny* should have dressed
the Garden, Genesis 2.15. 1 Cor. 15.41.
and not have been idle* so also, it is more than probable, that as the Saints,
according to the Scriptures, should have (like the Stars) different degrees of
Glory, so shall they have different actings, Offices, and Employments; for the
performance of which, the Tongue, and speech, above other parts, and Members of
the Body; as being the Souls Image, and Interpreter, will have the greatest
share, and honor. As for their Offices, he who is truly the Fountain of
honor, our Lord, and Emperor, the Lord Jesus, says, that the Saints shall be
all Kings; Revel. 5.10. Luke 12.32. Luke 22.29. Luke 19.19.
yet with a difference, as to the extent of their Governments; For some shall
rule over five, others over ten Cities, in this Empire of Glory. Now their
several and respective Functions, and atchievments in their Governments, none
will suppose, can be performed, without the use of the Tongue, and speech. If
all things in the Church Militant, must be done with decency, and in order,
much more admirable shall be the unparalled order of this Church Tryumphant;
The regulation, directory, and carrying on of which, I conceive shall not be as
now, by the use and help of any kind of Books, or Canons; but by verbal Orders,
and Acts flowing continually from their Souls, now as full of Light, as Life;
That gracious promise, and prophecy, being then to be completed, and
fulfilled; They shall be all taught of God. Isay. 54.13.
Let none mistake me, as though I here hold forth, that Saints shall have any
Dominion, or Rule over their Brethren; No, I mean, and intend no such thing;
For all here are Kings, and free, and shall be subject to none, but God, and
Christ, their Head. But this I conceive, that this Church Tryumphant, being
that glorious, and mystical Body, whereof only Christ is the Head, 1 Cor.
12.12. to verse. 27.
it is (as the Apostle elegantly) concerning the Church Militant, like the
natural Body, compounded, and made up of many Members; every one of which has
a different degree of honor, grace, and glory, and are designed for several
uses, and actions; which without any servitude, or disrespect, from each other
of their Members, they do, and cheerfully execute, in order to the good,
benefit, and happiness of the whole; according as they are continually
influenced, and directed, 1 Timothy 6.15. Revel. 19.16.
by their Head, the Lord Jesus, who is the only Potentate, The King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords.

I come now to the third, and last particular, the gubernative, and mandatory
acting of the Tongue, and voice, of glorified Saints upon the new Earth, as in
respect of all animate, and inferior Creatures; as Fowls of the Air, Beasts
of the Earth, and creeping things: some of all which kinds, as being
intelligible, although not rationable; are now subjected to, and obedient to
the voice of Man, even to the command of wicked Men: As first, for instance,
are not Faulcons, Lanners, Gosshawkes, and all kind of ravenous Fowls,
brought, and taught to obey the Rulers call, and voice of the Faulkner? And as
for other Fowls, how wonderful is the subjection, and observance of the
Cormorants, and the coy Ducks, as to the Instructions, and designs of their
Masters. And as for harmless, lesser, and singing Birds; how speedy and trusty
Conveighers of Letters are the Pigeons, called Carriors in the Eastern
Countries, to the Merchants? How do Parrots, and other Birds speak and sing, as
they are taught, and when they are commanded so to do by their Teachers?

Next, how are all sorts of wild and devouring Beasts made Tame, and obedient
to their Keepers; as the Lion, Bear, Tiger, Wolf; especially the Elephants, and
Rhinoceroses, so much used, and employed in Wars, and for service by the
Eastern Nations? As also those less wild, the Horse, Mule, Ass, the Camels,
Dromedary; and Dogs of all sorts; Baboons, Apes, and Monkies: of which last, a
credible Writer reports, that he knew a Monky to have so well learnt, and
obeyed the rules of his Tutor, that he would not only play a Game at Chess, but
often give a Check-Mate to a good Gamester.

As to creeping things; although Naturalists report, many strange things
concerning their love, and subjection to Man; and daily experience shows us,
with what awe and fear they are possessed, when they but hear a humane voice: yet
for brevity sake, I will only observe, what is written concerning the Adder,
that it has such a dreadful apprehension of the force, and power of
Incantation; that to avoid the Inchanters voice, she will stop one of her Ears
with the end of her Tail, and the other by laying it close to the Earth, which
as to the actions, although not to the precise manner of doing, the Holy
Scriptures witness, That the Adder stops her Ear from hearing the voice of
the Charmer, Psalm. 58.5.
charm he never so wisely.

If then there remains, and appears such manifest signs, and testimonies of
Man's dominion, and of the inferior Creatures obedience, and subjection to him,
even after the Fall, Gods curse, the Creatures rebellion, and the vacating of
Man's commission: How perfectly entire, and absolute, shall this Dominion be,
and the Creatures subjection and obedience, when the glorified Saints in the
right of Christ, the Lord, and Heir of all things, their Head, Heb. 1.2. Romans
8.17.
shall be as coheirs with him, restored to this their Primitive right, and
prerogative? which promise and act of Christ, could not be fulfilled, or
performed to us, in this particular, (although no small privilege of the
Saints) unless before their second, and last degree of Glory, They reign with
him upon the renewed Earth, Revel. 20.4.
a thousand years; according to the Scripture; which Earth, (it is more than
probable) shall be furnished as before, with several kinds of Creatures; to the
end, that they may be in subjection to, and under the dominion of the Saints,
who shall be all Kings: now a King, and subjects, are relatives, so that no
subjects, Revel. 20.6.
no King. If it be a truth, that they shall not reign over one another, it is
as clear a truth, they shall reign over all terrene animals, and inferior
Creatures.

But it may be objected, how shall the Creature, according to that assertion of
the Apostle, Be delivered from Bondage, they now are under, Romans 8.21.
and enjoy the liberty of the Sons of God, if they be under this subjection?

I answer; as it is no diminution of our liberty, that we shall then be in
subjection to God, in Christ, because his Service is our perfect freedom; so
it shall be no impeachment, or contradiction, to the liberty in that Scripture
intended, to be restored to the Creatures; For no other liberty, it is clear,
is there meant to be given then, but what they had before; their unwilling
subjection to bondage, by reason of Gods curse, for Man's sin, and it, being one
of the principal ends of their Creation, to delight, serve, and obey Man, Gods
Vicegerent upon Earth, their service therein, according to the Primitive
Ordinance of God, (as may be observed also, in the unwearied motions of the
Sun, and Planets) shall be their joy, honor, and freedom, not their bondage:
This government having no need, or occasion, to make any such harsh, laborious,
oppressive, or slautering use of any Creature, as now: all the Saints vocal
commands, being then, by the wonderful wisdom, and providence of God, so
ordered, and made agreeable to the nature, and will of the Creatures, and that
by a certain kind of instinct, as that their subjection, and obedience, shall
be as natural, pleasing, and acceptable to them, as it is to the Fire and Air,
to ascend; they being as ambitious and ready to obey, as the Saints to rule,
govern, and command them; since all their Orders, and verbal Injunctions, shall
tend to the great glory of God, ours and their Creator, and of Christ our
Redeemer.

As to the particular actings* and subject matter of the Saints verbal
Statutes, and Injunctions in this their Dominion and Government of the
Creatures, I shall not further enlarge, (as conducing nothing to the subject I
am now upon) although the Holy Prophets* in mysterious Figures, and
expressions, hold forth some light and discovery thereof. Only I desire it may
be observed, That before Man's Fall, the several genusses, or kinds, of all
terrene Creatures, were in possession of, and enjoyed Paradise with Adam: else,
how could they be brought by the Lord to Adam, to see what he would call them?
And whatsoever Adam called every living Creature, Genesis 2.19, 20.
that was the name thereof. From which I note, the great use of the Tongue, and
speech of Man in that blessed Garden; the certain and clear Figure of our
restored and Paradisical Earth? as also that the Creatures were not brought by
God to Adam only, and barely, to receive their Names; but that Adam should
particularly, and understandingly view them; that so he might take seriously
notice of the variety of their kinds, the wonderfulness of their forms, and
shapes; and Phylosophically inspect, (as being the wisest of all Earthly
Beeings) their respective qualities, and natures; that so he might not only
give them significant, and proper names, (a Prerogative and Character,
declaring him Lord and King over them) but as a Priest unto God, Revel. 20.6.
to both which Offices the Saints are to be restored) he might from the daily
contemplation of them, praise, admire, and adore; as the Saints also shall do,
the great and only most high God, who has made them, and us, and all things
for his own Glory.

From this my weak, and short inquiry, and induction, of a few particulars* it
is made clear and evident how excellent a Member the Tongue is; and also how
great and manifold, the use and exercise thereof, will be in this our glorified
condition. I shall now therefore, according to my former Method, conclude this
subject, and this Treatise, with a few Meditations.

Soliloquium.
O my Soul, shall thy Tongue, voice, and speech, have such an excellent, and
glorious employment, in the state of glory, as to be thy Representee
Ambassador, and Prolucutor to God, Saints, Angels, and Creatures? shall it be
the most loud, sweet, and full-sounding Organ, and Instrument of the worship,
and high praises of the Trinity in Unity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, God
blessed for ever? shall it be a vocal Trumpet, in the ravishing, and most
melodious Chore of Millions of Millions of glorified Saints and Angels, to
sound forth, and speak of, to one another, the wonderful works, and
providence of God, past, present, and to come, divulged in the large Mapps of
our Creation, Redemption, and Glorification, to his continual, and everlasting
praise, and glory? Shall it be a principal Engine, and Actor, as to that
Office, and Government, thou shall be placed in, amongst thy fellow Saints, in
this glorious and universal Empire of the Lord Jesus, reigning Personally as
King, and Mediator, in this his Mediatory Kingdom, upon the renewed Earth? Yea
lastly, shall it be the Expressor, of all thy Orders, and Commands, in the
Execution of thy restored Dominion, over the terrene, and inferior Creatures?

O with holy David, (that now glorified Saint, Psalm. 141 3.
) Set a watch over thy Lips, that thou offend not with thy Tongue; and remember
that authentic Declaration of thy Judge, Lord, and Savior, By thy words thou
shall be justified, Matthew. 12.37.
and by thy words thou shall be condemned; Matthew. 12.36.
and that of every idle word, thou shall give an account, at the Day of
Judgment; Because, matthew. 12.34.
out of the abundance of wickedness that is within the Heart, the Mouth
speaks. James 3.2*
If any Man (says St. James) offend not in word, the same is a perfect Man,
and able also to bridle the whole Body. 3,
Behold (says the same Apostle) we put Bits into the Horses mouths, that they
may obey us, and we turn about their whole Body; Behold also the Ships, 4,
which though they (...) so great, and are driven of fierce Winds, yet are they
twined about, with a very small Helm, whether so ever the Governor lists; 5,
Even so the Tongue is a little member, and boasts great things; Behold how
great a matter a little Fire kindles; And the Tongue is a Fire, 6,
a World of iniquity; so is the Tongue amongst our Members, that it defiles
the whole Body, and sets on Fire the course of nature; And it is set on Fire
of Hell: 7,
For every kind of Beasts, and of Birds, and of Serpents, and the things in the
Sea is tamed, 8,
and has been tamed of Mankind; But the Tongue can no Man tame, it is an
unruly evil, full of deadly poison; Therewith bless we God, 9,
even the Father; and therewith curse we Men, which are made after the
similitude of God: 10,
shall out of the same Mouth proceed blessing, and cursing? O my Soul, these
things ought not so to be; Does a Fountain send forth at the same place, 11,
sweet, and bitter? Can the Fig Tree (O my Soul) bear Olive-Berries; 12.
either a Vine Figgs? so can no Fountain both yield salt Water, and fresh.
Therefore, James 1.26.
If any Man seem to be religious, and bridleth not his Tongue, but deceives
his own Heart, this Man's Religion is vain. Titus 3.2.
Speak evil of no Man: Let no corrupt communication proceed out of thy Mouth,
but that which is good, Ephesians. 4.29.
to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the Hearers; Neither
filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, Ephesians. 5.4.
which are not convenient; but rather giving of thanks; 1 Cor. 15.33.
Since evil Communications corrupt good Manners.

O my Soul, is cursing, swearing, vain, wanton, and evil-speaking, the Rant*
and Garb of the wicked; y^^* the Language of Hell? And is holy, and a religious
discourse and communication, the Character, and Dial^^t of Saints upon Earth?
and praises, and thanksgiving, the exercise of the Spirits of just Men made
perfect, and of the glorious Angels? Yea, the Language of Heaven? O let not thy
Tongue learn, or speak, the Language of Ashdod, Nehe. 13.24.
but of Canaan; not the blasphemous roaring^ of the Devils, and the damned; but
the sweet Anthem^ of the Saints, and Angels. Yea, begin thy Heaven upon Earth,
and be warbling and tuning this blessed and useful Instrument, thy Tongue, to
Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs, Ephesians. 5.19. Psalm. 14.7. Psalm. 103.1, 2,
3, 4,
singing and making melody in thy Heart to the Lord; For it is good to sing
praises to our God* For it is pleasant, and praise is comely. O bless the Lord*
O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth all thine iniquities,
and heals all thy diseases; who redeemeth thy life from destruction, 5.
who crowns the^ with loving kindness, and tender mercies; who satisfyeth thy
Mouth with good things, so that thy Youth is renewed like the Eagles. O my
Soul, shall thy Tongue in the next glorious Life, be thy Chronologer, and
Orator to Gods praise, before; and to thy fellow Saints, of Gods works, and
providence, past, present, and to come? O be exercising, and conning over thy
Lesson, in this Life: And in^u^e it here, to what it shall do hereafter. Say to
my friends, relations, and fellow Christians; Come and hear all ye that fear
God, and I will declare what he has done for my Soul. Yea, Psalm. 66.16.
let thy Tongue be thy glory, and as the Tongue of a ready Writer. Psalm. 108.1.
Let thy Mouth speak of wisdom; and the Meditation of thy Heart, Psalm. 45.2.
of understanding: Remember the Days of old, Psalm. 49.3.
meditate of all Gods works, muse on the works of his Hands, Psalm. 143.5.
speak of the might of his terrible acts, Psalm. 145.5, 6, 7.
and declare his greatness; Abundantly utter the memory of his great goodness,
and sing of his righteousness, whilst thou live; Psalm. 146.2.
^raise the Lord, yea, sing praises unto thy God, whilst thou have any Being.
O my Soul, shall the Saints in this glorious Empire of Christ in the new
Heaven, and new Earth, be all Kings; and yet as one ^tar differs from another
in glory, so they there shall have different degrees of gifts, and graces,
offices, and employments; every Vessel being full of grace, and glory, although
of different measures, and capacities; not ruling, or lording it over one
another; and yet of necessary and excellent use, by reason of their various and
different gifts, manifestations and employments, to add an increase of
happiness, blessedness, and glory to each other; a pattern, and resemblance of
which joint Kingship, under one Head, and King, the Lord Jesus, (as was
mentioned before) is seen (...) the natural Body, and in the militant, and
mystical body of Christ; The Saints glorified, being like so many precious
Stones, (which although of different bigness, and value, yet being judiciously
set, by a skillful (...)) to radiate one upon other, that they add luster each
(...) other, and without any diminution, to the worth of any individual Stone,
serve necessarily, to the greater and fuller perfection of the Jewel?

Will it be thus O my Soul, and will thy Tongue be then a principal Actor, in
this thy most honorable station, and vocation? Acts 13.36.
Serve thy God with David in thy Generation, not hiding any Talent God has
given thee, with the slothful Servant in the Earth. matthew. 25.25.
Set not thy Candle under a Bushel, but upon a Table, Mark 4.21.
that it may enlighten the whole House, thy Family, thy Friends, thy
Fellow Members; yea all (except Dogs, or Swine) that thou conversest with;
Math. 7.6.
speaking unto them, as the Saints no doubt shall do, 1 Cor. 14.3.
to one another in Glory, to edification, exhortation, and comfort; declaring
to them, (to the praise, and glory of God) thy experiences, thy consolations,
and Divine manifestations. And for as much as thou art zealous of spiritual
gifts; 1 Cor. 14.12.
seek, that thou may excel, to the edifying of the Church; that spiritual
Body of Christ, whereof thou art a living Member. And since God, as the Apostle
excellently observes, 1 Cor. 12.28, 31.
has set some in the Church; First Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly
Teachers; after that Miracles, then gifts of healing, helps, Governments,
diversities of Tongues; Covet thou earnestly the best gifts; 1 Cor. 12.4,
For there are diversity of gifts, but the same spirit; But the manifestation
of the Spirit, is (...) to every Man to profit withal; 7,
To one is given by the Spirit, 8,
the Word of Wisdom; to another, the Word of Knowledge, by the same Spirit; to
another Faith, by (...) same Spirit; 9,
to another the gift of Healing, by the same Spirit; 10,
to another working of Miracles; to another Prophecy; to another discerning of
Spirits; to another, di^vers kinds of Tongues; to another, the interpretation
of Tongues; 11,
but all works that one, and the self same Spi^rit, dividing to every Man
severally, as he will; For, (...) the Body is one, 12,
and has many Members, and all the Members of that one Body, being many, are
one Body; (...) also is Christ. If they were all one Member, where we^^ the
Body? 19,
The Eye cannot say to the Hand, I have (...) need of thee; 21,
again; the Head unto the Feet, I have (...) need of you; Now we are the Body
of Christ, and Mem^bers in particular. 27.
Therefore O my Soul, since (...) Tongue, as to all divine, and spiritual
gifts, is now the principal Agent, and Expressor: And shall be then, (...) as a
Member of Christ, mystical Body, in this his glorious Kingdom, thou shall be
placed in thy Function, and respective administration, be not spiritually idle,
but ^it, and exercise thy Tongue continually, in declaring to others, according
as it shall be revealed to thee, by the Holy Spirit, the Magnalia Dei, the
wonderful ways, and works of God. matthew. 10.8.
Freely thou have received, freely give.

O my Soul, shall thou then be as one of Christ's Viceroyes, over all inferior
Creatures; shall thy Dictates, Orders, and Commands, be received and obeyed by
them, as the voice of God? O let not then thy speech, now, to them be mixed with
oaths, and cursings, according to the wo^t, and fashion of the wicked of the
Earth; whose behaviors toward the poor Brutes, are more like to Devils, than
Men, or Christians. Yea, let thy employment of them, and rule over them, be
gentle, mild, and moderate; not cruel, or oppressive, since the good Man with
the Scripture) is merciful toward his Beast: Prove. 1^.10.
And (...) tenderness of thy God toward them expressed as (...) of the reasons
of his commanding a seventh Days (...), That thy Beast may rest as well as
thee, teaches, Exodus 23.12.
what respect, and considerate pity, and compassion he expects from thee
toward them, as being fellow^Creatures, suffering what servitude they undergo,
for thy sin; and from which they shall be freed and delivered in thy glorious
liberty. But instead of speaking evil of, Romans 8.21.
or to the inferior Creatures, do thou now, as thou shall do, in the World to
come; with thy Heart, and Tongue, praise and glorify thy God, after the
Example of holy David, Psalm. 148. throughout, in, and for them, admiring his
love, and goodness to thee, to them, as also (...) unexpressible, yea
unconceivable power, and wisdom declared in their various forms, wonderful
strength, (...) qualities, excellent virtues, and uses; as being (...) great
end of theirs, and thy Creation; as the Lord ^^clares to Job, when he bids him
behold Behemoth, Read Job chap. 38. chap. 39. chap. the 40. Cant. 4. throughout.
and ^^^iathan, and leaves upon Record, for our Instruction, and Imitation, so
large a description of them, and of others of his Creatures. This holy
exercise, both of mind and voice, in the contemplation of the Creatures, was
without doubt a chief employment of Adam in his innocence. Let it be thine then
in thy return, and travailing to this second Paradise; that what is begun by
thee here in grace, may be perfected there in Glory.

O glorious God, and merciful Father; O infinite, Ejaculation.
lo^ing, and gracious Savior, and Redeemer; O holy and Eternal Spirit, my
Sanctifier, three infinitely glorious Persons; One Omnipotent, only wise, and
Eternal God, Blessed, blessed* blessed, from everlasting to everlasting* who
has so highly honored, and dignified me* a (...) Worm* Psalm. 22.6. Ephesians.
2.4, 5, 6.
and no Man; As to love me freely in thy Eter^nally begotten, and only beloved
Son* the Lord Jesus* God-Man; and in him* from before all beginnings, to elect
me, 1 Pet. 1, 2. Ephesians. 2.10.
unto Eternal Life, and Salvation; Creating (...) unto immortality and glory,
by giving me an immorta^ Soul* and a Body that shall assuredly be raised to
life* and glory, by thy Almighty Power, and by the virtue of the Resurrection
of my Head, (...). Ephesians. 2.1, 4, 5.
and Savior, who have miraculously raised me from a sinful death, unto a
spiritual life, in my effectual Calling, through Adoption, the Sanctification,
Romans 1.6. Romans 8.15. Romans 15.16. Romans 8.9. Romans 3.24, 25, 26. Jerem. 13.6.
(...)* John 6.54. Luke 14.14. Psalm. 116.12.108.1, 2.
and Inhabitation of thy holy Spirit, as (...) freely justified me, in thy Son,
the Lord my righteous^ness* and by this blessed and inseparable union to (...)*
in thy Son* by the Holy Ghost, given me assurance (...) Life, and Glory, which
shall indubitably beg^^ (...) my Soul, at my dissolution, and be complete at
the ^^^union of Soul and Body a^ the Resurrection of the (...)* What shall I
render unto the Lord for all his benefits* O God my heart is fixed, I will
sing, and give praise, (...) with my glory. Awake my Heart, awake my Tongue*
(...) self will awake early and join with the Archangels* and Angels, and the
Church Tryumphant in Heaven and with the Holy Catholic Church upon Earth, in
(...) Heavenly exercise of praise, and thanksgiving. O Lord* whose only
prerogative it is, to search the heart; know that these are the desires,
Jerem. 17.10.
and petitions of (...) Soul* yet with holy Paul I cry out, that to will is
present with me, (through thy grace) but how to perform* know not. Romans 7.^^*
Blessed Savior, give me of thy fullness so so^^ to receive grace, John ^.^6.
for grace. Yea be pleased to add (...) to grace, since thou alone workest in
us both the will and the deed; and the Heaven aspiring* piercing (...) of
praise, Phil. 2.13.
arises only from thy Divine Fire of Knowledge, and holy affections. Eternal
Father, let not this noble Instrument of thy Glory, my Tongue* be tuned to the
vain and wanton Lays of the World, and Sin* lest thereby being cracked,
unstrung, and made untunable for thy service here, it, and my whole Body, with
voluptuous Dive^, be cast (...) useless into the Fire of Hell, where a drop of
cold Water will not be (...) to cool a flaming lascivious Tongue* But let me* O
Lord, Luke 16.14.
be continually cha^^ing the Magn^lia Dei, and be singing those Evangelical^*
and prophetical Songs of the four Beasts, and four and twenty Elders, (the
figure and representative of thy holy Church) saying* and singing, Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God Almighty, which was* and is, Rev. 4.8, 11.
and is to come; Thou art worthy O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and
Power, for (...) Created all things* and for thy pleasure, they are, and were
Created. Thou O blessed Savior art worthy, to take the Book of the
Providential Decrees, and actings of the Father, as concerning thy Church, and
to open the Seal^, Revel. ^.8,
and to discover the meaning thereof; for th^^ wast slain, and have redeemed
us, to God, by thy blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and
Nation* 10,
And have made (...) unto our God, Kings, and Priests, and we shall (...) the
Earth; Worthy (...) O Lamb, 12,
that was (...), to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and
honor, and glory, and blessing. Blessing, 13.
^^nour, glory, and power, be unto (thee* O Father) That (...) upon the Throne,
and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever.

Great and marvailous are thy works, Rev. 15.3.
Lord God Allmighty, just, and (...), are thy ways, O King of Saints; 4.
who shall not fear thee O Lord* and glorify thy Name, Twelve wonderful
actings or works of God to be fulfilled.
for thou only (...) holy* For all Nations shall come and worship before thee,
for thy Judgments are made manifest, and thy (...), in the raising thy
Witnesses, Revel. 11, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
thy Magistracy, and Ministry, and pouring forth thy wrath upon the Beast, the
Man of Sin, that Western Antichrist* the Pope, 1. The raising of the witnesses.
and upon that Mystery of Iniquity, Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots,
and Abominations of the Earth, Rev. 11.11, 13. Rev. 13.1, 2. Rev. 17.5.
which is also spiritually called (...), and Egypt, and literally Rome, the
Throne, and Seat of the Beast, and two-horned Beast, the false Prophet, 2. The
ruin of Rome.
which is come now into remembrance, before thee O God; Revel. 11.8. Revel.
1^.10.
to give unto her the Cup, of the Wine, of the fierceness of thy wrath: she
says now in her heart, Revel. 13.11. Revel. 19.20. Revel. 16.19. Revel.
1^.(...).
I sit i^ Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow, therefore shall her
Plagues (...) in ow^ Di^^y, Death, and Mourning, and Famine* and she shall be
utterly (...) with Fire, for strong are thou (...) God that Judges her* And
the Bea^^, the Pope that was, 3. The ruin of the Papacy.
and is not, that is the Eight Head, and is of the Seventh, shall go into
Perdition, and be taken, and with him the false Prophet, Revel. 17.11.
the Roman Church, and Hierarchy, Rev. 13.12, 13.
that wrought Miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had
received the mark of the Beast, and them that worshipped his Image; These both,
shall be cast alive into a Lake of Fire, Revel. 19.20.
burning with Brimstone* First in this life, by a direful excommunica^tion by
all the Churches of Christ* and after this life, (...) the Fiery Lake of Hell.
O Almighty Savior, who (...) King of Kings, Revel. 19.16.
and Lord of Lords* shall my Tongue (...) my glorified condition, (as has been
showed) sing thy praises, declare, and perpetuate the memory of these thy
wonderful actings, after thou have done them* O (...) me now before thou do
them, (as beholding (...) very near, through the Perspective of thy Word, by
the Eye of my Faith) Sing that new Song of praises, before thy Throne,
concerning thy great and mavelous pro^idences, Revel. 14.1, 2, 3, 4.
with the hundred forty and four thousand, thy Virgins, and redeemed ones, that
stand with thee, o^ Mount Sion, (the Figure of thy Church) and tryumphingly
declare with the Angel, that the Hour of thy Judgment is come; Revel. 14.7.8.
and that Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great City, because she made all
Nations drink of the Wine of the wrath of her Fornication.

Let me also, as by the same prospect of Faith, beholding the Call, Read Rom 9.
Verse 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.
and Conversion of thy ancient People Israel, and scattered Jews, to be at
hand; and the total destruction of Gog, 4. Isreal's Conversion.
and Magog, (the blasphemous Mahumetan Turk) by their Sword, and in their Land*
and bless, and praise thy Name, Read Romans 11. v. 25. to v. 33.
for it is wonderful, fearful, and glorious.

Read Ezekiel chap. 37. unto chap. the 40.
O my Lord, have thou also declared and promised by thy Holy Apostle John, that
thou will shortly Lay hold on the Dragon, that old Serpent, which is the Devil,
and Satan, and bind him for a thousand years; 5 ly. The Destruction of the
great Turk. 6 ly. The binding of the Devil for 1000. Years.
Casting him into the bottomless Pit, and shutting him up, and setting a Seal
upon him, that he should deceive the Nations no more, until the thousand years
shall be fulfilled? And that then all the ends of the World shall remember, and
turn unto thee O Lord, Rev. 20.23.
7 ly. The Conversion of the World.
and all the Kindreds of the Nations shall worship before thee? And the
Kingdoms of this World shall become the Kingdoms of Thee, our Lord, Psalm.
22.27. Rev. 11.15. Joel 2.28, 29. Isay 54.13. Isay 32.15, 16, 17, 18. Isay
44.3. Psalm. 72* 11, 17. Psalm. 82.8. Psalm. 86.9. Isay 60.3. Isay 2.2. Jerem.
27.7. Dan. 7.14. Hag. 2.7. Isay. 2.4. Psalm. 29.11. Psalm. 27.11. Psalm. 72.3, 7.
Isay. 9.7. Isay. 65.20, 22. Isay 54.13. Isay 66.12. Jerem. 31.12, 13, 14. Isay.
2.18, 60, 17, 20.
and of thy Christ, and He shall reign for ever? Lord, shall I we see such a
blessed, and happy age, as this, when, as a natural, and rational effect of
Satan's binding, and thy casting him, and all his Legions of Devils, into the
local Hell, and of thy plentuous pouring forth of the gifts, and graces of thy
Spirit, according to the Prophets, the whole World shall be converted to
Christianity, all Wars and Contentions shall cease, Swords shall be turned into
Plow-shares, and Spears into Pruning Hooks, and the Nations shall learn War
no more; And long life, and peace, and plenty, shall Crown this Orb; when all
Idolatry, Ignorance, open profaneness, and wickedness shall be laid aside; and
purity, light, and unity in life and doctrine, worship, and discipline, shall
shine forth throughout the Earth, even above the Primitive times, when saving
knowledge, and a Salomonial wisdom, shall cover the Earth, even as the Waters
cover the Seas? Shall I, I say, behold all this, by faith, through the gracious
illumination of thy blessed Spirit, in thy Word of Truth? And shall I not cry
out with holy David, Read for further proof of this peaceable Kingdom of
Christ. Isay. cap. 60.65. from the beginning to the end.
Lord open thou my Lips, and my Mouth shall show forth thy praise? yea often
glorify thee, in singing the 96. Psalm, which being a clear Prophecy of this
time, thy Spirit indicted to that purpose, as also the 97. the 98. the 99. and
the 100. Psalms.

O Lord, have thou foretold, Zeph. 3.9. Zach. 14.9. Isay. 11.6. Zach. 12.8.
Psalm. 51.15.
and promised by thy Prophet Daniel, That Judgment shall be given unto the
Saints of the most High, and that the Saints shall possess the Kingdom? Read
these Psalms, being a clear Prophecy, of the victorious and peaceable Kingdom
of Christ.
That then Righteousness shall be the Girdle of thy Loins, and faithfulness
the Girdle of thy Reins? That thou will give us Judges as at the first, and
Counselors as at the beginning, and that thou will make our Exactors
righteousness? 8 ly. The Destruction of all Christ's enemies under his
victorious Kingdom.
That the Judgment shall fit, and the Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness
of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the People, of the
Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, Dan. 7.22.
Isay. 11.5. Isay 1.26. Isay. 60.17. Dan. 7.26, 27.
and all Dominions shall serve Him? Yea, is this that fifth, and universal
Monarchy, and victorious Kingdom, which is by thy Almighty Power, and Spirit,
to be acted and carried on by thy Saints, when as it is witnessed by the
Prophets, and thy Servant David, Thou shall break thy Enemies with a Rod of
Iron, and shall dash them in pieces, Psalm. 2.9.
like a Potters Vessel, when the Lord at thy right hand, Psalm. 110.5,
shall strike through Kings, in the Day of his wrath, and shall Judge amongst
the Heathen, 6.
and shall fill the places with the dead Bodies, and wound the Heads over many
Countries? When thou shall put a two-edged Sword into the Hand of thy Saints,
to execute vengeance upon the Heathen, Psalm. 149.6,
and punishment upon the People, 7,
to bind their Kings with Chains, and their Nobles with Fetters of Iron, 8,
to execute the Judgment written; this honor have all the Saints? Yea, is this
thy victorious Kingdom and Government, 9.
wherein righteousness, peace, holiness, and purity, shall be so greatly
exercised, and exalted, by, and under thy Saints upon Earth, confirmed by thee,
in a Vision, to thy Apostle John; who declares, that after Satan was bound by
thee, Rev. 20.4.
a thousand years, He saw Thrones, and they (to wit) thy Saints) sat upon
them, and Judgment was given unto them? The Prodromus to which Sessions, he
saw, Revelations the 19. from Verse the 11. unto the end of that Chapter?

Revel. 19. Verse 11. to the end.
And shall not both my Tongue, and Heart, in the certain belief, that these
wonderful prophetical promises shall, yea, are now, at the point, to be made
good unto thy Church, and to be fulfilled; praise, and glorify thee, in the
joyful expectation thereof; in those words, which thy own Spirit Indicted on
this subject, and for this purpose; O clap your Hands all ye People, shout
unto God with the voice of Triumph, Psalm. 47.1,
for the Lord most High is terrible, 2,
he is a great King over all the Earth, He shall subdue the People under us, 3,
and the Nations under our Feet; he shall choose our Inheritance for us, the
excellency of Jacob, whom he loved; 4,
For God is the King of all the Earth, sing ye praises with understanding; 7,
God reigns over the Heathen, 8,
God sits upon the Throne of his Holiness; The Princes of the People are
gathered together, even the People of the God of Abraham; 9.
for the Shields of the Earth belongs unto God, he is greatly exalted.

O blessed Savior, who art that great Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18.15, 18, 19. Revel.
22.6. Revel. 20.1, 2, 3. Heb. 4.9.
promised by Moses; yea, the Lord God of the Prophets; Have thou foretold to us
by them, that after the binding and sealing up Satan, and all the Powers of
Darkness, in Hell, the bottomless Pit; thy Saints, thy Church shall enjoy a
Sabatisme, a thousand years of rest, and peace, 9 ly. The Saints peaceable
reign for 1000 years.
upon this Earth; which I humbly expect, when their six thousand years of
trouble, labor, and persecution shall be expired, typified, and prefigured (as
I in all humility conceive) in the Arks resting the 17. Day of the 7. Month, as
a Type of this rest in the six Days Creation, Genesis 2.1, 2, 3. Exodus 20.8, 9,
10, 11.
and thy seventh Days rest; and in thy appointing us a laborious Week, and six
Days of Work, and every seventh Day to be a Sabbath, a Day of rest to us, and
the Creatures; And in the seventh Years rest to the Field, and release to
Servants; the righteousness, and holiness, peace, plenty, and happiness: of
which their reign, and Kingdom, I but lately mentioned, and evidenced, by a
few Scriptures of many, that clearly hold it forth to us? O let my Heart, and
Tongue, in the assured faith of thy accomplishing this great work, sing with
joy the seventy-second Psalm; The lively Prophecy of this thy peaceable
Kingdom, under thy Saints upon Earth, under the Type of Solomon; concluding
with the Holy Psalmist, Psalm. 72.18, 19,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who only does wondrous works; And blessed
be his glorious Name for ever; Genesis 18.25. Heb. 9.28. 1 These. 1.8.
And let the whole Earth be filled with his Glory, Amen.

O Lord, the Judge of all the Earth, have thou promised to come unto us the
second time, without Sin, 10 ly. The Destruction of Gog and Magog, and the
World by Fire, at Christ's second coming.
unto Salvation; but in flaming Fire, to take vengeance of all that know thee
not? Hereby destroying them and Hypocrites, together with the Apostatizing
Nations, called Gog, and Magog, as Sprung from a Scythian Root, seduced from
the true Faith, Revel. 20.7, 8, 9, 10.
by the deceits of Satan, at his loosing for a season; The number of whom is
as the Sand of the Sea, and by him gathered together, to incompass the Camp of
thy Saints, Rev 20.4, 5. compared with Luke 14.14. 1 Cor. 15.23. 1 These. 4.16.
and the holy City, thy true Church, made up of Gentiles, and Israelites. Have
thou then promised a Resurrection of the Just, even of all thine Elect ones,
and Martyrs; and that They shall be Priests of God, Rev. 20.6.
and of thee O Christ, and that they shall reign with thee a thousand years?
For thou have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, Rev. 5.10.
and we shall reign upon Earth: Isai. 65.17. 2 Pet. 3.13. 1 Cor. 15.23. 1 These
4.16. Rev. 20.5.
Even in that new Heaven, and new Earth, which thou will create, shall our
Salvation be then perfected, and completed, in that first Resurrection, the
Redemption of our Bodies, now sown in Corruption, but then raised in
Incorruption; 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44.
sown in dishonor, but raised in Glory; sown in weakness, but raised in
Power; sown a natural Body, Phil. 3.21. 1 John 3.2.
but raised a spiritual Body, and glorious, like unto thee O Lord.

Vid. my Chronology of the Age of this World, taken out of the Scripture. which
will shortly be published. Dan. 12.13.
For ever blessed Redeemer; shall I according to Scripture-Chronology (probably)
about twelve hundred and thirteen years hence, with holy Daniel, stand in the
Lot, at the end of the Days, and in my glorified Body, with the many myriades
of Angels, and glorious Saints upon the renewed Earth, behold, and enjoy thee
personally a thousand years? shall my Tongue then declare thy Acts, and the
wonders of thy love, mercy, and truth, and praise thee with them, for this thy
great salvation; as being in a sure possession of Glory? O let my Heart, and
Tongue, now praise thee in faith, and assurance thereof; Heb. 11.1.
Since Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not
seen. Yea, let me with thy Prophet and Apostle, 2 Timothy 1.10. Hos. 13.14. 1 Cor.
15.54, 55, 56, 57.
Triumph over that last Enemy, Death; and singing, say, O Death where is thy
Sting, O Grave where is thy Victory? The Sting of Death is Sin, and the
strength of Sin is the Law, 11 ly. The Day of Judgment beginning with the
rewarding the Saints: And ending with the Judging the wicked, and Devils.
Death is swallowed up in Victory. Thanks be to God, which gives us the
Victory, through thee our Lord Jesus Christ.

O thou whose Name is called the Word of God, who art the King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords; the only Potentate, to whom all Judgment is committed by the
Father, Rev. 19.13, 16. 1 Timothy 6.15. John 5.22. Acts 10.42. 2 Cor. 5.10.
and who art ordained of God to be the Judge of the quick and of the dead; we
must therefore all appear before thy Judgment Seat: when thy righteousness
shall shine forth as the Light, and thy Judgment as the Noonday; in giving to
every one according to their works: Psalm. 37.6.
And to all thine Elect, called thy Sheep, Mat. 16.27.
at thy right hand, Mat. 25.33. Isai. 53.11. Romans 3.26.
(who are freely justified by thy righteousness) according to the goodness of
their thoughts, words, and deeds; which, (and not any of their sins as being
fully satisfied for, Isai. 44.22. Acts 3.19. Romans 4.25. 1 Cor. 15.3.
and blotted out by thy Death and Merits) shall then be remembered, as being the
fruits of thy own Grace; That so thy Saints may be gradually rewarded,
according to their works, not for their works, Romans 5.17. Romans 12.6. Romans 2.6.
Revel. 2 23. Romans 2.7, 10. Mat. 25.34. Revel. 20.4.
both in the new Earth, and highest Heavens, with Eternal Life and Glory; And
inherit the Kingdom prepared for them before the Foundation of the World.
After which act of thy remunerative Justice, and thy Reign upon the renewed
Earth, with thy Saints a thousand years, thou will I believe, raise and Judge
all the wicked, Mat. 25.33. Revel. 20.5. 1 Cor. 6.3.
called the Goats, at thy left hand, and the Apostate Angels, according as thou
have declared in thy Word of Truth; when, every ungodly one shall be sentenced,
and punished, Revel. 20.12.
proportionable, and according to the evil of their thoughts, words, and
actions; then being all made manifest, Luke 12.2.
who with the Devils, their Tempters and Tormenters, shall by thy mighty Angels
be cast into the Lake of Fire; mat. 25 41. Rev. 20.14, 15.
the Local Hell, unto Eternity. This is the second Death.

O my King, my Judge, my Spouse, Luke 21.26, 28. mat. 25.30.
shall this dreadful time of Judgment, fearful indeed to the wicked, but a
most joyful Day to the Godly, certainly come upon the World, according to thy
Word? Shall there be a long tract of time measured out, in the acting, and
manifesting thy Judgments, and magnifying the glory of thy remunerative, and
vindicative Justice, to the World, as well as there has been a long space, of
proclaiming, and holding forth the Golden Scepter of thy free Grace, and
incomprehensible love, and mercy, to the Sons of Men? Is this truth one of the
Articles of the Christian Faith, and as certain to us, as the Day of our death,
according to that unrepealable Statute, It is appointed to Men once to dye,
Heb. 9.27.
and afterward comes the Judgment? Shall the Crowns, dignities, and rewards,
conferred upon thy Saints, be one chief subject of praise, and fill the Mouths
of Men, and Angels, with continual Hallelujahs unto God; not only whilst they
rest upon the renewed Earth, but also in the highest Heavens, after the end of
this long Day, and the pouring out of thy wrath, and execution of thy righteous
Judgments upon wicked Men, and Devils; when thy glorious justice in both the
parts thereof shall be finished, and completed, according to that Prophecy of
the Psalmist* then perfectly fulfilled, Psalm. 58.11.
Verily there is a reward for the righteous. Verily he is a God that judges in
the Earth? O let both my Heart and Tongue, now inure themselves to this
Subject, Romans 1.17.
since I live by faith, and not by sense, and sing with the Elect ones in the
Revelations, that prophetical Song, Revel. 19.1,
calculated for this time, saying, Hallelujah, Salvation, and Glory, and
Honor, and Power, unto the Lord our God, 2,
for true and righteous are his Judgments; Praise our God all ye his Servants,
and ye that fear him, 5,
both small, and great; Hallelujah, for the Lord reigns; 6,
Let us be glad, and rejoice, and give honor to him, for the Marriage of the
Lamb is come, and hi^ Wife has made her self ready; 7,
And to her was granted, that she should be arrayed in fine Linen, 8,
clean, and white, for the fine Linen is the righteousness of Saints* Blessed
are they that are called to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb. 9.
12 ly. The end of Christ's Mediatory Kingdom, and the translation of the
Saints* to Heaven, there to be for ever.


O King of Saints, and King of Nations, our Almighty Savior, and Conqueror;
who have fulfilled the Law, satisfied Divine Justice, overcome the World,
Crucified Sin, spoiled Principalities, and Powers; and wilt at the Resurrection
of the Just, and the Redemption of our Bodies, Revel. 15.3. Romans 8.4. Romans 5 9.
John 16.33. Rom 6.6. Colos. 2.15. Luke 14.14. Rom 8.23. 1 Cor. 15.26. Psalm.
68.18.
destroy our last Enemy Death, and after the Judging and Hellifying, of wicked
Men, and Devils, wilt in Triumph ascend on high, with thy Elect, and lead
Captivity Captive, that the Glory which thy Father gave thee, may be given
them, that they may be with thee where thou art, and may behold the Glory which
he has given thee, Joh. 17.22, 24.
and possess an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in Heaven for us, 1 Pet. 1.4.
where we shall be ever with thee our Lord, and see God face to face, 1 These.
4.17. 1 Cor. 13.12.
and in thee the perfections of all Creatures, as in their first cause: And
know thee (according to our measure) as we are known by thee; Blessed Mediator,
this is that time, when, 1 Cor. 15.24.
all rule, all authority, and power, being put down, and under thee in the
Kingdom of thy Saints; and under thee in thy personal, and glorious reign upon
Earth: All Enemies, even Death it self being destroyed, 1 Cor. 15.24, 25, 26.
and put under thy Feet; thou shall deliver up the Kingdom (so far as it is
Mediatory, personal, and singly acted, 1 Cor. 15.28.
and managed by thee, in thy humane appearance, and Manhood) to God, even the
Father; That so thou the Son (as being also as Man, mat. 1.18. Luke 1.32.
the Son of God) might be subject, as to thy present kind of administration,
unto him, that put all things under thee, 1 Cor. 15.28.
that God may be all in all; And the whole Universe and Creation, both in
Heaven, and Earth, especially thy spiritual Body, thy Church, may be
immediately governed, and influenced by him, who is three in one, God-blessed
for ever; To which mystical Body, thy Spouse, and Church, as also to Angels,
thou still remainest Head, and Lord for ever: Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. Colos.
1.10.
which being now perfectly, and inherently, sanctified, and graciously
admitted, Ephe. 2.18, 22.
through the glorious inhabitation, and communion of thy most holy, and eternal
Spirit, to an immediate fellowship, real, 1 John 1.3. 1 Cor. 6.17. 1 Cor. 12.13.
and spiritual union (although not essential) with the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, one God blessed for ever, Joh. 11.25, 26. John 8.12. Colos. 3.3. Romans
5.17. John 6.57. Joh. 14.19.
shall live eternally in the life of God; and in whole, and in part, as
respecting every individual Member, and Vessel, be always full; yet always
increasing, in knowledge, grace, and glory, as Eying, and enjoying,
continually, the Divine Nature, and cast into an Ocean, of infiniteness unto
Eternity.

This is the Generation of them that seek thee, Psalm. 24.6.
that seek thy face, O God of Jacob. Therefore let both my Heart and Tongue,
even now, O Lord prepare, and begin to praise thee, as from Pisgath, with
beholding Canaan; Numb. 23.14.
and by faith, the eye of my Soul, from the raised hill of holy Contemplation,
2 Cor. 12.2.
viewing this Saint Paul's third Heaven; the Throne of God, and of his glory;
and the many, yea innumerable shining, and starrified Mansions, in thy Fathers
house, (the places prepared by thee for thy Saints) as also their Kingdom, and
State of endless glory, happiness, and blessedness: In the ravishing Meditation
of these things, their translation, and thy second most glorious and tryumphant
Assention, O let me sing and rejoice, in the words of thy Prophet David,
foretelling both thy Ascentions; Psalm. 47.5, 6,
God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with a sound of a Trumpet; sing praises
to God, sing praises; sing praises to our King, sing praises. Lift up your
Heads O ye Gates, Psalm. 24.7.
and be ye lift up ye everlasting Doors, and the King of Glory shall come in.
Who is this King of Glory? 8,
the Lord, strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in Battle. Lift up your Heads, O
ye Gates; even lift them up ye everlasting Doors, 9,
and the King of Glory shall come in. 10.
Who is this King of Glory? the Lord of Hosts, He is the King of Glory. Selah.

I have now by Divine assistance, according to my weak-sightedness, 1 Cor.
13.9, 12.
(for all Men here know but in part, and as in a Glass darkly, and imperfectly)
taken a view of the Land of Promise, the Inheritance of the Saints, in light,
Colos. 1.12.
and presented to the Lord, and to his Spouse the Church, what discoveries he
has in great mercy given me, as concerning Eternal Life, that last and great
Article of the Christian faith, begun visibly, in the Saints glorified
condition, in the new Heaven, and new Earth, and continued unto Eternity in the
Heaven of Heavens. Wherein concluding with the glorification, and blessed use,
and exercise of our Tongues, in that happy state, I thought it proper, both as
to the general subject, I have been upon, (as being the Vision, exercise, and
Triumph of Faith); and as to the subject matter, both lauditory to God, and
declarative to one another, about which our Tongues shall, in our renewed life,
be employed; to declare in this life, with all humility and thankfulness of
Heart, and Tongue, (to both which, my Pen is but the Secretary) in the
Ejaculatory part of that Meditation; what by faith I behold, and am assured
from the Word of Truth shall come to pass here, and be enjoyed by me, and all
Gods Elect, in the life to come; and shall be there a blessed Subject, of our
praises to all Eternity. In which Song of 12. parts, or Jacobs Laddar of 12.
Staves, whose foot stands upon Earth, and top reaches to Heaven, we may by
faith ascend, beginning here upon Earth in this present Year of our Lord 1666.
by twelve successive Steps, wonderful, and most signal periods, (noted before
in the Margint) to the last, and highest ascent, the Glorification of the
Saints in the Heavens.

Being now come to Hercules Pillars, the Ne-plus ultra, of Faith; beyond which,
all sacred Scripture (the light of Faith) is silent: I can proceed, nor walk
any further, in these Contemplations, lest walking without a Light, I fall into
the Darkness of Error: It being alike sinful curiosity, and presumption, to
inquire what God will do after this silence, When time shall be no longer;
Revel. 10.6.
as to ask what he did before time was, and before this World was Created.
Wherefore I shall here conclude these my imperfect Meditations; and with all
humility, and reverence, return all Honor, Glory, and Praise, to thee, O
glorious Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
one God blessed for ever, for thy most gracious assistance, by the light of thy
Word, and Spirit, in this great Work, a subject too weighty for Angels, how
much more for me, a simple, sinful, and weak Worm. Lord, I acknowledge that
whatsoever is good, right, and true, in this Treatise, is of, and from thee,
who art Goodness, Light, Psalm. 25.8. John 14.6.
and Truth, and to thee alone belongs the praise; and that whatsoever therein
is Hay or Stuble, is mine, 1 Cor. 3.12.
who humbly takes shame therefore, and Petitions for thy free pardon, in my
Lord Christ Jesus, beseeching thee, that in the assurance of thy love, and
mercy in him, and in the faith, light, and assurance of thy glorious Truths,
herein declared out of thy Word, I may with Holy Job, all the Days of my
appointed time, Job 14.14.
wait until my Change come. And with zealous Paul, Phil. 1.23.
desire to depart and to be with Christ, that so my faith and hope may be
swallowed up in the possession of thee; and Vision, may be changed into
fruition. Thy Spirit, and thy Bride say come; And let him that hears, say
come; Thou O Lord that testifies these things, Rev. 22.17.
say, Surely I come quickly; 20,
Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with us all. Amen. 21.


Soli Deo Gloria.
An Advertisement by the Author to the Reader.
FOr the more clear, and fuller proof of the Twelve great things, mentioned in
the Conclusion of this Work, I refer the Reader to my Treatise almost ready to
be published; Entitled An humble Exposition of most of the
Scripture-Prophesies, concerning Twelve great Periods to be fulfilled to the
Church; beginning to be manifested in the Year 1666. and concluding with the
end of our Lords Mediatory Kingdom, and the Translation of the Saints, to the
highest Heavens.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE, Of the Things contained in the TREATISE Intitulated,
MEDITATIONS ON FAITH.
A.
THe Affections, lose their appetite, if ye do but change the object, viz.
Spiritual for Temporal Page. 4 Christ's Agony as described, should much act upon
our spirits Page. 27 The use and abuse of the Affections Page. 45, 46 All Arts
and Sciences are in the Scripture, as Metaphysick, Phylosophie, Astronomy,
Chronology, Rhetoric, andc. Page. 71 Christ's answer to the soul, complaining
of her Affections Page. 81 The Antiquity of the Scriptures Page. 102 Of the
Affections glorified Page. 151 Of holy Anger glorified Page. 160 A Soliloquium
upon it Page. 161 An Ejaculation upon it Page. 161 A caution against blotting
Assurance Page. 185
B.
The Body of man like the pool of Bethesda, with its five Porches Page. 22 The
curse and judgment of the Body Page. 52 The Souls complaint against the Body,
with Christ's answer Page. 88, 89. etc. Of the Body glorified Page. 164 Of the
spirituality, and swiftness of our Bodies, at the Resurrection Page. 169 A
soliloquium and ejaculation on those two qualities of the Body Page. 170 The
glorious shining of the Body, at the Resurrection Page. 171 A soliloquium on
that shining of the Body Page. 173 Item, an ejaculation upon it Page. 174 Of
the Immortality of the Body glorified Page. 175
C.
The Certain condition of man, is to be uncertain Page. 8 A man may be a
Conduit-pipe to others, and be a Vessel of dishonor himself Page. 15, 17 Of
Christ's Death and Burial Page. 33, 34 His victory over Hell Page. 35 His
Resurrection Page. 36 His Ascension Page. 38 Man in respect of Conscience, is
as one possessed Page. 42 A Contemplation on love Page. 47 A Contemplation on
the insatisfaction in Riches, Honors, Pleasures, Wisdom Page. 49 A
Contemplation on fear Page. 51 A Contemplation on the sinfulness of the Eyes,
Ears, Nostrils, Taste and Touch Page. 56 Of Christ's Priestly Office Page. 57
The occasion of Christ's Priesthood Page. 58 A Contemplation upon Christ's
Priesthood Page. 60 Of Christ's satisfaction Page. 61 Christ's answer to the
poor soul, complaining of his Conscience Page. 75 The souls general Complaint
answered by Christ Page. 85, 86 The souls Complaint against her Senses, Tongue,
and Members of her body; and Christ's answer to it Page. 88, 89 A meditation on
the excellency of Christ's person Page. 99 Against Coveteousness Page. 123 An
Ejaculation upon the glorious Change of the body at the Resurrection Page. 185
D.
Demas described Page. 14 A Dialogue between Christ, and the poor complaining
soul in many particulars, which Christ answers and satisfies Page. 74 Our
victory by Christ, over Death Page. 130 Our victory over the fear of Death
Page. 132 Our victory over the pain, and separation by Death Page. 133 All
things fall short of the Duration of glorified Bodies and Souls; and the high
principle thereof Page. 180, 181 A soliloquium upon that Duration Page. 182 The
Destruction of Christ's enemies Page. 242
E.
An Ejaculation for Grace Page. 21 An Ejaculation on Christ's sufferings Page.
30 The sinfulness of the Eyes Page. 53 The sinfulness of the Ears, with a
contemplation on them Page. 54 Of Eternal life Page. 146 The destruction of
Christ's Enemies Page. 242
F.
The Fundamental graces Page. 2 The definition of Faith Page. 3 The means of
Faith Page. 21 Christ the Son of God, the object of Faith Page. 22 The palsy
of Fear Page. 50 A contemplation on Fear Page. 51 Of Forgiveness of sins Page.
63 Our victory over the Fear of Death Page. 132, 133 The affection of Fear
glorified Page. 153
G.
Of the understanding Glorified Page. 148 Of the will Glorified Page. 149 A
contemplation upon them both Page. 150 Of the Memory Glorified Page. 150 Of the
Affections Glorified Page. 151 Of Love Glorified Page. 151 Of Fear Glorified
Page. 153 A soliloquium on Love and Fear Glorified Page. 155 Item an
Ejaculation upon them Page. 155 Of Anger Glorified Page. 160 Of Joy Glorified
Page. 162 Of the Body Glorified Page. 164 Of the Senses Glorified Page. 188 The
destruction of Gog and Magog, and the World by fire at Christ's second coming
Page. 243
H.
Honor distinguished and defined Page. 5 Many good qualities spoiled by
Hypocrisy, exemplyfied in Saul Page. 9 Hypocrisy deciphered to the life Page.
13 Historical faith Page. 4 A short History of the life of Christ Page. 24, 25
A senceless Hard-heart most dangerous Page. 43, 44 Christ's answer to the
complaint of a hard Heart Page. 76 Honor, one of the worlds Darts to wound
souls Page. 119 Of the sense of Hearing glorified Page. 199 An ejaculation upon
the glorification of the sense of Hearing Page. 203
I.
Judas described Page. 16 Infidelity, the first means of Death Page. 20 Joy
distinguished and described Page. 48 No true Joy in riches Page. 48 No true Joy
in honors Page. 48 No true Joy in pleasures Page. 48 No true Joy in humane
wisdom Page. 49 The consolation in Christ's Intercession Page. 60 Of
Justification Page. 62 The necessity of It Page. 68 Of Imputative righteousness
Page. 62 The Definition and Exposition of it Page. 64 Christ's answer to the
Soul, complaining against Joy Page. 81, 82 Christ's Kingly-Office at the last
Judgment Page. 139 A short Application of Comfort, against fear of the last
Judgment Page. 142 Of Joy glorified Page. 162 The Conversion of Israel Page.
240 The day of Judgment, beginning with the rewarding of the Saints, and ending
with the judging of the wicked Page. 244
K.
The happiness of Divine Knowledge, consists mostly in Fruition Page. 7 Of
Christ's Kingly-Office now Page. 93 Kings called Pastors, and the Application
of it Page. 96, 97 Of Christ's Kingly-office at the last Judgment Page. 139 Of
Christ Victorious Kingdom Page. 242 The end of Christ's Mediatory Kingdom Page.
246
L.
Man's natural Light, is comparatively darkness Page. 12 A lawful and useful
Love of Self Page. 16 Gods Love infinitely excels man's Page. 33 The
commendation and corruption of Love Page. 47 Christ's answer to the souls
complaint against Love ^1 The commendation of Gods Laws Page. 101 Lust, one of
the Worlds darts, to wound souls Page. 117 Of Life Eternal Page. 146 Of the
affection of Love glorified Page. 151 A watch to be set on the Lips Page. 233
M.
Miraculous faith Page. 15 Man's Misery by Nature Page. 41 His Mind dark, as
with Egytian darkness Page. 41 The earthly-minded Man, the only Melancholy man
Page. 49 Christ's answer to the poor Souls complaint, against its unfaithful
Memory Page. 78, 79 Of the Memory glorified Page. 150 The end of Christ's
Mediatory Kingdom Page. 246
N.
All Natural Mysteries, and the Knowledge of them shall be discovered, and
hightened at the Resurrection Page. 149
O.
An Objection [that God might have confirmed man, as he did the fallen Angels]
answered Page. 68 The weak Believers Objections answered Page. 73 The souls
Objection, it cannot hear, because dead, answered by Christ Page. 73 The souls
Objection [that the expressions of Comfort in Scripture, are too general]
answered by Christ Page. 73 An Objection [that professors being forbidden
sensual pleasures, are of all men most miserable] answered Page. 125
P.
Poverty distinguished and deciphered Page. 26 Of Christ's Priestly-Office Page.
57 Of his Prophetical-Office Page. 70 All Revelations flows thence Page. 70 A
Contemplation upon it Page. 70 Our Protection by Christ Page. 106 Persecution
one of the worlds Darts, to wound profession of Religion Page. 120 An
Expostulation touching Persecution Page. 121 Against sensual Pleasures Page.
124 The forbidding sensual Pleasures, does not (as the Laodicean thinks) make
Professors of all men most miserable Page. 125 An Antidote against Persecution
Page. 128 The ruin of the Papacy Page. 240
Q.
General Questions answered, 1. Why God does not in the same instant call,
justify, sanctify, and glorify his Elect? 2. Why God does not build up that
wide breach, which sin has made in man's Nature Page. 67
R.
Imputative Righteousness, defined and expounded Page. 64 Proofs of our right
in Christ's Imputative Righteousness Page. 65 Riches is one of the worlds Darts,
to wound souls Page. 118 Proofs and comfort in the Resurrection Page. 135 Of
the Ruin of Rome Page. 239
S.
The Soul is never unimployed Page. 1 The sinful use of Smelling Page. 54 Of
Christ's Satisfaction Page. 61 The Souls complaint against the Senses, answered
by Christ Page. 88, 89 The commendation of the Scriptures, from the Author,
Antiquity, and Holiness thereof Page. 101, 102, and 103 Christ's protection of
us from Satan Page. 107 His protection of us from Sin Page. 108, 109, 110, 111,
112 Against Sensual pleasures Page. 124 A Soliloquium on the affections of
love, and fear, glorified Page. 155 Of the Senses glorified Page. 188 Of the
sense of Seeing glorified Page. 195 A soliloquium upon that Sense Page. 197 An
ejaculation upon that Sense Page. 198 Of the sense of Smelling glorified Page.
210 A soliloquium upon that sense of Smelling glorified Page. 213 An
ejaculation upon the sense of Smelling, glorified Page. 214
T.
Temporary faith Page. 8 The sinfulness of the Taste Page. 55 The sinfulness of
the Touch Page. 55 The souls complaint against the Tongue, and Christ's answer
to it Page. 88, 89 Of the sense of Tasting glorified Page. 205 A soliloquium
upon the glorified sense of Tasting Page. 207 An ejaculation upon it Page. 209
Of the sense of Touching glorified Page. 215 ^n inference whether spiritual
bodies (as Angels) may not be Tangible, by spiritual humane glorified bodies at
the Resurrection Page. 215, 216 A soliloquium upon the Touch, glorified Page.
218 An ejaculation upon the Touch glorified Page. 220, 237 Of the Tongue
glorified Page. 222 A soliloquium upon the Tongue, glorified Page. 232 Against
cursing, swearing, and wicked, or vain Talking Page. 234 The destruction of the
great Turk Page. 241 The binding of the Devil, for a Thousand years Page. 241
The Saints peaceable Reign, for a Thousand years Page. 243 The Translation of
the Saints to Heaven Page. 246
U.
Christ's answer to the poor soul, complaining of his Understanding Page. 7^ A
Contemplation upon our Victory by Christ, over Honors, Covetousness,
Voluptuousness, and persecution Page. 129 Of the Understanding glorified Page.
148 Of Christ's Victorious Kingdom Page. 242
W.
The excellency of the Word Page. 1^ The great dependence of the Will on other
faculties Page. 4^ Against free- Will Page. 45 The souls complaint against the
Will, answered by Christ Page. 8^ Christ's victory over the World Page. 11^ The
Worlds darts by which it wounds souls Page. 11^ Of the Will glorified Page. 14^
A Watch to be set upon the Lips Page. 238 Twelve Wonderful Works of God to be
fulfilled Page. 239 Of the raising of the Witnesses Page. 23^
X.

Y.
The binding of the Devil for a thousand Years Page. 241 The Saints peaceable
reign, for a thousand Years Page. ^43
Z.
Of Zeal glorified Page. 15^ Zeal not a simple grace, but the intense degree of
every grace Page. 156 A soliloquium on glorified Zeal Page. 159 An ejaculation
and commendation of glorified Zeal Page. 159
FINIS
-- Place this before the Scripture-Catechisme at Folio 259

THE EPISTLE TO HIS Entirely beloved Wife, and Twelve dear Children, and to
their Childrens Children, until the second coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.
MOst affectionately indeared Wife, and Children, one with me by Nature, and by
Grace; who therefore may challenge and lay claim to my especial care, love, and
respects, besides the discharge of my duty to God, who has placed you under my
circumspection, and government, and commands my const^^t, utmost, and unwearied
endeavors, in order to your Eternal Salvation. What my continued pains, and
frequent watching over you, have been, whilst I was present with you, your
selves, and the rest of my Family will witness, as to Weekly Catechizing,
Morning and Evening expounding the Holy Scriptures, and praying with you,
besides my constant Repetition of Sermons, preparation, and particular
examination of you, on the Lord's Day, and Monthly Sacraments; and often
remembrance of you, (...) to your Daily exercise of private Prayers, reading of
the Scriptures, and the Works of God's faithful Ministers. O let not my above
Twenty Years labors be in vain, to any one of you; ^ay, which is far worse, be
a great aggrevation, both of your sin, and punishment, should ye offend, and
rebel against so much light, and means, and neglect so great salvation. But
most dearly beloved; I believe, and hope, better things of you, and things that
accompany Salvation, although I thus speak; And therefore during my above Seven
Tears Exile, and separation from you, I have not ceased, to put you in
remembrance of your duty to God, and to stir you up by Letters, to the
continuance in well doing, since you shall reap Glory, and Eternal Life, if you
faint not, but persevere and continue therein constant to the end: Witness,
that large Epistle, sent unto you, dated from Antwerp, January the first, 1665.
Wherein from the Mouth of our most blessed Savior, (as being in a manner all
his words) you are exhorted to, and instructed in, what things you are to
believe, and to practice; what you are to embrace; and what to eschew, as to
grace and virtue, and as to vice and error: which I earnestly desire you, yea
charge you, as a Husband, and a Father, to read often over, or at least once a
Quarter. Which were it not all Scripture, and through the grace and mercy of
God skimmed, and digested for your edification; I should not by this
recommendation have presumed to put so high a value upon it. Since which time*
having by God's gracious assistance, finished this Treatise of Faith, (being
destitute of Worldly gifts to bestow up on you) That in discharge of my duty to
God, and to you, I may still continue and express my conjugal, and paternal
affection, respectively to the Souls of you all. I have directed and dedicated
it to you, and yours; desiring, and requiring your frequent, and serious
perusal of it, as being for the subject matter, the most sublime, and holding
forth the glorious knowledge of the only Infinite, and most high God; and the
wonderful and high Mysteries of Man's Salvation, as they are manifested in the
face of the Lord Jesus Christ; who is here lively represented, both to the eye,
and to the exercise of your faith, beginning with the promise to Adam, and Man's
fall and misery, and proceeding to his Incarnation, Life, Death, and Passion,
Resurrection, and Assension, and the exercise of his Threefold Office, as
Priest, and the Prophet, and King, with all benefits from them, with his
Kingdom, considered in its several degrees, and administrations, first as it
was legal, and spiritual, under the Law; Secondly, purely spiritual under the
Gospel; Thirdly, as it shall be victorious over Satan, and Worldly enemies, in
this latter Age of the World; Fourthly, peaceable, holy and righteous during
the Sabbatisms, the Saints Reign a thousand years upon Earth; Fifthly,
glorious, after the Resurrection of the Elect, and their Reign with Christ
personally, a Thousand Years upon the renewed Earth; Sixthly, Judicial,
beginning at Christ's second coming, under which the Saints are rewarded, and
all the wicked raised, judged, condemned, and cast into the Local Hell,
together with the evil Angels, Seventhly, Eternally glorious, when Christ's
Mediatory Kingdom being expired, and delivered up to the Father, that God may
be all in all, the Saints shall be translated into the highest Heavens; that
they may there Reign, and live with God and Christ, the Head of the Saints, and
Angels, for ever, and for ever. As the subject matter has a pre-eminence, as
being a discourse of things most excellent above others, the knowledge,
belief, and saving application thereof to your souls is of all exercises the
most excellent, profitable, and delightful, since without faith, and the true
knowledge of God in Christ, there is no light, joy, peace, rest, happiness to
your souls here, nor in the life to come salvation. And to have revealed to you
the great mysteries, and secret counsel of God, together with their wonderful
products to the end of the World, and Scripture-manifestation, which are bid
from the ungodly, but discovered by the light of his Word, in the Prophets, in,
and by his spirit (to those that fear him) is of all speculative knowledge to
Christians the most pleasant, useful, and encouraging, as being through an
assured hope, that Helmet of Salvation, which will carry you victoriously
through all difficulties, and opposition; to triumph in endless glory; together
with what I have ^^re sum'd up, as the substance and body of this Treatise, I
have ^lso intermixed methodically, many Soliloquies, and Ejaculatory Pe^^tions,
as necessary to conclude several principal heads in these Meditations, which I
earnestly desire you to make a frequent, and sin^^re use, and application of,
praying you to make them yours, as well as mine; and beseech the Lord that they
may have a like effect upon you, as to your spiritual food and edification, as
the first and second concoction has in the stomach as to a good and perfect
digestion, and turning the Meat into a fit Chile to be san^^fied and made good
blood and spirits; besides an after chew^ng of the Cud, by remeditation and
practice in a Gospel and spiritual signification, will much difference and
distinguish you that (...) clean Christians, from those that are unclean: who
for want of the heat of Divine affections, devour but not digest holy things.
To include, I desire my great suffering condition, abounding with sorrows,
hopes, and fears, and all kinds of Tentations, discomforts and distractions; my
above Twenty removes to several Residences, and more than seven years Exile,
and separation from my ^ooks, dearest Friends, and Relations, my ignorance,
infirmities, and sinfulness, as being the greatest of sinners, the least of
Saints, (...) excuse, and apologize for me to any of my Brethren of the
^hurches of Christ, that shall with you read these Contemplations ^^ to any
defects, or errors therein, as being one of the lowest ^^rms in the School of
Christ, and therefore ready in all humility to submit any thing herein
contained to the Judgment of the Saints that are learned or judicious; and to
give, or receive light, or satisfaction to, or from any that differ from me in
Opinion. Which I cannot but expect, because of the diversity, and rarity of a
great part of this subject, which may be a reason, that plowing with no man's
Heifer, in some things I may walk alone, yet left not in the dark and without
(as seems to me) a clear light of holy Scripture; hoping that this Essay of
mine, as to those great future mysteries, and periods of the Churches state,
may give some new light, through the free condescension of God's spirit, to me
his poor Exile in Pat^os, as to the understanding of many Scripture Prophesies
(in my Judgment, much mistaken by former Expositors, both ancient and modern;
and that though my weak light be but as a rush Candle, yet it may be an
occasion of the inflaming and lighting up of great and shining Tapers, both in
this generation and in the Age to come.

Most loving, gracious and faithful Consort, and hopeful Children, whom I
greatly long after in the bowels of Jesus Christ, And for whom, in the words of
the Apostle Paul, I frequently pray, that your love may abo^nd yet more and
more in knowledge, and in all Judgment, that ye may approve things that are
excellent, that ye may be sincere, and without offense, until the day of
Christ; Being filled with the Fruits of Righteousness, which are by Jesus
Christ unto the glory and praise of God. Phil. 1.8, 9, 10, 11.

For this cause I bow my Knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of
whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named; That he would grant you
according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his
spirit, in the inner Man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts, by faith, that
ye being rooted, and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all
Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the
love of Christ, which passes knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the
fullness of God: Ephesians. 3.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Having the Eyes of your
understanding enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his Calling,
and what the Riches of the glory of his Inheritance in the Saints; and what is
the exceeding greatness of his power to us wards, who believe according to the
working of his mighty Power: Ephesians. 1.18, 19. That you all with open Face
beholding, as in a Glass, the glory of the Lord, may be changed into the same
Image, from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord: 2 Cor. 3.18.
Finally, my dear Brethren, Sisters, and Fellow members in Christ, (for all
other Relation, and Denomination* shall shortly be laid aside.) Farewell, be
perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; And the God of
peace and love shall be with you. 2 Cor. 13.11. Amen.

Yours in all sincere and tender affection, as doubly Obliged by Nature and by
Grace. W. W.
This 29th. of June, 1666.
Sweetnese of Form, and Feature, Heeres Combinde,
Yet much below, the Beauty, of her mind.



The True Effigies of the Lady Katherine Harington Wife to Sir James Harington
and Baronet.

AN EPISTLE TO THE ELECT LADY, 3 John 1.
And her Children; My true Yoke Fellow, 2 Cor. 6.14.
and Dearly beloved Children, 1 Pet. 1.14.
Whom I love in the Truth. 3 John 1.

The Salutation (...) Exhortation of the Father to his Wife and Children.
HEar ye the Instruction of a Father, and attend to know understanding; pro. 4.1.
forget it not, neither decline from the words of my Mouth.

The Praise and Commendation of the Lord Jesus Christ, under the Name and Title
of Wisdom, as being the Wisdom of God.
Mat. 6.33.
First seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things
shall be added unto you.

pro. 4.7.
Wisdom is the principal thing, the one thing needful; and with all your
gettings, get understanding: Luke 10.42.
forsake her not, and she shall preserve you; pro. 4.6,
Love her, and she shall keep you; Exalt her, and she shall promote you; she
shall bring you to honor when you do embrace her; 8,
she shall give to your Head an Ornament of grace; 9,
a Crown of Glory shall she deliver unto you; 10,
and the Years of your Life shall be many: When you go, your steps shall not be
straightened; 12.
and when you run, you shall not stumble. 13.
Take fast hold of Instruction; let her not go, keep her, for she is your life.
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ; Act. 16.31.
who is the power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24.
and the wisdom of God. God, who at sundry times, Heb. 1.1.
and in diverse manners spoke in times past to the Fathers by the Prophets, has
in these last Days spoken unto us by his Son, 2.
who he has appointed Heir of all things; by whom also he made the Worlds.
Therefore ye ought to give the more earnest heed to the things that ye have
heard, The danger of neglecting to hear and obey the voice and Counsel of
Christ.
Heb. 2.1.
lest at any time ye should let them slip. For if the word spoken by Angels was
steadfast, 2,
and every transgression, and disobedience received a just recompense of
reward; How shall you escape, if you neglect so great salvation? 3.
If he that despised Moses Law, dyed without mercy under two or three
witnesses; Heb. 10.28. Heb. 12.25.
See that ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not, who refused
him that spoke on Earth; much more shall not ye escape, if ye turn away from
him that speaks from Heaven.

An Exhortation of the Father to his Wife and Children, to hearken to the word
and counsel of Christ.
Hear ye therefore the word which the Lord Jesus speaks unto you; Jer. 10.1.
(who spoke by the Prophets) and is the Lord God of the Holy Prophets; Heb. 1.1.
Rev. 22.6.
since all Scripture is given by Inspiration of God; 2 Timothy 3.16.
even from him who is the Eternal Word of God; Rev. 19.13.
and is profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction
in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, 2 Timothy 3.17.
thoroughly furnished, unto all good works.

Counsel is mine, and found wisdom; I am understanding, Prove. 8.14,
I have strength: I love them that love me; 17.
and those that seek me early, shall find me.

A SCRIPTVRE-CATECHISME.
Here begins the speech of the Lord Jesus Christ, as speaking in his own
Person, to those to whom this Epistle (...) directed: and (...) applicable to
all other Christians.
Joh. 1.14.
I am the only begotten Son of the Father; the brightness of his glory, the
express Image of his Person, Heb. 1.3.
upholding all things by the Word of my Power. I was by him as one brought up
with him; Prove. 8.30,
and I was daily his delight; rejoicing always before him; rejoicing in the
habitable parts of his Earth, 31,
and my delights were with the Sons of Men. Blessed is the Man that hears me,
34,
waiting daily at my Gates, waiting at the Posts of my Doors: For who so
finds me, finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord. 35,
But he that sins against me, 36.
sins against his own Soul; all that hate me, The danger of rejecting Christ.
love death. But (if) ye set at naught my counsel, prove. 1.25.
I also will laugh at your Calamity, 26
I will mock when your fear comes; when your fear comes as Desolations, 27
and your destruction comes as a whirlwind, Then shall ye call upon me, 28
but I will not answer; for that you hated knowledge, 29
and did not choose the fear of the Lord; Therefore shall you eat of the fruit
of your own way, 31
and be filled with your own devices: 33.
But who so hearkneth to me, shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear
of evil.

The Confession of faith, commonly called the Apostles Creed, held forth (...)
Christ in Scripture Expressions.
Joh. 14.1.
Believe in God, believe also in me; I and the Father am one; Joh. 10.30.
There are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost, 1 John 5.7.
and these three are one. For though there be many that are called Gods, 1 Cor.
8.5, and 6. verse.
whether in Heaven, or in Earth; The Lord your God is one Lord, 1. The Doctrine
of the Trinity.
Mark 12.29.
and to you there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things; who
Created the Heaven, Genesis 1.1.
and the Earth. And one Lord Jesus Christ, 1 John 4.14.
the Savior of the World, by whom are all things; Ephesians 4.4.
and you by him. And one Spirit, 1 pet. 1.2.
the Holy Ghost, by whom you are sanctified. 2. Article, that Jesus Christ is
the eternal Son of God, and our Lord.


Joh. 14.6. Rev. 19.13. 1 John 1.4.
I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; the Word of God; that in the beginning
was with God; and was God, the life and light of Men; 3. Article, as to the
Incarnation of the Lord Jesus Christ, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and
born of the Virgin Mary.
Joh. 12.36. Joh. 1.14. mat. 1.20. Gal. 4.4. mat. 1.23.18.25. and 1. ver. To
1.3. Heb. 2.16
while ye have light, believe in the light; in me the Eternal Word, that was
made flesh, and dwelt amongst you; was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and made of
a Woman, born of the Virgin Mary, of the Seed of Abraham, and of the Seed of
David.

The beloved, and only begotten Son of the Father, mat. 3.17.
full of grace and truth. This is the work of God, Joh. 1.14.
that ye believe on me, whom he has sent; 4. Article, concerning Christ's
Condemnation by Pontius Pilate, his Crucifixion, Death, and Burial, and all
other sufferings in Soul and Body.
Joh. 6.29.
that was delivered to Pontius Pilate, mat. 27.2.
the Governor of Judea, who gave Sentence, Luke 23.24.
scourged me, and delivered me to be Crucified; who, that I might sanctify you
with my own Blood, mat. 27.26.
Suffered without the Gate; Heb. 13.12.
being obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross; phil. 3.8.
dyed for your sins, was buried, 1 Cor. 15.3, 4.
and rose again the third Day, according to the Scriptures, Romans 4.25.
for your Justification. Zac. 12.10.
O look upon me whom you have pierced, and see if there be any sorrow like unto
my sorrow, Lam. 1.12.
wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the Day of his fierce anger; Mat.
26.38.
whose Soul being in an Agony in the Garden, Luke 22.43.
was exceeding sorrowful, Mat. 27.46.
even unto death, so that my sweat was as it were great drops of blood; Isa.
53.10.
And I cried out upon the Cross, my God, 2 Cor. 5.21.
my God, why have thou forsaken me? my Soul being then made an offering for
sin, Isa. 53.6.
yea sin for you; Psalm. 16.10.
and upon me the Lord laid the iniquities of you all.

Yet did he not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer his holy one to see
corruption. 5. Article, as to Christ's Resurrection.


Joh. 1.12. Luke 24.34. Joh. 20.17. Psalm. 68.18. Col. 2.15.
To as many of you as receive me, and believe on my name, I will give power to
become the Sons of God. 6. Article, Of Christ's Ascension.
For I the Lord am risen indeed; And am ascended unto my Father, and to your
Father, and to my God and your God, and have led Captivity Captive, spoiled
Principalities and Powers, and made a show of them openly, tryumphing over
them; am received into Heaven; Mark 16.19. Act. 1.9. mat. 28.18.
and sit at the right hand of God, (having all power given me in Heaven, and in
Earth) where I ever live to make intercession for you, Heb. 7.25. Rev. 1.7.
Act. 1.11. Heb. 9.28. Act. 10.42. Joh. 5.22. Ephesians. 1.22, 23.
until I come in the Clouds, in the same manner as I was taken up from you into
Heaven, the second time without sin unto salvation; 7. Article, Of Christ's
coming to Judgment.
as being ordained of God to be the Judge of the quick and dead. For my Father
judges no Man, but has committed all judgment unto the Son. 8. Article,
Concerning the Holy Ghost, is proved in the 1 st. Article, concerning the
Trinity.
I am the head over all things, to the Church, which is my Body (the fullness of
him that fills all in all.) The House and Church of the living God; The
Pillar and ground of the truth. As your Body is one, 1 Timothy 3.15. 1 Cor. 12.12,
13.
and has many Members, and all the Members of that one Body being many, 9.
Article, Concerning the Catholic Church and Communion of Saints.
are one Body, so also is Christ. Therefore by one spirit be ye baptized into
one body, 1 Cor. 10.16,
and be made to drink into one spirit; the Cup of blessing which you bless, is
it not the Communion of my blood? And the Bread which you break, 17.
is it not the Communion of my Body? For you being many are one Bread, and one
Body; Wherefore let there be no schism in the Body, 1 Cor. 12.25.
but let each of you as Members, have the same care one for another, to the
increase of the body, unto the edifying it self in love. Ephesians. 4.16.


10. Article, Concerning forgiveness of sins.
Be it known unto you, that through me is preached unto you the forgiveness of
sins; Act. 13.38,
and by me you that believe, 39.
and are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the
Law of Moses. Act. 5.31.
For God has exalted me with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, Ephesians.
1.7. Col. 1.14.
for to give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins, and redemption
through my blood, according to the riches of his grace.

I am the Resurrection and the Life, he that believes in me, 11. Article,
Concerning the Resurrection of the body.
Joh. 11.25,
though he were dead, yet shall he live. And who so ever lives and believes
in me shall never dye; 26.
For the hour comes, Joh. 5.28,
in the which, all that are in the Graves shall hear my voice; and shall come
forth; they that have done good, 29.
unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil, unto the
Resurrection of Damnation.

12. Article, Concerning life everlasting.
Joh. 10.27.
If you then will be my Sheep, hear my voice, and I will know you; 28
and you shall follow me; and I will give unto you eternal life, and you shall
never perish, neither shall any Man pluck you out of my hand; My Father which
gave you unto me, 29
is greater than all, and no Man is able to pluck you out of my Fathers hand;
For God so loved the World, that he gave me his only begotten Son, Joh. 3.16.
that who so ever of you believes in me, should not perish, but have
everlasting life.

The Preface to the Decalogue, or Ten Commandments.
Joh. 14.23.
If ye love me, ye will keep my words; Faith without works is dead; (therefore)
follow peace with all Men, Ja. 2.20.
and holiness, without which no Man shall see God. Heb. 12.14.
And be ye doers of the Word, Jam. 1.22.
and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. Mar. 10.19.
Ye know the Commandments.

1. Commandment.
I am the Lord thy God, thou shall have no other Gods before me. Exodus 20.2, 3.


2. Commandment.
4
2. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or any likeness of any thing
that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that is in the
Water under the Earth, thou shall not bow down thy self to them, 5
nor serve them, etc.

3. Commandment.
7
3. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, etc.

4. Commandment.
8
4. Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy; six Days shall thou labor, and
do all thy work, 9
but the seventh Day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. 10


5. Commandment.
12
5. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, etc.

6. Commandment.
13
6. Thou shall not kill.

7. Commandment.
14
7. Thou shall not commit Adultery.

8. Commandment.
15
8. Thou shall not steal.

9. Commandment.
16
9. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.

10. Commandment.
10. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House, 17.
etc.

The Conclusion of the Ten Commandments.
This is the great Commandment, That you love the Lord your God with all your
heart, mar. 12.29.
and with all your soul, 30
with all your mind, and with all your strength; Note, that the promises and
reasons annexed to some of the Commandments are omitted for brevity sake.
31.
and your Neighbor as your self.

mat. 7.1^.
Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, do ye even
so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets.

The Exhortation of the Lord Jesus to the use of Gospel Ordinances. viz.
mar. 16.16.
He that believes, and is Baptized, shall be saved: but he that believes not,
shall be damned. Joh. 3.3.
Verily, verily I say unto you, except you be born again of Water and the
Spirit, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: 1. To Baptism.
5
For that which is born of the flesh, 6.
is flesh; and that which is born of the spirit, is spirit.

2. To the Lord's Supper.
Joh. 6.54.
Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will
raise him up at the last day. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is
drink indeed; 55
He that eats my flesh, 56
and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him; As the living Father has
sent me, 57
and I live by the Father, so he that eats me, even he shall live by me; I am
the Bread of Life that came down from Heaven, 35. and 58.
not as the Fathers did eat, and are dead; He that eats this Bread, shall
live for ever; What though I am ascended where I was before? 62
63.
It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing; the words that I
speak unto you are spirit, and they are life.

I (the Lord Jesus) took Bread and blessed it, and gave it to my Disciples,
mat. 26.26.
and said, Take, eat, 27.
this is my body; And I took the Cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them,
saying, Drink* ye all of it; 28.
For this is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many, for the
remission of sins.

This do in remembrance of me; For as often as ye eat this Bread, Luke 22.19.
and drink this Cup* you show my Death, 1 Cor. 11.26.
till I come.

3 ly. To the reading of the Scriptures.
Deuteronomy. 11.18.19,
Lay up my word in your heart, and in your soul; And you shall teach them your
Children, speaking of them when you sit in your house, and when you walk by the
way; when you lie down, and when you rise up; And you shall write them upon the
Door-posts of your houses, 20,
and upon your Gates; 21.
That your days may be prolonged, and the days of your Children in the Land, as
the days of Heaven upon Earth. Blessed are ye that read and hear my words;
Rev. 1.3.
my Sheep hear my voice; Joh. 10.27.
Yea, blessed are they that hear my word, Luke 11.28.
and keep it.

4 ly. To the hearing of the Word of God preached.
Let every one of you be swift to hear, slow to wrath; Ja. 1.19.
If any of you hear my voice, and open the door, Rev. 3.20.
I will come in to him, and will sup with him, Luke 8.8.22
and he with me. Wherefore he that has Ears to hear, let him hear. My Mother
and Brethren are ye that hear the Word of God, 13.
and do it. Be ye that good ground, who with honest and good hearts, having
heard my word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.

5 ly. To the Meditations of the Word of God, and of his works.
Let not the Book of my Law, my Word, depart out of your mouth; Jos. 1.8.
but you shall meditate therein day and night, that you may observe to do
according to all that is written therein; for then shall you make your way
prosperous, then shall you have good success. Meditate also of all my works.
Psalm. 77.12.


6 ly. To Prayer in public and private.
Ephesians. 5.17.
Pray without ceasing; And when you pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven,
etc. Also after this manner pray ye; Luke 11.2.
Ask and it shall be given you, mat. 6.9.
seek and ye shall find, Knock and it shall be opened unto you; mat. 7.7.
Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my Name (according to his will) he will give
it unto you. Joh. 15.16.
1 John 5.14.
Therefore be careful for nothing: phil. 4.6.
but in every thing by Prayer, and Supplication, with thanksgiving, let your
requests be made known unto God. But ask in faith, nothing wavering. And when
you pray, Jam. 1.6. mat. 6.6.
enter into your Closet; and when you have shut your Door, pray to the Father
which is in secret, and your Father who sees in secret, shall reward you
openly.

7 ly. To Obedience to Church-Governors and Discipline.
Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch
for your souls, as they that must give an account, that they may do it with
joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you.

Mat. 18.15:
Moreover, if your Brother shall trespass against any of you, go and tell him
his fault between thee and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou have gained
thy Brother; But if he will not hear thee, 16.
then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word may be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them,
17.
tell it unto the Church; but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto
thee as an Heathen Man, and a Publican. 18.
Verily I say unto you, whatsoever my (Church) shall bind on Earth, shall be
bound in Heaven; and whatsoever they shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in
Heaven. I gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, Ephesians.
4.11, 12.
and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work
of the Ministry, 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Timothy 3.13.
for the edifying of my Body. Let the Elders that Rule well be counted worthy
of your double honor, especially they that labor in word and doctrine. Also,
they that have used the Office of a Deacon well, purchase to themselves a good
degree, and great boldness in the faith, which is in me.

The Exhortation of the Lord Jesus to Gospel-saving Graces. viz.
Repent ye, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out: Act. 3.19^
Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep; Jam. 4.9.
humble your selves in my sight, and I will lift you up. Job 25.4.
Can Man be justified with God, 1. To Repentance.
Psalm. 51.5. Ephesians. 2.3. Genesis 6.5. Romans 7.1. Isa. 1.6.
or how can he be clean that is born of a Woman? Behold, you were shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did your Mother conceive you. By nature you are the
Children of wrath. And the Imaginations of your heart are only evil continually
in you, that is, in your flesh dwells no good thing. From the sole of the
foot, even to the head, there is no soundness in you, but wounds, and bruises,
and putrified sores. Ye have sinned and done wickedly, Dan. 9.5.
and have rebelled, even by departing from my precepts. Your iniquities are
increased over your heads, Ezra. 9.6.
and your trespasses are grown up to the Heavens. Romans 3.13.
And the poison of the Asps is under your Lips. Wash you, and make you clean,
put away the evil of your doings from before mine Eyes; Isa. 1.16,
17,
cease to do evil, learn to do well: Come now, let us reason together, though
your sins be as Scarlet, 18.
they shall be as white as Snow; though they be red as Crimson, Pro. 28.13.
they shall be as Wool. 1 John 1.9.
Confess and forsake your sins, and you shall find mercy. For I am faithful
and just to forgive you your sins. 7.
And my blood shall cleanse you from all sins. 1 John 1.7.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, Mat. 11.28.
and I will give you rest. Joh. 6.37.
And you that come to me, I will by no means cast out. But if ye will still do
wickedly, 1 Samuel 12.25.
ye shall be consumed. And I will rain snares; Psalm. 11.6.
an horrible tempest. And I will break the hairy Scalp of you that go on in
iniquity. Psalm 68.21.
Psalm. 50.22.
Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver you. Deuteronomy. 30.15.
See, I have set before you life, and good, and death, and evil; therefore
choose life, that ye may live.

2. To Faith.
He that has received my Testimony, has set to his Seal, Joh. 3.33.
that God is true; The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into
his hand. 35,
He that believes on the Son has everlasting life; 36.
and he that believes not the Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God
abides on him. 1 Cor. 1.30.
I am made unto you of God, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption: 2 Cor. 5.21.
And to be sin for you, that knew no sin; that you might be made the
righteousness of God in me. Romans 10.4.
I am the end of the Law for righteousness, to every one of you that believes.
And was made a curse for you, that the blessing of Abraham might come to you,
Gal 3.13,
14.
and that ye might receive the promise of the spirit, through faith in me;
which grace comes by hearing, Romans 10.17.
and hearing of the Word of God; Ephesians. 2.8.
and is the gift of God.

Col. 1.23.
Be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, 3. To Hope.
27.
which ye have heard; for I in you am the hope of Glory. But put on this hope
for an Helmet; 1 These. 5.8. Heb. 6.9.
and let it be as an Anchor of your Souls both sure and steadfast; rejoicing
therein* firmly to the end. Heb. 3.6. 1 John 3.3.
And let every one of you, that has this hope in him, purify himself, even as
I am pure.

1 Pet. 4:8. 1 Cor. 16:14.
Above all things have servent charity, for charity will cover the multitude of
sins; 4. To Charity.
yea, let all your things be done with charity, 1 Cor. 13.1.
without which, though you speak with the tongues of Men and Angels, you are
become as sounding brass, 2.
or a tinkling Cimbal. And though you have the gift of Prophecy, and
understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; And though you have all faith, 3.
so that you could remove Mountains, and have no charity, you are nothing. And
though you bestow all your goods to feed the poor, and though you give your
Bodies to be burned, and have not charity, it profits nothing. Charity
suffers long, 4.
and is kind, charity envieth not; Charity vaunteth not its self; Is not
puffed up; does not behave it self unseemly, 5.
seeks not her own; Is not easily provoked, thinks no evil; 6.
Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth. 7.
Bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all
things; Charity never fails. 8,
Wherefore above all things, Col. 3.14.
put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness. 1 Timothy 1.5.
The end of the Commandment. The royal Law. Romans 13.10.
And the fulfilling of the Law. If ye therefore fulfill this royal Law, Jam.
2.8.
according to the Scripture; Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self; Mat.
5.44.
ye do well: Yea, I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you,
and pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you; That you may be
the Children of your Father which is in Heaven, 45.
for he makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and the good, and sends Rain on
the just, and on the unjust.

5. To holy courage or fortitude.
Ephesians. 6.11.
And put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
wiles of the Devil. 12.
Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Mat. 10.28.
And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but
rather fear him which is able to destroy both body, and soul, in Hell.
Whosoever does not bear my Cross, Mar. 10.21.
and come after me, cannot be my Disciple. 29.
Verily I say unto you, whosoever of you shall leave House, or Brethren, or
Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands, for my sake, and
the Gospel, shall receive an hundred fold, now in this time, Houses, and
Brethren, and Sisters, and Mother, 30.
and Children, and Lands, with persecutions; and in the World to come
everlasting life.

6. To Christian-Temperance.
1 Cor. 9.25.
Every Man that striveth for the masterie is temperate in all things; 26.
now they do it to obtain a corruptible Crown, but you an incorruptible. 27.
Therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight, not as those that beat the
Air: but keep under your Bodies, and bring them into subjection. 2 Pet. 1.6.
And add to your knowledge temperance. For the fruits of my Spirit is love,
joy, Gal. 5.22.
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, 23.
faith, meekness, temperance, against such there is no Law.

2 Pet. 1.6.
Add to your temperance, patience; And in your patience possess your Souls; 7.
To Holy Patience.
Luke 21.19.
and bring forth fruit with patience. And let patience have her perfect work,
Luke 8.15.
that ye may be perfect and entire, Jam. 1.4,
wanting nothing. Being followers of those, Heb. 6.12.
who through faith and patience inherit the promises. Jam. ^.^^.
Ye have heard of the patience of Job. Jam. ^.10.
Also take for an example your Brethren the Prophets, Heb. 12.1.
of suffering affliction and of patience. And run with patience the race which
is set before you.

8. To Divine-Wisdome.
Mat. 16.16.
Be ye wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves. Col. 1.9.
And filled with the knowledge of my will, in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding. 10.
That ye may walk worthy of me unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good
work, and increasing in the knowledge of God. See that ye walk circumspectly,
Ephesians. 5.11.
not as fools, but as wise, 16.
redeeming the time, because the days are evil, 17.
understanding what the will of the Lord is. Romans 16.19.
Being wise unto that which is good, but simple concerning evil. 1 Cor. 3*19.
For the wisdom of the World is foolishness with God; and it is earthly, Jam.
^.15.
sensual, and devilish. But the wisdom that is from above, 17.
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of
mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy. Wherefore if
any of you lack wisdom, Jam. 1.5.
let him ask of God which gives to all Men liberally, and upbraideth not, and
it shall be given you; but let him ask in faith, 6.
nothing wavering.

Put on humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another,
9. To Christian ^umility.
Col. 3.12.
and forgiving one another; 13.
if any Man has a quarrel against any, even as I have forgiven you, so do ye*
For before honor is humility. Prove. 15.33.
And he that humbles himself shall be exalted. What does the Lord require of
you, Luke 14.11.
but to do justly, and love mercy, Mic. 6.8.
and to walk humbly with your God. Jam. 4.6.
For God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. Yea, I will hear
the desire of the humble. Psalm. 10.17.
And although I inhabit Eternity, Job 22.29.
I will dwell with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit. Isa. 57.15.
Wherefore learn of me, Mat. 11.29.
for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your Souls.

Blessed are you that are poor in spirit, for yours is the Kingdom of Heaven.
10. The Exhor^^tion of the Lord (...) to several (...) graces com^^nly called
the ^atitudes.
Mat. 5.3.
That mourn, for you shall be comforted. 4
That are meek, for you shall inherit the Earth. 5
6
That hunger and thirst after righteousness, for you shall be filled. Blessed
are you that are merciful, for you shall obtain mercy. 7
That are pure in heart, for you shall see God. 8
That are peacemakers, for you shall be called the Children of God. 9
Blessed are you that are persecuted for righteousness sake; 10
for yours is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are you when Men shall revile
you, 11
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and
be exceeding glad, 12.
for great is your reward in Heaven; for so persecuted they the Prophets which
were before you.

Heb. 13.4.
Marriage is honorable in all, and the Bed undefiled; 11. To Religious ^^astity.
but Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge: Wherefore flee Fornication,
every sin that a Man does, 1 Cor. 6.18.
is without the body; But he that commits Fornication, finneth against his
own body; Know you not that your bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 19,
which is in you, which you have of God, an^ you are not your own? For you are
boug^^ with a price; 20*
Therefore glorify God in yo^^ bodies and spirits, which are Gods. Also, (...)
you not my Members? 1 Cor. 6.15.
Will you then take (...) Members, and make them the Members of (...) Harlot? 16
God forbid. What? know you (...) that he that is joined to an Harlot is (...)
body? 17
For two (says he) shall be one Flesh* But he that is joined unto me, is one
spirit* This is the will of God, 1 These. 4.3.
even your sanctifica^tion; that you should abstain from fornication* And that
every one of you should know (...) to possess his Vessel in sanctification, 4*
an^ honor; 5.
not in the lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles which know not God. Ye (...)
heard that it was said by them of old (...) Thou shall not commit Adultery:
Mat. 5.27,
2^.
But I say (...) to you, whosoever looks on a Woman to (...) after her, has
committed Adultery with (...) already in his heart. Prove. 6.29.
And whosoever touches another Man's Wife, shall not be innocent* Whoredom,
Hos. 4.11.
and Wine, and new Wine tak^ away the heart, Prove. 6.26.
and by means of a (...) Woman* a Man is brought to a piece of bre^^ and the
Adulteress will hunt for the prec^^^ life. Prove. 23.27.
An Whore is a deep ditch, and a stra^^^ Woman is a narrow Pit. Her House
inclin^^ unto death, Prove. 2.18.
and her path unto the dead. L^^ not your heart incline to her ways, Prove. 7.25.
go not stray in her paths, for she has cast down (...) wounded; 26
yea, many strong Men have be^^ slain by her, 27
her House is the way to Hell, g^^ing down to the Chambers of death. (...) that
go unto her return again, Prove. 3.19.
neither tak^ they hold of the path of life. Know this there^fore, Ephesians. 5.5.
that no Whoremonger, nor unclean Person, nor covetous Man, who is an Idolater,
has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of God.

12. To Christian Justice, and Righteousness.
Psalm. 106.3.
Blessed are ye that keep Judgment, and tha^ do righteousness at all times.
Psalm. 4.5.
Offer to God the sacrifices of righteousness, Psalm 11.7.
and put your trus^ in the Lord; For the righteous Lord loves righteousness,
his countenance does behold the upright. Isa. 32.17.
The work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect thereof quietness and
assurance for ever. He that follows after righteousness and mercy, Prove.
21.21.
finds life, righteousness, Romans 6.13.
and honor. Therefore yield your selves unto God, as those that are alive from
the dead, and your members as Instruments of righteousness unto God. 1 John 3.7.
For he that does righteousness, 10*
is righteous, even as I am righteous; but whosoever does not righteousness, is
not of God; And shall utterly perish in their own corruptions, 2 Pet. 2.12.
and receive the reward of unrighteousness, 13.
and shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6.9.
But the righteous shall shine forth as the Sun, Mat. 13.43.
in the Kingdom of my Father; And they that turn many to righteousness, as the
Stars for ever and ever. Dan. 12.3.


^. To Gospel-^^^^rity, upright^^ and truth.
Mat. 5.48.
Be ye perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven, Prove. 10.9.
is perfect. For he that walks uprightly, Pro 28.18.
walks surely, and shall be saved. For the righteous Lord loves
righteousness, his countenance does behold the upright. Psalm. 11.7.
Fear the Lord, Jeh. 24.14.
and serve him in sincerity, and in truth. Pro. 11.3.
For the integrity of the upright shall guide them. Psalm. 97.11.
Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart. But
the hope of the hypocrite shall perish. Job 8.13.
Remove from you the way of lying; Psalm 119.29.
and let every one speak truth to his Neighbor. Ephesians. 4.25.
For I am the Lord God of truth. Psalm. 31.5.


4 ly. To Holy ^^^^kfulness and (...) of God.
Ephesians. 5.20.
Give thanks for all things to God the Father in my name; Psalm. 50.23.
For he that offers praise glorifieth me. Heb. 13.15.
By me therefore offer the sacrifice of praise continually, that is the fruit
of your lips. 1 Timothy 4.4.
For every Creature of God is good, and nothing is to be refused, if it be
received with thanksgiving. Psalm. 147.10.
Praise ye therefore the Lord, for it is good; to sing praises to your God, for
it is pleasant, and praise is comely.

^. The Exhortation (...) the Lord Jesus (...) Divine affecti^^s. viz.
Joh. 15.11.
These things have I spoken to you, that my joy might remain in you, Joh. 16.20.
and that your joy might be full. Verily, verily I say unto you, that ye shall
weep and lament, 22
but the World shall rejoice, 1. To Holy Joy and delight.
but your sorrow shall be turned into Joy, and your Joy no Man takes from you.
Romans 14.17.
For the Kingdom of God is not mea^ and drink, but righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost; Gal. 5.22,
Yea, the fruit of my Spirit is love, joy, and peace; long-suffering,
gentleness, 23.
goodness; faith, meekness, temperance, against such there is no Law. The joy
of the Lord is your strength. Neh. 8.10.
Therefore rejoice in the Lord ye righteous, Psalm. 33.1.
for praise is comely for the upright; Phil. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord always, again I say rejoice.

Psalm. 37.4.
Delight your selves also in the Lord, and let his Commandments be your
delights, and he shall give you the desires of your heart. and 119.143.
Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing. Romans 15.13.


2. To filial fear of God.
I^a. 8.13,
Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be
your dream, and he shall be unto you for a Sanctuary. 14.
Be ye in the fear of the Lord all the day long. Pro. 23.17.
For it is the beginning of knowledge, Pro. 1.7.
a Fountain of life, Prove. 10 27. Prove. 22.4.
to depart from the snares of death* Yea, by the fear of the Lord are riches,
and honor, Phil. 2.12.
and life. Work out therefore your own salvation with fear and trembling,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God. 2 Cor. 78 1.
Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear. Romans 8.15.
Isa. 8.12.
Therefore fear not their fear, 1 John 4.18. Romans 8.15.
for perfect love casts out such fear; But ye have received the spirit of
Adoption, whereby ye cry Abba Father.

Phil. 4.18.
It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing; 3. To holy zeal and
anger.
Tit. 2.14.
for I gave my self for you, that I might redeem you from all iniquity, and
purify unto my self a peculiar People zealous of good works. Psalm. 69.9:
Let therefore after my example and David's, Joh. 2.17.
the zeal of my House eat you up, Psalm. 119.139.
and consume you. And be like Phineas, Number. 25.17.
who was zealous for his God. Be angry for sin (as Jacob's anger was kindled
against Rachel) but sin not. Ephesians. 4.26. Genesis 30.2.
Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath; For whosoever is angry with his Brother
without a cause, Mat. 5.22.
shall be in danger of Judgment.

4. To holy hatred.
Psalm. 97.10. Psalm. 139.21, 22. Pro. 8.36.
Ye that love the Lord hate evil; yea, they hate those that hate me with a
perfect hatred. All that hate me love death. Note, the Exhortation to godly
love and sorrow are to be found in the foregoing Exhortations to repentance and
charity.


The Preface to the Dehortations of the Lord Jesus from several prin^ipal Vices.
Gal. 5.16,
Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the Flesh; 17,
For the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh;
and these are contrary the one to the other; so that ye cannot do the things
that ye would. 18,
But if ye be led by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law. Now the works of the
Flesh are manifest, 19,
which are these, Adultery, Fornication, 20,
Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, 21.
Witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,
envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like; of the which, I
tell you before, as I have also told in time past, that they which do such
things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

The Dehortations ^^rst from unbelief.
Heb. 3.12.
Take heed Brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in
departing from the living God. Mat. 16.16.
He that believes not shall be damned. Therefore ye ought to give the more
earnest heed to the things that ye have heard, Heb. 2.1.
lest at any time ye should let them slip; For if the word spoken by Angels was
steadfast, 2.
and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward*
How shall ye escape, 3.
if you neglect so great Salvation? which at the first began to be spoken by
(Me) the Lord, and was confirmed unto you, 4.
by them that heard (Me); God also bearing them witness, both with signs and
wonders, and with diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to
his own will.

Luke 12.46.
Take heed that your portion be not among the Unbelievers in the Lake, 2. From
Atheism, ^he first branch ^f unbelief.
that burns with Fire and Brimstone. Psalm 14.1.
Nor say with the Fool in your heart, there is no God: and the Lord will not do
good, Zeph. 1.12.
neither will he do evil.

3. From Polutheims, or having more Gods than one, the 2 d. Br. unbelief.
Exodus 22.20.
He that sacrifices, (or gives worship) unto any God, save unto the Lord only;
he shall be utterly destroyed. Exodus 20.3.
You shall have no other Gods before me.

4. From Idolatry, the 3 d. Br. of unbelief.
Lev. 26.1.
Ye shall make you no Idols, nor graven Images, neither shall you set up any
Image of them in your Land, to bow down unto it; For I am the Lord your God.

5. From Blasphemy, the 4. Br. of unbelief.
Lev. 24.16.
He that blasphemeth the Name of the Lord, shall surely be put to death; all the
Congregation shall stone him.

6. From Profaneness, the 5. B.
Lev. 18.21.
Thou shall not profane the Name of thy God, I am the Lord.

7. From Sacrilege, the 6. Br.
Prove. 22.25.
It is a snare to the Man, which devoureth that which is holy; and after vows
to make inquiry.

8. From hypocrisy, the 7. Br.
Job 13.16.
An Hypocrite shall not come before God; His hope shall perish. The Congregation
of the Hypocrites shall be desolate. Job 8.13. Job 15.34. Job 27.8.
For what is the hope of an Hypocrite, though he has gained, when God takes
away his Soul.

9. From Sabbath-breaking, the 8. Bra.
Isa. 58.13.
If you turn away your Feet from the Sabbath, from doing your pleasure on my
Holy Day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord honorable, and
shall honor him, not doing your own ways, nor finding your own pleasure, nor
speaking your own words; Then shall you delight your selves in the Lord; 14.
and I will give you to ride upon the high places of the Earth, and feed you
with the heritage of Jacob my Servant, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken
it. Lev. 19.13.
Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary; I am the Lord.

I conceive that in all things (some) are superstitious; 10. From Superstition,
the 9 th. Br. of unbelief.
Act. 17.22. Joh. 15.14.
therefore ye are my friends, if ye do what I command you. Deuteronomy. 4.2.
Ye shall not add unto the word that I command you, neither shall ye diminish
ought from it; that ye may keep the Commandments of the Lord your God, Psalm.
119.104.
which I command you. But shall with my Servant David hate every false way.

11. From Lukewarmness, the 10 th. Branch.
Rev. 3.15,
I know there are many, that are neither cold nor hot, 16
and I will spue them out of my mouth.

12. From hard-heartedness, the 11. Branch.
Pro. 28.13,
He that covers his sins, shall not prosper; but whosoever confesses, and
forsakes them, shall have mercy. 14.
Happy is the Man that fears always, but he that hardneth his heart shall
fall into mischief.

Number. 15.30.
The Soul that does ought presumptuously, the same reproacheth the Lord; 13.
From presumptuous sinning, the 12. Branch.
and that soul shall be cut off from his People. As also the Man that will do
presumptuously, Deuteronomy. 17.12.
and will not hearken to the Priest, that stands to minister before the Lord
your God; or unto the Judge; even that Man shall die.

Wherefore, pray with my Servant David, Lord keep back thy Servants from
presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19.13.
let them not have dominion over us, so shall you be innocent from the great
Transgression.

14. From sinful swearing, the 13. Branch.
Exo. 20.7.
Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not
hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain. Let your communication be Yea,
yea; Nay, nay; Mat. 5.37.
for whatsoever is more than these, comes of evil.

15. From Incorrigibleness, the 14. Branch.

A Preface to the dehortation against despair.


Prove. 29.10.
He that being often reproved, hardneth his Neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy.

Isa. 50.10.
Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his Servant,
that walks in darkness, and has no light? let him trust in the Name of the
Lord, and stay upon his God. When ye are troubled on every side, 2 Cor. 4.8.
be not distressed; when ye are perplexed, Joh. 20.27.
be ye not in despair. Be not faithless, but believing.

16. From despair, the last Branch.
Genesis 4.13.
Say not with despairing Cain, my iniquity is greater than that it may be
forgiven; Nor go not with him out of the preference of the Lord. 16.
Romans 14.15.
Destroy not your Souls, which I died for; 1 Samuel 31.4.
With hopeless Saul, who took a Sword, and fell upon it. Nor do as Judas, who
went and hanged himself. Mat. 27.5.


A Debortation from Incharitableness.
1 John 3.10.
Whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God; neither is he, that loves not
his brother; He that loves not his Brother, 14.
abides in death. Whosoever hates his Brother, 15.
is a murderer; and ye know, that no murderer has eternal life abiding in
him.

1. General branch of uncharitableness as to the Souls of others.
Pro. 16.29,
Be ye not like the violent Man, who inticeth his Neighbor, and leads him
into the way that is not good; 30.
who shuts his eyes to devise froward things, moving his lips, he brings
evil to pass. 1. By tempting to sin.
Genesis 39.7.
Nor like to Potiphar's wife; nor to the strange Woman that flattereth with her
lips; Prove. 7.5.
nor to them who say, Come with us, let us lay wait for blood; Prove. 1.11.
let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause; 1.
cast in thy lot amongst us, 14.
let us all have one Purse.

2. By evil example.
1 Kin. 15.16.
Imitate not Jeroboam, who did sin, and who made Israel to sin.

3. By not reproving.
Lev. 19.17.
You shall not hate your Brethren in your heart; you shall in any wife reprove
them, and not suffer sin upon them.

4. By flattering.
Job 17.5.
He that speaks flattery to his friends, even the eyes of his Children shall
fail. Pro. 26.28.
And a flattering mouth, works ruin.

5. By not instructing.
Ezekiel. 34.2,
Woe to the Sheppards of Israel, that do feed themselves; Should not the
Sheppards feed the Flock? 3.
Ye eat the fat, and ye cloth you with the Wool; ye kill them that are fed,
but ye feed not the Flock.

6. By persecuting for conscience.
Psalm. 10.2.
The wicked in his pride do persecute the poor: but they shall be taken in the
devises that they have imagined. Rev. 13.10.
He that leads into Captivity, shall go into Captivity; He that kills with
the Sword, must be killed with the Sword. Rev. 16.6.
For they have shed the blood of the Saints and Prophets, and God will give
them blood to drink, for they are worthy.

2. General branch of uncharitableness as to the Persons of others.
At the hand of Man, at the hand of every Man's Brother will I require the life
of Man; Genesis 9.5.
whosoever sheddeth Man's blood, by Man shall his blood be shed; 6.
For in the Image of God made I Man. 1. By murder.
And blood defiles the Land. And the Land cannot be cleansed of the blood that
is shed therein, Number. 35.33.
but by the blood of him that shed it. 30.
Therefore whosoever kills any Person, the Murderer shall be put to death. Ye
shall take no satisfaction, 31.
for the life of a Murderer which is guilty of death; But he shall be surely
put to death.

If a Man cause a blemish in his Neighbor; As he has done, 2. By mayming.
Lev. 24.19.
so shall it be done unto him; breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth:
As he has caused a blemish in a Man, 20.
so shall it be done unto him again.

3. By unjust Imprisonment.
Jer 37.15.
Be ye not like unto unjust Zedekiah, who put Jeremiah into Prison, Jer. 51.11.
for speaking to him in the Name of the Lord. Not like cruel Herod, who bound
John in Prison, Man 6.17.27.
and beheaded him for Herodias sake, left you partake of their punishments.
Act. 12.23.


Jam 2.25.
If a Brother or Sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, 4. By not
Relieving.
and one of you say, Depart in peace, 26.
be you warmed and filled; Notwithstanding you give them not those things that
are needful to the Body, Mat. 25.31.
What does it profit? When I sit upon the Throne of my Glory, I shall say unto
such on my left hand, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire, 41,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Verily I say unto you, 45.
inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these (my poor Saints) ye did
it not to me.

3. General Bran. of uncharitableness as to the Estates of others.
Hab 2.6.
Woe to him that increases that which is not his: Mal. 3.5.
I will be a swift witness, says the Lord, against those that oppress the
hireling in his wages, the Widow and the Fatherless, and that turn aside the
stranger from his right; 1. By Oppression.
He that does wrong, Col. 3.25.
shall receive from the wrong that he has done; And with me there is no
respect of Persons.

2. By stealing.
Zac. 5.2.
Behold a flying Roll, the length thereof is twenty Cubits, and the breadth
thereof ten Cubits. 3,
This is the curse that goes forth over the face of the whole Earth: for every
one that steals shall be cut off, according to it; 4.
And it shall enter into the House of the Thief, and it shall remain in the
midest of his House, and shall consume it with the Timber thereof, Ephesians. 4.28.
and the Stones thereof. Therefore let him that stole steal no more, but rather
let him labor, working with his hands the thing which is good, that he may
have to give to him that needs. 3. By defrauding.
1 These. 4.6.
Let no Man go beyond and defraud his Brother in any matter, because that the
Lord is the avenger of all such.

4. By contentiousness.
1 Cor. 6.5.
I speak to the shame of (many;) is it so that there is not a wise Man amongst
you? No not one that shall be able to Judge between his Brethren; 6.
But Brother goes to Law with Brother, and that before the Unbelievers; Is any
one will sue you at the Law, Mat. 5.40.
and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also.

5. By Usury or Extortion.
Pro. 28.8.
He that by Usury and unjust gain increases his substance, he shall gather it
for him that will pity the poor. Mat. 23.25.
Woe unto such, who like the Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, make clean the
outside of the Cup, and of the Platter; but within they are full of Extortion
and excess; Luke 3.13.
Therefore exact no more than is appointed you.

6. By depopulation.
Isa. 5.8.
Woe unto them that join House to House, and lay Field to Field, till there be
no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the Earth. 9
Of a truth, many Houses shall be desolate, even great and fair without
Inhabitant; 10.
Yea, ten Acres of Vineyard shall yield one Bath, and the Seed of an Omer shall
yield one Epha.

7. By false witnessing.
Luke 3.14.
Do violence to no Man, neither accuse any falsely; Pro. 19.5.
for a false witness shall not be unpunished. A false witness shall perish.
Behold, if a witness be a false witness, Pro. 21.28.
and has testified falsely against his Brother, Deuteronomy. 19.18.
then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his Brother.

8. By cursing, or evil Imprecations.
Romans 12.14.
Bless, and curse not. (Those) That delight in cursing, Psalm. 109.17,
so let it come unto them; As they delight not in blessing, so let it be far
from them; 18.
As they have clothed themselves with cursing, as with a Garment, so let it
come into their bowels like Water, and like Oil into their bones.

4. General Era. of uncharitableness as to the good name of others.
Pro. 10.18.
He that utters slander is a Fool; I will tear those in pieces, Psalm. 50.22.
and there shall be none to deliver them, ^0.
that sit and speak against their Brother, and slander their own Mothers Son:
Yea, 1. By slandering, and back-bitting, and tale-bearing.
Psalm. 64.7.
I will shoot at them with an Arrow, suddenly they shall be wounded; they
shall make their own Tongues to fall upon themselves, 3
who whet their Tongues like a Sword, Psalm. 64.3.
and bend their Bow to shoot their Arrows: even bitter words, 4
that they may shoot in secret at the perfect. Thou shall not go up and down as
a Talebearer among thy People. Neither shall thou raise a false report, Lev.
19.16. Exo. 23.1.
nor put thy hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness.

A Dehoratation from Intemperance.
Isa. 5.11.
Woe unto them that rise up early in the Morning, that they may follow strong
Drink, that continue until Night, 1. From Drunkenness.
till Wine inflame them. Woe unto them that are mighty to drink Wine, 22.
and Men of strength to mingle strong Drink. Woe unto him that gives his
Neighbor drink, Hab. 2.15.
that put thy Bottle to him, and make him drunken also, that thou may
look on their nakedness. Who has woe? Pro. 23.29.
Who has sorrow? Who has contentions? Who has babbling? Who has wounds
without cause? Who has redness of Eyes? They that tarry long at the Wine, 30.
they that go to seek mixed Wine. 2. From Gluttony.
Pro. 23.21.
The Drunkard and Glutton shall come to poverty, and drowsiness shall cloth a
Man with rags. 2 Pet. 1.6.
Add therefore to your knowledge, temperance; A fruit of the Spirit; Gal. 5.23.
against such there is no Law: Be therefore sober and vigilant, 3. From
Insorbriety.
1 Pet. 5.8.
because your Adversary the Devil walks about as a Roaring Lion, 1 These. 5.7.
seeking whom he may devour. They that be drunken, 8.
be drunken in the Night; but you that are of the Day, Phil. 4 5.
be sober: Let your moderation be known to all Men, for I am at hand. And use
this World as not abusing of it; 1 Cor. 7.31.
for the fashion of this World passes away.

A Dehortation from sinful fear.
Isay. 51.7.
Hearken unto me ye that know righteousness, the People in whose heart is my
Law. Fear ye not the reproach of Men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings.
8.
For the Moth shall eat them up like a Garment, and the Worm shall eat them
like Wool; Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, Isa. 8.13.
and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread; 12.
neither fear you their fear, Rev. 22.8.
nor be afraid. (For) the fearful and unbelieving shall have their portion in
the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death.

A Dehortation from Ignorance,
Pro. 1.7.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, but Fools despise wisdom
and understanding; 1. Affected.
22.
How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? And the Scorners delight in
their scorning? Pro. 2.3.
and Fools hate knowledge? Cry after knowledge, and lift up your voice for
understanding; 4,
Seek her as Silver, and search for her as for hid treasures. 9.
Then shall ye understand righteousness, and judgment, and equity; yea, every
good path.

Lev. 5.17.
If a Soul sin, and commit any of those things that are forbidden to be done by
the Commandments of the Lord, 2. Natural
though he wist it not; yet is he guilty, and shall bear his iniquity. 3.
Wilful.
2 Pet. 3.5.
How much more shall they be guilty, that are willingly ignorant? In flaming
Fire (therefore) will I take vengeance on them that know not God, 2 These. 1.8.
and that obey not my Gospel.

A Dehoratation from Injustice.
Deu. 27.9.
Cursed be he that perverteth the Judgment of the stranger, Fatherless and
Widow; wherefore keep ye far from a false matter; Exo. 23.7.
and the innocent and righteous slay not; 1. In Majestrates.
for I will not justify the wicked. Lev. 19.15.
Ye shall do no unrighteousness in Judgment, ye shall not respect the Person of
the poor, nor honor the Person of the mighty; But in righteousness shall you
Judge your Neighbor.

2. In private Persons.
Woe unto him that builds his House by unrighteousness, Jer. 22.13.
and his Chambers by wrong, that uses his Neighbors service without wages,
and gives him not for his work.

3. By not giving Obedience justly due to Superiors.
2 Samuel 23.3.
He that rules over Men must be just; Thou shall not revile the Judge, Lev.
22.28.
nor curse the Ruler of People. Submit therefore your selves to every Ordinance
of Man for the Lord's sake; 1 Pet. 2.13.
whether it be to the King as Supreme, 1. As Majestrates.
or unto Governors, 14.
as unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for
the praise of them that do well; 15.
For so is the will of God, that with well-doing, you may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish Men; 16.
As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the
Servants of God. Honor all Men, 17.
love the Brotherhood. Fear God, honor the King. For whosoever resists the
Power, Romans 13.2.
resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves Damnation. Render therefore to all, their dues; Tribute to whom
Tribute is due, 7.
Custom to whom Custom; Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor. Owe no Man
any thing, 8.
but to love one another, for he that loves another has fulfilled the Law. 2.
As Ministers of the Gospel.
Heb. 13.7.
Remember them that have the Rule over you, that have spoken to you the Word of
God, whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. Luke 10.16.
He that hears them, hears me; and he that despises them, despises me;
and he that despises me, despises him that sent me. Whatsoever City they
enter, and they receive them not; 10.
I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom, 12.
than for that City.

3. As Natural Parents.
Prove. 1 8.
Hear the Instruction of your Father, and forsake not the Law of your Mother; 9.
For they shall be an Ornament of Grace unto your Heads, and Chains about your
Necks; Pro. 30.17.
But the Eye that mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the
Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it.

A general Dehortation from fleshly uncleanness.
Exodus 22.19.
Whosoever lies with a beast, shall be surely put to death.

1. From Buggery.
Lev. 20.13.
If a Man lie with Mankind, as he lies with a Woman, 2. From Sodomy.
both of them have committed an abomination; they shall surely be put to Death;
their blood shall be upon themselves.

Deu. 23.17.
There shall be no Whore of the Daughters of Israel, 3. From Whoredom.
nor a Sodomite of the Sons of Israel. 2 Pet. 2.6.
God turned the Cities of Sodom and Gomorra into ashes, condemning them with an
overthrow, making them an ensample unto those, that after should live ungodly.

4. From Incest.
Lev. 18. read from v. 1. to v. 19.
None of you shall approach to any that is near of Kin to him, to uncover their
nakedness; I am the Lord; after the doings of the Land of Egypt, and after the
doings of the Land of Canaan, shall ye not do.

5. From Poligamy.
1 Cor. 7.2.
Let every Man have his own Wife, and every Woman have her own Husband. If a
Woman, Romans 7.3.
whilst her Husband lives, marries another Man, she shall be called, (that is,
she is an Adulteress) the like is true of a Man, if he marry another Woman,
whilst his Wife lives; Luke 16.18.
For whosoever puts away his Wife, and marries another, 6. From Adultery.
commits Adultery: Whoremongers and Adulterers God will Judge. Heb. 13.3.


Lev. 18.20.
Thou shall not lie carnally with thy Neighbors Wife, to defile thy self with
her. The Adulterer and Adulteress shall surely be put to death. Lev. 20.10.
1 Cor. 6.9.
Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, 10.
nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with Mankind, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God.

7. From Fornication.
Col. 3.5.
Mortify your Members which are upon the Earth, fornication, uncleanness,
inordinate affection, 6.
evil concupiscence; For which things sake, the wrath of God comes on the
Children of disobedience: 1 Cor. 10.8.
And commit not Fornication, as some of the Israelites committed, and fell in
one Day three and twenty thousand. Rev. 22.15.
Without (the new Jerusalem) are Whoremongers, Rev. 21.8.
who shall have their part in the Lake which burns with Fire, which is the
second Death.

A Dehortation from Lasciviousness.
Mat. 15.19. Pro. 16.26. Psalm. 119.113. Jer. 4.14. Pro. 24.9. Psalm. 139 2. Heb.
4.12.
Out of the heart proceeds evil thoughts, which are an abomination to the Lord.
Wherefore hate all vain thoughts, Let them not lodge within you, 1. In wanton
Thoughts.
for the thought of foolishness is sin. I understand your thoughts afar off;
and am a discerner of the thoughts and intents of your hearts.

2. In wanton Words.
Ephesians. 4.29.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths, but that which is good
to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers. Ephesians. 5.3.
But fornication, and all uncleanness, let it not be once named amongst you, as
becomes Saints; 4.
Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not
convenient: but rather giving of thanks. For because of these things comes the
wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience. 6.
7.
Be not therefore partakers with them. Mat. 12.36.
I say unto you, every idle word that Men shall speak, they shall give account
thereof at the Day of Judgment; For by thy words thou shall be justified, 37.
and by thy words thou shall be condemned.

3. In wanton looks.
Mat. 5.28.
Whosoever looks upon a Woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery with
her already in his heart. Job 31.1.
Wherefore with holy Job, make a Covenant with thine Eyes, that thou think not
upon a Maid, (to lust after her; Luke 11.34.
) For when thy Eye is evil, thy Body also is full of darkness. Job 11.26.
The Eyes of the wicked shall fail; But chiefly them that walk after the Flesh
in the lust of uncleanness; 2 Pet. 2.10.
Having Eyes full of Adultery, 14,
and that cannot cease from sin, 9,
and are reserved to the Day of Judgment to be punished, 17.
and to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever.

4. In wanton ^^tions.
Romans 13.12.
The Night is far spent, the Day is at hand, therefore cast ye off the works of
Darkness, and put on the Armor of Light, walking honestly, 13.
as in the Day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in Chambering and
wantonness; But put ye on me the Lord Jesus Christ, 14.
and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof; Romans 8.13.
For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye, through the Spirit,
do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.

A Dehortation from lying.
Act. 5.3.
Let not Satan, who is a liar from the beginning, Joh. 8.44.
and the Father of lies, fill your hearts to sin against the Holy Ghost, 1. By
denying the Truth.
Joh. 14.17.
who is the Spirit of truth, Act. 5.5, 10.
that ye be not stricken with sudden Death, as was Ananias and Saphira. Ye
shall not lie one unto another; but every one speak the truth with his
Neighbor; For ye are Members one of another. Ephesians. 4.25.
For I will destroy them that speak leasing; Psalm. 5.6. Psalm. 63.11.
and the mouth that speaks lies shall be stopped.

2. By breach of Covenant to God.
Isay. 24.4.
The Earth mourns and fades away, the World languisheth and fades away, the
haughty People of the Earth do languish, the Earth also is defiled under the
Inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the Laws, 5.
changed the Ordinance, broken the everlasting Covenant. Heb. 12.14. Col. 2.11,
12, 13. Heb. 10.29.
I am the Mediator of the new Covenant, sealed unto you in my Sacraments of
Baptism and my Supper. Tread not then under foot the Son of God; nor count the
blood of my Covenant wherewith ye are sanctified, an unholy thing; nor do
despite unto my Spirit of grace. 30, 31.
For vengeance is mine, I will recompense; yea, I will judge my people; It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

2. Of Vows to God.
Eccl. 5.4.
When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he has no pleasure
in fools. Pay that which thou have vowed; Deu. 23.21.
The Lord thy God will surely require it of thee, and it would be sin in thee.

3. Of Promises and Covenants to Men.
23.
That which is gone out of thy Lips, thou shall keep and perform to God, and to
Men, lest thou be excluded my holy Hill, Psalm. 15.14.
and suffer alike Judgment with King Zedekiah; for shall he escape that does
such things? Or shall he break the Covenant, Eze. 17.15.
and be delivered. Surely where the King dwells that made him King, 16.
whose Oath he despised, and whos^ Covenant he break, even with him in the
midest of Babylon shall he die.

A Dehortation from Covetousness.
Deu. 5.21.
Thou shall not desire thy Neighbors Wife* neither shall thou covet thy
Neighbors House* his Field, 1. In the heart.
or his Man servant, or his Maidservant, his Ox, or his Ass, or any thing
that i^ thy Neighbors. Hab. 2.9.
Woe unto him that covered an evil covetousness to his House, that he man set
his Nest on high, that he may be delivere^ from the power of evil. Pro. 28.20.
He that makes ha^ to be rich, 2. In Action.
shall not be innocent. No covetou^ Man, Ephesians. 5.5.
(who is an Idolater) has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, Luke
12.15. Jer. 22.13.
and of God. Take heed, and beware of Covetousness. For woe unto him that
builds his House by unrighteousness, 1 Kings 21.19.
and his Chambers by wrong. Beware of Ahab's sin, and his punishment.

2 ly. From worldlyness and carking ^ares.
Mat. 6.24.
No Man can serve two Masters, for either he will hate the one, and love the
other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve
God and Mammon. Therefore I say unto you, 25.
take no thought for your Life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor
yet for your body what ye shall put on; Is not the life more than meat? and the
body than raiment? 32.
For after all these things the Gentiles seek; for your Heavenly Father
knows, that ye have need of all these things. Wherefore having food and
raiment, Heb. 13.5.
be therewith content; for I have said I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee. 1 Timothy 6.9.
They that will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many
foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown Men in destruction and perdition; 10.
for the love of money is the root of all evil; which while some coveted after,
they have erred from the faith; and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows. 1 John 2.15.
Wherefore love not the World, nor the things that are in the World; if any Man
love the World, the love of the Father is not in him.

3 ly. From Nigardness.
Pro. 11.14.
There is that scatters, and yet increases; and there is that withholds
more than is meet, and yet tends to poverty. The liberal Soul shall be made
fat; 15.
and he that waters shall be watered also himself. Eccl. 6.1.
There is an evil which I have seen under the Sun, and it is common among Men;
A Man to whom God has given riches, wealth and honor, so that he wanted
nothing for his Soul of all that he desires; 2.
yet God gives him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger eats it; this is
vanity, and it is an evil disease.

A Dehortation from Idleness.
1 Cor. 7.20.
Let every Man abide in the same Calling in which he was called. Mat. 20.6.
Let none stand idle all the Day; 1. By having no Calling, or by neglecting a
Caliing.
Pro. 19.15.
For an idle Soul shall suffer hunger; And by much sloathfulness the building
decays, Eccl. 10.18.
and through idleness of the hands the House droppeth through. Ezekiel. 16.49.
Behold, this was the iniquity of Sodom, abundance of idleness. Avoid ye
therefore their sin, Genesis 19.15.
lest ye be consumed, 24.
as was that City; upon which the Lord rained Brimstone and Fire from the Lord
out of Heaven.

2. Idleness in private Persons.
Pro. 22.29.
See thou a Man diligent in his business, he shall stand before Kings; he
shall not stand before mean Men: Pro. 23.21.
But drowsiness shall cloth a Man with rags. Romans 12.11.8.
Wherefore be not sloathful in business, as private Persons.

3. Idleness in public Persons.
Romans 12.8.
Let him that Rules do it with diligence; lest when I come and reckon with you,
Mat. 25.19.
the sloathful and unprofitable Servant be cast into utter Darkness, where
shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth. 30.


The Dehortation of the Lord Jesus from sinful Passions.
Ephesians. 4.26.
Be ye angry, but sin not; let not the Sun go down upon your wrath. Like Simeon
and Levy, Genesis 49.5.
Instruments of Cruelty are in their habitations; 6.
for in their anger they slew a Man, and in their self-will they dug down a
wall. Cursed be their anger, 7.
for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel. I will divide them in
Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. Therefore be not hasty in Spirit to be
angry; Eccl. 7.9:
for anger rests in the bosom of fools.

2. From causless Anger.
Mat. 5.29.
Whosoever is angry with his Brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the
Judgment.

A Dehortation from sinful hatred.
Gal. 5.20.
One of the works of the Flesh is hatred; therefore thou shall not hate thy
Brother in thy heart. 1. Of Persons.
Lev. 19.17. Psalm. 34.21.
They that hate the righteous shall be desolate. 1 John 2.9.
He that faith he is in the Light, and hates his Brother, is in darkness even
until now. 1 John 3.5.
Whosoever hates his Brother is a Murderer, and ye know, that no Murderer has
Eternal Life abiding in him. 2. Of good things.
Mic^. 3.2.
Woe to them that hate good, and love evil. All they that hate me, Pro. 8.36.
love death.

A Dehortation from Malice.
1 Pet. 2.1.
Use not your liberty for a Cloak of maliciousness: 16.
But let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil-speaking,
be put away from you; Ephesians. 4.31.
with all malice; and be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one
to another, even as God, for my sake, has forgiven you.

A Dehortation from strife and contention.
Pro. 17.14.
The beginning of strife, is, as when one lets out Water; therefore leave off
contention before it be meddled with. Romans 13.13.
Walk honestly, as in the Day, Phil. 2.3.
not in strife, and envying. Let nothing be done through strife; For where
strife and envying is, Jam. 3.16.
there is confusion, and every evil work.

A Dehortation from Envy.
Jam. 4.5.
The Spirit that is in you lusts to envy, which slays the silly one, and is
the rottenness of the bones. Job 5.2.
Charity suffers long, envyeth not. Pro. 14.30
Wherefore, laying aside all malice, and all guile, 1 Cor. 13.4.
and hypocrisies, and envies, and evil speaking; 1 Pet. 2.1.
2.
as new born babes, desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that ye may grow
thereby.

A Dehortation from Revenge.
Romans 12.19.
Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath; for
it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay it, says the Lord. 20.
Therefore, if thine Enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink; for
in so doing, thou shall heap Coals of Fire on his head. 21.
Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.

A Dehortation from Pride.
Pro. 8.13.
Pride and arrogance, and the evil way, and the froward mouth, do I hate. Only
by pride comes contention, Pro. 13.10.
and where it comes, there comes shame. 1. Branch from ^piritual Pride.
Pro. 11.2.
But with the lowly is wisdom. Wherefore let him that stands, Romans 11.20.
take heed lest he fall. 1 Cor. 10.12.
Be not high-minded, but fear. For, who makes thee to differ from another?
And, what have thou, that thou have not received? Now, if thou did receive
it, why do thou glory, 1 Cor. 4.7.
as though thou had not received it?

2. Branch from Worldly Pride.
Jer. 9.13.
Thus says the Lord, let not the wise Man glory in his wisdom; neither let the
mighty Man glory in his might; let not the rich Man glory in his riches: 14.
But let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows
me, that I am the Lord that exercise loving kindness, Judgment and
righteousness in the Earth. For in these things I delight, says the Lord. 2
Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. Isa. 14.12. Genesis 3.6. Psalm. 10.4.
Pride cast the Angels out of Heaven. Your first Parents out of Paradise; and
the wicked World into Hell. For the wicked, through the pride of his
countenance, will not seek after God.

3. Branch from Ambition.
Behold, that which I have built, I will break down; Jer. 45.4.
and that which I have planted, will I pluck up. 5.
And seek thou great things for thy self? Joh. 4.44.
seek them not. For, behold I will bring evil upon all flesh. How can ye
believe, who receive honor one of another, 1 Cor. 10.17.
and seek not the honor which comes from God only. He that glories, 18.
let him glory in the Lord; for not he that commends himself is approved, but
whom the Lord commends. Mat. 11.29.
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest to your
Souls. Mat. 18.4.
Whosoever shall humble himself, as a little Child, the same is greatest in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Whosoever exalts himself, Mat. 23.12.
shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself, shall be exalted. (Be ye
not ambitious like Absalon, 2 Samuel 18.9.14.
and Adonijah, least ye partake of their Judgments and violent deaths. 1 King.
2.25.
)

A Dehortation from Ingratitude.
Ephesians. 5.20. Psalm. 147.1.
Give thanks always for all things unto God, and the Father in my Name; For it
is good to sing praise unto our God; 1. Toward God.
for it is pleasant, and praise is comely. 2 Cor. 32.25.
Be ye not therefore guilty of the great sin of ingratitude, with Hezekiah,
Luke 17.17.
and the nine Lepers, who rendered not again according to the benefits done
unto them. 18.


2. Toward Men.
2 Timothy 3.1.
In these last times, Men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous,
boasters, proud, blaspheamers, 2.
disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection,
despisers of those that are good. 3.
Traitors, from such turn away. 4.
Whosoever rewards evil for good, Pro. 17.13.
evil shall not depart from his House; Example in King Joash, who remembered not
the kindness which Jehojada, 2 Cro. 24.22.
the Father of Zacharias had done unto him, but slew his Son. 25.
Therefore his Servants conspired against him, for the blood of the Son of
Jehojada the Priest, and slew him on his Bed.

A Dehortation from sensuality, or ^oluptuousness.
Whosoever loves pleasure shall be a poor man; he that loves Wine and Oil shall
not be rich. Pro. 21.17.
Woe unto the Land whose Princes eat in the morning; Eccl. 10.16.
17.
But blessed is the Land whose Princes eat in due season; for strength, and not
for drunkenness, Luke 6.25.
Woe unto you that are full; for ye shall hunger. Woe unto you that laugh now;
for ye shall mourn and weep, Jam. 5.1.
For your miseries that shall come upon you. Your riches are corrupted, 2.
and your Garments are Moth-eaten; your Gold and Silver is cankered, 3.
and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh,
5.
as it were Fire: ye have lived in pleasure on the Earth, 8.9*
and been wanton; ye have nourished your hearts, as in a Day of slaughter, 2
Pet. 2*13.
Behold the Judge stands before the Door; and my coming draws nigh, when
all such shall receive the reward of unrighteousness; 1 Timothy 5.6.
As they that count it pleasu^e, to riot in the Day time, 13.
and living in pleasure, are dead whilst they are alive. Jude 12.
Spots they are, and blemishes, sporting themselves with their own deceivings,
while they feast with you, feeding themselves without fear; Clouds they are
without Water, 13.
Trees, whose fruit withers; without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by thee
roots. Raging Waves of the Sea, foaming our their own shame, wandering Stars, to
whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. 17.
Beloved, remember the words which were spoken before of my Apostle, who told
you there should be mockers in these last times, 18.
who should walk after their own ungodly lusts: 19.
These be they who separate themselves, 2 Timothy 3.4.
sensual, having not the Spirit. Lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God. 2
Pet. 3.3.
These are those scoffers in these last days, walking after their own lust; and
saying, Where is the promise of his coming? 4.
For, since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the
beginning of the Creation. 1 Cor. 15.32.
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. Mat. 24.38.
For as in the Days that were before the Flood, they were eating and drinking,
marrying and giving in marriage; and knew not until the Flood came, and took
them all away; 39,
so shall also my coming be. 42.
Watch therefore, and pray, lest ye fall into temptation; Mat. 26.41.
For you know not what hour your Lord does come. Mat. 24.44.
Therefore be you ready, Mat. 24.48.
for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son of Man comes. 49.
But if with that evil Servant, you shall say in your hearts, my Lord deferreth
his coming, 50.
and shall smite your Fellow Servants, and eat and drink with the drunken, I
will come in an hour which you are not aware of, 51.
and cut you asunder, and appoint you your portion with the Hypocrites; there
shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Eccles. 1.1.
Solomon the Preacher, the Son of David King of Israel, Eccles. 2.9.
was great, and increased more than all that were before him in Jerusalem, 10.
who kept not from his Eyes whatsoever they desired, and withheld not his
Heart from any joy; For his Heart rejoiced in all his Labors, 11.
whose wisdom also remained with him; when he looked on all the works that his
Hands had wrought, and the Labor he had labored to do (as is before at large
enumerated by him) makes this acknowledgment: Eccles. 1.2.
Behold, All is Vanity, and Vanity of Vanities, and Vexation of Spirit, and
there was no profit under the Sun. Therefore love not the World, 1 John 2.15.
nor the things of the World; 16.
For all that is in the World, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and
the Pride of Life, is not of the Father, but i^ of the World. And the World
passes away, and the Lusts therefore; 17.
but he that does the will of God, abides for ever.

A Dehortation from Inconstancy.
Gal. 6.8.
Be ye not weary of well-doing; for in due season you shall reap, if ye faint
not. He that sows to the Flesh, 9.
shall of the Flesh rea^ Corruption. But he that sows to the Spirit, shall of
the Spirit reap life everlasting. Are there any so foolish, Gal. 3.3.
as to begin in the Spirit, and to think to be made perfect in the Flesh?

1. Branch of Inconstancy, Backsliding.
If any Man have run well; let none hinder you, Gal. 5.7.
that you should nor obey the truth. Remember Lot's Wife. Luke 17.32.
No Man having put his Hand to the Plough, Luke 9.62.
and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of God; Heb. 10.38.
If any Man draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. But ye are not of
them that draw back, 39.
unto Perdition; but of them that believe, unto the saving of the Soul. Pro
14.14.
The back-slider shall be filled with his own ways; but a good Man shall be
satisfied from himself. Jer. 3.22.
Let backsliding* Children return, and I will heal their backslidings, Hos^.
14.4.
and will love them freely.

2. Branch is Apostasy.
Mat. 12.43.
When the unclean Spirit is gone out of a Man, he walks through dry places,
seeking rest, 44.
and finds none. Then he faith, I will return unto my House, from whence I
came out; and when he is come, he finds it empty, swept, 45.
and garnished: Then goes he, and takes with himself, seven other Spirits,
more wicked than himself, and they enter in, and dwell there: And the last
state of that Man, is worse than the first. 2 Pet. 2.20.
For if, after Men have escaped the pollutions of the World, through the
knowledge of (Me) the Lord and Savior, they are again entangled therein, and
overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the beginning: 21.
For it had been better for them, not to have known the way of righteousness,
then after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandments delivered
unto them: 22.
But it is happened unto them, according to the true Proverb; The Dog is turned
to his own Vomit again; And the Sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the
Mire. Joh. 15.5.
I am the Vine, ye are the Brances, he that abides in Me, and I in him,
brings forth much fruit; for without me ye can do nothing. 6.
If a Man abide not in me, he is cast out, as a Branch, and is withered, and
Men gather them, and they are cast into the Fire, and they are burned. As the
Father has loved me, 9.
so have I loved you; continue you in my love. Joh. 8.31.
If ye continue in my Word, then are ye my Disciples indeed. And ye shall know
the truth, 32.
and the truth shall make you free. Jam. 1.25.
Whosoever looks into the perfect Law of Liberty, and continues therein, he
being not a forgetful Hearer, but a doer of the work, this Man shall be blessed
in his deed. I am the Lord, Jer. 17.13.
the hope of Israel; all that forsake Me, shall be ashamed, and they that
depart from Me, shall be written in the Earth, because they have forsaken me,
the Lord, the Fountain of living Waters. Mat. 10, 22.
But he that endures unto the end, shall be saved.

3. Branch of Inconstancy, is the sin against the holy Ghost.
1 John ^.16.
If any Man see his Brother sin a sin, which is not unto Death, he shall ask,
and I will give him life, for them that sin not unto Death. There is a sin unto
Death; I do not say, that he shall pray for it. Heb* 6.4.
For it is impossible for those, who were once enlightened, and have tasted of
the Heavenly Gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted
the good Word of God, 5.
and the Powers of the World to come; 6.
If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto Repentance, seeing they
crucify unto themselves (Me) the Son of God afresh, and put Me to an open
shame. For the Earth which drinks in the Rain, 7.
which comes often upon it, and brings forth Herbs meet for them, by whom it
is dressed, receives blessing from God; But that which bears Thorns and
Briars, 8.
is rejected, and is nigh unto Cursing, whose end is to be burned. Heb. 10.26.
If then ye sin wilfully, after that ye have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin; but a certain fearful looking
for of Judgment, 27.
and Fiery indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries. 28.
He that despised Moses Law, died without mercy, under two or three witnesses;
29.
Of how much soarer punishment suppose ye, shall be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot (Me) the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the
Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite
unto my spirit of grace? Mat. 12.31.
Wherefore I say unto you, that all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven unto men; But the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be
forgiven unto Men. 32.
And whosoever speaks a word against (Me) the Son of Man, it shall be
forgiven him; but whosoever sins against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him, neither in this World, nor in the World to come. Heb. 6.9.
But beloved, I am persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany
Salvation, though I thus speak. Pray therefore that you may be kept back from
presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19.13.
and that they may not have dominion over you: So shall you be innocent from
the great transgression.

Pro. 3.1.
My Children, forget not my Law, but let your hearts keep my Commandments; The
Preface to the Counsels of the Lord Jesus.
For length of Days, 2.
and long life, and peace shall they add unto you. Romans 12.11.
Be not slothful in business, 1. As to Diligence (...) our Calling.
but fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord.

Genesis 5.24. Genesis 6.9. Heb. 11.27. Ephesians. 5.8. Phil. 3.16. 1 John 1.3^ 2 Pet. 1.3.
1 Cor. 6.7.
As Enoch and Noah walked with God; and Moses seeing him who is invisible; 2. To
Holy walk^^g with God.
So walk you as Children of the Light, and by the same Rule, since your
fellowship is with the Father and the Son. And you are made partakers of the
Divine nature, and being joined unto me, are one Spirit.

Pro. 4.20.
My Children, attend to my words, incline your Ears unto my sayings; 21.
let them not depart from your Eyes, keep them in the midest of your hearts.

1 John 2.4.
These things write I unto you, that ye sin not; 3. Against Sin.
and that your joy may be full: And if any of you sin, 1 John 1.4.
I am your Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2.1.2.
and the Propitiation for your sins. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit
sin, 1 John 3.9.
for his Seed remains in him. Have respect therefore to all my Commandments,
Psalm. 119.6.
And keep your selves from your Iniquity. Psalm. 18.23.
Repent and turn from all your transgressions, 2 Cor. 10.7.
with a godly sorrow not to be repented of; Ezekiel. 18.30. Psalm. 119.136.
So iniquity shall not be your ruin. Yea, let Rivers of Waters run down your
Eyes, because Men keep not my Law.

Counsel against Temptation.
Luke 21.36.
Watch and pray always, lest you run into temptation; Mat. 26.41.
through (Me) that strengthens you, you shall be able to do all things; Phil.
4.13.
And be more than Conquerors; and saved from your Enemies, Romans 8.37.
Luke 1.71.
and from the hand of all that hate you.

Counsel against evil Company.
Ephesians. 5.11.
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, Pro. 4.24.
nor go in the way of evil Men; but rather reprove them. To set God always
before us.
Psalm. 16.8.
Set me always before you; 1 These. 5.10.
And whether you sleep or wake, be together with me. 1 Timothy 6.12.
Lay hold on Eternal Life, since the things that are seen, And to have an Eye
to Eternity.
are temporal; but the things that are not seen, 2 Cor. 4.28.
are eternal. For you know, 2 Cor. 5.1.
that if your Earthly House of this Tabernacle was dissolved, you have a
building of God, an House not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens.

Counsel as to the watching our hearts.
Psalm. 119.113.
Hate evil thoughts, and let not vain thoughts lod within you. Jer. 4.14.
Keep your heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life; Pro.
4.23.
Yea, out of your hearts proceed evil thoughts, Mat. 15.19.
Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, Romans 11.20.
False-witness, Blasphemies. Be not high-minded, but fear. For God resists
the proud, Jam 4.6.
but gives grace to the humble. Be angry, Ephesians. 4.26.
but sin not; Let not the Sun go down up on your wrath. Heb. 13.5.
Let your Conversation be without Covetousness, and be content with such things
as ye have; For I have said I will never leave thee, 1 Pet. 3.4.
nor forsake thee. A meek and quiet Spirit is in the sight of God, of much
Price.

As to the keeping of a good Conscience.
Act. 24.16.
Exercise your selves to have always a conscience void of offense, toward God,
and toward Men. 1 Timothy 4.2.
Speak not lies in Hypocrisy, not have your understandings darkened, Ephesians. 4.18.
nor your Consciences feared with an hot Iron. Happy are you, Romans 14.22.
if you condemn not your selves in those things which you allow; since he that
doubts is condemned: 23.
For, whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Have your Hearts sprinkled from an
evil Conscience; Heb. 10.^2.
And follow after the things which make for peace, Romans 14.19.
and things wherewith one may edify one another. Not to offend a Brothers
Conscience.
20.
It is good neither to eat Flesh, nor to drink Wine, nor any thing whereby your
Brother stumbleth, 21.
or is offended, or is made weak.

Counsel as to the wel^rdering of our Tongues.
Tit. 3.2.
Speak evil of no Man. Take heed to your ways, Psalm. 39.1.
that you offend not with your Tongues.

Isa. 59.7.
Let not wasting and destruction be in your Paths, Counsel as to the right using
of our ^states, Gifts, and Talents.
Luke 15.13.
nor wast your substance among Harlots. Wherefore do ye spend Money, for that
which is not Bread? Isa. 55.2.
And set your Eyes upon that which is not? Pro. 23.5.
If riches increase, set not your Hearts on them; For riches certainly make
themselves Wings, and fly away, as an Eagle toward Heaven. Eccles. 1.2.
Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity. Pro. 3.9.
Therefore honor the Lord with your substance, and with the first fruits of
your increase. Eccl. 11.1.
Cast your Bread upon the Waters; for after many Days you shall find it. 2.
Give a portion to seven, and also to eight. He that has pity on the poor,
Pro. 19.17.
lends unto the Lord; And that which ye have given, will he repay you again.
Luke 16.9.
Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness; that when ye
fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations. Luke 11.41.
Give Alms of those things you have, and lend, Luke 6.35.
looking for nothing again. Say not to your Neighbor, Go, and come again to
morrow I will give, Pro. 3.28.
when you have it by you. Nor shut your hands from your poor Brethren; Deuteronomy.
15.7.
Lest, Mat. 25.41.
I say unto you, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels; For I was an hungry, and ye gave me no Meat; 42.
I was thirsty, and ye gave me no Drink. I was a stranger, and ye took me not
in; 43.
Sick, and in Prison, and ye Visited me not. 45.
For inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these my poor Members, ye
did it not to me.

Counsel as to the well-improving of our time.
Ephesians. 5.15.16.
See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise, Redeeming the
time: Eat not the Bread of Idleness, Pro. 31.27.
for the idle Soul shall suffer hunger: Pro. 19.15.
And through idleness of the hands, Eccl. 10.18.
the House droppeth through.

Counsel against sinful and unprofitable Discourses.
1 Timothy 6.20.
Shun profane and vain babbling, for they will increase to more ungodliness;
Ephesians. 4.29.
And let no corrupt communication come out of your Mouths, but that which is
good, to the use of edifying, that it may minister Grace to the hearers. Mat.
12.37.
For by your words you shall be justified, and by your words you shall be
condemned; 36.
And of every idle word that you shall speak, you shall give an account thereof
at the Day of Judgment.

Counsel against profane swearing.
Mat. 5.34.
Swear not at all; But let your Communication be yea, yea; nay, nay; for
whatsoever is more than these, 37,
comes of evil. Let your light so shine before Men, that they may see your
good works, 16.
and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.

Counsel against sluggishness.
Pro. 20.13.
Love not sleep, lest you come to poverty.

Counsel to watch over and reprove our Neighbors, and patiently to receive
r^proofs.
Lev. 19.17.
You shall not hate your Brother in your heart; you shall in any wise rebuke
your Neighbor, Psalm. 141.5.
and not suffer sin upon him. Let the righteous reprove you; for it shall be an
excellent Oil that shall not break your heads.

Gal. 6.10.
As you have opportunity, do good to all Men; Counsel to Charity.
especially to them who are of the household of faith.

Counsel concerning your Tables.
Luke 21.34.
Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting, and drunkenness. 1 Cor. 10.31.
Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the glory
of God. Ephesians. 5.20.
Give thanks always for all things; 1 Timothy 4.4.
for every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be
received with thanksgiving.

Concerning your Callings.
1 Cor. 7.20.
Let every one of you abide with God in the same Calling wherein he was called;
Being not slothful in business, 24.
serving the Lord. For he that is slothful in his work, Romans 12.11. Pro. 18.9.
is Brother to him that is a great waster. Go not beyond, and defraud your
Brother in any matter; 1 These. 4.6.
for I am the avenger of all such; Col. 3.9.
neither lie one unto another.

Counsel concerning your Relations.
Ephesians. 6.1.
Children, obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right. 2.
Honor your Father and Mother, which is the first Commandment with promise.
1. Of Children toward their Parents.
3.
That it may be well with you, and you may live long on the Earth. Parents
provoke not your Children to wrath, 2. Of Parents to their Children.
but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Husbands drink
Waters out of your own Cistern; 3. Of Husbands to their Wives.
Pro. 5 15.18.20. Ephesians. 5.25.
Rejoice with the Wise of your Youth. Embrace not the bosom of a stranger.
Love your Wives; as I also loved my Church, and gave my self for it. 28.
So ought you to love your Wives, even as your own Bodies. He that loves his
Wife, 31.33.
loves himself, for they two are one Flesh. Dwelling with them according to
knowledge, 1 Pet 3.7.
and honoring them as the weaker Vessels, and as being Heirs together of the
grace of Life.

4. Of Wives to their Husbands.
1 Pet 3* 3.
Wives, let your adorning be not that which is outward, but that of the hidden
Man of the heart. Eph^ 5.22. 23.
See that you reverence your Husbands, submitting your selves unto them, as
unto the Lord, 24.
and as to your head; For as my Church is subject unto Me, as its Head; so be
you to your own Husbands, in every thing. Love your Husbands, Tit. 2.4. 5. 1
Pet. 3.4.
love your Children; be discreet, chaste, and keepers at home, And of a quiet
and meek Spirit.

5. Of Servants.
Ephesians. 6.5.
Servants, be obedient to them that are your Masters, according to the Flesh,
with fear and trembling, in singleness of your hearts, as unto Me; Tit. 2.9.10.
Ephesians. 6.6.
not answering again, nor purloyning, but showing all good fidelity. Not with
Eye-service, as Men-pleasers; but as my Servants, doing the will of God from
the heart; with good will, 7.
doing service as to Me, not to Men. Knowing that whatsoever any good thing any
of you does, 8.
the same shall ye receive of Me, whether ye be bond or free.

6. Of Masters.
Ephesians. 6.9.
Masters, do the same things unto your Servants, forbearing threatening, knowing
that your Master is in Heaven, neither is there respect of Persons with him.

Col. 4.5.
Walk in wisdom toward them that are without; And let your speech be always
with grace seasoned with Salt, that you may know how to answer every Man; 6.
That if any Man obey not the Word, they may without the Word be won by your
Conversation; And that they of the contrary part may be ashamed, Tit. 2.8.
as having no evil thing to say of you. Psalm. 101.2
Behave your selves wisely in a perfect way. Keep your Mouths as with a Bridle,
Psalm. 31.1.
while the wicked are before you. Mat. 7.6.
Cast not your Pearl before Swine; nor give that which is holy unto Dogs, lest
they trample them under their Feet, and turn again, and rent you. Follow not a
Multitude to do evil; If Sinners entice you, Exodus 23.2. Pro. 1.10.
consent you not; walk you not in the way with them; 15.
Refrain your Feet from their Path. Romans 14.13.
Judge not one another, nor put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in
your Brothers way. Luke 17.1.
It is impossible, but that offenses will come, but woe unto them through whom
they come.

Counsel as to your Carriage toward those within.
1 Pet. 3.8.
Be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another; love as Brethren, be
pitiful, be courteous; 9.
not rendering evil for evil, nor railing for railing; but contrariwise
blessing.

Counsel as to the Observation of God's mercies, works, and providence.
Psalm. 77.11.
Remember my works and wonders of old, and forget not all my benefits; 12.
Meditate also, and talk of my doings, Psalm. 103.2.
who has forgiven your iniquities, and healed all your Diseases, and redeemed
your lives from destruction; who crowns you with loving kindness, 3.
and tender mercies; 4.
who satisfies your Mouths with good things, so that your Youth is renewed
like the Eagles: 5.
who has heard your supplications, Psalm. 6.9.
and received your Prayers.

Counsel to attend your answer, and return of Prayer.
Isa. 21.8.
Stand continually on your Watchtower, and hearken what I the Lord (that
hears Prayer) will say unto you. Psalm. 85.8.
You shall call upon Me, Psalm. 91.15.
and I will answer; Yea, before you call, I will answer. Isa. 65.24.


Heb. 12.5.
My Children, despise not my chastning, nor faint when you are rebuked of Me;
Counsel as to our behavior under afflictions and persecutions.
For whom I love, 6.
I chasten, and scourge every Son whom I receive. If you endure chastning, I
deal with you as with Sons; 7.
For, what Son is he whom the Father chastneth not? 8.
But if ye be with. out Chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye
Bastards, 10.
and not Sons. Your Fathers chasten you after their own pleasure, but I for
your profit, that you may be partakers of my Holiness. 11.
No chastning for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous; Nevertheless,
afterward it yields the peaceable fruits of righteousness, unto them that
are exercifed thereby. 2 Timothy 3.12.
All that will live godly in me, shall suffer persecution. 2 Cor. 1.5.
But as my sufferings abound in you, so your Consolations abound by Me. 1 Pet.
4.14.
For the Spirit of Glory, and of God, rests upon you. 2 Cor. 4.17.
And your light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for you a far
more exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory. 2 Timothy 2.12.
For, if you suffer with me, you shall also Reign with Me. Lift up therefore
the Hands that hang down, Heb. 12.12.
and feeble Knees, and make straight Paths for your Feet. 4.
Ye have not resisted unto blood, striving against Sin. Wherefore consider me
the Captain of your Salvation, Heb. 2.10
that was made perfect by sufferings, and that endured such contradiction of
sinners against my self, Heb. 12.3.
lest you be weary and faint in your minds; Mat. 10.24.
For the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord.

Gal. 5.1.
Stand fast therefore in that liberty, in which I have made you free; Counsel as
to the right use of our Christian Liberty.
13.
only use not your liberty for an occasion to the Flesh, nor to the offense of
your weak Brother; Romans 14 21.
but by love serve one another: All things are lawful to you, but all things
are not convenient. 1 Cor. 6.12.


Against the abusing of grace.
Romans 6.1.
Continue not in sin, that Grace may abound; Nor do evil, Romans 3.8.
that good may come, whose damnation is just; neither turn my Grace into
Lasciviousness. Jude 4.


To the Duties of prayer, self-denial, bearing the Cross, and perseverance.
1 Pet. 4.7. Mat. 16.24. Mat. 10.22.
Watch unto Prayer; Deny your selves, and take up your Cross, and follow Me. He
that endures unto the end shall be saved.

Counsel to our growing in Grace.
2 Pet. 1.10.
Give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. Add to your Faith,
Virtue; to Virtue, 5.
Knowledge; to Knowledge, Temperance; 6.
to Temperance, Patience; and to Patience, 7.
Godliness; and to Godliness, Brotherly kindness; and to Brotherly kindness,
Charity. For if you do these things, 10.
ye shall never fall; For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly
into my everlasting Kingdom. 11.


The Preface to the Antidotes.
1 John 4.1.
Beloved, believe not every Spirit; but try the Spirits, whether they be of God;
because many false Prophets are gone out into the World. 1 Timothy 4.1.
And my Spirit speaks expressly, that in these latter times, some shall depart
from the faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils. 2.
Speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their Consciences seared with an hot Iron.
3.
Forbidding to marry; and commanding to abstain from Meats, which God has
created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe, and know the
truth. For every Creature of God is good, 4.
and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving. 2 These. 2.3.
Let no Man therefore deceive you by any means, neither by Spirit, nor by Word,
2.
nor by Letter; For that wicked one is now revealed, 8.
whom I the Lord have bgan to consume with the Spirit of my Mouth, and will
destroy with the brightness of my coming. Even him, 9.
whose coming has been after the working of Satan, with all Power, and Signs,
and lying Wonders. 10.
And with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; because
they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. 11.
And for this cause, God has sent them strong Delusions, that they should
believe a lie; 12.
That they all might be Damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. This is that Spirit of Antichrist, 1 John 4.3.
whereof you have heard, that it should come, and even now already it is in the
World.

2 These. 2.3.
That Son of Perdition, who opposes, and exalts himself, above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped. 4.
So that he, as God, sits in the Temple of God, (the Christian Church)
showing himself that he is God.

Antidotes given by the Lord Jesus against several Heresies and Errors.
The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them; Luke 22.25.
and they that exercise Authority upon them are called Benefactors; 26.
But ye shall not be so; But he that is greatest among you, let him be as the
Younger; and he that is Chief, as he that does serve. Mat. 23.8.
Be not ye therefore called ^abbi, for one is your Master, even Christ, and all
ye are Brethren: 1. Against the Popes Supremacy.
9.
And call no man your Father upon Earth, for one is your Father which is in
Heaven: 1 Pet. 5.3.
Nor be ye called Masters, nor be ye as Lords over Gods Heritage; For one is
your Master, Mat. 23.10.
even Christ: But he that is greatest amongst you, shall be your Servant; And
he that Exalts himself, 11.12.
shall be Abased; and he that shall humble himself, shall be Exalted.

2. Against the Popes Infallibility.
Luke 18.19. Eccles. 5.7.
None is Good save one, that is God: There is not a Just man upon Earth that
does Good, and sins not. 20.
Therefore, if ye say that ye have not sinned, 1 John 1.10.
you make God a Liar, and his Word is not in you. Jam 3.1.
Be not therefore many Masters, knowing ye shall receive the greater
Condemnation. 2.
For in many things ye offend all. Act. 15.39.
The Contention was sharp betwixt Paul and Barnabas, Act. 13 9.
that they parted asunder; And John fell down to Worship before the Feet of the
Angel. Rev. 22.8.
9. 1 Cor. 13.9.
Ye know in part, and Porphesie in part; Even F^^er who was first, and whom I
called Ceph^^, Mat. 10.2.
by Interpretation, a Stone; and who seemed to be a Pillar, Joh. 1.42.
walked not Uprightly according to the Truth of the Gospel; Gal. 2*9.14. Mat.
14.30.
And before the Cock mowed twice, denied Me thrice: How much more Fallible is
his pretended Successor?

3. Against the ^^pes Power to for^^ve Sins.
Mark 2.7. 2 These. 2.3.
Why also does this Man of sin both speak and act Blasphemies? Who can forgive
sins but God only? Exodus 34.6.
It is I the Lord, the Lord God, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin,
that have Power on Earth to forgive sins; Mark 2.1^*
And in Me ye have Redemption through my Blood, even Forgiveness of sins. Col.
1.13.


4. Against the ^^opes Power, (...) from (...) ^owes, and (...).
Mat. 5.33.
Again, ye have heard, that it has been said to them of Old time, Thou shall
not Forswear thy self; thou shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths; ^
And that if a man Vow a Vow unto the Lord, or Swear an Oath, to bind his Soul
with a Bond, He shall not break his Word; he shall do according to all that
proceeds out of his mouth: 2 Timothy 3.1.
But in these last days, the Beast that ascends out of the Bottomeless Pit,
Rev. 11.7.
is a Truce-breaker; and with perfidious Zedikiah, 2 Timothy 3.3. Ezekiel 17 16.
a Dispiser of Oaths, and a Breaker of Covenants; Mat. 5.19.
Whosoever therefore shall break one of the least of these my Commandments, and
shall teach men so, He shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven.

5. Against the Popes power, to add to the Scriptures; or to bind Conscience by
his Canons, and Decretals.
Pro. 30.5.
Every Word of God is pure; and the Law of the Lord is perfect, Psalm. 19.7.
that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly Furnished unto all good Works, 2 Timothy 3.17.
Add thou not unto his Words, lest he reprove thee, Pro. 30.6.
and thou be found a Liar. For, neither Peter, nor Paul, much less the Pope,
nor the False Prophet, Rev. 16.13.
the Roman Church) that other Beast coming out of the Earth, that has Two
Horns like a Lamb; Rev. 13.11.
but speaks like the Dragon, (the Devil) has any Dominion over your Faith; 2
Cor. 1.24.
But are Helpers of your Joy; For by Faith you stand: For though they, or an
Angel from Heaven, Gal. 1 8.
preach any other Gospel than that which my Apostles have preached unto you,
Deuteronomy. 12.32.
let him be accursed: Whatsoever things I command, observe to do them; you
shall not add nor diminish from them: Rev. 21.18.
For if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the Plagues
that are written in this Book; 19.
And if any man shall take away from the Words of the Book of this Prophecy,
God shall take away his part out of the Book of Life. Mark 7.7.
In Vain therefore do they worship Me, who teach for Doctrines the Commandments
of men, Mat. 15.8.
drawing near unto Me with their mouths, and Honoring Me with their Lips, Mark
7.9.
but their Hearts is Far from Me: Ful-well they reject the Commandments of
God, that they may keep their own Traditions. Let no man therefore Judge you in
meat or drink, Col. 2.16.
or in respect of an Holy Day; 21.
for you are dead with Me from the Rudiments of the World: Neither be you
subject to Ordinances, 23.
such as these; Touch not, Taste not, Handle not; which things indeed have a
show of Wisdom in Will Worship, and Humility, and neglecting of the body, not
in any Honor to the satisfying of the Flesh; For the Kingdom of God is not
Meat and Drink, Romans 14.17.
but Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Ephesians. 2.20.
And ye are built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, I my self
being the Chief corner Stone.

6. Against the ^^^es power, to ^^nnonize Saints, (...) to Excommuni^^^e any
from being Saints.
Joh. 6.44.
No man can come unto Me, except the Father which has sent Me draw him; and I
will raise him up at the last day; 37.
All that the Father gives Me, shall come unto Me, and him that comes to Me,
I will in no wise cast out; My Father which gave them Me is greater than all,
Joh. 10.29.
and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand. Zac. 11.17.^
VVoe then to the Idol Shepherds that leaves the Flock, and has the
Instruments of a Foolish Shepherd, 15.
in whom, now is fulfilled what I foretold by my Prophet; 16.
For I will raise up a Shepherd in the Land, which shall not visit those that
be cut off; neither shall seek the young One, nor heal that which is broken,
nor Feed that that stands still; but he shall eat the flesh of the Fat, and
tear their Claws in pieces: The Sword shall be upon his Arm, 17.
and upon his right Eye; his Arm shall be dried up, and his right Eye shall be
utterly darkened. Luke 10.20.
Wherefore rejoice, because your Names are written in Heaven; Mat. 10.28.
And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the Soul; But
rather fear Me, who am able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell: The
Foundation of God stands sure; 2 Timothy 2.19.
having this Seal, the Lord knows who are his (It is I only) that gives to
him that overcomes, Rev. 2^ 17.
to eat of the hidden Manna; and a white Stone, and in the Stone a new Name
written, which no man knows, saving he that receives it. But (this)
Diotrepsi^, Joh. 3.9.
who loves to have the Pre-eminence amongst them, receives Me not; neither
does he receive the Brethren, 10.
and forbideth them that would, and casts them (by his own power) out of the
Church. But he shall proceed no further, 2 Timothy 3.9.
for (his) folly shall be manifest to all Men.

7. Against the Popes Power to exercise the Civil Sword against those that
will not re^eive his Doctrine.
1 Timothy 3.2.
A Bishop then must be blameless, not given to Wine, no striker, not greedy of
filthy lucre, but patient, 3.
not a Brawler, not covetous. Even when Peter drew his Sword, Mat. 26.51.
(in a far better quarrel, then his pretended Successor fights for); 52.
I said unto him, put up again thy Sword into his place, for all they that
(thus without Commission from Me) take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword.
Rev. 13.10.
He that leads into Captivity, must go into Captivity; and he that (thus)
kills with the Sword, must be killed with the Sword. Rev. 16.5.6.
For I am righteous, who have judged thus. That they that have shed the blood
of the Saints and Prophets, shall have given them blood to drink, for they are
worthy. Mat. 24.48.
This is that evil Servant, which has said in his heart, my Lord delayeth his
coming; and does begin to smite his fellow servants, 49,
and to eat and drink with the drunken; I the Lord of this Servant, 50.
will come in a Day, when he looks not for me, and in an Hour that he is not
aware of; 51.
and will cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with Hypocrites, there
shall be wailing and gnashing of Teeth.

Antidotes given by the Lord Jesus against several Heresies and Errors of the
Apostate ^^^^^ane Church.
Romans 6.10.
I am he that died unto sin once: And by my own blood entered in once into the
holy place, Heb. 9.12.
having obtained Eternal Redemption for you; Heb. 7.27.
who need not Daily, as those High Priests, to offer up Sacrifice for my own
sins, and then for the Peoples: For this I did once, when I offered up my self.
Ezekiel 24.6.
Woe to the bloody City, that is filthy and polluted; Mystery Babylon the
great, Zep. 3.1^
the Mother of Harlots, and abominations of the Earth; Rev. 17.5.
That says to the wood of my (Cross) awake; 1. Against the Idolatry of the
Mass.
to the dumb Stone (and wafer Cake) it shall teach. Behold, it is laid over
with Gold and Silver, Hab. 2.19.
and there is no breath at all in the midst of it. Luke 22.19.
For although I took Bread, Mat. 26.28.
saying, This is my Body; and the Cup, and said, This is my Blood; Do this in
remembrance of me: And my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed;
Joh. 6.55.
I explained my self, 62.
and added, Does this offend you? What, and if ye shall see the Son of Man
ascended up, 63.
where he was before? It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits
nothing; the words that I speak unto you are spirit, and they are life. Heb.
10.11.
Every Priest therefore, of that Apostate Church, which daily minister, and
offer up oftentimes the same Sacrifices, which can never take away sins: 12.
But after I had offered one Sacrifice for sins, for ever, I sat down at the
right hand of God; 1 John 2^2.
I am the Propitiation for your sins.

2. Against the false Doctrine of Purgatory.
Heb. 1.3.
I by my self have purged your sins; and by one Offering, have perfected for
ever, those that are sanctified. Heb. 10.12.14. Heb. 10.16.17,
Yea, this is the Covenant that I have made with you; your sins and iniquities
will I remember no more. Now, where remission of these is, 18.
there is no more offering for sin: Much-less is there need of a
Purgatory-Fire, to purge the Souls of any redeemed ones. Enoch was translated,
Heb. 11.5.
that he should not see Death; 2 King. 2.11. Luke 16.22.
Elijah went up by a Whirlwind into Heaven; Lazarus the Beggar died, and was
carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom; The Thief dying, Luke 23.43.
was that Day with Me in Paradise. Rev. 14.13.
And blessed are they that dye in the Lord, that they may rest from their
Labors, Psalm. 9.17.
and their works follow them; But the wicked shall be turned into Hell. Where
is then to be found in God's Word, this third place, for the tormenting and
purifying of the Saints.

3. Against the Praying to, and worship of the Saints.
Psalm. 65.1.
I am he that hears Prayer; unto me shall all flesh come, 2.
unto me shall the Vow be performed. Psalm. 62.5.
Wait you therefore only upon God, for your Expectation is from him. You shall
worship the Lord your God, 1 Samuel 12.24.
and him only shall you serve. Mat. 4.10.
Then not Saints and Angels (as does the Roman Whore) The Woman arrayed in
Purple and Scarlet color, Rev. 17.16.
and decked with Gold and precious Stones, 4.
and Pearl, having a Golden Cup in her hand, full of abominations and
filthiness of her Fornication.

Eccl. 9.5.
Further, consider the Dead know not any thing, neither have they any more
reward; for the memory of them is forgotten: 6.
Also, their love, and their hatred, and their envy is now perished; neither
have they any more a portion, for ever in any thing done under the Sun. Isa.
63.16.
Doubtless God is your Father, though Abraham be ignorant of you, and Israel
acknowledge you not: Unto whom you have boldness, 2. Of Angels.
Ephesians. 3 12.
and access with confidence, by the faith of Me. Let no Man therefore beguile
you of your reward, Col. 2.18.
in Voluntary Humility, and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things,
which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind. Rev. 19.10.
An Angel, when John fell at his feet to worship him, said; See thou do it not;
I am thy fellow servants, and of thy Brethren, that have the testimony of Jesus,
worship God. Judge. 13.16.
And an Angel said to Manoath, if thou will offer a burnt-offering, thou must
offer it unto the Lord. Joh. 14.6.
I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no Man comes unto the Father, 1 Timothy
2.5.
but by Me, that one Mediator betwixt God and Men.

4. Against the worshipping of Pictures and Images.
Mar. 10.19.
You know the Commandments, Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or
any likeness of any thing, Exo. 20.4.
that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that is in the
Water under the Earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, 5.
nor serve them; For I the Lord, thy God, am a jealous God; Visiting the
iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation
of them that hate Me; 6.
And showing mercy unto thousands of them that love Me, and keep my
Commandments. Why then does the Beast, Rev. 13.1.
that rose up out of the Sea, having seven Heads, and ten Horns; and upon his
Horns, ten Crowns; and upon his Heads, the Names of Blasphemy; Rev. 14.9.
And those that worship him, and his Image, and receive his Mark in their
Forehead, or in their Hand, Reject the commandments of God, Mat. 7.9.
that they may keep their own Traditions? Blasphemously leaving out of their
Decalogue, in some of their Books, this Commandment? Joh. 3 19.
As hating the Light, because their deeds are evil. Isa. 40.18.
To whom will ye liken God? Or what likeness will ye compare with him? Isa.
42.8.
I am the Lord, that is my Name, and my Glory will I not give to another, nor
my praise to graven Images. They shall be turned back, 17.
they shall be greatly ashamed, Act. 17.25.
that trust in graven Images. God is not worshipped with Men's hands, as though
he needed any thing, seeing he gives to all, life, Isa. 46.6.
and breath, and all things. They lavish Gold out of the Bag, and weigh Silver
in the Balance, and hire a Goldsmith, and he makes it a God. Exodus 32* 4, 5,
6. Judge. 17.3. 4, 12, 13. 2 King. 12. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. Romans 1.21, 22, 23.
Did not the Israelites thus worship God in the Golden Calf at Horeb, In Mica's
Teraphim and Images, and in Jeroboam's Calves in Dan and Bethel? Yea, did not
the Heathens formerly, and do not the Pagans now, profess, that they worship
not their Idols, as believing them to be Gods? But they worship their Gods in
those Idol-Representations. Wherefore, confounded be all they that serve graven
Images, Psalm. 97.7.
that boast themselves of Idols. Worship him all ye Gods.

5. Against the false Doctrine of freedom from Original Sin.
Job 15.14.
What is Man, that he should be clean; and he that is born of a Woman, that he
should be righteous? Job 14.4.
Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one. Behold, you were
shapen in iniquity, Psalm. 51.5.
and in sin did your Mothers conceive you. Genesis 6.5.
And every Imagination of your Heart is evil, and evil continually: Yea, by
Nature you are all the Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. Ephesians. 2.1.
and dead in trespasses and sins. Who can say, I have made my Heart clean? Pro.
20.9.
I am pure from my sin? Eccl. 7.20.
There is not a just Man upon Earth, that does good, Job 2.3.
and sins not. If my Servant Job abhorred himself, Job 42.6.
and repented in Dust and Ashes; And David professes, that in my sight, Psalm.
143.2.
no Man living shall be justified; And Daniel confessed, Dan: 9.8.
to him belonged confusion of face, because he had sinned against Me; Act. 9.15.
And Paul, my chosen Vessel, cried out, O wretched Man that I am, Romans 17.24.
who shall deliver me from the body of this Death? In me, that is, Romans 7.18.
in my Flesh, there dwells no good thing; And my beloved John declares, 1 John 1.8.
if ye say you have no sin, ye deceive your selves, and the truth is not in
you; Yea, my self commanded my Apostles, and all my Saints, to acknowledge, that
when they have done all those things that are commanded them, Luke 17.10.
say, Ye are unprofitable Servants; We have done that which was our duty to do.
Dan. 7.8.
Then how dares that little Horn, that has a Mouth, speaking great things, and
makes War with the Saints, 21.
and for a time prevails against them, with his Abetters, presume to assert
and teach these damnable Doctrines? That all Children after Baptism, have no
Original Sin. And that in, and by nature, Man has a free will, and is able,
and may with some help of grace, keep and fulfill the whole Law; And not only
that some of them merit salvation, and justify themselves by their good works,
before God; but do super-errogate, and merit salvation for others also.

1 Cor. 1.31.
Wherefore, let him that glories, glory in the Lord; 6. Against the false
Doctrine concerning free will.
For it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs; Romans 9.16.
but of God that shows mercy. Romans 7.18.
To will, is present with me, says my Servant Paul; But how to perform that
which is good, Ephesians. 2.8.
I find not; For it is God that works in you, both to will and to do, of his
good pleasure. Romans 6.23. Joh. ^.25
And your faith is the gift of God; and so is Eternal Life. The Dead shall hear
the Voice of Me, the Son of God, and they that hear, shall live. For you has
God quickened, Col. 2.15.
together with me, being dead in sins and trespasses. 7. Against the false
Doctrine of Justification by Works.
Isa 64.6.
Wherefore say with my Prophet Isaiah, we are all as an unclean thing, and all
our righteousness are as filthy rags. In the Lord have I righteousness and
strength. Isa. 44.24.
In the Lord shall all the Seed of Israel be justified, 25.
Romans 3.20.
and shall glory. Therefore by the deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be
justified; For by the Law, 21.
is the knowledge of sin. But now the Righteousness of God without the Law is
manifested, being witnessed by the Law, and the Prophets. 22.
Even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of me unto all, and upon all
them that believe; For there is no difference, 23.
for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. 2 Cor. 5.21.
For, I which knew no sin, was made sin for you, that you might be made the
righteousness of God, which is in me; Romans 10.4.
Who am the end of the Law for righteousness, to every one that believes; And
am made of God, 1 Cor. 1.30.
to you wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.

The Preface of the Lord Jesus to his Antidotes, against several other Heresies
and Errors of the last times.
2 Timothy 3.1.
This know also, that in these last days, perilous times shall come; for Men
shall be lovers of themselves, 2.
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful,
unholy; without natural affection, truce breakers, 3.
false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good; 4.
Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures, more than lovers of God; 5.
having a form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof; from such turn
away. 6.
For of this sort, are they which creep into Houses, and lead Captive silly
Women, laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts; ever learning, 7.
and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Now as Jannes and
Jambres with-stood Moses, 8.
so do these also resist the truth, Men of corrupt minds, reprobate as
concerning the faith; 9.
But they shall proceed no further; for their folly shall be manifest to all
Men, as theirs was.

Antidotes, first against Atheism.
Psalm. 14.1.
The Fool has said in his heart, there is no God, they are corrupt, they have
done abominable works, there is none that does good. Therefore the wrath of God
is revealed from Heaven, Romans 1.18.
against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of Men; who hold the truth in
unrighteousness; 19.
Because, that which may be known of God, is manifest in them, For God has
showed it unto them; 20.
For the invisible things of him, from the Creation of the World, are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and
Godhead; so that they are without excuse.

2. Against the Heresy of (...).
Joh. 17.25.
O righteous Father, the World has not known Thee, Joh. 14.6.
but I have known Thee. No Man comes to the Father but by Me. No man has seen
God at any time; Joh. 1.18.
the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared
him. Joh: 14.9.
He that has seen Me, has seen the Father; Joh. 10.30.
For I and the Father am one Believe also my works, that ye may know and
believe, 38.
that the Father is in Me, and I in him. For in the beginning was I the Word,
Joh. 1.1.
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. All things were made by Me, 3.
and without Me was not any thing made, that was made. In me was life, 4.
and the life was the light of Men. Joh. 1.14.
I the Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst you, and ye beheld my glory, the
glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. Col. 1.15.
I am the image of the invisible God. By me were all things created, that are
in Heaven, 16.
and that are in Earth, visible and invisible; whether they be Thrones, or
Dominions, 17.
or Principalities, or Powers; All things were created by Me, and for Me; I am
before all things, and by me all things consist.

3. Against the Heresy of denying the Holy Ghost to be God.
1 John 5.7.
There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost; and these three are one.

Mat. 28.18.
I spoke unto my Apostles, and true Ministers, 19.
saying, Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. What high blasphemers then
are they, that deny the Holy Ghost to be God? Genesis 1.2.
The Spirit of God moved upon the Waters; And by the Word of the Lord were the
Heavens made, Psalm. 33.6.
and all the Host of them, by the Spirit of his Mouth. Joh. 15.26.
The Spirit of Truth, which proceeds from the Father, He shall testify of
Me. For he shall not speak of himself, Joh. 16.13.
but whatsoever he shall hear, 14.
that shall he speak; He shall glorify Me, for he shall receive of mine, and
shall show it unto you. Act. 5.3.
Peter said unto Ananias, In that thou have lied to the Holy Ghost, thou have
not lied unto Men, 4.
but unto God. Wherefore I say unto you, Mat. 12.31.
all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto Men, But the blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto Men. 2 Cor. 13.14.
The Grace of me, the Lord Jesus Christ, Joh. 16.17.
and the love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost, Joh 7.20.
the Comforter, Romans 15.16.
Preserver and Sanctifier, be with you all.

4. Against the Heresy of Community of Women.
1 These. 4.3.
This is the will of God, even your Sanctification, that you should abstain from
Fornication; 4.
and that every one of you should know how to possess his Vessel in
Sanctification, and Honor; 5.
Not in the lust of Concupiscence, as the Gentiles, that know not God:
Wherefore to avoid Fornication, 1 Cor. 7.2.
let every Man have his own Wife, and every Woman her own Husband.

Mat. 19.4.
Have you not read, that he that made Man in the beginning, 5. Against Poligamy.
made them Male and Female? Mal. 2.14.
I the Lord will bear witness against them, that deal treacherously with the
Wife of their Youth; Is she not thy Companion, and the Wife of thy Covenant?
And did not I make one? 15.
yet had I the residue of the Spirit. And wherefore one, that I might seek a
godly Seed. Therefore take heed to your spirit; and let none deal treacherously
against the Wife of his Youth. 2 Mal. 16.
For I the Lord God of Israel hate putting away. Mat. 9.9.
Therefore I say unto you, whosoever shall put away his Wife, except it be for
Fornication, and shall marry another, commits Adultery; and whosoever
marries her that is put away, commits Adultery. The Husband is the Head of
the Wife (not of Wives) as I am the Head of the Church. Ephesians. 5.23.
Let every one therefore, ^3.
in particular, so love his Wife, even as himself; And the Wife (not the Wives)
see that she reverence her Husband.

6. Against the forsaking and casting off Gospel Ordinances.
1 These. 5.19.
Despise not Prophesyings; quench not the Spirit. Luke 10.16.
He that hears you, (that are my true Ministers) hears Me; and he that
despises you, despises Me; and he that despises Me, despises him that sent
Me. Joh. 8.17.
He that is of God hears God's words. Joh. 10.3.
My Sheep hear my voice; He that knows God, 1 John 4.6.
hears my Ministers; but he that is not of God, hears them not. And as often
as you eat the Bread, 1 Cor. 11.24.
and Drink of the Cup in my Sacraments, 25.
ye do it in remembrance of Me, 26.
and show my Death, until I come. Pray without ceasing. 1 These. 5.17. Psalm.
14.4.
The workers of iniquity call not upon the Lord.

7. Against those who lay aside, and make useless the Moral Law.
Mat. 5.17.
Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets, I am not come to
destroy but to fulfill; 18.
For verily I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot, or one title
shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled. 19.
Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall
teach Men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven: But
whosoever shall do, and teach them the same, shall be called great in the
Kingdom of Heaven.

8. Against those who cast off, and despise Civil Government.
Mat. 22.21.
Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's; and unto God, the things that
are Gods. Let every Soul be subject unto the higher Powers; Romans 13.1.
For there is no Power, but of God; The Powers that be, 2.
are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God. And they that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation.
3.
For Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil; Will thou then not
be afraid of the Power? Do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of
the same. 4.
For he is the Minister of God to thee for good; but if thou do that which is
evil, be afraid, for he bears not the Sword in vain;for he is the Minister of
God, a Revenger, to execute wrath upon him that does evil. 5.
Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but for Conscience
sake. For this cause pay you Tribute also, 6.
for they are Gods Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing. 7.
Render therefore to all their dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due; Custom,
to whom Custom; Fear, to whom Fear; Honor, to whom Honor.

9. Against those who prefer a Light within them before, besides, and against
the Scriptures.
1 John 5.19.
The whole World lies in wickedness. And this is the Condemnation, Joh. 3.19.
that Light is come into the World, and that Men love darkness rather than
Light, because their deeds are evil. Romans 3.9.
Jews and Gentiles are all under sin, as it is written; 10.11.
There is none righteous, no not one; There is none that understands; There
is none that seeks after God. Luk^ 11.35
Take heed therefore, that the Light which is in you, be not darkness. Mat.
6.23*
If the Light that is in you, be darkness, how great is that darkness?

10. Against Enthusiasmes.
1 John 4.1.
Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they are of
God; Because many false Prophets are gone out into the World. If any Man shall
say unto you, Mat. 24.23.
Lo here is Christ, or there, believe it not; For there shall arise false
Christ's, 24.
and false Prophets, and shall show great signs, 25.
and wonders; insomuch, that if it were possible, they should deceive the very
Elect: 2 Cor* 11.13.
Behold, I have told you before, such are false Apostles, deceitful workers,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ; And no marvel, 14.
for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light; 15.
Therefore it is no great thing, if his Ministers also be transformed, as the
Ministers of Righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works. To the
Law, and to the Testimony; Isa. 8 20.
If they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no light in
them.

11. Against Anti-Scripturists.
2 Pet. 1.19.
This is that sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto you do well, that ye take heed,
as unto a Light that shines in a dark place, until the Day dawn, and the
Day Star arise in your Hearts; 2 Timothy 3.16.
Knowing this first, that all Scripture is given by Inspiration of God; 2 Pet.
1.20.
And that no Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation; For
the Prophesies came not in old time, by the will of Man; But holy Men of God
spoke, 21.
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

12. Against those who deny Infants Baptism, and the Lords Day to be a
Christian Sabbath.
Mat. 10.13.
When I was upon Earth, they brought young Children unto Me, that I should touch
them, and my Disciples (like some in these last days) rebuked those that
brought them; 14.
But when I saw it, I was much displeased, and said unto them, suffer little
Children to come unto Me, and forbid them not, For of such is the Kingdom of
God. 15.
Verily, I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God, as a
little Child, he shall not enter therein. And I took them up in my Arms, 16.
and put my Hands upon them, and blessed them. Baptism is now the only way for
little Children to come to the Lord Christ. Act. 2.3^.
The Promise is made to you, and to your Children, and to all that are afar of,
even as many as the Lord your God shall call. 1 Cor. 7.14.
The unbelieving Husband is Sanctified by the (believing) Wife, and the
unbelieving Wife is Sanctified by the believing Husband, or else were your
Children unclean, but now they are holy. Act. 16.15.1.33.
The Examples of the Apostles Baptizing whole Families, are of great force: And
the History of their practice, and of the first Churches planted by them, 1
Cor. 1.16.
is to be believed with an Historical faith, Act. 1.3. Luke 24.15. Joh.
20.19.26. Act. 2.1. 1 Cor. 16.2. Act. 20.7. Rev. 1.10.
and looked upon with much reverence, by all true Christians, both in this
point, and in the change of the Jewish Sabbath, to the Lord's Day; As holding
forth without doubt an Apostolical Institution.

13. Against those who deny propriety of Goods and Estates.
Number. 26.52.
The Lord spoke to Moses, saying, The Land shall be divided for an Inheritance,
according to the number of Names; 53.
to many thou shall give more Inheritance, 54.
and to few thou shall give the less inheritance. Exodus 10.15.17.
Thou shall not steal. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors Ox, nor his Ass,
nor any thing that is thy Neighbors. Give to him that asks; Mat. 5.43.
and from him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou away. For the poor you
have always with you. Mat. 26.11.
I charge you that are Rich in this World, 1 Timothy 6.17.
that you trust not in uncertain Riches, but in the living God; who gives you
all things richly to enjoy; 18.
that you do good, that you be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing
to communicate. Act. 4.34.
(When) as many as were possessed of Lands, or Houses, sold them, and brought
the price of the things which were sold, 35.
and laid them down at the Apostles Feet, (in that most sad time of
Persecution) and distribution was made unto every Man, according as he had
need; Act. 5.3.
(Even then) Peter said unto Ananias, why has Satan filled thy heart, to lie
to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the Land? Whilst it
remained, Was it not thy own? 4.
And after it was sold, Was it not in thine own Power? 1 Cor. 10.14.
Let no Man therefore seek his own, but every one another wealth: 2 These. 3.11.
For there are some that walk disorderly, 12.
working not at all, but are busybodies; Now them that are such, I command
that with quietness they work, and eat their own Bread; that they may have to
give to him that needs. Ephesians. 4.28.


14. Against Re^^tization.
Rev. 18.4.
Come out of Babylon my People; but count not the blood of the Covenant, Heb.
10.29.
by which ye were sanctified, an unholy thing. If ye have been once born again
of Water and the Spirit, Joh. 3.4.
Can a Man be so again born the second time? The Pharisees and Lawyers rejected
the counsel of God (as being not Baptized of John) against themselves. Luke
7.30.


Heb. 3.12.
Take heed lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing
from the holy Ordinance of God, Mat. 28.19.
Seeing you have been Baptized into the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
Gal. 3 2.
and of the Holy Ghost. This only would I know of such; Received you the
spirit, and your Convertion, by, and under the first Baptism, 3.
or your second? Having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect in the
Flesh? Gal. 5.19, 20, 21, 22.
Now the works of the Flesh, are hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife,
seditions, envyings; but the fruit of the Spirit, is love, joy, Gal. 5.15.
peace. If ye bite and devour one another; take heed that you be not consumed
one of another: And that it be not truly said of you, 1 John ^.1^.
by my Saints, They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had
been of us, they would, no doubt, have continued with us; But they went out,
that they might be made manifest, that they were not all of us. But continue
you in the things that ye have learned, and have been assured of, knowing of
whom ye have learned them; For evil Men, and Seducers, 2 Timothy 3.13.
shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived.

15. Against Schism, and uncharitable Separation from the Church.
Heb. 10.24.
Consider one another, to provoke to love, and to good works, not forsaking the
assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some is; 25.
But exhorting one another, and so much the more, as ye see the Day
approaching; Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace.
Ephesians. 4.3.
4.
For there is one Body, and one Spirit, even as you are called in one hope of
your Calling. 5.
One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; 6.
one God, and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.
1 Cor. 12.27.
Since then you are the Body of Christ, and Members in particular, 25*
let there be no Schism in the Body. 1 Cor. 11.18.
Now I hear that there be divisions amongst those that call themselves
Christians; 19.
For there must be Heresies also among you, that those that are approved, may
be manifest among you; Jude 17.
which were spoken before of my Apostles, 18.
that there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own
ungodly lusts. 19.
These be they, who separate themselves, sensual, having not the spirit. Now, 1
Cor. 1.10.
by my Name, I desire you, that you all speak the same thing, and that there be
no Divisions amongst you, but that you be perfectly joined together in the same
mind, and in the same judgment; 1 Cor. 3.4
If you say then, I am of Paul* 1 Cor. 1.12.
and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ, 13.
Are ye not carnal? Is Christ divided? 1 Cor. 3.5.
Who then is Paul? And who is Apollo? but Ministers, by whom ye believed, Even
as the Lord gave to every Man. 6.
If then such an one, as was Paul, plants; or as Apollo was, waters; It is
God that gives the increase. Therefore let no Man glory in Men; 11.
But do you mark them, Romans 16.17.
which cause Divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine you have learned,
18.
and avoid them; For they that are such, serve not Me, but their own Belly; and
by good words, and fair Speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple.

Phil. 4.8.
Finally, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, The
Conclusion of the Speech of the Lord Jesus.
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any Virtue, and if
there be any praise, 9.
think on these things; And those things which ye have both known and received,
Joh. 16.27.
and heard, and seen in me, do; And the Father himself that loves you, Phil. 4
8.
the God of Peace shall be with you.

Holy Father, (who hear me always) This is Life Eternal, The Prayer of the
Lord Jesus for ^ll his Elect.
Joh. 17.11. Joh. 11.42. Joh. 17.3.
to know Thee the only true God, and Me whom thou have sent; Keep through thy
own Name, Joh. 17.11.
those that thou have given Me, that they may be one, as we are one; That they
all may be one, 21.
as thou Father art in Me, and I in Thee, that they also may be one in us. 22.
And the glory which thou gave Me, I have given them, that they may be one,
even as we are one; 23.
I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; And that the
World may know that thou have sent Me; and have loved them, as thou have loved
Me. 24.
Father, I will that they also, whom thou have given me, be with me where I am,
that they may behold my Glory, which Thou have given me; I have given to them
the words which Thou gave me; 8.
and they have received them, and have known surely that I came out from Thee,
and they have believed that Thou did send me. 9.
I pray for them, I pray not for the World; but for those that thou have given
me; 10.
For they are Thine; and all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am
glorified in them. 15.13.17.
I pray that thou would keep them from the evil of the World, and that my
joy may be fulfilled in them; Sanctify them with thy truth, thy word is truth.

The Fathers concluding Exhortation and Prayer for his Wife and Children.
2 Cor. 13.11.
Finally, Beloved Wife of my Youth, and dear Children; Farewell, be perfect, be
of good comfort, Mal. 2.14.
be of one mind, live in peace and the God of peace and love shall be with you.
Ephesians. 5.1.
Ephesians. 3.14.
For this cause I bow my Knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom
the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named; 15,
That he would give you according to the riches of his glory to be strengthened
with might by his spirit in the inner man; 16.
17.
That Christ may live in your hearts by faith; that ye being rooted and
grounded in love, 18.
may be able to comprehend with all Saints what is the breadth, 19.
and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ which
passes knowledge, that ye might be filled with the fullness of God. The God of
Peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that great Shepherd of
the Sheep, Heb 13.20.
through the blood of the everlasting Covenant make you perfect in every good
work to do his will, 21.
working in you that which is most pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ.
Now to him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or
think, Ephesians. 3.20.
according to the power that works in us to him be glory in the Church by
Jesus Christ, throughout all Ages, World without end. The Grace of the Lord
Jesus Christ, 21.
and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all, Amen.

A Postscript of the Father to his Wife and Children, concerning the foregoing
Epistle, with some further Exhortations to the practice thereof.
MY dearest heart, and entirely affected Children, the good and salvation of
whose Souls I pray for, and labor for, as for my own; I have I trust (by the
direction of the holy Spirit) chosen in this manner to write unto you, as
hoping that what is delivered to you in the Person, and words of our Lord and
beloved Savior. For such is every word in the Epistle (except some words not
substantial necessary for connection, explanation and application requisite in a
subject of such various matter) You will with the more reverence and affection,
delight and obedience, attend to, and receive; For although all the words
therein, were not uttered by his own mouth upon Earth, yet were they all
indicted by his holy Spirit, who spoke by the Prophets and Apostles, and is the
Lord God of the holy Prophets. Heb. 1.1.
So that if ye will not hear and obey him herein, Rev. 22.6.
speaking to you, by himself, and by them; Neither will you be persuaded, Luke
16.31.
though one arose and spoke to you from Hell, and from the dead; Ye know after
what manner I have been with you, Act. 20.18.
at all seasons; And how I have kept nothing back that was profitable unto you,
20.
but have showed you, and have taught you both in private, 21.
and more publicly; Testifying unto you, and exhorting you to repentance
toward God, 24.
and faith to our Lord Jesus Christ. 22.
And now behold I am as one bound a Prisoner, and a banished man, separated
from you; not knowing what things shall further befall me: But none of these
things move or grieve me; neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I
might finish my course with joy. For I am persuaded and assured that neither
Tribulation, Romans 8.35.
or Distress, Persecution, or Famine, nakedness or peril, or Sword, Death, or
Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, 38,
nor things present, nor things to come; 39.
nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate me
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus my Lord, 1 Jo. 4.19.
or cause to cease my love to him; As therefore loving him, because he has
loved me first. 2 Timothy 4.8.
Yea, I am further assured, that when I have finished my course, a Crown of
righteousness is laid up for me, which my Lord the righteous Judge shall give
me at that Day, and not to me only, but unto all those that love his appearing.
And now my dearly beloved ones, I know not, God he only knows, whether we shall
see the Face of one another any more: Wherefore, that living or dead, I may
discharge my duty as a Husband, and as a Father, I take you to record this Day,
that I am pure from the blood of you all; For I have not shunned to declare
unto you the counsel of God* Take heed therefore to your Souls, which God has
purchased with his own blood, for I know that after my departure, grievous
Wolves and Enemies, such as the mighty Powers of Darkness, the numerous
tempting, and malicious men of the World, and that out of your own selves,
which therefore are the most dangerous of adversaries, will arise strong,
innumerable and impetuous Lusts, all endeavoring to draw you from the Faith,
and to destroy your most precious Souls; Therefore watch, and remember that by
the space of these many years, I have not ceased to warn every one of you Night
and Day with tears. Phil. 4.1.
Therefore my dearly beloved, and longed for, my Joy and Crown, stand fast in
the Lord my dearly beloved. 3.
And I entreat thee also true Yoke Fellow, help, counsel, and encourage our
Children in the way of godliness and righteousness, 1 Timothy 4.8.
which is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now is,
13.
and of that which is to come; Hide not thy talent, nor neglect the gifts that
are in thee, until I come again unto you. Give attendance to reading, 14.
to exhortation, meditate upon these things that I have written, and give thy
self wholly to them, 15.
that thy profiting may appear to all. Be an example to our Children in Word, 1 Timothy 4.12.
in Conversation, in Chastity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity: For in doing
this, 16.
thou shall both save thy Self and Family, now solely under thy charge; and as
to the care of whose Soul^, thou must shortly be accountable at God's Tribunal.

2 Cor. 6.11.
O ye that are my precious Jewels, my chief and only riches upon Earth, my mouth
is open to you, 12.
my heart is enlarged, ye are not straightened in me, be ye not therefore
straightened in your own bowels; Now for a recompense in the same, 13.
I speak unto you as unto my Children, be ye also enlarged. And now dear and
beloved Christians, for this is the highest, 2 Cor. 5.16.
and shall be my concluding Title, and sweetest compellation, as therein not
knowing you after the Flesh; I commend you unto God, and to the Word of his
Grace, Act. 20.32.
which is able to build up, and to give you an Inheritance among all them that
are sanctified; Ephesians. 1.16.
Ceasing not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my Prayers; 17.
That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, The Father of glory may give unto you
the spirit of wisdom and revelation, in the knowledge of him: The Eyes of your
understanding being enlightened, 18.
that ye may know what is the hope of his calling; 19.
And what the riches of the glory of his Inheritance in the Saints; And what is
the exceeding greatness of his Power to usward that believe.

Your most affectionate Husband and Father, J. H.
From Antwerpe, the First of January, 1665.
A Directory Letter (Mutatis Mutandis) sent by the Author to every one of his
Twelve Children, prefixed to the Manuscript of the following Epistle, now
Printed for the use and benefit of other Christian Families.
Dear Daughter Mary,
I Commend unto your serious and often Reading and Meditation this following
Epistle, a Work which cost me much labor, study, and time in the Collection,
yet performed with much delight and cheerfulness, as moved to write it to all
my Relations, by the good Spirit of the Lord, as the best means I could use to
counsel stir up, and advise them, with Mary, to choose the better part, which
shall never be taken from them.

Wherefore loving Daughter, let me lay this Paternal Charge upon you, as I
shall do upon the rest of your Brothers and Sisters, for whom I am preparing
Transcripts out of the Original, written by my own hand: That you read it over
at least once a Quarter, as long as you live, as being not mine, but the
Epistle of our most dear Lord and Savior presented to you only by my hands,
his most unworthy Instrument. The subject matter thereof being his most sacred
Word, who is the Lord God of all the holy Prophets, the Penmen hereof, And the
great Prophet of his Church; whose Word, whosoever will not hear and obey, are
threatened to be destroyed. My design herein, I hope, through the grace and
mighty power of the most holy Spirit of Christ, will be prosperous, and
effectual, as being not only a Letter of advice and counsel from an earthly
Father, whom I am confident you love, and will obey in the Lord; But the
Epistle, and most powerful Exhortations of your heavenly Father, yea, the
love-letter of your Head and Spouse the Lord Jesus Christ, who has married you
unto himself in holiness and everlasting righteousness.

Dear Daughter, the holy Scriptures being the Foundation of all saving
knowledge, and true Religion, I have by the direction and assistance of the
Lord, skim'd off for you the Cream thereof, and given you a few proofs of many,
holding forth, as from his own mouth; First, The excellency of his Person:
Secondly, The Fundamental Articles of the Christian faith, and belief in the
words of the holy Scripture only: Thirdly, what things are to be practiced by
you, held forth in God's holy Law: Fourthly, what evil things are to be
eschewed, either respecting Doctrine, or manners, wherein you have the Lord
Jesus Christ's encouragement and exhortation, to the attaining of all saving
graces, and virtues, and his Dehortation from all errors in Doctrine,
(especially those that are sown, and professed in these worst of times) and from
all sins and vices in practice: Fifthly, You have herein many of his Holy
Counsels, directing how to walk holily, righteously, circumspectly, and
unblameably in your life and conversation, together with the holy means and
Ordinances ordained by him, for the obtaining and strengthening his graces in
you, which is concluded with his Prayer and mine to our Heavenly Father for a
blessing. O let not then, much beloved Child, This Letter (should you neglect
the counsel given you therein) after my decease, bear witness against you: But
let it be a Record and lasting Legacy read and practiced by you, and your
Childrens Children; which is the fervent Prayer of your

Most affectioned Father J. H.
Antwerpe this first of January, 1665.
An INDEX of the CONTENTS of this EPISTLE, And of the Scripture-Catechisme
(materially) contained in it.
THe Salutation and Exhortation of the Father, to his Wife and Children. Page
259. The Praise and Commendation of the Lord Jesus Christ, under the Name and
Title of Wisdom, as being, and that essentially the Wisdom of God. Eadem. The
danger of neglecting to hear and obey the Voice and Counsel of Christ. P. 260.
B. An Exhortation of the Father to his Wife and Children, to hearken to the
Word and Counsel of Christ. Ead. C. The Speech of the Lord Jesus Christ, as
speaking in his own Person, to those to whom this Epistle is directed, and is
applicable to all other Christians. P. 261. A. The Danger of Rejecting Christ.
Ead. B. The Confession of Faith, commonly called the Apostles Creed, held forth
by Christ in Scripture Expressions. Ead. C. 1. Article, The Doctrine of the
Trinity. Eadem. 2. Article, That Jesus Christ is the Eternal Son of God, and
our Lord. 3. Article, As to the Incarnation of the Lord Jesus Christ, who was
conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary. P. 262. A 4. Article,
Concerning Christ's Condemnation by Pontius Pilate, his Crucifixion, Death, and
Burial, and all other Sufferings in Soul and Body. Eadem. 5. Article, Of
Christ's Resurrection. 6. Article, Of Christ's Ascension. 7. Article, Of
Christ's coming to Judgment. 8. Art. Concerning the Holy Ghost, is proved in
the first Article, concerning the Trinity. Page 263. 9. Article, Concerning the
Catholic Church, and the Communion of Saints. Ead. C. 10. Article, Concerning
forgiveness of Sins. 11. Article, Concerning the Resurrection of the Body. Ead.
12. Article, Concerning Life everlasting. P. 264. A. Ead. C. The Preface to the
Decalogue or Ten Commandments. Ead. B. and C. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Commandments. The Conclusion of the Ten Commandments. Note, That the Promises,
etc. are omitted for brevity. 265 A The Exhortation of the Lord Jesus, to the
use of Gospel Ordinances. Viz. 1. To Baptism. 2. To the Lord's Supper. Ead. C
Page 266 A B C 3. To the reading of the Scriptures. 4. To the hearing of the
Word of God preached. 5. To Meditation of the Word of God, and of his works. 6.
To Prayer in public and private. 7. To Obedience to Church-Governors and
Discipline. P 267 B C The Exhortation of the Lord Jesus to Gospel-saving
Graces, Viz. 1. To Repentance. 2. To Faith. P 268 C Page 270 A B C 3. To Hope.
4. To Charity. 5. To holy Courage or Fortitude. 6. To Christian Temperance. 7.
To holy Patience. 8. To Divine Wisdom. Page 271 A B Ead. C 9. To Christian
Humility. 10. The Exhortation of the Lord Jesus to several saving Graces,
commonly called the Beatitudes. 11. To Religious Chastity. P 272 C P 273 A 12.
To Christian Justice and Righteousness. 13. To Gospel sincerity, uprightness
and truth. P. Ead. C. 14. To godly thankfulness, and praising of God. Ead. C.
and P. 274 The Exhortation of the Lord Jesus to Divine affections, Viz. 1. To
holy joy and delight. 2. To filial fear of God. 3. To holy zeal and anger. 4.
To holy hatred. P 275 A The Preface to the Dehortations of the Lord Jesus from
several principal vices. Ead. 275 276 The Dehortation. 1. From Unbelief. 2.
From Atheism. 3. From Polutheisme. 4. From Idolatry. 5. From Blasphemy. 6.
From Profaneness. 7. From Sacrilege. 8. From Hypocrisy. 9. From
Sabbath-breaking. 10. From Superstition. 11. From Lukewarmness. Page 277 A B
12. From hard-heartedness. 13. From presumptuous sinning. 14. From sinful
swearing. 15. From incorrigibleness. A Preface to the Dehortation against
despair. 16. From Despair. A Dehortation from Incharitableness. P 278 A B 1.
General Branch of Incharitableness, as to the Souls of others. 1. By tempting.
2. By evil example. Ead. B 3. By not reproving. 4. By Flattering. 5. By not
Instructing. 6. By persecuting for Conscience. Ead. C P 279 A 2d. General
Branch of Incharitableness, as to the Persons of others. 1. By Murder. 2. By
Maiming. 3. By unjust Imprisonment. 4. By not relieving. Ead. B P 180 A 3d.
General Branch of Incharitableness, as to the estates of others. 1. By
oppression. 2. By stealing. 3. By defrauding. 4. By contentiousness. 5. By
usury or extortion. Ead. A. B 6. By Depopulation. 7. By false witnessing. 8. By
cursing, or evil Imprecations. 4. General Branch of Incharitableness, as to the
good name of others: 1. By slandering and backbiting and tale-bearing. Ead. C
A Dehortation from Intemperance. 1. From Drunkenness. 2. From Gluttony. 3. From
Insobriety. P 281 B C A Dehortation from sinful fear. A Dehortation from
Ignorance. 1. Affected. 2. Natural. 3. Wilful. P 282 A B A Dehortation from
Injustice. 1 In Magistrates. 2 In private Persons. 3 By not giving obedience
justly due to Superiors. 1 As Magistrates. 2 As Ministers of the Gospel. 3 As
natural Parents. Ead. C. A General Dehortation from fleshly uncleanness. 1 From
Buggery. 2 From Sodomy. 3 From Whoredom. 4 From Incest. 5 From Polygamy. 6
From Adultery. 7 From Fornication. P 283 C P 284 A B A Dehortation from
Lasciviousness. 1 In wanton thoughts. 2 In wanton words. 3 In wanton looks. 4
In wanton actions. Ead. C. P 285 C A Dehortation from Lying. 1 By denying the
truth. 2 By breach of Covenant to God. 2 Of vows to God. 3 Of promises and
Covenants to Men. Ead. B C and P 286 A Dehortation from Covetousness. 1 In the
heart. 2 In action. 3 From worldliness, and carking cares. 4. From
Nigardliness. P 286 C P 287 A A Dehortation from Idleness. 1 By having no
Calling, or by neglecting a Calling. P 287 C and 288 A 2. Idleness in private
Persons. 3 Idleness in public Persons. Ead. B. The Dehortation of the Lord
Jesus from sinful passions. 1. From rash anger. 2 From causless anger. Ead. C.
Ead. C A Dehortation from sinful hatred. 1 Of Persons. 2 Of good things. Eadem
C A Dehortation from Malice. Ead. C A Dehortation from strife and contention. P
289 A A Dehortation from envy. A Dehortation from revenge. Ead. C A Dehortation
from Pride. 1 Branch from spiritual Pride. 2 Branch from Worldly pride. 3
Branch from Ambition. Ead. C Ead. C and P 290 A Dehortation from Ingratitude. 1
Toward God. 2 Toward Men. Ead. C. A Dehortation from sensuality or
voluptuousness. P 291 A A Dehortation from inconstancy. 1 Branch, backsliding.
2 Branch, Apostasy. 3 Branch, is the sin against the holy Ghost. P 292 C P 294
B The Preface to the Counsels of the Lord Jesus. 1 To diligence in our Calling.
2 To holy walking with God. 3 Against sin. P 295 B P 296 A Counsel against
Temptation. Ead. B Counsel against evil company. To set God always before Us,
and to have an eye to Eternity. Ead. B C Counsel to watch over our hearts. As
to the keeping of a good Conscience, not to offend a Brothers conscience. P 297
A Counsel, as to the well ordering of our tongues, and as to the right using of
our estates, gifts and talents. Ead. C Counsel, as to the well improving of our
time. P 290 A Ead. C Counsel against sinful and unprofitable discourses.
Against profane swearing. Counsel against sluggishness. Ead. C Counsel to
watch over, and reprove our Neighbor; and patiently to receive reproofs.
Counsel to charity. Counsel concerning your Tables. Concerning your callings.
Ead. C and 299 A Counsel concerning your Relations. 1. Of Children to their
Parents. 2 Of Parents to their children. 3 Of Husbands to their Wives. 4 Of
Wives. 5 Of Servants. 6 Of Masters. Ead. C Counsel concerning our carriage
toward those without. P 300 Counsel as to the observation of God's mercies,
works and providence. Ead. C Counsel to attend the answer and return of
Prayer. Ead. C Counsel, as to our behavior under afflictions and persecutions.
P 301 C ACounsel, as to the right use of our Christian liberty against the
abusing of grace. Ead. B C Counsel as to the duties of Prayer, self denial,
bearing the cross and perseverance. Counsel to our growing in grace. P 302 A
The Preface to the Antidotes. Ead. C and P 305 A Ead. B Antidotes given by the
Lord Jesus against several Heresies and Errors. 1 Against the Pope's Supremacy.
2 Against the Pope's Infallibility. Ead. C 3 Against the Pope's Power to
forgive sins. 4 Against the Pope's Power to absolve from oaths, vows, and
promises. P 304 A 5 Against the Pope's Power to add to the Scriptures, or to
bend conscience by his Cannons and Decretals. P 305 A Against the Pope's Power
to canonize Saints, or to excommunicate any from being Saints. P 306 A Against
the Pope's Power to exercise the civil Sword against those that will not
receive his Doctrines. Eadem C Antidotes given by the Lord Jesus Christ against
several heresies and errors of the Apostate Roman Church. and 307 A Ead. C 1
Against the Idolatry of the Mass. 2 Against the false Doctrine of Purgatory.
Ead. C and 308 A 3 Against the praying to and worship, 1 Of Saints. 2 Of
Angels. 4 Against the worshping of Pictures and Images. Eadem C. 5 Against the
false Doctrine of freedom from Original sin. P. 309 C. 6 Against their false
Doctrine concerning Free will. P. 310 C. 7 Against their false Doctrine of
Justification by works. Eadem C. The Preface of the Lord Jesus to his Antidotes
against several other Heresies and Errors of the last times. P. 111 B^
Antidotes, 1. Against Atheism. Eadem C. 2 Against the Heresy of Arianisme. P.
312 A. 3. Against the Heresy of denying the Holy Ghost to be God. Eadem C. 4.
Against the Heresy of community of Women. 113 B. C. 5. Against Poligamy. 6.
Against the forsaking and casting off of Gospel -- Ordinances. Eadem C. 7.
Against those who lay aside and make useless the Moral Law. and p 314 A 8.
Against those who cast off and despise civil Government. Eadem B. 9. Against
those who prefer a light within them before, besides, and against the
Scriptures. P. 315 A. 10. Against Enthusiasmes. Eadem B. 11. Against
Anti-scripturists. Eadem C. 12. Against those who deny Infant Baptism; and the
Lord's Day to be the Christian Sabbath. Eadem C. and p 316 A 13. Against those
who deny propriety of Goods and Estates. Eadem C 14. Against Rebaptization. P.
317 B^ 15. Against Schism and uncharitable separation from the Church. The
conclusion of the speech of the Lord Jesus. The Prayer of the Lord Jesus for
all his Elect. P. 318 A. P. 55. B. The Fathers concluding Exhortation and
Prayer for his Wife and Children. P. 56 A. A Postscript of the Father to his
Wife and Children, concerning the foregoing Epistle, with some further
Exhortations to the practice thereof. Eadem C. and P. 57, 58, and 59.
ERRATA Of the Printer.
FOlio 265, Line 27, (Add) And brake it.

Folio 269, Line 28, (Add) Do good to them that hate you.

Fol. 276, in the Margent, for, Polutheims, put Polutheismes.

For Cap. Proverbs the 22, put Chap. the 20.

Fol. 279. Line 31. for from, put for.

Fol. 282, Line 21, put (Thy) after of.

Fol. 293, Line 38, for Brances, put Branches.

Fol. 294, Line 42, Add (He) after shall.

Fol. 297. Mar. for Mat. the 5, make it the 25.

Fol. 203. Line 22, Add after was.

(So) Marg. for Matthew, Mark.

Fol. 305. Line 40. for Diotropses, put Diotrephes.

Fol. 306. Line 31, for after Sacrifice, add (First)

Fol. 313. Marg. for Joh. the 17. put the 7.

An Humble ANSWER to a PAPER or QVERY, Given to the Author, by King CHARLES the
First, at Hombey; concerning the Observations of Easter Day A. D. 1647.
By the KING.
I desire to be resolved of this Question, Why the new Reformers discharge the
keeping of Easter?

The Reason for this Query is,

I Conceive the Celebration of this Feast was Instituted by the same Authority
which changed the Jewish Sabbath into the Lord's Day, or Sunday: for it will
not be found in Scripture where Saturday is discharged to be kept or turned
into the Sunday, wherefore it must be the Churches Authority that changed the
one, and instituted the other. Therefore my Opinion is, that those who will not
keep this Feast, may as well return to the Observation of Saturday, and refuse
the Weekly Sunday. When any Body can show me, that herein I am in an error, I
shall not be ashamed to confess and mend it: till when you know my mind.

C. R.

My Answer to his Majesty's Query.
May it please your Majesty,
I Cannot but from the blessed example of our Savior, (who was in his Age a
new Reformer of old Errors, Viz. the false glosses of the Scribes and
Pharisees, Math. 5.20.) but account all such Reformers in our times, blessed
also; But for the keeping of Easter, although I know not any Ordinance of
Parliament discharging it, yet with submission to better judgments, I in all
dutifulness conceive, That your Majesty's reason upon which your Query is
built, has a great mistake even in the foundation of it, you being pleased to
lay this for a ground, That the change of the Sabbath; and the Institution of
Easter are by one and the same equal Authority and Ecclesiastical Decree, which
with your Majesty's favor, I cannot yield to, for I humbly conceive that the
change of the Jewish Sabbath (the commemoration of the Work of the Creation)
unto the Lords day, the remembrance of that great Work, (the Work of Redemption
finished upon this Day of the Lord's Resurrection) was by no less than by
Divine Authority, because the keeping of one Day in Seven as a Sabbath to God,
was not only sanctified and set apart, by God's own example in the Creation,
Genesis 2. Ver. 2 and accordingly observed by the Israelites many Weeks before the
Law was given, Exodus 16.23. But is One of the Ten Commandments delivered by
God's own mouth in Mount Sinay, written by his own Finger in Tables of Stone,
commanded by himself to be put into the Ark of the Covenant; which Decalogue or
Ten Commandments are also by our blessed Savior in his Sermon upon the Mount
declared to be the rule of his Peoples moral obedience, unto the end of the
World, Math. 5.17. and in the following part of that Sermon, wherein he
vindicates the Law from the corrupt Glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees; he
instances only in moral duties, and moral Laws. From all which Divines
generally infer that the Decalogue is to continue in force unto the Worlds end;
and therefore it seems most apparent that no Authority* that is inferior to
that which appointed the Seventh Day from the Creation to be the Sabbath, could
abrogate that Day, and appoint an other Day to be used instead of it, because
neither the Law of Nature, nor the Holy Scripture, does any where give the
least intimation, that any humane Power may change any of the Commandments of
God, and indeed so many absurdities would follow upon such an assertion, as I
am confident your Majesty will not own it. It remains therefore that the change
of the Day must be the work of Christ himself, or of his Apostles, who were
divinely inspired, Acts 15. 21. And to prove that it was so, Viz. That the
Lords Day by Divine Institution now succeeds in the room of the Jewish Sabbath,
I shall use no other Arguments than these which I find in ^^rned Bishop
Andrews his Speech in the Star Chamber, at the ^^^sure of Mr. Traske, who
expressly says, that it has ever been the Churches Doctrine, That Christ made
an end of all Sabboths, by his Sabbath in the grave; and that presently the
Lords Day came in the place of it. And that according to Austin's judgment, the
Lord's Day is declared to be the Christian Sabbath, by the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ, which the said Bishop not only says, but proves by these
Arguments.

1. Because he then began the new World, Heb. 1.2. By whom ^e made the Worlds:
The first World which ended with his ^^rial: The second World or new Creation
which began with his Resurrection.

2. Because all the four Evangelists say Christ rose, Vna Sab^ttorum, that is
the first Day of the Week.

3. The Apostles kept their holy Meetings on that Day to Preach, and Pray, and
Celebrate the Lord's Supper, Acts 20.7.

4. The Day is called the Lord's Day, not only in the Apostles times, but by
the Apostle John himself, Rev. 1.10. And he further adds, that this Epithet
(Dominicum) in the Scripture is only applied to these two, The Lord's Day, and
the Lord's Supper, To show that they are both to be taken alike in Scripture.

5. He says we have not only example, but express precept for it, 1 Cor. 16.2.
That upon the first Day of the Week which was the Day of their Assembly, then
Collections or Oblations would be made.

6. And lastly, He affirms that in all Ages of the Church this Day was
observed. To this I may add our Savior's rest upon that Day from his Works,
Heb. 4.10. His often visiting the Apostles during the Forty Days, after his
Resurrection, upon that Day speaking of the things appertaining to the Kingdom
of God, Acts 1.3. Now what more material thing was there to be declared to them
than this, The change of the Sabbath, and the appointing a set time for his
Worship; he accordingly appearing thrice on the first Day of the Week, (besides
his being seen of the Women) to teach and instruct his Disciples. First to the
two Disciples that went to Emmaus, Luke 24.15, etc. to the Apostles when Thomas
was absent, John 20.19. And the third time when Thomas was present, John 20.26.
As also observe, that those wonderful and extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost
were poured out according to his promise upon the Apostles and Church (then)
met together, Acts 2.1. The Day of Penticost being the Morrow after the Seventh
Sabbath, to be accounted from the Day of the Sheaf-Offering, Lev. 23.15. By all
which, he seems to have honored and set apart that Day above others, for his
service. Lastly, this being a principal Institution, might probably be one of
those Decrees ordained by the Apostles (as well as that concerning the
Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11.34.) delivered by Paul to the Churches in all the Cities,
through which he passed, Acts 16.4. But for the Observation of Easter to be an
Annual Festival to Christians, I find not any thing in the Holy Scriptures: And
your Majesty is pleased to place it only upon the Churches Authority. And
although I will not contend about the Churches Power in the Institution of such
things as are simply indifferent, yet I suppose I may boldly assert, that such
things as are only Instituted by Ecclesiastical Authority, having no footstep
in the Scripture, may by Ecclesiastical Authority be laid aside.

Your Majesty's most Loyal Subject, and Humble Servant, H. J.

AN EPISTLE DEDICATORY, To the the truly Noble Pair, and my most Religious
Parents.
MOst Honored and best beloved Parents, Three Sabbaths of Years (the third
part of Man's life) is already Cyphered in my Youths Accounts, and who knows how
soon the Divine number of our days, after my times last addition, may conclude
the Numeration of my life, thus; Haec summa totalis: Wherefore, lest Death
should proclaim me Bankrupt before I had paid the due Debt of gratefulness,
which I owe you, next to my Heavenly Father, for my Life, Education, and
Preservation; I here presume to present you with this disordered and weak
Meditations; the Fruits of some few hours destinated for the Lord's days
Preparation, as a testimonial of my thankfulness for those your numberless
Merits, which are as far beyond requital, as expression; Let them (I beseech
you) obtain a favorable Acceptance, a patient Perusal, and a Fatherly Censure,
glorifying God, who with his Grace has assisted my Weakness, and shall supply
the deficiency of all our Meditations, with the fruition of himself; till which
Imperfection of Happiness, I rest,

Yours in the Lord, and in all filial Obedience, J. H.

To the Worthy AUTHOR OF THIS Divine Meditation, The Unworthy Peruser wishes
all Health and Happiness.
ON Worthy Sir, and live to view,
The like done by your Heir to you.
There Is one will bless,
With Interests, this your gratefulness,
Sweetning your Budd,
Both to your own, and Parents good,
Blessing the feet, which I suppose,
Would highly grace a full-blown Rose.
Often have I seen those Budds that prove
Worm-eaten by that Canker Love;
Spending their prime,
Of wit in Sonnets, or such Rhyme,
As leaves behind,
The Savor of a tainted mind.
Ma^gre their Wits, I tell you true,
I enjoy none but such as you;
Not that I know your Birth and Blood
Springs high, but that I see a good,
That sets you off
Beyond the bitter reach or scoff,
Of those loose Tongues,
Which blast it in their drunken Songs,
Think no work lovely, sweet, or witty,
That is not tuned to Cupids Ditty.
On Lovely Sir (I speak the truth,
From Him you think on in your Youth)
He Will not forget,
This Labor, or Essay, but set,
A mark of note,
Upon those Hours which you devote,
Unto his Service, and will Pay
Richly, at All Saints Holy Day:
Mean while he pawns his Word to be
A Friend unto your hopes, and he
That never Rights,
The meanest of his Favorites,
Will raise your Stock,
And prove your Sun, your Shield, your Rock,
Perfume your Name, and make it as dear
As his, that dyed the Hopeful Peire.
Long may the Noble Pair, to whom
You own your Breath, next God become
Suitors for you,
That labor to repay the due,
You owe to them,
From whom you Sprang a hopeful stemm;
To which you have the Heart, and Hand
Of him, that rests,
Yours to Command, W. Mewes.

MEDITATIONS UPON THE CREATION, MAN'S Fall, and Redemption BY CHRIST, Presented
to his Parents in the XXI. Year of his Age.

Anno Dom. 1627.

London, Printed in the Year, 1669.

Prayer and Meditation are Twins, therefore A Preparative Prayer.
O Almighty God, and most gracious Father, from thy goodness I acknowledge all
good gifts do proceed, therefore I humbly, and earnestly do beseech thee, to
illuminate my Soul by thy Spirit, that my Understanding, being raised above all
Earthly Cogitations, may through thy merciful assistance, so meditate of thee,
and thy wonderful Works, that contem^^ng all Worldly Vanities, my delight may
only consist in beholding of thy Majesty: The Consideration of it being best
able, both to humble my proud Heart, and create in it a love, and fear to all
thy Precepts, that so I beginning (although in weakness) to live the life of
grace here, I may (through thy favor in Christ) live the Life of Glory with
thee hereafter.

Amen.
DIVINE MEDITATIONS OF GOD'S Majesty IN THE CREATION.
ALL sublunary things tend, and press toward their Center: The Sea-man's
Needle always points North and South, Nature thereby (as it were) Lecturing our
Souls to behold and move toward none but thee O God, our North-Star, our
Center; Lord, I confess, it had been a vain presumption in Mortality (being
defiled with sin) to have once conceived a thought of thy Holiness, had not thy
mercy in Jesus Christ, revealed unto us in thy word and promises, not only to
give us leave, but commanded us to know thee, that conceiving of thee aright,
we might love thee with all our hearts, fear thee in all our actions, and serve
thee with our best endeavors. Why made thou Man with his Face erected
toward the Heavens, when Beasts walk grovelling upon the Ground, unless thou
have ordained that all Eyes contemning Earth as tramled under Feet, should
stand open toward the Skies, that our Souls through those Casements might
behold the Starry outside of the ^irmament, though but a dark reflection of thy
brightness, and might view in the Su^s splendor a petty Emblem to lead us to
the Infiniteness of thy Glory, and beautifulness of that new Jerusalem, in
which thou crownest the Inhabitants with a perpetual Day of Happiness. These
Objects (O Lord) damme up the M^uth of Wick^dness, being sufficient though dumb
Witnesses, to condemn the wilful ignorance of Senceless Atheists: Who behold
much Art in a costly Fabric, and applaud not the skill of the Architector. Who
sees exquisitness in any work, and is not forced to acknowledge the Work-mans
perfection; and what Eyes can be so purblinded with folly and perverseness, as
not to spell out in each Leaf of Natures Book thy Divinity? Open thou my Lips
(O Lord) and my Mouth shall show forth thy Praise.

Of the Creation.
THe beginning of all Created Substances was nothing, who but thou O Lord, Genesis
1.1.
Infinite in Power, of no Materials could frame so vast a Chaos? Verse 2.
Before each particulars composure, darkness, as a Canopy, covered the confused
Lump of intermixed Bodies, when by thy Word (O Father of Light) was light
created, Verse 3.
the happy Morning to so great a Night; Verse 6.
the huge Concave of the Firmament being the purest extraction of that gross
heap is made to Circle the Earth, Verse 7.
separating the Waters above from those below by thy Command. Verse 9.
Where was the naked Earth visible, when the Waters covered the Face thereof,
until thy will gave them both name, and bounds? How rude an object were the
Towering Hill^, and humble Valleys, Verse. 11. and 12.
then destitute of thy Livery, their Ornament, until Grass, Herbs, and
fruit-bearing Trees clothed them by thy Ordinance. When the Heavens wanted
their Ornament, the Times and Seasons their Order, Genesis 1.16.
and distinguishments, thou made two great Lights* the Sun to Rule by Day,
the Moon and Stars to Rule by Night; Psalm 136.8.
For thy Mercy endures for ever. Were the waste Places of the deep inhabited,
or the Regions of the Air fath^med, Genesis 1.26.
before thy Power made the Seas bring forth all manner of Fowls, and Fish,
even that Leviathan, whose Scales are his Pride, shut up together as with a
close Seal, which by his neesing a Light does shine, Job 41.15.
and his Eyes are like the Eyelids of the Morning, upon Earth there is none
his like, who is made without fear? Did not thy Wisdom O God fill the Deserts
with wild Beasts, the Earth with creeping things? Job 40.
Who made Behemoth, which moves his Tail like a Cedar? His Bones are as strong
Pieces of Brass, his ^^^es are like Bars of Iron, he is the chief of thy ways
(O God) thou that made him, can make thy Sword approach unto him. What
shall I say? Who can express thee, which art far beyond expression? I will
conclude with the conclusion of thy Works, the ^^^ation of Man; In his Body
rightly termed a little World, as ^^ing a mixture of the four Elements, who can
(...) ^^e symmetry and proportion of each Member, and com^lin^ss of ^^ch part*
so ^urious a structure, being only a ^i^ man^^on (...) (...) Tenant as the
Soul; in whose praise (which speak^ thy p^^ise) I will only say two words,
calling it according to thy Word, thy ^^^ge; What is Man that thou art mindful
of him? Psalm. 8.4.
or the Son of ^^an, that thou visitest him? Thou have made him little lower
^^an the Angels, and have Crow^^d him with glory and honor; ^^ou made him to
have dominion over the works of thy hands, ^^ou have put all things under his
Feet: Therefore bless the Lo^d (O my Soul) all that is within m^^less his holy
name; Psalm. 103.12.
bless the lord in all his works, in all places of his Dominion; bless the Lord
O my Soul.

Of Man's Fall, and of God's Mercy and Goodness in our Redemption.
THe Object of misery, is mercy: Diseases if known, and felt, (...) often
obtain remedies; when insensible maladies make Men ^^glect the opportunity of
recovery. Man's worst Disease is sin, ^^iginally rooted in us in Adam, nourisht
and made fruitful by our (...) actual transgressions; the feeling and knowledge
of whi^^^, ^^st first make us witnesses and publishers of our dangers and (...)
before God's mercy can be the prospect of our wretchedness, (...) goodness our
healing. Wherefore (O my Soul) let thy follow^^^ Meditations, triply divide
themselves; First, behold what thou (...) in thy fall, with the fearful
adjuncts thereof, that a true hu^^^ation may make thee pliable to receive the
happy impression (...) God's Seal. Secondly, what thou art through the mercy of
(...) in Jesus Christ, Revel. 7.
that thy heart being fraught with thankful^^ss, may praise him both in word
and action. Thirdly, what (...) shall be* The consideration of which may make
thee perse^^^^ and press toward the mark, only Desiring to be dissolved, (...)
to be with Christ.

The judgments best evidence (to conclude the praise or dif^^ise of things) is
by contraries; Man's misery by his Fall.
therefore the view of our crea^^d happiness will most aptly confirm, and
discover the infinite ^^supportableness of our loss; which a particular
demonstration will better illustrate, than a general surview. The principal
parts in the composure of Man, is a Soul and Body; of which the Soul as first
in degree, The Souls Created Happiness.
so in our Discourse: The Heathens esteemed the derivation of their Pedigree
from famous Ancestors, their chiefest honor; some even coveting to line out
their Originals from the shameful Adulteries of their imaginary Gods: but let
us in looking back to our Souls Original, glorify our Creator* one not (...)
not fictitious, as theirs; but the God of Gods, the Lord of Lords. Psalm. 136.2.
Thus the Soul in its Creation has its beginning from God* For in him we live,
and move, and have our Being: Nay, Paul further adds, Acts 17.28.
that we are his Offspring. What Creature can be capable of more Honor, more
Glory? The Soul is God's offspring, not in respect of its substance, but its
qualities, even so far forth as it was then adorned by him with Divine gifts;
and therefore called his Image, The Divine Gifts of the Soul.
in respect of the whole Man; but especially of the Soul, created of a
spiritual and immortal Essence (as St. Augustine divinely glosses) consisting
and endued with three supreme faculties; the Memory, Imagination, and Will:
that these, yet but one Soul, might symbolize the Trinity in Unity. The Memory
could not then be over-burthened, but like a constant good Soil naturally
received all Seeds of goodness, and returned them with a plentiful increase.
The Fantasy and intellect was as apprehensive, as the Memory trusty; like a
mirror as it were b^ reflection, discovering to the Souls sight, the highest
of reveal^d mysteries; being then a fit perspective, to appropriate and
distinguish all far distant and supreme Contemplations: The will w^^ constant
like the Sun, in a course of goodness, and as a shadow followed the substance
of virtue, bowing with Mordecai to (...) but God. Thus in respect of himself,
was Man the Image of (...) Creator; behold him so in his domination over the
Creatures, God saying, Let them have dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and
(...) the Foul of the Air, Genesis 1.26.
and over the Cattle, and over all the Earth. As if he should say, He is my
Likeness, my Vicegetent, you inferior Creatures, obey him; but let him love,
fear, and look only toward me. O inestimable favor, O unvaluable privilege!
and yet behold, not valued, neglected of Man; all Earthly object^ quickly
satiate the sight, but who can sufficiently behold thee O Lord? Thus have we
glanced over the Compendium of the Souls Happiness; a brief indeed, For who can
express it at large? Rare objects are most attractive. The Eye of my weak
Meditations has so long gazed on this now Eclipsed Sun, that it has almost
forgot the Sphere wherein it is fixed, (the Body) then a Chrystaline Lanthorn
fit for such a Lamp, Of the Body in the Creation.
now a Prison of a twilighted Soul. Here needs not much illustration; we may
guess at Hercules Stature by his Foot, but easily of his Foot by the rest of
his Body. God's works are all full of perfection, the whole Creation had not
one lame part. In the Souls eminence, view the Bodies excellence: Man was Gods
Image, not the Soul only; the Body was not God's Image in respect of its Form
(since he is invisible, incomprehens^ble, and cannot be by us defined) but as
it is the inferior part of Man, and inseparable Companion of the rational
Soul* so it also enjoyed a right in the same Attributes, and Privileges, the
^^ul then giving a Majesty to the Face, and being made more ^^plendent, by the
fellowship and harmonious marriage with the ^^dy; the Body being necessarily
most obvious to be employed (...) all terrene and inferior actions, as the
other in Heavenly Con^^mplations. Thus with comfort have we gazed upon Man,
glo^^ous in his Creation, as the Sun ascending from Earth; 2 ly. (As (...)
object to move a religious gratefulness) shining in his Meridian of Happiness;
Let us now in the third place (with shame and con^^sion of Face, and hearty
humiliation of Soul) behold him sitting (...) darkness, quenching his Light in
the Ocean of sin, and misery. Of Man's Fall.
Which declining subject, that we may more clearly perceive, Let (...) first
consider the causes of our loss; 2 ly. The fall, or act it self; dly. The
fearful effects of so cursed a breach. Almighty God ^^ving Created the great
World, and lastly, Man as an Epitome (...) the whole, Plants a Garden, Genesis 2.8.
therein placing him both to be a ^^esser, and Surveyor of those rarities; that
with pleasure each ^^ce might view in their Nature, the Wisdom; in their
Form, (...) Power of his Creator: The merciful Lord makes him, and ^^^ves him
a Freeholder in this Eden, this Heaven upon Earth, ^^ly reserves to himself
this small Royalty, the two Trees, the one (...) Life, the other of good and
evil, in the midst of the Garden: (...) we may see it included in that first
and general deed of gift ^elivered to Adam; And the Lord God commanded the Man,
Genesis 2.16.
^^ying, Of every Tree of the Garden thou may freely eat: But of ^he Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it; 17.
(...) in the Day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye. O ^^all
command, O easy Yoke, O the free and infinite mercy of ^hee, O Almighty
Creator! What? have thou made Man, and (...) the World for Man, and yet for all
this, tyest him to no more ^^vitude, than the obedience of one sense, Thou
shall not eat? O ^^retched Adam, Why did thou entertain such a cursed
credulity? believing rather thy Slave, than thy Lord; an inferior Crea^ure,
before thy Creator; the Father of Lies, before the Truth it self. Was thy free
judgment thus soon captivated? (Lord leave not us weaklings to our selves, but
magnify thy power in our imbecility:) Surely, unhappy Man, had not ambition
and infidelity Eclipsed the apprehensive brightness of thy understanding, Jude
1.6.
thou might have made thy Ringleaders fall, a mirror to view thine own in.
O blindness! the more blameworthy, the less to be pitied, (...) self did
both willingly, wilfully, and speedily occasion (...) thy gracious God
imprisoned all thy senses within his (...) command, all Judgments would have
condemned thy ungrateful disobedience; how much more blameable art thou that
might have viewed it, touched it, and delighted thy self with the fragrancy
of that pleasant Fruit eternally without offense, and ye^ still desire more,
even to taste thy Death. O bitter sweet! sweet in thy deceitful expectation,
bitter in thy accursed fruition. O behold now what knowledge thou have
obtained! thou know now the good thou had, and have lost; the evil thou
did want, and now enjoyest: Momentary was thy imaginary pleasure, certain,
and eternal thy procured curse: O the Childishness of Man's perfectest age! The
fearful effects of Man's Fall.
which sold the little World, himself, the great World about himself, for such
a knowledge which made him know good, not more, but less, by knowing evil: All
things that are good in themselves, in their first enjoying, gain from us most
estimation; but Man, here blessed with the fruition of all happiness, which
jointly met in him as in its Center, undervalues it even in the first
possession; exchanging pleasure for pain, knowledge for ignorance, Paradise for
Hell, and Life for Death. But what nee^ is there of my weak descriptions, in
delineating the lamentable (...) of Man's fall? Since, if every Christian would
but deal faithfully with himself, and retire into his own Soul, viewing it in
the state of Unregeneration, he might in that too lively Picture of d^^d Adam,
learn the chief point of wisdom, to know himself. I appeal to the witness of
thy Conscience, O Christian Reader, whither thou find not naturally the
Supreme faculties of thy Soul, the Enemies of God, and goodness, the
bondslaves, and willing Vassals of sin and Satan; the parts of thy Body, the
Members of wickedness, and ready Instruments of ill. Is not thy memory a
magazine of evil, unhospitable to goodness? Thy imagination and intellect, like
the Northern Seas frozen with ignorance, to whom the Sun of wisdom gives so
dim a Light, that thy highest knowledge, is to know thou know nothing. Is
not wickedness the Center of thy will, toward which it moves with a natural
swiftness, all holy motions being contrary to its course? Lastly, do not
generally the parts of the whole Man, which did before by their concordance,
and harmonious obedience, so sweetly express the due praise of the most
glorious Creator, now rebelliously jar, with a hideous and cursed confusion?
But what need these questions? I would to God every Man's unhappy experience did
not affirm, and ascertain this truth: as there is none free from Death, so none
from sin, the cause of Death: we all alike come into this World, all suck in
corruption with their first breath; no sooner have our Souls a Being, but they
are in a deep Consumption; so that our life is but a continued dying, a
Prologue of Death, according to that of Job 1.21. Naked came we into this
World: naked of goodness, as well as Clothes, and naked shall we return again,
except thou cloth us to Christ: our beginnings, our foundations are laid with
untempered mortar, Can then our afterworks be unlike the Original? We must all
say with David, In ^in has my Mother conceived me, and I was shapen in
iniquity. Psalm. 51.5.
(...) the Root evil, and can the Fruit be good? Is the Fountain bit^er, and
can the streams be sweet? Do Men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of
Thistles? Has Adam fallen, Mat. 6.16.
and was accursed, and shall his Offspring stand, and be justified? No,
assuredly There is none good, no not one, we are all wrapped up in the same
condemnation: O wretched Man that I am, Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? I thank God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Let us now, having waded in the gulf of (...) miseries, from
that depth, behold the height of Gods mercy. ^^y mercies O Lord are great, and
reach unto the Heavens, Psalm 57.10.
and ^^y truth unto the Clouds. Thou have delivered my Soul from ^ell, my Body
from Death, thy Mercies are above all thy Works, ^onderful are they, Who can
express them?

This World is a Monarchy, the great Emperor thereof is God, no admits of no
Equal, nor Partners in his Government: Kings, ^rinces, and all things else, are
either Subjects, or Subject to ^^m; nay more, his Creatures, For by Him were
all things Created which are in Heaven, and which are in Earth, things visible,
Col. 1.16.
and invisible. Crimes of the highest nature, are only accounted Trea^ons in
terrene States, but the least breach of those general Sta^^tes, enacted by the
Earths great Lawgiver, is not only Capital, (...) infinitely punishable: had
Man offended either his Superiors, (...) Angels, or his equals, as Man; it had
been possible to have reconciled the one by submission, the other by
satisfaction: but having tra^sgressed the Commandment of God, no created, and
^nite substance can repair his ruins; for infinite is his Justice, in^nite our
sins, and consequently infinite our punishment. Thus wretched and miserable are
we in our selves, by reason of our ^all; and thus destitute of redress from
others, by reason of the ^reatness of our fault, and unrecoverableness of our
loss: and ^^stly, O Lord, do we deserve to be so, since wittingly, willingly,
and wilfully we made our selves so.

Of Man's Redemption by Christ.
GOD is both infinitely just, and infinitely merciful: as his Mercy hinders not
the Execution of his Justice, so his Justice bounds not the extent of his
Mercy. Man is here infinitely indebted to God, and utterly unable to pay. God's
Justice requires payment, his Mercy places his Son as principal in the Bond,
who fully satisfies his Justice, and repeales the Judgment pronounced against
our Souls and Bodies. O gracious Father, in this thy Son, our Savior, the Lord
Jesus Christ. Thy love is infinite, like thy self, boundless as thy Divinity,
and so ineffable, that the Tongues of Men and Angels are not able to express
it. Mercy implored, has its first motion or inducement from the suppliant; but
thy mercy first beheld us, when we had no power to view thee, being blinded by
Satan; thy goodness raised us, when we were dead and buried in sin, and thy
free love only procured thee to move in compassion toward us, who were moved
through transgression, contrary to thee: unvaluable and extraordinary gifts are
assured (although silent expressions) of a fixed and ardent affection: But who
O Lord is able to value thy gift, to declare, much less apprehend thy love?
Friendship is reciprocal, for a friend can no sooner exhibit any reality of
benevolence, but, as it were, by reflection, he is presently apprehensive of
the like from the receiver* though not in quantity, as being perhaps less able,
yet in quality, as being not less loving. But O merciful Creator, thy love met
with hatred, the very object of thy favor was thy Enemy, whom thou did not
reconcile with a gift, as fearing his power or ability to resist thee, since he
was thy Creature, thy Prisoner, thy just sentence of Condemnation waiting but
the watchword of thy will to execute him! O unexhausted Fountain of wisdom,
there was no weakness or deficiency in thee, which (Man destroyed) might any
whit disable or diminish thy workmanship in a second Creation, since all thy
works keep time with thy Word! What caused thee then, O powerful Maker, to give
Life, where Death was due; Heaven, where Hell was deserved; Pleasure and Joy,
where Pain and Torment was incurred! Why did thou give mercy and forgiveness
to Man, and denyedst it to Angels; honoring the Humanity with a Personal
Union, which in Adam was a Traitor by Rebellion? Lastly, Why gave thou thy
only begotten Son to Death, that we might be thy Adopted Sons in Life. Ephesians. 2.4.
Lord, my Soul shall answer with St. Paul; God, who is rich in Mercy, for his
great Love wherewith he loved Us, even when we were dead in Sin, has quickened
Us together in Christ, by Grace we are saved. The Mercies of God the Son in our
Redemption.
O only begotten Son of the Father, the Word by which all things were made; O
light of the World, God equal with the Father in Majesty, why from such a
height of Glory, did thou descend to this Vale of Misery, John 1.3.
forsaking Heaven for Earth, making thy Footstool thy Throne, being included
in the Virgins Womb, though the vast Universe cannot comprehend thee? Lord, thy
own Spirit can best express the reason of this thy wonderful humiliation. Jesus
Christ came into this World to save Sinners. Behold, here God made Man; Lord,
Mark 10.45.
how low is the Foundation of thy Mercy laid? although the height reach above
the Clouds, gracious Savior, who does not in this Mirror of thy Love,
perceive the powerfulness of thy Divinity, as being the first and self-mover in
this work of compassion? thy mercy having its first motion from thy self,
according to that, thy own protestation made unto thy Children, Hosea 14.4.
I will love them freely. But O my Soul, now thou have viewed this beautiful
Gate of the Temple with admiration, reverence, and affection, proceed, for the
birth of thy Savior, is but the beginning of his mercies. All Princes are but
Vice-Royes, God only is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: Yet who amongst them
is not welcomed into his Kingdom, with joyful Acclamations, and royal
Solemnities? But lo here, not only the King of Israel, but the great Emperor
of Heaven and Earth, born in Bethelem, the least of the Cities of Judah; a
City, and yet affords no place, but a Stable, to lodge and entertain the Worlds
Monarch; Heaven must point him out by a Star, Angels must preach him, before
any of his own acknowledge him; and then Shepherds are his Heralds to Proclaim
him. The sequel, and after-story of his Life, is no less reproachfully
miserable, than this Prologue of his birth. Poverty clothes Him with obscurity
and affliction 30. Years; in which space, his very Infancy is not free from
Persecution by Herod: witness those Innocents of Bethelem, who suffered for
him, who came to dye for them; he flying into Egypt, from the wrath of Man,
that he might undergo the anger of God, preserving himself not from pain, but
for pain. O Lord, had thy Loves Foundation been laid in Earth, the hatred and
ungratefulness of Man, might have ruined thy proceedings, and induced thee to
have retrograded from thy purposed design; but behold the Root of thy Mercy was
in thy Self, which brought forth the fruits of thy sufferings, thy love being
natural, therefore immutable; none of thy grievous pressures were obscured from
thy view, for thy praescience beheld, as present, all fore-past actions, and
future events; so that thou were not ignorantly, or contrary to thy will,
overtaken by them; no necessity did enforce thee to undergo so difficult a
Task, since constraint is only prevalent in a finite nature; but thou art
infinite, comprehending all things, circumscribed by nothing. Lord Jesus, let
me admire, since I cannot express this thy love, and make me to love thee again
in some measure, that thus have loved me without measure. Here whilst my Soul,
full of wonder, desires to stay and meditate, thy goodness leads me still
forwards, and as it were reproves my lingering thus. O Man, bound not thy
thoughts progress with the first mercies of thy Savior; to wit, that Light
shined in Darkness. John 1.5.
The Word became Flesh; yea, that the life of all things received life, and the
Son of God became the Son of Man: behold, more mysteries of love not regarded,
the Creator rejected of his Creature; John 1.11.
He came unto his own, and his own received him not. He who ordained Holes for
the Foxes, Nests for the Birds of the Air; Mat. 8.20.
he who measured the Earth as with a span, and clothes the Heavens as with a
Garment; he who is a self-moving Sphere, whose Center is every where, whose
circumference is no where; He, even the Savior and Creator of Man, has not
amongst Men whereon to rest his Head. O admirable and unconceivable
humiliation, of greater force, because not enforced; freely, not reciprocally
undertaken* being therefore of infinite merit before God, and worthy of Man's
eternal acknowledgment; what could Man suffer, which the Son of Man did not
undergo? nay, what anger, torment, punishment, or affliction, could an
infinitely enraged Deity inflict, which God made, Man did not endure? for
behold, no sooner does this Son of Righteousness, whose light is in himself,
Luke 2.32.
arise to be a light unto the Gentiles, dissipating the mists of Superstition
and Ignorance, the morning of the Gospel succeeding the Evening of Idolatry, no
sooner did he appear to the glory of his People Israel, dispersing those Clouds
of Ceremonies, which Veiled the mercy Seat, but that present Generation,
prefering Darkness before Light, interposed unbelief to Eclipse his splendor:
witness John 3.19. And this is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the
World, and Men loved Darkness rather than Light. Also, they retorted the beams
of his Priestly Office, Luke 5.21.
saying, None but God has Power to forgive Sins. They shuned the Light of his
Gospel-Prophesie and Teaching; witness that loving Lamentation, O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, Luke 13.34.
and stonest them that are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy
Children together, as a Hen her Brood under her Wings, but ye would not!
Lastly, they denied and rejected his Dominion, with that abnegation, We have no
King but Caesar. Joh. 19 15.
Lord, were the Children of Israel so severely punished, Number. 16.47. 2 Match.
Chap. 3.
for repining against Aaron, though but a ^igure of Thee? Was Heliodorus so
suddenly and fearfully tormented for resisting the High Priest? And do thou,
who thus revengedst, and defendest thy substitutes, whilst thou were in
Heaven, as being the sum of all Figures, the substance of all shadows, and an
Eternal High Priest, according to the Order of Melchizedeck: Heb. 5.10.
I say, do thou now, being on Earth, nearer to their reproaches, and yet not
further off from thy power, pass over their iniquities, suffering thy self to
be crucified by them, whom thy Justice should have crucified, to be sacrificed
by the wrath of them, whom thy anger (had thou come to destroy, Luke 9.56.
not to save) should have sacrificed? Was Noah, Lot, Moses, Elisha, all
Prophets, all Types of Thee, 2 Pet. 2.5, 6, 7.
by thee aided and made victorious over their unbelieving and insulting
adversaries, and why do not thou, O Lord, of all Prophets, being now thine
own Orator, and yet despised, Numb. 16.32.
demolish Corazin, or Bethsaida, with other Cities of Judea, 2 King. 21.24.
either by Water or Fire? O Lord, thou art still the same God: then thy Justice
was manifested, but now thy mercy is magnified, as appears by that Deploration
over Jerusalem, Luke 13.34.
where the Floods of Waters are now converted to an Inundation of Tears, the
Fire and Brimstone to love-burning, and pitying sighs: though some murmuring,
ask, From whence have thou this Authority? others blaspheming, make thee a
Sabbath-breaker, Luke 20.2. John 9.16. Luke 11.15. Mat. 11.9.
and esteem thee as a Conjurer, a Glutton, a Wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans
and Sinners; yet have thou not now a devouring Gulf for such Repiners, Teeth of
wild Beasts for such calumniating Blasphemers, unless we behold that one alone
bottomless Gulf of thy mercy most extended, and most deep, even to Man in the
depth of his misery* Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. Luke
23.34.
O Christ, Did fear dead thy revenge due to those Sinners against their own
Souls? No, fear is a duty of the Creature ruled by thee, not overruling thee;
Passion is incident to inferiors, and therefore below thee, which have no
Superior: Did want of ability smother thy anger? No, thy Power is not
extinguished, no less than ^nfinite, although in thy humiliation clouded,
during thy pleasure. Lord, why did those many Legions of Heavenly Soldiers
suffer thy Enemies to carry thee, their General, away Captive? those Bonds,
which could not resist Sampson's force, fetter the Arms of thee the Almighty,
who gave him strength; those Nails fasten thee to the Cross, who were as able
to deliver thy self, as thou were willing to suffer. O Savior, my thankful
Soul, by way of confession, replies thus, The unmeasurableness of thy love
patiently swallowed up all these contumelies and reproaches; for love instead
of revenge, thou forgavest thine Enemies; instead of calling for power to
destroy Man, thou proclamedst his Salvation; crying out, It is finished: the
Angels, John 19.30.
when thou were attached by Judas, although within thy Call, must only be
admiring Witnesses of thy Patience, not Executors of those Traitors. Lastly,
thy Mercy only manacled thy hands, and nailed thee to thy Cross, making Thee a
Transgressor, by the bearing of our Sins, that we might become righteous,
through the Imputation of thy Merits, 1 Pet. 2.24.
according to that of Peter, Who his own Self bare our Sins in his Body on the
Tree, that we being dead to Sin, should live in Righteousness, by whose Stripes
we are healed. These things, gracious Savior, yea infinitely more, have thou
done for us; which since we cannot apprehend, let us with reverence admire,
rejoicing that we have viewed thee in thy Birth, to be our Kinsman, in thy Life
our Example, in thy Death our Savior, after Death our Resurrection, and Glory,
Lord, what art thou not unto us? a Balm for our Wounds, a Laver for our Souls,
a Sacrifice for our Sins, and the Life of our Death. What have thou not
suffered for us? Were thou not humbled in thy Birth, persecuted all thy Life,
and though innocent, adjudged to Death, that our Nature might be exalted, our
Life enlarged, our Guilt acquitted? Were thou not scourged, disrobed, Crowned
with Thorns, lifted upon the Cross, derided, athirst, forsaken, and slain, that
we might be delivered from the Judgments of thy Father, clothed with thy
Righteousness, Crowned with thy Glory, lifted up into Heaven, freed from the
mocks of Satan, satisfied with the sweet draughts of thy Love, received of
thee for ever, to Live Eternally? What shall I render unto the Lord for all his
benefits toward me? Psalm. 116.12.
I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon his Name, saying, Glory be to
God in the Highest, Luke 2:14.
Peace on Earth, good Will toward Men: Praise, and Honor, and Glory, and
Power be unto Him that sits on the Throne, Rev. 5.13.
and unto the Lamb for evermore.

Soli Deo Gloria.
A Concluding Prayer.
O Eternal, Infinite, and Everlasting God, by whom all things were Created,
that are made, and in whom we Live, Move, and have our Being; I, thy poor
Creature, humbly beseech Thee to deal graciously with me, thy Servant,
pardoning all my Offenses, and passing by all the errors, wants, and
imperfections, committed in these my feeble Meditations. O Lord, I praise Thee
for thy favorable assistance of my weakness, ever confessing thy great
Goodness in my Creation, the Pride, Incredulity, and Weakness of my Nature, in
Man's Fall, and thy Infinite Mercy in my Redemption. O let the one rejoice me,
the other humble me, and the last make me obediently thankful in the observant
performance of all thy Commands; that so I may glorify Thee, which is the end
of my Being, repent, and believe in Thee, who art the Resurrection of my Fall,
and live with Thee Eternally which is the Compleatment of my Salvation, and
fulfilling of my Hope, which is fixed in Jesus Christ: To whom with the Father,
and the Holy Spirit, be all possible Praise, Obedience, and Thanksgiving, now
and for ever.

Amen.
Upon several temporal Mercies, Providence, and Deliverances Graciously
Vouchsafed, By the Lord, (Infinite in Goodness) To the most unworthy Author;
And to many also of his near Relations.

EBENEZER HITHERTO has GOD helped me. 1 Sa. 7.12. Bethel; the House of God,
Genesis 28.19. A Pillar of PRAISE Erected by An English JACOB unto the only
Infinite, Eternal, and Almighty JEHOVAH, in all Sincerity, Humility, Reverence
and filial fear. Hallelujah. Eternal FATHER, Glorious SON, and Holy GHOST,
Three Persons, but One GOD, in Essence, who the HOST Of Heaven and Earth did
make, and art Goodness, Power, Justice, Truth, Love, Wisdom, Holiness;

To Thee, with JACOB, -- SAMUEL, A PILLAR I -- ERECT, to tell All Future AGES,
to thy PRAISE, Thy MERCIES to Me all my DAYS: Their's, like their Faith, was
of firm Stone, Mine, weak, like Me, a PAPER One. O let thy Strength made
Perfect be, In my Great -- IMBECILITY. Two Mites, Goats Hair, from Hearts most
free, Are JEWELS, in Thy TREASURY: LORD, had I Men, and Angels Tongues, That
KEY would be below the SONGS, Of THANKSGIVING, I owe to THEE, For what in
CHRIST thou did for ME; From which Eternal Love, forth Springs The Temporal
Mercies, which these Hymns Commemorate. O let Free -- GRACE Be Adamantine, and
my -- BASE, And IRON-HEART, to THEE attract Sealed by Thy SACRAMENTAL Act, So
shall my Person, and these Sheets, Which I prostrate at THY blessed FEET,
Received be, as being PERFVM'D By thy sweet SPIRIT, and only Tuned Unto thy
Praise; and thy Great NAME, Be blessed by ALL that read the same; Who shall, by
Favors showed to ME, Be moved to Love, and Trust in THEE.

Accept dear Lord in Goodness what is here Thine, And in Thy MERCY Pardon what
is Mine. Yea, Let this Humble Work, a future BASIS be, For SAINTS to raise
Colums of Glory unto Thee.

-- Place this before Occasional Meditations, at Folio 347

AN EXHORTATORY EPISTLE TO THE Nobility, and Gentry of Great Britain.
Right Honorable,
NOble and generous Spirits of this famous Island: Whose Persons I truly love
and honor, both as Christians, and of the same Nation with me; as also for
your excellent wits, parts, and gifts; who equallize Tully and Virgil in
Eloquence and Poetry; Witness your many Romances, Comedies, Tragedies, and
amorous Works, now extant. O consider all you that are thus rarely accomplished,
both by Art and Nature, that you must shortly give an account of these
deposited Talents; and of your misspent time, and stewardships, at the near
approaching Sessions, and Jail-delivery of your Souls, out of the Prison of
your Bodies; and at the great Assize, the dreadful Day of Judgment, to our
great God, and to the Lord Jesus the Judge of the quick, and the dead; Who has
made all things for his Glory, and the wicked for the Day of his Wrath. O will
you not then blush for shame, and be confounded at what you now pride your
selves in; when Satan, your Maecenas, shall then be your Accuser, and produce
as evidence against you, Item, so many precious Hours lost, such high strains,
and Veins of Witrun wast, such excellent Language defiled, and abused; and
such, and such, a happy Muse ravished, and debaucht: in the compiling, and
publishing so many false, and unhallowed Legions, to stir up, and inflame your
own Lusts, and the sleeping passions, and corruptions of the Youth of both
Sexes, in these Nations; So many Stage Plays, the Scoffers of goodness, and
holiness of conversation; the Consumers of useful time, and of the innate
Virtue, Modesty, and Estates of all kinds of Persons; as also so many Frothy,
and Airy amorous Verses, Ditties, and Songs, the Nurses and Panders of all
manner of looseness, and uncleanness, in all sorts of People.

Had these precious Stones, and Gems, these sparkling Diadems (I mean your
choice Indowments) been set in Aaron's Breast Plate, or been offered up as a
gift to God, who gave you them; to be for the Ornament and praise of his
Church, his Temple: How brightly would they have shined, as in their proper
Sphere, for which he created them; Whereas they are now by their fall, from
their Heavenly Orb, to this vile Earth, of sin and vanity; become like so many
sliding Stars, which whilst they pass through the darkened Air of corrupted,
and deceived Observers, give forth a false Light, and suddenly are extinct,
leaving behind them nothing but a corrupting Belly, and a Hellish, and
sulphurious stink, to the view, and in the Nostrils of all Divine Astronomers.

Is it your highest honor to be styled Christians? have you at your
Installment in Baptism, vowed, and promised, to resist the Devil, the World,
and the Flesh? And will you by your wanton Poems, and vain Sonnets, offer
Sacrifices to Satan, the God of this World, and to his Idol, the World, and
blot, and blur your sacred and glorious Title, and dishonor, and profane that
holy Name by which you are called? Has the Lord Jehovah, your gracious God,
and Almighty Savior, who was the first great Orator, and Poet that wrote upon
Earth; given you an unparalled Example, by the Pen of Moses, in the whole
Book of Deuteronomy, the very Marrow of Divine Eloquence, Deuteronomy. chap. 1. verse.
3. and in that Elixar of Poesy, that Song of the Lord's own composing; Deuteronomy.
32. to the end of the 43. verse? Has his choicest Saints, lest you sublime
patterns of Heavenly Poesy, Witness the Songs of Moses, and Meriam, Exodus 15.
unto the 22. verse. and Psalm. 90. Of Deborath, and Barak. Jud. 5. to the end; Of
King David, 2 Samuel 22. from Verse. 2. to the end: Besides his Book of Psalms,
upon diverse subjects, witness also the 11. Psalms of Asaph, beginning with the
73. Psalm. and ending with the 82. Psalm? The Psalms of Heman, and Ethan, the
Ezrahites, Psalm. 88. and 89. The Canticles, or Song of Songs, written by King
Solomon, besides One Thousand and Five other Songs; 1 Kings 4.32. The Songs
written by the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 5.1. and Chap. 26.1. the Song of Habakkuk,
Chap. 3. to the end; And in the New Testament, the Song of the blessed Virgin;
and of Simeon, and the many Angelical, and Heavenly Hymns, wherewith the
mysterious Book of the Revelations, is gloriously imbroidered?

Besides these excellent Presidents, and Examples, the sacred Scriptures are
full of Precepts, enjoining and commanding this thankful, cheerful, and
singing temper, to be in all his Saints, in these words, and the like;
Whosoever offers praise, glorifieth me; Psalm. 50.23. O come let us sing unto
the Lord, let us make a joyful noise to the Rock of our Salvation, Psalm. 95.1.
The like, Psalm. 96.1. and 98.1. Praise the Lord, for it is good to sing praises
unto our God, for it is pleasant, and praise is comely, Psalm. 147.1. In the New
Testament we are commanded to rejoice ever-more. 1 These. 51.6. and to sing with
Grace in our hearts, Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, Col. 3.16. In
which holy exercise* our blessed Savior has given us his Example after his
last Supper, Math. 26.30. And that blessed Poet, and singer of Israel, that Man
after God's own heart, King David; Who upon diverse gracious providence,
deliverances and mercies, as well private, as public, penned many Psalms; As,
Psalm. 3.
upon the occasion of his flight from his Son Absolon, the slanderous words,
Psalm. 7.
and treacherous actings of Cush the Benjamite, the Psalm of thanksgiving
before mentioned for his many deliverances from Saul, and all his Enemies;
Psalm: 18.
And at the Dedication of his House. Psalm. 30.
To these I shall add the Psalm penned by him, when he changed his behavior
before Abimelech, alias, Achish, King of Gath; His Song of loves, or
commendation of Solomon's Queen, the Egyptian; Psalm. 34.
The Tipe of the Gentile Church; his penitential Psalm, Psalm. 45.
when Nathan had been with him, after he had gone into Bathsheba, Psalm. 51.
his Poem concerning Doeg's false accusation of Abimelech the High Priest, his
Psalm upon the Ziphims, discovery of him to Saul; Psalm. 52. Psalm. 54. Psalm. 56.
Psalm. 57. Psalm. 142. Psalm. 59. Psalm. 60. Psalm. 63. Psalm. 72. Psalm. 92.
another when the Philistims took him in Gath; Also his two thankful Memorials
of his deliverance from Saul in the Cave; and another for his preservation,
when Saul sent, and they watched his House to kill him; A third upon his
Victory over Aram, Naharaim, Aram, Zobath, and against the Edomites; A fourth
concerning his abode in the Wilderness of Judah; to these may yet further be
observed, the Song written for his Son Solomon, and his Psalm for the Sabbath
Day.

To these Scripture examples, which are indeed the very sacred Rhetoric and
Poesy of the Eternal God the Holy Ghost; lest you should think it too high
presumption to write after so rare a Copy; Let me remember you of, and set
before you also, ^s so many laudable, and excellent Patterns, a few of the many
famous Works of our own Countrymen; such as the divine, and eloquent
Contemplations, and occasional Meditations of Doctor Hall, Spencer's Fairy
Queen; Deveout H^rberts sweet guards, and honest Wither's Poems; which are as
so many eminent Piramides, of white and black Marble, whose tops point toward
Heaven as glorifying God, as their chief aim, and end; and whose substance,
and Basis, shall as their living Monuments, stand fixed and undemolish upon
Earth, to their perpetual honor; and as ^eaching Pillars, to Posterity for
ever. Here possibly some of you may object, that you are to seek of subjects to
employ our parts, and gift^ upon, to the glory of God, and the good and
Instruction of your Brethren.

To whom I answer; View, and contemplate the wonderful Works of our Almighty
and most wise Creator, in the vast Canony of the Heavens, and the large Globe
of the Earth, and Seas; and you shall find matter enough, for all the Tongues,
Pens, and gifts of Men, and Angels; Be not like the bruit Beasts that remain
sensual, and dumb in the midst of wonders. Are you professedly Christians, and
shall that great and glorious subject, the admirable and stupendous work of
your Redemption, by the Lord Jesus Christ, God-Man, the Savior anointed, the
Mysterious work of the Incomprehensible Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
the Eternal God blessed for ever, a work above all expressions and conceptions;
yea, above the praises of holy Saints, made perfect, and glorious Angels;
wherein is held forth, (if ever you hope to be saved from Hell, and endless
torments) your free, and eternal Election, by God the Father, to everlasting
Life, 1 Pet. 1.2. Romans 15.16. Romans 5^.1, 9. 1 Pet. 1.3. Col. 1.6, 8. ^^ 27 Romans
3.^^. Romans ^.32. Romans 5.18. Romans 8.4. 1 Cor. 1.30. Romans 5.10. Joh. 1.1.25.14.
Heb. 1.23.
and Glory; your effectual calling, and sanctification by the holy Spirit, your
free Justification by the alone righteousness of Christ, and ravishing lively
hope of a never ending happy, and blessed state, in the highest Heavens: The
blessed fruit, and effect of the infinite* and free love of God, of the
unvaluable Righteousness, Merit, Death, Passion, Satisfaction, and continued
Mediation of Christ our Lord; that Person who is God, in our Nature, the
eternal begotten and beloved Son of the Father, the brightness of his glory,
and the express Image of his Person; I say, shall this Miracle of divine love,
this wonder of wonders, these your chief, and greatest concerns, together with
its most beautiful attendants, Faith, Hope, Love, and the rest of the holy
Image of God in you be slighted, forgotten, and not thought worthy to be the
subject of your choicest Oratory and Poetry, and of the best of your gifts,
wit, and parts; (O Jewish Ingratitude) shall a Heavenly Host of Angels, (much
less concerned than you) begin, give, and leave you a pattern, in that short,
Luke 2.14.
but full Anthem, at our Savior's Birth; Glory be to God on High; on Earth,
peace; good will toward Men? And will you be still wickedly, yea brutishly
unthankful, and not follow their holy example; shall not the French Druids, and
our own British Bards, stand up in Judgment against you, at the last Day?

But possible some of you will say, you are as yet but Babes in Christ, and
your Muse cannot as yet mount so high, as these sublime Mysteries: to whom I
answer; Is not the large Mapp of God's great, constant, and mavelous
providence, actings, and deliverances, toward his Church in all Ages, even
from the beginning of the World, until this Day, spread before your Eyes in the
sacred Scriptures of truth, and in Ecclesiastical, and other Histories? Yea, in
your own Nation, in this our Age of wonders? All which, in honor, and
gratitude to God, and the edification, and encouragement of his Church, calls
for from you, in Imitation of God's Saints in former times, (as has been before
declared) many Triumphant Arches, Pillars, and Monuments of praise; both in
Prose, and Verse; never to be worn out by time, or thrown down by the Malice,
and slanders of traducing Persons.

But probably, some of you, may be Politicians, and time-servers, and therefore
(although convins't of your duty) think it neither prudent, nor safe to
discover either your Religion, Judgment, or affection. To such, that like
Naman, to the Prophet Elisha, say, God be merciful to me in this; I cannot say,
go in peace; but this I will say, that Ingratitude includes all other sins
against God, and Man; ( Si ingratum, dixeris Omnia dixeris;) Wherefore that all
such may convince, and Judge themselves, notwithstanding all these Excuses, and
subter fuges; Let me ask them this question; Have you from your birth, until
now, received no mercies, nor blessings from God to your Souls, to your Bodies,
or to your Relations? No recovery from spiritual or bodily Diseases, nor
deliverances from spiritual and corporal enemies, and dangers? no blessings,
temporal, spiritual, and eternal; no gracious, and extraordinary providence to
you, or yours? If then you cannot deny, but must acknowledge to have received
from the Lord, many favors of this Nature, O may I not say of the most of the
English Nobility and Gentry, as once our Savior of the Ten Leapers, Were there
not Ten cleansed, where are the Nine? Only One returning to give thanks.
Wherefore lest your unthankfulness, mud and stop up the stream of God's mercy
to you, and the Nation for the future; and since it is God's commands, the
practice of God's Saints, and your duty, as Creatures, and Christians, to be
Praisefull; Yea, lest your Talents be taken from you, and given to others, and
you receive that most terrible Sentence, declared by our Lord at his return, to
the unprofitable Servant, that hid his Talent in a Napkin; Bind him Hand and
Foot, Mat. 22.13.
and cast him into everlasting Fire. O let that fearful Declaration, like a
Thunderclap, rouse, and awaken you out of your sleepy sloathfulness; Romans
13.12.
the Night is far spent, the Day is at hand, even of your Judgment, and mine;
Wherefore walk as Children of the Light, Ephesians. 5.8.16.
and Husband that Inch of your Life, which is behind, redeeming the time,
because the Days you live in, are evil. Stir up the Grace that is in you,
meditate of, and contemplate the ineffable excellencies, and attributes of our
Incomprehensible God, as they are manifested in his glorious actings, and the
forementioned particulars; Pen, Publish, Print, to this, and future
Generations, his wonderful works and praises: So shall you be Angelical Heralds
of his Glory; Grandize, and Ennobilize your Nobility, dignifie, and
hononourably perpetuate your Gentility: And not like most of the preceding
Peers, and Gentry of this Nation, (which is worth your observation) have like
them your Names written in the Dust, and buried in oblivion: O join then with
Angels, and Ark-Angels, and all the Triumphant, and glorified Saints in Heaven;
in spiritual, and divine Hallelujahs here, and you shall certainly sing your
part with them, in the blessed Chore of Glory, to Eternity.

Right honorable, and renowned Gentlemen; as I have presumed to present and
direct this weak Piece to your view, so what I have above written in Zeal to
God's glory, and unfeigned love to your Souls, shall be my Apology to the
following subject: As that my end therein is primarily the glory of God, whose
praises is my duty, as well as his command, to exalt in my own Soul, and
others, as has been declared, and to perpetuate, as much as in me lies, to my
Posterity, and to all future Generations, what great, and free love, mercy, and
goodness, he has showed to me, and mine; herein endeavoring to imitate the
Holy example of that Royal Psalmist King David, who has thus in Verse expressed
both his resolution and practice; Come unto me all ye that fear God, Psalm.
66.17.
and I will tell you, what he has done for my Soul: (I say for my Soul) as may
appear in some degree, in the alluzions, and applications in several temporal
mercies, and personal deliverances, commemorated in this Book; I acknowledging
to Angels, and Men, that God's Fatherly love in Christ, and care of my poor
Soul, in supporting, preserving, and delivering it from Sin, Satan, and the
World; my mighty Adversaries, and from innumerable spiritual evils, and
temptations; Do as far transcend (to the glory of his free grace be it spoken)
my temporal and corporal deliverances, and mercies, as the Heaven is above the
Earth, and my unvaluable Soul, is more precious, than this poor Hut of Earth, I
sojourn in.

Here possibly, some great Men, or rare Wits, who (Eagle-like) soar far above
my mean parts and gifts, may uncharitably sensure, and object, (to say no more)
What does this poor Man's Personal, or spiritual mercies, and deliverances,
concern us? To such, I answer; Are you Christians, and fellow members of
Christ's Body, and will you not weep with those that weep, and rejoice with
those that rejoice? As God commands you? Romans 12.15.
Can you be living Members, 1 Cor. 12. Verse. 18. until 28.
although in the highest rank in this spiritual Body, and not sympathize, and
be affected with the grief, or weal, of the lowest Christians, its Feet? O take
heed, lest such pride, and insensibleness, declare you to be no living Member
of one Church; However, I am assured, all those that fear God, now, and in Ages
to come, shall read with delight, rejoice, and praise God with me, for his
gracious providence and merciful deliverances, recorded in this following
Treatise; Which I although clothed in a plain and low style, in the Opinion,
it may be of some carping Momusses, and overcurious Critics, whom nothing
will please, but what is their own, or what is like ( Sphynkes Ridles) to be
understood by a few; Or that is not imbroidered with humane strains of Wit, and
Eloquence, or bumbasted, and imbossed with affected praises, and needless
Epithites. For my part, I have not endeavored to humor such; nor to drown
matter in words, but without affectation, vaunting, or racking in Prose, or in
Verse, I have desired to keep to my own Genuine, and natural Dialect; And to be
understood, rather than to be so obscure, as to need a Comment; What you find
is good herein, it flows (although through my Leaden Pipe) from the Spirit of
the Lord, the unexhaustible Fountain of Grace, and goodness; what is
incongruous or evil, it is the sinful slime, and filth, which naturally cleaves
to every humane Aquaeduct, (except the Holy Scripture) (Nam Humanum est Errare)
which being in voluntary is pardoned by the Lord, I doubt not of yours; unless,
I should be so uncharitable, as to think you disdain to imitate so Divine a
Pattern.

To conclude, my Lords, and Gentlemen, I confess I was heartily grieved for my
own, and your great ingratitude, (when upon a diligent inquiry, I could find
few, or none, (Monuments, or Returns) of this Nature; although I am assured,
all of you are vastly indebted to our great and gracious God, for numberless,
spiritual, and temporal blessings, mercies, and deliverances; and which is
worse, many of you have great Incomes given you by him, and to this end, of
wit, parts, and gifts, with which you might, and ought, to make to him a just,
and thankful repayment; especially, since our liberal Heavenly Father, expects
from you, but his own Coin, lent you to improve, to his glory, and but a
sincere, praiseful and declared acknowledgments for real, and unvaluable
benefits.

This serious and sad consideration of my own, and your sinful Omissions,
stirred me up speedily (lest I should dye ungrateful) to Pen, and publish this
Work, not only in discharge of my duty to the only great and glorious God, my
loving, and merciful Father; But as an humble Essay, and Copy, for you to write
by; which, if but any one of you follow, I shall rejoice much, because such an
one, has received great good thereby, and the Lord by him, much glory; But if
none, I shall weep in secret, for your Ingratitude: And have much joy, and
peace, in that herein, I have done my duty to God, and to you; But I hope
better things of you: In which charitable expectation, I subscribe my self, my
Lords and Gentlemen,

Your most humble Servant In the Lord, J. H.

OCCASIONAL MEDITATIONS.
ARGUMENT. Upon the Lord's most gracious Sustentation of Me, when I was Born a
Month before my full time.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
EVery extraordinary acting of Nature, is not only to be admired, but to be
observed by us; wherefore, was I so overhasty to be Born, which the wisest of
the Heathen, accounted the bginning of their misery? Was I weary of my Eight
Months Prison, and ambitious of a freer Place, and Air? Or was my heart more
hot than others, and therefore sooner needed the refreshing fanning of my
Lungs? Or was the Womb weary of such a sinful burden? or rather, did my loving
Mother's affectionate longing to see, and enjoy me, occasion this Abortion? was
it weakness in her, or too early strength in me, that relaxt or brake in Pieces
the silver Bonds of the Womb? was I by the care of the Nurse wrapped in the Skin
of a Lamb, (as in a second Womb) to preserve, and renew my heat, and life? were
some, or all these the natural causes of my unexpected Birth, and preservation;
yet it becomes me, as a Christian, to look far higher, even to him, who is the
cause of causes, the being of Beeings, Natura Naturans; God blessed for ever;
whose Eternal Will and Decree was the first cause, the others, but secondary;
Yea, he was the Midwife that brought me forth, thus sooner, into this World of
sin, and misery; In sense of which my sad condition (as by a natural instinct
(with all other Infants) the first thing I did, then, was to weep, and cry; How
much more cause have I now, and that experimentally, with humble Paul, to cry
out, O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of Death;
and to sigh out this my Prayer, and spiritual Hymn unto the Lord?

The NEW BIRTH. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the foregoing Subject.
O Blessed Creator, let my first Birth (be,
A Figure of my second Birth to thee;)
Sooner than many others: 'Twas thy grace,
That fired my heart, during my youthful race,
And caused me, seek, the free refreshing Gales
Of thy blessed Spirit, to cool, and fill the Sails,
Of its desires; That from the noisome Womb,
And dark some Jaile of Sin, I might become,
A freeborn Son to thee, and change my place,
This Earth, for Heaven; the Birth of Sin, for Grace.
'Twas thy free-love, which did desire to see,
(Blessed Parent!) thy own Image, born in Me.
That poured clean Water on me, washed away
My Natures Blood, and stench, and did allay,
Ezekiel. 16.6.
My shivering doubts, and fears by putting on,
Thy Lambs warm Skin, the Imputation
1 Cor. 1.30.
Of thy Sons righteousness, that from that heat,
A life of grace might spring, and be complete.
Lord, since thou might have made my Grave in Womb,
Or by miscarrying, clo^'d me in my Tomb;
Or made my life, through sin, a living Death,
A treasury of wrath. Let my new Birth,
And life, bring forth to thee, the thankful fruit
Of holiness; So shall I Retribute,
Thy own in my poor Mite; and to thy praise,
Live thankfulness, sincerely all my Days.
Amen.
ARGUMENT. The REMEMBRANCER. A Psalm for the Lord's Day: Being my thankful
acknowledgment of the Lord's many Mercies to me, in my Formation, and Being.
LOrd, who giv'st in mercy great,
A seventh Day to meditate
On thy works of Creation,
Give me grace to think upon,
Thy great goodness unto me,
Who did bring,
From a nothing,
Me, a something for to be.
Next, that me thou have not made,
As frail Flowers, which quickly fade;
Nor a Toad, a Dog, a Swine,
Or a Creature Serpentine;
But a Being rational,
Fit to see,
And to know thee,
Great Creator of us all.
That I was no Innocent,
Organ-less Deficient;
Nor a Monster from my Birth,
Void of shape, a shame to Earth:
Thus, and worser, had I been,
But thy love,
Was far above
Such, thy just reward of sin.
Thou art he, that gav'st me light,
In a Land made free from night,
Of dark Antichristian Mists,
Pagans, and Mahometists;
Where poor Infants with their breath,
Sucking are,
Infectious Air,
Live a Life far worse than Death.
Here thou did unto me give,
In thy life, new life to live;
Where so many love the Night,
And with Owls, do hate the Light;
Yea, like Fish in Jordan's streams,
Swim with ease,
Into dead Seas,
Sleep, and perish, in false Dreams;
Wherefore, Lord, upon thy Day,
I will praise thy Name for aye;
Till thy second Sabbath (blessed)
Gives to me Eternal Rest,
Where from World, Sin, Satan, free;
I shall ring,
And sweetly sing,
Hallelujah's, out to thee.
ARGUMENT. Upon God's gracious deliverance of me, from the Infection of the
Plague, when being a Child, I was present in my Nurses Hand, at the Bedside
of one that was sick, and dyed thereof: whereby many of that Town were
infected, and dyed.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
CHaritable Visits to our Neighbors, many times prove uncharitable to our
selves; such proved this, of my self, Nurse, and others, to the sick Bed of the
Vicar of the Town; by which the Inhabitants were infected, and many of his
Parishioners followed him, not only to, but into the Grave; whereof many were
Children, Plants of my Age, and standing: Cruel Death, as an Enemy to time, and
Mankind ( Saturn-like) delighting to devour tender Babes, as well as aged
Men, which his enmity, our good God converts to our good; that so being
fore-warned, we might be fore-arm'd, and always prepared to encounter him; as
being both the most certain, and the uncertain Adversa^y.

O my Soul, has Death often by sickness, and danger, shaken thy Glass, and
lest Summons and Suppenaes at thy Door; and has the great Numberer of thy
Sands, and Days, from time to time, sent thee Repreeves, with King Phillip's
Motto, written on the backside of them; Mortalis es* Is more than three
Quarters of thy Years of Life, posted away, in Childhood, Youth, Manhood, sin,
and vanity; O let the small remainder with Solomon be thy Ecclesiastes, to
preach this his experimental truth, to thy Children, and all following
Generations.

Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity and vexation of Spirit; that so thou
despising all things under the Sun, may soar aloft, and enjoy that only chief
good, that is above the Sun; thy God, in Christ, blessed for ever: to whom in a
thankful remembrance of this great signal, and primitive mercy and deliverance,
I humbly present this following Ejaculation, and thanksgiving.

The ANTIDOTE. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject.
FI^ lazy Soul! shall the Idolaters give,
Unto dead Marbles, praise? and will thou live
Unthankful? Shall God's Instrument, thy Tongue,
Be tuned to folly, not unto his Song?
When in thy Youth, an ignorant charity,
Led thee into Death's ambush; He stood bie,
Could else, one, and the same, infectious breath,
Preser^e thy Life, which brought to others Death?
O in this mercy, greater mercies see,
Death swallowing others, swallowed up of thee!
Lord, since in dangers, thou new life did give,
Let Souls anew, as well as Bodies live;
That filled with praise, faith, hope, and fervent love;
Heart, Tongue, may bless thee here, my Soul above.
Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon a dangerous fall from a Horse, when I was a Child, whereby I
received three hurts, one in the Head, another in the Arm, and a third in the
Leg, and upon God's mercy in my recovery thereof.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
SInful falls are a just cause of falls under Judgments, my first fall in Adam
(could my Childhood have pleaded innocence as to all other) deserved not only
this, but that which is infinitely worse; a remediless fall into Hell. The
indulgency of my Parents in satisfying my childish desires, and my too early
venturousness, together with the much mettle and ill qualities of my Horse,
were the external occasion of this my sad disaster; which left me not only on
the ground, and cruelly hurt, but for a time senseless; and only fit to be
carried in a Coach unto my Fathers House, whose loving care prepared not only
one, to set my dislocated Bones; but applied Balsomes unto my wounds, by which
means, through God's mercy, I obtained health, strength, and a perfect recovery.

YOVTHS EMBLEM. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject.
O Gracious God, and Father; let my sense,
Be spiritualized, and from each Providence,
As Bees from Flowers, suck sweetness; then I shall
Praise thee for greater mercies, by this Fall;
Which was from thee, a mild Correction,
For Adam's, and my own Transgression:
For had thou judged severely, I had fell,
Not only from my Horse, but into Hell.
O Lord, me thinks, by this sad fall, and fate,
Thou mind'st me of my Unregenerate State,
When I indulged my will, and rid upon
A wanton Steed, my loose affection,
Which gave me many falls, wounded my Head,
My Reason-Faculties; yea, left me Dead,
And hurt in Arm, and Leg, senceless, and mad,
Unfit to act, or walk upright. Thus sad
Was that my Youthful State, when from above,
Thou did in thy Caroche, of Faith, and Love,
(Dear Father) draw me home, and for my good,
Balsom'd, and healed my wounds, with thy Sons Blood.
O let those parts, which thou have doubly cured,
Be doubly thankful, and henceforth impour'd,
To contemplate, walk in, and act thy will,
Since real praise is, thy Word, to fulfill.
Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon God's gracious preserving of me from any harm, by Eight several
Falls, from my Horse.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
MY whole Life, O Lord, has been a Circle, a Map, filled full with thy loving
and extraordinary Providence; which should I at any time forget, I might
justly deserve to be forgotten of thee. In these eight merciful deliverances, I
bear witness, and seal to that great, and comfortable truth, the constant, and
powerful Ministration of thy glorious Angels, for the preservation of thy
Children; according to those comfortable promises, Heb. 1.14.
That thy Angels are ministering Spirits, for the good of thy Elect; And that
they shall hold them up in their hands, lest they should dash their Feet
against a stone. Psalm. 91.11, 12.
Who else but they, (as thy blessed Instruments) did put under their Hands, and
aleviate such, and so many down-falls, that they broke not into many pieces
(such a Venice Glass as my frail Body) nor dislocated in the least, any of the
many wheels of so curious a Watch? That is so soon, and easily put into
disorder, as appears in the frequent, and sad disasters of others; that by such
overthrows, have lost their lives, or the use of their Limbs. O Lord, great and
special mercies, call for from me, great and singular praises; which after the
example of the Man after thy own heart, I humbly offer to thee, in this Psalm,
and thankful memorial of these thy many Preservations.

The OCTONARY. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject.
DEar Lord, our Sins, according to thy Curse,
Have burdened Earth, and Creatures; yea, far worse.
Our God, no wonder then, thy Subjects pay,
Vengeance on them, that do thee disobey;
And that the Horse, so often, his Rider throws,
For to regain his Freedom, from such Foes;
Trampling them under Feet, that he might see
That which is burdensome to him, Earth, thee.
Eight times (O Lord) have I thus humbled, lain
Prostrate; As often, Thou have me raised again,
(In goodness) safe, and sound; O let these falls,
Be, both from Sin, and Mercy, blessed calls,
Remembrancers; The one, these dangers brought,
And by the other, my Salvation's wrought;
Blessed Love, and Wisdom, that thus throws me down
To raise me up again, unto a Crown!
Lord, let this close be the Echo of that sound;
Where Sin exceeds, thy Grace much more abounds.
Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon God's merciful Preservation of me from any Harm, when being a
Child, and alone in my Fathers Coach; the Horses running down a steep Hill,
the Boot flew open, by a jolt in the way, and I was cast out of the Coach upon
the Ground; and taken up without any the least hurt, or maim.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
O Lord God, who have been a gracious Father to me in my Childhood, as well as
now, in my elder Years; How great cause have I to trust in thee continually;
and to celebrate thy praise to future Generations? O that Men would praise the
Lord for his goodness, Psalm. 107.8.
and for his wonderful works to the Children of Men.

Although violent motions are not perpetual, yet are they very often hurtful,
and destructive, as is evidenst, by the sad effects of Earthquakes,
Whirl-winds, and Hurricanes, Thunders, and Lightning; Psalm. 148.8.
yet all these, yea, Fire, and Hail, Snow, and Vapor, stormy Wind fulfilling
(O Lord) thy Word, shall praise thee, and declare thy gracious Presence with
thy Children; Exodus 14 21.
as once in the Red Sea, Dan. 3.25.27.
the Fiery Furnace, and now with me the greatest of Sinners, the least of
Saints; yea, unworthy to be called thy Son; else, when I was cast violently out
of a Coach, by a Jolt that forced open the Boot, Luk 15.21.
the swifter and violent motions of the hinder Wheels, had taken advantage of
the much slower, and heavy motion of my falling Body, and run over, and broken
my Bones, or pitched me upon my Head, to the destruction of my sense, or life,
as has often happened by such accidents: But if an evil spirit was in the
Horses, as once in the Gadarine Swine, which is frequently the occult cause, of
such sudden and usual frenzies of Beasts: (although taken notice of, or
observed, by few Persons) yet I am assured, O Lord, thy good Angels and
providence was present to preserve me, from any hurt in so eminent a danger:
Wherefore with thankful David, all my Bones shall praise thee; yea, Psalm. 35.10.
those Bones which thou have kept from breaking, shall rejoice; yea, I will
further record this thy great goodness, in this following Hymn, to all future
Ages.

The HURRICANE. Ejaculation or Hymn on the former Subject.
THy Mercy Lord, is a continued Act,
As well as is thy self; witness this Fact,
Of Love, which does succeed the four
Last mentioned Blessings, ush'ring many more.
O let my constant Praises, imitate
Thee, in thy Daily goodness, that Ingrate,
I may not prove; yea, let this Providence,
Make me more thankful, as reminding hence,
Thy higher favors; for my Soul has bin,
Shut up, and hurred in a Coach of Sin;
My Flesh full-oft, in which my sinful Will,
As Charrioteer, has drove me down the Hill,
Of Worldly Pleasures; on swift moving Wheels,
Of raging Passions; (Steeds, whose Mouth near feels,
Religious Bit;) Pride, Lust; This Chariot moved,
With feerless speed; Till Grace, in thy Beloved,
Cans'd thee, as often, to scotch it, on
Some Stone; some blessed affliction:
By which, thrown out, cast down, upon the Ground;
Thy Child has lain, as in a spiritual swound:
From which thou still have raised me, by the Arm,
Of Mercy, and Me saved from lustful harm.
O, let me run no more, in Sins career,
But draw me to Thee, by thy Love, and Fear;
Nor suffer me, for to run down the Hill
Again, of Earths delights; but let thy will
Be mine; so shall my changed Soul aspire
Heaven (like Elijah) in a Coach of Fire,
True holy Zeal; letting my Garment fall,
Of Sin, that thou may be my All in All.
Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon God's gracious preserving, and preventing me from falling,
Horse and Man into a deep Pit, when I was riding in the Night (the Moon only
shining) to a Horse-Race: when being upon the brink of it, I was stopped
suddenly, by the Call of my Friend, that accompanied Me.
Soliloquium, or Discourse.
DAy unto Day, and Night unto Night, teaches knowledge; Thy Mercies, Psalm.
19.2.
O Lord, are renewed to me every Morning, and thy Providence are circular, and
without an end; therefore let nulla Dies be sine linea; no Day pass without my
thankful remembrance, and recording of thy many great, and undeserved mercies.

Worldly, yea, too often sinful Pleasure, is the Dallilah, and flattering
Mistress of our Youth, so that slavishly, and unweariedly we court it Day and
Night; else I would not have lost my sleep, nor traveled all Night, only to
see such a transitory delight, as a Horse Race; where usually our precious
time, our wisdom, and our Moneys, run faster away from us, than our Horses.

The night of Ignorance, and the Moonshine of Unsanctified Reason, is of all
times most dangerous, to Youthful Travelers; who when they dream that they are
galloping on the palfrey of Pleasure, toward Paradise, are, before they so
much as think of it, upon the edge, yea, often fall headlong, into that
bottomless Pit of Hell.

Genesis 2.18.
Lord, thy Word says, It is not good for a Man to be alone, yet Experience
teaches me also, that Companions in sinful Vanities are great Incendiaries; Thy
merciful Providence, Lord, at this time made my Companion in Vanity, the
Instrument of this great Deliverance; and also made thy Word good; for had not
my friend, whose Elder Years and Experience gave him knowledge of the way, and
danger, even in that instant of time, cried out, and stopped my career, I had
unrecoverably fallen, both Horse and Man, into a deep and horrible Pit, even
into Death.

Wherefore, dear Lord, let me henceforth never be alone, but let a truly
enlightened Conscience, which is my best and intimate Friend, be always present
with me, especially in the Night of Temptation, to fore-warn me from falling
into the dangerous Pit of Sin; which to all thine, is the Figure, as well as
the deserver, of the bottomless Gulf of Hell.

Amen.

The PIT. Ejaculation or Hymn on the former Subject.
LOrd, in this Night-peece, there is drawn to Life,
The Day-peece of our Youth, wherein most rife,
It is for Us, to travel in the Night
Of Ignorance; and by the Moonshine light,
Of our unhallowed reason; After Sin,
And Pleasures, till we fall, Psalm. 143.7.
are taken in
Their Gulf, and snares; Rev. 9.1.
how often in Holy Writ
Is Death, Hell, and Affliction called a Pit? Psalm. 40.3.

Yea, every Sin; especially a Whore,
Which Man, and Beast, Soul, Body, does devour; Isa. 24.17, 18.

What cause have I, that in my Youthful Days,
Have escaped these dangers, Pro. 23.27.
for to render praise
To Thee, Preserver of Body, and Soul,
From Death, Hell, trouble, and from Sins control? Isa. 30.21.

Thou, went the Voice, behind me, that cried stay,
Avoid each sinful Pit; This is the way,
Conscience thou also gav'st me, to fore-warn
Me (as a trusty Friend) of every harm;
Wherefore I offer Soul, and Body both,
A living Sacrifice to thee; by Oath,
Covenanting for to serve Thee, whilst I live,
That do new Life, from Sin, and danger give.
ARGUMENT. Upon God's merciful deliverance of me in Three great dangers of
Drowning, twice upon the River of Thames, and a third time in Rutland, when
being a fishing alone, I slipped from off a Tree into a River.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
O Incomprehensible Creator, and loving Father! how delightfully ravishing, and
comfortably supporting, is the Meditation, and experimental knowledge of thy
gracious Omnipresence to thy Children! whereas the thought and belief of it, to
the wicked, thy Enemies, is most terrible; for to all such, Heb. 12.29.
our God is a consuming Fire.

O Lord, thou art not only the God of the Mountains, and of the Valleys of the
Earth, 1 King. 20.28.
but of the Rivers also; and have been mercifully present to deliver, 2 Cor.
11.26.
and preserve me, as thou did thy Servant David, and Paul, in Perils of Land,
and in Perils of Water, Psalm. 124.4.
else had I sunk down into the deep Waters; Yea, the Floods had gone over my
Head, and Soul, as well as in these three dangers, they fearfully washed my Body
and Clothes.

In the two distresses upon the Thames, when the Watermen were all at a
nonplus, thy only powerful providence, preserved, steered, and rowed me into
safety; In the third, when my own Feet slipped and betrayed me, and the Tree I
held by, broke, and failed me, thy Hand alone saved, and drew me out of a
watery, muddy, and perilsome Pit.

If every lesser mercy (O Lord) calls for a tribute of praise, how much more
such as these, which are thy so sudden and opportune reprieves from Death;
since it is a truth, although spoken by the Father of lies, Job 2.4.
Skin for skin, and all that a Man has, will he give for his life. Wherefore
since our lives preservation is the greatest corporal mercy, open thou my Lips
O Lord, and my Mouth shall show forth, in these Lines, yea sing forth, thy
praise; Psalm. 51.15.
for three so great deliverances, in this following Psalm of Thanksgiving.

The TEMPEST. Ejaculation or Hymn on the former Subject.
NOt humane Courage, Wisdom did direct,
To use, or build, Boats, Ships; The Architect,
Of these our floating Chariots, was the Lord,
Who framed the Earth and Heavens; he by his word,
To Noah first in the Ark, a Pattern drew, Genesis 6.14, 15, 16.

Unparalleled; that we might it renew,
In little, which is now so often done,
That in one, first, bold Drake, durst (like the Sun)
Incircle Earth, and Seas; live and lie,
Within an Intch of Death, and yet not die.
Upon a spawn of one of these, I plowed
The back of Themasies; when lo aloud,
The Wind beats up a charge, on Sins old Jar,
Retwixt these Elements; Renews the War:
I interposed by chance, these Combitants,
As strangers often fall into made Rants;
By which rash act, the force, and strokes I bore,
Of both; Ma^gre two seconds, armed with Oars;
Who spent, and wearied, gave up to the Wind,
My wooden Fort; who entering us, to bind,
And drive along; Thames jealous grew,
Of such bold Seasures, claimed us, as her dew;
And enters with a troop of Waves, our Hull;
Erects her watery Streamers, fills us full
With churlish Billows; ordering us to lie,
In her deep muddy Dungeon, till we die.
The Wind enraged with this affront, us tore
From out her Bands, and drove us to the shore;
Thereby declaring the third Elements right,
To us her Subjects, as it were in spight^
Thus far, I take a Poet's liberty,
To shadow forth my danger. Now unty,
O Lord, my Sails, the affections of my Soul,
That filled with thy free spirit, without control,
Of an unthankful calm, I may lanch forth,
Into thy Sea of Mercy. praise thy worth;
O Lord, my Soul i^barkt in Flesh, sails in
Continually a Sea of Lust, and Sin;
On which the Prince of the Air, that evil spright,
Blows, raises fearful Storms by Day, by Night;
Filling the Sails of my Affections
With evil Aires raising my Passions
Like swelling Billows; sometimes watery Waves
Of Worldly sorrow, fills me; then the braves
Of Earthly joys, over lades me, till a Train
Led by mad Anger, casts them out again.
Next in the Whirl pool of sad doubts and fears,
My Bark is whirled about* near drowned with tears;
But if a calm succeeds these storms, then he
Sends forth his Sirens (Women-like) to me,
His Tritons ^err^ne Pleasures, and Delights;
That harkning to their Songs and Charms, I might
In such security* run foul upon
The shelves of Lust* called Love, Presumption,
And Prides high Rocks; or if I take not care,
Be swallowed up in the Gulf of Despair.
Lord, is it th^^ experimentally,
With my poor Soul* are all these dangers nie,
Incumbent ^^ me? during such sad storms,
Mat. 8.24, 25, 26, 27.
Sleep not, dear Savior; in me, command Calmes:
Be thou my Pilot, Let thy Spirit Gales
Joh. 3.8.
Fill constantly all my affections Sails;
1 Pet. 5.9.
Let Faith, my main most hope, my Anchor be,
Heb. 6.19.
And all my Passions quieted by thee:
So s^all I escape all shelves, all Sirens charms,
All Rocks and Gulphs, as embraced in thy Arms,
Till that my ^ark brought in my Soul on shore,
May praise thee both, for mercies evermore.
Amen.
The ANGLER.
O Lord, thy third and great deliverance
Of me from Drowning, (not the Lady chance,
The wicked's Goddess) for my Tribute calls,
Of P^^ise, deservedly, since such sad falls
Have Coffined Men in Water, mud, and Death;
Whereas, (...), thou gave me a new breath;
Even then, when Angling Tree, Hands, Feet betrayed,
And cast me in a watery Pit; no Aid
Being near, and I alone; then did thy Hand
Double my strength and drew me out to Land.
Blessed be thy Name for this, and what thou did
So often for my Soul; when that amidst
Her Angling after Worldly pleasures, she
Did fall from her false Confidences Tree,
Into the deep and filthy Pits of sin,
And Vanity; a state near perishing!
Yea, when unto this dangerous fall,
My Hands, Feet, Members, did contribute all;
Then did thou Lord appear to me, alone,
And helpless* Renewed grace, and heard'st my moan;
Gave to my hand of Faith, thy hand of Love, Gal. 5.6.

In Christ, to draw and lift me out above
Such dangers, That with the wise Merchant, Mat. 13.45, 46.
I
May fish for gems, and the best Pearl buy.
Lord, since in thee, both soul and body live,
Accept these double Praises, which they give.
Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon a great Snow, and God's gracious deliverance of Me, and my
Servant from being smothered, and lost, when many others perished therein, in
our Travel, and return Home.
Soliloquium, or Discourse.
PRaise the Lord; Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapor, Psalm. 148.7, 8.
stormy Wind, fulfilling his word: what means this second deluge of Snow?
burying our Island (as it were) in an Alablaster Sepulcher; Why are the shewers
of mercy descending in Earths refreshing Veins, through the cold of the middle
Region of the Air? or rather, of our evil hearts, frozen and turned into Snow,
into a Judgment; the Earth seeming to do Penance for our sins and uncleanness.
Is our Land become a Romanist, and Prelatick, that she Clothes her self with,
and so much delights in Surplices, and white Vestures? or has the Sun (as in
Hezekiah's time) reverted ten degrees, whereby our Northern temperate Zone, is
become a frozen Polar clime? 2 King 20.10.
Has any Venetian Artist, that can make Glass malliable, in a few Hours
christalliz'd the fluid Rivers, and hardened soft Snow, to bear without sinking,
the pulsation and burdens of Horse and Man? or are the Clouds turned
Levellers, as having covered ditches and hedges, the distinction of every Man's
propriety; and turned the surface of our Lands, into a Salisbury Plain; a
Berry, as well for Sheep, as Rabbets? Whence was that faith and courage that
spirited me, upon the providential call of my necessary return home, Mat. 14.19.
(like as Peter's walking upon the Water) to amble over; yea, gallop upon the
hollow Snow, not fearing Pit, Ditch, or danger? whence all these Wonders, and
above all, my Preservation; when so many perished, and were smothered, not in
Beds of Feathers, (as by Tyrants some have been,) but in Beds of Snow? Are they
not from thee, O Lord, the great Creator, and prime Agent in all the works, and
admirable Prodigies of nature; the only Savior and Preserver of Man, and
Beast, and of me, Psalm. 36.6.
thy most unworthy Servant? Who therefore desires Grace from thee, to exalt
thee, and to perpetuate thy Praises in my own heart, and in the hearts of
others, to all succeeding Generations, that shall read this Memorial, and sing
this Song of Thanksgiving.

The SNOWIE LANDSCAPE. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject.
LOrd, let my Souls Eyes open be,
As well as Lips, to praise*
That in each mercy, I may see
Thy Presence all my Days.
Thou wast my Guide, over snowie Plains,
Where was no track, nor way;
Thou made the sugarfied Rain,
As solid as the Clay;
On which I traveled many Miles,
In safety, without fear;
Over Hedge, and Ditch, over Gates, and Styles,
For thou wast with me there.
Although I past over many a Pit,
Filled and smoothed over with Snow,
Thou would not let me fall in it,
Romans 6 23.
Though sin deserves a woe.
Yea, many perishing that Day,
Were buried above Ground,
Loosing their Lines, as well as way,
Being choked, smothered, drowned.
Through all these dangers, thou me led,
Secure unto my place,
With goodness, as with Manna fed, Exodus 16.35.

Thy Monument of Grace.
O Lord, this World's a Ball of Snow,
In Hand it melts away;
Full of deep Pits, which overthrow,
All those that go astray:
Covered they are, also from sight,
By Satan, and Men's guile;
With Snow (that is, pretense of right)
White Devils most beguile.) 1 Cor. 11.14.

Wherefore, O Lord, let not my Eye,
Be dazzled with such light,
But be enabled to epsy,
Their Pits, and works of Night.
Let not my Soul, now traveling home,
Venture without a Guide,
Thy spirit and Word; nor walk (where none,
Of thine have gone) aside.
Nor let me ride over Hedge and Ditch;
I mean, the sacred Bound
Of righteous Laws; which Devilish Itch,
Whole Nations does confound.
Lord, let these Prayers, and Praises be,
Accepted in thy Son;
So shall my Soul, and Body see
Thy great Salvation.
Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon the Lord's Deliverance of Me, from a Company of Robbers, when I
and my Servant having a great Charge of Money* was Waylaid by them, at my
return home in the Forest of Rockingum, about the Month of May.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
IN the space of time, in which the Sun had almost twice measured the vast
Concave of Heaven, and taken an exact and curious surveigh of both the
Hemispheres of Sea, and Land; I poor slow Worm and Pilgrim, had only paced
about thirty Miles toward my home; Rackt with my Journey, roasted with heat,
and flowr'd over with sweat and dust; when on the sudden, my way led me into a
most pleasant plain, a second Temple or Arcadia, for delight and pleasure; to
guard which, from the hot Invasion of the Sun, or the sudden irruption of
Storms; stood round in Rank, and deep Filles, Armies of sturdy Oaks,
over-lookt by their tall Chieftains, bauld-headed with Age; yea, some of them
possibly free Britains, before the Conquest, and never since subdued, nor
subjected; instead of the harsh and Warlike sounds of Drums and Trumpets,
there were elevated in their Arms (as being Dwarfs) several sets of Nature's
Musicians, clothed with colored Liveries, of several sorts of Feathers, after
the America fashion; whose diversity, and sweetness of Notes, and Songs,
warbled forth through living Cornets, and intrals; as much excells that of dead
Sheeps Guts, as the animate, the inanimate; and Nature does Ar^, her Ape and
imitatrix: As for the Plain it self, which I may well call Nature's great Oval
Table, because there she Daily teasted her Guests, and offspring; it was most
beautifully spread, as it were with a green Carpet of unshorn Velvet,
imbroidred with many colored and Gold like Flowers; For it was now about the
Month of May the gladsome and concluding time of her anniversary Feast, in
remembrance of her Creation; the Beasts we call wild, as though they had been
metamorphized Acteons, and had still retained his reason, seemed tame, and
civilized, feeding upon her Varieties, cookt and prepared for them there,
without intemperance, or gluttony: But O, how short, and temporary are all
Earthly delights, and refreshments! for no sooner was I cheared, contented, and
revived, (after about ten Hours travel with this new Scene of things, pleasant
change, and sweet prospect) but the carreering of four Horsemen, issuing out
of several quarters of the Woods, alarmed me to prepare for an onset, and to
alight, with my Servant; that drawing our Swords, and cocking our Pistols, and
backed by our Horses, we might not be surpised, but secure our selves, and a
considerable sum of Money: This our prepared vigilance (as I conjecture) being
at a near distance, perceived by our adversaries, they stopped; united, and
wheeled about, retreating into the Woods again; thereby encouraging us to
remount, and to return that Night with safety home.

But the true cause of this great deliverance, as being from thee, O Lord, is
only known to thee; who struck the Sodomites and Syrians with an intellectual,
rather than with an organical blindness, that thou might preserve safe, thy
Lot, and Elisha; Genesis 19.11.
and caused the numerous Army besieging Samaria, 2 King. 6.18.
for the sake of a few there; and to make thy Word good, 2 King. 7.6, 7.
and thy Power known, to be abused, and deceived also, by their other Sense of
Hearing, and to fly, when none pursued them.

How, and by what means, these Robbers were diverted, I know not: but this I
know, that it is my duty, O Lord, greatly to praise thee, for this
preservation, and to commemorate it to Posterity for ever; which, accept I
beseech thee in this my poor Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and never-dying
Record, dedicated to thy Glory.

Amen.

The RESCVE. Ejaculation or Hymn on the former Subject.
MY Life, from first to last, O Lord's,
A Pilgrimage, a Journing toward
My home; few, evil, are my Days; Genesis 47.9.

As wrackt with sickness, scortcht with Rays,
Of Earthly and Celestial Suns;
Wearied with care, dusted, undone
With slanders; sweating all my race,
Under sad troubles and disgrace.
Amidst these travels, thou did please,
Good God, to give to me some ease;
An interval, wherein I did
A sweet refreshing take, and rid,
As on a Plain, adorned with store
Of Flowery blessings, green all over
With mercies; then I Brutes did see,
Grown tame and civilized by Thee;
Yea there, encompast with thy Arms,
I was from Sun, and other harms,
Secured; then did I often hear
Music, beyond that of the Spheres,
Without, within me: But alas,
This lasted not; for soon I was
Assailed by a Troop of sly,
Eccles. 6.12.
And Hellish Thieves, powers in high
Places; spiritual wickedness,
Skilfully armed, none weaponless;
One Fiend, as I remember well,
Had Darts of Lust, inflamed from Hell;
Another, Bow and Arrows on,
Feathered with Pride, Ambition:
A third was armed Cappee, point V^e,
With a Coat-Male of Avarice;
The last, with Sword, and Lance; (excess
Of Pleasures;) and Voluptuousness.
O Lord, I bless thee, who did then,
And since, counsel, even when,
I knew not how for to defend
My Soul, and Treasures, from these Fiends,
Thou did advise me to dismount,
From my own strength, and to account,
Jam. 4.6.
Humility, the surest Ground,
On which to stand, and to confound
These Robbers; yea, thou did prepare,
And cockt my heart, full-charg'd with prayer,
Ephesians. 6.17.
Thou help'st me to draw out thy Sword,
The Devil-daunting written Word;
They thus repulst, fled, gave me space,
For to proceed on toward my Place
Of rest, and peace; That Tower wherein,
No fear of Satan, World or Sin;
The Soul and Body both, which thou,
Did, and do still preserve, shall bow,
Unto thy Praise Eternally,
Rom 8.37.
And Triumph in thy Victory.
Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon God's good Providence over me, and his Preservation of me, from
the Vices of the times, when I was left by my Parents to my liberty, and alone
in the Cities of Westminster and London, young, and about Seventeen Years of
Age.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
O How early, even in the Spring of my Youth, did sin and vanity bud, flower,
and bring forth clusters of Sodom, and Apples of Gomorah! no sooner was I
mounted for London, (about the year 1625.) but a Troop of Lusts were on
Horseback also, ready to attend me thither; Viz. Pride, in a disguise and
Garment of neatness; Lust, in a light riding suit of love, and amorousness;
Lying, in a diverse colored Coat of Complement and good language; and Idleness,
in a wide-made Suit, slasht, and open-sleeved of recreation; upon which, was a
traveling Cloak of friendly Visits: seventy miles as to my labor, seemed but
a short stage; but as to my longing desires, five hundred; until I got a fight
of the Southern constellation of the English Geminy, Peter and Paul's Churches,
and the united Cities of London and Westminster; where I was no sooner settled,
but I found my self unsettled through the multitude of temptations, and
incitations to sin and vanity. Being almost suffocated with ill scent of pride
and vanity, I rode out for Recreation, to a Park near it, to find out sweeter
Air, but there me thought the Proverb was verified, The World runs upon Wheels;
which raised up Clouds of dust, as though the Earth against Nature would take
place of the Element of Air: There I saw many Inchanters of both Sexes, raise
their familiars, and command and charm them within multiplied circles of
Coaches: wherefore I returned from thence, to walk as I conceived, in a more
private and reserved Paradise, called therefore the Springs Garden; but that I
was so crowded and shouldred, with the Gallants of both Sexes, which, as so
many moving Groves, filled up, and replanted the Walks, that the whole Garden,
was (me thought) changed into a wild Wood, and Wilderness; wherefore to avoid
this throng, through some solitary Meddowes and winding Paths, I sought in the
Center of the Wood, for some place of privacy; and found some little
Hermitages, where I hoped to have discoursed with some sober or devout Persons;
but found them to be Chapels of ease, dedicated to Bacchus, Ceres, and Venus;
which made me think of the truth and reason of that Sentence, ( Sine Cerere and
Bacho, friget Venus.) The Lord's Day being come, I thought to spend that Day
better, than the Days of the Weeks past, and therefore Visited the Church of
Peter's Westminster: which, to say no more in its commendation, (according to
Relations) I found to be in some things, like St. Peter's Church in Rome. This
(being I was a Protestant, and in a Protestant City) did raise my admiration,
but not my devotion. After this, having heard extolled the wit and language of
our English Poets, and that their Plays, (a fit name for such Airy Poems) were
much Visited, and by the Youth of our Nation, preferred above the best of
Sermons; As also that they were acted to the life, in the public Theaters; I
went thi^ther, and was both an Auditor, and Spectator; where I heard wi^ and
language abused.

Being told of the Noble Buildings of both Exchanges, and of the great
concourse to them of Coaches, and Persons of the best Quality; I expected
better things there, but found in that place an Exchange; but as for the
Company, the like, or the same. The Shopkeepers and their Feminines, being
like the Company of Players, I saw lately; that know how to act all parts
currantly and sedantly, especially those of lying, equivocation, dissimulation,
and overreaching, when they meet with Country Ignoramuses.

After some time, I adventured, at the instance of some of my acquaintance, not
therein my friends, to go into a Tavern; I stopped, and thought the fair
structure, rich Sign-bush and Basin, had some resemblance to the Roman
Tryumphant Arches; But my admiration was soon changed into a detestation; for
the roaring and singing, bawling and swearing of their Tenants at will, the
knocking of Pots, the scraping of Fiddlers, the gaping of Tapsters at the Bar
(not of truth and Justice, but too often of the contrary) made me think it to
be a Bedlam, a place full of madmen, or the House of Circes, where by mixed
intoxicating, and adulterated Liquors, rational Men are changed into Swine,
Dogs, Goats, and Lions; yea, into all kind of Beasts, and bruitishness. My mind
tasting no good, nor finding any satisfaction in these things, I thought to
entertain it with more private (and as most think (although therein deceived)
harmless delights, and recreations; such as Complemental Visits of fair and
virtuous Ladies, Balls, and mixed Dancings; yea, I assaid by chaste and modest
Rules or Bonds, to bind Cupid; as I vainly held forth in an Herogliphical
Order: But for, and after all these carnal pleasures, my heart was, and is sad;
yea, I found my soul empty of that Rest and happiness I sought after; and being
seasonably, and graciously taught by the same spirit of wisdom, that
instructed Solomon, I sealed, and that experimentally with him, to that truth
of God* Vanity of Vanities, Eccl. 1.14.
all is vanity and vexation of Spirit. the 12.and 8.
And though I saw an end of all perfection in Earthly things, Psalm. 119.96.
(with holy David) yet the Law and Word of God is exceeding broad, which caused
me diligently to attend upon some living Oracles of God in those times;
Seraphical Holesworth, devout Tailor, pious Gouge, eloquent Shute, with others;
by whose holy wooings, and love tokens, my first love to my Spouse (begun about
a year before in the Country,) was now renewed, increased, and confirmed; and
these great temptations of the World, and my Enemy, Satan, prevented, and
overcome; Mat. 3.16, 17.
who thus, a while after my first Conversion, assaulted me as he did my
Savior, as soon as he entered upon his Office; Mat. 4.8, 9.
deceitfully showing to me, in these Cities, as in a time, and contracted Map,
the Vanities of all the World, and the empty glory thereof; insinuating to me,
the enjoying of them, would I fall down, and worship him; that is, yield to his
temptations, and enslave my self to him, by the wicked possessing of all these
sinful Lusts, and delights: But blessed be the Lord, Psalm. 124.7.
who has broaken the Snare, and I am escaped. For which great deliverance and
manifold mercies, accept O Lord, in my dear Mediator's hand, my multiplied
praises, both here, and in this following Psalm of Thanksgiving.

The METROPOLIS. Ejaculation or Hymn on the former Subject.
LOrd, thy Word is Verity,
Psalm. 119.142.
Child hood, Youth are Vanity,
^ccl. 11.10.
Else had not such Troops of Vice
Waited on me in Disguise.
Blessed be that Power, which from thee,
^osh. 9.3, 4, 5.6.
Made them Gibeonites to me;
So that they shall henceforth be,
Verse 21.17. Psalm. 51.17.
Hart-hewers, Water-drawers,
In my Sacrifice to Thee.
When in Courts, I saw Men rise,
On Prides Wings, by Flatteries,
Viewed, dear God, their Luxury,
Sinful Lusts, and Gluttony,
Through thy help, I left that place,
As a School of Vice, not Grace;
A Quag-mire, where the rich often,
Lose Estates spent at Court-rates,
When Poor Beggars mount aloft.
When Sins Parks, Vicinity
Had almost impailed Me,
And those Herds of Women spies,
Had near filtcht away my Eyes,
Then thou show me, Lord, that time,
Was not mine to lose, but thine;
And that those that spend a Day,
On such sights, and vain delights,
Do but with white Devils play.
In the Garden, called the Spring,
Where the Flowers, and Fruit are sin;
In which Bound, by Day and Night,
Devils walk like Angels bright.
Where young Adams, Genesis 3.6.
by their suit
Eat again forbidden Fruit.
There thou call'st me Lord, to thee,
From those Groves,
Of wanton Loves,
Promised better things to Me.
Thence, to Theaters I went,
Where vain Wits their Poems vent;
Heard and saw such Ribaldry,
As defiles both Ear and Eye;
For Man's mind inclined to ill, Genesis 6.5.

Runs not up, but down the Hill:
There thy spirit to me told,
He Is asleep that comes to seek,
In a Cole-pit, veins of Gold.
To Exchanges, Old and New,
I repaired, as worth my View;
There my Ears were deft with Cries,
Lackt you Sir, what will you buy:
Pride and Conscience in that place,
I saw sold; all things, but Grace.
Lord, thou kept'st my wit, and purse,
From deceits,
And lying Cheats,
And their Females, which were worse.
Then to Taverns I went in,
Which I found the sinks of sin;
There the Devil's Revels be,
Lust, and Drinking, Gluttony;
Swearing, Dancing, Carding, Dice,
Cheating, and all other Vice.
On their Doors, Lord set a Cross,
To keep me,
All that love thee,
From Souls, Bodies, Plague, and loss.
Last I thought of a reserve,
How to please, and yet preserve
Me from all unchaste delights,
By a choice of virtuous wights,
Who agreed a^ modest ^^lls,
Often to meet by mutual calls,
By mixed Dancing, will not quall,
Sathan's wiles,
Who Us beguiles,
Give an Inch, He Will take an ^ll.
Blessed Lord, that m^dest me see
Sin, and dangers misery;
And that all things here below,
Are but Ciphers in a row;
That a Father was to me,
When my Parents left me free,
In my Youth, and in a place,
Where all Vice
Has its rise,
And true virtues in disgrace.
Yet, where Satan has his Thrones,
Rev. 2.13.
Thou had Churches, precious Ones,
Unto which thou leddest thy Youth,
Psalm 22.22.
And declared to me thy truth;
Cant. 7.12.
There thou gave to me thy love,
Cant. 5.^
Kissed me, called me Spouse, and Dove,
Cant. 6.9^
And embraced me in thy Arms,
Made me taste,
Cant. 2.6.
Thy delicates,
Cant. 5.1.
And delivered me from harms.
Cant. 5.1.
Is thy love, Lord set upon,
Psalm. 68.13.
Such an Ethiopian?
Jerem. 13.23.
Did thou take me from the P^ts,
Cleanse me from my Leopard's spots?
Let me a chaste comfort be,
Now, and ever, unto thee,
Till I be, by Angels led,
My first rise,
To Paradise,
Then to Heaven, thy Marriage ^ed.
ARGUMENT. Upon God's go^dness, and gracious Providence to me, in his choice,
and gift of a rich, beautiful, fruitful, and which is above all, faithful and
religious Wife.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
HAving expended above the third part of my life, in a single condition, both
God and Nature taught me, Genesis 2.18.
that it was not good for Man to be alone, no not in innocence* much less in a
state of corruption and temptation; Wherefore after many motions, interviews,
and disappointments, the good and all-wise ordering Providence of my most
gracious God and Father, chose for, and gave to me, as a fit, loving, and
helpful consort, and yoke fellow, The eldest Daughter, and Coheir of a worthy
Person that was a Knight, Alderman, and Lord-Major of London; a Wife, not only
fruitful in Children, but in many other blessings: As being a builder up of my
Family, by a large Portion; One of Natures best Pieces for beauty, and
proportion; Psalm. 128.^.
The Psalmists Olive and Vine, for fruitfulness; And which is above all, and
the rarest perfection of that Sex; a Person chaste, faithful and religious: For
favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain, Pro. 31.30.
but a Woman that fears the Lord, she shall be praised. Of whom, as far as my
Observation reaches at this Day, I can truly say with Solomon; Many Daug^ters
have done virtuously, but she has excelled them all. Pro. 31.29.
An eminent Witness of this her Virtue, was her public spirit, care, and love
to me, and her family, In her voluntary sale, and parting with her Jointure,
and own Land, yielding a considerable Revenue, and an unparalled House and
Seat, for the payment of Debts, and making provision for our Children; yea,
which is much more to her perpetual honor, she was, blessed be God, to be his
great and chiefest Instrument, for the restoring part of the estate to the
Heir, and for the maintenance of the Family, to which, during my above Eight
Years separation, she remains to be under God, a most careful Supportress.
Which great blessing, O Lord, continue to me, and the Family, in giving her
health, and long life, Psalm. 128.2, 6.
that she may eat the labor of her hands, and see her Childrens Children, and
peace upon Israel: And as my thankful, and perpetual acknowledgment, and
remembrance of such a plenitude of blessings, Accept this my humble Hymn of
Praise, in the hand of my dear Savior, in whom thou have given me these, and
all other Mercies.

Amen.

The Good WIFE. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject.
O Lord, that out of Man, the Woman made;
And in blessed Marriage, her, to him repaid;
Genesis 2.21.22, 23, 24.
Making two, one a new; That he, and she,
Might be, one Cabinet of Chastity;
A choice Elixar of Society,
And fruitful Seed plot of Posterity.
I bless thy Name, that do me dignifie,
Not only to declare, and testify,
Thy gracious wisdom, in this mystery
Of Wedlock; But me, Tenant made in Fee,
To these rich blessings, by thy choice, and lone
Of all these Mercies, Treasured up in one;
When in this Worlds couzening Lottery,
Where for one Prize, a hundred Blanks do lie,
My self I ventured; Thou O Lord draw'st out,
For me a Ring of Gold, set all about
With precious Stones; One was a Diamond,
Of Chastity; next it, in the same round,
Saphires of Faith and Hope, with the Onyx Stone
Of Sun-like Charity, divinely shone:
A fifth, was a fair Rubie of sweet modesty,
Joined with a Jasper of Fidelity;
An Emrauld next was set of Constancy,
With a rich Topaz of true Prudency;
Sweet Ametists of Loves, (which loyal are,)
Incircled this Ring, and Jewel rare:
And for to give a splendour, to each Eye,
All those were filled with much Humility.
With this thou did me Wed; give me to wear,
Till now, near Six and Thirty Year.
(Blessed be thy Grace!) no Hearts dividing far,
Disturbing Us, by a Domestic War:
She is, O Lord, that blessed Vine, by which,
Thou do o're-spread my House, and it enrich, Psalm. 128.3.

With Sixteen hopeful Branches; unto whom,
Dry Breasts, thou gave not, nor miscarrying Womb;
Yea, thou allaidst to her, the curse of Sin, Hos. 9.14. Genesis 3.16.

The pains of births, and breeding she was in;
And which, does much exceed all Earthly wealth, 1 Timothy 2.15.

Thou gave Us both, a great degree of health;
Pelican-like, (thy Instrument of good)
Did feed her young ones, thrice, with her own Blood
When others lessen portions, through expense,
She made hers greater, by her Providence;
And was thy help, during my happy fa^e,
To more than double our Pattern Estate:
And when thou mouldrest it to naught, her pains,
Was thy blessed means, for to restore again,
A part of what was lost, that she might be,
Mother and Father to her Family.
To Us, from Parents, Lord, descends our Land, Prove. 19.14. Prove. 18.22.

But prudent Wives, are gifts from thy own Hand:
What Is wanting here, to her perfection,
View in her Picture, drawn by Solomon; Prove. 31.10. to the end of that Chap.

Lord, have thou multiplied thy loves; And thus,
By doubling Units, caused an Overplus
Of blessings; Let me not divide by Sin,
Thy Mercies, nor substract them in
And by Ingratitude; Let my sum be,
Addition of Praises unto Thee,
And pious fruits; so shall my Tongue, and Life,
Be one, like Soul and Body, Man and Wife;
A living Sacrifice of Thankfulness,
A free will Offering, till I thee possess;
And in that Union, there most clearly see,
Of holy Marriage, the great Mystery. Ephesians. 5.32.

Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon the great, and Holy Mystery held forth to Us, by God, in
Marriage.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
MArriage is honorable amongst all Men, and the Bed undefiled* but
Whoremongers and Adulterers, God will Judge; Wherefore, Wives submit your
selves unto your own Husbands, as unto the Lord; For the Husband is the Head of
the Wife, as Christ is the Head of the Church; Therefore, as the Church is
subject unto Christ, so let Wives be unto their own Husbands, in every thing;
Husbands love your Wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave
himself for it; so ought Men to love their Wives, as their own Bodies; For no
Man ever hated his own Flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the
Lord the Church; For we are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his
Bones; For this cause, shall a Man leave his Father and Mother, and be joined
unto his Wife, and they two shall be one Flesh. This is a great mystery; but I
speak of Christ, and his Church; Nevertheless, let every one of you in
particular, so love his Wife, even as himself; and let the Wife see that she
reverence her Husband. Thus far the Apostle, Ephesians. chap. 5. verse. 22, 23, 24,
25, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.

From whose words, especially his conclusion, (This is a great mystery) I
infer, that Marriage (although not in a strict and Popish sense) yet, as to a
larger meaning, and construction of the Word, may be called a Sacrament, as
holding forth by outward and visible signs, and things, spiritual mysteries,
and instructions: Of this nature in Scripture, and many instances, as the Ark,
Rainbow, Red Sea, Rock, Manna, and other such like.

Is it so, O my Soul? And has the Lord so extraordinarily, and abundantly
blessed this Ordinance, and condition unto thee; as thou have declared in thy
foregoing Memorial, and thankful Acknowledgment? Let, upon this occasion, thy
Meditation be further stirred up, and enlarged; and from this great temporal
blessing and mystery, behold, declare, and point out, the far greater and
excelling blessings, which are, and shall be enjoyed by thee, and the Church,
the Spouse of Christ, by our spiritual Marriage, and Union unto Him.

As Marriage in the Institution, and in the particular Application, is the Holy
Ordinance of God, and the blessed effect of his gracious Providence, and
Eternal Decree: All Marriages (according to the Proverb) being made in Heaven,
so is that great Architype thereof, the Marriage of the Church, and in it, Genesis
2.22.
of every true believer unto Christ. The Father bringing every one of us to
him, as he did Eve to Adam. Joh. 6* 44.
For none comes to me, but whom the Father draws, says our Savior Christ;
yea, Romans 8.28, 29, 30.
our Election, effectual Calling, and Regeneration, together with our Union by
Faith, and spiritual Espousal to Christ our Heavenly Husband* is of, and from
the Eternal Decree, Love and Election of God our Father.

As the Woman was of the Man, and not the Man of the Woman; and the Woman was
Created for the Man, 1 Cor. 11.8, 9.
and not the Man for the Woman; so was the Church typified by Eve, taken out of
the side of the second Adam, the Lord Jesus Christ, that she might be made (as
being his Rib, Beloved, and near to his heart) Flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bone; his only Spouse, and one with him, (as the Apostle Paul asserts) Ephesians.
the 5. ver. 30. This was effectually done, when being asleep in Death, upon the
Cross; the Being, and Redemption of his Church, arose, and sprung forth of his
side, in a Flood of infinite, precious, Joh. 19.34.
and Cordial Blood, and Water.

To conclude, this our spiritual Union and Marriage, is by the Apostle called a
great Mystery, Ephesians. 5.32.
as being the blessed effect of the free grace of God, who is assentially love;
and therefore it is as to the height and depth, length and breadth thereof,
Incomprehensible, and passing all understanding. Ephesians. 3.18, 19. Col. 2.9, 10,
11, 12, 13 14, 15. Verses. Act. 11.26. Jer. 3.24. Dan. 9.14.
By virtue of this Espousal in Baptism, we (as Wives amongst us) change our
names into his; and instead of Adamites, are called Christians; And on our
part, promise to forsake Father, and Mother, and all things else for him; and
to honor, love, and obey him. On the other part, the Lord Jesus Christ thus
betrothed to us, in holiness, and everlasting righteousness, becomes thereby
our Lord, Lawgiver, and Spouse; our Pattern, Protector, and Savior, as in the
Type, Husbands amongst us, are, or ought to be unto their Wives; and as they,
so he endowes us here, not only with all temporal blesings, (so far as shall be
for our good; Tim. 4.8.
For Godliness has the promises of this Life, and of that Life which is to
come;) But with the rich dowry of all the saving Graces of his holy Spirit,
Clothing us with the white Robes of his perfect and immaculat righteousness;
As being made of God, unto us, righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30.
wisdom, sanctification, and redemption; Yea, the Lord our righteousness: And
as for hereafter, Jer. 23.6.
he gives us the earnest and assurance of being Coheirs with him, of Eternal
Life, and Glory. Joh. 10.28.


Amen.

EPITHELAMIVM. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject.
BReath not this Air, Men of unchaste desires,
No Fewels here, for your unhallowed Fires.
Heb. 8.5.
Lord, I adore thy wisdom, and thy love,
That shadow'st, in blessed Wedlock, things above;
Ephesians. 5.30, 31, 32.
Teaching Us; that, this Unions Mystical,
And sets forth, thine with Us; Before the Fall,
Genesis 2.21, 22, 23.
A crooked Kib thou streightnest, gav'st it Life,
Made it a Virgin pure, first Adam's Wife;
That she, of thy dear Spouse, the Type might be,
Once crookt by sin, but now made straight in Thee:
Ephesians. 5 26, 27.
Yea, in the chaste delights of Marriage Bed,
Her union thou holdst forth, with thee, her Head;
Genesis 2.21, 22, 23. 1 Cor. 6.15.10. chap. 12.12, 13. Cant. 7.12. 1 John 4.19.
Cant. 1.2. Joh. 6.63. Cant. 2.6.
In which, thou giv'st to her thy loves, that she,
Being first beloved, might flame in love to Thee;
Kissing her with the kisses of thy Mouth,
Quickened with sp'rit and life, thy sacred Truth;
Thou also her incirclest in the Arms
Of thy protection; And her frees from harms.
For why, thy right hand-power does her o're-spread,
And left hand-care supports her graceful head;
Her sp'rit'al senses, ear, taste, smell, touch, sight,
Thou satisfi'st with ravishing delight;
Her piercing eye of Faith, sees and applies,
Cant 4.9. Heb. 11.27. Psalm. 119.24.103.
Thy excellency hid from Worldly eyes;
Her ears being filled with Music of thy Voice,
Does in thy Word and promises rejoice;
Thou altogether lovely art, unto
Cant. 5.16. Cant. 2.2. Cant. 5.1.
Her inward touch, whence mutual love does flow;
She tastes thy Spice, Myrrh, Honey, Milk and Wine,
Of Hope, Joy, Peace, Delight; all sweets Divine;
Cant. 1.12, 14.
Thy Spicknard, Camphire, fills her smelling sense,
Psalm. 25 8.
Also thy Cassida, Aloes, Frankincense,
And fragrant Ointments. All which, well express
Cant. 3.6.
Thy love, truth, mercy, wisdom, holiness;
Thy power and goodness, Cant. 1.3.
grace, and righteousness,
Sweet Oders, which her cherish and refresh.
In fine, thy Nuptial-Bed is covered over,
Cant. 3.10.
And paved with love, and filled with Graces store;
Here, in her, thou shed'st incorrupted Seed, 2 Pet. 1 23. Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. Jam.
1.18. Joh 5.1. Gal. 4.19. Romans 8.20. 2 Cor. 3.10 Eccl. 15.10. 2 Pet. 1.4. Joh.
1.12.13. 1 Cor. 6.15, 16, 17. chap. 12.12, 13. Ephesians. 5 30, 31.

Begets in her a Christ-like form indeed;
Whence follows, that, which joys both Heaven and Earth,
Divine Conception, and thy Saints new birth;
So that one Christ, one Sp'rit, one flesh, and bone,
One Body, is thy Church; thus 'twas made one:
Hence, as of Faith, and mutual love, the effects;
Thou rul'st, and in her dwell'st, and her protects;
Clothes her with Golden Robes, thy righteousness;
Make her within glorious, through holiness;
Giv'st her the promises of this World's life,
And of that life to come; and as thy Wife, Psalm. 45.11. 1 John 4.12, 15, 16.
Psalm. 84.11. Psalm 45 1, 3. 1 Cor. 1.30. Zac. 10.20, 21. Romans 6.19.22. 2 Timothy
4.8. 2 Pet. 1 3. 1 Pet. 5.4. Revel. 2.20. Revel. 3 21. Cant. 2.16. Revel. 5.10*
Revel. 20.6. Mat 13.43. 1 Cor. 15.24.

Crown'st her with Glory, sets her on thy Throne,
With thee on Earth, as thy beloved One;
Next, to thy Fathers Kingdom, her translates,
To live with God; Thy Churches highest State.
Another Hymn upon the same blessed Subject, being Meditations upon my
Marriage-Day. The TYPE.
Blessed Miracle of Love! whose sacred Rights,
Restores to Man his own, and re-unites,
Natures Division! Two Bodies were combined
In Adam once; Lo here two Souls I find,
Knit in a purer union; How does the smile of one,
Attend the others joy? her sighs, my groan?
If absence parts us, like as though one breath
Did fan two hearts, both seem to suffer Death.
If distance Clouds our view, the strength of Love,
Does make our thoughts, as well as Bodies move,
In visits to each other: So, though two parts
We seem to be, we still are one in Heart.
The Anti Type, or Application.
MY Love, my Spouse, my Sav'our! Can the Fires
Sprung from weak Natures notions, and desires,
Produce such Sympathies? O let thy flame,
Spir'd by a purer spirit, effect the same,
In my unworthy Soul: The Loves of all,
Compared with that of thine, the Original
Are but as shades, to substances; the Ray,
Unto its Globe of light, as Night to Day.
Lord, in my Baptism review, how I
There plighted troth to thee, and did deny,
All other loves save thine; nor was this Act
My single deed alone, but a compact:
John 4.19.
For why? so free's thy grace, Man so accursed,
That none can love, except thou love them first.
Thou art my Head, O Christ, can I then be
A living Member, and not part of thee?
The Heavens high distance does not dim the Eye
Of Souls, nor can it lessen, or untie
Thy Spirits union: now, naught wants but this,
To be unbod'ed where my Savior is.
O let me be unclothed then; And by Angels led,
To thee, my Spouse; To Heaven, my Nuptial-Bed.
Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon God's all wise, and gracious Providence, in ordering of
Affairs, for the preserving and continuing love, and peace betwixt me, and my
own Father, and Father-in-Law; in danger to have been interrupted, by reason of
some differences, arising from a dispute, in point of my Right, as to the one;
and from an act of love toward my Family, as to the other.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
AS false Ground, under the Foundation of a Building; a crack in a Master-beam
of an House, and a breach in a Wall of a City, is very dangerous and
destructive. So are distances, differences, and divisions in Families, and
betwixt near Relations: This truth, O Heavenly Father, thou gave me (even in
my blooming Manhood) to know, and to obviate, when as from two very near
Relations, my own Father, and Father-in-Law, upon two different accounts, I had
deeply suffered, both as to profit, and affection; (and that for the defense of
what I conceived to be my right, and for well doing) Had not thou (O Lord)
been to me a Father, Judge, and Friend, to preserve love, and to order and
reconcile us, as to the things in difference.

O Lord, thou have tried me at all times, in all places, by all Persons, that I
poor Creature might prove, and have a full, and sweet experience of thee also,
as to thy gracious Immutability, Omnipresence, and All Sufficiency in all
things concerning me: 2 Cor. 1.10.
For thou have, thou do, and I trust wilt deliver me, in, and from the evil
of all Temptations, and according to thy faithful Word and promise, cause all
things to work together for my good. Romans 8.28.


To thee therefore, O infinite wisdom and goodness, do I offer up the Calves
of my Lips, and the praises of my Soul, for these thy merciful, preventing,
restraining, and commenting providence, in this, and the following Psalm, as a
living Sacrifice.

Amen.

The VMPHIRE. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject.
Satan, the first divider of himself,
And Man from God, is still a forward Else, Genesis 3.

To ruin all things by Division,
As does the Jesuit, Pope, his Eldest Son:
Yea, to this truth of Christ he sets his hand,
Kingdoms, within divided, cannot stand.
Of these, his Wyles, thou warnest me, O Lord, Mat. 12.25.

And taught me how to cement a discord,
'Twixt me and near Relations, by love,
1 Cor. 13.7^
Which bears all things, rather than remove,
Or break domestic Bonds; since such a rent,
Of Friends, widens in time, grows permanent;
Yea, as a broken Bone well set, does grow
Far stronger than it was before; Even so,
Through thy wise ordering and providence,
These breaches made to me a better fence;
Romans 8.28.
Working together for my future good,
According to thy Word (now understood)
In that, Instead of losing what was got,
Thou changed my part, gav'st me a better lot.
Lord, since Parental loves thus ebb and flow,
Give me thy love, which does for ever grow:
Let not my Crimes make mortal my sins wounds,
Romans 5.20.
Since their increase, makes Grace much more abound.
O bring me to that place of rest and ease,
Of Charity, and Everlasting Peace;
Where Devils, World, Sin, cannot divide me,
From Parents, Fellow Members, nor from Thee.
Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon God's most gracious Answer of our Prayers, in giving Rain after
a great Draught, threatening a Famine in Three Summers successively, Viz. In the
Years, 1637. 1638, 1639.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
O Lord, as sin is the substance, so affection and judgment, is the dark
shadow that always attends and accompanies it, as the effect does the cause.
This truth was verified to this Nation of England, in the Years 1637, 1638, and
1639. When according to thy Word, a fruitful Land, was turned into barrenness,
Psalm. 107.34.
for the wickedness of them that dwell therein.

As the first Rebellion of Adam brought a curse upon the whole lower Creation,
Genesis 3.27.
so this wicked offspring, by sin, often invert the order, and harmony of the
Elements, and makes malignant the influence of the higher Orbs, causing those
Celestial Planets, which were Created for blessings to Mankind, to be
Executors of thy righteous Judgments.

Of this, these Three Years Prodigies, are clear and sufficient witnesses, when
as that only Magazin of light, and heat, to the Universe, (thy glorious Sun)
which chears and delights Man and Beast, and gives in our Northern Regions, in
the Spring, as it were new life to Vegatives; was made by thee, for England's
iniquities, a terrible Curse, as occasioning deadly Diseases, Fevers, and
Murrains upon Men and Beasts, through its constant and excessive heat; and like
a Globe, and Furnace of Fire, withered, and burnt up all Grass and Vegitives;
especially our Grain, the staff of life, destroying by this Heavenly Fire, our
Earthly blessings.

As thy Sun, so thy watering Pots, the Clouds, which like swelling Pappes, used
to distill streams of fruitful Rains, according to thy Ordinance; were now
vanished, or rather banished to the Antipodes; or if any appeared, they were but
dry breasts, and true symptoms of the barren Womb of England; yea, thou made
the Heavens contrary to their Nature, to become as Brass, Deuteronomy. 28.23.
and the Earth as Iron; that the one might be as the Hammer, the other the
Anvil, whereon to forge thy many Darts, and sharp Arrows of ensuing Plagues.

As thy Rod of Justice, O Lord, has three Cords, or Lashes, which thou call
thy three sore or greatest Judgments; Ezekiel. 14.21.
Viz. War, Pestilence, and Famine; whereof this last is the greatest, as being
usually the dregs, and the effect of the two former; So thy mercy also has a
threefold time, or Plea, (as in the Gospel;) Lord let the Fig Tree alone this
third Year also, Luke 13.7, 8, 9.
to try it, whether or no it will bring forth Fruit, before thou cuttest it
down.

Lord, as England's sin called for, and deserved this greatest Judgment,
(Famine) so thy mercy did, during these three Years, successively threatening
this grievous Plague, give her three years warning, and space of Repentance;
Yea, did offer thy Peoples Prayers unto thee, by the hand of our Mediator, for
a reprieve, and obtained it; and which is much more wonderful, a pardon, and
dismission of so justly deserved, and so long impending a Judgment; for which
great condiscention, I will bless thee as long as I have a being. And that the
Generations to come may praise thee also, I have in all humility and
thankfulness, returned and recorded in this, and the following Meeters, thy
never to be forgotten Goodness, and Mercy.

The LAMENTATION. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject.
BRight Eye of Heaven! how does thine Ire,
(...).
From a smooth Brow, dart forth thy Fire?
No Tropicks bound, thy torred Zone,
Since Britains know no temperate one;
Why does those living rays, which grace
Thy Tellus brow, now scorch her Face?
No Saturn thou; yet the same heats,
Which gave thy offspring life, retreates
Them into Death, and makes them have
Within themselves a withered Grave.
See, how black Clouds of dust arise,
To blear thy Beams, because the Skies
Have none. In Sackcloth, see, thy Queen,
Sits; having laid aside her green.
Her Spring-paint gone, wrinkles appears,
And shows her Aged, five thousand Years.
Art thou not jealous for to see,
Thy love lie nak't forc Company?
Or art thou Spanioliz'd, and would,
Through these new Inlets, spy out Gold?
Does Hell keep Jubill, and desires,
Thee to shine there with lightsome Fires?
See Troops of Blades, whose strength did keep,
Whole Cities, Townships scarce dare peep,
Or show in Field; yea, in these fears,
Some not offending, lose their Ears:
Whole Rivers scarce thy thirst does bound,
Whilst Springs, their heads, hide under ground.
Tell me, is Phaeton in place,
Or Daphne? has thy Twelve Months Race,
Fired thy Axtell? for did thou fear,
Our Springs hive would out-brave thy Sphere?
But whence this brightning, (hark) my moan
Is answered by a Thunders groan;
Wrath, through that Planet burns, Earth, Skies,
(...).
Men's barren Hearts, assimuliz's.
The Application, and Petition.
DRead Lord! I tremble, and now see,
The cause of this Catastrophie.
Leaves had the Fig Tree, were pruned,
Yet fruitless Vines; yea, like untuned
Instruments, whose Notes do jar,
And only Briefs, and Minnums are,
Of goodness; full of stops, which lie,
And discord makes, not harmony*
Were the Microcosmes, on which,
Thy love has shined with a most rich
Influx; yet we thy Graces dew
Dry up, and lose both fruit, and hue.
Lord, let thy showers on both Worlds fall,
So shall thy Sun not scortch, but all
Things fructuate: On us rain blood,
No evil Omen this, but good; 1 John 1.7.

On that, unbowel Clouds of Rain,
So shall both Spring grow green again.
Yea, once more Blood, and Water, 1 John 5.8.
shall
Witness on Earth thy Peace to all;
Rivers shall flow then in each Place, John 7.38.

And to both, prove the streams of Grace.
Blessed Sp'rit, upon these Waters move, Genesis 1.2.

That both may yield Thee fruit, praise, love:
And those dry Chaps, that want a Tongue,
Shall sing a close unto this Song.
Amen.

A thanksgiving for Rain, after the forementioned great Drought, Anno 1637,
1638, 1639.
ARGUMENT.
The God that hears Prayer, heard ours;
And pity seems to weep in showers. Psalm. 65.2.

The Shewer of Mercy.
Soul. A Dialogue between the Soul and Mercy.
MErcy! If peace, 'twixt Heaven, and Us,
Tell me! why roars his Cannon thus?
Why do I hear, where e're I come
The Warlike Wings strike up their Drum?
See thou that Row, so vastly bent,
As if the Centers point it meant,
To split through us; that by one Doom,
The World might fall into its Tomb,
Or Chaos; May be, through Earths heart,
Nature two counter-poles, World dart,
Because (as some think) she is decayed,
Her Poles worn out, or over-way'd;
No drooping Soul, that thunders noise,
Mercies Answer.
Is Justice murmur, 'cause my voice,
Prevails with God. The other sound
Musters up Troops of blessings round
The Orb. As for the threatening Bow,
It Is my Triumphant Arch; no woe
Portending, since he means no harm,
Who turns the Bows horns from his Arm.
Witness those orient streaks, which are
Genesis 9.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. verse.
The Ensigns of Earths Peace, not War.
Since then the string is in thy power,
Dart up by force of love, a shewer
Of praise; then by that Jacob's scale,
Let thy Soul mount with a fresh gale;
Take Heaven by force, no danger fear,
It Is freedom to be Captived there.
Earths Jubily.
TEll me, my Soul, when did the Skies,
So become Morning to all Eyes?
Were ever tears, so timely shed
As these, which strangely raise the Dead?
Genesis 7.11.
Mercy now puts on Justice Gown,
And smiles, under the old Worlds frown:
Dame Earth grown frolic, now attires
Her front with liquid Pearls, and desires
To feast the Creatures; by her lie,
Clear mirrons for to dress her by.
Young Hairs, she busheth forth, to hide
Her baldness; and like Autumes Bride,
Has over her, by Spike-men born,
A Canopie of swelling Corn.
The Springs invited; but she grown
Feavereth, to Southern Climes was gone
For health; yet presents her Queen,
By Proxy, with a suit of green;
With which Earth spreads her lap, and sets
Thereon, her fruits and delicates:
The feasts prepared; then in each place,
Let us before we eat, say Grace.
The Thanksgiving.
GOod God, such a new World as this,
Deserves, a second Genesis,
To preach thy power, and love, which thrice, This Drought was continued three
Summers, and was every Summer relieved with Rain.

Has made our health a Paradise;
O give us innocence too,
So place and blessing shall anew,
Through Christ by right of re-intaile,
Be ours, and ours, till Issue fail.
Lord, make all Heads, Fountains; all Eyes,
Limbicks; distilling like the Skies,
Through heat of love, a weeping Rain;
Let hearts, like Earth, grow soft again;
So shall such mutual Harmony,
Show grace, as sin works sympathy.
And to thee Lord, this truth return,
That Mercy melts, though Justice burn;
Witness Earth, Heaven, my Heart, Eyes, Pen;
May they thus ever melt, Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon God's merciful restoring me to health, and graciously
supporting and comforting me, in a fearful Agony, and Apprehension of Death; by
reason of a dangerous Cough, which caused me to spit Blood.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
AS Pride, War, and Contention, are the ungrateful Offspring of Peace and
Plenty; so are sickness, and affliction, the succeeding and unhappy Daughters
of health and prosperity. This is not only my Observation, but Experiment; As
having the fresh Spring of my Youth, after an Halcion calm, and time of
health; on a sudden turned almost, into an Autumn, or Fall, of that leavy
beauty, and greenness which my Body (which is but a Tree inverted) was adorned
with; and that by an unexpected and dangerous Spout, or Cattar of Rhumetick
Rain, seconded with a fearful Hurricane, or Thunder-storm of a rending Cough;
which had not God been very gracious, had undoubtedly ^ink both the Pilot and
Vessel, my Soul and Body, I pumping out through the Lungs, much Water and
Blood. But with the Mariners in Jonah's Ship, or rather with Jonah in the
Whales Belly, I cried, and prayed unto my God, even in this Agony, and preluge
of Death, his Sergeant, wherein, Pompa mortis, magis ^erret, quam mors ipsa; As
an addition to these my inward fears, and terrors arising from my dangerous
condition, was the apprehension of my Arch Enemy and Accuser, Satan,
preparing, and ready to prefer at the Bar of Divine Justice, a long Role and
Indictment of my great offenses, attested too by my own Conscience, (which is
more than a thousand witnesses) as also the legal and just punishment of them;
Hell, Eternal Death and Torment; I say again, with all humble and reiterated
thankfulness, I then petitioned my Almighty Savior, who delivered me out of
the Belly of this Whale, and gave me a reprieve from Death; stood by me, as he
did by Paul in the storm, Act 27.24.
and bad me be of good comfort, since Satan the Accuser of the Saints was cast
out, and overcome in his Victory; Rev 12.10. Hes. 2.14, 15. Col. 1.20.2.14.
Heb. 7.25. Chap. 10.22. Romans 5.17, 18. 2 Cor. 5.21.
his Indictment and Role of my Sins, concealed and nailed upon his Cross: That
my Conscience was both cleansed, and pacified, through the washing of his all
purifying blood; And that Divine Justice was satisfied to the uttermost, by his
active, and passive obedience and sufferings, he being made sin for me, that I
might be made the righteousness of God in him; Yea, that he was made unto me of
God, 1 Cor. 1.30. Col. 3.3.
righteousness, and sanctification, wisdom, and redemption; That my life was
hid in him with God: Joh. 10.28. Col. 3.4.
And that he had given unto me Eternal Life: And that when he shall appear, I
shall appear also with him in Glory.

Blessed Savior, with these Cordials thou did, thou do revive and rejoice
my Soul; and in great mercy did answer my Prayer, and restored both my mind
and body, to perfect health. For which, I bless thy name, and record thy praise
here, and in this following Hymn.

The REPRIEVE. Ejaculation or Hymn. Sing this to the Tune of the 100. Psalm.

LOrd, how uncertain, full of change,
Is our lives state! now well, anon
Deaths Image; as though man (O strange!)
Was Natures true Camelion.
Our Youth and Beauty, like a Flower, Isa. 28.1.

Withers, as soon as looked upon;
Much like the Gourd of Jonah's Bower,
An one Day lived Hephemeron. Jonah 4.6, 7.

Sin is the Nimrod, and the first
Tyrant, that did both Worlds subject; Genesis 3.17.

To Floods, Storms, Earthquakes, Genesis 6.5, 6, 7.
and accursed
Mutations, (Wars) that Royal Theft.)
My Microcosme a witness often,
Was, and is still of this sad truth,
Shaken, and under Water brought,
With coughs and rheums, even from my Youth.
The effect of this Earthquake, at last,
Like others, (which presage no good, Mat. 24.7.
)
Was to make Chasmes, and Waters cast
Out of my entrails; tinged with blood.
At which aghast, I trembling fell
Into a clammy and cold sweat;
Was wrackt with thoughts of Death and Hell,
Of Sin, and God's dread Judgment Seat.
Then my Physician, Lord, thou wast;
Luke 5 31.
Stopped by opening a Vain
1 John 1.7.
Of thy own Blood; and my Soul cast
Into that Bath, which cured my pain.
Thus Gallen, Esculapius,
Thou far excel'st; made me all whole,
And by o're-coming Death for us,
1 Cor. 15.26, 54, 55, 56.
Cured both my Body, and my Soul.
Joh. 10.28. Joh. 11.25, 26.
Thou gave to both new life, that I
Being freed from fear of shame, and death,
Might live in thee, and never die;
And praise thee, whilst I have my breath.
Thou art, Lord, my Catholicon,
A certain Cure of each Disease,
1 Cor. 10.4
The only Rock I rest upon;
My Joy, my Cordial, and my Peace.
Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon God's Fatherly, and manifold goodness, in delivering me from
Death, and giving me a merciful recovery out of five several dangerous
sickness. Viz. From a deadly Surfeit in my Childhood, from an inclination to a
Consumption, for many Years in my Youth; And in my elder days from a painful
Cough and Plurisie: From two dangerous Agues; And from many other like
Disasters.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
THe tremendious curse, for Man's sin, and rebellion against God his Creator,
Genesis 2.17.
is Death, temporal and Eternal. The Quartermaster and Harbinger of Death, is
sickness, who prepares as soon as we were born, (for even then we begin to die)
matter, or food, (corrupt humors, and innumerable diseases) for this all
devouring Monster; together, with unremovable quarters, until according to the
Proverb, He has eaten us out of House and home; So that this our dying Life,
is but a living Death. Lord, as all have sinned in Adam, so all in him are
dead; witness that thy just Statute, and Sentence, Rom 5.12, 17.
It is appointed unto all Men once to dye: Heb. 9.27.
To which Law (as acknowledging my self a sinful Son of Adam) I humbly submit,
and have these five times entertained Deaths forerunners, or Vanguard. The
first of his Messengers, was a short, yet dangerous Surfeit, in the time of my
Childhood; out of which, by thy blessing upon the means, used by a friendly
Physician, I was speedily recovered. The second, was a continued defluxion of
Rheum, which caused a constant Cough, and inclined me for many years (in the
entrance of my Manhood) unto a Consumption. By this correction, Heavenly
Father, thou did most wisely bridle, order, and allay the strong and
indomitable Lusts of my Youth; that beholding daily, Death, thy Sergeant, at
the Door, I might fear to act wickedness, and submit to thy Discipline: This
friend of Death (which thy mercy and wisdom made in a sense, a friend, unto
me) by thy special providence, and ordering me to use fit means, was, after
many years space, and at a time, and in a place, where that Disease was always
before dangerously afflictive, discharged also, and I wonderfully, and
perfectly recovered. The third assailant, was a deadly Plurisie, the consequent
and usual effect of a long and violent Cough, which by a terrible pain, and
stitch, made my breathing (the necessary Servant and Bellows of Life) painful;
which after diverse Months suffering, and fruitless use of many remedies, Thou,
O Lord, Psalm. 65 2.
that hear and answerest Prayer, heard mine; and by thy blessing upon a
Plaster laid to my Stomach, and a Purge, did in one Night and a Day free me
from all pains, Coughs and Distempers, to the admiration of my self, and
Relations. The fourth Allie, and Spy of Death, was a violent Ague, whose eight
Hours hot fits might well deserve the Name of a Fever; This ceaz'd upon me at
Homby, where thy providence, O Lord, by this thy Attachment, freed me from a
worse, because illegal detainure; These fiery Fits, (the very shaddows of Hell)
at a certain Hour every other Day, for some Weeks, like a well-ordered
Regiment, made their assaults; and as so many Roman Rams, or whole Cannon,
battered all my Rampires of Earth, the outworks of Nature, preparing, and
making a breach for their General (Death) to enter at. But even then also, O
most gracious God, and Father, Jer. 8.22.
the only expert Physician, that curest both Body and Soul, Thou freely,
without any Fee, (for alas, I had nothing of merit to give thee) Visited me,
and did attend to my cry, and pitied my many sighs, and groans; walking with
me in this Fiery Furnace; so that although I was often burning, Dan. 3.25.
Exodus 31.2.
like Moses Bush, yet I was not consumed: Yea, thou made these Brats of sin,
and death, instead of Destroyers, my Refiners: Diseases and afflictions being
not punishments to thine, and beginnings of Hell, as to the wicked; But like
the Purges, Vomits, and Blood-lettings of a skilful, and loving Father, and
Physician, for prevention; and for the cure, not for the destruction of thy
Children, and Patients; according to thy Word, this shall be the fruit, to take
away their Sin.

Praised be thy Name, O Lord, that in much loving kindness and faithfulness,
Isay 27.9. Psalm. 119.75.
has always afflicted me; and did then also, after a few Weeks, give me a
perfect recovery, by thy blessing, upon the Medicine of a poor Widow, even
after that the utmost endeavors of a skilful Doctor proved uneffectual.

The fifth, and last dangerous encounter, was with another Pursivant of Death,
a second painful and perilsome Ague. From this Ague, also, after three very
accute fits, thou gave me a happy and healthful recovery. Lord, what shall I
render unto thee for these five most gracious recoveries, and as it were new
lives; And for thy deliverance from many other lesser Distempers? Yea, what
have I to return unto thee, since all I am is thine, and all my most spiritual
Sacrifices are lame, weak, and sickly? Lord, although such were forbidden under
the Law, Deuteronomy. 15.21.
yet under thy Gospel we have a great High Priest, which takes away the
iniquity, Exodus 28.38.
and infirmity of our holy things; in whom thou have declared (even from
Heaven) that thou art well pleased with us; And who is that compassionate
Physician, Mat. 3.17. Mat. 9.12.
that came not to heal the whole, but the sick? Blessed Savior, heal now the
infirmities of my Soul, as thou have done these of my Body; That according to
thy promise, the dumb may sing, and the lame may skip, Isa. 35.6.
as the Lamb; Yea, open thou my Lips, and my Mouth shall show forth thy praise;
Psalm. 8.4.
O Lord God, what is Man, that thou visistest him, or the Son of Man, that thou
regardest him? That as a Father, and Nurse, thou should watch over us, from
Morning to Night, and from Night to Morning; That the left hand of thy gracious
providence, should be always under my head, and that the right hand of thy
unchangeable and fervent love, Cant. 2.6.
should continually embrace me; That thou should lead me to Heaven, by the
Gates of Hell. That thou should wound me, that thou might heal me. Humble
me, that thou might exalt me. That thou should exercise me with sickness,
to teach me how to overcome Death, The height and sum total of all sicknesses.
O for ever blessed be thy Name, that gives me not only believingly, but
practically, and feelingly, Romans 5.8.
to seal the truth of that cordial Word, that says, That tribulation brings
forth patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope; which makes us
not ashamed: Wherefore my heart, which thou have enlarged; my lips, which thou
have opened; and my life, which thou have thus often renewed, (through Grace)
does praise thee this Day, for these, and all others thy great Mercies; and
desires to perpetuate my thankful acknowledgment in this, and the following
Memorial to all Generations.

Amen.

The BETHESDA. Ejaculation or Hymn on the former Subject.
TRue, is that Axiom, since the Curse,
(Best things corrupted, become worse,
Than others, which are less refined.)
By Man, and Angels fall, we find,
This truth confirmed; yea, our best meat^,
Putrified, are Diseases Seats.
Hence came my Surfeit, by that food,
That pleased my taste; was sweet, and good. Meditation upon my Surfeit.

This tempted me to an Excess,
That always brings forth Putrid^ess,
Which Nature striving to cast out,
By Vomit, made me sick throughout.
This first assault, Thou Lord withstood,
Of Death, thus withering my Bud
Of Childhood; And by Friends advice,
Purged out my sickness, and its rice;
Restoring health to me, and joy
To Parents; grieved by my annoy.
All sins a surfeit, and abuse
Of what is good; through our misuse,
A Lust, rebelling to Excess,
And yet a want of Holiness;
Lord, Vomit, Purge me, and supply
Thy Grace; so shall I live, not die.
Meditation upon my inclination to a Consumption.
Man's Life, from Birth, does hasten on
Toward Death, by a Consumption
Of moisture Radical; like Lights,
We wast this Oil by burning bright;
But Rheums, and Coughs accession,
Adds Wings to Dissolution.
Such was my state for many Years,
Which ballanc't me 'twixt hopes and fears,
Until in Mercy thou though'st good,
To bles^ the means, dry up this Flood
Of Mall-concocted humors; So,
That it no more my Earth o're-flow.
O Lord, the streams, that drowned my Soul,
Are wicked Lusts; let Grace control
This Deluge, lest it more and more
Consume thy radicating store;
That Body, Soul, restored again,
May be in the full of Grace, not wain.
As Art, by Succors, Forcers, mount
Meditation upon my Plurisie.
Waters, upon a like account,
Rheum pumping Coughs, raise it, and Air,
Above, out of their place. Hence are,
Those stiches, pains, and Plurisies,
Which us endanger, and Disease.
Such was the cause, such the effect,
Of my third sickness; whose Aspect
Prefigur'd, and made way for Death,
The Night before my Cure, was a Night of Thunder and Lightning.
By Stitches, Coughs, shortness of breath;
Yea, all one Night, to add to pain,
Thunders did roar, and Lightnings flame.
When thus upon thy wrack, I lay,
Lord, thou did turn my Night to Day;
And answered from thy glorious Throne,
My prayers, tears, my sighs and groans;
And bl^st weak means, refresht my Soul,
And on a sudden made me whole.
A wonder next a Miracle,
Was this my quick recovery,
Which merits, Lord, a Pyramid;
A Trophy, that cannot be hid,
Of praise: That Saints, in after Days,
May bless, love, trust in thee always.
Lord, frothy Distillations,
Lustful Inflammations,
Shorten still thy Spirits breath,
Threatening to me a worser Death;
By pricks of Conscience, and Heart grief,
O give unto my Soul relief.
Dry up, O Lord, these Springs of sin,
That do obstruct thy breathings in
My sickly Soul; Let Conscience be
Freed from its pains, as cleans'd by thee;
So shall my Soul and Body live, 1 John 1.7.

And to Thee living praises give.
The Bodies Earthquake, Agues are, Meditation upon his two Agues.

Shaking us like a pent-up Air;
Then breaking forth, through our Earths pores,
It casts out Flames, and Waters store;
Imbalming us with sweat, as't were
To fit us for our Sepulcher.
Such was my two last Sicknesses,
Deaths prelude, and a long recess
Of Health, which no Court-Pagentry
Could flatter, for to stay with me;
Nor yet my Office, which transfer
I did to God's Commissioner.
An all-controling Ague, (which
Like the Familiar of a Witch)
Did haunt me, at set-hours each Day
At first, till Mercy did allay:
And to each other, changed my fit,
Lest I should be burnt up by it.
Here sometimes I, as frozen lay,
Shaking for cold, as Seamen say
Those do, near the North pole; Anon,
Burnt up, as one in the torrid Zone,
For eight Hours space; at whose retreat,
I almost drowned was with sweat.
Thus alternative, cold, and heat,
Predominant were, in the same seat
And subject; So the Scriptures tell,
Sinners tormented are in Hell;
Mat. 8.12.
Where weeping, wailing, gnashing Teeth,
Show cold, and heat, and easless grief.
Out of this Aguish, Hell, in which
I twice was cast, some Years betwixt;
I cried with David, Jonah; Then
Psalm. 34.6. Jonah 2.2.
Thou savest me, as thou did them:
Wherefore, as they, so I will bless
Thee in my Heart, Tongue, Life, and Verse.
O Lord, I have (since Life) began,
Been sick of a Quotidian,
Which sometime does me greatly shake,
With faithless fears, which makes me quake;
Anon, mad Anger boyles my blood,
Breaths out ill humors, like a Flood.
O purge out quite this Malady,
And passions tune to Harmony.
So shall such holy temp'rament
Give health to both, with sweet content;
And fear, thus sp'rit'aliz'd shall bring;
Phil. 2.12.
No trembling, but what is good, against sin:
Psalm. 69.9.
Yea, Anger sanctified, shall still
Burn up, and cast out what is ill.
ARGUMENT. Upon my sight of a dead Corpse, and the Contemplation, that Death is
the Compleatment of all Diseases; and therefore will be (the Lord knows how
soon) notwithstanding those my former Recoveries, my last, and incurable
Sickness; but not my Conqueror, since Death is swallowed up in Victory. 1 Cor.
15.5, 4.


Soliloquium, or Discourse.
WHat a lively Moniter is this dead Carcass! the Daily News of Mortality has
not moved me so much, as the fight of this one Trophy of Death. Reports deliver
things by whole sail; and from others, when the Eye, more feelingly, gathers a
truth from many particulars, as being its own Judge, Witness, and Informer, The
common sounds of Death, Posts through our Ears, without any stop; whereas the
Spectacle thereof, by a self-application, Innes even in our Hearts. The
distressed Soul, being fled, unbodied, unhoused; and the battered Citadel
surrendered into the Enemies possession; Lo, how the Successors of sin do
Patrizare, trampling upon these mud Walls, and demolishing this Mansion of
Clay; The Luminaries of the Body, which used to shine with a living brightness,
like the Gelly of a sliding Meteor, ly^ now intombed in darkness; And that
ruddy hue, which gave the name of flesh, to this whited Earth, has either
changed its color, or its place: Every particular Member has now left off its
motion, and rests manacled in a long, and a breathless sleep; Yea, the whole
Body is made ready for its Burial, lies imbalmed in a cold sweat.

It Is better to be in the House of Mourning, than of Mirth; Eccl ^.2.
to be humble, than secure: whilst my Eye amazedly wanders over these dead
Limbs, methinks, in them I view the true Anatomy of my own fate; and read in
pale Characters, that immutable Decree, It is appointed to all Men once to dye.
O Lord, Heb. 9.27.
since this is thy will, and the Law of Nature; give me grace to seek out my
Enemy, rather than suffer my Enemy to seek out me; that so my preparation, may
lessen both my fear and danger. Since the sudden assault of ambushments, annoy
more, than the open force of pitched Battails; and the unexpectedness of
death's approach, terrifies, and hurts more, than his merciless Dart: Wherefore
let me dye Daily, 1 Cor. 15.31.
with Saint Paul, that when I cease to dye, I may begin to live; rather than
dye but once, and ever, with the rich Glutton in the Gospel. Luke 16 22, 23.
The light of the Body is the Eye, and the Eye of the Soul is Faith; the one of
these I must lose, the other I may lose. O Lord, which only give light in
darkness, grant that when I cease to see Vanity, I may begin to view thee; not
through a fleshly perspective, as now, but spiritually, in a far more excellent
manner; And when my Soul is divested of these Rags of Flesh, and freed from her
dull, and sleeping Earth, shall appear naked in thy Presence; Cloth her with
the Robes of beauty, and glory, as having already given her a new Name, Rev.
2.17.
the Wedding Garment, the best Robe; that so when Death shall be swallowed up
in Victory, and the numberless automes of my dust, Mat. 22.11, 12.
through thy power, new-molded into a Body, Luke 15.22.
my Soul may make a re-entry; from which incorruptible and inseparable Union of
Parts, 1 Cor. 15.54.
may proceed, an Eternal perfection of Immortality, and Glory.

Amen.

The TRYVMPH. A Corolary Poem on the former Subject.
OVt-face me not, Grim Death, as though thy hate
Ingraved in this dead Corpse, could make my fate
Unhappy; bright Metals, aged with rust,
Are polisht best, by fretting them with dust.
And the Refiner, melts with Fire, his Ore,
To make it purer than it was before.
What, though a poisonous Wasp thou art, as Eved
1 Cor. 15.54.
Of putrid matter; Death by Christ, is dead?
Or if that Natures Lion, still thou be,
Judge 14.8.
A Sampson's Lion (sure) thou art to me.
Triumph not then, so proudly over this dust,
As though it was not laid up here in trust;
Nor vainly think that this sad Chaos can,
Make me believe no Life, because no Man;
Bodies are but the Souls Seat, which in case
She leaves, we live still, though we change the place.
The naked Grain, which from the Seeds-Man's hand,
Falls to be buried in the furrowed Land,
Corrupts, then Springs in a new form. So we,
Once Mortal, put on Immortality; 1 Cor. 15.53.

Thou being but God's Chinick, to reverse
Man to his first Materials; that his Hearse
May be a Phoenix Nest; from whence shall rise,
When our Sun shines, a Bird of Paradize.
The CIRCLE. Another Corolary Poem of Mortality.
TEll me, fond Man, what Joy thou have
In Courting Pleasures, or to taste
These Earthly vain delights; since all,
Add but degrees unto thy fall.
No sooner Nature has begun, and done
Her work in thee; but it is undone.
Ripe Years no sooner calls thee Man,
But Age makes thee a Babe again.
Thus Circular, is Man's course, our Birth,
Derived from Dust, returns to Earth;
Being only Statutes made of Clay,
Once to be viewed, then thrown away;
Experimental Figures, wherein Features
Are drawn, thereby to Limn out rarer Creatures.
ARGUMENT. Upon God's merciful Preservation of Me, and my Family in health; in
a time of a General Sickness, and Mortality; which broke forth under the
Usurpation of Oliver Cromwell.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
NAtions, in the Holy Scriptures, are compared to Seas, which have their
Calmes, and Storms; their Ebbes and Flowings: Psalm. 93.3, 4.
So these have their Peace and War, health and sickness, in a continual
Vicissitude. O that these changes would prepare us for our last, great,
certain, and yet uncertain Change.

England! and I in England, bear witness to all this; as having seen, and
experimented its truth: particularly that of health, and sickness; when of a
sudden, (as in the Dream of Pharaoh's Kine) our flourishing health was
devoured, Genesis 41.12, 3, 4. Psalm. 93.1, 2. Deuteronomy. 32 39. Psalm. 68.20. Psalm.
148.23.8.11, 12.
by lean and macerating Diseases. Wherefore, let us humbly acknowledge, that
the Lord alone Raigns in Heaven, and in Earth; that he wounds and heals; he
brings down to the Grave, and raises up; and that, to God the Lord, belongs
the Issues of Death. O Almighty Savior, thou art not only styled in Scripture,
The Lord, and General of animate, Exodus 9.8.
but also of animate Hosts; As of the Stars, Hail, Exo. 12.29, 30.
Snow and of Diseases; which last sort of thy Militia, during his Rule, (that
ambitiously called himself our Protector) I saw quar^ered under thy Sergeant,
Major Death's Colors, for many Months, in the Towns and Houses round about my
Habitation. During all which time, thou O Lord, did most graciously give to
me, and my whole Family, a Protection from these troublesome and unwelcome
Guests; Blessing us all with a happy and un-interrupted health. O most liberal
and bountiful God and Father; singular favors, (such as this) calls for from
me; singular praises and acknowledgments; since not any goodness in us, above
our Neighbors, caused this distinguishing mercy: For we were, and are sinful
beyond others; but thy free Grace, who delightest to do good, Exodus 34.6, 7.
as being full of Bowels of pity and compassion, and shows Mercy to whom thou will show mercy. Wherefore, Exodus 33.19
O Lord, since thou art not like to ill-natured Man, but give without
grudging; Jam. 1.5.
yea, have promised more to them, to whom thou have already given much; Add I
beseech thee this Grace, Mark 4.25.
that I may exceed others in real thankfulness, as thou have made me to precede
many others, in this, and the like favors. In testimony of which great and
special Mercy to me, and mine, in our preservation; I humbly present to thee
this Cordial acknowledgment in this, and the following Psalm of Praise.

Amen.

The PROTECTION. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject.
WHen Sin becomes Universal,
No wonder Epedemical
Diseases answer Justice call,
Making each House an Hospital:
Such was unhappy England's fate,
When a Usurper Ruled our State.
Then Lord, unto my Family,
Thou wast a healthful Sanctu'ry; Esaias 8.14.

Thy Mercies great Indulgency,
Freed us from this Mortality:
Made Us to Goshen-like, when fear, Exodus 8, 22. Chap. 9.26.

Sickness, and Death, Triumphant elsewhere.
Sad was these times, whon Corn and Grass,
Like to their owners, withered was,
For want of help to Inn, (alas)
And tend them; yea, to such a pass,
Were many Households brought before
It ceast, three parts were sick, or more.
Good God! how free's thy Grace? how great
Thy Love? how sinful, uncompleat
Am I? the Subject, Stage, and Seat
Of Favors, which I here repeat
With Praise, since thou protection grants
To worst of Sinners, least of Saints.
Fevers, O Lord, of Luxury,
Tumors of Pride, and Vanity,
Dropsies of swelling Gluttony,
Agues of sad Apostasy,
Most Families do now infect,
Make Sick; O do thou mine protect.
And let not an Egyptian Night
Of Error, now Eclipse the Light
Of Goshen; Exodus 10.23.
but let thy might
Preserve their Families upright;
So shall our Houses Churches be, Colos. 4.15.

And give all Glory unto Thee.
Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon God's gracious Preservation of my Horses, and other Cattle from
dying, in the time of a great Murrain, under Oliver Cromwell's Government, when
many of my Neighbors were very much damnified.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
AS Achan's sin, let Israel blood; So Readiness guilt of blood, made Israel fast
perforce, Josh. 7.1, 5. 2 Samuel 21.1. 2 Samuel ^4* 1^, 15.
in three Years of Famine. David's pride in Numeration, concludes in Israel's
humiliation, and Pestilential substraction: And the High presumption of the
Princes of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 5.1, 3, 5.
in the captivating God's Ark, ends in the shame and reproach, Plague and
destruction of the People of their principal Cities, Ekron, and Ashdod: to all
which Examples* the Poet bears witness, Delirent Reges, plectuntur Achivi.

As Israel suffered for Korah, Dathan's, and Abiram's Rebellion; So England was
punished with several Judgments (as I humbly conceive) for Cromwell's
unfaithfulness, Numb. 16.1.31, 32, 46, 47, 48, 49.
and ambition; witness the great and strange Plague amongst Horses, and other
Cattle; and which was very remarkable, it raged most amongst his Troops, the
Pillars of his Pride. Not, but that in all these Inflictions, the Peoples Sins
was the principal cause, and the Princes offense, as it were, 2 Samuel 24, 1.
the shooing-horn, to pull them on them; as the Holy Spirit witnesses, as to
Isreal's Plague. The anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved
David against them, saying, go and number Israel, and Judah. That is, he
permited Satan to stand up against Israel, and to provoke David to number
Israel; as it is clearly held forth, in the first of the Chronicles, Chapter
the 21. Verse. 1.

But to return, This Plague, or Murrain was so contagious, that it cleaved unto
the very Walls, Planks, and Mangers of Stables: insomuch, that the fresh and
untainted Horses, brought and placed in them, to supply the former loss, were
presently infected, and dyed; alike Mortality was also amongst other Cattle: So
that it is hard to say, whether the dying groans of Beasts and Horses, or the
Cries of the Husbandmen, and Carriers, and those whose livelihood was swept
away by this Beasom of destruction, was the greater.

O most gracious God, who in the midst of these general Losses, and Complaints,
preserved my Stock untoucht, and entire; not for my righteousness sake, which
is as filthy Rags, but for thy mercy sake: Accept I beseech thee this my
thankful acknowledgment, of thy singular goodness, and Fatherly providence
amongst the rest of thy mercies, Isa. 5.1. Deuteronomy. 31. 19, 21, 22. Exodus 15.1.
Jud. 5.12. 2 Sa. 22.1.
which according to thy own example, and thy Saints, my duty, and thy command;
I desire to record, and declare to my Childrens Children, and to all future
Generations; that when through the Redemption of my Savior Jesus Christ, thou
shall translate me to praise thee in the Heavenly Chore of glorious Saints and
Angels; Psalm. 28.7. Psalm. 33.3. Ca^t. 1.1. Rev. 9.9. Rev. 14.3. 1 King. 4.32.
Ephesians. 5.19. Colos. 3.16.
They and thy People in succeeding Ages, may continue to praise, and bless thy
Name here upon Earth, and be encouraged by thy manifold favors to me (thy poor
Servant) to fear, love, and trust in thee for ever. Lord, since thy Glory, and
the good of my own Soul, and others, is my only end in this Work; Let it
receive a blessing from thee.

Amen.

The SHAMBLES. A Corolary Poem on the former Subject.
WHence is it, that the stately Stalls for Horse,
Of Noble Men are empty; And perforce,
The Grooms do idly wait, bewail the fate
Of their dead Steeds; who seem to lie in state,
Like some in our proud Age? yea, Gentry fear,
No course at Brackly will be run this Year,
For want of raceing Barbes; And that their Hounds,
Will surfeit with much Horseflesh; be unsound
For want of Exercise; and Troopers cry
Old pay will not suffice new Horse to buy.
Why? are our Fields Vntill'd? why does our Grain,
Now sow it self, before brought home again,
For want of Teames to Inn it? And the Road,
Through Carriers loss of Horse, so thinly's troad?
Yea, Dairy-men, and Graziers, throw up Ground,
Because their Sheep and Cattle die unsound?
Our Oracle, God's Word, gives answer, Thus,
All Plagues are fruits of sin; And the first curse, Genesis 3.39. Genesis 3.17. Genesis
3.1^.

Which like the Jewish Leprosy infects,
All that is ours, (though Creatures innocent)
As being on Us, in part, a Punishment.
Thus Rulers, righteously do confiscate,
Not only Rebels Lives, but their Estate;
And Princes use, for faults in the Nonage,
Of a beloved Son, to whip his Page.
O let our sinless Brutes, sad dying moanes,
Stir up in Us Offenders, hearty groans
For all our sins, their Plague: so shall this loss,
To Us become a blessing, not a Cross.
Lord, though my fault did greatly contribute
Unto this common harm, yet at thy suite,
This Judgment thou on others laid; Let fall;
Sparing my goods, who was a principal;
Preserving unto Admiration,
My Stock, in this so great Contagion.
Lord, as thy Mercy here was singular,
So let my praise, the common pitch, as far
Transcend; That so thy favors magnitude
May not bring forth, make great, ingratitude
In Me: Who, for thy Preservation,
Offer my self for an Oblation.
Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon God's gracious Providence, in the seasonable quenching, and
preserving, Eleven times, four of my Houses, (then in my possession) from being
burnt down, and destroyed; And that without my suffering of any considerable
loss.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
OF all inanimated Instruments of God's curse for sin, none have been so
violent, irresistible, and destructive to Man, as the four Elements; Numb.
16.31.32, 33.
because of all sublunary things, they possess the largest extent; and
therefore have the greatest power, and influence: Witness the Earths
tremendious swallowing up the Tents, and Families of rebellious Korah, Dathan,
and Abiram; and the destructive and ruinating Antiochian Earthquakes; Genesis
7.20.21, 22, 23. Numb. 25.9.
The Universal Deluge in Noah's time by Water; The great Mortality and
destruction of the Israelites in the Wilderness; and our late dreadful
Pestilences in London, proceeding from the corruption of the Air; and the
fearful and unparalled Visitation of Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 19.24, 25.
by Elementary Fire.

Of which four Fundamental Simples, and sole Ingredients of our lower Creation;
None is so terrible, so tormenting, so swift, and so indomitable, as the
Element of Fire: and therefore not only the unsupportable pains of Hell, are
held forth to us in Scripture, by Fire; Isa. 30.33.
But flaming Fire is already irrevocably ordained by the Lord (as the blessed
Apostle Peter witnesses)to bring up the rear, and to be the last, 2 Pet. 3.7,
10.
and the most desolating Judgment upon this wicked World; The sad, yet lively
figures of this last Fiery Destruction, are the Burnings of Houses, Towns, and
Cities, particularly that of the great, famous, and ancient City of London, in
the Year 1666. Against which City, those Ignation Fires, marched with such a
large and fearful front, that they destroyed, and laid in Ashes, in three Days,
the glory, labors, and expenses of two thousand seven hundred of Years.

O gracious God! has Fire been so raging, unmerciful, and desolating to many
thousands of Houses and Palaces, in London and England? has it now, and
heretofore, impoverisht, and undone many thousands of Persons, and good
Christians? what cause have I (a sinner, above others) to record and
acknowledge thy great and continued mercies; for no less than Eleven times
quenching the Fires begun in Four of my Houses, (lately in my possession) and
for preserving our Goods from any considerable Damage?

O let thy Goodness and Mercy, that was virtually Water, to allay, and put out
these judicial and terrene Fires, kindled by my sin; as well as though the
malice of Enemies, and carelessness of Servants, be as Oil, to cause the Flames
of my Love and thankfulness, so to mount aloft, that they may be heard, and
seen afar off; even of all that serve, and trust in thee in these three
Nations; That they in the consideration of these, and of others thy mavelous
loving kindness to me, declared in this my poor work, may praise thee with me
also; Yea, let this holy and Heavenly Fire, consume and burn up whatsoever is
not thy goods, and furniture in me; and destroy every Image of Jealousy, 1
Cor. 3.16.
any Lust that Satan has set up in thy Temple, my Body; or upon thy Altar, my
heart; so shall my whole Man (like thy House consecrated by Solomon) be
replenisht with thy brightness and glory: 2 Chro. 5.13, 14.
yea, being thus filled with the Holy Ghost, my Life and Soul shall shine like
holy Stephens Face, thy Proto-Martyr, Act. 6.15.
and Confessor here, and both Soul and Body hereafter to Eternity, shall be
made like unto my Savior's glorious Body: For we know that when Christ, who is
our life, shall appear, Phil. 3.21. Col. 3.4.
we shall also appear with him in Glory.

Amen.

The EXTINGVISHER. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject.
HOw blessed, and Heaven-like, was Man's State in Paradise;
When nakedness, with goodness clothed, was of a greater price
By far, than Cloth of Gold, imbost with Diamonds,
Rubies, great orient Pearls, and other precious Stones!
There was no need, nor pompous use of Houses fair,
To live, lodge, Banquet in, or fence from Wind, cold Air,
Or Summers heat; Grass ever green, imbrodered
With various colored Flowers, was his sweet Bed;
The Earth, his Table was, spread with variety
Of gustful Plants and Herbs; yea every fruitful Tree,
As Servitors, present his Smell, Eye, Hands, and Taste
With all kinds of the varest Fruits, and delicates:
Above the rest, was that, Nature-preserving Tree,
Of Life, given him to feed on to Eternity.
By Day, his large previllion, was the Azure Sky,
Glorious like Heaven, through the Sun's light; his Canopie,
Also by Night it was, though changed, and altered clean,
As being spangled over with Stars, like a new Scene.
O wretched Man, who by thy own rebelliousness,
Have forfeited this Patent of true blessedness;
And art most justly out-lawed, and by sin cast out,
Of this, thy first condition; And be-set about
With miseries: hence is it, that each Element,
Of which thou art compounded, is revengeful bent
Against thee; that the glorious Sun, whose Heavenly Fire,
Was made to warm, and cherish thee, is through God's Ire,
By its refracted Beams, thy great Tormentor: Hence
The Air is full of Thunders, Tempest; and with cold condenst,
Powers forth, the down-Snow, and canded Hail, with Rains,
Like Floods. Witness the Indian Spouts, and Hurricanes;
The Seas, and Rivers, now have leave to pass their bounds,
And make that Sea again, or Lakes that was dry ground.
Hence is it that our Mother Earth, out of whose Womb,
So many kinds spring forth, unnaturally becomes
Their Tomb, before their time; And with a trembling Jaw,
Devours her Offspring; swallows up in her vast Maw
Whole Towns; yea, Towering Cities, and the swelling Streams,
Of Rivers deep, making proud Mountains, humble Plains.
Hence is it, that wild Beasts rebel against Man, their Sovereign Lord;
Nimrods oppress, and Brothers fall by Brothers Sword.
These fearful fruits of Sin, and of first Adam's Fall,
Was the ground Plot, Impulsive cause, Original,
Of Houses, Towns, and Cities; Then necessity,
Was Man's Surveyor, But now Pride, and Luxury;
Which changed has our Fathers Caves, Tents, Cottages,
To Castles, Towers, like Babel, stately Palaces,
And costly Buildings; Four such, Lord, for my rich lot,
Thou gave me once; built, furnished to my hand, what not?
Nay more, that love, and mercy, might thy bounty match,
Eleven times thy good providence, kept only watch,
And blessed the means, to quench those Flames, that had begun
To Ceize House, Goods, upon sins Execution:
Yea once, the side pience of a Garret, was on Fire, put out,
Without the knowledge, help of any Person (wonderful throughout!)
In all these Fires, our Damages was very small,
When Neighbors lost fair Dwellings, Household Stuff, and all
Their precious things. Wherefore let this thy goodness be,
By me, O Lord, Recorded to Posterity.
That what is deficient here, to celebrate thy praise,
May be supplied by them in time, and length of Days.
Dear God, to give, preserve from harm, Four pleasant Seats,
Was thy great act of love, and care; made more complete,
In giving, gracing me poor sinful Hut of Clay,
To be thy Temple, and thy dwelling Night, and Day: 1 Cor. 3.16.

But wretched Man I am, and mad, that in return, 2 Cor. 6.16.

Have often essai'd thine; yea my one House to burn,
By Flames of Lusts, which from the middle story, my vil'd heart,
Flamed through my Eyes Balcons, and fill the highest part, Romans 7.24.

My mind with smokie darkness; so that Flakes of Fire,
Endangered thence, my Neighbors House, yet has not thy just Ire,
Good God, left me, thus foolishly by my own act,
To be burnt down: but in remembrance of my firm contract
To thy dear Son, my Spouse, thou did bind up, restrain,
Satan, that unclean Sp'rit, the Wind that blew that Flame;
Yea, poured by the hand of faith, thereon my Savior's blood,
Which dampt those Fires; repaired, and made thy Structure good.
Lord, am I a Bankrupt, unable to repay,
My Debt of Gratitude, for favors every Day;
Deliverances from many Dangers Temporal;
What shall I render for these Mercies spiritual?
Lord, I am wholly thine, by right of Creation,
And thy Son's purchase, constant preservation;
Wherefore accept thy own, my all: Let it suffice,
Since Soul and Body is thy living Sacrifice.
Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon God's gracious preserving of me from being Burnt in my Lodgings
in Summerset House.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
DAy unto Day utters Speech, and Night unto Night shows knowledge, Psalm.
19.2.
as to the constant, gracious, and wonderful Providence of the Lord, for the
preservation of his People.

Amongst whom, (to the praise and glory of his free grace, be it spoken) I have
had a large share, witness the foregoing Records, and this deliverance, when in
the conclusion of some Hours spent alone in Fasting and Prayers, and I ready to
arise from my Knees, and to change my Cushion for my Bed at Ten a Clock at
Night, I heard a great crack, as of a Pistol, issuing from behind the Hangings,
and corner of the Chamber, within two Yards of me; at which sudden noise, I
arose up, and pulled back the Hangings, saw a Barrel full of small-Cole, all of
a flame, occasioned by the innocent carelessness, and thrift of my Fire-maker,
who had cast back some live small Coals, into the Tub; the breaking of whose
burnt Hoops, gave me this timely Alarm: which had it been delayed but a few
Minutes, I, and my Servant had been a Bed, and asleep, and locked up in my
Bedchamber, within that Dining Room; And the Hangings that hung over the
Barrel, certainly Fired; together with that Room, and that whole stately
Structure.

O Lord, whilst we are faithfully employed in thy service, and worship; we are
assuredly under thy Almighty Protection; who have promised to those that make
thee their Refuge; Psalm. 91.10, 11, 12.
That there shall no evil befall them, nor any Plague come near their
dwellings; That thy Angels shall take charge of them, to keep them in all their
ways, that they shall bear them up in their hands, lest they dash their Foot
against a Stone. O how sweet, how comfortable, how encouraging to thy People,
is the most firm belief of the constant presence, Heb. 1.14.
watchful, and powerful assistance of thy glorious Angels, whom thou have made
Ministering Spirits for the good of thy Elect; As thy Servant at this time found
by experience! Such gracious Providence as this, being most probably timed,
acted, and discovered by an Angel, as the laying of the Train, and kindling of
the Fire, and inflaming of the Barrel, might possibly be, the malicious
contrivance of a wicked Spirit; Who, as the Scriptures witness, are as
constantly Instruments of evil, to Mankind (although the wicked World are
ignorant thereof) as the others are of all good, to thy Children.

Lord, probably it was the Devils will and design, that the Barrel should not
have flamed forth so soon, by a quarter of an Hour, and then without any noise;
that so, the Chamber being empty, and we a Bed, and asleep; and the Hangings on
Fire, we might have been first certainly smothered, and afterward burnt. (A
Roman-like Obsequie.) But thy All-wise providence suffered him (as thou did
his Guy Faulkes) to bring his Plot to an accomplishment, and then ordered thy
Angel thus strangely and opportunely, to discover to thy greater glory, his
disappointment, and thy Servants wonderful Salvation, and serious Observation
of this thy most Fatherly love, care, and watchfulness over me, thy poor Child
and Creature. Blessed God, and Father, how have thou, through our Adoption in
Christ, meliorated our condition, so that our greatest Enemies, in all their
malicious actings against us, are now made but Carriers, to convey thy
love tokens unto us; yea, all our troubles and dangers, are so many choice and
faith-strengthning experiences of thy Power, Goodness, and mercy; so that now,
instead of fearing of them, we can rejoice and triumph in, and over them; And
give to our selves, and others, a satisfying reason why thou suffer Devils,
and Diabolical Men thus to act, rage, and persecute thy Saints; when thou
could in a moment cast them all into Hell. Why thou leadest us into various
Temptations, afflicts us with Diseases, suffer us to be Daily incompast
about with troubles, and dangers; when in an instant thou could renew, and
make again this Earth our Paradise; Is it not, O Lord, (as well as to exercise
and brighten our Graces, and to purge out our sins) that in and by these Trials
thou might also have a frequent, and fit occasion to manifest thy self unto
us, (in the face of our Lord Jesus Christ) in all thy glorious Attributes, of
Power, and Wisdom, Justice, and Faithfulness, Love, Mercy and Goodness? Thus O
Lord, this great danger of Burning, was to me the Mother of a far greater
mercy, thy wonderful preservation; and shall now, and for ever be the subject
of my praise, and thanksgiving: which I humbly present to thy most gracious
Majesty, in this Memorial, and the following Poem. Amen.

The DELIVERANCE. A Corolary Poem on the former Subject.
O Lord, how aptly does thy sacred Word compare,
Eccl. 1.7.3. Chap. 2.23. Chap. 1.3, 10. Chap 4 4. Genesis 3.10. Heb. 9.27.
Men unto Travelers, whose toilsome Journeys are
Begun, even from the Womb; whence natures pass they have,
And make some short, some longer steps, unto the Grave,
Our common home; fulfilling thy Decree most just,
For sin; That Earthly Bodies shall return to Dust?
But is this all is held forth, by this comparison?
No, our Life and Way, like theirs, is tiresome;
Over Hills, through Vailes; now high, then low; through passages
That cragged, Woody are, untrode, where Ambushes
Of sundry mischiefs, troubles, (Thief-like) us engage:
Such has my course been, Lord, throughout my Pilgrimage.
Instance amongst the rest of my Life's Narrative,
This following danger, and thy loves preservative.
Who would have thought dead small Coals, laid some yards from fire,
Unused for five Hours space, should as it were conspire,
Behind my Hangings, without sight, or scent of fume,
Or crackling, me, and a great Palace to consume?
Or that my harmless Maid should ignorantly lay,
A train over Night, to burn us all before next Day;
By her too careless thrift, in casting back some Coals,
Inkindled, when she made my Fire? Who could control,
But thou O Lord, this dreadful fate of causes set,
Within few Minutes, to produce a sad effect?
Thou forcest the dead Barrels Hoops, in the nick of time,
To sound Alarm, and discover this design;
Else had I quickly slept in Death, been smothered,
Consumed (as on a Roman Pile) upon my Bed.
At which great noise, which did direct my Eyes and Hand,
I rose* withdrew the Veil, and cast the flaming brand
Into my Chimny-Fire; converting prayer to praise,
And vows of gratefulness, unto thee all my Days;
Which here I pay, adding this Application,
That when one of the Sex, first in transgression,
Genesis 3.12.
Inflamed, by some wanton Insects, the Gunpowder of Lust,
1 Timothy 2.14.
Barrel'd up in my Heart (like that kindling dust,)
In The Night, (the Sunset of thy Grace) which Coals did lie
Smothering sometimes, behind the graceful Tapistry
Of my Christian profession; yea, when that Fire,
With noise, and Hell-assisting fury, did conspire,
To burn, and break the Hoops and Bonds of Chastity,
That so the Dining Room, on Fire, (my Body) suddenly
My surpised Soul (its Guest) might sleeping, burn, and ^lie;
With all her goods, thy grace, in this Catastrophie:
Then did thou fright my Conscience, by guilts Thunderclap,
And raised me up with holy speed, for to draw back
The hangings of hypocrisy; And to cast in
The renewed Fire of Zeal, (this Hell-like) Fire of Sin,
And to pour on the Waters of repenting tears,
With Daily Prayers, and Fasting, which this Devil fears,
Casts out. O Lord, thy temporal deliverances
Of Body, have been great; but thy Indulgences, Mat. 17.21.

And Mercies to my Soul, exceeds as far,
As does the Heaven, the Earth, the light of Sun, a Star;
For by the one, thou have spun out the slender thread
Of my expiring life; but by the other, thou instead
Of Death Eternal, the reward and fruit of sin, Rom 6.21, 23. Romans 6.22, 23.
Col. 1.27.

Have given me Glory, everlasting Life in Him,
Who is my hope. O that I had the thankful Tongue,
Of Men, and Angels, that I might enrich this Song
Of praise, for thy redoubled favors, and free love,
Which are beyond expression; yea, which soar above
My weak conceptions: Lord, accept this Widows Mite,
Because I offer all I have; for it is thy right.
To me, for sin, belongs confusion, shame of Face;
But to thee, O Lord, forgiveness, mercy, through free grace. Dan. 9.8, 9.

Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon God's most gracious and wonderful Providence, in preventing,
and delivering me, from being Slain, and from committing of Manslaughter, in
my Lodgings, in Sommerset-House, about the Year, 1647.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
HE that dwells in the secret of the most High, shall abide under the shadow
of the Almighty. Psalm. 91.2.
Gracious God, I humbly and thankfully acknowledge, that thou have performed to
me this thy promise, although I come far short of fulfilling the condition:
Mat. 25.24. Romans 8.32. Ja. 1.5. Psalm. 23 3. Ezekiel. 20.9.
For thou art no hard Master, (as the sloathful Servant slandered thee) but the
most liberal and bountiful Lord; whose grace is free, who gives without
upbraiding, and who savest us temporally, spiritually, and eternally, for thy
own Name sake; Even when there is but a step betwixt Us and Death.

This truth was both verified and manifested, when I and my Servant, in my
Lodgings in Somerset House, were suddenly awakened out of our sweet, and quiet
Nights sleep, about break of Day, on a Summers Morning, by a great noise upon
my Stairs head, seconded by the most forcible breaking open of my Dining Room
Door, though defended by two great ^olts, and a strong Spring-Lock: which first
assault gave us only time to step out of our Beds, in our Shirts, to my
Chamber Door, with our naked Swords, and wound-up, and ready-prim'd Pistols,
charged with Bullets; against which Door, without any Parley, another assault
was made, by a kind of a Roman battering Ram, which (...) out, and cast into
the Flore, three strong Staples, the security of my Lock and Bolts; The Door
wide open, a Person unknown to me, with others following him with drawn Swords,
would have entered the Chamber, not once answering my loud de^ and, of what they
came for: Whereupon they pressing upon me even to the point of my Sword, I
verily believed they intended to murder me, and the rather, because not long
before, reports were spread abroad, of a design of massacring in one Night, all
the then Parliament Men in their Beds. Wherefore in self-defence, I presented
my Pistol, and struck Fire against the Breast of the Leading-man without effect,
which failure in all likelihood might have encouraged, and provoked him and his
associates, to have rusht in upon us naked Men, and to have hewed us in pieces*
but certainly there was more with us, than was against us; else had not a
valiant tried Officer, with some Files of Soldiers; for such I understood them
to be afterward, at the sight only of two Men in their Shirts been struck with
such a pannick fear, that they suddenly and with great speed ran back through
the Dining Room, not stopping in their flight, nor recollecting their spirits*
until they came to the bottom of my Stairs. To which Stairs top, I in my Shirt
with the like speed pursued them; where, upon a second demand of their
intentions, and who they were the Officer told me, he was sent by Order from
Major General Skippon, to search a House in Somerset House Yard, and to
apprehend two dangerous and disaffected Persons, which before they could
attach, were slipped out of their Beds, into the Cellar of that private House,
which by reason of the height of that great House, above that Lean too; had a
Cellar under the Cellar belonging to my Lodgings; from whence forcing up a
board of the Flore they crept up into my Cellar, and from thence to my
Stare-case, under which they hid themselves; and after our parley, were there
found, and taken. These Persons, he told me, he and his Soldiers pursued
through the same Hole, into my Cellar* and Lodgings, supposing all to be but
one, and the same House; whereupon, I telling him my Name, and rectifying the
mistake, The Officer came up to the Stair-head, and craved pardon for his rash
and dangerous Error; I returning to my Bed* and he with his Prisoners, the same
way that he came; (my Door into the House, Court, or Quadrangle, being all this
time fast locked, and bolted) as we left it, at our going to bed.

O Lord, how did this ignorant, and innocent mistake, by thy all wise
permission and ordering, involve me into a double danger, that thou might
redouble Mercies! had these Soldiers (...) more knowing in their actings* I
had been more ignorant of thine; yea, if I had not been in so great danger, I
had not been so graciously delivered; Thus to the answering, and satisfying of
all murmurings and objections against thy Government of the World, thou do
exalt and justify thy Holiness, Power, Wisdom, and Righteousness, in bringing
forth Light out of Darkness, and that not only out of things casually evil, as
here, but out of what is morally evil, as in Adam's fall; which thy Omnipotency
could have impeded, did not the conjunction and greater shining forth (in the
midest of this black ^oile) of thy Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, and all other thy
Attributes, through the darkness and contrariety of Providence, and opposition
of Sin and Satan, make more for thy Glory, the Chiet, Just, and Sovereign end
of all thy Works; Who, but thou O Lord, who art the God of Nature, can
change, and unnaturalize Nature; So that hungry Lions shall not devour thy
Daniel; Dan. 6 22. Dan 4 27. Jon 2 10. Exo. 14.21, 22.
Fire shall not burn thy Three Children; A Whale shall not smother, and concoct
thy Jonah, nor the fluid Sea flow over, and drown thy Israel! Who, but thou O
Lord, at this time did forbid a Sulphur Stone to spit forth Fire, at the
collition and motion of the wheel of my Pistol, or extinguished its sparks with
Gunpowder; that thou might preserve my Hand from the guilt, my Conscience
from the trouble, my Heart from the grief, and my good Name from the reproach
of Manslaughter! Who but thou O Lord did cause Man with naked Swords to
recoil, and valiant Soldiers to turn their backs, and to fly from two naked
Men; provoking them, and in part disarmed; that so Friends might not act as
Enemies, nor pour forth the blood, and destroy the lives of one another! Who
was it, but thou Almighty Savior, that gave a right understanding betwixt us,
and turned our fears and dangers into a Happy deliverance, and thanksgivings!
Which then and now accept O Lord; who at this time did mercifully prevent my
friends, at other times, did powerfully restrain my Enemies from taking away
my life; And as thy goodness has been continued, so let my praise be
perpetuated in this Memorial to future Generations, even till time shall be no
more.

Amen.

The INVISIBLE GVARD. A Corolary Poem upon the former Subject.
MAn's Life is wholly unsecure;
Upon him dangers do attend,
Job 5.7.
As Shades on Substances; As sure
As Sparks fly up; from Foes, from Friends,
Asleep, awake, early, and late,
In Sickness, Health; In every State.
Instance, Loyal Mephibosheth,
2 Samuel 16.3, 4. 2 Samuel 4.5, 6. 2 Samuel 3.27. 2 Kin. 8.15. 2 Sa. 20.9, 10. 2 Sa.
13.28, 29. Judge. 4.21.
By slandring Ziba spoiled; the ends,
Murders, of sleeping Ishboseth,
And Abner, by their seeming Friends,
Of sick Benhadad, Amasa,
Of healthful Ammon, Sisera.
This Axiom, often has been proved true,
In and by me; Witness this Role,
Full fraught with dangers, old and new;
And this, which Mercy did control;
Else had I Killed, or Killed bin;
Or both, without malicious sin.
That Leaders, should, by Daylight take,
A Palace for a Tenement,
That Friends, like Enemies, should break
Open Doors, not showing their intent;
Assault, as Foes; no words exchange,
But Swords and Pistols was most strange.
But this, most wonderful of all,
A Fire-stone struck, no sparks confer;
Or if it did, should vainly fall
Into a Bed of Gunpowder,
As upon Snow; that Powder dry,
Should be more merciful, than I.
That Soldiers, and their Officer,
That feared not thundering Cannons Crack,
Should fly from naked Men, as 'twere
Afrighted, with one Pistols knack;
That this should end, without all harm,
Was only God's restraining Arm.
O Lord, though danger, is sins Lot,
By thy Decree, Esth. 1.19. Chap. 3.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Chap. 7.10.
like Persian Law
Reversless; yet this Haman's Plot,
Against Israel, thou do overawe,
And by assisting Providence,
Us safeguard gives, in thy defense.
Wherefore, ( Purin-like) Feasts of Praise,
I will keep Daily unto Thee, Esth. 9.26.

Who have been gracious all my Days,
In Peerless Mercies, unto me;
That all things work (as says thy Word)
Good unto thine, I here Record. Romans 8.28.

Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon God's gracious preserving Me from the Infection, of the
loathsome and dangerous Disease of the small Pox, Four times; and of my Wife,
Six times, when some Persons, in the Houses in which we lived in, were sick of
it.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
AS Sin is the Distemper of the Soul, so is Sickness of the Body; both Maladies
ending in Death, the one Temporal, the other Eternal: As every Sickness is the
sad effect of Sin, so every Disease Herogliphical and Sumetomical, of some Sin
or other, discovering, as well as punishing it. So the Tun-bellied Dropsy, is
both the figure, and scourge of Drunkenness; The inflaming Fever, of Fiery
anger, and passions; The noisome French-Disease, of filthy Lust; and the
fulsome Face ingraving and marring, small Pox, of Pride.

O how does our righteous God humble, affright and punish the proud, wanton,
and beautiful Persons of our times, by this Tyrant: Who, as the Lord's Bailiff,
having seized their whole Bodies upon Execution, for the Debt of Sin; and
baffled, and fooled their expected Rescuers, their deified Physicians, binds
his Prisoners Hand and Foot unto their Beds; Regards not their groans, sighs,
and tears that falls from their late amorous, and lascivious Eyes; which he
seals up with a scab, singing off, (as Peasants do their Swine) even unto
baldness, their curiously curled, powdered, and abused Hair; swells up, and
greatens their Heads, and Faces, beyond all proportion, even unto
monstrousness; Clothes their Idolized, and beautiful Faces, and Bodies, instead
of Silk, and Tissues; of curious paints, promates, and costly washes; at first*
with Job-like Boiles, and Ulcerated Carbuncles; afterward, with a loathsome,
ugly, and stinking temporary Leprosy; and when that shakes off, he brands, and
stigmatizes them, with most dis-figuring Marks; that so all may know, that
looks on them, under whose Tyranny they have been? As for their smiling and
enticing Lips, their false Tongues, and Epycurian Throats, the Instruments of
Voice; by all which, they used to quaver, and warble forth wanton Aires, and
deluding words; He commands to silence, and binds them by the strict, and sore
Bonds of outward and inward Tumors, and Imposthumations; to be dumb, and quiet,
scarcely permitting them so much liberty, as to send relief, and nourishment,
to their almost-starved, and languishing Mother-Nature.

O Lord! have thou no less than four times delivered my self, and six times my
second-self, my dear Wife, from this painful, dangerous, loathsome, unsatiable,
and dis-figuring Malady, even when it seized upon others of our Family? Have
thou foretold, and fore-threatned, (as I humbly conceive) this destructive
Disease, by thy Prophet Isaiah, as thy most just Judgment for pride, Chap. 3.
Verse. 7. held forth in these words, The Lord shall smite with a Scab, the Crown
of the Head, of the Daughters of Zion; and the Lord will discover their secret
parts? yea, have thou set down, and ennumerated the many Instruments of
Israel's pride, and ours; Verse. 18, 19 20, 21, 22, 23. A Scripture worthy to be
seriously read, and considered, by the proud Gallants of both Sexes, in our
times. Concluding thus, Verse. 24. And it shall come to pass, that instead of a
sweet smell, there shall be a stink; and instead of a Girdle, a Rent; and
instead of well-set Hair, baldness; and instead of a Stomacher, a girding of
Sackcloth; and burning, instead of beauty: Judgments, that seems to me, to be
the very lively Characters of the small Pox.

O let me, to whom thou may say, as once my Savior did, Joh. 8.7.
to the Scribes and Pharisees; If thou be without sin, throw the first
Stone, at the proud Offenders of these times; (After my humble and penitent
acknowledgment of my manifold offenses, of this kind) Bless and praise thy
Name, for these thy so often reiterated Mercies, and Deliverances.

O Lord, thy many favors have so indebted me, that I am a Bankrupt, and unable
to repay; Deuteronomy. 15.17.
Wherefore I humbly beseech thee, to seize upon all that I am, and have, to thy
use and service; yea, nail my Ear to the Door of thy House, that I may be thy
Servant for ever; so shall I still be a great gainer: for thy service is
perfect freedom; And I had rather, with King David, be a Doorkeeper in thy
House, than to dwell in the Tents of Wickedness, or to sit upon the Thrones of
the KINGS of the Earth. Psalm. 34.10.


Gracious God, and Father, let me not here forget, that when thou did thus
frequently preserve us from the Infection of this Disease; thou did then at
several times deliver from Death, and dis-figuring Eleven of our Children* even
when some of them were in great danger thereof, by this Malady.

Lord, are my Children living Images, and legible transcripts, of my self; yea,
self-multiplyed? Then surely their Reprieves from Death and danger, is mine,
and so to be acknowledged by me: Wherefore, in all Gratitude, I offer them up
to Thee, as living Sacrifices of Praise; Humbly entreating, that my Sons and
Daughters may be thine here, in all fillial Obedience; and that thou will
please to be mine, my Wife and Childrens Portion in this thy Kingdom of Grace;
and our Eternal Inheritance, in thy Kingdom of Glory.

Amen.

The HOUSE of CORRECTION. A Corolary Poem on the former Subject.
COme hither, proud white Clay, and sadly view,
Pride plumed of all her Feathers, in her new;
Denuded of her Silks, and Sattins (Webs of Worms)
Imbroideries, Tissues, and her rich Perfumes;
Her precious Jewels, Pearls, (Her Lovers pawnes;)
Her o're-fine Hollands, Cambricks, Cobweb-lawnes;
Her Flanders Lace; all which poor Tenants wrack;
She carrying Farms, yea, Manors on her back.
This is that Day, that fearful Malady,
Isa. 3.18.
In, and by which, the sinful Bravery,
Of Zion's Daughters, shall be tain away,
As says the Lord; Their Ornaments most gay,
Tinklings about their Feet; their Cawles, round Tires,
Much like the Moon; their Chains, Bracelets, Attires,
Verse. 19,
Called Mufflers; Bonnets, Adornments of Legs;
20,
Their Head-bands, Tablets, and those other dregs
21,
Of Pride; their Earrings, and Nose-Jewels, Rings;
22,
Their diverse sorts of Clothing, Mantles, Crisping-Pins;
Wimples, fine Linen, Glasses, Hoods, and Vailes,
23.
And whatsoever fills Prides swelling Sails.
Dan. 4.30, 31, 32, 33, 34. Act. 12.23. Luk* 2.1. 1 King. 9.30. Mar. 6.17, 18,
19 Jud. 16.5, 18. Act. 25.23.
Tell me ye vaunting Nebuchadnezars,
Proud Herod's, and ambitious Caesar's;
Ye painted Jesabels, Herodiases,
False Delilahs, and unchaste Bernices
Of our worst times: What will you trembling say,
When Sergeant Pox arrests you? And that Day
Confines you to your Chambers, binds you fast
Unto your sickly Beds, long time; then cast
You into Burnings, like to Hell; next, spots
Your Body, like a Toad, confounds, besots
Your mind, and senses, makes you speechless lie,
Extending Tongue, and Throat, to strangling nie;
Shuts up your Eyes with Scabs, denies your sight,
As clowding quite its Medium, the Light;
Next, he scalds-off your Absalon-like Hair, 2 Samuel 14.26

That has so often been wanton with the Air;
And nobler Creatures, swells your Head, and Face,
Big, like your minds, and the Gigantick race;
Covers your Face with a corrupted Mud,
Which eats out your Complexion, all that is good;
And least it should a Resurrection have,
He buries it in Pits, as in a Grave;
Yea, your whole Body, he scurffs over with Scabs,
To teach you, Pride shall clothed be with such Rags;
Lord, have thou me preserved unto this Day,
And my Consort, from this deformed Hidra
Of pain, and evils, this Complication,
Of Maladies; (to Admiration,)
Yea, when thou Four, and Six times visited
Mine, and her dwelling freely ransomed,
Eleven Children from dis-figuring;
Although the fruit of theirs, and of my sin,
Who have been, and still am, most apt to be
Guilty, and sick of Pride, Idolatry;
As to all Gifts, and Graces, Children, Wife,
House, Land, and other good things of this Life;
Which are thy Tallents, put into my Hand, Mat. 25.14, 15, 19.

To use, and to repay, at thy Command;
Not mine, who now can nothing call my own,
But sin, and its wages, Hell, Death, Corruption; Romans 6.23.

O Lord, accept my thankful heart, thy Gift;
Which I return, with Eyes, and Hands up lift,
For thy Protections Ten-fold Antidote,
Against these infections, never to be forgot;
Wherefore, let my whole Man, my Life, my Pen,
Thy Praises Register for aie, Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon God's gracious Preservation of Me, and my Wife, from Poisoning,
or any Distemper, after we had drank off a Tankard of Beer, at the bottom of
which* we found dead, a great venomous Spider.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
2 King. 4.40.
AS in my former Recovery from a Surfeit of Meat; There was Mors in Olla, Death
in the Dish; so here also, Death lay in ambush in the Cup. For no sooner was
Nature plentifully refresht, but that at the sight of a great venomous Spider,
which lay dead at the bottom of the Por, we had reason to fear, that our
Refresher would prove our Destroyer, and our Drink, our Poison.

At the discovery of this Enemy, we were both afrighted, and the more, (which
may seem extraordinary, and strange,) because it was dead, whereas usually
living, not dead Adversaries are hurtful.

Whither this black and ugly Creature, was as full of Malice, as Poison, and
therefore burst her self in the Beer, in a kind of Revenge; For, or as the
effect of her drowning, I know not; nor had we time to be Coroners; since our
present danger did not admit of any delay, as to the seeking for, and taking an
Antidote: Wi^d. 17.12.
Our fear (as is usual) not neglecting, or betraying such means, and succors,
as reason offered; Viz. The taking a good draught of the Oil of Olives, which
by the blessing of our gracious God, drowned both our fear and danger; we both
remaining without the least Distemper, in perfect health.

O Lord, how true is that Proverb, Latet Anguis in Herba; (that poisonous Asps,
lie covered in Cleopatra's Basket of Fruit, and Flowers) and that in a
spiritual sense, as well as corporal. When has my Soul been more in danger of
the sting and venom of sin? than in prosperity, and in the sweet enjoyments of
the lawful, and necessary delights, and refreshments of this life; Such as
Meat, Drink, and Clothing, Wife, Children, Relations, great Offices, and
Preferments, Riches, Friends, and Recreations; Honors, stately Houses, and
great Revenues; In, and under all which, 1 Cor. 1.24, 30.
sin, and deadly corruptions lurk, and lie hid. Wherefore blessed Lord, and
Savior, who art the power and wisdom of the Father, and art by him made unto
me Wisdom; Teach me, that in the use and enjoying of all these thy temporal
blessings, I may neither be superstitiously abstemious, nor presumptuously
secure; that so, whenever I shall discover the venomous Spider of Sin, lie in
the bosom of any Earthly delights, or refreshments; I may instantly resort to
my Antidote, the Oil Olive of thy Grace, called in thy Word, the Oil of
Gladness, Psalm. 45.7.
the Anointing; So should sin break, and cast out its Poison, 1 John 2.27.
in any vicious temptation it shall be corrected, and repelled, and at the
worst be but as a dead Spider, a mortified Lust.

Blessed and praised be thou O Lord, Mat. 9.12.
who only art the all-curing Physician, and have given to me thy sick Patient:
(For thou comes to heal such) Antidotes both for Body and Soul, against both
kinds of poisons; for both which experimental Receipts, and merciful
Recoveries, and Deliverances; I praise thy Name, with my whole Man, and here
declare thy gracious goodness to me, and my dear Yoke Fellow, Psalm. 66.16.
in this, and other thy Preservations, to all that fear thee, in, and to all
Ages.

Amen.

The PRESERVATIVE. A Thankful Poem upon the same Subject.
AS Satan is the Father of all Sin, Joh. 8.44. Genesis 3.17. Genesis 4.7. Gen* 3.5.

So Sin the Mother is, of dangers; and of death;
Both which he acts, as he did first begin,
Under the specious show of good on Earth;
Which, though he hates, yet under that disguise,
This Juggling Cheator, ushers in his Lies:
Thus his deluded Agents, falsely style,
To save more than is meet, a virtuous thrift, Pro. 11.24.

And to be prodigal in things most vile,
A gentle spending, and a liberal Gift;
Heresy, they call new Light, Idolatry,
A Medium of Worship, and true Piety.
Pride, neatness, Swine-like, drunkenness,
And beastly Gluttony, good fellowship;
Deceit, Trades mystery, Voluptuousness,
Christian Refreshment; Ruining suertiship,
A friendly Office; murderous Duelling,
True Valor; Justice, right determining.
Lust, and Lasciviousness, his Factors name;
Love-Courting Amorousness, Affection;
Hell's Patches, Beauties spots; Painting, no stain;
But a good Art, to help Complexion*
Legends of Lies, a pious fraud, base Guile,
Good Language, and a Complemental Style.
As moral Crimes, so often poenal, ill
Dangers, and mischiefs, (like the Crocodile)
Lie covered under sensual Pleasures still,
As under Water; till they Us beg^ile,
And ceize upon; Thus Tomaris rich Tent,
Was Cyrus Sepulcher, and Monument.
Judge. 5.25.
And Jael's Lordly Dish of cooling Drink,
Judge. 4.21.
Lulled Sisera into a deadly sleep;
2 Sa. 13 28, 29. Esth 7.9, 1^8
Thus Ammon, Haman, when they least did think
Of danger; Death, did their own Funerals keep,
And the Whores Vassailes, Rev. 17.4.
drink her filthy Wine,
Out of her Golden Cup of Jus Divine.
Sweet Lord, thus also, in the lawful Taste
Of thy good Creature, in a silver Cup,
I, and my dearest, might have drunk our last,
Had thou not seasoned our poisonous^Sup;
2 Kin. 4.40, 41.
Elisha-like, cast out by thy Command,
Act. 2^.3, 4.
Its Venom, as the Viper from Paul's hand.
In both, fulfilling what thou promised,
Mar. 16.18
At thy Ascension, as of Faith, a sigue,
That such of thine should not be poisoned,
Nor hurt by Serpents, or by deadly Wine;
Blessed be thy Name, who by one act of Love,
Cant. 5.2.
Both strengthened Faith, and thus preserved thy Dove.
Sin, Lord, of all things here is most venomous,
As swelled and badg'd with deadly poisonous Lusts.
Lies in my Heart, not dead, (but vigorous)
As was that Spider, ready for to burst; Exodus 25.6. Exodus 30.25. Psalm. 45.7.

O let thy Grace, by Oil prefigured,
Preserve my Soul, (as that) my Body did.
So shall I live, here blessed, with sprit'all health,
And cast out from the bottom of my heart,
All spider-like vil'd thoughts, dead, which by stealth,
Creep in, and poison would, my better part;
Yea, ever live to praise thee, in that place,
Where sin shall be no more, nor want of Grace.
Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon God's merciful preservation of some of our Family, from being
killed, or hurt by a Fowling-Piece, full laden; and unawares discharged, by an
unskilful Person, carelessly meddling with the Cock thereof; in the Room, wherein
they were diversely Employed.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
NO Person, time, place, or Company upon Earth, is free from danger; not Julius
Caesar, who was stabbed, and slain, in the Senate House of Rome; although a
Person as fortunate, as great; in a time of Peace, and in a Place, that was the
richest, and strongest Piece of the Worlds head; therefore called the Capitol;
and in the midst of an Assembly of the justest, gravest, wisest, greatest,
richest, and valiantest Men of the whole Earth.

But it may be Objected, that although civil Persons, times, places, and
Senates, may be unsecure; yet Ecclesiastical are not so, and therefore they,
their times of Worship, and Assemblies, are at the least, by the papal
Cannon-Laws, styled and made spiritual, and privileged; their Synods and
Counsels, sacred; and their Churches, and Monasteries, Sanctuaries; not only
for themselves, but for the most flagitious Persons, such as Traitors, and
Murderers.

I answer, that as I deny that De Jure, they have any such security, or
privilege; so De Facto, they, and others have found it otherwise, to their
cost; instance in the three ( Cerberus-like) Heads of the Roman Catholic
Church; Simson's Church Histo. page 394.
as they falsely, and nonsensically call it, Gregory the XII. Benedict the XIII.
and John the XXIV. all Three Elected, and acknowledged Popes at one time; and
deposed by the Council of Constance, called by the Emperor Sigismund, who there
chose Martin the V. Pope, in their Room; which Election is the present
Foundation of all the succeeding Popes, and their actings; which if the
Papists, and their Champions the Jesuits, deny to be legal, where will they
find a Pope, Papacy, and Succession ever since Peter, or since John the XXIV.
yea, all actings by, and since Pope Martin the V. are illegal, and therefore
Null? If they affirm it legal, then they confess their Church had three Heads,
or Popes at once; that the Emperor of Germany has a right to call together,
when he pleases, a General Council: that such a General Counsel has a right to
Depose Pope, or Popes. And lastly, that he, and they did lawfully then Elect
their Pope, without his Concave of Cardinals. But leaving them this Bone to
pick, I proceed in my Meditations, and instance, together with this, as a clear
proof, and Example, (besides many others like (as to the Popes) the sad fate of
others, Jews, and Pagans, slain in their holy places; as of Senacherib, 2
King. 19 37. 2 King. 11.20. 1 King. 2.29, 30, 34.
slain by his Sons in the Temple of Niscoch his God; Of Queen Athaliath,
attached in the Temple, and afterward slain; Of Joab slain by Benajath, at the
Horns of the Altar. I might here add many more, but I conceive these are
sufficient to prove my assertion, and to answer the Popish objection; That no
Ecclesiastical Persons, holy times, or places, are free, and privileged from
danger.

If it be lawful (that is fit) according to the Proverb, to compare small
things with great; This truth and observation, that all Persons, times, places,
and Companies, are subject to danger, was verified to our Family; where Persons
of the better rank, and Servants being together in the Kitchen, upon several
employments, a Fowling-piece laden with great shot, Bullets, or Slugs; was
involuntarily discharged, without the hurt of any Person; it is deadly burden,
being by the great force of the Powder, buried, as in a Grave, in a large Hole
in the Wall; That it might be a Daily remembrancer of God's gracious
providence, and our deliverance, and excite continually our thankfulness.

Psalm. 6.43.
Lord, thy Word likens Men's Mouths, to Bows or Quivers of Arrows, which many
times unwarily, and unadvisedly shoot sharp Arrows, even bitter words: In the
same sense, they may also be compared to Guns, out of which Gun-powder-wits,
shoot forth piercing jeeres, floutes and slanders; to the blowing up, and
firing the good Names and passions of themselves, and those they converse with;
O be thou therefore pleased to shield me in, and deliver me from such Company;
Yea, set a watch upon my Lips, that I offend not with my Tongue, so shall I not
shoot at, Psalm. 141.3.
or be shot at by others; And join that Mercy, with this other to my Family, in
my Thanksgiving; For which I praise thee, as shall my Childrens Children, when
they shall read this; and the rest of thy most gracious providence, and
merciful deliverances to me, and mine.

Amen.

PROVIDENCE. A Poem upon the same Subject.
ALl Actings here, are ordered from above,
Although they seem excentrical to move;
Like Watches Wheels, turned by a Spring unseen;
In this Worlds Play, Dame Fortune has no scean;
The Down of Snow, and the white Candid Balls
Of Hail, do not irregularly fall;
Sparrowes and Hairs do not upon Earth light, Mat. 10.29, 30.

Without Divine appointment, and foresight;
No second cause preferred, nor happy chance, Esth. 2.16, 17.

Did Esther, to the Persian Throne advance;
Not Michal's wit, nor Planets good Aspect, 1 Samuel 19.13.

Did David from the Sword of Saul protect;
But the Almighties presence, which does Eye,
And Govern all things, (this is Destiny.)
Thus was a piece ordered, to wound the Wall,
When carelessly discharged, missing them all,
Within that Room; unto the wonder, joy,
Of our whole Family, freed from annoy.
All kinds of Death are fearful, most of all,
That which is sudden, since by it does fall,
Souls, with Men's Bodies, often into a Tomb,
From whence there is no Resurrection:
How great was then this Mercy, Lord, that spared,
Some unconverted, others unprepared
For Death, leaving to Us, within that Room,
Deep Characters of thy protection?
Unto thy praise, let us raise Pyramidies;
And Print them here, and in our memories;
And since thy presence only does protect,
Let it produce in Us this blessed effect;
That we may always fear to sin, so shall we be,
Free from this double Death, and Cas'alty,
Dreading no dangers, fate, or destiny,
Because before prepared to live, or die.
Amen.
ARGUMENT. Being a thankful remembrance and acknowledgment of the Lord's great
goodness and bounty, in giving Me by one, and my only Wife, Sixteen Children.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
MArriage is honorable amongst all Men, and the Bed undefiled; not only to the
Jewish, but Gentile Nations. Insomuch that some Commonwealths have allotted
great rewards, privileges, and immunities, to the Parents, (that in lawful
Wedlock) have had many Children; Yea, the Holy Ghost records it (no doubt) to
the honor of Jaier, the Gileadite, Judge. 10.4. Judge. 8.30.
that he had thirty Sons, to whom he gave thirty Cities; and of Gideon, that he
had threescore and ten Sons.

The poorest Man that has a numerous Issue, is therein more serviceable, and a
greater Benefactor to the Church and State, than the noblest, and richest
Subjects, that have few or none; To whom the Scriptures gives this name of
diminution, Isa 56.3.
that they are barren, and dry Trees in the Vineyard of the Church, and
Commonwealth; Hos. 9 14.
The consideration of which sad, and unfruitful condition, 1 Samuel 1.7, 10.
caused the Melancholy of Hanna, the passionate speech of Rachel, Genesis 30.1.
Give me Children, or else I dye; and the discontented reply, Genesis 15.1, 2.
(to say no worse) of faithful Abraham, to the Lords most gracious offer, and
promise, I will be thy Shield, and thy exceeding great reward; Lord, what will thou give me, since I go Childless?

On the other side, the happiness, Genesis 15.5. Genesis 22.17. Genesis 46.8. Unto Verse.
28. Ruth 4.11.
and blessedness of fruitfulness, is held forth in God's after-promise to
Abraham; that he should be the Father of many Nations, and that his Seed should
be as the Sand of the Seashore, and the Stars of Heaven; In his blessing upon
Jacob, in giving him Twelve Sons, the Roots and Basis of that great and
National Church, and of his only people, the Twelve Tribes of Israel. This
blessing, as the greatest and richest of temporal good things, is set in the
front of the Psalmist's Song of praise; that our Sons may be as plants grown up
in their Youth, and our Daughters may be as Corner-stones, Psalm* 14.12.
polished after the similitude of a Palace; Yea, it is held forth, not only as
a blessing too, but as a discovering Character (many times) of a godly Man; Thy
Wife shall be as a fruitful Vine, by the sides of thine House; Thy Children
like Olive-plants, round about thy Table: Behold, Psalm. 128.3, 4.
that thus shall the Man be blessed that fears the Lord.

O most gracious, and liberal God, and Father; are a numerous Issue, and many
hopeful Children a great blessing? yea, the richest of all outward temporal
gifts, as has been here noted, and is observed in the following Poem; How
great has been thy goodness unto me, and how many are my Obligations to thee?
that have given me by one Wife, Sixteen Olive-branches* and them
circumstantiated, with diverse remarkable favors.

Many have had Children, but much to their grief, as mournfully falling out of
a living Coffin of Flesh, into a dead one of Earth; or expiring, not long
after; Whereas, all mine (except four) are in great mercy continued to me in
life and health, unto this Day: And as for the four deceased, two of them being
Daughters, they departed hence, about the age of four years; (a time of much
innocence:) The other two being a Son, and a Daughter, and both gracious
Children, slept in the Lord, after they had attained unto years of discretion;
and therefore I have good reason in Charity, to hope they are all with God in
Glory.

Diverse Persons have Children, but they, through their Parents error, or
neglect, involuntarily, or voluntarily (which ^^st is most to be lamented) have
departed hence, unsealed, unbaptized; But the Lord has greatly favored me, in
giving me the honor, to offer all but one (born when I was absent in the Wars)
to him in Baptism, with fervent prayer and thanksgiving. Many have Children,
but they are either redundant or defective in their Members, or Senses, or
otherwise deformed; But the Lord graciously gave unto me, mine, perfect and
well-favour'd; Others have Issue, but they are all of one Sex; But the Lord
beneficially, almost equally divided my number, giving me Seven Sons, and Nine
Daughters.

Several Persons have a large Progeny, but they prove to be pricks in their
Eyes, and thorns to their sides, by their wicked lives, and disobedience; (but
the good Lord, blessed be his Name) has given me to see some Characters of
saving Grace ingraved by his blessed Spirit, in the major part of mine; and
some good hopes of the rest, in God's good time. O Lord, have thou inricht me
with the best Earthly Treasures? sixteen Sons, and Daughters; and multiplied
that number of Mercies, as to the many blessings, Temporal, Spiritual, Eternal,
conferred upon the greater part of them already; and upon the rest, in that thy
Sealed Covenant of Baptism, Genesis 17.7.
and in thy faithful promise, made to me, as well as to Abraham; since thou
have given me to believe, and to plead it here before thee; I will be thy God,
and the God of thy Seed: Psalm. 116.12.
What shall I render unto thee, O Lord, for all these thy benefits? Since I,
and my Children, are but like seventeen Ciphers, Act. 2.27. Act. 3.14. Rev.
7.4. Psalm. 87.5, 6.
which signify nothing, unless thou place with, and before us, that only blessed
Unite, thy Holy One, the Lord Jesus, in, and by whom we shall be accounted of a
great value with thee; and be numbered amongst thy Saints: O let me, and my
Childrens Children, obey and glorify thee, until time be swallowed up in
Eternity; that what is wanting now, as to our thankfulness, may be in some
measure, (although never enough, for thy mercies are unmeasurable) be supplied
in the length of years, and by so many, and in, and by their multiplied
Generations; for whose sakes, as well as for this present Age, I humbly
Register here, both thy blessings, and my perpetual praises.

Amen.

The BEE-HIVE. A thankful Poem on the same Subject.
Have thou, O gracious God, so highly honored me,
As to co-work, and be thy humble Instrument,
To bring forth Souls, arrayed with Immortality,
Mat. 16.26.
(...) worth than this whole world, with its rich ornaments,
Genesis 1.26, 27.
(...) being living Images of Thee, by right,
Col. 1.12.
Of Christ, in posse, to be glorious Saints in Light?
Have thou by me, O Lord, as thy blessed second cause,
(...), that for their rare excelling frame,
Cor. 3.18.
Are (...) worlds; and through obedience to thy Laws,
And Faith; shall be like thee, and truly fear thy Name?
Have thou me given sixteen Tongues, Rev. 2.17.
and sixteen pair
Of Hands and Feet, to praise, serve thee; for thine they are? Act. 11.26.

And shall my Muse be silent? All these Tongues be d^mb,
As to thy praise? No Lord, through thy assisting grace,
I, and my swarm of Children, Isay 8.18.
shall become
A holy Quire, a little Church, thy dwelling Place; Col. 4.15.

The Trumpets of that Goodness, which gives me to see
Sixteen fair Branches from one blessed Tree. Psalm. 90.1.

Lord, did thy Abraham esteem one Isaac more
Than all his Earthly wealth? Are a Posterity, Gen 15.2.

The living Monuments of Parents, a rich Ore?
Our lively Pourtraictures, in whom we never die;
Pillars of Families, and the Foundations,
And Builders up of Churches, Cities, Nations.
The strength of Kingdoms, Riches of a State;
The honor, and defense of their weak aged Sires,
As ready for to meet the Enemies in the Gate, Psalm. 127.4, 5.

A gift only from thee; the fruit of chaste desires, Psalm. 11.3, 6.

Natures prime Flowers for beauty; and which long endure,
Our choicest Household Stuff, and richest Furniture. Psalm. 127.3.

O let me, as my prop'^est act of Gratitude,
As living Sacrifices, offer them to thee,
And to thy Service; since such servitude,
Their freedom is, (as once I did in Baptism,)
Lord, hear my fervent Prayer, and answer give, Joh. 8.36. 2 Cor. 4.16. Ephesians.
4.23. Romans 6.4.

Granting them all, in thee, a renewed life to live.
Amen.
ARGUMENT. Upon the Lord's most bountiful goodness in giving me an Estate of
Inheritance, of about Three Thousand, Three Hundred Pounds a Year; and upon his
wise and righteous Providence since, in his Re-assumption, Job 1.21.
and taking it from me: Naked come I out of my Mothers Womb, and naked shall I
return thither* The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken; blessed be the
name of the Lord.

Soliloquium, or Discourse.
HOw wonderful, various, and mysterious, are the actings of God in this World;
so that no Man knows love, or hatred, by all that is before them: All things
come alike to all: Eccl* 9.1, 2.
There is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked; Let no Man therefore
rashly Judge himself, or his Brother, Mat. 7 1, 2.
as to these mundain, and subsolary Dispensations; lest he be judged of the
Lord, and possibly before he dies; in another give Judgment upon himself. Job
43.7, 8.
This was the great sin of Job's Religious Friends, Psalm. 35.11, 16.
and David's wicked Enemies, in their change and low condition; who censured
the one for his hypocrisy, and the other as a Rebel, and a Traitor. Wherefore,
as private persons Judge not before the time; 1 Samuel 22.8.
when the Lord has promised that the righteousness of all his people, shall
shine forth as the light, 1 Cor. 4, 5. Psalm. 37.6.
and their Judgment as the Noonday.

Man's state in this World, is much like the Moon, to Day in the full, glorious
and lightsome; to Morrow in the Wane, dark, and scarcely visible: 1 Timothy 6.17.
The Holy Spirit styling all our good things here, Prove. 2.3, 5.
uncertain Riches, and compares them to an Eagle that has Wings, and suddenly
flies away; Of this truth, the Lord (to his praise be it spoken) (for, Job ^.1^.
shall I receive good, and not evil from the Lord?) has made me an eminent
Example; when he ordered my light to be blown out by one breath; And I, and my
numerous Family, Psalm. 119.75.
to be lest to starving, and darkness; And all this, not in hatred, but in his
wonderful love; which I shall here declare, to all the people of God, (from
experience, which is the truest demonstration) and to the carnal World, to whom
this is a great mystery; My gracious God, since this my suffering condition,
having, instead of my Earthly possessions, given me himself, (the everlasting
fullness of all things) to be my unvaluable Inheritance; The knowledge, and
assurance of which inestimable gift, of being his, and he mine; And of the
Concomitants, and fruits thereof; Eternal Life, and Glory (notwithstanding my
early Convertion) I would (had it been purchaseable) have given a World for,
Mat. 16.26.
in my prosperity; For, what shall a Man gain, though he possess the whole
World, if he lose his Soul? yea, what shall a Man give in Exchange for his
Soul? And as to the present Cloud over me, the World beholds only the dark, not
the light-side thereof; Viz. The wonderful providence, and preservations,
conferred and accumilated, both upon me, and mine, during my above Eight Years
restraint, and separation; which is the Lord give me leave, and life, I shall
in all humble thankfulness to God's glory, and his Churches good, 1 Samuel 24.7,
8. Dan. 6.23. Dan. 3.27. 1 King. 17.6.
more at large declare; He having preserved me often, as he did David, Daniel,
and the Three Children in the Cave, Lions Den, and Fiery Furnace; and provided
for me, and mine, as strangely as he did for Eliath, when fed with Flesh by the
Beaks of wild and Flesh-devouring Ravens.

Eternal Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Three glorious Persons, One Omnipotent,
and Incomprehensible God, and Being; my God in Covenant, my gracious Father,
in thy only begotten, and beloved Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, my alone
Redeemer; Joh. 4.8.
The only Fountain of love, and goodness; for thou art love, and a God of
tender mercies: Who did not only give me a large paternal Estate, but when
that was all taken from me, for five Years, in the late Wars, did in that
time of my want, and necessity, relieve me and my numerous Family by the gift
of a good Revenue, (the Legacy of my Wi^es Father) who did not only after the
end of the late troubles, in the Year 1646. Restore to me my confiscated
Estate; but greatly increased it, giving to me four good Houses, most pleasant
Seats; which I built, and planted not, (as thou did once to Israel;) together
with a revenue, of about Three Thousand Three Hundred Pounds a Year, Lands of
Inheritance. And now Lord, Deuteronomy. 19.1.
which is a favor above all the rest, thou have been pleased to exchange my
earthly possession, for an Eternal Inheritance, purchased for me, by the
infinitely precious blood of thy own Son, the Lord Jesus Christ; And made sure
unto me, by thy deed, and new Covenant of Grace; Witnessed, Sealed, and
delivered to me, by the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth. Thus Lord have thou
made my loss, my gain, and converted my earthly poverty, into the riches of
Heaven; made me to thy people, and to after Ages, a Monument of thy mercy, and
a witness of thy faithfulness; in preserving me, when thou leadest me through
the Fire, Isa. 43.2.
and through the Water, and deliverest me in Six, and Seven troubles; Yea,
whatsoever thou did so largely promise to thine, Job 5.9. Psalm. 91.
throughout. Psalm. 126.13.
in the Ninety first Psalm, by thy Prophet, thou have graciously fulfilled to
me. Wherefore, I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon thy Name, O
Lord; and pay my Vows unto Thee, in the midst of the Congregation of thy
People: Yea, by this Paper-Herald, I will proclaim and transmit to posterity,
the many great, and unparalled favors, to me, and mine; that so the future
Generations, of those that love, and fear thee, may trust in thee, and praise,
and serve thee also, until time shall be no more.

Amen.

The ROYAL EXCHANGE. A Corolary Poem upon the former Subject.
WHen the Almighty Power, the Eternal Light,
The Abyss of Wisdom, living Spring
Of Life, and Goodness, out of Nothing's Night,
Brought forth the Seeds of every thing,
Genesis ^. throughout.
All Creatures were Created good: no change,
From their first Law, did then produce,
Any defect, in all this lower Range,
Of Works, prepared for Man's Use;
Till Man, their Lord, by Deviation
Genesis 3.17.
From God's blessed Rule, brought, through his Curse,
A Change, upon this Worlds Creation;
Yea, Death, of all things the worst:
Hence is it, that the once pure Elements,
Corrupt, imperfect are; yea, fight
With one another; not at all content,
With Natures bounds, and their first right.
Yea, limping Age, succeeds our frolic Youth;
And poverty, a prosperous State;
Disgrace, high honors; and disasters, does
Dog our delights; now love, then hate
Affects Us; This Day we speak high,
The next, we cause have for to mourn;
Now we are well, to Morrow sick, and die;
Like Seas, our Calmes, fore-go a storm.
Psalm. 148.6.
Thus living Creatures, and Inanimate,
Prove, and obey God's just Decree;
That Man that was unstedfast, and ingrate,
Might plagued be, with Inconstancy,
Of theirs, and of his own Condition;
And as in a clear Mirror see,
(In order unto his Conversion)
Eccl. 1.14.
Their Emptiness, and Vanity.
These are Gods Hieroglyphics, in which we,
By a conjunct Experience,
May read all Creatures Mutability,
If fixed not in the Eternal Ens.
Blessed be our great Mathematician,
That from this lower circumference,
Draws all these lines, and makes them meet again,
Fixed in our Center, God Immense.
Lord, to my self, and others, thou have me,
Ordered to be, a Map of Change;
One of these teaching Figures, never free,
From some removes, (These last more strange
Then all forepast:) As from the second place,
Of honor in three Nations State;
To be the Object of this Worlds disgrace,
Of obliquy, and highest hate.
That after Twenty Years, hard service done,
(Upon my Countries call) wherein
I lost Five Thousand Pounds; yet asked no boon,
Nor wages, whilst I sat therein,
Should now a Prisoner be for life; and dead,
As to the World, to Children, Wife,
From Saints, and public Worship, separated:
(My food, and comfort, joy, and life.)
That after diverse Thousand Pounds a Year
Possession, in a Moments time,
I should deprived be of all, and fear,
A starving both of me, and mine;
That of four noble houses, and sweet Seats,
In the prime places of this I Will;
I should no Hive have for my swarms receipt,
But live abroad, as an Exile.
Dear Lord, am I Elisha-like, beset,
With Troops of troubles? does the World, 2 King. 6.14, 15, 16, 17.

Like to his Servants, cry, He Is lost? a Net
Of Misery, is on him hurled.
Lord, open thou their Eyes, and they shall see,
That more is with me, than against;
That Changes, have Exchanges, sent from Thee;
By which, my State is much advanst.
Instead of Mundane honors buble, thou
Have me Adopted for thy Son; Romans 8.15.

And granted me to know it, and to bow
Both Knee, and Heart, for what is done;
Impris'nment for life, and long restraint,
Thou have converted, made to be,
A freedom; much enlarged* of which I vaunt,
Gal. 5.1.
As now, enjoying more of Thee.
For Thousands loss of Pounds, and annual Rents,
And Houses like to Paradise;
Mar. 10.30.
Thou have a Hundredfold, (freed from events,)
Given me; and life, that never dies;
2 Cor. 4.1, 17.
An House, not made with Hands, which is above,
2 Cor. 5.1, 2. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
Eternal, built by Thee: yea more,
A Crown, a Kingdom, where there is no removes;
Assured, Luke 12.32.
reserved for me in store.
Psalm. 113.5.
O! who is like to thee? who but a God,
Can gifts confer, so rich as these?
Who would not service do to thee, whose Rod
Is dipped in Honey, and whose fees,
Are, for our weakness sake, set forth, compared,
To Empires, precious Diadems,
But do as far exceed, Terrene rewards,
As Monarchs do, our common Men?
Let Worldly Princes, then, set a great rate,
Upon their Crowns, and Signories;
Wallow in pleasures; I Will not change my State,
Nor Prison, for their Royalties;
Mar. 10.30.
Much less my future hopes, and sure intaile,
On me O Lord, through thy free grace,
Of an Eternal Kingdom, not to fail,
In Heaven, at the end of my short Race.
Until which blessed Hour, for which I wait,
The Days of my appointed time,
Job 14.14.
With Job, my Prison, I will dedicate
Unto thy Service, as a place Divine;
To sing thy praises in, for this Exchange
Of Earth, for Heaven; So shall I be,
On Earth, in Heaven; until I change
My Place, but not my Company.
Amen.
Soli Deo Gloria.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE. Containing the Subject Matter of the foregoing
Treatise, to direct the Reader by the Folio, to find readily any of the
distinct Meditations, and Poems, set forth therein.
Occasional Meditations. Corolary Poems upon each immediately foregoing Subject.
(A)
Abortion. The New Birth.

(B)
Breaches. Burning. The Vmphire. Sommerset-House. The Deliverance.

(C)
Coach. Cough. Children. The Huricane. The Reprieve. The Bee-Hive.

(D)
Drowning Drought. Dead Corpse. The Tempest. The Angler.
(viz.) in the Tears 1637, 1638, 1639. The Lamentation. The Application and
Petition. The Shower of Mercy.
Earth's Jubilee. The Thanksgiving. The Triumph. The Circle.


(E)
Evils of Diseases. Viz. Surfeit, Consumption, Coughs, Plurisie, Agues, etc.
The Bethesda.

(F)
Fire. The Extinguisher.

(G)
Gift. Gain. 3000. Pounds a Year, and upon his Mercy in ordering the loss
thereof to his much greater gain. The Royal Exchange.

(H)
Horse. Youths Emblem. Concerning his Preservation from any harm by Eight
other several Falls from his Horse* The Octonary.

(I)
Infection. The Shambles.

(K)
Killing. Sommerset-House, through a mistake. The Invisible Guard.

(L)
Life. The Protection.

(M)
Marriage. Mystery. Epithelamium.

(N)
Noctious Disease of the small Pox. The House of Correction.

(O)
Oversight. Providence.

(P)
Plague. The Antidote.

(Q)
Quarry-Pit. The Pit.

(R)
Robbers. The Rescue.

(S)
Spider. The Preservative.

(T)
Travel. The Snowy Land-Skip.

(V)
Vices. London. The Metropolis.

(W)
Wife. The good Wife.

AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE. Of the Significant Titles prefixed to the several Poems,
with their respective Folioes, for the more ready finding, and turning to any
of them.
(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

(E)

(F)

(G)

(H)

(I)

(K)

(L)

(M)

(N)

(O)
The Octonary.
(P)
The Pit. The Petition. The Protection. The Preservative. The Providence.
(Q)

(R)
The Remembrancer. The Rescue. The Reprieve.
(S)
The Shower of Mercy. The Shambles.
(T)
The Tempest. The Tipe and Anti-Tipe. The Thanksgiving. The Triumph.
(V)
The Vmphire.
(W)
The good Wife.
(X)

(Y)
Youths Emblem.
The ERRATAES of the Press, which the Courteous Reader is desired to amend.
PAge 357. Line 26 for went, were. p. 361. l. 23. f. in, into. p. 364. l. 11.
f. Temple, Tempe. p. 366. Mar. f. Eclet. Ephesians. p. 368. l. 4. f. Meadoes,
Meanders. l. 26. f (and subjects of) fit subjects for. p. 369. l. 30. f. time,
true. p. 372. l. 7. f. by, but. l. 35. f. comfort, consort. p. 373. l. 28. f.
be, by. p. 374. l. 33. f. filled, foild. p. 376. l. 26. f. and, Ar. p. 379. l. 6.
f. it was, twins. p. 381. l. 24. f. commenting, Cementing. p. 382. l. 22. f.
draugt, drought. l. 25. f. Affection, Affliction. l. 33. f. this, his. p. 364.
l. 33. f. (for) or. l. 34. f. Hive, Huwe.. p. 386. l. 5. f. wings, winds. l.
11. f. World, would. l. 31. f. morning, mourning. p. 387. l 6. f. feaversh,
feverish. l. 16. f. Health, Heath. p. 388. l. 16. f. preluge, prelude. p. 390.
l. 23. f. disasters. distempers. p. 399. l. 3^ f. Chinicke, Chimicke. p. 403.
Mar. f. Genesis Lamon. p. 406. l. 4. f. varest, rarest. l. 31. f. down, downie.
p. 410. Man. f. Ecletias. 1.7.3.1.3.7.8. f. Genes. 10: Genes. 19. p. 411. l.
28. leave out O. p. 416. l. 30. f. shakes, shales. p. 419. l. 5. f. your, you.
p. 424. Mar. f. Psalm. 6.43. Psalm. 64.3. p. 427. Mar. f. Gen 15.^7. Genesis 15.5.
f. Genesis 22. p. Genesis 22.17. f. Genesis 46. Genesis 16.^. p. 430. Mar. f. Job 43. Job.
42. p. 432. l. 14. f things, Changes.

NOAH'S Dove; OR, AN EPISTLE OF PEACE, Directed to his Entirely affected
Brethren, The PRESBYTERIAN, AND CONGREGATIONAL -- MEN, As a Probable means for
their Agreement and Union.

IMPRIMAT. Joseph Carill.

LONDON, Printed for T. W. for Ed. Husband, Printer for the House of Commons.
1645.

NOAH'S Dove; OR, AN EPISTLE OF PEACE Directed to his Entirely affected
Brethren, the Presbiterians, and Congregational-men, as a probable means for
their Agreement and Union.
Sincerely Beloved,
I Have read of Two Children contending in the Womb of their Mother, the one
beloved, Genesis 25.22.
the other hated, Mal. 1.3.
but ye are both Jacob's, both the Israel of God, O far be it from such
Brethren to rend and lacerate their Mothers bowels, Genesis 45.24.
or to fall out in the way. Are we not one Body, Ephesians. 4.6.
and have we not all one spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, Romans 12.1.
one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.
1 Cor. 13.4.
I beseech you by the mercies of God, Gal. 5.22.
by the excellent effects of charity, by the fruits of the spirit, by the
examples and commands of the Lord Jesus, mat. 11.29. Joh. 13.34, 35.
and the Character of his Disciples, be meek and lowly, and love one another;
So shall the Plots of Rome, and Hell be prevented, and all Sectaries shut their
Mouths. Why should it be spoken to our shame, that there is not a wise Man
amongst us? 1 Cor. 6.5,
No, not one that is able to judge between his brethren. 6.
But Brother asperses and declaims against Brother, 7.
and that before the Antichristians. Now therefore there is utterly a fault
amongst you; Know ye not that Revilers shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? 10.
But some will answer, that they have received a new light; O be cautious, that
novelty Eclipse not truth, since the last Days foretold and forewarned of by
our Savior, mat. 24.12.
are at hand, wherein iniquity abounds, and the love of many waxes cold; hence
Father against Son, and Son against Father, betraying one another, and hating
one another; hence the Judgments of Famine and Pestilence; Nation rising up
against Nation. So that the whole World seems to be on Fire before its time;
Verse. 7.10.
These Days, not I, but the Lord Jesus the great Prophet of his Church,
dictates and points out to be the time when many false Christ's and Prophets (or
Teachers of Christianity) shall arise; Verse. 11. and 24.
who by their applause or excellency of parts, and external holiness, by which
they shall show forth, as it were, signs and wonders, and gather a Multitude of
Disciples, Declaring that in such a Meeting, Verse. 26. and 24.
be it in Woods or Deserts, or in secret Chambers, the true way of Christ is to
be found, deceiving as it were, if possible, the very Elect. Our Lord teaching
us from hence, how near a similitude, these new Doctrines shall have to truth
and true holiness. But be they as Paul, or Cephas in the Church, or as Angels
from Heaven, believe them not; Verse 27. Gal. 1.^. 2 Cor. 11.13.
for as the Lightning comes out of the East, and shines even to the West, so
shall also the glorious coming of the Son of Man be; that is, (as I humbly
conceive) that his Gospel, which at first broke out like Lightning in the East,
shall in this last Age upon the ruins, and through the Clouds of spiritual
Babylon dart it self, and shine gloriously in our Western Churches, even to the
Indies; that the other parallel Prophecy may be fulfilled by the subjecting
and uniting Kingdoms of the Earth, unto the Kingdom of the Lord, Rev. 11.15.
and of his Christ.

Ephesians. 4.14.
Let us not then be carried about with every mind of Doctrine, but hold fast the
Gospel delivered to us by Christ and his Apostles in the Unity of his Spirit,
Ephesians. 4.3.
and the bond of peace, since other Foundation can no Man lay, 1 Cor. 3.11.
it being a sin so much as to doubt, much more to defend, that the Fundamentals
of our Religion, Romans 14.23.
some of which are mentioned by the Author to the Hebrews, and received by the
Churches in all Ages, Heb. 6.1.
are not to bind, as de futuro, as having a possibility upon new notions, to be
nulled or changed, which is to make God a liar, to undermine his Church, and to
pull down the Pillars thereof; For if the Foundations be destroyed, What shall?
Nay, Psalm. 12.3.
what can the righteous do? Wherefore my humble suit unto our Master Builders,
is, to keep the Foundation unmovable, not permitting a Resurrection to ancient
Heretics before the time, that so whatsoever Men build thereon, whether it be
Gold or Stubble, 1 Cor. 3.12.
may be brought to the Test in this Fiery Trial.

Stand fast therefore Brethren in that liberty wherein Christ has made us
free, Gal. 5.1.13.
not making your liberty a Cloak for maliciousness, not for an occasion to the
Flesh, but by love serve one another; judging thus of one another, that he that
loves his brother, abides in the light; but he that hates his brother,
whatsoever he may boast of new discoveries, walks in darkness, 1 John 2.9.1.
and knows not whether he goes. Because that darkness has blinded his eyes,
and that whatsoever seems to be religious, and yet bridles not his Tongue, he
deceives his own heart, Jam. 1.16.
and his Religion is vain.

But that I may not only persuade, but offer my Mite, I shall in all humility
propose a medium; which if found agreeable to the Word of God, may through the
blessing of the Almighty make up the breach, and reconcile your greatest
difference.

I conceive you both agree in these particulars, That all shall be Members, 1
Cor. 14.34.
and have right to vote in your Churches (from which Votes* 2 Timothy 2.11.
Women are excepted) shall not only be free from just scandal, that is
profaneness, and the impenitent practice of any known Sin, 1 Cor. 5.11.
but be endowed with a sufficiency of knowledge; 2 Cor. 6.14, 17
to which end (since your accord in the principles of Religion) I hope there
will be speedily set forth and established, one short Catechism for Information
and Examination. Next, in condescension to the impediments, I hear it is
mutually resolved, that the Government of their respective Members, reconciling
of inferior differences, and ordering their Conversations, even as far as
Ordination, and the Censure of Excommunication, respect being had in Appeals to
the Advice and Results of the Classes and Provincial Synods, and saving to the
Presbyterians, their right be ordered by their particular Congregations.

Ephesians. 2.21.
Thus far we are knit together in one spiritual building and Temple of God. The
great difference, if I understand it, is, the Tegument and Covering, which is
indeed the Ornament, coupling and strength of the whole Aedifice: as where
shall rest (as to us) under the same Scepter, the determinative and concluding
Power, the end of Appeals, the regulation of that unlimited Plea, and overmuch
extended liberty of Conscience, Joh: 17.21.
that so we may be one, as Christ and his Father are one; this, some of you fix
in a general Assembly, others limit to a particular Congregation; The first
pleads not only Scripture analogically, but prudence for preserving union, and
preventing of Tumults; as also antiquity, from the parallel in general Counsels
and Parliaments, affirming that the other way, has no Grounds in Scripture,
since Churches were necessarily independent, no State being then Christian,
that this way (by reason that our corrupt Nature has no check) is destructive
to the Unity of Religion: Since, according to the number of the Congregations
will their Opinions, as also pernicious to Commonwealths; there being no Fewds
so bloody and irreconcilable, as those that break out about points of Faith;
instance in the Wars between Turk and Persian, Papists and Protestants in
the Lutheran Contestations and Arian Persecutions.

Lastly, They conclude an inconsistency in this way with Relations and
Callings, disaffection and departure from Bed, Board, Families, and
Employments, being experimental consequences of Religious differences.

On the other side, the contracting party affirm, that a general Assembly
differs but in Name from a Conclave of Cardinals, or Prelatical Synod, that
every Member of the Church is free, and ought not in matters of Faith, to
conclude himself by Proxy, that no Church has power over another, or brethren
(since the Apostles,) have dominion over the Consciences of their brethren,
that their platform of Church Government ought to be, and is Jure Divino, that
the Evangelical Scripture sets forth theirs, and no other.

Now dear Brethren, give me your pardon and leave with Moses, Exodus 2.13.
to step in betwixt your Combatings with his Abraham's words, Why do ye
contend, being ye are Brethren? Genesis 13* 8*
it may be God giving a blessing, and each of you in his hand, I shall in my
Preposition be a Medium to unite you, (only despise not my endeavors) since
the Lord hides many things from the wise and prudent, Mat. 11.25.
and reveals them to Babes.

But to proceed, I observe neither of you arrogate to your selves an
infallibility, but piously seek an Orthodox and prudential way of Government,
for the attaining and preserving GOD's truth; blessed are your endeavors; yea
they shall be blessed. Wherefore I ask the Presbiterians, Why do ye extol and
lift up a general Assembly above the rest of the Flock of Christ? To the
Independents, I say, Why do ye prefer the Judgment of one particular
Congregation, before the joint Votes of all refined Christian Churches of the
Kingdom? surely the first will yield to me, that where most of God's People
are, in their judgment, there is the greatest measure of his Spirit; and to
such Assemblies principally, and to their Votes, are made all those gracious
promises (I need not quote the places) concerning Christ's Spirit and Presence;
I mean to such a Multitude, not of Men only, but of purged and visible
Believers.

The other, I presume, both from Grounds of Scripture, and Reason, will grant,
that could the Votes of all the reputed and received Members of Christ, of
their several Churches, be jointly taken, and in one place, they must be
accepted, and are but as the Vote of one great Congregation; which though it
has an increase of Ministers and Elders, yet according to a true definition,
for Essence, is a Church, and that more eminently, though not more truly, than
the particular Congregations, of whom it consists, even as an Assembly made up
of many Families, Col. 4.15.
called by the Apostles, Churches of God; Romans 16.5.
is more excellent than its subdivisions.

But that I may make good by Scripture, this incorporaing of Churches
conjuncture and union of Votes, I shall remember you of these Three Chief
Proofs, and Lights of Church Government, both for Doctrine and manners. The
first shows the Primitive and Apostolic way of ending Controversies in
Doctrine, by the summoning that great Assembly of the Members of the Churches
of Jerusalem and Judea* of which Churches read Acts 11.1. and Gallat. 1.22.
Therefore called a Multitude, Acts 15.12. In which the Apostles (although
endued with an infallible Spirit) and the Elders of the Churches did not only
Vote, and Decree matters (though that in many cases wherein the People
consents, such Votes may be, and are necessary, expedient and lawful) but the
whole Church, Verse 22. which compared with Acts 2. Verse 41. wherein Three
Thousand are said to be converted; and with Acts 4. Verse 4. wherein Five
Thousand were by One Sermon converted, clearly demonstrates, that this Assembly
was composed of many Congregations, as further appears from the Apostles
Teaching and Preaching in every House, Acts 5.42. How else could Eight Thousand
Men, besides Women and Children, be taught and edified.

The like is proved from the Election and choice of the Seven Deacons, by the
Vote of the Multitude, Acts 6.5. where the Apostles, and Elders also were
present, yea those whom the Holy Ghost Acts 2.47. calls a Church in a National
respect, Compare Romans 16.16. with the Postscript of that Epistle.
he calls Churches, Acts 9.31. in a Congregational consideration. And lastly,
in Corinth there more than probably appears to be many Congregations, else
whence or where were these discentions and divisions? some saying, I am of
Paul; others, I am of Apollo, of Cephas, 1 Cor. 1.12. All the Members of which
were commanded to meet in one Assembly for the Excommunication of the
incestuous Persons, 1 Cor. 5.4. Where note, they were to meet, to whom the
Epistle was directed, and who are admonished to mourn: But the Epistle and
Exhortation was directed to the whole Church of Corinth, and not to the Elders
only; Ergo, the whole Congregation, when they shall desire it, have a right to
a Vote and censure.

Having thus fully proved by Scripture, that in Cities and Provinces, and
consequently in Kingdoms, the Members of particular Congregations may, and
were by command to meet for the deciding of any great difference, yea, the
Apostles, though of an infallible Spirit, did not contradict, but gave both
approbation and institution to that liberty. Act. 1.15.23.
I shall with humblest submission offer this following preposition, Act. 21.22.
as a right and fit Medium of reconciliation. That in all great Schisms and
Heresies, over-spreading whole Churches, if the breach cannot be made up by
advice, argument, and subordinate Discipline, either Congregational or
Presbyterian, an Appeal be made to a general Assembly, who after the stating,
disputing, and voting such Points in difference, together with the merit of the
offense (the Recusant Church or Churches, notwithstanding continuing
unsatisfied) that then the Assembly adjourn that Sessions for Three Months; in
which time, the Assembly, Members of each Congregation to be ordered after
Fasting and Prayer, to state the Question, and declare their Arguments, and
Judgment of the General Assembly to their particular Churches, and so
accordingly at that Meeting receive and bring up each Churches Vote and
Sentence, with the number (because of the disproportion of Parishes) summed up
of those that affirm, and those that descent, that so at the next Session the
Question may be decided and concluded by the major Vote, both of Churches and
Members; which Scripture-way will not only by a Religious Policy from time to
time discover the temper, pulse, and inclination of the whole Kingdom, and
consequently administer a great help and direction to Government, but will give
full satisfaction to all, (unless to obstinate Heretics) as being the Judgment
and Vote (even by the Pole) of all the visible and undividual Christians of the
Kingdom politically united, as in one Congregation; yea the disobedient will
be left without excuse, and justly liable to their Sentence of Excommunication.

But put the Question, a considerable number of Churches in the Kingdom give
in their Vote, with a new opinion hazarding a rent and division in the Nation?

I Answer, that upon so sad an occasion, our Church (in imitation of the
ancient calling of General Counsels, upon the overflowing of Heresy) ought to
desire the Judgment and assistance, and that by additional Votes (if it may be)
of all the reformed Churches in the World, which comes nearest to the Judgment
of the holy Catholic Church, the Body of Christ, to which he has promised his
presence and spirit of truth to the end; and therefore must, Mat. 28.20.
as to each particular State or Church, though not infallibly, yet
prudentially, end and conclude by obedience, either active or passive, the
discenting Churches, whom the civil Magistrate, after the Churches
Excommunication, is to order by Banishment or lesser punishment, according as
their Doctrines shall be more or less prejudicial to the State wherein they
live: 2 Cor. 15. v. 12, 13, 14.
Which, since they suffer as evil doers, is (as to that Commonwealth) a civil
and necessary act of preservative Justice, not an enforcing of Conscience or
Persecution. Mat. 18.17.


Thus fervently beseeching the blessing of the All-wise God, upon my poor
endeavors, trusting that in the Bowels of love and charity, I have in
sincerity and plainness declared unto you the mind of Christ in all humility, I
conclude,

The unworthiest of all the Servants of the Lord Jesus, J. H.

FINIS.

