THE OCEANA OF James Harrington, AND HIS OTHER WORKS; Some whereof are now first
published from his own MANUSCRIPTS.

The whole Collected, Methodiz'd, and Reviewed, WITH An Exact Account of his
LIFE Prefixed, By JOHN TOLAND.

RESPUBLICA Res est Populi cum been ac just geritur, sive ab uno Rege, sive a
paucis Optimatibus, sive ab universo Populo. Cum vero injustus est Rex (quem
Tyrannum voco) aut injusti Optimates (quorum Consensus Factio est) aut injustus
ipse Populus (cui nomen usitatum nullum reperio, nisi ut ipsum Tyrannum
appellem) non jam vitiosa sed omnino nulla Respublica est, quoniam non RES est
POPULI cum Tyrannus eam Factiove capessat; nec ipse Populus jam Populus est si
sit injustus, quoniam non est Multitudo Juris consensu and Utilitatis
communione sociata.

Fragmentum Ciceronis ex lib. 3. de Republica, apud Augustine. de Civ. Dei, l.
2. c. 21. LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster. M. DCC.

MOSES.

SOLON.

CONFUCIUS.

LYCURGUS.

NUMA.

L. JUNIUS BRUTUS.

GVLIELMVS. III.

Commercio.

Opificio.

M. DCC.

I. TOLANDVS. LIBERTATI. SACRAVIT.

M. ^ander ^ucht. Scul:



TO THE LORD MAYOR, ALDERMEN, SHERIFS, AND COMMON COUNCIL OF LONDON.
IT is not better known to you, most worthy Magistrates, that Government is the
preserving Cause of all Societys, than that every Society is in a languishing
or flourishing condition, answerable to the particular Constitution of its
Government: And if the Goodness of the Laws in any place be thus
distinguishable by the Happiness of the People, so the Wisdom of the People is
best discerned by the Laws they have made, or by which they have chosen to be
governed. The truth of these Observations is no where more conspicuous than in
the present State of that most Ancient and Famous Society you have the honor to
rule, and which reciprocally injoys the cheerful influence of your
Administration. It Is solely to its Government that London ows being universally
acknowleg'd the largest, fairest, richest, and most populous City in the World;
all which glorious Attributes could have no Foundation in History or Nature, if
it were not likewise the most free. It Is confessed indeed that it derives infinite
Advantages above other places from its incomparable Situation, as being an
inland City, seated in the middle of a Vale no less delicious than healthy, and
on the Banks of a Noble River, in respect of which (if we regard how many score
miles it is navigable, the clearness and depth of its Channel, or its smooth
and even Course) the Seine is but a Brook, and the celebrated Tyber it self a
Rivulet: Yet all this could never raise it to any considerable pitch without
the inestimable Blessings of LIBERTY, which has chosen her peculiar Residence,
and more eminently fixed her Throne in this place. LIBERTY is the true Spring of
its prodigious Trade and Commerce with all the known parts of the Universe, and
is the original Planter of its many fruitful Colonys in America, with its
numberless Factorys in Europe, Asia, and Africa: hence it is that every Sea is
covered with our Ships, that the very Air is scarce exemted from our
Inventions, and that all the Productions of Art or Nature are imported to this
common Storehouse of Mankind; or rather as if the whole Variety of things
wherewith the Earth is stockt had bin principally designed for our profit or
delight, and no more of 'em allowed to the rest of Men, than what they must
necessarily use as our Purveyors or Laborers. As LIBERTY has elevated the
native Citizens of London to so high a degree of Riches and Politeness, that
for their stately Houses, fine Equipages, and sumtuous Tables, they excede the
Port of some Foren Princes; so is it naturally become every Man's Country, and
the happy Refuge of those in all Nations, who prefer the secure enjoyment of
Life and Property to the glittering pomp and slavery, as well as to the
arbitrary lust and rapine of their several Tyrants. To the same Cause is owing
the Splendour and Magnificence of the public Structures, as Palaces, Temples,
Halls, Colleges, Hospitals, Schools, Courts of Judicature, and a great many
others of all kinds, which, tho singly excelled where the Wealth or State of any
Town cannot reach further than one Building, yet, taking them all together,
they are to be equaled no where besides. The delicat Country Seats, and the
large Villages crowded on all hands around it, are manifest Indications how
happily the Citizens live, and makes a Stranger apt to believe himself in the
City before he approaches it by some miles. Nor is it to the felicity of the
present times that London is only indebted: for in all Ages, and under all
Changes, it ever showed a most passionat love of LIBERTY, which it has not more
bravely preserved than wisely managed, infusing the same Genius into all
quarters of the Land, which are influenced from hence as the several parts of
the Animal Body are duly supplied with Blood and Nourishment from the Heart.
Whenever therefore the execrable design was hatched to inslave the Inhabitants of
this Country, the first Attemts were still made on the Government of the City,
as there also the strongest and most succesful Efforts were first used to
restore Freedom: for we may remember (to name one instance for all) when the
late King was fled, and every thing in confusion, that then the chief Nobility
and Gentry resorted to Guildhall for protection, and to concert proper methods
for settling the Nation hereafter on a Basis of Liberty never to be shaken. But
what greater Demonstration can the World require concerning the Excellency of
our National Government, or the particular Power and Freedom of this City, than
the BANK of England, which, like the Temple of SATURN among the Romans, is
esteemed so sacred a Repository, that even Foreners think their Treasure more
safely lodged there than with themselves at home; and this not only don by the
Subjects of Absolute Princes, where there can be no room for any Public Credit,
but likewise by the Inhabitants of those Commonwealths where alone such Banks
were hitherto reputed secure. I am the more willing to make this Remark,
because the Constitution of our Bank is both preferable to that of all others,
and coms the nearest of any Government to HARRINGTON'S Model. In this respect a
particular Commendation is due to the City which produced such Persons to whose
Wisdom we ow so beneficial an Establishment: and therefore from my own small
observation on Men or Things I fear not to prophesy, that, before the term of
years be expired to which the Bank is now limited, the desires of all people
will gladly concur to have it rendered perpetual. Neither is it one of the last
things on which you ought to value your selves, most worthy Citizens, that
there is scarce a way of honoring the Deity known any where, but is either
already allowed, or may be safely exercised among you; Toleration being only
denied to immoral Practices, and the Opinions of Men being left as free to them
as their Possessions, excepting only POPERY, and such other Rites and Notions
as directly tend to disturb or dissolve Society. Besides the political
Advantages of Union, Wealth, and numbers of People, which are the certain
Consequents of this impartial Liberty, it is also highly congruous to the nature
of true Religion; and if any thing on Earth can be imagined to engage the
Interest of Heaven, it must be specially that which procures it the sincere and
voluntary respect of Mankind. I might here display the Renown of the City for
Military Glory, and recite those former valiant Atchievments which our
Historians carefully record; but I should never finish if I enlarged on those
things which I only hint, or if I would mention the extraordinary Privileges
which London now injoys, and may likely possess hereafter, for which she well
deserves the name of a New Rome in the West, and, like the old one, to become
the Soverain Mistress of the Universe.

THE Government of the City is so wisely and completely contrived, that
HARRINGTON made very few Alterations in it, tho in all the other parts of our
National Constitution he scarce left any thing as he found it. And without
question it is a most excellent Model. The Lord Mayor, as to the Solemnity of
his Election, the Magnificence of his State, or the Extent of his Authority,
tho inferior to a Roman Consul (to whom in many respects he may be fitly
compared) yet he far outshines the figure made by an Athenian Archon, or the
grandeur of any Magistrate presiding over the best Citys now in the World.
During a vacancy of the Throne he is the chief Person in the Nation, and is at
all times vested with a very extraordinary Trust, which is the reason that this
Dignity is not often conferred on undeserving Persons; of which we need not go
further for an Instance than the Right Honorable Sir RICHARD LEVET, who now so
worthily fills that eminent Post, into which he was not more freely chosen by
the Suffrages of his Fellowcitizens, than he continues to discharge the
Functions of it with approved Moderation and Justice. But of the great Caution
generally used in the choice of Magistrates, we may give a true judgment by the
present Worshipful Sherifs, Sir CHARLES DUNCOMB and Sir JEFFERY JEFFERIES, who
are not the Creatures of petty Factions and Cabals, nor (as in the late Reigns)
illegally obtruded on the City to serve a Turn for the Court, but unanimously
elected for those good Qualitys which alone should be the proper
Recommendations to Magistracy; that as having the greatest Stakes to lose they
will be the more concern*d for securing the Property of others, so their
willingness to serve their Country is known not to be inferior to their Zeal
for King WILLIAM; and while they are, for the Credit of the City, generously
equalling the Expenses of the Roman Praetors, such at the same time is their
tender care of the Distressed, as if to be Overseers of the Poor were their sole
and immediate Charge. As the Common Council is the Popular Representative, so
the Court of Aldermen is the Aristocratical Senate of the City. To enter on the
particular Merits of those Names who compose this Illustrious Assembly, as it
must be owned by all to be a labor no less arduous than extremely nice and
invidious, yet to pass it quite over in such a manner as not to give at least a
Specimen of so much Worth, would argue a pusillanimity inconsistent with
LIBERTY, and a disrespect to those I would be always understood to honor. In
regard therefore that the eldest Alderman is the same at London with what the
Prince of the Senate was at Rome, I shall only presume to mention the Honorable
Sir ROBERT CLAYTON as well in that capacity, as by reason he universally passes
for the perfect Pattern of a good Citizen. That this Character is not
exaggerated will be evident to all those who consider him, either as raising a
plentiful Fortune by his Industry and Merit, or as disposing his Estate with no
less liberality and judgment than he got it with honesty and care: For as to
his public and private Donations, and the provision he has made for his
Relations or Friends, I will not say that he is unequaled by any, but that he
deserves to be imitated by all. Yet these are small Commendations if compared
to his st^ddy Conduct when he supplied the highest Stations of this Great City.
The danger of defending the Liberty of the Subject in those calamitous times is
not better remembered than the courage with which he acted, particularly in
bringing in the Bill for excluding a Popish Successor from the Crown, his brave
appearance on the behalf of your Charter, and the general applause with which
he discharged his Trust in all other respects; nor ought the Gratitude of the
People be forgot, who on this occasion first styled him the Father of the City,
as CICERO for the like reason was the first of all Romans called the Father of
his Country. That he still assists in the Government of London as eldest
Alderman, and in that of the whole Nation as a Member of the High Court of
Parliament, is not so great an honor as that he deserves it; while the Posterity
of those Familys he supports, and the memory of his other laudable Actions,
will be the living and eternal Monuments of his Virtue, when time has consumed
the most durable Brass or Marble.

TO whom therefore should I inscribe a Book containing the Rules of good Polity,
but to a Society so admirably constituted, and producing such Great and
Excellent Men? That elsewhere there may be found who understand Government
better, distribute Justice wiser, or love Liberty more, I could never persuade
my self to imagine: nor can the Person wish for a nobler Address, or the Subject
be made happy in a more suitable Patronage than THE SENATE AND PEOPLE OF LONDON;
to whose uninterrupted increase of Wealth and Dignity, none can be a heartier
Welwisher, than the greatest admirer of their Constitution, and their most
humble Servant,

JOHN TOLAND.

THE PREFACE.
HOW allowable it is for any man to write the History of another, without
intitling himself to his Opinions, or becoming answerable for his Actions, I
have expressly treated in the Life of JOHN MILTON, and in the just defense of
the same under the Title of AMYNTOR. The Reasons there alleged are Excuse and
Authority enough for the Task I have since imposed on my self, which is, to
transmit to Posterity the worthy Memory of JAMES HARRINGTON, a bright Ornament
to useful Learning, a hearty Lover of his Native Country, and a generous
Benefactor to the whole World; a Person who obscured the false Luster of our
Modern Politicians, and that equaled (if not exceded) all the Ancient
Legislators.

BUT there are some People more formidable for their Noise than Number, and for
their Number more considerable than their Power, who will not fail with open
mouths to proclaim that this is a seditious Attemt against the very being of
Monarchy, and that there is a pernicious design on foot of speedily introducing
a Republican Form of Government into the Britannic Islands; in order to which
the Person (continue they) whom we have for some time distinguished as a zealous
promoter of this Cause, has now published the Life and Works of HARRINGTON, who
was the greatest Commonwealthsman in the World. This is the substance of what
these roaring and hoarse Trumpeters of Detraction will sound; for what is likely
to be said by men who talk all by rote, is as easy to guess as to answer, tho
it is commonly so silly as to deserve no Animadversion. Those who in the late
Reigns were invidiously nicknam'd Commonwealthsmen, are by this time
sufficiently cleared of that Imputation by their Actions, a much better Apology
than any Words: for they valiantly rescued our ancient Government from the
devouring Jaws of Arbitrary Power, and did not only unanimously concur to fix
the Imperial Crown of England on the most deserving Head in the Universe, but
also settled the Monarchy for the future, not as if they intended to bring it
soon to a period, but under such wise Regulations as are most likely to
continue it for ever, consisting of such excellent Laws as indeed set bounds to
the Will of the King, but that render him thereby the more safe, equally binding
up his and the Subjects hands from unjustly seizing one another prescribed
Rights or Privileges.

IT IS confessed, that in every Society there will be always found some Persons
prepared to enterprise any thing (tho never so flagitious) grown desperate by
their Villainies, their Profuseness, their Ambition, or the more raging madness
of Superstition; and this Evil is not within the compass of Art or Nature to
remedy. But that a whole People, or any considerable number of them, should
rebel against a King that well and wisely administers his Government, as it
cannot be instanced out of any History, so it i^ a thing in it self impossible.
An infallible Expedient therefore to exclude a Commonwealth, is for the King to
be the Man of his People, and, according to his present Majesty's glorious
Example, to find out the Secret of so happily uniting too seemingly
incompatible things, Principality and Liberty.

IT IS strange that men should be cheated by mere Names! yet how frequently are
they seen to admire under one denomination, what going under another they would
undoubtedly detest; which Observation made TACITUS lay down for a Maxim, That
the secret of setting up a new State consists in retaining the Image of the
old. Now if a Commonwealth be a Government of Laws enacted for the common Good
of all the People, not without their own Consent or Approbation; and that they
are not wholly excluded, as in absolute Monarchy, which is a Government of Men
who forcibly rule over others for their own private Interest: Then it is
undeniably manifest that the English Government is already a Commonwealth, the
most free and best constituted in all the world. This was frankly acknowleg'd
by King JAMES the First, who styled himself the Great Servant of the
Commonwealth, It is the Language of our best Lawyers, and allowed by our
Author, who only makes it a less perfect and more inequal Form than that of his
Oceana, wherein, he thinks, better provision is made against external Violence
or internal Diseases. Nor dos it at all import by what names either Persons, or
Places, or Things are called, since the Commonwealthsman finds he injoys
Liberty under the security of equal Laws, and that the rest of the Subjects are
fully satisfied they live under a Government which is a Monarchy in effect as
well as in name. There Is not a man alive that excedes my affection to a mixed
Form of Government, by the Ancients counted the most perfect; yet I am not so
blinded with admiring the good Constitution of our own, but that every day I
can discern in it many things deficient, some things redundant, and others that
require emendation or change. And of this the supreme Legislative Powers are so
sensible, that we see nothing more frequent with them than the enacting,
abrogating, explaining, and altering of Laws, with regard to the very Form of
the Administration. Nevertheless I hope the King and both Houses of Parliament
will not be counted Republicans; or, if they be, I am the readiest in the world
to run the same good or bad Fortune with them in this as well as in all other
respects.

BUT, what HARRINGTON was obliged to say on the like occasion, I must now
produce for my self. It was in the time of ALEXANDER, the greatest Prince and
Commander of his Age, that ARISTOTLE (with scarce inferior Applause, and equal
Fame) wrote that excellent piece of Prudence in his Closet which is called his
Politics, going upon far other Principles than ALEXANDER's Government which it
has long outlived. The like did LIVY without disturbance in the time of
AUGUSTUS, Sir THOMAS MORE in that of HENRY the Eighth, and MACCHIAVEL when
Italy was under Princes that afforded him not the ear. If these and many other
celebrated Men wrote not only with honor and safety, but even of Commonwealths
under Despotic or Tyrannical Princes, who can be so notoriously stupid as to
wonder that in a free Government, and under a King that is both the restorer
and supporter of the Liberty of Europe, I should do justice to an Author who
far outdos all that went before him in his exquisit knowledge of the Politics?

THIS Liberty of writing freely, fully, and impartially, is a part of those
Rights which in the last Reigns were so barbarously invaded by such as had no
inclination to hear of their own enormous violations of the Laws of God and
Man; nor is it undeserving Observation, that such as raise the loudest Clamors
against it now, are the known Enemies of King WILLIAM's Title and Person, being
sure that the Abdicated King JAMES can never be reinthron'd so long as the
Press is open for brave and free Spirits to display the Mischiefs of Tyranny in
their true Colors, and to show the insinit Advantages of Liberty. But not to
dismiss even such unreasonable People without perfect satisfaction, let 'em
know that I don't recommend a Commonwealth, but write the History of a
Commonwealthsman, fairly divulging the Principles and Pretenses of that Party,
and leaving every body to approve or dislike what he pleases, without imposing
on his Judgment by the deluding Arts of Sophistry, Eloquence, or any other
specious but unfair methods of persuasion. Men, to the best of their ability,
ought to be ignorant of nothing; and while they talk so much for and against a
Commonwealth, it is sit they should at least understand the Subject of their
Discourse, which is not every body's case. Now as HARRINGTON'S Oceana is, in my
Opinion, the most perfect Form of Popular Government that ever was: so this,
with his other Writings, contain the History, Reasons, Nature, and Effects of
all sorts of Government, with so much Learning and Perspicuity, that nothing
can be more preferably read on such occasions.

LET not those therefore, who make no opposition to the reprinting or reading of
PLATO's Heathen Commonwealth, ridiculously declaim against the better and
Christian Model of HARRINGTON; but peruse both of 'em with as little prejudice,
passion, or concern, as they would a Book of Travels into the Indys for their
improvement and diversion. Yet so contrary are the Tempers of many to this
equitable disposition, that DIONYSIUS the Sicilian Tyrant, and such Beasts of
Prey, are the worthy Examples they would recommend to the imitation of our
Governors, tho, if they could be able to persuade 'em, they would still miss of
their foolish aim: for it is ever with all Books, as formerly with those of
CREMUTIUS CORDUS, who was condemned by that Monster TIBERIUS for speaking
honorably of the immortal Tyrannicides BRUTUS and CASSIUS. TACITUS records the
last words of this Historian, and subjoins this judicious Remark: The Senate,
says he, ordered his Books to be burnt by the Ediles; but some Copys were
concealed, and afterward published; whence we may take occasion to laugh at
the sottishness of those who imagine that their present Power can also abolish
the memory of succeding time: for on the contrary, Authors acquire additional
Reputation by their Punishment; nor have Foren Kings; and such others as have
used the like severity, got any thing by it, except to themselves Disgrace, and
Glory to the Writers. But the Works of HARRINGTON were neither suppressed at
their first publication under the Usurper, nor ever since called in by lawful
Authority, but as inestimable Treasures preserved by all that had the happiness
to possess 'em entire; so that what was a precious rarity before, is now become
a Public Good, with extraordinary advantages of Correctness, Paper, and Print.
What I have performed in the History of his Life, I leave the Readers to judge
for themselves; but in that and all my other studys, I constantly aimed as much
at least at the benefit of Mankind, and especially of my fellow Citizens, as at
my own particular Entertainment or Reputation.

THE Politics, no less than Arms, are the proper study of a Gentleman, tho he
should consine himself to nothing, but carefully adorn his Mind and Body with
all useful and becoming Accomplishments; and not imitat the servil drudgery of
those mean Spirits, who, for the sake of some one Science, neglect the knowledge
of all other matters, and in the end are many times neither masters of what
they profess, nor versed enough in any thing else to speak of it agreably or
pertinently: which renders 'em untractable in Conversation, as in Dispute they
are opinionative and passionat, envious of their Fame who eclipse their
littleness, and the sworn Enemies of what they do not understand.

BUT Heaven be duly praised, Learning begins to flourish again in its proper
Soil among our Gentlemen, in imitation of the Roman Patricians, who did not
love to walk in Leading strings, and to be guided blindfold, nor lazily to
abandon the care of their proper Business to the management of Men having a
distinct Profession and Interest: for the greatest part of their best Authors
were Persons of Consular Dignity, the ablest Statesmen, and the most gallant
Commanders. Wherefore the amplest satisfaction I can enjoy of this sort will be,
to find those delighted with reading this Work, for whose service it was
intended by the Author; and which with the study of other good Books, but
especially a careful perusal of the Greec and Roman Historians, will make 'em
in reality deserve the Title and Respect of Gentlemen, help 'em to make an
advantageous Figure in their own time, and perpetuat their illustrious Names
and solid Worth to be admired by future Generations.

AS for my self, tho no employment or condition of Life shall make me disrelish
the lasting entertainment which Books afford; yet I have resolved not to write
the Life of any modern Person again, except that only of one Man still alive,
and whom in the ordinary course of nature I am like to survive a long while, he
being already far advanced in his declining time, and I but this present day
beginning the thirtieth year of my Age.

Canon near Bansted, November. 30. 1699.
THE LIFE OF James Harrington.
1. JAMES HARRINGTON (who was born in January 1611) was descended of an Ancient
and Noble Family in Rutlandshire, being Great Grandson to Sir JAMES HARRINGTON;
of whom it is observed by the Wright's Antiquitys of the County of Rutland, p.
52.
Historian of that County, that there were sprung in his time eight Dukes, three
Marquisses, seventy Earls, twenty seven Viscounts, and thirty six Barons; of
which number sixteen were Knights of the Garter: to confirm which Account, we
shall annex a Copy of the Inscription on his Monument and that of his three
Sons at Exton, with Notes on the same by an uncertain hand. As for our Author,
he was the eldest Son of Sir SAPCOTES HARRINGTON, and JANE the Daughter of Sir
WILLIAM SAMUEL of Vpton in Northamtonshire. His Father had Children besides
him, WILLIAM a Merchant in London; ELIZABETH married to Sir RALPH ASHTON in
Lancashire, Baronet; ANN married to ARTHUR EVELYN Esquire. And by a second Wife he
had JOHN killed at Sea; EDWARD a Captain in the Army, yet living; FRANCES
married to JOHN BAGSHAW of Culworth in Northamtonshire Esquire and DOROTHY married
to ALLAN BELLINGHAM of Levens in Westmorland Esquire. This Lady is still alive,
and, when she understood my Design, was pleased to put me in possession of all
the remaining Letters, and other Manuscript Papers of her Brother, with the
Collections and Observations relating to him, made by his other Sister the Lady
ASHTON, a Woman of very extraordinary Parts and Accomplishments. These, with
the Account given of him by ANTHONY WOOD in the second Volum of his Athenae
Oxonienses, and what I could learn from the Mouths of his surviving
Acquaintance, are the Materials whereof I composed this ensuing History of his
Life.

2. IN his very Childhood he gave sure hopes of his future Abilitys, as well by
his Inclination and Capacity to learn whatever was proposed to him, as by a
kind of natural gravity; whence his Parents and Masters were wont to say, That
he rather kept them in aw, than needed their correction: yet when grown a Man,
none could easily surpass him for quickness of Wit, and a most facetious
Temper. He was entered a Gentleman Commoner of Trinity College in Oxford in the
year 1629, and became a Pupil to that great Master of Reason Dr. CHILLINGWORTH,
who discovering the Errors, Impostures, and Tyranny of the Popish Church
(whereof he was for some time a Member) attackt it with more proper and
succes^ful Arms than all before, or perhaps any since have don. After
considerably improving his Knowledge in the University, he was more particularly
fitting himself for his intended Travels, by learning several Foren Languages,
when his Father died, leaving him under Age. Tho the Court of Wards was still
in being, yet by the Soccage Tenure of his Estate he was at liberty to choose
his own Guardian; and accordingly pitched upon his Grandmother the Lady SAMUEL,
a Woman eminent for her Wisdom and Virtue. Of her and the rest of his
Governors, he soon obtained a permission to satisfy his eager desire of seeing
some other parts of the World, where he could make such Observations on Men and
Manners, as might best fit him in due time to serve and adorn his Native
Country.

3. HIS first step was into Holland, then the principal School of Martial
Discipline, and (what touched him more sensibly) a place wonderfully flourishing
under the influence of their Liberty which they had so lately asserted, by
breaking the Yoke of a severe Master, the Spanish Tyrant. And here, no doubt,
it was that he begun to make Government the Subject of his Meditations: for he
was often heard to say, that, before he left England, he knew no more of
Monarchy, Anarchy, Aristocracy, Democracy, Oligarchy, or the like, than as hard
words whereof he learnt the signification in his Dictionary. For some months he
listed himself in my Lord CRAVEN'S Regiment and Sir ROBERT STONE'S; during
which time being much at the Hague, he had the opportunity of further
accomplishing himself in two Courts, namely those of the Prince of Orange, and
the Queen of Bohemia, the Daughter of our K. JAMES I. then a Fugitive in
Holland, her Husband having bin abandoned by his Father in Law, betrayed by the
King of Spain, and stripped of all his Territorys by the Emperor. This excellent
Princess entertained him with extraordinary favor and civility on the account
of his Uncle the Lord HARRINGTON, who had bin her Governor; but particularly
for the sake of his own Merit. The Prince Elector also courted him into his
Service, engaged him to attend him in a Journey he made to the Court of Denmark,
and, after his return from traveling, committed the chief management of all
his Affairs in England to his care. Nor were the young Princesses less
delighted with his Company, his Conversation being always extremely pleasant,
as well as learned and polite; to which good qualitys those unfortunat Ladys
were far from being strangers, as appears by the Letters of the great
Philosopher CARTESIUS, and by the other Writers of those times.

4. THO he found many Charms inviting his longer stay in this place, yet none
were strong enough to keep him from pursuing his main design of traveling; and
therefore he went next through Flanders into France, where having perfected himself
in the Language, seen what deserved his curiosity, and made such Remarks on
their Government as will best appear in his Works, he removed thence into
Italy. It happened to be then (as it is now) the Year of Jubilee. He always
used to admire the great dexterity wherewith the Popish Clergy could maintain
their severe Government over so great a part of the World, and that Men
otherwise reasonable enough should be enchanted out of their Senses, as well as
cheated out of their Money, by these ridiculous Tricks of Religious Pageantry.
Except the small respect he showed to the Miracles they daily told him were
performed in their Churches, he did in all other things behave himself very
prudently and inoffensively. But going on a Candlemass day with several other
Protestants, to see the Pope perform the Ceremony of consecrating Wax Lights;
and perceiving that none could obtain any of those Torches, except such as kissed
the Pope's To (which he exposed to 'em for that purpose) tho he had a great
mind to one of the Lights, yet he would not accept it on so hard a condition.
The rest of his Companions were not so scrupulous, and after their return
complained of his squeamishness to the King; who telling him he might have don
it only as a respect to a temporal Prince, he presently replied, that since he
had the honor to kiss his Majesty's hand, he thought it beneath him to kiss any
other Prince's foot. The King was pleased with his answer, and did afterward
admit him to be one of his Privy Chamber extraordinary, in which quality he
attended him in his first Expedition against the Scots.

5. HE preferred Venice to all other places in Italy, as he did its Government
to all those of the whole World, it being in his Opinion immutable by any
external or internal Causes, and to finish only with Mankind; of which
Assertion you may find various proofs alleged in his Works. Here he furnished
himself with a Collection of all the valuable Books in the Italian Language,
especially treating of Politics, and contracted acquaintance with every one of
whom he might receive any benefit by instruction or otherwise.

6. AFTER having thus seen Italy, France, the Low Countries, Denmark, and some
parts of Germany, he returned home into England, to the great joy of all his
Friends and Acquaintance. But he was in a special manner the Darling of his
Relations, of whom he acknowleg'd to receive reciprocal satisfaction. His
Brothers and Sisters were now pretty well grown, which made it his next care so
to provide for each of 'em as might render 'em independent of others, and easy
to themselves. His Brother WILLIAM he bred to be a Merchant, in which calling
he became a considerable Man; he was a good Architect, and was so much notic'd
for his ingenious Contrivances, that he was received a Fellow of the Royal
Society. How his other Brothers were disposed, we mentioned in the beginuing of
this Discourse. He took all the care of a Parent in the education of his
Sisters, and would himself make large Discourses to 'em concerning the
Reverence that was due to Almighty God; the benevolence they were obliged to
show all mankind; how they ought to furnish their minds with knowledge by
reading of useful Books, and to show the goodness of their disposition by a
constant practice of Virtue: In a word, he taught 'em the true Rules of
humanity and decency, always inculcating to 'em that good Manners did not so
much consist in a fashionable carriage (which ought not to be neglected) as in
becoming words and actions, an obliging address, and a modest behavior. He
treated his Mother in Law as if she were his own, and made no distinction
between her Children and the rest of his Brothers and Sisters; which good
Example had such effects on 'em all, that no Family has bin more remarkable for
their mutual friendship.

7. HE was of a very liberal and compassionat nature, nor could he endure to
see a Friend want any thing he might spare; and when the Relief that was
necessary exceded the bounds of his Estate, he persuaded his Sisters not only
to contribute themselves, but likewise to go about to the rest of their
Relations to complete what was wanting. And if at any time they alleged that
this Bounty had bin thrown away on ungrateful Persons, he would answer with a
smile that he saw they were mercenary, and that they plainly sold their Gifts
since they expected so great a return as Gratitude.

8. HIS natural inclinations to study kept him from seeking after any public
Employments. But in the year 1646, attending out of curiosity the Commissioners
appointed by Parliament to bring King CHARLES the First from Newcastle nearer to
London, he was by some of 'em named to wait on his Majesty, as a Person known to
him before, and engaged to no Party or Faction. The King approved the Proposal,
yet our Author would never presume to com into his presence except in public,
till he was particularly commanded by the King; and that he, with THOMAS
HERBERT (created a Baronet after the Restoration of the Monarchy) were made
Grooms of the Bedchamber at Holmby, together with JAMES MAXWELL and PATRICK
MAULE (afterward Earl of Penmoore in Scotland) which two only remained of his
old Servants in that Station.

9. HE had the good luck to grow very acceptable to the King, who much
conversed with him about Books and Foren Countries. In his Sisters Papers I find
it expressed, that at the King's command he translated into English Dr.
SANDERSONS Book concerning the Obligation of Oaths: but ANTHONY WOOD says it
was the King's own doing, and that he showed it at different times to
HARRINGTON, HERBERT, Dr. JUXON, Dr. HAMMOND, and Dr. SHELDON for their
approbation. However that be, it is certain he served his Master with untainted
fidelity, without doing any thing inconsistent with the Liberty of his Country;
and that he made use of his Interest with his Friends in Parliament to have
Matters accommodated for the satisfaction of all Partys. During the Treaty in
the I Will of Wight, he frequently warned the Divines of his acquaintance to take
heed how far they pressed the King to insist upon any thing which, however it
concerned their Dignity, was no essential point of Religion; and that such
matters driven too far would infallibly ruin all the endeavors used for a
Peace, which Prophecy was proved too true by the Event. His Majesty loved his
company, says ANTHONY WOOD, and, finding him to be an ingenious Man, chose
rather to converse with him than with others of his Chamber: They had often
discourses concerning Government; but when they happened to talk of a
Commonwealth, the King seemed not to endure it. Here I know not which most to
commend, the King for trusting a Man of Republican Principles, or HARRINGTON
for owning his Principles while he served a King.

10. AFTER the King was removed out of the I Will of Wight to Hurstcastle in
Hampshire, HARRINGTON was forcibly turned out of service, because he vindicated
some of his Majesty's Arguments against the Parliament Commissioners at Newport,
and thought his Concessions not so unsatisfactory as did some others. As they
were taking the King to Windsor, he begged admittance to the Boot of the Coach
that he might bid his Master farewell; which being granted, and he preparing to
kneel, the King took him by the hand, and pulled him in to him. He was for
three or four days permitted to stay; but because he would not take an Oath
against assisting or concealing the King's Escape, he was not only discharged
from his Office, but also for some time detained in custody, till Major General
IRETON obtained his Liberty. He afterward found means to see the King at St.
James's, and accompanied him on the Scaffold, where, or a little before, he
received a Token of his Majesty's Affection.

11. AFTER the King's Death he was observed to keep much in his Library, and
more retired than usually, which was by his Friends a long time attributed to
Melancholy or Discontent. At length when they wearied him with their
importunitys to change this sort of Life, he thought fit to show 'em at the
same time their mistake and a Copy of his Oceana, which he was privately writing
all that while: telling 'em withal, that ever since he began to examine things
seriously, he had principally addicted himself to the study of Civil
Government, as being of the highest importance to the Peace and Felicity of
mankind; and that he succeeded at least to his own satisfaction, being now
convinced that no Government is of so accidental or arbitrary an Institution as
people are wont to imagine, there being in Societys natural causes producing
their necessary effects, as well as in the Earth or the Air. Hence he
frequently argued that the Troubles of his time were not to be wholly
attributed to wilfulness or faction, neither to the misgovernment of the
Prince, nor the stubborness of the People; but to a change in the Balance of
Property, which ever since HENRY the Seventh's time was daily falling into the
Scale of the Commons from that of the King and the Lords, as in his Book he
evidently demonstrats and explains. Not that hereby he approved either the
Breaches which the King had made on the Laws, or excused the Severity which some
of the Subjects exercised on the King; but to show that as long as the Causes
of these Disorders remained, so long would the like Effects unavoidably follow:
while on the one hand a King would be always indeavoring to govern according to
the example of his Predecessors when the best part of the National Property was
in their own hands, and consequently the greatest command of Money and Men, as
one of a thousand pounds a Year can entertain more Servants, or influence more
Tenants, than another that has but one hundred, out of which he cannot allow
one Valet; and on the other hand he said, the People would be sure to struggle
for preserving the Property whereof they were in possession, never failing to
obtain more Privileges, and to enlarge the Basis of their Liberty, as often as
they met with any success (which they generally did) in quarrels of this kind.
His chief aim therefore was to find out a method of preventing such Distempers,
or to apply the best Remedys when they happened to break out. But as long as
the Balance remained in this unequal state, he affirmed that no King whatsoever
could keep himself easy, let him never so much endeavor to please his People;
and that tho a good King might manage Affairs tolerably well during his life,
yet this did not prove the Government to be good, since under a less prudent
Prince it would fall to pieces again, while the Orders of a well constituted
State make wicked men virtuous, and fools to act wisely.

12. THAT Empire follows the Balance of Property, whether lodged in one, in a
few, or in many hands, he was the first that ever made out; and is a noble
Discovery, whereof the Honor solely belongs to him, as much as those of the
Circulation of the Blood, of Printing, of Guns, of the Compass, or of Optic
Glasses, to their several Authors. It Is incredible to think what gross and
numberless Errors were committed by all the Writers before him, even by the
best of them, for want of understanding this plain Truth, which is the
foundation of all Politics. He no sooner discoursed publicly of this new
Doctrine, being a man of universal acquaintance, but it engaged all sorts of
people to busy themselves about it as they were variously affected. Some,
because they understood him, despised it, alleging it was plain to every man's
capacity, as if his highest merit did not consist in making it so. Others, and
those in number the fewest, disputed with him about it, merely to be better
informed; with which he was well pleased, as reckoning a pertinent Objection of
greater advantage to the discovery of Truth (which was his aim) than a
complaisant applause or approbation. But a third sort, of which there never
wants in all places a numerous company, did out of pure envy strive all they
could to lessen or defame him; and one of 'em (since they could not find any
precedent Writer out of whose Works they might make him a Plagiary) did
endeavor, after a very singular manner, to rob him of the Glory of this
Invention: for our Author having friendly lent him a part of his Papers, he
published a small piece to the same purpose, intitl'd, A Letter from an Officer
of the Army in Ireland, etc. Major WILDMAN was then reputed the Author by some,
and HENRY NEVIL by others; which latter, by reason of this thing, and his great
intimacy with HARRINGTON, was by his detractors reported to be the Author of
his Works, or that at least he had a principal hand in the composing of them.
Notwithstanding which provocations, so true was he to the Friendship he professed
to NEVIL and WILDMAM, that he avoided all harsh Expressions or public Censures
on this occasion, contenting himself with the Justice which the World was soon
obliged to yield to him by reason of his other Writings, where no such clubbing
of Brains could be reasonably suspected.

13. BUT the publication of his Book met with greater difficultys from the
opposition of the several Partys then set against one another, and all against
him; but none more than some of those who pretended to be for a Commonwealth,
which was the specious name under which they covered the rankest Tyranny of
OLIVER CROMWELL, while HARRINGTON, like PAUL at Athens, indeavor'd to make known
to the People what they ignorantly adored. By showing that a Commonwealth was a
Government of Laws, and not of the Sword, he could not but detect the violent
administration of the Protector by his Bashaws, Intendants, or Majors General,
which created him no small danger: while the Cavaliers on the other side taxed
him with Ingratitude to the memory of the late King, and preferred the Monarchy
even of a Usurper to the best ordered Commonwealth. To these he answered, that
it was enough for him to forbear publishing his Sentiments during that King's
life; but the Monarchy being now quite dissolved, and the Nation in a state of
Anarchy, or (what was worse) groaning under a horrid Usurpation, he was not
only at liberty, but even obliged as a good Citizen to offer a helping hand to
his Countrymen, and to show 'em such a Model of Government as he thought most
conducing to their Tranquillity, Wealth, and Power: That the Cavaliers ought of
all People to be best pleased with him, since if his Model succeeded, they were
sure to enjoy equal Privileges with others, and so be delivered from their
present Oppression; for in a well constituted Commonwealth there can be no
distinction of Partys, the passage to Preferment is open to Merit in all
persons, and no honest man can be uneasy: but that if the Prince should happen
to be restored, his Doctrine of the Balance would be a light to show him what
and with whom he had to do, and so either to mend or avoid the Miscarriages of
his Father; since all that is said of this doctrine may as well be accommodated
to a Monarchy regulated by Laws, as to a Democracy or more popular form of a
Commonwealth. He used to add on such occasions another reason of writing this
Model, which was, That if it should ever be the fate of this Nation to be, like
Italy of old, overrun by any barbarous People, or to have its Government and
Records destroyed by the rage of some merciless Conqueror, they might not be
then left to their own Invention in framing a new Government; for few People
can be expected to succeed so happily as the Venetians have don in such a case.

14. IN the mean time it was known to some of the Courtiers, that the Book was a
printing; whereupon, after hunting it from one Press to another, they seized
their Prey at last, and conveyed it to Whitehall. All the solicitations he
could make were not able to retrieve his Papers, till he remembered that
OLIVER'S favorit Daughter, the Lady CLAYPOLE, acted the part of a Princess very
naturally, obliging all persons with her civility, and frequently interceding
for the unhappy. To this Lady, tho an absolute stranger to him, he thought fit
to make his application; and being led into her Antichamber, he sent in his
Name, with his humble request that she would admit him to her presence. While
he attended, some of her Women coming into the room were followed by her little
Daughter about three years old, who staid behind them. He entertained the Child
so divertingly, that she suffered him to take her up in his arms till her
Mother came; whereupon he stepping toward her, and setting the Child down at
her feet, said, Madam, it is well you are com at this nick of time, or I had
certainly stolen this pretty little Lady: Stolen her, replied the Mother!
pray, what to do with her? for she is yet too young to become your Mistress.
Madam, said he, tho her Charms assure her of a more considerable Conquest, yet
I must confess it is not love but revenge that promted me to commit this theft.
Lord, answered the Lady again, what injury have I don you that you should steal
my Child? None at all, replied he, but that you might be induced to prevail
with your Father to do me justice, by restoring my Child that he has stolen.
But she urging it was impossible, because her Father had Children enough of his
own; he told her at last it was the issue of his brain which was misrepresented
to the Protector, and taken out of the Press by his order. She immediately
promised to procure it for him, if it contained nothing prejudicial to her
Father's Government; and he assured her it was only a kind of a Political
Romance, so far from any Treason against her Father, that he hoped she would
acquaint him that he designed to dedicat it to him, and promised that she her
self should be presented with one of the first Copys. The Lady was so well
pleased with his manner of Address, that he had his Book speedily restored to
him; and he did accordingly inscribe it to OLIVER CROMWELL, who, after the
perusal of it, said, the Gentleman had like to trapan him out of his Power, but
that what he got by the Sword he would not quit for a little paper Shot: adding
in his usual cant, that he approved the Government of a single Person as little
as any of 'em, but that he was forced to take upon him the Office of a High
Constable, to preserve the Peace among the several Partys in the Nation, since
he saw that being left to themselves, they would never agree to any certain
form of Government, and would only spend their whole Power in defeating the
Designs, or destroying the Persons of one another.

15. BUT nothing in the world could better discover CROMWELL'S Dissimulation
than this Speech, since HARRINGTON had demonstrated in his Book, that no
Commonwealth could be so easily or perfectly established as one by a sole
Legislator, it being in his power (if he were a man of good Invention himself,
or had a good Model proposed to him by others) to set up a Government in the
whole piece at once, and in perfection; but an Assembly, being of better
Judgment than Invention, generally make patching work in forming a Government,
and are whole Ages about that which is seldom or never brought by 'em to any
perfection: but is commonly ruined by the way, leaving the noblest Attemts
under reproach, and the Authors of 'em exposed to the greatest dangers while
they live, and to a certain infamy when dead. Wherefore the wisest Assemblys, in
mending or making a Government, have pitched upon a sole Legislator, whose
Model they could rightly approve, tho not so well digest; as Musicians can play
in consort, and judge of an Air that is laid before them, tho to invent a part
of Music they could never agree, nor succeed so happily as one Person. If
CROMWELL therefore had meant as he spoke, no man had ever such an opportunity of
reforming what was amiss in the old Government, or setting up one wholly new,
either according to the Plan of Oceana, or any other. This would have made him
indeed a Hero superior in lasting fame to SOLON, LYCURGUS, ZALEUCUS, and
CHARONDAS; and render his Glory far more resplendent, his Security greater, and
his Renoun more durable than all the Pomp of his ill acquired Greatness could
afford: whereas on the contrary he lived in continual fears of those he had
enslaved, died abhorred as a monstrous betrayer of those Libertys with which he
was entrusted by his Country, and his Posterity not possessing a foot of what
for their only sakes he was generally thought to usurp. But this last is a
mistaken Notion, for some of the most notorious Tyrants lived and died without
any hopes of Children; which is a good reason why no mortal ought to be trusted
with too much Power on that score. LYCURGUS and ANDREW DORIA, who, when it was
in their power to continue Princes, chose rather to be the founders of their
Countries Liberty, will be celebrated for their Virtue through the course of all
Ages, and their very Names convey the highest Ideas of Godlike Generosity;
while JULIUS CAESAR, OLIVER CROMWELL, and such others as at any time enslaved
their fellow Citizens, will be for ever remembered with detestation, and cited
as the most execrable Examples of the vilest Treachery and Ingratitude. It is
only a refined and excellent Genius, a noble Soul ambitious of solid Praise, a
sincere lover of Virtue and the good of all Mankind, that is capable of
executing so glorious an Undertaking as making a People free. It Is my fixed
opinion, that if the Protector's mind had the least tincture of true greatness,
he could not be proof against the incomparable Rewards proposed by HARRINGTON
in the Corollary of his Oceana; as no Prince truly generous, whether with or
without Heirs, is able to resist their Charms, provided he has an opportunity
to advance the happiness of his People. 'Twas this Disposition that brought the
Prince of ORANGE to head us when we lately contended for our Liberty; to this
we ow those inestimable Laws we have obtained* since out of a grateful
confidence we made him our King; and how great things, or after what manner, we
may expect from him in time to com, is as hard to be truly conceived as
worthily expressed.

16. I SHALL, now give some account of the Book it self, intitl'd by the Author,
The Commonwealth of Oceana, a name by which he designed England, as being the
noblest Island of the Northern Ocean. But before I proceed further, I must
explain some other words occurring in this Book, which is written after the
manner of a Romance, in imitation of PLATO'S Atlantic Story, and is a method
ordinarily followed by Lawgivers.

Adoxus -- King JOHN. Convallium -- Hamton Court. Coraunus -- HENRY VIII.
Dicotome -- RICHARD II. Emporium -- London. Halcionia -- The Thames. Halo --
Whitehall. Hiera -- Westminster. Leviathan -- HOBBES. Marpesia -- Scotland.
Morpheus -- JAMES I. Mount Celia -- Windsor. Neustrians -- Normans. Olphaus
Megaletor -- OLIVER CROMWELL. Panopaea -- Ireland. Pantheon -- Westminster Hall.
Panurgus -- HENRY VII. Parthenia -- Queen ELIZABETH. Scandians -- Danes.
Teutons -- Saxons. Turbo -- WILLIAM the Conqueror. Verulamius -- Lord
Chancellor BACON.

17. THE Book consists of Preliminarys divided into two parts, and a third
Section called the Council of Legislators; then follows the Model of the
Commonwealth, or the body of the Book; and lastly coms the Corollary or
Conclusion. The Preliminary Discourses contain the Principles, Generation, and
Effects of all Governments, whether Monarchical, Aristocratical, or Popular,
and their several Corruptions, as Tyranny, Oligarchy, and Anarchy, with all the
good or bad mixtures that naturally result from them. But the first part dos in
a more particular manner treat of ancient Prudence, or that genius of
Government which most prevailed in the world till the time of JULIUS CAESAR.
None can consult a more certain Oracle that would conceive the nature of Foren
or Domestic Empire; the Balance of Land or Money; Arms or Contracts; Magistracy
and Judicatures; Agrarian Laws; Elections by the Ballot; Rotation of Officers,
with a great many such heads, especially the inconveniences and preeminences of
each kind of Government, or the true comparison of 'em all together. These
Subjects have bin generally treated distinctly, and every one of them seems to
require a Volum; yet I am of opinion that in this short Discourse there is a
more full and clearer account of them, than can be easily found elsewhere: at
least I must own to have received greater satisfaction here than in all my
reading before, and the same thing has bin frankly owned to me by others.

18. THE second part of the Preliminarys treats of modern Prudence, or that
genius of Government which has most obtained in the world since the expiration
of the Roman Liberty, particularly the Gothic Constitution, beginning with the
inundation of the barbarous Northern Nations over the Roman Empire. In this
Discourse there is a very clear account of the English Government under the
Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normans, till the foundations of it were cunningly
undermined by HENRY VII. terribly shaken by HENRY VIII. and utterly ruined
under CHARLES I. Here he must read who in a little compass would completely
understand the ancient Feuds and Tenures, the original and degrees of our
Nobility, with the inferior Orders of the rest of the People: under the Saxons,
what was meant by Ealdorman, or Earls; King's Thane; middle Thane or. Vavasors;
their Shiremoots, Sherifs, and Viscounts; their Halymoots, Weidenagemoots, and
such others. Here likewise one may learn to understand the Baronage of the
Normans, as the Barons by their Possessions, by Writ, or by Letters Patent;
with many other particulars which give an insight into the 'springs and
management of the Barons Wars, so frequent and famous in our Annals. The rest
of this Discourse is spent in showing the natural Causes of the dissolution of
the Norman Monarchy under CHARLES the First, and the generation of the
Commonwealth, or rather the Anarchy that succeeded.

19. NEXT follows the Council of Legislators: for HARRINGTON being about to
give the most perfect Model of Government, he made himself master of all the
Ancient and Modern Politicians, that he might as well imitat whatever was
excellent or practicable in them, as his care was to avoid all things which
were impracticable or inconvenient. These were the justest measures that could
possibly be taken by any body, whether he designed to be rightly informed, and
sufficiently furnished with the best materials; o^ whether he would have his
Model meet with an easy reception: for since his own Sentiments (tho never so
true) were sure to be rejected as private Speculations or impracticable
Chimeras, this was the readiest way to make 'em pass currently, as both
authorized by the wisest men in all Nations, and as what in all times and
places had bin practiced with success. To this end therefore he introduces,
under feigned names, nine Legislators, who perfectly understood the several
Governments they were appointed to represent. The Province of the first was the
Commonwealth of Israel; that of the second, Athens; of the third, Sparta; of
the fourth, Carthage; of the fifth, the Achaeans, Aetolians, and Lycians; of
the sixth, Rome; of the seventh, Venice; of the eighth, Switzerland; and of the
ninth, Holland. Out of the Excellencys of all these, supplied with the Fruits
of his own invention, he framed the Model of his Oceana; and indeed he shows
himself in that work so throly versed in their several Historys and
Constitutions, that to any man who would rightly understand them, I could not
easily recommend a more proper Teacher: for here they are dissected and laid
open to all Capacitys, their Perfections applauded, their Inconveniencys
exposed, and parallels frequently made between 'em no less entertaining than
useful. Nor are the Ancient and Modern Eastern or European Monarchys forgot,
but exhibited with all their Advantages and Corruptions, without the least
dissimulation or partiality.

20. AS for the Model, I shall say nothing of it in particular, as well because
I would not forestal the pleasure of the Reader, as by reason an Abridgment of
it is once or twice made by himself, and inserted among his Works. The method
he observes is to lay down his Orders or Laws in so many positive Propositions,
to each of which he subjoins an explanatory Discourse; and if there be
occasion, adds a Speech supposed to be delivered by the Lord ARCHON, or some of
the Legislators. These Speeches are extraordinary fine, contain a world of good
Learning and Observation, and are perpetual Commentarys on his Laws. In the
Corollary, which is the conclusion of the whole Work, he shows how the last
hand was put to his Commonwealth; which we must not imagine to treat only of the
Form of the Senate and Assemblys of the People, or the manner of waging War and
governing in Peace. It contains besides, the Discipline of a National Religion,
and the security of a Liberty of Conscience; a Form of Government for Scotland,
for Ireland, and the other Provinces of the Commonwealth; Governments for
London and Westminster, proportionably to which the other Corporations of the
Nation are to be modeled; Directions for the encouraging of Trade; Laws for
regulating Academys; and most excellent Rules for the Education of our Youth,
as well to the Wars or the Sea, to Manufactures or Husbandry, as to Law,
Physic, or Divinity, and chiefly to the breeding and true figure of
accomplished Gentlemen: There are admirable Orders for reforming the Stage; the
number, choice, and business of the Officers of State and the Revenue, with all
sorts of Officers; and an exact account both of their Salarys, and the ordinary
yearly charge of the whole Commonwealth, which for two rarely consistent
things, the grandeur of its State, and the frugal management of its Revenues,
excedes all the Governments that ever were. I ought not to omit telling here,
that this Model gives a full answer to those who imagine that there can be no
Distinctions or Degrees, neither Nobility nor Gentry in a Democracy, being led
into this mistake, because they ignorantly think all Commonwealths to be
constituted alike; when, if they were but never so little versed in History,
they might know that no Order of men now in the world can com near the Figure
that was made by the Noblemen and Gentlemen of the Roman State: nor in this
respect dos the Commonwealth of Oceana com any thing behind them; for, as
HARRINGTON says very truly, an Army may as well consist of Soldiers without
Officers, or of Officers without Soldiers, as a Commonwealth (especially such a
one as is capable of Greatness) consist of a People without a Gentry, or of a
Gentry without a People. So much may suffice for understanding the scope of
this Book: I shall only add, that none ought to be offended with a few od terms
in it, such as the Prime Magnitude, the Pillar of Nilus, the Galaxy, and the
Tropic of Magistrates, since the Author explains what he means by 'em, and that
any other may call 'em by what more significative names he pleases; for the
things themselves are absolutely necessary.

21. NO sooner did this Treatise appear in public, but it was greedily bought
up, and become the subject of all men's discourse. The first that made exceptions
to it was Dr. HENRY FERN, afterward Bishop of Chester. The Lady ASHTON
presented him with one of the Books, and desired his opinion of it, which he
quickly sent in such a manner as showed he did not approve of the Doctrine, tho
he treated the Person and his Learning with due respect. To this Letter a reply
was made, and some Querys sent along with it by HARRINGTON, to every one of
which a distinct Answer was returned by the Doctor; which being again confuted
by HARRINGTON, he published the whole in the year 1656, under the title of Pian
Piano, or an Intercourse between H. FERN Doctor in Divinity, and JAMES
HARRINGTON Esquire upon occasion of the Doctor's Censure of the Commonwealth of
Oceana. It Is a Treatise of little importance, and contains nothing but what he
has much better discoursed in his answers to other Antagonists, which is the
reason that I give the Reader no more trouble about it.

22. THE next that wrote against Oceana was MATTHEW WREN, eldest Son to the
Bishop of Ely. His Book was intitl'd Considerations, and restrained only to the
first part of the Preliminarys. To this our Author published an answer in the
first Book of his Prerogative of Popular Government, where he inlarges,
explains, and vindicats his Assertions. How inequal this Combat was, and after
what manner he treated his Adversary, I leave the Reader to judge; only minding
him that as WREN was one of the Virtuosi who met at Dr. WILKINS'S (the Seminary
of the now Royal Society) HARRINGTON jokingly said, That they had an excellent
faculty of magnifying a Louse, and diminishing a Commonwealth. But the Subjects
he handles on this occasion are very curious, and reduced to the twelve
following Questions.

(1.) WHETHER Prudence (or the Politics) be well distinguished into Ancient and
Modern?

(2.) WHETHER a Commonwealth be rightly defined to be a Government of Laws and
not of men; and Monarchy to be a Government of some men or a few men, and not of
Laws?

(3.) WHETHER the Balance of Dominion in Land be the natural cause of Empire?

(4.) WHETHER the Balance of Empire be well divided into National and
Provincial? and whether these two, or any Nations that are of a distinct
Balance, coming to depend on one and the same head, such a mixture creates a
new Balance?

(5.) WHETHER there be any common Right or Interest of Mankind distinct from
the Interest of the parts taken severally? and how by the orders of a
Commonwealth this may best be distinguished from private Interest?

(6.) WHETHER the Senatusconsulta, or Decrees of the Roman Senate, had the power
of Laws?

(7.) WHETHER the Ten Commandments, proposed by God or MOSES, were voted and
past into Laws by the People of Israel?

(8.) WHETHER a Commonwealth, coming up to the perfection of the Kind, coms not
up to the perfection of Government, and has no flaw in it? that is, whether the
best Commonwealth be not the best Government?

(9.) WHETHER Monarchy, coming up to the perfection of the Kind, coms not short
of the perfection of Government, and has not some flaw in it? that is, whether
the best Monarchy be not the worst Government? Under this head are also
explained the Balance of France, the Original of a Landed Clergy, Arms, and
their several kinds.

(10.) WHETHER any Commonwealth, that was not first broken or divided by it
self, was ever conquered by any Monarch? where he shows that none ever were,
and that the greatest Monarchys have bin broken by very small Commonwealths.

(11.) WHETHER there be not an Agrarian, or some Law or Laws to supply the
defects of it, in every Commonwealth? Whether the Agrarian, as it is stated in
Oceana, be not equal and satisfactory to all Interests or Partys?

(12.) WHETHER a Rotation, or Courses and Turns, be necessary to a welorder'd
Commonwealth? In which is contained the Parembole or Courses of Israel before
the Captivity, together with an Epitome of the Commonwealth of Athens, as also
another of the Commonwealth of Venice.

23. THE second Book of the Prerogative of Popular Government chiefly concerns
Ordination in the Christian Church, and the Orders of the Commonwealth of
Israel, against the opinions of Dr. HAMMOND, Dr. SEAMAN, and the Authors they
follow. His Dispute with these learned Persons (the one of the Episcopal, and
the other of the Presbyterian Communion) is comprehended in five Chapters.

(1.) THE first, explaining the words Chirotonia and Chirothesia,
paraphrastically relates the Story of the Perambulation made by the Apostles
PAUL and BARNABAS through the Citys of Lycaonia, Pisidia, etc.

(2.) THE second shows that those Citys, or most of 'em were at the time of
this Perambulation under Popular Government; in which is also contained the
whole Administration of a Roman Province.

(3.) THE third shows the deduction of the Chirotonia, or holding up of hands,
from Popular Government, and that the original of Ordination is from this
custom: in which is also contained the Institution of the Sanhedrim or Senate of
Israel by MOSES, and of that of Rome by ROMULUS.

(4.) THE fourth shows the deduction of the Chirothesia, or the laying on of
hands, from Monarchical or Aristocratical Government, and so the second way of
Ordination procedes from this custom: here is also declared how the
Commonwealth of the Jews stood after the Captivity.

(5.) THE fifth debates whether the Chirotonia used in the Citys mentioned was
(as is pretended by Dr. HAMMOND, Dr. SEAMAN, and the Authors they follow) the
same with the Chirothesia, or a far different thing. In which are contained the
diverse kinds of Church Government introduced and exercised in the age of the
Apostles. By these heads we may perceive that a great deal of useful Learning
is contained in this Book; and questionless he makes those Subjects more plain
and intelligible than any Writer I ever yet consulted.

24. AGAINST Oceana chiefly did RICHARD BAXTER write his Holy Commonwealth, of
which our Author made so slight that he vouchsafed no other answer to it but
half a sheet of Cant and Ridicule. It dos not appear that he railed at all the
Ministers as a parcel of Fools and Knaves. But the rest of BAXTER'S complaint
seems better grounded, as that HARRINGTON maintained neither he nor any
Ministers understood at all what Polity was, but prated against they knew not
what, etc. This made him publish his Holy Commonwealth in answer to HARRINGTON
's Heathenish Commonwealth; in which, adds he, I plead the Cause of Monarchy as
better than Democracy or Aristocracy; an odd way of modelling a Commonwealth.
And yet the Royalists were so far from thinking his Book for their service,
that in the year 1683 it was by a Decree of the University of Oxford condemned
to be publicly burnt, which Sentence was accordingly executed upon it, in
company with some of the Books of HOBBES, MILTON, and others; whereas no censure
past on HARRINGTON's Oceana, or the rest of his Works. As for Divines meddling
with Politics, he has in the former part of the Preliminarys to Oceana
delivered his Opinion, That there is something first in the making of a
Commonwealth, then in the governing of it, and last of all in the leading of
its Armies, which (tho there be great Divines, great Lawyers, great Men in all
Professions) seems to be peculiar only to the genius of a Gentleman; for it is
plain in the universal series of story, that if any man founded a Commonwealth,
he was first a Gentleman; the truth of which Assertion he proves from MOSES
downwards.

25. BEING much importuned from all hands to publish an Abridgment of his
Oceana, he consented at length; and so, in the year 1659, was printed his Art
of Lawgiving (or of Legislation) in three Books. The first, which treats of the
Foundations and Superstructures of all kinds of Government, is an abstract of
his Preliminarys to the Oceana: and the third Book, showing a Model of Popular
Government fitted to the present State or Balance of this Nation, is an exact
Epitome of his Oceana, with short Discourses explaining the Propositions. By
the way, the Pamphlet called the Rota is nothing else but these Propositions
without the Discourses, and therefore to avoid a needless repetition not printed
among his Works. The second Book between these two, is a full Account of the
Commonwealth of Israel, with all the variations it underwent. Without this Book
it is plainly impossible to understand that admirable Government concerning
which no Author wrote common sense before HARRINGTON, who was persuaded to
complete this Treatise by such as observed his judicious Remarks on the same
Subject in his other Writings. To the Art of Lawgiving is annexed a small
Dissertation, or a Word concerning a House of Peers, which to abridg were to
transcribe.

26. IN the same year, 1659, WREN coms out with another Book called Monarchy
asserted, in vindication of his Considerations. If he could not press hard on
our Author's Reasonings, he was resolved to overbear him with impertinence and
calumny, treating him neither with the respect due to a Gentleman, nor the fair
dealing becoming an ingenuous Adversary, but on the contrary with the utmost
Chicanery and Insolence. The least thing to be admired is, that he would needs
make the University a Party against him, and bring the heavy weight of the
Church's displeasure on his sholders: for as corrupt Ministers style themselves
the Government, by which Artifice they oblige better men to suppress their
Complaints, for fear of having their Loyalty suspected; so every ignorant
Pedant that affronts a Gentleman, is presently a Learned University; or if he
is but in Deacons Orders, he is forthwith transformed into the Catholic Church,
and it becoms Sacrilege to touch him. But as great Bodies no less than private
Persons, grow wiser by Experience, and com to a clearer discernment of their
true Interest: so I believe that neither the Church nor Universitys will be now
so ready to espouse the Quarrels of those, who, under pretense of serving them,
engage in Disputes they no ways understand, whereby all the discredit redounds
to their Patrons, themselves being too mean to suffer any diminution of Honor.
HARRINGTON was not likewise less blamable in being provoked to such a degree by
this pitiful Libel, as made him forget his natural character of gravity and
greatness of mind. Were not the best of men subject to their peculiar
weaknesses, he had never written such a Farce as his Politicas^er, or Comical
Discourse in answer to Mr. WREN. It relates little or nothing to the Argument,
which was not so much amiss, considering the ignorance of his Antagonist: but
it is of so very small merit, that I would not insert it among his other Works,
as a piece not capable to instruct or please any man now alive. I have not
omitted his Answer to Dr. STUBBE concerning a select Senate, as being so little
worth; but as being only a repetition of what he has much better and more amply
treated in some of his other pieces. Now we must note that upon the first
appearance of his Oceana this STUBBE was so great an admirer of him, that, in
his Preface to the Good Old Cause, he says he would enlarge in his praise, did
he not think himself too inconsiderable to add any thing to those Applauses
which the understanding part of the World must bestow upon him, and which, tho
Eloquence should turn Panegyrist, he not only merits but transcends.

27. OTHER Treatises of his, which are omitted for the same reason, are, 1. A
Discourse upon this Saying: The Spirit of the Nation is not yet to be trusted
with Liberty, lest it introduce Monarchy, or invade the Liberty of Conscience;
which Proposition he disapproved. 2. A Discourse showing that the Spirit of
Parlaments, with a Council in the intervals, is not to be trusted for a
Settlement, lest it introduce Monarchy, and Persecution for Conscience. 3. A
Parallel of the spirit of the People with the spirit of Mr. ROGERS, with an
Appeal to the Reader whether the spirit of the People, or the spirit of men
like Mr. ROGERS be the fitter to be trusted with the Government. This ROGERS
was an Anabaptist, a seditious Enthusiast, or fifthmonarchy man. 4. Pour
enclouer le canon, or the nailing of the Enemies Artillery. 5. The stumbling
block of Disobedience and Rebellion, cunningly imputed by PETER HEYLIN to
CALVIN, removed in a Letter to the said P. H. who wrote a long Answer to it in
the third part of his Letter combat. It Is obvious by the bare perusal of the
Titles, that these are but Pamphlets solely calculated for that time; and it
certainly argues a mighty want of Judgment in those Editors who make no
distinction between the elaborat Works which an Author intended for universal
benefit, and his more slight or temporary Compositions, which were written to
serve a present turn, and become afterward not only useless, but many times not
intelligible. Of this nature are the Pieces I now mentioned: all their good
things are much better treated in his other Books, and the personal Reflections
are (as I said before) neither instructive nor diverting. On this occasion I
must signify, that tho the History I wrote of MILTON'S Life be prefixed to his
Works, yet I had no hand in the Edition of those Volumes; or otherwise his
Logic, his Grammar, and the like, had not increased the bulk or price of his
other useful Pieces. Our Author translated into English Verse some of Virgil's
Eclogs, and about six Books of his Aeneids; which, with his Epigrams, and other
Poetical Conceits, are neither worthy of him nor the light.

28. SOME other small Books he wrote which are more deserving, and therefore
transmitted to Posterity with his greater Works; namely, 1. Valerius and
Publicola, or, the true form of a Popular Commonwealth, a Dialog. 2. Political
Aphorisms, in number 120. 3. Seven Models of a Commonwealth, Ancient and
Modern; or brief Directions showing how a fit and perfect Model of Popular
Government may be made, found, or understood. These are all the Commonwealths
in the World for their kinds, tho not for their number. 4. The Ways and means
whereby an equal and lasting Commonwealth may be suddenly introduced, and
perfectly founded, with the free consent and actual confirmation of the whole
People of England. 5. There is added, The Petition of diverse well affected
Persons, drawn up by HARRINGTON, and containing the Abstract of his Oceana; but
presented to the House of Commons by HENRY NEVIL the 6 th of July 1659, to
which a satisfactory answer was returned, but nothing don. 6. Besides all
these, finding his Doctrine of Elections by Balloting not so well understood as
could he desired, he published on one side of a large sheet of Paper, his use
and manner of the Ballot, with a copper Cut in the middle representing such an
Election in the great Assembly of the Commonwealth: but it is now inserted in
its proper place in the body of Oceana. Most of these contain Abridgments of
his Model, adapted to the various Circumstances and Occurrences of those times;
but containing likewise some Materials peculiar to themselves, and for that
reason thought fit to be printed a second time. He did not write the Grounds
and Reasons of Monarchy exemplified in the Scottish Line (which Book is prefixed
to his Works) but one JOHN HALL, born in the City of Durham, educated at
Cambridg, and a Student of Grays Inn. Being commanded by the Council of State
(of whom he had a yearly Pension) to attend OLIVER into Scotland, it occasioned
him to publish that Piece. He wrote several other things in Prose and Verse,
and died before he was full thirty, lamented as a Prodigy of his Age.

29. HARRINGTON having thus exhausted all that could be written on this
Subject, he likewise indeavor'd to promote his Cause by public discourses at a
nightly meeting of several curious Gentlemen in the New Palace Yard at
Westminster. This Club was called the Rota, of which I shall give a short
account from ANTHONY WOOD, who mortally hated all Republicans, and was as much
prejudiced in favor of the Royalists, tho, to his honor be it spoken, he never
denied justice to either side. Their Discourses about Government, says he, and
of ordering a Commonwealth, were the most ingenious and smart that ever were
heard; for the Arguments in the Parliament house were but flat to those. This
Gang had a balloting Box, and balloted how things should be carried by way of
Essay; which not being used or known in England before on this account, the
room was every evening very full. Besides our Author and H. NEVIL, who were the
prime men of this Club, were CYRIAC SKINNER, Major WILDMAN, Major VENNER,
CHARLES WOLSLEY afterward knighted, ROGER COKE the Author of the Detection of
the four last Reigns, WILLIAM POULTNEY afterward made a Knight, JOHN AUBRY,
MAXIMILIAN PETTY, and Dr. PETTY who was afterward Sir WILLIAM, Sir JOHN
HOSKYNS, and a great many others, some whereof are still living. -- The Doctrine
was very taking, and the more because, as to human foresight, there was no
possibility of the King's return. The greatest of the Parlamentmen hated this
Rotation and Balloting, as being against their Power. Eight or ten were for it,
of which number H. NEVIL was one, who proposed it to the House, and made it out
to the Members, that, except they embraced that sort of Government, they must
be ruined. The Model of it was, that the third part of the Senate or House
should rote out by Ballot every year (not capable of being elected again for
three years to com) so that every ninth year the Senate would be wholly altered.
No Magistrate was to continue above three years, and all to be chosen by the
Ballot, than which nothing could be invented more fair and impartial, as 'twas
then thought, tho opposed by many for several reasons. This Club of
Commonwealthsmen lasted till about the 21 st of Feb. 1659, at which time the
secluded Members being restored by General GEORGE MONK, all their Models
vanished.

30. WHEN the whole matter is duly considered, it is impossible a Commonwealth
should have succeeded in England at that time, since CROMWELL, who alone had the
Power, yet wanted the Will to set it up. They were comparatively but very few
that entertained such a Design from the beginning of the Troubles; and, as it
usually happens, a great part of these did afterward desert their Principles,
being seduced by the Honors and Preferments whereby they were retained in the
Service of the reigning Powers. The body of the People were either exasperated
on a religious account, only to obtain that Liberty which they afterward
mutually denied each other, or by the change of the Balance they grew weary of
Monarchy, and did not know it. The Republicans indeed made an advantage of
their Discontents to destroy the established Government, without acquainting
'em with their real Designs; and when this was effectually don, the People (who
had no settled Form in their view, and thought all things safe by the Victory
they had gained over the King and the Church) fell in with what was first
offered by those in whom they confided, and would as well have accepted a
better Government if they had bin managed by men of honest and public Designs.
But the Multitude can seel, tho they cannot see. Instead of enjoying their
desired Liberty, they soon sound themselves under a most heavy Yoke, which they
naturally labored to shake off; and yet in all the changes then made, two
things were remarkable, that every one of 'em would be styled a Commonwealth,
and yet none of 'em would mend or take warning by the Errors of those that
preceded, but still continued to abuse the Nation, and unnaturally to ingross
the Government into a few hands. The People being all this while told they were
under a Commonwealth, and not being able to see through the deceit, begun to think
themselves mistaken in the choice they had made, since their sufferings under
these pretended Commonwealths were infinitely greater than what induced 'em to
dissolve the former Monarchy. In this condition the several Partys might (as
HARRINGTON used to say) be fitly compared to a company of Puppydogs in a bag,
where finding themselves uneasy for want of room, every one of 'em bites the
tail or foot of the next, supposing that to be the cause of his misery. By this
means whatever was said against a Commonwealth obtained ready belief, as, that
it is the most seditious sort of Government, and that instead of one Tyrant
there are a great many who enrich themselves by laying intolerable Taxes on
others. All this and much more the People in England then experienced, and
therefore detesting their new Commonwealth, they restored the old Monarchy. But
to do all Governments the Justice due from an impartial Historian, they never
had a Commonwealth, but were interchangeably under Anarchy, Tyranny, and
Oligarchy, to which Commonwealths have ever bin the greatest enemies, and have
frequently lent their voluntary assistance to deliver other Nations from the
like oppressions. Thus the People of England came to hate the name of a
Commonwealth, without loving their Liberty the less.

31. BUT to return whence we digress'd: Our Author, not concerned in the
excessive fears and hopes of those that favored or opposed the Restoration of
CHARLES the Second, continued to live in a peaceable manner at his one house,
demeaning himself as became a person blindly engaged to no Party or Factions.
But tho his Life was retired, it was not solitary, being frequented with people
of all sorts, some with a malicious design to fish something to his prejudice;
and others to gain advantage to themselves by his learned Conversation, or to
put him upon something toward the better settlement of the Kingdom. Among these
there was an eminent Royalist who prevailed with him to draw up some
Instructions for the King's service, whereby he might be inabl'd to govern with
satisfaction to the People and safety to himself: which being performed and
signed with his one hand, his Friend after showing it to several of the
Courtiers, found they did not approve a Scheme that was not likely to further
their selfish Designs. At last he put his Paper into the hands of a great
Minister about the King; and how well our Author was rewarded for his good
Intentions, we are now going to relate. About this time he was busy in reducing
his Politics into short and easy Aphorisms, yet methodically digested in their
natural order, and suited to the most vulgar capacitys. Of this he made no
secret, and freely communicated his Papers to all that visited him. While he
was putting the last hand to this System, and as an innocent man apprehensive
of no danger, he was by an Order from the King, on the 28 th of December 1661,
seized by Sir WILLIAM POULTNEY and others, and committed to the Tower of London
for treasonable Designs and Practices. He had the written sheets of his
Aphorisms then lying loose on the table before him, and understanding they
intended to carry 'em to the Council, he begged the favor that he might stitch
'em together; which was granted, and so removed with some other Papers to
Whitehall. I have that Manuscript now in my hands, and another Copy of the same
which was given me by one of his acquaintance, from both which I have printed
it among the rest of his Works. It is a complete System of Politics, and
discovers the true Springs of the rise, temper, and dissolution of all sorts of
Governments, in a very brief and perspicuous manner.

32. HE had no time given him to take leave of any body, but was straight
conveyed to the Tower, where none were allowed to com to his sight or speech.
His Sisters were inconsolable, and the more so, the less they knew what was
laid to their Brother's charge. One of them, who on another occasion had
experienced the King's favor, threw her self now at his feet, and petitioned
him to have compassion on her Brother, who through a great mistake was fallen
under his Majesty's displeasure: for as she was sure that none of his Subjects
exceded his Loyalty, so his Majesty might see he was not the man they designed,
since the Warrant was for Sir JAMES HARRINGTON, whereas her Brother was never
honored with such a Title by his Majesty's Ancestors, and he would not have
accepted it from OLIVER. To this the King made answer, that tho they might be
mistaken in his Title, he doubted he might be found more guilty of the Crimes
alleged against him, than he wished any Brother of hers to be. Then she pressed
he might be examined before his Majesty, or be brought to a speedy trial.
Shortly after my Lord LAUDERDALE, Sir GEORGE CARTERET, and Sir EDWARD WALKER
were sent to the Tower to question him about a Plot which, they said, he had
contrived against his Majesty's Person and Government. At this he was
extraordinarily revived, not being able to divine before the cause of his
Confinement, and knowing himself wholly innocent of this Charge. He found means
to transmit a Copy of his Examination to his Sisters, giving 'em leave to
publish it, which was never hitherto don, and is as follows.

33. THE Examination of JAMES HARRINGTON, taken in the Tower of London by the
Earl of LAUDERDALE, Sir GEORGE CARTERET, and Sir EDWARD WALKER. LORD
LAUDERDALE. Sir, I have heretofore accounted it an honor to be your Kinsman,
but am now sorry to see you upon this occasion; very sorry I assure you.


HARRINGTON. My Lord, seeing this is an occasion. I am glad to see you upon
this occasion. Which said, the Commissioners sat down; and Mr. HARRINGTON
standing before my Lord, he began in this manner:


Lord. SIR, the King thinks it strange that you, who have so eminently appeared
in Principles contrary to his Majesty's Government, and the Laws of this
Nation, should ever since he came over live so quiet and unmolested, and yet
should be so ungrateful. Were you disturbed? were you so much as affronted,
that you should enter into such desperate practices?


Har. MY Lord, when I know why this is said, I shall know what to say.


Lord. WELL then, without any longer preamble, will you answer me ingenuously,
and as you are a Gentleman, to what I have to propose?


Har. MY Lord, I value the asseveration (as I am a Gentleman) as high as any
man, but think it an asseveration too low upon this occasion; wherefore, with
your leave, I shall make use of some greater asseveration.


Lord. FOR that do as you see good: do you know Mr. WILDMAN?


Har. MY Lord, I have some acquaintance with him.


Lord. WHEN did you see him?


Har. MY Lord, he and I have not bin in one house together these two years.


Lord. WILL you say so?


Har. YES, my Lord.


Lord. WHERE did you see him last?


Har. ABOUT a year ago I met him in a street that gos to Drurylane.


Lord. DID you go into no house?


Har. NO, my Lord.


Sir G. Carteret. That Is strange!


Lord. COM, this will do you no good: Had not you, in March last, meetings with
him in Bowstreet in Coventgarden? where there were about twenty more of you;
where you made a Speech about half an hour long, that they should lay by
distinguishing Names, and betake themselves together into one Work, which was
to dissolve this Parliament, and bring in a new one, or the old one again. Was
not this meeting adjourned from thence to the Mill Bank? were not you there
also?


Har. MY Lord, you may think, if these things be true, I have no refuge but to
the mercy of God and of the King.


Lord. TRUE.


Har. WELL then, my Lord, solemnly and deliberatly, with my eyes to Heaven, I
renounce the mercy of God and the King, if any of this be true, or if ever I
thought or heard of this till now that you tell it me.


Sir G. C. THIS is strange!


Lord. DO you know BAREBONES?


Har. YES, my Lord.


Lord. WHEN did you see him?


Har. I THINK that I have called at his house or shop thrice in my life.


Lord. HAD you never any meetings with him since the King came over?


Har. NO, my Lord.


Sir G. C. THIS is strange!


Lord. DO you know Mr. NEVIL?


Har. VERY well, my Lord.


Lord. WHEN did you see him?


Har. MY Lord, I seldom used to visit him; but when he was in Town, he used to
see me at my house every evening, as duly almost as the day went over his head.


Lord. WERE you not with him at some public meeting?


Har. MY Lord, the publickest meeting I have bin with him at, was at dinner at
his own lodging, where I met Sir BERNARD GASCOIN, and I think Col. LEG.


Sir Edw. Walker. THEY were good safe company.


Lord. WHAT time was it?


Har. IN Venison time I am sure, for we had a good Venison pasty.


Lord. DO you know one PORTMAN?


Har. NO, my Lord, I never heard of his name before.


Sir G. C. THIS is strange!


Lord. COM, deal ingenuously, you had better confess the things.


Har. MY Lord, you do not look upon me (for I saw he did not firmly) I pray
look upon me. Do you not know an innocent face from a guilty one? com, you do,
my Lord, every one dos: My Lord, you are great Men, you com from the King, you
are the Messengers of Death.


Lord. IS that a small matter? (at which my Lord gave a shrug.)


Har. IF I be a Malefactor, I am no old Malefactor: why am not I pale? why do
not I tremble? why dos not my tongue falter? why have you not taken me
tripping? My Lord, these are unavoidable symtoms of guilt. Do you find any such
thing in me?


Lord. NO (which he spoke with a kind of amazement) and then added, I have said
all that I think I have to say.


Har. MY Lord, but I have not.


Lord. COM then.


Har. THIS plainly is a practice, a wicked practice, a practice for innocent
Blood; and as weak a one as it is wicked. Ah, my Lord, if you had taken half
the pains to examine the Guilty that you have don to examine the Innocent, you
had found it; it could not have escaped you. Now, my Lord, consider if this be
a practice, what kind of persons you are that are thus far made instrumental in
the hands of wicked men. Nay, whither will wickedness go? Is not the King's
Authority (which should be sacred) made instrumental? My Lord, for your own
sake, the King's sake, for the Lord's sake, let such Villanys be found out and
punished. At this my Lord LAUDERDALE, as was thought somewhat out of
countenance, rose up; and fumbling with his hand upon the Table, said:


Lord. WHY if it be as you say, they deserve punishment enough, but otherwise
look it will com severely upon you.


Har. MY Lord, I accepted of that condition before.


Lord. COM, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, it is late.


Har. MY Lord, now if I might I could answer the Preamble.


Lord. COM, say; and so he sat down again.


Har. MY Lord, in the Preamble you charge me with being eminent in Principles
contrary to the King's Government, and the Laws of this Nation. Some, my Lord,
have aggravated this, saying, that I being a private man have bin so mad as to
meddle with Politics: what had a private man to do with Government? My Lord,
there is not any public Person, not any Magistrate, that has written in the
Politics worth a button. All they that have bin excellent in this way, have bin
private men, as private men, my Lord, as my self. There is PLATO, there is
ARISTOTLE, there is LIVY, there is MACCHIAVEL. My Lord, I can sum up
ARISTOTLE'S Politics in a very few words; he says there is the barbarous
Monarchy (such a one where the People have no Votes in making the Laws) he says
there is the Heroic Monarchy (such a one where the People have their Votes in
making the Laws) and then he says there is Democracy; and affirms that a man
cannot be said to have Liberty, but in a Democracy only.

MY Lord LAUDERDALE, who thus far had bin very attentive, at this showed some
impatience.


Har. I SAY, ARISTOTLE says so; I have not said so much. And under what Prince
was it? Was it not under ALEXANDER, the greatest Prince then in the World? I
beseech you, my Lord, did ALEXANDER hang up ARISTOTLE, did he molest him? LIVY
for a Commonwealth is one of the fullest Authors; did not he write under
AUGUSTUS CAESAR? did CAESAR hang up LIVY, did he molest him? MACCHIAVEL what a
Commonwealthsman was he? but he wrote under the Medici when they were Princes
in Florence; did they hang up MACCHIAVEL, or did they molest him? I have don no
otherwise than as the greatest Politicians, the King will do no otherwise than
as the greatest Princes. But, my Lord, these Authors had not that to say for
themselves that I have; I did not write under a Prince, I wrote under a
Usurper, OLIVER. He having started up into the Throne, his Officers (as
pretending to be for a Commonwealth) kept a murmuring, at which he told them
that he knew not what they meant, nor themselves; but let any of them show him
what they meant by a Commonwealth (or that there was any such thing) they
should see that he sought not himself: the Lord knew he sought not himself, but
to make good the Cause. Upon this some sober men came to me and told me, if any
man in England could show what a Commonwealth was, it was my self. Upon this
persuasion I wrote; and after I had written, OLIVER never answered his Officers
as he had don before, therefore I wrote not against the King's Government. And
for the Law, if the Law could have punished me, OLIVER had don it; therefore my
Writing was not obnoxious to the Law. After OLIVER the Parliament said they were
a Commonwealth; I said they were not, and proved it: insomuch that the
Parliament accounted me a Cavalier, and one that had no other design in my
writing, than to bring in the King; and now the King first of any man makes me
a Roundhead.


Lord. THESE things are out of doors; if you be no Plotter, the King dos not
reflect upon your Writings.

AND so rising up, they went out: my Lord being at the head of the stairs, I
said to him, My Lord, there is one thing more; you tax me with Ingratitude to
the King, who had suffered me to live undisturbed: truly, my Lord, had I bin
taken right by the King, it had (by this Example already given) bin no more
than my due. But I know well enough I have bin mistaken by the King; the King
therefore taking me for no Friend, and yet using me not as an Enemy, is such a
thing as I have mentioned to all I have conversed with, as a high Character of
Ingenuity and Honor in the King's Nature.


Lord. I AM glad you have had a sense of it; and so went down.


Har. MY Lord, it is my duty to wait on you no farther.


34. NOTWITHSTANDING the apparent Innocence of our Author, he was still
detained a close Prisoner; and Chancellor HIDE, at a Conference of the Lords
and Commons, charged him with being concerned in a Plot, whereof one and thirty
persons were the chief m^nagers after this manner: That they met in Bowstreet
Coventgarden, in St. M^rtins le grand, at the Mill Bank, and in other places;
and that they were of seven different Partys or Interests, as three for the
Commonwealth, three for the Long Parliament, three for the City, three for the
Purchasers, three for the Disbanded Army, three for the Independents, and three
for the Fifthmonarchy men. That their first Consideration was how to agree on
the choice of Parlamentmen against the ensuing Session; and that a special care
ought to be had about Members for the City of London, as a precedent for the
rest of the Kingdom to follow, whereupon they nominated the four Members after
chosen, and now sitting in Parliament: but three of these, being then present,
stood up, and cleared themselves of this Aspersion. Their next care was to
frame a Petition to the Parliament for a preaching Ministry, and Liberty of
Conscience. Then they were to divide and subdivide themselves into several
Councils and Committees, for the better carrying on their business by
themselves or their Agents and Accomplices all over the Kingdom. In these
Meetings HARRINGTON was said to be often in the Chair; that they had taken an
Oath of Secrecy, and concerted measures for levying Men and Money.

35. THE Chancellor added, that tho he had certain Information of the times and
places of their meetings, and particularly those of HARRINGTON and WILDMAN,
they were nevertheless so fixed in their nefarious design, that none of those
they had taken would confess any thing, not so much as that they had seen or
spoken to one another at those times or places; which obstinacy, he thought,
must needs proceed from a faithfulness to their Oath. But a Committee of Lords
and Commons, after several sittings, could make nothing of this imaginary Plot,
and did not ever name our Author in all their Reports.

36. HIS Sisters in the mean time being impatient to see him, and to know his
Condition, after several fruitless Petitions, obtained an order of Council at
last to be admitted into the Tower, where they found him barbarously treated by
the Lieutenant, whom they softened into more humanity with a present of fifty
pounds under the notion of Fees. By them he delivered a Petition to the King,
importing that in the late times he was no public Person, nor acted to any
man's detriment in his Life, Body, or Estate, but on the contrary had don his
endeavors to help all persons in distress; that he had opposed the Usurper in
such a manner as was judged even by the Royalists themselves to be very much to
his disadvantage; and that it was not probable that he, who had lived so
peaceably before, would attemt any Novelty after his Majesty's Restoration:
wherefore he begged the favor of a public Trial, or a more easy confinement. But
tho he had bin now a prisoner during the space of five months, neither he nor
any on his behalf could receive an Answer to their Petitions; which made him
somewhat impatient, not so much to enjoy his Liberty, as to vindicat himself
from the base Aspersions of his Enemies. He therefore continually urged his
sister ASHTON to procure him a Trial, which she not being able to effect, he
petitioned the Parliament, showing that he had lain a close Prisoner in the
Tower for five months upon a bare suspicion of some disaffection to the
Government, which in all his Examinations did not in the least appear; and that
he hoped ever that time so to have cleared his innocence by a public Trial, as
to deserve his Liberty. But because he understood these matters were in some
measure represented to their House, he would not presume, without first making
his application to them, to sue for his freedom by other legal means. May it
therefore please this honorable House, says he, to take tender consideration of
the sufferings of an Englishman hitherto innocent; and that the long
continuance of him in prison without trial may be hereafter the case of others,
and a precedent for the like case: and that this honorable House would please
to move his Majesty that your Petitioner may be proceeded against by a legal way
of Trial, or that he may have his freedom; that so he may no longer languish in
Prison to the ruin of his Health and Estate. These are not the words of a man
conscious of Guilt, or afraid of Power.

37. HIS Sister could get no Member to deliver this Petition, or to give her
any encouragement; some alleging that she was more likely to destroy than serve
her Brother, and others that by unseasonable pressing she might precipitat his
danger; whereas if he would be patient under his sufferings, he might be safe in
his restraint. Then he advised her to move for his habeas Corpus; which at
first was flatly denied, but afterward when it was granted and duly served,
his Warder came one day to his Sisters at Westminster, and acquainted them that
between one and two a clock that morning their Brother was put on board a Ship
to be transported he knew not whither, without any time given him either to see
his Friends, or to make provision of Money, Linen, or other necessarys. Nor
could his Relations for a whole fortnight, either at the Tower or in the
Secretarys Office, learn what was become of him, till they received a note from
himself on board one of the King's Ships then lying under Hurst Castle,
informing them that he believed he was bound for Plymouth. About a month after
he sent 'em word by another letter that he was landed on a kind of Rock opposite
to Plymouth, called St. Nicholas's Island, whence he afterward had frequent
opportunitys of writing to 'em many pious and moral Admonitions, as well as
Letters of business and entertainment.

38. BUT his close restraint to this small spot of Earth, where there was no
fresh Water, and scarce any room to move his Body, quickly changed the state of
his Health; this occasioned him to petition he might be removed to Plymouth,
which was granted, his Brother WILLIAM, and his Uncle ANTHONY SAMUEL, obliging
themselves in a Bond of 5000 l. for his safe Imprisonment. Here he had not only
the liberty of walking on the Hoe, but was also used with extraordinary Respect
by the Deputy Governor of the Fort Sir JOHN SKELETON, who frequently invited him
to his Table, and much loved his Conversation. Among the other Acquaintance he
made at Plymouth, one was Dr. DUNSTAN, who advised him to take a preparation of
Guaiacum in Coffee, as a certain cure for the Scurvy, with which he was then
troubled. He drank of this Liquor in great quantitys, every morning and
evening. But after using it for some time, his Sisters, to their no small
amazement, received no more Answers to their Letters. At length Advice was
brought 'em from his Landlady, that his Fancy was much disordered, and desiring
some body might com to look after him. Immediately one of them addressed her self
to the Earl of Bath, then chief Governor of Plymouth, and informed him of his
Prisoner's sad condition. This noble Lord, who laid many Obligations on him
before, and gave frequent orders for his good Usage, went hereupon to intercede
for him with the King, representing the danger of his Life if he were not
removed from that unwholsom place to London, where he might have the Advice of
able Physicians: and the King was accordingly pleased to grant a Warrant for
his Release, since nothing appeared against him supported by good Proof or
probable Presumtions.

39. THE next day the Lady ASHTON, with another of his Sisters, took their
Journey toward Plymouth, where they found their poor Brother so transformed in
Body and Mind, that they scarce could persuade themselves it was the same
person. He was reduced to a Skeleton, not able to walk alone, slept very
little, his imagination disturbed, often fainted when he took his drink, and
yet so fond of it that he would by no means be advised to forbear it. Dr.
PRUJEAN, and other eminent Physicians, greatly blamed Dr. DUNSTAN'S
prescriptions, giving their Opinion under their hands that Guaiacum and the
other drying things, which he administered to his Patient in Coffee, were
enough of themselves to beget Melancholy or Phrenzy, where there was no
previous disposition to it. A rumor at Plymouth, that HARRINGTON had taken some
drink which would make any man mad in a month; the surliness of his Doctor, and
something blab'd by a Maid that was put against his will to attend him, made his
Sister suspect he had soul play lest he should write any more Oceanas. It Is
certain, that (tho his Recovery was never perfect) he mended finely as soon as
he was persuaded to abstain from this Liquor. In less than a month he was able
to bear the Journey to London in a Coach, where he was no sooner arrived but Sir
JOHN SKELETON, who was then in Town, paid him a visit. My Lady ASHTON
complaining to him that she had not timely notice of her Brother's Distemper,
he protested he would have sent her word of it, had not his Doctor assured him
that he only counterfeited; and yet at the same time he made him take strong
Doses of Hellebor, and God knows what besides.

40. HE past some time at Ashted in Surrey to drink the Epsomwaters, by which he
found no benefit. At London he was put wholly under the care of Doctor PRUJEAN,
who with all his Art could afford little help to the weakness of his Body, and
none at all to the disorder of his Mind, to his dying day. He was allowed to
discourse of most other things as rationally as any man, except his own
Distemper, fancying strange things in the operation of his animal Spirits,
which he thought to transpire from him in the shape of Birds, of Flys, of Bees,
or the like. And those about him reported that he talked much of good and evil
Spirits, which made them have frightful apprehensions. But he used, they said,
sometimes to argue so strenuously that this was no depraved imagination, that
his Doctor was often put to his shifts for an Answer. He would on such
occasions compare himself to DEMOCRITUS, who for his admirable discoverys in
Anatomy was reckoned distracted by his fellow Citizens, till HIPPOCRATES cured
'em of their mistake. I confess I did not know at first what to make of these
things from the informations of his Acquaintance, till I met with a Letter of
Dr. BURTHOGGE to his Sister, wherein are contained certain Querys proposed to
him by HARRINGTON, with a state of his Case written by the Doctor, who was his
intimat Friend, and a very good judge, whether considered as a Physician or a
Philosopher, as appears by his late Treatise of the Soul of the World, etc. and
as I have particular reason to affirm from his Letters to my Lady ASHTON, which
are all now before me. Among other things the Doctor says, that he ever expressed
the highest satisfaction in thinking of what he had at any time written, as the
best Service he was capable to do his Country, and sincerely intended by him to
the glory of God, which he thought in some measure to be the good of mankind: so
far was he from being under any remorse of Conscience on that score, as his ill
wishers maliciously reported. Now, tho I was somewhat staggered concerning the
nature of his Distemper by Dr. BURTHOGGE'S Letter, I grew perfectly amazed when
I found among his Papers the beginning of a little Treatise written by himself,
wherein (without raillery) he proves 'em to be all mad that thought him so with
respect to what he discoursed of Nature, which he maintained to work
mechanically or mathematically, as BELLINI, BORELLI, Dr. PITCAIRNS, and other
eminent men have since evidently shown. It appears there that his pretended
Visions of Angels and Devils were nothing else but good or bad animal Spirits,
and that his Flys and Bees were only Similitudes whereby he used to express the
various figures and forms of those Particles. I own that he might probably
enough be much decayed in his understanding, by reason of his great and long
weakness of body; but I shall never be convinced that he was delirious in that
only instance which they allege: and to satisfy the Learned in this point
(which, in my opinion, is a memorable Story that concerns 'em all) I shall
subjoin his own discourse to this History.

41. WERE he really out of order, it had bin his misfortune, not his fault, and
was the case of some of the best men that ever lived. An action that will better
persuade the world he was not truly himself, was his marrying in this
condition. The Lady was a very agreeable woman, whose Person and Conversation he
always admired; she was the Daughter of Sir MARMADUKE DORREL of
Buckinghamshire, famed for wit more than became her pretensions to good sense,
had long lived among his Relations with the respect of a Friend and a Sister;
but now would needs change the office of a voluntary Attendant for the name of
a Wife. It soon appeared that this match was not so much disinterested as she
would pretend, which occasioned some difference between 'em; but they were
quickly reconciled, and she was always treated by him afterward with the
highest Generosity, tho she did not use him so handsomely when they were both
young and healthy, and might have made a more seasonable match than at this
time. Toward his latter end he was subject to the Gout, and enjoyed little
ease, but languishing and drooping a good while, he fell at last into a Palsy,
and departed this Life at Westminster, the 11 th of September, in the Year 1677
(leaving his Estate to his Brother's Children) and lys buried there in S.
Margaret's Church, on the South side of the Altar, next to the Grave of Sir
WALTER RALEIGH, with this Inscription over him: Hic jacet JACOBUS HARRINGTON
Armiger (silius maximus natu SAPCOTIS HARRINGTON de Rand, in Com. Linc. Equitis
aurati, and JANAE uxoris ejus, siliae GULIELMI SAMUEL de Vpton in Com.
Northamton. Militis) qui obiit septimo die Septembris, aetatis suae sexagesimo
sexto, anno Dom. 1677. Nec virtus, nec animi dotes (arrha licet ^terni in
animam amoris Dei) corruptione eximere queant corpus.

42. THUS died JAMES HARRINGTON, whose Name is sure to live so long as Learning
and Liberty bear any Reputation in England. But tho he did not think so highly
of himself, yet he was strongly persuaded that his Oceana was the Model of an
equal Commonwealth, or a Government wherein no Party can be at variance with or
gaining ground upon another, and never to be conquered by any foren Power;
whence he concluded it must needs be likewise immortal: for as the People, who
are the materials, never die; so the Form, which is the Motion, must (without
some opposition) be endless. The Immortality of a Commonwealth is such a new and
curious Problem, that I could not assure my self of the Reader's pardon,
without giving him some brief account of the Arguments for it, and they run much
after this manner. The perfection of Government is such a Libration in the
frame of it, that no Man or Men under it can have the interest, or (having the
interest) can have the power to disturb it with Sedition. This will be granted
at first sight, and HARRINGTON appeals to all Mankind, whether his Oceana
(examined by this principle) be not such an equal Government, completely and
entirely framed in all its necessary Orders or fundamental Laws, without any
contradiction to it self, to Reason, or Truth. If this be so (as the contrary
dos not yet appear) then it has no internal cause of Dissolution, and
consequently such a Government can never be ruined any way; for he further
shows (what all History cannot contradict) that a Commonwealth, if not first
broken or divided by Factions at home, was never conquered by the Arms of any
Monarch from the beginning of the World to this day: but the Commonwealth of
Oceana having no Factions within, and so not to be conquered from without, is
therefore an equal, perfect, and immortal Government. For want of this equality
in the frame he clearly demonstrats how the Commonwealths of Rome, Athens, and
others, came to be destroyed by their contending and ove^topping partys; whereas
that of Venice can never change or finish. He proves that this Equality is yet
more wanting in Monarchys; for in absolute Monarchy (as that of the Turk, for
example) the Janizarys have frequent interest, and perpetual power to raise
Sedition to the ruin of the Emperor, and, when they please, of the Empire: This
cannot be said of the Armies of Oceana, and therefore an absolute Monarchy is no
perfect Government. In what they improperly call a mixed Monarchy the Nobility
are sometimes putting Chains on the King, at other times domineering over the
People; the King is either oppressing the People without control, or contending
with the Nobility as their Protectors; and the People are frequently in arms
against both King and Nobility, till at last one of the three Estates becoms
master of the other two, or till they so mutually weaken one another that
either they fall a prey to some more potent Government, or naturally grow into a
Commonwealth: therefore mixed Monarchy is not a perfect Government; and if no
such Partys or Contentions can possibly exist in Oceana, then on the contrary
is it a most equal, perfect, and immortal Commonwealth, Quod erat demonstrandum.

43. IT will not be objected to the disparagement of this Model, that it was no
better received by OLIVER CROMWELL; nor is it fair to judge of things at any time
by their Success. If it should be said, that, after the expiration of his
Tyranny, the People did not think fit to establish it; I shall only answer,
that all the Attemts which have bin used for introducing Arbitrary Power have
proved as unfortunat, whereby it appears at least that the character which
TACITUS gave the Romans of his time, may as well agree to the People of
England: and it is, that They are able to bear neither absolute Liberty, nor
absolute Slavery.

CONCLUSION.
I AM disposed to believe that my Lady ASHTON'S memory failed her, when she
said that her Brother was at Rome during the Jubilee; for as Chronology seems
to contradict it, so she might easily mistake the Jubilee for the Ceremony of
consecrating Candles, or any other solemnity; his remarks being equally
applicable to all those of the Popish Church. But as to the whole of this
History, tho it be managed with due moderation, and contains nothing but bare
matters of fact, or such observations as they naturally suggest; yet I was
sensible before I wrote it, that I could not escape the displeasure of three
sorts of persons: such as have resolved to be angry at whatever I do; such as
neither rightly understand what is written by me nor any body else; and those
who, without any particular spite against an Author, yet to get a penny will
pretend to answer any book that makes a considerable figure. Therefore I find my
self obliged beforehand to disclaim all explanations made of my meaning, beyond
what is warranted by the express words of my Book; having constantly indeavor'd
not only to write intelligibly, but so as that none can possibly misunderstand
me. I renounce all the designs that may be imputed to me by such as are so far
from being admitted into my secret, that they were never in my company; but I
specially disown whatever is said by those who first presume to divine my
thoughts, and then to vent their own rash conjectures as my undoubted opinions.
I slight their artifice who, when unable to object against the point in
question, labor to engage their Adversary in matters wholly besides the
purpose; and when their Evasions have no better fortune than their Attacks,
fall to railing against his Person, because they cannot confute his Arguments.
I am as much above the malice of some, as they are below my resentments; and I
would at any time choose to be rather the object of their Envy than of their
Favor: but as I am far from thinking my self exemt from all the indiscretions
of Youth, or the frailtys of human Nature; so I am not conscious of
entertaining higher thoughts of my own performances than are becoming, or
meaner of other men's than they deserve. I know that to enterprise any thing out
of the common road is to undergo undoubted envy or peril; and that he, who is
not beforehand resolved to bear opposition, will never do any great or
beneficial exploit: yet it is no small encouragement to me, that from the
beginning of the world to this time not a single instance can be produced of
one who either was or would be eminent, but he met with Enemies to his person
and fame. Notwithstanding this consideration be just, yet if I write any thing
hereafter (either as obliged by Duty, or to amuze idle time) I have determined
it shall not concern personal disputes, or the narrow interests of jarring
Factions, but something of universal benefit, and which all sides may
indifferently read. Without such provocations as no man ought to endure, this
is my fixed resolution; and I particularly desire that none may blame me for
acting otherwise, who force me to do so themselves. I shall never be wanting to
my own defense, when either the Cause or the Aggressor deserves it: for as to
those Authors who conceal their names, if they write matters of fact it is a
sign they cannot make them good; and all men are agreed to reject their
Testimony, except such as resolve to deny others common justice: but the ill
opinion of these prejudiced persons can no more injure any man, than their good
opinion will do him honor. Besides other reasons of mentioning my supposed
designs, one is to disabuse several people who (as I am told) are made to
believe that in the History of SOCRATES I draw a Parallel between that
Philosopher and JESUS CHRIST. This is a most scandalous and unchristian
calumny, as will more fully appear to the world whenever the Book it self is
published: for that I have bin some time about it, I freely avow; yet not in the
manner those officious Informers report, but as becoms a disinterested
Historian, and a friend to all mankind.

The Inscription on the Monument of Sir JAMES HARRINGTON and his three Sons, at
Exton in Rutlandshire.
HERE lies Sir James Harrington of Exton Knight. with And Sister to Sir Philip
Sidney Knight.
Lucy his Wife, Daughter to Sir William Sidney Knight. by whom he had 18 Children,
whereof three Sons and 8 Daughters married as follows.

THE eldest Son, Sir Who was afterward created Ld Harrington, and his Lady was
Governess to the Queen of Bohemia. His Family is extinct as to Heirs Male: One
of his Daughters was married to the Earl of Bedford, and was Groom of the Stole
to Q. Ann. The other was married to a Scotch Lord whose name was Lord Bruce
Earl of Elgin; his Grandson now Lord Alisbury.
John, married the Heiress of Robert Keylwoy Surveyor of the Court of Wards and
Liverys. The 2 d Son, Sir Who happened to be President of Ireland; and from him
descended my Lady Fretchavil's Father, my Lady Morison, and my Lord Falkland's
Lady.
Henry, took to Wife one of the Coheirs of Francis Agar, one of his Majesty's
Privy Council in Ireland. the 3 d Son, James. Afterward Baronet: To him were
born Sir Edward Harrington, Sir Sapcotes Harrington, and Mr. John Harrington;
who had Issue both Sons and Daughters.
Harrington Esquire had to Wife one of the Coheirs of Robert Sapcotes Esquire. The
eldest Daughter, Elizabeth, was married to Sir Edward Who was Father to the
Lord Montague, the Earl of Manchester, and Lord Privy Seal; and Sir Sidney
Montague, who was afterward created Earl of Sandwich; and to the Earl of
Rutlana's Lady, and Judge Montague.
Montague Knight. The 2 d, Frances, to Sir William Who was afterward created Lord
Chichester and Earl of Dunsmore; and married one of his Daughters to the Earl
of Southamton, by whom he had the present Lady Northumberland. And his other
Daughter married her self to Col. Vill^rs, and is now Governess to the Lady
Mary the Duke of York's eldest Daughter.
Lee Knight. The 3 d, Margaret, to Don Which Dukedom afterward fell to him; and by
this Lady he had one sole Daughter and Heir, who is said to have married the
Duke of Ferio, and by him to have had one Daughter, who is married to a King of
Portugal.
Bonitto de Sisnores of Spain, of the Family of the Dukes of Frantasquo. The 4
th, Katherine, to Sir Edward Of Lincolnshire, the King's Standardbearer.
Dimmock Knight. The 5 th, Mary, to Sir Edward An ancient noble Family in Kent.
Wing^ield Knight. The 6 th, Maball, to Sir Andrew Now Lord Cambden, Owner of the
place where this Monument is.
^oell Knight. The 7 th, Surah, was married to the Lord Hastings, Heir to the Earl
of Huntingdon. The 8 th, Theodosia, One of whose Daughters married the Earl of
Hume in Scotland, and had by him two Daughters; one married my Lord Morris,
and the other my Lord Maitland now Duke of Lauderdale. The other Daughter of my
Lady Dudley was Heir to the Honor of Dudley Castle; of whose Issue by the
Mother's side is the present Lord Dudley.
to the Lord Dudley of Dudley Castle.

THE same Sir James and Lucy were married fifty years: She died first, in the
72 d year of her Age; he shortly after yielded to Nature, being 80 years old,
in the year of our Lord 1591, and of Queen Elizabeth's Reign 34. their Son
James being made sole Executor to them both; who, that he might as well perform
to his Parents their Rites, as leave a Testimony of his own Piety to Posterity,
has erected and dedicated this Monument to their eternal Memory.

The Mechanics of Nature: OR An Imperfect Treatise written by JAMES HARRINGTON
during his sickness, to prove against his Doctors that the Notions he had of
his own Distemper were not, as they alleged, Hypocondriac Whimsys or Delirious
Fancys.
The PREFACE.
HAVING bin about nine months, some say in a Disease, I in a Cure, I have bin
the wonder of Physicians, and they mine; not but that we might have bin
reconciled, for Books (I grant) if they keep close to Nature must be good ones,
but I deny that Nature is bound to Books. I am no studied Naturalist, having
long since given over that Philosophy as inscrutable and uncertain: for thus I
thought with my self; Nature, to whom it is given to work as it were under her
Veil or behind the Curtain, is the Art of God: now if there be Arts of Men who
have wrought openly enough to the understanding (for example that of TITIAN)
nevertheless whose excellency I shall never reach; How shall I thus, sticking
in the Bark at the Arts of Men, be able to look thence to the Roots, or dive
into the Abyss of things in the Art of God? And nevertheless, Si placidum caput
undis extulerit, should Nature afford me a sight of her, I do not think so
meanly of my self but that I would know her as soon as another, tho more
learned man. Laying therefore Arts wholly, and Books almost all aside, I shall
truly deliver to the world how I felt and saw Nature; that is, how she came
first into my senses, and by the senses into my understanding. Yet for the sake
of my Readers, and also for my own, I must invert the order of my Discourse;
For theirs, because, till I can speak to men that have had the same Sensations
with my self, I must speak to such as have a like understanding with others:
For my own, because, being like in this Discourse to be the Monky that played
at Chess with his Master, I have need of some Cushion on my head, that being in
all I have spoken hitherto more laid at than my Reason. My Discourse then is to
consist of two parts: the first, in which I appeal to his understanding who
will use his Reason, is a Platform of Nature drawn out in certain Aphorisms;
and the second, in which I shall appeal to his senses who in a Disease very
common will make further trial, is a Narrative of my Case.

A Platform or Scheme of Nature.
1. NATURE is the Fiat, the Breath, and in the whole Sphere of her activity the
very Word of God.

2. SHE is a Spirit, that same Spirit of God which in the beginning moved upon
the Waters, his plastic Virtue, the (...).

3. SHE is the Providence of God in his Government of the things of this world,
even that Providence of which it is said, that without it a Sparrow cannot fall
to the ground, Mat. 10. 29.

4. SHE is the Anima Mundi, or Soul of the World; Principio Coelum, ac Terras,
camposque liquentes,
Lucentemque globum Lunae, Titaniaque astra
SPIRITUS intus alit, totamque effusa per artus
Men's agitat molem, and magno se corpore miscet.
Indehominum pecudumque genus, vitaeque volantum,
Et quae marmoreo fert monstra sub aequore pontus.
Igneus est ollis vigor, and coelestis Origo
Seminibus, quantum non noxia corpora tardant,
Terrenique hebetant artus, moribundaque membra.
Hinc metuunt, cupiuntque, dolent, g^udentque, neque auras
Dispiciunt clausae tenebris and carcere caeco. Virgil. Aen. l. 6.


5. SHE is infallible: for the Law of an infallible Lawgiver must needs be
infallible, and Nature is the Law as well as the Art of God.

6. THO Nature be not fallible, yet she is limited, and can do nothing above
her matter; therefore no Miracles are to be expected from her.

7. AS Defects, Redundancys, or such other rude qualitys of matter, ought not
to be attributed to the Artificer or his Art; so neither is Nature, or the Art
of God, to be charged with Monsters or imperfections, the things so reputed
being the regular Effects both of the Matter and the Art that forms it.

8. NATURE is not only a Spirit, but is furnished, or rather furnishes her self
with innumerable ministerial Spirits, by which she operats on her whole matter,
as the Universe; or on the separat parts, as man's Body.

9. THESE ministerial Spirits are certain Ethereal Particles invisibly mixed
with elementary Matter; they work ordinarily unseen or unfelt, and may be
called Animal Spirits.

10. AS in sound Bodies there must needs be GOOD SPIRITS managing the Economy
of Health; so in unsound Bodies, as in chronical Diseases, there must needs be
EVIL SPIRITS managing the Economy of Distempers.

11. ANIMAL Spirits, whether in the Universe, or in man's Body, are good or
evil Spirits, according to the Matter wherein and whereof they are generated.

12. WHAT is a good Spirit to one Creature, is evil to another, as the food of
some Beasts is poison to man; whence the gentleness of the Dove, and the
fierceness of the Hauk.

13. BETWEEN the Animal Spirits of the whole or Universe, and of the parts, as
of man's Body, there is an intercourse or cooperation which preserves the
common order of Nature unseen; and in some things often foretells or discovers
it, which is what we call Prefages, Signs, and Prodigys.

14. THE work of good Spirits, as Health for example, is felicitous, and as it
were Angelical; and that of evil Spirits, as in Diseases, is noxious, and as it
were diabolical, a sort of fascination or witchcraft.

15. ALL Fermentation is caused by unlocking, unbinding, or letting loose of
Spirits; as all Attenuation is occasioned by stirring, working, or provoking of
Spirits; and all Transpiration by the emission or sending abroad of Spirits.

16. NOTHING in Nature is annihilated or lost, and therefore whatever is
transpir'd, is received and put to some use by the Spirits of the Universe.

17. SCARCE any man but at some time or other has felt such a motion as Country
people call the Lifeblood; if in his Ey, perhaps there has flown out something
like a dusky cloud, which is a transpiration or emission of Spirits; perhaps as
it were a flash of Fire, which also was an emission of Spirits, but differenced
according to the matter wherein and whereof they were wrought, as Choler, etc.

18. ANIMAL Spirits are ordinarily emitted streaking themselves into various
figures, answerable to little arms or hands, by which they work out the matter
by Transpiration, no otherwise than they unlocked it, and wrought it up in the
body by attenuation, that is, by manufacture: for these operations are
perfectly mechanical, and downright handywork as any in our shops or workhouses.

19. IF we find Nature in her operations not only using hands, but likewise
something analogous to any Art, Tool, Engine, or Instrument which we have or use,
it cannot be said that Nature had these things of men, because we know that men
must have these things of Nature.

20. IN Attenuation and Transpiration, where the matter of the Disease is not
only copious but inveterat, the Work will not as I may say be inarticulat, as
in the trembling called the Lifeblood; but articulat, and obviously so to the
sense of the Patient by immediate strokes of the Humor upon his Organs, which
sometimes may be strong enough (tho not ordinarily) to reach another.

21. NATURE can work no otherwise than as God taught her, nor any man than as
she taught him.

22. WHEN I see a curious piece from the hands of an Apprentice, I cannot
imagine that his Master was a bungler, or that he wrought not after the same
manner as his Servant learned of him; which I apply to God and Nature.

23. PHYSICIANS sometimes take the PRUDENCE of Nature for the PHRENSY of the
Patient.

24. IF any man can show why these things are not thus, or that they may be
otherwise, then I have don, and there is said in this part already more than
enough; but if they can neither show that these things are not thus, nor know
how they should be otherwise, then so far I stand my ground, and am now armed
for my Narrative Cap a pe.

IT IS a thousand pitys that we have not this Narrative, to which no doubt he
applied these Principles, and thence formed the state of his Distemper. But the
Manuscript containing no more, we may however evidently conclude that the
Writer of it was not so greatly disordered in his thoughts, which are for the
most part very just, and all as close and coherent as any man's.

ERRATA.
Preface. Page 8. line 2. for too, read two.

Life. P. 21. To the other words there explained add Hemisua the River Trent,
and Alma the Palace of St. James.

Works. P. 5. l. 32. r. opac. P. 35. l. 11. f. Assertors, r. Assertress. P. 48.
l. 5. r. than to. P. 54. l. 11. r. Lycians. P. 106. l. 17. r. Tarentum. P. 107.
l. 28. f. My Lords, other, r. My Lord's other. P. 110. l. 19. r. Brokage. P.
267. l. 37. f. poisoning, r. poising.

THE Grounds and Reasons OF MONARCHY Considered: And Exemplified in the Scottish
Line, out of their own best Authors and Records.

THE PREFACE.
THERE is nothing that has more confounded Knowledge among men, than the
reciprocal violences of the Understanding and the Will; or, to speak plainly,
the Passion of the one and Blindness of the other: Since some by chance or
interest take up Principles which they force the Understanding by strained
Arguments to maintain; others by the habit of some Opinion so bewitch the Will
into confederacy, that they can never quit it, even after confutation. To
remedy this Disorder, since I had resolved with my self to say something to this
Point (which tho it be but as a small Wyre, yet the great weight of civil
Felicity lys upon it) I knew no better Method than to take the Scales from the
Eyes of the Understanding, and to show the Will how better to bring about her
great Design of Good. And in the prosecution of this, I would not skirmish with
every Argument, which had bin a thing of immense slavery, and not for every Ey;
but I chose rather to strike at the Foundations, that the Understanding might
lose its Passion, and more freely consider upon what Quicksands they lay. And
in this I needed not to be positive, because I undertake a Task in which most
Men are commonly succesful, that is, to support Error rather than to assert
Truth. Hence I consider Kingship simply, not troubling my self to maintain any
other Form, or to consider Oaths, Ends, Changes of Government, or the
particular Necessity or Reasons of Safety: they being distinct Considerations
and Subjects by themselves. Now if this negative Method satisfys not, I see no
such great cause to be discouraged; for, I confess, I do not perceive it so
easy a thing to discover an Error; and I had rather tell a Man he was out of
the way, than by endeavoring to bring him to the end of his Journey, lead him
further about. And it is my opinion, that as Skepticism is not only useless,
but dangerous; if in setting our Thoughts in a posture of Defense, it makes us
absolutely wavering and incredulous: yet had I rather be skeptical in my
Opinion, than maintain it upon grounds taken upon trust, and not demonstrated.

THE Second Part is merely an instance accommodated to the Arguments of the
First, wherein I would not be understood to be a Writer of an Epitome (for I
have other Employments for my Time and Thoughts, and those nobler too) but to
set down a true Series by way of Example; and therefore I was only to note
Accesses to Government, and Recesses from it, with the Effects proceeding from
the Persons of Governors. And here as I needed not much trouble Chronology: So
lest it might be a bare Sceleton, I sprinkled some Observations that came to
hand, and seem to afford either Pleasure or Use. Thus much, lest I might be
misunderstood, I thought necessary to premise.

THE Grounds and Reasons OF MONARCHY.
The First Part.
I HAVE often thought it strange, that among all the Governments, either past
or present, the Monarchical should so far in Extent and Number excede the
Popular, as that they could never yet com into comparison. I could never be
persuaded but it was more happy for a People to be disposed of by a number of
Persons jointly interested and concerned with them, than to be numbered as the
Herd and Inheritance of One, to whose Lust and Madness they were absolutely
subject; and that any Man of the weakest Reason and Generosity would not rather
choose for his Habitation that spot of Earth where there was access to Honor by
Virtue, and no Worth could be excluded, rather than that where all Advancement
should proceed from the Will of one scarcely hearing and seeing with his own
Organs, and gained for the most part by means lewd and indirect: and all this
in the end to amount to nothing else but a more splendid and dangerous Slavery.
To clear this Point, I considered how inscrutably Providence carrys on the
turns and stops of all Governments, so that most People rather found than made
them. The Constitutions of Men, some not fit to be Masters of their Liberty, some
not capable, some not willing; the Ambition of settled Tyrants, who breaking
their own Bonds have brought in violent Alterations; and lastly, civil Discord,
have either corrupted or altered better Settlements.

BUT these are Observations rather than Arguments, and relate to Fact rather
than Reason. That which astonished me most was to see those of this Heroic and
Learned Age, not only not rising to Thoughts of Liberty, but instead thereof
foolishly turning their Wits and Swords against themselves in the maintenance
of them whose Slaves they are: and indeed they can be no weak Causes that
produce so long and settled a Distemper; tho some of those I mentioned, if not
most of them, are the true ones.

HE knows nothing that knows not how superstitiously the generality of Mankind
is given to retain Traditions, and how pertinacious they are in the maintenance
of their first Prejudices, insomuch that a Discovery or more refined Reason is
as insupportable to them, as the Sun is to an Ey newly brought out of Darkness.
Hence Opiniativeness (which is commonly proportioned to their Ignorance) and a
generous Obstinacy sometimes to Death and Ruin. So that it is no wonder if we
see many Gentlemen, whose Education enabled them only to use their Senses and
first Thoughts, so dazzled with the Splendour of a Court, prepossest with the
Affection of a Prince, or bewitched with some subdolous Favor, that they choose
rather any hazard than the Enchantment should be dissolved. Others, perhaps a
degree above these, yet in respect of some Title stuck upon the Family (which
has bin as fortunat a Mystery of Kingcraft as any other) or in reverence to some
glorious former Achievements (minding not that in all these cases the People
are the only effective means, and the King only imaginary) think they should
degenerat from Bravery in bringing on a Change. Others are witheld by Sloth and
Timorousness, either not daring, or unwilling to be happy; some looking no
further than their private Welfare, indifferent at the multiplication of public
Evils; others (and these the worst of all) out of a pravity of Nature
sacrificing to their Ambition and Avarice, and in order to that, following any
Power, concurring with any Machinations, and supporting their Authors: while
Princes themselves (trained up in these Arts, or receiving them by Tradition)
know how to wind all their humors to their own advantage, now foisting the
Divinity of their Titles into Pulpits, now amuzing the People with Pomp and
Shows, now diverting their hot Spirits to some unprofitable foren War (making
way to their accursed ends of Revenge or Glory, with the effusion of that Blood
which should be as dear to them as their own) now stroking the People with some
feeble but enforced Law, for which notwithstanding they will be paid (and it is
observed, the most notorious Tyrants have taken this Course) now giving up the
eminentest of their Ministers (which they part with as indifferently as their
Robes) to the Rage and Fury of the People; so that they are commanded and
condemned by the same Mouth, and the credulous and ignorant, believing their
King divinely set over them, sit still, and by degrees grow into Quiet and
Admiration, especially if lul'd asleep with some small continuance of Peace (be
it never so injust, unsound, or dangerous) as if the Body Politic could not
languish of an internal Disease, tho its Complexion be fresh and cheerful.

THOSE are the Reasons which (if I conceive aright) have stupify'd the less
knowing part of Mankind. Now, how the more searching part have soodly
miscarried, will fall under consideration.

FIRST then, we need not take the pains to demonstrat how easy a thing it is
for men of Acuteness, not conversant in Civil Affairs, not only to miscarry in
the Apprehension, but even in their Judgment of them: for they, instead of
bringing the Series and Reason of things into Rule and Method, use on the
contrary to measure them by their own presupposed Speculation; and by that
means become incapable of weighing rightly the various Incidences and
Circumstances of Business. For it is to be observed, that the Theorems of no
Art or Profession are either more easily found, or of more difficult practice
than those of Policy; so that it is no wonder if Men merely contemplative, fail
so often in the very laying of Grounds, as we shall anon* instance. Now how
fruitful Daintys Error and Absurdity are, we all know. But more especially the
Contentions of contemplative Men are most numerous, various, and endless; for
wrangling is with them an Art, and they are indu'd with that ungenerous Shame,
never to acknowledge their Mistakes. Moreover, their Principles are most times
ill-grounded, and it is to be feared that in their Superstructures they as
often call in their Imaginations as their Judgment to frame Arguments. Besides,
these men fighting only with Pen, Ink and Paper, seldom arrive at a means to
decide the Quarrel, by which he that gains the last word is supposed Conqueror;
or the other leaves almost as inglorious a Conquest to the Victor, as if he had
bin overthrown.

THAT which I would infer from all this, is, that the Generality of speculative
Men, for the most part guiding their Understandings by those Notions which they
find in Books, fall not seldom by this means into considerable Errors. For all
Books, those I mean that are human, and fall directly under our Consideration,
either lay down practical Things and Observations of Kingship, or some general
and universal Notions, or else controversially assert Monarchy against some
Opposers. Now in the two latter there are generally found two grand and
insupportable Fallacys, the first whereof is, that they fraudulently converse in
Generals, and (to borrow the School-terms) speak of that in the Abstract which
they should do in the Concrete: As for example, where they should assert the
particular Right of this or that Prince, they cunningly or ignorantly lay out
most of their Discourse about Monarchy in general, and often weary and amaze
the Dispute before they com to the true ground and stating of the Quarrel,
whereby the Readers (diverted by such Prepossession, and entangled by general
Notions of Authority, Power and Government) seldom descend into the
consideration of Particulars, where the great Scruple and Difficulty for the
most part lys. So that any King (be his Access to the Government never so
fraudulent and unjustifiable) coms to be looked on as sacred, authoritative,
and by degrees begins not to blush at the Attributes of Sacred Majesty, Grace,
and Highness, or any other Terms that the servil Flattery and witty Barbarity
of Courtiers can give to them: nay, some even of the wickedest of the Roman
Emperors could be content to be saluted with Perennitys and Divinitys; whereas
if Men would call their Reason into counsel, they might find that these blazing
Stars were opace Bodies, and did shine only by Reflection: These Men having no
more Luster than either the Cabal of their own state and distance, or the
wretched Imposition upon the People, casts on them. For did Men divest the
Authority from the Person, they would then commonly find it inconsiderable, if
not positively evil. And again, consider Authority in it self as a thing fixed,
real, immutable, and (when justly administered) sacred, they might find, that
granting a Prince to be the most regular, just Person in all the world, yet
many Men as good joined with him, entrusted, and concurring to the same end,
might do much more good; and that to deny this, were to be as irrational as to
deny that one Person could do any good at all. But however, this I take to be
certain and demonstrable out of their own Principles, that Kings being only to
be considered in respect of the Trust and Power lodged in them, a number of Men
by as just means (not to say better) invested with the same Trust and Power,
are every jot as sacred, and of as much Divine Right as any Monarch is, the
Power being essentially the same, united or divided, as if a Commission be to
one or three. It will follow then, that Republics may be as just and
authoritative as Kingships; and then their radical Argument of the Jure Divino
of Kingship is wholly enervated, and the other rendered equally as Soverain.
And I am to note (but this is only transiently) the Poorness, or, to say
better, the Blasphemy of that Argument which flourishes out Kings as the Types
of Divinity, and vainly lavishes some Metaphysics, to prove that all things have
a natural tendency to Oneness; nay, the itch of some merry Wits has carried them
to run over most of the Divine Attributes (as some English Lawyers have talked
of the legal, I must say fantastical Ubiquity and Omniscience of our Kings,
tho we see the contrary; and some Civilians have said as much about the Emperor
before them) whereas they should consider, that the immense Simplicity of God
flows out in its several Operations with ineffable variety, God being every
where and the same, or, as the Platonists say, a Center in every part of its
Circle, a Spirit without Quantity, Distance, and Comprehension; whereas Man is a
determinat narrow Being, who doing one thing, ceases to do another, and
thinking of one thing is forced to quit his former thought. Now how sit he is
to be a Shadow of this Archetype, let any judge, unless he could be refined from
his Corporeity, and enlarged into a proportionable Immensity. Besides, I know
not whether it be safe to think or no, That as God, who, for the most part,
indues Men with Gifts suitable to the places to which he calls them, would in
some measure pour out his Spirit proportionat to these Men, whereas most commonly
we find them, notwithstanding their extraordinary advantages of Society,
Education, and Business, as weak Men as any other: and good Princes being
swayed by the Advice of Men, good and wise, and the bad seduced by Men of their
own Inclinations, what are all Monarchys but in reality Optimacys? for a few
only essentially govern under the name of one, who is utterly as unable as the
meanest of those over whom he claims Superiority.

THE second Fallacy is this, That Men, while they labor thus to support
Monarchy, tell us not what kind of Monarchy it is, and consequently gain
nothing, tho we should grant them the former Proposition to be true. For what
dos it avail to tell me of the Title of such a Prince, if I know not by what
Title he holds? Grant it were visible to me that such a Man was marked out by
Providence to be my Governor, yet if I cannot tell what kind of one, whether
absolute, mixed, limited, merely executive, or only first in order, how shall I
know to direct my Obedience? If he be absolute, my very natural Liberty is
taken away from me; nor do I know any Power that can make any Man such, the
Scripture setting just limitations and restrictions to all Governors. If mixed
and limited, I must know the due Temper and Bounds whereby he is to rule, or
else he may usurp or be mistaken, and I oppressed or injured. If executive, the
Power fundamentally resides not in him, but in the Great Council, or them
entrusted by the People; then I adore only a Shadow. Now if any Prince of
Europe can really clear up these Mists, and show the Lines of his Government
drawn fairly, and his Charter whole and authentic, like that of Venice and
ancient Rome, for my part, I Will be the first man shall swear him Allegiance,
and the last that will preserve him. But you will find that they will tell you
in general about their Office, and in particular of their Claims of Succession,
Inheritance, and Ancestors; when look but three or four Storys back, and you
will meet either some savage unnatural Intrusion, disguised under some forced
Title or chimerical Cognation, or else some violent Alteration, or possibly some
slender Oath or Articles, hardly extorted and imperfectly kept. Now if any man
that will but run over these Rules, and apply them to any History whatever (as
we shall exemplify in that of Scotland, upon which for the present we have
pitched) and not find most Titles ambiguous, the Effects of former Monarchys
(for where, in a Catalogue of forty Kings, can you almost show me three good
ones, but things merely struggling to maintain their Titles and domestic
Interest?) ruinous to the People, who for the most part consider them no
otherwise than as to be rescued from violent Confusion, not as they conduce to
the positive Happiness of a civil Life; I say, all this will be found to be
true, or my small Conversation in Books is extremely false. And truly I
conceive reading of History to be the most rational Course to set any Judgment
right, because it instructs by Experience and Effects, and grounds the Judgment
upon material Observations, and not blindly gropes after Notions and Causes,
which to him are tantum non inscrutabile; but of that anon. A main Mistake
under this Topic has bin an erroneous comparison and application of matters
Civil and Military; for Men observing that mixed Councils about Generals,
Plurality, Equality of Commands, frequent and sudden Military Alterations, have
brought no small Distempers and Dangers to several Governments and Attemts;
therefore they presently conclude, that in Civils also it is the safest to
continue a Command in one hand for preventing the like Disturbances. But here
they are deceived; Civil matters consist in long debate, great consideration,
patient expectation, and wary foresight, which is better to be found in a
number of choice experienced Heads, than in one single Person, whose Youth and
Vigor of Spirit inables him rather to Action, and fills him with that noble
Temerity which is commonly so happy in Martial Affairs; that must be guided
always to improve Occasions, which are seldom to be found again, and, which
mistaken, are to be scarcely amended. Besides, the Ferocity of daring Spirits
can hardly be bounded while they stand level; so that it is no wonder if they
extinguish all Emulations by putting the Power into the hands of one, whereas in
a Commonwealth it is quite otherwise: and Factions (unless they be cruelly
exorbitant) do but poise and balance one another; and many times, like the
discord of Humors upon the natural Body, produce real good to the Government.
That slender conceit, that Nature seems to dress out a Principality in most of
her works, as among Birds, Bees, etc. is so slender indeed (in regard they are
no more Chiefs than what they fancy them, but all their Prepotency is merely
predatory or oppressive; and even Lions, Elephants, Crocodils and Eagles, have
small inconsiderable Enemies, of which they stand in fear, and by which they are
often ruined) that the Recital confutes it; and if it were so, yet unless they
could prove their One Man to be as much more excellent than the rest as those
are, and that solely too, I see not what it would advantage them, since to
comply with the design of Nature in one, they would contradict it in others,
where she is equally concerned. But these Philological and Rhetorical Arguments
have not a little hindered the severer Disquisition of Reason, and prepossessed
the more easy Minds with Notions so much harder to be laid aside, as they are
more erroneous and pleasing.

THESE are the fundamental Errors that have misled the Judgment; now those
which have misguided the Conscience, have principally proceeded from the
Misinterpretation of Scripture; and therefore seeming Sacred, have bin less
examined and doubted, as carrying the most Authority. Thus in the Old
Testament, there being such frequent mention of Kings, which notwithstanding
were given in Wrath, they superstitiously maintain not only the necessity, but
even the impunity of Kings; whereas we know not their Powers and Limitations,
and it is inconsequent to argue, That because Judea was so governed, we should
follow the same Pattern, when we find neither Precept, Consequence, nor
Necessity convincing us. And it is madness to think that while the Divine
Spirit so freely and vehemently exclaims against the Iniquity of men, God would
authorize it so far as to leave it in them only unpunishable who should
exterminat and reform it. As for the Antiquity from ADAM, it is true, before
his Fall his Dominion was large and wide, but it was over the Beasts that after
his Fall learned to rebel against him; and oeconomically, not despotically,
over his Wife and Children. But what is this to Civil Government? In the New
Testament (for I the bries^ier pass over this head, in regard it has bin so
copiously treated upon by those under whose Profession it falls, and that it
dos not immediately conduce to my Design) the principal Argument has bin the
meekness of CHRIST and his compliance with Civil Powers, which certainly, if he
had bin disposed to have resisted, say they, he could as easily have
overthrown, as with a few Cords whip the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple.
But he, that was the Wisdom of his Father, rather thought fit to build up his
Kingdom (which is not earthly, nor known of earthly men) in Meekness and
Obedience to Civil Powers, which are perpetually changed and hurried at the
Will of the first Mover, otherwise he would never have concerned himself so
much in giving Dues to CAESAR, and to God what is Gods; intimating the distinct
Obedience owing by all men, as Christians, and Citizens. When, granting
Monarchy the most and only lawful Government, yet every one knows, that knows
any thing of the Roman Story, that AUGUSTUS had no more Title to that
Government, than to any of those over whom he usurped, and that his Access to
the Government was as fraudulent and violent as could be. Another Error is the
mistaking of the word (...). Romans 13.
Powers, when it is clear the Scripture speaks of it in a Latitude, as extending
it to all sorts of established Governments. Now men have falsely pretended, that
those Powers were only meant of Kings; and what by an indiscrete collation of
the places of the Old, and violent wrestings of others of the New Testament,
they perfected the other grand Mistake; which since it has bin already cleared
up, and as we said is but collateral with us for the present, we shall no
further mention it.

AS for the alleged Examples and Speeches of the Primitive Times, I see not
much in them considerable: for tho Insurrections against Princes cannot be
produced, or rather much is said against them, yet we are to consider, that the
Gospel of CHRIST (which was at that time not much defiled by the World) engages
not to any Domination, but (wholly taken up with its own Extasys, spiritual
Delights and Expectations) neglects all other Affairs as strange and dangerous.
And moreover (tho I know what has bin said to the contrary) I cannot find,
after well considering those Ages, any probable ground how, if they would have
rebel'd, they could have made any Head. They were indeed numerous, but then
they had Legionarys among them; and who knows not what an ineffectual thing a
People is (be it never so desirous) when overaw'd by the Soldiery? And they
were a People (as Greatness to God and Man is different) not considerable for
their worldly Power (for how few eminent Commanders were converted in the first
Ages?) but out of his own mere choice, so that it was not strange if they could
not do much. For God, as he chose the weakest means in planting the Gospel,
even Fishermen; so, in the primitive Propagation he called the weaker Men, tho
Christianity afterward grew ample and august, and Kings were proud to give
their Names to it.

AS for the Fathers (supposing them free of their many Adulterations,
Interpolations, and all those Errors and Incertaintys which the process of time
and fraud of men has foisted into them) they are to be accepted only as
Witnesses, not as Judges: that is to say, they may prove matter of Fact, but
none of their words matter of Right; especially if we consider their Writings,
either Homilys, Commentarys, or Controversys, which are ever directed to
another end than this is, and they themselves (men secluded from Business) are
so much more unable to judge and resolve civil Controversys, in regard the
unhappiness of the latter times has produced many Controversys not known or
thought of in their days, which not falling directly under their Profession,
cannot receive any Light or Authority from them.

HAVING thus considered Kingship, and how well it has appeared through the false
Lights of the Understanding, we shall now consider, whether, taking it by it
self, its Foundations be laid upon a Cylinder or upon a Cube: and this, I
think, we are the likeliest to do, if we consider them in their Rights and
Uses, or, to speak plainer, in their Legality and Policy; so that if we find
that none of the ways of retaining their Crowns can be authentic except one,
and that one makes against them, we shall see we have no just causes of blind
Adoration or implicit Obligation to truckle under any of their Commands. And if
again we discover that sort of Government it self is not so profitable to the
end of civil Happiness, but rather diametrically opposite to it; we may suppose
that men are either strangly obstinat, or else they might eradicat an Error
which not only offers so many Prejudices to their Understanding, but that has
such an evil Influence upon their external Welbeing.

WE have then to consider, that for One man to rule over Many, there must
necessarily be pretended some Right, tho it be but colorable; for either he
must be chosen by the People as their Arbitrator and supreme Judge, or else he
must by force of Arms invade them, and bring them to Obedience, which he by
force preserving for his Sons or Successors, makes way for a third Claim, which
is Inheritance. A fourth some have invented, tho were it real, it is but a
difference of the last, and I therefore shall mention it under that Head. But to
the Consideration.

FIRST therefore Election, supposing the People, either finding themselves
unable to weild their own Happiness, or for preventing of Disorder, make choice
of one Man to be set over them, it here instantly follows, that the Authority
is in the People, and flowing from them; for Choice argues a Power, and being
elected a Subordination to it; in the end, I mean, tho not in every act. Now
there is none chosen but for some End, or for some Intentions reciprocal betwixt
both Partys; for otherwise such a choice were but Dotage, and consequently
invalid: Wherefore thus it will follow, that those who pretend to King it upon
this Topic, must either show a formal Election (which I think many Kings are
not able to do) or if he can show one, produce also the Conditions and Ends for
which he was chosen. Now all parts being either implicit or explained, let him
exhibit the Covenant, that it may be known whether he governs according to it
or not; for if he transgresses, he forfeits, and the others are absolved from
their promised Obedience. If the Agreement be unwritten or intentional, either
Party is relatively tied; and then if he dos any thing against the welfare of
the People (that Soverain Law and end of all Governments) the People may not
only justly suppose the former Capitulation broken, but even endeavor, by what
possible means they can, to restore themselves to their former Rights: for why
should the making of a Compact prejudice any when it is once broken? And here
comes in another Fallacy, with which the Assertors of Royalty have so
flourished, that an Agreement between a People and one Man should descend to
his Posterity; whereas it is to be considered, that the People choosing one man
is commonly in consideration of his Person and personal Merit; which not being
the same in his Son (as commonly Familys in the Horizon are in the Meridian,
the Founders being braver than any that follow after them) that very intent is
frustrated and ceases; and the People providing for the Happiness of a few
years, which are determinable with incertainty of the latter part of the Life
of one man, run themselves and their Posterity into an eternal Inconvenience
(for any thing they know) of bad Governors. And if the People would never so
formally agree with him, that in regard of his Merits or felicity of Actions,
his Son should be received in that place, yet would they not stand to it, that
very Pact expiring with the life of either. For my Father may leave me
notionally a Slave in a Tenure (a thing frequent with our Ancestors) or as
Civilians term it, a Feodary, with which I am content, in respect of the
Advantage it brings me, or because my own Estate is too little to be
independent, and therefore I think it good prudence to be sheltered under the
protection of the greater; but my natural Liberty, that is to say, to make my
Life as justly happy and advantageous to me as I may, he can no more give away
from me than my Understanding or Eysight: for these are Privileges with which
God and Nature have indu'd me, and these I cannot be denied but by him that
will also deny me a Being. But to go on, Suppose a second Generation should
accept the Son, and a third a Grandson, yet this confirms not a fourth; and the
People very impoliticly strengthen and confirm the Power by continuance, and in
a manner with their own hands lay the Foundation of Absoluteness; their
Governors themselves growing in Interests, increasing in Alliances and Forces:
so it is very improbable but that within a little they grow too big and
formidable, and leave nothing of Liberty except the Name, and (if they be less
cunning) not that. A pertinent Example of this, and so near us that I cannot
pass it, we see in young ORANGE and the Low Countries at this day, who
continuing his Progenitors for their signal Services, and him for theirs, are
now punished for their generous and indiscrete rewarding of Virtue, that their
Liberty was lately almost blown up before they well perceived it to be
undermined, and they are now at charge to maintain their own Oppression. As for
that formal Election and Stipulation, who sees not what a vain and ridiculous
cheat it is, they coming with Swords in their hands to demand the Scepter of a
weak and stupid multitude that appears only to gaze upon the Ceremonys, and
whose refusal were ineffectual? but it is a gracious piece of the Cabal of
Tyranny to deceive the People with Shadows, Fantasms, and names of Liberty.

AS for those that intrude by Force, they cannot certainly have the Forehead to
infer any Right, they being but, as the Pirat said to ALEXANDER, public and
more magnificent Robbers. Certainly these are the NIMRODS, the great Hunters,
Gods Scourges, and the Burdens of the Earth; and whether they be Founders of
Empires, or great Captains (as BOCCALIN distinguishes them) they ought rather
to be remembered with horror and detestation, than have that undue Reverence
with which they commonly meet.

YET these are they that lay the Foundations of Succession, and from these do
the Successors claim, and enjoy with he less reluctance, because the regret of
the Violences, and hate of the first daily wears out; whether it be by the
continuance of Peace that charms men into a love of ease, or that the
continuance of Slavery enfeebles their Minds, that they rather choose to look at
their present Enjoyment than real Happiness; so that it is not strange if the
Person of their Oppressor becomes in time adorable, and he himself thinks that
confirmed and justified to him in process of time, to which in the beginning he
had no right. But if we consider the business a little higher, we might find
that since neither the People (as we have proved before) have power to make
themselves Vassals, and the Intruders themselves cannot pretend any just Title;
their Domination is merely illegal, and apt to be shaken off with the first
convenience, it being every whit as equitable, that these men should be judged
Enemies of Mankind, and condemned to die the death of Parricids for usurping a
Power, as NERO for abusing it. But I would fain ask the Regious Defenders, by
what Law they can maintain Governments to be inherent in one, and to be
transmitted to his Offspring? If they say by the Law of God, I would demand
again how they can make this Law appear to me? If they say that the Scripture
contains the Right and sacredness of Kings, I ask them again, How they know
that God extends that Privilege and Authority to this King? If they say, that
he is involved in the general Right, they do but run into a Circle; unless they
can show me, that all his Approches to the Government were regular, and such as
God was pleased with, or else God had by some Sign and Wonder declared his
approbation of him; for without these two, they must make God the Author of
Evil, which is impious, and pretend his Commission for an unlawful Act; and by
the same right, any other (as a Tyrant, for example) may pretend it to an
Action never so unjust, it being no inusual thing to borrow the face of
Divinity, even upon some foul Impostures, as (to forbear further Instances)
NUMA'S Conference with AEGERIA, SCIPIO'S Retirement into the Capitol, and
SERTORIUS'S white Heart.

Now if they pretend the Law of Nature, they must demonstrat to us, both that
she endowed men with inequal Freedom, and that she shaped out such a Man to
rule; whereas it appears on the contrary, that all Men naturally are equal: for
tho Nature with a noble Variety has made different the Features and Lineaments
of Men, yet as to Freedom, till it be lost by some external means, she has made
every one alike, and given them the same Desires. But suppose she had intended
such a Family for Government, and had given them some illustrious Marks, as we
read of some that had, whether by the imagination of their Mothers, or by
Deceit; yet then would Nature fall into a double Irregularity, first in
deserting her Method of making all free, and secondly in making her general
Work merely subservient, and secondary to her particular; which how contrary it
is to that beautiful Harmony of hers, I need not much insist. Now if they say,
they are Fathers of the People, and for that reason they call themselves the
Heads, inferring the People to be no more than a Trunk, it is only metaphorical,
and proves nothing: for they must remember, that since Father has a relation
upon which it depends, and upon whose removal it vanishes, they themselves
cannot bring any such; for by physical procreation they will not offer it; and
for metaphorical Dependence, it will com to nothing, we seeing People languish
when their Princes are fullest, and, like Leeches, rather willing to burst than
to fall of; and on the contrary, the People upon the removal of a Prince
cheerful and relieved. Now if there were so strict a Union between these two,
such a Contrariety and Antipathy could never appear; for certainly when any two
Persons endeavor to gain ground one upon another, there is an Enmity, whatever
is pretended. Besides, if these men would be Fathers, it were then their duty
to do like Fathers, which is to provide for, defend and cherish; whereas on the
contrary, it is they themselves that eat the bread out of the mouths of their
Children, and through the groans of the Poor. And whereas Flattery has said, that
what they draw up in Vapors they send down in Showers, yet are we sure that
such rains are for the most part unfruitful, if not ominous and infectious. If
they pretend the Law of Nations, it were well they would declare to us first
what this Law is, and whether generally agreed on or no by Nations. If they
say, yes, they must resolve whether explicitly or implicitly: if they say the
former, let them produce them; if the latter, they must demonstrat, that all
Nations are agreed in such and such Notions, and all men of these Nations,
since every one must be of equal capacity: When on the contrary, tho the
Understandings of most men, whom we know or have conversed with, seem to agree
in some general maxims, but unpolished, unnumbred, and unmethodiz'd, yet we see
many Nations differing from us in many things, which we think clearly,
fundamentally, and naturally true; neither do Climats and Education only so
diversify the Minds of men, but even their Understandings, and the different
ways of thinking so distinguish even those of one Country, that tho we may
please our selves in thinking that all men's thoughts follow the fantastical
method of ours, yet we might find, if we were perfectly conversant with all men
of the World, and well read in their Authors (as we are not with half of them,
no, nor any one man with the twentieth part) that there are scarce four or five
Axioms, excepting as they make a part of the Law of nature, would be
universally received. Now (for I have bin the longer by reason that this
imaginary Law has bin so held up by the Civilians, and made the subterfuge of
so many considerable Disputes) if it be so weak as that we can scarce tell
whether it has a being or no, for even that which we account the most sacred
piece of it, the violation of public Messengers, the Tartar and Muscovite,
unless restrained by fear, break it every day. What then are the Arguments
deduced from it? or if there were such a Law, what would it avail such a
particular man? for why should other Nations impose a Governor where they are
not concerned? And if they pretend this Law as to the preservation and impunity
of their Persons, the same Answer will serve again, with this addition, That
they make an Offender incapable of punishment, which is but to give them a
Commission to offend. Now if they run upon that distinction of suspending only,
and not punishing (as if forsooth this kind of People must be preserved, tho by
the ruin of Mankind, to immediate Vengeance) then I say, That Suspension is
really a Punishment; and if his Demerits can deserve that, I see not but that
upon a proportionable Increase, they may deserve Dethronization or Death, as
clearly as two and two make four, and four more make eight. If they allege
positive or municipal Laws, and number Homages, they are not much the nearer,
since that all such Laws are but Rivulets and Branches of them we before
examined; and since we found that those speak so little in their favor, that
which these do cannot signify much, especially since Princes, who are ever
watchful to improve all occasions of this nature, can either by terror or
artifice draw Assemblys, or the major part of them, to their own Lure; nay,
even the worst of them have not forgot to be solicitous in this case. But it
must be remarked, That whatever positive Laws are repugnant to those general
ones, they are injurious, and ought to be repealed. And truly it is a sad
Observation, that as Monarchs grow, either out of the weakness of Government,
and (as I may say) its Pupilage, as ROMULUS and THESEUS did at Rome and Athens,
or else out of the disease or depravation of it, as CAESAR again invaded Rome:
so have the People bin never more fond of them, than when Manners were at the
highest corruption, which ever gave access of strength to them; nor have they
more distasted them, than when their Spirits and Discipline were the most brave
and healthful: so fatally disagreeing are true Liberty, which is the very
source of Virtue and Generosity, and the impotent Domination of a single
Tyrant, who commonly reigns by no other means than the Discords of braver
Citizens, who can neither endure Equality or Superiority among themselves, and
rather admit a general Vassalage, than just Equality; or by the Vices of the
baser sort, which naturally reconcile them and Kings, and concern them both in
a bad Example. But suppose Succession a thing sacred and inviolable, yet once
break and interrupt it, it is little worth, either the Usurper being to be
acknowleg'd regular, or the whole Series dashed out of order. Nay, we see
Aspirers themselves either so blinded with their Pretenses, or with Animosity,
and so crying up their own Titles, that it is almost impossible for any private
Judgment to do right in this case, themselves thwarting one another; and it
cannot be in the power of Nature that both should be right. But who can
instance one Monarch whose Crown is come to him by untainted Succession? and
what History will not confirm the Example I shall anon bring? Certainly tho
Succession were a thing that had not so little reason or reality, yet I see not
why men should with such a strange pertinacy defend it. Matters of Government
ought to be managed by Prudence; but Succession puts them into the hands of
Fortune, when a Child incapable or infirm, under the regiment of a Nurse, must
(possibly) be Supreme Governor, and those whom either their Abilitys or Virtues
fit for it, subordinat or laid aside. But what if the Person whom necessity has
set at the stern be incapable, lunatic, weak, or vicious, is not this a good
way to prevent Controversys? yet this plainly enervats all good Counsil, when a
King should have need of Tutors, and that a multitude of People should be
commanded by one who commands not himself; and, when we scarce obey even
excellent Princes, to adore Shadows and weak ones.

AS for BOXHORNIUS'S distinction of Succession, wherein the next Heir must
necessarily succeed by the original Right of the former, I would ask him,
whether the Predecessor were a Possessor or Usufructuary? If the first, all our
former Arguments fall on him; if the latter, it makes not for his Successor,
the People being Owners: and besides, the distinction is one of his own
coining, never pretended before; upon the first controversy it is invalid,
although the first Founder had a Right, as we have proved the contrary.

HAVING, with what brevity I could, brought to an end my first Intention, I
shall now fall upon the second, which is the intrinsic value and expediency of
this Government, and some little comparison with others; but herein we shall be
short, and only so far as concerns this. And indeed it is a business so
ticklish, that even Mr. HOBS in his piece de Cive, tho he assured himself that
the rest of his Book (which is principally calculated for the assertion of
Monarchy) is demonstrated, yet he douts whether the Arguments which he brings
to this business be so firm or not; and MALVEZZI contrarily remonstrats (in his
Discourses upon TACITUS) that Optimacys are clearly better than Monarchys, as
to all advantages. And indeed if we look on the Arguments for Monarchy, they
are either Flourishes, or merely Notions; such are the reference and perfection
of Unity, which, say they, must needs work better and more naturally, as one
simple cause (besides that it stills and restrains all other claims) than many
coordinat: whereas they never consider that tho among many joint Causes there
may be some jarring, yet like cross Wheels in an Engine, they tend to the
regulation of the whole. What violent Mischiefs are brought in by the
Contentions of Pretenders in Monarchys, the Ambiguitys of Titles, and lawless
Ambition of Aspirers? whereas in a settled Republic all this is clear and
unperplex'd; and in case any particular man aspires, they know against whom to
join, and punish as a common Enemy. As for that reason which alleges the
advantage of Secresy in business, it carries not much with it, in regard that
under that even most pernicious designs may be carried on; and for wholesome
Councils (bating some more nice Transactions) it matters not how much they be
tossed among those who are so much entrusted and concerned in them, all bad
designs being never in probability so feeble and ineffectual, as when there are
many eyes to overlook them, and voices to decry them. As for that expedition in
which they say Monarchs are so happy, it may as well further a bad intention,
as give effect to a just Council, it depending on the Judgment of a single man,
to whose will and ends all must refer; whereas a select number of entrusted
Persons may hasten every opportunity with a just slowness as well as they, tho
indeed (unless it be in some Military critical Minutes) I see not such an
Excellency in the swiftness of heady Dispatch, precipitation in Counsils being
so dangerous and ominous. As for what concerns private Suitors, they may as
speedily and effectually (if not more) be answered in staid Republics, as in
the Court of a King, where Bribery and unworthy Favorits do not what is just,
but what is desired.

WITH these and many others as considerable (which partly willingly, and partly
in this penury of Books, forgettingly I pass) do they intend to strengthen this
fantastical and airy Building; but as sly Controverters many times leave out
the principal Text or Argument, because should it be produced, it could not be
so easily answered: so these men tell us all the Advantages of Monarchy,
supposing them still well settled, and under virtuous men; but you shall never
hear them talk of it in its corrupt state under lewd Kings and unsettled Laws;
they never let fall a word of the dangers of Interreigns, the Minoritys and
Vices of Princes, Misgovernments, evil Councils, Ambitions, Ambiguitys of
Titles, and the Animositys and Calamities that follow them, the necessary
Injustices and Oppressions by which Monarchs (using the Peoples Wealth and
Blood against themselves) hold them fast in their Seats, and, by some suspension
of Divine Justice, die not violently.

WHEREAS other Governments, established against all these Evils, being ever of
Vigor and just Age, settled in their own Right, freed from pretenses, served by
experienced and engaged Councils, and (as nothing under the Moon is perfect)
sometimes gaining and advantaged in their Controversys, which have not seldom
(as we may see in Old Rome) brought forth good Laws and Augmentations of
Freedom; whereas once declining from their Purity and Vigor, and (which is the
effect of that) ravished by an Invader, they languish in a brutish Servitude,
(Monarchy being truly a Disease of Government) and like Slaves, stupid with
harshness and continuance of the lash, wax old under it, till they either
arrive at that Period which God prescribes to all People and Governments, or
else better Stars and Posterity awaken them out of that Lethargy, and restore
them to their pristin Liberty, and its daughter Happiness.

BUT this is but to converse in Notions, wandering, and ill abstracted from
things; let us now descend to practical Observation, and clearly manifest out
the whole Series of Time and Actions, what Circumstances and Events have either
ushered or followed one Race of Kings, That if there were all the Justice in
the World that the Government of a Nation should be entailed upon one Family,
yet certainly we could not grant it to such a one whose criminal Lives and
formidable Deaths have bin Evidences of God's Wrath upon it for so many
Generations.

AND since no Country that I know yields such an illustrious Example of this as
Scotland dos, and it may be charity to bring into the way such as are misled, I
have pitched upon the Scottish History, wherein as I have only consulted their
own Authors, as my fittest Witnesses in this case; so have I (not as a just
History, but as far as concerns this purpose) faithfully, and as much as the
thing would permit, without glosses represented it: so that any calm
Understanding may conclude that the Vengeance which now is levelled against that
Nation, is but an attendent of this new introduced Person; and that he himself,
tho for the present he seems a Log among his Frogs, and suffers them to play
about him, yet God will suffer him (if the English Army prevents not) to turn
Stork and devour them, while their Cries shall not he heard, as those that (in
spite of the warning of Providence, and the light of their own Reasons, for
their own corrupt Interest and greedy Ambition) brought these Miserys upon
themselves.

An Instance of the preceding REASONS out of the SCOTTISH HISTORY.
The Second Part.
AND now we com to our main business, which is the review of Story, wherein we
may find such a direct and uninterrupted Series, such mutual Endearments
between Prince and People, and so many of them crowned with happy Reigns and
quiet Deaths (two successively scarce dying naturally) that we may conclude,
they have not only the most reason, but a great deal of excellent Interest who
espouse the Person and Quarrel of the hopeful Descendent of such a Family: nor
shall we be so injurious to the Glory of a Nation, proud with a Catalogue of
Names and Kings, as to expunge a great part of their number; tho some, who have
don it, affirm there can be no probability that they had any other being than
what HECTOR BOYS, and the black book of Pasley (out of which BUCHANAN had most
of his Materials) are pleased to bestow on them, there being no mention of the
name of Scot in any Authentic Writer, till four hundred years after CHRIST. No,
we shall no more envy these old Heroes to them, than their placing the Red Lion
in the dexter Point of their Escucheon. But tho we might in justice reject them
as fabulous and monkish, yet since they themselves acknowledge them, and they
equally make against them, we shall run them over like genuin Ireland, but a
Contention arises about the validity of their Oath to him, and Uncles are
appointed to succeed, which argues it Prorex. After his Death

ruled valiantly and well, yet he had GILLUS a Bastard Son, Vafer and Regni
cupidus. The next of the Line are Twins, DOCHAM and DORGAL, Sons of DURST: they
while they disputed about priority of Age, are, by the artifice of GILLUS,
slain in a Tumult; who makes a strong Party, and seizing of a Hold, says he was
made Supervisor by his Father, and so becoms King, cuts off all the Race
Ireland. After EVEN coms EDER: after

AFTER him CORBRET the Second, whose Son LUCTAC for

HIS Son CONAR, one of the Conspirators against him, succeeded,

ETHODIUS his Sister's Son succeeded, who was slain in the

HIS Son being a Minor, SATRAEL his Brother was accepted,

DONALD, who outdid the others Vices by contrary Virtues,

ETHODIUS the Second, Son of the first of that name, was Familiarium tumultu
occisus.

HIS Son ATHIRCO promised fair, but deceived their expectations Picts.
NATHALOCK, turning his Injury into Ambition,

AFTER his Death ATHIRCO'S Children were called back, and

HIS Brother DONALD succedes (the youngest of the three) who, Marray; whom he
incountring with inequal Forces, is taken Prisoner with thirty of the Nobility,
and whether of Grief, or his Wounds, dy's in Prison.

Scots and Picts about a Dog (as that between the Trojans and Italians for a
white Heart) and the defection of CARAUSIUS from DIOCLESIAN, which happened in
his time.

Culdys (an Order of religious Men of that time overborn by others succeding)
He being dead, three Sons of Picts, with their assistance seized on it, forcing
others to fly; but proving cruel, the Nobility conspired and slew him.

Picts, who came to revenge ROMACH, routed his Army in a pitched Battle; but
NECTHAM coming again, he was routed, and both he and NECTHAM slain.

Picts, and wasting their Fields, HERGUST, when he saw there could be no
advantage by the Sword, suborned two Picts to murder him, who drawing to
conspiracy the Piper that lay in his Chamber (as the manner was then) he at the
appointed time admitted them, and there slew him.

Picts, to the almost extirpation and banishment of the Scots; but at last the
Picts, taking distaste at the Romans, entered Scots, and agreed that FERGUS
(whose Uncle the last King was) being then in banishment, and of a military
breeding and inclination, should be chosen King. With him the Danes maintained
a long War against the Romans, and pulled down the Picts wall: at last he and
the King of Picts were in one day slain in a Battle against them. This Man's
access to Government was strange, ignotus Rex ab ignoto populo accersitus, and
may be thought temerarious; he having no Land for his People, and the Roman
Name inimical; yet founded he a Monarchy, there having been Kings ever since;
and we are to note, this is the first man that the sounder Writers will allow
to be real and not fabulous. Him succeeded his Son Saxons, left the rule to his
Brother GORAN, who notwithstanding he made a good League Britans, which much
conduced to his and the Peoples settlement, yet in requital, after thirty four
years, they made away with him; which brought in EUGENIUS, the Third of that
name, Ireland with her Children. This man in thirty three years time did
nothing but reign, and make short Incursions upon the Borders; he left the Rule
to his Brother CONGAL, a monastical, superstitious, and Saxons, and struck with
the Death of COLUMBA, died of Grief.

AFTER him was chosen KENNETH, who has left nothing Scots Succession, that we
see it inverted by Usurpation or cross Elections in every two or three
Generations) This man left an ambiguous Fame; for HECTOR BOETHIUS says he was
peaceable; the Manuscript, implacably severe: He reigned sixteen years, and
left his Son FERCHARD Successor, who, Scots Sermons to the Saxons. He was
followed by his Nephew FERCHARD, Son to the first of that who continuing a
blank Reign, or it may be a happy Irish War, and many learned Men; besides the
Assistance lent HUNGUS to fight against the Northumbrians, whom he beat in a
famous Battle, which (if I may mention the matter) was presignify'd to HUNGUS
in a Dream, St. Andrew appearing to him, and assuring him of it; and in the
time of Battle a white Cross (that which the Heralds call a Saltier, and we see
commonly in the Scots Banners) appeared in the Sky; and this I think to have
bin the occasion of that bearing, and an Order of Knights of St. Andrew,
sometimes in reputation in Scotland, but extinguished, for ought I can perceive,
before the time of JAMES the Sixth, tho the Collar and Pendant of it are at
this day worn about the Scots Picts; in which Attemt he was drowned, and Picts
in many signal Victorys; but at last was slain by them, leaving his name to the
place Pictish Name. This man may be added to the two FERGUSES, and truly may be
said to be the Founder of the Scots Empire, not only in making that the middle
of his Dominion, which was once the bounds, but in confirming his Acquisitions
with good Laws, having the opportunity of a long Peace, which was sixteen
years, his whole time of Government being twenty. This was he that placed that
Stone, famous for that illusory Prophecy, Ni fallat fatum, etc. (which first
was brought out of Spain into Ireland, and from thence into Argyle) at Scoon;
where he put it in a Chair, in which all his Successors (till EDWARD the First
brought it away) were crowned, and since that all the Kings of England, till
the happiness of our Commonwealth made it useless. His Brother DONALD was his
Successor, a man made up of extremitys of Virtues Picts had called in the
Danes) and driving them much into despair (a Bravery that has not seldom rained
many excellent Captains) was taken by them, put into a little Cave, and there
slain. He was succeeded by ETHUS his Brother, who had all his eldest Brother's
Vices, England, and a great part of Ireland; of whose King a Minor, and in his
power, he generously made no advantage, but settled his Country, and provided
faithful and able Guardians for him. These things justly yield him the name of
Great. DONALD Son of CONSTANTIN the Second, by his Danes, which none of his
Predecessors would do; and after they had deserted him basely, yet yielded them
Succors, consisting of the chief of the Scots Nobility, which with the whole
Danish Army were routed by the Saxons. This struck him so, that he retired
among the Culdys (which were as the Greec Caloyers, or Romish Monks at this
day) and there buried himself alive. After him was MILCOM, Son of Danes that
with a Navy unexpectedly came into the Frith, was slain. DUF his Son succedes,
famous for an Accident, Commander of the Castle of Forres, where he then lay,
interceded for some of them; but being repulsed, and exasperated by his Wife,
after he had made all his Servants drunk, slew him in his Bed, and buried him
under a little Bridge (lest the cutting of Turfs might discover a Grave) near
Kilros Abbey; tho others say, he turned aside a River, and after he had buried
him, suffered it to take its former Thane (so they then called Lieutenants of
Counties) whose Daughter he had ravished.

Danes, beat them in that famous Battle, which was won by the three HAYS,
Husbandmen (from whom all the HAYS now give three Shields Gules) who with their
Sythes reinforced the lost Battle; but in his latter time he lost this
reputation, by poisoning MILCOLM Son of DUF, to preserve the Crown for a Son of
his Name, tho of less merit (for says BUCHANAN, They use to choose the fittest,
not the nearest) which being don, he got ordained in a Parliament, that the
Succession should be lineal, the Son should inherit, and be called Prince of
Scots; and if he were a Minor, be governed by some wise Man (here coms the
pretense of Succession, whereas before it was clearly Elective) and at fifteen
he should choose his Guardian himself. But the Divine Vengeance, which seldom,
even in this life, passes by Murder, overtook him; for he was ensnared by a
Lady, whose Son he had caused to be executed, and slain by an Arrow out of an
Ambush she had laid. England assisting the Danes) fought him, routed his Army,
and with the loss of his own Life took away his, they dying of mutual
Constantinians, who made a good Party; but at the Intercession of FORARD (an
accounted Rabbi of the times) they at last agreed, GRIME being to enjoy the
Kingdom for his Life, after which MILCOLUMB should succeed, his Father's Law
standing in force. But he, after declining into Leudness, Cruelty and Spoil (as
Princes drunk with Greatness and Prosperity use to do) the People called back
MILCOLUMB, who rather receiving Battle than giving it (for it was upon
Ascension-day, his principal Holy Day) routed his Forces, wounded himself, took
him, pulled out his Eyes, which altogether made an end of his Life, all
Factions and Humors being reconciled.

Danes, that under their King SUENO had invaded Scotland, in his latter time
grew to such Covetousness and Oppression, that all Authors agree he was
murdered, tho they disagree about the manner; some say by Con^ederacy with his
Servants; some by his Kinsmen and Competitors; some by the Friends of a Maid whom
he had ravished. DONALD his Grandchild succeeded, a good-natured and Danish Army
that had invaded and distressed him; but at last being ensnared by his Kinsman
MACKBETH (who was pricked forward by Ambition, and a former Vision of three
Women of a sour human shape, whereof one saluted him Thane of Angus, another
Earl of Murray, the third King) he was beheaded.

THE Severity and Cruelty of MACKBETH was so known, Fife fled into England to
MILCOLM Son of DONALD, who by his persuasions, and the assistance of the King
of England, entered Scotland, where he found such great accessions to his
Party, that MACKBETH was forced to fly; his Death is hid in such a mist of
Fables, that it is not certainly known.

MILCOLUMB, the third of that name, now being quietly America, and others from
Cottages and Dovecotes) His first trouble was FORFAR, MACKBETH'S Son, who
claimed the Crown, but was soon after cut of. Some War he had with that WILLIAM
whom we call falsely the Conqueror, some with his own People, which by the
intercession of the Bishops were ended. At length quarrelling with our WILLIAM
the Second, he laid siege to Alnwick Castle, which being forced to extremity, a
Knight came out with the Keys on a Spear, as if it were to present them to him,
and and to yield the Castle; but he, not with due heed receiving them, was run
through the Ey and slain. Some from hence derive the name of PIERCY (how truly I
know not) His Son and Successor EDWARD following his Revenge too hotly,
received some Wounds, of which within a few days he died.

DONALD BANE (that is in Irish, White) who had fled into Norway, if he would
procure him to be King, which was don with ease, as the times then stood; but
this Usurper being hated by the People, who generally loved the memory of
MILCOLM, they se^ DUNCAN, MILCOLM'S Bastard, against him, who forced him to
English invading on both sides, that they called in EDGAR Son of MILCOLM, then
in England, who with small Assistances possessed himself* all Men deserting
DONALD, who being taken and brought to the King, died in Prison. EDGAR English
Alliance, spent nine years virtuously and peaceably; and gave the People leave
to breathe and rest, after so much trouble and bloodshed. His Brother Fierce,
succeeded; the beginning of whose Reign being disturbed by a Rebellion, he
speedily met them at the Spey, which being a swift River, and the Enemy on the
other side, he offered himself to ford it on Horseback: but ALEXANDER CAR
taking the Employment from him, forded the River with such Courage, that the
Enemy fled, and were quiet the rest of his Reign. Some say he had the name of
ACER, because some Conspirators being by the fraud of the Chamberlain admitted
into his Chamber, he casually waking, first slew the Chamberlain, and after him
six of the Conspirators, not ceasing to pursue the rest, till he had slain most
of them with his own hands: this with the building of some Abbys, and seventeen
years Reign, is all we know of him.

France by our HENRY the Second; which brought him to such contemt, that he was
vexed by frequent Insurrections, especially them of Murray, whom he almost
extirpated. The latter part of his Reign was spent in building Monasterys; he
himself tied by a Vow of Chastity, would Northumberland, gave occasion for a
War, in which he was surpised and taken, but afterward released upon his
doing Homage for the Kingdom of Scotland to King HENRY, of whom he acknowledged
to hold it, and putting in caution the Castles of Roxboro (once strong, now
nothing but Ruins) Barwic, Edinburg, Sterling, all which notwithstanding was
after released by RICHARD Coeur de Lion, who was then upon an Expedition to the
Holy War; from whence returning, both he and DAVID Earl of Huntingdon, Brother
to the King of Scots, were taken Prisoners. The rest of his Reign (except the
rebuilding of St. Johnston, which had bin destroyed by Waters, whereby he lost
his eldest Son, and some Treatys with our King JOHN) was little worth memory;
only you will wonder that a Scottish King could reign forty nine years, and yet
die in peace.

Sterling, governing him at their pleasure. But soon after he was awaked by a
furious Invasion of ACHO King of Norway (under the pretense of some Islands
given him by MACBETH) whom he forced to accept a Peace, and spent the latter
part amidst the Turbulencys of the Priests (drunk at that time with their
Wealth and Ease) and at last having seen the continued Funerals of his Sons
DAVID, ALEXANDER, his Wife, and his Daughter, he himself with a fall from Horse
broke his neck, leaving of all his Race only a Grandchild by his Daughter,
which died soon after.

THIS Man's Family being extinguished, they were forced to run to another Line,
which, that we may see how happy an expedient immediate Succession is for the
Peace of the Kingdom, and what Miseries it prevents, I shall, as briefly and as
pertinently as I can, set down.

DAVID, Brother to K. WILLIAM, had three Daughters, MARGARET married to ALLAN
Lord of Galloway, ISABEL married to ROBERT BRUCE Lord of Annandale and
Cleveland, ADA married to HENRY HASTINGS Earl of Huntingdon. Now ALLAN begot on
his Wife DORNADILLA, married to JOHN BALIOL afterward King of Scotland, and
two other Daughters. BRUCE on his Wife got ROBERT BRUCE Earl of Carick, having
married the Heretrix thereof. As for HUNTINGDON he desisted his claim. The
question is, whether BALIOL in right of the eldest Daughter, or BRUCE being com
of the second (but a Man) should have the Crown, he being in the same degree,
and of the more worthy Sex. The Controversy being tossed up and down, at last was
referred to EDWARD, the First of that name, King of England. He thinking to fish
in these troubled waters, stirs up eight other Competitors, the more to
entangle the business, and with twenty four Counselors, half English, half
Scots, and abundance of Lawyers fit enough to perplex the matter, so handled
the business, after cunning delays, that at length he secretly tampers with
BRUCE (who was then conceived to have the better right of the business) that if
he would acknowledge the Crown of him, he would adjudg it for him; but he
generously answering, that he valued a Crown at a less rate, than for it to put
his Country under a foren Yoke: He made the same motion to BALIOL, who accepted
it; and so we have a King again, by what Right we all see; but it is good
reason to think that Kings, com they by their Power never so unjustly, may
justly keep it.

BALIOL having thus got a Crown, as unhappily kept it; for no Fife, he not only
pardoned them, but gave them a piece of Land in controversy: whereupon MACDUF'S
Brother complains against him to EDWARD, who makes him rise from his Seat in
Parliament, and go to the Bar: He hereupon enraged, denies EDWARD assistance
against the French, and renounces his Homage. EDWARD immediately coms to Berwi^,
takes and kills seven thousand, most of the Nobility of Fife and Lowthian, and
afterward gave them a great Defeat at Dunbar, whose Castle instantly
surrendered. After this he marched to Montrose, where BALIOL resigned himself
and Crown, all the Nobility giving homage to EDWARD. BALIOL is sent Prisoner to
London, and from thence, after a years detention, into France. While EDWARD was
possessed of all Scotland, one WILLIAM WALLACE arose, who being a private man,
bestir'd himself in the Calamity of his Country, and gave the English several
notable foils. EDWARD coming again with an Army, beat him that was already
overcom with Envy and Emulation as well as Power; upon which he laid by his
Command, and never acted more, but only in slight Incursions. But the English
being beaten at Roslin, EDWARD coms in again, takes Sterling, and makes them
all render Homage; but at length BRUCE seeing all his Promises nothing but
smoke, enters into League with CUMMIN to get the Kingdom: but being betrayed by
him to EDWARD, he stabbed CUMMIN Drumfreis, and made himself King. This man, tho
he came with disadvantage, yet wanted neither Patience, Courage, nor Conduct;
so that after he had miserably lurked in the Mountains, he came down, and
gathering together some Force, gave our EDWARD the Second such a defeat near
Sterling, as Scotland never gave the like to our Nation: and continued the War
with various fortune with the Third, till at last Age and Leprosy Murray, whose
severity in punishing was no less dreaded than his Valor had bin honored. But
he soon after dying of poison; and EDWARD BALIOL, Son of JOHN, coming with a
Fleet, and st^engthn'd with the assistance of the English, and some Robbers, the
Mar was routed, so that BALIOL makes himself King, and DAVID was glad to retire
into France. Amidst these Parties (EDWARD the Third backing BALIOL) was
Scotland miserably torn, and the BRUCES in a manner extinguished, till ROBERT
(after King) with them of Argile and his own Family and Friends, began to renew
the claim, and bring it into a War again; which was carried on by ANDREW MURRAY
the Governor, and afterward by himself: So that DAVID, after nine years
banishment, durst return, where making frequent Incursions, he at length in the
fourth year of his return marched into England, and in the Bishopric of Durham
was routed, and fled to an obscure Bridge, showed to this day by the
Inhabitants. There he was by JOHN COPLAND taken prisoner, where he continued
nine years, and in the thirty ninth year of his Reign he died.

English were perpetually in action. He left his Kingdom to JOHN his Bastard
Son by the Lady MORE his Concubin, whom he married, either to legitimat the
three Children (as the manner was then) he had by her, or else for old
Acquaintance, his Wife and her Husband dying much about France, the Boy was
taken at Flamburg, and kept by our HENRY the Fourth: upon the hearing of which
his Father swounded, and soon after died. His Reign was memorable for nothing
but his breaking with GEORGE Earl of March (to whose Daughter, upon the payment
of a great part of her Portion which he never would repay, he had promised his
Son DAVID for a Husband) to take the Daughter of DOUGLAS who had a greater;
which occasioned the Earl of March to make many inrodes with our HENRY HOTSPUR;
and a famous Duel of three hundred men apiece, whereof on the one side ten
remained, and on the other one, which was the only way to appease the deadly
Feuds of these two Familys. The Interreign was governed by ROBERT, who enjoying
the Power he had too much coveted, little minded the Liberty of his Nephew,
only he sent some Auxiliarys into France, who, they say, behaved themselves
worthily; and his slothful Son MORDAC, who making his Sons so bold with
Indulgence, that one of them killed a Falcon on his fist, which he denied to
give him: he in revenge procured the Parliament to ransom the King, who had bin
eighteen years a Prisoner. This JAMES was the First of that name, Athol, slew
him in his Chamber, his Wife receiving two wounds, endeavoring to defend him.

THIS JAMES left the Second, a Boy of six years, whose Infancy, York against
HENRY the Sixth, he was diverted by an English Gentleman that counterfeited
himself a Nuncio (which I mention out of a Manuscript, because I do not
remember it in our Storys) and broke up his Army. Soon after besieging Roxburg,
he was slain by the bursting of a Cannon in the twenty ninth year of his Age.

JAMES the Second left a Boy of seven Years, governed by his Mother, Sterling,
where he flying to a Mill, and asking for a Confessor, a Priest came, who told
him, that tho he was no good Priest, yet he was a good Leech, and with that
stabbed him to the heart. A Parliament approved his death, and ordered Indemnitys
to all that had fought against him.

JAMES the Fourth, a Boy of fifteen Years, is made King, governed Floddon
Field, or, as some suppose, at Kelsy by the HUMES, which (as the Manuscript
alleges) seems more probable, in regard that the Iron Belt (to which he added a
Ring every Year) which he wore in repentance for the death of his Father, was
never found, and there were many, the day of Battle, habited like him. His
Successor was his Son JAMES, the Fifth of that name, a Boy of not above two
Scotland was wasted almost into Famine and Solitude: however in his just Age he
proved an industrious Prince, yet could not so satisfy the Nobility, but that
he and they continued in a mutual hate, till that barbarous execution of young
HAMILTON so filled him with Remorse, that he dreamed he came and cut of his two
Arms, and threatened after to cut of his Head. And he displeased the People so
much, that he could not make his Army fight with the English then in Scotland;
whereupon he died of grief, having first heard the death of his two Sons, who
died at the instant of his Dream, and leaving a Daughter of five days old, whom
he never saw.

English Arms (awaked for her cause) brought the great design of sending her
into France to perfection: So at five Years old she was transported, and at
fifteen married to the Dolphin FRANCIS, after King; while her Mother, a
Daughter of the GUISE, in her Regency, exercised all Rage against the
Professors of the pure Religion then in the dawn. FRANCIS after two Years left
her a childless Widow, so that at eighteen she returned into Scotland to
succeed her Mother (then newly dead) in her Exorbitancys.

I HAD almost forgot to tell, that this young Couple in the transport of their
nuptial Solemnitys took the Arms and Title of England; which indiscrete
Ambition we may suppose first quickened the jealousy of ELIZABETH against her,
which after kindled so great a flame.

IN Scotland she showed what a strange influence loose Education has upon
Youth, and the weaker Sex. All the French Effeminacys came over with her, and
the Court lost that little Severity which was left. DAVID RIZIO, an Italian
Fiddler, was the only Favorit, and it is too much feared, had those enjoyments
which no Woman can give but she that gives away her Honor and Chastity.

BUT a little after, HENRY Lord Darnly coming with MATTHEW Earl of Lenox, his
Father, into Scotland, she cast an ey upon him, and married him. Whether it
were to strengthen her pretension to England, he being com of HENRY the
Seventh's Daughter, as we shall tell anon, or to color her Adulterys, and hide
the shame of an Impregnation (tho some have whispered, that she never conceived,
and that the Son was supposititious) or some Phrenzy of Affection drew her that
way; certain it is she soon declined her Affection to her Husband, and
increased it to DAVID (he being her perpetual Companion at board, and managing
all Affairs, while the King with a contemtible Train was sent away) insomuch
that some of the Nobility that could not digest this, entered a Conspiracy,
which the King headed, and slew him in her Chamber.

THIS turned all her neglect of the King into rage, so that her chiefest
business was to appease her Favorits Ghost with the slaughter of her Husband;
poison was first attemted, but it being (it seems) too weak, or his Youth
overcoming it, that expectation failed. But the Devil and BOTHWEL furnished her
with another that succeeded; she so intices him, being so sick that they were
forced to bring him in a Horslitter to Edinburg, where she cherished him
extremely, till the credulous young man began to lay aside suspicion, and to
hope better: So she puts him into a ruinous house near the Palace, from whence
no news can be had, brings in her own bed, and lys in the house with him; and
at length when the design was ripe, causes him one Sunday night, with his
Servant, to be strangled, thrown out of the Window, and the house to be blown
up with Gunpowder, her own rich Bed having bin before secretly conveyed away.
This and other performances made her favor upon BOTHWEL so hot, that she must
marry him; the only obstacle was, he had a Wife already; but she was compelled
to sue for a Divorce, which (so great Persons being concerned) it was a wonder
it should be granting so long as ten days. Well, she marrys; but the more
honest Nobility amazed at those Exorbitancys, assemble together, and with Arms
in their hands begin to expostulat. The newmarry'd Couple are forced to make
back Southwards; where finding but slender assistance, and the Queen foolishly
coming from Dunbar to Leith, was glad at last to delay a parley till her Dear
was escaped; and then (clad in an old tattered coat) to yield her self a
Prisoner.

BEING brought to Edinburg, and used rather with hate of her former Enormitys,
than pity of her present Fortune, she received a Message, that she must either
resign the Crown to her Son JAMES (that was born in the time of her marriage
with DARNLY) or else they would proceed to another Election, and was forced to
obey. So the Child then in his Cradle was acknowleg'd JAMES the Sixth, better
Great Britain.

THE wretched Mother flying after into England, was entertained (tho with a
Guard) by Queen ELIZABETH; but after that being suborned by the Papists, and
exasperated by the GUIZES, she entered into Plots and Machinations, so
inconsistent with the Safety of England, that by an Act of Parliament she was
condemned to death, which she received by a Hatchet at Fotheringay Castle.

THE Infancy of her Son was attended with those domestic Evils that accompany
the Minority of Kings. In his Youth he took to Wife the Daughter of Denmark (a
Woman I hear little of, saving the Character SALUST gives SEMPRONIA, that she
could dance better than became a virtuous Woman) with whom he supposing the
Earl GOWRY too much in League, caused him and his Brother to be slain at their
own house whither he was invited; he giving out, that they had an intent to
murder him; and that by miracle and the assistance of some men (whom he had
instructed for that purpose, and taught their tale) he escaped. For this
Deliverance (or to say better, Assassination) he blasphemed God with a solemn
Thanksgiving once a Year all the remainder of his Life.

WELL had it bin for us, if our Forefathers had laid hold of that happy
opportunity of ELIZABETH'S Death (in which the TEUTHORS took a period) to have
performed that which, perhaps in due punishment, has cost us so much blood and
sweat; and not have bowed under the sway of a Stranger, disdained by the most
generous and wise at that time, and only supported by the Faction of some, and
the Sloth of others; who brought but a slender Title, and (however the flattery
of the times cried him up for a SOLOMON) weak Commendations for such an
advancement.

HIS Title stood thus, MARGARET, eldest Daughter to HENRY the Seventh, was
married to JAMES the Fourth, whose Son JAMES the Fifth had MARY the Mother of
JAMES the Sixth. MARGARET after her first Husband's death, marrys ARCHIBALD
DOUGLAS Earl of Angus, who upon her begot MARGARET Wife of MATTHEW Earl of
Lenox, and Mother of that HENRY DARNLY, whose tragical End we just now
mentioned. Now upon this slender Title, and our internal Dissensions (for the
Cecilians and Essexians, for several ends, made perpetual Applications) got
JAMMY from a Revenue of 30000 l. to one of almost two Millions, tho there were
others that had as fair pretenses (and what else can any of them make?) the
Statute of 25 Edw. 3. expressly excluding Foreners from the Crown: and so the
Children of CHARLES BRANDON by MARY the second Daughter, Dowager of France,
being next to com in. And the Lady ARABELLA being sprung from a third Husband
(the Lord STUART) of the said MARGARET, and by a Male Line, carried surely so
formidable a pretension (it should seem) that even that Iniquity which was
personally inherent to her, made her days very unhappy, and for most part
captive, and her death ('it is thought) somewhat too early; so cruel are the
Persecutions of cowardly minds, even against the weakest and most unprotected
Innocence.

AND indeed his Right to the Crown was so unsatisfactory even to the most
judicious of those days, that TOBY MATTHEWS having suit about some Privileges
which he claimed to his Bishopric (which was then Durham) wherein the King
opposed him; and having one day stated the Case before some of his Friends, who
seemed to approve of it; yes, says he, I could wish he had but half so good a
Title to the Crown. And it is known that some Speeches of Sir WALTER RAWLEY, too
generous and English for the times, was that which brought him to Trial and
Condemnation for a seign'd Crime; and afterward so facilitated that barbarous
Design of GUNDAMAR, to cut of his Head for a Crime, for which he was condemned
fourteen years before, and which by the Commissions he after received
(according to the opinion of the then Lord Chancellor, and the greatest
Lawyers) was in Law pardoned.

THIS may appear besides our purpose; but we could not sever this
consideration, unless we would draw him with a half face, and leave as much in
umbrage as we expressed. That which most solemnized his Person was, first the
consideration of his adhering to the Protestant Religion; whereas we are to
consider that those slight Velitations he had with BELLARMIN and the Romanists,
tended rather to make his own Authority more intrinsically intense and
venerable, than to confute any thing they said: for he had before shak'd them
of as to foren Jurisdiction; and for matter of Popery, it appeared in his
latter time that he was no such enemy to it, both by his own compliances with
the Spanish Ambassadors, the design of the Spanish Match (in which his Son was
personally imbarkt) and the slow assistances sent to his Daughter, in whose
safety and protection Protestantism was at that time so much concerned.

FOR his Knowledge, he had some glancings and niblings, which the Severity of
the excellent BUCHANAN forced into him in his younger time, and after
conversation somewhat polished. But tho I bear not so great a contemt to his
other Works, as BEN JOHNSON did to his Poetry, yet if they among many others
were going to the fire, they would not be one of the first I should rescue, as
possibly expecting a more severe and refined Judgment in many others; and
knowing that he that had so many able Wits at command, might easily give their
Oracles through his Mouth. But suppose the things generous and fit to live (as I
am not yet convinced) yet what commendation is this to a King, who should have
other business than spinning and weaving fine Theorys, and engaging in School
Chiquaneries? which was well understood by HENRY the Fourth, who hearing some
men celebrat him with these Attributes; yes (answered he, very tartly) He is a
fine King, and writes little Books.

IT IS true, he was a good Drol, and possibly after Greec Wine somewhat factious:
But of his substantial and heroic Wisdom I have not heard any great Instances.
He himself used to brag of his Kingcraft, which was not to render his People
happy, and to prosecute the ends of a good King, but to scrue up the
Prerogative, divert Parlaments from the due disquisition and prosecution of
their Freedoms, and to break them up at pleasure; and indeed his parting with
the Cautionary Towns of the Low Countries, and that for so small a Sum, showed
him a Person not so quicksighted, or unfit to be overreach'd.

FOR his peaceable Reign, honorable and just Quarrels he wanted not; but sloth
and cowardice witheld him: and indeed the ease and luxury of those times
fomented and nourished those lurking and pestilent humors, which afterward so
dangerously broke out in his Son's Reign.

WE shall not trouble his Ashes with the mention of his personal Faults; only,
if we may compare God's Judgments with apparent Sins, we may find the latter
end of his Life neither fortunat nor comfortable to him. His Wife distasted by
him, and some say, languishing of a soul Disease; his eldest Son dying with too
violent symtoms of Poison, and that, as is feared, by a hand too much allied;
his second (against whom he ever had a secret antipathy) scarce returned from a
mad and dangerous Voyage; his Daughter (all that was left of that Sex)
banished, with her numerous Issue, out of her Husband's Dominion, and living in
miserable Exile; and lastly, himself dying of a violent death by poison, in
which his Son was more than suspected to have a hand, as may be inferred from
BUCKINGHAM'S Plea, that he did it by the Command of the Prince, and CHARLES'S
dissolution of the Parliament that took in hand to examine it; and lastly, his
indifferency at Buckingham's death (tho he pretended all love to him alive) as
glad to be rid of so dangerous and so considerable a Partner of his Guilt. Yet
the miter'd Parasits of those times could say, that one went to Heaven in
Noah's Ark, the other in Elisha's Chariot, he dying of a pretended Fever, she
(as they said) of a Dropsy.

CHARLES having now obtained his Brother's Inheritance, carried Rhee. The next,
that Noble and Christian betraying of Rochel, and consequently in a manner the
whole Protestant Interest in France. The middle of the Reign was heightening of
Prerogative and Prelacy, and conforming our Churches to the pattern of Rome;
till at last just Indignation brought his Subjects of Scotland into England,
and so forced him to call a Parliament: which tho he shamelesly says in the
first line of the Book, called his, was out of his own inclination to
Parlaments, yet how well he liked them, may appear by his first tampering with
his own Army in the North, to surprise and dissolve them; then with the Scots,
who at that time were Court proof; then raising up the Irish Rebellion, which
has wasted millions of Lives; and lastly, his open secession from Westminster,
and hostility against the two Houses, which maintained a first and second sharp
War, that had almost ruined the Nation, had not Providence in a manner
immediately interposed and rescued us to Liberty, and made us such signal
Instruments of his Vengeance, that all wicked Kings may tremble at the example.

IN a word, never was Man so resolute and obstinat in a Tyranny; never People
more strangely besotted with it. To paint the Image of DAVID with his face, and
blasphemously to parallel him with CHRIST, would make one at first thought
think him a Saint: But to compare his Protestations and Actions; his Actions of
the Day, his Actions of the Night; his Protestant Religion, and his courting of
the Pope; and obedience to his Wife; we may justly say, he was one of the most
consummat in the Arts of Tyranny that ever was. And it could be no other than
God's hand that arrested him in the height of his Designs and Greatness, and
cut off him and his Family, making good his own Imprecations on his own Head.

Scotland, which has accepted his Son, whom for distinction sake we will be
content to call CHARLES the Second. Certainly these People were strangely blind
as to God's Judgment perpetually poured out upon a Family; or else wonderfully
addicted to their own Interest, to admit the spray of such a stock; one that
has so little to commend him, and so great improbability to further their
Designs and Happiness; a Popish Education if not Religion too, however for the
present he may seem to dissemble it; France, the Jesuits, and his Mother, good
means of such an improvement; the dangerous Maxims of his Father, besides the
Revenge he ows his Death, of which he will never totally acquit the Scots; his
Hate to the whole Nation; his Sense of MONTROSE'S Death; his backwardness to
com to them till all other means failed (both his foren begged Assistances, his
Propositions to the Pope, and Commissions to MONTROSE) and lastly, his late
running away to his old Friends in the North: so that any man may see his
present compliance to be but histrionical and forced, and that as soon as he
has led them into the Snare, and got power into his own hands, so as that he
may appear once more barefaced, he will be a scourge upon them for their gross
Hypocrisy, and leave them a sad Instance to all Nations, how dangerous it is to
espouse such an Interest, against which God with so visible and severe a hand
dos fight, carried on by and for the support of a tyrannizing Nobility and
Clergy, and wherein the poor People are blindly led on by those afrighting (but
false and ungrounded) pretensions of Perfidy and Perjury, and made instrumental
with their own Estates and Blood toward inslaving and ruining themselves.

THE Commonwealth OF OCEANA.

To his HIGHNESS The Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland,
and Ireland.

-- Quid rides? mutato nomine, de te
Fabula narratur. -- Horat.
The Introduction, or Order of the Work.
Pliny's Description of Oceana.
OCEANA is saluted by the Panegyrist after this manner; O the most blessed and
fortunat of all Countries, OCEANA* How deservedly has Nature with the bountys of
Heaven and Earth indu'd thee? Thy ever-fruitful Womb not closed with Ice, nor
dissolved by the raging Star; where CERES and BACCHUS are perpetual Twins. Thy
Woods are not the harbor of devouring Beasts, nor thy continual Verdure the
ambush of Serpents, but the food of innumerable Herds and Flocks presenting
thee their Shepherdess with distended Dugs, or golden Fleeces. The wings of thy
Night involve thee not in the horror of darkness, but have still some white
feather; and thy Day is (that for which we esteem Life) the longest. But this
Ecstasy of PLINY (as is observed by BERTIUS) seems to allude as well to Marpesia
and Panopea, now Provinces of this Commonwealth, as to Oceana it self.

The Nature of the People.
TO speak of the People in each of these Countries, this of Oceana, for so soft
a one, is the most martial in the whole World. Let States that aim at Greatness
(says VERULAMIUS) take heed how their Nobility and Gentlemen multiply too fast,
for that makes the common Subject grow to be a Peasant and base Swain driven
out of heart, and in effect but a Gentleman's Laborer; just as you may see in
Coppice Woods, if you leave the Staddels too thick, you shall never have clean
Underwood, but Shrubs and Bushes: So in Countries, if the Gentlemen be too many,
the Commons will be base; and you will bring it to that at last, that not the
hundredth Poll will be sit for a Helmet, specially as to the Infantry, which is
the nerve of an Army, and so there will be great Population and little
Strength. This of which I speak has bin no where better seen than by comparing
of Oceana and France, whereof Oceana, tho far less in Territory and Population,
has bin nevertheless an overmatch, in regard the middle People of Oceana make
good Soldiers, which the Peasants in France do not In which words VERULAMIUS
(as MACHIAVEL has don before him) harps much upon a string which he has not
perfectly tuned, and that is the balance of Dominion or Property: as it follows
more plainly in his praise of the profound and admirable device of PANURGUS
King of Oceana, in making Farms and Houses of Husbandry of a Standard; that is,
maintained with such a proportion of Land to them, as may breed a Subject to
live in convenient plenty, and no servil condition, and to keep the Plow in the
hand of the owners, and not mere hirelings. And thus indeed (says he) you shall
attain to VIRGIL'S Character Terra potens armis atque ubere gleba.
which he gives of ancient Italy.

BUT the Tillage bringing up a good Soldiery, brings up a good Commonwealth;
which the Author in the praise of PANURGUS did not mind, nor PANURGUS in
deserving that praise: for where the owner of the Plow coms to have the Sword
too, he will use it in defense of his own; whence it has happened that the
People of Oceana in proportion to their property have bin always free. And the
Genius of this Nation has ever had some resemblance with that of ancient Italy,
which was wholly addicted to Commonwealths, and where Rome came to make the
greatest account of her rustic Tribes, and to call her Consuls from the Plow;
for in the way of Parlaments, which was the Government of this Realm, men of
Country-lives have bin still entrusted with the greatest Affairs, and the
People have constantly had an aversion to the ways of the Court. Ambition
loving to be gay, and to fawn, has bin a Gallantry looked upon as having
something in it of the Livery; and Husbandry, or the country way of Life, tho of
a grosser spinning, as the best stuf of a Commonwealth, according to ARISTOTLE,
such a one being the most obstinat Assertors of her Liberty, and the least
subject to Innovation or Turbulency. Wherefore till the Foundations (as will be
hereafter showed) were removed, this People was observed to be the least
subject to Shakings and Turbulency of any: Whereas Commonwealths, upon which the
City Life has had the stronger influence, as Athens, have seldom or never bin
quiet; but at the best are found to have injured their own business by
over-doing it. Whence the Urban Tribes of Rome, consisting of the Turba
forensis, and Libertins that had received their Freedom by manumission, were of
no reputation in comparison of the Rustics. It is true, that with Venice it may
seem to be otherwise, in regard the Gentlemen (for so are all such called as
have a right to that Government) are wholly addicted to the City Life: but then
the Turba forensis, the Secretarys, Cittadini, with the rest of the Populace,
are wholly excluded. Otherwise a Commonwealth, consisting but of one City,
would doubtless be stormy, in regard that Ambition would be every man's trade:
but where it consists of a Country, the Plow in the hands of the owner finds
him a better calling, and produces the most innocent and steady Genius of a
Commonwealth, such as is that of Oceana.

The Nature of the Marpesians.
MARPESIA, being the Northern part of the same Island, is the dry Nurse of a
populous and hardy Nation, but where the Staddels have bin formerly too thick:
whence their Courage answered not their hardiness, except in the Nobility, who
governed that Country much after the manner of Poland; but that the King was
not elective till the People received their Liberty, the yoke of the Nobility
being broke by the Commonwealth of Oceana, which in grateful return is thereby
provided with an inexhaustible Magazin of Auxiliarys.

The Nature of the Panopeans.
PANOPEA, the soft Mother of a slothful and pusillanimous People, is a neighbor
Island, anciently subjected by the Arms of Oceana; since almost depopulated for
shaking the Yoke, and at length replanted with a new Race. But (through what
virtues of the Soil, or vice of the Air soever it be) they com still to
degenerat. Wherefore seeing it is neither likely to yield men fit for Arms, nor
necessary it should; it had bin the Interest of Oceana so to have disposed of
this Province, being both rich in the nature of the Soil, and full of
commodious Ports for Trade, that it might have bin ordered for the best in
relation to her Purse: which in my opinion (if it had bin thought upon in time)
might have bin best don by planting it with Jews, ^llowing them their own Rites
and Laws; for that would have brought them suddenly from all parts of the
World, and in sufficient numbers. And tho the Jews be now altogether for
Merchandise, yet in the Land of Canaan (except since their exile from whence
they have not bin Landlords) they were altogether for Agriculture; and there is
no cause why a man should doubt, but having a fruitful Country, and excellent
Ports too, they would be good at both. Panopea well peopled, would be worth a
matter of four millions dry rents; that is, besides the advantage of the
Agriculture and Trade, which, with a Nation of that Industry, coms at least to
as much more. Wherefore Panopea being farmed out to the Jews and their Heirs for
ever, for the pay of a provincial Army to protect them during the term of seven
years, and for two Millions annual Revenue from that time forward, besides the
Customs which would pay the provincial Army, would have bin a bargain of such
advantage both to them and this Commonwealth, as is not to be found otherwise
by either. To receive the Jews after any other manner into a Commonwealth, were
to maim it: for they of all Nations never incorporat, but taking up the room of
a Limb, are of no use or office to the body, while they suck the nourishment
which would sustain a natural and useful Member.

IF Panopea had bin so disposed of, that Knapsack, with the Marpesian
Auxiliary, had bin an inestimable Treasure; the Situation of these Countries
being Islands (as appears by Venice how advantageous such a one is to the like
Government) seems to have bin designed by God for a Commonwealth. And yet that,
through the streitness of the place and The Situation of the Commonwealth of
Oceana.
defect of proper Arms, can be no more than a Commonwealth for Preservation:
whereas this, reduced to the like Government, is a Commonwealth for increase,
and upon the mightiest foundation that any has bin laid from the beginning of
the World to this day. Illam arcta capiens Neptunus compede stringit:
Hanc autem glaucis captus complectitur ulnis.


THE Sea gives law to the growth of Venice, but the growth of Oceana gives law
to the Sea.

THESE Countries having bin anciently distinct and hostil Kingdoms, came by
MORPHEUS the Marpesian (who succeeded by hereditary right to the Crown of
Oceana) not only to be joined under one head; but to be cast, as it were by a
charm, into that profound sleep, which, broken at length by the Trumpet of
Civil War, has produced those effects, that have given occasion to the ensuing
Discourse, divided into four parts.

1. The Preliminarys, showing the Principles of Government. 2. The Council of
Legislators, showing the Art of making a Commonwealth. 3. The Model of the
Commonwealth of Oceana, showing the effect of such an Art. 4. The Corollary,
showing some Consequences of such a Government.
The Preliminarys, showing the Principles of Government.
JANOTTI, the most excellent Describer of the Commonwealth of Venice, divides
the whole Series of Government into two Times or Periods. The one ending with
the Liberty of Rome, which was the Course of Empire, as I may call it, of
Ancient Prudence, first discovered to mankind by GOD himself in the Fabric of
the Commonwealth of Israel, and afterward picked out of his Footsteps in
Nature, and unanimously followed by the Greecs and Romans. The other beginning
with the Arms of CAESAR, which, extinguishing Liberty, were the Transition of
Ancient into Modern Prudence, introduced by those Inundations of Huns, Goths,
Vandals, Lombards, Saxons, which, breaking the Roman Empire, deformed the whole
face of the World with those ill features of Government, which at this time are
become far worse in these western parts, except Venice, which escaping the hands
of the Barbarians, by virtue of its impregnable Situation, has had its ey fixed
upon ancient Prudence, and is attained to a perfection even beyond the Copy.

Definitions of Government.
RELATION being had to these two times, Government (to define it de jure, or
according to ancient Prudence) is an Art whereby a Civil Society of Men is
instituted and preserved upon the Foundation of common Right or Interest; or
(to follow ARISTOTLE and LIVY) It is the Empire of Laws, and not of Men.

AND Government (to define it de facto, or according to modern Prudence) is an
Art whereby some man, or some few men, subject a City or a Nation, and rule it
according to his or their private Interest: which, because the Laws in such
cases are made according to the interest of a man, or of some few Familys, may
be said to be the Empire of Men, and not of Laws.

THE former kind is that which MACHIAVEL (whose Books are neglected) is the
only Politician that has gone about to retrieve; and Page 180. Page 377.
that LEVIATHAN (who would have his Book imposed upon the Universitys) gos about
to destroy. For, It is (says he) another Error of ARISTOTLE'S Politics, that in
a well-ordered Commonwealth not Men should govern, but the Laws. What man that
has his natural senses, tho he can neither write nor read, dos not find himself
governed by them he fears, and believes can kill or hurt him when he obeys not?
Or, who believes that the Law can hurt him, which is but Words and Paper,
without the Hands and Swords of men? I confess, that Magistratus est lex armata.
the Magistrate upon his Bench is that to the Law, which a Gunner upon his
Platform is to his Cannon. Nevertheless, I should not dare to argue with a man
of any Ingenuity after this manner. A whole Army, tho they can neither write
nor read, are not afraid of a Platform, which they know is but Earth or Stone;
nor of a Cannon, which without a hand to give fire to it, is but cold Iron;
therefore a whole Army is afraid of one man. But of this kind is the
Ratiocination of LEVIATHAN (as I shall show in diverse places that com in my
way) throout his whole Politics, Page 111.
or worse; as where he says of ARISTOTLE and of CICERO, of the Greecs, and of
the Romans, who lived under popular States, that they derived those Rights not
from the Principles of Nature, but transcribed them into their Books, out of
the practice of their own Commonwealths, as Grammarians describe the Rules of
Language out of Poets. Which is as if a man should tell famous HERVY, that he
transcribed his Circulation of the Blood not out of the Principles of Nature,
but out of the Anatomy of this or that Body.

TO go on therefore with this preliminary Discourse, I shall divide it
(according to the two definitions of Government relating to JANOTTI'S two
times) into two parts. The First treating of the Principles of Government in
general, and according to the Ancients: The Second treating of the late
Governments of Oceana in particular, and in that of modern Prudence.

Division of Government.
GOVERNMENT, according to the Ancients, and their learned Disciple MACHIAVEL,
the only Politician of later Ages, is of three kinds; The Government of One
Man, or of the Better sort, or of the whole People: which by their more learned
names are called Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy. These they hold, through
their proneness to degenerat, to be all evil. For whereas they that govern
should govern according to Reason, if they govern according to Passion, they do
that which they should not do. Wherefore as Reason and Passion are two things,
so Government by Reason is one thing, and the corruption of Government by
Passion is another thing, but not always another Government: as a Body that is
alive is one thing, and a Body that is dead is another thing, but not always
another Creature, tho the Corruption of one coms at length to be the Generation
of another. The Corruption then of Monarchy is called Tyranny; that of
Aristocracy, Oligarchy; and that of Democracy, Anarchy. But Legislators having
found these three Governments at the best to be naught, have invented another
consisting of a mixture of them all, which only is good. This is the Doctrine of
the Ancients.

BUT LEVIATHAN is positive, that they are all deceived, and that there is no
other Government in Nature than one of the three; as also that the Flesh of
them cannot stink, the names of their Corruptions being but the names of men's
Phansies, which will be understood when we are shown which of them was Senatus
Populusque Romanus.

TO go my own way, and yet to follow the Ancients, the Principles of Government
are twofold; Internal, or the goods of the Mind; and External, or the goods of
Fortune. The goods of the Mind are Goods of the Mind and of Fortune.
natural or acquired Virtues, as Wisdom, Prudence, and Courage, etc. The goods
of Fortune are Riches. There be goods also of the Body, as Health, Beauty,
Strength; but these are not to be brought into account, upon this score,
because if a Man or an Army acquires Victory or Empire, it is more from their
Discipline, Arms, and Courage, than from their natural Health, Beauty, or
Strength, in regard that a People conquered may have more of natural Strength,
Beauty and Health, and yet find little remedy. The Principles of Government
then are in the goods of the Mind, or in the goods of Fortune. To the goods of
the Mind answers Authority; to the goods of Fortune, Power or Empire. Empire
and Authority.
Wherefore LEVIATHAN, tho he be right where he says that Riches are Power, is
mistaken where he says that Prudence, or the reputation of Prudence, is Power:
for the Learning or Prudence of a Man is no more Power than the Learning or
Prudence of a Book or Author, which is properly Authority. A learned Writer may
have Authority tho he has no Power; and a foolish Magistrate may have Power, tho
he has otherwise no Esteem or Authority. The difference of these two is
observed by LIVY in EVANDER, of whom he says, Regebat magis Autoritate quam
Imperio.
that he governed rather by the Authority of others, than by his own Power.

Empire.
TO begin with Riches, in regard that Men are hung upon these, not of choice as
upon the other, but of necessity and by the teeth: for as much as he who wants
Bread is his Servant that will seed him; if a Man thus seeds a whole People,
they are under his Empire.

Division of Empire.
EMPIRE is of two kinds, Domestic and National, or Foren and Provincial.

Domestic Empire.

Dominion.


DOMESTIC Empire is founded upon Dominion.

DOMINION is Property real or personal, that is to say, in Lands, or in Money
and Goods.

Balance in Lands.
LANDS, or the parts and parcels of a Territory, are held by the Proprietor or
Proprietors, Lord or Lords of it, in some proportion; and such (except it be in
a City that has little or no Land, and whose Revenue is in Trade) as is the
proportion or balance of Dominion or Property in Land, such is the nature of
the Empire.

Absolute Monarchy.
IF one Man be sole Landlord of a Territory, or overbalance the People, for
example three parts in four, he is Grand Signior: for so the Turk is called
from his Property; and his Empire is absolute Monarchy.

Mixed Monarchy.
IF the Few or a Nobility, or a Nobility with the Clergy be Landlords, or
overbalance the People to the like proportion, it makes the Gothic balance (to
be shown at large in the second part of this Discourse) and the Empire is mixed
Monarchy, as that of Spain, Poland, and late of Oceana.

Popular Government.
AND if the whole People be Landlords, or hold the Lands so divided among them,
that no one Man, or number of Men, within the compass of the Few or
Aristocracy, overbalance them, the Empire (without the interposition of Force)
is a Commonwealth.

Tyranny.

Oligarchy.

Anarchy.


IF Force be interposed in any of these three cases, it must either frame the
Government to the Foundation, or the Foundation to the Government; or holding
the Government not according to the balance, it is not natural, but violent:
and therefore if it be at the devotion of a Prince, it is Tyranny; if at the
devotion of the Few, Oligarchy; or if in the power of the People, Anarchy. Each
of which Confusions, the balance standing otherwise, is but of short
continuance, because against the nature of the balance, which, not destroyed,
destroys that which opposes it.

BUT there be certain other Confusions, which, being rooted in the balance, are
of longer continuance, and of worse consequence; as first, where a Nobility
holds half the Property, or about that proportion, and the People the other
half; in which case, without altering the balance, there is no remedy but the
one must eat out the other: as the People did the Nobility in Athens, and the
Nobility the People in Rome. Secondly, when a Prince holds about half the
Dominion, and the People the other half (which was the case of the Roman
Emperors, planted partly upon their military Colonies, and partly upon the
Senate and the People) the Government becoms a very shambles both of the Princes
and the People. Somewhat of this nature are certain Governments at this day,
which are said to subsist by confusion. In this case, to fix the balance, is to
entail misery: but in the three former, not to fix it, is to lose the
Government. Wherefore it being unlawful in Turkey, that any should possess Land
but the Grand Signior, the balance is fixed by the Law, and that Empire firm.
Nor, tho the Kings often fell, was the Throne of Oceana known to shake, until
the Statute of Alienations broke the Pillars, by giving way to the Nobility to
sell their Estates. Si terra recedat, Ionium Aegaeo frangat mare.
While Lacedemon held to the division of Land made by LYCURGUS, it was
immovable, but, breaking that, could stand no longer. This kind of Law fixing
the balance in Lands is called Agrarian, and was first introduced by God
himself, who divided the Land of Canaan to his People by Lots, and is of such
virtue, that wherever it has held, that Government has not altered, except by
consent; as in that unparalled example of the People of Israel, when being in
liberty they would needs choose a King. But without an Agrarian, Government,
whether Monarchical, Aristocratical, or Popular, has no long Lease.

AS for Dominion personal or in Money, it may now and then stir up a MELIUS or a
MANLIUS, which, if the Commonwealth be not provided with some kind of
Dictatorian Power, may be dangerous, tho it has bin seldom or never successful:
because to Property producing Empire, it is required that it should have some
certain root or foothold, which, except in Land, it cannot have, being
otherwise as it were upon the Wing.

Balance in Money.
NEVERTHELESS, in such Cities as subsist mostly by Trade, and have little or no
Land, as Holland and Genoa, the balance of Treasure may be equal to that of
Land in the cases mentioned.

BUT LEVIATHAN, tho he seems to scew at Antiquity, following his furious Master
CARNEADES, has caught hold of the public Sword, to which he reduces all manner
and matter of Government; as, where he affirms this opinion [that any Monarch
receives his Power Page 89.
by Covenant, that is to say, upon conditions] to proceed from the not
understanding this easy truth, That Covenants being but Words and Breath, have
no power to oblige, contain, constrain, or protect any Man, but what they have
from the public Sword. But as he said of the Law, that without this Sword it is
but Paper; so he might have thought of this Sword, that without a Hand it is
but cold Iron. The Hand which holds this Sword is the Militia of a Nation; and
the Militia of a Nation is either an Army in the field, or ready for the field
upon occasion. But an Army is a Beast that has a great belly, and must be fed;
wherefore this will com to what Pastures you have, and what Pastures you have
will com to the balance of Property, without which the public Sword is but a
name or mere spitfrog. Wherefore to set that which LEVIATHAN says of Arms and of
Contracts a little streighter; Arms and Contracts.
he that can graze this Beast with the great belly, as the Turk dos his
Timariots, may well deride him that imagins he received his Power by Covenant,
or is obliged to any such toy: it being in this case only that Covenants are
but Words and Breath. But if the Property of the Nobility, stocked with their
Tenants and Retainers, be the pasture of that Beast, the Ox knows his Master's
Crib; and it is impossible for a King in such a Constitution to reign otherwise
than by Covenant; or if he breaks it, it is words that com to blows.

Page 90.
BUT says he, when an Assembly of Men is made Soverain, then no Man imagins any
such Covenant to have past in the Institution. But what was that by PUBLICOLA
of appeal to the People, or that whereby the People had their Tribuns? ^y, says
he, no body is so dull as to say, that the People of Rome made a Covenant with
the Romans, to hold the Soverainty on such or such conditions; which not
performed, the Romans might depose the Roman People. In which there be several
remarkable things; for he holds the Commonwealth of Rome to have consisted of
one Assembly, whereas it consisted of the Senate and the People; That they were
not upon Covenant, whereas every Law enacted by them was a Covenant between
them; That the one Assembly was made Soverain, whereas the People who only were
Soverain, were such from the beginning, as appears by the ancient style of
their Covenants or Laws, Censuere patres, jussit populus.
The Senate has resolved, the People have decreed; That a Council being made
Soverain, cannot be made such upon conditions, whereas the Decemvirs being a
Council that was made Soverain, was made such upon conditions; That all
Conditions or Covenants making a Soverain, the Soverain being made, are void;
whence Page 89.
it must follow that, the Decemviri being made, were ever after the lawful
Government of Rome, and that it was unlawful for the Commonwealth of Rome to
depose the Decemvirs; as also that CICERO, if he wrote otherwise out of his
Commonwealth, did not write out of Nature. But to com to others that see more
of this balance.

B. 5, 3. 3, 9.
YOU have ARISTOTLE full of it in diverse places, especially where he says, that
immoderat Wealth, as where One Man or the Few have greater Possessions than the
Equality or the Frame of the Commonwealth will bear, is an occasion of
Sedition, which ends for the greater part in Monarchy; and that for this cause
the Ostracism has bin received in diverse places, as in Argos and Athens. But
that it were better to prevent the growth in the beginning, than, when it has
got head, to seek the remedy of such an evil.

D. B. 1. c. 55.
MACCHIAVEL has missed it very narrowly and more dangerously; for not fully
perceiving that if a Commonwealth be galled by the Gentry, it is by their
overbalance, he speaks of the Gentry as hostil to popular Governments, and of
popular Governments as hostil to the Gentry; and makes us believe that the
People in such are so enraged against them, that where they meet a Gentleman
they kill him: which can never be proved by any one example, unless in civil
War; seeing that even in Switzerland the Gentry are not only safe, but in
honor. But the Balance, as I have laid it down, tho unseen by MACCHIAVEL, is
that which interprets him, and that which he confirms by his Judgment in many
others as well as in this place, where he concludes, That he who will go about
to make a Commonwealth where there be many Gentlemen, unless he first destroys
them, undertakes an Impossibility. And that he who goes about to introduce
Monarchy where the condition of the People is equal, shall never bring it to
pass, unless he cull out such of them as are the most turbulent and ambitious,
and make them Gentlemen or Noblemen, not in name but in effect; that is, by
enriching them with Lands, Castles, and Treasures, that may gain them Power
among the rest, and bring in the rest to dependence upon themselves, to the end
that they maintaining their Ambition by the Prince, the Prince may maintain his
Power by them.

WHEREFORE as in this place I agree with MACCHIAVEL, that a Nobility or Gentry,
overbalancing a popular Government, is the utter bane and destruction of it; so
I shall show in another, that a Nobility or Gentry, in a popular Government not
overbalancing it, is the very life and soul of it.

The right of the Militia stated.
BY what has bin said, it should seem that we may lay aside further disputes of
the public Sword, or of the right of the Militia; which, be the Government what
it will, or let it change how it can, is inseparable from the overbalance in
Dominion: nor, if otherwise stated by the ^aw or Custom (as in the Commonwealth
of Rome, Consules sine lege Curiata rem militarem attingere non potuerunt.
where the People having the Sword, the Nobility came to have the overbalance)
avails it to any other end than destruction. For as a Building swaying from the
Foundation must fall, so it fares with the Law swaying from Reason, and the
Militia from the balance of Dominion. And thus much for the balance of National
or Domestic Empire, which is in Dominion.

The Balance of foren Empire.
THE balance of Foren or Provincial Empire is of a contrary nature. A man may
as well say, that it is unlawful for him who has made a fair and honest
purchase to have Tenants, as for a Government that has made a just progress,
and enlargement of it self, to have Provinces. But how a Province may be justly
acquired, appertains to another place. In this I am to show no more than how or
upon what kind of balance it is to be held; in order whereto I shall first show
upon what kind of balance it is not to be held. It has bin said, that national
or independent Empire, of what kind soever, is to be exercised by them that
have the proper balance of Dominion in the Nation; wherefore provincial or
dependent Empire is not to be exercised by them that have the balance of
Dominion in the Province, because that would bring the Government from
Provincial and Dependent, to National and Independent. Absolute Monarchy, as
that of the Turks, neither plants its People at home nor abroad, otherwise than
as Tenants for life or at will; wherefore its National and Provincial Government
is all one. But in Governments that admit the Citizen or Subject to Dominion in
Lands, the richest are they that share most of the Power at home; whereas the
richest among the Provincials, tho native Subjects, or Citizens that have bin
transplanted, are least admitted to the Government abroad: for men, like
slowers or roots being transplanted, take after the soil wherein they grow.
Wherefore the Commonwealth of Rome, by planting Colonys of its Citizens within
the bounds of Italy, took the best way of propagating it self, and naturalizing
the Country; whereas if it had planted such Colonys without the bounds of Italy,
it would have alienated the Citizens, and given a root to Liberty abroad that
might have sprung up foren, or savage, and hostil to her: wherefore it never
made any such dispersion of it self and its strength, till it was under the
yoke of the Emperors, who disburdening themselves of the People, as having less
apprehension of what they could do abroad than at home, took a contrary course.

THE Mamalucs (which till any man show me the contrary, I shall presume to have
bin a Commonwealth consisting of an Army, whereof the common Soldier was the
People, the Commission Officer the Senate, and the General the Prince) were
Foreners, and by Nation Circassians, that governed Egypt; wherefore these never
durst plant themselves upon Dominion, which growing naturally up into the
National Interest, must have dissolved the foren yoke in that Province.

THE like in some sort may be said of Venice, the Government whereof is usually
mistaken: for Venice, tho it dos not take in the People, never excluded them.
This Commonwealth, the Orders whereof are the most Democratical or Popular of
all others, in regard of the exquisit Rotation of the Senate, at the first
institution took in the whole People; they that now live under the Government
without participation of it, are such as have since either voluntarily chosen
so to do, or were subdued by Arms. Wherefore the Subject of Venice is governed
by Provinces; and the balance of Dominion not standing, as has bin said, with
Provincial Government: As the Mamalucs durst not cast their Government upon
this balance in their Provinces, lest the National Interest should have rooted
out the Foren; so neither dare the Venetians take in their Subjects upon this
balance, lest the foren Interest should root out the National (which is that of
the 3000 now governing) and by diffusing the Commonwealth throout her
Territorys, lose the advantage of her Situation, by which in great part it
subsists. And such also is the Government of the Spaniard in the Indies, to
which he deputes Natives of his own Country, not admitting the Creolios to the
Government of those Provinces, tho descended from Spaniards.

BUT if a Prince or a Commonwealth may hold a Territory that is foren in this,
it may be asked, why he may not hold one that is native in the like manner? To
which I answer, because he can hold a foren by a native Territory, but not a
native by a foren* and as hitherto I have shown what is not the provincial
Balance, so by this answer it may appear what it is, namely the Overbalance of
a native Territory to a foren; for as one Country balances it self by the
distribution of Property according to the proportion of the same, so one
Country overbalances another by advantage of diverse kinds. For example, the
Commonwealth of Rome overbalanc'd her Provinces by the vigor of a more
excellent Government opposed to a crazier, or by a more exquisit Militia
opposed to one inferior in Courage or Discipline. The like was that of the
Mamalucs, being a hardy People, to the Egyptians that were a soft one. And the
balance of Situation is in this kind of wonderful effect; seeing the King of
Denmark, being none of the most potent Princes, is able at the Sound to take
Toll of the greatest: and as this King by the advantage of the Land can make
the Sea tributary; so Venice, by the advantage of the Sea, in whose arms she is
impregnable, can make the Land to feed her Gulf. For the Colonys in the Indies,
they are yet Babes that cannot live without sucking the breasts of their Mother
Citys, but such as I mistake if when they com of age they do not wean
themselves: which causes me to wonder at Princes that delight to be exhausted
in that way. And so much for the principles of Power, whether National or
Provincial, Domestic or Foren; being such as are external, and founded in the
goods of Fortune.

Authority.
I COM to the principles of Authority, which are internal, and founded upon the
goods of the Mind. These the Legislator that can unite in his Government with
those of Fortune, coms nearest to the work of God, whose Government consists of
Heaven and Earth: which was said by PLATO, tho in different words, as, when
Princes should be Philosophers, or Philosophers Princes, the World would be
Eccles. 10. 15. Tacit.
happy. And says SOLOMON, There is an evil which I have seen under the Sun,
which procedes from the Ruler (enimvero neque nobilem, neque ingenuum, nec
libertinum quidem armis praeponere, regia utilitas est) Grot.
Folly is set in great dignity, and the Rich (either in Virtue and Wisdom, in
the goods of the Mind, or those of Fortune upon that balance which gives them a
sense of the National Interest) sit in low places. I have seen Servants upon
horses, and Princes walking as Servants upon the earth. Sad complaints, that
the principles of Power and of Authority, the goods of the Mind and of Fortune,
do not meet and twine in the Wreath or Crown of Empire! Wherefore, if we have
any thing of Piety or of Prudence, let us raise our selves out of the mire of
private Interest to the contemplation of Virtue, and put a hand to the removal
of this evil from under the Sun; this evil against which no Government that is
not secured, can be good; this evil from which the Government that is secure
must be perfect. SOLOMON tells us, that the cause of it is from the Ruler, from
those principles of power, which, balanced upon earthly trash, exclude the
heavenly treasures of Virtue, and that influence of it upon Government, which
is Authority. We have wandered the Earth to find out the balance of power: but
to find out that of Authority, we must ascend, as I said, nearer Heaven, or to
the Image of God, which is the Soul of Man.

THE Soul of Man (whose life or motion is perpetual Contemplation or Thought)
is the Mistress of two potent Rivals, the one Reason, the other Passion, that
are in continual suit; and, according as she gives up her will to these or
either of them, is the felicity or misery which Man partakes in this mortal
life.

FOR as whatever was Passion in the contemplation of a man, being brought forth
by his will into action, is Vice and the bondage of Sin; so whatever was Reason
in the contemplation of a man, being brought forth by his will into action, is
virtue and the freedom of Soul.

AGAIN, as those actions of a man that were Sin acquire to himself Repentance
or Shame, and affect others with Scorn or Pity; so those actions of a man that
are Virtue acquire to himself Honor, and upon others Authority.

NOW Government is no other than the Soul of a Nation or City: wherefore that
which was Reason in the debate of a Commonwealth being brought forth by the
result, must be Virtue; and forasmuch as the Soul of a City or Nation is the
Soverain Power, her Virtue must be Law. But the Government whose Law is Virtue,
and whose Virtue is Law, is the same whose Empire is Authority, and whose
Authority is Empire.

AGAIN, If the Liberty of a man consists in the Empire of his Reason, the
absence whereof would betray him to the bondage of his Passions; then the
Liberty of a Commonwealth consists in the Empire of her Laws, the absence
whereof would betray her to the Lust of Tyrants. And these I conceive to be the
Principles upon which ARISTOTLE and LIVY (injuriously accused by LEVIATHAN for
not writing out of nature) have grounded their Assertion, That a Commonwealth
is an Empire of Laws, and not of Men. But they must not ^arry it so. For, says
he, the Liberty, whereof there is so frequent and Page 110.
honorable mention in the Historys and Philosophy of the ancient Greecs and
Romans, and the Writings and Discourses of those that from them have received
all their Learning in the Politics, is not the Liberty of particular Men, but
the Liberty of the Commonwealth. He might as well have said, that the Estates
of particular Men in a Commonwealth are not the Riches of particular Men, but
the Riches of the Commonwealth; for equality of Estates causes equality of
Power, and equality of Power is the Liberty not only of the Commonwealth, but
of every Man. But sure a Man would never be thus irreverent with the greatest
Authors, and positive against all Antiquity, without some certain demonstration
of Truth: and, what is it? Why, there is written on the Turrets of the City of
Lucca in great Characters at this day the word LIBERTAS; yet no Man can thence
infer, that a particular Man has more Liberty or Immunity from the Service of
the Commonwealth there, than in Constantinople. Whether a Commonwealth be
Monarchical or Popular, the Freedom is the same. The Mountain has brought
forth, and we have a little Equivocation! For to say, that a Luchese has no
more Liberty or Immunity from the Laws of Luca, than a Turk has from those of
Constantinople; and to say that a Lucchese has no more Liberty or Immunity by
the Laws of Lucca, than a Turk has by those of Constantinople, are pretty
different Speeches. The first may be said of all Governments alike; the second
scarce of any two; much less of these, seeing it is known, that whereas the
greatest Basha is a Tenant, as well of his Head as of his Estate, at the Will
of his Lord, the meanest Lucchese that has Land, is a Freeholder of both, and
not to be controlled but by the Law, and that framed by every private Man to no
other end (or they may thank themselves) than to protect the Liberty of every
private Man, which by that means coms to be the Liberty of the Commonwealth.

BUT seeing they that make the Laws in Commonwealths are but Men, the main
Question seems to be, how a Commonwealth coms to be an Empire of Laws, and not
of Men? or how the Debate or Result of a Commonwealth is so sure to be
according to Reason; seeing they who debate, and they who resolve, be but Men?
And as often ^obs.
as Reason is against a Man, so often will a Man be against Reason.

THIS is thought to be a shrewd saying, but will do no harm; for be it so that
Reason is nothing but Interest, there be diverse Interests, and so diverse
Reasons.

AS first, there is private Reason, which is the Interest of a private Man.

SECONDLY, There is Reason of State, which is the Interest (or Error, as was
said by SOLOMON) of the Ruler or Rulers, that is to say, of the Prince, of the
Nobility, or of the People.

THIRDLY, There is that Reason, which is the Interest of Mankind, Hooker. B. 1.
or of the whole. Now if we see even in those natural Agents that want sense,
that as in themselves they have a Law which directs them in the means whereby
they tend to their own perfection, so likewise that another Law there is, which
touches them as they are sociable parts united into one Body, a Law which binds
them each to serve to others good, and all to prefer the good of the whole,
before whatsoever their own particular; as when stones, or heavy things forsake
their ordinary wont or center, and fly upwards, as if they heard themselves
commanded to let go the good they privately wish, and to relieve the present
distress of Nature in common. There is a common Right, Law of Nature, or
Interest of the whole; which is more excellent, and so acknowleg'd to be by the
Agents Grot.
themselves, than the Right or Interest of the Parts only. Wherefore tho it may
be truly said that the Creatures are naturally carried forth to their proper
utility or prosit, that ought not to be taken in too general a sense; seeing
diverse of them abs^ain from their own prosit, either in regard of those of the
same kind, or at least of their young

MANKIND then must either be less just than the Creature, or acknowledge also
his common Interest to be common Right. And if Reason be nothing else but
Interest, and the Interest o^ Mankind be the right Interest, then the Reason of
Mankind must be right Reason. Now compute well; for if the Interest of popular
Government com the nearest to the Interest of Mankind, then the Reason of
popular Government must com the nearest to right Reason.

BUT it may be said, that the di^ficulty remains yet; for be the Interest of
popular Government right Reason, a Man dos not look upon Reason as it is right
or wrong in it self, but as it makes for him or against him. Wherefore unless
you can show such Orders of a Government, as, like those of God in Nature,
shall be able to constrain this or that Creature to shake off that Inclination
which is more peculiar to it, and take up that which regards the common Good or
Interest; all this is to no more end, than to persuade every man in a popular
Government not to carve himself of that which he desires most, but to be
mannerly at the public Table, and give the best from himself to Decency and the
common Interest. But that such Orders may be established, as may, nay must give
the upper hand in all cases to common Right or Interest, notwithstanding the
nearness of that which sticks to every man in private, and this in a way of
equal certainty and facility, is known even to Girls, being no other than those
that are of common practice with them in diverse cases. For example, two of them
have a Cake yet undivided, which was given between them: that each of them
therefore may have that which is due, Divide, says one to the other, and I will
choose; or let me divide, and you shall choose. If this be but once agreed upon,
it is enough: for the divident, dividing unequally, loses, in regard that the
other takes the better half; wherefore she divides equally, and so both have
right. O the depth of the Wisdom of God! and yet by the mouths of Babes and
Sucklings has he set forth his strength; that which great Philosophers are
disputing upon in vain, is brought to light by two harmless Girls, even the
whole Mystery of a Commonwealth, which lys only in dividing and choosing. Nor
has God (if his Works in Nature be understood) left so much to Mankind to
dispute upon, as who shall divide, and who choose, but distributed them for ever
into two Orders, whereof the one has the natural right of dividing, and the
other of choosing. For Example:

The Orders of popular Government in Nature.
A COMMONWEALTH is but a civil Society of Men: let us take any number of Men
(as twenty) and immediately make a Commonwealth. Twenty Men (if they be not all
Idiots, perhaps if they be) can never com so together, but there will be such a
difference in them, that about a third will be wiser, or at least less foolish
than all the rest; these upon acquaintance, tho it be but small, will be
discovered, and (as Stags that have the largest heads) lead the herd: for while
the six discoursing and arguing one with another, show the eminence of their
parts, the fourteen discover things that they never thought on; or are cleared
in diverse Truths which had formerly perplexed them. Wherefore in matter of
common concernment, difficulty, or danger, they hang upon their lips as
Children upon their Fathers; and the influence thus acquired by the six, the
eminence of whose parts is found to be a stay and comfort to the fourteen, is
Authoritas Patrum.
the Authority of the Fathers. Wherefore this can be no other than a natural
Aristocracy diffused by God throout the whole Body of Mankind to this end and
purpose; and therefore such as the People have not only a natural, but a
positive Obligation to make use of as their Guides; as where the People of
Israel are commanded to take wise men, Deuteronomy. 1. 13.
and understanding, and known among their Tribes, to be made Rulers over them.
The six then approved of, as in the present case, are the Senate, not by
hereditary Right, or in regard of the greatness of their Estates only (which
would tend to such Power as might force or draw the People) but by election for
their excellent Parts, which tends to the advancement of the influence of their
Virtue or Authority that leads the People. Wherefore the Office of the Senate is
not to be Commanders, but Counselors of the People; and that which is proper
to Counselors is first to debate, and afterward to give advice in the business
whereupon they have debated; whence the Decrees of the Senate are never Laws, nor
so Senatusconsulta.
called: and these being maturely framed, it is their duty Far ad Populum.
to propose in the case to the People. Wherefore the Senate is no more than the
debate of the Commonwealth. But to debate, is to discern or put a difference
between things that, being alike, are not the same; or it is separating and
weighing this reason against that, and that reason against this, which is
dividing.

The People.
THE Senate then having divided, who shall choose? Ask the Girls: for is she that
divided must have chosen also, it had bin little worse for the other in case
she had not divided at all, but kept the whole Cake to her self, in regard that
being to choose too, she divided accordingly. Wherefore if the Senate have any
farther power thanto divide, the Commonwealth can never be equal. But in a
Commonwealth consisting of a single Council, there is no other to choose than
that which divided; whence it is, that such a Council sails not to scramble,
that is, to be factious, there being no other dividing of the Cake in that case
but among themselves.

NOR is there any remedy but to have another Council to choose. The Wisdom of
the Few may be the Light of Mankind; but the Interest of the Few is not the
Profit of Mankind, nor of a Commonwealth. Wherefore seeing we have granted
Interest to be Reason, they must not choose, lest it put out their Light. But as
the Council dividing consists of the Wisdom of the Commonwealth, so the
Assembly or Council choosing should consist of the Interest of the Commonwealth:
as the Wisdom of the Commonwealth is in the Aristocracy, so the Interest of the
Commonwealth is in the whole body of the People. And whereas this, in case the
Commonwealth consist of a whole Nation, is too unweildy a body to be assembled,
this Council is to consist of such a Representative as may be equal, and so
constituted, as can never contract any other Interest than that of the whole
People; the manner whereof, being such as is best shown by Exemplification, I
remit to the Model. But in the present case, the six dividing, and the fourteen
choosing, must of necessity take in the whole interest of the twenty.

DIVIDING and choosing in the language of a Commonwealth is debating and
resolving; and whatsoever upon debate of the Senate is proposed to the People,
and resolved by them, is enacted Authoritate Patrum and jussu Populi.
by the authority of the Fathers, and by the power of the People, which
concurring, make a Law.

The Magistracy.
BUT the Law being made, says LEVIATHAN, is but Words and Paper without the
Hands and Swords of Men; wherefore as those two Orders of a Commonwealth, namely
the Senate and the People, are Legislative, so of necessity there must be a
third to be executive of the Laws made, and this is the Magistracy; in which
order, with the rest being wrought up by art, the Commonwealth consists of the
Senate proposing, the People resolving, and the Magistracy executing: whereby
partaking of the Aristocracy as in the Senate, of the Democracy as in the
People, and of Monarchy as in the Magistracy, it is complete. Now there being
no other Commonwealth but this in Art or Nature, it is no wonder if MACCHIAVEL
has showed us that the Ancients held this only to be good; but it seems strange
to me, that they should hold that there could be any other: for if there be
such a thing as pure Monarchy, yet that there should be such a one as pure
Aristocracy, or pure Democracy, is not in my understanding. But the Magistracy
both in number and function is different in different Commonwealths.
Nevertheless there is one condition of it that must be the same in every one,
or it dissolves the Commonwealth where it is wanting. And this is no less than
that as the hand of the Magistrate is the executive Power of the Law, so the
head of the Magistrate is answerable to the People that his execution be
according to the Law; by which LEVIATHAN may see that the hand or sword that
executes the Law is in it, and not above it.

The Orders of a Commonwealth in experience, as that
NOW whether I have rightly transcribed these Principles of a Commonwealth out
of Nature, I shall appeal to God and to the World. To God in the Fabric of the
Commonwealth of Israel: and to the World in the universal Series of ant^ent
Prudence. But in regard the same Commonwealths will be opened at large in the
Council of Legislators, I shall touch them for the present but slightly,
beginning with that of Israel.

Of Israel.
THE Commonwealth of Israel consisted of the Senate, the People, and the
Magistracy.

THE People by their first division, which was genealogical, were contained
under their thirteen Tribes, Houses, or Familys; whereof the firstborn in each
was Prince of his Tribe, and had the leading of it: Numb. 1.
the Tribe of LEVI only being set apart to serve at the Altar, had no other
Prince but the High Priest. In their second division they were divided locally
by their Agrarian, or the distribution of the Land of Josh. chapter 13, to chapter 42.
Canaan to them by lot, the Tithe of all remaining to LEVI; whence according to
their local division, the Tribes are reckoned but twelve.

The People.
THE Assemblys of the People thus divided were methodically gathered by
Trumpets to the Congregation; which was, it should seem, Numb. 10. 7.
of two sorts. For if it were called by one Trumpet only, the Princes of the
Tribes and the Elders only assembled; but if it were called Numb. 10. 4.
with two, the whole People gathered themselves to the Congregation, Numb. 10. 3.
for so it is rendered by the English: but in the Greec it is called Ecclesia,
Judge. 20. 2.
or the Church of God, and by the Talmudist, the great Synagog. The word
Ecclesia was also anciently and properly used for the Civil Congregations or
Assemblys of the People in Athens, Lacedemon, and Ephesus, where it is so
called in Scripture, tho it be otherwise rendered Acts 19. 23.
by the Translators, not much as I conceive to their commendation, seeing by
that means they have lost us a good lesson, the Apostles borrowing that name
for their spiritual Congregations, to the end that we might see they intended
the Government of the Church to be Democratical or Popular, as is also plain in
the rest of their Constitutions.

THE Church or Congregation of the People of Israel assembled in a military
manner, and had the result of the Commonwealth, or Judge. 20. 2.
the power of confirming all their Laws, tho proposed even by God Exodus 19.
himself; as where they make him King; and where they reject or depose him as
Civil Magistrate, and elect Saul. It is manifest 1 Samuel 8. 7.
that he gives no such example to a Legislator in a popular Government as to
deny or evade the power of the People, which were a contradiction: but tho he
deservedly blames the ingratitude of the People in that action, he commands
SAMUEL, being next under himself Supreme Magistrate, to hearken to their Voice
(for where the suffrage of the People gos for nothing, it is no Commonwealth)
and comforts him, saying, They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected
me that I should not reign over them. But to reject him that he should not
reign over them, was as Civil Magistrate to depose him. The Power therefore which
the People had to depose even God himself as he was Civil Magistrate, leaves
little doubt but that they had power to have rejected any of those Laws
confirmed by them throout the Deuteronomy. 29.
Scripture, which (to omit the several parcels) are generally contained under
two heads, those that were made by Covenant with the People in the Land of
Moab, and those which were made by Covenant with the People in Horeb: which
two, I think, amount to the whole body of the Israelitish Laws. But if all and
every one of the Laws of Israel being proposed by God, were no otherwise
enacted than by Covenant with the People, then that only which was resolved by
the People of Israel was their Law; and so the result of that Commonwealth was
in the People. Nor had the People the result only in matter of Law, Josh. 7.
16. Judge. 20. 8, 9, 10. 1 Samuel 7. 6, 7, 8. 1 Chronicles. 13. 2. 2 Chronicles. 30. 4.
Judge. 11. 11. 1 Samuel 10. 17. 1 Mac. 14. Exodus 9. 3, 4, 5. Josh. 7. 1 Samuel 10.
but the Power in some cases of Judicature; as also the right of levying War;
cognizance in matter of Religion; and the election of their Magistrates, as the
Judge or Dictator, the King, the Prince: which functions were exercised by the
Synagoga magna or Congregation of Israel, not always in one manner; for
sometimes they were performed by the suffrage of the People, viva voce; sometimes
by the Lot only; and at others by the Ballot, or by a mixture of the Lot with
the Suffrage, as in the case of ELDAD and MEDAD, which I shall open with the
Senate.

The Senate.
THE Senate of Israel, called in the Old Testament the seventy Elders, and in
the New the Sanhedrim (which word is usually translated the Numb. 11.
Council) was appointed by God, and consisted of Seventy Elders besides Deuteronomy. 1.
MOSES, which were at first elected by the People; but in what Numb. 11.
manner is rather intimated than shown. Nevertheless, because I cannot otherwise
understand the passage concerning ELDAD and MEDAD, of whom it is said, that
they were of them that were written, but went not up to the Tabernacle, then
with the Talmudists, I conceive that ELDAD and MEDAD had the suffrage of the
Tribes, and so were written as Competitors for Magistracy; but coming
afterward to the lot, failed of it, and therefore went not up to the
Tabernacle, or place of Confirmation by God, or to the Sessionhouse of the
Senate with the Seventy upon whom the lot fell to be Senators: for the
Sessionhouse of the Sanhedrim was first in the Court of the Tabernacle, and
afterward in that of the Temple, where it came to be called the stone Chamber
John.
or Pavement. If this were the Ballot of Israel, that of Venice is the same
transposed: for in Venice the Competitor is chosen as it were by the lot, in
regard that the Electors are so made, and the Magistrate is chosen by the
Suffrage of the great Council or Assembly of the People. But the Sanhedrim of
Israel being thus constituted, MOSES for his time, and after him his Successor,
sat in the midst of it as Prince or Archon, and at his left hand the Orator or
Father of the Senate; the rest of the bench coming round with either horn like a
Crescent, had a Scribe attending upon the tip of it.

THIS Senate, in regard the Legislator of Israel was infallible, and the Laws
given by God such as were not fit to be altered by men, is much different in
the exercise of their Power from all other Senats, except that of the
Areopagits in Athens, which also was little more than a Supreme Judicatory; for
it will hardly, as I conceive, be found that the Sanhedrim proposed to the
People till the return of the Children of Israel out of Captivity under Esdras,
at which time there was a new Law made, namely, for a kind of Excommunication,
or rather Banishment, which had never bin before in Israel. Nevertheless it is
not to be thought that the Sanhedrim had not always that right, which from the
time of Esdras it more frequently exercised, of proposing to the People, but
that they forbore it in regard of the fullness and infallibility of the Law
already made, whereby it was needless. Wherefore the function of this Council,
which is very rare in a Senate, was executive, The Magistracy.
and consisted in the administration of the Law made; and whereas the Council it
self is often understood in Scripture by the Priest Deuteronomy. 17. 9, 10, 11.
and the Levit, there is no more in that save only that the Priests and the
Levits, who otherwise had no Power at all, being in the younger years of this
Commonwealth, those that were best studied in the Laws were the most frequently
elected into the Sanhedrim. For the Courts consisting of three and twenty
Elders sitting in the Gates of every City, and the Triumvirats of Judges
constituted almost in every Village, which were parts of the executive
Magistracy subordinat to the Sanhedrim, I shall take them at better leisure,
and in the larger Discourse; but these being that part of this Commonwealth
which was instituted by MOSES upon the advice of JETHRO the Priest Exodus 18.
of Midian (as I conceive a Heathen) are to me a sufficient warrant even from
God himself who confirmed them, to make farther use of human Prudence, wherever
I find it bearing a Testimony to it self, whether in Heathen Commonwealths or
others: And the rather, because so it is, that we who have the holy Scriptures,
and in them the Original of a Commonwealth, made by the same hand that made the
World, are either altogether blind or negligent of it; while the Heathens have
all written theirs, as if they had had no other Copy: As, to be more brief in
the present account of that which you shall have more at large hereafter;

Of Athens.
ATHENS consisted of the Senate of the Bean proposing, of the Church or Assembly
of the People resolving, and too often debating, which was the ruin of it; as
also of the Senate of the Aropagits, the nine Archons, with diverse other
Magistrates executing.

Of Lacedemon
LACEDEMON consisted of the Senate proposing; of the Church or Congregation of
the People resolving only and never debating, which was the long life of it;
and of the two Kings, the Court of the Ephors, with diverse other Magistrates
executing.

Of Carthage.
CARTHAGE consisted of the Senate proposing and sometimes resolving too; of the
People resolving and sometimes debating too, for which fault she was reprehended
by ARISTOTLE; and she had her Suffetes, and her hundred Men, with other
Magistrates executing.

Of Rome.
ROME consisted of the Senate proposing, the Concio or People resolving, and too
often debating, which caused her storms; as also of the Consuls, Censors,
Aedils, Tribuns, Pretors, Questors, and other Magistrates executing.

Of Venice.
VENICE consists of the Senate or Pregati proposing, and sometimes resolving too;
of the great Council or Assembly of the People, in whom the result is
constitutively; as also of the Doge, the Signory, the Censors, the Dieci, the
Quazancies, and other Magistrates executing.

Of Switzerland and Holland.
THE proceeding of the Commonwealths of Switzerland and Holland is of a like
nature, tho after a more obscure manner: for the Soveraintys, whether Cantons,
Provinces, or Citys, which are the People, send their Deputys commissioned and
instructed by themselves (wherein they reserve the Result in their own power) to
the Provincial or general Convention, or Senate, where the Deputies debate, but
have no other power of Result than what was conferred upon them by the People,
or is farther conferred by the same upon farther occasion. And for the executive
part they have Magistrates or Judges in every Canton, Province or City, besides
those which are more public, and relate to the League, as for adjusting
Controversies between one Canton, Province or City, and another; or the like
between such persons as are not of the same Canton, Province or City.

BUT that we may observe a little farther how the Heathen Politicians have
written, not only out of Nature, but as it were out of Scripture: As in the
Commonwealth of Israel God is said to have bin King; so the Commonwealth where
the Law is King, is said by ARISTOTLE to be the Kingdom of God. And where by
the Lusts or Passions of Men a Power is set above that of the Law deriving from
Reason, which is the dictat of God, God in that sense is rejected or deposed
that he should not reign over them, as he was in Israel. Page 170.
And yet LEVIATHAN will have it, that by reading of these Greec and Latin (he
might as well in this sense have said Hebrew) Authors, young Men, and all
others that are unprovided of the antidot of solid Reason, receiving a strong
and delightful impression of the great Exploits of War, achieved by the
Conductors of their Armies, receive withal a pleasing Idea of all they have don
besides; and imagine their great prosperity not to have proceeded from the
emulation of particular Men, but from the virtue of their popular form of
Government, not considering the frequent Seditions and Civil Wars produced by
the imperfection of their Polity. Where, first, the blame he lays to the
Heathen Authors is in his sense laid to the Scripture; and whereas he holds them
to be young Men, or Men of no antidot that are of like opinions, it should seem
that MACCHIAVEL, the sole retriever of this ancient Prudence, is to his solid
Reason a beardless Boy that has newly read LIVY. And how solid his Reason is,
may appear, where he grants the great prosperity of ancient Commonwealths,
which is to give up the Controversy. For such an effect must have some adequat
cause; which to evade he insinuats that it was nothing else but the emulation
of particular Men: as if so great an Emulation could have bin generated without
as great Virtue; so great Virtue without the best Education; the best Education
without the best Laws; or the best Laws any otherwise than by the excellency of
their Polity.

BUT if some of these Commonwealths, as being less perfect in their Polity than
others, have bin more seditious, it is not more an argument of the infirmity of
this or that Commonwealth in particular, than of the excellency of that kind of
Polity in general; which if they, that have not altogether reached, have
nevertheless had greater prosperity, what would befall them that should reach?

IN answer to which Question let me invite LEVIATHAN, who of all other
Governments gives the advantage to Monarchy for perfection, to a better
disquisition of it by these three assertions.

THE first, That the perfection of Government lys upon such a libration in the
frame of it, that no Man or Men in or under it can have the interest; or having
the interest, can have the power to disturb it with Sedition.

THE second, That Monarchy, reaching the perfection of the kind, reaches not to
the perfection of Government; but must have some dangerous flaw in it.

THE third, That popular Government, reaching the perfection of the kind,
reaches the perfection of Government, and has no flaw in it.

THE first assertion requires no proof.

FOR the proof of the second; Monarchy, as has bin shown, is of two kinds, the
one by Arms, the other by a Nobility, and there is no other kind in Art or
Nature: for if there have bin anciently some Governments called Kingdoms, as one
of the Goths in Spain, and another of the Vandals in Africa, where the King
ruled without a Nobility, and by a Council of the People only; it is expressly
said by the Authors that mention them, that the Kings were but the Captains,
and that the People not only gave them Laws, but deposed them as often as they
pleased. Nor is it possible in reason that it should be otherwise in like
cases; wherefore these were either no Monarchys, or had greater slaws in them
than any other.

BUT for a Monarchy by Arms, as that of the Ture (which of all models that ever
were coms up to the perfection of the kind) it is not in the wit or power of
Man to cure it of this dangerous flaw, That the Janizarys have frequent
interest and perpetual power to raise Sedition, and to tear the Magistrate, even
the Prince himself, in pieces. Therefore the Monarchy of Turkey is no perfect
Government.

AND for a Monarchy by a Nobility, as of late in Oceana (which of all other
models before the declination of it came up to the perfection in that kind) it
was not in the power or wit of Man to cure it of that dangerous flaw, That the
Nobility had frequent interest and perpetual power by their Retainers and
Tenants to raise Sedition; and (whereas the Janizarys occasion this kind of
Calamity no sooner than they make an end of it) to levy a lasting War, to the
vast effusion of Blood, and that even upon occasions wherein the People, but for
their dependence upon their Lords, had no concernment, as in the feud of the
Red and White. The like has bin frequent in Spain, France, Germany, and other
Monarchys of this kind; wherefore Monarchy by a Nobility is no perfect
Government.

FOR the proof of the third assertion; LEVIATHAN yields it to me, that there is
no other Commonwealth but Monarchical or Popular: wherefore if no Monarchy be a
perfect Government, then either there is no perfect Government, or it must be
popular; for which kind of Constitution I have something more to say, than
LEVIATHAN has said or ever will be able to say for Monarchy. As,

FIRST, That it is the Government that was never conquered by any Monarch, from
the beginning of the World to this day: for if the Commonwealths of Greece came
under the yoke of the Kings of Macedon, they were first broken by themselves.

SECONDLY, That it is the Government that has frequently led mighty Monarchs in
Triumph.

THIRDLY, That it is the Government, which, if it has bin seditious, it has not
bin so from any imperfection in the kind, but in the particular Constitution;
which, wherever the like has happened, must have bin inequal.

FOURTHLY, That it is the Government, which, if it has bin any thing near
equal, was never seditious; or let him show me what Sedition has happened in
Lacedemon or Venice.

FIFTHLY, That it is the Government, which, attaining to perfect equality, has
such a libration in the frame of it, that no Man living can show which way any
Man or Men, in or under it, can contract any such Interest or Power as should
be able to disturb the Commonwealth with Sedition; wherefore an equal
Commonwealth is that only which is without flaw, and contains in it the full
perfection of Government. But to return.

BY what has bin shown in Reason and Experience it may appear, that tho
Commonwealths in general be Governments of the Senate proposing, the People
resolving, and the Magistracy executing; yet some are not so good at these
Orders as others, through some impediment or defect in the frame, balance, or
capacity of them, according to which they are of diverse kinds.

Division of Commonwealths.
THE first division of them is into such as are single, as Israel, Athens,
Lacedemon, etc. and such as are by Leagues, as those of the Acheans, Etolians,
Lyceans, Switz, and Hollanders.

THE second (being MACCHIAVEL'S) is into such as are for preservation, as
Lacedemon and Venice, and such as are for increase, as Athens and Rome; in
which I can see no more than that the former takes in no more Citizens than are
necessary for defense, and the latter so many as are capable of increase.

THE third division (unseen hitherto) is into equal and inequal, and this is
the main point, especially as to domestic Peace and Tranquillity; for to make a
Commonwealth inequal, is to divide it into partys, which sets them at perpetual
variance, the one party endeavoring to preserve their Eminence and Inequality,
and the other to attain to Equality: whence the People of Rome derived their
perpetual strife with the Nobility or Senate. But in an equal Commonwealth there
can be no more strife than there can be overbalance in equal weights; wherefore
the Commonwealth of Venice, being that which of all others is the most equal in
the Constitution, is that wherein there never happened any strife between the
Senate and the People.

AN equal Commonwealth is such a one as is equal both in the balance or
foundation, and in the superstructure; that is to say, in her Agrarian Law, and
in her Rotation.

Equal Agrarian.
AN equal Agrarian is a perpetual Law establishing and preserving the balance
of Dominion by such a distribution, that no one Man or number of Men, within
the compass of the Few or Aristocracy, can com to overpower the whole People by
their possessions in Lands.

AS the Agrarian answers to the Foundation, so dos Rotation to the
Superstructures.

Rotation.
EQUAL Rotation is equal vicissitude in Government, or succession to Magistracy
conferred for such convenient terms, enjoying equal vacations, as take in the
whole body by parts, succeding others, through the free election or suffrage of
the People.

Prolongation of Magistracy.
THE contrary whereunto is prolongation of Magistracy, which, trashing the wheel
of Rotation, destroys the life or natural motion of a Commonwealth.

Ballot.
THE election or suffrage of the People is most free, where it is made or given
in such a manner, that it can neither oblige Qui beneficium accepit libertatem
vendidit.
nor disoblige another; nor through fear of an Enemy, or bashfulness toward a
Friend, impair a Man's liberty.

WHEREFORE, says CICERO, Grata populo est tabella quae frontes aperit hominum,
mentes tegit, datque came libertatem ut quod velint faciant.
the Tablet or Ballot of the People of Rome (who gave their Votes by throwing
Tablets or little pieces of Wood secretly into Urns marked for the negative or
affirmative) was a welcome Constitution to the People, as that which, not
impairing the assurance of their brows, increased the freedom of their
Judgment. I have not stood upon a more particular description of this Ballot,
because that of Venice exemplified in the Model is of all others the most
perfect.

Definition of an equal Commonwealth.
AN equal Commonwealth (by that which has bin said) is a Government established
upon an equal Agrarian, arising into the Superstructures or three Orders, the
Senate debating and proposing, the People resolving, and the Magistracy
executing by an equal Rotation through the suffrage of the People given by the
Ballot. For tho Rotation may be without the Ballot, and the Ballot without
Rotation, yet the Ballot not only as to the ensuing Model includes both, but is
by far the most equal way; for which cause under the name of the Ballot I shall
hereafter understand both that and Rotation too.

NOW having reasoned the Principles of an equal Commonwealth, I should com to
give an instance of such a one in experience, if I could find it; but if this
work be of any value, it lys in that it is the first example of a Commonwealth
that is perfectly equal. For Venice, tho it coms the nearest, yet is a
Commonwealth for preservation; and such a one, considering the paucity of
Citizens taken in, and the number not taken in, is externally unequal: and tho
every Commonwealth that holds Provinces must in that regard be such, yet not to
that degree. Nevertheless Venice internally, and for her capacity, is by far
the most equal, tho it has not in my judgment arrived at the full perfection of
equality; both because her Laws supplying the defect of an Agrarian, are not so
clear nor effectual at the Foundation, nor her Superstructures by the virtue of
her Ballot or Rotation exactly librated; in regard that through the paucity of her
Citizens, her greater Magistracys are continually wheeled through a few hands, as
is consest by JANOTTI where he says, that if a Gentleman coms once to be Savio
di terra ferma, it seldom happens that he fails from thenceforward to be
adorned with some one of the greater Magistracys, as Savi di mare, Savi di terra
ferma, Savi Grandi, Counselors, those of the Decemvirat or Dictatorian
Council, the Aurogatori or Censors which require no vacation or interval.
Wherefore if this in Venice, or that in Lacedemon, where the Kings were
hereditary, and the Senators (tho elected by the People) for life, cause no
inequality (which is hard to be conceived) in a Commonwealth for preservation,
or such a one as consists of a few Citizens; yet is it manifest, that it would
cause a very great one in a Commonwealth for increase, or consisting of the
Many, which by engrossing the Magistracys in a few hands, would be obstructed
in their Rotation.

BUT there be who say (and think it a strong Objection) that let a Commonwealth
be as equal as you can imagine, two or three Men when all is don will govern it;
and there is that in it, which, notwithstanding the pretended sufficiency of a
popular State, amounts to a plain confession of the imbecility of that Policy,
and of the Prerogative of Monarchy: for as much as popular Governments in
difficult cases have had recourse to Dictatorian Power, as in Rome.

TO which I answer, That as Truth is a spark to which Objections are like
bellows, so in this respect our Commonwealth shines; for the Eminence acquired
by suffrage of the People in a Commonwealth, especially if it be popular and
equal, can be ascended by no other steps than the universal acknowlegement of
Virtue: and where men excel in Virtue, the Commonwealth is stupid and injust,
if accordingly they do not excel in Authority. Wherefore this is both the
advantage of Virtue, which has her due encouragement, and of the Commonwealth
which has her due services. These are the Philosophers which PLATO would have
to be Princes, the Princes which SOLOMON would have to be mounted, and their
Steeds are those of Authority, not Empire; or, if they be buckl'd to the
Chariot of Empire, as that of the Dictatorian Power, like the Chariot of the
Sun, it is glorious for terms and vacations, or intervals. And as a
Commonwealth is a Government of Laws and not of Men, so is this the
Principality of Virtue, and not of Man; if that fail or set in one, it rises in
another Uno avulso, non deficit alter Aureus, and simili frondescit virga
metallo.
who is created his immediate Successor. And this takes away that vanity from
under the Sun, which is an Error proceeding more or less from all other Rulers
under Heaven but an equal Commonwealth.

THESE things considered, it will be convenient in this place to speak a word
to such as go about to insinuat to the Nobility or Gentry a fear of the People,
or to the People a fear of the Nobility or Gentry, as if their interests were
destructive to each other; when indeed an Army may as well consist of Soldiers
without Officers, or of Officers without Soldiers, as a Commonwealth
(especially such a one as is capable of Greatness) of a People without a
Gentry, or of a Gentry without a People. Wherefore this (tho not always so
intended, as may appear by MACCHIAVEL, who else would be guilty) is a
pernicious error. There is something first in the making of a Commonwealth, then
in the governing of it, and last of all in the leading of its Armies; which (tho
there be great Divines, great Lawyers, great men in all professions) seems to
be peculiar only to the Genius of a Gentleman. For so it is in the universal
series of Story, that if any man has founded a Commonwealth, he was first a
Gentleman MOSES had his Education by the Daughter of PHARAOH; THESEUS and
SOLON, of noble Birth, were held by the Athenians worthy to be Kings; LYCURGUS
was of the Royal Blood; ROMULUS and NUMA Princes; BRUTUS and PUBLICOLA
Patricians; the GRACCHI, that lost their lives for the People of Rome and the
restitution of that Commonwealth, were the Sons of a Father adorned with two
Triumphs, and of CORNELIA the Daughter of SCIPIO, who being demanded in
marriage by King PTOLOMY, disdained to become the Queen of Egypt. And the most
renowned OLPHAUS MEGALETOR, sole Legislator (as you will see anon) of the
Commonwealth of Oceana, was derived from a noble Family: nor will it be any
occasion of scruple in this case, that LEVIATHAN affirms the Politics to be no
antienter than his Book de Cive. Such also as have got any fame in the Civil
Government of a Commonwealth, or by the leading of its Armies, have bin
Gentlemen; for so in all other respects were those plebeian Magistrates elected
by the People of Rome, being of known Descents, and of equal Virtues, except
only that they were excluded from the name by the Usurpation of the Patricians.
Holland, through this defect at home, has borrowed Princes for Generals, and
Gentlemen of diverse Nations for Commanders: And the Switzers, if they have any
defect in this kind, rather lend their People to the Colors of other Princes,
than make that noble use of them at home, which should assert the Liberty of
Mankind. For where there is not a Nobility to hearten the People, they are
slothful, regardless of the World, and of the public interest of Liberty, as
even those of Rome had bin without their Gentry: wherefore let the People
embrace the Gentry in peace, as the light of their eyes; and in war, as the
trophy of their arms. And if CORNELIA disdained to be Queen of Egypt, if a
Roman Consul looked down from his Tribunal upon the greatest King; let the
Nobility love and cherish the People that afford them a Throne so much higher
in a Commonwealth, in the acknowledgement of their Virtue, than the Crowns of
Monarchs.

An inequal Commonwealth.
BUT if the equality of a Commonwealth consist in the equality first of the
Agrarian, and next of the Rotation, then the inequality of a Commonwealth must
consist in the absence or inequality of the Agrarian, or of the Rotation, or of
both.

ISRAEL and Lacedemon, which Commonwealths (as the People of this, in JOSEPHUS,
claims kindred of that) have great resemblance, were each of them equal in
their Agrarian, and inequal in their Rotation; especially Israel, where the
Sanhedrim or Senate, first elected by the People, as appears by the words of
MOSES, took upon them Deuteronomy. 1.
ever after, without any precept of God, to substitute their Successors by
Ordination; which having bin there of civil use, as Excommunication, Community
of Goods, and other Customs of the Esseans, who were many of them converted,
came afterward to be introduced into the Christian Church. And the election of
the Judge, Suffes or Dictator, was irregular, both for the occasion, the term,
and the vacation of that Magistracy; as you find in the Book of Judges, where
it is often repeated, That in those days there was no King in Israel, that is,
no Judge: and in the first of SAMUEL, where ELY judged Israel forty years, and
SAMUEL all his life. In Lacedemon the election of the Senate being by suffrage
of the People, tho for life, was not altogether so inequal; yet the hereditary
Right of Kings, were it not for the Agrarian, had ruined her.

ATHENS and Rome were inequal as to their Agrarian, that of Athens being
infirm, and this of Rome none at all; for if it were more anciently carried, it
was never observed. Whence by the time of TIBERIUS GRACCHUS the Nobility had
almost eaten the People quite out o their Lands, which they held in the
occupation of Tenants and Servants: Whereupon, the remedy being too late, and
too vehemently applied, that Commonwealth was ruined.

THESE also were inequal in their Rotation, but in a contrary manner. Athens,
in regard that the Senate (chosen at once by lot, not by suffrage, and changed
every year, not in part, but in the whole) consisted not of the natural
Aristocracy; nor sitting long enough to understand, or to be perfect in their
office, had no sufficient Authority to restrain the People from that perpetual
Turbulence in the end, which was their ruin, notwithstanding the efforts of
NICIAS, who did all a man could do to help it. But as Athens by the headiness
of the People, so Rome fell by the Ambition of the Nobility, through the want of
an equal Rotation; which, if the People had got into the Senate, and timely into
the Magistracys (whereof the former was always usurped by the Patricians, and
the latter for the most part) they had both carried and held their Agrarian,
and that had rendered that Commonwealth immovable.

BUT let a Commonwealth be equal or inequal, it must consist, as has bin shown
by Reason and all Experience, of the three general Orders; that is to say, of
the Senate debating and proposing, of the People resolving, and of the
Magistracy executing. Wherefore I can never wonder enough at LEVIATHAN, who,
without any reason or example, will have it, that a Commonwealth consists of a
single Person, or of a single Assembly; nor can I sufficiently pity those
thousand Gentlemen, whose Minds, which otherwise would have waver'd, he has
framed (as is affirmed by himself) into a conscientious obedience (for so he is
pleased to call it) of such a Government.

BUT to finish this part of the Discourse, which I intend for as complete an
Epitome of ancient Prudence, and in that of the whole Art of Politics, as I am
able to frame in so short a time;

THE two first Orders, that is to say, the Senate and the People, are
Legislative, whereunto answers that part of this Science which by Politicians is
intitl'd De Legibus.
of Laws; and the third Order is executive, to which answers that part of the
same Science which is styled De Judiciis.
of the Frame and Course of Courts or Judicatorys. A word to each of these will
be necessary.

Of Laws.
AND first for Laws, they are either Ecclesiastical or Civil, such as concern
Religion or Government.

LAWS Ecclesiastical, or such as concern Religion, according to the universal
course of ancient Prudence, are in the power of the Magistrate; but according to
the common practice of modern Prudence, since the Papacy, torn out of his hands.

BUT, as a Government pretending to Liberty, and yet suppressing Liberty of
Conscience (which, because Religion not according to a man's Conscience can to
him be none at all, is the main) must be a contradiction; so, a man that,
pleading for the Liberty of private Conscience, refuses Liberty to the National
Conscience, must be absurd.

A COMMONWEALTH is nothing else but the National Conscience. And if the
conviction of a man's private Conscience produces his private Religion, the
conviction of the national Conscience must produce a national Religion. Whether
this be well reasoned, as also whether these two may stand together, will best
be shown by the examples of the ancient Commonwealths taken in their order.

IN that of Israel the Government of the National Religion appertained not to
the Priests and Levits, otherwise than as they happened to be of the Sanhedrim
or Senate, to which they had no right at all but by election. It is in this
capacity therefore that the People are commanded Deuteronomy. 17.
under pain of death to hearken to them, and to do according to the sentence of
the Law which they should teach; but in Israel the Law Ecclesiastical and Civil
was the same, therefore the Sanhedrim having the power of one, had the power of
both. But as the National Religion appertained to the Jurisdiction of the
Sanhedrim, so the Liberty of Conscience appertained, from the same date, and by
the same right, to the Deuteronomy. 18. 10.
Prophets and their Disciples; as where it is said, I will raise up a Prophet --
and whoever will not hearken to my words which he shall speak in my name, I
will require it of him. The words relate to prophetic Right, which was above
all the Orders of this Commonwealth; whence ELIJAH not only refused to obey the
King, but destroyed his 2 Kings 1.
Messengers with fire. And whereas it was not lawful by the National Religion to
sacrifice in any other place than the Temple, a Prophet was his own Temple, and
might sacrifice where he would, as ELIJAH did in Mount Carmel. By this right
JOHN the Baptist and our 1 Kings 18. 19.
Savior, to whom it more particularly related, had their Disciples, and taught
the People; whence is derived our present right of GATHERED CONGREGATIONS:
Wherefore the Christian Religion grew up according to the Orders of the
Commonwealth of Israel, and not against them. Nor was Liberty of Conscience
infringed by this Government, till the civil Liberty of the same was lost, as
under HEROD, PILAT, and TIBERIUS, a threepil'd Tyranny.

TO proceed, Athens preserved her Religion, by the testimony of PAUL, with
great Superstition: If ALCIBIADES, that Atheistical fellow, had not showed them
a pair of heels, they had shaven off his head for shaving their MERCURYS, and
making their Gods look ridiculously upon them without beards. Nevertheless, if
PAUL reasoned with them, they loved news, for which he was the more welcome; and
if he converted DIONYSIUS the Areopagit, that is, one of the Senators, there
followed neither any hurt to him, nor loss of honor to DIONYSIUS. And for Rome,
if CICERO, in his most excellent Book de natura Deorum, overthrew the National
Religion of that Commonwealth, he was never the farther from being Consul. But
there is a meanness and poorness in modern Prudence, not only to the damage of
Civil Government, but of Religion it self: for to make a man in matter of
Religion, which admits not of sensible demonstration (jurare in verba Magistri)
engage to believe no otherwise than is believed by my Lord Bishop, or Goodman
Presbyter, is a Pedantism, that has made the Sword to be a Rod in the hands of
Schoolmasters; by which means, whereas the Christian Religion is the farthest of
any from countenancing War, there never was a War of Religion but since
Christianity: For which we are beholden to the Pope; for the Pope not giving
liberty of Conscience to Princes and Commonwealths, they cannot give that to
their Subjects which they have not themselves: whence both Princes and Subjects
either through his instigation, or their own disputes, have introduced that
execrable custom, never known in the world before, of sighting for Religion,
and denying the Magistrate to have any jurisdiction concerning it; whereas the
Magistrates losing the power of Religion loses the Liberty of Conscience, which
in that case has nothing to protect it. But if the People be otherwise taught,
it concerns them to look about them, and to distinguish between the shrieking
of the Lapwing, and the voice of the Turtle.

TO com to Civil Laws, if they stand one way and the balance another, it is the
case of a Government which of necessity must be new modeled; wherefore your
Lawyers advising you upon the like occasions to fit your Government to their
Laws, are no more to be regarded, than your Tailor if he should desire you to
fit your body to his doublet. There is also danger in the plausible pretense of
reforming the Law, except the Government be first good, in which case it is a
good Tree, and (trouble not your selves overmuch) brings not forth evil fruit;
otherwise, if the Tree be evil, you can never reform the fruit: or if a Root
that is naught bring forth fruit of this kind that seems to be good, take the
more heed, for it is the ranker poison. It was nowise probable, if AUGUSTUS had
not made excellent Laws, that the bowels of Rome could have com to be so
miserably eaten out by the Tyranny of TIBERIUS and his Successors. The best
Rule as to your Laws in general is, that they be few. Rome by the testimony of
CICERO was best governed under those of the twelve Tables; and by that of
TACITUS, Plurimae leges, corruptissima respublica. You will be told, That where
the Laws be few, they leave much to Arbitrary Power; but where they be many,
they leave more: The Laws in this case, according to JUSTINIAN and the best
Lawyers, being as litigious as the Suitors. SOLON made few; LYCURGUS fewer
Laws: and Commonwealths have the fewest at this day of all other Governments.

Of Courts.
NOW to conclude this part with a word de Judiciis, or of the Constitution or
Course of Courts; it is a Discourse not otherwise capable of being well managed
but by particular examples, both the Constitution and Course of Courts being
diverse in different Governments, but best beyond compare in Venice, where they
regard not so much the Arbitrary Power of their Courts, as the Constitution of
them; whereby that Arbitrary Power being altogether unable to retard or do hurt
to business, produces and must produce the quickest dispatch, and the most
righteous dictats of Justice that are perhaps in human nature. The manner I
shall not stand in this place to describe, because it is exemplified at large
in the Judicature of the People of Oceana. And thus much of ancient Prudence,
and the first branch of this preliminary Discourse.

The Second Part of the Preliminarys.
IN the second Part I shall endeavor to show the Rise, Progress, and
Declination of modern Prudence.

THE date of this kind of Policy is to be computed, as was shown, from those
Inundations of Goths, Vandals, Huns, and Lombards, that overwhelmed the Roman
Empire. But as there is no appearance in the Bulk or Constitution of modern
Prudence, that it should ever have bin able to com up and grapple with the
Ancient, so something of necessity must have interposed, whereby this came to be
enervated, and that to receive strength and encouragement. And this was the
execrable Reign of the Roman Emperors taking rise from (that foelix scelus) the
Arms of CAESAR, in which storm the Ship of the Roman Commonwealth was forced to
disburden it self of that precious Freight, which never since could emerge or
raise its head but in the Gulf of Venice.

The Transition of Ancient into Modern Prudence.
IT is said in Scripture, Thy evil is of thy self, O Israel! To which answers
that of the Moralists, Nemo nocetur nisi ex se.
None is hurt but by himself, as also the whole matter of the Politics; at
present this Example of the Romans, who, through a negligence committed in their
Agrarian Laws, let in the sink of Luxury, and forfeited the inestimable
Treasure of Liberty for themselves and their Posterity.

The Agrarian Laws of the Romans.
THEIR Agrarian Laws were such, whereby their Lands ought to have bin divided
among the People, either without mention of a Colony, in which case they were
not obliged to change their abode; or with mention and upon condition of a
Colony, in which case they Sigonius de Ant. To.
were to change their abode; and leaving the City, to plant themselves upon the
Lands so assigned. The Lands assigned, or that ought to have bin assigned in
either of these ways, were of three kinds: Such as were taken from the Enemy
and distributed to the People; or such as were taken from the Enemy, and under
color of being reserved to the Public use, were through stealth possessed by the
Nobility; or such as were bought with the Public Money to be distributed. Of the
Laws offered in these cases, those which divided the Lands taken from the
Enemy, or purchased with the Public Money, never occasioned any dispute; but
such as drove at dispossessing the Nobility of their Usurpations, and dividing
the common purchase of the Sword among the People, were never touched but they
caused Earthquakes, nor could they ever be obtained by the People; or being
obtained, be observed by the Nobility, who not only preserved their prey, but
growing vastly rich upon it, bought the People by degrees quite out of those
Shares that had been conferred upon them. This the GRACCHI coming too late to
perceive, found the Balance of the Commonwealth to be lost; but putting the
People (when they had least force) by forcible means upon the recovery of it,
did ill, seeing it neither could nor did tend to any more than to show them by
worse effects, that what the Wisdom of their Leaders had discovered was true.
For (quite contrary to what has happened in Oceana, where, the Balance falling
to the People, they have overthrown the Nobility) that Nobility of Rome, under
the conduct of SYLLA, overthrew the People and the Commonwealth: seeing SYLLA
first introduced that new Balance, which was Military Colonys.
the Foundation of the succeding Monarchy, in the plantation of Military
Colonys, instituted by his distribution of the conquered Lands, not now of
Enemies, but of Citizens, to forty seven Legions of his Soldiers; so that how he
came to be PERPETUAL DICTATOR, or other Magistrates to succeed him in like
Power, is no Miracle.

The Balance of the Roman Empire.
THESE Military Colonys (in which manner succeding Emperors continued, as
AUGUSTUS by the distribution of the Veterans, whereby he had overcom BRUTUS and
CASSIUS, to plant their Soldiery) consisted of such as I conceive were they
that are called Milites beneficiarii; in regard that the Tenure of their Lands
was by way of Benefices, that is for Life, and upon condition of Duty or
Service in the War upon their own Charge. These Benefices ALEXANDER SEVERUS
granted to the Heirs of the Incumbents, but upon the same conditions. And such
was the Dominion by which the Roman Emperors gave their Balance. But to the
Beneficiarys, as was no less than necessary for the safety of the Prince, a
matter of eight thousand by the Example of AUGUSTUS were added, which departed
not from his sides, but were his perpetual Guard, called Pretorian Bands; tho
these, according to the incurable flaw already observed in this kind of
Government, became the most frequent Butchers of their Lords that are to be
found in Story. Thus far the Roman Monarchy is much the same with that at this
day in Turkey, consisting of a Camp, and a Horsequarter; a Camp in regard of the
Spahys and Janizarys, the perpetual Guard of the Prince, except they also
chance to be liquorish after his Blood; and a Horsequarter in regard of the
distribution of his whole Land to Tenants for Life, upon condition of continual
Service, or as often as they shall be commanded at their own charge by Timars,
being a word which they say signifys Benefices, that it shall save me a labor
of opening the Government.

BUT the Fame of MAHOMET and his Prudence, is especially founded in this, That
whereas the Roman Monarchy, except that of Israel, was the most imperfect, the
Turkish is the most perfect that ever was. Which happened in that the Roman (as
the Israelitish of the Sanhedrim and the Congregation) had a mixture of the
Senate and the People; and the Turkish is pure. And that this was pure, and the
other mixed, happened not through the Wisdom of the Legislators, but the different
Genius of the Nations; the People of the Eastern Parts, except the Israelits,
which is to be attributed to their Agrarian, having bin such as scarce ever
knew any other Condition than that of Slavery; and these of the Western having
ever had such a relish of Liberty, as through what despair soever could never be
brought to stand still while the Yoke was putting on their Necks, but by being
sed with some hopes of reserving to themselves some part of their Freedom.

WHEREFORE JULIUS CAESAR (says Comitia cum populo s^rtitus est.
SUETONIUS) Dion.
contented himself in naming half the Magistrates, to leave the rest to the
suffrage of the People. And MAECENAS, tho he would not have AUGUSTUS to give
the People their Liberty, would not have him take it quite away Neque id
existima^e debes autorem me tibi esse, ut tyrannidem in S. P. Q. R. in
servitutem redactum teneas: quod neque dicere meum, n^que facere tuum est.
. Whence this Empire being neither Hawk nor Buzzard, made a flight accordingly;
and the Prince being perpetually tossed (having the Avarice of the Soldiery on
this hand to satisfy upon the People, and the Senate and the People on the other
to be defended from the Soldiery) seldom died any other death than by one Horn
of this Dilemma, as is noted more at large by MACCHIAVEL. But P. cap. 19.
the Pretorian Bands, those bestial executioners of their Captain's Tyranny upon
others, and of their own upon him, having continued from the time of AUGUSTUS,
were by CONSTANTIN the Great (incensed against them for taking part with his
Adversary MAXENTIUS) removed from their strong Garrison which they held in Rome,
and distributed into diverse Provinces. The Benefices of the Soldiers that were
hitherto held for Life and upon Duty, were by this Prince made Hereditary: so
that the whole Foundation whereupon this Empire was first built being now
removed, shows plainly, that the Emperors must long before this have found out
some other way of support; and this was by stipendiating the Goths, a People
that, deriving their Roots from the Northern parts of Germany, or out of
Sweden, had (through their Victorys obtained against DOMITIAN) long since spread
their Branches to so near a Neighborhood with the Roman Territorys, that they
began to overshadow them. For the Emperors making use of them in their Armies
(as the French do at this day of the Switz) gave them that under the notion of
a Stipend, which they received as Tribute, coming (if there were any default in
the payment) so often to distrein for it, that in the time of HONORIUS they
sacked Rome, and possessed themselves of Italy. And such was the transition of
ancient into modern Prudence; or that breach which being followed in every part
of the Roman Empire with Inundations of Vandals, Huns, Lombards, Franks,
Saxons, overwhelmed ancient Languages, Learning, Prudence, Manners, Citys,
changing the names of Rivers, Macchiavel.
Countries, Seas, Mountains, and Men; CAMILLUS, CAESAR and POMPEY, being com to
EDMUND, RICHARD, and GEOFFREY.

The Gothic Balance.
TO open the Groundwork or Balance of these new Politicians: Feudum, says
CALVIN the Lawyer, is a Gothic word of diverse significations; for it is taken
either for War, or for a possession of conquered Lands, distributed by the
Victor to such of his Captains and Soldiers as had merited in his Wars, upon
condition to acknowledge him to be their perpetual Lord, and themselves to be
his Subjects.

Institution of Feudatory Principalitys.
OF these there were three Kinds or Orders: The first of Nobility,
distinguished by the Titles of Dukes, Marquisses, Earls; and these being
gratified with the Citys, Castles, and Villages of the conquered Italians,
their Feuds participated of Royal Dignity, and were called Regalia, by which
they had right to coin Money, create Magistrates, take Toll, Customs,
Confiscations, and the like.

FEUDS of the second Order were such as, with the consent of the King, were
bestowed by these Feudatory Princes upon men of inferior Quality, called their
Barons, on condition that next to the King they should defend the Dignitys and
Fortunes of their Lords in Arms.

THE lowest Order of Feuds were such as being conferred by those of the second
Order upon private men, whether Noble or not Noble, obliged them in the like
Duty to their Superiors; these were called Vavasors. And this is the Gothic
Balance, by which all the Kingdoms this day in Christendom were at first
erected; for which cause, if I had time, I should open in this place the Empire
of Germany, and the Kingdoms of France, Spain, and Poland: But so much as has
bin said being sufficient for the discovery of the Principles of modern
Prudence in general, I shall divide the remainder of my Discourse, which is
more particular, into three parts.

THE first showing the Constitution of the late Monarchy of Oceana.

THE second, the Dissolution of the same. And

THE third, the Generation of the present Commonwealth.

THE Constitution of the late Monarchy of Oceana is to be considered in
relation to the different Nations by whom it has bin successively subdued and
governed. The first of these were the Romans, the second the Teutons, the third
the Scandians, and the fourth the Neustrians.

THE Government of the Romans, who held it as a Province, I shall omit, because
I am to speak of their Provincial Government in another place; only it is to be
remembered here, that if we have given over running up and down naked, and with
dappl'd hides, learned to write and read, and to be instructed with good Arts,
for all these we are beholden to the Romans, either immediately, or mediatly by
the Teutons: for that the Teutons had the Arts from no other hand, is plain
enough by their Language, which has yet no word to signify either writing or
reading, but what is derived from the Latin. Furthermore, by the help of these
Arts so learned, we have bin capable of that Religion which we have long since
received; wherefore it seems to me, that we ought not to detract from the memory
of the Romans, by whose means we are, as it were, of Beasts become Men, and by
whose means we might yet of obscure and ignorant Men (if we thought not too
well of our selves) become a wise and a great People.

For the proof of the ensuing Discourse out of Records and Antiquitys, see
Selden's Titles of Honor, from page 593, to page 837.
THE Romans having governed Oceana provincially, the Teutons were the first
that introduced the Form of the late Monarchy. To these succeeded the Scandians,
of whom (because their Reign was short, as also because they made little
alteration in the Government as to the Form) I shall take no notice. But the
Teutons, going to work upon the Gothic Balance, divided the whole Nation into
three sorts of Feuds, that of Ealdorman, that of Kings Thane, and that of
Middle Thane.

The Teuton Monarchy.
WHEN the Kingdom was first divided into Precincts will be as hard to show, as
when it began first to be governed; it being impossible that there should be
any Government without some Division. The Division that was in use with the
Teutons, was by Countys, and every County had either its Ealdorman, or High
Reeve. The title of Ealdorman came in time to Eorl, or Erl, and that of High
Reeve to High Sheriff.

Earls.
EARL of the Shire or County denoted the Kings Thane, or Tehant by Grand
Serjeantry or Knights Service, in chief or in capite; his Possessions were
sometimes the whole Territory from whence he had his denomination, that is, the
whole County, sometimes more than one County, and sometimes less, the remaining
part being in the Crown. He had also sometimes a third, or some other customary
part of the profits of certain Citys, Boroughs, or other places within his
Earldom. For an example of the possessions of Earls in ancient times, ETHELRED
had to him and his Heirs the whole Kingdom of Mercia, containing three or four
Countys; and there were others that had little less.

Kings Thane.
KINGS Thane was also an honorary Title, to which he was qualified that had
five Hides of Land held immediately of the King by service of personal
attendance; insomuch that if a Churl or Countryman had thriven to this
proportion, having a Church, a Kitchen, a Belhouse (that is, a Hall with a Bell
in it to call his Family to dinner) a Boroughgate with a seat (that is, a
Porch) of his own, and any distinct Office in the Kings Court, then was he the
Kings Thane. But the proportion of a Hide Land, otherwise called Caruca, or a
Plow Land, is difficult to be understood, because it was not certain;
nevertheless it is generally conceived to be so much as may be managed with one
Plow, and would yield the maintenance of the same, with the appurtenances in
all kinds.

Middle Thane.
THE Middle Thane was feudal, but not honorary; he was also called a Vavasor,
and his Lands a Vavasory, which held of some Mesn Lord, and not immediately of
the King.

POSSESSIONS and their Tenures, being of this nature, show the Balance of the
Teuton Monarchy; wherein the Riches of Earls were so vast, that to arise from
the Balance of their Dominion to their Power, they were not only called Reguli
or little Kings, but were such indeed; their Jurisdiction being of two sorts,
either that which was exercised by them in the Court of their Countys, or in
the High Court of the Kingdom.

Shiremoot.
IN the Territory denominating an Earl, if it were all his own, the Courts
held, and the Profits of that Jurisdiction were to his own use and benefit. But
if he had but some part of his County, then his Jurisdiction and Courts (saving
perhaps in those possessions that were his own) were held by him to the King's
use and benefit; that is, he commonly supplied the Office which the Sheriffs
regularly executed in Countys that had no Earls, and whence they came to be
called Viscounts. Viscounts.
The Court of the County that had an Earl was held by the Earl and the Bishop of
the Diocese, after the manner of the Sheriffs Turns to this day; by which means
both the Ecclesiastical and Temporal Laws were given in charge together to the
Country. The Causes of Vavasors or Vavasorys appertained to the cognizance of
this Court, where Wills were proved, Judgment and Execution given, Cases
criminal and civil determined.

Halymoot.
THE Kings Thanes had the like Jurisdiction in their Thane Lands, as Lords in
their Manors, where they also kept Courts.

BESIDES these in particular, both the Earls and Kings Thanes, together with
the Bishops, Abbots, and Vavasors, or Middle Thanes, had in the High Court or
Parliament of the Kingdom, a more public Weidenagemoots.
Jurisdiction, consisting First of deliberative Power for advising upon, and
assenting to new Laws: Secondly, of giving counsil in matters of State: and
Thirdly, of Judicature upon Suits and Complaints. I shall not omit to inlighten
the obscurity of these times (in which there is little to be found of a
methodical Constitution of this High Court) by the addition of an Argument,
which I conceive to bear a strong testimony to it self, tho taken out of a late
Writing that conceals the Author. It is well known, says he, that in every
quarter of the Realm a great many Boroughs do yet send Burgesses to the
Parliament, which nevertheless be so anciently and so long since decayed and gone
to naught, that they cannot be showed to have bin of any Reputation since the
Conquest, much less to have obtained any such Privilege by the grant of any
succeding King: wherefore these must have had this right by more ancient usage,
and before the Conquest, they being enable now to show whence they derived it.

THIS Argument (tho there be more) I shall pitch upon as sufficient to prove;
First, that the lower sort of the People had right to Session in Parliament
during the time of the Teutons. Secondly, that they were qualified to the same
by election in their Boroughs, and, if Knights of the Shire (as no doubt they
are) be as ancient in the Countries. Thirdly, If it be a good Argument to say,
that the Commons during the reign of the Teutons were elected into Parliament,
because they are so now, and no man can show when this custom began; I see not
which way it should be an ill one to say, that the Commons during the reign of
the Teutons constituted also a distinct House, because they do so now; unless
any man can show that they did ever sit in the same House with the Lords.
Wherefore to conclude this part, I conceive for these, and other reasons to be
mentioned hereafter, that the Parliament of the Teutons consisted of the King,
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons of the Nation,
notwithstanding 25 Edw. 3. c. 1.
the style of diverse Acts of Parliament, which runs as that of Magna Charta in
the Kings name only, seeing the same was nevertheless enacted by the King,
Peers, and Commons of the Land, as is testified in those words by a subsequent
Act.

Monarchy of the Neus^rians.
THE Monarchy of the Teutons had stood in this posture about two hundred and
twenty years; when TURBO Duke of Neustria making his claim to the Crown of one
of their Kings that died childless, followed it with successful Arms; and being
possessed of the Kingdom, used it as conquered, distributing the Earldoms, Thane
Lands, Bishoprics and Prelacys of the whole Realm among his Neustrians. From
this time the Earl came to be called Comes, Consul, and Dux (tho Consul and Dux
grew afterward out of use) the Kings Thanes came to be called Barons, and their
Lands Baronys; the Middle Thane holding still of a mean Lord, retained the name
of Vavasor.

Their Earls.
THE Earl or Comes continued to have the third part of the Pleas of the County
paid to him by the Sheriff or Vice-comes, now a distinct Officer in every
County depending upon the King; saving that such Earls as had their Countys to
their own use, were now Counts Palatin, and had under the King Regal
Jurisdiction: insomuch that they constituted their own Sheriffs, granted
Pardons, and issued Writs in their own names; nor did the Kings Writ of
ordinary Justice run in their 27 11. 8.
Dominions till a late Statute, whereby much of this privilege was taken away.

Their Barons.
FOR Barons, they came from henceforth to be in different times of three kinds;
Barons by their Estates and Tenures, Barons by Writ, and Barons created by
Letters Patents. From TURBO the first to ADOXUS the seventh King from the
Conquest, Barons had their denomination from their Possessions and Tenures. And
these were either Spiritual or Temporal; for not only the Thane Lands, but the
Barons by their Possessions.
possessions of Bishops, as also of some twenty six Abbats, and two Priors, were
now erected into Baronys, whence the Lords Spiritual that had suffrage in the
Teuton Parliament as Spiritual Lords, came to have it in the Neustrian Parliament
as Barons, and were made subject (which they had not formerly bin) to Knights
service in chief. Barony coming henceforth to signify all honorary possessions
as well of Earls as Barons, and Baronage to denote all kinds of Lords as well
Spiritual as Temporal having right to sit in Parliament, the Baronys in this
sense were sometimes more, and sometimes fewer, but commonly about 200 or 250,
containing in them a matter of sixty thousand feuda militum, or Knights Fees,
whereof some twenty eight thousand were in the Clergy. It is ill luck that no man
can tell what the Land of a Knights Fee (reckoned in some Writs at 40 l. a year,
and in others at 10) was certainly worth; for by such a help we might have
exactly demonstrated the Balance of this Government. But says COOK, it
contained Cook 11. Inst. page 596.
twelve Plow Lands, and that was thought to be the most certain account. But
this again is extremely uncertain; for one Plow out of some Land that was
fruitful, might work more than ten out of some other that was barren.
Nevertheless, seeing it appears by BRACTON, Balance of the Neustrian Monarchy.
that of Earldoms and Baronys it was wont to be said, that the whole Kingdom was
composed; as also, that these consisting of 60000 Knights Fees, furnished 60000
men for the King's service, being the whole Militia of this Monarchy, it cannot
be imagined, that the Vavasorys or Freeholds in the People amounted to any
considerable proportion. Wherefore the Balance and Foundation of this Government
was in the 60000 Knights Fees, and these being possessed by the 250 Lords, it was
a Government of the Few, or of the Nobility; wherein the People might also
assemble, but could have no more than a mere name. And the Clergy holding a
third to the whole Nation, as is plain by the Parliament Roll; it is an
absurdity (seeing the Clergy of France came first through their Riches to be a
State of that Kingdom) to acknowledge the People to have bin a State of this
Realm, and not to allow it to the Clergy, who were so much more weighty in the
Balance, which is 4 Rich. 2. Number. 13.
that of all other whence a State or Order in a Government is denominated.
Wherefore this Monarchy consisted of the King, and of the three (ordines Regni,
or) Estates, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons: It consisted of
these I say as to the balance, tho during the Reign of some of these Kings, not
as to the administration.

Administration of the Neustrian Monarchy during the reign of the first Kings.
FOR the ambition of TURBO, and some of those that more immediately succeeded him,
to be absolute Princes, strove against the nature of their Foundation, and,
inasmuch as he had divided almost the whole Realm among his Neustrians, with
some encouragement for a while. But the Neustrians while they were but foren
Plants, having no security against the Natives, but in growing up by their
Princes sides, were no sooner well rooted in their vast Dominions, than they
came up according to the infallible consequence of the Balance domestic, and,
contracting the National interest of the Baronage, grew as fierce in the
vindication of the ancient Rights and Liberties of the same, as if they had bin
always Natives: Whence, the Kings being as obstinat on the one side for their
absolute Power, as these on the other for their Immunitys, grew certain Wars
which took their denomination from the Barons.

THIS fire about the middle of the Reign of ADOXUS began to break out. And
whereas the Predecessors of this King had diverse times bin forced to summon
Councils resembling those of the Teutons, to Barons by Writ.
which the Lords only that were Barons by Dominion and Tenure had hitherto
repaired, ADOXUS seeing the effects of such Dominion, began first not to call
such as were Barons by Writ (for that was according to the practice of ancient
times) but to call such by Writs as were otherwise no Barons; by which means
striving to avoid the consequence of the Balance, in coming unwillingly to set
the Government straight, he was the first that set it awry. For the Barons in
his Reign, and his Successors, having vindicated their ancient Authority,
restored the Parliament with all the Rights and Privileges of the same, saving
that from thenceforth the Kings had found out a way whereby to help themselves
against the mighty, by Creatures of their own, and such as had no other support
but by their favor. By which means this Government, being indeed the
Masterpiece of modern Prudence, has bin cried up to the Skys, as the only
invention whereby at once to maintain the Soverainty of a Prince, and the
Liberty of the People. Whereas indeed it has bin no other than a wrestling
match, wherein the Nobility, as they have bin stronger, have thrown the King; or
the King, if he has bin stronger, has thrown the Nobility; or the King, where
he has had a Nobility, and could bring them to his party, has thrown the
People, as in France and Spain; or the People where they have had no Nobility,
or could get them to be of their party, have thrown the King, as in Holland,
and of later times in Oceana. But they came not 49 11. 3.
to this strength but by such approaches and degrees, as remain to be further
opened. For whereas the Barons by Writ (as the sixty four Abbats, and thirty six
Priors that were so called) were but pro tempore, DICOTOME being the twelfth
King from the Conquest, began to Barons by Letters Patents.
make Barons by Letters Patents, with the addition of honorary Pensions for the
maintenance of their Dignitys to them and their Heirs; so that they were hands
in the King's Purse, and had no shoulders for his Throne. Of these when the
House of Peers came once to be full, as will be seen hereafter, there was
nothing more emty. But for the present, the Throne having other supports, they
did not hurt that so much as they did the King: For the old Barons taking
DICOTOME'S Prodigality to such Creatures so ill, that they deposed him, got the
trick of it, and never gave over setting up and pulling down their Kings
according to their various interests, and that faction of the White Dissolution
of the late Monarchy of Oceana.
and Red, into which they had bin thenceforth divided, till PANURGUS the
eighteenth King from the Conquest, was more by their Favor than his Right
advanced to the Crown. This King through his natural subtilty reflecting at once
upon the greatness of their Power, and the inconstancy of their favor, began to
find another Flaw in this kind of Government, which is also noted by
MACCHIAVEL, namely that a Throne supported by a Nobility, is not so hard to be
ascended, as kept warm. Wherefore his secret Jealousy, lest the dissension of
the Nobility, as it brought him in, might throw him out, made him travel in
ways undiscovered by them, to ends as little foreseen by himself: while to
establish his own safety, he by mixing Water with their Wine, first began to
open those Sluices that have since overwhelmed not the King only, but the
Throne. For whereas a Nobility strikes not at the Throne without which they
cannot subsist, but at some King that they do not like; popular Power strikes
through the King at the Throne, as that which is incompatible with it. Now that
PANURGUS in abating the Power of the Nobility, was the cause whence it came to
fall into the hands of the People, appears by those several Statutes that were
made in his Reign, as that for Population, those against Retainers, and that
for Alienations.

BY the Statute of Population, all houses of Husbandry that were used with
twenty Acres of Ground and upwards, were to be maintained, and kept up for ever
with a competent proportion of Land laid to them, and in no wise, as appears by
a subsequent Statute, to be severed. By which means the houses being kept up,
did of necessity enforce Dwellers; and the proportion of Land to be tilled
being kept up, did of necessity enforce the Dweller not to be a Beggar or
Cottager, but a Man of some substance, that might keep Hinds and Servants, and
set the Plow a going. This did mightily concern (says the Historian of that
Prince) the might and manhood of the Kingdom, and in effect amortize a great
part of the Lands to the hold and possession of the Yeomanry or middle People,
who living not in a servil or indigent fashion, were much unlink'd from
dependence upon their Lords, and living in a free and plentiful manner, became
a more excellent Infantry; but such a one upon which the Lords had so little
Power, that from henceforth they may be computed to have bin disarmed.

AND as they lost their Infantry after this manner, so their Cavalry and
Commanders were cut off by the Statute of Retainers: for whereas it was the
custom of the Nobility to have younger Brothers of good houses, metal'd
fellows, and such as were knowing in the feats of Arms about them; they who
were longer followed with so dangerous a train, escaped not such Punishments,
as made them take up.

HENCEFORTH the Country-lives, and great Tables of the Nobility, which no
longer nourished veins that would bleed for them, were fruitless and loathsome
till they changed the Air, and of Princes became Courtiers; where their
Revenues, never to have bin exhausted by Beef and Mutton, were found narrow,
whence followed racking of Rents, and at length sale of Lands: the riddance
through the Statute of Alienations being rendered far more quick and facil than
formerly it had bin through the new invention of Intails.

TO this it happened, that CORAUNUS the Successor of that King dissolving the
Abbys, brought with the declining state of the Nobility so vast a prey to the
Industry of the People, that the Balance of the Commonwealth was too apparently
in the popular Party, to be unseen by the wise Council of Queen PARTHENIA, who
converting her reign through the perpetual Lovetricks that past between her and
her People into a kind of Romance, wholly neglected the Nobility. And by these
degrees came the House of Commons to raise that head, which since has bin so
high and formidable to their Princes, that they have looked pale upon those
Assemblys. Nor was there any thing now wanting to the destruction of the
Throne, but that the People, not apt to see their own strength, should be put
to feel it; when a Prince, as stiff in disputes as the nerve of Monarchy was
grown slack, received that unhappy encouragement from his Clergy which became
his utter ruin, while trusting more to their Logic than the rough Philosophy of
his Parliament, it came to an irreparable breach; for the House of Peers, which
alone had stood in this gap, now sinking down between the King and the Commons,
showed that CRASSUS was dead, and the Isthmus broken. But a Monarchy divested
of its Nobility, has no refuge under Heaven but an Army. Wherefore the
dissolution of this Government caused the War, not the War the dissolution of
this Government.

OF the King's success with his Arms it is not necessary to give any further
account, than that they proved as ineffectual as his Nobility; but without a
Nobility or an Army (as has bin showed) there can be no Monarchy. Wherefore what
is there in nature that can arise out of these Ashes, but a popular Government,
or a new Monarchy to be erected by the victorious Army?

TO erect a Monarchy, be it never so new, unless like LEVIATHAN you can hang
it, as the Country-fellow speaks, by Geometry (for what else is it to say, that
every other Man must give up his will to the will of this one Man without any
other foundation?) it must stand upon old Principles, that is, upon a Nobility
or an Army planted on a due balance of Dominion. Aut viam inveniam aut faciam,
was an Adage of CAESAR; and there is no standing for a Monarchy unless it finds
this Balance, or makes it. If it finds it, the work's don to its hand: for,
where there is inequality of Estates, there must be inequality of Power; and
where there is inequality of Power, there can be no Commonwealth. To make it,
the Sword must extirpat out of Dominion all other roots of Power, and plant an
Army upon that ground. An Army may be planted Nationally or Provincially. To
plant it Nationally, it must be in one of the four ways mentioned, that is,
either Monarchically in part, as the Roman Benesiciarii; or Monarchically in
the whole, as the Turkish Timariots; Aristocratically, that is, by Earls and
Barons, as the Neustrians were planted by TURBO; or Democratically, that is, by
equal lots, as the Israelitish Army in the Land of Canaan by JOSHUA. In every
one of these ways there must not only be Confiscations, but Confiscations to
such a proportion as may answer to the work intended.

CONFISCATION of a People that never sought against you, but whose Arms you
have born, and in which you have bin victorious, and this upon premeditation,
and in cold blood, I should have thought to be against any example in human
Nature, but for those alleged by MACCHIAVEL of AGATHOCLES, and OLIVERETTO di
Fermo: the former whereof being Captain General of the Syracusans, upon a day
assembled the Senate and the People, as if he had something to communicate with
them, when at a sign given he cut the Senators in pieces to a man, and all the
richest of the People, by which means he came to be King. The procedings of
OLIVERETTO in making himself Prince of Fermo, were somewhat different in
circumstances, but of the same nature. Nevertheless CATILIN, who had a spirit
equal to anv of these in his intended mischief, could never bring the like to
pass in Rome. The head of a small Commonwealth, such a one as was that of
Syracusa or Fermo, is easily brought to the block; but that a populous Nation,
such as Rome, had not such a one, was the grief of NERO. If SYLLA or CAESAR
attained to be Princes, it was by Civil War, and such Civil War as yielded rich
spoils, there being a vast Nobility to be confiscated; which also was the case
in Oceana, when it yielded earth by Earldoms and Baronys to the Neustrian, for
the plantation of his new Potentats. Where a Conqueror finds the Riches of a
Land in the hands of the Few, the Forseitures are easy, and amount to vast
advantage; but where the People have equal shares, the Confiscation of many
coms to little, and is not only dangerous, but fruitless.

THE Romans in one of their defeats of the Volsci found among the Captives
certain Tusculans, who, upon examination, confessed that the Arms they bore were
by command of their State; whereupon information being given to the Senate by the
General CAMILLUS, he was forthwith commanded to march against Tusculum; which
doing accordingly, he found the Tusculan Fields full of Husbandmen, that stirred
not otherwise from the Plow, than to furnish his Army with all kind of
Accommodations and Victuals: drawing near to the City, he saw the Gates wide
open, the Magistrates coming out in their Gowns to salute and bid him welcome:
entering, the Shops were all at work, and open; the Streets sounded with the
noise of Schoolboys at their Books; there was no face of War. Whereupon CAMILLUS
causing the Senate to assemble, told them, That tho the Art was understood, yet
had they at length found out the true Arms whereby the Romans were most
undoubtedly to be conquered, for which cause he would not anticipat the Senate,
to which he desired them forthwith to send, which they did accordingly; and
their Dictator with the rest of their Ambassadors being found by the Roman
Senators as they went into the house standing sadly at the door, were sent for
in as Friends, and not as Enemies: Where the Dictator having said, If we have
offended, the fault was not so great as is our Penitence and your Virtue; the
Senate gave them peace forthwith, and soon after made the Tusculans Citizens of
Rome.

BUT putting the case, of which the World is not able to show an example, That
the forfeiture of a populous Nation, not conquered, but Friends, and in cool
blood, might be taken; your Army must be planted in one of the ways mentioned.
To plant it in the way of absolute Monarchy, that is, upon feuds for life, such
as the Timars, a Country as large and fruitful as that of Greece, would afford
you but sixteen thousand Timariots, for that is the most the Turc (being the
best husband that ever was of this kind) makes of it at this day: and if
Oceana, which is less in fruitfulness by one half, and in extent by three
parts, should have no greater a force, whoever breaks her in one battle, may be
sure she shall never rise; for such (as was noted by MACCHIAVEL) is the nature
of the Turkish Monarchy, if you break it in two battles, you have destroyed its
whole Militia; and the rest being all slaves, you hold it without any further
resistance. Wherefore the erection of an absolute Monarchy in Oceana, or in any
other Country that is no larger, without making it a certain prey to the first
Invader, is altogether impossible.

TO plant by halves, as the Roman Emperors did their Beneficiarys, or military
Colonys, it must be either for life; and this an Army of Oceaners in their own
Country (especially having Estates of Inheritance) will never bear; because
such an Army so planted is as well confiscated as the People; nor had the
Mamalucs bin contented with such usage in Egypt, but that they were Foreners,
and daring not to mix with the Natives, it was of absolute necessity to their
being.

OR planting them upon Inheritance, whether Aristocratically as the Neustrians,
or Democratically as the Israelits, they grow up by certain consequence into
the national Interest: and this, if they be planted popularly, coms to a
Commonwealth; if by way of Nobility, to a mixed Monarchy, which of all other
will be found to be the only kind of Monarchy, whereof this Nation, or any other
that is of no greater extent, has bin or can be capable: for if the Israelits
(tho their Democratical Balance, being fixed by their Agrarian, stood firm) be
yet found to have elected Kings, it was because, their Territory lying open,
they were perpetually invaded, and being perpetually invaded, turned themselves
to any thing which through the want of experience they thought might be a remedy;
whence their mistake in election of their Kings (under whom they gained
nothing, but on the contrary lost all they had acquired by their Commonwealth,
both Estates and Libertys) is not only apparent, but without parallel. And if
there have bin (as was shown) a Kingdom of the Goths in Spain, and of the
Vandals in Asia, consisting of a single Person and a Parliament (taking a
Parliament to be a Council of the People only, without a Nobility) it is
expressly said of those Councils, that they deposed their Kings as often as they
pleased: nor can there be any other consequence of such a Government, seeing
where there is a Council of the People, they do never receive Laws, but give
them; and a Council giving Laws to a single Person, he has no means in the
World whereby to be any more than a subordinat Magistrate, but force: in which
case he is not a single Person and a Parliament, but a single Person and an
Army, which Army again must be planted as has bin shown, or can be of no long
continuance.

IT is true, that the Provincial Balance being in nature quite contrary to the
National, you are no way to plant a Provincial Army upon Dominion. But then you
must have a native Territory in Strength, Situation, or Government, able to
overbalance the foren, or you can never hold it. That an Army should in any
other case be long supported by a mere Tax, is a mere phansy as void of all
reason and experience, as if a Man should think to maintain such a one by
robbing of Orchards: for a mere Tax is but pulling of Plumtrees, the roots
whereof are in other Men's grounds, who suffering perpetual Violence, com to hate
the Author of it: And it is a Maxim, that no Prince that is hated by his People
can be safe. Arms planted upon Dominion extirpat Enemies, and make Friends; but
maintained by a mere Tax, have Enemies that have roots, and Friends that have
none.

TO conclude, Oceana, or any other Nation of no greater extent, must have a
competent Nobility, or is altogether incapable of Monarchy: for where there is
equality of Estates, there must be equality of Power; and where there is
equality of Power, there can be no Monarchy.

The generation of the Commonwealth.
TO com then to the generation of the Commonwealth; it has bin shown how through
the ways and means used by PANURGUS to abase the Nobility, and so to mend that
flaw which we have asserted to be incurable in this kind of Constitution, he
suffered the Balance to fall into the power of the People, and so broke the
Government: but the Balance being in the People, the Commonwealth (tho they do
not see it) is already in the nature of Cornua nota pri^^ vitulo, quam
frontibus extant.
them. There wants nothing else but Time (which is slow and dangerous) or Art
(which would be more quick and secure) for the bringing those native Arms
(wherwithal they are found already) to resist they know not how every thing
that opposes them, to such maturity as may fix them upon their own strength and
bottom.

What Prudence is.
BUT whereas this Art is Prudence; and that part of Prudence which regards the
present Work, is nothing else but the skill of raising such Superstructures of
Government, as are natural to the known Foundations: they never mind the
Foundation, but through certain animosities (wherewith by striving one against
another they are infected) or through freaks, by which, not regarding the course
of things, nor how they conduce to their purpose, they are given to building in
the Air, com to be divided and subdivided into endless Partys and Factions,
both Civil and Ecclesiastical: which briefly to open, I shall first speak of
the People in general, and then of their Divisions.

A PEOPLE (says MACCHIAVEL) that is corrupt, is not capable of a Commonwealth.
But in showing what a corrupt People is, he has either involved himself or me;
nor can I otherwise com out of the Labyrinth, than by saying, that the Balance
altering a People, as to the foregoing Government, must of necessity be
corrupt: but Corruption in this sense signifys no more than that the Corruption
of one Government (as in natural Bodies) is the Generation of another. Wherefore
if the Balance alters from Monarchy, the Corruption of the People in this case
is that which makes them capable of a Commonwealth. But whereas I am not
ignorant, that the Corruption which he means is in Manners, this also is from
the Balance. For the Balance leading from Monarchical into Popular, abates the
Luxury of the Nobility, and, enriching the People, brings the Government from a
more private to a more public Interest; which coming nearer, as has bin shown,
to Justice and right Reason, the People upon a like alteration is so far from
such a Corruption of Manners, as should render them incapable of a
Commonwealth, that of necessity they must thereby contract such a Reformation of
Manners as will bear no other kind of Government. On the other side, where the
Balance changes from Popular to Oligarchical or Monarchical, the public
Interest, with the Reason and Justice included in the same, becoms more private;
Luxury is introduced in the room of Temperance, and Servitude in that of
Freedom; which causes such a corruption of Manners both in the Nobility and
People, as, by the Example of Rome in the time of the Triumvirs, is more at
large discovered by the Author to have bin altogether incapable of a
Commonwealth.

BUT the Balance of Oceana changing quite contrary to that of Rome, the Manners
of the People were not thereby corrupted, but on the contrary adapted to a
Commonwealth. For differences of Opinion in a People not rightly informed of
their Balance, or a division into Partys (while there is not any common
Ligament of Power sufficient to reconcile or hold them) is no sufficient proof
of Corruption. Nevertheless, seeing this must needs be matter of scandal and
danger, it will not be amiss, in showing what were the Partys, to show what
were their Errors.

THE Partys into which this Nation was divided, were Temporal, or Spiritual:
and the Temporal Partys were especially two, the one Royalists, the other
Republicans: each of which asserted their different Causes, either out of
Prudence or Ignorance, out of Interest or Conscience.

FOR Prudence, either that of the Ancients is inferior to the Modern (which we
have hitherto bin setting face to face, that any one The Royalist.
may judge) or that of the Royalist must be inferior to that of the
Commonwealthsman. And for Interest, taking the Commonwealthsman to have really
intended the Public (for otherwise he is a Hypocrit and the worst of Men) that
of the Royalist must of necessity have bin more p^ivat. Wherefore the whole
dispute will com upon matter of Conscience; and this, whether it be urged by
the Right of Kings, the Obligation of former Laws, or of the Oath of
Allegiance, is absolved by the Balance.

FOR if the Right of Kings were as immediately derived from the Breath of God as
the Life of Man, yet this excludes not Death and Dissolution. But, that the
dissolution of the late Monarchy was as natural as the Death of a Man, has bin
already shown. Wherefore it remains with the Royalists to discover by what
Reason or Experience it is possible for a Monarchy to stand upon a popular
Balance; or, the Balance being popular, as well the Oath of Allegiance, as all
other Monarchical Laws imply an impossibility, and are therefore void.

The Commonwealthsman.
TO the Commonwealthsman I have no more to say, but that if he excludes any
Party, he is not truly such; nor shall ever found a Commonwealth upon the
natural Principle of the same, which is Justice. And the Royalist for having
opposed a Commonwealth in Oceana (where the Laws were so ambiguous that they
might be eternally disputed, and never reconciled) can neither be justly for
that cause excluded from his full and equal share in the Government; nor
prudently, for this reason, that a Commonwealth consisting of a Party will be
in perpetual labor of her own destruction: Whence it was that the Romans having
conquered the Albans, incorporated them with equal Right into the Commonwealth.
And if the Royalists be flesh of your flesh, and nearer of Blood than were the
Albans to the Romans, you being also both Christians, the Argument's the
stronger. Nevertheless there is no reason that a Commonwealth should any more
favor a Party remaining in fixed opposition against it, than BRUTUS did his own
Sons. But if it sixes them upon that opposition, it is its own fault, not
theirs; and this is don by excluding them. Men that have equal Possessions, and
the same security for their Estates and their Libertys that you have, have the
same cause with you to defend both: But if you will be trampling, they fight
for Liberty, tho for Monarchy; and you for Tyranny, tho under the name of a
Commonwealth: The nature of Orders in a Government rightly instituted being
void of all jealousy, because, let the Partys which it embraces bo what they
will, its Orders are such as they neither would resist if they could, nor could
if they would, as has bin partly already shown; and will appear more at large
by the following Model.

Religious Par*tys.
THE Partys that are Spiritual are of more kinds than I need mention; some for a
National Religion, and others for Liberty of Conscience, with such animosity on
both sides, as if these two could not consist together, and of which I have
already sufficiently spoken, to show, that indeed the one cannot well subsist
without the other. But they of all the rest are the most dangerous, who,
holding that the Saints must govern, go about to reduce the Commonwealth to a
Party, as well for the Reasons already shown, as that their Pretenses are
against Scripture, where the Saints are commanded to submit to the Higher
Powers, and to be subject to the Ordinance of Man. And that men, pretending
under the notion of Saints or Religion to Civil Power, have hitherto never
failed to dishonor that Profession, the World is full of Examples, whereof I
shall confine my self at present only to a couple, the one of Old, the other of
New Rome.

Saints.
IN Old Rome the Patricians or Nobility pretending to be the godly Party, were
questioned by the People for engrossing all the Magistracys of that
Commonwealth, and had nothing to say why they did so, but Quod nemo plebeius
auspicia haberet.
that Magistracy required a kind of Holiness which was not in the People: Plebs
ad id maxima indignatione exarsit, quod auspicari, tanquam invisi* Diis
immortalibus, negarentur posse. T. Live. 4. 8.
at which the People were filled with such Indignation as had com to cutting of
Throats, if the Nobility had not immediately laid by the Insolency of that Plea;
which nevertheless when they had don, the People for a long time after
continued to elect no other but Patrician Magistrates.

THE Example of New Rome in the rise and practice of the Hierarchy (too well
known to require any further illustration) is far more immodest.

THIS has bin the course of Nature: and when it has pleased, or shall please
God to introduce any thing that is above the course of Nature, he will, as he
has always don, confirm it by Miracle; for so in his Prophecy of the Reign of
CHRIST upon Earth, he expressly promises: seeing that the Souls of them that
were beheaded for JESUS, shall be seen to live and reign with him; which will
be an object of Sense, the rather, because the rest of the Dead are not to live
again till the Thousand Years be finished. And it is not lawful for men to
persuade us that a thing already is, tho there be no such object of our Sense,
which God has told us shall not be till it be an object of our Sense.

THE Saintship of a People as to Government, consists in the election of
Magistrates fearing God, and hating Covetousness, and not in their confining
themselves, or being confined to men of this or that Party or Profession. It
consists in making the most prudent and religious choice they can; yet not in
trusting to Men, but, next God, to their own Orders. Give us good Men, and they
will make us good Laws, is the Maxim of a Demagog, and is (through the alteration
which is commonly perceivable in men, when they have power to work their own
Wills) exceeding fallible. But give us good Orders, and they will make us good
Men, is the Maxim of a Legislator, and the most infallible in the Politics.

BUT these Divisions (however there be some good Men that look sadly on them)
are trivial things; first as to the Civil concern, because the Government,
whereof this Nation is capable, being once seen, takes in all Interests. And,
secondly, as to the Spiritual; because as the pretense of Religion has always
bin turbulent in broken Governments, so where the Government has bin sound and
steady, Religion has never showed it self with any other face than that of the
natural Sweetness, and Tranquillity: nor is there any reason why it should; The
Errors of the People are from their Governors.
wherefore the Errors of the People are occasioned by their Governors. If they be
doubtful of the way, or wander from it, it is because their Guides misled them;
and the Guides of the People are never so well qualified for leading by any
Virtue of their own, as by that of the Government.

THE Government of Oceana (as it stood at the time whereof we discourse,
consisting of one single Council of the People, exclusively of the King and the
Lords) was called a Parliament: Nevertheless the Parlaments of the Teutons and
of the Neustrians consisted, as has bin shown, of the King, Lords and Commons;
wherefore this under an old Name was a new thing: A Parliament consisting of a
single Assembly elected by the People, and invested with the whole Power of the
Government, without any Covenants, Conditions, or Orders whatsoever. So new a
thing, that neither ancient nor modern Prudence can show any avowed Example of
the like. And there is scarce any thing that seems to me so strange as that
(whereas there was nothing more familiar with these Counsillors, than to bring
the Scripture to the House) there should not be a Man of them that so much as
offered to bring the House to the Scripture, wherein, as has bin shown, is
contained that Original, whereof all the rest of the Commonwealths seem to be
Copys. Certainly if LEVIATHAN (who is surer of nothing than that a popular
Commonwealth consists but of one Council) transcribed his Doctrine out of this
Assembly, for him to except against ARISTOTLE and CICERO for writing out of
their own Commonwealths, was not so fair play; or if the Parliament transcribed
out of him, it had bin an honor better due to MOSES. But where one of them
should have an Example but from the other, I cannot imagine, there being nothing
of this kind that I can find in story, but the Oligarchy of Athens, the thirty
Tyrants of the same, and the Roman Decemvirs.

Lib. 8.
FOR the Oligarchy, THUCYDIDES tells us, that it was a Senate or Council of Four
hundred, pretending to a Balancing Council of the People consisting of Five
thousand, but not producing them; wherein you have the definition of an
Oligarchy, which is a single Council both debating and resolving, dividing and
choosing; and what that must com to, was shown by the Example of the Girls, and
is apparent by the experience of all times: wherefore the Thirty set up by the
Lacedaemonians (when they had conquered Athens) are called Tyrants by all
Authors, LEVIATHAN only excepted, who will have them against all the World to
have bin an Aristocracy; but for what reason I cannot imagine, these also, as
void of any Balance, having bin void of that which is essential to every
Commonwealth, whether Aristocratical or Popular; except he be pleased with
them, because that, according to the Testimony of XENOPHON, they killed more
men in eight months, than the Lacedaemonians had don in ten years; oppressing
the People (to use Sir WALTER RALEIGH'S words) with all base and intolerable
Slavery.

THE usurped Government of the Decemvirs in Rome was of the same kind. Wherefore
in the fear of God let Christian Legislators (setting the Pattern given in the
Mount on the one side, and these execrable Examples on the other) know the
right hand from the left; and so much the rather, because those things which do
not conduce to the good of the Governed, are fallacious, if they appear to be
good for the Governors. God in chastising a People, is accustomed to burn his
Rod. The Empire of these Oligarchys was not so violent as short, nor did they
fall upon the People, but in their own immediate ruin. A Council without a
Balance is not a Commonwealth, but an Oligarchy; and every Oligarchy, except it
be put to the defense of its Wickedness or Power against some outward danger, is
factious. Wherefore the Errors of the People being from their Governors (which
Maxim in the Politics bearing a sufficient testimony to it self, is also proved
by MACCHIAVEL) if the People of Oceana have bin factious, the Cause is
apparent: But what Remedy?

The General.
IN answer to this Question, I com now to the Army; of which the most
victorious Captain, and incomparable Patriot OLPHAUS MEGALETOR was now General:
who being a much greater master of that Art, whereof I have made a rough draught
in these Preliminarys, had such sad reflections upon the ways and procedings of
the Parliament, as cast him upon Books, and all other means of diversion, among
which he happened on this place of MACCHIAVEL: Thrice happy is that People
which chances to have a Man able to give them such a Government at once, as
without alteration may secure them of their Libertys; seeing it is certain that
Lacedemon, in observing the Laws of LYCURGUS, continued about eight hundred
years without any dangerous Tumult or Corruption. My Lord General (as it is
said of THEMISTOCLES, that he could not sleep for the Glory obtained by
MILTIADES at the Battle of Maratho) took so new and deep an Impression at these
words of the much greater Glory of LYCURGUS, that, being on this side assaulted
with the emulation of his illustrious Object, and on the other with the Misery
of the Nation, which seemed (as it were ruined by his Victory) to cast it self
at his feet, he was almost wholly deprived of his natural rest, till the debate
he had within himself came to a firm resolution, that the greatest Advantages
of a Commonwealth are, first, that the Legislator should be one Man: And,
secondly, that the Government should be made altogether, or at once. For the
first, It is certain, says Des. B. 1. c. 9.
MACCHIAVEL, that a Commonwealth is seldom or never well turned or constituted,
except it has bin the Work of one Man; for which That a Legislator is to b^ one.
cause a wise Legislator, and one whose mind is firmly set, not upon private but
the public Interest, not upon his Posterity but upon his Country, may justly
endeavor to get the soverain Power into his own hands: nor shall any man that
is Master of Reason blame such extraordinary means as in that case will be
necessary, the end proving no other than the Constitution of a well-ordered
Commonwealth. The reason of this is demonstrable: for the ordinary means not
failing, the Commonwealth has no need of a Legislator; but the ordinary means
failing, there is no recourse to be had but to such as are extraordinary. And,
whereas a Book or a Building has not bin known to attain to its perfection, if
it has not had a sole Author or Architect; a Commonwealth, That a Commonwealth
is to be made at once.
as to the Fabric of it, is of the like nature. And thus it may be made at once;
in which there be great advantages: for a Commonwealth made at once, takes
Security at the same time it lends its Money; and trusts not it self to the
Faith of Men, but lanches immediately forth into the Empire of Laws: and being
set straight, brings the Manners of its Citizens to its rule; whence followed
that uprightness which was in Lacedemon. But Manners that are rooted in men,
bow the tenderness of a Commonwealth coming up by twigs to their bent; whence
followed the obliquity that was in Rome, and those perpetual Repairs by the
Consuls Axes, and Tribuns Hammers, which could never finish that Commonwealth
but in destruction.

MY Lord General being clear in these Points, and of the necessity of some other
course than would be thought upon by the Parliament, appointed a meeting of the
Army, where he spoke his sense agreeable to these Preliminarys with such success
to the Soldiery, that the Parliament was soon after deposed; and he himself (in
the great Hall of the Pantheon or Palace of Justice, situated in Emporium the
capital City) was created by the universal Suffrage of the Army, Lord ARCHON,
or sole Legislator of Oceana: upon which Theater you have, to conclude this
piece, a Person introduced, whose fame shall never draw its Curtain.

THE Lord ARCHON being created, fifty select Persons to assist him (by laboring
in the Mines of ancient Prudence, and bringing its hidden Treasures to new
light) were added, with the style also of Legislators, and sat as a Council,
whereof he was the sole Director and President.

The Council of Legislators.
OF this piece, being the greater half of the whole work, I shall be able at
this time to give no farther account, than very briefly to show at what it aims.

MY Lord ARCHON in opening the Council of Legislators, made it appear how
unsafe a thing it is to follow Phansy in the Fabric of a Commonwealth; and how
necessary that the Archives of ancient Prudence should be ransacked before any
Counsillor should presume to offer any other matter in order to the work in
hand, or toward the consideration to be had by the Council upon a Model of
Government. Wherefore he caused an Urn to be brought, and every one of the
Counsillors to draw a Lot. By the Lots as they were drawn, The Commonwealth of
ISRAEL fell to PHOSPHORUS DE AUGE. ATHENS NAVARCHUS DE PARALO. LACEDEMON LACO
DE SCYTALE. CARTHAGE MAGO DE SYRTIBUS. the ACHEANS, AETOLIANS, and LYCIANS
ARATUS DE ISTHMO. the SWITZ ALPESTER DE FULMINE. HOLLAND, and the UNITED
PROVINCES GLAUCUS DE ULNA. ROME DOLABELLA DE ENYO. VENICE LYNCEUS DE STELLA.

THESE contained in them all those Excellencys whereof a Commonwealth is
capable; so that to have added more, had bin to no purpose. Upon time given to
the Counsillors, by their own Studys and those of their Friends, to prepare
themselves, they were opened in the Order, and by the Persons mentioned at the
Council of Legislators; and afterward by order of the same were repeated at
the Council of the Prytans to the People: for in drawing of the Lots, there
were about a dozen of them inscribed with the letter P. whereby the Counsillors
that drew them became Prytans.

THE Prytans were a Committee or Council sitting in the great Hall of Pantheon,
to whom it was lawful for any man to offer any thing in order to the Fabric of
the Commonwealth: for which cause, that they might not be oppressed by the
throng, there was a Rail about the Table where they sat, and on each side of
the same a Pulpit; that on the right hand for any man that would propose any
thing, and that on the left for any other that would oppose him. And all Partys
(being indemnify'd by Proclamation of the ARCHON) were invited to dispute their
own Interests, or propose whatever they thought fit (in order to the future
Government) to the Council of the Prytans, who (having a Guard of about two or
three hundred men, lest the heat of dispute might break the peace) had the
Right of Moderators, and were to report from time to time such Propositions or
Occurrences as they thought fit, to the Council of Legislators sitting more
privately in the Palace called Alma.

THIS was that which made the People (who were neither safely to be admitted,
nor conveniently to be excluded in the framing of the Commonwealth) verily
believe when it came forth, that it was no other than that whereof they
themselves had bin the makers.

MOREOVER, this Council sat diverse months after the publishing, and during the
promulgation of the Model to the People; by which means there is scarce any
thing was said or written for or against the said Model, but you shall have it
with the next impression of this work by way of Oration addressed to, and
moderated by the Prytans.

BY this means the Council of Legislators had their necessary Solitude and due
aim in their greater work, as being acquainted from time to time with the pulse
of the People, and yet without any manner of interruption or disturbance.

WHEREFORE every Commonwealth in its place having bin opened by due Method; that
is, First, by the People; Secondly, by the Senate; And, Thirdly, by the
Magistracy: The Council upon mature debate took such results or orders out of
each, and out os every part of each of them, as upon opening the same they
thought fit; which being put from time to time in writing by the Clear or
Secretary, there remained no more in the conclusion, than putting the Orders so
taken together, to view and examine them with a diligent ey, that it might be
clearly discovered whether they did interfere, or could any wise com to
interfere or jostle one with the other. For as such Orders jostling, or coming
to jostle one another, are the certain dissolution of the Commonwealth; so
taken upon the proof of like experience, and neither jostling, nor showing
which way they can possibly com to jostle one another, they make a perfect, and
(for ought that in human Prudence can be foreseen) an immortal Commonwealth.

AND such was the Art whereby my Lord ARCHON (taking Counsil of the Commonwealth
of Israel, as of MOSES; and of the rest of the Commonwealths, as of JETHRO)
framed the Model of the Commonwealth of Oceana.

THE MODEL OF THE Commonwealth of OCEANA.
WHEREAS my Lord ARCHON being from MOSES and LYCURGUS the first Legislator that
hitherto is found in History to have introduced or erected an entire
Commonwealth at once, happened, like them also, to be more intent upon putting
the same into execution or action, than into writing; by which means the Model
came to be promulgated or published with more brevity and less illustration
than is necessary for their understanding who have not bin acquainted with the
whole Procedings of the Council of Legislators, and of the Prytans, where it
was asserted and cleared from all objections and doubts: To the end that I may
supply what was wanting in the promulgated Epitome to a more full and perfect
Narrative of the whole, I shall rather take the Commonwealth practically, and
as it has now given an account of it self in some years Revolutions (as
DICEARCHUS is said to have don that of Lacedemon, first transcribed Suidas.
by his hand some three or four hundred years after the Institution) yet not
omitting to add for proof to every Order such Debates and Speeches of the
Legislators in their Council, or at least such parts of them as may best
discover the reason of the Government; nor such ways and means as were used in
the institution or rise of the Building, not to be so well conceived, without
some knowledge given of the Engines wherwithal the mighty Weight was moved. But
through the entire omission of the Council of Legislators or Workmen that squared
every stone to this Structure in the Quarrys of ancient Prudence, the proof of
the first part of this Discourse will be lame, except I insert, as well for
illustration, as to avoid frequent repetition, three remarkable Testimonys in
this place.

Exodus 18. 24.
THE first is taken out of the Commonwealth of Israel: So MOSES hearkened to
the voice of (JETHRO) his Father in law, and did all that he had said. And
MOSES chose able men out of all Israel, and Numb. 1. 16.
made them heads over the People; Tribuns, as it is in the vulgar Latin; or
Phylarchs, that is, Princes of the Tribes, sitting upon twelve Sellis
Curulibus. Grot.
Thrones, Matthew.
and judging the twelve Tribes of Israel: and next to these he chose Rulers of
Thousands, Rulers of Hundreds, Rulers of Fiftys, and Rulers of Tens, which were
the steps or rise of this Commonwealth from its foundation or root to its
proper elevation or accomplishment in the Sanhedrim, and the Congregation,
already opened in the Preliminarys.

THE Second is taken out of Lacedemon, as LYCURGUS (for the greater impression
of his Institutions upon the minds of his Citizens) pretended to have received
the Model of that Commonwealth from the Oracle of APOLLO at Delphos, the words
whereof are thus recorded by PLUTARCH in the Life of that famous Legislator:
When thou Crag. de Rep. Lac. lib. 1. c. 6.
shall have divided the People into Tribes (which were six) and Obas (which were
five in every Tribe) thou shall constitute the Senate, consisting, with the two
Kings, of thirty Counsillors, who, according as occasion requires, shall cause
the Congregation to be assembled between the Bridge and the River Gnacion, where
the Senate shall propose to the People, and dismiss them without suffering them
to debate. The Ob^ were Linages into which every Tribe was divided, and in each
Tribe there was another Division containing all those of the same that were of
military Age; which being called the Mora, was subdivided into Troops and
Companys that were held in perpetual Discipline under the Command of a Magistrate
called the Polemarch.

THE Third is taken out of the Commonwealth of Rome, or those parts of it which
are comprised in the first and second Books of LIVY, where the People,
according to the institution by ROMULUS, are first divided into thirty Curias
or Parishes, whereof he elected (by three out of each Curia) the Senate, which
from his Reign to that of SERVIUS Halicar.
TULLUS proposed to the Parishes or Parochial Congregations; and these being
called the Comitia Curiata, had the election of the Quirites, Regem create; ita
patribus visum est: Tullum Hostilium Regem Populus jussit, Patres authors
facti.
Kings, the Confirmation of their Ut ab Romulo traditum, suffragium viritim
eadem vi, eodemque jure omnibus datum est.
Laws, and the last appeal in matters of Judicature, as appears in the case of
HORATIUS that killed his Sister; till in the Reign of SERVIUS (for the other
Kings kept not to the institution of ROMULUS) the People being grown somewhat,
the Power of the Curiata was for the greater part translated to the Centuriata
Comitia instituted by this King, which distributed the People according to the
cense or valuation of their Estates into six Classes, every one containing
about forty Centurys, divided into Youth and Elders; the Youth for
field-service, the Elders for the defense of their Territory, all armed and
under continual Discipline, in which they assembled both upon military and civil
occasions. But when the Senate proposed to the People, the Horse only, whereof
there were twelve Centurys consisting of the richest sort over and above those
of the Foot enumerated, were called with the first Classis of the Foot to the
suffrage; or if these accorded not, then the second Classis was called to them,
but seldom or never any of the rest. Wherefore the People after the expulsion of
the Kings, growing impatient of this inequality, rested not till they had
reduced the suffrage as it had bin in the Comitia Curiata to the whole People
again: But in another way, that is to say, by the Comitia Tributa, which
thereupon were instituted, being a Council where the People in exigencys made
Laws without the Senate; which Laws were called Plebiscita. This Council is that
in regard whereof CICERO and other great Wits so frequently inveigh against the
People, and sometimes even LIVY, as at the first Hunc annum insignem maxim
Comitia Tributa efficient; res major victoria ^uscepti certaminis quam usu,
plus enim dignitatis Comitiis ipsis detractum est, patribus ex Concilio
submovendis, quam virium aut plebi additum aut demtum patribus.
institution of it. To say the truth, it was a kind of Anarchy, whereof the
People could not be excusable, if there had not, through the Courses taken by the
Senate, bin otherwise a necessity that they must have seen the Commonwealth run
into Oligarchy.

Sigonius.
THE manner how the Comitia Curiata, Centuriata or Tributa were called, during
the time of the Commonwealth, to the suffrage, was by lot: the Curia, Century,
or Tribe, whereon the first lot fell, being styled Principium, or the
Prerogative; and the other Curiae, Centurys, or Tribes, whereon the second,
third, and fourth Lots, etc. fell, the Jure vocatae: From henceforth not the
first Classis, as in the times of SERVIUS, but the Prerogative, whether Curia,
Century, or Tribe, came first to the Suffrage, whose Vote was called Omen
Praerogativum, and seldom failed to be leading to the rest of the Tribes. The
Jure vocatae in the order of their Lots came next: the manner of giving
suffrage was, by casting wooden Tablets, marked for the Affirmative or the
Negative, into certain Urns standing upon a Scaffold, as they marched over it
in files; which for the resemblance it bore, was called the Bridge. The Candidat
or Competitor, who had most Suffrages in a Curia, Century, or Tribe, was said
to have that Curia, Century, or Tribe; and he who had most of the Curiae,
Centurys, or Tribes, carried the Magistracy.

THESE three places being premised, as such upon which there will be frequent
reflection, I com to the Narrative, divided into two parts, the first
containing the Institution, the second the Constitution of the Commonwealth; in
each whereof I shall distinguish the Orders, as those which contain the whole
Model, from the rest of the Discourse, which tends only to the explanation or
proof of them.

Institution of the Commonwealth.
IN the institution or building of a Commonwealth, the first work (as that of
Builders) can be no other than fitting and distributing the Materials.

Divisions of the People.
THE Materials of a Commonwealth are the People; and the People of Oceana were
distributed by casting them into certain Divisions, regarding their Quality,
their Age, their Wealth, and the places of their residence or habitation, which
was don by the ensuing Orders.

1. Order. Into Freemen and Servants.
THE first ORDER distributes the People into Freemen or Citizens, and Servants,
while such; for if they attain to Liberty, that is, to live of themselves, they
are Freemen or Citizens.

THIS Order needs no proof, in regard of the nature of Servitude, which is
inconsistent with Freedom or participation of Government in a Commonwealth.

2. Order. Into Youth and Elders.
THE second ORDER distributes Citizens into Youth and Elders (such as are from
18 years of age to 30, being accounted Youth; and such as are of 30 and
upwards, Elders) and establishes that the Youth shall be the marching Armies,
and the Elders the standing Garrisons of this Nation.

A COMMONWEALTH whose Arms are in the hands of her Servants, had need be
situated (as is elegantly said of Venice by Lontana della feed degli huomini.
CONTARINI) out of the reach of their clutches; witness the danger run by that
of Carthage in the Rebellion of SPENDIUS and MATHO. But tho a City (if one
Swallow makes a Summer) may thus chance to be safe, yet shall it never be
great; for if Carthage or Venice acquired any Fame in their Arms, it is known
to have happened through the mere virtue of their Captains, and not of their
Orders: wherefore Israel, Lacedemon, and Rome entailed their Arms upon the prime
of their Citizens, divided (at least in Lacedemon and Rome) into Youth and
Elders; the Youth for the Field, and the Elders for defense of the Territory.

3. Order. Into Horse and Foot.
THE third ORDER distributes the Citizens into Horse and Foot by the cense or
valuation of their Estates; they who have above one hundred Pounds a year in
Lands, Goods, or Monys, being obliged to be of the Horse; and they who have
under that Sum, to be of the Foot. But if a man has prodigally wasted and spent
his Patrimony, he is neither capable of Magistracy, Office, or Suffrage in the
Commonwealth.

CITIZENS are not only to defend the Commonwealth, but according to their
abilitys, as the Romans under SERVIUS TULLUS (regard had to their Estates) were
some inrol'd in the Horse Centurys, and others of the Foot, with Arms enjoined
accordingly; nor could it be otherwise in the rest of the Commonwealths, tho
out of Historical Remains, that are so much darker, it be not so clearly
provable. And the necessary Prerogative to be given by a Commonwealth to
Estates, is in some measure in the nature of Industry, and the use of it to the
Public. Populus Romanus per Classes divisus erat, and pro Patrimonii facultate
censebantur; ex iis, omnes quibus res erat, ad militiam ducebantur; diligenter
enim pro victoria laborabant, qui ex liberate bona patriam desendebant: Illi
autem quibus nullae opes erant, caput suum, quod solum possideb^nt,
censebantur, and belli tempore in moenibus residebant; facile enim poterant
existere proditores, quia egestas haud facile habetur sine damno. Hos igitur
Marius, quibus non fuerat Resp. committenda, duxit ad bellum.
The Roman People, says JULIUS EXUPERANTIUS, were divided into Classes, and
taxed according to the value of their Estates. All that were worth the Sums
appointed were employed in the Wars; for they most eagerly contend for the
Victory, who fight for Liberty in defense of their Country and Possessions. But
the poorer sort were pol'd only for their Heads (which was all they had) and
kept in Garrison at home in time of War: For these might betray the Armies for
Bread, by reason of their Poverty; which is the reason that MARIUS, to whom the
care of the Government ought not to have bin committed, was the first that led
'em into the field; and his Success was accordingly. There is a mean in things;
as exorbitant Riches overthrow the Balance of a Commonwealth, so extreme
Poverty cannot hold it, nor is by any means to be trusted with it. The Clause
in the Order concerning the Prodigal is Athenian, and a very laudable one; for
he that could not live upon his Patrimony, if he coms to touch the public Money,
makes a Commonwealth Bankrupt.

4. Order. Into Parishes, Hundreds, and Tribes.
THE fourth ORDER distributes the People according to the places their
Habitation, into Parishes, Hundreds, and Tribes.

FOR except the People be methodically distributed, they cannot be methodically
collected; but the being of a Commonwealth consists in the methodical
Collection of the People: wherefore you have the Israelitish Divisions into
Rulers of Thousands, of Hundreds, of Fiftys, and of Tens; and of the whole
Commonwealth into Tribes: The Laconic into Obas, Moras, and Tribes; the Roman
into Tribes, Centurys, and Classes: and something there must of necessity be in
every Government of the like nature; as that in the late Monarchy, by Countys.
But this being the only Institution in Oceana (except that of the Agrarian)
which required any charge, or included any difficulty, ingages me to a more
particular Description of the manner how it was performed, as follows.

The use and method of the Surveyors.
A THOUSAND Surveyors commissionated and instructed by the Lord ARCHON and the
Council, being divided into two equal numbers, each under the inspection of two
Surveyors General, were distributed into the Northern and Southern parts of the
Territory, divided by the River Hemisua, the whole whereof contains about ten
thousand Parishes, some ten of those being assigned to each Surveyor: For as to
this matter there needed no great exactness, it tending only (by showing
whither every one was to repair, and wherabout to begin) to the more orderly
carrying on of the work; the nature of their Instructions otherwise regarding
rather the number of the Inhabitants, than of the Parishes. The Surveyors
therefore being every one furnished with a convenient proportion of Urns, Balls
and balloting Boxes (in the use whereof they had bin formerly exercised) and now
arriving each at his respective Parishes, began with the People, by teaching
them their first lesson, which was the Ballot; and tho they found them in the
beginning something froward as at toys, with which (while they were in
expectation of greater matters from a Council of Legislators) they conceived
themselves to be abused, they came within a little while to think them pretty
sport, and at length such as might very soberly be used in good earnest:
whereupon the Surveyors began the Institution included in

5. Order* Institution of the Parishes, of the Ballot, and of the Deputys.
THE fifth ORDER, requiring, That upon the first Monday next ensuing the last
of December, the bigger Bell in every Parish throout the Nation be rung at
eight of the Clock in the morning, and continue ringing for the space of one
hour; and that all the Elders of the Parish respectively repair to the Church,
before the Bell has don ringing; where dividing themselves into two equal
Numbers, or as near equal as may be, they shall take their places according to
their Dignitys (if they be of diverse qualitys) and according to their Seniority
(if they be of the same) the one half on the one side, and the other half on
the other, in the body of the Church: which don, they shall make Oath to the
Overseers of the Parish for the time being (instead of these the Surveyors were
to officiat at the Institution or first Assembly) by holding up their hands, to
make a fair Election according to the Laws of the Ballot, as they are hereafter
explained, of such Persons, amounting to a fifth part of their whole number, to
be their Deputys, and to exercise their Power in manner hereafter explained, as
they shall think in their Consciences to be fittest for that trust, and will
acquit themselves of it to the best advantage of the Commonwealth. And Oath
being thus made, they shall proceed to Election, if the Elders of the Parish
amount to one thousand by the Ballot of the Tribe (as it is in due place
explained) and if the Elders of the Parish amount to fifty or upwards, but
within the number of one thousand, by the Ballot of the hundred (as it is in
due place explained). But if the Elders amount not to fifty, then they shall
proceed to the Ballot of the Parish, as it is in this place and after this
manner explained. The two Overseers for the time being shall seat themselves at
the upper end of the middle Ally, with a Table before them, their faces being
toward the Congregation: And the Constable for the time being shall set an Vrn
before the Table, into which he shall put so many Balls as there be Elders
present, whereof there shall be one that is gilded, the rest being white; and
when the Constable has shaken the Vrn sufficiently to mix the Balls, the
Overseers shall call the Elders to the Vrn, who from each side of the Church
shall com up the middle Ally in two files, every man passing by the Vrn, and
drawing out one Ball; which if it be Silver, he shall cast into a Bowl standing
at the foot of the Vrn, and return by the outward Ally on his side to his
place. But he who draws the golden Ball is the Proposer, and shall be seated
between the Overseers, where he shall begin in what order he pleases, and name
such as (upon his Oath already taken) he conceives fittest to be chosen, one by
one, to the Elders; and the Party named shall withdraw while the Congregation
is balloting his name by the double Box or Boxes appointed and marked on the
outward part, to show which side is Affirmative and which Negative, being
carried by a Boy or Boys appointed by the Overseers, to every one of the
Elders, who shall hold up a pellet made of linen Rags, between his Finger and
his Thumb, and put it after such a manner into the Box, as tho no man can see
into which side he puts it, yet any man may see that he puts in but one pellet
or suffrage. And the suffrage of the Congregation being thus given, shall be
returned with the Box or Boxes to the Overseers, who opening the same, shall
pour the affirmative Balls into a white Bowl standing upon the Table on the
right hand, to be numbered by the first Overseer; and the Negative into a green
Bowl standing on the left hand, to be numbered by the second Overseer: and the
suffrages being numbered, he who has the major part in the Affirmative is one
of the Deputys of the Parish: and when so many Deputys are chosen as amount to
a full fifth part of the whole number of the Elders, the Ballot for that time
shall cease. The Deputys being chosen are to be listed by the Overseers in
order as they were chosen, except only that such as are Horse must be listed in
the first place with the rest, proportionable to the number of the
Congregation, after this manner: Anno Dom.
The List of the first Mover.
A. A. Ord. Eq. 1 Dep. of the Parish of -- in the Hundred of -- and the Tribe
of -- which Parish at the present Election contains 20 Elders, whereof one is of
the Horse or Equestrian Order. B. B. 2 Dep. C. C. 3 Dep. D. D. 4 Dep. E. E. 5
Dep.

The first and second in the List are Overseers by consequence: the third is
the Constable, and the fourth and fifth are Churchwardens; the Persons so
chosen are Deputys of the Parish for the space of one year from their Election,
and no longer; nor may they be elected two years together. This List being the
Primum Mobile, or first Mover of the Commonwealth, is to be registered in a
Book diligently kept and preserved by the Overseers, who are responsible in
their places for these and other Dutys to be hereafter mentioned, to the
Censors of the Tribe: and the Congregation is to observe the present Order, as
they will answer the contrary to the Phylarch, or Prerogative Troop of the
Tribe; which, in case of failure in the whole or any part of it, have power to
sine them or any of them at discretion, but under an Appeal to the Parliament.

FOR proof of this Order; First, in Reason: It is with all Politicians past
dispute, that paternal Power is in the right of Nature; and this is no other
than the derivation of Power from Fathers of Familys, as the natural root of a
Commonwealth. And for Experience, if it be otherwise in that of Holland, I know
no other example of the like kind. In Israel, the soverain Power came clearly
from the natural Root, the Jos. 24. 1.
Elders of the whole People; and Rome was born (Comitiis Curiatis) in her
Parochial Congregations, out of which ROMULUS first raised her Senate, then all
the rest of the Orders of that Commonwealth, which rose so high: For the depth
of a Commonwealth is the just height of it.

Ipsa haeret Scopulis, and tantum vertice ad Auras Aethereas, quantum r^dice ad
Tartara, tendit.
She raises up her Head unto the Skys,
Near as her Root unto the Center lys.
AND if the Commonwealth of Rome was born of thirty Parishes, this of Oceana
was born of ten thousand. But whereas mention in the birth of this is made of an
Equestrian Order, it may startle such as know that the division of the People
of Rome, at the Institution of that Commonwealth into Orders, was the occasion
of its ruin. The distinction of the Patrician as a hereditary Order from the
very Institution, engrossing all the Magistracys, was indeed the destruction of
Rome; but to a Knight or one of the Equestrian Order, says HORACE, Si
quadringentis sex septem millia desunt, Plebs eris.
By which it should seem that this Order was not otherwise hereditary than a
man's Estate, nor did it give any claim to Magistracy; wherefore you shall never
find that it disquieted the Commonwealth; nor dos the name denote any more in
Oceana, than the Duty of such a man's Estate to the Public.

BUT the Surveyors both in this place and in others, forasmuch as they could
not observe all the Circumstances of this Order, especially that of the time of
Election, did for the first as well as they could; and, the Elections being
made and registered, took each of them Copys of those Lists which were within
their Allotments; which don, they produced

4. Order.

Of Ordination, a National Religion, and Liberty of Conscience.


THE sixth ORDER, directing, in case a Parson or Vicar of a Parish coms to be
removed by Death or by the Censors, that the Congregation of the Parish
assemble and depute one or two Elders by the Ballot, who upon the charge of the
Parish shall repair to one of the Vniversitys of this Nationwith a Certificat
signed by the Overseers, and addressed to the Vice Chancellor: which Certificat
giving notice of the Death or Removal of the Parson or Vicar, of the value of
the Parsonage or Vicarage, and of the desire of the Congregation to receive a
Probationer from that University; the Vice Chancellor upon the receipt thereof
shall call a Convocation, and having made choice of a fit Person, shall return
him in due time to the Parish, where the Person so returned shall receive the
full fruits of the Benefice or Vicarage, and do the duty of the Parson or
Vicar, for the space of one year, as Probationer: and that being expired, the
Congregation of the Elders shall put their Probationer to the Ballot: and if he
attains not to two parts in three of the Suffrage affirmative, he shall take
his leave of the Parish, and they shall send in like manner as before for
another Probationer; but if their Probationer obtains two parts in three of the
Suffrage affirmative, he is then Pastor of that Parish. And the Pastor of the
Parish shall pray with the Congregation, preach the Word, and administer the
Sacraments to the same, according to the Directory to be hereafter appointed by
the Parliament. Nevertheless such as are of gathered Congregations, or from time
to time shall join with any of them, are in no wise obliged to this way of
electing their Teachers, or to give their Votes in this case, but wholly left
to the liberty of their own Consciences, and to that way of Worship which they
shall choose, being not Popish, Jewish, or Idolatrous. And to the end they may
be the better protected by the State in the free exercise of the same, they are
desired to make choice, in such manner as they best like, of certain Magistrates
in every one of their Congregations, which we could wish might be four in each
of them, to be Auditors in cases of differences or distaste, if any through variety
of opinions, that may be grievous or injurious to them, should fall out. And
such Auditors or Magistrates shall have power to examine the matter, and inform
themselves, to the end that if they think it of sufficient weight, they may
acquaint the Phylarch with it, or introduce it into the Council of Religion;
where all such Causes as those Magistrates introduce, shall from time to time be
heard and determined according to such Laws as are or shall hereafter be
provided by the Parliament for the just defense of the Liberty of Conscience.

THIS Order consists of three parts, the first restoring the power of
Ordination to the People, which, that it originally belongs to them, is clear,
tho not in English yet in Scripture, where the Apostles ordained Acts 14. 23.
Elders by the holding up of hands in every Congregation, that is, by the
suffrage of the People, which was also given in some of those Citys by the
Ballot. And tho it may be shown that the Apostles ordained some by the laying on
of hands, it will not be shown that they did so in every Congregation.

EXCOMMUNICATION, as not clearly provable out of the Scripture, being omitted,
the second part of the Order implys and establishes a National Religion: for
there be degrees of Knowledge in divine things; true Religion is not to be
learnt without searching the Scriptures; the Scriptures cannot be searched by
us unless we have them to search; and if we have nothing else, or (which is all
one) understand nothing else but a Translation, we may be (as in the place
alleged we have bin) beguiled or misled by the Translation, while we should be
searching the true sense of the Scripture, which cannot be attained in a
natural way (and a Commonwealth is not to presume upon that which is
supernatural) but by the knowledge of the Original and of Antiquity, acquired by
our own studys, or those of some others, for even Faith coms by hearing.
Wherefore a Commonwealth not making provision of men from time to time, knowing
in the original Languages wherein the Scriptures were written, and versed in
those Antiquitys to which they so frequently relate, that the true sense of
them depends in great part upon that Knowledge, can never be secure that she
shall not lose the Scripture, and by consequence her Religion; which to
preserve she must institute some method of this Knowledge, and some use of such as
have acquired it, which amounts to a National Religion.

THE Commonwealth having thus performed her duty toward God, as a rational
Creature, by the best application of her Reason to Scripture, and for the
preservation of Religion in the purity of the same, yet pretends not to
Infallibility, but coms in the third part of the Order, establishing Liberty of
Conscience according to the Instructions given to her Council of Religion, to
raise up her hands to Heaven for further light; in which proceeding she follows
that (as was shown in the Preliminarys) of Israel, who tho her National
Religion was always a part of her Civil Law, gave to her Prophets the upper
hand of all her Orders.

Definition of a Parish.
BUT the Surveyors having now don with the Parishes, took their leaves; so a
Parish is the first division of Land occasioned by the first Collection of the
People of Oceana, whose Function proper to that place is comprised in the six
preceding Orders.

Institution of the Hundred.
THE next step in the progress of the Surveyors was to a meeting of the nearest
of them, as their work lay, by twentys; where conferring their Lists, and
computing the Deputys contained therein, as the number of them in Parishes,
being nearest Neighbors, amounted to one hundred, or as even as might
conveniently be brought with that account, they cast them and those Parishes
into the Precinct which (be the Deputys ever since more or fewer) is still
called the Hundred: and to every one of these Precincts they appointed a
certain place, being the most convenient Town within the same, for the annual
Rendevouz; which don, each Surveyor returning to his Hundred, and summoning the
Deputys contained in his Lists to the Rendevouz, they appeared and received

7. Order.
THE seventh ORDER, requiring, That upon the first Monday next ensuing the last
of January, the Deputys of every Parish annually assemble in Arms at the
Rendevouz of the Hundred, and there elect out of their number one Justice of
the Peace, one Juryman, one Captain, one Ensign of their Troop or Century, each
of these out of the Horse; and one Juryman, one Crowner, one High Constable,
out of the Foot; the Election to be made by the Ballot in this manner. The
Jurymen for the time being are to be Overseers of the Ballot (instead of these,
the Surveyors are to officiat at the first Assembly) and to look to the
performance of the same according to what was directed in the Ballot of the
Parishes, saving that the High Constable setting forth the Vrn, shall have five
several suits of Gold Balls, and one dozen of every suit; whereof the first
shall be marked with the Letter A, the second with the letter B, the third with
C, the fourth with D, and the fifth with E: and of each of these suits he shall
cast one Ball into his Hat, or into a little Vrn, and shaking the Balls
together present them to the first Overseer, who shall draw one, and the suit
which is so drawn by the Overseer shall be of use for that day, and no other:
for example, if the Overseer drew an A, the High Constable shall put seven Gold
Balls marked with the letter A into the Vrn, with so many Silver ones as shall
bring them even with the number of the Deputys, who being sworn, as before, at
the Ballot of the Parish to make a fair Election, shall be called to the Vrn;
and every man coming in manner as was there showed, shall draw one Ball, which
if it be Silver, he shall cast it into a Bowl standing at the foot of the Vrn,
and return to his place; but the first that draws a Gold Ball (showing it to
the Overseers, who if it has not the letter of the present Ballot, have power
to apprehend and punish him) is the first Elector, the second the second
Elector, and so to the seventh; which Order they are to observe in their
function. The Electors as they are drawn shall be placed upon the Bench by the
Overseers, till the whole number be complete, and then be conducted, with the
List of the Officers to be chosen, into a Place apart, where being private, the
first Elector shall name a Person to the first Office in the List; and if the
Person so named, being balloted by the rest of the Electors, attains not to the
better half of the Suffrages in the Affirmative, the first Elector shall
continue nominating others, till one of them so nominated by him attains to the
plurality of the Suffrages in the Affirmative, and be written first Competitor
to the first Office. This don, the second Elector shall observe in his turn the
like order; and so the rest of the Electors, naming Competitors each to his
respective Office in the List, till one Competitor be chosen to every Office:
and when one Competitor is chosen to every Office, the first Elector shall
begin again to name a second Competitor to the first Office, and the rest
successively shall name to the rest of the Offices till two Competitors be
chosen to every Office; the like shall be repeated till three Competitors be
chosen to every Office. And when three Competitors are chosen to every Office,
the List shall be returned to the Overseers, or such as the Overseers, in case
they or either of them happened to be Electors, have substituted in his or
their place or places: and the Overseers or Substitutes having caused the List
to be read to the Congregation, shall put the Competitors, in order as they are
written, to the Ballot of the Congregation: and the rest of the Procedings
being carried on in the manner directed in the Fifth Order, that Competitor, of
the three written to each Office, who has most of the Suffrages above half in
the Affirmative, is the Officer. The List being after this manner completed,
shall be entered into a Register, to be kept at the Rendevouz of the Hundred,
under inspection of the Magistrates of the same, after the manner following:
Anno Domini
The List of the Nebulosa.
A. A. Ord. Eq. Justice of the Peace of the Hundred of -- in the Tribe of --
which Hundred consists at this Election of 105 Deputys. B. B. Ord. Eq. First
Juryman C. C. Ord. Eq. Captain of the Hundred D. D. Ord. Eq. Ensign E. E.
Second Juryman F. F. High Constable G. G. Crowner

THE List being entered, the High Constable shall take three Copys of the same,
whereof he shall presently return one to the Lord High Sheriff of the Tribe, a
second to the Lord Custos Rotulorum, and a third to the Censors; or these, through
the want of such Magistrates at the first muster, may be returned to the Orator,
to be appointed for that Tribe. To the observation of all and every part of
this Order, the Officers and Deputys of the Hundred are all and every of them
obliged, as they will answer it to the Phylarch, who has power in case of
failure in the whole or any part, to fine all or any of them so failing at
discretion, or according to such Laws as shall hereafter be provided in that
case; but under an Appeal to the Parliament.

THERE is little in this Order worthy of any further account, but that it
answers to the Rulers of Hundreds in Israel, to the Mora or Military part of
the Tribe in Lacedemon, and to the Century in Rome. The Jurymen, being two in a
Hundred, and so forty in a Tribe, give the Latitude allowed by the Law for
exceptions. And whereas the Golden Balls at this Ballot begin to be marked with
Letters, whereof one is to be drawn immediately before it begins; this is to the
end that the Letter being unknown, Men may be frustrated of tricks or foul
play, whereas otherwise a Man might bring a Golden Ball with him, and make as if
he had drawn it out of the Urn. The Surveyors, when they had taken Copys of
these Lists, had accomplished their work in the Hundreds.

Definition of the Hundred.
SO a Hundred is the second Division of Land occasioned by the second
Collection of the People, whose Civil and Military Functions proper to this
place are comprised in the foregoing Order.

HAVING stated the Hundreds, they met once again by Twentys, where there was
nothing more easy than to cast every twenty Hundreds, as they lay most
conveniently together, into one Tribe; so the whole Territory of Oceana,
consisting of about ten thousand Institution of the Tribe.
Parishes, came to be cast into one thousand Hundreds, and into fifty Tribes. In
every Tribe at the place appointed for the annual Rendevouz of the same, were
then, or soon after, begun those Buildings which are now called Pavilions; each
of them standing with one Of the Pavilion.
open side upon fair Columns, like the porch of some ancient Temple, and looking
into a Field, capable of the muster of some four thousand Men: Before each
Pavilion stand three Pillars sustaining Urns for the Ballot, that on the
right hand equal in height to the brow of a Horsman, being called the Horse
Vrn; that on the left hand, with Bridges on either side to bring it equal in
height with the brow of a Footman, being called the Foot Vrn; and the middle
Vrn with a Bridge on the side toward the Foot Urn, the other side, as left for
the Horse, being without one: and here ended the whole work of the Surveyors,
who returned to the Lord ARCHON with this Account of the Charge.
l. s. The whole Charge of the Institution.
IMPRIMIS, Urns, Balls, and Balloting Boxes for ten thousand Parishes, the same
being wooden Ware, 20000 00 ITEM, Provisions of the like kind for a thousand
Hundreds, 3000 00 ITEM, Urns and Balls of Metal, with Balloting Boxes for fifty
Tribes, -- 2000 00 ITEM, For erecting of fifty Pavilions, -- 60000 00 ITEM,
Wages for four Surveyors General at 1000 l. a man, 4000 00 ITEM, Wages for the
rest of the Surveyors, being 1000, at 250 l. a man, -- 250000 00 Sum Total,
339000 00

THIS is no great matter of charge for the building of a Commonwealth, in
regard that it has cost (which was pleaded by the Surveyors) as much to rig a
few Ships. Nevertheless that proves not them to be honest, nor their account to
be just; but they had their Money for once, tho their reckoning be plainly
guilty of a Crime, to cost him his Neck that commits it another time, it being
impossible for a Commonwealth (without an exact provision that it be not abused
in this kind) to subsist: for if no regard should be had of the Charge (tho
that may go deep) yet the Debauchery and Corruption, whereto, by negligence in
Accounts, it infallibly exposes its Citizens, and thereby lessens the public
Faith, which is the Nerve and Ligament of Government, ought to be prevented.
But the Surveyors being dispatched, the Lord ARCHON was very curious in giving
names to his Tribes, which having caused to be written in Scrols cast into an
Urn, and presented to the Counsillors, each of them drew one, and was
accordingly sent to the Tribe in his lot, as Orators of the same, a Magistracy
no otherwise instituted, than for once and pro tempore, to the end that the
Council upon so great an occasion might both congratulat with the Tribes, and
assist at the first muster in some things of necessity to be differently carried
from the established Administration, and future Course of the Commonwealth.

THE Orators being arrived, every one as soon as might be, at the Rendevouz of
his Tribe, gave notice to the Hundreds, and summoned the Muster, which appeared
for the most part upon good Horses, and already indifferently well armed; as to
instance in one for all, the Tribe of Nubia, where HERMES DE CADUCEO, Lord
Orator of the same, after a short salutation and a hearty welcome, applied
himself to his business, which began with

8. Order.
THE eighth ORDER, requiring, That the Lord High Sheriff as Commander in Chief,
and the Lord Custos Rotulorum as Mustermaster of the Tribe (or the Orator for
the first Muster) upon reception of the Lists of their Hundreds, returned to
them by the High Constables of the same, presently cause them to be cast up,
dividing the Horse from the Foot, and listing the Horse by their names in
Troops, each Troop containing about a hundred in number, to be inscribed,
first, second, or third Troop, etc. according to the Order agreed upon by the
said Magistrates: Which don, they shall list the Foot in like manner, and
inscribe the Companys in like order. These Lists upon the Eve of the Muster
shall be delivered to certain Trumpeters and Drummers, whereof there shall be
fifteen of each sort (as well for the present as other uses to be hereafter
mentioned) stipendiated by the Tribe. And the Trumpeters and Drummers shall be
in the Field before the Pavilion, upon the day of the Muster, so soon as it is
light, where they shall stand every one with his List in his hand, at a due
distance, placed according to the Order of the List; the Trumpeters with the
Lists of the Horse on the right hand, and the Drummers with the Lists of the
Foot on the left hand: where having sounded a while, each of them shall begin
to call, and continue calling the names of the Deputys, as they com into the
field, till both the Horse and Foot be gathered by that means into their due
Order. The Horse and Foot being in order, the Lord Lieutenant of the Tribe
shall cast so many Gold Balls marked with the figures 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. as there
be Troops of Horse in the Field, together with so many Silver Balls as there be
Companys, marked in the same manner, into a little Vrn, to which he shall call
the Captains; and the Captains drawing the Gold Balls shall command the Horse,
and those that draw the Silver the Foot, each in the order of his Lot. The like
shall be don by the Conductor at the same time for the Ensigns at another Vrn;
and they that draw the Gold Balls shall be Cornets, the rest Ensigns.

THIS Order may puzzle the Reader, but tends to a wonderful speed of the
Muster, to which it would be a great matter to lose a day in ranging and
martialling, whereas by virtue of this the Tribe is no sooner in the field than
in Battalia, nor sooner in Battalia than called to the Urns or the Ballot by
virtue of

9. Order.
THE ninth ORDER, whereby the Censors (or the Orator for the first Muster) upon
reception of the Lists of the Hundreds from the High Constables, according as
is directed by the seventh Order, are to make their Notes for the Vrns
beforehand, with regard had to the Lists of the Magistrates, to be elected by
the ensuing Orders; that is to say, by the first List called the prime
Magnitude, six; and by the second called the Galaxy, nine. Wherefore the Censors
are to put into the middle Vrn for the Election of the first List twenty four
Gold Balls, with twenty six Blanks or Silver Balls, in all sixty; and into the
side Vrns sixty Gold Balls divided into each according to the different number
of the Horse and the Foot: that is to say, if the Horse and the Foot be equal,
equally; and if the Horse and the Foot be inequal, inequally, by an
Arithmetical Proportion. The like shall be don the second day of the Muster,
for the second List, except that the Censors shall put into the middle Vrn 36
Gold Balls with 24 Blanks, in all sixty; and sixty Gold Balls into the side
Vrns, divided respectively into the number of the Horse and the Foot: and the
Gold Balls in the side Vrns at either Ballot are by the addition of Blanks to
be brought even with the number of the Ballotants at either Vrn respectively.
The Censors having prepared their Notes, as has bin shown, and being com at the
day appointed into the Field, shall present a little Vrn to the Lord High
Sheriff, who is to draw twice for the Letters to be used that day, the one at
the side Vrns, and the other at the middle. And the Censors having fitted the
Vrns accordingly, shall place themselves in certain movable Seats or Pulpits
(to be kept for that use in the Pavilion) the first Censor before the Horse
Vrn, the second before the Foot Vrn, the Lord Lieutenant doing the Office of
Censor pro tempore at the middle Vrn; where all and every one of them shall
cause the Laws of the Ballot to be diligently observed, taking a special care
that no Man be suffered to com above once to the Vrn (whereof it more
particularly concerns the Subcensors, that is to say, the Overseers of every
Parish, to be careful; they being each in this regard responsible for their
respective Parishes) or to draw above one Ball, which if it be Gold, he is to
present to the Censor, who shall look upon the Letter; and if it be not that of
the day, and of the respective Vrn, apprehend the Party, who for this or any
other like disorder, is obnoxious to the Phylarch.

THIS Order being observed by the Censors, it is not possible for the People,
if they can but draw the Balls, tho they understand nothing at all of the
Ballot, to be out. To philosophize further upon this Art, tho there be nothing
more rational, were not worth the while; because in writing it will be
perplexed, and the first practice of it gives the demonstration: whence it came
to pass, that the Orator, after some needless pains in the explanation of the
two foregoing Orders, betaking himself to exemplify the same, found the work
don to his hand; for the Tribe, as eager upon a business of this nature, had
retained one of the Surveyors, out of whom (before the Orator arrived) they had
got the whole Mystery by a stolen Muster, at which in order to the Ballot they
had made certain Magistrates pro tempore. Wherefore he found not only the
Pavilion (for this time a Tent) erected with three Posts supplying the place of
Pillars to the Urns; but the Urns being prepared with a just number of Balls
for the first Ballot, to become the Field, and the occasion very gallantly, with
their Covers made in the manner of Helmets, open at either ear to give passage
to the hands of the Ballotants, and flanting with noble Plumes to direct the
March of the People. Wherefore he proceeded to

10. Order.
THE tenth ORDER, requiring of the Deputys of the Parishes, That upon every
Monday next ensuing the last of February, they make their personal appearance,
Horse and Foot in Arms accordingly, at the Rendevouz of the Tribe; where being
in Discipline, the Horse upon the right, and the Foot upon the left, before the
Pavilion, and having made Oath by holding up their hands upon the tender of it
by the Lord High Sheriff, to make Election without favor, and of such only as
they shall judge fittest for the Commonwealth: The Conductor shall take three
Balls, the one inscribed with these words [outward Files] another with these
words [inward Files] and the third with these [middle Files] which Balls he
shall cast into a little Vrn, and present it to the Lord High Sheriff, who,
drawing one, shall give the words of Command, as they are thereupon inscribed,
and the Ballot shall begin accordingly. For example, if the Ball be inscribed
middle Files, the Ballot shall begin by the middle; that is, the two Files that
are middle to the Horse, shall draw out first to the Horse Vrn, and the two
Files that are middle to the Foot, shall draw out first to the Foot Vrn, and be
followed by all the rest of the Files as they are next to them in order. The
like shall be don by the inward, or by the outward Files, in case they be first
called. And the Files, as every Man has drawn his Ball, if it be Silver, shall
begin at the Vrn to countermarch to their places; but he that has drawn a Gold
Ball at a side Vrn, shall proceed to the middle Vrn, where if the Ball he draws
be Silver, he also shall countermarch: But if it be Gold, he shall take his
place upon a form set cross the Pavilion, with his face toward the Lord High
Sheriff, who shall be seated in the middle of the Pavilion, with certain Clercs
by him, one of which shall write down the names of every Elector, that is, of
every one that drew a Gold Ball at the middle Vrn, and in the Order his Ball
was drawn, till the Electors amount to six in number. And the first six
Electors, Horse and Foot promiscuously, are the first Order of Electors; the
second six (still accounting them as they are drawn) the second Order; the
third six, the third Order; and the fourth six, the fourth Order of Electors:
every Elector having place in his order, according to the order wherein he was
drawn. But so soon as the first Order of Electors is complete, the Lord High
Sheriff shall send them with a Copy of the following List, and a Clerc that
understands the Ballot, immediately to a little Tent standing before the
Pavilion in his ey, to which no other Person but themselves, during the
Election, shall approach. The List shall be witten in this manner: Anno Domini
The List of the Prime Magnitude or first days Election of Magistrates.
Institution of the Prime Magnitude.
1. The Lord High Sheriff, Commander in Chief of the Tribe of Nubia, containing
at this present Muster 700 Horse, and 1500 Foot, in all 2200 Deputys. 2. Lord
Lieutenant 3. Lord Custos Rotulorum, Mustermaster General 4. The Conductor,
being Quartermaster General 5. The first Censor 6. The second Censor

AND the Electors of the first hand or order, being six, shall each of them
name to his respective Magistracy in the left such as are not already elected
in the Hundreds, till one Competitor be chosen to every Magistracy in the List
by the Ballot of the Electors of the first Order; which don, the List with the
Competitors thereunto annexed shall be returned to the Lord High Sheriff by the
Clerc attending that Order, but the Electors shall keep their places: for they
have already given their Suffrage, and may not enter into the Ballot of the
Tribe. If there arises any Dispute in an Order of Electors, one of the Censors
or Subcensors appointed by them in case they be Electors, shall enter into the
Tent of that Order; and that Order shall stand to his Judgment in the decision
of the Controversy. The like shall be don exactly by each other Order of
Electors, being sent as they are drawn, each with another Copy of the same
List, into a distinct Tent, till there be returned to the Lord High Sheriff
four Competitors to every Magistracy in the List; that is to say, one
Competitor elected to every Office in every one of the four Orders: which
Competitors the Lord High Sheriff shall cause to be pronounced or read by a
Crier to the Congregation; and the Congregation having heard the whole Lists
repeated, the Names shall be put by the Lord High Sheriff to the Tribe, one by
one, beginning with the first Competitor in the first Order, thence proceeding
to the first Competitor in the second Order, and so to the first in the third
and fourth Orders. And the Suffrages being taken in boxes by boys (as has bin
already shown) shall be poured into the Bowls standing before the Censors, who
shall be seated at each end of the Table in the Pavilion, the one numbering the
Affirmatives, and the other the Negatives; and he, of the four Competitors to
the first Magistracy, that has most above half the Suffrages of the Tribe in
the Affirmative, is the first Magistrate. The like is to be don successively by
the rest of the Competitors in their order. But because soon after the Boxes
are sent out for the first name, there be others sent out for the second, and
so for the third, etc. by which means diverse names are successively at one and
the same time in ballotting; the Boy that carrys a Box shall sing or repeat
continually the name of the Competitor for whom that Box is carrying, with that
also of the Magistracy to which he is proposed. A Magistrate of the Tribe
happening to be an Elector, may substitute any one of his own Order to execute
his other Function. The Magistrates of the Prime Magnitude being thus elected,
shall receive the present Charge of the Tribe.

IF it be objected against this Order, that the Magistrates to be elected by it,
will be Men of more inferior rank than those of the Hundreds, in regard that
those are chosen first; it may be remembered, that so were the Burgesses in the
former Government, nevertheless the Knights of the Shire were Men of greater
quality: And the Election at the Hundred is made by a Council of Electors, of
whom less cannot be expected than the discretion of naming Persons fittest for
those Capacitys, with an ey upon these to be elected at the Tribe. As for what
may be objected in point of Difficulty, it is demonstrable by the foregoing
Orders, that a Man might bring ten thousand Men (if there were occasion) with
as much ease, and as suddenly to perform the Ballot, as he can make five
thousand Men (drawing them out by double Files) to march a quarter of a mile.
But because at this Ballot, to go up and down the Field, distributing the linen
Pellets to every Man, with which he is to ballot or give suffrage, would lose a
great deal of time, therefore a Man's Wife, his Daughters, or others, make him
his provision of Pellets before the Ballot; and he coms into the field with a
matter of a score of them in his pocket. And now I have as good as don with the
sport. The next is

11. Order.

Functions of the Magistrates of the Prime Magnitude.


THE eleventh ORDER, explaining the Dutys and Functions of the Magistrates
contained in the List of the Prime Magnitude: And those of the Hundreds,
beginning with the Lord High Sheriff, who, over and above his more ancient
Offices, and those added by the former Order, is the first Magistrate of the
Phylarch, or Prerogative Troop. The Lord Lieutenant, over and above his Duty
mentioned, is Commander in Chief of the Musters of the Youth, and second
Magistrate of the Phylarch. The Custos Rotulorum is to return the yearly
Muster-rolls of the Tribe, as well that of the Youth as of the Elders, to the
Rolls in Emporium, and is the third Magistrate of the Phylarch. The Censors by
themselves, and their Subcensors, that is, the Overseers of the Parishes, are
to see that the respective Laws of the Ballot be observed in all the popular
Assemblys of the Tribe. They have power also to put such National Ministers, as
in Preaching shall intermeddle with matters of Government, out of their
Livings; except the Party appeals to the Phylarch, or to the Council of
Religion, where in that case the Censors shall prosecute. All and every one of
these Magistrates, together with the Justices of Peace, and the Jurymen of the
Hundreds, amounting in the whole number to threescore and six, are the
Prerogative Troop or Phylarch of the Tribe.

THE Function of the Phylarch or Prerogative Troop is fivefold.

Functions of the Phylarch.
FIRST, They are the Council of the Tribe, and as such to govern the Musters of
the same according to the foregoing Orders, having cognizance of what has past
in the Congregation or Elections made in the Parishes or the Hundreds, with
power to punish any undue practices, or variation from their respective Rules
and Orders, under an Appeal to the Parliament. A Marriage legitimatly is to be
pronounced by the Parochial Congregation, the Muster of the Hundred, or the
Phylarch. And if a Tribe have a desire (which they are to express at the Muster
by their Captains, every Troop by his own) to petition the Parliament, the
Phylarch, as the Counsil, shall frame the Petition in the Pavilion, and propose
it by Clauses to the Ballot of the whole Tribe; and the Clauses that shall be
affirmed by the Ballot of the Tribe, and signed by the hands of the six
Magistrates of the Prime Magnitude, shall be received and esteemed by the
Parliament as the Petition of the Tribe, and no other.

SECONDLY, The Phylarch has power to call to their assistance what other Troops
of the Tribe they please (be they Elders or Youth, whose Discipline will be
hereafter directed) and with these to receive the Judges Itinerant in their
Circuits, whom the Magistrates of the Phylarch shall assist upon the Bench, and
the Jurys elsewhere in their proper functions according to the more ancient Laws
and Customs of this Nation.

THIRDLY, The Phylarch shall hold the Court called the Quarter Sessions
according to the ancient Custom, and therein shall also hear Causes in order to
the protection of Liberty of Conscience, by such Rules as are or shall
hereafter be appointed by the Parliament.

FOURTHLY, All Commissions, issued into the Tribes by the Parliament, or by the
Chancery, are to be directed to the Phylarch, or some of that Troop, and
executed by the same respectively.

FIFTHLY, In the case of Levys of Money the Parliament shall tax the Phylarchs,
the Phylarchs shall tax the Hundreds, the Hundreds the Parishes, and the
Parishes shall levy it upon themselves. The Parishes having levied the Tax
Money, accordingly shall return it to the Officers of the Hundreds, the Hundreds
to the Phylarchs, and the Phylarchs to the Exchequer. But if a man has ten
Children living, he shall pay no Taxes; if he has five living, he shall pay but
half Taxes; if he has bin married three years, or be above twenty five years of
Age, and has no Child or Children lawfully begotten, he shall pay double Taxes.
And if there happen to grow any dispute upon these or such other Orders as
shall or may hereto be added hereafter, the Phylarchs shall judge the Tribes,
and the Parliament shall judge the Phylarchs. For the rest, if any man shall go
about to introduce the right or power of Debate into any popular Council or
Congregation of this Nation, the Phylarch or any Magistrate of the Hundred, or
of the Tribe, shall cause him presently to be sent in custody to the Council of
War.

Institution of the Roll called the Pillar of Nilus.
THE part of the Order relating to the Rolls in Emporium being of singular use,
is not unworthy to be somewhat better opened. In what manner the Lists of the
Parishes, Hundreds, and Tribes are made, has bin shown in their respective
Orders, where after the Partys are elected, they give an account of the whole
number of the Elders or Deputys in their respective Assemblys or Musters; the
like for this part exactly is don by the Youth in their Discipline (to be
hereafter shown) wherefore the Lists of the Parishes, Youth and Elders, being
sum'd up, give the whole number of the People able to bear Arms; and the Lists
of the Tribes, Youth and Elders, being sum'd up, give the whole number of the
People bearing Arms. This account, being annually recorded by the Master of the
Rolls, is called the Pillar of Nilus, because the People being the Riches of
the Commonwealth, as they are found to rise or fall by the degrees of this
Pillar, like that River, give an account of the public Harvest.

THUS much for the Description of the first days work at the Muster, which
happened, as has bin shown, to be don as soon as said: for as in practice it is
of small difficulty, so requires it not much time, seeing the great Council of
Venice, consisting of a like number, begins at twelve of the Clock, and elects
nine Magistrates in one Afternoon. But the Tribe being dismissed for this night,
repaired to their Quarters, under the conduct of their new Magistrates. The next
morning returning into the field very early, the Orator proceeded to

12. Order. Institution of the Galaxy.
THE twelfth ORDER, directing the Muster of the Tribe in the second days
Election, being that of the List called the Galaxy; in which the Censors shall
prepare the Vrns according to the Directions given in the ninth Order for the
second Ballot; that is to say, with 36 Gold Balls in the middle Vrn, making
four Orders, and nine Electors in every Order, according to the number of the
Magistrates in the List of the Galaxy, which is as follows:

1. Knight to be chosen out of the Horse. 2. Knight

3. Deputy to be chosen out of the Horse. 4. Deputy 5. Deputy

6. Deputy to be chosen out of the Foot. 7. Deputy 8. Deputy 9. Deputy

THE rest of the Ballot shall proceed exactly according to that of the first
day. But forasmuch as the Commonwealth demands as well the fruits of a man's
body as of his mind, he that has not bin married shall not be capable of these
Magistracys till he be married. If a Deputy, already chosen to be an Officer in
the Parish, in the Hundred, or in the Tribe, be afterward chosen of the
Galaxy, it shall be lawful for him to delegat his Office in the Parish, in the
Hundred, or in the Tribe, to any one of his own Order, being not already chosen
into Office. The Knights and Deputys being chosen, shall be brought to the head
of the Tribe by the Lord High Sherif, who shall administer to them this Oath;
Ye shall well and truly observe and keep the Orders and Customs of this
Commonwealth which the People have chosen. And if any of them shall refuse the
Oath, he shall be rejected, and that Competitor which had the most voices next
shall be called in his place; who if he takes the Oath shall be entered in the
List; but if he also refuses the Oath, he who had most voices next shall be
called, and so till the number of nine out of those Competitors which had most
voices be sworn Knights and Deputys of the Galaxy. [This Clause, in regard of
the late Divisions, and to the end that no violence be offered to any man's
Conscience, to be of force but for the first three years only.] The Knights of
the Galaxy being elected and sworn, are to repair, by the Monday next ensuing
the last of March, to the Pantheon or Palace of Justice, situated in the
Metropolis of this Commonwealth (except the Parliament, by reason of a
contagious Sickness, or some other occasion, has adjourned to another part of
the Nation) where they are to take their places in the Senate, and continue in
full Power and Commission as Senators for the full term of three years next
ensuing the date of their Election. The Deputys of the Galaxy are to repair by
the same day (except as before excepted) to the Halo situated in Emporium,
where they are to be listed of the Prerogative Tribe, or equal Representative
of the People; and to continue in full Power and Commission as their Deputys
for the full term of three years next ensuing their Election. But forasmuch as
the term of every Magistracy or Office in this Commonwealth requires an equal
vacation, a Knight or Deputy of the Galaxy, having fulfilled his term of three
years, shall not be reelected into the same Galaxy, or any other, till he has
also fulfilled his three years vacation.

WHOEVER shall rightly consider the foregoing Orders, will be as little able to
find how it is possible, that a worshipful Knight should declare himself in Ale
and Beef worthy to serve his Country, as how my Lord High Sherifs Honor, in
case he were protected from the Law, could play the knave. But tho the
foregoing Orders, so far as they regard the Constitution of the Senate and the
People, requiring no more as to an ordinary Election than is therein explained,
that is but one third part of their Knights and Deputys, are perfect; yet must
we in this place, and as to the Institution, of necessity erect a Scaffold. For
the Commonwealth to the first creation of her Councils in full number, required
thrice as many as are eligible by the foregoing Orders. Wherefore the Orator,
whose aid in this place was most necessary, rightly informing the People of the
reason, staid them two days longer at the Muster, and took this course. One
List containing two Knights and seven Deputys, he caused to be chosen upon the
second day; which List being called the first Galaxy, qualified the Partys
elected of it with power for the term of one year and no longer: another List
containing two Knights and seven Deputys more, he caused to be chosen the third
day, which List being called the second Galaxy, qualified the Partys elected of
it with Power for the term of two years and no longer. And upon the fourth day
he chose the third Galaxy, according as it is directed by the Order, empowered
for three years; which Lists successively falling (like the Signs or
Constellations of one Hemisphere, which setting, cause those of the other to
rise) cast the great Orbs of this Commonwealth into an annual, triennial, and
perpetual Revolution.

THE business of the Muster being thus happily finished, HERMES DE CADUCEO,
Lord Orator of the Tribe of Nubia, being now put into her first Rapture, caused
one of the Censors Pulpits to be planted in front of the Squadron, and
ascending into the same, spoke after this manner.

My Lords, the Magistrates and the People of the Tribe of Nubia.
WE have this day solemnized the happy Nuptials of the two greatest Princes
that are upon the Earth or in Nature, ARMS and COUNCILS: in the mutual Embraces
whereof consists your whole COMMONWEALTH; whose Councils upon their perpetual
Wheelings, Marches, and Countermarches, create her Armies; and whose Armies with
the golden Vollys of the BALLOT at once create and salute her Councils. There
be those (such is the World at present) that think it ridiculous to see a
Nation exercising its Civil Functions in Military Discipline; while they,
committing their Buff to their Servants, com themselves to hold Trenchards. For
what avails it such as are unarmed, or (which is all one) whose Education
acquaints them not with the proper use of their Swords, to be called Citizens?
What were two or three thousand of you, tho never so well affected to your
Country, but naked, to one Troop of Mercenary Soldiers? If they should com upon
the Field and say, Gentlemen, It is thought fit that such and such Men should
be chosen by you; where were your Liberty? Or, Gentlemen, Parlaments are
exceeding good, but you are to have a little patience, these times are not so
fit for them; where were your Commonwealth? What causes the Monarchy of the
Tur^s but Servants in Arms? What was it that begot the glorious Commonwealth of
Rome, but the Sword in the hands of her Citizens? Wherefore my glad eyes salute
the Serenity and Brightness of this day with a shower that shall not cloud it.
Behold the Army of Israel become a Commonwealth, and the Commonwealth of Israel
remaining an Army, with her Rulers of Tens and of Fiftys, her Rulers of
Hundreds and Thousands, drawing near (as this day throout our happy Fields) to
the Lot by her Tribes, increased above threefold, and led up by her Phylarchs
or Princes, to sit upon Sellis Curulibus.
fifty Thrones, judging the fifty Tribes of Oceana! Or, Is it Athens, breaking
from her Iron Sepulcher, where she has bin so long trampled by Hosts of
Janizarys? For certainly that is the voice of THESEUS, having gathered his
scattered Athenians into one City. -- Haec juris sui
Parere Domino Civitas uni negat:
Rex ipse Populus annuas mandat vice^
Honoris hui^ illive --.

This freeborn Nation lives not upon the Dole or Bounty of one man, but
distributing her annual Magistracys and Honors with her own hand, is her self
King PEOPLE -- (at which the Orator was a while interrupted with shouts, but at
length proceeded) -- Is it grave Lacedemon in her armed Tribe divided by her
Obae and her Mora, which appears to chide me that I teach the People to talk,
or conceive such Language as is dressed like a Woman, to be a sit Usher of the
Joys of Liberty into the hearts of men? Is it Rome in her victorious Arms (for
so she held her Concio or Congregation) that congratulats with us, for finding
out that which she could not hit on, and binding up her Comitia Curiata,
Centuriata, and Tributa, in one inviolable League of Union? Or is it the Great
Council of incomparable Venice, bowling forth by the self same Ballot her
immortal Commonwealth? For, neither by Reason nor by Experience is it
impossible that a Commonwealth should be immortal; seeing the People being the
Materials, never die; and the Form, which is Motion, must, without opposition,
be endless. The Bowl which is thrown from your hand, if there be no rub, no
impediment, shall never cease: for which cause the glorious Luminarys that are
the Bowls of God, were once thrown for ever; and next these, those of Venice.
But certainly, my Lords, whatever these great Examples may have shown us, we
are the first that have shown to the World a Commonwealth established in her
rise upon fifty such Towers, and so garnizon'd as are the Tribes of Oceana,
containing a hundred thousand Elders upon the annual List, and yet but an
Outguard; besides her marching Armies to be equal in the Discipline, and in the
number of her Youth.

AND forasmuch as Soverain Power is a necessary but a formidable Creature, not
unlike the Powder which (as you are Soldiers) is at once your Safety and your
Danger, being subject to take fire against you as well as for you; how well and
securely is she by your Galaxys so collected as to be in full force and vigor,
and yet so distributed that it is impossible you should be blown up by your own
Magazine? Let them who will have it, that Power if it be confined cannot be
Soverain, tell us, whether our Rivers do not enjoy a more secure and fruitful
Reign within their proper banks, than if it were lawful for them, in ravaging
our Harvests, to spill themselves? Whether Souls, not confined to their
peculiar Bodies, do govern them any more than those of Witches in their Trances?
Whether Power, not confined to the bounds of Reason and Virtue, has any other
bounds than those of Vice and Passion? Or if Vice and Passion be boundless, and
Reason and Virtue have certain Limits, on which of these Thrones holy men
should anoint their Soverain? But to blow away this dust, The Soverain Power of
a Commonwealth is no more bounded, that is to say straightened, than that of a
Monarch; but is balanced. The Eagle mounts not to her proper pitch, if she be
bounded; nor is free, if she be not balanced. And lest a Monarch should think
he can reach further with his Scepter, the Roman Eagle upon such a Balance
spread her Wings from the Ocean to Euphrates. Receive the Soverain Power; you
have received it, hold it fast, embrace it for ever in your shining Arms. The
virtue of the Loadstone is not impaired or limited, but receives strength and
nourishment by being bound in Iron. And so giving your Lordships much Joy, I
take my leave of this Tribe.

THE Orator descending, had the period of his Speech made with a vast applause
and exultation of the whole Tribe, attending him for that night to his quarter,
as the Phylarch with some commanded Troops did the next day to the Frontiers of
the Tribe, where leave was taken on both sides with more Tears than Grief.

Definition of the Tribe.
SO, a Tribe is the third Division of Land occasioned by the third Collection
of the People, whose Functions proper to that place are contained in the five
foregoing Orders.

THE Institution of the Commonwealth was such as needed those Props and
Scaffolds which may have troubled the Reader; but I shall here take them away,
and com to the Constitution which stands by it self, and yields a clearer
prospect.

Constitution of the Commonwealth.
THE motions, by what has bin already shown, are Spherical; and Spherical
Motions have their proper Center: for which cause (e're I proceed further) it
will be necessary, for the better understanding of the whole, that I discover
the Center whereupon the Motions of this Commonwealth are formed.

THE Center, or Basis of every Government, is no other than the Fundamental
Laws of the same.

FUNDAMENTAL Laws are such as state what it is that a Man may call his own,
that is to say, Property; and what the Means be whereby a Man may enjoy his own,
that is to say, Protection. The first is also called Dominion, and the second
Empire or Soverain Power, whereof this (as has bin shown) is the natural product
of the former; for such as is the Balance of Dominion in a Nation, such is the
nature of its Empire.

WHEREFORE the Fundamental Laws of Oceana, or the Center of this Commonwealth,
are the Agrarian and the Ballot: The Agrarian by the Balance of Dominion
preserving Equality in the Root; and the Ballot by an equal Rotation conveying
it into the Branch, or Exercise of Soverain Power: As, to begin with the
former, appears by

13. Order.
THE thirteenth ORDER, constituting the Agrarian Laws of Oceana, Marpesia and
Panopea, whereby it is ordained, First, for all such Lands as are lying and
being within the proper Territorys of Oceana, that every Man who is at present
possessed, or shall hereafter be possessed of an Estate in Land exceeding the
Revenue of two thousand Pounds a year, and having more than one Son, shall
leave his Lands either equally divided among them, in case the Lands amount to
above 2000 l. a year to each; or so near equally in case they com under, that
the greater part or portion of the same remaining to the eldest, excede not the
value of two thousand Pounds Revenue. And no man, not in present possession of
Lands above the value of two thousand Pounds by the year, shall receive, enjoy
(except by lawful Inheritance) acquire, or purchase to himself Lands within the
said Territorys, amounting, with those already in his possession, above the
said Revenue. And if a man has a Daughter, or Daughters, except she be an
Heiress, or they be Heiresses, he shall not leave or give to any one of them in
Marriage or otherwise, for her Portion, above the value of one thousand five
hundred Pounds in Lands, Goods, and Monys. Nor shall any Friend, Kinsman, or
Kinswoman, add to her or their Portion or Portions that are so provided for, to
make any one of them greater. Nor shall any man demand, or have more in
marriage with any Woman. Nevertheless an Heiress shall enjoy her lawful
Inheritance, and a Widow, whatsoever the Bounty or Affection of her Husband
shall bequeath to her, to be divided in the first Generation, wherein it is
divisible according as has bin shown.

SECONDLY, For Lands lying and being within the Territorys of Marpesia, the
Agrarian shall hold in all parts as it is established in Oceana, except only in
the Standard or Proportion of Estates in Land, which shall be set for Marpesia
at five hundred Pounds. And,

THIRDLY, For Panopea, the Agrarian shall hold in all parts, as in Oceana. And
whosoever possessing above the proportion allowed by these Laws, shall be
lawfully convicted of the same, shall forfeit the Overplus to the use of the
State.

AGRARIAN Laws of all others have ever bin the greatest Bugbears, and so in the
Institution were these, at which time it was ridiculous to see how strange a
fear appeared in every body of that which, being good for all, could hurt no
body. But instead of the proof of this Order, I shall out of those many Debates
that happened e're it could be past, insert two Speeches that were made at the
Council of Legislators, the first by the Right Honorable PHILAUTUS DE GARBO, a
young Man, being Heir apparent to a very Noble Family, and one of the
Counsillors, who expressed himself as follows.

May it please your Highness, my Lord ARCHON of Oceana.
IF I did not, to my capacity, know from how profound a Counsillor I dissent,
it would certainly be no hard task to make it as light as the day: First, That
an Agrarian is altogether unnecessary. Secondly, That it is dangerous to a
Commonwealth. Thirdly, That it is insufficient to keep out Monarchy. Fourthly,
That it ruins Familys. Fifthly, That it destroys Industry. And last of all,
that tho it were indeed of any good use, it will be a matter of such difficulty
to introduce in this Nation, and so to settle that it may be lasting, as is
altogether invincible.

FIRST, That an Agrarian is unnecessary to a Commonwealth, what clearer
Testimony can there be, than that the Commonwealths which are our Cotemporarys
(Venice, to which your Highness gives the upper hand of all Antiquity, being
one) have no such thing? And there can be no reason why they have it not,
seeing it is in the Soverain Power at any time to establish such an Order, but
that they need it not; wherefore no wonder if ARISTOTLE, who pretends to be a
good Commonwealthsman, has long since derided PHALEAS, to whom it was
attributed by the Greecs, for his invention.

SECONDLY, That an Agrarian is dangerous to a Commonwealth is affirmed upon no
slight Authority, seeing MACCHIAVEL is positive, that it was the Dissension
which happened about the Agrarian that caused the Destruction of Rome; nor do I
think that it did much better in Lacedemon, as I shall show anon.

THIRDLY, That it is insufficient to keep out Monarchy cannot without impiety
be denied, the holy Scriptures bearing witness, that the Commonwealth of
Israel, notwithstanding her Agrarian, submitted her neck to the arbitrary Yoke
of her Princes.

FOURTHLY, Therefore to com to my next Assertion, That it is destructive to
Familys; this also is so apparent, that it needs pity rather than proof. Why,
alas, do you bind a Nobility (which no Generation shall deny to have bin the
first that freely sacrificed their Blood to the ancient Libertys of this
People) on an unholy Altar? Why are the People taught, That their Liberty,
which, except our noble Ancestors had bin born, must have long since bin
buried, cannot now be born except we be buried? A Commonwealth should have the
innocence of the Dove. Let us leave this purchase of her Birth to the Serpent,
which eats it self out of the womb of its Mother.

FIFTHLY, But it may be said, perhaps, that we are fallen from our first Love,
become proud and idle. It is certain, my Lords, that the hand of God is not upon
us for nothing. But take heed how you admit of such assaults and sallys upon
Men's Estates, as may slacken the Nerve of Labor, and give others also reason to
believe that their Sweat is vain; or else, whatsoever be pretended, your
Agrarian (which is my Fifth Assertion) must indeed destroy Industry. For, that
so it did in Lacedemon is most apparent, as also that it could do no otherwise,
where every Man having his 40 Quarters of Barley, with Wine proportionable,
supplied him out of his own Lot by his Laborer or Helot; and being confined in
that to the scantling above which he might not live, there was not any such
thing as a Trade, or other Art, except that of War, in exercise. Wherefore a
Spartan, if he were not in Arms, must sit and play with his fingers, whence
insu'd perpetual War, and, the Estate of the City being as little capable of
increase as that of the Citizens, her inevitable Ruin. Now what better ends you
can propose to your selves in the like ways, I do not so well see as I perceive
that there may be worse: For Lacedemon yet was free from Civil War: But if you
employ your Citizens no better than she did, I cannot promise you that you
shall fare so well, because they are still desirous of War that hope it may be
profitable to them; and the strongest Security you can give of Peace, is to
make it gainful. Otherwise Men will rather choose that whereby they may break
your Laws, than that whereby your Laws may break them. Which I speak not so much
in relation to the Nobility or such as would be holding, as to the People or
them that would be getting; the passion in these being so much the stronger; as
a Man's felicity is weaker in the fruition of things, than in their prosecution
and increase.

TRULY, my Lords, it is my fear, that by taking of more hands, and the best
from Industry, you will further indamage it, than can be repaired by laying on
a few, and the worst; while the Nobility must be forced to send their Sons to
the Plow, and, as if this were not enough, to marry their Daughters also to
Farmers.

SIXTHLY, But I do not see (to com to the last point) how it is possible that
this thing should be brought about, to your good I mean, tho it may to the
destruction of many. For that the Agrarian of Israel, or that of Lacedemon
might stand, is no such miracle; the Lands, without any consideration of the
former Proprietor, being surveyed and cast into equal Lots, which could neither
be bought, nor sold, nor multiplied: so that they knew wherabout to have a Man.
But in this Nation no such Division can be introduced, the Lands being already
in the hands of Proprietors, and such whose Estates ly very rarely together,
but mixed one with another; being also of Tenures in nature so different, that
as there is no experience that an Agrarian was ever introduced in such a case,
so there is no appearance how, or reason why it should: but that which is
against Reason and Experience is impossible.

THE case of my Lord PHILAUTUS was the most concerned in the whole Nation; for
he had four younger Brothers, his Father being yet living to whom he was Heir
of ten thousand Pounds a year. Wherefore being a Man both of good Parts and
Esteem, his Words wrought both upon Men's Reason and Passions, and had born a
stroke at the head of the business, if my Lord ARCHON had not interposed the
Buckler in this Oration.

My Lords, the Legislators of Oceana.
MY Lord PHILAUTUS has made a thing which is easy to seem hard; if the Thanks
were due to his Eloquence, it would be worthy of less praise, than that he ows
it to his Merit, and the Love he has most deservedly purchased of all Men: nor
is it rationally to be feared, that he who is so much beforehand in his private,
should be in arrear in his public Capacity. Wherefore my Lord's tenderness
throout his Speech arising from no other Principle than his Solicitude lest the
Agrarian should be hurtful to his Country; it is no less than my duty to give
the best satisfaction I am able to so good a Patriot, taking every one of his
Doubts in the Order proposed. And,

FIRST, Whereas my Lord, upon observation of the modern Commonwealths, is of
opinion, that an Agrarian is not necessary: It must be consest, that at the
first sight of them there is some appearance favoring his Assertion, but upon
Accidents of no precedent to us. For the Commonwealths of Switzerland and
Holland, I mean of those Leagues, being situated in Countries not alluring the
Inhabitants to Wantonness, but obliging them to universal Industry, have an
implicit Agrarian in the nature of them: and being not obnoxious to a growing
Nobility (which, as long as their former Monarchys had spread the wing over
them, could either not at all be hatched, or was soon broken) are of no example
to us, whose Experience in this point has bin to the contrary. But what if even
in these Governments there be indeed an explicit Agrarian? For when the Law
commands an equal or near equal distribution of a Man's Estate in Land among
his Children, as it is don in those Countries, a Nobility cannot grow; and so
there needs no Agrarian, or rather there is one. And for the growth of the
Nobility in Venice (if so it be, for MACCHIAVEL observes in that Republic, as a
cause of it, a great mediocrity of Estates) it is not a point that she is to
fear, but might study, seeing she consists of nothing else but Nobility; by
which, whatever their Estates suck from the People, especially if it coms
equally, is digested into the better Blood of that Commonwealth, which is all,
or the greatest benefit they can have by accumulation. For how inequal soever
you will have them to be in their Incoms, they have Officers of the Pomp, to
bring them equal in expenses, or at least in the ostentation or show of them.
And so unless the advantage of an Estate consists more in the measure than in
the use of it, the Authority of Venice dos but enforce our Agrarian; nor shall
a Man evade or elude the Prudence of it, by the Authority of any other
Commonwealth. For if a Commonwealth has bin introduced at once, as those of
Israel and Lacedemon, you are certain to find her underlaid with this as the
main Foundation; nor, if she is obliged more to Fortune than Prudence, has she
raised her head without musing upon this matter, as appears by that of Athens,
which through her defect in this point, says ARISTOTLE, introduced her Ostracism,
as most of the Democracys Poli^. 1. 3. c. 9.
of Greece. But, not to restrain a Fundamental of such latitude to any one kind
of Government, do we not yet see, that if there be a sole Landlord of a vast
Territory, he is the Turc? That if a few Landlords overbalance a populous
Country, they have store of Servants? That if a People be in an equal balance,
they can have no Lords? That no Government can otherwise be erected, than upon
some one of these Foundations? That no one of these Foundations (each being else
apt to change into some other) can give any security to the Government, unless
it be fixed? That through the want of this fixation, potent Monarchys and
Commonwealths have fallen upon the heads of the People, and accompanied their own
sad Ruins with vast effusions of innocent Blood? Let the Fame, as was the merit
of the ancient Nobility of this Nation, be equal to, or above what has bin
already said, or can be spoken; yet have we seen not only their Glory, but that
of a Throne, the most indulgent to, and least invasive for so many Ages upon
the Liberty of a People that the World has known, through the mere want of fixing
her foot by a proportionable Agrarian upon her proper Foundation, to have fallen
with such horror, as has bin a Spectacle of Astonishment to the whole Earth.
And were it well argued from one Calamity, that we ought not to prevent
another? Nor is ARISTOTLE so good a Commonwealthsman for deriding the invention
of PHALEAS, as Polit. l. 5. c. 3.
in recollecting himself, where he says, That Democracys, when a less part of
their Citizens overtop the rest in Wealth, degenerat into Oligarchys and
Principalitys: and, which coms nearer to the present purpose, that the greater
part of the Nobility of Tarantum coming accidentally to be ruined, the
Government of the Few came by consequence to be changed into that of the Many.

THESE things considered, I cannot see how an Agrarian, as to the fixation or
security of a Government, can be less than necessary. And if a Cure be
necessary, it excuses not the Patient, his Disease being otherwise desperate,
that it is dangerous; which was the case of Rome, not so stated by MACCHIAVEL,
where he says, That the strife about the Agrarian caused the Destruction of
that Commonwealth. As if when a Senator was not rich (as CRASSUS held) except
he could pay an Army, that Commonwealth could expect nothing but Ruin, whether
in strife about the Agrarian, or without it. Nuper divitiae avaritiam, and
abundantes voluptates desiderium, per luxum atque libidinem, pereundi
perdendique omnia invexere. Live. in Praef.
Of late, says LIVY, Riches have introduced Avarice; and voluptuous Pleasures
abounding, have through Lust and Luxury begot a desire of blasting and destroying
all good Orders. If the greatest Security of a Commonwealth consists in being
provided with the proper Antidote against this Poison, her greatest danger must
be from the absence of an Agrarian, which is the whole truth of the Roman
example. For the Laconic, I shall reserve the farther explication of it, as my
Lord also did, to another place: and first see whether an Agrarian proportioned
to a popular Government be sufficient to keep out Monarchy. My Lord is for the
Negative, and fortified by the People of Israel electing a King. To which I
say, That the Action of the People therein expressed is a full Answer to the
Objection of that Example: For the Monarchy neither grew upon them, nor could,
by reason of the Agrarian, possibly have invaded them, if they had not pulled
it upon themselves by the election of a King. Which being an Accident, the like
whereof is not to be found in any other People so planted, nor in this, till, as
it is manifest, they were given up by God to infatuation (for says he to
SAMUEL, They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected Me, that I should
not reign over them) has something in it which is apparent, by what went before,
to have bin besides the course of Nature, and by what followed. For the King
having no other Foundation than the Calamitys of the People, so often beaten by
their Enemies, that despairing of themselves, they were contented with any
change; if he had Peace as in the days of SOLOMON, lest but a slippery Throne
to his Successor, as appeared by REHOBOAM. And the Agrarian, notwithstanding
the Monarchy thus introduced, so faithfully preserved the Root of that
Commonwealth, that it shot forth oftener, and by intervals continued longer than
any other Government, as may be computed from the Institution of the same by
JOSHUA, 1465 years before CHRIST, to the total dissolution of it, which
happened in the Reign of the Emperor ADRIAN, 135 years after the Incarnation. A
People planted upon an equal Agrarian, and holding to it, if they part with
their Liberty, must do it upon good will, and make but a bad title of their
Bounty. As to instance yet further in that which is proposed by the present
Order to this Nation, the Standard whereof is at 2000 l. a year: The whole
Territory of Oceana being divided by this proportion, amounts to 5000 Lots. So
the Lands of Oceana being thus distributed, and bound to this Distribution, can
never fall to fewer than five thousand Proprietors. But five thousand
Proprietors so seized will not agree to break the Agrarian, for that were to
agree to rob one another; nor to bring in a King, because they must maintain
him, and can have no benefit by him; nor to exclude the People, because they
can have as little by that, and must spoil their Militia. So the Commonwealth
continuing upon the balance proposed, tho it should com into five thousand
hands, can never alter; and that it should ever com into five thousand hands,
is as improbable as any thing in the World that is not altogether impossible.

MY Lords, other Considerations are more private: As that this Order destroys
Familys; which is as if one should lay the ruins of some ancient Castle to the
Herbs which usually grow out of them; the destruction of those Familys being
that indeed which naturally produced this Order. For we do not now argue for
that which we would have, but for that which we are already possessed of; as
would appear, if a note were but taken of all such as have at this day above
two thousand Pounds a year in Oceana. If my Lord should grant (and I will put
it with the most) that they who are Proprietors in Land, exceeding this
proportion, excede not three hundred; with what brow can the Interest of so few
be balanced with that of the whole Nation? or rather, what Interest have they
to put in such a Balance? They would live as they have bin accustomed to do;
Who hinders them? They would enjoy their Estates; who touches them? They would
dispose of what they have according to the Interest of their Familys: It is
that which we desire. A Man has one Son; let him be called: Would he enjoy his
Father's Estate? It is his, his Son's, and his Son's Son's after him. A Man has
five Sons; let them be called: Would they enjoy their Father's Estate? It is
divided among them: for we have four Votes for one in the same Family, and
therefore this must be the Interest of the Family, or the Family knows not its
own Interest. If a Man shall dispute otherwise, he must draw his Arguments from
Custom, and from Greatness, which was the Interest of the Monarchy, not of the
Family: and we are now a Commonwealth. If the Monarchy could not bear with such
Divisions because they tended to a Commonwealth; neither can a Commonwealth
connive at such Accumulations, because they tend to a Monarchy. If the Monarchy
might make bold with so many for the good of one, we may make bold with one for
the good of so many; nay, for the good of all. My Lords, it coms into my mind,
that which upon occasion of the variety of Partys enumerated in our late Civil
Wars, was said by a Friend of mine coming home from his Travels, about the
latter end of these Troubles; That he admired how it came to pass, that younger
Brothers, especially being so many more in number than their Elder, did not
unite as one man against a Tyranny, the like whereof has not bin exercised in
any other Nation. And truly, when I consider that our Countrymen are none of
the worst natured, I must confess I marvel much how it coms to pass, that we
should use our Children as we do our Puppys; take one, lay it in the lap, feed
it with every good bit, and drown five: nay yet worse; forasmuch as the Puppys
are once drowned, whereas the Children are left perpetually drowning. Really, my
Lords, it is a flinty Custom! And all this for his cruel Ambition, that would
raise himself a Pillar, a golden Pillar for his Monument, tho he has Children,
his own reviving Flesh, and a kind of Immortality. And this is that Interest of
a Family, for which we are to think ill of a Government that will not endure
it. But quiet your selves: The Land through which the River Nilus wanders in one
stream, is barren; but where it parts into seven, it multiplys its sertil
shores by distributing, yet keeping and improving such a Propriety and
Nutrition, as is a prudent Agrarian to a wellorder'd Commonwealth.

NOR (to com to the fifth Assertion) is a political Body rendered any fitter
for Industry, by having one gouty and another withered Leg, than a natural. It
tends not to the improvement of Merchandise that there be some who have no need
of their Trading, and others that are not able to follow it. If Confinement
discourages Industry, an Estate in Money is not confined; and lest Industry
should want whereupon to work, Land is not ingrost or entailed upon any man, but
remains at its devotion. I wonder whence the computation can arise, that this
should discourage Industry. Two thousand Pounds a year a man may enjoy in
Oceana, as much in Panopea, five hundred in Marpesia: There be other
Plantations, and the Commonwealth will have more. Who knows how far the Arms of
our Agrarian may extend themselves? and whether he that might have left a
Pillar, may not leave a Temple of many Pillars to his more pious Memory? Where
there is some measure in Riches, a man may be rich; but if you will have them to
be infinite, there will be no end of starving himself, and wanting what he has:
and what pains dos such a one take to be poor! Furthermore, if a man shall
think that there may be an Industry less greasy, or more noble, and so cast his
thoughts upon the Commonwealth, he will have leisure for her, and she Riches
and Honors for him; his Sweat shall smell like ALEXANDER'S. My Lord PHILAUTUS
is a young Man, who enjoying his ten thousand Pounds a year, may keep a noble
House in the old way, and have homely Guests; and having but two, by the means
proposed, may take the upper hand of his great Ancestors; with reverence to
whom, I may say, there has not bin one of them would have disputed his place
with a Roman Consul. My Lord, do not break my heart; the Nobility shall go to
no other Plows than those from which we call our Consuls. But, says he, it
having bin so with Lacedemon, that neither the City nor the Citizens were
capable of increase, a blow was given by that Agrarian, which ruined both. And
what are we concerned with that Agrarian, or that blow, while our Citizens and
our City (and that by our Agrarian) are both capable of increase? The Spartan,
if he made a Conquest, had not Citizens to hold it; the Oceaner will have enough:
the Spartan could have no Trade, the Oceaner may have all. The Agrarian in
Laconia, that it might bind on Knapsacs, forbidding all other Arts but that of
War, could not make an Army of above 30000 Citizens. The Agrarian in Oceana
without interruption of Traffic, provides us in the fifth part of the Youth an
annual source or fresh spring of 100000, besides our Provincial Auxiliarys, out
of which to draw marching Armies; and as many Elders, not feeble, but men most
of them in the flower of their Age, and in Arms for the defense of our
Territorys. The Agrarian in Laconia banished Money, this multiplys it: That
allowed a matter of twenty or thirty Acres to a man; this two or three
thousand: There is no comparison between them. And yet I differ so much from my
Lord, or his Opinion that the Agrarian was the ruin of Lacedemon, that I hold
it no less than demonstrable to have bin her main support. For if, banishing
all other diversions, it could not make an Army of above 30000; then letting in
all other diversions, it must have broken that Army. Wherefore LYSANDER bringing
in the golden spoils of Athens, irrecoverably ruined that Commonwealth; and is
a warning to us, that in giving encouragement to Industry, we also remember,
that Covetousness is the root of all Evil. And our Agrarian can never be the
cause of those Seditions threatened by my Lord, but is the proper cure of them,
as Hinc usura vorax, rapidumque in tempore Foenus; Hinc concussa fides, and
multis utile bellum.
LUCAN notes well in the State of Rome before the Civil Wars, which happened
through the want of such an Antidote.

Why then are we mistaken, as if we intended not equal advantages in our
Commonwealth to either Sex, because we would not have Women's Fortunes consist
in that metal, which exposes them to Cutpurses? If a man cuts my Purse, I may
have him by the heels, or by the neck for it; whereas a man may cut a woman's
purse, and have her for his pains in fetters. How brutish, and much more than
brutish, is that Commonwealth, which prefers the Earth before the Fruits of her
Womb? If the People be her Treasure, the staff by which she is sustained and
comforted, with what Justice can she suffer them, by whom she is most enriched,
to be for that cause the most impoverished? And yet we see the Gifts of God,
and the Bountys of Heaven in fruitful Familys, through this wretched custom of
marrying for Money, become their insupportable grief and poverty. Nor falls this
so heavy upon the lower sort, being better able to shift for themselves, as
upon the Nobility or Gentry. For what avails it in this case, from whence their
Veins have derived their Blood; while they shall see the Tallow of a Chandler
sooner converted into that Beauty which is required in a Bride? I appeal,
whether my Lord PHILAUTUS or my self be the Advocat of Nobility; against which
in the case proposed by me, there would be nothing to hold the balance. And why
is a Woman, if she may have but fifteen hundred pounds, undon? If she be
unmarry'd, what Nobleman allows his Daughter in that case a greater Revenu,
than so much Money may command? And if she marry, no Nobleman can give his
Daughter a greater portion than she has. Who is hurt in this case? nay, who is
not benefited? If the Agrarian gives us the sweat of our brows without
diminution; if it prepares our Table, if it makes our Cup to overflow; and
above all this, in providing for our Children, anoints our Heads with that Oil
which takes away the greatest of worldly cares; what man, that is not besotted
with a Covetousness as vain as endless, can imagine such a Constitution to be
his Poverty? seeing where no woman can be considerable for her portion, no
portion will be considerable with a woman; and so his Children will not only
find better preferments without his Brocage, but more freedom of their own
Affections. We are wonderful severe in Laws, that they shall not marry without
our consent; as if it were care and tenderness over them: But is it not, lest
we should not have the other thousand Pounds with this Son, or the other
hundred Pounds a year more in Jointure for that Daughter? These, when we are
crossed in them, are the Sins for which we water our couch with tears, but not of
Penitence; seeing whereas it is a mischief beyond any that we can do to our
Enemies, we persist to make nothing of breaking the affection of our Children.
But there is in this Agrarian a Homage to pure and spotless Love, the
consequence whereof I will not give for all your Romances. An Alderman makes not
his Daughter a Countess till he has given her 20000 l. nor a Romance a
considerable Mistress till she be a Princess; these are Characters of bastard
Love. But if our Agrarian excludes Ambition and Covetousness, we shall at
length have the care of our own breed, in which we have bin curious as to our
Dogs and Horses. The Marriage Bed will be truly legitimat, and the Race of the
Commonwealth not spurious.

BUT (impar magnanimis ausis, imparque dolori) I am hurled from all my hopes by
my Lords last assertion of Impossibility, that the Root from whence we imagine
these Fruits, should be planted or thrive in this Soil. And why? because of the
mixture of Estates, and variety of Tenures. Nevertheless, there is yet extant
in the Exchequer an old Survey of the whole Nation; wherefore such a thing is
not impossible. Now if a new Survey were taken at the present rates, and the
Law made, that no man should hold hereafter above so much Land as is valued
therein at 2000 l. a year, it would amount to a good and sufficient Agrarian. It
is true, that there would remain some difficulty in the different kind of Rents,
and that it is a matter requiring not only more leisure than we have, but an
Authority which may be better able to bow men to a more general Consent, than
is to be wrought out of them by such as are in our capacity. Wherefore, as to
the manner, it is necessary that we refer it to the Parliament; but as to the
matter, they cannot otherwise fix their Government upon the right Balance.

I SHALL conclude with a few words to some parts of the Order, which my Lord has
omitted. As first to the Consequences of the Agrarian to be settled in
Marpesia, which irreparably breaks the Aristocracy of that Nation; being of
such a nature, as standing, it is not possible that you should govern. For
while the People of that Country are little better than the Cattle of the
Nobility, you must not wonder if according as these can make their Markets with
foren Princes, you find those to be driven upon your Grounds. And if you be so
tender, now you have it in your power, as not to hold a hand upon them that may
prevent the slaughter which must otherwise ensue in like cases, the Blood will
ly at your door. But in holding such a hand upon them, you may settle the
Agrarian; and in settling the Agrarian, you give that People not only Liberty,
but Lands; which makes your Protection necessary to their Security; and their
Contribution due to your Protection, as to their own Safety.

FOR the Agrarian of Panopea, it allowing such proportions of so good Land, men
that conceive themselves straightened by this in Oceana, will begin there to let
themselves forth, where every Citizen will in time have his Villa. And there is
no question, but the improvement of that Country by this means must be far
greater than it has bin in the best of former times.

I HAVE no more to say, but that in those ancient and heroic Ages (when men
thought that to be necessary which was virtuous) the Nobility of Athens having
the People so much engaged in their debt, that there remained no other question
among these, than which of those should be King, no sooner heard SOLON speak
than they quitted their Debts, and restored the Commonwealth; which ever after
held a solemn and annual Feast called the Sisacthia, or Recision, in memory of
that Action. Nor is this example the Phoenix; for at the institution by
LYCURGUS, the Nobility having Estates (as ours here) in the Lands of Laconia,
upon no other valuable consideration than the Commonwealth proposed by him,
threw them up to be parcel'd by his Agrarian. But now when no man is desired to
throw up a farthing of his Money, or a shovel full of his Earth, and that all we
can do is but to make a virtue of necessity; we are disputing whether we should
have Peace or War: For Peace you cannot have without some Government, nor any
Government without the proper Balance. Wherefore if you will not fix this which
you have, the rest is Blood, for without Blood you can bring in no other.

BY these Speeches made at the Institution of the Agrarian, you may perceive
what were the Grounds of it. The next is

14. Order.
THE fourteenth ORDER, constituting the Ballot of Venice, as it is fitted by
several Alterations, and appointed to every Assembly, to be the constant and
only way of giving suffrage in this Commonwealth, according to the following
Scheme.

P: 113.

The Manner and Use of the Ballot.



I SHALL endeavor by the preceding Figure to demonstrat the Manner of the
VENETIAN BALLOT (a thing as difficult in discourse or writing, as facil in
practice) according to the use of it in Oceana. The whole Figure represents the
Senate, containing, as to the House or form of sitting, a square and a half; the
Tribunal at the upper end being ascended by four steps. On the uppermost of
these sit the Magistrates that constitute the Signory of the Commonwealth, that
is to say, A the Strategus; B the Orator; C the three Commissioners of the
Great Seal; D the three Commissioners of the Treasury, whereof one, E, exercises
for the present the Office of a Censor at the middle Urn F.

TO the two upper steps of the Tribunal answer G G. G G. the two long Benches
next the Wall on each side of the House; the outwardmost of which are equal in
height to the uppermost step, and the innermost equal in height to the next. Of
these four Benches consists the first Seat; as the second Seat consists in like
manner of those four Benches H H. H H. which being next the Floor, are equal in
height to the two nethermost steps of the Throne. So the whole House is
distributed into two Seats, each consisting of four Benches.

THIS distribution causes not only the greater convenience, as will be shown,
to the Senators in the exercise of their Function at the Ballot, but a greater
grace to the aspect of the Senate. In the middle of the outward benches stand I.
I. the chairs of the Censors, those being their ordinary places, tho upon
occasion of the Ballot they descend, and sit where they are shown by K. K. at
each of the outward Urns L. L. Those M. M. that sit with their Tables, and the
Bowls N. N. before them, upon the half space or second step of the Tribunal
from the floor, are the Clercs or Secretarys of the House. Upon the short Seats
O. O. on the floor (which should have bin represented by Woolsacks) sit P the
two Tribuns of the Horse; Q the two Tribuns of the Foot; and R R. R R. the
Judges: all which Magistrates are Assistants, but have no suffrage. This posture
of the Senate considered, the Ballot is performed as follows.

FIRST, whereas the gold Balls are of several suits, and accordingly marked with
several Letters of the Alphabet, a Secretary presents a little Urn (wherein
there is one Ball of every suit or mark) to the Strategus and the Orator; and
look what Letter the Strategus draws, the same and no other is to be used for
that time in the middle Urn F; the like for the Letter drawn by the Orator is
to be observed for the side Urns L. L. that is to say, if the Strategus drew a
Ball with an A, all the gold Balls in the middle Urn for that day are marked
with the Letter A; and if the Orator drew a B, all the gold Balls in the side
Urn for that day are marked with the Letter B: which don immediately before the
Ballot, and so the Letter unknown to the Ballotants, they can use no fraud or
juggling; otherwise a man might carry a gold Ball in his hand, and seem to have
drawn it out of an Urn. He that draws a gold Ball at any Urn, delivers it to
the Censor or Assessor of that Urn, who views the Character, and allows
accordingly of his Lot.

THE Strategus and the Orator having drawn for the Letters, the Urns are
prepared accordingly by one of the Commissioners and the two Censors. The
preparation of the Urns is after this manner. If the Senate be to elect, for
example, the List called the Tropic of Magistrates, which is this;

1. The Lord STRATEGVS; 2. The Lord ORATOR; 3. The third COMMISSIONER of the
Great Seal; 4. The third COMMISSIONER of the Treasury; 5. The first CENSOR; 6.
The second CENSOR;
This List or Schedule consists of six Magistracys, and to every Magistracy
there are to be four Competitors, that is, in all four and twenty Competitors
proposed to the House. They that are to propose the Competitors are called
Electors, and no Elector can propose above one Competitor: wherefore for the
proposing of four and twenty Competitors you must have four and twenty
Electors; and whereas the Ballot consists of a Lot and of a Suffrage, the Lot is
for no other use than for the designation of Electors; and he that draws a gold
Ball at the middle Urn is an Elector. Now, as to have four and twenty
Competitors proposed, you must have four and twenty Electors made; so to have
four and twenty Electors made by lot, you must have four and twenty gold Balls
in the middle Urn; and these (because otherwise it would be no Lot) mixed with
a competent number of Blanks, or silver Balls. Wherefore to the four and twenty
gold Balls cast six and twenty silver ones, and those (reckoning the Blanks
with the Prizes) make fifty Balls in the middle Urn. This don (because no man
can com to the middle Urn that has not first drawn a gold Ball at one of the
side Urns) and to be sure that the Prizes or gold Balls in this Urn be all
drawn, there must com to it fifty persons: therefore there must be in each of
the side Urns five and twenty gold Balls, which in both com to fifty; and to
the end that every Senator may have his Lot, the gold Balls in the side Urns
are to be made up with Blanks equal to the number of the Ballotants at either
Urn: for example, the House consisting of 300 Senators, there must be in each
of the side Urns 125 Blanks and 25 Prizes, which com in both the side Urns to
300 Balls. This is the whole Mystery of preparing the Urns, which the Censors
having skill to do accordingly, the rest of the Ballot, whether the partys
balloting understand it or no, must of necessary consequence com right; and
they can neither be out, nor sall into any confusion in the exercise of this
Art.

BUT the Ballot, as I said, is of two parts, Lot and Suffrage, or the
Proposition and Result. The Lot determins who shall propose the Competitors;
and the Result of the Senate, which of the Competitors shall be the Magistrates.
The whole, to begin with the Lot, procedes in this manner.

THE first Secretary with an audible Voice reads first the List of the
Magistrates to be chosen for the day; then the Oath for fair Election, at which
the Senators hold up their hands; which don, another Secretary presents a
little Urn to the Strategus, in which are four Balls, each of them having one
of these four Inscriptions: FIRST SEAT AT THE UPPER END. FIRST SEAT AT THE
LOWER END. SECOND SEAT AT THE UPPER END. SECOND SEAT AT THE LOWER END. and look
which of them the Strategus draws, the Secretary pronouncing the Inscription
with a loud Voice, the Seat so called coms accordingly to the Urns: this in the
Figure is the SECOND SEAT AT THE UPPER END. The manner of their coming to the
side Urns is in double Files, there being two holes in the cover of each side
Urn, by which means two may draw at once. The Senators therefore SS. SS. are
coming from the upper end of their Seats HH. HH. to the side Urns L. L. The
Senators TT. T. are drawing. The Senator V has drawn a gold Ball at his side
Urn, and is going to the middle Urn F, where the Senator W having don the like
at the other side Urn, is already drawing. But the Senators X X. X X. having
drawn Blanks at their side Urns, and thrown them into the Bowls Y. Y. standing
at the feet of the Urns, are marching by the lower end into their Seats again;
the Senator a having don the like at the middle Urn, is also throwing his blank
into the Bowl b, and marching to his Seat again: for a man by a prize at a side
Urn gains no more than right to com to the middle Urn, where if he draws a
Blank, his Fortune at the side Urn coms to nothing at all; wherefore he also
returns to his place. But the Senator c has had a Prize at the middle Urn,
where the Commissioner having viewed his Ball, and found the mark to be right,
he marches up the steps to the Seat of the Electors, which is the form d set
cross the Tribunal, where he places himself according as he was drawn with the
other Electors eee drawn before him. These are not to look back, but sit with
their Faces toward the Signory or State, till their number amount to that of
the Magistrate to be that day chosen, which for the present, as was shown, are
six; wherefore six Electors being made, they are reckoned according as they were
drawn: First, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, in their Order; and the
first six that are chosen are the FIRST ORDER OF ELECTORS.

THE first Order of Electors being made, are conducted by a Secretary, with a
copy of the List to be chosen, out of the Senate, and into a Committee or
Council Chamger, being neither suffered by the way, nor in their room (till the
Ballot be ended) to have conference with any but themselves; wherefore the
Secretary, having given them their Oath that they shall make Election according
to the Law and their Conscience, delivers them the List, and seats himself at
the lower end of the Table with his Pen and Paper, while another Secretary
keeps the Door.

BY such time as the first Order of Electors are thus seated, the second Order
of Electors is drawn, who with a second Copy of the same List are conducted
into another Committee-chamber, by other Secretarys performing the same Office
with the former.

THE like exactly is don by the third and by the fourth Orders (or Hands, as
the Venetians call them) of Electors; by which means you have the four and
twenty Electors divided according to the four Copys of the same List, by six,
into four Hands or Orders; and every one of these Orders names one Competitor
to every Magistracy in the List; that is to say, the first Elector names to the
first Magistracy, the second Elector to the second Magistracy, and so forth.
But tho the Electors, as has bin shown, are chosen by mere lot, yet the
Competitors by them named are not chosen by any Lot, but by the Suffrage of the
whole Order: For example; The first Elector in the first Order proposes a Name
to be Strategus, which Name is balloted by himself and the other five Electors;
and if the Name so balloted attain not to above half the Suffrages, it is laid
aside, and the first Elector names another to the same Magistracy; and so in
case this also fails, another, till one he has named, whether it be himself, or
some other, has attained to above half the Suffrages in the affirmative; and the
name so attaining to above half the Suffrages in the Affirmative is written to
the first Magistracy in the List by the Secretary; which being don, the second
Elector of the first Order names to the second Magistracy till one of his
nomination be chosen to the same. The like is don by the rest of the Electors
of the first Order, till one Competitor be chosen, and written to every
Magistracy in their List. Now the second, third, and fourth Orders of Electors
doing exactly after the same manner, it coms to pass that one Competitor to
every Magistracy being chosen in each Order, there be in all four Competitors
chosen to every Magistracy.

IF any Controversy arises in an Order of Electors, one of the Censors (these
being at this game the Groomporters) is advertised by the Secretary, who brings
him in, and the Electors disputing are bound to acquiesce in his Sentence. For
which cause it is that the Censors do not ballot at the Urns; the Signory also
abstains, lest it should deform the House: wherefore the Blanks in the side Urns
are by so many the fewer. And so much for the Lot, which is of the greater Art
but less Consequence, because it concerns Proposition only: But all (except the
Tribuns and the Judges, which being but Assistants have no Suffrage) are to
ballot at the Result, to which I now com.

THE four Orders of Electors having perfected their Lists, the face of the
House is changed: for the Urns are taken away, and every Senator and Magistrate
is seated in his proper place, saving the Electors, who, having given their
Suffrages already, may not stir out of their Chambers, till the House have
given theirs, and the rest of the Ballot be performed; which follows in this
manner.

THE four Lists being presented by the Secretarys of each Council of Electors
to the Signory, are first read, according to their Order, to the House with an
audible Voice; and then the Competitors are put to the Ballot or Suffrage of
the whole Senate in this manner: A. A. named to be Strategus in the first Order*
whereupon eight Ballotins or Pages, such as are expressed by the Figures f. f.
take eight of the Boxes represented, tho rudely, by the Figures g. g. and go
four on the one, and four on the other side of the House, that is, one to every
Bench, singing A. A. named to be the Strategus in the first Order: and every
Magistrate and Senator (beginning by the Strategus and the Orator first) holds
up a little Pellet of Linen, as the Box passes, between his Finger and his
Thumb, that men may see he has but one, and then puts it into the same. The Box
consisting in the inner part of two Boxes, being painted on the outside white
and green, to distinguish the Affirmative from the Nagative side, is so made,
that when your Hand is in it, no man can see to which of the sides you put the
Suffrage, nor hear to which it falls, because the Pellet being Linen, makes no
noise. The Strategus and the Orator having begun, all the rest do the like.

THE Ballotins having thus gathered the Suffrages, bring them before the
Signory, in whose presence the outward Boxes being opened, they take out the
inner Boxes, whereof the Affirmative is white, and the Negative green, and pour
the white into the Bowl N on the right hand, which is white also, and the green
into the Bowl N on the lest, which is also green. These Bowls or Basins (better
represented at the lower end of the Figure by h. i.) being upon this occasion
set before the Tables of the Secretarys at the upper end N. N. the white on the
right hand, and the green on the lest, the Secretarys on each side number the
Balls: by which if they find that the Affirmatives amount not to above one
half, they write not the Name that was balloted; but if they amount to above
one half, they write it, adding the number of above half the Suffrages to which
it attained. The first name being written, or laid aside, the next that is put
is B. B. named to be Strategus in the second Order; the third C. C. named to be
Strategus in the third Order; the fourth D. D. named to be Strategus in the
fourth Order: and he of these four Competitors that has most above half in the
Affirmative, is the Magistrate; or if none of them attain to above half, the
nomination for that Magistracy is to be repeated by such new Electors as shall
be chosen at the next Ballot. And so, as is exemplified in the first
Magistracy, procedes the Ballot of the rest; first in the first, then in the
second, and so in the third and fourth Orders.

NOW whereas it may happen that A. A. (for example) being named Strategus in the
first Order, may also be named to the same or some one or more other Magistracys
in one or more of the other Orders; his name is first balloted where it is
first written, that is, to the more worthy Magistracy, whereof if he misses, he
is balloted as it coms in course for the next, and so for the rest, if he
misses of that, as often as he is named.

AND because to be named twice or oftener, whether to the same or some other
Magistracy, is the stronger recommendation; the note must not fail to be given
upon the name, at the proposition, in this manner; A. A. named to be Strategus
in the first, and in the second Order: or A. A. named to be Strategus in the
first and the third; in the first and the fourth, etc. But if he be named to
the same Magistracy in the first, second, third, and fourth Orders, he can have
no Competitor; wherefore attaining to above half the Suffrages, he is the
Magistrate. Or thus: A. A. named to be Strategus in the first, to be Censor in
the second, to be Orator in the third, and to be Commissioner of the Seal in
the fourth Order, or the like in more or fewer Orders: In which cases if he
misses of the first Magistracy, he is balloted to the second; if he misses of
the second, to the third; and if he misses of the third, to the fourth

THE Ballot not finished before Sunset, tho the Election of the Magistrates
already chosen be good, voids the Election of such Competitors as being chosen
are not yet furnished with Magistracys, as if they had never bin named (for
this is no Juggling Box, but an Art that must see the Sun) and the Ballot for
the remaining Magistracys is to be repeated the next day by new Orders of
Electors, and such Competitors as by them shall be elected. And so in the like
manner, if of all the names proposed to the same Magistracy, no one of them
attains to above half the Suffrages in the Affirmative.

THE Senatorian Ballot of Oceana being thus described, those of the Parish, of
the Hundred, and of the Tribe, being so little different, that in this they are
all contained, and by this may be easily understood, are yet fully described,
and made plain enough before in the 5 th, 6 th, 7 th, 8 th, 9 th, and 10 th
Orders.

THIS therefore is the general Order, whence those branches of the Ballot, some
whereof you have already seen, are derived; which, with those that follow, were
all read and debated in this place at the Institution. When my Lord EPIMONUS DE
GARRULA, being one of the Counsillors, and having no farther patience (tho the
Rules were composed by the Agent of this Commonwealth, residing for that
purpose at Venice) than to hear the direction for the Parishes, stood up and
made way for himself in this manner.

May it please your Highness, my Lord ARCHON.
UNDER correction of Mr. PEREGRIN SPY, our very learned Agent and
Intelligencer, I have seen the World a little, Venice, and (as Gentlemen are
permitted to do) the Great Council balloting. And truly I must needs say, that
it is for a dumb show the goodliest that I ever beheld with my eyes. You should
have some would take it ill, as if the noble Venetians thought themselves too
good to speak to strangers, but they observed them not so narrowly. The truth
is, they have nothing to say to their Acquaintance; or Men that are in Council
sure would have Tongues: For a Council, and not a word spoken in it, is a
contradiction. But there is such a pudder with their marching and
countermarching, as, tho never a one of them draw a Sword, you would think they
were training; which till I found that they did it only to entertain strangers,
I came from among them as wise as I went thither. But in the Parliament of
Oceana you had no Balls, nor Dancing, but sober Conversation; a man might know
and be known, show his parts, and improve 'em. And now if you take the advice
of this same fellow, you will spoil all with his whimsys. Mr. Speaker, -- Cry
you mercy, my Lord ARCHON, I mean; Set the wisest man of your House in the
Great Council of Venice, and you will not know him from a fool. Whereas nothing
is more certain, than that flat and dull fellows in the judgment of all such as
used to keep company with them before, upon election into our House, have
immediately chitted like Barley in the fat, where it acquires a new Spirit, and
slow'd forth into Language, that I am as confident as I am here, if there were
not such as delight to abuse us, is far better than TULLYS; Or, let any body
but translate one of his Orations, and speak it in the House, and see if every
body do not laugh at him. This is a great matter, Mr. Speaker; they do not cant
it with your Booklearning, your Orbs, your Centers, your prime Magnitudes, and
your Nebulones, things I profess that would make a sober man run stark mad to
hear 'em; while we, who should be considering the Honor of our Country, and
that it gos now or never upon our hand, whether it shall be ridiculous to all
the World, are going to Nineholes, or trow Madam for our business, like your
dumb Venetian, whom this same Sir POLITIC your Resident, that never saw him do
any thing but make faces, would insinuat into you, at this distance, to have
the only knack of State. Whereas if you should take the pains, as I have don, to
look a little nearer, you would find these same wonderful things to be nothing
else but mere natural Fopperys, or Capricios, as they call them in Italian,
even of the meanest of that Nation. For, put the case you be traveling in
Italy, ask your Contadino, that is, the next Country fellow you meet, some
question, and presently he ballots you an answer with a nod, which is
affirmative; or a shake with his head, which is the negative box; or a shrug
with his shoulder, which is the Bossolo di non sinceri. -- Good! You will
admire SANDS for telling you, that Grotta di Cane is a Miracle: and I shall be
laughed at for assuring you, that it is nothing else but such a damp (continued
by the neighborhood of certain Sulphur Mines*) as through accidental heat dos
sometimes happen in our Coalpits. But Ingratitude must not discorage an honest
man from doing good. There is not, I say, such a tonguety'd Generation under
Heaven as your Italian; that you should not wonder if he makes signs. But our
People must have something in their Diurnals, we must ever and anon be telling
'em our minds; or if we be at it when we raise Taxes, like those Gentlemen with
the finger and the thumb, they will swear that we are Cutpurses. -- Com, I know
what I have heard 'em say, when some men had money that wrought hard enough for
it; and do you conceive they will be better pleased when they shall be told,
that upon like occasions you are at mumchance or stoolball? I do not speak for
my self; for tho I shall always acknowledge, that I got more by one years
sitting in the House, than by my three years Travels, it was not of that kind.
But I hate that this same SPY, for pretending to have played at Billiards with
the most Serene Commonwealth of Venice, should make such fools of us here, when
I know that he must have had his intelligence from some Corncutter upon the
Rialta; for a noble Venetian would be hanged if he should keep such a fellow
company. And yet if I do not think he has made you all dote, never trust me, my
Lord ARCHON is sometimes in such strange Raptures. Why, good my Lord, let me be
heard as well as your Apple Squire; Venice has fresh blood in her Cheeks, I
must confess, yet she is but an old Lady. Nor has he picked her Cabinet; these
he sends you are none of her Receipts I can assure you, he bought them for a
Julio at St. Marcs of a Mountebank. She has no other wash, upon my knowledge,
for that same envied Complexion of hers but her Marshes, being a little better
scented, saving your presence, than a Chamberpot. My Lords, I know what I say,
but you will never have don with it, That neither the Great Turc, nor any of
those little Turcs her Neighbors, have bin able to spoil her! Why you may as
well wonder that Weesels do not suck eggs in Swans nests. Do you think that it
has lain in the devotion of her Beads; which you that have puk'd so much at
Popery, are now at length resolved shall consecrat M. Parson, and be dropped by
every one of his Congregation, while those same whimsical Intelligences your
Surveyors (you will break my heart) give the turn to your primum mobile? and so
I think they will; for you will find, that Money is the primum mobile, and they
will turn you thus out of some three or four hundred thousand Pounds: a pretty
Sum for Urns and Balls, for Boxes and Pills, which these same Quacksalvers are
to administer to the Parishes; and for what Disease I marvel! Or how dos it
work? Out coms a Constable, an Overseer, and a Churchwarden! Mr. Speaker, I am
amazed!

NEVER was there Goose so stuck with Lard as my Lord EPIMONUS'S Speech with
Laughter; the ARCHON having much ado to recover himself, in such manner as
might enable him to return these thanks.

IN your whole lives, my Lords, were you never entertained with so much
Ingenuity; my Lord EPIMONUS having at once mended all the faults of Travelers.
For, first, whereas they are abominable liars, he has not told you (except some
malicious body has misinformed him concerning poor SPY) one syllable of
falsehood. And, secondly, whereas they never fail to give the upper hand in all
their Discourses to foren Nations, still justling their own into the kennel; he
bears an Honor to his Country that will not dissolve in Cephalonia, nor be
corrupted with Figs and Melons, which I can assure you is no ordinary
obligation: And therefore hold it a matter of public concern, that we be no
occasion of quenching my Lord's Affections; nor is there any such great matter
between us, but in my opinion might be easily reconciled: for tho that which my
Lord gained by sitting in the House, I steadfastly believe, as he can affirm,
was got fairly; yet dare I not, nor do I think, that upon consideration he will
promise so much for other Gamesters, especially when they were at it so high,
as he intimats not only to have bin in use, but to be like enough to com about
again. Wherefore, say I, let them throw with boxes; for unless we will be below
the Politics of an ordinary, there is no such bar to cogging. It is known to
his Lordship, that our Game is most at a throw, and that every cast of our Dice
is in our Suffrages; nor will he deny, that partiality in a Suffrage is
downright cogging. Now if the Venetian Boxes be the most soverain of all
Remedys against this same cogging, is it not a strange thing that they should
be thrown first into the fire by a fair Gamester? Men are naturally subject to
all kinds of Passions: Some you have that are not able to withstand the brow of
an Enemy; and others that make nothing of this, are less proof against that of
a Friend. So that if your Suffrage be barefaced, I dare say you shall not have
one fair cast in twenty. But whatever a man's fortune be at the box, he neither
knows whom to thank, nor whom to challenge. Wherefore (that my Lord may have a
charitable opinion of the choice Affection which I confess to have, above all
other Beautys, for that of incomparable Venice) there is in this way of
Suffrage no less than a demonstration that it is the most pure: and the purity
of the Suffrage in a popular Government is the Health, if not the Life of it;
seeing the Soul is no otherwise breathed into the Soverain Power, than by the
Suffrage of the People. Wherefore no wonder if POSTELLUS be of opinion, that
this use of the Ball is the very same with that of the Bean in Athens; or, that
others, by the Text concerning ELDAD and MEDAD, derive it from the Commonwealth
of Israel. There is another thing, tho not so material to us, that my Lord will
excuse me if I be not willing to yield, which is, that Venice subsists only by
her Situation. It is true, that a man in time of War may be more secure from
his Enemies by being in a Citadel, but not from his Diseases: wherefore the first
cause, if he lives long, is his good Constitution, without which his Citadel
were to little purpose; and it is not otherwise with Venice.

WITH this Speech of the ARCHON I conclude the proof of the Agrarian, and the
Ballot, being the Fundamental Laws of this Commonwealth; and com now from the
Center to the Circumferences or Orbs, whereof some have bin already shown: As how
the Parishes annually pour themselves into the Hundreds, the Hundreds into the
Tribes, and the Tribes into the Galaxys; the Annual Galaxy of every Tribe
consisting of two Knights and seven Deputys, whereof the Knights constitute the
Senate; the Deputys, the Prerogative Tribe, commonly called the People; and the
Senate and People constitute the Soverain Power, or Parliament of Oceana.
Wherefore to show what the Parliament is, I must first open the Senate, and then
the Prerogative Tribe.

The Face of the S^nat.
TO begin with the Senate, of which (as a Man is differently represented by a
Picturedrawer, and by an Anatomist) I shall first discover the Face or Aspect,
and then the Parts, with the use of them. Every Monday morning in the Summer at
seven, and in the Winter at eight, the great Bell in the Clockhouse at the
Pantheon begins, and continues ringing for the space of one hour: in which time
the Magistrates of the Senate, being attended according to their Quality, with a
respective number of the Ballotins, Doorkeepers, and Messengers; and having the
Ensigns of their Magistracys born before them, as the Sword before the
Strategus, the Mace before the Orator, a Mace with the Seal before the
Commissioners of the Chancery, the like with the Purse before the Commissioners
of the Treasury; and a Silver Wand, like those in use with the Universitys,
before each of the Censors, being Chancellors of the same. These with the
Knights, in all three hundred, assemble in the House or Hall of the Senate.

THE House or Hall of the Senate, being situated in the Pantheon or Palace of
Justice, is a Room consisting of a Square and a half. In the middle of the
lower end is the Door; at the upper end hangs a rich State overshadowing the
greater part of a large Throne, or half pace of two Stages; the first ascended
by two steps from the floor, and the second about the middle rising two steps
higher. Upon this stand two Chairs, in that on the right hand sits the
Strategus, in the other the Orator, adorned with Scarlet Robes, after the
fashion that was used by the Dukes in the Aristocracy. At the right end of the
upper Stage stand three Chairs, in which the three Commissioners of the Seal
are placed; and at the other end sit the three Commissioners of the Treasury,
every one in a Robe or Habit like that of the Earls. Of these Magistrates of
this upper Stage consists the Signory. At either end of the lower Stage stands
a little Table, to which the Secretarys of the Senate are set with their tusted
Sleeves in the habit of civil Lawyers. To the four steps, whereby the two Stages
of the Throne are ascended, answer four long Benches, which successively
deriving from every one of the steps, continue their respective height, and
extend themselves by the side Walls toward the lower end of the House, every
Bench being divided by numeral Characters into the thirty seven parts or
places. Upon the upper benches sit the Censors in the Robes of Barons; the
first in the middle of the right hand bench, and the second directly opposite to
him on the other side. Upon the rest of the Benches sit the Knights, who if
they be called to the Urns, distributing themselves by the Figures, com in
equal files, either by the first Seat, which consists of the two upper Benches
on either side; or by the second Seat, consisting of the two lower Benches on
either side: beginning also at the upper, or at the lower ends of the same,
according to the Lot whereby they are called; for which end the Benches are
open, and ascended at either end with easy stairs and large passages. The rest
of the Ballot is conformable to that of the Tribe; the Censors of the House
sitting at the side Urns, and the youngest Magistrate of the Signory at the
middle: the Urns being placed before the Throne, and prepared according to the
number of the Magistrates to be at that time chosen by the Rules already given
to the Censors of the Tribes. But before the Benches of the Knights on either
side stands one being shorter; and at the upper end of this sit the two Tribuns
of the Horse. At the upper end of the other, the two Tribuns of the Foot in
their Arms; the rest of the Benches being covered by the Judges of the Land in
their Robes. But these Magistrates have no Suffrage, nor the Tribuns, tho they
derive their presence in the Senate from the Romans; nor the Judges, tho they
derive theirs from the ancient Senate of Oceana. Every Monday this Assembly sits
of course; at other times, if there be occasion, any Magistrate of the House by
giving order for the Bell, or by his Lictor or Ensignbearer, calls a Senate. And
every Magistrate or Knight during his Session has the Title, Place, and Honor of
a Duke, Earl, Baron, or Knight, respectively. And every one that has born the
same Magistracy by his third Session, has his respective Place and Title during
the term of his Life, which is all the Honor conferred by this Commonwealth,
except upon the Master of the Ceremonys, the Master of the Horse, and the King
of the Heralds, who are Knights by their places. And thus you have the face of
the Senate, in which there is scarce any Feature that is not Roman or Venetian;
nor do the Horns of the Crescent extend themselves much unlike those of the
Sanhedrim, on either hand of the Prince, and of the Father of that Senate. But
upon Beauty, in which every Man has his phansy, we will not otherwise
philosophize than to remember that there is something more than decency in the
Robe of a Judge, that would not be well spared from the Bench; and that the
gravest Magistrate, to whom you can commit the Sword of Justice, will find a
quickness in the Spurs of Honor, which if they be not laid to Virtue, will lay
themselves to that which may rout a Commonwealth.

Constitution of the Senate.
TO com from the Face of the Senate, to the Constitution and Use of the Parts:
It is contained in the peculiar Orders. And the Orders which are peculiar to
the Senate, are either of Election or Instruction.

ELECTIONS in the Senate are of three sorts, Annual, Biennial, and Extraordinary.

ANNUAL Elections are performed by the Schedule called the Tropic: And the
Tropic consists of two parts; the one containing the Magistrates, and the other
the Councils to be yearly elected. The Schedule or Tropic of the Magistrates is
as follows in

15. Order. Tropic of the Magistrates.
THE fifteenth ORDER, requiring, That upon every Monday next ensuing the last
of March, the Knights of the Annual Galaxys taking their places in the Senate,
be called the third Region of the same; and that the House having dismissed the
first Region, and received the third, proceed to election of the Magistrates
contained in the first part of the Tropic, by the ensuing Schedule:

The Lord Strategus, Annual Magistrates. The Lord Orator, The first Censor, The
second Censor,

The third Commissioner of the Seal, Triennial Magistrates. The third
Commissioner of the Treasury,

THE Annual Magistrates (provided that no one Man bears above one of those
Honors during the term of one Session) may be elected out of any Region. But
the Triennial Magistrates may not be elected out of any other than the third
Region only, lest the term of their Session expire before that of their Honor;
and (it being unlawful for a Man to bear Magistracy any longer than he is
thereto qualified by the Election of the People) cause a Fraction in the
Rotation of this Commonwealth.

Of the Strategus.
THE Strategus is first President of the Senate, and General of the Army, if it
be commanded to march; in which case there shall be a second Strategus elected
to be first President of the Senate, and General of the second Army: and if this
also be commanded to march, a third Strategus shall be chosen; and so on, as
long as the Commonwealth sends forth Armies.

Of the Orator.
THE Lord Orator is the second and more peculiar President of the Senate, to
whom it appertains to keep the House to Orders.

Of the Censors.
THE Censors, whereof the first by consequence of his Election is Chancellor of
the University of Clio, and the second of that of Calliope, are Presidents of
the Council for Religion and Magistrates, to whom it belongs to keep the House
to the order of the Ballot. They are also Inquisitors into the ways and means
of acquiring Magistracy; and have power to punish indirect procedings in the
same, by removing a Knight or Magistrate out of the House, under appeal to the
Senate.

Of the Commissioners of the Seal.
THE Commissioners of the Seal being three, whereof the third is annually chosen
out of the third Region, are Judges in Chancery.

Of the Commissioners of the Treasury.
THE Commissioners of the Treasury being three, whereof the third is annually
chosen out of the third Region, are Judges in the Exchequer; and every
Magistrate of this Schedule has right to propose to the Senate.

Of the Signory.
BUT the Strategus with the six Commissioners, are the Signory of this
Commonwealth, having right of Session and Suffrage in every Council of the
Senate, and Power either jointly or severally to propose in all or any of them.

I HAVE little in this Order to observe or prove, but that the Strategus is the
same Honor both in name and thing that was born, among others, by PHILOPEMEN
and ARATUS in the Commonwealth of the Acheans; the like having bin in use also
with the Aetolians. The Orator, called otherwise the Speaker, is with small
alteration the same that had bin of former use in this Nation. These two, if
you will, may be compared to the Consuls in Rome, or the Suffetes in Carthage;
for their Magistracy is scarce different.

THE Censors derive their power of removing a Senator from those of Rome; the
Government of the Ballot, from those of Venice; and that of Animadversion upon
the Ambitus, or canvass for Magistracy, from both.

THE Signory, with the whole Right and Use of that Magistracy, to be hereafter
more fully explained, is almost purely Venetian.

THE second part of the Tropic is directed by

16. Order. Constitution of the Councils.
THE sixteenth ORDER, whereby the Constitution of the Councils, being four, that
is to say, the Council of State, the Council of War, the Council of Religion,
and the Council of Trade, is rendered conformable in Of the Council of State.
their Revolutions to that of the Senate. As, first, by the annual Election of
five Knights out of the third Region of the Senate, into the Council of State,
consisting of fifteen Knights, five in every Region. Secondly, Of the Council
of War.
By the annual Election of three Knights out of the third Region of the Council
of State, to be proposed by the Provosts, and elected by that Council, into the
Council of War, consisting of nine Knights, three in every Region, not excluded
by this Election from remaining Members also of the Council of State. The four
Tribuns of the People have right of Session Of the Council of Religion.
and Suffrage in the Council of War. Thirdly, By the annual Election of four
Knights out of the third Region of the Senate into the Council of Religion,
consisting of twelve Knights, four in every Region: Of this Council Of the
Council of Trade.
the Censors are Presidents. Fourthly, By the annual Election of four Knights
out of the third Region of the Senate into the Council of Trade, Of the Provosts.
consisting of twelve Knights, four in every Region. And each Region, in every
one of these Councils thus constituted, shall weekly and interchangeably elect
one Provost, whose Magistracy shall continue for one Week; nor shall he be
reelected into the same, till every Knight of that Region in the same Of the
Council of the Provosts.
Council has once born the same Magistracy. And the Provosts being one in every
Region, three in every Council, and twelve in all, besides their other
Capacitys, shall assemble and be a Council, or rather an Academy apart, to
certain ends and purposes to be hereafter further explained, with those of the
rest of the Councils.

THIS Order is of no other use than for the frame and turn of the Councils, and
yet of no small one: for in Motion consists Life; and the Motion of a
Commonwealth will never be current, unless it be circular. Men that, like my
Lord EPIMONUS, not enduring the resemblance of this kind of Government to Orbs
and Spheres, fall on physicing and purging it, do no more than is necessary;
for if it be not in Rotation both as to Persons and Things, it will be very
sick. The People of Rome, as to Persons, if they had not bin taken up by the
Wheel of Magistracy, had overturned the Chariot of the Senate. And those of
Lacedemon, as to Things, had not bin so quiet when the Senate trash'd their
Business, by incroaching upon the Result, if by the Institution of the Ephors
they had not brought it about again. So that if you allow not a Commonwealth
her Rotation, in which consists her Equality, you reduce her to a Party, and
then it is necessary that you be Physicians indeed, or rather Farriers; for you
will have strong Patients, and such as must be halter'd and cast, or your
selves may need Bonesetters. Wherefore the Councils of this Commonwealth, both
in regard of their Elections, and, as will be shown, of their Affairs, are
uniform with the Senate in their Revolutions; not as Whirlpits to swallow, but
to bite, and with the Scrues of their Rotation to hold and turn a Business
(like the Vice of a Smith) to the Hand of the Workman. Without Engines of which
nature it is not possible for the Senate, much less for the People, to be
perfect Artificers in a political Capacity. But I shall not hold you longer from

17. Order. Constitution of the biennial Election or Orb of Ambassadors in
ordinary.
THE seventeenth ORDER, directing biennial Elections, or the Constitution of
the Orb of Ambassadors in ordinary, consisting of four Residences, the
Revolution whereof is performed in eight years, and preserved through the Election
of one Ambassador in two years by the Ballot of the Senate to repair to the
Court of France, and reside there for the term of two years; and the term of
two years being expired, to remove from thence to the Court of Spain, there to
continue for the space of two years, and thence to remove to the State of
Venice; and after two years residence in that City, to conclude with his
residence at Constantinople for a like term of time, and so to return. A Knight
of the Senate, or a Deputy of the Prerogative, may not be elected Ambassador in
Ordinary, because a Knight or Deputy so chosen, must either lose his Session,
which would cause an unevenness in the motion of this Commonwealth, or
accumulat Magistracy, which agrees not with the equality of the same. Nor may
any Man be elected into this Capacity, that is above five and thirty years of
Age, lest the Commonwealth lose the charge of his Education, by being deprived
at his return of the Fruit of it, or else enjoy it not long through the defects of
Nature.

THIS Order is the Perspective of the Commonwealth, whereby she foresees Danger,
or the Traffic; whereby she receives every two years the return of a Statesman
enriched with eight years experience, from the prime Marts of Negotiation in
Europe And so much for the Elections in the Senate that are ordinary; such as
are extraordinary follow in

18. Order. Constitution of Election Extraordinary, or by the Scrutiny.
THE eighteenth ORDER, appointing all Elections upon emergent occasions, except
that of the Dictator, to be made by the Scrutiny, or that kind of Election,
whereby a Council coms to be a fifth Order of Electors. For Example, if there be
occasion of an Ambassador Extraordinary, the Provosts of the Council of State,
or any two of them shall propose to the same, till one Competitor be chosen by
that Council: and the Council having chosen a Competitor, shall bring his name
into the Senate, which in the usual way shall choose four more Competitors to the
same Magistracy; and put them, with the Competitor of the Council, to the
Ballot of the House, by which he of the five that is chosen is said to be
elected by the Scrutiny of the Council of State. A Vice Admiral, a Polemarch,
or Field Officer, shall be elected after the same manner, by the Scrutiny of
the Council of War. A Judge or Sergeant at Law, by the Scrutiny of the
Commissioners of the Seal. A Baron, or considerable Officer of the Exchequer,
by the Scrutiny of the Commissioners of the Treasury. Men in Magistracy, or out
of it, are equally capable of Election by the Scrutiny; but a Magistrate or
Officer elected by the Scrutiny to a military Employment, if he be neither a
Knight of the Senate, nor a Deputy of the Prerogative, ought to have his Office
confirmed by the Prerogative, because the Militia in a Commonwealth, where the
People are Soverain, is not lawful to be touched injussu Populi.

THE Romans were so curious, that tho their Consuls were elected in the
Centuriatis.
Centuriat Assemblys, they might not touch the Militia, except they were
confirmed in the Curiatis Comitiis.
Parochial Assemblys: for a Magistrate not receiving his Power from the People,
takes it from them; and to take away their Power, is to take away their
Liberty. As to the Election by the Scrutiny, it is easily perceived to be
Venetian, there being no such way to take in the Knowledge, which in all reason
must be best in every Council of such men as are most fit for their turns, and
yet to keep them from the biass of particular Affection or Interest under that
pretense: For the cause why the Great Council in Venice scarce ever elects any
other than the Name that is brought in by the Scrutiny, is very probable to be,
that they may.... This Election is the last of those appertaining to the Senate.
The Councils being chosen by the Orders already shown, it remains that we com
to those whereby they are instructed: and the Orders of Instruction to the
Councils are two, the first for the Matter whereupon they are to proceed; and
the second for the Manner of their proceeding. The Matter of the Councils is
distributed to them by

19. Order. Instructions for the Councils as to their Matter.
THE nineteenth ORDER, distributing to every Council such Businesses as are
properly to belong to their Cognizance, whereof some they shall receive and
determine; and others they shall receive, prepare, and introduce into the House:
As, first,

For the Council of State.
THE Council of State is to receive all Addresses, Intelligences, and Letters
of Negotiation; to give audience to Ambassadors sent to, and to draw up
Instructions for such as shall be sent by, this Commonwealth; to receive
Propositions from, and hold Intelligence with the Provincial Councils; to
consider upon all Laws to be enacted, amended, or repealed; and upon all Levys
of Men or Money, War or Peace, Leagues or Associations to be made by this
Commonwealth, so far forth as is conducible to the orderly preparation of the
same to be introduced by them into the Senate. Provided For the Council of War.
that all such Affairs, as otherwise appertaining to the Council of State are,
for the good of the Commonwealth, to be carried with greater secrecy, be
managed by the Council of War, with Power to receive and send forth Agents,
Spys, Emissarys, Intelligencers, Frigots; and to manage Affairs of that nature,
if it be necessary, without communication to the Senate, till such time as it
may be had without detriment to the Business. But they shall have no Power to
engage the Commonwealth in a War, without the consent of the Senate and the
People. It appertains also to this Council to take charge of the Fleet as
Admiral; and of all Storehouses, Armorys, Arsenals, and Magazins appertaining
to this Commonwealth. They shall keep a diligent Record of the military
Expeditions from time to time reported by him that was Strategus or General, or
one of the Polemarchs in that Action; or at least so far as the Experience of
such Commanders may tend to the improvement of the military Discipline, which
they shall digest and introduce into the Senate: and if the Senate shall thereupon
frame any Article, they shall see that it be observed in the Musters or
Education of the Youth. And whereas the Council of War is the Sentinel or Scout
of this Commonwealth, if any Person or Persons shall go about to introduce
Debate into any popular Assembly of the same, or otherwise to alter the present
Government, or strike at the root of it, they shall apprehend, or cause to be
apprehended, seized, imprisoned; and examine, arraign, acquit, or condemn, and
cause to be executed any such Person or Persons, by their proper Power and
Authority, and without appeal.

For the Council of Religion.
THE Council of Religion, as the Arbiter of this Commonwealth in cases of
Conscience more peculiarly appertaining to Religion, Christian Charity, and a
pious Life, shall have the care of the National Religion, and the protection of
the Liberty of Conscience, with the cognizance of all Causes relating to either
of them. And first as to the National Religion; They shall cause all Places or
Preferments of the best Revenue in either of the Vniversitys to be conferred
upon no other than such of the most learned and pious Men, as have dedicated
themselves to the study of Theology. They shall also take a special care that
by such Augmentations as be or shall hereafter be appointed by the Senate, every
Benefice in this Nation be improved at least to the value of one hundred pounds
a year. And to the end that there be no interest at all, whereby the Divines or
Teachers of the National Religion may be corrupted, or corrupt Religion, they
shall be capable of no other kind of Employment or Preferment in this
Commonwealth. And whereas a Directory for the Administration of the National
Religion is to be prepared by this Council, they shall in this and other
Debates of this nature proceed in manner following: A Question arising in
matter of Religion shall be put and stated by the Council in writing; which
Writing the Censors shall send by their Beadles (being Proctors chosen to
attend them) each to the University whereof he is Chancellor; and the
Vice Chancellor of the same receiving the Writing, shall call a Convocation of
all the Divines of that University, being above forty years of Age. And the
Vniversitys upon a point so proposed, shall have no manner of Intelligence or
Correspondence one with another, till their Debates be ended, and they have
made return of their Answers to the Council of Religion by two or three of
their own Members, that may clear their sense, if any doubt should arise, to
the Council; which don, they shall return, and the Council having received such
information, shall proceed according to their own Judgments, in the preparation
of the whole matter for the Senate: That so the Interest of the Learned being
removed, there may be a right application of Reason to Scripture, which is the
Foundation of the National Religion.

SECONDLY, This Council, as to the protection of the Liberty of Conscience,
shall suffer no coercive Power in the matter of Religion to be exercised in
this Nation: The Teachers of the National Religion being no other than such as
voluntarily undertake that calling; and their Auditors or Hearers, no other
than are also voluntary. Nor shall any gathered Congregation be molested or
interrupted in their way of Worship (being neither Jewish nor Idolatrous) but
vigilantly and vigorously protected and defended in the Enjoyment, Practice,
and Profession of the same. And if there be Officers or Auditors appointed by
any such Congregation for the introduction of Causes into the Council of
Religion, all such Causes so introduced shall be received, heard, and
determined by the same, with recourse had, if need be, to the Senate.

THIRDLY, Every Petition addressed to the Senate, except that of a Tribe, shall be
received, examined, and debated by this Council; and such only as they, upon
such examination and debate had, shall think fit, may be introduced into the
Senate.

For the Council of Trade.
THE Council of Trade being the Vena Porta of this Nation, shall hereafter
receive Instructions more at large. For the present, their Experience attaining
to a right understanding of those Trades and M^sterys that feed the Veins of
this Commonwealth, and a true distinction of them from those that suck or
exhaust the same, they shall acquaint the Senate with the Conveniences and
Inconveniences, to the end that Encouragement may be applied to the one, and
Remedy to the other.

For the Academy of the Provosts.
THE Academy of the Provosts, being the Affability of the Commonwealth, shall
assemble every day toward the Evening in a fair Room, having certain
withdrawing Rooms thereto belonging. And all sorts of Company that will repair
thither for Conversation or Discourse, so it be upon matters of Government,
News, or Intelligence, or to propose any thing to the Councils, shall be freely
and affably received in the outer Chamber, and heard in the way of civil
Conversation, which is to be managed without any other Aw or Ceremony than is
thereto usually appertaining; to the end that every Man may be free, and that
what is proposed by one, may be argued or discoursed by the rest, except the
matter be of secrecy; in which case the Provosts, or some of them, shall take
such as desire Audience into one of the withdrawing Rooms. And the Provosts are
to give their minds, that this Academy be so governed, adorned, and preserved,
as may be most attractive to Men of Parts and good Affections to the
Commonwealth, for the excellency of the Conversation.

FVRTHERMORE, If any Man, not being able or willing to com in person, has any
advice to give which he judges may be for the good of the Commonwealth, he may
write his mind to the Academy of the Provosts, in a Letter signed or not
signed; which Letter shall be left with the Doorkeeper of the Academy. Nor
shall any Person delivering such a Letter be seized, molested, or detained, tho
it should prove to be a Libel. But the Letters so delivered shall be presented
to the Provosts; and in case they be so many that they cannot well be perused
by the Provosts themselves, they shall distribute them as they please to be
read by the Gentlemen of the Academy, who finding any thing in them material,
will find matter of Discourse: Or if they happen upon a business that requires
privacy, return it with a Note upon it to a Provost. And the Provosts by the
Secretarys attending shall cause such Notes out of Discourses or Letters to be
taken as they please, to the end that they may propose, as occasion serves,
what any two of them shall think sit out of their Notes so taken to their
respective Councils: to the end that not only the Ear of the Commonwealth be
open to all, but that Men of such Education being in her ey, she may upon
emergent Elections or Occasions be always provided of her choice of sit Persons.

^or the Attendance of the Councils.
EVERY Council being adorned with a State for the Signory, shall be attended by
two Secretarys, two Doorkeepers, and two Messengers in ordinary, and have power
to command more upon Emergencys, as occasion requires. And the Academy shall be
attended with two Secretarys, two Messengers, and two Doorkeepers; this with
the other Councils being provided with their farther Conveniences at the charge
of the State.

For the Dic^at^r.
BUT whereas it is incident to Commonwealths, upon Emergencys requiring
extraordinary speed or secrecy, either through their natural delays or unnatural
have, to incur equal danger, while holding to the slow pace of their Orders,
they com not in time to defend themselves from some sudden blow; or breaking
them for the greater speed, they but have to their own destruction: If the
Senate shall at any time make Election of nine Knights extraordinary, to be
added to the Council of War, as a Juncta for the term of three Months, the
Council of War, with the Juncta so added, is for the term of the same Dictator
of Oceana, having power to levy Men and Money, to make War and Peace, as also to
enact Laws, which shall be good for the space of one year (if they be not
sooner repealed by the Senate and the People) and for no longer time, except
they be confirmed by the Senate and the People. And the whole Administration of
the Commonwealth for the term of the said three Months shall be in the
Dictator; provided, that the Dictator shall have no Power to do any thing that
tends not to his proper end and institution, but all to the preservation of the
Commonwealth as it is established, and for the sudden restitution of the same
to the natural Channel and common course of Government. And all Acts, Orders,
Decrees, or Laws of the Council of War with the Juncta, being thus created,
shall be signed,

DICTATOR OCEANAE.

THIS Order of Instructions to the Councils being (as in a matter of that
nature is requisite) very large, I have used my best skill to abbreviat it in
such manner as might show no more of it than is necessary to the understanding
of the whole; tho as to the parts, or further dutys of the Councils, I have
omitted many things of singular use in a Commonwealth. But it was discoursed at
the Council by the ARCHON in this manner.

My Lords, the Legislators;
YOUR Councils, except the Dictator only, are proper and native Springs and
Sources, you see, which (hanging a few sticks and straws, that, as less
considerable, would otherwise be more troublesome, upon the banks of their
peculiar Channels) derive the full stream of business into the Senate, so pure,
and so far from the possibility of being troubled or stained (as will
undeniably appear by the Course contained in the ensuing Order) with any kind
of private Interest or Partiality, that it shall never be possible for any
Assembly harkening to the advice or information of this or that worthy Member
(either instructed upon his Pillow, or while he was making himself ready, or by
the Petition or Ticket which he received at the door) to have half the Security
in his Faith, or advantage by his Wisdom; such a Senate or Council being, through
the incertainty of the Winds, like a wave of the Sea. Nor shall it otherwise
mend the matter by flowing up into dry ditches, or referring businesses to be
better examined by Committees, than to go further about with it to less
purpose; if it dos not eb back again with the more mud in it. For in a case
referred to an occasional Committee, of which any Member that is desirous may
get himself named, and to which no body will com, but either for the sake of
his Friend, or his own Interest; it fares little better as to the Information
of the Senate, than if it had bin referred to the Partys. Wherefore the Athenians
being distributed into four Tribes, out of which by equal numbers they annually
chose four hundred Men, called the Senate of the Bean (because the Ballot at
their Election was performed by the use of Beans) divided them by Fiftys into
eight parts. And every Fifty in their turn, for one eighth part of the year,
was a Council apart called the Prytans. The Prytans in their distinct Council
receiving all Comers, and giving ear to every Man that had any thing to propose
concerning the Commonwealth, had power to debate and prepare all the businesses
that were to be introduced into the Senate. The Achaeans had ten selected
Magistrates called the Demiurgs, constituting a Council apart called the
Synarchy, which with the Strategus prepared all the business that was
introduced into their Senate. But both the Senate of the Athenians, and that of
the Achaeans, would have wondered if a Man had told them, that they were to
receive all Comers and Discourses, to the end that they might refer them
afterward to the Prytans or the Synarchy; much less to an occasional
Committee, exposed to the catch that catch may of the Partys interested. And
yet Venice in this, as in most of her Orders, excels them all by the
Constitution of her Councils, that of the College, and the other of the Dieci,
or Council of Ten. The course of the College is exactly described in the
ensuing Order: And for that of the Dieci, it so little differs from what it has
bestowed upon our Dictator, that I need not make any particular description of
it. But to Dictatorian Power in general, and the use of it, because it must
needs be of difficult digestion to such as, puking still at ancient Prudence,
show themselves to be in the Nursery of Motherwit; it is no less than necessary
to say something. And, First, in a Commonwealth that is not wrought up, or
perfected, this Power will be of very frequent, if not continual use; wherefore
it is said more than once, upon defects of the Government, in the Book of
Judges, That in those days there was no King in Israel. Nor has the Translator,
tho for no King he should have said no Judge, abused you so much; seeing that
the Dictator (and such was the Judge of Israel) or the Dictatorian Power being
in a single Person, so little differs from Monarchy, which followed in that,
that from the same cause there has bin no other effect in any Commonwealth; as
in Rome was manifest by SYLLA and CAESAR, who to make themselves Absolute or
Soverain, had no more to do than to prolong their Magistracy; for Dictatoris
imperium quasi Numen. Live.
the Dictatorian Power was reputed Divine, and therefore irresistible.
Nevertheless, so it is, that without this Power, which is so dangerous, and
subject to introduce Monarchy, a Commonwealth cannot be safe from falling into
the like dissolution; unless you have an Expedient in this case of your own,
and bound up by your Providence from recoiling. Expedients in some cases you
must not only have, but be beholden for them to such whom you must trust at a
pinch, when you have not leisure to stand with them for Security; which will be
a thousand times more dangerous. And there can never be a Commonwealth
otherwise than by the Order in debate wrought up to that perfection; but this
necessity must sometimes happen in regard of her natural slowness and openness,
and the suddenness of Assaults that may be made upon her, as also the Secrecy
which in some cases may be of absolute necessity to her Affairs. Whence
MACCHIAVEL concludes it positively, That a Commonwealth unprovided of such a
Refuge, must fall to ruin: for her course is either broken by the blow in one
of those cases, or by her self, while it startles her out of her Orders. And
indeed a Commonwealth is like a Greyhound, which having once coasted, will
never after run fair, but grow slothful; and when it coms to make a common
practice of taking nearer ways than its Orders, it is dissolved: for the being
of a Commonwealth consists in its Orders. Wherefore at this lift you will be
exposed to danger, if you have not provided beforehand for the safety of your
Resort in the like cases: nor is it sufficient that your Resort be safe, unless
it be as secret and quick; for if it be slow or open, your former
Inconveniences are not remedied. Now for our imitation in this part, there is
nothing in experience like that of the Council of Ten in Venice; the benefit
whereof would be too long to be shown in the whole piece, and therefore I shall
take but a pattern out of JANOTTI. In the War, says he, which the Venetians had
with Florence in Casentin, the Florentins finding a necessity in their affairs
far from any other inclination in themselves to ask their Peace, sent
Ambassadors about it to Venice, where they were no sooner heard, than the
bargain was struck up by the Council of Ten: and every body admiring (seeing
this Commonwealth stood upon the higher ground) what should be the reason of
such have; the Council upon the return of the Ambassadors imparted Letters to
the Senate, whereby it appeared, that the Turc had newly lanch'd a formidable
Fleet against their State; which had it bin understood by the Florentins, it
was well enough known they would have made no Peace. Wherefore the service of
the Ten was highly applauded by the Senate, and celebrated by the Venetians.
Whereby may appear, not only in part what use there is of Dictatorian Power in
that Government, but that it is assumed at the discretion of that Council;
whereas in this of Oceana it is not otherwise entrusted than when the Senate, in
the Election of nine Knights extraordinary, gives at once the Commission, and
takes security in a balance, added to the Council of War, tho securer before by
the Tribuns of the People than that of Venice, which yet never incurred
Jealousy: For if the younger Nobility have bin often girding at it, that
happened not so much through the apprehension of danger in it to the Commonwealth,
as through the aw of it upon themselves. Wherefore the Graver have doubtlesly shown
their Prudence in the Law; whereby, the Magistracy of these Counsillors being to
last till their Successors be created, the Council is established.

THE Instructions of the Councils for their matter being shown, it remains that
I show the Instructions for the manner of their proceeding, as they follow in

20. Order. Instructions for the Councils as to their manner of Proceeding.
THE twentieth ORDER, containing the Method of Debates to be observed by the
Magistrates and the Councils successively, in order to a Decree of the Senate.

THE Magistrates of the Signory, as Counsillors of this Commonwealth, shall take
into their consideration all matters of State, or of Government; and, having
right to propose in any Council, may any one or more of them propose what
business he or they please in that Council to which it most properly belongs.
And, that the Councils may be held to their duty, the said Magistrates are
superintendents and inspectors of the same, with right to propose to the Senate.

THE Censors have equal Power with these Magistrates, but in relation to the
Council of Religion only.

ANY two of the three Provosts in every Council may propose to, and are the
more peculiar Proposers of, the same Council; to the end that there be not only
an inspection and superintendency of business in general, but that every work
be also committed to a peculiar hand.

ANY one or more of the Magistrates, or any two of the Provosts respectively
having proposed, the Council shall debate the business so proposed, to which
they of the third Region that are willing shall speak first in their order;
they of the second, next; and they of the first, last: and the opinions of
those that proposed or spoke, as they shall be thought the most considerable by
the Council, shall be taken by the Secretary of the same in writing, and each
of them signed with the name of the Author.

THE Opinions being thus prepared, any Magistrate of the Signory, the Censor, or
any two of the Provosts of that Council, upon this occasion may assemble the
Senate.

THE Senate being assembled, the Opinions (for example, if they be four) shall
be read in their Order, that is, according to the Order or Dignity of the
Magistrates or Counsillors by which they were signed. And being read, if any of
the Council introducing them will speak, they, as best acquainted with the
business, shall have precedence; and after them the Senators shall speak
according to their Regions, beginning by the third first, and so continuing
till every man that will has spoken: and when the Opinions have bin
sufficiently debated, they shall be put all together to the Ballot after this
manner.

FOUR Secretarys carrying each of them one of the Opinions in one hand, with a
white Box in the other, and ^ach following the other, according to the order of
the Opinions, shall present his Box, naming the Author of his Opinion to every
Senator; and one Secretary or Ballotin with a green Box shall follow the four
white ones; and one Secretary or Ballotin with a red Box shall follow the green
one: and every Senator shall put one Ball into some one of these six boxes. The
Suffrage being gathered and opened before the Signory, if the red Box or
Nonsincere had above half the Suffrages, the Opinions shall he all cast out,
for the major part of the House is not clear in the business. If no one of the
four Opinions had above half the Suffrages in the Affirmative, that which had
fewest shall be cast out, and the other three shall be balloted again. If no
one of the three had above half, that which had fewest shall be cast out, and
the other two shall ballot again. If neither of the two had above half, that
which had fewest shall be cast out, and the remaining Opinion shall be balloted
again. And if the remaining Opinion has not above half, it shall also be cast
out. But the first of the Opinions that arrives at most above half in the
Affirmative, is the Decree of the Senate. The Opinions being all of them cast
out by the Nonsincere, may be reviewed, if occasion permits, by the Council,
and brought in again. If they be cast out by the Negative, the case being of
advice only, the House approves not, and there is an end of it: the case being
necessary, and admitting delay, the Council is to think again upon the
business, and to bring in new Opinions; but the Case being necessary, and not
admitting delay, the Senate immediately electing the Juncta, shall create the
Dictator. Et videat Dictator ne quid Respub. detrimenti capiat.
And let the Dictator, as the Roman saying is, take care that the Commonwealth
receives no harm.

THIS in case the Debate concludes not in a Decree. But if a Decree be past, it
is either in matter of State or Government according to Law enacted already,
and then it is good without going any further: or it is in matter of Law to be
enacted, repealed, or amended; and then the Decree of the Senate, especially if
it be for a War, or for a Levy of Men or Money, is invalid, without the result
of the Commonwealth, which is in the Prerogative Tribe, or Representative of
the People.

THE Senate having prepared a Decree to be proposed to the People, shall appoint
their Proposers; and no other may propose for the Senate to the People but the
Magistrates of the House: that is to say, the three Commissioners of the Seal,
or any two of them; the three of the Treasury, or any two of them; or the two
Censors.

THE Senate having appointed their Proposers, shall require of the Tribuns a
muster of the People at a set time and place: and the Tribuns or any two of
them having mustered the People accordingly, the Proposers shall propose the
Sense or Decree of the Senate by clauses to the People. And that which is
proposed by the Authority of the Senate, and resolved by the Command of the
People, is the Law of Oceana.

TO this Order, implicitly containing the sum very near of the whole Civil part
of the Commonwealth, my Lord ARCHON spoke thus in Council.

My Dear Lords;
THERE is a Saying, That a man must cut his Coat according to his Cloth. When I
consider what God has allowed or furnished to our present work, I am amazed.
You would have a popular Government, he has weighed it to you in the present
balance, as I may say, to a dram; you have no more to do, but to fix it. For
the Superstructures of such a Government, they require a good Aristocracy: and
you have, or have had a Nobility or Gentry the best studied, and the best
Writers, at least next that of Italy, in the whole World; nor have they bin
inferior, when so exercised, in the leading of Armies. But the People are the
main body of a Commonwealth; show me from the Treasurys of the Snow (as it is
in JOB) to the burning Zone, a People whose shoulders so universally and so
exactly fit the Corslet. Nevertheless it were convenient to be well provided
with Auxiliarys. There is Marpesia through her fruitfulness inexhaustible of men,
and men through her barrenness not only inured to hardship, but in your Arms. It
may be said, that Venice, excepting only that she takes not in the People, is
the most incomparable Situation of a Commonwealth. You are Venice taking in
your People and your Auxiliarys too. My Lords, the Children of Israel were
makers of Brick, before they were builders of a Commonwealth: But our brick is
made, our Mortar tempered, the Cedars of Lebanon are hewed and squared to our
hands. Has this bin the work of man? or is it in man to withstand this work?
Shall he that contends with the Almighty, instruct him? He that reproves God,
let him answer it. For our parts, every thing is so laid, that when we com to
have use of it, it is the next at hand; and unless we can conceive that God and
Nature do any thing in vain, there is no more for us to do but to dispatch. The
Piece, which we have reached to us in the foregoing Orders, is the Aristocracy.
Athens, as has bin shown, was plainly lost through the want of a good Aristocracy.
But the sufficiency of an Aristocracy gos demonstrably upon the hand of the
Nobility or Gentry: for that the Politics can be mastered without study, or
that the People can have leisure to study, is a vain imagination; and what kind
of Aristocracy Divines and Lawyers would make, let their incurable running upon
their own narrow biass, and their perpetual invectives against MACCHIAVEL (tho
in some places justly reprovable, yet the only Politician, and incomparable
Patron of the People) serve for instruction. I will stand no more to the
Judgment of Lawyers and Divines in this work, than to that of so many other
Tradesmen; but if this Model chances to wander abroad, I recommend it to the
Roman Speculativi (the most complete Gentlemen of this age) for their censure:
or, with my Lord EPIMONUS his leave, send three or four hundred Copys to your
Agent at Venice, to be presented to the Magistrates there; and when they have
considered them, to be proposed to the debate of the Senate, the most competent
Judges under Heaven, who, tho they have great Affairs, will not refuse to
return you the Oracle of their Ballot. The Counsillors of Princes I will not
trust; they are but Journymen. The Wisdom of these later times in Princes
Affairs (says VERULAMIUS) is rather fine deliverys and shiftings of dangers
when they be near, than solid and grounded courses to keep them off. Their
Counsillors do not derive their procedings from any sound root of Government
that may contain the demonstration, and assure the success of them, but are
expedient-mongers, givers of themselves to help a lame dog over a style; else
how coms it to pass, that the fame of Cardinal RICHLIEU has bin like Thunder,
whereof we hear the noise, but can make no demonstration of the reason? But to
return, if neither the People, nor Divines, and Lawyers, can be the Aristocracy
of a Nation, there remains only the Nobility; in which style, to avoid farther
repetition, I shall understand the Gentry also, as the French do by the word
Noblesse.

NOW to treat of the Nobility in such sort as may be less obnoxious to mistake,
it will be convenient, and answerable to the present occasion, that I divide my
Discourse into four parts.

THE First treating of Nobility, and the kinds of it.

THE Second, of their capacity of the Senate.

THE Third, of the diverse kinds of Senats.

THE Fourth, of the Senate, according to the foregoing Orders.

NOBILITY may be defined diverse ways; for it is either ancient Riches, or
ancient Virtue, or a Title conferred by a Prince or a Commonwealth.

NOBILITY of the first kind may be subdivided into two others, such as hold an
overbalance in Dominion or Property to the whole People, or such as hold not an
overbalance. In the former case, a Nobility (such was the Gothic, of which
sufficient has bin spoken) is incompatible with popular Government; for to
popular Government it is essential that Power should be in the People, but the
overbalance of a Nobility in Dominion draws the Power to themselves. Wherefore
in this sense it is that MACCHIAVEL is to be understood, where he says, Questi
tali sono pernitiosi in ogni Republica, and in ogni Provincia.
That these are pernicious in a Commonwealth; and of France, Spain, and Italy,
that they are Nations Lequali tutte insieme sono la corruttela del mondo.
which for this cause are the corruption of the World: for otherwise Nobility
may according to his definition (which is, That they are such as live upon
their own Revenues in plenty, without engagement either to the tilling of their
Lands, or other work for their livelihood) hold an underbalance to the People;
in which case they are not only safe, but necessary to the natural mixture of a
well-ordered Commonwealth. For how else can you have a Commonwealth that is not
altogether mechanic? or what comparison is there of such Commonwealths as are,
or com nearest to mechanic, for example, Athens, Switzerland, Holland, to
Lacedemon, Rome, and Venice, plumed with their Aristocracys? Your Mechanics,
till they have first feathered their nests, like the Fowls of the Air, whose
whole employment is to seek their food, are so busied in their private
concernments, that they have neither leisure to study the public, nor are
safely to be trusted with it, Egestas haud sacile habetur sine damno.
because a Man is not faithfully embarked in this kind of ship, if he has no
share in the freight. But if his share be such as gives him leisure by his
private advantage to reflect upon that of the public, what other name is there
for this sort of Men, being a leur aise, but (as MACCHIAVEL you see calls them)
NOBILITY? especially when their Familys com to be such as are noted for their
Services don to the Commonwealth, and so take into their ancient Riches ancient
Virtue, which is the second definition of Nobility, but such a one as is scarce
possible in nature without the former. For as the Baggage, says VERULAMIUS, is
to an Army, so are Riches to Virtue; they cannot be spared nor left behind, tho
they be impediments, such as not only hinder the march, but sometimes through the
care of them lose or disturb the Victory. Of this latter sort is the Nobility
of Oceana; the best of all others, because they, having no stamp whence to
derive their price, can have it no otherwise than by their intrinsic value. The
third definition of Nobility, is a Title, Honor, or distinction from the
People, conferred or allowed by the Prince or the Commonwealth. And this may be
two ways, either without any stamp or privilege, as in Oceana; or with such
privileges as are inconsiderable, as in Athens after the battle of Plateae,
whence the Nobility had no right, as such, but to religious Offices, or
inspection of the public Games, to which they were also to be elected by the
People: or with Privileges, and those considerable ones, as the Nobility in
Athens before the battle of Plateae, and the Patricians in Rome, each of which
had right, or claimed it, to the Senate and all the Magistracys; wherein for some
time they only by their stamp were current.

BUT to begin higher, and to speak more at large of Nobility in their several
capacitys of the Senate. The Phylarchs or Princes of the Tribes of Israel were
the most renowned, or, as the Latin, the Numb. 1. 16.
most noble of the Congregation, whereof by hereditary right they had the leading
and judging. The Patriarchs, or Princes of Familys, Ver. 18.
according as they declared their Pedigrees, had the like right as to their
Familys; but neither in these nor the former, was there any hereditary right to
the Sanhedrim: tho there be little question but the wise men, and
understanding, and known among their Tribes, which the People, Deuteronomy. 1. 13.
took or elected into those or other Magistracys, and whom MOSES made Rulers
over them, must have bin of these; seeing they could not choose but be the most
known among the Tribes, and were likeliest by the advantages of Education to be
the most wise and understanding.

SOLON having found the Athenians neither locally nor genealogically, but by
their different ways of Life, divided into four Tribes, that is, into the
Soldiery, the Tradesmen, the Husbandmen, and the Goatherds, instituted a new
distribution of them, according to the cense or valuation of their Estates,
into four Classes: the first, second, and third, consisting of such as were
Proprietors in Land, distinguished by the rate of their Freeholds, with that
stamp upon them, which making them capable of adding Honor to their Riches,
that is to say, of the Senate and all the Magistracys, excluded the fourth,
being the Body of the People, and far greater in number than the former three,
from all other right, as to those Capacitys, except the election of these, who
by this means became a hereditary Aristocracy or Senatorian Order of Nobility.
This was that course which came afterward to be the destruction of Rome, and
had now ruined Athens. The Nobility, according to the inevitable Nature of such
a one, having laid the Plot how to divest the People of the Result, and so to
draw the whole Power of the Commonwealth to themselves; which in all likelihood
they had don, if the People, coming by mere chance to be victorious in the
Battle of Plateae, and famous for defending Greece against the Persians, had
not returned with such Courage as irresistibly broke the Classes, to which of
old they had born a white Tooth, brought the Nobility to equal Terms, and the
Senate with the Magistracys to be common to both; the Magistracys by Suffrage,
and the Senate (which was the mischief of it, as I shall show anon in that
Constitution) by Lot only.

THE Lacedaemonians were in the manner, and for the same cause with the
Venetians at this day, no other than a Nobility, even according to the
definition given of Nobility by MACCHIAVEL; for they neither exercised any
Trade, nor labored their Lands or Lots, which was don by their Helots: wherefore
some Nobility may be far from pernicious in a Commonwealth by MACCHIAVEL'S own
Testimony, who is an admirer of this, tho the Servants thereof were more in
number than the Citizens. To these Servants I hold the answer of LYCURGUS, when
he bad him who asked why he did not admit the People to the Government of his
Commonwealth, to go home and admit his Servants to the Government of his
Family, to relate: for neither were the Lacedaemonians Servants, nor farther
capable of the Government, unless, whereas the Congregation had the Result, he
should have given them the Debate also; every one of these that attained to
sixty years of Age, and the major Vote of the Congregation, being equally
capable of the Senate.

THE Nobility of Rome, and their capacity of the Senate, I have already
described by that of Athens before the battle of Plateae; saving only that the
Athenian was never eligible into the Senate without the suffrage of the People,
till the introduction of the Lot, but the Roman Nobility ever: for the
Patricians were elected into the Senate by the Kings, by the Consuls, or the
Censors; or if a Plebeian happened to be conscrib'd, he and his Posterity
became Patricians. Nor, tho the People had many disputes with the Nobility, did
this ever com in controversy, which, if there had bin nothing else, might in my
judgment have bin enough to overturn that Commonwealth.

THE Venetian Nobility, but that they are richer, and not military, resemble at
all other points the Lacedemonian, as I have already shown. These MACCHIAVEL
excepts from his rule, by saying, that their Estates are rather personal than
real, or of any great revenue in Land; which coms to our account, and shows,
that a Nobility or party of the Nobility, not overbalancing in Dominion, is not
dangerous, but of necessary use in every Commonwealth, provided it be rightly
ordered: for if it be so ordered as was that of Rome, tho they do not
overbalance in the beginning, as they did not there, it will not be long ere
they do, as is clear both in reason and experience toward the latter end. That
the Nobility only be capable of the Senate, is there only not dangerous, where
there be no other Citizens, as in this Government and that of Lacedemon.

THE Nobility of Holland and Switzerland, tho but few, have Privileges not only
distinct from the People, but so great, that in some Soveraintys they have a
negative voice; an example which I am far from commending, being such as (if
those Governments were not cantoniz'd, divided, and subdivided into many petty
Soveraintys that balance one another, and in which the Nobility, except they
had a Prince at the head of them, can never join to make work) would be the
most dangerous that ever was but the Gothic, of which it favors. For in ancient
Commonwealths you shall never find a Nobility to have had a negative but by the
Poll, which, the People being far more in number, came to nothing; whereas these
have it, be they never so few, by their stamp or order.

OURS of Oceana have nothing else but their education and their leisure for the
public, furnished by their Ease and competent Riches; and their intrinsic
value, which, according as it coms to hold weight in the judgment or suffrage
of the People, is their only way to honor and preferment. Wherefore I would have
your Lordships to look upon your Children as such, who if they com to shake off
some part of their baggage, shall make the more quick and glorious march: for it
was nothing else but the baggage sordidly plundered by the Nobility of Rome,
that lost the victory of the whole World in the midst of her Triumph.

HAVING followed the Nobility thus close, they bring us, according to their
natural course and diverse kinds, to the diverse Constitutions of the Senate.

THAT of Israel (as was showed by my Right Noble Lord PHOSPHORUS DE AUGE, in
the opening of the Commonwealth) consisted of seventy Elders, elected at first
by the People. But whereas they were for life, they ever after (tho without any
divine precept for it) substituted their Successors by Ordination, which
Ceremony was most usually performed by imposition of hands; and by this means a
Commonwealth of as popular institution as can be found, became, as it is
accounted by JOSEPHUS, Aristocratical. From this Ordination derives that which
was introduced by the Apostles into the Christian Church; for which cause I
think it is, that the Presbyterians would have the Government of the Church to
be Aristocratical: Tho the Apostles, to the end, as I conceive, that they might
give no occasion to such a mistake, but show that they intended the Government
of the Church to be popular, ordained Elders, as has bin shown, by the holding
up of hands (or free Suffrage of the People) in every Congregation, or
Ecclesia: for that is the word in the Original, being borrowed from the civil
Congregations of the People in Athens and Lacedemon, which were so called; and
the word for holding up of hands in the Text, is also the very same, which
signified the Suffrage of the People in Athens, (...); for the Suffrage of the
Athenians was given per Chirotonian, says EMMIUS.

THE Council of the Bean (as was shown by my Lord NAVARCHUS DE PARALO in his
full Discourse) being the proposing Senate of Athens (for that of the Areopagits
was a Judicatory) consisted of four, some say five hundred Senators, elected
annually, all at once, and by a mere lot without suffrage. Wherefore tho the
Senate, to correct the temerity of the Lot, had power to cast out such as they
should judge unworthy of that honor; this related to manners only, and was not
sufficient to repair the Commonwealth, which by such means became impotent: and
forasmuch as her Senate consisted not of the natural Aristocracy, which in a
Commonwealth is the only spur and rein of the People, it was cast headlong by
the rashness of her Demagogs or Grandees into ruin; while her Senate, like the
Roman Tribuns ( Qui fere semper regebantur a multitudine magis quam regebant.
who almost always, instead of governing, were rather governed by the
multitude) proposed not to the Result only, but to the Debate also of the
People, who were therefore called to the Pulpits, where some vomited, and others
drank poison.

THE Senate of Lacedemon, most truly discovered by my Lord LACO DE SCYTALE,
consisted but of 30 for life, whereof the two Kings having but single Votes,
were hereditary, the rest elected by the free Suffrage of the People, but out
of such as were sixty years of age. These had the whole debate of the
Commonwealth in themselves, and proposed to the Result only of the People. And
now the riddle which I have heretofore found troublesome to unfold, is out; that
is to say, why Athens and Lacedemon, consisting each of the Senate and the
People, the one should be held a Democracy, and the other an Aristocracy, or
laudable Oligarchy, as it is termed by ISOCRATES; for that word is not,
wherever you meet it, to be branded, seeing it is used also by ARISTOTLE,
PLUTARCH, and others, sometimes in a good sense. The main difference was, that
the People in this had the Result only, and in that the Debate and Result too.
But for my part, where the People have the election of the Senate, not bound to
a distinct order, and the Result, which is the Soverain Power, I hold them to
have that share in the Government (the Senate being not for life) whereof, with
the safety of the Commonwealth, they are capable in nature; and such a
Government, for that cause, to be Democracy: tho I do not deny, but in
Lacedemon, the paucity of the Senators considered, it might be called
Oligarchy, in comparison of Athens; or, if we look on their continuance for
life, tho they had bin more, Aristocracy.

THE Senate of Rome (whose Fame has bin heard to thunder in the Eloquence of my
Lord DOLABELLA D' ENYO) consisting of 300, was, in regard of the number, less
Oligarchical than that of Lacedemon; but more in regard of the Patrician, who,
having a hereditary Capacity of the same, were not elected to that Honor by the
People; but, being conscrib'd by the Censors, enjoyed it for life. Wherefore
these, if they had their wills, would have resolved as well as debated; which
set the People at such variance with them, as dissolved the Commonwealth:
whereas if the People had enjoyed the Result, that about the Agrarian, as well
as all other strife, must of necessity have ceased.

THE Senats of Switzerland and Holland (as I have learnt of my Lords ALPESTER
and GLAUCUS) being bound up (like the sheaf of Arrows which the latter gives)
by Leagues, ly like those in their Quivers: But Arrows, when they com to be
drawn, fly some this way, and some that; and I am contented that these concern us
not.

THAT of Venice (by the faithful Testimony of my most excellent Lord LINCEUS DE
STELLA) has obliged a World, sufficiently punished by its own blindness and
ingratitude, to repent and be wiser: for whereas a Commonwealth in which there
is no Senate, or where the Senate is corrupt, cannot stand; the Great Council of
Venice, like the Statue of Nilus, leans upon an Urn or Waterpot, which pours
forth the Senate in so pure and perpetual a stream, as being enable to stagnat,
is for ever incapable of Corruption. The fuller Description of this Senate is
contained in that of Oceana; and that of Oceana in the foregoing Orders. To
every one of which, because something has bin already said, I shall not speak in
particular. But in general, your Senate, and the other Assembly, or the
Prerogative, as I shall show in due place, are perpetual, not as Lakes or
Puddles, but as the Rivers of Eden; and are beds made, as you have seen, to
receive the whole People, by a due and faithful vicissitude, into their
current. They are not, as in the late way, alternat. Alternat Life in
Government is the alternat Ut fratrem pollux alterna morte redemit.
Death of it.

THIS was the Gothic work, whereby the former Government (which was not only a
ship, but a gust too) could never open her sails, but in danger to overset her
self; neither could make any voyage, nor ly safe in her own harbor. The Wars of
later ages, says VERULAMIUS, seem to be made in the dark, in respect of the
glory and honor which reflected on men from the Wars in ancient times. Their
shipping of this sort was for Voyages, ours dare not lanch; nor lys it safe at
home. Your Gothic Politicians seem to me rather to have invented some new
Ammunition or Gunpowder, in their King and Parliament, than Government. For what
is become of the Princes (a kind of People) in Germany? blown up. Where are the
Estates, or the Power of the People in France? blown up. Where is that of the
People in Arragon, and the rest of the Spanish Kingdoms? blown up. On the other
side, where is the King of Spain's Power in Holland? blown up. Where is that of
the Austrian Princes in Switzerland? blown up. This perpetual peevishness and
jealousy, under the alternat Empire of the Prince, and of the People, is
obnoxious to every Spark. Nor shall any man show a reason that will be holding
in prudence, why the People of Oceana have blown up their King, but that their
Kings did not first blow up them. The rest is discourse for Ladys. Wherefore
your Parlaments are not henceforth to com out of the Bag of AEOLUS, but by your
Galaxys, to be the perpetual food of the Fire of VESTA.

YOUR Galaxys, which divide the House into so many Regions, are three; one of
which constituting the third Region is annually chosen, but for the term of
three years; which causes the House (having at once Blossoms, Fruit half ripe,
and others dropping off in full maturity) to resemble an Orange-tree, such as
is at the same time an Education or Spring, and a Harvest too: for the People
have made a very ill choice in the Man, who is not easily capable of the
perfect knowledge in one year of the Senatorian Orders; which Knowledge, allowing
him for the first to have bin a Novice, brings him the second year to practice,
and time enough. For at this rate you must always have two hundred knowing Men
in the Government. And thus the Vicissitude of your Senators is not perceivable
in the steadiness and perpetuity of your Senate; which, like that of Venice,
being always changing, is for ever the same. And tho other Politicians have not
so well imitated their Pattern, there is nothing more obvious in Nature, seeing
a Man who wears the same Flesh but a short time, is nevertheless the same Man,
and of the same genius; and whence is this but from the constancy of Nature, in
holding a Man to her Orders? Wherefore keep also to your Orders. But this is a
mean Request, your Orders will be worth little, if they do not hold you to
them; wherefore imbark. They are like a Ship, if you be once aboard, you do not
carry them, but they you; and see how Venice stands to her tackling: you will
no more forsake them, than you will leap into the Sea.

BUT they are very many, and difficult. O, my Lords, what Seaman casts away his
Card, because it has four and twenty Points of the Compass? and yet those are
very near as many, and as difficult as the Orders in the whole circumference of
your Commonwealth. Consider, how have we bin tossed with every wind of Doctrine,
lost by the glib Tongues of your Demagogs and Grandees in our own Havens? A
company of Fiddlers that have disturbed your rest for your Groat; two to one,
three thousand pounds a year to another, has bin nothing. And for what? Is
there one of them that yet knows what a Commonwealth is? And are you yet afraid
of such a Government in which these shall not dare to scrape, for fear of the
Statute? THEMISTOCLES could not fiddle, but could make of a small City a great
Commonwealth: these have fiddel'd, and for your Money, till they have brought a
great Commonwealth to a small City.

IT grieves me, while I consider how, and from what causes imaginary
Difficultys will be aggravated, that the foregoing Orders are not capable of
any greater clearness in discourse or writing: But if a Man should make a Book,
describing every trick or passage, it would fare no otherwise with a game at
Cards; and this is no more, if a Man plays upon the square. There is a great
difference, says VERULAMIUS, between a cunning Man and a wise Man (between a
Demagog and a Legislator) not only in point of honesty, but in point of
ability: As there be that can pack the Cards, and yet cannot play well; so
there be some that are good in Canvasses and Factions, that are otherwise weak
men. Allow me but these Orders, and let them com with their Cards in their
sleeves, or pack if they can. Again, says he, it is one thing to understand
Persons, and another to understand Matters; for many are perfect in men's
humors, that are not greatly capable of the real part of Business: which is the
constitution of one that has studied Men more than Books. But there is nothing
more hartful in a State, than that cunning men should pass for wise. His words
are an Oracle. As DIONYSIUS, when he could no longer exercise his Tyranny among
men, turned Schoolmaster, that he might exercise it among Boys. Allow me but
these Orders, and your Grandees so well skilled in the Baits and Palats of Men,
shall turn Ratcatchers.

AND whereas Councils (as is discretely observed by the same Author in his time)
are at this day, in most places, but familiar meetings (somewhat like the
Academy of our Provosts) where matters are rather talked on than debated, and
run too swift to order an Act of Council; give me my Orders, and see if I have
not puzzel'd your Demagogs.

IT is not so much my desire to return upon hants, as theirs that will not be
satisfied; wherefore if, notwithstanding what was said of dividing and choosing
in our preliminary Discourses, men will yet be returning to the Question, Why
the Senate must be a Council apart (tho even in Athens, where it was of no other
Constitution than the popular Assembly, the distinction of it from the other
was never held less than necessary) this may be added to the former Reasons,
that if the Aristocracy be not for the Debate, it is for nothing; but if it be
for debate, it must have convenience for it: And what convenience is there for
debate in a crowd, where there is nothing but jostling, treading upon one
another, and stirring of Blood, than which in this case there is nothing more
dangerous? Truly, it was not ill said of my Lord EPIMONUS, That Venice plays
her game, as it were, at Billiards or Nineholes; and so may your Lordships,
unless your Ribs be so strong, that you think better of Footbal: for such sport
is Debate in a popular Assembly, as, notwithstanding the distinction of the
Senate, was the destruction of Athens.

THIS Speech concluded the Debate which happened at the Institution of the
Senate. The next Assembly is that of the People or Prerogative Tribe.

The Face of the Prerogative Tribe.
THE face, or mein of the Prerogative Tribe for the Arms, the Horses, and the
Discipline, but more especially for the select men, is that of a very noble
Regiment, or rather of two; the one of Horse, divided into three Troops
(besides that of the Provinces, which will be shown hereafter) with their
Captains, Cornets, and two Tribuns of the Horse at the head of them; the other
of Foot in three Companys (besides that of the Provinces) with their Captains,
Ensigns, and two Tribuns of the Foot at the head of them. The first Troop is
called the Phoenix; the second the Pelican; and the third the Swallow. The
first Company the Cypress; the second the Myrtle; and the third the Spray. Of
these again (not without a near resemblance of the Roman division of a Tribe)
the Phoenix and the Cypress constitute the first Class; the Pelican and the
Myrtle the second; and the Swallow with the Spray the third, renewed every
Spring by

21. Order. The Change or Election of the Triennial Officers of the Prerogative.
THE one and twentieth ORDER, directing, that upon every Monday next ensuing
the last of March, the Deputys of the annual Galaxy arriving at the Pavilion in
the Halo, and electing one Captain and one Cornet of the Swallow (triennial
Officers) by and out of the Cavalry at the Horse Vrn, according to the Rules
contained in the Ballot of the Hundred; and one Captain with one Ensign of the
Spray (triennial Officers) by and out of the Infantry at the Foot Vrn, after
the same way of ballotting; constitute and become the third Classes of the
Prerogative Tribe.

SEVEN Deputys are annually returned by every Tribe, whereof three are Horse,
and four are Foot; and there be fifty Tribes: so the Swallow must consist of
150 Horse, the Spray of 200 Foot. And the rest of the Classes being two, each
of them in number equal; the whole Prerogative (besides the Provinces, that is,
the Knights and Deputys of Marpesia and Panopea) must consist of 1050 Deputys.
And these Troops and Companys may as well be called Centurys as those of the
Romans; for the Romans related not, in so naming theirs, to the number. And
whereas they were distributed according to the valuation of their Estates, so
are these; which by virtue of the last Order, are now accommodated with their
triennial Officers. But there be others appertaining to this Tribe, whose
Election, being of far greater importance, is annual, as follows in

22. Order. The Change or Election of the Annual Magistrates of the Prerogative.
THE twenty second ORDER; whereby the first Class having elected their
triennial Officers, and made Oath to the Old Tribuns, that they will neither
introduce, cause, nor to their power suffer Debate to be introduced into any
popular Assembly of this Government, but to their utmost be aiding and
assisting to seize and deliver any Person or Persons in that way offending, and
striking at the Root of this Commonwealth, to the Council of War; are to
proceed with the other two Classes of the Prerogative Tribe to election of the
new Tribuns, being four annual Magistrates, whereof two are to be elected out of
the Cavalry at the Horse Vrn, and two out of the Infantry at the Foot Vrn,
according to the common Ballot of the Tribes. And they may be promiscuously
chosen out of any Classis, provided that the same Person shall not be capable
of bearing the Tribunitian Honor twice in the term of one Galaxy. The Tribuns
thus chosen shall receive the Tribe (in reference to the Power of mustering and
disciplining the same) as Commanders in chief; and for the rest as Magistrates,
whose proper Function is prescribed by the next Order. The Tribuns may give
leave to any number of the Prerogative, not exceeding one hundred at a time, to
be absent, so they be not Magistrates, nor Officers, and return within three
months. If a Magistrate or Officer has a necessary occasion, he may also be
absent for the space of one month; provided, that there be not above three
Corners or Ensigns, two Captains, or one Tribun so absent at one time.

TO this the ARCHON spoke at the Institution after this manner.

My Lords;
IT is affirmed by CICERO in his Oration for FLACCUS, that the Commonwealths of
Greece were all shaken or ruined by the intemperance of their Comitia, or
Assemblys of the People. The truth is, if good heed in this point be not taken,
a Commonwealth will have bad legs. But all the world knows he should have
excepted Lacedemon, where the People, as has bin shown by the Oracle, had no
power at all of Debate, nor (till after LYSANDER, whose Avarice opened a gulf,
that was not long ere it swallowed up his Country) came it ever to be exercised
by them. Whence that Commonwealth stood longest and firmest of any other, but
this, in our days, of Venice: which having underlaid her self with the like
Institution, ows a great, if not the greatest part of her steddiness to the
same principle; the great Council, which is with her the People, by the
Authority of my Lord EPIMONUS, never speaking a word. Nor shall any
Commonwealth, where the People in their political capacity is talkative, ever
see half the days of one of these: But being carried away by vainglorious Men
(that, as OVERBURY says, piss more than they drink) swim down the stream; as
did Athens, the most prating of these Dames, when that same ranting fellow
ALCIBIADES fell a demagoging for the Sicilian War. But whereas Debate by the
authority and experience of Lacedemon and Venice, is not to be committed to the
People in a well-ordered Government, it may be said, That the Order specified
is but a slight bar in a matter of like danger; for so much as an Oath, if
there be no recourse upon the breach of it, is a weak ty for such hands as have
the Sword in them: wherefore what should hinder the People of Oceana, if they
happen not to regard an Oath, from assuming Debate, and making themselves as
much an Anarchy as those of Athens? To which I answer, Take the common fort in
a private capacity, and, except they be injured, you shall find them to have a
bashfulness in the presence of the better sort, or wiser Men; acknowleging
their Abilitys by attention, and accounting it no mean honor to receive respect
from them: But if they be injured by them, they hate them, and the more for
being wife or great, because that makes it the greater injury. Nor refrain they
in this case from any kind of intemperance of Speech, if of Action. It is no
otherwise with a People in their political capacity; you shall never find that
they have assumed Debate for it self, but for something else. Wherefore in
Lacedemon where there was, and in Venice where there is nothing else for which
they should assume it, they have never shown so much as an inclination to it.
Nor was there any appearance of such a desire in the People of Rome (who from
the time of ROMULUS had bin very well contented with the power of Result either
in the Comitiis Curiatis.
Parochial Assemblys, as it was settled upon them by him; or in the meetings of
the Centuriatis.
Hundreds, as it was altered in their regard for the worse by SERVIUS TULLIUS)
till news was brought some fifteen years after the exile of TARQUIN their late
King (during which time the Senate had governed pretty well) that he was dead at
the Court of ARISTODEMUS the Tyrant of Cumae. Eo nuncio erecti patres, erecta
plebs. Sed patribus nimis luxuriosa ea fuit laetitia; plebi, cui ad eam diem
summa open inservitum erat, injuriae a primoribus fieri coepere. Live. l. 2.
Whereupon the Patricians, or Nobility, began to let out the hitherto dissembled
Venom, which is inherent in the root of Oligarchy, and fell immediately upon
injuring the People beyond all moderation. For whereas the People had served
both gallantly and contentedly in Arms upon their own charges, and, tho joint
Purchasers by their Swords of the conquered Lands, had not participated in the
same to above two Acres a man (the rest being secretly usurped by the
Patricians) they through the meanness of their support, and the greatness of their
expense, being generally indebted, no sooner returned home with Victory to lay
down their Arms, than they were snatched up by their Creditors, the Nobility,
to cram Goals. Whereupon, but with the greatest modesty that was ever known in
the like case, they first fell upon debate, affirming, Se foris pro liberate
and imperio dimicantes, domi a civibus captos and oppressos esse: tutioremque
in bello quam in pace, inter hosts quam inter cives, libertatem plebis esse.
that they were oppressed and captivated at home, while abroad they fought for
Liberty and Empire; and that the Freedom of the common People was safer in time
of War than Peace, among their Enemies than their Fellowcitizens. It is true,
that when they could not get the Senate, through fear, as was pretended by the
Patricians, to assemble and take their grievances into consideration, they grew
so much the warmer, that it was glad to meet; where APPIUS CLAUDIUS, a fierce
Spirit, was of opinion, that recourse should be had to Consular power, whereby
some of the brands of Sedition being taken off, the flame might be extinguished.
SERVILIUS being of another temper, thought it better and safer to try if the
People might be bowed than broken. But this debate was interrupted by
tumultuous news of the near approach of the Volsci, a case in which the Senate
had no recourse but to the People, who contrary to their former custom upon the
like occasions would not stir a foot, but fell a laughing, and saying, Patres
militarent, patres arma caperent, ut penes eosdem pericula belli, penes quos
praemia, essent.
Let them fight that have something to fight for. The Senate that had purses, and
could not sing so well before the Thief, being in a great perplexity, found no
possible way out of it, but to beseech SERVILIUS, one of a Genius well known to
be popular, That he would accept of the Consulship, and make some such use of it
as might be helpful to the Patrician Interest. SERVILIUS accepting of the
Offer, and making use of his Interest with the People, persuaded them to hope
well of the good intention of the Fathers, whom it would little beseem to be
forced to those things which would lose their Grace, and that in view of the
Enemy, if they came not freely; and withal published an Edict, that no Man
should withhold a Citizen of Rome by imprisonment from giving his name (for
that was the way, as I shall have opportunity hereafter to show more at large,
whereby they drew out their Armies) nor to seize or sell any man's Goods or
Children that was in the Camp. Whereupon the People with a mighty concourse
immediately took Arms, marched forth, and (which to them was as easy as to be
put into the humor, and that, as appears in this place, was not hard) totally
defeated the Volsci first, then the Sabins (for the neighbor Nations, hoping to
have had a good bargain of the Discord in Rome, were up in arms on all sides)
and after the Sabins, the Aurunci. Whence returning victorious in three
Battles, they expected no less than that the Senate would have made good their
words: when APPIUS CLAUDIUS, the other Consul, of his innate Pride, and that he
might frustrat the Faith of his Colleague, caused the Soldiers (who being set at
liberty, had behaved themselves with such valor) to be restored at their return
to their Creditors and their Goals. Great resort upon this was made by the
People to SERVILIUS, showing him their Wounds, calling him to witness how they
had behaved themselves, and minding him of his promise. Poor SERVILIUS was
sorry, but so overaw'd with the headiness of his Colleague, and the obstinacy of
the whole faction of the Nobility, that not daring to do any thing either way,
he lost both Partys: the Fathers conceiving that he was ambitious, and the
People that he was false; while the Consul CLAUDIUS continuing to countenance
such as daily seized and imprisoned some of the indebted People, had still new
and dangerous Controversys with them, insomuch that the Commonwealth was torn
with horrid Division, and the People (because they found it not so safe, or so
effectual in public) minded nothing but laying their heads together in private
Conventicles. For this AULUS VIRGINIUS, and TITUS VETUSIUS, the new Consuls,
were reproved by the Senate as slothful, and upbraided with the Virtue of APPIUS
CLAUDIUS. Whereupon the Consuls having desired the Senate, that they might know
their pleasure, showed afterward their readiness to obey it, by summoning the
People according to command, and requiring names whereby to draw forth an Army
for diversion, but no man would answer. Report hereof being made to the Senate,
the younger sort of the Fathers grew so hot with the Consuls, that they desired
them to abdicat the Magistracy, which they had not the courage to defend.

THE Consuls, tho they conceived themselves to be roughly handled, made this
soft Answer: Fathers Conscript, that you may please to take notice it was
foretold some horrid Sedition is at hand, we shall only desire, that they whose
valor in this place is so great, may stand by us to see how we behave our
selves, and then be as resolute in your Commands as you will: your Fatherhoods
may know if we be wanting in the performance.

AT this some of the hot young Noblemen returned with the Consuls to the
Tribunal, before which the People were yet standing; and the Consuls having
generally required names in vain, to put it to something, required the name of
one that was in their ey particularly; on whom, when he moved not, they
commanded a Lictor to lay hands: but the People thronging about the Party
summoned, forbad the Lictor, who durst not touch him; at which the Hotspurs
that came with the Consuls, enraged by the affront, descended from the Throne
to the aid of the Lictor; from whom in so doing they turned the indignation of
the People upon themselves with such heat, that the Consuls interposing,
thought fit, by remitting the Assembly, to appease the Tumult; in which
nevertheless there had bin nothing but noise. Nor was there less in the Senate,
being suddenly rallied upon this occasion, where they that received the
repulse, with others whose heads were as addle as their own, fell upon the
business as if it had bin to be determined by clamor, till the Consuls,
upbraiding the Senate that it differed not from the Marketplace, reduced the
House to Orders. And the Fathers having bin consulted accordingly, there were
three Opinions; PUBLIUS VIRGINIUS conceived, that the consideration to be had
upon the matter in question, or aid of the indebted and imprisoned People, was
not to be further extended than to such as had engaged upon the promise made by
SERVILIUS: TITUS LARGIUS, that it was no time to think it enough, if men's
Merits were acknowleg'd, while the whole People, sunk under the weight of their
debts, could not emerge without some common aid; which to restrain, by putting
some into a better condition than others, would rather more inflame the Discord
than extinguish it. APPIUS CLAUDIUS (still upon the old hant) would have it,
that the People were rather wanton than fierce: It was not oppression that
necessitated, but their power that invited them to these freaks; the Empire of
the Consuls since the appeal to the People (whereby a Plebeian might ask his
fellows if he were a Thief) being but a mere scarecrow. Go to, says he, let us
create the Dictator, from whom there is no appeal, and then let me see more of
this work, or him that shall forbid my Lictor. The advice of APPIUS was abhorred
by many; and to introduce a general recision of Debts with LARGIUS, was to
violat all Faith: That of VIRGINIUS, as the most moderat, would have past best,
but that there were private Interests, that constant bane of the Public, which
withstood it. So they concluded with APPIUS, who also had bin Dictator, if the
Consuls and some of the graver sort had not thought it altogether unseasonable,
at a time when the Volsci and the Sabins were up again, to venture so far upon
alienation of the People: for which cause VALERIUS, being descended from the
PUBLICOLAS, the most popular Family, as also in his own person of a mild
nature, was rather trusted with so rigid a Magistracy. Whence it happened, that
the People, tho they knew well enough against whom the Dictator was created,
seared nothing from VALERIUS; but upon a new promise made to the same effect
with that of SERVILIUS, hoped better another time, and throwing away all
disputes, gave their names roundly, went out, and, to be brief, came home again
as victorious as in the former Action, the Dictator entering the City in
Triumph. Nevertheless when he came to press the Senate to make good his promise,
and do something for the ease of the People, they regarded him no more as to
that point than they had don SERVILIUS. Whereupon the Dictator, in disdain to be
made a stale, abdicated his Magistracy, and went home. Here then was a
victorious Army without a Captain, and a Senate pulling it by the beard in their
Gowns. What is it (if you have read the Story, for there is not such another)
that must follow? Can any man imagine, that such only should be the opportunity
upon which this People could run away? Alas, poor men, the Aequi and the
Volsci, and the Sabins were nothing, but the Fathers invincible! There they sat
some three hundred of them armed all in Robes, and thundering with their
Tongues, without any hopes in the earth to reduce them to any tolerable
conditions. Wherefore, not thinking it convenient to abide long so near them,
away marches the Army, and incamps in the fields. This Retreat of the People is
called the Secession of Mount Aventin, where they lodged very sad at their
condition; but not letting fall so much as a word of murmur against the
Fathers. The Senate by this time were great Lords, had the whole City to
themselves; but certain Neighbors were upon the way that might com to speak
with them, not asking leave of the Porter. Wherefore their minds became
troubled, and an Orator was posted to the People to make as good conditions
with them as he could; but, whatever the terms were, to bring them home, and
with all speed. And here it was covenanted between the Senate and the People,
that these should have Magistrates of their own Election, called the Tribuns;
upon which they returned.

TO hold you no longer, the Senate having don this upon necessity, made frequent
attempts to retract it again; while the Tribuns on the other side, to defend
what they had got, instituted their Tributa Comitia, or Council of the People;
where they came in time, and, as Disputes increased, to make Laws without the
Authority of the Senate, called Plebiscita. Now to conclude in the point at
which I drive; such were the steps whereby the People of Rome came to assume
Debate: nor is it in Art or Nature to debar a People of the like effect, where
there is the like cause. For ROMULUS having in the Election of his Senate
squared out a Nobility for the support of a Throne, by making that of the
Patricians a distinct and hereditary Order, planted the Commonwealth upon two
contrary Interests or Roots, which shooting forth in time produced two
Commonwealths, the one Oligarchical in the Nobility, the other a mere Anarchy
of the People, and ever after caused a perpetual feud and enmity between the
Senate and the People, even to death.

THERE is not a more noble or useful question in the Politics than that which
is started by MACCHIAVEL, Whether means were to be found whereby the Enmity that
was between the Senate and the People of Rome could have bin removed. Nor is
there any other in which we, or the present occasion, are so much concerned,
particularly in relation to this Author; forasmuch as his Judgment in the
determination of the question standing, our Commonwealth falls. And he that
will erect a Commonwealth against the Judgment of MACCHIAVEL, is obliged to
give such reasons for his enterprise as must not go a begging. Wherefore to
repeat the Politician very honestly, but somewhat more briefly, he disputes
thus.

Macch. Disc. B. 1. c. 6.
THERE be two sorts of Commonwealths, the one for preservation, as Lacedemon
and Venice; the other for increase, as Rome.

LACEDEMON being governed by a King and a small Senate, could maintain it self a
long time in that condition, because the Inhabitants, being few, having put a
bar upon the reception of Strangers, and living in a strict observation of the
Laws of LYCURGUS, which now had got reputation, and taken away all occasion of
Tumults, might well continue long in Tranquillity. For the Laws of LYCURGUS
introduced a greater equality in Estates, and a less equality in Honors, whence
there was equal Poverty; and the Plebeians were less ambitious, because the
Honors or Magistracys of the City could extend but to a few, and were not
communicable to the People: nor did the Nobility by using them ill, ever give
them a desire to participat of the same. This proceeded from the Kings, whose
Principality being placed in the midst of the Nobility, had no greater means
whereby to support it self, than to shield the People from all injury; whence
the People not fearing Empire, desired it not: And so all occasion of enmity
between the Senate and the People was taken away. But this Union happened
especially from two causes; the one, that the Inhabitants of Lacedemon being
few, could be governed by the Few: the other, that, not receiving Strangers
into their Commonwealth, they did not corrupt it, nor increase it to such a
proportion as was not governable by the Few.

VENICE has not divided with her Plebeians, but all are called Gentlemen that
be in administration of the Government; for which Government she is more
beholden to Chance than the Wisdom of her Lawmakers: For many retiring to those
Islands, where that City is now built, from the inundations of Barbarians that
overwhelmed the Roman Empire, when they were increased to such a number, that
to live together it was necessary to have Laws; they ordained a form of
Government, whereby assembling often in Council upon Affairs, and sinding their
number sufficient for Government, they put a bar upon all such as repairing
afterward to their City should become Inhabitants, excluding them from
participation of Power. Whence they that were included in the Administration
had right; and they that were excluded, coming afterward, and being received
upon no other conditions to be Inhabitants, had no wrong; and therefore had no
occasion, nor (being never trusted with Arms) any means to be tumultuous.
Wherefore this Commonwealth might very well maintain it self in Tranquillity.

THESE things considered, it is plain that the Roman Legislators, to have
introduced a quiet State, must have don one of these two things; either shut
out Strangers, as the Lacedaemonians; or, as the Venetians, not allowed the
People to bear Arms. But they did neither. By which means the People having
power and increase, were in perpetual tumult. Nor is this to be helped in a
Commonwealth for increase, seeing if Rome had cut off the occasion of her
Tumults, she must have cut off the means of her Increase, and by consequence of
her Greatness.

Wherefore let a Legislator consider with himself, whether he would make his
Commonwealth for preservation, in which case she may be free from Tumults; or
for increase, in which case she must be infested with them.

IF he makes her for preservation, she may be quiet at home; but will be in
danger abroad. First, Because her Foundation must be narrow, and therefore weak,
as that of Lacedemon, which lay but upon 30000 Citizens; or that of Venice,
which lys but upon 3000. Secondly, Such a Commonwealth must either be in Peace,
or in War: If she be in Peace, the Few are soonest effeminated and corrupted,
and so obnoxious also to Faction. If in War, succeding ill, she is an easy
prey; or succeding well, ruined by increase: a weight which her Foundation is
not able to bear. For Lacedemon, when she had made her self Mistress, upon the
matter, of all Greece, through a slight accident, the Rebellion of Thebes,
occasioned by the Conspiracy of PELOPIDAS discovering this infirmity of her
nature, the rest of her conquered Citys immediately fell off, and in the turn as
it were of a hand reduced her from the fullest tide to the lowest eb of her
fortune. And Venice having possessed her self of a great part of Italy by her
purse, was no sooner in defense of it put to the trial of Arms, than she lost
all in one Battle.

WHENCE I conclude, That in the Ordination of a Commonwealth a Legislator is to
think upon that which is most honorable; and laying aside Models for
Preservation, to follow the example of Rome conniving at, and temporizing with
the enmity between the Senate and the People, as a necessary step to the Roman
Greatness. For that any Man should find out a balance that may take in the
Conveniences, and shut out the Inconveniences of both, I do not think it
possible. These are the words of the Author, tho the method be somewhat altered,
to the end that I may the better turn them to my purpose.

MY LORDS, I do not know how you hearken to this sound; but to hear the
greatest Artist in the modern World, giving sentence against our Commonwealth,
is that with which I am nearly concerned. Wherefore, with all honor due to the
Prince of Politicians, let us examine his reasoning with the same liberty which
he has asserted to be the right of a free People. But we shall never com up to
him, except by taking the business a little lower, we descend from effects to
their causes. The causes of Commotion in a Commonwealth are either external or
internal. External are from Enemies, from Subjects, or from Servants. To dispute
then what was the cause why Rome was infested by the Italian, or by the Servil
Wars; why the Slaves took the Capitol; why the Lacedaemonians were near as
frequently troubled with their Helots, as Rome with all those; or why Venice,
whose Situation is not trusted to the faith of Men, has as good or better
quarter with them whom she governs, than Rome had with the Latins; were to
dispute upon external causes. The question put by MACCHIAVEL is of internal
causes; Whether the enmity that was beeween the Senate and the People of Rome
might have bin removed. And to determine otherwise of this question than he dos,
I must lay down other Principles than he has don. To which end I affirm, that a
Commonwealth internally considered, is either equal or inequal. A Commonwealth
that is internally equal, has no internal cause of Commotion, and therefore can
have no such effect but from without. A Commonwealth internally inequal has no
internal cause of quiet, and therefore can have no such effect but by diversion.

TO prove my Assertions, I shall at this time make use of no other than his
examples. Lacedemon was externally unquiet, because she was externally inequal,
that is as to her Helots; and she was internally at rest, because she was equal
in her self, both in root and branch: In the root by her Agrarian, and in
branch by the Senate, inasmuch as no Man was thereto qualified, but by election
of the People. Which Institution of LYCURGUS is mentioned Arist. Polit. B. 2.
by ARISTOTLE, where he says, that rendering his Citizens emulous (not careless)
of that honor, he assigned to the People the election of the Senate. Wherefore
MACCHIAVEL in this, as in other places, having his ey upon the division of
Patrician and Plebeian Familys as they were in Rome, has quite mistaken the
Orders of this Commonwealth, where there was no such thing. Nor did the quiet
of it derive from the Power of the Kings, who were so far from shielding the
People from the injury of the Nobility, of which there was none in his sense
but the Senate, that one declared end of the Senate at the institution was to
shield the People from the Kings, who from that time had but single Votes.
Neither did it proceed from the straitness of the Senate, or their keeping the
People excluded from the Government, that they were quiet, but from the
equality of their administration, seeing the Senate (as is plain by the Oracle,
their fundamental Law) had no more than the Debate, and the Result of the
Commonwealth belonged to the People. Wherefore when THEOPOMPUS and POLYDORUS
Kings of Lacedemon, would have kept the People excluded from the Government, by
adding to the ancient Law this Clause, If the determination of the People be
faulty, it shall be lawful for the Senate to resume the Debate; the People
immediately became unquiet, and resumed that Debate, which ended not till they
had set up their Ephors, and caused that Magistracy to be confirmed by their
Kings. Nam cum primus instituisset Theopompus ut Ephori Lacedamone crearentur,
ita futuri regiae potestati oppositi quemadmodum Romae Tribuni pl^bis consulati
imperio sunt objecti; atque illi u^or dixi^^et, id egi^^^ illum ut fil^is
minorem potestatem re^inqueret: Relinquam, inquit, sed diuturniorem. Optime
quidem: Ea enim demum tuta est potentia, quae viribus suis modum imponit.
Theopompus igitur legitimis regnum vinculis constringendo, quo longius a
licentia ^etraxit, hot propius ad benevolentiam civium admovit. Val. Max. l. 4.
c. 1. de externis,. 8.
For when THEOPOMPUS first ordained that the Ephori or Overseers should be
created at Lacedemon, to be such a restraint upon the Kings there as the
Tribuns were upon the Consuls at Rome, the Queen complained to him, that by
this means he transmitted the Royal Authority greatly diminished to his
Children: I leave indeed less, answered he, but more lasting. And this was
excellently said; for that Power only is safe which is limited from doing hurt.
THEOPOMPUS therefore, by confining the Kingly Power within the bounds of the
Laws, did recommend it by so much to the Peoples Affection, as he removed it
from being Arbitrary. By which it may appear, that a Commonwealth for
preservation, if she coms to be inequal, is as obnoxious to enmity between the
Senate and the People, as a Commonwealth for increase; and that the Tranquillity
of Lacedemon was derived from no other cause than her Equality.

FOR Venice, to say that she is quiet because she disarms her Subjects, is to
forget that Lacedemon disarmed her Helots, and yet could not in their regard be
quiet; wherefore if Venice be defended from external causes of Commotion, it is
first through her Situation, in which respect her Subjects have no hope (and this
indeed may be attributed to her fortune) and, secondly, through her exquisit
Justice, whence they have no will to invade her. But this can be attributed to
no other cause than her Prudence; which will appear to be greater, as we look
nearer; for the effects that proceed from Fortune, if there be any such thing,
are like their cause, inconstant. But there never happened to any other
Commonwealth so undisturbed and constant a Tranquillity and Peace in her self,
as is that of Venice; wherefore this must proceed from some other cause than
Chance. And we see that as she is of all others the most quiet, so the most
equal Commonwealth. Her Body consists of one Order, and her Senate is like a
rolling stone, as was said, which never did, nor, while it continues upon that
rotation, never shall gather the moss of a divided or ambitious interest; much
less such a one as that which grasped the People of Rome in the talons of their
own Eagles. And if MACCHIAVEL, averse from doing this Commonwealth right, had
considered her Orders, as his Reader shall easily perceive he never did, he
must have bin so far from attributing the Prudence of them to Chance, that he
would have touched up his admirable work to that perfection, which, as to the
civil part, has no pattern in the universal World but this of Venice.

ROME, secure by her potent and victorious Arms from all external causes of
Commotion, was either beholden for her Peace at home to her Enemies abroad, or
could never rest her head. My LORDS, you that are Parents of a Commonwealth,
and so freer Agents than such as are merely natural, have a care. For, as no
man shall show me a Commonwealth born straight, that ever became crooked; so,
no man shall show me a Commonwealth born crooked, that ever became straight.
Rome was crooked in her birth, or rather prodigious. Her twins the Patricians
and Plebeian Orders came, as was shown by the foregoing story, into the World,
one body but two heads, or rather two bellys: for, notwithstanding the Fable
out of AESOP, whereby MENENIUS AGRIPPA the Orator that was sent from the Senate
to the People at Mount Aventin, showed the Fathers to be the Belly, and the
People to be the Arms and the Legs (which except that, how slothful soever it
might seem, they were nourished, not these only, but the whole Body must
languish and be dissolved) it is plain, that the Fathers were a distinct Belly;
such a one as took the meat indeed out of the Peoples mouths, but abhorring the
Agrarian, returned it not in the due and necessary nutrition of a Commonwealth.
Nevertheless, as the People that live about the Cataracts of Nilus are said not
to hear the noise, so neither the Roman Writers, nor MACCHIAVEL the most
conversant with them, seem among so many of the Tribunitian storms, to hear
their natural voice: for tho they could not miss of it so far as to attribute
them to the strife of the People for participation in Magistracy, or, in which
MACCHIAVEL more particularly joins, to that about the Agrarian; this was to
take the business short, and the remedy for the disease.

A PEOPLE, when they are reduced to misery and despair, become their own
Politicians, as certain Beasts when they are sick become their own Physicians,
and are carried by a natural instinct to the desire of such Herbs as are their
proper cure; but the People, for the greater part, are beneath the Beasts in
the use of them. Thus the People of Rome, tho in their misery they had recourse
by instinct, as it were, to the two main Fundamentals of a Commonwealth,
participation of Magistracy, and the Agrarian, did but taste and spit at them,
not (which is necessary in Physic) drink down the potion, and in that their
healths. For when they had obtained participation of Magistracy, it was but
lamely, not to a full and equal Rotation in all Elections; nor did they greatly
regard it in what they had got. And when they had attained to the Agrarian,
they neglected it so far as to suffer the Law to grow obsolete: but if you do
not take the due dose of your Medicines (as there be slight tastes which a man
may have of Philosophy that incline to Atheism) it may chance to be poison,
there being a like taste of the Politics that inclines to Confusion, as appears
in the Institution of the Roman Tribuns, by which Magistracy and no more, the
People were so far from attaining to Peace, that they in getting but so much,
got but heads for an eternal feud; whereas if they had attained in perfection
either to the Agrarian, they had introduced the equality and calm of Lacedemon,
or to Rotation, and they had introduced that of Venice: And so there could have
bin no more enmity between the Senate and the People of Rome, than there was
between those Orders in Lacedemon, or is now in Venice. Wherefore MACCHIAVEL
seems to me, in attributing the Peace of Venice more to her luck than her
prudence, of the whole stable to have saddled the wrong Horse; for tho Rome --
Qui nimbos and non imitabile fulmen
Aere, and cornipedum cursu simularat equorum.

in her military part could beat it better, beyond all comparison, upon the
sounding hoof, Venice for the civil part has plainly had the wings of Pegasus.

THE whole Question then will com upon this point, Whether the People of Rome
could have obtained these Orders? And first, to say, that they could not have
obtained them without altering the Commonwealth, is no Argument; seeing neither
could they, without altering the Commonwealth, have obtained their Tribuns,
which nevertheless were obtained. And if a man considers the posture that the
People were in when they obtained their Tribuns, they might as well, and with
as great ease (forasmuch as the reason why the Nobility yielded to the Tribuns
was no other, than that there was no remedy) have obtained any thing else. And
for experience, it was in the like case that the Lacedaemonians did set up their
Ephors, and the Athenians after the battle of Plateae bowed the Senate (so hard
a thing it is for a Commonwealth that was born crooked to become straight) as
much the other way. Nor, if it be objected, that this must have ruined the
Nobility (and in that deprived the Commonwealth of the Greatness which she
acquired by them) is this opinion holding; but confuted by the sequel of the
story, showing plainly, that the Nobility through the defect of such Orders, that
is to say, of Rotation and the Agrarian, came to eat up the People: and
battening themselves in Luxury, to be, as SALUST speaks of them, Inertissimi
nobiles, in quibus, sicut in statua, praeter nomen nihil erat additamenti.
a most sluggish and lazy Nobility, in whom, besides the name, there was no
more than in a statue; and to bring so mighty a Commonwealth, and of so huge a
Glory, to so deplorable an end. Wherefore means might have bin found to remove
the enmity that was between the Senate and the People of Rome.

MY LORDS, If I have argued well, I have given you the comfort and assurance,
that notwithstanding the judgment of MACCHIAVEL, your Commonwealth is both safe
and sound: but if I have not argued well, then take the comfort and assurance
which he gives you while he is firm, That a Legislator is to lay aside all
other examples, and follow that of Rome only, conniving and temporizing with
the enmity between the Senate and the People, as a necessary step to the Roman
Greatness. Whence it follows, that your Commonwealth, at the worst, is that
which he has given you his word is the best.

I HAVE held your Lordships long, but upon an account of no small importance,
which I can now sum up in these few words: Where there is a liquorishness in a
popular Assembly to debate, it procedes not from the Constitution of the
People, but of the Commonwealth. Now that your Commonwealth is of such a
Constitution as is naturally free from this kind of intemperance, is that which
to make good, I must divide the remainder of my Discourse into two Parts.

THE First, showing the several Constitutions of the Assemblys of the People in
other Commonwealths.

THE Second, comparing our Assembly of the People with theirs: and showing how
it excludes the Inconveniences, and embraces the Conveniences of them all.

IN the beginning of the first Part I must take notice, that among the popular
Errors of our days it is no small one, that men imagine the ancient Governments
of this kind to have consisted for the most part of one City, that is, of one
Town; whereas by what we have learnt of my Lords that opened them, it appears
that there was not any considerable one of such a Constitution but Carthage,
till this in our days of Venice.

FOR to begin with Israel, it consisted of the twelve Tribes, locally spread or
quartered throout the whole Territory; and these being called together by
Trumpets, constituted the Church or Assembly of the People. The vastness of
this weight, as also the slowness thence inavoidable, became a great cause (as
has bin shown at large by my Lord PHOSPHORUS) of the breaking that
Commonwealth; notwithstanding that the Temple, and those religious Ceremonys
for which the People were at least annually obliged to repair thither, were no
small Ligament of the Tribes, otherwise but slightly tacked together.

ATHENS consisted of four Tribes, taking in the whole People both of the City
and of the Territory; not so gathered by THESEUS into one Town, as to exclude
the Country, but to the end that there might be some Capital of the
Commonwealth: tho true it be, that the Congregation consisting of the
Inhabitants within the Walls, was sufficient to all intents and purposes,
without those of the Country. These also being exceeding numerous, became
burdensome to themselves, and dangerous to the Commonwealth; the more for their
ill education, as is observed by XENOPHON and POLYBIUS, who compare them to
Mariners that in a calm are perpetually disputing and swaggering one with
another, and never lay their hands to the common tackling or safety, till they
be all endangered by some storm. Which caused THUCYDIDES, when he saw this
People through the purchase of their misery become so much wiser, as to reduce
their Comitia or Assemblys to five thousand, to say in his eighth Book; And
now, at least in my time, the Athenians seem to have ordered their State
aright, consisting of a moderat temper both of the Few (by which he means the
Senate of the Bean) and of the Many, or the five thousand. And he dos not only
give you his judgment, but the best proof of it; for this, says he, was the
first thing that, after so many misfortunes past, made the City again to raise
her head. The place I would desire your Lordships to note, as the first example
that I find, or think is to be found, of a popular Assembly by way of
Representative.

LACEDEMON consisted of thirty thousand Citizens dispersed throout Laconia, one
of the greatest Provinces in all Greece, and divided, as by some Authors is
probable, into six Tribes. Of the whole body of these, being gathered,
consisted the great Church or Assembly, which had the Legislative Power; the
little Church, gathered sometimes for matters of concern within the City,
consisted of the Spartans only. These happened, like that of Venice, to be good
Constitutions of a Congregation, but from an ill cause the infirmity of a
Commonwealth, which through her paucity was Oligarchical.

WHEREFORE, go which way you will, it should seem, that without a Representative
of the People, your Commonwealth consisting of a whole Nation, can never avoid
falling either into Oligarchy or Confusion.

THIS was seen by the Romans, whose rustic Tribes extending themselves from the
River Arno to the Vulturnus, that is, from Fes^l^ or Florence to C^pua,
invented a way of Representative by Lots: the Tribe upon which the first fell,
being the Prerogative; and some two or three more that had the rest, the Jure
vocatae. These gave the Suffrage of the Commonwealth in Binis Comitiis.
two meetings; the Prerogative at the first Assembly, and the Jure vocatae at a
second.

NOW to make the parallel, all the Inconveniences that you have observed in
these Assemblys are shut out, and all the Conveniences taken into your
Prerogative. For first it is that for which Athens, shaking off the blame of
XENOPHON and POLYBIUS, came to deserve the praise of THUCYDIDES, a
Representative. And, secondly, not as I suspect in that of Athens, and is past
suspicion in this of Rome, by lot, but by suffrage, as was also the late House
of Commons, by which means in your Prerogatives all the Tribes of Oceana are
Jure vocatae; and if a man shall except against the paucity of the standing
number, it is a wheel, which in the revolution of a few years turns every hand
that is fit, or fits every hand that it turns to the public work. Moreover, I
am deceived if upon due consideration it dos not fetch your Tribes, with
greater equality and ease to themselves and to the Government, from the
Frontiers of Marpesia, than Rome ever brought any one of hers out of her
Pom^ria, or the nearest parts of her adjoining Territorys. To this you may add,
That whereas a Commonwealth, which in regard of the People is not of facility in
execution, were sure enough in this Nation to be cast off through impatience; your
Musters and Galaxys are given to the People, as milk to Babes, whereby when they
are brought up through four days election in a whole year (one at the Parish, one
at the Hundred, and two at the Tribe) to their strongest meat, it is of no
harder digestion, than to give their. Negative or Affirmative as they see
cause. There be gallant men among us that laugh at such an Appeal or Umpire;
but I refer it whether you be more inclining to pardon them or me, who I
confess have bin this day laughing at a sober man, but without meaning him any
harm, and that is PETRUS CUNAEUS, where speaking of the nature of the People,
he says, that taking them apart, they are very simple, but yet in their
Assemblys they see and know something: and so runs away without troubling
himself with what that something is. Whereas the People, taken apart, are but so
many private Interests; but if you take them together, they are the public
Interest. The public Interest of a Commonwealth, as has bin shown, is nearest
that of mankind, and that of mankind is right reason; but with Aristocracy
(whose Reason or Interest, when they are all together, as appeared by the
Patricians, is but that of a Party) it is quite contrary: for as, taken apart,
they are far wiser than the People considered in that manner; so being put
together, they are such fools, who by deposing the People, as did those of
Rome, will saw off the branch whereupon they sit, or rather destroy the root of
their own Greatness. Wherefore MACCHIAVEL following ARISTOTLE, and yet going
before him, may well assert, Che la multitudine e piu savia and piu constante
che un Prencipe.
That the People are wiser and more constant in their Resolutions than a
Prince; which is the Prerogative of popular Government for Wisdom. And hence it
is that the Prerogative of your Commonwealth, as for Wisdom so for Power, is in
the People: which (tho I am not ignorant that the Roman Prerogative was so
called a Praerogando, because their Suffrage was first asked) gives the
denomination to your Prerogative Tribe.

THE Elections, whether Annual or Triennial, being shown by the twenty second,
that which coms in the next place to be considered is

23. Order. The Constitution, Function, and manner of Proceeding of the
Prerogative.
THE twenty third ORDER, showing the Power, Function, and manner of Proceeding
of the Prerogative Tribe.

THE Power or Function of the Prerogative is of two parts, the one of Result,
in which it is the Legislative Power; the other of Judicature, in which regard
it is the highest Court, and the last appeal in this Commonwealth.

FOR the former part (the People by this Constitution being not obliged by any
Law that is not of their own making or confirmation, by the result of the
Prerogative, their equal Representative) it shall not be lawful for the Senate
to require obedience from the People, nor for the People to give obedience to
the Senate in or by any Law that has not bin promulgated, or printed and
published for the space of six weeks; and afterward proposed by the Authority
of the Senate to the Prerogative Tribe, and resolved by the major Vote of the
same in the Affirmative. Nor shall the Senate have any power to levy War, Men,
or Money, otherwise than by the consent of the People so given, or by a Law so
enacted, except in cases of Exigence, in which it is agreed, that the Power
both of the Senate and the People shall be in the Dictator, so qualified, and
for such a term of time, as is according to that Constitution already
prescribed. While a Law is in promulgation, the Censors shall animadvert upon
the Senate, and the Tribuns upon the People, that there be no laying of heads
together, no Conventicles or canvassing to carry on or oppose any thing; but
that all may be don in a free and open way.

FOR the latter part of the Power of the Prerogative, or that whereby they are
the Supreme Judicatory of this Nation, and of the Provinces of the same, the
cognizance of Crimes against the Majesty of the People, such as High Treason,
as also of Peculat, that is, robbery of the Treasury, or defraudation of the
Commonwealth, appertains to this Tribe. And if any Person or Persons,
Provincials or Citizens, shall appeal to the People, it belongs to the
Prerogative to judge and determine the case; provided that if the Appeal be from
any Court of Justice in this Nation or the Provinces, the Appellant shall first
deposit a hundred Pounds in the Court from which he appeals, to be forfeited to
the same, if he be cast in his Suit by the People. But the Power of the Council
of War being the expedition of this Commonwealth, and the martial Law of the
Strategus in the Field, are those only from which there shall ly no Appeal to
the People.

THE Proceeding of the Prerogative in case of a Proposition, is to be thus
ordered. The Magistrates, proposing by Authority of the Senate, shall rehearse
the whole matter, and expound it to the People: which don, they shall put the
whole together to the Suffrage, with three Boxes, the Negative, the
Affirmative, and the Nonsincere: and the Suffrage being returned to the
Tribuns, and numbered in the presence of the Proposers, if the major Vote be in
the Nonsincere, the Proposers shall desist, and the Senate shall resume the
Debate. If the major Vote be in the Negative, the Proposers shall desist, and
the Senate too. But if the major Vote be in the Affirmative, then the Tribe is
clear, and the Proposers shall begin and put the whole matter, with the
Negative and the Affirmative (leaving out the Nonsincere) by Clauses; and the
Suffrages being taken and numbered by the Tribuns in the presence of the
Proposers, shall be written and reported by the Tribuns to the Senate. And that
which is proposed by the Authority of the Senate, and consirm'd by the Command
of the People, is the Law of Oceana.

THE Proceeding of the Prerogative in a case of Judicature is to be thus
ordered. The Tribuns being Auditors of all Causes appertaining to the
cognizance of the People, shall have notice of the Suit or Trial, whether of
Appeal or otherwise, that is to be commenced; and if any one of them shall
ac^ept of the same, it appertains to him to introduce it. A Cause being
introduced, and the People mustered or assembled for the decision of the same,
the Tribuns are Presidents of the Court, having power to keep it to Orders, and
shall be seated upon a Scaffold erected in the middle of the Tribe. Upon the
right hand shall stand a Seat, or large Pulpit assigned to the Plaintiff, or the
Accuser; and, upon the left, another for the Defendent, each if they please
with his Council. And the Tribuns (being attended upon such occasions with so
many Ballotins, Secretarys, Doorkeepers, and Messengers of the Senate as shall
be requisite) one of them shall turn up a Glass of the nature of an Hourglass,
but such a one as is to be of an hour and a halfs running; which being turned
up, the Party or Council on the right hand may begin to speak to the People. If
there be Papers to be read, or Witnesses to be examined, the Officer shall lay
the Glass sideways till the Papers be read, and the Witnesses examined, and
then turn it up again; and so long as the Glass is running, the Party on the
right hand has liberty to speak, and no longer. The Party on the right hand
having had his time, the like shall be don in every respect for the Party on
the left. And the Cause being thus heard, the Tribuns shall put the question to
the Tribe with a white, a black, and a red Box (or Nonsincere) whether Guilty*
or not Guilty. And if the Suffrage being taken, the major Vote be in the
Nonsincere, the Cause shall be reheard upon the next juridical day following,
and put to the question in the same manner. If the major Vote coms the second
time in the Nonsincere, the Cause shall be heard again upon the third day: but
at the third hearing the question shall be put without the Nonsincere. Upon the
first of the three days in which the major Vote coms in the white Box, the
Party accused is absolved; and upon the first of them in which it coms in the
black Box, the Party accused is condemned. The Party accused being condemned,
the Tribuns (if the case be criminal) shall put with the white and the black
Box these Questions, or such of them, as, regard had to the case, they shall
conceive most proper.

1. WHETHER he shall have a Writ of ease. 2. WHETHER he shall be sinned so much,
or so much. 3. WHETHER he shall be consiscated. 4. WHETHER he shall be rendered
incapable of Magistracy. 5. WHETHER he shall be banished. 6. WHETHER he shall
be put to death.
THESE, or any three of these Questions, whether simple or such as shall be
thought sitly mixed, being put by the Tribuns, that which has most above half
the Voies in the black Box is the Sentence of the People, which the Troop of
the third Classis is to see executed accordingly.

BUT whereas by the Constitution of this Commonwealth it may appear that neither
the Propositions of the Senate, nor the Judicature of the People, will be so
frequent as to hold the Prerogative in continual employment; the Senate, a main
part of whose Office it is to teach and instruct the People, shall duly (if
they have no greater Affairs to divert them) cause an Oration to be made to the
Prerogative by some Knight or Magistrate of the Senate, to be chosen out of the
ablest men, and from time to time appointed by the Orator of the House, in the
great Hall of the Pantheon, while the Parliament resides in the Town; or in some
Grove or sweet place in the sield, while the Parliament for the heat of the year
shall reside in the Country; upon every Tuesday, morning or afternoon.

AND the Orator appointed for the time to this Office, shall first repeat the
Orders of the Commonwealth with all possible brevity; and then making choice of
one or some part of it, discourse thereof to the People. An Oration or Discourse
of this nature, being afterward perused by the Council of State, may as they
see cause be printed and published.

THE ARCHON'S Comment upon the Order I find to have bin of this sense.

My Lords,
TO crave pardon for a word or two in farther explanation of what was read, I
shall briefly show how the Constitution of this Tribe or Assembly answers to
their Function; and how their Function, which is of two parts, the former in
the Result or Legislative Power, the latter in the supreme Judicature of the
Commonwealth, answers to their Constitution. MACCHIAVEL has a Discourse, where
he puts the question, Whether the guard of Liberty may with more security be
committed to the Nobility, or to the People. Which doubt of his arises through the
want of explaining his terms; for the guard of Liberty can signify nothing else
but the Result of the Commonwealth: so that to say, that the guard of Liberty
may be committed to the Nobility, is to say, that the Result may be committed
to the Senate, in which case the People signify nothing. Now to show it was a
mistake to affirm it to have bin thus in Lacedemon, sufficient has bin spoken;
and whereas he will have have it to be so in Venice also, Quello appresso il
quale e la somma autorita di tutta la citta, e delle leggi and decreti, de i
quali ^ende l'autorita cosi del Senato come ancora di tutti i Magistrati, e il
Consiglio Grande.
They, says CONTARINI, in whom resides the Supreme Power of the whole
Commonwealth, and of the Laws, and upon whose Orders depends the Authority as
well of the Senate as of all the other Magistrates, is the GREAT COUNCIL. It is
institutively in the Great Council, by the judgment of all that know that
Commonwealth; tho for the Reasons shown, it be sometimes exercised by the Senate.
Nor need I run over the Commonwealths in this place for the proof of a thing so
doubtless, and such as has bin already made so apparent, as that the Result of
each was in the popular part of it. The popular part of yours, or the
Prerogative Tribe, consists of seven Deputys (whereof three are of the Horse)
annually elected out of every Tribe of Oceana; which being fifty, amounts to
one hundred and fifty Horse, and two hundred Foot. And the Prerogative
consisting of three of these Lists, consists of four hundred and fifty Horse,
and six hundred Foot, besides those of the Provinces to be hereafter mentioned;
by which means the overbalance in the Suffrage remaining to the Foot by one
hundred and fifty Votes, you have to the support of a true and natural
Aristocracy, the deepest root of a Democracy that has bin ever planted.
Wherefore there is nothing in Art or Nature better qualified for the Result than
this Assembly. It is noted out of CICERO by MACCHIAVEL, That the People, tho
they are not so prone to find out Truth of themselves, as to follow Custom, or
run into Error; yet if they be shown Truth, they not only acknowledge and
embrace it very suddenly, but are the most constant and faithful Guardians and
Conservators of it. It is your Duty and Office, whereto you are also qualified
by the Orders of this Commonwealth, to have the People as you have your Hauks
and Greyhounds, in Leases and Slips, to range the Fields, and beat the Bushes
for them; for they are of a nature that is never good at this sport, but when
you spring or start their proper quarry. Think not that they will stand to ask
you what it is, or less know it than your Hauks and Greyhounds do theirs; but
presently make such a flight or course, that a Huntsman may as well undertake
to run with his Dogs, or a Falconer to fly with his Hauk, as an Aristocracy at
this game to compare with the People. The People of Rome were possessed of no
less a prey than the Empire of the World, when the Nobility turned tails, and
perched among Daws upon the Tower of Monarchy. For tho they did not all of them
intend the thing, they would none of them endure the Remedy, which was the
Agrarian.

BUT the Prerogative Tribe has not only the Result, but is the Supreme
Judicature, and the ultimat Appeal in this Commonwealth. For the popular
Government that makes account to be of any standing, must make sure in the
first place of the Ante omnes de provocatione adversus Magistratus ad Populum,
sacrandcque cum bonis capite ejus, qui regni occupandi consilia iniisset.
Appeal to the People. As an Estate in trust becoms a man's own, if he be not
answerable for it; so the Power of a Magistracy not accountable to the People,
from whom it was received, becoming of private use, the Commonwealth loses her
Liberty. Wherefore the Right of Supreme Judicature in the People (without which
there can be no such thing as popular Government) is confirmed by the constant
practice of all Commonwealths; as that of Israel in the cases of ACHAN, and of
the Tribe of BENJAMIN, adjudg'd by the Congregation. The Dicasterion or Court
called the Heliaia in Athens, which (the Comitia of that Commonwealth
consisting of the whole People, and so being too numerous to be a Judicatory)
was constituted sometimes of five hundred, at others of one thousand, or,
according to the greatness of the cause, of fifteen hundred, elected by the Lot
out of the whole Body of the People, had with the nine ARCHONS that were
Presidents, the cognizance of such Causes as were of highest importance in that
State. The five Ephors in Lacedemon, which were popular Magistrates, might
question their Kings, as appears by the cases of PAUSANIAS, and of AGIS, who
being upon his Trial in this Court, was cried to by his Mother to appeal to the
People, as PLUTARCH has it in his Life. The Tribuns of the People of Rome
(like, in the nature of their Magistracy, and for some time in number, to the
Ephors, as being, according to HALICARNASSEUS and PLUTARCH, instituted in
imitation of them) h^d power Diem dicere.
to summon any man, his Magistracy at least being expired (for from the Dictator
there lay no Appeal) to answer for himself to the People. As in the case of
CORIOLANUS, who was going about to force the People, by withholding Corn from
them in a Famine, to relinquish the Magistracy of the Tribuns; in that of
SPURIUS CASSIUS for affecting Tyranny; of MARCUS SERGIUS for running away at
Veii; of CAIUS LUCRETIUS for spoiling his Province; of JUNIUS SILANUS for
making War, without a command from the People, against the Cimbri; with diverse
others. And the Crimes of this nature were called Laes^e Majestatis, or High
Treason. Examples of such as were arrain'd or tried for Peculat, or
Defraudation of the Commonwealth, were MARCUS CURIOUS, for intercepting the Money
of the Samnits; SALINATOR, for the inequal division of Spoils to his Soldiers;
MARCUS POSTHUMOUS, for cheating the Commonwealth by a feigned Shipwreck. Causes
of these two kinds were of a more public nature; but the like Power upon
Appeals was also exercised by the People in private matters, even during the
time of the Kings; as in the case of HORATIUS. Nor is it otherwise with Venice,
where the Doge LOREDANO was sentenced by the Great Council; and ANTONIO
GRIMANI, afterward Doge, questioned, for that he being Admiral had suffered
the Ture to take Lepanto in view of his Fleet.

NEVERTHELESS, there lay no Appeal from the Roman Dictator to the People; which
if there had, might have cost the Commonwealth dear, when SPURIUS MELIUS
affecting Empire, circumvented and debauched the Tribuns: whereupon ^ITUS
QUINTIUS CINCINNATUS was created Dictator; who having chosen SERVILIUS AHALA to
be his Lieutenant, or Magister Equitum, sent him to apprehend MELIUS, whom,
while he disputed the Commands of the Dictator, and implored the aid of the
People, AHALA cut off upon the place. By which example you may see in what
cases the Dictator may prevent the Blow which is ready somtims to fall e're the
People be aware of the Danger. Wherefore there lys no Appeal from the Dieci, or
the Council of Ten, in Venice, to the Great Council, nor from our Council of
War to the People. For the way of proceeding of this Tribe, or the Ballot, it
is, as was once said for all, Venetian.

THIS Discourse of Judicatorys whereupon we are fallen, brings us rather naturally
than of design from the two general Orders of every Commonwealth, that is to
say, from the debating part or the Senate, and the resolving part or the People,
to the third, which is the executive part or the Magistracy, whereupon I shall
have no need to dwell: For the executive Magistrates of this Commonwealth are
the Strategus in Arms; the Signory in their several Courts, as the Chancery,
the Exchequer; as also the Councils in diverse cases within their Instructions;
the Censors as well in their proper Magistracy, as in the Council of Religion;
the Tribuns in the Government of the Prerogative, and that Judicatory; and the
Judges with their Courts: Of all which so much is already said or known as may
suffice.

THE Tuesday Lectures or Orations to the People will be of great benefit to the
Senate, the Prerogative, and the whole Nation. To the Senate, because they will
not only teach your Senators Elocution, but keep the System of the Government
in their memorys. Elocution is of great use to your Senators; for if they do
not understand Rhetoric (giving it at this time for granted, that the Art were
not otherwise good) and com to treat with, or vindicat the cause of the
Commonwealth against some other Nation that is good at it, the advantage will be
subject to remain upon the merit of the Art, and not upon the merit of the
Cause. Furthermore, the Genius or Soul of this Government being in the whole
and in every part, they will never be of ability in determination upon any
particular, unless at the same time they have an Idea of the whole. That this
therefore must be, in that regard, of equal benefit to the Prerogative, is
plain; tho these have a greater concernment in it. For this Commonwealth is the
Estate of the People: and a man, you know, tho he be virtuous, yet if he dos
not understand his Estate, may run out or be cheated of it. Last of all, the
Treasures of the Politics will by this means be so opened, risled, and
dispersed, that this Nation will as soon dote, like the Indians, upon glass
Beads, as disturb your Government with Whimsys and Freaks of Motherwit; or
suffer themselves to be stutter'd out of their Libertys. There is not any
reason why your Grandees, your wise men of this Age, that laugh out and openly
at a Commonwealth as the most ridiculous thing, do not appear to be, as in this
regard they are, mere Idiots, but that the People have not eyes.

THERE remains no more relating to the Senate and the People than

24. Order. Constitution of the provincial part of the Senate and the People.
THE twenty fourth ORDER, whereby it is lawful for the Province of Marpesia to
have 30 Knights of their own election continually present in the Senate of
Oceana, together with 60 Deputys of Horse, and 120 of Foot in the Prerogative
Tribe, indu'd with equal Power (respect had to their quality and number) in the
Debate and Result of this Commonwealth: provided that they observe the Course
or Rotation of the same by the annual Return of 10 Knights, 20 Deputys of the
Horse, and 40 of the Foot. The like in all respects is lawful for Panopea; and
the Horse of both the Provinces amounting to one Troop, and the Foot to one
Company, one Captain and one Cornet of the Horse shall be annually chosen by
Marpesia, and one Captain and one Ensign of the Foot shall be annually chosen
by Panopea.

THE Orb of the Prerogative being thus complete, is not unnaturally compared to
that of the Moon, either in consideration of the Light borrowed from the Senate,
as from the Sun; or of the ebs and floods of the People, which are marked by
the Negative or Affirmative of this Tribe. And the Constitution of the Senate
and the People being Constitution of the Parliament.
shown, you have that of the Parliament of Oceana, consisting of the Senate
proposing, and of the People resolving; which amounts to an Act of Parliament.
So the Parliament is the Heart, which, consisting of two Ventricles, the one
greater and replenished with a grosser matter, the other less and full of a
purer, sucks in, and spouts forth the vital Blood of Oceana by a perpetual
Circulation. Wherefore the life of this Government is no more unnatural or
obnoxious upon this score to dissolution, than that of a Man; nor to giddiness
than the World: seeing the Earth, whether it be it self or the Heavens that are
in rotation, is so far from being giddy, that it could not subsist without
motion. But why should not this Government be much rather capable of duration
and steddiness by motion? than which God has ordained no other to the universal
Commonwealth of Mankind: seeing one Generation coms, and another gos, but the
Earth remains firm for ever; that is, in her proper Situation or Place, whether
she be moved or not moved upon her proper Center. The Senate, the People, and
the Magistracy, or the Parliament so constituted, as you have seen, is the
Guardian of this Commonwealth, and the Husband of such a Wife as is elegantly
described by SOLOMON. She is like the Merchant's Ship; she brings her Prove. 31.
Food from far. She considers a Field, and buys it: With the fruit of her hands
she plants a Vineyard. She perceives that her Merchandise is good. She
stretches forth her hands to the Poor. She is not afraid of the Snow for her
Household; for all her Household are clothed with Scarlet. She makes her self
Coverings of Tapestry; her Clothing is Silk and Purple, Her Husband is known
(by his Robes) in the Gates, when he sits among the Senators of the Land. The
Gates, or inferior Courts, were branches as it were of the Sanhedrim or Senate
of Israel. Nor is our Commonwealth a worse Houswife, or she has less regard to
her Magistrates; as may appear by

25. Order.
THE twenty fifth ORDER: That, whereas the public Revenue is through the late Civil
Wars dilapidated, the Excise, being improved or improvable to the Revenue of
one Million, be applied for the space of eleven years to com, to the reparation
of the same, and for the present maintenance of the Magistrates, Knights,
Deputys, and other Officers, who according to their several Dignitys and
Functions, shall annually receive toward the Support of the same, as follows.

THE Lord Strategus Marching, is, upon another account, to have Field Pay as
General. lib. per ann. THE Lord Strategus sitting -- 2000 THE Lord Orator --
2000 THE three Commissioners of the Seal -- 4500 THE three Commissioners of the
Treasury -- 4500 THE two Censors -- 3000 THE 290 Knights, at 500 l. a man --
145000 THE 4 Ambassadors in Ordinary -- 12000 THE Council of War for
Intelligence -- 3000 THE Master of the Ceremonys -- 500 THE Master of the Horse
-- 500 HIS Substitute -- 150 THE 12 Ballotins for their Winter Liverys -- 240
FOR their Summer Liverys -- 120 FOR their Boardwages -- 480 FOR the keeping of
three Coaches of State, 24 Coachhorses, with Coachmen and Postilions -- 1500
FOR the Grooms, and keeping of 16 great Horses for the Master of the Horse, and
for the Ballotins whom he is to govern and instruct in the Art of Riding -- 480
THE 20 Secretarys of the Parliament -- 2000 THE 20 Doorkeepers, who are to
attend with Poleaxes; for their Coats -- 200 FOR their Boardwages -- 1000 THE
20 Messengers, which are Trumpeters, for their Coats -- 200 FOR their
Boardwages -- 1000 FOR Ornament of the Musters of the Youth -- 5000 Sum --
189370

OVT of the personal Estates of every man, who at his Death bequeaths not above
forty shillings to the Muster of that Hundred wherein it lys, shall be levied
one per cent. till the solid Revenue of the Muster of the Hundred amounts to 50
l. per annum for the Prizes of the Youth.

THE twelve Ballotins are to be divided into three Regions, according to the
course of the Senate; the four of the first Region to be elected at the Tropic
out of such Children as the Knights of the same shall offer, not being under
eleven years of Age, nor above thirteen. And their Election shall be made by
the Lot at an Vrn set by the Sergeant of the House for that purpose in the Hall
of the Pantheon. The Livery of the Commonwealth for the fashion or the color
may be changed at the Election of the Strategus according to his phansy. But
every Knight during his Session shall be bound to give to his Footman, or some
one of his Footmen, the Livery of the Commonwealth.

THE Prerogative Tribe shall receive as follows.
lib. by the week. THE 2 Tribuns of the Horse -- 14 THE 2 Tribuns of the Foot
-- 12 THE 3 Captains of Horse -- 15 THE 3 Cornets -- 9 THE 3 Captains of Foot
-- 12 THE 3 Ensigns -- 7 THE 442 Horse, at 2 l. a man -- 884 THE 592 Foot, at 1
l. 10 s. a man -- 888 THE 6 Trumpeters -- 7 10 s. THE 3 Drummers -- 2 5 s. SVM
by the Week -- 1850 15 s. SVM by the Year 96239 THE Total of the Senate, the
People, and the Magistracy, 287459 15 s.

THE Dignity of the Commonwealth, and Aids of the several Magistracys and
Offices thereto belonging, being provided for as aforesaid, the Overplus of the
Excise, with the Product of the Sum rising, shall be carefully managed by the
Senate and the People through the diligence of the Officers of the Exchequer, till
it amounts to eight Millions, or to the purchase of about four hundred thousand
Pounds solid Revenue. At which time, the term of eleven years being expired,
the Excise, except it be otherwise ordered by the Senate and the People, shall
be totally remitted and abolished for ever.

AT this Institution the Taxes, as will better appear in the Corollary, were
abated about one half, which made the Order when it came to be tasted, to be of
good relish with the People in the very beginning; tho the Advantages then were
no ways comparable to the Consequences to be hereafter shown. Nevertheless, my
Lord EPIMONUS, who with much ado had bin held till now, found it midsummer
Moon, and broke out of Bedlam in this manner.

My Lord ARCHON,
I HAVE a singing in my head like that of a Cartwheel, my Brains are upon a
Rotation; and some are so merry, that a man cannot speak his griefs, but if your
highshod Prerogative, and those same slouching Fellows your Tribuns, do not
take my Lord Strategus's, and my Lord Orator's heads, and jole them together
under the Canopy, then let me be ridiculous to all Posterity. For here is a
Commonwealth, to which if a man should take that of the Prentices in their
ancient Administration of Justice at Shrovetide, it were an Aristocracy. You
have set the very Rabble with Troncheons in their hands, and the Gentry of this
Nation like Cocks with Scarlet Gills, and the Golden Combs of their Salarys to
boot, lest they should not be thrown at.

NOT a Night can I sleep for some horrid Apparition or other; one while these
Myrmidons are measuring Silks by their Quarterstaves; another, stuffing their
greasy Pouches with my Lord High Treasurers Jacobusses. For they are above a
thousand in Arms to three hundred, which, their Gowns being pulled over their
ears, are but in their Doublets and Hose. But what do I speak of a thousand?
there be two thousand in every Tribe, that is, a hundred thousand in the whole
Nation, not only in the posture of an Army, but in a civil Capacity sufficient
to give us what Laws they please. Now every body knows, that the lower sort of
People regard nothing but Money; and you say it is the Duty of a Legislator to
presume all men to be wicked: wherefore they must fall upon the richer, as they
are an Army; or, lest their minds should misgive them in such a villainy, you
have given them encouragement that they have a nearer way, seeing it may be don
every whit as well as by the overbalancing Power which they have in Elections.
There is a Fair which is annually kept in the Center of these Territorys at
Kiberton, a Town famous for Ale, and frequented by good Fellows; where there is
a Solemnity of the Pipers and Fiddlers of this Nation (I know not whether
Lacedemon, where the Senate kept account of the stops of the Flutes and of the
Fiddlestrings of that Commonwealth, had any such Custom) called the Bulrunning;
and he that catches and holds the Bull, is the annual and supreme Magistrate of
that Comitia or Congregation, called King Piper; without whose License it is
not lawful for any of those Citizens to enjoy the liberty of his Calling; nor
is he otherwise legitimatly qualified (or civitate donatus) to lead Apes or
Bears in any Perambulation of the same. Mine Host of the Bear, in Kiberton, the
Father of Ale, and Patron of good Footbal and Cudgelplayers, has any time since
I can remember, bin Grand Chancellor of this Order. Now, say I, seeing great
things arise from small beginnings, what should hinder the People, prone to
their own Advantage, and loving Money, from having Intelligence conveyed to them
by this same King Piper and his Chancellor, with their Loyal Subjects the
Minstrils and Bearwards, Masters of Ceremonys, to which there is great recourse
in their respective Perambulations, and which they will commission and
instruct, with Directions to all the Tribes, willing and commanding them, that
as they wish their own good, they choose no other into the next primum Mobile,
but of the ablest Cudgel and Footbalplayers? Which don as soon as said, your
primum Mobile consisting of no other stuff, must of necessity be drawn forth
into your Nebulones, and your Galimofrys; and so the silken Purses of your
Senate and Prerogative being made of Sows ears, most of them Blacksmiths, they
will strike while the Iron is hot, and beat your Estates into Hobnails; mine
Host of the Bear being Strategus, and King Piper Lord Orator. Well, my Lords,
it might have bin otherwise expressed, but this is well enough a conscience. In
your way, the Wit of man shall not prevent this or the like Inconvenience; but
if this (for I have conferred with Artists) be a mathematical Demonstration, I
could kneel to you, that e're it be too late we might return to some kind of
Sobriety.

IF we emty our Purses with these Pomps, Salarys, Coaches, Lacquys, and Pages,
what can the People say less, than that we have dressed a Senate and a Prerogative
for nothing, but to go to the Park with the Ladys?

MY Lord ARCHON, whose meekness resembl'd that of MOSES, vouchsafed this Answer.

My Lords;
FOR all this, I can see my Lord EPIMONUS every night in the Park, and with
Ladys; nor do I blame this in a young Man, or the Respect which is and ought to
be given to a Sex that is one half of the Commonwealth of Mankind, and without
which the other would be none: But our Magistrates, I doubt, may be somewhat of
the oldest to perform this part with much acceptance; and, as the Italian
Proverb says, To love and not enjoy, is the way to break ones heart.
Servire and non gradire e cosa da far morire. Wherefore we will lay no certain
Obligation upon them in this Point, but leave them, if it please you, to their
own fate or discretion. But this (for I know my Lord EPIMONUS loves me, tho I
can never get his esteem) I will say, if he had a Mistress should use him so,
he would find it a sad Life; or I appeal to your Lordships, how I can resent it
from such a Friend, that he puts King Piper's Politics in the Balance with
mine. King Piper, I deny not, may teach his Bears to dance, but they have the
worst ear of all Creatures. Now how he should make them keep time in fifty
several Tribes, and that two years together, for else it will be to no purpose,
may be a small matter with my Lord to promise; but it seems to me of impossible
performance. First, Through the nature of the Bean; and, Secondly, through that of
the Ballot; or how what he has hitherto thought so hard, is now com to be easy:
but he may think, that for expedition they will eat up these Balls like Apples.
However, there is so much more in their way by the Constitution of this, than
is to be found in that of any other Commonwealth, that I am reconciled; it now
appearing plainly, that the Points of my Lord's Arrows are directed at no other
White, than to show the excellency of our Government above others; which, as he
procedes further, is yet plainer; while he makes it appear, that there can be
no other elected by the People but Smiths, Brontesque Steropesque and nudus
membra Pyracmon:

OTHONIEL, AOD, GIDEON, JEPHTHA, SAMSON, as in Israel: MILTIADES, ARISTIDES,
THEMISTOCLES, CIMON, PERICLES, as in Athens: PAPYRIUS, CINCINNATUS, CAMILLUS,
FABIUS, SCIPIO, as in Rome: Smiths of the fortune of the Commonwealth; not such
as forged Hobnails, but Thunderbolts. Popular Elections are of that kind, that
all the rest of the World is not able, either in number or glory, to equal
those of these three Commonwealths. These indeed were the ablest Cudgel and
Footbal-players; bright Arms were their Cudgels, and the World was the Ball
that lay at their feet. Wherefore we are not so to understand the Maxim of
Legislators, which holds all men to be wicked, as if it related to Mankind or a
Commonwealth, the Interests whereof are the only strait lines they have whereby
to reform the crooked; but as it relates to every Man or Party, under what
color soever he or they pretend to be trusted apart, with or by the whole.
Hence then it is derived, which is made good in all experience, that the
Aristocracy is ravenous, and not the People. Your Highwaymen are not such as
have Trades, or have bin brought up to Industry; but such commonly whose
Education has pretended to that of Gentlemen. My Lord is so honest, he dos not
know the Maxims that are of absolute necessity to the Arts of Wickedness; for
it is most certain, if there be not more Purses than Thieves, that the Thieves
themselves must be forced to turn honest, because they cannot thrive by their
Trade: But now if the People should turn Thieves, who sees not that there would
be more Thieves than Purses? Wherefore that a whole People should turn Robbers
or Levellers, is as impossible in the end as in the means. But that I do not
think your Artist which you mentioned, whether Astronomer or Arithmetician, can
tell me how many Barlycorns would reach to the Sun; I could be content he were
called to the account, with which I shall conclude this Point: when by the way
I have chid my Lords the Legislators, who, as if they doubted my Tackling could
not hold, would leave me to flag in a perpetual Calm, but for my Lord EPIMONUS,
who breaths now and then into my Sails, and stirs the Waters. A Ship makes not
her way so briskly, as when she is handsomely brushed by the Waves, and tumbles
over those that seem to tumble against her; in which case I have perceived in
the dark, that Light has bin struck even out of the Sea, as in this place,
where my Lord EPIMONUS feigning to give us a demonstration of one thing, has
given it of another, and of a better. For the People of this Nation, if they
amount in each Tribe to two thousand Elders, and two thousand Youths, upon the
annual Roll, holding a fifth to the whole Tribe; then the whole of a Tribe, not
accounting Women and Children, must amount to twenty thousand; and so the whole
of all the Tribes, being fifty, to one Million. Now you have ten thousand
Parishes, and reckoning these one with another, each at one thousand pounds a
Year dry Rent, the Rent or Revenue of the Nation, as it is or might be let to
Farm, amounts to ten Millions; and ten Millions in Revenue divided equally to
one Million of men, coms but to ten pounds a year to each wherewith to maintain
himself, his Wife and Children. But he that has a Cow upon the Common, and
earns his Shilling by the day at his labor, has twice as much already as this
would com to for his share; because if the Land were thus divided, there would
be no body to set him on work. So my Lord EPIMONUS'S Footman, who costs him
thrice as much as one of these could thus get, would certainly lose by this
bargain. What should we speak of those innumerable Trades whereupon men live,
not only better than others upon good shares of Lands, but become also
purchasers of greater Estates? Is not this the demonstration which my Lord
meant, that the Revenue of Industry in a Nation, at least in this, is three or
fourfold greater than that of the mere Rent? If the People then obstruct
Industry, they obstruct their own livelihood; but if they make a War, they
obstruct Industry. Take the Bread out of the Peoples mouths, as did the Roman
Patricians, and you are sure enough of a War, in which case they may be
Levellers; but our Agrarian causes their Industry to slow with Milk and Honey.
It will be owned, that this is true, if the People were given O fortunati
nimium, bona si sua norint, Agricolae!
to understand their own happiness; But where is it they do that? Let me reply
with the like question, Where do they not? They do not know their happiness it
should seem in France, Spain, and Italy: but reach them what it is, and try
whose Sense is the truer. As to the late Wars in Germany, it has bin affirmed
to me there, that the Princes could never make the People to take Arms while
they had Bread, and have therefore suffered Countries now and then to be wasted,
that they might get Soldiers. This you will find to be the certain pulse and
temper of the People; and if they have bin already proved to be the most wise
and constant Order of a Government, why should we think (when no man can
produce one Example of the common Soldiery in an Army mutinying because they
had not Captains pay) that the Prerogative should jole the heads of the Senate
together, because these have the better Salarys; when it must be as evident to
the People in a Nation, as to the Soldiery in an Army, that it is no more
possible their Emoluments of this kind should be afforded by any Commonwealth
in the World to be made equal with those of the Senate, than that the common
Soldiers should be equal with the Captains? It is enough for the common
Soldier, that his Virtue may bring him to be a Captain, and more to the
Prerogative, that each of them is nearer to be a Senator.

IF my Lord thinks our Salarys too great, and that the Commonwealth is not
Houswife enough; whether is it better Houswisery that she should keep her
Family from the Snow, or suffer them to burn her House that they may warm
themselves? for one of these must be. Do you think that she came off at a
cheaper rate, when men had their Rewards by a thousand, two thousand pounds a
Year in Land of Inheritance? If you say, that they will be more godly than they
have bin, it may be ill taken; and if you cannot promise that, it is time we
find out some way of stinting at least, if not curing them of that same sacra
Fames. On the other side, if a poor man (as such a one may save a City) gives
his sweat to the Public, with what conscience can you suffer his Family in the
mean time to starve? But he that lays his hand to this Plow, shall not lose by
taking it off from his own: and a Commonwealth that will mend this, shall be
penny wise. The Sanhedrim of Israel being the Supreme, and a constant Court of
Judicature, could not choose but be exceeding gainful. The Senate of the Bean in
Athens, because it was but annual, was moderatly salariated; but that of the
Areopagits being for Life, bountifully: and what advantages the Senators of
Lacedemon had, where there was little Money or use of it, were in Honors for
life. The Patricians having no profit, took all. Venice being a Situation,
where a man gos but to the door for his Employment, the Honor is great, and the
Reward very little: but in Holland a Counsillor of State has fifteen hundred
Flemish Pounds a Year, besides other Accommodations. The States General have
more. And that Commonwealth looks nearer her Penny than ours needs to do.

FOR the Revenue of this Nation, besides that of her Industry, it amounts, as
has bin shown, to ten Millions; and the Salarys in the whole com not to three
hundred thousand Pounds a Year. The Beauty they will add to the Commonwealth
will be exceeding great, and the People will delight in this Beauty of their
Commonwealth; the Encouragement they will give to the study of the Public being
very profitable, the Accommodation they will afford to your Magistrates very
honorable and easy. And the Sum, when it or twice as much was spent in Hunting
and Housekeeping, was never any grievance to the People. I am ashamed to stand
huckling upon this Point; it is sordid. Your Magistrates are rather to be
provided with further Accommodations. For what if there should be Sickness?
whither will you have them to remove? And this City in the soundest Times, for
the heat of the Year, is no wholesome abode: have a care of their Healths to whom
you commit your own. I would have the Senate and the People, except they see
cause to the contrary, every first of June to remove into the Country Air for
the space of three months. You are better fitted with Summerhouses for them,
than if you had built them to that purpose. There is some twelve miles distant
the Convallium upon the River Halci^nia, for the Tribuns and the Prerogative, a
Palace capable of a thousand Men: and twenty miles distant you have Mount
Cel^^, reverend as well for the Antiquity as State of a Castle completely
capable of the Senate: the Proposers having Lodgings in the Convallium, and the
Tribuns in Celia, it holds the Correspondency between the Senate and the People
exactly. And it is a small matter for the Proposers, being attended with the
Coaches and Officers of State, besides other Conveniences of their own, to go a
matter of five or ten miles (those Seats are not much further distant) to meet
the People upon any Heath or Field that shall be appointed: where, having
dispatched their business, they may hunt their own Venizon (for I would have
the great walled Park upon the H^lcionia to belong to the Signory, and those
about the Convallium (...) the Tribuns) and so go to supper. Pray, my Lords,
see that they do not pull down these Houses to sell the Lead of them; for when
you have considered on it, they cannot be spared. The Founders of the School in
Hiera provided that the Boys should have a Summer Seat. You should have as much
care of these Magistrates. But there is such a selling, such a Jewish humor in
our Republicans, that I cannot tell what to say to it; only this, any man that
knows what belongs to a Commonwealth, or how diligent every Nation in that case
has bin to preserve her Ornaments, and shall see the wast lately made (the
Woods adjoining to this City, which served for the delight and health of it,
being cut down to be sold for three pence) will tell you, that they who did
such things would never have made a Commonwealth. The like may be said of the
Ruin or Damage don upon our Cathedrals, Ornaments in which this Nation excels
all others. Nor shall this ever be excused upon the score of Religion; for tho
it be true, that God dwells not in Houses made with hands, yet you cannot hold
your Assemblys but in such Houses, and these are of the best that have bin made
with hands. Nor is it well argued that they are pompous, and therefore profane,
or less proper for Divine Service; seeing the Christians in the Primitive
Church chose to meet with one accord in the Temple; so far were they from any
inclination to pull it down.

THE Orders of this Commonwealth, so far, or near so far as they concern the
Elders, together with the several Speeches at the Institution, which may serve
for the better understanding of them as so many Commentaries, being shown; I
should now com from the Elders to the Youth, or from the Civil Constitution of
this Government to the Military, but that I judge this the fittest place
wherinto, by the way, to insert the Government of the City, tho for the present
but perfunctorily.

The Government of Emporium.
THE Metropolis or Capital City of Oceana is commonly called Emporium, tho it
consists of two Citys distinct, as well in Name as in Government, whereof the
other is called Hiera: For which cause I shall treat of each apart, beginning
with Emporium.

The City-Tribes and Wards.
EMPORIUM with the Libertys is under a twofold Division, the one regarding the
National, and the other the Urban or City Government. It is divided, in regard
of the National Government, into three Tribes, and in respect of the Urban into
twenty six, which for distinction sake are called Wards, being contained under
the three Tribes but inequally: Wherefore the first Tribe containing ten Wards
is called Scazon, the second containing eight Metoche, and the third containing
as many, Telicouta; the bearing of which names in mind concerns the better
understanding of the Government.

Wardmote.
EVERY Ward has her Wardmote, Court, or Inquest, consisting of all that are of
the Clothing or Liverys of Companys residing within the same.

The Liverys.
SVCH are of the Livery or Clothing as have attained to the dignity to wear
Gowns and particolor'd Hoods or Tippets, according to the Rules and ancient
Customs of their respective Companys.

The Companys.
A COMPANY is a Brotherhood of Tradesmen professing the same Art, governed
according to their Charter by a Master and Wardens. Of these there be about
sixty, whereof twelve are of greater dignity than the rest, that is to say, the
Mercers, Grocers, Drapers, Fishmongers, Goldsmiths, Skinners, Merchant-Taylors,
Haberdashers, Salters, Ironmongers, Vintners, Clothworkers; which, with most of
the rest, have common CommonHalls.
Halls, diverse of them being of ancient and magnificent Structure, wherein they
have frequent meetings at the Summons of their Masters or Wardens, for the
managing and regulation of their respective Trades and Mysterys. These
Companys, as I shall show, are the Roots of the whole Government of the City.
For the Liverys that reside in the same Ward, meeting at the Wardmote Inquest
(to which it belongs to take cognizance of all sorts of Nusances, and
violations of the Customs and Orders of the City, and to present them to the
Court of Aldermen) have also power to make election of two sorts of Magistrates
or Officers; the first of Elders or Aldermen of the Ward, the second of Deputys
of the same, otherwise called Common Council men.

Election of Aldermen, and of the Common Council men.
THE Wards in these Elections, because they do not elect all at once, but some
one year, and some another, observe the distinction of the three Tribes; for
example, the Scazon consisting of ten Wards, makes election the first Year of
ten Aldermens* one in each Ward, and of one hundred and fifty Deputys, fifteen
in each Ward* all which are Triennial Magistrates or Officers, that is to say,
are to bear their dignity for the space of three Years.

THE second Year, the Metoche, consisting of eight Wards, elects eight
Aldermen, one in each Ward, and a hundred and twenty Deputys, fifteen in each
Ward; being also Triennial Magistrates.

THE third Year Telicouta, consisting of a like number of Wards, elects an
equal number of like Magistrates for a like term. So that the whole number of
the Aldermen, according to that of the Wards, amounts to twenty six; and the
whole number of the Deputys, to three hundred and ninety.

The Court of Aldermen.
THE Aldermen thus elected have diverse Capacitys: for, first, they are Justices
of the Peace for the term, and in consequence of their Election. Secondly, They
are Presidents of the Wardmote, and Governors each of that Ward whereby he was
elected. And last of all, these Magistrates being assembled together, constitute
the Senate of the City, otherwise called the Court of Aldermen: but no man is
capable of this Election that is not worth ten thousand Pounds. This Court upon
every new Election, makes choice of nine Censors out of their own number.

The Common Council.
THE Deputys in like manner being assembled together, constitute the
Prerogative Tribe of the City, otherwise called the Common Council: by which
means the Senate and the People of the City were comprehended, as it were, by
the motion of the National Government, into the same Wheel of annual,
triennial, and perpetual Revolution.

The Common Hall.
BUT the Liverys, over and above the right of these Elections by their
Divisions mentioned, being assembled all together at the Guild of the City,
constitute another Assembly called the Common Hall.

The Election of the Lord Mayor and Sherifs.
THE Common Hall has the right of two other Elections; the one of the Lord
Mayor, and the other of the two Sherifs, being annual Magistrates. The Lord
Mayor can be elected out of no other than one of the twelve Companys of the
first Ranks; and the Common Hall agrees by the plurality of Suffrages upon two
Names: which being presented to the Lord Mayor for the time being, and the
Court of Aldermen, they elect one by their Scrutiny; for so they call it, tho
it differs from that of the Commonwealth. The Orator or Assistant to the Lord
Mayor in holding of his Courts, is some able Lawyer elected by the Court of
Aldermen, and called the Recorder of Emporium.

THE Lord Mayor being thus elected, has two Capacitys; one regarding the
Nation, and the other the City. In that which regards the City, he is President
of the Court of Aldermen, having power to assemble the same, or any other
Council of the City, as the Common Council or Common Hall, at his will and
pleasure: and in that which regards the Nation, he is Commander in Chief of the
three Tribes wherinto the City is divided; one of which he is to bring up in
Person at the National Muster to the Ballot, as his Vicecomites, or High
Sherifs, are to do by the other two, each at their distinct Pavilion, where the
nine Aldermen, elected Censors, are to officiat by three in each Tribe,
according to the Rules and Orders already given to the Censors of the rustic
Tribes. And the Tribes of the City have no other than one common Phylarch,
which is the Court of Aldermen and the Common Council; for which cause they
elect not at their Muster the first List called the Prime Magnitude.

Some Conveniences in this Alteration.
THE Conveniences of this Alteration of the City Government, besides the bent
of it to a conformity with that of the Nation, were many, whereof I shall
mention but a few: As first, whereas men under the former administration, when
the burden of some of these Magistracys lay for life, were oftentimes chosen not
for their fitness, but rather unfitness, or at least unwillingness to undergo
such a weight, whereby they were put at great Rates to fine for their ease; a
man might now take his share in Magistracy with that equity which is due to the
Public, and without any inconvenience to his private Affairs. Secondly, Whereas
the City (inasmuch as the Acts of the Aristocracy, or Court of Aldermen, in
their former way of proceeding, were rather Impositions than Propositions) was
frequently disquieted with the inevitable consequence of disorder in the power
of Debate exercised by the popular Part, or Common Council; the right of Debate
being henceforth established in the Court of Aldermen, and that of Result in
the Common Council, killed the branches of Division in the Root. Which for the
present may suffice to have bin said of the City of Emporium.

The Government of Hiera.
THAT of HIERA consists as to the National Government of two Tribes, the first
called Agoraea, the second Propola: But as to the peculiar Policy, of twelve
Manipuls, or Wards divided into three Cohorts, each Cohort containing four
Wards; whereof the Wards of the first Cohort elect for the first Year four
Burgesses, one in each Ward; the Wards of the second Cohort for the second year
four Burgesses, one in each Ward; and the Wards of the third Cohort for the
third Year four Burgesses, one in each Ward; all triennial Magistrates: by which
the twelve Burgesses, making one Court for The Court.
the Government of this City, according to their Instructions by Act of
Parliament, fall likewise into an Annual, Triennial, and perpetual Revolution.

The High Steward.
THIS Court being thus constituted, makes election of diverse Magistrates; As
first of a High Steward, who is commonly some Person of Quality, and this
Magistracy is elected in the Senate by the Scrutiny of this Court; with him they
choose some able Lawyer to be his Deputy, and to hold the Court; and last of all
they elect out of their own Number six Censors.

THE High Steward is Commander in Chief of the two Tribes, whereof he in Person
brings up the one at the National Muster to the Ballot, and his Deputy the
other at a distinct Pavilion; the six Censors chosen by the Court, officiating
by three in each Tribe at the Vrns: and these Tribes have no other Phylarch but
this Court.

AS for the manner of Elections and Suffrage, both in Emporium and Hiera, it
may be said once for all, that they are performed by the Ballot, and according
to the respective Rules already given.

THERE be other Citys and Corporations throout the Territory, whose Policy
being much of this kind, would be tedious and not worth the labor to insert,
nor dare I stay. Juvenum manus emicat ardens.

I RETURN, according to the method of the Commonwealth, to the remaining part
of her Orbs, which are Military and Provincial; the Military, except the
Strategus, and the Polemarchs or Field Officers, consisting of the Youth only,
and the Provincial consisting of a mixture both of the Elders and of the Youth.

TO begin with the Youth, or the military Orbs, they are Circles to which the
Commonwealth must have a care to keep close. A Man is a Spirit raised by the
Magic of Nature; if she dos not stand safe, and so that she may set him to some
good and useful work, he spits fire, and blows up Castles: for where there is
life, there must be motion or work; and the work of idleness is mischief, but
the work of industry is health. To set Men to this, the Commonwealth must begin
betimes with them, or it will be too late: and the means whereby she sets them
to it, is EDUCATION, the plastic art of Government. But it is as frequent as
sad in experience (whether through negligence, or, which in the consequence is all
one or worse, oversondness in the domestic performance of this Duty) that
innumerable Children com to ow their utter Perdition to their own Parents; in
each of which the Commonwealth loses a Citizen. Wherefore the Laws of a
Government, how vvholsom soever in themselves, are such as, if Men by a
congruity in their Education be not bred to find a relish in them, they will be
sure to loath and detest. The Education therefore of a Man's own Children is not
wholy to be committed or trusted to himself. You find in Assueti more regio
vivere -- inter se conquerebantur -- Regem homin^m esse a quo impetres ubi jus,
ubi injuria opus sit; esse gratiae locum, esse benesicio; and irasci and
ignoscere posse; inter amicum and inimicum discrimen nosse. Leges rem surdam,
inexorabil^m esse; salubriorem, melioremque inopi quam potenti; nihil laxamenti
nec veniae habere, si medum excesseris; periculosum esse in tot humanis
erroribus sola innocentia vivere. Live. l. 2.
LIVY the Children of BRUTUS having bin bred under Monarchy, and used to a Court
life, making faces at the Commonwealth of Rome: A King (say they) is a Man
with whom you may prevail when you have need there should be Law, or when you
have need there should be no Law; he has Favors in the right, and he frowns not
in the wrong place; he knows his Friends from his Enemies. But Laws are deaf
inexorable things, such as make no difference between a Gentleman and an
ordinary fellow; a Man can never be merry for them, for to trust altogether to
his own innocence is a sad life. Unhappy wantons! SCIPIO on the other side,
when he was but a Boy (about two or three and twenty) being informed that
certain Patricians or Roman Gentlemen, through a qualm upon the defeat which
HANNIBAL had given them at Cannae, were laying their heads together and
contriving their Flight with the transportation of their Goods out of Rome,
drevv his Sword, and setting himself at the door of the Chamber where they
were at Council, protested, That who did not immediately swear not to desert
the Commonwealth, he would make his Soul to desert his Body. Let Men argue as
they please for Monarchy, or against a Commonwealth, the world shall never see
any Man so sottish or wicked as in cool blood to prefer the Education of the
Sons of BRUTUS before that of SCIPIO; and of this mould, except a MELIUS or a
MANLIUS, was the whole youth of that Commonwealth, tho not ordinarily so well
cast. Now the health of a Government, and the education of the Youth being of
the same pulse, no wonder if it has bin the constant practice of well ordered
Commonwealths to commit the care and feeling of it to public Magistrates. A duty
that was performed in such a manner by the Areopagits, as is elegantly praised
by ISOCRATES. The Athenians, says he, write not their Laws upon dead Walls, nor
content themselves with having ordained Punishments for Crimes, but provide in
such a way by the Education of their Youth, that there be no Crimes for
Punishment. He speaks of those Laws which regarded Manners, not of those Orders
which concerned the Administration of the Commonwealth, lest you should think
he contradicts XENOPHON and POLYBIUS. The Children of Lacedemon, at the seventh
year of their age, were delivered to the Paedonomi, or Schoolmasters, not
mercenary, but Magistrates of the Commonwealth, to which they were accountable
for their charge: and by these at the age of fourteen they were presented to
other Magistrates called the Beidiaei, having the inspection of the Games and
Exercises, among which that of the Platanis^a was famous, a kind of Fight in
Squadrons, but somewhat too sierce. When they came to be of military age, they
were listed of the Mora, and so continued in readiness for public Service under
the Discipline of the Polemarchs. But the Roman Education and Discipline by the
Centurys and Classes is that to which the Commonwealth of Oceana has had a more
particular regard in her three Essays, being certain degrees by which the Youth
commence as it were in Arms for Magistracy, as appears by

26. Order.
THE twenty sixth ORDER, instituting, That if a Parent has but one Son, the
Education of that one Son shall be wholly at the disposition of that Parent.
But whereas there be Free Schools erected and endowed, or to be erected and
endowed in every Tribe of this Nation, to a sufficient proportion for the
Education of the Children of the same (which Schools, to the end there be no
detriment or hindrance to the Scholars upon case of removing from one to
another, are every of them to be governed by the strict inspection of the
Censors of the Tribes, both upon the Schoolmasters manner of Life and Teaching,
and the proficiency of the Children, after the rules and method of that in
Hiera) if a Parent has more Sons than one, the Censors of the Tribes shall
animadvert upon and punish him that sends not his Sons within the ninth year of
their age to some one of the Schools of a Tribe, there to be kept and taught if
he be able at his own charges; and if he be not able, gratis, till they arrive
at the age of fifteen years. And a Parent may dispose of his Sons at the
fifteenth year of their age according to his choice or ability, whether it be
to Service in the way of Apprentices to some Trade or otherwise, or to further
study, as by sending them to the Ins of Court, of Chancery, or to one of the
Vniversitys of this Nation. But he that takes not upon him one of the
Professions proper to some of those places, shall not continue longer in any of
them than till he has attained to the age of eighteen years; and every Man
having not at the age of eighteen years taken upon him, or addicted himself to
the profession of the Law, Theology, or Physic, and being no Servant, shall be
capable of the Essays of the Youth, and no other person whatsoever: except a
Man, having taken upon him such a profession, happens to lay it by, ere he
arrives at three or four and twenty years of age, and be admitted to this
Capacity by the respective Phylarch, being satisfied that he kept not out so
long with any design to evade the Service of the Commonwealth; but, that being
no sooner at his own disposal, it was no sooner in his choice to com in. And if
any Youth or other Person of this Nation have a desire to travel into foren
Countries upon occasion of business, delight, or further improvement of his
Education; the same shall be lawful for him upon a Pass obtained from the
Censors in Parliament, putting a convenient limit to the time, and recommending
him to the Ambassadors by whom he shall be assisted, and to whom he shall yield
Honor and Obedience in their respective Residences. Every Youth at his return
from his Travel is to present the Censors with a Paper of his own writing,
containing the Interest of State or Form of Government of the Countries, or some
one of the Countries where he has bin; and if it be good, the Censors shall
cause it to be printed and published, prefixing a Line in commendation of the
Author.

EVERY Wednesday next ensuing the last of December, the whole Youth of every
Parish, that is to say every Man (not excepted by the foregoing part of the
Order) being from eighteen years of age to thirty, shall repair at the sound of
the Bell to their respective Church, and being there assembled in presence of
the Overseers, who are to govern the Ballot, and the Constable who is to
officiat at the Vrn, shall, after the manner of the Elders, elect every fifth
Man of their whole number (provided that they choose not above one of two
Brothers at one Election, nor above half if they be four or upward) to be a
Stratiot or Deputy of the Youth; and the List of the Stratiots so elected being
taken by the Overseers, shall be entered in the Parish Book, and diligently
preserved as a Record, called the first Essay, They whose Estates by the Law
are able, or whose Friends are willing to mount them, shall be of the Horse,
the rest are of the Foot. And he who has bin one year of this List, is not
capable of being reelected till after another year's interval.

EVERY Wednesday next ensuing the last of January, the Stratiots being mustered
at the Rendevouz of their respective Hundred, shall in the presence of the
Jurymen, who are Overseers of that Ballot, and of the High Constable who is to
officiat at the Vrn, elect out of the Horse of their Troop or Company one
Captain, and one Ensign or Cornet, to the command of the same. And the Jurymen
having entered the List of the Hundred into a Record to be diligently kept at
the Rendevouz of the same; the first public Game of this Commonwealth shall
begin and be performed in this manner. Whereas there is to be at every Rendevouz
of a Hundred one Cannon, Culverin, or Saker; the prize Arms being forged by
sworn Armorers of this Commonwealth, and for their proof, besides their Beauty,
viewed and tried at the Tower of Emporium, shall be exposed by the Justice of
Peace appertaining to that Hundred (the said Justice with the Jurymen being
Judges of the Game) and the Judges shall deliver to the Horsman that gains the
Prize at the Career, one suit of Arms being of the value of twenty Pounds; to
the Pikeman that gains the Prize at throwing the Bullet, one suit of Arms of
the value of ten Pounds; to the Musketeer that gains the Prize at the Mark with
his Musket, one suit of Arms of the value of ten Pounds; and to the Cannoneer
that gains the Prize at the mark with the Cannon, Culverin, or Saker, a Chain
of Silver being of the value of ten Pounds; provided, that no one man at the
same Muster plays above one of the Prizes. Whosoever gains a Prize is bound to
wear it (if it be his lot) upon Service; and no man shall sell or give away any
Armor thus won, except he has lawfully attained to two or more of them at the
Games.

THE Games being ended, and the Muster dismissed, the Captain of the Troop or
Company shall repair with a Copy of the List to the Lord Lieutenant of the
Tribe, and the High Constable with a Duplicat of the same to the Custos
Rotulorum, or Mustermaster General, to be also communicated to the Censors; in
each of which the Jurymen giving a note upon every name of an only Son, shall
certify that the List is without subterfuge or evasion: or, if it be not, an
account of those upon whom the Evasion or Subterfuge lys, to the end that the
Phylarch or the Censors may animadvert accordingly.

AND every Wednesday next ensuing the last of February, the Lord Lieutenant,
Custos Rotulorum, the Censors, and the Conductor, shall receive the whole
Muster of the Youth of that Tribe at the Rendevouz of the same, distributing
the Horse and Foot with their Officers, according to the Directions given in
the like case for the distribution of the Elders; and the whole Squadron being
put by that means in Battalia, the second Game of this Commonwealth shall begin
by the exercise of the Youth in all the parts of their military Discipline
according to the Orders of Parliament, or direction of the Council of War in
that case. And the hundred Pounds allowed by the Parliament for the Ornament of
the Muster in every Tribe, shall be expended by the Phylarch upon such
artificial Castles, Citadels, or the like Devices, as may make the best and
most profitable sport for the Youth and their Spectators. Which being ended,
the Censors having prepared the Vrns by putting into the Horse Vrn 220 Gold
Balls, whereof ten are to be marked with the letter M, and other ten with the
letter P; into the Foot Vrn 700 Gold Balls, whereof 50 are to be marked with the
letter M, and 50 with the letter P: and after they have made the Gold Balls in
each Vrn, by the addition of Silver Balls to the same, in number equal with the
Horse and Foot of the Stratiots, the Lord Lieutenant shall call the Stratiots
to the Vrns, where they that draw the Silver Balls shall return to their
places, and they that draw the Gold Balls shall fall off to the Pavilion,
where, for the space of one hour, they may chop and change their Balls
according as one can agree with another, whose Lot he likes better. But the
hour being out, the Conductor separating them whose Gold Balls have no letter,
from those whose Balls are marked, shall cause the Crier to call the Alphabet,
as first A; whereupon all they whose Gold Balls are not marked, and whose
sirnames begin with the letter A, shall repair to a Clerc appertaining to the
Custos Rotulorum, who shall first take the names of that letter; then those of
B, and so on, till all the names be alphabetically inrol'd. And the Youth of
this List being six hundred Foot in a Tribe, that is, 30000 Foot in all the
Tribes; and two hundred Horse in a Tribe, that is, 10000 Horse in all the
Tribes, are the second Essay of the Stratiots, and the standing Army of this
Commonwealth to be always ready upon command to march. They whose Balls are
marked with M, amounting, by 20 Horse and 50 Foot in a Tribe, to 2500 Foot, and
500 Horse in all the Tribes; and they whose Balls are marked with P, in every
point correspondent, are parts of the third Essay: they of M being straight to
march for Marpesia, and they of P for Panopea, to the ends, and according to
the further directions following in the Order for the provincial Orbs.

IF the Polemarchs or Field Officers be elected by the scrutiny of the Council
of War, and the Strategus commanded by the Parliament or the Dictator to march,
the Lords Lieutenants (who have power to muster and discipline the Youth so
often as they receive Orders for the same from the Council of War) are to
deliver the second Essay, or so many of them as shall be commanded, to the
Conductors, who shall present them to the Lord Strategus at the time and place
appointed by his Excellency to be the general Rendevou of Oceana, where the
Council of War shall have the accommodation of Horses and Arms for his men in
readiness: and the Lord Strategus having armed, mounted, and distributed them,
whether according to the recommendation of their Prize Arms, or otherwise,
shall lead them away to his Shipping, being also ready and provided with
Victuals, Ammunition, Artillery, and all other necessarys; commanding them, and
disposing of the whole Conduct of the War by his sole Power and Authority. And
this is the third Essay of the Stratiots, which being shipped, or marched out of
their Tribes, the Lord Lieutenants shall reelect the second Essay out of the
remaining part of the first; and the Senate another Strategus.

IF any Veteran or Veterans of this Nation, the term of whose Youth or Militia
is expired, having a desire to be entertained in the further service of the
Commonwealth, shall present him or themselves at the Rendevou of Oceana to the
Strategus, it is in his power to take on such and so many of them as shall be
agreed by the Polemarchs, and to send back an equal number of the Stratiots.

AND for the better managing of the proper Forces of this Nation, the Lord
Strategus, by appointment of the Council of War, and out of such Levys as they
shall have made in either or both of the Provinces to that end, shall receive
Auxiliarys by Sea or elsewhere at some certain place, not exceeding his proper
Arms in number.

AND whosoever shall refuse any one of his three Essays, except upon cause
shown he be dispensed withal by the Phylarch; or, if the Phylarch be not
assembled, by the Censors of his Tribe, shall be deemed a Helot or public
Servant, shall pay a fifth part of his yearly Revenue, besides all other Taxes,
to the Commonwealth for his Protection, and be incapable of bearing any
Magistracy except such as is proper to the Law. Nevertheless if a man has but
two Sons, the Lord Lieutenant shall not suffer above one of them to com to the
Vrn at one Election of the second Essay: and tho he has above two Sons, there
shall not com above half the Brothers at one Election: and if a man has but one
Son, he shall not com to the Vrn at all without the consent of his Parents, or
his Guardians; nor shall it be any reproach to him, or impediment to his
bearing of Magistracy.

THIS Order, with relation to foren Expeditions, will be proved and explained
together with

27. Order.
THE twenty seventh ORDER, providing, in case of Invasion apprehended, that the
Lords High Sherifs of the Tribes upon Commands received from the Parliament, or
the Dictator, distribute the Bands of the Elders into divisions after the
nature of the Essays of the Youth; and that the second Division or Essay of the
Elders, being made and consisting of 30000 Foot, and 10000 Horse, be ready to
march with the second Essay of the Youth, and be brought also by the Conductors
to the Strategus.

THE second Essay of the Elders and Youth being marched out of their Tribes,
the Lords High Sherifs and Lieutenants shall have the remaining part of the
annual Bands both of Elders and Youth in readiness, which, if the Beacons be
fired, shall march to the Rendevou to be in that case appointed by the
Parliament, or the Dictator. And the Beacons being fired, the Curiata Comitia,
or Parochial Congregations, shall elect a fourth both of Elders and Youth to be
immediately upon the Guard of the Tribes, and dividing themselves as aforesaid,
to march also in their Divisions according to Orders: which method in case of
extremity shall proceed to the election of a third, or the levy of a second, or
of the last man in the Nation, by the Power of the Lords High Sherifs; to the
end that the Commonwealth in her utmost pressure may show her trust that God in
his Justice will remember Mercy, by humbling her self, and yet preserving her
Courage, Discipline and Constancy, even to the last drop of her blood, and the
utmost farthing.

THE Services performed by the Youth, or by the Elders, in case of Invasion,
and according to this Order, shall be at their proper cost and charges that are
any ways able to endure it; but if there be such as are known in their Parishes
to be so indigent that they cannot march out of their Tribes, nor undergo the
burden in this case incumbent, then the Congregations of their Parishes shall
furnish them with sufficient sums of Money to be repaid upon the Certificat of
the same by the Parliament when the Action shall be over. And of that which is
respectively enjoined by this Order, any Tribe, Parish, Magistrate, or Person
that shall fail, is to answer for it at the Council of War, as a Deserter of
his Country.

THE ARCHON, being the greatest Captain of his own, if not of any age, added
much to the Glory of this Commonwealth, by interweaving the Militia with more
Art and Luster than any Legislator from or before the time of SERVIUS TULLIUS,
who constituted the Roman Militia. But as the Bones or Skeleton of a man, tho
the greatest part of his Beauty be contained in their Proportion or Symmetry,
yet shown without Flesh, are a spectacle that is rather horrid than
entertaining; so without Discourses are the Orders of a Commonwealth: which, if
she gos forth in that manner, may complain of her Friends that they stand mute,
and staring upon her. Wherefore this Order was thus fleshed by the Lord ARCHON.

My Lords;
DIOGENES seeing a young Fellow drunk, told him that his Father was drunk when
he begot him. For this in natural Generation I must confess I see no reason;
but in the Political it is right. The Vices of the People are from their
Governors; those of their Governors from their Laws or Orders; and those of
their Laws or Orders from their Legislators. Ut male posuimus initia, sic
catera sequuntur. Cic.
Whatever was in the Womb imperfect, as to her proper work, coms very rarely, or
never at all to perfection afterward: and the formation of a Citizen in the
Womb of the Commonwealth is his Education.

EDUCATION by the first of the foregoing Orders is of six kinds: At the School,
in the Mechanics, at the Universitys, at the Ins of Court or Chancery, in
Travels, and in military Discipline: some of which I shall but touch, and some I
shall handle more at large.

Schools.
THAT which is proposed for the erecting and indowing of Schools throout the
Tribes, capable of all the Children of the same, and able to give to the Poor
the Education of theirs gratis, is only matter of direction in case of very
great Charity, as easing the needy of the charge of their Children from the
ninth to the fifteenth year of their age, during which time their work cannot
be profitable; and restoring them when they may be of use, furnished with tools
whereof there are advantages to be made in every work, seeing he that can read
and use his Pen has some convenience by it in the meanest Vocation. And it
cannot be conceived, but that which coms, tho in small parcels, to the
advantage of every man in his Vocation, must amount to the advantage of every
Vocation, and so to that of the whole Commonwealth. Wherefore this is commended
to the Charity of every wisehearted and welminded man, to be don in time, and
as God shall stir him up or enable him; there being such provision already in
the case, as may give us leave to proceed without obstruction.

Mechanics in general.
PARENTS, under animadversion of the Censors, are to dispose of their Children
at the fifteenth year of their age to something; but what, is lest, according to
their abilitys or inclination, at their own choice. This, with the multitude,
must be to the Mechanics, that is to say, to Agriculture or Husbandry; to
Manufactures, or to Merchandise.

Husbandry.
AGRICULTURE is the Bread of the Nation; we are hung upon it by the teeth; it
is a mighty Nursery of Strength, the best Army, and the most assured Knapsac;
it is managed with the least turbulent or ambitious, and the most innocent
hands of all other Arts. Wherefore I am of ARISTOTLE'S opinion, that a
Commonwealth of Husbandmen, and such is ours, must be the best of all others.
Certainly, my Lords, you have no measure of what ought to be, but what can be
don for the encouragement of this Profession. I could wish I were Husband good
enough to direct something to this end; but racking of Rents is a vile thing in
the richer sort, an uncharitable one to the poorer, a perfect mark of Slavery,
and nips your Commonwealth in the fairest Blossom. On the other side, if there
should be too much ease given in this kind, it would occasion Sloth, and so
destroy Industry, the principal nerve of a Commonwealth. But if ought might be
don to hold the Balance even between these two, it would be a work in this
Nation equal to that for which FABIUS was sirnam'd MAXIMUS by the Romans.

Manufactures and Merchandise.
IN Manufactures and Merchandise the Hollander has gotten the start of us; but
at the long run it will be found, that a People working upon a foren Commodity
dos but farm the Manufacture, and that it is really entailed upon them only,
where the growth of it is native: as also that it is one thing to have the
carriage of other men's Goods, and another for a man to bring his own to the
best market. Wherefore (Nature having provided encouragement for these Arts in
this Nation above all others, where, the People growing, they of necessity must
also increase) it cannot but establish them upon a far more sure and effectual
Foundation than that of the Hollanders. But these Educations are in order to
the first things, or necessitys of Nature; as Husbandry to the Food,
Manufacture to the Clothing, and Merchandise to the Purse of the Commonwealth.

THERE be other things in Nature, which being second as to their Order, for
their Dignity and Value are first, and such to which the other are but
Accommodations; of this sort are specially these, Religion, Justice, Courage,
and Wisdom.

Vniversitys.
THE Education that answers to Religion in our Government is that of the
Universitys. MOSES the Divine Legislator was not only skilful in all the
Learning of the Egyptians, but took also into the Fabric of his Commonwealth
the Learning of the Midianites in the advice of JETHRO: and his Foundation of a
University laid in the Tabernacle, and finished in the Temple, became that
Pinnacle from whence (according to many Jewish and Christian Authors) all the
Learning in the world has taken wing; as the Philosophy of the Stoics from the
Pharisees; that of the Epicureans from the Sadduces; and from the Learning of
the Jews, so often quoted by our Acts 17. 18.
SAVIOR, and fulfilled in Him, the Christian Religion. Athens was the most famous
University in her days; and her Senators, that is to say, the Areopagits, were
all Philosophers. Lacedemon, to speak truth, tho she could write and read, was
not very bookish. But he that disputes hence against Universitys, disputes by
the same Argument against Agriculture, Manufacture, and Merchandise; every one
of these having bin equally forbid by LYCURGUS, not for it self (for if he had
not bin learned in all the Learning of Crete, and well traveled in the
knowledge of other Governments, he had never made his Commonwealth) but for the
diversion which they must have given his Citizens from their Arms, who, being
but sew, if they had minded any thing else, must have deserted the
Commonwealth. For Rome, she had ingenium par imperio, was as learned as great,
and held her College of Augurs in much reverence. Venice has taken her Religion
upon trust. Holland cannot attend it to be very studious. Nor dos Switzerland
mind it much; yet are they all addicted to their Universitys. We cut down Trees
to build Houses; but I would have some body show me, by what reason or
experience the cutting down of a University should tend to the setting up of a
Commonwealth. Of this I am sure, that the perfection of a Commonwealth is not
to be attained without the knowledge of ancient Prudence; nor the knowledge of
ancient Prudence without Learning; nor Learning without Schools of good
Literature: and these are such as we call Universitys. Now tho mere University
learning of it self be that which (to speak the words of VERULAMIUS) crafty men
contemn, and simple men only admire, yet is it such as wise men have use of;
for Studys do not teach their own use, but that is a Wisdom without and above
them, won by observation. Expert men may execute, and perhaps judge of
Particulars one by one; but the general Counsils and the Plots, and the
marshalling of Affairs, com best from those that are learned. Wherefore if you
would have your Children to be Statesmen, let them drink by all means of these
Fountains, where perhaps there were never any. But what tho the Water a man
drinks be not nourishment; it is the Vehicle without which he cannot be
nourished. Nor is Religion less concerned in this point than Government; for
take away your Universitys, and in a few years you lose it.

THE Holy Scriptures are written in Hebrew and Greec: they that have neither of
these Languages may think light of both; but find me a man that has one in
perfection, the study of whose whole Life it has not bin. Again, this is
apparent to us in daily Conversation, that if four or five Persons that have
lived together be talking, another speaking the same Language may com in, and
yet understand very little of their Discourse, in that it relates to
Circumstances, Persons, Things, Times and Places, which he knows not. It is no
otherwise with a man, having no insight of the times in which they were
written, and the Circumstances to which they relate, in the reading of ancient
Books, whether they be divine or human. For example, when we fall upon the
Discourse about Baptism and Regeneration that was between our SAVIOR and
NICODEMUS, where CHRIST reproaches him with his ignorance in this matter: Art
thou a Doctor in Israel, and understandest not these things? What shall we
think of it? or wherefore should a Doctor in Israel have understood these things
more than another, but that both Baptism and Regeneration, as was showed at
large by my Lord PHOSPHORUS, were Doctrins held in Israel? I instance in one
place of a hundred, which he, that has not mastered the Circumstances to which
they relate, cannot understand. Wherefore to the understanding of the Scripture,
it is necessary to have ancient Languages, and the knowledge of ancient times,
or the aid of them who have such knowledge: and to have such as may be always
able and ready to give such aid (unless you would borrow it of another Nation,
which would not only be base, but deceitful) it is necessary to a Commonwealth
that she have Schools of good Literature, or Universitys of her own. We are
commanded, as has bin said more than once, to search the Scriptures; and which
of 'em search the Scriptures, they that take this pains in ancient Languages
and Learning, or they that will not, but trust to Translations only, and to
words as they sound to present Circumstances? than which nothing is more
fallible, or certain to lose the true sense of Scriptures, pretended to be
above human Understanding, for no other cause than that they are below it. But
in searching the Scriptures by the proper use of our Universitys, we have bin
heretofore blessed with greater Victorys and Trophys against the purple Hosts and
golden Standards of the Romish Hierarchy, than any Nation; and therefore, why we
should relinquish this upon the presumtion of some, that because there is a
greater Light which they have, I do not know. There is a greater Light than the
Sun, but it dos not extinguish the Sun, nor dos any Light of Gods giving
extinguish that of Nature, but increase and sanctify it. Wherefore, neither the
Honor born by the Israelitish, Roman, or any other Commonwealth that I have
shown, to their Ecclesiastics, consisted in being governed by them, but in
consulting them in matters of Religion; upon whose Responses or Oracles they
did afterward as they thought fit. Nor would I be here mistaken, as if, by
affirming the Universitys to be, in order both to Religion and Government, of
absolute necessity, I declared them or the Ministry in any wise fit to be
trusted, so far as to exercise any power not derived from the Civil Magistrate
in the administration of either. If the Jewish Religion were directed and
established by MOSES, it was directed and established by the Civil Magistrate;
or if MOSES exercised this Administration as a Prophet, the same Prophet did
invest with the same Administration the Sanhedrim, and not the Priests; and so
dos our Commonwealth the Senate, and not the Clergy. They who had the supreme
Administration or Government of the National Religion in Athens, were the first
ARCHON, the Rex Sacrificus, or High Priest, and a Polemarch; which Magistrates
were ordained or elected Per (...).
by the holding up of hands in the Church, Congregation, or Comitia of the
People. The Religion of Lacedemon was governed by the Kings, who were also High
Priests, and officiated at the Sacrifice; these had power to substitute their
Pythii, Ambassadors, or Nuncios, by which, not without concurrence of the
Senate, they held intelligence with the Oracle of APOLLO at Delphos. And the
Ecclesiastical part of the Commonwealth of Rome was governed by the Pontifex
Maximus, the Rex Sacrificulus, and the Flamins, all ordained or elected by the
People, the Pontifex by the Tributis.
Tribes, the King by the Centuriatis.
Centurys, and the Flamins by the Curiatis Comitiis.
Parishes. I do not mind you of these things, as if, for the matter, there were
any parallel to be drawn out of their Superstitions to our Religion; but to
show that for the manner, ancient Prudence is as well a rule in divine as human
things; nay, and such a one as the Apostles themselves, ordaining Elders by the
holding up of hands in every Congregation, have exactly followed: for some of
the Congregations where they thus ordained Elders were those of Antioch,
Iconium, Lystra, Derbe, the Countries of Lycaonia, Pisidia, Pamphylia, Perga,
with Attalia. Now that these Citys and Countries, when the Romans propagated
their Empire into Asia, were found most of them Commonwealths, and that many of
the rest were indu'd with like power, so that the People living under the
protection of the Roman Emperors, continued to elect their own Magistrates, is
so known a thing, that I wonder whence it is that men, quite contrary to the
universal proof of these examples, will have Ecclesiastical Government to be
necessarily distinct from Civil Power, when the Right of the Elders ordained by
the holding up of hands in every Congregation to teach the People, was plainly
derived from the same Civil Power by which they ordained the rest of their
Magistrates. And it is not otherwise in our Commonwealth, where the Parochial
Congregation elects or ordains its Pastor. To object the Commonwealth of Venice
in this place, were to show us that it has bin no otherwise but where the Civil
Power has lost the liberty of her Conscience by embracing Popery; as also that
to take away the Liberty of Conscience in this Administration from the Civil
Power, were a proceeding which has no other precedent than such as is Popish.
Wherefore your Religion is settled after the following manner: the Universitys
are the Seminarys of that part which is national, by which means others with
all safety may be permitted to follow the Liberty of their own Consciences, in
regard that, however they behave themselves, the ignorance of the unlearned in
this case cannot lose your Religion nor disturb your Government, which
otherwise it would most certainly do; and the Universitys with their
Emoluments, as also the Benefices of the whole Nation, are to be improved by
such Augmentations as may make a very decent and comfortable subsistence for
the Ministry, which is neither to be allowed Synods nor Assemblys, except upon
the occasion shown in the Universitys, when they are consulted by the Council
of State, and suffered to meddle with Affairs of Religion, nor to be capable of
any other public Preferment whatsoever; by which means the Interest of the
Learned can never com to corrupt your Religion, nor disturb your Government,
which otherwise it would most certainly do. Venice, tho she dos not see, or
cannot help the corruption of her Religion, is yet so circumspect to avoid
disturbance of her Government in this kind, that her Council procedes not to
election of Magistrates, till it be proclaimed, Fora Papalini, by which words
such as have consanguinity with red Hats, or relation to the Court of Rome, are
warned to withdraw. If a Minister in Holland meddles with matter of State, the
Magistrate sends him a pair of Shoes; whereupon, if he dos not go, he is driven
away from his charge. I wonder why Ministers, of all men, should be perpetually
tampering with Government; first because they, as well as others, have it in
express charge to submit themselves to the Ordinances of men; and secondly,
because these Ordinances of men must go upon such political Principles, as they
of all others, by any thing that can be found in their Writings or Actions,
least understand: whence you have the suffrage of all Nations to this sense,
that an ounce of Wisdom is worth a pound of Clergy. Your greatest Clercs are
not your wisest men: and when some foul Absurdity in State is committed, it is
common with the French, and even the Italians, to call it Pas de Clerc, or,
Governo da Prete. They may bear with men that will be preaching without study,
while they will be governing without Prudence. My Lords, if you know not how to
rule your Clergy, you will most certainly, like a man that cannot rule his
Wife, have neither quiet at home, nor honor abroad. Their honest Vocation is to
teach your Children at the Schools and the Universitys, and the People in the
Parishes; and yours is concerned to see that they do not play the shrews: of
which parts dos consist the Education of your Commonwealth, so far as it
regards Religion.

The Ins of Court and Chancery.
TO JUSTICE, or that part of it which is commonly executive, answers the
Education of the Ins of Court and Chancery. Upon which to philosophize requires
a peculiar kind of Learning that I have not. But they who take upon them any
Profession proper to the Educations mentioned, that is, Theology, Physic, or
Law, are not at leisure for the Essays. Wherefore the Essays being Degrees
whereby the Youth commence for all Magistracys, Offices, and Honors in the
Parish, Hundred, Tribe, Senate or Prerogative; Divines, Physicians, and Lawyers,
not taking these Degrees, exclude themselves from all such Magistracys,
Offices, and Honors. And whereas Lawyers are likest to exact further reason for
this, they (growing up from the most gainful Art at the Bar to those
Magistracys upon the Bench, which are continually appropriated to themselves,
and not only endowed with the greatest Revenues, but also held for life) have
the least reason of all the rest to pretend to any other; especially in an
equal Commonwealth, where Accumulation of Magistracy, or to take a Person
engaged by his Profit to the Laws, as they stand, into the Power which is
Legislative, and which should keep them to what they were, or ought to be, were
a Soloecism in Prudence. It is true, that the Legislative Power may have need
of Advice and Assistance from the executive Magistracy, or such as are learned
inthe Law; for which cause the Judges are, as they have heretofore bin,
Assistants in the Senate. Nor, however it came about, can I see any reason why a
Judge, being but an Assistant or Lawyer, should be Member of a Legislative
Council.

I DENY not, that the Roman Patricians were all Patrons, and that the whole
People were Clients, some to one Family, and some to another, by which means they
had their Causes pleaded and defended in some appearance gratis; for the Patron
took no Money, tho if he had a Daughter to marry, his Clients were to pay her
Portion: nor was this so great a grievance. But if the Client accused his
Patron, gave testimony or suffrage against him, it was a crime of such a
nature, that any man might lawfully kill him as a Traitor; and this, as being
the nerve of the Optimacy, was a great cause of ruin to that Commonwealth: for
when the People would carry any thing that pleased not the Senate, the Senators
were ill provided if they could not intercede, that is, oppose it by their
Clients; with whom, to vote otherwise than they pleased, was the highest Crime.
The observation of this Bond till the time of the GRACCHI, that is to say, till
it was too late, or to no purpose to break it, was the cause, why in all the
former heats and disputes that had happened between the Senate and the People,
it never came to blows, which indeed was good: but withal, the People could
have no remedy, which was certainly evil. Wherefore I am of opinion, that a
Senator ought not to be a Patron or Advocat, nor a Patron or Advocat to be a
Senator: for if his Practice be gratis, it debauches the People; and if it be
mercenary, it debauches himself: take it which way you will, when he should be
making of Laws, he will be knitting of Nets.

LYCURGUS, as I said, by being a Traveller became a Legislator, but in times
when Prudence was another thing. Nevertheless we may not shut out this part of
Education in a Commonwealth, which will be her self a Traveller; for those of
this make have seen the World, especially because this is certain (tho it be
not regarded in our times, when things being left to take their chance, it
sares with us accordingly) that no man can be a Politician, except he be first
a Historian or a Traveller; for except he can see what must be, or what may be,
he is no Politician. Now if he has no knowledge in Story, he cannot tell what
has bin; and if he has not bin a Traveller, he cannot tell what is: but he that
neither knows what has bin, nor what is, can never tell what must be, or what
may be. Furthermore, the Embassys in ordinary by our Constitution are the
Prizes of young men, more especially such as have bin Travelers. Wherefore they
of these inclinations having leave of the Censors, ow them an account of their
time, and cannot choose but lay it out with some ambition of Praise or Reward,
where both are open: whence you will have eyes abroad, and better choice of
public Ministers; your Gallants showing themselves not more to the Ladys at
their Balls, than to your Commonwealth at her Academy, when they return from
their Travels.

BUT this Commonwealth being constituted more especially of two Elements, Arms
and Councils, drives by a natural instinct at Courage and Wisdom; which he who
has attained, is arrived at the perfection of human nature. It is true, that
these Virtues must have some natural root in him that is capable of them; but
this amounts not to so great a matter as some will have it. For if Poverty makes
an industrious, a moderat Estate a temperat, and a lavish Fortune a wanton man,
and this be the common course of things; Wisdom then is rather of necessity
than inclination. And that an Army which was meditating upon flight, has bin
brought by despair to win the Field, is so far from being strange, that like
causes will evermore produce like effects. Wherefore this Commonwealth drives
her Citizens like Wedges; there is no way with them but through, nor end but
that Glory whereof Man is capable by Art or Nature. That the Genius of the Roman
Familys commonly preserved it self throout the line (as to instance in some, the
MANLII were still severe, the PUBLICOLAE lovers, and the APPII haters of the
People) is attributed by MACCHIAVEL to their Education: nor, if Interest might
add to the reason why the Genius of a Patrician was one thing, and that of a
Plebeian another, is the like so apparent between different Nations, who,
according to their different Educations, have yet as different manners. It was
anciently noted, and long confirmed by the actions of the French, that in their
first assaults their Courage was more than that of Men; and for the rest less
than that of Women: which nevertheless, through the amendment of their Discipline,
we see now to be otherwise. I will not say, but that some Man or Nation upon an
equal improvement of this kind may be lighter than some other; but certainly,
Education is the scale without which no Man or Nation can truly know his or her
own weight or value. By our Historys we can tell when one Marpesian would have
beaten ten Oceaners, and when one Oceaner would have beaten ten Marpesians.
MARC ANTHONY was a Roman, but how did that appear in the embraces of CLEOPATRA?
You must have some other Education for your Youth; or they, like that passage,
will show better in Romance than true Story.

THE Custom of the Commonwealth of Rome in distributing her Magistracys without
respect of age, happened to do well in CORVINUS and SCIPIO; for which cause
MACCHIAVEL (with whom that which was don by Rome, and that which is well don,
is for the most part all one) commends this course. Yet how much it did worse
at other times, is obvious in POMPEY and CAESAR; Examples by which BOCCALINI
illustrats the Prudence of Venice in her contrary practice, affirming it to
have bin no small step to the ruin of the Roman Liberty, that these (having
tasted in their Youth of the supreme Honors) had no greater in their age to
hope for, but by perpetuating of the same in themselves; which came to Blood,
and ended in Tyranny. The opinion of VERULAMIUS is safe: The Errors, says he,
of young men are the ruin of business; whereas the Errors of old men amount but
to this, that more might have bin don, or sooner. But tho their Wisdom be
little, their Courage is great: Wherefore (to com to the main Education of this
Commonwealth) the Militia of Oceana is the Province of Youth.

THE distribution of this Province by the Essays is so fully described in the
Order, that I need repeat nothing: the Order it self being but a Repetition or
Copy of that Original, which in ancient Prudence is of all others the fairest;
as that from whence the Commonwealth of Rome more particularly derived the
Empire of the World. And there is much more reason in this age, when
Governments are universally broken, or swerved from their Foundations, and the
People groan under Tyranny, that the same causes (which could not be withstood
when the World was full of popular Governments) should have the like effects.

THE Causes in the Commonwealth of Rome, whereof the Empire of the World was not
any miraculous, but a natural (nay I may safely say a necessary) consequence,
are contained in that part of her Discipline which was domestic, and in that
which she exercised in her Provinces or Conquest. Of the latter I shall have
better occaon to speak when we com to our provincial Orbs; the former divided
the whole People by Tribes, amounting, as LIVY and CICERO show, at their full
growth to thirty five, and every Tribe by the Cense or Valuation of Estates
into five Classes: for the sixth being Proletary, that is the Nursery, or such
as through their poverty contributed nothing to the Commonwealth but Children, was
not reckoned, nor used in Arms. And this is the first point of the Militia, in
which modern Prudence is quite contrary to the ancient; for whereas we, excusing
the rich, and arming the poor, become the Vassals of our Servants, they, by
excusing the poor, and arming such as were rich enough to be Freemen, became
Lords of the Earth. The Nobility and Gentry of this Nation, who understand so
little what it is to be Lords of the Earth, that they have not bin able to keep
their own Lands, will think it a strange Education for their Children to be
common Soldiers, and obliged to all the Dutys of Arms: nevertheless it is not
for 4 s. a week, but to be capable of being the best man in the Field or in the
City; the latter part of which consideration makes the common Soldier herein a
better man than the General of any monarchical Army. And whereas it may be
thought, that this would drink deep of noble Blood, I dare boldly say, take the
Roman Nobility in the heat of their fiercest Wars, and you shall not find such
a shambles of them as has bin made of ours by mere Luxury and Slothfulness;
which, killing the Body, kill the Soul also; Animasque in vulnere ponunt.
Whereas common Right is that which who stands in the vindication of, has used
that Sword of Justice for which he receives the Purple of Magistracy. The Glory
of a man on Earth can go no higher, and if he falls he rises again, and coms
sooner to that reward which is so much higher as Heaven is above the Earth. To
return to the Roman Example: Every Classis was divided, as has bin more than
once shown, into Centurys, and every Century was equally divided into Youth and
Elders; the Youth for foren Service, and the Elders for the guard of the
Territory. In the first Classis were about eighteen Centurys of Horse, being
those which by the Institution of SERVIUS were first called to the Suffrage in
the Centuriatis.
Centurial Assemblys. But the Delectus, or Levy of an Army, which is the present
business, proceeded, according to POLYBIUS, in this manner.

Upon a War decreed, the Consuls elected four and twenty military Tribuns or
Colonels; whereof ten, being such as had merited their tenth Stipend, were
younger Officers. The Tribuns being chosen, the Consuls appointed a day to the
Tribes, when those in them of military age were to appear at the Capitol; the
day being com, and the Youth assembled accordingly, the Consuls ascended their
Tribunal, and the younger Tribuns were straight divided into four parts after
this manner: four were assigned to the first Legion (a Legion at the most
consisted of 6000 Foot, and 300 Horse) three to the second, four to the third,
and three to the fourth. The younger Tribuns being thus distributed, two of the
elder were assigned to the first Legion, three to the second, two to the third,
and three to the fourth. And the Officers of each Legion thus assigned, having
drawn the Tribes by Lots, and being seated according to their divisions at a
convenient distance from each other, the Tribe of the first Lot was called:
whereupon they that were of it knowing the business, and being prepared,
presently bolted out four of their number, in the choice whereof such care was
taken, that they offered none that was not a Citizen; no Citizen that was not
of the Youth; no Youth that was not of some one of the five Classes; nor any one
of the five Classes that was not expert at his Exercises. Moreover, they used
such diligence in matching them for Age and Stature, that the Officers of the
Legions, except they happened to be acquainted with the Youth so bolted, were
forced to put themselves upon fortune, while they of the first Legion chose
one; they of the second, the next; they of the third another; and the fourth
Youth fell to the last Legion: and thus was the Election (the Legions and the
Tribes varying according to their Lots) carried on till the Foot were complete.
The like course with little alteration was taken by the Horse Officers till the
Horse also were complete. This was called giving of Names, which the Judge. 20.
9.
Children of Israel did also by Lot; and if any man refused to give his Name, he
was sold for a Slave, or his Estate confiscated to the Commonwealth. When
Marcus Curious Consul cum subitum delectum edicere coactus esset, and juniorum
nemo respondisset, conjectis in sortem omnibus, Polliae quae proxima exierat,
primum nomen urna extractum citari jussit, neque eo respondente, bona
adolescentis hasta subjecit. Val.
MARCUS CURIOUS the Consul was forced to make a sudden Levy, and none of the
Youth would give in their Names, all the Tribes being put to the Lot, he
commanded the first Name drawn out of the Vrn of the Pollian Tribe (which
happened to com first) to be called; but the Youth not answering, he ordered
his Goods to be sold: which was conformable to the Law in Israel, according to
which SAUL took a yoke of Oxen, and hewed them in pieces, 1 Samuel 11. 7.
and sent them throout the Tribes, saying, Whosoever coms not forth to battle
after SAUL and SAMUEL, so shall it be don to his Oxen. By which you may observe
also, that they who had no Cattle were not of the Militia in Israel. But the
age of the Roman Youth by the Tullian Law determined at 30; and by the Law (tho
it should seem by MACCHIAVEL and others, that this was not well observed) a Man
could not stand for Magistracy till he was Miles emeritus, or had fulfilled the
full term of his Militia, which was complete in his tenth Stipend or Service:
nor was he afterward obliged under any penalty to give his name, except the
Commonwealth were invaded, in which case the Elders were as well obliged as the
Youth. Quod per magnos tumultus sieri solitum erat, justitio indicto, delectus
sine vacationibus habitus est. Live.
The Consul might also levy Milites evocatos, or Soldiers, commanded Men out of
such as had served their turn, and this at his discretion. The Legions being
thus complete, were divided by two to each Consul; and in these no Man had
right to serve but a Roman Citizen: now because two Legions made but a small
Army, the Romans added to every one of their Armies an equal number of Foot, and
a double number of Horse levied among their Latin or Italian Associats; so a
Consular Army, with the Legions and Auxiliarys, amounted to about thirty
thousand: and whereas they commonly levied two such Armies together, these being
joined made about sixty thousand.

THE Steps whereby our Militia follows the greatest Captain, are the three
Essays; the first, elected by a fifth man in the Curiatis.
Parishes, and amounting in the whole to one hundred thousand, choose their
Officers at the Centuriatis.
Hundreds, where they fall also to their Games or Exercises, invited by handsome
Prizes, such as for themselves and the honor of them will be coveted; such as
will render the Hundred a place of Sports, and exercise of Arms all the year
long; such as in the space of ten years will equip 30000 Men Horse and Foot,
with such Arms for their Forge, Proof, and Beauty, as (notwithstanding the
Argyraspides, or silver Shields of ALEXANDER'S Guards) were never worn by so
many; such as will present marks of Virtue and Direction to your General or
Strategus in the distribution of his Army, which doubles the value of them to
the Proprietors, who are bound to wear them, and eases the Commonwealth of so
much Charge, so many being armed already.

BUT here will be the Objection now. How shall such a Revenue be compas'd?
Fifty pounds a year in every Hundred is a great deal, not so easily raised: Men
will not part with their Money; nor would the sum as it is proposed by the Order
of Pomp, rise in many years. These are difficulties that fit our Genius
exactly: And yet a thousand pounds in each Hundred once levied, establishes the
Revenue for ever. Now the Hundreds one with another are worth ten thousand
pounds a year dry Rent, over and above personal Estates, which bring it to
twice the value: So that a twentieth part of one year's Revenue of the Hundred
dos it. If you cannot afford this while you pay Taxes, tho from henceforth they
will be but small ones, do it when you pay none. If it be then too much for one
year, do it in two: If it be two much for two years, do it in four. What
Husbands have we hitherto bin? What is become of greater Sums? My Lords, if you
should thus cast your Bread upon the Waters, after many days you would find it:
stand not huckling when you are offered Corn and your Money again in the mouth
of the Sack.

BUT to proceed: The first Essay being officer'd at the Hundreds, and mustered
at the Tributis.
Tribes (where they are entertained with other Sports, which will be very fine
ones) procedes to the Election of the second Essay, or standing Army of this
Nation, consisting of thirty thousand Foot, and ten thousand Horse; and these,
upon a War decreed, being delivered at the Rendevous of Oceana to the
Strategus, are the third Essay, which answers to the Roman Legions. But you may
observe, that whereas the Consuls elected the military Tribuns, and raised
commanded Men out of the Veterans at their own discretion; our Polemarchs or
Field Officers are elected by the Scrutiny of the Council of War: and our
Veterans not otherwise taken on than as Volunteers, and with the consent of the
Polemarchs; which may serve for the removal of certain scruples which might
otherwise be incident in this place, tho without encouragement by the Roman way
of proceeding, much less by that which is proposed. But whereas the Roman Legions
in all amounted not in one Army to above 30000 Men, or little more, you have
here forty thousand; and whereas they added Auxiliarys, it is in this regard
that Marpesia will be a greater Revenue to you, than if you had the Indys; for
whereas heretofore she has yielded you nothing but her native Thistles, in
plowing out the rankness of her Aristocracy by your Agrarian, you will find her
an inexhaustible Magazin of Men, and to her own advantage, who will make a far
better account by the Arms, than by the Pins of Poland. Wherefore as a Consular
Army consisted of about an equal number of Auxiliarys added to their Legions by
their Latin or Italian Associats, you may add to a Parlamentary Army an equal
number of Marpesians or Panopeans, as that Colony shall hereafter be able to
supply you: By which means the Commonwealth will be able to go forth to Battle
with fourscore thousand Men. To make Wars with small Forces is no Husbandry,
but a wast, a disease, a lingering and painful consumtion of Men and Money; the
Romans making theirs thick, made them short, and had little regard to Money, as
that which they who have Men enough, can command where it is fittest that it
should be levied. All the ancient Monarchys by this means got on wing, and
attained to vast Riches. Whereas your modern Princes being dear purchasers of
small parcels, have but emty pockets. But it may be some will accuse the Order
of rashness, in that it commits the sole Conduct of the War to the General; and
the Custom of Venice by her Proveditori, or checks upon her Commanders in
chief, may seem to be of greater Prudence: but in this part of our Government
neither Venice nor any Nation that makes use of mercenary Forces is for our
instruction. A mercenary Army, with a standing General, is like the fatal
Sister that spins; but proper Forces, with an annual Magistrate, are like her
that cuts the thread. Their Interests are quite contrary, and yet you have a
better Proveditor than the Venetian, another Strategus sitting with an Army
standing by him; whereupon that which is marching, if there were any probability
it should, would find as little possibility that it could recoil, as a foren
Enemy to invade you. These things considered, a War will appear to be of a
contrary nature to that of all other reckonings, inasmuch as of this you must
never look to have a good account if you be strict in imposing checks. Let a
Council of Huntsmen assembled beforehand, tell you which way the Stag shall
run, where you shall cast about at the fault, and how you shall ride to be in
at the chase all the day: but these may as well do that, as a Council of War
direct a General. The hours that have painted wings, and of different colors,
are his Council: he must be like the Ey that makes not the Scene, but has it so
soon as it changes. That in many Counsillors there is strength, is spoken of
Civil Administrations: as to those that are military, there is nothing more
certain, than that in many Counsillors there is weakness. Joint Commissions in
military affairs, are like hunting your Hounds in their Couples. In the Attic
War CLEOMENES and DEMARATUS, Kings of Lacedemon, being thus coupl'd, tug'd one
against another; and while they should have joined against the Persian, were
the cause of the common calamity: whereupon that Commonwealth took better
Counsil, and made a Law, whereby from thenceforth there went at once but one of
her Kings to Battle.

THE Fidenati being in rebellion, and having slain the Colony of the Romans,
four Tribuns with Consular Power were created by the People of Rome, whereof one
being left for the guard of the City, the other three were sent against the
Fidenati, who, through the division that happened among them, brought nothing home
but Dishonor: whereupon the Romans created the Dictator, and LIVY gives his
Judgment in these words: Tres Tribuni, potestate Consulari, documento fuere,
quam plurium imperium bello inutile esset; tendendo ad sua quisque consilia,
cum alii aliud videretur, aperuerunt ad occasionem, locum hosti.
The three Tribuns with Consular Power were a lesson how useless in War is the
joint Command of several Generals; for each following his own Counsils, while
they all differed in their opinions, gave by this opportunity an advantage to
the Enemy. When the Consuls QUINTIUS and AGRIPPA were sent against the AEQUI,
AGRIPPA for this reason refused to go with his Colleague, saying, Saluberrimum
in administratione magnarum rerum, summam imperii apud unum esse.
That in the administration of great Actions it was most safe that the chief
Command should be lodged in one Person. And if the Ruin of modern Armies were
well considered, most of it would be found to have fallen upon this point: it
being in this case far safer to trust to any one Man of common Prudence, than
to any two or more together of the greatest Parts. The Consuls indeed being
equal in Power, while one was present with the Senate, and the other in the
Field with the Army, made a good Balance; and this with us is exactly followed
by the Election of a new Strategus upon the march of the old one.

THE seven and twentieth Order, whereby the Elders in case of Invasion are
obliged to equal duty with the Youth, and each upon their own charge, is
suitable to Reason (for every Man defends his own Estate) and to our Copy, as in
the War with the Samnits and Tuscans. Senatus justitium indici, delectum omnis
generis hominum haberi jussit: nec ingenui modo, and juniores Sacramento adacti
sunt, sed seniorum etiam cohortes factae.
The Senate ordered a Vacation to be proclaimed, and a Levy to be made of all
sorts of Persons: And not only the Freemen and Youths were listed, but Cohorts
of the old Men were likewise formed. This Nation of all others is the least
obnoxious to Invasion. Oceana, says a French Politician, is a Beast that cannot
be devoured but by her self; nevertheless, that Government is not perfect which
is not provided at all points; and in this (ad Triarios res rediit) the Elders
being such as in a martial State must be Veterans, the Commonwealth invaded
gathers strength like ANTAEUS by her fall, while the whole number of the Elders
consisting of five hundred thousand, and the Youth of as many, being brought up
according to the Order, give twelve successive Battles, each Battle consisting
of eighty thousand Men, half Elders and half Youth. And the Commonwealth whose
Constitution can be no stranger to any of those Virtues which are to be
acquired in human life, grows familiar with Death ere she dys. If the hand of
God be upon her for her Transgressions, she shall mourn for her Sins, and ly in
the dust for her Iniquitys, without losing her Manhood.

Si fractus illabatur orbis,
Impavidam ferient ruinae.
THE remaining part, being the Constitution of the Provincial Orb, is partly
Civil, or consisting of the Elders; and partly Military, or consisting of the
Youth. The Civil part of the provincial Orb is directed by

28. Order.

Constitution of the Civil part of the Provincial Orb.


THE twenty eighth ORDER, whereby the Council of a Province being constituted of
twelve Knights, divided by four into three Regions (for their term and
revolution conformable to the Parliament) is perpetuated by the annual election
at the Tropic of four Knights (being triennial Magistrates) out of the Region of
the Senate whose term expires; and of one Knight out of the same Region to be
Strategus or General of the Province, which Magistracy is annual. The Strategus
or Magistrate thus chosen, shall be as well President of the Provincial Council
with power to propose to the same, as General of the Army. The Council for the
rest shall elect weekly Provosts, having any two of them also right to propose
after the manner of the Senatorian Councils of Oceana. And whereas all
Provincial Councils are Members of the Council of State, they may and ought to
keep diligent correspondence with the same, which is to be don after this
manner: Any Opinion or Opinions legitimatly proposed and debated at a
Provincial Council, being thereupon signed by the Strategus, or any two of the
Provosts, may be transmitted to the Council of State in Oceana; and the Council
of State proceeding upon the same in their natural course (whether by their own
Power, if it be a matter within their Instructions, or by Authority of the
Senate thereupon consulted, if it be a matter of State which is not in their
Instructions; or by Authority of the Senate and Command of the People, if it be
a matter of Law, as for the Levys of Men or Money upon common use and safety)
shall return such Answers, Advice, or Orders, as in any of the ways mentioned
shall be determined upon the case. The Provincial Councils of Marpesia and
Panopea respectively shall take special care that the Agrarian Laws, as also
all other Laws that be or shall from time to time be enacted by the Parliament
of Oceana, for either of them, be duly put in execution: they shall manage and
receive the Customs of either Nation for the Shipping of Oceana, being the
common Guard: they shall have a care that moderat and sufficient pay upon the
respective Province be duly raised for the support and maintenance of the
Officers and Soldiers, or Army of the same, in the most effectual, constant and
convenient way: they shall receive the Regalia, or public Revenues of those
Nations, out of which every Counsillor shall have for his term, and to his
proper use, the Sum of 500 l. per annum, and the Strategus 500 l. as President,
besides his Pay as General, which shall be 1000 Pounds; the remainder to go to
the use of the Knights and Deputys of the respective Provinces, to be paid, if
it will reach, according to the rates of Oceana; if not, by an equal
distribution, respectively; or the overplus, if there be any, to be returned to
the Treasury of Oceana. They shall manage the Lands (if there be any such held
in either of the Provinces by the Commonwealth of Oceana, in Dominion) and
return the Rents into the Exchequer. If the Commonwealth coms to be possessed of
richer Provinces, the Pay of the General or Strategus, and of the Councils, may
be respectively increased. The People for the rest shall elect their own
Magistrates, and be governed by their own Laws, having Power also to appeal from
their native or provincial Magistrates, if they please, to the People of Oceana.
And whereas there may be such as receiving Injury, are not able to prosecute
their Appeals at so great a distance, eight Sergeants at Law being sworn by the
Commissioners of the Seal, shall be sent by four into each Province once in two
years; who, dividing the same by Circuits, shall hear such Causes; and having
gathered and introduced them, shall return to the several Appellants, gratis,
the Determinations and Decrees of the People in their several cases.

THE term of a Knight in a Provincial Orb, as to domestic Magistracys, shall be
esteemed a Vacation, and no bar to present Election to any other Honor, his
provincial Magistracy being expired.

THE Quorum of a Provincial Council, as also of every other Council or Assembly
in Oceana, shall in time of health consist of two parts in three of the whole
number proper to that Council or Assembly; and in a time of sickness, of one
part in three: But of the Senate there can be no Quorum without three of the
Signory; nor of a Council without two of the Provosts.

THE Civil part of the Provincial Orb being declared by the foregoing Order;
the Military part of the same is constituted by

29. Order.

Constitution of the Military part of the Provincial Orb.


THE twenty ninth ORDER; whereby the Stratiots of the third Essay having drawn
the Gold Balls marked with the Letter M, and being ten Horse and fifty Foot in
a Tribe, that is to say, five hundred Horse, and two thousand five hundred Foot
in all, the Tribes shall be delivered by the respective Conductors to the
provincial Strategus or General, at such a time and place, or Rendevous, as he
shall appoint by Order and Certificat of his Election: and the Strategus having
received the Horse and Foot mentioned, which are the third Classis of his
provincial Guard or Army, shall forthwith lead them away, to Marpesia, where
the Army consists of three Classes, each Classis containing three thousand men,
whereof five hundred are Horse; and receiving the new Strategus with the third
Classis, the old Strategus with the first Classis shall be dismissed by the
Provincial Council. The same method with the Stratiots of the letter P, is to
be observed for the provincial Orb of Panopea: and the Commonwealth coming to
acquire new Provinces, the Senate and the People may erect new Orbs in like
manner, consisting of greater or less numbers, according as is required by the
respective occasion. If a Stratiot has once served his term in a Provincial
Orb, and happens afterward to draw the Letter of a Province at the Election of
the second Essay, he may refuse his Lot; and if he refuses it, the Censor of
that Vrn shall cause the Files balloting at the same to make a halt; and if the
Stratiot produces the Certificat of his Strategus or General, that he has
served his time accordingly, the Censor throwing the Ball that he drew into the
Vrn again, and taking out a Blank, shall dismiss the Youth, and cause the
Ballot to proceed.

TO perfect the whole Structure of this Commonwealth, some Directions are given
to the third Essay, or Army marching, in

30. Order.
THE thirtieth ORDER. When thou go to battle against thy Enemies, and see
Horses and Chariots, and a People more than thou; Deuteronomy. 20. 1.
be not afraid of them, for the Lord thy God is he that gos with thee to fight
for thee against thy Enemies. And when thou dividest the Spoil, it shall be as a
Statute and an Ordinance to thee, that as his 1 Samuel 30. 24.
part is that gos down to the battle, so shall his part be that tarrys by the
Stuff: that is, (as to the Commonwealth of Oceana) The Spoil taken of the Enemy
(except Clothes, Arms, Horses, Ammunition and Victuals, to be divided to the
Soldiery by the Strategus and the Polemarchs upon the place according to their
discretion) shall be delivered to four Commissarys of the Spoils elected and
sworn by the Council of War; which Commissarys shall be allowed Shipping by the
State, and Convoys according as occasion shall require by the Strategus; to the
end that having a Bill of Lading signed by three or more of the Polemarchs,
they may ship and bring, or cause such Spoils to be brought to the Prize-Office
in Oceana, where they shall be sold; and the Profit arising by such Spoils
shall be divided into three parts, whereof one shall go to the Treasury, another
shall be paid to the Soldiery of this Nation, and a third to the Auxiliarys at
their return from their Service, provided that the said Auxiliarys be equal in
number to the proper Forces of this Nation, otherwise their Share shall be so
much less as they themselves are fewer in number: the rest of the two thirds to
go to the Officers and Soldiers of the proper Forces. And the Spoils so divided
to the proper Forces, shall be subdivided into three equal parts, whereof one
shall go to the Officers, and two to the common Soldiers: The like for the
Auxiliarys. And the Share allotted to the Officers shall be divided into four
equal parts, whereof one shall go to the Strategus, another to the Polemarchs, a
third to the Colonels, and a fourth to the Captains, Cornets, Ensigns, and
under Officers, receiving their share of the Spoil as common Soldiers: The like
for the Auxiliarys. And this upon pain, in the case of failure, of what the
People of Oceana (to whom the Cognizance of Peculat or Crimes of this nature is
properly appertaining) shall adjudg or decree.

UPON these three last Orders the ARCHON seemed to be haranguing at the head of
his Army in this manner.

My Dear Lords and Excellent Patriots;
A GOVERNMENT of this make is a Commonwealth for Increase. Of those for
Preservation, the Inconveniences and Frailtys have bin shown: Their Roots are
narrow, such as do not run, have no Fibers, their tops weak and dangerously
exposed to the weather; except you chance to find one, as Venice, planted in a
Flowerpot; and if she grows, she grows top-heavy, and falls too. But you cannot
plant an Oak in a Flowerpot; she must have Earth for her Root, and Heaven for
her Branches. Imperium Oceano, famam quae terminet astris.


ROME was said to be broken by her own weight, but poetically: For that weight
by which she was pretended to be ruined, was supported in her Emperors by a far
slighter Foundation. And in the common experience of good Architecture, there
is nothing more known, than that Buildings stand the firmer and the longer for
their own weight; nor ever swerve through any other internal cause, than that
their Materials are corruptible: But the People never die; nor, as a political
Body, are subject to any other Corruption than that which derives from their
Government. Unless a Man will deny the Chain of Causes, in which he denis God,
he must also acknowledge the Chain of Effects; wherefore there can be no effect
in Nature, that is not from the first Cause, and those successive Links of the
Chain, without which it could not have bin. Now except a Man can show the
contrary in a Commonwealth; if there be no cause of Corruption in the first
make of it, there can never be any such Effect. Let no Man's Superstitition
impose Profaneness upon this Assertion; for as Man is sinful, but yet the
Universe is perfect, so may the Citizen be sinful, and yet the Commonwealth be
perfect. And as Man, seeing the World is perfect, can never commit any such Sin
as shall render it imperfect, or bring it to a natural dissolution; so the
Citizen, where the Commonwealth is perfect, can never commit any such Crime as
will render it imperfect, or bring it to a natural dissolution. To com to
experience; Venice, notwithstanding we have found fom flaws in it, is the only
Commonwealth in the Make whereof no man can find a cause of dissolution; for
which reason we behold her (tho she consists of men that are not without sin)
at this day with one thousand Years upon her back, yet for any internal cause,
as young, as fresh, and free from decay, or any appearance of it, as she was
born: but whatever in nature is not sensible of decay by the course of a
thousand Years, is capable of the whole Age of Nature; by which Calculation,
for any check that I am able to give my self, a Commonwealth, rightly ordered,
may, for any internal causes, be as immortal or longliv'd as the World. But if
this be true, those Commonwealths that are naturally fallen, must have derived
their Ruin from the rise of them. Israel and Athens died not natural but
violent deaths; in which manner the World it self is to die. We are speaking of
those causes of Dissolution which are natural to Government; and they are but
two, either Contradiction or Inequality: If a Commonwealth be a Contradiction,
she must needs destroy her self; and if she be inequal, it tends to strife, and
strife to ruin. By the former of these fell Lacedemon, by the latter Rome.
Lacedemon being made altogether for War, and yet not for Increase, her natural
Progress became her natural Dissolution, and the building of her own victorious
Hand too heavy for her Foundation; so that she fell indeed by her own weight.
But Rome perished through her native Inequality, which how it inveterated the
Bosoms of the Senate and the People each against other, and even to death, has
bin shown at large.

LOOK well to it, my Lords, for if there be a contradiction or inequality in
your Commonwealth, it must fall; but if it has neither of these, it has no
principle of Mortality. Do not think me impudent; if this be truth, I should
commit a gross indiscretion in concealing it. Sure I am that MACCHIAVEL is for
the immortality of a Commonwealth upon far weaker Principles. If a
Commonwealth, Disc. ^. 3. c. 22. b. 3. c. 29.
says he, were so happy as to be provided often with men, that, when she is
swerving from her Principles, should reduce her to her Institution, she would
be immortal. But a Commonwealth, as we have demonstrated, swerves not from her
Principles, but by and through her Institution; if she brought no Biass into the
world with her, her course for any internal Cause must be straight forward, as
we see is that of Venice. She cannot turn to the right hand, nor to the left,
but by some rub, which is not an internal but external cause; against such she
can be no way fortified, but through her Situation, as is Venice; or through her
Militia, as was Rome: by which Examples a Commonwealth may be secure of those
also. Think me not vain, for I cannot conceal my opinion here; a Commonwealth
that is rightly instituted can never swerve, nor one that is not rightly
instituted be secured from swerving by reduction to her first Principles:
Wherefore it is no less apparent in this place, that MACCHIAVEL understood not a
Commonwealth as to the whole piece, than where having told you, That a Tribun,
or any other Citizen Disc. B. 1. c. 18.
of Rome, might propose a Law to the People, and debate it with them; he adds,
this Order was good, while the People were good; but when the People became
evil, it became most pernicious. As if this Order (through which, with the like,
the People most apparently became evil) could ever have bin good; or that the
People, or the Commonwealth could ever have become good, by being reduced to
such Principles as were the Original of their Evil. The Disease of Rome was, as
has bin shown, from the native inequality of her Balance, and no otherwise from
the Empire of the World, than as, this falling into one Scale, that of the
Nobility (an evil in such a Fabric inevitable) kicked out the People. Wherefore
a Man that could have made her to throw away the Empire of the World, might in
that have reduced her to her Principles; and yet have bin so far from rendering
her immortal, that going no further, he should never have cured her. But your
Commonwealth is founded upon an equal Agrarian; and if the Earth be given to
the Sons of men, this Balance is the Balance of Justice, such a one as in
having due regard to the different Industry of different men, yet faithfully
judges the Poor. And Prove. 29. 14.
the King that faithfully judges the Poor, his Throne shall be established for
ever; much more the Commonwealth, seeing that equality which is the necessary
dissolution of Monarchy, is the Generation, the very Life and Soul of a
Commonwealth. And now, if ever, I may be excusable, seeing my assertion, that
the Throne of a Commonwealth may be established for ever, is consonant to the
holy Scriptures.

THE Balance of a Commonwealth that is equal, is of such a nature, that
whatever falls into her Empire, must fall equally; and if the whole Earth falls
into your Scales, it must fall equally; and so you may be a greater People, and
yet not swerve from your Principles one hair. Nay, you will be so far from
that, that you must bring the world in such a case to your Balance, even to the
Balance of Justice. But hearken, my Lords; are we on Earth? do we see the Sun?
or are we visiting those shady places which are feigned by the Poets?

Continuo auditae voces, vagitus and ingens.
These Gothic Empires that are yet in the world, were at the first, tho they
had legs of their own, but a heavy and unweildy burden; but their Foundations
being now broken, the Iron of them enters even into the Souls of the Oppressed;
and hear the voice of their Comforters: My Father has chastis'd you with
Whips, but I will chastise you with Scorpions. Hearken, I say; if thy Brother
cries to thee in affliction, will thou not hear him? This is a Commonwealth of
the Fabric, that has an open ear and a public concern; she is not made for her
self only, but given as a Magistrate of God to Mankind, for the vindication of
common Right, and the Law of Nature. Wherefore says CICERO of the like, that of
the Romans, Nos magis Patronatum orbis terrarum suscepimus, quam Imperium.
We have rather undertaken the Patronage, than the Empire of the World. If you,
not regarding this Example, like some other Nations that are upon the point to
smart for it, shall, having attained to your own Liberty, bear the Sword of
your common Magistracy in vain, sit still, and fold your Arms, or, which is
worse, let out the Blood of your People to Tyrants, to be shed in the defense
of their Yokes like Water, and so not only turn the Grace of God into
wantonness, but his Justice into Wormwood: I say if you do thus, you are not
now making a Commonwealth, but heaping coals of fire upon your own heads. A
Commonwealth of this make is a Minister of God upon Earth, to the end that the
World may be governed with Righteousness. For which cause (that I may com at
length to our present business) the Orders last rehearsed are buds of Empire,
such as with the blessing of God may spread the Arms of your Commonwealth, like
a holy Asylum, to the distressed World, and give the Earth her Sabbath of
years, or rest from her Labors, under the shadow of your Wings. It is upon this
point where the Writings of MACCHIAVEL, having for the rest excelled all other
Authors, com as far to excel themselves.

COMMONWEALTHS, says he, have had three ways of propagating Disc. B. 2. C. 4.
themselves, one after the manner of Monarchys, by imposing the Yoke, which was
the way of Athens, and toward the latter times of Lacedemon; another by equal
Leagues, which is the way of Switzerland; (I shall add of Holland, tho since
his time) a third by inequal Leagues, which, to the shame of the World, was
never practiced, nay nor so much as seen or minded, by any other Commonwealth
but that only of Rome. They will each of them, either for caution or imitation,
be worthy to be well weighed, which is the proper work of this place. Athens
and Lacedemon have bin the occasion of great scandal to the world, in two, or
at least one of two regards: the first their Emulation, which involved Greece
in perpetual Wars; the second their way of Propagation, which by imposing Yokes
upon others, was plainly contradictory to their own Principles.

FOR the first: Governments, be they of what kind soever, if they be planted
too close, are like Trees, that impatient in their growth to have it hindered,
eat out one another. It was not unknown to these in speculation, or, if you
read the story of AGESILAUS, in action, that either of them with thirty
thousand men might have mastered the East; and certainly, if the one had not
stood in the others light, ALEXANDER had com too late to that end, which was
the means (and would be if they were to live again) of ruin, at least to one of
them: wherefore with any man that understands the nature of Government this is
excusable. So it was between Oceana and Marpesia; so it is between France and
Spain, tho less excusable; and so it ever will be in the like cases. But to com
to the second occasion of Scandal by them given, which was in the way of their
propagation, it is not excusable: for they brought their Confederats under
bondage; by which means Athens gave occasion of the Peloponnesian War, the
wound of which she died stinking, when Lacedemon, taking the fame Infection
from her Carcass, soon followed.

WHEREFORE, my Lords, let these be warnings to you, not to make that Liberty
which God has given you a snare to others, in practicing this kind of
enlargement of your selves.

THE second way of Propagation or Enlargement used by Commonwealths, is that of
Switzerland and Holland, equal Leagues: This, tho it be not otherwise
mischievous, is useless to the World, and dangerous to themselves: useless to
the World; for as the former Governments were Storks, these are Blocks, have no
sense of Honor, or concern in the Sufferings of others. But as the Aetolians, a
State of the like Fabric, were reproached by PHILIP of Macedon, to prostitute
themselves, by letting out their Arms to the Lusts of others, while they leave
their own Liberty barren, and without legitimat issue; so I do not defame these
People: the Switzer for Valor has no Superior, the Hollander for Industry no
equal; but themselves in the mean time shall so much the less excuse their
Governments, seeing that to the Switz it is well enough known that the Ensigns
of his Commonwealth have no other Motto than in te converte manus: and that of
the Hollander, tho he sweats more Gold than the Spaniard digs, lets him
languish in debt; for she her self lives upon charity. These are dangerous to
themselves, precarious Governments, such as do not command, but beg their Bread
from Province to Province, in Coats that being patched up of all colors are in
effect of none. That their Cantons and Provinces are so many Arrows, is good;
but they are so many Bows too, which is naught.

LIKE to these was the Commonwealth of the ancient Tuscans, hung together like
Bobbins, without a hand to weave with them; therefore easily overcom by the
Romans, tho at that time, for number, a far less considerable People. If your
Liberty be not a Root that grows, it will be a Branch that withers; which
consideration brings me to the Paragon, the Commonwealth of Rome.

THE ways and means whereby the Romans acquired the Patronage, and in that the
Empire of the World, were different, according to the different condition of
their Commonwealth in her rise, and in her growth: in her rise she proceeded
rather by Colonys; in her growth by inequal Leagues. Colonys without the bounds
of Italy she planted none (such dispersion of the Roman Citizen as to plant him
in foren parts, till the contrary Interest of the Emperors brought in that
Practice, was unlawful) nor did she ever demolish any City within that compass,
or divest it of Liberty; but whereas the most of them were Commonwealths, stirred
up by emulation of her great felicity to war against her, if she overcame any,
she confiscated some part of their Lands that were the greatest Incendiarys, or
causes of the Trouble, upon which she planted Colonys of her own People,
preserving the rest of their Lands and Libertys for the Natives or Inhabitants.
By this way of proceeding, that I may be as brief as possible, she did many and
great things. For in confirming of Liberty, she propagated her Empire; in
holding the Inhabitants from Rebellion, she put a curb upon the incursion of
Enemies; in exonerating her self o^ the poorer sort, she multiplied her
Citizens; in rewarding her Veterans, she rendered the rest less seditious; and
in acquiring to her self the reverence of a common Parent, she from time to
time became the Mother of newborn Citys.

IN her farther growth the way of her Propagation went more upon Leagues, which
for the first division were of two kinds, Social and Provincial.

AGAIN, Social Leagues, or Leagues of Society, were of two kinds.

THE first called Latinity or Latin, the second Italian Right.

THE League between the Romans and the Latins, or Latin Right, approached
nearest to Jus Quiritium, or the Right of a native Roman. The Man or the City
that was honored with this Right, was Civitate donatus cum suffragio, adopted a
Citizen of Rome, with the right of giving Suffrage with the People in some
cases, as those of Confirmation of Law, or Determination in Judicature, if both
the Consuls were agreed, not otherwise; wherefore that coming to little, the
greatest and most peculiar part of this Privilege was, that who had born
Magistracy (at least that of Aedil or Quaestor) in any Latin City, was by
consequence of the same, a Citizen of Rome at all points.

ITALIAN Right was also a donation of the City, but without Suffrage: they who
were in either of these Leagues, were governed by their own Laws and
Magistrates, having all the Rights, as to Liberty, of Citizens of Rome, yielding
and paying to the Commonwealth as head of the League, and having in the conduct
of all Affairs appertaining to the common Cause, such aid of Men and Money as
was particularly agreed to upon the merit of the Cause, and specified in their
respective Leagues, whence such Leagues came to be called equal or inequal
accordingly.

PROVINCIAL Leagues were of different extension, according to the Merit and
Capacity of a conquered People; but they were all of one kind: for every
Province was governed by Roman Magistrates, as a Praetor or a Proconsul,
according to the dignity of the Province, for the Civil Administration and
Conduct of the Provincial Army; and a Quaestor for the gathering of the public
Revenue, from which Magistrates a Province might appeal to Rome.

FOR the better understanding of these Particulars, I shall exemplify in as
many of them as is needful: and first in Macedon.

THE Macedonians were thrice conquered by the Romans, first under the Conduct
of TITUS QUINTUS FLAMINIUS; secondly, under that of LUCIUS AEMILIUS PAULUS;
and, thirdly, under that of QUINTUS CAECILIUS METELLUS, thence called
MACEDONICUS.

FOR the first time PHILIP of Macedon, who (possessed of Acrocorinthus) boasted
no less than was true, that he had Greece in fetters, being overcom by
FLAMINIUS, had his Kingdom restored to him, upon condition that he should
immediately set all the Citys which he held in Greece and in Asia at liberty;
and that he should not make war out of Macedon, but by leave of the Senate of
Rome; which PHILIP (having no other way to save any thing) agreed should be don
accordingly.

THE Grecians being at this time assembled at the Isthmian Games, where the
Concourse was mighty great, a Crier, appointed to the office by FLAMINIUS, was
heard among them proclaiming all Greece to be free; to which the People being
amazed at so hopeless a thing, gave little credit, till they received such
testimony of the truth as put it past all doubt: whereupon they fell immediately
on running to the Proconsul with Flowers and Garlands, and such violent
expressions of their Admiration and Joy, as, if FLAMINIUS, a young man, about
thirty three, had not also bin very strong, he must have died of no other death
than their kindness, while every one striving to touch his hand, they bore him
up and down the field with an unruly throng, full of such Ejaculations as
these: How! Is there a People in the world, that at their own charge, at their
own peril, will fight for the Liberty of another? Did they live at the next
door to this fire? Or what kind of men are these, whose business it is to pass
the Seas, that the World may be governed with Righteousness? The Citys of
Greece and of Asia shake off their Iron Fetters at the voice of a Crier! Was it
madness to imagine such a thing, and is it don? O Virtue! O Felicity! O Fame!

IN this Example your Lordships have a donation of Liberty, or of Italian Right
to a People, by restitution to what they had formerly enjoyed; and some
particular Men, Familys, or Citys, according to their merit of the Romans, if
not upon this, yet upon the like occasions, were gratified with Latinity.

BUT PHILIP'S share by this means did not please him, wherefore the League was
broken by his Son PERSEUS; and the Macedonians thereupon for the second time
conquered by AEMILIUS PAULUS, their King taken, and they some time after the
Victory summoned to the Tribunal of the General; where remembering how little
hope they ought to have of Pardon, they expected some dreadful Sentence: When
AEMILIUS in the first place declared the Macedonians to be free, in the full
possession of their Lands, Goods, and Laws, with Right to elect annual
Magistrates, yielding and paying to the People of Rome one half of the Tribute
which they were accustomed to pay to their own Kings. This don he went on,
making so skilful a division of the Country in order to the methodizing of the
People, and casting them into a form of popular Government, that the
Macedonians, being first surpised with the Virtue of the Romans, began now to
alter the scene of their Admiration, that a Stranger should do such things for
them in their own Country, and with such facility, as they had never so much as
once imagined to be possible. Nor was this all, for AEMILIUS, as if not
dictating to conquered Enemies, but to some well deserving Friends, gave them in
the last place Laws so suitable, and contrived with such care and prudence, that
long use and experience (the only Correctress of Works of this nature) could
never find a fault in them.

IN this Example you have a Donation of Liberty, or of Italian Right, to a
People that had not tasted of it before, but were now taught how to use it.

MYLORDS, The Royalists should compare what we are doing, and we what hitherto
we have don for them, with this example. It is a shame that while we are
boasting up our selves above all others, we should yet be so far from imitating
such examples as these, that we do not so much as understand that if Government
be the Parent of Manners, where there are no Heroic Virtues, there is no Heroic
Government.

BUT the Macedonians rebelling, at the name of a false PHILIP, the third time
against the Romans, were by them judged incapable of Liberty, and reduced by
METELLUS to a Province.

NOW whereas it remains, that I explain the nature of a Province, I shall rather
choose that of Sicily, because having bin the first which the Romans made, the
descriptions of the rest relate to it.

WE have so received the Sicilian Citys into Amity, says CICERO, that they
enjoy their ancient Laws; and upon no other condition than of the same
obedience to the People of Rome, which they formerly yielded to their own
Princes or Superiors. So the Sicilians, whereas they had bin parcel'd out to
diverse Princes, and into diverse States (the cause of ^perpetual Wars, whereby,
hewing one another down, they became Sacrifices to the Ambition of their
Neighbors, or of some Invader) were now received at the old rate into a new
Protection which could hold them, and in which no Enemy durst touch them; no^
was it possible, as the case then stood, for the Sicilians to receive, or for
the Romans to give more.

A ROMAN Province is defined by SIGONIUS, a Region having Provincial Right.
Provincial Right in general was to be governed by a Roman Praetor, or Consul,
in matters at least of State, and of the Militia: And by a Quaestor, whose
Office it was to receive the Public Revenue. Provincial Right in particular was
different, according to the different Leagues or Agreements between the
Commonwealth, and the People reduced into a Province. Siculi hoc jure sunt, ut
quod civis cum cive agat, domi certet suis legibus; quod Siculus cum Siculo non
ejusdem Civitatis, ut de eo Praetor Judices, ex P. Rupilii Decreto, sortiatur.
Quod privatus a Populo petit, aut populus a privato, Senatus ex aliqua
Civitate, qui judicet, datur, cui alternae Civitates rejectae sunt. Quod civis
Romanus a Sic^lo petit, Siculus Judex datur; quod Siculus a cive Romano, civis
Romanus datur. Caeterarum rerum selecti Judices ex civium Romanorum conventu
proponi solent. Inter aratores and decumanos lege frumentaria, quam Hieronicam
appellant, judicia siunt. Because the rest would oblige me to a discourse too
large for this place, it shall suffice that I have showed you how it was in
Sicily.

MY LORDS, Upon the Fabric of your Provincial Orb I shall not hold you; because
it is sufficiently described in the Order, and I cannot believe that you think
it inferior to the way of a Praetor and a Quaestor. But whereas the Provincial
way of the Roman Commonwealth was that whereby it held the Empire of the World,
and your Orbs are intended to be capable at least of the like use; there may
arise many Controversys: As whether such a course be lawful; whether it be
feizible; and, seeing that the Romans were ruined upon that point, whether it
would not be to the destruction of the Commonwealth.

FOR the first, If the Empire of a Commonwealth be an occasion to ask whether
it be lawful for a Commonwealth to aspire to the Empire of the World, it is to
ask whether it be lawful for it to do its duty, or to put the World into a
better condition than it was before.

AND to ask whether this be feizible, is to ask why the Oceaner, being under
the like administration of Government, may not do as much with two hundred men
as the Roman did with one hundred; for comparing their Commonwealths in their
rise, the difference is yet greater. Now that Rome (seris Avaritia Luxuriaque)
through the natural thirst of her constitution, came at length with the fullness of
her Provinces to burst her self, this is no otherwise to be understood, than as
when a man that from his own evil Constitution had contracted the Dropsy, dys
with drinking: It being apparent that in case her Agrarian had held, she could
never have bin thus ruined; and I have already demonstrated that your Agrarian
being once poised, can never break or swerve.

WHEREFORE to draw toward some conclusion of this Discourse, let me inculcat the
use, by selecting a few Considerations out of many. The regard had in this
place to the Empire of the World appertains to a well-ordered Commonwealth,
more especially for two reasons.

1. THE facility of this great Enterprise, by a Government of the Model
proposed.

2. THE danger that you would run in the omission of such a Government.

THE facility of this Enterprise, upon the grounds already laid, must needs be
great, forasmuch as the Empire of the World has bin, both in Reason and
Experience, the necessary consequence of a Commonwealth of this nature only:
for tho it has bin given to all kinds to drive at it, since that of Athens or
Lacedemon, if the one had not hung in the others light, might have gained it;
yet could neither of them have held it: not Athens, through the manner of her
propagation, which, being by downright Tyranny, could not preserve what she
had; nor Lacedemon, because she was overthrown by the weight of a less
Conquest. The facility then of this great Enterprise being peculiar to popular
Government, I shall consider it, first, In gaining; and secondly, In holding.

FOR the former, Volenti non sit injuria; it is said of the People under
EUMENES, that they would not have changed their subjection for Liberty;
wherefore the Romans gave them no disturbance. If a People be contented with
their Government, it is a certain sign that it is good, and much good do them
with it. The Sword of your Magistracy is for a terror to them that do evil.
EUMENES had the sear of God, or of the Romans before his eyes; concerning such
he has given you no Commission.

BUT till we can say here are the Romans, where is EUMENES? Do not think that
the late appearances of God to you have bin altogether for your selves; he has
surely seen the Affliction of your Brethren, and heard their cry by reason of
their Taskmasters. For to believe otherwise, is not only to be mindless of his
ways, but altogether deaf. If you have ears to hear, this is the way in which
you will certainly be called upon: For if, while there is no stock of Liberty,
no sanctuary of the afflicted, it be a common object to behold a People casting
themselves out of the Pan of one Prince into the Fire of another; what can you
think, but if the World should see the Roman Eagle again, she would renew her
age, and her slight? Nor did ever she spread her Wings with better Omen, than
will be read in your Ensigns; which if, called in by an oppressed People, they
interpose between them and their Yoke, the People themselves must either do
nothing in the mean time, or have no more pains to take for their wished Fruit
than to gather it, if that be not likewise don for them. Wherefore this must
needs be easy, and yet you have a greater facility than is in the arm of flesh;
for if the Cause of Mankind be the Cause of God, the Lord of Hosts will be your
Captain, and you shall be a Praise to the whole Earth.

THE facility of Holding is in the way of your Propagation; if you take that of
Athens and Lacedemon, you shall rain Snares; but either catch, or hold nothing.
Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord: If setting up for Liberty, you
impose Yokes, he will infallibly destroy you. On the other side, to go about a
work of this nature by a League without a Head, is to abdicat that Magistracy,
wherewith he has not only indu'd you, but whereof he will require an account of
you; for, cursed is he that dos the Work of the Lord negligently. Wherefore you
are to take the course of Rome: if you have subdued a Nation that is capable of
Liberty, you shall make them a present of it, as did FLAMINIUS to Greece, and
AEMILIUS to Macedon, reserving to your selves some part of that Revenue which
was legally paid to the former Government, together with the right of being
Head of the League, which includes such Levys of Men and Money as shall be
necessary for the carrying on of the Public Work. For if a People have by your
means attained to freedom, they ow both to the Cause and you, such Aid as may
propagat the like Fruit to the rest of the World. But whereas every Nation is
not capable of her Liberty to this degree, lest you be put to doing and undoing
of things, as the Romans were in Macedon, you shall diligently observe what
Nation is fit for her Liberty to this degree, and what not: Which is to be don
by two Marks, the first if she be willing to help the Lord against the Mighty;
for if she has no care of the Liberty of Mankind, she deserves not her own. But
because in this you may be deceived by Pretenses, which, continuing for a while
specious, may afterward vanish; the other is more certain, and that is if she
be capable of an equal Agrarian; which that it was not observed by excellent
AEMILIUS in his donation of Liberty, and introduction of a Popular State among
the Macedonians, I am more than moved to believe for two reasons: the first,
because at the same time the Agrarian was odious to the Roman Patricians; the
second, that the PSEUDO-PHILIP could afterward so easily recover Macedon,
which could not have happened but by the Nobility, and their impatience, having
great Estates, to be equaled with the People; for that the People should
otherwise, at the mere sound of a Name, have thrown away their Liberty, is
incredible. Wherefore be assured, that the Nation where you cannot establish an
equal Agrarian, is incapable of its Liberty as to this kind of Donation. For
example, except the Aristocracy in Marpesia be dissolved, neither can that
People have their Liberty there, nor you govern at home; for they continuing
still liable to be sold by their Lords to foren Princes, there will never
(especially in a Country of which there is no other profit to be made) be want
of such Merchants and Drovers, while you must be the Market where they are to
receive their second Payment.

NOR can the Aristocracy there be dissolved but by your means, in relation
whereto you are provided with your Provincial Orb; which being proportioned to
the measure of the Nation that you have vindicated or conquered, will easily
hold it: for there is not a People in the World more difficult to be held than
the Marpesians, which tho by themselves it be ascribed to their own nature, is
truly to be attributed to that of their Country. Nevertheless you having nine
thousand men upon the continual guard of it, that, threatened by any sudden
insurrection, have places of retreat; and an Army of forty thousand men upon a
days warning ready to march to their rescue; it is not to be rationally shown
which way they can possibly slip out of your hands. And if a man shall think
that upon a Province more remote, and divided by the Sea, you have not the like
hold, he has not so well considered your Wings as your Talons, your shipping
being of such a nature, as makes the descent of your Armies almost of equal
facility in any Country: so that what you take you hold, both because your
Militia, being already populous, will be of great growth in it self; and also
through your Confederats, by whom in taking and holding you are still more enabled
to do both.

NOR shall you easilier hold, than the People under your Empire or Patronage
may be held. My Lords, I would not go to the door to see whether it be close
shut; this is no underhand dealing, nor a game at which he shall have any
advantage against you who sees your Cards, but on the contrary the Advantage
shall be your own: for with eighteen thousand men (which number I put, because
it circulats your Orb by the annual change of six thousand) having established
your matters in the order shown, you will be able to hold the greatest
Province; and eighteen thousand men, allowing them greater pay than any Prince
ever gave, will not stand the Province in one million Revenue; This by the pay
of a Parlamentary Army, is demonstrated in the C^rollary.
in consideration whereof, they shall have their own Estates free to themselves,
and be governed by their own Laws and Magistrates; which, if the Revenue of the
Province be in dry Rent (as there may be some that are four times as big as
Oceana) forty millions, will bring it with that of Industry, to speak with the
least, to twice the value: So that the People there, who at this day are so
oppressed that they have nothing at all whereon to live, shall for one Million
paid to you, receive at least seventy nine to their proper use: in which place
I appeal to any man, whether the Empire described can be other than the
Patronage of the World.

NOW if you add to the propagation of Civil Liberty (so natural to this
Commonwealth that it cannot be omitted) the propagation of the Liberty of
Conscience, this Empire, this Patronage of the World is the Kingdom of Christ:
For as the Kingdom of God the Father was a Commonwealth, so shall be the
Kingdom of God Psalm. 110. 3.
the Son; The People shall be willing in the day of his Power.

HAVING showed you in this and other places, some of those inestimable Benefits
of this kind of Government, together with the natural and facil Emanation of
them from their Fountain, I com (lest God, who has appeared to you, for he is
the God of Nature, in the glorious Constellation of these subordinat Causes,
whereof we have hitherto bin taking the true Elevation, should shake off the
dust of his Feet against you) to warn you of the Dangers which you, not taking
the opportunity, will incur by omission.

MACCHIAVEL speaking of the defect of Venice, through her want of proper Arms,
cries out, Questo tagliogli le gambe da montar in cielo.
This cut her Wings, and spoiled her mount to Heaven. If you lay your
Commonwealth upon any other Foundation than the People, you frustrat your self
of proper Arms, and so lose the Empire of the World; nor is this all, but some
other Nation will have it.

COLVMBVS offered Gold to one of your Kings, through whose happy incredulity
another Prince has drunk the Poison, even to the consumption of his People; but
I do not offer you a Nerve of War that is made of Pursestrings, such a one as
has drawn the face of the Earth into Convulsions, but such as is natural to her
Health and Beauty. Look you to it, where there is tumbling and tossing upon the
bed of sickness, it must end in death or recovery. Tho the People of the World,
in the dregs of the Gothic Empire, be yet tumbling and tossing upon the bed of
sickness, they cannot die; nor is there any means of recovery for them but by
ancient prudence, whence of necessity it must com to pass, that this Drug be
better known. If France, Italy, and Spain, were not all sick, all corrupted
together, there would be none of them so; for the sick would not be able to
withstand the sound, nor the sound to preserve their health without curing of
the sick. The first of these Nations (which, if you stay her leisure, will in
my mind be France) that recovers the health of ancient Prudence, shall
certainly govern the World; for what did Italy when she had it? And as you were
in that, so shall you in the like case be reduced to a Province; I do not speak
at random. Italy, in the Consulship of LUCIUS AEMILIUS PAPUS, and CAIUS ATILIUS
REGULUS, armed upon the Gallic Tumult that then happened of her self, and
without the Aid of foren Auxiliarys, seventy thousand Horse, and seven hundred
thousand Foot: But as Italy is the least of those three Countries in extent, so
is France now the most populous.

I, decus, I, nostrum, melioribus utere fatis.
MY dear Lords, Oceana is as the Rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the Valley. As
the Lilly among Thorns, such is my Love among the Daughters. She is comely as
the Tents of Kedar, and terrible as an Army with Banners. Her Neck is as the
Tower of David, builded for an Armory, whereon there hang a thousand Bucklers
and Shields of mighty Men. Let me hear thy Voice in the morning, whom my Soul
loves. The South has dropped, and the West is breathing upon thy Garden of
Spices. Arise, Queen of the Earth, Arise, holy Spouse of Jesus; for lo the
Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone; the Flowers appear on the Earth, the
time for the singing of Birds is com, and the Voice of the Turtle is heard in
our Land. Arise, I say, com forth, and do not tarry: Ah! wherefore should my eyes
behold thee by the Rivers of Babylon, hanging thy Harps upon the Willows, thou
fairest among Women?

EXCELLENT PATRIOTS; If the People be Soverain, here is that which establishes
their Prerogative: If we be sincere, here is that which disburdens our Souls,
and makes good all our Engagements: If we he charitable, here is that which
embraces all Partys: If we would be settled, here is that which will stand, and
last for ever.

IF our Religion be any thing else but a vain boast, scratching and defacing
human Nature or Reason, which, being the Image of God, makes it a kind of
Murder; here is that Empire whence Justice Amos 5. 24.
shall run down like a River, and Judgment like a mighty Stream. Who is it then
that calls us? or what is in our way? a Lion! is it not the Dragon that old
Serpent? for what wretched shifts are these? Here is a great deal, might we not
have some of this at one time, and some at another?

MY LORDS, permit me to give you the Sum, or brief Epitome of the whole
Commonwealth.
THE Center or Fundamental Laws are, first, the Agrarian, proportioned at two
thousand Pounds a Year in Land, ^ying and being within the proper Territory of
Oceana, and stating Property in Land at such a balance, that the Power can
never swerve out of the hands of the Many.

SECONDLY, The Ballot conveying this equal Sap from the Root, by an equal
Election or Rotation, into the Branches of Magistracy or Soverain Power.

THE Orbs of this Commonwealth being Civil, Military or Provincial, are, as it
were, cast upon this Mold or Center by the Divisions of the People; First into
Citizens and Servants: Secondly, into Youth and Elders: Thirdly, into such as
have one hundred Pounds a year in Lands, Goods or Monys, who are of the Horse;
and such as have under, who are of the Foot: Fourthly, they are divided by
their usual residence, into Parishes, Hundreds, and Tribes.

THE Civil Orbs consist of the Elders, and are thus created; every Monday next
ensuing the last of December, the Elders in every Parish elect the fifth man to
be a Deputy; which is but half a days work: every Monday next ensuing the last
of January, the Deputys meet at their respective Hundred, and elect out of
their number one Justice of the Peace, one Juryman, one Coroner, and one High
Constable of the Foot; one days work.

EVERY Monday next ensuing the last of February, the Hundreds meet at their
respective Tribe, and there elect the Lords High Sherif, Lieutenant, Custos
Rotulorum, the Conductor, the two Censors out of the Horse, the Magistrates of
the Tribe and of the Hundreds, with the Jurymen constituting the Phylarch, and
who assist in their respective Offices at the Assizes, hold the Quarter
Sessions, etc. The day following the Tribe elects the annual Galaxy, consisting
of two Knights, and three Deputys out of the Horse, with four Deputys out of
the Foot, thereby indu'd with Power, as Magistrates of the whole Nation, for the
term of three years. An Officer chosen at the Hundred may not be elected a
Magistrate of the Tribe; but a Magistrate or Officer either of the Hundred or of
the Tribe, being elected into the Galaxy, may substitute any one of his own
Order to his Magistracy or Office in the Hundred, or in the Tribe. This of the
Muster is two days work. So the body of the People is annually, at the charge
of three days work and a half, in their own Tribes, for the perpetuation of
their Power, receiving over and above the Magistracys so divided among them.

EVERY Monday next ensuing the last of March, the Knights, being a Hundred in
all the Tribes, take their places in the Senate; the Knights, having taken their
places in the Senate, make the third Region of the same; and the House procedes
to the Senatorian Elections. Senatorian Elections are annual, biennial, or
emergent.

THE annual are performed by the Tropic.

THE Tropic is a Scedule consisting of two parts; the first by which the
Senatorian Magistrates are elected; and the second, by which the Senatorian
Councils are perpetuated.

THE first part is of this Tenor.

THE Lord Strategus, Annual Magistrates, and therefore such as may be elected out
of any Region; the term of every Region having at the Tropic one year at the
least unexpir'd. THE Lord Orator, THE first Censor, THE second Censor,

THE third Commissioner of the Seal, Triennial Magistrates, and therefore such as
can be chosen out of the third Region only, as that alone which has the term of
three years unexpir'd. THE third Commissioner of the Treasury,

THE Strategus and the Orator sitting, are Consuls, or Presidents of the Senate.

THE Strategus marching is General of the Army, in which case a new Strategus
is elected to sit in his room.

THE Strategus sitting with the six Commissioners, being Counsillors of the
Nation, are the Signory of the Commonwealth.

THE Censors are Magistrates of the Ballot, Presidents of the Council for
Religion, and Chancellors of the Vniversitys.

THE second part of the Tropic perpetuats the Council of State, by the election
of five Knights out of the first Region of the Senate, to be the first Region of
that Council consisting of fifteen Knights, five in every Region.

THE like is don by the election of four into the Council of Religion, and four
into the Council of Trade, out of the same Region in the Senate; each of these
Councils consisting of twelve Knights, four in every Region.

BUT the Council of War consisting of nine Knights, three in every Region, is
elected by and out of the Council of State, as the other Councils are elected
by and out of the Senate. And if the Senate add a Juncta of nine Knights more,
elected out of their own number, for the term of three months, the Council of
War, by virtue of that addition, is Dictator of Oceana for the said term.

THE Signory jointly or severally has right of Session and Suffrage in every
Senatorian Council, and to propose either to the Senate, or any of them. And
every Region in a Council electing one weekly Provost, any two of those
Provosts have Power also to propose to their respective Council, as the proper
and peculiar Proposers of the same: for which cause they hold an Academy, where
any man either by word of mouth, or writing, may propose to the Proposers.

NEXT to the Elections of the Tropic is the biennial Election of one Ambassador
in ordinary, by the Ballot of the House, to the Residence of France; at which
time the Resident of France removes to Spain, he of Spain to Venice, he of
Venice to Constantinople, and he of Constantinople returns. So the Orb of the
Residents is wheeled about in eight years, by the biennial Election of one
Ambassador in Ordinary.

THE last kind of Election is emergent. Emergent Elections are made by the
Scrutiny. Election by Scrutiny is when a Competitor being made by a Council,
and brought into the Senate, the Senate chooses four more Competitors to him; and
putting all five to the Ballot, he who has most above half the Suffrages, is
the Magistrate. The Polemarchs or Fi^ld Officers are chosen by the Scrutiny of
the Council of War; an Ambassador Extraordinary by the Scrutiny of the Council
of State; the Judges and Sergeants at Law by the Scrutiny of the Seal; and the
Barons and prime Officers of the Exchequer, by the Scrutiny of the Treasury.

THE Opinion or Opinions that are legitimatly proposed to any Council must be
debated by the same, and so many as are resolved upon the Debate are introduced
into the Senate, where they are debated and resolved, or rejected by the whole
House: that which is resolved by the Senate is a Decree, which is good in
matters of State, but no Law, except it be proposed to, and resolved by the
Prerogative.

THE Deputys of the Galaxy being three Horse and four Foot in a Tribe, amount
in all the Tribes to one hundred and fifty Horse, and two hundred Foot; which,
having entered the Prerogative, and chosen their Captains, Cornet and Ensign
(triennial Officers) make the third Classis, consisting of one Troop, and one
Company; and so joining with the whole Prerogative, elect four annual
Magistrates, called Tribuns, whereof two are of the Horse, and two of the Foot.
These have the Command of the Prerogative Sessions, and Suffrage in the Council
of War, and Sessions without Suffrage in the Senate.

THE Senate having past a Decree which they would propose to the People, cause
it to be printed and published, or promulgated for the space of six weeks;
which being ordered, they choose their Proposers. The Proposers must be
Magistrates, that is, the Commissioners of the Seal, those of the Treasury, or
the Censors. These being chosen, desire the Muster of the Tribuns, and appoint
the day. The People being assembled at the day appointed, and the Decree
proposed, that which is proposed by authority of the Senate, and commanded by
the People, is the Law of Oceana, or an Act of Parliament.

SO the Parliament of Oceana consists of the Senate proposing, and the People
resolving.

THE People or Prerogative are also the Supreme Judicatory of this Nation,
having Power of hearing and determining all Causes of Appeal from all
Magistrates, or Courts Provincial, or Domestic; as also to question any
Magistrate, the term of his Magistracy being expired, if the Case be introduced
by the Tribuns, or any one of them.

THE Military Orbs consist of the Youth, that is, such as are from eighteen to
thirty years of Age; and are created in the following manner.

EVERY Wednesday next ensuing the last of December, the Youth of every Parish
assembling, elect the fifth of their number to be their Deputys; the Deputys of
the Youth are called Stratiots, and this is the first Essay.

EVERY Wednesday next ensuing the last of January, the Stratiots assembling at
the Hundred, elect their Captain and their Ensign, and fall to their Games and
Sports.

EVERY Wednesday next ensuing the last of February, the Stratiots are received
by the Lord Lieutenant their Commander in Chief, with the Conductors and the
Censors; and, having bin disciplined and entertained with other Games, are
called to the Vrns, where they elect the second Essay, consisting of two
hundred Horse and six hundred Foot in a Tribe; that is, of ten thousand Horse,
and thirty thousand Foot in all the Tribes, which is the Standing Army of this
Nation, to march at any warning. They also elect at the same time a part of the
third Essay, by the mixture of Balls marked with the letter M, and the letter
P, for Marpesia and Panopea; they of either mark being ten Horse and fifty Foot
in a Tribe, that is, five hundred Horse and two thousand five hundred Foot in
all the Tribes, which are forthwith to march to their respective Provinces.

BUT the third Essay of this Nation more properly so called, is when the
Strategus with the Polemarchs (the Senate and the People, or the Dictator having
decreed a War) receive in return of his Warrants the second Essay from the
hands of the Conductors at the Rendevous of Oceana; which Army marching with
all Accommodations provided by the Council of War, the Senate elects a new
Strategus, and the Lords Lieutenants a new second Essay.

A YOVTH, except he be an only Son, refusing any one of his three Essays,
without sufficient cause shown to the Phylarch or the Censors, is incapable of
Magistracy, and is fined a fifth part of his yearly Rent, or of his Estate, for
Protection. In case of Invasion the Elders are obliged to like duty with the
Youth, and upon their own charge.

THE Provincial Orb consisting in part of the Elders, and in part of the Youth,
is thus created.

FOUR Knights out of the first Region falling, are elected in the Senate to be
the first Region of the Provincial Orb of Marpesia; these being triennial
Magistrates, take their places in the Provincial Council, consisting of twelve
Knights, four in every Region, each Region choosing their weekly Provosts of the
Council thus constituted. One Knight more chosen out of the same Region in the
Senate, being an annual Magistrate, is President, with Power to propose; and the
Opinions proposed by the President, or any two of the Provosts, are debated by
the Council, and, if there be occasion of farther Power or Instruction than
they yet have, transmitted to the Council of State, with which the Provincial
is to hold Intelligence.

THE President of this Council is also Strategus, or General of the Provincial
Army; wherefore the Conductors upon notice of his Election, and appointment of
his Rendevous, deliver to him the Stratiots of his Letter, which he takes with
him into his Province: and the Provincial Army having received the new
Strategus with the third Classis, the Council dismisses the old Strategus with
the first Classis. The like is don for Panopea, or any other Province.

BUT whereas the term of every other Magistracy or Election in this
Commonwealth, whether annual or triennial, requires an equal Vacation, the term
of a Provincial Counsillor or Magistrate requires no Vacation at all. The Quorum
of a Provincial, as also that of every other Council and Assembly, requires two
thirds in a time of health, and one third in a time of sickness.



I THINK I have omitted nothing but the Props and Scaffolds, which are not of
use but in building. And how much is here? Show me another Commonwealth in this
compass? How many things? Show me another entire Government consisting but of
thirty Orders. If you now go to Law with any body, there ly to some of our
Courts two hundred Original Writs: If you stir your hand, there go more Nerves
and Bones to that motion: If you play, you have more Cards in the pack; nay you
could not sit with your ease in that Chair, if it consisted not of more parts.
Will you not then allow to your Legislator, what you can afford your
Upholdster; or to the Throne, what is necessary to a Chair?

MY LORDS, If you will have fewer Orders in a Commonwealth, you will have more;
for where she is not perfect at first, every day, every hour will produce a new
Order, the end whereof is to have no Order at all, but to grind with the clack
of some Demagog. Is he providing already for his golden Thum? Lift up your
heads; Away with Ambition, that fulsom complexion of a Statesman, tempered,
like SYLLA'S, with blood and muck. And the Lord give to his Senators Wisdom;
and make our faces to shine, that we may be a Light to them that sit in
darkness and the shadow of death, to guide their feet in the way of Peace. --
In the name of God, what is the matter! --

PHILADELPHUS the Secretary of the Council having performed his task in reading
the several Orders as you have seen, upon the receipt of a Packet from his
Correspondent BOCCALINI, Secretary of Parnassus, in reading one of the Letters,
burst forth into such a violent passion of weeping and downright howling, that
the Legislators being startled with the apprehension of some horrid news; one of
them had no sooner snatched the Letter out of his hand, than the rest crying,
Read, Read, he obeyed in this manner.

THE 3d instant his Phoebean Majesty having taken the nature of Free States
into his Royal consideration, and being steddily persuaded that the Laws in
such Governments are incomparably better and more surely directed to the good
of Mankind than in any other; that the Courage of such a Trajano Boccalini,
Centuria 1. Raggual. 21.
People is the aptest tinder to noble fire; that the Genius of such a Soil is
that wherein the roots of good Literature are least worm-eaten with Pedantism,
and where their Fruits have ever com to the greatest maturity and highest
relish; conceived such a loathing of their Ambition and Tyranny, who, usurping
the liberty of their native Countries, become slaves to themselves, inasmuch as
(be it never so contrary to their own Nature or Consciences) they have taken
the earnest of Sin, and are engaged to persecute all Men that are good with the
same or greater rigor than is ordained by Laws for the wicked: For Nemo unquam
imperium flagitio quaesitum bonis artibus exercuit.
none ever administered that Power by good, which he purchased by ill Arts:
PHOEBUS, I say, having considered this, assembled all the Senators residing in
the learned Court at the Theater of MELPOMENE, where he caused CAESAR the
Dictator to com upon the stage, and his Sister ACTIA, his Nephew AUGUSTUS,
JULIA his Daughter, with the Children which she had by MARCUS AGRIPPA, LUCIUS
and CAIUS CAESAR'S, AGRIPPA POSTHUMUS, JULIA, and AGRIPPINA, with the numerous
Progeny which she bore to her renowned Husband GERMANICUS, to enter. A
miserable Scene in any, but most deplorable in the eyes of CAESAR, thus
beholding what havoc his prodigious Ambition, not satisfied with his own
bloody Ghost, had made upon his more innocent Remains, even to the total
extinction of his Family. For it is (seeing where there is any humanity, there
must be some compassion) not to be spoken without tears, that of the full
branches deriving from OCTAVIA the elder Sister, and JULIA the Daughter of
AUGUSTUS, there should not be one fruit or blossom that was not cut off or
blasted by the Sword, Famine, or Poison. Now might the great Soul of CAESAR have
bin full; and yet that which poured in as much or more, was to behold that
execrable race of the CLAUDII, having hunted and sucked his Blood with the
thirst of Tigers, to be rewarded with the Roman Empire, and remain in full
possession of that famous Patrimony: a Spectacle to pollute the Light of
Heaven! Nevertheless as if CAESAR had not yet enough, his Phoebean Majesty
caused to be introduced on the other side of the Theater, the most illustrious
and happy Prince ANDREA DORIA, with his dear Posterity, embraced by the soft
and constant arms of the City of Genoa, into whose bosom, ever fruitful in her
gratitude, he had dropped her fair LIBERTY like the dew of Heaven; which when the
Roman Tyrant beheld, and how much more fresh that Laurel was worn with a firm
root in the Hearts of the People, than that which he had torn off, he fell into
such a horrid distortion of limbs and countenance, that the Senators who had
thought themselves steel and flint at such an object, having hitherto stood in
their reverend snowlike thawing Alps, now covered their faces with their large
sleeves.

MY Lords, said the ARCHON rising, witty PHILADELPHUS has given us a grave
admonition in a dreadful Tragedy. Discite justitiam moniti, and non temnere
Divos. Great and glorious Caesar, the highest character of flesh, yet could not
rule but by that part of Man which is the beast: but a Commonwealth is a
Monarchy; to her God is King, in as much as Reason, his dictat, is her Soverain
Power.

WHICH said, he adjourned the Council. And the Model was soon after
promulgated. Quod bonum, foelix, faustumque sit huic Reipublicae. Agite
Quirites, censuere Patres, jubeat Populus: The Sea roared, and the Floods clapped
their hands.

LIBERTAS.
The Proclamation of his Highness the Lord ARCHON of OCEANA upon Promulgation
of the Model.
See the course of the Decemvirs in the promulgation of the first ten of their
twelve Tables in LIVY.
Whereas his Highness and the Council, in the framing of the Model promulgated,
have not had any private interest, or ambition, but the fear of God, and the
good of this People before their eyes; and it remains their desire that this
great Work may be carried on accordingly: This present greeting is to inform
the good People of this Land, that as the Council of Prytans sat during the
framing of the Model, to receive from time to time such Propositions as should
be offered by any wisehearted or public spirited man, toward the institution
of a well ordered Commonwealth, so the said Council is to sit as formerly in
the great Hall of the Pantheon during Promulgation (which is to continue for
the space of three months) to receive, weigh, and, as there shall be occasion,
transmit to the Council of Legislators, all such Objections as shall be made
against the said Model, whether in the whole, or in any part. Wherf^re, that
nothing be don rashly, or without consent of the People, such, of what party
soever, with whom there may remain any doubts o^ difficultys, are desired with
all convenient speed to address themselves to the said Prytans; where, if such
objections, doubts, or difficultys receive solution to the satisfaction of the
Auditory, they shall have public thanks: but if the said objections, doubts or
difficultys, receive no solution to the satisfaction of the Auditory, then the
Model promulgated shall be reviewed, and the party that was the occasion of the
review, shall receive public thanks, together with the best Horse in his
Highness's Stable, and be one of the Council of Legislators. And so God have
you in his keeping.

I SHOULD now write the same Council of the Prytans, but for two reasons; the
one, that having had but a small time for that which is already don, I am
overlabor'd; the other, that there may be new Objections. Wherefore if my Reader
has any such as to the Model, I entreat him to address himself by way of
Oration, as it were, to the Prytans, that when this rough draught coms to be a
work, his Speech being faithfully inserted in this place, may give, or receive
correction to amendment: For what is written will be weighed. But Conversation,
in these days, is a game, at which they are best provided that have light Gold:
It is like the sport of Women that make Flowers of straws, which must be stuck
up, but may not be touched. Nor, which is worse, is this the fault of
Conversation only: But to the Examiner, Arist. Rhet.
I say, If to invent method, and to teach an art, be all one, let him show that
this Method is not truly invented, or this Art is faithfully taught.

I CANNOT conclude a Circle (and such is this Commonwealth) without turning the
end into the beginning. The time of Promulgation being expired, the Surveyors
were sent down, who having in due season made report that their work was
perfect, the Orators followed; under the administration of which Officers and
Magistrates the Commonwealth was ratified and established by the whole body of
the People, in their Curiatis, Centuriatis, and Tributis Comitiis.
Parochial, Hundred, and County Assemblys. And the Orators being, by virtue of
their Scrols or Lots, Members of their respective Tribes, were elected each the
first Knight of the third List, or Galaxy: wherefore having at their return
assisted the ARCHON in putting the Senate, and the People or Prerogative into
motion, they abdicated the Magistracy both of Orators and Legislators.

The COROLLARY.
FOR the rest (says PLUTARCH, closing up the story of LYCURGUS) when he saw
that his Government had taken root, and was in the very Plantation strong
enough to stand by it self, he conceived such a delight within him, as GOD is
described by PLATO to have don when he had finished the Creation of the World,
and saw his own Orbs move below him: For in the Art of Man (being the imitation
of Nature, which is the Hobbs.
Art of GOD) there is nothing so like the first call of beautiful Order out of
Chaos and Confusion, as the Architecture of a welorder'd Commonwealth. Wherefore
LYCURGUS seeing in effect, that his Orders were good, fell into deep
Contemplation how he might render them, so far as could be effected by human
Providence, inalterable and immortal. To which end he assembled the People, and
remonstrated to them, That for ought he could perceive, their Policy was
already such, and so well established, as was sufficient to intail upon them
and theirs all that Virtue and Felicity whereof human Life is capable:
Nevertheless that there being another thing of greater concern than all the
rest, whereof he was not yet provided to give them a perfect account, nor could,
till he had consulted the Oracle of APOLLO, he desired that they would observe
his Laws without any change or alteration whatsoever, till his return from
Delphos; to which all the People cheerfully and unanimously engaged themselves
by promise, desiring him that he would make as much have as he could. But
LYCURGUS before he went, began with the Kings and the Senators, and thence
taking the whole People in order, made them all swear to that which they had
promised, and then took his Journey. Being arrived at Delphos, he sacrificed to
APOLLO, and afterward inquired if the Policy which he had established, was
good and sufficient for a virtuous and a happy Life? By the way, it has bin a
Maxim with Legislators not to give checks to the present Superstition, but to
make the best use of it, as that which is always the most powerful with the
People; otherwise tho PLUTARCH being a Priest, was interested in the cause,
there is nothing plainer than CICERO in his Book De Divinatione has made it,
that there was never any such thing as an Oracle, except in the cunning of the
Priests. But to be civil to the Author, The God answered to LYCURGUS, that his
Policy was exquisit, and that his City, holding to the strict observation of
his form of Government, should attain to the height of fame and glory. Which
Oracle LYCURGUS causing to be written, failed not of transmitting to his
Lacedemon. This don, that his Citizens might be for ever inviolably bound by
their Oath, that they would alter nothing till his return, he took so firm a
resolution to die in the place, that from thenceforward receiving no manner of
Food, he soon after performed it accordingly. Nor was he deceived in the
consequence; for his City became the first in glory and excellency of
Government in the whole World. And so much for LYCURGUS according to PLUTARCH.

MY Lord ARCHON when he beheld not only the rapture of motion, but of joy and
harmony, into which his Spheres (without any manner of obstruction or
interfering, but as if it had bin naturally) were cast, conceived not less of
exultation in his Spirit; but saw no more necessity or reason why he should
administer an Oath to the Senate and the People that they would observe his
Institutions, than to a Man in perfect health and felicity of Constitution,
that he would not kill himself. Nevertheless whereas Christianity, tho it
forbids violent hands, consists no less in selfdenial than any other Religion,
he resolved that all unreasonable Desires should die upon the spot; to which end
that no manner of food might be left to Ambition, he entered into the Senate
with a unanimous Applause, and having spoken of his Government as LYCURGUS did
when he assembled the People, he abdicated the Magistracy of ARCHON. The Senate,
as struck with astonishment, continued silent; Men upon so sudden an Accident
being altogether unprovided of what to say; till the ARCHON withdrawing, and
being almost at the door, diverse of the Knights flew from their Places,
offering as it were to lay violent hands on him, while he escaping left the
Senate with the tears in their Eyes of Children that had lost their Father; and
to rid himself of all farther importunity, retired to a Country House of his,
being remote, and very private, in so much that no man could tell for some time
what was become of him. Thus the Lawmaker happened to be the first object and
reflection of the Law made: For as Liberty of all things is the most welcome to
a People, Never Ingratitude, but to^ much Love, the constant fault of the
People.
so is there nothing more abhorrent from their nature than Ingratitude. We,
accusing the Roman People of this Crime against some of their greatest
Benefactors, as CAMILLUS, heap mistake upon mistake; for being not so competent
Judges of what belongs to Liberty as they were, we take upon us to be more
competent Judges of Virtue. And whereas Virtue, for being a vulgar thing among
them, was of no less rate than Jewels are with such as wear the most; we are
selling this precious Stone, which we have ignorantly raked out of the Roman
ruins, at such a rate as the Switzers did that which they took in the Baggage
of CHARLES of Burgundy. For that CAMILLUS had stood more firm against the ruin
of Rome than her Capitol, was acknowleg'd; but on the other side that he stood
as firm for the Patricians against the Liberty of the People, was as plain:
wherefore he never wanted those of the People that would die at his foot in the
Field, nor that would withstand him to his beard in the City. An example in
which they that think CAMILLUS had wrong, neither do themselves right, nor the
People of Rome; who in this signify no less than that they had a scorn of
Slavery beyond the sear of Ruin, which is the height of Magnanimity. The like
might be shown by other examples objected against this, and other Popular
Governments, as in the Banishment of ARISTIDES the Just from Athens, by the
Ostracism, which, first, was no punishment, nor ever understood for so much as
a disparagement; but tended only to the Security of the Commonwealth, through the
removal of a Citizen (whose Riches or Power with a Party was suspected) out of
harms way for the space of ten years, neither to the diminution of his Estate
or Honor. And next, tho the virtue of ARISTIDES might in it self be
unquestioned, yet for him under the name of the Just to become Universal Umpire
of the People in all cases, even to the neglect of the legal ways and orders of
the Commonwealth, approached so much to the Prince, that the Athenians, doing
ARISTIDES no wrong, did their Government no more than right in removing him;
which therefore is not so probable to have com to pass, as PLUTARCH presumes,
through the envy of THEMISTOCLES, seeing ARISTIDES was far more popular than
THEMISTOCLES, who soon after took the same walk upon a worse occasion. Wherefore
as MACCHIAVEL, for any thing since alleged, has irrefragably proved that
Popular Governments are of all others the least ungrateful; so the obscurity, I
say, into which my Lord ARCHON had now withdrawn himself, caused a universal
sadness and cloud in the minds of Men upon the glory of his rising Commonwealth.

MUCH had bin ventilated in private discourse, and the People (for the Nation
was yet divided into Partys that had not lost their animositys) being troubled,
bent their eyes upon the Senate, when, after some time spent in devotion, and the
solemn action of Thanksgiving, his Excellency NAVARCHUS DE PARALO in the Tribe
of Dorean, Lord Strategus of Oceana (tho in a new Commonwealth a very prudent
Magistrate) proposed his part or opinion in such a manner to the Council of
State, that passing the Ballot of the same with great unanimity and applause,
it was introduced into the Senate, where it past with greater. Wherefore the
Decree being forthwith printed and published, Copys were returned by the
Secretarys to the Phylarchs (which is the manner of Promulgation) and the
Commissioners of the Seal, that is to say, the Right Honorable PHOSPHORUS DE
AUGE in the Tribe of Eudia, DOLABELLA D' ENYO in the Tribe of Turmae, and
LINCEUS DE STELLA in the Tribe of Nubia, being elected Proposers pro tempore,
bespoke of the Tribuns a Muster of the People to be held that day six weeks,
which was the time allowed for Promulgation at the Halo.

THE Satisfaction which the People throout the Tribes received upon
promulgation of the Decree, loaded the Carriers with weekly Letters between
Friend and Friend, whether Magistrates or private Persons. But the day for
Proposition being com, and the Prerogative upon the Place appointed in
Discipline, SANGUINE DE RINGWOOD in the Tribe of Saltum, Captain of the Phaenix,
marched by order of the Tribuns with his Troop to the Piazza of the Pantheon,
where his Trumpets entering into the great Hall by their Blazon gave notice of
his Arrival; at which the Sergeant of the House came down, and returning
informed the Proposers, who descending were received at the foot of the Stairs
by the Captain, and attended to the Coaches of State, with which CALCAR DE
GILVO in the Tribe of Phalera Master of the Horse, and the Ballotins upon their
great Horses, stood waiting at the Gate.

THE Proposers being in their Coaches, the Train for the Pomp, the same that is
used at the reception of Ambassadors, proceeded in this order: In the Front
marched the Troop with the Cornet in the Van, and the Captain in the Rear: next
the Troop came the twenty Messengers or Trumpets; the Ballotins upon the Curvet
with their Usher in the Van, and the Master of the Horse in the Rear: Next the
Ballotins, BRONCUS DE RAUCO in the Tribe of Bestia King of the Heralds, with
his Fraternity in their Coats of Arms; and next to Sir BRONCHUS, BORISTHENES DE
HOLIWATER in the Tribe of Ave, Master of the Ceremonys: The Mace and the Seal
of the Chancery went immediately before the Coaches; and on either side, the
Doorkeepers or Guard of the Senate, with their Poleaxes, accompanied with some
three or four hundred Footmen belonging to the Knights or Senators; the
Trumpeters, Ballotins, Guards, Postilions, Coachmen and Footmen, being very
gallant in the Liverys of the Commonwealth; but all, except the Ballotins,
without Hats, in lieu whereof they wore black velvet Calots, being pointed with
a little peak at the forehead. After the Proposers came a long file of Coaches
full of such Gentlemen as use to grace the Commonwealth upon the like
occasions. In this posture they moved slowly through the streets (affording in the
gravity of the Pomp, and the welcomness of the end, a most reverend and
acceptable Prospect to the People all the way from the Pantheon, being about
half a mile) and arrived at the Halo, where they found the Prerogative in a
close body environed with Scaffolds that were covered with Spectators. The
Tribuns received the Proposers, and conducted them into a Seat placed in the
front of the Tribe, like a Pulpit, but that it was of some length, and well
adorned by the Heralds with all manner of Birds and Beasts, except that they
were ill painted, and never a one of his natural color. The Tribuns were placed
at a Table that stood below the long Seat, those of the Horse in the middle,
and those of the Foot at either end, with each of them a Boul or Basin before
him, that on the right hand being white, and the other green: In the middle of
the Table stood a third which was red. And the Housekeeper of the Pavilion, who
had already delivered a proportion of linen Balls or Pellets to every one of
the Tribe, now presented Boxes to the Ballotins. But the Proposers as they
entered the Gallery, or long Seat, having put off their Hats by way of
Salutation, were answered by the People with a shout; whereupon the younger
Commissioners seated themselves at either end; and the first standing in the
middle, spoke after this manner.

My Lords, the People of Oceana.
WHILE I find in my self what a Felicity it is to salute you by this Name, and
in every Face, anointed as it were with the Oil of Gladness, a full and
sufficient testimony of the like sense, to go about to feast you with words,
who are already filled with that Food of the mind, which being of pleasing and
wholesome digestion, takes in the definition of true Joy, were a needless
Enterterprize. I shall rather put you in mind of that thankfulness which is
due, than puff you up with any thing that might seem vain. Is it from the arms
of flesh that we derive these Blessings? Behold the Commonwealth of Rome
falling upon her own victorious Sword. Or is it from our own Wisdom, whose
Counsils had brought it even to that pass, that we began to repent our selves
of Victory? Far be it from us, my Lords, to sacrifice to our own Nets, which we
our selves have so narrowly escaped! Let us rather lay our mouths in the dust,
and look up (as was taught the other day when we were better instructed in this
Lesson) to the Hills with our Gratitude. Nevertheless seeing we read how God
upon the neglect of his Prophets has bin provoked to wrath, it must needs
follow that he expects Honor should be given to them by whom he has chosen to
work as his Instruments. For which cause, nothing doubting of my Warrant, I
shall proceed to that which more particularly concerns the present occasion,
the discovery of my Lord ARCHON'S Virtues and Merit, to be ever placed by this
Nation in their true Meridian.

My Lords;
I AM not upon a Subject which persuades me to balk, but necessitats me to seek
out the greatest Examples. To begin with ALEXANDER erecting Trophys common to
his Sword and the Pestilence; To what good of Mankind did he infect the Air
with his heaps of Carcases? The Sword of War, if it be any otherwise used than
as the Sword of Magistracy, for the fear and punishment of those that do evil,
is as guilty in the sight of God, as the Sword of a Murderer; nay more, for if
the Blood of ABEL, of one innocent Man, cried in the ears of the Lord for
Vengeance, what shall the Blood of an innocent Nation? Of this kind of Empire,
the Throne of Ambition, and the Quarry of a mighty Hunter, it has bin truly
said, that it is but a great Robbery. But if ALEXANDER had restored the Liberty
of Greece, and propagated it to mankind, he had don like my Lord ARCHON, and
might have bin truly called the Great. ALEXANDER cared not to steal a Victory
that would be given: But my Lord ARCHON has torn away a Victory which had bin
stolen, while we were tamely yielding up Obedience to a The Scottish Royal Line.
Nation reaping in our Fields, whose Fields he has subjected to our Empire, and
nailed them with his victorious Sword to their native Caucasus.

MACCHIAVEL gives a handsome caution, Let no man, says he, be circumvented with
the Glory of CAESAR, from the false reflection of their Pens, who through the
longer continuance of his Empire in the Name than in the Family, changed their
Freedom for Flattery. But if a man would know truly what the Romans thought of
CAESAR, let him observe what they said of CATILIN.

AND yet by how much he who has perpetrated some heinous Crime, is more
execrable than he who did but attemt it; by so much is CAESAR more execrable
than CATILIN. On the contrary, let him that would know what ancient and heroic
Times, what the Greecs and Romans would both have thought and said of my Lord
ARCHON, observe what they thought and said of SOLON, LYCURGUS, BRUTUS, and
PUBLICOLA. And yet by how much his Virtue, that is crowned with the perfection
of his Work, is beyond theirs, who were either inferior in their aim, or in
their performance; by so much is my Lord ARCHON to be preferred before SOLON,
LYCURGUS, BRUTUS, and PUBLICOLA.

NOR will we shun the most illustrious Example of SCIPIO: This Hero, tho never
so little less, yet was he not the founder of a Commonwealth; and for the rest,
allowing his Virtue to have bin of the most untainted Ray, in what did it
outshine this of my Lord ARCHON? But if dazzling the Eyes of the Magistrates it
overaw'd Liberty, Rome might be allowed some excuse that she did not like it,
and I, if I admit not of this comparison: For where is my Lord ARCHON? Is there
a Genius, how free soever, which in his presence would not find it self to be
under power? He is shrunk into Clouds, he seeks Obscurity in a Nation that sees
by his Light. He is impatient of his own Glory, lest it should stand between
you and your Liberty.

LIBERTY! What is even that, if we may not be grateful? And if we may, we have
none: For who has any thing that he dos not ow? My Lords, there be some hard
conditions of Virtue: If this Debt were exacted, it were not due; whereas being
concel'd, we are all entered into Bonds. On the other side, if we make such a
payment as will not stand with a free People, we do not enrich my Lord ARCHON,
but rob him of his whole Estate, and ^his immense Glory.

THESE Particulars had in due deliberation and mature debate, according to the
Orders of this Commonwealth, It is proposed by Authority of the Senate, to you
my Lords the People of Oceana.

I. THAT the Dignity and Office of ARCHON, or Protector of the Commonwealth of
Oceana, be, and is hereby conferred by the Senate and the People of Oceana, upon
the most Illustrious Prince, and sole Legislator of this Commonwealth, OLPHAUS
MEGALETOR, Pater Patriae, whom God preserve, for the term of his natural Life.

II. THAT three hundred and fifty thousand pounds per annum yet remaining of
the ancient Revenue, be estated upon the said Illustrious Prince, or Lord
ARCHON, for the said term, and to the proper and peculiar use of his Highness.

III. THAT the Lord ARCHON have the reception of all foren Ambassadors, by and
with the Council of State, according to the Orders of this Commonwealth.

IV. THAT the Lord ARCHON have a standing Army of twelve thousand men, defrayed
upon a monthly Tax, during the term of three years, for the protection of this
Commonwealth against dissenting Partys; to be governed, directed, and commanded
by and with the advice of the Council of War, according to the Orders of this
Commonwealth.

V. THAT this Commonwealth make no distinction of Persons or Partys, but every
man being elected and sworn, according to the Orders of the same, be equally
capable of Magistracy; or not elected, be equally capable of Liberty, and the
enjoyment of his Estate free from all other than common Taxes.

VI. THAT a man putting a distinction upon himself, refusing the Oath upon
Election, or declaring himself of a Party not conformable to the Civil
Government, may within any time of the three years standing of the Army,
transport himself and his Estate, without molestation or impediment, into any
other Nation.

VII. THAT in case there remains any distinction of Partys not conforming to
the Civil Government of this Commonwealth, after the three years of the
standing Army be expired, and the Commonwealth be thereby forced to prolong the
term of the said Army, the pay from thenceforth of the said Army be levied upon
the Estates of such Partys so remaining unconformable to the Civil Government.

THE proposer having ended his Oration, the Trumpets sounded; and the Tribuns
of the Horse being mounted to view the Ballot, caused the Tribe (which
thronging up to the Speech, came almost round the Gallery) to retreat about
twenty paces, when LINCEUS DE STELLA receiving the Propositions, repaired with
BRONCHUS DE RAUCO the Herald, to a little Scaffold erected in the middle of the
Tribe, where he seated himself, the Herald standing bare upon his right hand.
The Ballotins having their Boxes ready, stood before the Gallery, and at the
command of the Tribuns marched, one to every Troop on Horseback, and one to
every Company on Foot; each of them being followed by other Children that bore
red Boxes: now this is putting the Question, whether the Question should be
put. And the Suffrage being very suddenly returned to the Tribuns at the Table,
and numbered in the view of the Proposers, the Votes were all in the
Affirmative: whereupon the red or doubtful Boxes were laid aside, it appearing
that the Tribe, whether for the Negative or Affirmative, was clear in the
matter. Wherefore the Herald began from the Scaffold in the middle of the Tribe,
to pronounce the first Proposition, and the Ballotins marching with the
Negative and Affirmative only, BRONCHUS with his Voice like Thunder, continued
to repeat the Proposition over and over again, so long as it was in Ballotting.
The like was don for every Clause, till the Ballot was finished, and the
Tribuns assembling, had signed the Points, that is to say, the number of every
Suffrage, as it was taken by the Secretary upon the tale of the Tribuns, and in
the sight of the Proposers; for this may not be omitted, it is the pulse of the
People. Now whereas it appertains to the Tribuns to report the Suffrage of the
People to the Senate, they cast the Lot for this Office with three silver Balls,
and one gold one; and it fell upon the Right Worshipful ARGUS DE CROOKHORN in
the Tribe of Pascua, first Tribun of the Foot. ARGUS being a good sufficient
man in his own Country, was yet of the mind that he should make but a bad
Spokesman; and therefore became something blank at his luck, till his Colleagues
persuaded him that it was no such great matter, if he could but read, having
his Paper before him. The Proposers taking Coach, received a Volly upon the
Field, and returned in the same order, save that being accompanied with the
Tribuns, they were also attended by the whole Prerogative to the Piazza of the
Pantheon, where with another Volly they took their leaves. ARGUS, who had not
thought upon his Wife and Children all the way, went very gravely up: and every
one being seated, the Senate by their silence seemed to call for the Report;
which ARGUS standing up, delivered in this wise.

Right Honorable Lords and Fathers assembled in Parliament;
SO it is, that it has fallen to my lot to report to your Excellencys the Votes
of the People, taken upon the third instant, in the first year of this
Commonwealth, at the Halo; the Right Honorable PHOSPHORUS DE AUGE in the Tribe
of Eudia, DOLABELLA DE ENYO in the Tribe of Turmae, and LINCEUS DE STELLA in
the Tribe of Nubia, Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal of Oceana, and
Proposers pro temporibus -- together with my Brethren the Tribuns, and my self
being present. Wherefore these are to certify to your Fatherhoods, that the said
Votes of the People were as follows; that is to say: TO the first Proposition,
Nemine contradicante -- TO the second, Nemine contradictante -- TO the third,
the like. TO the fourth 211, above half. TO the fifth 201, above half. TO the
sixth 150, above half, in the Affirmative. TO the seventh, Nomine again, and so
forth --


MY LORDS, It is a Language that is out of my Prayers, and if I be out at it,
no harm --

BUT as concerning my Lord ARCHON (as I was saying) these are to signify to you
the true-heartedness and good will which is in the People, seeing by joining
with you, as one man, they confess that all they have to give, is too little
for his Highness. For truly, Fathers, if he who is able to do harm, and dos
none, may well be called honest; What shall we say to my Lord ARCHON'S
Highness, who having had it in his power to have don us the greatest mischief
that ever befell a poor Nation, so willing to trust such as they thought well
of, has don us so much good, as we should never have known how to do our
selves? which was so sweetly delivered by my Lord Chancellor PHOSPORUS to the
People, that I dare say there was never a one of them could forbear to do as I
do -- An't please your Fatherhoods, they be tears of Joy. Ay, my Lord ARCHON
shall walk the streets (if it be for his ease I mean) with a Switch, while the
People run after him, and pray for him: he shall not wet his foot; they will
strew flowers in his way: he shall sit higher in their hearts, and in the
Judgment of all good men, than the Kings that go up stairs to their Seats; and
one of these had as good pull two or three of his fellows out of their great
Chairs, as wrong him, or meddle with him; he has two or three hundred thousand
men, that when you say the word, shall sell themselves to their shirts for him,
and die at his foot. His Pillow is of Down, and his Grave shall be as soft, over
which they that are alive shall wring their hands. And to com to your
Fatherhoods, most truly so called, as being the loving Parents of the People,
truly you do not know what a feeling they have of your Kindness, seeing you are
so bound up, that if there coms any harm, they may thank themselves. And, alas!
poor Souls, they see that they are given to be of so many minds, that tho they
always mean well, yet if there coms any good, they may thank them that teach
them better. Wherefore there was never such a thing as this invented, they do
verily believe that it is no other than the same which they always had in their
very heads, if they could have but told how to bring it out. As now for a
sample; My Lords the Proposers had no sooner said your minds, than they found
it to be that which heart could wish. And your Fatherhoods may comfort your
selves, that there is not a People in the world more willing to learn what is
for their own good, nor more apt to see it, when you have showed it them.
Wherefore they do love you as they do their own selves; honor you as Fathers;
resolve to give you as it were Obedience for ever: and so thanking you for your
most good and excellent Laws, they do pray for you as the very Worthys of the
Land, Right Honorable Lords and Fathers assembled in Parliament.

ARGVS came off beyond his own expectation; for thinking right, and speaking as
he thought, it was apparent by the House, and the thanks they gave him, that
they esteemed him to be absolutely of the best sort of Orators; upon which
having a mind that till then misgave him, he became very crounse, and much
delighted with that which might go down the next week in print to his Wife and
Neighbors. LIVY makes the Roman Tribuns to speak in the same style with the
Consuls, which could not be, and therefore for ought in him to the contrary,
VOLERO and CANULEIUS might have spoken in no better style than ARGUS. However,
they were not created the first year of the Commonwealth; and the Tribuns of
Oceana are since become better Orators than were needful. But the Laws being
enacted, had the Preamble annexed, and were delivered to BRONCHUS, who loved
nothing in the Earth so much as to go staring and bellowing up and down the
Town, like a Stag in a Forest, as he now did, with his fraternity in their
Coats of Arms, and I know not how many Trumpets, proclaiming the Act of
Parliament; when meeting my Lord ARCHON, who from a retreat that was without
Affectation, as being for Devotion only, and to implore a Blessing by Prayer
and Fasting upon his Labors, now newly arrived in Town, the Herald of the Tribe
of Bestia set up his throat, and having chanted out his Lesson, past as
haughtily by him, as if his own had bin the better Office; which in this place
was very well taken, tho BRONCHUS for his high mind happened afterward upon
some disasters, too long to tell, that spoiled much of his Imbroidery.

MY Lord ARCHON'S Arrival being known, the Signory, accompanied by the Tribuns,
repaired to him, with the news he had already heard by the Herald; to which my
Lord Strategus added, That his Highness could not doubt upon the Demonstrations
given, but the minds of Men were firm in the opinion, that he could be no
seeker of himself in the way of earthly Pomp and Glory: and that the Gratitude
of the Senate, and the People, could not therefore be understood to have any such
reflection upon him. But so it was, that in regard of Dangers abroad, and
Partys at home, they durst not trust themselves without a standing Army, nor a
standing Army in any man's hands but those of his Highness.

THE ARCHON made answer, that he ever expected this would be the sense of the
Senate and the People; and this being their sense, he should have bin sorry they
had made choice of any other than himself for a standing General: First,
Because it could not have bin more to their own safety: And, Secondly, Because
so long as they should have need of a standing Army, his work was not done:
That he would not dispute against the Judgment of the Senate and the People, nor
ought that to be. Nevertheless, he made little doubt but experience would show
every Party their own Interest in this Government, and that better improved
than they could expect from any other; that Men's animositys should overbalance
their Interest for any time, was impossible; that humor could never be lasting,
nor, through the Constitution of the Government, of any effect at the first
charge. For supposing the worst, and that the People had chosen no other into
the Senate and the Prerogative than Royalists, a matter of fourteen hundred men
must have taken their Oaths at their Election, with an intention to go quite
contrary, not only to their Oaths so taken, but to their own Interest; for
being estated in the Soverain Power, they must have decreed it from themselves
(such an example for which there was never any experience, nor can there be any
reason) or holding it, it must have don in their hands as well every whit as in
any other. Furthermore, they must have removed the Government from a Foundation
that apparently would hold, to set it upon another which apparently would not
hold; which things if they could not com to pass, the Senate and the People
consisting wholy of Royalists, much less by a parcel of them elected. But if
the fear of the Senate and of the People derived from a Party without, such a
one as would not be elected, nor engage themselves to the Commonwealth by an
Oath; this again must be so large, as would go quite contrary to their own
Interest, they being as free and as fully estated in their Liberty as any
other, or so narrow that they could do no hurt, while the People being in
Arms, and at the beck of the Strategus, every Tribe would at any time make a
better Army than such a Party; and there being no Partys at home, fears from
abroad would vanish. But seeing it was otherwise determined by the Senate and
the People, the best course was to take that which they held the safest, in
which with his humble thanks for their great bounty, he was resolved to serve
them with all Duty and Obedience.

A VERY short time after the Royalists, now equal Citizens, made good the
ARCHON'S Judgment, there being no other that found any thing near so great a
sweet in the Government. For he who has not bin acquainted with Affliction,
says SENECA, knows but half the things of this world.

MOREOVER they saw plainly, that to restore the ancient Government, they must
cast up their Estates into the hands of three hundred men; wherefore in case the
Senate and the Prerogative, consisting of thirteen hundred men, had bin all
Royalists, there must of necessity have bin, and be for ever, one thousand
against this or any such Vote. But the Senate being informed by the Signory,
that the ARCHON had accepted of his Dignity and Office, caused a third Chair to
be set for his Highness, between those of the Strategus and the Orator in the
House, the like at every Council; to which he repaired, not of necessity, but
at his pleasure, being the best, and, as ARGUS not vainly said, the greatest
Prince in the World: for in the Pomp of his Court he was not inferior to any,
and in the Field he was followed with a Force that was formidable to all. Nor
was there a cause in the nature of this Constitution to put him to the charge
of Guards, to spoil his stomach or his sleep: Insomuch, as being handsomely
disputed by the Wits of the Academy, whether my Lord ARCHON, if he had bin
ambitious, could have made himself so great, it was carried clear in the
Negative; not only for the Reasons drawn from the present balance, which was
Popular; but putting the case the balance had bin Monarchical. For there be some
Nations, whereof this is one, that will bear a Prince in a Commonwealth far
higher than it is possible for them to bear a Monarch. Spain looked upon the
Prince of Orange as her most formidable Enemy; but if ever there be a Monarch
in Holland, he will be the Spaniards best friend. For whereas a Prince in a
Commonwealth derives his Greatness from the root of the People, a Monarch
derives his from one of those balances which nip them in the root; by which
means the Low Countries under a Monarch were poor and inconsiderable, but in
bearing a Prince could grow to a miraculous height, and give the Glory of his
Actions by far the upper hand of the greatest King in Christendom. There are
Kings in Europe, to whom a King of Oceana would be but a petit Companion. But
the Prince of this Commonwealth is the Terror and the Judge of them all.

THAT which my Lord ARCHON now minded most, was the Agrarian, upon which Debate
he incessantly thrust the Senate and the Council of State; to the end it might
be planted upon some firm root, as the main point and basis of perpetuity to the
Commonwealth.

AND these are some of the most remarkable Passages that happened in the first
year of this Government. About the latter end of the second, the Army was
disbanded, but the Taxes continued at thirty thousand Pounds a month, for three
years and a half. By which means a piece of Artillery was planted, and a
portion of Land to the value of 50 l. a year purchased for the maintenance of
the Games, and of the Prize arms for ever, in each Hundred.

WITH the eleventh year of the Commonwealth, the term of the Excise, allotted
for the maintenance of the Senate and the People, and for the raising of a
public Revenue, expired. By which time the Exchequer, over and above the annual
Salarys, amounting to three hundred thousand Pounds, accumulating every year
out of one Million incom seven hundred thousand Pounds in Banco, brought it
with a product of the Sum, rising to about eight Millions in the whole: whereby
at several times they had purchased to the Senate and the People four hundred
thousand Pounds per annum solid Revenue; which, besides the Lands held in
Panopea, together with the Perquisits of either Province, was held sufficient
for a public Revenue. Nevertheless, Taxes being now wholly taken off, the
Excise of no great burden (and many specious advantages not vainly proposed in
the heightning of the public Revenue) was very cheerfully established by the
Senate and the People, for the term of ten years longer; and the same course
being taken, the public Revenue was found in the one and twentieth of the
Commonwealth, to be worth one Million in good Land. Whereupon the Excise was so
abolished for the present, as withal resolved to be the best, the most fruitful
and easy way of raising Taxes, according to future Exigencys. But the Revenue
being now such as was able to be a yearly Purchaser, gave a jealousy that by
this means the balance of the Commonwealth, consisting in private Fortunes,
might be eaten out; whence this year is famous for that Law whereby the Senate
and the People forbidding any further purchase of Lands to the Public within
the Dominions of Oceana and the adjacent Provinces, put the Agrarian upon the
Commonwealth her self. These Increases are things which Men, addicted to
Monarchy, deride as impossible, whereby they unwarily urge a strong Argument
against that which they would defend. For having their eyes fixed upon the Pomp
and Expense, by which not only every Child of a King being a Prince, exhausts
his Father's Coffers; but Favorits and servil Spirits, devoted to the flattery
of those Princes, grow insolent and profuse, returning a fit Gratitude to their
Masters, whom while they hold it honorable to deceive, they suck and keep
eternally poor: It follows that they do not see how it should be possible for a
Commonwealth to clothe her self in Purple, and thrive so strangely upon that
which would make a Prince's hair grow through his hood, and not afford him bread.
As if it were a Miracle that a careless and prodigal Man should bring ten
thousand Pounds a year to nothing, or that an industrious and frugal Man brings
a little to ten thousand Pounds a year. But the fruit of one man's industry and
frugality can never be like that of a Commonwealth; First, because the
greatness of the Increase follows the greatness of the Stock or Principal: And,
Secondly, because a frugal Father is for the most part succeeded by a lavish
Son; whereas a Commonwealth is her own Heir.

THIS year a part was proposed by the Right Honorable AUREUS DE WOOLSACK in the
Tribe of Pecus, first Commissioner of the Treasury, to the Council of State,
which soon after past the Ballot of the Senate and the People: by which the
Lands of the Public Revenue, amounting to one Million, were equally divided
into five thousand Lots, entered by their names and parcels into a Lotbook
preserved in the Exchequer. And if any Orphan, being a Maid, should cast her
Estate into the Exchequer for fourteen hundred Pounds, the Treasury was bound
by the Law to pay her quarterly two hundred Pounds a year, free from Taxes, for
her Life, and to assign her a Lot for her Security: if she married, her Husband
was neither to take out the Principal without her consent (acknowleg'd by her
self to one of the Commissioners of the Treasury, who according as he found it
to be free, or forced, was to allow or disallow of it) nor any other way engage
it, than to her proper use. But if the Principal were taken out, the Treasury
was not bound to repay any more of it than one thousand Pounds; nor might that
be repaid at any time, save within the first year of her Marriage: the like was
to be don by a half or quarter Lot respectively.

THIS was found to be a great Charity to the weaker Sex, and as some say, who
are more skilful in the like Affairs than my self, of good Profit to the
Commonwealth.

NOW began the native Spleen of Oceana to be much purged, and Men not to affect
Sullenness and Pedantism. The Elders could remember that they had bin Youth.
Wit and Gallantry were so far from being thought Crimes in themselves, that
care was taken to preserve their innocence. For which cause it was proposed to
the Council for Religion by the Right Honorable CADISCUS DE CLERO, in the Tribe
of Stamnum, first Censor, That such Women as living in Gallantry and View about
the Town, were of evil fame, and could not show that they were maintained by
their own Estates or Industry; or such as having Estates of their own, were yet
wastful in their way of life, and of ill example to others, should be obnoxious
to the animadversion of the Council of Religion, or of the Censors: In which
the proceeding should be after this manner. Notice should be first given of the
scandal to the party offending, in private: if there were no amendment within
the space of six months, she should be summoned and rebuked before the said
Council or Censors; and, if after other six months it were found that neither
this availed, she should be censured not to appear at any public Meetings,
Games, or Recreations, upon penalty of being taken up by the Doorkeepers, or
Guards of the Senate, and by them to be detained, till for every such Offense,
five Pounds were duly paid for her enlargement.

FURTHERMORE, if any common Strumpet should be found, or any scurrility or
profaneness represented at either of the Theaters, the Prelates for every such
Offense should be fined twenty Pounds by the said Council, and the Poet, for
every such offense on his part, should be whipped. This Law relates to another,
which also was enacted the same year upon this occasion.

THE Youth and Wits of the Academy having put the Business so home in the
defense of Comedys, that the Provosts had nothing but the Consequences provided
against by the foregoing Law to object, prevailed so far, that two of the
Provosts of the Council of State joined in a Proposition, which after much ado
came to a Law, whereby one hundred thousand pounds was allotted for the building
of two Theaters on each side of the Piazza of the Halo: and two annual
Magistrates called Prelates, chosen out of the Knights, were added to the Tropic,
the one called the Prelat of the Buskin, for inspection of the Tragic Scene
called Melpomene; and the other the Prelat of the Sock, for the Comic called
Thalia, which Magistrates had each five hundred pounds a year allowed out of the
Profits of the Theaters; the rest, except eight hundred a year to four Poets,
payable into the Exchequer. A Poet Laureat created in one of these Theaters, by
the Strategus receives a Wreath of five hundred pounds in Gold, paid out of the
said Profits. But no man is capable of this Creation, that had not two parts in
three of the Suffrages at the Academy, assembled after six weeks warning, and
upon that occasion.

THESE things among us are sure enough to be censured, but by such only as do
not know the nature of a Commonwealth: for to tell men that they are free, and
yet to curb the genius of a People in a lawful Recreation, to which they are
naturally inclined, is to tell a tale of a Tub. I have heard the Protestant
Ministers in France, by men that were wise, and of their own profession, much
blamed in that they forbad Dancing, a Recreation to which the genius of that
Air is so inclining, that they lost many who would not lose that: Nor do they
less than blame the former determination of rashness, who now gently connive at
that which they had so roughly forbidden. These Sports in Oceana are so
governed, that they are pleasing for private diversion, and profitable to the
Public: For the Theaters soon defrayed their own charge, and now bring in a
good Revenue. All this is so far from the detriment of Virtue, that it is to
the improvement of it, seeing Women that heretofore made havoc of their Honors
that they might have their Pleasures, are now incapable of their Pleasures, if
they lose their Honors.

ABOUT the one and fortieth year of the Commonwealth, the Censors, according to
their annual Custom, reported the Pillar of Nilus, by which it was found that
the People were increased very near one third. Whereupon the Council of War was
appointed by the Senate to bring in a State of War, and the Treasurers the State
of the Treasury. The State of War, or the Pay and Charge of an Army, was soon
after exhibited by the Council in this Account.

The Field Pay of a Parlamentary Army.
l. per ann. THE Lord Strategus, Marching -- 10000. Pole marchs. General of the
Horse -- 2000. Lieutenant General -- 2000. General of the Artillery -- 1000.
Commissary General -- 1000. Major General -- 1000. Quartermaster General --
1000. Two Adjutants to the Major General -- 1000. Forty Colonels -- 40000. 100
Captains of Horse, at 500 l. a Man -- 50000. 300 Captains of Foot, at 300 l. a
Man -- 90000. 100 Cornets, at 100 l. a Man -- 10000. 300 Ensigns at 50 l. a Man
-- 15000. 800 Quartermasters -- 20000. Sergeants Trumpeters Drummers 10000
Horse, at 2 s. 6 d. per day each -- 470000. 30000 Foot, at 1 s. per day each --
500000. Surgeons -- 400. Sum -- 1114400. 40000 Auxiliarys, amounting to
within a little as much -- 1100000. THE Charge of mounting 20000 Horse --
300000. THE Train of Artillery, holding a 3 d to the whole -- 900000. Summa
totalis -- 1414400.

ARMS and Ammunition are not reckoned, as those which are furnished out of the
Store or Arsenal of Emporium: Nor waftage, as that which gos upon the account
of the Fleet, maintained by the Customs; which Customs, through the care of the
Council for Trade, and growth of Traffic, were long since improved to about a
Million Revenue. The House being thus informed of a State of War, the
Commissioners brought in

THE state of the Treasury this present year, being the one and fortieth of the
Commonwealth.
l. RECEIVED from the one and twentieth of this Commonwealth, by 700000 l. a
year in bank, with the Product of the Sum rising -- 16000000.

EXPENDED from the one and twentieth of this Commonwealth.
l. IMPRIMIS, For the Addition of Arms for 100000 Men, to the Arsenal, or Tower
of Emporium -- 1000000. FOR the storing of the same with Artillery -- 300000.
FOR the storing of the same with Ammunition -- 200000. FOR beautifying the
Citys, Parks, Gardens, Public Walks, and Places for Recreation of Emporium and
Hiera, with Public Buildings, Aquaeducts, Statues, and Fountains, etc. -- --
1500000. EXTRAORDINARY Embassys -- 150000. Sum -- 3150000. REMAINING in the
Treasury, the Salarys of the Exchequer being defalk'd -- 12000000.

BY comparison of which Accounts, if a War with an Army of 80000 Men were to be
made by the Penny, yet was the Commonwealth able to maintain such a one above
three years, without levying a Tax. But it is against all Experience, Sense and
Reason, that such an Army should not be soon broken, or make a great progress;
in either of which cases the Charge ceases; or rather, if a right course be
taken in the latter, Profit coms in: for the Romans had no other considerable
way but Victory whereby to fill their Treasury, which nevertheless was seldom
emty. ALEXANDER did not consult his Purse upon his Design for Persia: It is
observed by MACCHIAVEL, that LIVY arguing what the event in reason must have
bin had that King invaded Rome, and diligently measuring what on each side was
necessary to such a War, never speaks a word of Money. No man imagins that the
Gauls, Goths, Vandals, Huns, Lombards, Saxons, Normans, made their Inroads or
Conquests by the strength of the Purse; and if it be thought enough, according
to the dialect of our Age, to say in answer to these things, that those times
are past and gone; what Money did the late GUSTAVUS, the most victorious of
modern Princes, bring out of Sweden with him into Germany? An Army that gos
upon a golden Leg, will be as lame as if it were a wooden one; but proper
Forces have Nerves and Muscles in them, such for which, having four or five
Millions, a Sum easy enough, with a Revenue like this of Oceana, to be had at
any time in readiness, you need never, or very rarely charge the People with
Taxes. What influence the Commonwealth by such Arms has had upon the World, I
leave to Historians, whose custom it has bin of old, to be as diligent
Observers of foren Actions, as careless of those domestic Revolutions which
(less pleasant it may be, as not partaking so much of the Romance) are to
Statesmen of far greater profit; and this Fault, if it be not mine, is so much
more frequent with modern Writers, as has caused me to undertake this Work; on
which to give my own Judgment, it is performed as much above the time I have
bin about it, as below the dignity of the matter.

BUT I cannot depart out of this Country, till I have taken leave of my Lord
ARCHON, a Prince of immense Felicity, who having built as high with his
Counsils, as he dig'd deep with his Sword, had now seen fifty years measured
with his own inerring Orbs.

Plutarch in the Life of Timoleon.
TIMOLEON (such a hater of Tyrants, that not able to persuade his Brother
TIMOPHANES to relinquish the Tyranny of Corinth, he slew him) was afterward
elected by the People (the Sicilians groaning to them from under the like
burden) to be sent to their relief: Whereupon TELECLIDES the Man at that time of
most Authority in the Commonwealth of Corinth, stood up, and giving an
Exhortation to TIMOLEON, how he should behave himself in his Expedition, told
him, that if he restored the Sicilians to Liberty, it would be acknowleg'd that
he had destroyed a Tyrant; if otherwise, he must expect to hear that he had
murdered a King. TIMOLEON taking his leave, with a very small Provision for so
great a Design, pursued it with a Courage not inferior to, and a Felicity
beyond any that had bin known to that day in mortal Flesh, having in the space
of eight years utterly rooted out of all Sicily those Weeds of Tyranny, through
the detestation whereof men fled in such abundance from their Native Country,
that whole Citys were left desolat; and brought it to such a pass, that others
through the fame of his Virtues, and the excellency of the Soil, flockt as fast
from all Quarters to it, as to the Garden of the World: While he, being
presented by the People of Syracusa with his Townhouse, and his Country
Retreat, the sweetest Places in either, lived with his Wife and Children a most
quiet, happy, and holy Life; for he attributed no part of his Success to
himself, but all to the Blessing and Providence of the Gods. As he past his
time in this manner, admired and honored by Mankind, LAPHISTIUS an envious
Demagog, going to summon him upon some pretense or other to answer for himself
before the Assembly, the People fell into such a Mutiny, as could not be
appeased but by TIMOLEON, who understanding the matter, reproved them, by
repeating the pains and travel which he had gone through, to no other end than that
every Man might have the free use of the Laws. Wherefore when DAEMENETUS another
Demagog, had brought the same Design about again, and blamed him impertinently
to the People for things which he did when he was General, TIMOLEON answered
nothing, but raising up his hands, gave the Gods thanks for their return to his
frequent Prayers, that he might but live to see the Syracusians so free, that
they could question whom they pleased.

NOT long after being old, through some natural imperfection, he fell blind; but
the Syracusians by their perpetual visits held him, tho he could not see, their
greatest Object: if there arrived Strangers, they brought them to see this
sight. Whatever came in debate at the Assembly, if it were of small
consequence, they determined it themselves; but if of importance, they always
sent for TIMOLEON; who being brought by his Servants in a Chair, and set in the
middle of the Theater, there ever followed a great shout, after which some time
was allowed for the Benedictions of the People; and then the matter proposed,
when TIMOLEON had spoken to it, was put to the Suffrage; which given, his
Servants bore him back in his Chair, accompanied by the People clapping their
hands, and making all expressions of Joy and Applause, till leaving him at his
House, they returned to the dispatch of their Business. And this was the Life
of TIMOLEON, till he died of Age, and dropped like a mature Fruit, while the Eyes
of the People were as the Showers of Autumn.

THE Life and Death of my Lord ARCHON (but that he had his Senses to the last,
and that his Character, as not the Restorer, but the Founder of a Commonwealth,
was greater) is so exactly the same, that (seeing by Men wholly ignorant of
Antiquity, I am accused of writing Romance) I shall repeat nothing: but tell
you that this year the whole Nation of Oceana, even to the Women and Children,
were in mourning, where so great or sad a Funeral Pomp had never bin seen or
known. Sometime after the performance of the Exequys, a Colossus, mounted on a
brazen Horse of excellent Fabric, was erected in the Piazza of the Pantheon,
ingrav'd with this Inscription on the Eastern side of the Pedestal: HIS



And on the Western with the following: GRATA PATRIA

Piae and Perpetuae Memoriae Lord ARCHON, and sole LEGISLATOR

Pater Patriae.

Invincible in the Field.

Inviolable in his Faith.

Unfeigned in his Zeal.

Immortal in his Fame.

The Greatest of Captains.

The Best of Princes.

The Happiest of Legislators.

The Most Sincere of Christians.

Who setting the Kingdoms of Earth at Liberty,

Took the Kingdom of the Heavens by Violence;

Anno Aetat. suae 116. Hujus Reipub. 50.




THE PREROGATIVE OF Popular Government.

BEING A POLITICAL DISCOURSE In Two Books.

The former Containing the first Preliminary of OCEANA, enlarged, interpreted,
and vindicated from all such Mistakes or Slanders as have bin alleged against
it under the Notion of Objections.

The Second Concerning Ordination, against Dr. H. HAMMOND, Dr. L. SEAMAN, and
the Authors they follow.

In which Two Books is contained the whole Commonwealth of the Hebrews, or of
Israel, Senate, People, and Magistracy, both as it stood in the Institution by
MOSES, and as it came to be formed after the Captivity.

As also the different Policys introduced into the Church of CHRIST, during the
time of the Apostles.

Without Council Purposes are disappointed; but in the multitude of Counsillors
they are established.

SOLOMON. La multitudine e piu Savia e piu costante ch'un Principe.

MACCHIAVEL. EPISTLE to the READER.
WHOSOEVER sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; for in the Image
of God made he Man. If this Rule holds as well in shedding the blood of a Turk
as of a Christian, then that wherein Man is the Image of God is REASON. Of all
Controversys, those of the Pen are the most honorable: for in those of Force,
there is more of the Image of the Beast, but in those of the Pen there is more
of the Image of God. In the Controversys of the Sword, there is but too often
no other Reason than Force; but the Controversy of the Pen has never any Force
but Reason. Of all Controversys of the Pen next those of Religion, those of
Government are the most honorable, and the most useful; the true end of each,
tho in a different way, being that the Will of God may be don in Earth as it is
in Heaven. Of all Controversys of Government, those in the vindication of
Popular Government are the most noble, as being that Constitution alone, from
whence all we have that is good is descended to us; and which, if it had not
existed, Mankind at this day had bin but a Herd of Beasts. The Prerogative of
Popular Government must either be in an ill hand, or else it is a game against
which there is not a Card in the wole pack; for we have the Books of MOSES,
those of the Greecs and of the Romans, not to omit MACCHIAVEL, all for it. What
have the Asserters of Monarchy; what can they have against us? A Sword; but
that rusts, or must have a Scabbard; and the Scabbard of this kind of Sword is
a good frame of Government.

A MAN may be possessed of a piece of Ground by force, but to make use or profit
of it, he must build upon it, and till it by Reason; for whatever is not
founded upon Reason, cannot be permanent. In Reason there are two parts,
Invention and Judgment: As to the latter, In a multitude of Counsillors (say
both SOLOMON and MACCHIAVEL) there is strength. Nay as for Judgment, there is
not that Order in Art or Nature that can compare with a Popular Assembly. THE
VOICE OF THE PEOPLE IS THE VOICE OF GOD. Hence it is that in all well-ordered
Policys the People have the ultimat result: but unless there be some other to
invent, a Popular Assembly can be of no effect at all but Confusion. Invention
is a solitary thing. All the Physicians in the world put together, invented not
the Circulation of the Blood, nor can invent any such thing, tho in their own
Art; yet this was invented by one alone, and being invented, is unanimously
voted and embraced by the generality of Physicians. The Plow and Wheels were at
first, you must think, the invention of some rare Artists; but who or what shall
ever be able to tear the use of them from the People? Hence, where Government
is at a loss, a sole Legislator is of absolute necessity; nay where it is not
at a loss, if well modeled, as in Venice, the Proposers, tho frequently
changeable, as in that case is necessary, are very few, as the Counsillors, the
Savi, the Provosts. Wherever a Commonwealth is thus proposed to, the Balance or
Popular Assembly will do her duty to admiration, but till then never. Yet so it
has bin with us of late years, that although in Royal Authority there was no more
than the right of Proposing, and the King himself was to stand (legibus and
consuetudinibus quas vulgas elegerit) to the result of the People, yet the
popular Council has bin put upon Invention, and they that have bin the
prevailing Party have used means to keep the Result to themselves, quite
contrary to the nature of Popular Administration. Let one speak, and the rest
judge. Of whatever any one man can say or do, Mankind is the natural and
competent Judge, in which is contained the very reason of Parlaments; through the
want of understanding this came in confusion. Man that is in Honor, and has no
understanding, is like the Beasts that perish. Nor can we possibly return to
Order, but by mending the Hedge where it was broken. A prudent, entire and sit
Proposition made to a free Parliament, recovers all. To them who are of the
greatest Eminency or Authority in a Commonwealth, belongs naturally that part
of Reason which is Invention; and using this, they are to propose: but what did
our Grandees ever invent or propose, that might show so much as that themselves
knew what they would be at? and yet how confidently do they lay the fault upon
the People, and their unfitness, forsooth, for Government: in which they are
wondrous wise! For, this I will boldly say, Where there was an Aristocracy that
performed their duty, there never was, nor ever can be a People unfit for
Government; but on the contrary, where the Aristocracy have failed, the People
being once under Orders, have held very often. But while they are not under
Orders, if they fail it is not their fault, but the fault of the Aristocracy;
for who else should model a Government but men of Experience? There is not in
England, I speak it to their shame, one GRANDEE that has any perfect knowledge
of the Orders of any one Commonwealth that ever was in the World. Away with
this same grave complexion, this huff of Wisdom maintained by making faces. The
People cannot do their duty consisting in Judgment, but by virtue of such
Orders as may bring them together, and direct them; but the duty of the
Aristocracy consisting in Invention, may be don by any one man, and in his
study; and where is that one man among all the Grandees that studys? They are
so far from knowing their own duty, that a man for proposing that in which none
can find a flaw, has don enough to be ridiculous to them, who are themselves
ridiculous to the whole World, in that they could never yet propose any thing
that would hold.

BUT if this amounts to a Demonstration, it amounts to a clear detection of
your profound Grandees, and a full proof that they are Phanatical Persons,
State Jesuits, such as have reduced the Politics to mental Reservation and
implicit Faith in their nods or nightcaps.

GOD, to propose his Commandments to the People of Israel, wrote them on two
Tables; the Decemviri, to propose their Commandments to the People of Rome,
wrote them on twelve Tables; the Athenians proposed in writing, signed with the
name of the particular Inventor; after this pattern do the Venetians, as was
said, the same at this day. But no Goosquill, no Scribbling: Your Grandees are
above this.

MOSES, who was the first Writer in this kind, shall be pardoned; but
MACCHIAVEL, the first in later times that has revived his Principles, or trod
in his steps, is deservedly pelted for it by Sermons. They are not for the
Scripture, but the Cabala.

I WILL tell you a story out of BOCCALINI: APOLLO having spied the Philosopher
and great Master of Silence HARPOCRATES in the Court of Parnassus, used such
importunity with him, that for once he was persuaded to speak; upon which such
apparent discovery was made of the Hypocrite, and the gross ignorance he had so
long harbor'd under a deceitful silence, that he was immediately banished the
Court. Were there cause, I could be modest; but this Virtue, to the diminution
of sound and wholesome Principles, would be none: wherefore let a Grandee write,
and I will show you HARPOCRATES.

THVS having sufficiently defied Sir GUY, I may with the less impeachment of
reputation descend to TOM THUM. Not that I hold my self a fit Person to be
exercised with Boys play, but that some, who should have more wit, have so
little as to think this something. A good Ratcatcher is not so great a blessing
to any City, as a good Jugglercatcher would be to this Nation. Now because I
want an Office, I shall show my Parts to my Country, and how fit I am for the
white Staff, or long Pole of so worshipful a Preferment.

Ridiculus ne sis, esto.
THE FIRST BOOK, CONTAINING
The first Preliminary of OCEANA, enlarged, interpreted, and vindicated from
all such Mistakes or Slanders as have bin alleged against it under the notion
of Objections.

(...)
(...).
A full Answer to all such OBJECTIONS as have hitherto bin made against OCEANA.
NEITHER the Author or Authors of the Considerations upon OCEANA, nor any
other, have yet so much as once pretended one Contradiction or one Inequality
to be in the whole Commonwealth. Now this is certain, That Frame of Government
which is void of any contradiction, or any inequality, is void of all internal
causes of Dissolution, and must, for so much as it embraces, have attained to
full perfection. This by wholesale is a full Answer to the Considerations, with
all other Objections hitherto; and will be (with any man that comprehends the
nature of Government) to thousands of such Books, or Myriads of such tittel
tattel. Nevertheless, because every man is not provided with a Sum, in the
following Discourse I shall comply with them that must have things by Retail,
or somewhat for their Farthing.

The PREFACE.
IT is commonly said, and not without encouragement by some who think they have
Parnassus by the horns, that the University has lashed me: so it seems I have
to do with the University, and lashing is lawful; with both which I am
contented. In Moorfields, while the People are busy at their sports, they often
and ridiculously lose their Buttons, their Ribbands, and their Purses; where if
they light, as sometimes they do, upon the Masters of that Art, they fall a
kicking them a while (which one may call a rude charge) and then to their work
again. I know not whether I invite you to Moorfields, but (difficile est
Satyram non scribere) all the favor I desire at your hands is but this, that
you would not so condemn one man for kicking, as in the same Act to pardon
another for cutting of Purses. A Gentleman that commits a fallacious Argument
to writing, or gos about to satisfy others with such Reasons as he is not
satisfied with himself, is no more a Gentleman but a Pickpocket; with this in
my mind, I betake my self to my work, or rather to draw open the Curtain, and
begin the Play.

ONE that has written Considerations upon OCEANA, speaks the Prolog in this
manner: I beseech you Gentlemen, are not we the Writers Epist.
of Politics somewhat a ridiculous sort of People? Is it not a fine piece of
Folly for private men sitting in their Cabinets to rack their brains about
Models of Government? Certainly our Labors make a very pleasant recreation for
those great Personages, who, sitting at the Helm of Affairs, have by their
large Experience not only acquired the perfect Art of Ruling, but have attained
also to the comprehension of the Nature and Foundation of Government. In which
egregious Complement the Considerer has lost his considering Cap.

IT was in the time of ALEXANDER, the greatest Prince and Commander of his age,
that ARISTOTLE, with scarce inferior Applause and equal Fame, being a private
man, wrote that excellent piece of Prudence in his Cabinet, which is called his
Politics, going upon far other Principles than those of ALEXANDER'S Government,
which it has long outlived. The like did TITUS LIVIUS in the time of AUGUSTUS,
Sir THOMAS MOOR in the time of HENRY the Eighth, and MACCHIAVEL when Italy was
under Princes that afforded him not the ear. These Works nevertheless are all
of the most esteemed and applauded in this kind; nor have I found any man,
whose like Endeavors have bin persecuted since PLATO by DIONYSIUS. I study not
without great Examples, nor out of my Calling; either Arms or this Art being
the proper Trade of a Gentleman. A man may be entrusted with a Ship, and a good
Pilot too, yet not understand how to make Sea-charts. To say that a man may not
write of Government except he be a Magistrate, is as absurd as to say, that a
man may not make a Sea-chart, unless he be a Pilot. It is known that
CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS made a Chart in his Cabinet, that found out the Indys. The
Magistrate that was good at his Steerage never took it ill of him that brought
him a Chart, seeing whether he would use it or no, was at his own choice; and
if Flatterers, being the worst sort of Crows, did not pick out the eyes of the
living, the Ship of Government at this day throout Christendom had not struck
so often as she has don. To treat of Affairs, Art della Guer. ^roem.
says MACCHIAVEL, which as to the conduct of 'em appertain to others, may be
thought a great boldness; but if I commit Errors in writing, these may be known
without danger, whereas if they commit Errors in acting, such com not otherwise
to be known, than in the ruin of the Commonwealth. For which cause I presume to
open the Scene of my Discourse, which is to change according to the variety of
these following Questions.

1. WHETHER Prudence be well distinguished into Ancient and Modern?

2. WHETHER a Commonwealth be rightly defined to be a Government of Laws, and
not of Men; and Monarchy to be a Government of some Man, or a few Men, and not
of Laws?

3. WHETHER the Balance of Dominion in Land be the natural cause of Empire?

4. WHETHER the Balance of Empire be well divided into National and Provincial?
and whether these two, or any Nations that are of distinct Balance, coming to
depend upon one and the same head, such a mixture creates a new Balance?

5. WHETHER there be any common Right or Interest of Mankind distinct from the
parts taken severally? and how by the Orders of a Commonwealth this may best be
distinguished from private Interest?

6. WHETHER the Senatusconsulta, or Decrees of the Roman Senate, had the power
of Laws?

7. WHETHER the ten Commandments proposed by GOD or MOSES were voted by the
People of Israel?

8. WHETHER a Commonwealth coming up to the perfection of the kind, coms not up
to the perfection of Government, and has no flaw in it?

9. WHETHER Monarchy, coming up to the perfection of the kind, coms not short
of the perfection of Government, and has not some flaw in it? in which is also
treated of the Balance of France, of the Original of a landed Clergy, of Arms,
and their kinds.

10. WHETHER a Commonwealth that was not first broken by it self, was ever
conquered by any Monarch?

11. WHETHER there be not an Agrarian, or some Law or Laws of that nature to
supply the defect of it, in every Commonwealth? and whether the Agrarian, as it
is stated in Oceana, be not equal and satisfactory to all Interests or Partys?

12. WHETHER Courses or a Rotation be necessary to a wellorder'd Commonwealth?
In which is contained the Parembole or Courses of Israel before the Captivity;
together with an Epitome of the whole Commonwealth of Athens, as also another
of the Commonwealth of Venice.

Ancient and Modern Prudence.
CHAP. I.
Whether Prudence be well distinguished into Ancient and Modern.
THE Considerer (where by Ancient Prudence I understand the Policy of a
Commonwealth, and by Modern Prudence that of King, Lords, and Commons, which
introduced by the Goths and Vandals upon the ruin of the Roman Empire, has
since reigned in these Western Countries, till by the predominating of some one
of the three parts, it be now almost universally extinguished) thinks it enough
for the confutation of this distinction, to show out of THUCYDIDES that of
Monarchy to be a more ancient Policy than that of a Commonwealth. Upon which
occasion, I must begin here to discover that which, the further I go, will be
the more manifest; namely, that there is a difference between quoting Authors,
and saying some part of them without book: this may be don by their words, but
the former no otherwise than by keeping to their sense. Now the sense of
THUCYDIDES, as he is translated by Mr. HOBBS in the place alleged, is thus: The
manner, says he, Thu. B. 1. P. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.
of living in the most ancient times of Greece was Thieving; the stronger going
abroad under the conduct of their most puissant Men, both to enrich themselves,
and fetch home maintenance for the weak: for there was neither Traffic,
property of Lands, nor constant Abode, till MINOS built a Navy, and expelling
the Malefactors out of the Islands, planted Colonys of his own, by which means
they who inhabited the Seacoasts, becoming more addicted to Riches, grew more
constant to their dwellings: of whom some, grown now rich, compassed their Towns
about with Walls. For out of a desire of Gain, the meaner sort underwent
Servitude with the Mighty; and the Mighty (thus overbalancing at home) with
their Wealth, brought the lesser Citys (abroad) into subjection. Thus PELOPS,
tho he was a stranger, obtained such Power in Peloponnesus, that the Country
was called after his name. Thus ATREUS obtained the Kingdom of Mycenae; and
thus Kingdoms with Honors limited came to be hereditary; and rising to Power,
proceeded afterward to the War against Troy. After the War with Troy, tho with
much ado, and in a long time Greece had constant rest (and Land without doubt
came to Property) for shifting their seats no longer, at length they sent
Colonys abroad; the Athenians into Ionia with the Islands, the Peloponnesians
into Italy, Sicily, and other parts. The Power of Greece thus improved, and the
desire of Money withal, their Revenues (in what? not in Money, if yet there was
no Usury; therefore except a man can show that there was Usury in Land) being
enlarged, in most of the Citys there were erected Tyrannys. Let us lay this
place to the former, when out of a desire of Gain the meaner sort underwent
Servitude with the Mighty, it caused hereditary Kingdoms with Honors limited,
as happened also with us since the time of the Goths and Vandals. But when the
People came to Property in Land, and their Revenues were enlarged, such as
assumed Power over then it was, says the Considerer, that the Grecians out of
an extreme aversion to that which was Consid. p. 4.
the cause of their present Sufferings, slipped into Popular Government, not that
upon calm and mature Debates they found it best, but that they might put
themselves at the greatest distance (which Spirit usually accompanys all
Reformations) from that with which they were grown into dislike. Whereby he
agrees exactly with his Author in making out the true Force and Nature of the
Balance, working even without deliberation, and whether men will or no. For the
Government that is natural and easy, being in no other direction than that of
the respective Balance, is not of choice but of necessity. The Policy of King,
Lords and Commons, was not so much from the Prudence of our Ancestors, as from
their necessity. If three hundred men held at this day the like overbalance to
the whole People, it was not in the power of Prudence to institute any other
than the same kind of Government, through the same necessity. Thus the meaner sort
with THUCYDIDES submitting to the Mighty, it came to Kingdoms with hereditary
Honors: but the People coming to be wealthy, called their Kings, tho they knew
not why, Tyrants; nay, and using them accordingly, found out means, with as
little deliberation it may be as a Bull takes to toss a Dog, or a Hern to split
a Hauk (that is, rather, as at the long-run they will ever do in the like
cases, by Instinct, than Prudence or Debate) to through down that, which by the
mere information of sense they could no longer bear; and which being thrown
down, they found themselves eased. But the question yet remains, and that is,
forsooth, whether of these is to be called Ancient Prudence. To this end, never
man made a more unlucky choice than the Considerer has don for himself of this
Author, who in the very beginning of his Book, speaking of the Peloponnesian
War, or that between the Commonwealths of Athens and Lacedemon, says, that the
Actions which preceded this, and those again that were more ancient, tho the
truth of them through length of time cannot by any means be clearly discovered;
yet for any Argument that (looking into times far past) he had yet lighted on
to persuade him, he dos not think they have bin very great either for matter of
War, or otherwise; that is, for matter of Peace or Government. And lest this
should not be plain enough, he calls the Prudence of the Mr. Hobbs in the
Magire.
three Periods, observed by Mr. HOBBS, viz. that from the beginning of the
Grecian Memory to the Trojan War, that of the Trojan War it self, and that from
thence to the present Commonwealths and Wars, Thu. B. 1. p. 3.
whereof he treats, The Imbecility of ancient Times. Whersore certainly this
Prevaricator, to give him his own fees, has less discretion than a Consid. p.
34.
common Attorney, who will be sure to examine only those Witnesses that seem to
make for the Cause in which he is entertained. Seeing that which he affirms to
be Ancient Prudence is deposed by his own witness to have bin the Imbecility
of ancient Times, for which I could have so many more than I have leisure to
examine, that (to take only of the most Authentic) as you have heard one Greec,
I shall add no more than one Roman, and that is FLORUS in his Prolog, where
(computing the Ages of the Romans, in the same manner THUCYDIDES did those of
the Greecs) he affirms the time while they lived under their Kings, to have bin
their Infancy; that from the Consuls till they conquered Italy, their Youth;
that from hence to their Emperors, their manly age; and the rest (with a
Complement or Salvo to TRAJAN his present their Dotage.

THESE things, tho originally all Government among the Gree^s and the Romans
was Regal, are no more than they who have not yet past their Novitiat in story,
might have known. Yet says the Considerer, Consid. p. 2, 3.
It seems to be a defect of experience to think that the Greec and the Roman
Actions are only considerable in Antiquity. But is it such a defect of
Experience to think them only considerable, as not to think them chiefly
considerable in Antiquity, or that the name of Ancient Prudence dos not belong
to that Prudence which was chiefest in Antiquity? True, says he, it is very
frequent with such as have bin conversant with Greec and Roman Authors, to be
led by them into a belief that the rest of the World was a rude inconsiderable
People, and, which is a term they very much delight in, altogether Barbarous.
This should be some fine Gentleman that would have Universitys pulled down; for
the Office of a University is no more than to preserve so much of Antiquity as
may keep a Nation from stinking, or being barbarous; which Salt grew not in
Monarchys, but in Commonwealths: or whence has the Christian World that
Religion and those Laws which are now common, but from the Hebrews and Romans?
or from whence have we Arts but from these or the Greecs? That we have a Doctor
of Divinity, or a Master of Arts, we may thank Popular Government; or with what
Languages, with what things are Scholars conversant that are otherwise
descended? will they so plead their own Cause as to tell us it is possible
there should be a Nation at this day in the world without Universitys, or
Universitys without Hebrew, Greec and Latin, and not be Barbarous, that is to
say, rude, unlearned, and inconsiderable? Yes, this humor even among the Greecs
and Romans themselves was a servil addiction to narrow Principles, and a piece
of very pedantical Pride. What, man! the Greecs and the Romans that of all
other would not serve, servil! their Principles, their Learning, with whose
scraps we set up for Batchelors, Masters, and Doctors of fine things, narrow!
their inimitable Eloquence a piece of very pedantical Pride! The World can
never make sense of this any otherwise than that since Heads and Fellows of
Colleges became the only Greecs and Romans, the Greecs and Romans are become
servily addicted, of narrow Principles, very Pedants, and prouder of those
things they do not understand, than the other were of those they did: For, say
they, in this Question, the Examples of the Babylonians, Persians and Egyptians
(not to omit the ancient and like modern Discoverys of the Queen of the
Amazons, and of the King of China) cannot without gross partiality be
neglected. This is pretty; they who say nothing at all to the Policy of these
Governments, accuse me, who have fully opened it, of negligence. The
Babylonian, Persian, and, for ought appears to the contrary, the Chinese
Policy, is sum'd up, and far excelled by that at this this day of Turkey; and in
opening this latter, I have opened them all, so far from neglect, that I every
where give the Turc his due, whose Policy I assert to be the best of this kind,
tho not of the best kind. But they will bear me down, and but with one
Argument, which I beseech you mark, that it is absolutely of the best kind; for
say they, it is of a more absolute form (has more of the Man and less of the
Law in it) than is to be met with in any Kingdom of Europe.

Greecs and Romans Pedantical Pride, but would be in us who have not the same
Temtation of Interest, downright Folly. The Interest of a People is not their
Guide but their Temtation! We that hold our Land divided among us, have not the
same Temtation of Interest that had the servil Hebrews, Greecs, and Romans; but
the same that had the free People of Babylon, Persia, and Egypt, where not the
People but the Prince was sole Landlord! O the Arts in which these men are
Masters! To follow the pedantical Pride of MOSES, LYCURGUS, SOLON, ROMULUS,
were with us downright Folly; but to follow humble and learned MAHOMET or
OTTOMAN, in whose only Model the Perfection of the Babylonian, Persian,
Egyptian Policy is consummated, is Ancient Prudence! Exquisit Politicians!
egregious Divines, for the leading of a People into Egypt or Babylon! These
things considered, whether Ancient Prudence, as I have stated it, be downright
Folly, or as they have stated it, be not downright Knavery, I appeal to any
Court of Claims in the world, where the Judges, I mean, have not more in their
Caps than in their Heads, and in their Sleeves than the Scarlet. And whereas Men
love compendious works, if I gain my Cause, the Reader, for an answer to the
Oxford Book, needs look no further than this Chapter. For if Riches and Freedom
be the end of Government; and these Men propose nothing but Slavery, Beggary,
and Turcism, what need more words?

CHAP. II.
Whether a Commonwealth be rightly defined to be a Government of Laws and not
of Men, and a Monarchy to be the Government of some Man, or a few Men, and not
of Laws?
THAT part of the Preliminarys which the Prevaricator, as is usual with him,
recites in this place falsely and fraudulently, is thus: Relation had to these
two times (that of Ancient and that of Modern Prudence) the one, as is computed
by JANOTTI, ending with the Liberty of Rome, the other beginning with the Arms
of CAESAR (which extinguishing Liberty, became the Translation of Ancient into
Modern Prudence, introduced in the Ruin of the Roman Empire by the Goths and
Vandals) GOVERNMENT (to define it de jure, or according to Ancient Prudence) is
an Art whereby a civil Society of Men is instituted and preserved, upon the
Foundation of Common Right or Interest; or (to follow ARISTOTLE and LIVY) it is
an Empire of Laws, and not of Men.

AND Government, to define it de facto, or according to Modern Prudence, is an
Art whereby some Man, or some few Men, subject a City or a Nation, and rule it
according to his or their private Interest; which, because Laws in such cases
are made according to the Interest of a Man, or some few Familys, may be said to
be an Empire of Men, and not of Laws.

HEREBY it is plain, whether in an Empire of Laws, and not of Men, as a
Commonwealth; or in an Empire of Men, and not of Laws, as Monarchy: First, That
Law must equally proceed from Will, that is either from the Will of the whole
People, as in a Commonwealth;

SECONDLY, That Will, whether of one, or more, or all, is not presumed to be,
much less to act without a Mover.

THIRDLY, That the Mover of the Will is Interest.

FOURTHLY, That Interests also being of one, of more, or of all; those of one
Man, or of a few Men, where Laws are made accordingly, being more private than
coms duly up to the Law, the nature whereof lys not in Partiality but in
Justice, may be called the Empire of Men, and not of Laws: And that of the
whole People coming up to the public Interest (which is no other than common
Right and Justice, excluding all Partiality or private Interest) may be called
the Empire of Laws, and not of Men. By all which put together, whereas it is
demonstrable that in this division of Government I do not stay at the Will,
which must have some Motive or Mover, but go to the first and remotest Notion of
Government, in the Foundation and Origination of it, in which lys the Credit of
this Division, and the Definition of the several Members, that is to say, of
Interest, whether private or public; the Prevaricator tells me, That this
division of Government Consid. p. ^.
having (he knows not how) lost its Credit, the definitions of the several
Members of it need not be considered further, than that they com not at all up
to the first and remotest Notion of Government in the Foundation and
Origination of it, in which lys all the difficulty; and being here neglected,
there is little hope the subsequent Discourse can have in it the light of
probable Satisfaction, much less the Force of infallible Demonstration.

VERY good! Interest it should seem then is not the first and remotest Notion
of Government, but that which he will outthrow; and at this cast, by saying,
that the Declaration of the Will of the Soverain Consid. p. 8.
Power is called Law: which if it outlives the Person whose Will it was, it is
only because the Persons who succeed in Power are presumed to have the same
Will, unless they manifest the contrary, and that is the Abrogation of the Law;
so that still the Government is not in the Law, but in the Person whose Will
gave a being to that Law. I might as well say, The Declaration to all men by
these presents that a man ows Money is called a Bond; which if it outlives the
Person that entered into that Bond, it is only because the Persons that succeed
him in his Estate, are presumed to have the same Will, unless they manifest the
contrary, and that is the abrogation or cancelling of the Bond; so that still
the Debt is not in the Bond, but in his Will who gave a being to that Bond. If
it be alleged against this example, that it is a private one, the case may be
put between several Princes, States, or Governments, or between several States
of the same Principality or Government, whether it be a Regulated Monarchy or a
Commonwealth; for in the like Obligation of the States (as of the King, the
Lords, and Commons) or Partys agreeing, Authoritate Patrum and jussu Populi,
till the Partys that so agreed to the Obligation, shall agree to repeal or
cancel it, lys all Law that is not merely in the Will of one Man, or of one
State, or Party, as the Oligarchy. But not to dispute these things further in
this place, let the Government be what it will, for the Prevaricator to fetch
the Origination of Law no further than the Will (while he knows very well that
I fetched it from Interest, the Antecedent of Will) and yet honest Man, nor a
good Bowler. No matter, he will be a better Gunner; for where I said that the
Magistrate upon the Bench is that to the Law, which a Gunner upon his Platform
is to his Cannon, he gos about to take better aim, and says, If the proportion
of things be accuratly considered, it will appear that the laden Cannon answers
not to the Laws, but to the Power of the Person whose Will created those Laws:
Which if some of them that the Power of the Person whose Will created them,
intended should be of as good Stuff or Carriage as the rest, do nevertheless
according to the nature of their Matter or of their Charge, com short or over,
and others break or recoil; sure this Report of the Prevaricator is not
according to the bore of my Gun, but according to the bore of such a Gunner.
Yet again, if he be not so good a Gunner, he will be a better Anatomist: for
whereas I affirm, that to say, ARISTOTLE and CICERO wrote not the Rights or
Rules of their Politics from the Principles of Nature, but transcribed them
into their Books out of the practice of their own Commonwealths, is as if a man
should say of famous HARVEY, that he transcribed his Circulation of the Blood,
not out of the Principles of Nature, but out of the Anatomy of this or that
Body: He answers, that the whole force of this Objection amounts but to this,
that because HARVEY in his Circulation has followed the Principles of Nature,
therefore ARISTOTLE and CICERO have don so in their Discourses of Government.

PRETTY! It is said in Scripture, Thy Word is sweet as Honey: Amounts that but
to this, Because Honey is sweet, therefore the Word of God is sweet? To say that
my Lord Protector has not conquered many Nations, were as if one should say,
that CAESAR had not conquered many Nations: Amounts that but to this, that
because CAESAR conquered many Nations, therefore my Lord Protector has conquered
many Nations? What I produce as a Similitude, he calls an Objection; where I
say, as, he says, because: what ingenuous man dos not detest such a cheat! A
Similitude is brought to show how a thing is or may be, not to prove that it is
so; it is used for Illustration, not as an Argument: The Candle I held did not
set up the Post, but show where the Post was set, and yet this blind Buzzard
has run his head against it. Nor has he yet enough; if he be not the better
Naturalist, he will be the better Divine, tho he should make the worse Sermon.
My Doctrine and Use upon that of SOLOMON, I have seen Servants upon Horses, and
Princes walking as Servants upon the Ground, discovers the true means whereby
the Principles of Power and Authority, the Goods of the Mind and of Fortune,
may so meet and twine in the Wreath or Crown of Empire, that the Government
standing upon Earth like a holy Altar, and breathing perpetual Incense to
Heaven in Justice and Piety, may be something, as it were, between Heaven and
Earth; while that only which is proposed by the best, and resolved by the most,
becoms Law; and so the whole Government an Empire of Laws, and not of Men. This
he says, is a goodly Sermon; it is honest, and sense. But let any man make
sense or honesty Consid. p. 7.
of this Doctrine, which is his own; To say that Laws do or can govern, is to
amuse our selves with a Form of Speech, as when we say Time, or Age, or Death,
dos such a thing; to which indeed the Phansy of Poets, and Superstition of
Women, may adapt a Person, and give a Power of Action: but wise Men know they
are only Expressions of such Actions or Qualifications as belong to Things or
Persons.

SPEAK out; Is it the Word of God, or the Knavery and Nonsense of such
Preachers that ought to govern? Are we to hearken to that of the Talmud, There
is more in the word of a Scribe, than in the words of the Law; or that which
Christ thereupon says to the Pharisees, You have made the Word of God of no
effect by your Traditions? Mat. 15. 6.
Say, is the Commonwealth to be governed in the Word of a Priest or a Pharisee,
or by the Vote of the People, and the Interest of Mankind?

CHAP. III.
Whether the Balance of Dominion in Land be the natural Cause of Empire?
THE Doctrine of the Balance is that, tho he strains at it, which choaks the
Prevaricator: for this of all others is that Principle which makes the
Politics, not so before the invention of the same, to be undeniable throout,
and (not to meddle with the Mathematics, an Art I understand as little as
Mathematicians do this) the most demonstrable of any whatsoever.

FOR this cause I shall rather take pleasure than pains to look back, or tread
the same path with other, and perhaps plainer steps: as thus; If a man having
one hundred pounds a year may keep one Servant, or have one man at his command,
then having one hundred times so much, he may keep one hundred Servants; and
this multiplied by a thousand, he may have one hundred thousand men at his
command. Now that the single Person, or Nobility of any Country in Europe, that
had but half so many men at command, would be King or Prince, is that which I
think no man will doubt. But Point de Argent, point de Suisse.
no Money, no Switzers, as the French speak: If the Money be flown, so are the
Men also. Tho Riches in general have Wings, and be apt to bate; yet those in
Land are the most hooded, and tied to the Perch, whereas those in Money have the
least hold, and are the swiftest of flight. A Bank where the Money takes not
wing, but to com home seized, or like a Coyduck, may well be great; but the
Treasure of the Indys going out, and not upon returns, makes no Bank. Whence a
Bank never paid an Army; or paying an Army, soon became no Bank. But where a
Prince or a Nobility has an Estate in Land, the Revenue whereof will desray this
Charge, there their Men are planted, have Toes that are Roots, and Arms that
bring forth what Fruit you please.

THUS a single Person is made, or a Nobility makes a King, not with difficulty,
or any great prudence, but with ease, the rest coming home, as the Ox that not
only knows his Master's Crib, but must starve or repair to it, Nor for the same
reason is Government acquired with more ease than it is preserved; that is, if
the Foundation of Property lightly com, lightly go. The reason why a single
Person, or the Nobility that has one hundred thousand men, or half so many at
command, will have the Government, is that the Estate in Land, whereby they are
able to maintain so many, in any European Territory, must overbalance the rest
that remains to the People, at least three parts in four, by which means they
are no more able to dispute the Government with him or them, than your Servant
is with you. Now for the same reason, if the People hold three parts in four of
the Territory, it is plain there can neither be any single Person nor Nobility
able to dispute the Government with them; in this case therefore, except Force
be interposed, they govern themselves. So by this computation of the Balance of
Property or Dominion in Land, you have according to the threefold Foundation of
Property, the Root or Generation of the threefold kind of Government or Empire.

Oceana, p. 39.
IF one man be sole Landlord of a Territory, or overbalance the whole People,
three parts in four, or therabouts, he is Grand Signior; for so the Turc, not
from his Empire, but his Property is called; and the Empire in this case is
absolute Monarchy.

IF the Few, or a Nobility, or a Nobility with a Clergy, be Landlords to such a
proportion as overbalances the People in the like manner, they may make whom
they please King; or if they be not pleased with their King, down with him, and
set up whom they like better; a HENRY the Fourth, or the Seventh, a GUISE, a
MONTFORT, a NEVIL, or a PORTER, should they find that best for their own ends
and purposes: For as not the Balance of the King, but that of the Nobility in
this case is the cause of the Government, so not the Estate or Riches of the
Prince or Captain, but his Virtue or Ability, or fitness for the ends of the
Nobility, acquires that Command or Office. This for Aristocracy, or mixed
Monarchy. But if the whole People be Landlords, or hold the Land so divided
among them, that no one man or number of men within the compass of the Few, or
Aristocracy overbalance them, it is a Commonwealth. Such is the Branch in the
Root, or the Balance of Property naturally producing Empire; which not
confuted, no man shall be able to batter my Superstructures, and which
confuted, I lay down my Arms. Till then, if the cause necessarily precede the
effect, Property must have a being before Empire, or beginning with it, must be
still first in order.

PROPERTY coms to have a being before Empire or Government two ways, either by
a natural or violent Revolution. Natural Revolution happens from within, or by
Commerce, as when a Government erected upon one Balance, that for example of a
Nobility or a Clergy, through the decay of their Estates coms to alter to another
Balance; which alteration in the Root of Property, leaves all to confusion, or
produces a new Branch or Government, according to the kind or nature of the
Root. Violent Revolution happens from without, or by Arms, as when upon
Conquest there follows Confiscation. Confiscation again is of three kinds, when
the Captain taking all to himself, plants his Army by way of military Colonys,
Benefices, or Timars, which was the Policy of MAHOMET; or when the Captain has
some Sharers, or a Nobility that divides with him, which was the Policy
introduced by the Goths and Vandals; or when the Captain divides the
Inheritance by Lots, or otherwise, to the whole People; which Policy was
instituted by GOD or MOSES in the Commonwealth Israel. This triple
distribution, whether from natural or violent Revolution, returns as to the
generation of Empire to the same thing that is to the nature of the Balance
already stated and demonstrated. Now let us see what the Prevaricator will say,
which first is this.

Consid. p. 14.
THE Assertion, that Property producing Empire consists only in Land, appears
too positive. A Pig of my own Sow; this is no more than I told him, only there
is more implied in what I told him, than he will see; which therefore I shall
now further explain. The balance in Money may be as good or better than that of
Land in three cases. First, where there is no Property of Land yet introduced,
as in Greece during the time of her ancient Imbecility; whence, as is noted by
THUCYDIDES, the meaner sort through a desire of Gain underwent the Servitude of
the Mighty. Secondly, in Citys of small Territory and great Trade, as Holland
and Genoa, the Land not being able to feed the People, who must live upon
Traffic, is overbalanc'd by the means of that Traffic, which is Money. Thirdly,
in a narrow Country, where the Lots are at a low scantling, as among the
Israelits, if care be not had of Money in the regulation of the same, it will
eat out the balance of Land. For which cause tho an Israelit might both have
Money, and put it to Usury (Thou shall lend [upon usury] to many Nations) yet
Deuteronomy. 15. 6. and 23. 19.
might he not lend it upon usury to a Citizen or Brother: whence two things are
manifest: First, that Usury in it self is not unlawful: And next, that Usury in
Israel was no otherwise forbidden, than as it might com to overthrow the
Balance or Foundation of the Government: for where a Lot as to the general
amounted not perhaps to four Acres, a man that should have had a thousand
Pounds in his Purse, would not have regarded such a Lot in comparison of his
Money; and he that should have bin half so much in debt, would have bin quite
eaten out. Usury is of such a nature, as, not forbidden in the like cases, must
devour the Government. The Roman People, while their Territory was no bigger,
and their Lots, which exceded not two Acres a man, were yet scantier, were
flead alive with it; and if they had not helped themselves by their Tumults,
and the Institution of their Tribuns, it had totally ruined both them and their
Government. In a Commonwealth, whose Territory is very small, the Balance of
the Government being laid upon the Land, as in Lacedemon, it will not be
sufficient to forbid Usury, but Money it self must be forbidden. Whence LYCURGUS
allowed of none, or of such only as being of old, or otherwise useless Iron,
was little better, or, if you will, little worse than none. The Prudence of
which Law appeared in the neglect of it, as when LYSANDER, General for the
Lacedaemonians in the Peloponnesian War, having taken Athens, and brought home
the spoil of it, occasioned the Ruin of that Commonwealth in her Victory. The
Land of Canaan compared with Spain or England, was at the most but a Yorkshire,
and Laconia was less than Canaan. Now if we imagine Yorkshire divided, as was
Canaan, into six hundred thousand Lots, or as was Laconia, into thirty
thousand; a Yorkshire man having one thousand Pounds in his Purse, would, I
believe, have a better Estate in Money than in Land; wherefore in this case, to
make the Land hold the Balance, there is no way but either that of Israel by
forbidding Usury, or that of Lacedemon by forbidding Money. Where a small Sum
may com to Holland and Genoa. But in a Territory of such extent as Spain, or
England, the Land being not to be overbalanc'd by Money, there needs no
forbidding of Money or Usury. In Lacedemon Merchandise was forbidden, in Israel
and Rome it was not exercised; wherefore to these Usury must have bin the more
destructive: but in a Country where Merchandise is exercised, it is so far from
being destructive, that it is necessary; else that which might be of profit to
the Commonwealth would rust unprofitably in private purses, there being no man
that will venture his Money but through hope of some Gain; which if it be so
regulated that the Borrower may gain more by it than the Lender, as at four in
the hundred, or therabouts, Usury becoms a mighty Profit to the Public, and a
Charity to private Men; in which sense we may not be persuaded by them that do
not observe these different causes, that it is against Scripture. Had usury to
a Brother bin permitted in Israel, that Government had bin overthrown: but that
such a Territory as England or Spain cannot be overbalanc'd by Money, whether it
be a scarce or a plentiful Commodity, whether it be accumulated by Parsimony,
as in the purse of HENRY the 7 th, or presented by Fortune, as in the Revenue
of the Indys, is sufficiently demonstrated, or shall be.

FIRST, by an Argument ad hominem, one good enough for the Consid. p. 12.
Prevaricator, who argues thus; The Wisdom or the Riches of another man can
never give him a Title to my Obedience, nor oblige Mr. HARRINGTON to give his
Clothes or Money to the next man he meets, wiser or richer than himself.

IF he had said stronger, he had spoiled all; for the parting with a man's
Clothes or Money in that case, cannot be helped: now the richer, as to the case
in debate, is the stronger, that is, the advantage of Strength remains to the
Balance. But well; he presumes me to have Clothes and Money of my own, let him
put the same case in the People, or the similitude dos not hold. But if the
People have Clothes and Money of their own, these must either rise (for the
bulk) out of Property in Land, or at least out of the cultivation of the Land,
or the Revenue of Industry; which if it be dependent, they must give such a
part of their Clothes and Money to preserve that dependence out of which the
rest arises to him or them on whom they depend, as he or they shall think fit,
or parting with nothing to this end, must lose all; that is, if they be
Tenants, they must pay their Rent, or turn out. So i^ they have Clothes and
Money dependently, the Balance of Land is in the Landlord or Landlords of the
People: but if they have Clothes and Money independently, then the Balance of
Land must of necessity be in the People themselves, in which case they neither
would, if there were any such, nor can, because there be no such, give their
Money or Clothes to such as are wiser, or richer, or stronger than themselves.
So it is not a man's Clothes and Money or Riches, that oblige him to acknowledge
the Title of his Obedience to him that is wiser or richer, but a man's no
Clothes or Money, or his Poverty, with which, if the Prevaricator should com to
want, he could not so finely prevaricat but he must serve some body, so he were
rich, no matter if less wise than himself. Wherefore seeing the People cannot be
said to have Clothes and Money of their own without the balance in Land, England
or Spain, Money can never com to overbalance Land.

FOR a second Demonstration of this Truth, HENRY the Seventh, tho he missed of
the Indys, in which for my part I think him happy, was the richest in Money of
English Princes. Nevertheless this accession of Revenue did not at all
preponderat on the King's part, nor change the balance. But while making Farms
of a Standard he increased the Yeomanry, and cutting off Retainers he abas'd
the Nobility, began that Breach in the balance of Land, which proceeding has
ruined the Nobility, and in them that Government.

FOR a third, the Monarchy of Spain, since the Silver of Potosi sailed up the
Guadalquivir, which in English is, since that King had the Indys, stands upon
the same balance in the Lands of the Nobility on which it always stood.

Consid. p. 16.
AND so the learned Conclusion of the Prevaricator (That it is not to be
doubted but a Revenue sufficient to maintain a Force able [to cry ware horns]
or beat down all opposition, dos equally conduce to Empire, whether it arises
from Rents, Lands, Profits of ready Money, Dutys, Customs, etc.) asks you no
more than where you saw her Premises. For unless they ascended his Monti, and
his Banks, it is not to be imagined which way they went; and with these,
because he is a professed Zealot for Monarchy, I would wish him by no means to be
montebanking or meddling: for the purse of a Prince never yet made a Bank, nor,
till spending and trading Money be all one, ever shall. The Genoese, which the
King of Spain could never do with the Indys, can make you a Bank out of Letters
of Exchange, and the Hollander with Herrings. Let him com no more here; where
there is a Bank, ten to one there is a Commonwealth. A King is a Soldier, or a
Lover, neither of which makes a good Merchant; and without Merchandise you will
have a lean Bank. It is true, the Family of the MEDICI were both Merchants, and
made a Bank into a Throne: but it was in Commonwealth of Merchants, in asmall
Territory, by great purchases in Land, and rather in a mere confusion than
under any settled Government; which Causes, if he can give them all such
another meeting, may do as much for another man. Otherwise let it be agreed and
resolved, that in a Territory of any extent, the balance of Empire consists in
Land, and not in Money; always provided that in case a Prince has occasion to
run away, as HENRY the Third of France did out of Poland, his Balance in ready
Money is absolutely the most proper for the carrying on of so great and sudden
an Enterprise.

IT is an excellent way of disputing, when a man has alleged no experience, no
example, no reason, to conclude with no doubt. Certainly upon such occasions it
is not unlawful nor unreasonable to be merry. Reasons, says one Comedian, are
not so common as Blackberrys. For all that, says another Comedian, no doubt but
a Revenue in Taxes is as good as a Revenue in Feesimple; for this, in brief, is
the sense of his former particular, or that part of it, which, the Monti and
the Banks being already discharged, remains to be answered. Yet that the Rents
and Profits of a man's Land in Feesimple or Property, com It is not to be
doubted but that Violence may be permanent or durable, and the Blackberry, for
it is because Nature is permanent or durable! What other construction can be
made of these words? It is not to be doubted but a Revenue sufficient to
maintain a Force able to beat down all opposition (that is, a Force able to
raise such a Revenue) dos equally (on which word grows the Blackberry) conduce
to Empire; that is, as much as could any natural Balance of the same! He may
stain mouths, as he has don some, but he shall never make a Politician. The
Earth yields her natural increase without losing her heart; but if you com once
to force her, look your Force continue, or she yields you nothing: and the
balance of Empire consisting of Earth, is of the nature of her Element.

DIVINES are given to speak much of things which the Considerer balks in this
place that would check them, to the end he may fly out with them in others,
whereto they do not belong, as where he Consid. p. 23.
says, that Government is foun^ed either upon Paternity, and the natural
Advantage the first Father had over all the rest of Mankind, who were his Sons;
or else from the increase of Strength and Power in some Man or Men, to whose
Will the rest submit, that by their submission they may avoid such mischief, as
otherwise would be brought upon them. Which two Vagarys are to be fetched home
to this place.

FOR the former; If ADAM had lived till now, he could have seen no other than
his own Children; and so that he must have bin King by the right of Nature, was
his peculiar Prerogative. But whether the eldest Son of his House, if the
Prevaricator can find him at this time of day, has the same right, is somewhat
disputable; because it was early when ABRAHAM and LOT dividing Territorys,
became several Kings: and not long after when the Sons of JACOB being all
Patriarchs, by the appointment of God, whose Right sure was not inferior to
that of ADAM, tho he had lived, came under Popular Government. Wherefore the
advantage of the first Father is for grave men a pleasant fancy; nevertheless
if he had lived till now, I hope they understand that the whole Earth would
have bin his Demeans, and so the Balance of his Property must have answered to
his Empire, as did that also of ABRAHAM and LOT to theirs. Wherefore this way of
Deduction coms directly home again to the Balance. Paterfamilias De jure belli,
l. 1. c. 3.
Latifundia possidens, and neminem alia lege in suas terras recipiens quam ut
ditioni suae, qui recipiuntur, se subjiciant, est Rex, says GROTIUS. Fathers of
Familys are of three sorts, either a sole Landlord, as ADAM, and then he is an
absolute Monarch; or a few Landlords, as LOT and ABRAHAM, with the Patriarchs
of those days; who if Canaan by MELCHISEDEC, to whom as King and Priest ABRAHAM
paid Tithes of all that he had. Such a Magistracy was that also of JETHRO, King
and Priest in the Commonwealth of Midian. Fathers of Familys for the third
sort, as when the Multitude are Landlords (which happened in the division of
the Land of Canaan) make a Commonwealth. And thus much, however it was out of
the Prevaricator's head in the place now deduced, he, excepting no further
against the Balance than that it might consist as well in Money as in Land, had
confessed before.

HIS second Vagary is in his deduction of Empire from increase of Strength, for
which we must once more round about our ^oalsire. The strength whereby this
effect can be expected, consists not in a pair of Fists, but in an Army; and an
Army is a Beast with a great Belly, which subsists not without very large
pastures: so if one man has sufficient pasture, he may feed such a Beast; if a
few have the pasture, they must feed the Beast, and the Beast is theirs that
feed it. But if the People be the Sheep of their own pastures, they are not
only a flock of Sheep, but an Army of Lions, tho by some accidents, as I confessed
before, they be for a season confinable to their dens. So the advantage or
increase of Strength depends also upon the Balance. There is nothing in the
world to swear this Principle out of countetenance, but the fame of PHALARIS,
GELON, DIONYSIUS, AGATHOCLES, NABIS, etc. with which much good do them that
like it. It is proper to a Government upon the Balance to take root at home,
and spread outward; and to a Government against the Balance to seek a root
abroad, and to spread inwards. The former is sure, but the latter never
successful. AGATHOCLES for having conquered Africa, took not the better root in
Syracusa. Parvi sunt arma for as, nisi sit consilium domi.

To conclude this Chapter; the Prevaricator gives me this thanks for finding
out the Balance of Dominion (being as ancient in Nature as her self, and yet as
new in Art as my Writing) that I have given the world cause to complain of a
great disappointment, who, while at my hand that Satisfaction in the Principles
of Government was expected, which several great Wits had in vain studied, have
in diversifying Riches in words only, as Property, Dominion, Agrarian, Balance,
made up no more than a new Lexicon, expressing the same thing that was known
before; seeing the opinion that Riches are Power is (as ancient as the first
Book of THUCYDIDES, or the Politics of ARISTOTLE, and) not omitted by Mr.
HOBBS, or any other Politician. Which is as if he had told Dr. HARVEY, that
whereas the Blood is the Life was an Opinion as ancient as MOSES, and no Girl
ever pricked her finger, but knew it must have a course; he had given the world
cause to complain of great disappointment in not showing a Man to be made of
Gingerbread, and his Veins to run Malmsy.


Whether the Balance of Empire be well divided into National and Provincial;
And whether these two, or any Nations that are of distinct Balance, coming to
depend upon one and the same Head, such a mixture creates a new Balance.
THE Balance of Empire that is National, as it is stated in the former Chapter,
stands in a regulated or mixed Monarchy upon the Property or native Interest of
the Nobility; in a Commonwealth, upon the Property or native Interest of the
People; so these are very natural. But the Balance of absolute Monarchy,
partaking of Force as well as Nature, is a mixed thing, and not much different
from the Balance of Provincial Empire, or the manner of holding a Province or
conquered Country. In a Province, if the Native that is rich be admitted to
Power, the Power grows up native, and overtops the foren: therefore you must
either not plant your Citizens in your Provinces, where in time they will become
native; or, so planting them, neither trust them with Power nor with Arms. Thus
the provincial Balance coms to be contrary to the National. And as where Empire
is native or national, the administration of it can be no otherwise than
according to the national Balance; so where Empire is foren or provincial, the
administration of it can be no otherwise than contrary to the national Balance.
That this may be admitted without opposition the Considerer is inclining to
allow, always provided he be Consid. p. 16, 17.
satisfied in this demand, Whether distinct Balances under the same Head or
Governor, as those of Castile and Arragon, the Power of the King (I presume he
means by the Balance of a Nobility) being greater in the one, and that of the
People in the other, may not so poise one the other, as to produce a new
Balance. To which I answer, That no one Government whatsoever has any more than
one of two Balances; that, except in the cases excepted, of Land which is
national, or that of Arms which is provincial. Wherefore if the King of Spain by
his War against the Commons altered the Balance of Arragon, it must have bin
one of two ways, either by strengthening the Balance of the Nobility, and
governing the Arragonian People by them, in which case their Balance, tho
altered, remained yet National; or by holding both Nobility and People by a
provincial Governor and an Army, in which case his Empire in that Kingdom is
provincial. There is no third way; nor, putting the case that the Balance of
Castile be national, and that of Arragon provincial, dos this any more create
in the Monarchy of Spain a third Balance of Empire, than did the multiplication
of Associations and Provinces, diverse for their Balances, in the Commonwealth
of Rome. England and Scotland being united in one Prince, made, if it had bin
rightly used, an increase of Strength, but not a third Balance; nor do the
Kingdoms in Spain. Whether a Soverainty has many Territorys and Provinces in
subjection, or in League, it is all one as to this point; the stronger Union or
League will give the stronger Balance: and the case of the present Soveraintys
in Europe being no other, the more nice than wise Speculation of the
Considerer, who has not bin able to discern the Balance of a League from that
of Empire, is a Mares nest.

CHAP. V.
Whether there be any common Right or Interest of Mankind distinct from the
parts taken severally; and how by the Orders of a Commonwealth it may best be
distinguished from private Interest.
IN the next place the Prevaricator dos not go about to play the man, but the
unlucky boy. Where I say that the Soul of Man is Mistress of two potent Rivals,
Reason and Passion; he dos not stand to weigh the truth of the thing, or the
fitness of the comparison, either of which had bin fair; but tumbles Dick upon
Sis, the Logic upon the Rhetoric, the Sense upon the Figure, and scuds away in
this manner: If I could be persuaded Mr. HARRINGTON was so far in earnest, as
Consid. p. 19. 20.
to expect any man should be convinced by the metaphorical use of two or three
words, some farther consideration might be proposed. This is to use his Readers
as the Fox dos the Dogs, when having pist upon his Tail, and flapt it in their
Eyes, he gets away. Dos not his Book deserve to be gilded and carried in
Statesmens Pockets? Alas! mine are nothing? Quis leget haec? vel duo vel nemo:
they break the Stationer. And yet let me comfort my self, Whose are better? the
Prevaricator seems to set every whit as light by those of HOOKER and GROTIUS,
at least where they favor me. The Opinions of GROTIUS, says he, cannot oblige
us beyond the Reasons whereon they are founded; and what are those? he will
dispute against that which he dares not repeat: that his Comment may take you
by the Nose, he has left out the Text. The words of GROTIUS are of this sense:
Tho it be truly said that the In Proleg. de jure B. ac P.
Creatures are naturally carried to their proper Vtility, this ought not to be
taken in too general a sense, seeing diverse of them abstain from their own
Profit, either in regard of those of the same kind, or at least of their Young.
Which words, says the Prevaricator, carry a great restriction in them, and the
way of producing Actions in Beasts is so different from the emanation of human
Reason (mark the Impostor! the Author is speaking of natural Affection, and he
wipes out that, and puts in human Reason) that the Inferences from (the natural
Affection of) the one, to the (degree of Reason which is in the) other, must
needs be very weak. Excellent! dos it therefore follow that the eminent degree
of Reason, wherewithal God has indu'd Man, must in him deface that natural
Affection, and desertion in some cases of private for common good, which is
apparent even in Beasts? What do reverend Divines mean to cry up this Infidel?
Nay, is not he worse than an Insidel that provides not for his own Family? A
Commonwealth is but a great Family; and a Family is a little Commonwealth. Even
Beasts, in sparing out of their own mouths, and exposing themselves to danger
for their young, provide for their Familys; and in providing for their Familys,
provide for their whole Commonwealth; that is, forsake in some things their
private good and safety, for the good of the public, or of the kind. In this
case it is that even Stones or heavy things, says Book 1.
HOOKER, forsake their ordinary wont or center, and fly upwards to relieve the
distress of Nature in common. Wretch that he is, shall a Stone upon this
occasion fly upwards, and will he have a Man to go Mr. HOOKER'S Expression,
says he, is altogether figurative; and it is easier to prove from thence that
things wanting Sense make Discourses, and act by Election, than that there is
such a thing as a common Interest of Mankind. This is like the rest, HOOKER
speaks of the necessity that is in Nature, and this Gentleman translates that
Sense into the word Election. So because a Stone is necessitated to comply with
the common interest of Nature, without Discourse or Election; therefore it
rather follows from hence, that things wanting Sense make Discourses, and act
by Election, than that there is such a thing as a common Interest of Mankind.
His old Trick. I do not say, that because it is so with the other Creatures,
therefore it must be so with Man: but as we see it is with the Creatures in this
part, so we find it to be with Man. And that so, and more than so, we find it
to be with Man (who tho he be evil, gives good things to his Children, will
work hard, lay up, deny himself, venture his Life for his little Commonwealth)
is thus further demonstrated. All civil Laws acknowledge that there is a common
Interest of Mankind, and all civil Laws proceed from the Nature of Man;
therefore it is in the Nature of Man to acknowledge that there is a common
Interest of Mankind. Upon this acknowlegement of Mankind, a Man that steals is
put to death, which certainly is none of his private Interest; nor is a man put
to death for any other Man's private Interest: therefore there is a common
Interest of Mankind distinct from the parts taken severally. But this, tho
acknowleg'd in part by all Governments, yet through their natural frailty is
nothing so well provided for in some as in others: for if the Power be in one or
a few Men, one or a few Men, we know, may be Thieves, and the rather, because
applying Money that is public, without a consideration that is public, to uses
that are private, is thieving. But such Thieves will not be hanged; in this case
therefore the Government gos not upon public but private Interest. In the frame
of such a Government as can go upon no other than the public Interest, consists
that whole Philosophy of the Soul which concerns Policy: and this whole
Philosophy of the Soul being throout the Commonwealth of Oceana demonstrated;
for the Prevaricator to insinuat that I have omitted it, is to show what it is
that he loves more than Truth. The main of this Philosophy consists in deposing
Passion, and advancing Reason to the Throne of Empire. I expected news in this
place, that this were to promise more for the Magistrate or the People than has
bin performed by the Stoics; but two Girls, meaning no body any harm, have
provoked his Wrath, forsooth, to such extravagancy by the way, that tho in all
modesty it were forbid, as he confesses, by their cheeks, which discovering the
Green Sickness, showed that they were past the rod, he has taken them up!
Tantaene animis coelestibus irae! What he may have in School Divinity for so
rude a charge, I do not know; but he shall never be able to show any Maxim for
this kind of Discipline or Philosophy of the Soul, either in Chevalry or the
Politics. The offense of the Girls was no more, than that having a Cake (by the
gift of an Uncle or Aunt, or by purchase, or such a one perhaps as was of their
own making) in common, or between them, the one had most accuratly divided, and
the other was about to choose; when Consid. p. 22, 23.
in coms this rude fellow: How now Gentlewomen, says he, What, dividing and
choosing! Will no less serve your turn than the whole Mystery of a well-ordered
Commonwealth? Who has taught you to cast away Passion, an't please you, like
the Bran, and work up Reason as pure as the Flower of your Cake? Are you
acquainted with the Author of Oceana, that has seen foren Countries, conversed
with the Speculativi, learned of the most serene Lady VENETIA to work with
Bobbins, makes you a Magistracy like a Pippin Py, and sells Butterprints with
S. P. Q. R.? Have don, as you dread Ballads, fusty Pamphlets, or the Ostracism
of Billingsgate. Have don, I say; will you vy that green in your Cheeks with
the purple of the State? must your Mother, who was never there her self, seek
you in the Oven? Com, when I live to see MACCHIAVEL in pufpaste, a Commonwealth
com out of a Bakehouse, where Smocks were the Boulters, let me be a Milhorse.
-- But now you must know coms the best Jest of all, and I need not say that it
coms from Oxford; he tells them that their Cake is Dow (let it not be lost I
beseech you) and so snatching it away, eats it, for all the world as
Jackpudding eats the Custard. Did you ever see such a Bestia?

BUT whereas either office, that of dividing or choosing, was communicable to
either of the Girls, it is not indifferent in the distribution of a
Commonwealth, because dividing is separating one thing, one reason, one
interest, or consideration from another, which they that can so discern in
private affairs are called discrete, but they that can do it in public are
prudent; and the way of this kind of dividing in the language of a Commonweath
is Debating. But they that are capable of this kind of dividing or debating are
few among many, that when things are thus divided and debated, are able enough
to choose, which in the language of a Commonwealth is to resolve. Hence it is
that the Debate of the Few, because there be but few that can debate, is the
wisest Debate; and the Result of the Many (because every man has an Interest
what to choose, and that choice which suits with every man's Interest, excludes
the distinct or private Interest or Passion of any man, and so coms up to the
common and public Interest or Reason) is the wisest Result. To this end, God,
who dos nothing in vain, has so divided Mankind into the Few or the natural
Aristocracy, and the Many or the natural Democracy, that there can hardly be
upon any occasion a meeting of twenty men, wherein it will not be apparent, or
in which you may not see all those Lines which are requisite to the face of a
beautiful Commonwealth. For example, among any twenty men, occasionally met,
there will be some few, perhaps six, excelling the fourteen in greatness of
Parts. These six falling into discourse of business, or giving their judgment
upon Persons or Things, tho but by way of mere Conversation, will discover
their Abilitys; whereupon they shall be listened to and regarded by the
Fourteen; that is, the Six will acquire an Authority with, and imprint a
Reverence upon the Fourteen: which Action and Passion in the Roman Commonwealth
were called Authoritas Patrum, and Verecundia Plebis. Nevertheless if the Six
endeavor to extend the Authority, which they find thus acquired, to Power, that
is, to bring the Fourteen to terms or conditions of Obedience, or such as would
be advantageous to the Few, but prejudicial to the Many; the Fourteen will soon
find, that consenting, they hurt not only themselves by indamaging their own
Interests, but hurt the Six also who by this means com to lose their Virtue,
and so spoil their Debate, which, while such advantages are procurable to
themselves, will go no further upon the common Good, but their private Benefit.
Wherefore in this case they Consid. p. 26.
But says the Prevaricator, the Paralogism lys in this, that the twenty men are
first supposed to be a Commonwealth, and then it is considered how they would
dispose of the Government. What is this? Art is the imitation of Nature;
therefore Art presumes Nature to be Art. A Picture is the representation of a
Face; therefore the Picturedrawer presumed the Face to be a Picture; and in this
same, there is lying, being, or squatting, a thing called a Paralogism. Did you
ever hear such a Paraketism? for to speak a word without understanding the
sense of it, is like a Parrat. And yet I wrong the Parrat in this comparison;
for she, tho she do not understand her self, is understood by others, whereas
neither can this Prevaricator tell what he means, nor any man Consid. p. 27.
else. Or riddle me, riddle me what is this? The sense of want among men that
are in equality of Power may beget a desire of exchange; as let me have your
Horse, and you shall have my Cow, which is the fountain of private Contracts:
but it is not to be with reason imagined, that this should be enough to make a
man part with a natural Freedom, and put himself into the hands of a Power from
which he can afterward have no shield, tho it should be used to his own
destruction.

MOST victorious Nonsense! for he that says nothing, cannot be answered. It
should seem, if the twenty men were indeed a Commonmonwealth, or in equality of
Power, for so he puts the case, they might truck Horses and Cows, but not by
any means consider, or once let it enter into their heads, how by Art to make
good their natural Freedom: That (unless they set up a Prince, as you shall see
anon) were to part with their natural Freedom, and put themselves into the
hands of a Power from which (there being no other Power but themselves) they
can afterward have no shield. To read it thoroughly for the understanding, as
is intimated in his Epistle, will be more, I doubt, than his Book will obtain
of any Reader. Yet is he, in his own conceit, as surefooted as any Mule, and
knows the Road. But Mr. HARRINGTON has not lost his way without company; his
Brother GROTIUS complains, that they who treat of Jus Gentium, do commonly
mistake some part of the Roman Jus Civil for it: and even so he laments (an't
please you) that while men profess to consider the Principles of Government,
they fall upon Notions which are the mere effects of Government. But as an Ape
is the more ugly for being like a Man; so this Prevaricator, for making Faces
like GROTIUS. I, who am complained of, deriving Government from the true
Principle of the same, in the Balance or Foundation, set the Superstructures
accordingly; and he who complains forsooth, never so much as proposes any thing
like a Principle or Superstructure, but runs altogether upon mere Notions:
Consid. p. 28.
As where he asks me, What Security will you give, that the Six in their
Consultations shall not rather aim at their own advantage, than that of the
Fourteen, and so make use of the eminence of their Parts to circumvent the
rest? In another place he can answer himself and say, that the Fourteen, or the
People in this Constitution, have the Vote and the Sword too. How then should
the Six circumvent them? What Security has a Prince, that his People will not
pull him out of his Throne? why, a Nobility or an Army: And are not the People
in a Commonwealth their own Army? Is this to mind Principles? On the other
side, How, says he, shall we be satisfied that the Fourteen will not soon begin
to ihink themselves wise enough to consult too, and making use of their excess
in Power, pull the Six off their Cushions? As if there were any experience
public or private, any sense or reason, that men having the whole Power in their
own hands, would deprive themselves of Counsillors; or that ever a Commonwealth
deposed the Senate, or can depose the Senate, and remain a Commonwealth. The
People of Capua being enraged to the full height, resolved and assembled
together (the Senate, if the People will, being always in their power) on
purpose to cut the throats of the Senators, when PACUVIUS CALAVIUS exhorted
them that ere they went upon the design, they would first make election among
themselves of a new Senate, which, the throats of the old being cut, might for
the safety of the Commonwealth immediately take their places; for, said he,
Sen^tum omnin^ non ha^^re non vultis: Quippe aut Rex, quod abominand^m; aut,
quod ^num liberae civitatis Concilium est* Senatus habendus est. Live.
You must either have a King, which is to be abhorred; or whatever becoms of
this, you must have some other Senate: for the Senate is a Council of such a
nature as without it no free City can subsist. By which Speech of PACUVIUS, the
People, who thought themselves, as the Considerer has it, wise enough to
consult, being convinced, sell to work for the Election of a succeding Senate
out of themselves (the Prevaricator should not tell me of Notions, but learn
that in a Commonwealth there must be a Senate, is a Principle) while the People
of Capua were intent upon choosing this new Senate, the Partys proposed seemed to
them to be so ridiculously unsit for such an Office, that by this means coming
to a nearer sight of themselves, they were secretly so filled with the shame of
their Enterprise, that slinking away, they would never after be known so much
as to have thought upon such a thing. Nor ever went any other People so far,
not the Florentins themselves, tho addicted to Innovation or changing of the
Senate beyond all other examples. Sons of the University, Brothers of the
College, Heads and Points; you love fine words. Whether tends to bring all
things into servitude, my Hypothesis, or his Aroche^.
Hypothytes? For says he, I am willing to gratify Mr. HARRINGTON with his
partition of the twenty men into six and fourteen; but if I had bin in a humor
of contradiction, it had bin as free for me to have said that some one of the
twenty would have excelled all the rest in Judgment, Experience, Courage, and
height of Genius, and then told him, that this had bin a natural Monarchy,
established by God himself over Mankind: As if the twenty would give their
Clothes or Money to the next man they meet wiser or richer than themselves,
which before he denied; Oportet mendacem esse memorem. God established Kings no
otherwise than by election of the People; and the twenty will neither give
their Clothes nor Money: How then? why in coms a Gallant with a file King! What
more? by Divine Right! As he took the Cake from the Girls!

CHAP. VI.
Whether the Senatusconsulta, or Decrees of the Roman Senate, had the Power of
Laws.
AMONG diverse and weighty Reasons why I would have that Prince look well to his
file of Musketeers, this is no small one, that he being upon no balance, will
never be able to give Law without them. For to think that he succedes to the
Senate, or that the power of the Senate may serve his turn, is a presumtion that
will fail him. The Senate, as such, has no power at all, but mere Authority of
proposing to the People, who are the makers of their own Laws; whence the
Decrees of the Senate of Rome are never Laws, nor so called, but
Senatusconsulta. It is true that a King coming in, the Senate, as there it did,
may remain to his aid and advantage; and then they propose not as formerly to
the People, but to him, who coms not in upon the right of the Senate, but upon
that of the People: whence says JUSTINIAN; Quod Principi placuit legis habet
vigorem, quum lege Regia quae de ejus imperio lata est, Populus ei, and in eum
omne imperium suum and potestatem concedat.
The Princes Pleasure has the force of Law, since the People have by the Lex
Regia concerning his Power, made over to him all their own Empire Consid. p.
30, 31.
and Authority. Thus the Senatusconsultum Macedonicum, with the rest that had
place allowed by JUSTINIAN in compilement of the Roman Laws, were not Laws in
that they were Senatusconsulta, or proposed by the Senate, but in that they were
allowed by JUSTINIAN or the Prince, in whom was now the right of the People.
Wherefore the Zealot for Monarchy has made a pas de clerc, or foul step in his
procession, where he argues thus out of CUJACIUS: It was soon agreed that the
distinct Decrees of the Senate and People should be extended to the nature of
Laws; therefore the distinct Decrees of the Senate are Laws, whether it be so
agreed by the People, or by the Prince, or no. For thus he has no sooner made
his Prince, than he kicks him heels over head; seeing where the Decrees of the
Senate are Laws without the King, that same is as much a King as the
Prevaricator a Politician. A Law is that which was past by the Power of the
People, or of the King. But out of the Light; in this place he takes a Welsh
Bait, and Consid. p. 32.
looking back, makes a muster of his Victorys, like the bussing Gascon, who, to
show what he had thrown out of the windows in his Debauchery, made a formal
repetition of the whole Inventory of the House.

CHAP. VII.
Whether the Ten Commandments were proposed by GOD or MOSES, and voted by the
People of Israel.
ONE would think the Gascon had don well; Is he satisfied? No, he will now
throw the House out of the windows. The principal Consid. p. 33, 35.
stones being already taken from the Foundation, he has a bag of certain Winds
wherwithal to reverse the Superstructures. The first Wind he lets go is but a
Puff, where he tells me, that I bring Switzerland and Holland into the
enumeration of the Heathen Commonwealths: which if I had don, their Libertys in
many parts and places being more ancient than the Christian Religion in those
Countries (as is plain by TACITUS, where he speaks of CIVILIS, and of the
Customs of the Germans) I had neither wronged them nor my self; but I do no
such matter, for having enumerated the Heathen Commonwealths, I add that the
Procedings of Holland and Switzerland, tho after a more obscure Oceana, p. 51.
manner, are of the like nature. The next is a Storm, while reproaching me with
Rudeness, he brings in Dr. FERN and the Clergy by head and shoulders, who till
they undertake the quarrel of Monarchy, to the confusion of the Commonwealth of
Israel, at least so far that there be no weight or obligation in such an
Example, are posted. As if for a Christian Commonwealth to make so much use of
Israel as the Roman did of Athens, whose Laws she transcribed, were against the
Interest of the Clergy, which, it seems, is so hostil to popular Power, that to
say the Laws of Nature, tho they be the Fountains of all Civil Law, are not the
Civil Law, till they be the Civil Law; or thus, that thou shall not kill, thou
shall not steal, tho they be in natural Equity, yet were not the Laws of Israel
or of England, till voted by the People of Israel, or the Parliament of England,
is to assert Consid. p. 35, 40.
the People into the mighty Liberty of being free from the whole moral Law;
and, inasmuch as to be the Adviser or Persuader of a thing, is less than to be
the Author or Commander of it, to put an Indignity upon God himself. In which
Fopperys the Prevaricator, boasting of Principles, but minding none, first
confounds Authority and Command or Power; and next forgets that the dignity of
the Legislator, or, which is all one, of the Senate succeding to his Office, as
the Sanhedrim to MOSES, is the greatest dignity in a Commonwealth: and yet that
the Laws or Orders of a Commonwealth derive no otherwise, whether from the
Legislator, as MOSES, LYCURGUS, SOLON, etc. or the Senate, as those of Israel,
Lacedemon, or Athens, than from their Authority received and confirmed by the
Vote or Command of the People. It is true, that with Almighty God it is
otherwise than with a mortal Legislator, but through another Nature which to him
is peculiar, from whom as he is the cause of being, or the Creator of Mankind,
Omnipotent Power is inseparable; yet so equal is the goodness of this Nature to
the greatness thereof, that as he is the cause of welbeing by way of Election,
for example in his chosen People Israel, or of Redemption, as in the Christian
Church, himself has preferred his Authority or Proposition before his Empire.
What else is the Now therefore if ye will obey my Voice indeed, and keep my
Covenant, ye shall be to me a Exodus 19. 5.
Kingdom, or I will be your King; which Proposition being voted by the People
in the Affirmative, God procedes to propose to them the ten Commandments in so
dreadful a manner, that the People being excedingly Exodus 20. 19.
afrighted, say to MOSES, Speak thou with us, and we will hear thee: that is, be
thou henceforth our Legislator or Proposer, and we will resolve accordingly;
but let not God speak with us, lest we die. From whenceforth God proposes to the
People no otherwise than by MOSES, whom he instructs in this manner; These are
the Judgments which thou shall propose or set before them. Wherefore it is said
of the Deuteronomy. 29. 1.
Book of Deuteronomy, containing the Covenant which the Lord commanded MOSES to
make with the Children of Israel in the Land of Moab, besides the Covenant
which he made with them in Horeb; This is Deuteronomy. 4. 44.
the Law which MOSES set before the Children of Israel. Neither did GOD in this
case make use of his Omnipotent Power, nor CHRIST in the like, who also is King
after the fame manner in his Church, and would have bin in Israel, where when
to this end he might have mustered up Legions of Angels, and bin victorious
with such Armies, or Argyraspides, as never Prince could show the like, he says
no more Matthew. 23. 37.
than, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee and thy
Children, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not?
where it is plain that the Jews rejecting CHRIST, that he should not reign over
them, the Law of the Gospel came not to be the Law of the Jews; and so if the
ten Commandments came to be the Law of Israel, it was not only because God
proposed them, seeing Christ also proposed his Law, which nevertheless came not
to be the Law of the Jews, but because the People received the one, and
rejected the other. It is not in the nature of Religion that it should be
thought a profane saying, that if the Bible be in England, or in any other
Government, the Law or Religion of the Land, it is not only because God has
proposed it, but also because the People or Magistrate has received it, or
resolved upon it; otherwise we must set lighter by a Nation or Government than
by a private Person who can have no part nor portion in this Law, unless he vote
it to himself in his own Conscience, without which he remains in the condition
he was before, and as the Heathen, who are a Law to themselves. Thus whereas* in
a Covenant there must be two Partys, the Old and New Testament being in sum the
Old and New Covenant; these are that Authority and Proposition of GOD and
CHRIST, to which they that refuse their Vote or Result may be under the Empire
of a Clergy, but are none of his Commonwealth. Nor, seeing I am gone so far, dos
this at all imply Freewil, but, as is admirably observed by Mr. HOBBS, the
freedom of that which naturally precedes Will, namely, Deliberation or Debate,
in which, as the Scale by the weight of Reason or Passion coms to be turned one
way or other, the Will is caused, and being caused, is necessitated. When God
coms in thus upon the Soul of Man, he gives both the Will and the Deed; from
which like Ossice of the Senate in a Commonwealth, that is, from the excellency
of their Deliberation and Debate, which prudently and faithfully unsolded to
the People, dos also frequently cause and necessitat both the Will and the
Deed. GOD himself has said of the Senate, that they are Gods: an expression, tho
divine, yet not unknown to the Heathens; Homo homini Deus, one man, for the
excellency of his Aid, may be a God to

FOR the things I have of this kind, as also for what I have said upon the
words Chirotonia and Ecclesia, the Prevaricator is delighted to make me
beholden underhand to Mr. HOBBS, notwithstanding the open enmity which he says
I profess to his Politics. As if JOSEPHUS upon that of SAMUEL, They have not
rejected thee, but they have rejected me 1 Samuel 8. 7.
that I should not reign over them, had not said of the People ((...)) that
they unchirotoniz'd or unvoted God of the Kingdom. Now if they unchirotoniz'd
or unvoted God of the Kingdom, then they had chirotoniz'd or voted him to the
Kingdom; and so not only the Doctrine that God was King in Israel by Compact or
Covenant, but the use of the word Chirotonia also in the sense I understand it,
is more ancient than Mr. HOBBS. I might add that of CAPELLUS, Deus Populi
Judaici Rex crat veluti politicus, and civilis Legislator. In Diatriba de Voto
Jephthae.
God was a Political King and Civil Legislator of the Jews. And for the use I
have made of the word Ecclesia, as no man can read such as have written of the
Grecian Commonwealths, and miss it, so I do not remember that Mr. HOBBS has
spoken of it. To these things fuller satisfaction will be given in the second
Book; which nevertheless I do not speak to the end I might wave Obligation to
so excellent an Author in his way. It is true, I have opposed the Politics of
Mr. HOBBS, to show him what he taught me, with as much disdain as he opposed
those of the greatest Authors, in whose wholesome Fame and Doctrine the good of
Mankind being concerned, my Conscience bears me witness that I have don my
duty. Nevertheless in most other things I firmly believe that Mr. HOBBS is, and
will in future Ages be accounted the best Writer, at this day, in the world.
And for his Treatises of human Nature, and of Liberty and Necessity, they are
the greatest of new Lights, and those which I have followed, and shall follow.

CHAP. VIII.
Whether a Commonwealth coming up to the perfection of the kind, coms not up to
the perfection of Government, and has no flaw in it.
WHAT a Commonwealth coming up to the perfection of the kind is, I have shown
both by the definition of an equal Commonwealth, and the Exemplification of it
in all the parts.

THE Definition is contained in the first of my Preliminarys; which, because it
is short, I shall repeat.

An equal Commonwealth is a Government established upon an equal Agrarian,
arising into the Superstructures or three Orders, the Senate debating and
proposing, the People resolving, and the Magistracy executing, by an equal
Rotation, or interchangeable Election, through the suffrage of the People given by
the Ballot. The Exemplification is the whole Commonwealth Oceana. Each of which
by him, who, if his Doctrine of pure and absolute Monarchy be observed, can be
no Englishman, is called an Irish Bog; as in some sense it is, seeing the
Prevaricator has set never Consid. p. 43.
a foot in it that will stand, nor has more to say, than that Where there is
one ambitious poor man, or one vicious rich man, it is impossible there should
be any such Government as can be secure from Sedition.

WHICH, First, is rather to make all Governments ineffectual, or to make all
Governments alike, than to object against any, seeing That there should not be
one ambitious poor man, or one vicious rich man, is equally, if not more,
improbable in a Monarchy than in a Commonwealth.

SECONDLY, That one man alone, whether he be rich or poor, should without a
Party be able to disturb a Commonwealth with Sedition, is an absurdity; nor is
such a party, as may be able in some sort to disturb the Peace by robbing upon
the Highway, or some such disorder, always able to disturb a Government with
Sedition. Wherefore this feat gos not so much upon the ability of any one man,
rich or poor, as the Power of the Party he is able to make; and this strength
of the Party gos upon the nature of the Government, and the content or
discontents thence deriving to the Few, or the Many. The Discontents, whether
of the Few or the Many, derive from that which is, or by them is thought to be
some bar to their Interest; and those Interests which are the causes of Sedition
are three, the desire of Liberty, the desire of Power, and the desire of
Riches; nor be there any more: for where the People through want of Bread, through
Violence offered to their Women, or Oppression, rise up against their
Governors, it relates to the desire of Liberty; those also under the name of
Religion make not a fourth, but com to one of the three.

NOW to speak in the first place of the Many, and anon of the Few; the People
in an equal Commonwealth have none of these three Interests: Not the desire of
Liberty, because the whole Frame of an equal Commonwealth is nothing else but
such a method whereby the Liberty of the People is secured to them: Not of
Power, because the Power which otherwise they could not exercise, is thus
estated in them: Nor of Riches, because where the Rich are so bounded by an
Agrarian that they cannot overbalance (and therefore neither oppress the People,
nor exclude their Industry or Merit from attaining to the like Estate, Power,
or Honor) the whole People have the whole Riches of the Nation already equally
divided among them; for that the Riches of a Commonwealth should not go
according to the difference of men's Industry, but be distributed by the Poll,
were inequal. Wherefore the People in an equal Commonwealth having none of those
Interests which are the causes of Sedition, can be subject to no such effect.

TO affirm then with the Considerer, that the whole of this Libration is
reduced to the want of Power to disturb the Commonwealth, must needs be a
mistake, seeing in the Commonwealth proposed the People have the Power, but can
have no such Interest; and the People having no such Interest, no Party can
have any such Power, it being impossible that a Party should com to overbalance
the People, having their Arms in their own hands. The whole matter being thus
reduced to the want of Power to disturb the Government; this, according to his
own Argument, will appear to be the Libration in which the Power, whereof the
Governor is possessed, so vastly excedes the Power remaining with those who are
to obey (which in case of contest must be so small a Party) that it would be
desperately unreasonable for them to hope to maintain their Cause. If the true
method then of attaining to perfection in Government be to make the Governor
absolute, and the People in an equal Commonwealth be absolute, then there can
be none in this Government, that upon probable terms can dispute the Power with
the Governor, and so this State by his own Argument must be free from Sedition.
Thus far upon occasion of the ambitious poor Man objected. I have spoken of the
Many; and in speaking of the Many, implicitly of the Few: for as in an equal
Commonwealth, for example in England during the Peerage or Aristocracy, the
Many depended upon or were included in the Few; so in an equal Commonwealth the
Few depend upon or are included in the Many, as the Senate of Venice depends
upon, or is included in the Great Council, by which it is annually elected in
the whole or in some part. So what was said in an equal Commonwealth of the Many
or the poorer sort, is also said of the Few or of the Richer; who, through the
virtue of the Agrarian, as in Oceana, or of other Orders supplying the defect
of an Agrarian, as in Venice, not able to overbalance the People, can never
have any Power to disturb the Commonwealth in case they had such an Interest,
nor can have any such Interest in case they had such Power. For example in
Oceana, putting the case that the Few were as powerful as it is possible they
should be; that is, that the whole Land was fallen into five thousand hands:
The five thousand, excluding the People, could get no more Riches by it,
because they have the whole Land already; no more Liberty by it, because they
were in perfect Liberty before; nor any more Power by it, because through the
equality of the Balance, or of their Estates, they can be no more by themselves
than an equal Commonwealth, and that they were already with the People: but
would be much less, the Power or Commonwealth, in which there be five thousand
Equals, being not greater, but much less than the Power or Commonwealth wherein
the whole People are equal; because the Power or Effect of a greater People is
proportionably greater than the Power or Effect of a lesser People, and the Few
by this means would get no more than to be the lesser People. So the People
being no bar to the Riches, Liberty, nor Power of the five thousand, and the
desire of Liberty, Riches, and Power, being the only causes of Sedition; there
could arise no Sedition in this Commonwealth by reason of the Nobility, who
have no such Interest if they had the Power, nor have any such Power if they
had the Interest, the People being equally possessed of the Government, of the
Arms, and far superior in number. In sum, an equal Commonwealth consists but of
one hereditary Order, the People, which is by election divided into two Orders,
as the Senate and the Congregation in Lacedemon, or the Senate and the Great
Council in Venice; for the Gentlemen of Venice, as has bin often said, are the
People of Venice, the rest are Subjects. And an inequal Commonwealth consists
of two Hereditary Orders, as the Patricians and Plebeians in Rome, whereof the
former only had a hereditary Capacity of the Senate: whence it coms to pass that
the Senate and the People in an equal Commonwealth having but one and the same
Interest, never were nor can be at variance; and that the Senate and the People
in an inequal Commonwealth having two distinct Interests,

IF a man be resolved, as the Considerer is, to huddle these things together,
there is no making any thing of this kind of Policy; of which therefore it will
be a folly to talk. For example, Lacedemon is either to be considered as not
taking in the Helots; and then in her self she was an equal Commonwealth void
of any Sedition, or cause of it, how much soever she were troubled with the
Helots: So the Objection made by him, of her Troubles by the Helots, is
impertinently urged, to show that she was a seditious Commonwealth: Or if he
will needs have it, that she took in the Helots, it is undeniable that she took
them in inequally, and so was inequal; whence the Troubles by the Helots must
needs be impertinently urged against an equal Commonwealth.

AGAIN, when I allege Venice from PIERO GRADENIGO, that is, for the space of
about four hundred years from the present date, at which time the Reformation,
yet in force, began, as an Example of an equal Commonwealth; for him to
instance in the times before, when tho the Commonwealth, according to the
intention, was as equal as now, yet being not bound by sufficient Orders to
give her self Security of her native Liberty, her Dukes on the one side did
what they pleased, and the enraged People on the other side banished, condemned
to death, or murdered them; who sees not the Imposture? Indeed he blushes at it
himself. Wherefore my Assertion being not yet knocked on the head, he promises
to kill it better, first by the example of Lacedemon leaving out the Helots,
and next by that of Venice since the time of PIERO GRADENIGO.

Consid. p. 60. Pausan. Lacon.
FOR the first you must know that once upon a time there was a quarrel between
CLEOMENES and DEMARATUS Kings of Lacedemon about Succession, which was
determined by the Ephori, that is, by a Court of Justice, and not by the Sword;
the like happened Plut. Alcib.
in LEOTYCHIDES the known Bastard of ALCIBIADES, or so confessed to be by his
Mother to diverse of her Maids. Now this is a Maxim in the Politics, Where the
differences of Kings can go no further than a Court of Justice, there the
Government is seditious. Most ridiculous! Is there a stronger Argument that
such a Government is not seditious? No matter, give him room; Much more fatal
was the contest between CLEONYMUS and his Brother AREUS the Son of ACROTATUS,
by whose War ZARAX was ruined, and PYRRHUS came into the game, who besieged the
Capital City: the Reign of AGIS and CLEOMENES was so full of turbulency, as
would put a man out of breath to relate. Fair and softly: was not all this
after LYSANDER, and the Spoils of Athens had broken the Agrarian, and so ruined
Lacedemon? I affirm there can be no Sedition in an equal Commonwealth; and he
to oppose me, shows that there was Sedition in an inequal one; whether dos this
affirm his Assertion or mine?

BUT for better luck in Venice. This City by Mr. HARRINGTON'S own confession is
possessed of several Advantages. Yes, I say that the Commonwealth of Venice, thus
seated, is like a man in a Citadel, who thereby may be the safer from his
Enemies, but never a whit the safer from diseases. What conclusion would you
expect he should infer from hence? Why among these therefore there is good cause
to reckon her Immunity from Seditions: Dos not our Logician repeat faithfully,
and she is like a Ship ready to be boarded by Pirates, has the Turc on this
Frontier, the Pope on that, the King of Spain on another. As if this were an
Argument every Government must not be void of Sedition, seeing there is none
except they be Islands, whose Frontiers are not bounded by the Territorys of
other Princes. Well, but since the last Reglement (in English, Reformation) in
the time of GRADENIGO, you have had three Seditions in Venice, that of MARINO
BOCCONI, that of BAIAMONTE TIEPOLO, and that of MARINO FALERIO.

BODIN has bin long since beaten for this like Stockfish, and yet our Author
will be serving it up for a Courtly dish. BOCCONI would have killed the Duke,
but was hanged before he could do it. FELTON killed a Duke that had greater
power here than the other in Venice, and was hanged afterward, therefore
England was a seditious Government; for this must either be undeniable for
FELTON'S sake, or why must the other be so for BOCCONI'S? Again, FALERIO and
his Accomplices would have destroyed the Great Council, but were hanged before
they could do it. VAUX and his Accomplices would have blown up the Parliament
but were hanged before they could do it; therefore England was in this relation
a seditious Government, else why was Venice? There passes not a month but there
die Rogues at Tyburn, is the Government therefore seditious? or is this one
regard in which it is not? Where all that so invade the Government are by
virtue of the same brought to that end, there the Commonwealth, or the Orders
of it, are not the cause but the cure of Sedition; and so these are undeniable
Arguments that Venice is not seditious, where, since the Reformation, there has
not bin a cut finger upon this score, save only through the conspiracy of
BAIAMONTE, which indeed came to blows. Nor for this yet can Venice be called a
seditious Commonwealth. You find no man accusing Rome of Sedition, in that she
had a MANLIUS or a MELIUS that dangerously affected Monarchy, because to these
her Orders, by which they suffered Death, as soon applied the Remedy. But Rome
was a seditious Commonwealth, because the perpetual feud that was between the
Senate and the People sprung out of her Orders, and was that to which there was
no Remedy to apply. England was not a seditious Government because it had a
VAUX or a FELTON, but because the Power anciently of the Nobility, and late of
the People, was such by the Orders of the same as might at any time occasion
Civil War. Put the case a Slave or some desperate fellow has killed the Great
Turc, the Government for that cannot be said to be seditious, but in this, that
through the very nature of the Policy, the Janizarys at any time may do as much,
it is undeniably seditious. BAIAMONTE'S Conspiracy he will not say was of this
nature. It was not a Disease in the Bones of the Commonwealth, but a thing that
no sooner appeared, or broke out (tho it be true, there happened a little
scratching first) than it fell off like a Scab; such an accident may besal the
best Constitution, and Venice never had the like but once: if he could say as
much of a Monarchy, he gains no advantage; yet let him say it, and prove it, I
give him all. I omit many Falsehoods and Absurditys in the proceeding of the
Prevaricator, as where he intimats the Power of the Dukes to have bin that
whereby Venice gained I know not what, and yet to have Venice having no power at
all, is known to be false. Why should I stay to put you in mind that having
affirmed Venice to derive her Immunity from intestin Discord no otherwise than
a Ship that is ready to be boarded by Pirates, he instances in such examples to
the contrary, as took occasion by the hair of a soren scalp, while in those of
BOCCONI and TIEPOLO the Commonwealth by her Wars with the Genoeses and Ferrara,
was put to her plunges, and in that of FALERIO reduced to the last extremity? I
shall only note, that if such sudden flashes as these may com under the name of
Sedition, he has don a fine Office for Monarchy, seeing no Senate is so much
exposed to like blows as any Prince.

WELL; but for all this it is confessed that there may be such a thing as a
seditious Commonwealth, in that the feud between the Senate and Consid. p. 48.
the People of Rome could not be cured; What Security, says he, will you give
us, that the like may not happen in Oceana, or that the whole body of the
People being entrusted with giving a Vote, and keeping a Sword, may not by way
of Counsil or Arms, fall to such work as levelling the five thousand, or
bringing the Agrarian from two to one thousand pounds a year, or less, as they
fancy?

TO which I answer by a like question, What security will he give me that the
People of any Commonwealth shall not cast themselves into the Sea? A Prince may
be mad, and do so, but the People are naturally incapable of such madness. If
men will boast of their knowledge in Principles, and yet talk of nothing but
effects, why may not a Man fly as well as a Bird? but if Causes may be
regarded, let him once show how the Will, seeing it is not free, nor moved
without some Object, should move the People in such a manner; or for what, they
having all the Liberty and all the Power that can be had, should it strive?
Well, that is soon don, for the Land may com into the hands of five thousand,
and so the Booty may be great, and the resistance small. Good: The Romans being
the wisest of all People, went no further toward the Remedy of their
Grievances, than to strive for the introduction of an Agrarian, in which they
fainted too, even to the destruction of that Government. Except these, none
have bin so wise; and if there be any such thing familiar with the nature of
the People, why appeared it but once, and then vanished without effect? why did
not the People for example under the late Monarchy (when the Dominion or
Freehold of the Nation, by greater shares, was in a smaller Party, and they had
not only Riches, but Liberty and Power too, to whet them on) ever so much as
think of levelling three hundred Men? for the Nobility and Clergy, in whom was
the Balance, were no more. If it be replied that the People were not armed; by
whom did the Barons make War with the Kings? If they were not trusted with a
Vote; what was that of the House of Commons? Let Dominion or Freehold stand
upon what balance you will, inequal or equal, from the beginning of the world
you shall never find a People turning Levellers. And as Reason is Experience in
the root, so Experience is Reason in the branch, which might therefore be
sufficient in the case. Nevertheless for clearer satisfaction in a point of
such concernment, I shall endeavor to dig up and discover the root of this
branch, or the reason of this Experience. That which in Beasts is Instinct,
whereof they can give no account, is in it self that Wisdom of God whereby he
provides for them; so it is with the People, they are not Oceana. The Revenue
of Industry is in those that work, that is, the People: Wherefore the Revenue of
the People, where their Industry is not obstructed, is twofold to that of the
Nobility, holding the whole Territory in Freehold. But where their Industry is
obstructed, their Revenue is nothing. Civil War being of all other the greatest
Obstruction of Industry, the People in taking Arms must venture all they have,
for that, which if they obtain they lose two for one; and if they obtain not,
all for nothing. Wherefore a People never will, nor ever can; never did, nor
ever shall take Arms for Levelling. But they are entrusted with a Vote; and
therefore taking away the Lands of the five thousand, or diminishing the
Agrari^n by way of Counsil, they need not obstruct their Industry: but,
preserving the Revenue of that, may bring themselves into the possession of the
Land too. This will they, this can they less do, because being in Counsil they
must propose something for the advantage of the Commonwealth, or of themselves,
as their end in such an Action. But the Land coming to be in the possession of
five thousand, falls not into a number that is within the compass of the Few,
or such a one as can be Princes, either in regard of their Number, or of their
Estates; but to such a one as cannot consent to abolish the Agrarian, because
that were to consent to rob one another: nor can they have any Party among
them, or against their common Interest, strong enough to force them, or to
break it; which remaining, the five thousand neither are nor can be any more
than a Popular State, and the Balance remains every whit as equal, as if the
Land were in never so many more hands. Wherefore the Commonwealth being not to
be bettered by this means, the People by Counsil can never go about to level,
nor diminish the Agrarian for the good of the Commonwealth. Nor can they
undertake it for the inrichment of themselves, because the Land of Oceana, as
has bin demonstrated, being levelled or divided equally among the Fathers of
Familys only, coms not to above ten pounds a year to each of them, whereas every
Footman costs his Master twenty pounds a year; and there is not a Cottager
having a Cow upon the Common, but with his own Labor, at one shilling a day,
gets twenty pounds a year; which, the Land being levelled, were impossible,
because there would be no body able to set a Laborer on work, o^ to keep a
Servant: wherefore neither would, nor could the People by Counsil go about any
such business. So there being no possible cause of Disagreement between the Few
and the Many, the Senate and the People, there can be no such effect; whence
this is the Government, which being perfectly equal, has such a Libration in
the frame of it, that no man in or under it can contract such an Interest or
Power, as should be able to disturb the Commonwealth with Sedition. Yet after
all this, the Prevaricator will only tell Consid. p. 67.
Mr. HARRINGTON (for to deny the Conclusion is a fair way of disputing) that
this Libration is of the same nature with a Perpetual Motion in the Mechanics.
But let me tell him, that in the Politics there is nothing mechanic, or like
it. This is but an Idiotism of some Mathematician Rusticus expectat dum defluat
amnis, at ille
Labitur and labetur in omne volubilis aevum.
The silly Swain upon a River stood,
In hope the rolling bottom of the Flood
Would once unwind it self, whose liquid Clew
The silver Thread for ever shall renew.


THE Mathematician must not take God to be such a one as he is. Is that of the
Sun, of the Stars, of a River, a perpetual Motion? Galen. de usu partium, l. 4.
Even so one Generation gos and another coms. Nature, says GALEN, has a tendency
to make her Creature immortal, if it were in the capacity of the matter on
which she has to work; but the People never dys. This motion of theirs is from
the hand of a perpetual Mover, even God himself, in whom we live, and move, and
have our being; and to this Current the Politician adds nothing but the Banks,
to which end, or none, the same God has also created human Prudence. Wherefore
there is not any thing that raises it self against God or right Reason, if I
say that it is in human Prudence so to apply these Banks, that they may stand
as long as the River runs; or let this Considerer consider again, and tell me
out of Scripture or Reason, why not. Mathematicians, it is true, pretended to
be the Monopolists of Demonstration; but speak ingenuously, have they, as to
the Politics, hitherto given any other Demonstration, than that there is a
difference between Seeing, and making of Spectacles? Much more is that
comparison of the Politics, going upon certain and demonstrable Principles, to
Astrologers and Fortunetellers, who have none at all, vain and injurious. For
as in relation to what DAVID has said, and Experience confirmed, of the Age of
Man, that it is threescore years and ten; I may say, that if a Man lys bedrid,
or dys before threescore years and ten, of any natural Infirmity or Disease, it
was not through any imperfection of Mankind, but of his particular Constitution:
So in relation to the Principles and Definition of an equal Commonwealth yet
unshaken, nay untouched by this Prevaricator, I may safely affirm, that a
Commonwealth is a Government, which if it has bin seditious, it has not bin
from any imperfection in the kind, but in the particular Constitution, which
where the like has happened, must have bin inequal. My Retreat to these
Principles is called running into a Bog; as if such as have no Principles were
not Bogs, Informis limus, Stygiaeque paludes.

CHAP. IX.
Whether Monarchy coming up to the perfection of the kind, coms not short of
the perfection of Government, and has not some flaw in it. In which is also
treated of the Balance of France; of the Original of a landed Clergy; of Arms,
and their kinds.
ON Monarchy I have said, that whereas it is of two kinds, the one by Arms, the
other by a Nobility; for that by Arms, as (to take the most perfect model) in
Turkey, it is not in Art or Nature to cure it of this dangerous flaw, that the
Janizarys have frequent Interest, and perpetual Power to raise Sedition, or
tear the Magistrate in pieces. For that by a Nobility, as (to take the most
perfect Model) of late in Oceana, it was not in Art or Nature to cure it of
that dangerous flaw, that the Nobility had frequent Interest and perpetual
Power by their Retainers and Tenants to raise Sedition, and levy War: whence I
conclude that Monarchy reaching the perfection of the kind, reaches not the
perfection of Government, but must still have some dangerous flaw in it.

THIS place (tho I did not intend by it to make work for a Tinker) could not be
of less concernment, than it proves to the Prevaricator, who, as if he were
obliged to mend all, falls first to patching with a Monarchy by Arms, then with
a Monarchy by a Nobility; at length despairing, throws away each, and betakes
himself with egregious confidence, to make out of both a new Monarchy, which is
neither. By observation of these three flourishes, the present Chapter may be
brought into some method. The first blow of his Hammer, or that whereby he
intends the flaw or hole in Monarchy by Arms shall henceforth be mended and
tite, is this: That the Guards of the King's Consid. p. 46.
Person be not increased beyond the necessity of security; that they be not
suffered to stagnat at Court, but be by a perpetual circulation drawn out upon
service; and chiefly that they consist not of one entire Body united under the
same Head, but be divided into distinct Partys and Commands; as we may see in
France, where tho (in proportion to the extent of their Dominions) the King's
Guards be more numerous than those of the Roman or Turkish Emperors, yet being
divided into distinct Bodies of French, Scots and Switzers, under their several
Colonels and Captains, they have never bin the Authors of any the least
Sedition. And in Turkey of late years they begin to learn the Art of poisoning
the Janizarys by the Spahys, and so have frequently evaded the danger of their
Mutinys. Which fine work at first view gos upon this false ground, that the
Foundation of Monarchy by Arms is laid upon the Princes Guards, or the Court
Militia, whereas Monarchy by Arms consists in no other Balance than the Princes
being sole Landlord, which, where imperfect, as it was in that of the Roman
Emperors, the Empire is the most troubled, and where perfect, as in Turkey, the
Empire is less seditious. For that which he says of France, it relates to
Monarchy by a Nobility; and therefore is not to be confounded, according to his
method, with this, but referred to the next branch.

has given the Earth to the Sons of Men, that of a sole Landlord, as Turkey, is
not so natural in the cause or foundation, as the Timars, and therefore requires
the application of some kind of force, as the Janizarys, who are not the root of
the Government, that being planted in the Earth of the Timars, or military
Farms and Colonys (for that the Janizarys are not the Foundation of this
Empire, which was founded long before, is plain, in that this Order was not
introduced till AMURATH the Second) but the Dragon that lys at that root, and
without which the Fruit would fall into the mouths of the Timariots by way of
Property (as when the Knights Fees granted first for life, became afterward
hereditary in Oceana) which would cause such a fall from Monarchy, that it
would become, as we have seen, the rise of popular Power (the Lots, in case this
should happen, of the Timariots, little differing from those divided by JOSHUA
to the Children of Israel) wherefore when this happens in the Turkish Monarchy,
it is at an end. And that this dos not happen, tho there be diverse other
concurrent Policys, I would have any man show me, how it could be but for the
Janizarys. Otherwise it is plain that the Janizarys being a flying Army, on
wing at all games, and upon all occasions, are not so much the Guard of the
Prince, as of the Empire; which ruined, the Prey falls to the Timariots, as
those that are in possession, except these be ruined too, who being all Horse,
and far greater in number than the Janizarys that are Foot, would (in case the
aw of the Prince, and the Policy of the Government which holds them divided,
were broken) be invincible by the Janizarys, who nevertheless by these aids can
easily contain them. Whence the Sedition of the Janizarys, like that of a
Nobility, may be dangerous to the Prince, but never threatens the Throne;
whereas the Sedition of the Timariots, like that of a People, would be more
against the Throne than the Prince. These things considered, and in them the
Nature, Constitution, or Disease of Monarchy by Arms, we may consult the more
rationally with the Considerer upon the Applications or Remedys by him offered,
which are three.

FIRST, That the Guards of the King's Person be not increased beyond the
necessity of Security. But of what Security, that of his Person, or of his
Empire, or of both? for speaking of a Monarchy by Arms, in this latter sense
only it is true; and if so, then this singular Maxim of State (Frustra fit per
plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora) might have bin spared (Cela s'en va sans
le dire, comme les heures de nostre cure.)

SECONDLY, That they be not suffered to stagnat at Court, but be by a perpetual
circulation drawn out upon service; for if there be not perpetual service, it
should seem, men might be apt to think that Government was instituted for Peace
as well as War. I add no more than is implied in his words, which as to this of
Turkey have chanced well; where not the Stagnation of the Janizarys only, but of
the Court it self (which by the institution should always be in exercise of
Arms) is the cause of that present decay, so perceivable in this Empire. But
the Prince sitting still or stagnating, to what the Circulation of the
Janizarys (whose Alienation from the Government, or Intelligence with the
Timariots, must needs be of dangerous consequence) could tend, should have bin
thought on: otherwise to expose the Empire to

BUT his chief Remedy remains: This Court Militia must not consist of one
entire body united under the same head, but be divided under several Colonels,
Captains, Partys, Brigades, and distributed to several Quarters. As if this
were a cure, there were any Army that could be mutinous: but where he says, not
united under the same Head, he intimats perhaps diverse Generals, and diverse
Armies; now such are the Turkish Beglerbegs, and the Provinces under their
Governments. That these therefore be kept divided, so that not any two of them
can lay their heads together without having them cut off, nor any Son succeed
the Father in Government, requires that there be always a sufficient force
(distinct from the Interest of the Timariots and Beglerbegs) united, and still
ready upon occasion of this service; and the Janizarys with the Spahys or
Court-Horse being united, are no more than sufficient for this service.
Wherefore if these also were so divided as thereby to be weakened, they could not
be sufficient for this service; and their division, except such as might weaken
them, would be of no security to the Prince. That the Provinces, under this aw,
are less apt to rebel, than the Court-Guards to mutiny, is no wonder; but the
Court-Guards being cured by the prescription of this Physician, of the
possibility of Mutiny, which without weakening them is impossible, the
Provinces, if Liberty, or Riches, or Power be desirable, would never endure the
yoke of this Government. Wherefore it being inavoidable in the Turkish Empire,
that either the Janizarys, or the Timariots may do what they list (in regard
that whether of them be able to give Law to the other, must at the same time be
able to give Law to the Prince; and to bring them to an equal Balance, were to
make a Civil War, or at least to sow the Seed of it) the native Wound of
Monarchy by Arms remains incurred and incurable. What more may be don for
Monarchy, founded upon a Nobility, coms next to be tried. In this the
Considerer gives his word, that there never rises any danger to the Crown, but
when either a great part of the Soverain Power is put into the hands of the
Nobility, as in Germany and Poland Consid. p. 47.
(where it should seem by him, that the Electors and the Gentry do not put Power
into the hands of the Emperor, or King, but the Emperor or King puts Power into
the hands of the Electors or Gentry) or when some Person or Family is suffered
to overtop the rest in Riches, Commands, and Dependence, as the Princes of the
Blood and Lorrain, not long since, in France; and of old the MONTFORTS and
NEVILS in England. The first of these he declares to be a vicious Government,
and a Monarchy only in name: The second he undertakes shall easily admit of
this Remedy; That the great ones be reduced (decimo sexto) to a lesser Volum,
and levelled into an Equality with the rest of their Order.

HIS Putpin is pretty: The Emperor puts Power into the hands of the Electors;
and the King of Poland puts Power into the hands of the Gentlemen: Which
Governments therefore (and all such like, as when the King of England did put
Power into the hands of the Barons, at such a time as he was no longer able to
keep it out of their fingers, by which means the ancient and late Government of
King, Lords and Commons, was restored) are vicious Constitutions, and Monarchys
only in name; such as he will not meddle with, and therefore let them go. Well;
but where is the Patient then? if these be not Monarchys by Nobility, where some
Person or Family is suffered to overtop the rest in Riches, Commands, and
Dependence, as the Princes of the Blood and Lorrain, not long since, in France;
and of old the MONTFORTS and the NEVILS in England. So then the same again (for
these are no other) upon recollection, are those that admit of this easy cure.
Let the great Ones be reduced to a lesser Volum, and levelled with the rest of
their Order. But how? if they be the weaker Party, they are not the Great Ones;
and if they be the stronger Party, how will he reduce them? Put the case a man
has the Gout, his Physician dos not bid him reduce his overtopping Toes to the
Volum of the other Foot, nor to level them to equality with the rest of their
Order, but prescribes his Remedys, and institutes the Method that should do
this feat. What is the Method of our AESCULAPIUS? Point de Novelle; or where
are we to find it? even where you please. The Princes of the Blood, and of
Lorrain in France; the MONTFORTS and the NEVILS in England, overtop'd not their
Order by their own Riches or Power, but by that of the Party, which for their
Fidelity, Courage, or Conduct, entrusted them with the managing of their Arms
or Affairs. So the Prince that would have levelled them, must have levelled their
Party; which in case the Controversy be upon the Right, or pretended Right of
the Nobility in the Government, which commonly makes them hang together, may
com to the Consid. p. 49.
whole Order: what then? Why then, says he, the Prince must preserve his
Nobility weighty enough to keep the People under, and yet not tall enough in
any particular Person to measure with himself: which, abating the figure, is
the same again; and so I have nothing to answer but the figure. Now for this,
the Prince himself is no otherwise tall, than by being set upon the shoulders
of the Nobility; and so if they set another upon the same shoulders (as in
HENRY the 4 th or the 7 th, who had no Titles to the Crown, nor could otherwise
have measured with the Prince) be he never so low, he coms to be tall enough in
his particular person to measure with the Prince, and to be taller too, not
only by those old examples, but others that are younger than our selves, tho
such (the Nobility having not of late bin weighty enough to keep the People
under) as derive from another Principle, that of popular Balance. A Prince
therefore preserving his Nobility weighty enough to keep the People under, must
preserve in them the balance of that kind of Empire: and the balance containing
the Riches, which are the Power, and so the Arms of the Nation; this being in
the Nobility, the Nobility, when willing, must be able to dispose of the King,
or of the Government. Nor under a less weight is a Nobility qualified to keep
down the People, as by an Argument from the contrary. HENRY the 7 th having
found the strength of his Nobility, that set him in a Throne to which he had no
right, and fearing that the Tide of their Favor turning, they might do as much
for another, abated the dependence of their Tenants, and cut off their Train of
Retainers; which diminution of their weight, releasing the People by degrees,
has caused that Plain or Level into which we live to see the Mountain of that
Monarchy now sunk and swallowed: wherefore the Balance of the Nobility being
such as failing, that kind of Monarchy coms to ruin; and not failing, the
Nobility, if they join, may give Law to the King, the inherent disease of a
Monarchy by a Nobility remains also uncur'd, and incurable.

THESE are points to which I had spoken before; but something The Balance of
France.
concerning France and foren Guards was mumbl'd by the Prevaricator in a wrong
place, while he was speaking of Turkey, where there is no such thing. This, lest
I be thought to have courted opposition for nothing, shall open a new Scene;
while I take the occasion in this place to speak first of the Balance of the
French Monarchy, and next of the Nature and Use of Foren Guards.

THE whole Territory of France, except the Crown Lands, which on this account
are not considerable, consists of three shares or parts, whereof the Church
holds one, the Nobility another; and the Presidents, Advocats, other Officers
of the Parlaments, Courts of Justice, the Citizens, Merchants, Tradesmen, the
Treasures, Receivers of the Customs, Aids, Taxes, Impositions, Gabels, all
which together make a vast body, hold a third: by how equal Portions I am sorry
that I do not know, nor where to learn; but this is the Balance of the French
Monarchy, to which the Peasant holding nothing, but living (tho in one of the
best Countries of the World) in the meanest and most miserable condition of a
Laborer, or Hynd, is of no account at all.

THE Partys that hold the Balance in a Territory are those of whom the
Government dos naturally consist, wherefore these are called Estates; so the
Clergy, the Nobility, and the Commons, are the three Estates of France. Tho the
third, because the Peasant partaking not of the Balance can (in relation to
Government) be of no account, is not called the Commons, but only the third
Estate: whereas the Yeomanry and Gentry in England having weighed as well in the
Balance as the Church and the Nobility, the three Estates of England (while the
Monarchy was in vigor) were the Clergy, the Nobility, and the Commons. The
Consent of Nations evinces that the Function Grotius de Imp. Sum. Pot. circa
sacra. C. 2. S. 4.
of the Clergy, or Priest, except where otherwise determined by Law, appertains
to the Magistrate. By this right NOAH, ABRAHAM, JOB, with the rest of the
Patriarchs, instructed their Familys, or sacrificed. There seems to have bin a
kind of Commonwealth in Canaan, while MELCHISEDEC was both King and Priest.
Such also was MOSES till he consecrated AARON, and conferred the Priesthood upon
the Levits, who are expressly said to succeed to the firstborn, that is to the
Patriarchs, who till then exercised that Function. Nor was it otherwise with
the Gentiles, where they, who had the Soverain Power, or were in eminent
Magistracy, did also the Priestly Office (omnino apud veteres qui rerum
potiebantur, iidem Auguria tenebant: ut enim sapere, sic divinare, regale
ducebant, says CICERO; and VIRGIL, REX ANIUS, Rex idem hominum, PHOEBIQUE
Sacerdos.) You find the Heroes, that is Princes, in Poets, sacrificing. The
Ethiopian, Egyptian, Lacedemonian Kings did the like. In Athens constantly and
in Rome, when they had no Kings, occasionally they elected a Rex sacrorum, or
King Priest. So that a free People had thus far Power of electing their
Priests, is not denied by any man. This came, it should seem, to be otherwise
Original of a Landed Clergy.
established by the Law in Egypt, where the Priests (whose Lands JOSEPH when he
bought those of the People did not buy) being Genesis 47. 22.
great Landlords, it may be to the Third of the whole Territory, were one of the
three Estates of the Realm. And it is clear in Scripture that the People, till
they sold their Lands, became not Servants to Egypt they deposed their Xenoph.
in Orat. de Ages.
King, which implys the recovery of their Balance; but so, seeing they set up
another, as withal shows the Balance of the Nobility to have bin predominant.
These Particulars seem to com near to the account of DIODORUS SICULUS, by whom
the Balance of Egypt should L. 1.
have stood thus: The whole Revenue was divided into three Parts, whereof the
Priest had the first, the King had the second, and the Nobility had the third.
It seems to me that the Priests had theirs by their ancient Right and Title,
untouched by JOSEPH; that the Kings had all the rest by the purchase of JOSEPH;
and that in time, as is usual in like cases, a Nobility came through the bounty of
succeding Kings to share with them in one half. But however it came about,
Egypt by this means is the first example of a Monarchy upon a Nobility, at
least distributed into three Estates by means of a Landed Clergy, which by
consequence came to be the greatest Counsillors of State, and, fitting Religion
to their uses, to bring the People to be the most superstitious in the whole
World.

WERE it not for this Example, I should have said, that the Indowment of a
Clergy or religious Order with Lands, and the erecting of them into an Estate
of the Realm or Government, were no antienter than the Goths and Vandals, who
introducing a like Policy, which to this day takes place throout the Christian
World, have bin the cause;

FIRST, Why the Clergy have bin generally great Counsillors to Kings, while the
People are led into Superstition.

SECONDLY, By planting a religious Order in the Earth, why Religion has bin
brought to serve worldly ends.

AND, Thirdly, by rendering the Miter able to make War; why of latter Ages we
have had such a thing as War for Religion, which till the Clergy came to be a
third State or Landlords, was never known in the World: For that some Citys of
Greece, taking Arms upon the Thucyd. l. 1.
Usurpation or Violation of some Temple, have called it the Holy War; such
Disputes having bin put upon matter of Fact, and not of Faith, in which every
man was free, came not to this account. MOSES was learned in all the Learning
of the Egyptians; but a Landed Clergy introduced he not in Israel: nor went the
Apostles about to lay any such Foundation of a Church. Abating this one example
of Egypt, till the Goths and Vandals, who brought in the third Estate, a
Government, if it were inequal, consisted but of two Estates; as that of Rome,
whether under the Kings or the Commonwealth, consisted of the Patricians and
Plebeians, or of the Nobility and the People. And an equal Commonwealth
consists but of one, which is the People: for example of this you have
Lacedemon and Venice, where the People being few, and having many Subjects or
Servants, might also be called a Nobility, as in regard of their Subjects they
are in Venice, and in regard of their Helots or Servants, they might have bin
in Lacedemon. That, I say, which, introducing two Estates, causes Division, or
makes a Commonwealth inequal, is not that she has a Nobility, without which she
is deprived of her most special Ornament, and weakened in her Conduct, but when
the Nobility only is capable of Magistracy, or of the Senate; and where this is
so ordered, she is inequal, as Rome. But where the Nobility is no otherwise
capable of Magistracy, nor of the Senate, than by Election of the People, the
Commonwealth consists but of one Order, and is equal, as Lacedemon or Venice.

BUT for a Politician commend me to the Considerer, he will have Rome to have
bin an equal Commonwealth, and Venice to be an inequal one, which must be
evinced by wiredrawing. For having elsewhere, as has bin shown, admitted without
opposition that the Balance of Empire is well divided into national and
provincial, the humor now Consid. p. 16. 69. 70.
takes him to spin that wedg into such a thread, as by intangling of these two,
may make them both easy to be broken. Hereto he betakes himself in this manner.
As Mr. HARRINGTON has well observed (p. 40.) where there are two Partys in a
Republic with equal Power (as in that of Rome, the People had one half, and the
Nobility had the other half) Confusion and Misery are there entailed. For
remedy whereof, or to avoid this, there can be no way but to make the
Commonwealth very inequal.

IN answer to this, there will need no more than to repeat the same things
honestly. Mr. HARRINGTON speaks of the national Balance of Empire (p. 40.) to
this sense: Where the Nobility holds half the Property, or about that
proportion, and the People the other half (the shares of the Land may be equal;
but in regard the Nobility have much among Few, and the People little among
Many, the Few will not be contented to have Authority, which is all their
proper share in a Commonwealth, but will be bringing the People under Power,
which is not their proper share in a Commonwealth; wherefore this Commonwealth
must needs be inequal. And except by altering the Balance, as the Athenians did
by the Sisacthia, or recision of Debts; or as the Romans went about to do by an
Agrarian, it be brought to such an equality, that the whole Power be in the
People, and there remain no more than Authority to the Nobility) there is no
remedy but the one (with perpetual feud) will eat out the other, as the People
did the Nobility in Athens, and the Nobility the People in Rome. Where the
Carcass is, there will be the Eagles also; where the Riches are, there will be
the Power. So if a few be as rich as all the rest, a few will have as much
Power as all the rest; in which case the Commonwealth is inequal, and there can
be no end of staving and tailing, till it be brought to equality. Thus much for
the national Balance; For the provincial, there Power dos not follow Property,
but the contrary: This the Prevaricator having acknowledged, lets slip, to the
end he may take a gripe of Venice, which (because the three or four thousand of
which originally consisted, and now consists that whole Government, having
acquired Provinces, and increase of their City by later comers, do not admit
these to participation of Power) he says is an inequal Commonwealth. He will be
a Millhorse, whether the Cake be dow or not; for this is to draw in a circle:
and Rome, which by his former Arguments should have bin equal, by this again
must be inequal, seeing Rome as little admitted her Provinces into the body of
the Commonwealth, as dos Venice. This clash is but by way of Parenthesis; to
return therefore to the business in present agitation.

THE Estates, be they one, or two, or three, are such (as was said) by virtue
of the Balance, upon which the Government must naturally depend. Wherefore
constitutively the Government of France (and all other Monarchys of like
Balance) was administered by an English, CHARLES the 7 th was put to such
shifts as, for the recovery of himself in the greatest distress, he could make.
To which recovery, while the Estates could not be legally called, he happening
to attain without them, so ordered his affairs, that his Successors, by adding
to his Inventions, came to rule without this Assembly; a way not suting with
the nature of their Balance, which therefore required some Assistance by force,
and other concurring Policys of like nature, whereof the foren Guards of that
Monarchy are one; the great baits alluring the Nobility another; and the
emergent Interest of the Church a third.

TO begin with the last of these; the Church (except it be in a War for
Religion, as when they joined with the Princes of Lorrain, and what Party of
the French Nobility were made, or they could make against the King of Navar)
are not of themselves so hot at hand, or promt to Arms: but the King being (to
use their word) no Heretic, through their great apprehension of the third Estate,
as that which is most addicted to the Protestant Religion, may be confident
they will never side with the People. So by this emergent Interest or Accident
he has the Church sure enough.

FOR the Nobility, which is exceeding gallant, this Change has the greatest
baits; for whereas the Church being not spared, the third Estate is laden, and
the Peasant overladen with Taxes, the Nobility is not only at better ease in
this regard, but for the greater or more considerable part, receives advantage
by it: the King having always, whether in Peace or War, a great Cavalry, than
which there is no better in the world for the Exercise, Entertainment, and
Profit of the Nobility; Governments of Citys, Castles, Provinces in abundance,
which he rarely distributes to any other. The greater Nobility are Marechals,
Generals; the less Officers in the Armies, specially of the Horse, the
Emoluments whereof they receive also in time of Peace; and many of this Order
being Pensioners, taste of the King's Liberality, without taking pains, or
having any Employment at all. By which both that France is a Monarchy by a
Nobility, and how she holds her Nobility, is apparent.

NOW the Church and the Nobility standing thus engaged to the King, by which
means he has two parts of the Balance to one, it is demonstrable that the
Government must be quiet. Nor, seeing the Church for the reason shown is sure
enough, coms the Government (since the Protestant Citys and Holds were
demolished) to be otherwise disquieted than by the flying out of the Nobility,
which, whenever it happens in any party considerable, either for the Number, or
the Interest, causes the Crown to shake; for it seldom coms to pass upon this
occasion, but the third Estate, or some part of it, takes Arms immediately. In
which place it is worthy to observed, that Wealth, according to the
distribution of the Balance, has contrary motions. The third Estate in France
having Riches, and those laden with Taxes, com to have something to lose, and
something to save: which keeps them in continual fear or hope. The Nobility
holding to the King, the third Estate has something* to lose, which withholds
them from Arms through fear; but the Nobility flying out, the third Estate has
something to save, which precipitats them into Arms through hope: whereas the
Peasant having nothing to save or to lose, to hope or to fear, never stirs. The
case standing thus, the sufficiency of the French France, while it is not
governed by the Assembly of States, is yet of the same Balance it was when
governed by the Assembly of States; it may be said that a Government of the
same Balance may admit of diverse Administrations.

TO which I need make no other answer, than to put you in mind that while this
Government was natural, or administered by the Assembly of States, it is
celebrated by MACCHIAVEL to have bin the best ordered of any Monarchy in the
world; and that what it is, or has bin of later times, you may believe your own
eyes or ears.

Of Arms, and their kind.
THERE be yet, before I can com to foren Guards, some previous Considerations.
All Government, as is implied by what has bin already shown, is of these three
kinds: A Government of Servants: A Government of Subjects; or, a Government of
Citizens. The first is absolute Monarchy, as that of Turkey: The second
Aristocratical Monarchy, as that of France: The third a Commonwealth, as those
of Israel, of Rome, of Holland. Now (to follow MACCHIAVEL in part) of these,
the Government of Servants is the harder to be conquered, and the easier to be
held: The Government of Subjects is the easier to be conquered, and the harder
to be held. To which I shall presume to add, that the Government of Citizens is
both the hardest to be conquered, and the hardest to be held.

MY Authors Reasons, why a Government of Servants is the hardest to be
conquered, com to this, that they are under perpetual Discipline and Command,
void of such Interests and Factions, as have Hands or Power to lay hold upon
Advantages or Innovation; whence he that invades the Turk must trust to his own
strength, and not rely upon Disorders in the Government, or Forces which he
shall be sure enough to find united.

HIS Reasons why this Government, being once broken, is easily held, are, that
the Armies once past hope of rallying, there being no such thing as Familys
hanging together, or Nobility to stir up their Dependents to further Reluctance
for the present, or to preserve themselves by complacence with the Conquerors
for future Discontents or Advantages, he that has won the Garland has no more
to do but to extinguish the Royal Line, and wear it ever after in security. For
the People having bin always Slaves, are such whose condition he may better, in
which case they are Gainers by their Conqueror, but can Persian Empire, he and
his Captains after him could hold it without the least dispute, except it arose
among themselves. Hence MAHOMET the Second having taken Constantinople, and put
PALAEOLOGUS the Greec Emperor (whose Government was of like nature with the
Persian) together with his whole Family, to the Sword, the Turk has held that
Empire without reluctance.

ON the other side, the Reasons why a Government of Subjects is easilier
conquered, are these: That it is supported by a Nobility so ancient, so
powerful, and of such hold and influence upon the People, that the King without
danger, if not ruin to himself or the Throne (an example whereof was given in
HEN. 7 th of England) can neither invade their Privileges, nor level their
Estates; which remaining, they have power upon every discontent to call in an
Enemy, as ROBERT Count of Artois did the English, and the Duke of Guise the
Spaniard into France.

THE Reasons why a Government of Subjects being so easily conquered, is
nevertheless the harder to be held, are these: That the Nobility being soon out
of countenance in such a case, and repenting themselves of such a bargain, have
the same means in their hands whereby they brought in the Enemy, to drive him
out, as those of France did both the English and the Spaniard.

FOR the Government of Citizens, as it is of two kinds, an equal or an inequal
Commonwealth, the Reasons why it is the hardest to be conquered, are also of
two kinds; as first, the Reasons why a Government of Citizens, where the
Commonwealth is equal, is hardest to be conquered, are, that the Invader of
such a Society must not only trust to his own strength, inasmuch as the
Commonwealth being equal, he must needs find them united, but in regard that
such Citizens, being all Soldiers or trained up to their Arms, which they use
not for the defense of Slavery, but of Liberty (a condition not in this world
to be bettered) they have more specially upon this occasion the highest Soul of
Courage, and (if their Territory be of any extent) the vastest Body of a well
disciplined Militia that is possible in nature: wherefore an example of such a
one overcom by the Arms of a Monarch, is not to be found in the World. And if
some small City of this Frame has happened to be vanquished by a potent
Commonwealth, this is her Prerogative, her Towers are her Funeral Pile, and she
expires in her own flame, leaving nothing to the Conqueror but her Ashes, as
Saguntum overwhelmed by Carthage, and Numantia by Rome.

THE Reasons why a Government of Citizens, where the Commonwealth is inequal,
is, next the former, the hardest to be conquered, are the same, with this
difference, that tho her Peace be not perfect within, her condition is not to
be bettered by any thing without. Wherefore Rome in all her strife never called
in an Enemy; and if an Enemy upon occasion of her strife, and hopes of
advantage by it, came without calling, he presented her with her most Soverain
Cure, who had no leisure to destroy her self, till having no Enemy to find her
work, she became her own. -- Nondum tibi defuit hostis,
In te verte manus --
Nor is there any example that a Government of this kind was ever Holland by
Marriages of their Princes, and Genoa through her Factions, as those of the FIESCI
and ADORNI. Guic. l. 11.


TO conclude this part as to the Reasons why a Government of Citizens so
acquired or possessed, as through Marriage, or Faction, is the hardest to be held,
there needs no more than that men accustomed to their Arms and their Libertys
will never endure the Yoke. Wherefore the Spaniard, tho a mighty King, no sooner
began in Holland, a small Commonwealth, to innovat or break her Orders, than
she threw him off with such Courage and Disdain, as is admirable to the World.
And somewhat of the like kind did Genoa by the help of her DORIA in the
vindication of her Liberty from France.

Proper and Improper Arms.
TO com by this farthest way about as I think the nearest way home: Arms are of
two sorts, Proper or Improper; that is, Native or Foren.

PROPER and Native Arms are, according to the triple nature of Government, of
three kinds; Servants in Arms, as the Helots in Lacedemon, the Timariots and
Janizarys in Turkey; Subjects in Arms, as the Horse in France, and the Seaguards
or Forces in Venice; or Citizens in Arms, as those upon the Lexiarcha in
Athens, of the Morae in Lacedemon, and the Legions in Rome.

IMPROPER or Foren Arms are of two sorts; Auxiliarys, and Mercenarys

AUXILIARYS are such as are supplied by virtue of some League, as were those of
the Latins and Italians to the Romans; and those of the Cantons of Swiss
(except Zuric) to the King of France: or they may be such as are occasionally
lent freely, or let forth for Money by one State to another, the latter whereof
differ not much from Mercenarys.

MERCENARYS are Soldiers of Fortune that have no other Trade than their Arms,
and let out themselves for Money; of such consisted the greatest part of the
Carthaginian Strength, such is the Land Force of Venice, and, notwithstanding
the ancient League of France with those Nations, such at this day are the Swiss
and Scottish Guards (and sometimes a good part of the Foot) in France.

MACCHIAVEL discourses upon these Particulars in his Art of War, to admiration:
by whom I shall therefore steer.

WHERE the Arms in bulk are proper, and consisting of Citizens, they have other
Trades, and therefore are no Soldiers of Fortune; and yet because the
Commonwealth has Arms for her Trade (in regard she is a Magistrate given for the
good of Mankind, and bears not her Sword in vain) they are all educated as well
in Military as Civil Discipline, taking their turns in service of either nature
according to the occasion, and the Orders of the Commonwealth, as in Israel,
Athens, Lacedemon, and Rome, which had (if their Territorys permitted, and
sometimes, as I may say, whether their Territorys permitted or no, as in Israel)
the vastest, the highest tempered, and the best disciplined Militia, that is to
be found in the whole compass of Story. Some Armies of Israel have consisted of
three or four hundred thousand men: Rome upon the rumor of a Gallic Tumult,
armed in Italy only, without Plin. L. Aemilio Papo, C. Atilio Regulo Coss.
foren Aid, seventy thousand Horse and seven hundred thousand Foot; Turk can
hardly arm half so many) not to be credited.

HENCE that a Commonwealth, which had not first broken her self, or bin broken
by some other Commonwealth, should not be found to have bin conquered by the
Arms of any Monarch, is not miraculous, but a natural effect of an apparent
Cause. In this place, or upon this Text, Divines whom I would desire not to be
Enemies of popular Power, but to give MACCHIAVEL his due, shall, if they please,
hear him make a Art della Guer. Proem.
goodly Sermon, in these words: If ancient Commonwealths and Governments used
Diligence in any other Order to make their People lovers of Peace, faithful to
their Country, and to have the fear of God before their eyes, they doubled it in
this of their Militia: for of whom should your Country expect greater Faith,
than of such as have offered themselves to die for her? Whom should she endeavor
to make greater Lovers of Peace, than them who only can inslave her by force?
In whom should there be greater Fear of God, than in such as carry their Lives
in their hands? This, when Lawgivers and Captains rightly cinsider'd, was the
cause why Soldiers were esteemed, honored, followed, and imitated above all men
in the World; whereas since such Orders are broken, and Custom is altogether
deviated from the course of ancient Prudence, men are com to detest the
Iniquity of the Camp, and fly the Conversation of such as are in Arms, as the
Pestilence. Where the Arms in bulk are proper, but consist of Subjects, they
are the best next; and but the best next, as appears by all Examples ancient
and modern. The Arms with which PYRRHUS Prince of Epyrus invaded the Romans,
were of Subjects; yet that Prince, tho he was not vanquished by the Romans,
confessed their advantage, and gave them over. The Spaniard being a far more
potent King than was PYRRHUS, has acknowleg'd as much to the Hollanders, tho a
far less Commonwealth than Rome: So have the Princes of Austria, and of
Burgundy, to the Switzers. That the Arms of Subjects are nevertheless as much
superior to the Arms of Servants, as inferior to the Arms of Citizens, is as
plain; seeing as ALEXANDER, with thirty thousand Subjects, vanquished DARIUS,
having innumerable Slaves; so thirty thousand Christians are at this day a
match for any Army of Turks: and we see Venice, whose Force by Sea consists of
Subjects, to have made him quit that Element near as fully to her Dominion or
Empire, as did the Persian to Athens.

TO Arms that are proper, but consist of Servants, all the preeminence that can
be given is, that they are better than foren Arms; a proof whereof we have in
those of SELIMUS, whereby he conquered the Mamalucs; who being but a foren Force
that held Egypt in subjection, the Country was irrecoverably lost, and, for the
reasons already shown, as easily kept.

IMPROPER Arms, whether Auxiliary or Mercenary, where the Force of a Prince or
of a Commonwealth consists, for the bulk or greater part, of no other, are the
least effectual, and the most dangerous of all. For Auxiliarys, or what effect
has bin found of them by Princes or Commonwealths, it was seen in France during
the League by the Spaniard; and in Holland during the Reign of Queen ELIZABETH
by the English; but especially in the Goths and Vandals, who having bin
Auxiliarys or Mercenarys, relied upon by the later Emperors, came thereby to
ruin the Roman Empire.

MERCENARYS who make their Arms their Trade, must of be breakers of their
Faith, given up to Rapin, Enemies of Peace and Government?

TO instance in some Commonwealths, that of Carthage after her first War with
the Romans, fell through the Rebellion of SPENDIUS and MATHO, Ringleaders of her
Mercenarys, into another that was far more dangerous. Of such a Dilemma were
the Arms of this State, that if HANNIBAL had conquered Rome, he must have bin
King of Carthage; and not conquering Rome, Carthage was ruined. The
Commonwealth of Milan, trusting her self to F. SFORZA and his Mercenarys,
became the Subject of her Servant, and he her Duke. Nor is Venice, whose
Landforces are of the same kind, otherwise in safety as to these, than by her
Situation. To give some instances of the same nature in Princes* The Father of
F. SFORZA being Captain of a like mercenary Army, forced JOAN Queen of Naples,
whom he left disarmed in the midst of her Enemies, to lay her self at the feet
of the King of Arragon; and BRACCIO by such another Treachery had plainly
possessed himself of the Kingdom of Naples, had he not bin broken at Aquila,
where Death intercepted his design. From what has bin said (first of
Government, and then of Arms) if a Government of Servants be harder to be
conquered, and easier to be held, then in this foren Arms must needs be least
necessary, and most dangerous.

IF a Government of Subjects be easier to be conquered, and harder to be held,
then in this foren Arms may be more necessary, but must be less dangerous.

BUT tho a Government of Citizens be both hardest to be conquered, and hardest
to be held, yet as it is again in this regard of two kinds, this cannot be said
of each kind alike; wherefore I must distinguish.

IN a Government of Citizens, if the Commonwealth be not for increase, but
preservation only, as Lacedemon, Carthage, Venice, foren Arms are both
necessary and dangerous; but in a Government of Citizens, where the
Commonwealth is both for increase and preservation, as Rome, foren Arms are
neither necessary nor dangerous.

TO repeat the parts of this Conclusion, which being brief is obscure, more
fully and particularly.

THE Empire of Turkey is of the harder kind to be conquered, wherefore the Turk
needs not foren Guards to defend him, but it is of the easier to be held;
wherefore let him take heed of intrusting his Person with foren Guards, who
having a foren Interest, may have a foren Nation to assist them: and so the
Person of the Prince being in their hands, they have no more to do than to
extinguish the Royal Line; and the Empire being easily held, is their own
thenceforth with security. Thus the Mamalucs which were at first foren Guards,
extinguishing the Royal Line of the Kings of Egypt, came to possess and hold
that Realm without opposition. Who well considers this point, will never enough
admire the Policy of the Turk in the creation (as it were) of his Janizarys,
free from any national Interest that might make them dream of, or desire
Liberty; and yet so void of all foren Interest or Knowledge, that they know not
what, or who were their Country or Parents. Hence tho they have Interest to
murder the Turk, and sometimes do accordingly, they have no further Interest in
the world but what depends upon the Government; and so the Empire is safe, tho
the Prince be in danger: whereas if they were foren Guards, or had any native
Interest, not only the Prince, but the Empire too would be in danger, the rest
being Servants, and such whose condition might be bettered by a change, but
could be no worse. Wherefore a Government of Servants must by no means admit of
foren Guards or Mamalucs.

BUT the Empire of France, where the Nobility are not only subject to fly out,
but to call in Strangers, may have use of foren Guards, which not obnoxious to
native Interest and Factions, as those of the Nobility, are the readiest and
best help at this lift; yet not dangerous, tho having the Prince in their
power, because by him they are safe from the Nobility, who, were it not for the
Prince, would be so far from bearing or brooking foren Guards, that in case a
Forener came in upon their call, having the same means to help themselves
whereby they brought him in, they would shake the Yoke, and the ends why they
called him in, being satisfied or repented of, drive him out again, as they did
the Spaniard and the English. But if this Government being invaded or
conquered, be so hard to be kept, how much harder being surpised? Wherefore in
a Government by Subjects, foren Arms may be more necessary, but must be less
dangerous.

IN a Commonwealth for preservation, as Lacedemon, Carthage, Venice, foren Arms
are necessary: So Lacedemon, tho able to defend her self by her proper Forces
against any one City, yet the Wars in Greece going much upon Leagues and
Confederats, was forced also to make use of her Confederats, and sometimes of
her Helots.

BUT as anciently to Carthage, so now to Venice, foren or mercenary Forces are
essential, because for Land-service such a Constitution can have no other: Yet
is this course extremely dangerous, as appeared by Lacedemon, who (being ever
in fear of her Helots) when she had acquired upon the matter the whole Empire
of Greece, came, by the Rebellion of her Confederats, not only to lose all, but
likewise to ruin. For Carthage, upon the Mutiny of SPENDIUS and MATHO, she
escaped, as at other times upon like occasions, very narrowly. That such an
Accident neither has befaln Venice, nor can befall her, is to be attributed to
her Situation, by which, in this regard, she is secure: Nevertheless, her
Progress or Increase, which by this means either cannot be great, or being
great, must render her but the more infirm, is fully barred.

TO a Commonwealth for increase, which always takes in the whole body of the
People, foren Arms (seeing she abounds above all other kinds of Policy, with
such as are proper) must needs be the least necessary; and they are the most
safe, because never admitting them, but for her mere convenience and frugality
in expense of native Blood, she receives no such charge of them as can recoil,
but must carry point blank, and as vigorously at her proper Interest, very near
as her proper Arms. Thus did the Latin and Italian Auxiliarys, of which, joined
with the Roman Legions, consisted a Consular Army.

BY thus much it seems that an inference from the success of Arms to the
perfection of Government, and from the perfection of Government to the success
of Arms, should be no fallacious way of disputing.

BUT this being sweaty work with the Considerer, who loves his The Switz,
Scottish, and French Guards, have never bin the Authors of any Sedition,
therefore the Seditiousness of a Nobility may be mended by foren Guards: which
is, as if one should say, such a Physician has never bin the cause of the Gout;
therefore the Gout may be cured by such a Physician. That foren Arms may be well
enough applied in the case of a seditious Nobility, and have some good effects,
is not denied: but is France therefore cured of her Sedition, or remains she,
notwithstanding her foren Guards, the most seditious Example in the world? If
thus she has not bin, nor be, what has he read of the Princes of the Blood in
former times, or heard of late from them? But if thus she has bin, and be, is
it not a fine way of Cure to give us an example of the Disease for the Remedy?
Nor are her Guards so void of Sedition neither; but the Switzer, if he wants
his pay, dares threaten Paris: the Scot, at least of late years, has not bin so
bold; but if a Prince flys out, the Ensigns of the French Guards will one way
or other be Captains, while Soldier and Officer too follows his Affections or
Interests, which way soever they frame. I should be glad to know when a Dragon
fell from that Court, that did not bear down Stars with his Train. But the
Prevaricator is set upon it: whereas of late years the Janizarys are known to
have bin far more imbrued in the Blood of their Princes than ever; he gives us
his honest word, that of late years in Turkey they begin to learn the art of
poising the Janizarys (who are the Foot of the Princes Guard) by the Spahys
(who are the Horse of the same) and so have frequently evaded the danger of
their Mutinys. At which rate, seeing every Army consists of Horse and Foot, no
Army could be mutinous. If these had not bin mere slights, and so intended, he
might have don well to have shown us one Mutiny of the Janizarys appeased by
the Spahys. But all the parts of his Politics, as was said of those in
Rhetoric, consist of Pronunciation.

THUS the Wounds of Monarchy, notwithstanding the former, or this last Remedy
of foren Guards, are still bleeding or festering.

BUT his Courage is undaunted (aut viam inveniet aut faciet) he will either
mend a Government, or make one, by asserting without any example, but with
egregious confidence, That the perfection of Consid. p. 48, 49.
Monarchy is free from those flaws which are charged upon it, and that it
consists in governing by a Nobility, weighty enough to keep the People under,
yet not tall enough in any particular Person to measure with the Prince; and by
a moderat Army kept under the notion of Guards and Garrisons, which may be
sufficient to strangle all Sedition in the Cradle: from which mixture, or
counterpoise of a Nobility and an Army, arises the most excellent form of
Monarchical Government.

There Is for your learning now, A Model which is a short Horse, and a
Legislator that has soon curry'd him. To the parts of it, consisting of a
Nobility, and in force, I have already spoken severally. I shall now speak to
the whole together; that is, to the imagined mixture or counterpoise of a
Nobility and an Army; and because there is nothing in Nature that has not had a
natural effect by some example.

THE scale of Arms, or of Iron, continued in the Line of WILLIAM the Conqueror;
and the scale of Property, or Gold, continued in the Barons of England, and
their Successors. But in this before the Barons Wars consisted not the
perfection of the Monarchy, a vicious Constitution, and a Monarchy only in name
(so says the Considerer) therefore the Balance being then only even, when
neither the King could overbalance or get the better of the Barons, nor the
Barons overbalance or get the better of the King; the perfection of Monarchy
consisted in the Barons Wars! LYCURGUS the Second!

MARK; the King by all means must have a Nobility weighty enough to keep down
the People; and then he must have an Army to hold Gold weight with his
Nobility: as if the Nobility in that case would keep down the People, and not
fetch them up (as did the Barons) into their Scale, that so together they might
weigh down the Army; which sooner or later is the infallible consequence of
this Phansy, or let it be shown where it was ever otherwise. To instance in
France is quite contrary, where all the considerable Offices and Commands being
in the Nobility, or the richer sort of that Nation, the Balance of Arms and of
Property are not two, but one and the same. There is no way for Monarchy, but
to have no Army, or no other than the Nobility, which makes the regulated
Monarchy, as in France, Spain, etc. or to have an Army that may weigh down
Nobility and People too; that is, destroy them both, which makes the absolute
way of Monarchy, as in Turkey: the wit of man never found, nor shall find a
third, there being no such thing in Nature.

THIS Chapter is already with the longest, and yet I must give you a Corollary,
pouce de roy, or a piece above measure; relating to a Question on which the
greenest Politician that ever brought his Verjuce to the Press, has spurred me.

WHERE he desires to know my opinion of the way of governing by Councils, which
he confesses he has always thought admirable; he dos not Consid. ^. 49, 50.
mean such as are coordinat with the Prince (which have bin seen in the World)
but such as those of Spain, purely of Advice and Dispatch, with power only to
inform and persuade, but not limit the Princes Will. For almost all the
Weaknesses which have bin thought incident to Monarchy, are by this course
prevented; and if there be any steadiness and maturity in the Senate of a
Commonwealth, this takes it all in.

TO give my Counsil without a Fee, and deal sincerely with a Prevaricator: Let
the Prince (that is, such a one as his) hold himself contented with his Divan,
or Cabinet. If this be that he means, we are agreed; but if he would have more,
I can make no less of his words, than a hankering after such Councils as I have
proposed, and that these are such as he always thought admirable, such as
prevent almost all the Weaknesses incident to Monarchy, and take in the
steadiness and maturity of a Commonwealth.

HOW may we make this agree with that other place, where he says, that there is
no frame of Laws, or Constitution of Government, which will not decay and com
to ruin, unless repaired by the Prudence and Consid. p. 68.
Dexterity of them that govern? Now that this may not be expected from a
Monarch, as well as from a Senate or Assembly of Men, he has not yet met with
any conviction, but rather finds it reasonable to think that where Debates are
clearest, the result of them most secret, and the execution sudden (which are
the advantages of Monarchy) there the disorders of a State will soonest be
discovered, and the necessary Remedys best applied. Rome were as clear as those
of ANTIOCHUS, that her Results were as secret as those of PHILIP or PERSEUS,
and of more sudden execution than either of theirs. He doubted it might be
true, which is affirmed by good Authors, and commonly enough known, that for
the clearness of Debate, and secresy of Result, the world never saw any thing
like the Senate of Venice; and that in all appearance they are for execution as
quick with the Divan, as the Divan can be with them. Now when all this is don,
to banish so generous Thoughts without showing us for what cause, and knock
under the table, is sad news. But he shall sind me, in any thing that is
reasonable, most ready to serve him. To the Question then, how such Councils as
I have proposed would do with a Prince; I answer, truly the best of them, I
doubt, but untowardly. One, that is the popular Assembly, has no mean, but is
either the wisest in Nature, or has no brains at all.* When affairs go upon no
other than the public Interest, this having no other Interest to follow, nor
eyes to see withal, is the wisest Council: but such ways are destructive to a
Prince, and they will have no Nay. The Congregation of Israel, when REHOBOAM
would not hearken to their advice, deposed him: and we know what popular
Councils, so soon as they came to sufficient Power, did in England. If a Prince
put a popular Council from this Ward, he dos a great matter, and to little
purpose; for they understand nothing else but themselves. Wherefore the Kings of
France and of Spain have dissolved all such Assemblys. It is true, where a
Prince is not strong enough to get Money out of them but by their consent, they
are necessary; yet then they are not purely of Advice and Dispatch, but share
in the Government, and he cannot be meddling with their Purses, but they will be
meddling with his Laws. The Senate is of sitter use for a Prince, and yet, except
he has the way of TIBERIUS, but a ticklish piece, as appears by MAXIMINUS, who
was destroyed by PUPIENUS and BALBINUS, Captains set up against him by this
Order. To go to the root: These things are not otherwise in Prudence or Choice
than by direction of the Balance; where this is popular, no Remedy but the
Prince must be advised by the People, which if the late King would have
endured, the Monarchy might have subsisted somewhat longer: but while the
Balance was Aristocratical, as during the great Estates of the Nobility and the
Clergy, we find not the People to have bin great or wise Counsillors. In sum,
if a King governs by a popular Council, or a House of Commons, the Throne will
not stand long: If he governs by a Senate, or a House of Lords, let him never
fear the Throne, but have a care of himself: there is no third, as I have said
often enough, but the Divan.


Whether a Commonwealth that was not first broken by her self, was ever
conquered by the Arms of any Monarch?
I COM in this Chapter to resume the Discourse, where I broke off in the
former, making good my assertion, That a Commonwealth is the Government, which
from the beginning of the world to this day was never conquered by any Monarch;
for if the Commonwealths of Greece came under the yoke of the Kings of Macedon,
they were first broken by themselves.

WHEN I speak of a Commonwealth, in relation to this point, I am no more to be
argued against out of the little Citys in Asia, or those of Ragusa, and San
Marino, which cannot be shown to have had the command of any considerable Army,
than I argue against the Prevaricator, where he asserts Monarchy to consist of
a mixture of Arms and of a Nobility, from the King of Yuetot, who had neither.

THIS Assertion in the judgment of any rational man ought not to be
incounter'd, but where there was a natural possibility of defense, in regard
that a City which has no Army at all, as Geneva (which yet being invaded by the
Duke of Savoy, found means to defend her self) or such a one as is not
considerable, should be subdued by some potent Monarch (if we could find the
example) concerns the Government no more, than if it had bin overwhelmed by some
Inundation, or swallowed up by some Earthquake. And yet all that is opposed by
the Considerer, amounts not to thus much. The Testimony he brings out of
PAUSANIAS coms far short; for it is Consid. p. 53. Paus. Messen.
recorded (says the Author speaking of the Lacedaemonians) that being corrupted
by the Bounty of CRAESUS, they were the first that contracted Amity with the
Barbarians at the time when that King added the Territorys inhabited by the
Dorians upon the border of Caria, with other Commonwealths in Asia, to his
Empire. So that CRAESUS corrupted the Lacedaemonians with Gifts, PAUSANIAS is
express; but whether he obtained the Asiatic Citys (likely in this case to have
bin easilier corrupted than the Lacedaemonians) by Arms or by Purchase, he is
not express: and the presumtion of the latter, as in other regards, so in this,
is the stronger, that CRAESUS by the testimony of SOLON, was more potent in
Gold than in Iron. Now if it were so (and if otherwise, let the Considerer
show) that these Commonwealths, inveigl'd by the Treasure of CRAESUS, came
first under the Lydian, and fell with that under the Persian Empire, when
CRAESUS was subdued by CYRUS; all I can learn by this example is no more than
that CRAESUS, for ought that is perceivable, might have bought those
Commonwealths as COSIMO of MEDICIS did Florence; from whom it is affirmed by
MACCHIAVEL, that there was not a considerable Man in the whole City that had
not received some considerable Sum. So this example presumes; but in the next,
which is of Sicily, there is not so much as a Presumtion in favor of the
Assertor: the State of Sicily, before that which the Romans call the first
Carthaginian War, being clear in Story against his design. For that Africa for
the generation of Monsters is not more famous than Sicily for that of Tyrants,
they who have passed their Novitiat in Story are not ignorant; nor how Fazello
Hist. de Sicil* Polyb. l. 1.
when TIMOLEON had freed her of this Vermin, and with Liberty she had recovered
some strength and virtue, she relapsed under AGATHOCLES and his horrid violation
of Faith, while he was trusted with the Arms of her Citizens: how after him
PYRRHUS was called in from Epirus; after PYRRHUS, HIERO usurped; all by the
same Arts, getting first into trust or charge, and then recoiling upon them
that would take no warning: by which it is apparent that the Commonwealths of
Sicily, like those of Greece, were ruined by themselves, and their own
Disorders; and no more subdued upon these changes by foren Arms, than was
Israel by the Canaanites, or Rome by the Gauls or Decemvirs.

ISRAEL, having broken her Orders, was indeed sometimes oppressed by the
Canaanites; Rome was sacked by the Gauls, and usurped by the Decemvirs. But as
the man that having got a fall in a Duel, throws off his Adversary, recovers
himself and his Sword, is not conquered, Decree of the States of Holland apud
Grot. Hist. 4.
so neither the Commonwealth: wherefore neither Holland nor Genoa, tho they have
bin under, being yet standing, can be said to be conquered by the Arms of Spain
or France, but rather the contrary; seeing the Liberty of Holland (in many
Citys more ancient than any Records or other Monuments there can witness, and
in it self than that of Tacitus, whereby CIVILIS, born of Princely Blood, is
affirmed to have vindicated the Batavian Freedom) is still the same; and Genoa,
tho happy in her DORIA, remains as she was before he was born. Nor did the
Family of the MEDICIS banished out of Florence (where, by virtue of their
prodigious Wealth, and the inevitable consequence of the Balance, their
Ancestors had bin Princes many years before CHARLES the Fifth was a Soldier)
any more by the help of his Arms, those of the Pope (at that time of the same
Family) and their Party at home, than get into their known saddle. To insist a
little more at large upon the Storys of Genoa and Florence (because upon these
the Prevaricator sets up his rest that Mr. HARRINGTON must needs be afflicted)
Genoa was and is an Oligarchy consisting of twenty eight Familys, making the
Great Council, or Aggregation, as they call it, none but these being capable of
the Senate or of Magistracy; and if ever it could be said of a Commonwealth,
that she had broken her self, it might be said, at the time related to, of
Genoa, where not only the Faction of the Guelphs and Gibelins, which had
destroyed many Citys in Italy, then reigned; but the feud between the People
included, and the Subject excluded, was as great as ever had bin between the
Nobility and the People in Rome. Besides the quarrel of the FIESCHI and the
ADORNI, two Familys, like CAESAR and POMPEY, which having many years together
as it were ingrost the Magistracy of Duke, were nevertheless perpetually
striving each with other, which should have it; and if one of these (as it did)
brought in the King of France, there is nothing plainer than that this
Commonwealth was subdued by her own Sedition, nor is there a man knowing any
thing of her affairs, that makes any doubt of it. That of Florence indeed, if
the Prevaricator could show it had bin ever up, I should grant were down; but
to relate the Story of this City, I must relate that of the House of MEDICIS.
From COSIMO, a Citizen famous throout Europe both for his Wisdom and Florence.
To Comines. P. Jovius. Macchiavel.
COSIMO succeeded PETER, to PETER LAURENCE, a man in Prudence and Liberality
resembling his Grandfather, save that he used more absolute Power in managing
the Commonwealth; yet with gentleness, and not altogether to the suppression of
Liberty. Nevertheless he obtained of the Signory (which did for the most part
as he would have them) some small Guard for his Person; he was a man renowned
through Italy, and looked upon by foren Princes with much respect. To him succeeded
his Son, another PETER, who through Youth and Rashness conceiving the Power
exercised by his Predecessors to be no more than his due, took upon him the
Government as absolute Lord of all; and standing most formidably upon his
Guard, grew sottishly profuse of the public Money, and committed many Absurditys
and Violences: By which means having incurred the hatred of the Citizens, he
was banished by the Signory, with Cardinal JOHN and JULIAN his Brothers. This
JOHN coming after to be Pope LEO the Tenth, required the revocation of his
Brother's Banishment, and the restitution of the House of MEDICIS; to which
finding the prevailing Party of the Florentins to be refractory, he stirred up
the Arms of the Emperor CHARLES the Fifth against them, by whose joint aid the
City, after a long siege, was reduced to her old Ward, and ALEXANDER of
MEDICIS, Nephew to the Pope and Son in law to the Emperor, set in the known
Saddle of his Ancestors. This is the* Action for which the Prevaricator will
have a Commonwealth to have bin conquered by the Arms of a Monarch, tho whoever
reads the Story may very safely affirm, First, That Florence never attained to
any such Orders as could deserve the name of a Commonwealth; and next, That the
Purse of COSIMO had don that long before, which is here attributed to the Arms
of the Pope and the Emperor. Reason and Experience, as I said, are like the
Roots and the Branches of Plants and Trees: As of Branches, Fruits, and
Flowers, being open and obvious to the ey, the smell, the touch, and taste,
every Girl can judge; so examples to vulgar capacitys are the best Arguments.
Let him that says a Commonwealth has bin at any time conquered by a Monarch, to
it again, and show us the example. But tho Fruits and Flowers be easily known
each from other, their Roots are latent, and not only so, but of such
resemblance, that to distinguish of these a man must be a Gardener or a
Herbalist. In this manner, the reason why a Commonwealth has not bin overcom by
a Monarch, has bin shown in the distribution of Arms, those of a Prince
consisting of Subjects or Servants, and those of a Commonwealth rightly ordered
of Citizens, which difference relates plainly to the perfection or imperfection
of the Government.

Consid. p. 51.
BUT, says the Prevaricator, this seems intended for a trial of our Noses,
whether they will serve us to discover the fallacy of an inference from the
prosperous success of Arms to the perfection of Government. If the University,
who should have some care of the Vinyard of Truth, shall ly pigging of wild
Boars, to grunt in this manner and fear with their tusks, and I happen to ring
some of them (as I have don this Marcassin for rooting) there is nothing in my
faith why such trial of their Noses should be Sin; but for fallacious
Inferences, such I leave to them whose Caps are squarer than their Play.

FOR all that, Great and well policy'd Empires, says he, have bin subverted by
People so eloign'd from the perfection of Government, that we scarce know of
any thing to ty them together, but the desire of Booty. Where, or how came he
to know this? What Reason or Experience dos he allege for the proof of it? May
we not say of this, it is for the trial of our Noses, whether they will serve
us to discover that a Conclusion should have some Premises? He gives us leave to
go look, and all the Premises that I can find are quite contrary.

Judge. chapter 1, and 2.
THE Arms of Israel were always victorious, till the death of JOSHUA, whereupon
the Orders of that Commonwealth being neglected, they came afterward to be
seldom prosperous. ISOCRATES in his Oration to the Areopagits, speaks thus of
Athens: The Lacedaemonians, who when we were under Oligarchy, every day
commanded us something; now while we are under popular Administration, are our
Petitioners that we would not see them utterly ruined by the Thebans. Nor did
Lacedemon fall to ruin till her Agrarian, the Foundation of her Government, was
first broken. The Arms of Rome (ever noted by Historians, and clearly evinced
by MACCHIAVEL to have bin the Art della Guerra.
result of her Policy) during the popular Government were at such a pitch, as if
Victory had known no other wings than those of her Eagles: nor seeing the Goths
and Vandals are the Legislators, from whom we derive the Government of King,
Lords, and Commons, were these when they overcame the Roman Empire, a People so
cloign'd from the perfection of Government, but their Policy was then far
better than that of the Emperors, which having bin at first founded upon a
broken Senate, and a few military Colonys, was now com to a Cabinet, and a
mercenary Army. The Judgment of all Ages and Writers upon the Policy of the
Roman Emperors, is in this place worthy, and through the pains already taken by
ERASMUS and SLEIDAN, easy to be inserted. O miserable and deplorable State,
says ERASMUS, the Authority of the Senate, the Power of the Law, the In his
Preface to Suetonius.
Liberty of the People being trod underfoot! to a Prince, that got up in this
manner, the whole World was a Servant, while he himself was a Servant to such,
as no honest man would have endured the like Servants in his House: the Senate
dreaded the Emperor, the Emperor dreaded his execrable Militia: the Emperor
gave Laws to Kings, and received them from his Mercenarys. To this is added by
SLEIDAN, That the condition De quat. Imp.
of these Princes was so desperate, it was a wonderful thing Ambition it self
could have the Courage to run such a hazard; seeing from CAIUS CAESAR slain in
the Senate to CHARLES the Great, there had bin above thirty of them murdered,
and four that had laid violent hands upon themselves: For there was always
something in them that offended the Soldiery, which whether they were good or
bad, was equally subject to pick Quarrels, upon the least occasion raised
Tumults, and dispatched even such of them as they had forced to accept of that
Dignity, for example, AELIUS PERTINAX. But if this be true, that of the Goths
and Vandals, when they subdued this Empire, must have bin the better
Government; for so ill as this never was there any, except that only of the
Kings of Israel, which certainly was much worse. Those of the Britans and the
Gauls were but the dregs of this of Rome, when they were overcom by the Saxons
and Franks, who brought in the Policy of the Goths and Vandals.

Turkish Policy had not attained to that extent of Territory which is plainly
necessary to the nature of it, nor was the Order of the Janizarys yet
instituted. The Hollander, who under a potent Prince was but a Fisherman, with
the restitution of the popular Government, is become the better Soldier; nor has
he bin matched but by a rising Commonwealth, whose Policy you will say was yet
worse, but then her Balance (being that especially which produces men) was far
better. For Vastness, for Fruitfulness of Territory, for Bodies of Men, for
Number, for Courage, Nature never made a Country more potent than Germany: yet
this Nation, anciently the Seminary of Nations, has of late years, merely through
the defect of her Policy (which intending one Commonwealth, has made a hundred
Monarchys in her Bowels, whose cross Interests twist her guts) bin the Theater
of the saddest Tragedys under the Sun; nor is she curable, unless some Prince
falling to work with the Hammer of War, be able totally to destroy the old, and
forge her a Government entirely new. But if this coms to pass, neither shall it
be said, that a well-policy'd Empire was subverted, nor by a People so eloign'd
from perfection of Government, but theirs must be much better than the other.
Let me be as ridiculous as you will, the World is (in faece Romuli) ripe for
great Changes which must com. And look to it, whether it be Germany, Spain,
France, Italy, or England. that coms first to fix her self upon a firm
Foundation of Policy, she shall give Law to, and be obeyed by the rest. There
was never so much fighting as of late days to so little purpose; Arms, except
they have a root in Policy, are altogether fruitless. In the War between the
King and the Parliament, not the Nation only, but the Policy of it was divided;
and which part of it was upon the better Foundation?

Consid. p. 51.
BUT, says he, Ragusa and San Marino are commended for their upright and equal
frame of Government, and yet have hardly extended their Dominion beyond the
size of a handsome Manor.

HAVE Ragusa or San Marino bin conquered by the Arms of any Monarch? For this
(I take it) is the question; tho, if they had, these being Commonwealths
unarmed, it were nothing to the purpose. The question of Increase is another
point. Lacedemon could not increase (because her frame was of another nature)
without ruin; yet was she not conquered by any Monarch.

Consid. p. 52.
COM, com, says he, for all this; It is not the perfection of Government, but
the populousness of a Nation, the natural valor of the Inhabitants, the
abundance of Horses, Arms, and other things necessary for equipping of an Army,
assisted with a good military Discipline, that qualify a People for Conquest;
and where these concur, Victory is entailed upon them. Very fine!

AS if these could concur any otherwise than by virtue of the Policy. For
example, there is no Nation under Heaven more populous Essay 29.
than France: Yet, says Sir FRANCIS BACON, If the Gentlemen be too many, the
Commons will be base, and not the hundredth Poll fit for a Helmet, as may be
seen by comparison of England with France, whereof the former, tho far less in
Territory and Populousness, has bin nevertheless the overmatch; in regard the
middle People in England make good Soldiers, which the Peasants in France do
not. This therefore was from the Policy, by which the one has bin the freest,
and the other the most enslaved Subject in the World; and not from
Populousness, in France must have bin the Overmatch.

THE like is observable in the natural valor of the People, there being no
greater courage of an Infantry, than that of the middle People in England,
whereas the Peasant having none at all, is never used in Arms. Again, France has
one of the best Cavalrys in the World, which the English never had, yet it
availed her not. Victory is more especially entailed upon Courage, and Courage
upon Liberty, which grows not without a Root planted in the Policy or
Foundation of the Government.

ALEXANDER with a handful of Freemen overcame the greatest abundance of Horses,
Arms, and other things necessary for the equipping of an Army, the hugest
Armies, the most vast and populous Empire in the World; and when he had don,
could not by all these subdue that handful of freer men (tho he killed CLYTUS
with his own hand in the quarrel) to the servil Customs of that Empire. And
that the best military Discipline derived from the Policy of the Romans, I
intimated before, and have shown at large in other places.

BUT the Prevaricator neither minds what is said, nor cares what he says; to
affirm that a Commonwealth was never conquered by any Monarch, and that a
Commonwealth has conquered many Monarchs, or frequently led mighty Kings in
triumph, is to run upon the foil, the second Proposition being with him no more
than only the conversion of the first. As if that Rome was not conquered by
Consid. p. 55.
the World, and that the World was conquered by Rome, were but a simple
conversion. So the World having not conquered Venice, it must follow, that
Venice has conquered the World. Do we take, or are we taken? Nor is he thus
satisfied to burn his fingers, but he will blister his tongue.

WHERE I said that the Commonwealth of Venice, consisting of all them that
first fled from the main Land to those Islands where the City is now planted, at
the Institution took in the whole People, he would make you believe I had said
that the Senate of Venice, at the first Institution, took in the whole People:
It is matter of fact, and that in Consid. p. 70. Oceana, p. 43.
which his Integrity will be apparent to every man's judgment. I pray see the
places. And yet when he has put this trick upon me, he tells me, perhaps it is
not true; and this only I grant him past peradventure is false, whether that I
said it, or that the thing is possible. For how is it possible, that the Senate,
which is no otherwise such than as it consists of the Aristocracy, or select
part of the People, should take in the whole People? It is true, that good
Authors, both ancient and modern, when they speak of the Senate of Rome, or of
Venice historically, imply the People. MACCHIAVEL speaks of the Magistracy of
PUBLILIUS PHILO, as prolonged by the Senate of Rome, without making any mention
of the People, by whom nevertheless it was granted: the like is usual with
other Authors. THUANUS seldom mentions the Commonwealth of Venice, but by the
name of the Senate; which not understood by the learned Considerer, where
CONTARINI speaks in the same manner of the Courses taken by the Commonwealth of
Venice, for withholding the Subject in the City from Sedition, he takes him to
be speaking of the means whereby the Senate (an't please you) keeps the People
under: and so having put one trick upon me, and another upon That Venice is as
much as any in the World an inequal Commonwealth. Now the Conclusion you know
no body can deny.

CHAP. XI.
Whether there be not an Agrarian, or some Law or Laws of that nature, to supply
the defect of it in every Commonwealth: and whether the Agrarian, as it is
stated in Oceana, be not equal and satisfactory to all Interests.
IN this Chapter the Prevaricator's Devices are the most welfavor'd: for whereas
the Agrarian of Oceana dos no more than pin the basket, which is already
filled, he gets up into the Tree where the Birds have long since eaten all the
Cherrys, and with what Clouts he can rake up, makes a most ridiculous Scarcrow.
This pains he needed not to have taken, if he had not slighted overmuch the
Lexicon, of which he allows me to be the Author; yet will have it, that he
understood the words before, some of which nevertheless his ill understanding
requires should be further interpreted in this place, as Property, Balance,
Agrarian, and Levelling.

PROPERTY is that which is every man's own by the Law of the Land; and of this
there is nothing stirred, but all entirely left as it was found by the Agrarian
of Oceana.

PROPERTY in Money (except, as has bin shown, in Citys that have little or no
Territory) coms not to the present account. But Property in Land, according to
the distribution that happens to be of the same, causes the political Balance
producing Empire of the like nature: that is, if the Property in Lands be so
diffused through the whole People, that neither one Landlord, nor a few Landlords
overbalance them, the Empire is popular. If the Property in Lands be so ingrost
by the Few, that they overbalance the whole People, the Empire is
Aristocratical, or mixed Monarchy; but if Property in Lands be in one Landlord,
to such a proportion as overbalances the whole People, the Empire is absolute
Monarchy. So the political Balance is threefold, Democratical, Aristocratical,
and Monarchical.

EACH of these Balances may be introduced either by the Legislator at the
institution of the Government, or by civil Vicissitude, Alienation, or
Alteration of Property under Government.

EXAMPLES of the Balance introduced at the Institution, and by the Legislator,
are first those in Israel and Lacedemon, introduced by GOD or MOSES, and
LYCURGUS, which were Democratical or Popular. Secondly, Those in England,
France and Spain, introduced by the Goths, Vandals, Saxons, and Franks, which
were Aristocratical, or such as produced the Government of King, Lords, and
Commons. Thirdly, Those in the East and Turkey, introduced by NIMROD, and
MAHOMET or OTTOMAN, which were purely Monarchical.

EXAMPLES of the Balance introduced by civil Vicissitude, Alienation, or
Alteration of Property under Government, are in Florence, where the MEDICI
attaining to excessive wealth, the Balance altered In Greece, where the Argives
being lovers Pausan. Corinth.
of Equality and Liberty, reduced the Power of their Kings to so small a
matter, that there remained to the Children and Successors of CISUS little more
than the Title, where the Balance altered from Monarchical to Popular. In Rome,
about the time of CRASSUS, the Nobility having eaten the People out of their
Lands, the Balance altered from Popular, first to Aristocratical, as in the
Triumvirs, CAESAR, POMPEY and CRASSUS; and then to Monarchical, as when CRASSUS
being dead, and POMPEY conquered, the whole came to CAESAR. In Tarentum, not
long after the War with the Medes, Arist. Pol. L. 5. c. 3.
the Nobility being wasted, and overcom by Iapyges, the Balance, and with that
the Commonwealth, changed from Aristocratical to Popular: The like of late has
discovered it self in Oceana. When a Balance coms so through civil Vicissitude to
be changed, that the change cannot be attributed to human Providence, it is
more peculiarly to be ascribed to the hand of God; and so when there happens to
be an irresistible change of the Balance, not the old Government which God has
repealed, but the new Government which he dictats as present Legislator, is of
Divine Right.

THIS Volubility of the Balance being apparent, it belongs to Legislators to
have eyes, and to occur with some prudential or legal Remedy or Prevention; and
the Laws that are made in this case are called Agrarian. So An Agrarian is a
Law sixing the Balance of a Government in such a manner that it cannot alter.

THIS may be don diverse ways, as by intailing the Lands upon certain Familys,
without power of Alienation in any case, as in Israel and Lacedemon; or, except
with leave of the Magistrate, as in Spain: But this, by making some Familys too
secure, as those in possession, and others too despairing, as those not in
possession, may make the whole People less industrious.

WHEREFORE the other way, which by the regulation of Purchases ordains only that
a man's Land shall not excede some certain proportion; for example, two thousand
Pounds a year; or, exceeding such a proportion, shall divide in descending to
the Children, so soon as being more than one, they shall be capable of such a
division, or subdivision, till the greater share excedes not two thousand
pounds a year in Land, lying and being within the native Territory, is that
which is received and established by the Commonwealth of Oceana.

BY Levelling, they who use the word seem to understand, when a People rising
invades the Lands and Estates of the richer sort, and divides them equally
among themselves; as for example, -- No where in the World; this being that,
both in the way and in the end, which I have already demonstrated to be
impossible. Now the words of this Lexicon being thus interpreted, let us
hearken what the Prevaricator will say, and out it coms in this manner.

Consid. p. 73.
TO him that makes Property, and that in Lands, the Foundation of Empire, the
establishing of an Agrarian is of absolute necessity, that by it the Power may
be fixed in those hands to whom it was at first committed.

WHAT need we then proceed any further, while he, having no where disproved the
Balance in these words, gives up the whole Cause? For as to that which he says
of Money, seeing neither the vast Treasure of HENRY the 7 th altered the Balance
of England, nor the Revenue of Indys alters that of Spain, this Retrait (except
in the Cases excepted) is long since barricado'd. But he is on and off, and,
any thing to the contrary notwithstanding, gives you this for certain.

THE Examples of an Agrarian are so infrequent, that Mr. HARRINGTON is
constrained to wave all but two Commonwealths; and can find in the whole extent
of History only Israel and Lacedemon to fasten upon.

A MAN that has read my Writings, or is skilled in History, cannot choose but
see how he slurs his Dice; nevertheless to make this a Pol. L. 2. C. 5.
little more apparent, It has seemed to some (says ARISTOTLE) the main point of
Institution in Government, to order Riches right; whence otherwise derives all
civil Discord. Upon this ground PHALEAS the Chalcedonian Legislator made it his
first work to introduce equality of Goods; and PLATO in his Laws allows not
increase to a possession beyond certain bounds. The Argives and the Messenians
had each their Agrarian after the manner of Lacedemon. If a man shall translate
the words Plut. Lycurg.
((...), virtus and facultas civilis) Political Virtue or Faculty, where he
finds them in ARISTOTLE'S Politics (as I make bold, and appeal to the Reader
whether too bold to do) by the words Political Balance, understood as I have
stated the thing, it will give such a light to the Author, as will go nearer
than any thing alleged (as before by this Prevaricator) to deprive me of the
honor Pol. L. 3. C. 9.
of that invention. For example, where ARISTOTLE says, If one man, or such a
number of men, as to the capacity of Government com within the compass of the
Few, excel all the rest ((...)) in balance, or in such a manner, that the
((...)) Political Facultys or Estates of all the rest be not able to hold
weight with him or them, they will never condescend to share equally with the
rest in power, whom they excel in Balance; nor is it to any purpose to give
them Laws, who will be as the Gods, their own Laws, and will answer the People
as the Lions are said by ANTISTHENES to have answered the Hares, when they had
concluded, that every one ought to have an equal Portion. For this cause (he
adds) Citys that live under Popular Power, have instituted the Ostracism for
the preservation of Equality; by which, if a man increase in Riches, Retinue,
or Popularity, above what is safe, they can remove him (without loss of Honor
or Estate) for a time.

IF the Considerer thinks that I have strained courtesy with ARISTOTLE (who
indeed is not always of one mind) further than is warrantable, in relation to
the Balance, be it as he pleases; I who must either have the more of Authority,
or the less of Competition in the point, shall lose neither way. However, it is
in this place enough that the Ostracism being of like nature, was that which
supplied the defect, in the Grecian Citys, of an Agrarian. To proceed then to
Rome, that the People there, by striving for an Agrarian, strove to save their
Liberty, is apparent, in that through the want of such a Law, or the nonobservance
of it, the Commonwealth came plainly to ruin. If a Venetian should keep a
Table, or have his House furnished with Retainers, he would be obnoxious to the
Council of Ten; and if the best of them appear with other State or Equipage
than is allowed to the meanest, he is obnoxious to the Officers of the Pomp:
which two Orders in a Commonwealth, where the Gentry have but small Estates in
Land, are as much as needs be in lieu of an Agrarian. But the German Republics
have no more to supply the place of this Law, than that Estates descending are
divided among the Children; which sure no man but will say must needs be
Oceana, where grant this, and you grant the whole Agrarian. Thus had I set him
all the Commonwealths in the World before; and so it is no fault of mine, that
he will throw but at three of them: These are Israel, Lacedemon, and Oceana.

Consid. p. 77.
FIRST at Israel: Mr. HARRINGTON (says he) thinks not upon the Promise of GOD
to ABRAHAM (whence the Israelites derived their Right to the Land of Canaan)
but considers the division of the Lands as a Politic Constitution upon which
the Government was founded, tho in the whole History of the Bible there be not
the least footstep of such a design.

WHAT means the man! the Right of an Israelite to his Land derived from the
Promise of GOD to ABRAHAM, therefore the Right of an Oceaner to his Land must
derive from the Promise of GOD to ABRAHAM? Or, why else should I in speaking of
Oceana (where Property is taken as it was found, and not stirred a hair) think
on the Promise to ABRAHAM? Nor matters it for the manner of division, seeing
that was made, and this was found made, each according to the Law of the
Government. But in the whole Bible (says he) there is not the least footstep
that the end of the Israelitish Agrarian was Political, or that it was intended
to be the Foundation of the Government.

THE Footsteps of God, by the Testimony of DAVID, may be seen in the deep
Waters, much more, by the consent of the whole Bible, in Land, or in the
foundation of Empire; unless we make the Footsteps of God to be one thing, and
his ways another, which as to Government are these.

Grot. ad Numb. 26. 53.
GOD by the Ballot of Israel (more fully described in the next Book) divided
the Land (some respect had to the Princes and Patriarchs for the rest) to every
one his inheritance, according to the number of names, which were drawn out of
one Urn first, and the Lots of Land (the measure with the goodness of the same
considered) drawn afterward out of the other Urn to those names. Wherefore God
ordaining the Cause, and the Cause of necessity producing the Effect, God in
ordaining this Balance intended Popular Government. But when the People
admitting of no Nay, would have a King, God thereupon commanding SAMUEL to show
them the manner of the King, SAMUEL declared to the People concerning the
manner or policy of the King, saying, He will take your Fields and your
Vinyards, and your Oliveyards, even 1 Samuel 8.
the best of them, and give to his Servants (which kind of proceeding must needs
create the Balance of a Nobility;) over and above this, he will take the tenth
of your Seed, and of your Vinyards, and of your Sheep (by way of Tax, for the
maintenance of his Armies) and thus your Daughters shall com to be his Cooks and
Confectioners, and your Sons to run before his Chariot. There is not from the
Balance to the Superstructures a more perfect description of a Monarchy by a
Nobility. For the third Branch, the People of Egypt in time of the Famine, which
was very sore, com to JOSEPH, saying, Buy us and our Land Genesis 47. 19, 20.
for Bread, and we and our Land will be Servants to PHARAOH. And JOSEPH bought
all the Land of Egypt (except that of the Priests) for PHARAOH. So the Land
became PHARAOH'S: who, lest the remembrance of their former Property by lively
marks and continual remembrancers should stir them up (as the Vandals in
Africa, stripped in Grot. ad Genesis 47.
like manner of their Property, and yet remaining in their ancient even from one
end of the borders of Egypt to the other end thereof. In which you have the
Balance of a sole Landlord or absolute Prince, with the miserable, and yet
necessary consequence of an enslaved People. Now the Balance of Governments
throout the Scriptures being of these kinds, and no other, the Balance of
Oceana is exactly calculated to the most approved way, and the clearest
Footsteps of God in the whole History of the Bible: and whereas the Jubilee was a
Law instituted for preservation of the popular Balance from alteration, so is
the Agrarian in Oceana.

BUT says the Prevaricator, Hocus Pocus, or in the name of Wonder, how can this
Agrarian be the Foundation of that Government which had subsisted more than
forty five years without it? For they were so long after the giving of this Law
for the division of the Land, before they had the Land to divide.

WHICH is as if one should say upon that other Law of the like date, Judges and
Officers shall thou make thee in all thy gates; Hocus Pocus, or in the name of
Wonder, how should the Children of Israel make them Judges and Officers in
their gates, before they had any gates to make them in? fine sport to be played
by an Attorney for the Clergy with Scripture, where it is plain enough that the
Laws of a Commonwealth were given by MOSES to an Army, to be put in execution
when that Army should become a Commonwealth, as happened under JOSHUA.

BUT no saying will serve his turn. If this Agrarian were meant as fundamental
to the Government, the Provision (he will have it) was weak, and not proper for
attaining the end proposed, there being nothing in the nature of the Agrarian
to hinder, but that the whole Country might for the space of near fifty years,
that is, the time between the two Jubiles, have com into the hands of one man,
and so have destroyed Balance, Agrarian, Government and all.

THIS they that boast of their Mathematics might have taken the pains (before
they had bin so confident) to have demonstrated possible; as how or by what
means one Lot could com in fifty years to be multiplied six hundred thousand
times, and that without Usury, which bar (the Israelits being no Merchants) was
thought sufficient to be given: or thus to call the Prudence of God by their
impracticable Phansys in question, is abominable.

I WOULD have Divines (as this Prevaricator persuades, and it should seem has
persuaded some of them) to overthrow the Commonwealth of Israel; for otherwise I
will give them my word they shall never be able to touch that of Oceana, which,
except in the hereditary Succession and Dignity of the Princes of the Tribes,
and the Patriarchs, and that the Senate was for life, differs not from the
former: for as to the diverse working up of the Superstructures in diverse
Commonwealths, according to the diversity of occasions, it coms to no
accountable difference; and much, I conceive, of this carving or finishing in
Israel (which had it bin extant, would perhaps have shown a greater
resemblance) is lost. For the Senats, as to their numbers, that of the 300 in
Oceana, considering the bulk of the People, excedes not that of the Seventy in
Israel; the Succession and Dignity of the Princes of the Tribes and of the
Patriarchs was ordained for the preservation of the Pedigrees, which (CHRIST
being born) are not any more to be of like consequence; and that the Senators
were for life, derived from a Egypt (tho not that of the Senate till it was
instituted by God) from the descent of the Patriarchs into that Land, who being
at their descent seventy Persons, and governing their Familys by the right of
Paternity, as the People increased, and they came to die, had their Successors
appointed in such a manner that the number of Seventy, in remembrance of those
Patriarchs, was diligently preserved. And forasmuch as the Patriarchs governing
their own Familys (which at first were all) in their own right, were
consequently for life, this also pleased in the substitution of others. These
things rightly considered, I have not varied from the Authority of Israel in a
tittle, there being neither any such necessary use of Pedigrees, nor
uninterrupted Succession of Elders for life in Oceana; and unless a man will
say, That we ought to have the like Effect where there is not the like Cause
(which were absurd) the Authority of a Commonwealth holds no otherwise than
from the Cause to the Effect.

OCEANA, I say, cannot be wounded but by piercing the Authority of Israel, with
which she is armed Cap a Pe. It is true, as the Prevaricator says in another
place, that Law can oblige only those Consid. p. 36.
to whom it was given; and that the Laws of Israel were given, as to the Power
or Obligation of them, only to the Children of Israel. But the Power, as has
bin shown, of a Commonwealth, and her Authority, are different things; her
Power extends no further than her own People, but her Authority may govern
others, as that of Athens did Rome, when the latter wrote her twelve Tables by
the Copy of the former. In this manner, tho a Man, or a Commonwealth, writing
out of ancient Governments, have liberty to choose that which suits best with
the occasion, out of any; yet (whether we consider the Wisdom and Justice of
the Legislator supremely good, or the excellency of the Laws) the Prerogative
of Authority, where the nature of the thing admits it, must needs belong to
Israel. That this opinion should go sore with Divines, is strange; and yet, if
there be any feeling of their pulse by this their Advocat or Attorney, it is as
true.

In his Epist.
FOR while he finds me writing out of Venice, he tells me, I have wisely put my
self under her Protection or Authority, against whom he dares not make War,
lest he should take part with the Turk.

Consid. p. 39.
BUT when he finds me writing out of Israel, he tells me, that he is not aware
of any Prerogative of Authority belonging to the Israelitish more than any
other Republic: which is to take part with the Devil.

SO much for Israel. Now for Lacedemon; but you will permit me to shake a
Friend or two by the hand, as I go.

THE first is ARISTOTLE, in these words: Pol. L. 5. c. 3.
INEQUALITY is the source of all Sedition, as when the Riches of one or the few
com to cause such an Overbalance as draws the Commonwealth into Monarchy or
Oligarchy; for prevention whereof the Ostracism has bin of use in diverse places,
as at Argos and Athens. But it were better to provide in the beginning, that
there be no such Disease in the Commonwealth, than to com afterward to her
Cure.



Plut. Lycur.
LYCURGUS judging that there ought to be no other inequality among Citizens of
the same Commonwealth than what derives from their Virtues, divided the Land so
equally among the Lacedaemonians, that on a day beholding the Harvest of their
Lots lying by Cocks or Ricks in the field, he laughing said, that it seemed to
him they were all Brothers.



THE third should have bin the Considerer, but he is at feud with us all.
Consid. p. 78.
THE Design of LYCURGUS, he professes, was not so much to attain an Equality in
the frame of his Government, as to drive into exile Riches, and the effects of
them, Luxury and Debauchery.



GENTLEMEN, What do you say? you have the Judgment of three great Philosophers,
and may make your own choice; only except he that has but one hundred pounds a
year, can have Wine and Women at as full command, and Retainers in as great
plenty, as he that has ten thousand, I should think these advantages accru'd
from Inequality, and that LYCURGUS had skill enough in a Commonwealth to see as
much. No, says the Prevaricator, it appears far otherwise, in that he admitted
of no Money but old Iron, a Cartload of which was worth little. Well, but in
Israel, where Silver and Gold was worth enough, my Gentleman would have it,
that one man in the compass of fifty years might purchase the whole Land, tho
that Country was much larger than this: and yet where, if the People had used
Money, they would have used Trade, and using both, such a thing, through the
straitness of the Territory, might have happened, he will not conceive the like
to have bin possible. No, tho he has an example of it in LYSANDER, who by the
spoil of Athens ruined the Agrarian, first by the overbalance that a man's Money
came to hold to his Lot; then by eating out the Lots themselves, and in those
the Equality of the Commonwealth. But these things he interprets pleasantly, as
if the Vow of voluntary Poverty (so he calls it) being broken, the
Commonwealth, like a forsworn Wretch, had gone and hanged her self: a Phansy too
rank, I doubt, of the Cloister, to be good at this work.

BUT whereas PLUTARCH, upon the narrowness of these Lots (which had they bin
larger, must have made the Citizens fewer than thirty thousand, and so unable
to defend the Commonwealth) and use of this same old and rusty Iron instead of
Money, observes Plut. Lycur.
it came by this means to pass that there was neither a fine Orator,
Fortuneteller, Baud, nor Goldsmith to be found in Lacedemon; our Considerer
professes,

THAT it is to him as strange as any thing in History, that LYCURGUS should
find credit enough to settle a Government, which carried along with it so much
want and hardship to particular men, that the total absence of Government could
scarce have put them into a worse condition; the Laws that he made prohibiting
the use of those things, which to enjoy with security, is that only to other
men that makes the Yoke of Laws supportable.

HERE he is no Monk again; I would ask him no more, than that Pontus) at the
Lacedemonian black broth: But who has opened his mouth against Plumpottage,
gilded Coaches, Pages, Lacquys, fair Mannorhouses, good Tables, rich Furniture,
full Purses, Universitys, good Benefices, Scarlet Robes, square Caps, rich
Jewels, or said any thing that would not multiply all this? Why, says he, you
are so far right, that the Voice of LYCURGUS'S Agrarian was, Every man shall be
thus poor; and that of yours is, That no man shall be more than thus rich. This
is an Argument (an't please you) by which he thinks he has proved, that there
is no difference between the Agrarian that was in Lacedemon, and that which is
in Oceana: For, Sir, whatsoever is thus and thus, is like: But the Agrarian of
Lacedemon was thus, A man could have no Money, or none that deserved that name;
and the Agrarian of Oceana is thus, A man's Money is not confined: Therefore the
Agrarian of the one, and of the other, are like. Was it not a great grievance
in Lacedemon, think you, that they had no such Logic nor Logician? Be this as
it will, It had bin impossible, says he, for LYCURGUS to have settled his
Government, had he not wisely obtained a Response from the Oracle at Delphos,
magnifying and recommending it: After which all resistance would have bin
downright Impiety and Disobedience, which concerns Mr. HARRINGTON very little.
The Bible then is not so good an Oracle as was that at Delphos. But this
Reflection has a tang with it, that makes me think it relates to that where he
says, I know not how, but Mr. HARRINGTON has Consid. p. 18.
taken up a very great unkindness for the Clergy. He will know nothing; neither
that the Oracle of the Scripture is of all other the clearest for a
Commonwealth, nor that the Clergy being generally against a Commonwealth, are
in this below the Priests of Delphos, who were more for LYCURGUS than these are
for MOSES. But hav'at the Agrarian of Oceana with the whole bail of Dice, and
at five throws.

THE first throw is, That it is unjust: For,

Consid. p. 81.
IF it be truly asserted (in Oceana, Page the 39th) that Government is founded
on Property, then Property consists in Nature before Government, and Government
is to be fitted to Property, not Property to Government. How great a Sin then
would it be against the first and purest notion of Justice, to bring in a
Government not only different from but directly destructive to the settled
Property of Oceana, where (in the 107th Page) there are confessed to be three
hundred Persons, whose Estates in Land excede the Standard of two thousand
pounds a year. Let me not be chok'd with the Example of Lacedemon, till Mr.
HARRINGTON has shown us the Power of his Persuasion with the Nobility of
Oceana, as LYCURGUS with them of Lacedemon, to throw up their Lands to be
parcel'd by his Agrarian (as Page 111.) and when that is don, I shall cease to
complain of the Injustice of it. Nor need any one of these three hundred be put
to own a shame, for preferring his own Interest before that of a whole Nation;
for tho when Government is once fixed, it may be fit to submit private to public
Vtility, yet when the question is of choosing a Government, every particular man
is left to his own native Right, which cannot be prescribed against by the
Interest of all the rest of Mankind.



WHEREAS I no where deny Property to derive her being from Law; he insinuats
that I presume Property to be in Nature. There Is One.

WHEREAS in natural and domestic Vicissitude, I assert, That Empire is to follow
the Legal State of Property; he imposes, as if I had asserted, that Empire must
follow the natural state of Property. Two.

WHEREAS in violent or foren Vicissitude (as when the Israelits possessed
themselves of the Land of Canaan, the Goths and Vandals of Italy, the Franks of
France, the Saxons of England) Property, in order to the Government to be
introduced, is alterable; he insinuats as if I had said, that Empire must
always follow the state of Property, not as it may be altered in that relation,
but as it is found. Three.

WHEREAS the Government of Oceana is exactly fitted to Property, as it was
settled before; he insinuats it to be destructive to the settled Property. Four.

WHEREAS I say, that to put it with the most, they that are Proprietors of Land
in Oceana, exceeding two thousand pounds a year, do not excede three hundred
Persons; he says, that I have confessed they be three hundred. Five.

WHEREAS I show that the Nobility of Lacedemon, upon the persuasion of LYCURGUS,
threw up their Estates to be parcel'd by his Agrarian; but that in Oceana, it
is not needful or required that any man should part with a Farthing, or throw
up one shovelful of his Earth: he imposes, as if I went about to persuade the
Nobility to throw up their Lands. Six.

WHEREAS I have shown that no one of those within the three hundred can have any
Interest against the Agrarian; he, without showing what such an Interest can
be, insinuats that they have an Interest against it. Seven.

WHEREAS the Government of Oceana gos altogether upon consent, and happens not
only to fit private to public, but even public to private Utility, by which means
it is void of all Objection; he insinuats, that it is against private Utility.
Eight.

WHERE he says, that in choosing a Government every man is left to his own
native Right; he insinuats that the Agrarian (which dos no more than fix
Property, as she found it) is against native Right. Nine.

WHEREAS God has given the Earth to the Sons of men, which native Right (as in
case a man for hunger takes so much as will feed him, and no more, of any other
man's meat or herd) prescribes against legal Property, and is the cause why the
Law esteems not such an Action to be Theft; he insinuats that there is a native
Right in legal Property, which cannot be prescribed against by the Interest of
all the rest of Mankind. Ten.

WHILE he pleaded the case of Monarchy, Levelling was concluded lawful; in the
case of a Commonwealth, which asks no such favor, Levelling is concluded
unlawful. Eleven.

IN the Reformation or Level as to Monarchy, tho Property subsisted before that
Level, yet Property was to be fitted to the Government, and not the Government
to Property* but in the case of a Commonwealth the Government is to be fitted
to Property, and not Property Twelve.

IN that, any man was bound to relinquish his native Right, else how could a
Prince level his Nobility? In this, no man is bound to relinquish his native
Right. Thirteen.

IN that, this same native Right might be prescribed against by the Prince; in
this, it cannot be prescribed against by the Interest of Mankind. Fourteen.

IN that, no Nobleman but ought to own a shame if he preferred his Interest
before that of the Prince; in this, no Nobleman ought to own a shame for
preferring his own Interest before that of a whole Nation. Fifteen.

WOULD you have any more? these fifteen majors and minors, or false Dice, are
soop'd up again, and put all into this Conclusion or Box, like themselves.

THVS the Interest of the three hundred is not balanced with that of a whole
Nation, but that of some few extravagant Spirits; who, by making Dams in the
Current of other men's Estates, hope to derive some Water to their own parched
Fortunes.

CALVMNIARE fortiter, nihil adhaerebit. If a River has but one natural Bed or
Channel, what Dam is made in it by this Agrarian? but if a River has had many
natural Beds or Channels, to which she has forgot to reach her Breast, and
whose Mouths are dried up or obstructed; these are Dams which the Agrarian dos
not make, but remove: and what parched Fortunes can hereby hope to be watered,
but theirs only, whose Veins having drunk of the same Blood, have a right in
Nature to drink of the same Milk? The Law of MOSES allowed the firstborn but a
double portion: was his an extravagant Spirit?

HIS second throw is, That the nature of the Agrarian is such as cannot be
fixed, in regard that the People being entrusted with a Vote and a Sword, may
alter it for the less, or com to downright Levelling. But as to this, in the 8
th Chapter I have barred his Dice, that being the place in which I thought most
proper to give a full Answer to this Objection.

AT the third throw, he is extreme awkward. For whereas the Israelits
(notwithstanding the Voyages of SOLOMON, and what is said of the Ships of
Tharsis) during their Agrarian, or while they had Land, were a Commonwealth of
Husbandmen, and not of Merchants, nor came to the exercise of this Trade, till
they had no Land, or after their dispersion by the Emperor ADRIAN; he scrues it
in, after this manner -- As the Jews who have no Lands, are every where great
Traders; Consid. p. 85.
so the possession of Lands being limited by this Agrarian, men who are either
covetous or ambitious (as if Estates were not got by Industry, but by
Covetousness and Ambition) will employ themselves and their Estates in foren
Traffic, which being in a manner wholly ingrost by the Capital City of Oceana,
that City, already too great, will immediately grow into an excess of Power and
Riches, very dangerous to the Commonwealth; Amsterdam being com by such means
to exercise of late a Tyranny in the disposal of some public Affairs, much to
the prejudice both of the Liberty and Interest of the rest of the Union. An
equal, if not greater Incommodity to Oceana, would b^ created by the Agrarian,
which making Emporium a City of Princes, would render the Country a
Commonwealth of

NEWS, not from Tripoli, nor any other corner of the whole World but one. Bate
me this, and show me in what other City increase of Houses or new Foundations
was ever held a Nuisance. This sure is a Phansy that regards not the old Folks,
or ancient Prudence.

ONE of the Blessings that God promised to ABRAHAM, was, that his Seed should
be multiplied as the Stars of Heaven: And the Commonwealth of Rome, by
multiplying her Seed, came to bound her Territory with the Ocean, and her Fame
with the Stars of Heaven. That such a Populousness is that without which there
can be no great Commonwealth, both Reason and good Authors are clear; but
whether it ought to begin in the Country, or in the City, is a scruple I have
not known them make. That of Israel began in the Country, that of Rome in the
City. Except there be obstruction or impediment by the Law, as in Turkey where
the Country, and in England where the City is forbid to increase; wherever
there is a populous Country, for example France, it makes a populous City, as
Paris; and wherever there is a populous City, as Rome after the ruin of Alba,
and Amsterdam after the ruin (as to Trade) of Antwerp, it makes a populous
Territory, as was that of the Rustic Tribes, and is that of Holland.

BUT the ways how a populous City coms to make a populous Country, and how a
populous Country coms to make a populous City, are contrary; the one happening
through sucking, as that of the City, and the other through weaning, as that of the
Country.

FOR proof of the former: the more mouths there be in a City, the more meat of
necessity must be vented by the Country, and so there will be more Corn, more
Cattle, and better Markets; which breeding more Laborers, more Husbandmen, and
richer Farmers, bring the Country so far from a Commonwealth of Cottagers, that
where the Blessings of God, through the fruitfulness of late years with us,
rendered the Husbandman unable to dispute Precedence with the Beggars Bush, his
Trade thus uninterrupted, in that his Markets are certain, gos on with increase
of Children, of Servants, of Corn, and of Cattle: for there is no reason why
the Fields adjoining to Emporium, being but of a hard soil, should annually
produce two Crops; but the Populousness of the City.

THE Country then growing more populous, and better stocked with Cattle, which
also increases Manure for the Land, must proportionably increase in
fruitfulness. Hence it is that (as the Romans also were good at such works) in
Holland there is scarce a puddle undrain'd, nor a bank of Sand cast up by the
Sea, that is not covered with Earth, and made fruitful by the People; these
being so strangely, with the growth of Amsterdam, increased, as coms perhaps to
two parts in three: nor, the Agrarian taking place in Oceana, would it be
longer disputed, whether she might not destroy Fishes to plant Men. Thus a
populous City makes a Country milch, or populous by sucking; and whereas some may
say, that such a City may suck from foren parts, it is true enough, and no
where more apparent than in Amsterdam. But a City that has recourse to a foren
Dug, ere she had first sucked that of her proper Nurse or Territory dry, you
shall hardly find; or finding (as in some Plantation not yet weaned) will hardly
be able to make that Objection hold, seeing it will not ly so much against

BUT a populous Country makes a populous City by weaning; for when the People
increase so much, that the dug of Earth can do no more, the overplus must seek
some other way of Livelihood: which is either Arms, such were those of the Goths
and Vandals; or Merchandise and Manufacture, for which ends it being necessary
that they lay their Heads and their Stock together, this makes populous Citys.
Thus Holland being a small Territory, and sucked dry, has upon the matter
weaned the whole People, and is thereby become as it were one City that sucks all
the World.

BUT by this means, says the Considerer, Emporium being already too great
(while indeed Amsterdam, considering the narrowness of the Territory, or the
smalness of Holland, is much more populous) would immediately grow into an
excess of Power and Riches, very dangerous to Liberty, an example whereof was
seen in the late Tyranny of that City: As if it were not sufficiently known
that Amsterdam contributes, and has contributed more to the desence of the
Commonwealth, or United Provinces, than all the rest of the League, and had in
those late Actions which have bin scandalized, resisted not the Interest of
Liberty, but of a Lord. That the increase of Rome, which was always studied by
her best Citizens, should make her Head too great for her Body, or her Power
dangerous to the Tribes, was never so much as imagined; and tho she were a City
of Princes, her rustic Tribes were ever had in greatest Esteem and Honor;
insomuch, that a Patrician would be of no other.

BUT the Authority of ancient Commonwealths is needless; the Prevaricator by
his own Argumentation or Might, lays himself neck and heels.

Consid. p. 93.
FOR, says he, Were this Agrarian once settled, Emporium would be a City of
Princes, and the Nobility so throly plumed, that they would be just as strong
of wing, as wild Fowl in moulting time. There would be a City of Princes, and
yet no Nobility. He is so fast that I have pity on him, if I knew but which way
to let him loose. He means perhaps, that the Merchants growing rich, would be
the Nobility; and the Nobility growing poor, would be Grasiers.

BUT so for ought I know it was always, or worse, that is, men attained to
Riches and Honors by such or worse Arts, and in Poverty made not always so
honest Retreats. To all which Infirmitys of the State, I am deceived if this
Agrarian dos not apply the proper Remedys. For such an Agrarian makes a
Commonwealth for increase: the Trade of a Commonwealth for increase, is Arms;
Arms are not born by Merchants, but by Noblemen and Gentlemen. The Nobility
therefore having these Arms in their hands, by which Provinces are to be
acquired, new Provinces yield new Estates; so whereas the Merchant has his
returns in Silk or Canvas, the Soldier will have his return in Land. He that
represents me as an Enemy to the Nobility, is the man he speaks of; for if ever
the Commonwealth attains to five new Provinces (and such a Commonwealth will
have Provinces enough) it is certain, that (besides Honors, Magistracys, and the
Revenues annexed) there will be more Estates in the Nobility of Oceana, of
fourteen thousand pounds Land a year, than ever were, or can otherwise be of
four; and that without any the least danger to the Rome had but looked so far
to it, as to have made good her Agrarian in Italy, tho she had neglected the
rest, the Wealth of her Nobility might have sucked her Provinces, but must have
enriched the People; and so rather have watered her Roots, than starved and
destroyed them, as it did. In this case therefore the Nobility of Oceana would
not moulter like wild Fowl, but be strong of wing as the Eagle.

ONE Argument more I have heard urged against the Populousness of the Capital
City, which is, That the Rich in time of sickness forsaking the place, by which
means the Markets com to fail, the Poor, lest they should starve, will run
abroad, and infect the whole Country. But should a man tell them at Paris, or
Grand Cairo (in the latter whereof the Plague is more frequent and furious than
happens with us) that they are not to build Houses, nor increase so much, lest
they should have the Plague; or that Children are not to be born so fast, lest
they die, they would think it strange news. A Commonwealth is furnished with
Laws, and Power to add such as she shall find needful. In case a City be in
that manner visited, it is the duty of the Country, and of the Government, to
provide for them by contribution.

Consid. p. 37.
THE difficulty in making the Agrarian equal and steady through the rise or fall
that may happen in Money, which is the fourth throw of the Prevaricator, is that
which it might have bin for his ease to have taken notice was long since
sufficiently barred, where it is said, That if a new Survey at the present Rent
was taken* an Agrarian ordaining that no man should thenceforth hold above so
much Land as is there valued at the rate, however Money might alter, would be
equal and steady enough.

Consid. p. 89.
HIS last cast is, That the Agrarian would make War against universal and
immemorial Custom; which being without doubt more prevalent than that of
Reason, there is nothing of such difficulty as to persuade men at once, and
crudely, that they and their Forefathers have bin in an Error.

WISE men, I see, may differ in Judgment or Counsil: for, says Essay 24.
Sir FRANCIS BACON, Surely every Medicin is an Innovation, and he that will not
apply new Remedys must expect new Evils: for Time is the greatest Innovator;
and if Time of course alters things to the worse, and Wisdom and Counsil may
not alter them to the better, what must be the end?

BUT the case of the Agrarian receives equal strength from each of these
Counsillors or Opinions: from the latter, in that it gos upon grounds which
Time has not innovated for the worse, but for the better; and so according to
the former coms not to have bin at once, and crudely persuaded, but introduced
by Custom, now grown universal and immemorial. For who remembers the Gentry of
this Nation to have worn the blew Coats of the Nobility, or the lower sort of*
People to have lived upon the smoke of their Kitchins? On the contrary, Is it
not now a universal Custom for men to rely upon their own Fortunes or Industry,
and not to put their Trust in Princes, seeking in their Liberality or
Dependence the means of living? The Prevaricator might as well jump into his
great Grandfather's old Breeches, and persuade us that he is a la mode, or in
the new cut, as that the ways of our Forefathers would agree with our Customs.
Dos not every man now see, that if the Kings in those days had settled the
Estates of the Oceana that the bulk of the Estate should descend to the eldest
Son, by the Agrarian he cannot, in case he has more Brothers, inherit above two
thousand pounds a year in Land, or an equal share. But neither dos this,
whether you regard the Parents or the Children, make War with Custom. For
putting the case the Father has twenty thousand pounds a year in Land, he gos
not the less in his custom or way of Life for the Agrarian, because for this he
has no less: and if he has more or fewer Sons to whom this Estate descends by
equal or inequal portions, neither do they go less in their ways or customs of
Life for the Agrarian, because they never had more. But, says ARISTOTLE Pol. L.
3. c. 9.
(speaking of the Ostracism as it supplys the defect of an Agrarian) this course
is as necessary to Kings as to Commonwealths. By this means the Monarchys of
Turkey and of Spain preserve their Balance; through the neglect of this has that of
the Nobility of Oceana bin broken: and this is it which the Prevaricator, in
advising that the Nobility be no further levelled than will serve to keep the
People under, requires of his Prince. So, That an Agrarian is necessary to
Government, be it what it will, is on all hands concluded.

CHAP. XII.
Whether Courses or a Rotation be necessary to a well-ordered Commonwealth. In
which is contained the Courses or Parembole of Israel before the Captivity,
together with the Epitome of Athens and Venice.
Oceana, p. 54.
ONE bout more and we have don: This (as reason good) will be upon Wheels or
Rotation: For,

AS the Agrarian answers to the equality of the Foundation or Root, so dos
Rotation to the equality of the Superstructures or Branches of a Commonwealth.

EQUAL Rotation is equal Vicissitude in, or Succession to Magistracy conferred
for equal terms, injoining such equal Vacations, as case the Government to take
in the Body of the People, by parts succeding others, through the free Election or
Suffrage of the whole.

THE contrary whereto is prolongation of Magistracy, which, trashing the wheel
of Rotation, destroys the Life or natural Motion of a Commonwealth.

THE Prevaricator, whatever he has don for himself, has don this for me, that
it will be out of doubt whether my Principles be capable of greater Obligation*
or Confirmation, than by having Objections made against them. Nor have I bin
altogether ungrateful, or nice of my Labor, but gone far (much farther than I
needed) about, that I might return with the more valuable Present to him that
sent me on the

ROTATION in a Commonwealth is of the Magistracy, of the Senate, of the People;
of the Magistracy and the People; of the Magistracy and the Senate; or of the
Magistracy, of the Senate, and of the People: which in all com to six kinds.

FOR example of Rotation in the Magistracy, you have the Judge Grot.
of Israel, called in Hebrew Shophet. The like Magistracy after the Kings
ITHOBAL and BAAL came in use with the Tyrians; from these, with their Posterity
the Carthaginians, who also called their supreme Magistrates, being in number
two, and for their Term Annual, Shophetim, which the Latins by a softer
Pronunciation render Suffetes.

THE Shophet or Judge of Israel was a Magistrate, not, that I can find, obliged
to any certain term, throout the Book of Judges; nevertheless, it is plain,
that his Election was occasional, and but for a time, after the manner of a
Dictator.

TRUE it is, that ELI and SAMUEL ruled all their lives; but upon this such
impatience in the People followed, through the corruption of their Sons, as was
the main cause of the succeding Monarchy.

THE Magistrates in Athens (except the Areopagits, being a Judicatory) were all
upon Rotation. The like for Lacedemon and Rome, except the Kings in the former,
who were indeed hereditary, but had no more Power than the Duke in Venice,
where all the rest of the Magistrates (except the Procuratori, whose Magistracy
is but mere Ornament) are also upon Rotation.

FOR the Rotation of the Senate you have Athens, the Achaeans, Aetolians,
Lycians, the Amphictionium; and the Senate of Lacedemon reproved, Pol. l. 2. c.
7.
in that it was for life, by ARISTOTLE: Modern Examples of like kind are the
Diet of Switzerland, but especially the Senate of Venice.

FOR the Rotation of the People, you have first Israel, where the Congregation
(which the Greecs call Ecclesia; the Latins, Comitia, or Concio) having a
twofold capacity; first, that of an Army, in which they were the constant Guard
of the Country; and, secondly, that of a Representative, in which they gave the
Vote of the People, at the creation of their Laws, or election of their
Magistrates, was Monthly. 1 Chronicles. 27. 1.
Now the Children of Israel after their Number, to wit, the chief Fathers and
Captains of thousands and hundreds, and their Officers that served the King in
any matter of the Courses, which came in and went out month by month, throout
all the months of the year, of every Course were twenty and four thousand.

Grot. ad loc.
SUCH a multitude there was of military Age, that without inconvenience, four
and twenty thousand were every month in Arms, whose term expiring, others
succeeded, and so others; by which means the Rotation of the whole People came
about in the space of one year. The Tribuns, or Commanders of the Tribes in
Arms, or of the Prerogative for the month, are named in the following part of
the Chapter, to the sixteenth Verse; where begins the enumeration of the
Princes (tho GAD and ASHUR, for what reason I know not, be omitted) of the
Tribes, remaining in their Provinces, where they judged the People, and as they
received Orders, were to bring or send such farther Inforcement or Recruits as
occasion required to the Army: after these, some other Officers are mentioned.
There is no question to be made but this

TO their Laws, as where DAVID proposes the reduction of the Ark: And DAVID
consulted with the Captains of thousands and hundreds, 1 Chronicles. 13.
and with every Leader. And DAVID said to all the Congregation of Israel, If it
seems good to you, and it be of the Lord God, let us send abroad to our
Brethren every where (the Princes of Tribes in their Provinces) that are left
in the Land of Israel, and with them also to the Priests and Levites, which are
in the Citys and Suburbs, that they may gather themselves to us; and let us
bring again the Ark of our God to us, for we inquired not at it in the days of
SAUL. And all the Congregation (gave their Suffrage in the Affirmative) said
that they would do so; for the thing was right in the eyes of the People. Nulla
lex sibi soli conscientiam Justitiae Grot. e Tertul.
suae debet, sed eis a quibus obsequium expectat. Now that the same Congregation
or Representative gave the Vote of the People also in the Election of Priests,
Officers and Magistrates; Moreover DAVID and 1 Chronicles. 25.
the Captains of the Host separated to the Service of the Sons of ASAPH, and of
HEMAN, and of JEDUTHUN, who should prophesy with Harps, with Psalterys, and
with Cymbals. But upon the occasion to which we are more especially beholden
for the preservation and discovery of this admirable Order (DAVID having
proposed the business in a long and 1 Chronicles. 28. 2.
pious speech) the Congregation made SOLOMON the Son of DAVID King the second
time, and anointed him to the Lord to be chief Governor, 1 Chronicles. 29. 22.
and ZADOK to be Priest. For as to the first time that SOLOMON was made King, it
happened, through the Sedition of ADONIJAH, to 1 Kings 1.
have bin don in have and tumultuously by those only of Jerusalem; and the
reason why ZADOK is here made Priest, is, that ABIATHAR was put out for being
of the Conspiracy with ADONIJAH.

I MAY expect (by such Objections as they afford me) it should be alleged, that
to prove an Order in a Commonwealth, I instance in a Monarchy; as if there were
any thing in this Order monarchical, or that could, if it had not bin so
received from the Commonwealth, have bin introduced by the Kings, to whom in
the judgment of any sober man (the Prevaricator only excepted, who has bin
huckling about some such Council for his Prince) no less could have followed
upon the first frown of the People, than did in REHOBOAM, who having 1 Kings 12.
used them roughly, was deposed by the Congregation, or the major part. It is
true, that while Israel was an Army, the Congregation, as it needed not to
assemble by way of Election or Representative, so I believe it did not; but
that by all Israel assembled to this end, should be meant the whole People
after they were planted upon their Lots, and not their Representative, which in
a political sense is as properly so called, were absurd and impossible. Nor
need I go upon presumtion only, be the same never so strong, seeing it is said
in Scripture of the Korathites, that they were keepers of the Gates of the
Tabernacle, and their Fathers 1 Chronicles. 9. 29.
being over the Host of the Lord, were keepers of the Entry: That is,
(according to the Interpretation of GROTIUS) the Korathites were Numbers, their
Numb. 4.
Ancestors the Kohathites had bin in the Camp, or while Israel was yet an Army.
But our Translation is lame in the right foot, as to the true discovery of the
ancient manner of this service, which according to the Septuagint and the
vulgar Latin was thus, they were keepers of the Gates of the Tabernacle ((...),
and familiae eorum per vices) and their Fathers by turns, or Rotation. So that
Offices and Services by Courses, Turns, or Rotation, are plainly more ancient
than Kings in the Commonwealth of Israel; tho it be true that when the Courses
or Rotation of the Congregation or Representative of the People were first
introduced, is as hard to show, as it would be how, after the People were once
planted upon their Lots, they could be otherwise assembled. If Writers argue
well and lawfully from what the Sanhedrim was in the institution by JEHOSAPHAT,
to what it had more anciently bin; to argue from what the Congregation was in
the institution by DAVID, to what it had more anciently bin, is sufficiently
warranted.

THESE things rightly considered, there remains little doubt but we have the
courses of Israel for the first example of Rotation in a popular Assembly. Now
to com from the Hebrew to the Grecian Prudence, the same is approved by
ARISTOTLE, which he exemplifys in the Commonwealth of THALES MILESIUS, where
the People, Pol. l. 4. c. 14.
he says, assembled ((...)) by turns or Rotation. Nor is the Roman Prudence
without some shadow of the like Proceeding, where the Prerogative (pro tempore)
with the jure vocatae, being made by Lot, gave frequently the Suffrage of the
whole People. But the Gothic Prudence in the Policy of the third State, runs
altogether upon the Collection of a Representative by the Suffrage of the
People (tho not so diligently regulated, by Terms and Vacations, as to a
standing Assembly were necessary, by Turns, Rotation, Parembole or Courses) as
in the election of the late House of Commons, and the constitutive Vicissitude
of the Knights and Burgesses, is known by sufficient experience.

WHEN the Rotation of a Commonwealth is both in the Magistracy and the People,
I reckon it to be of a fourth kind, as in Israel, where both the Judge and the
Congregation were so elected.

THE fifth kind is when the Rotation of a Commonwealth is in the Magistracy and
the Senate, as in those of Athens, of the Achaeans, of the Aetolians, of the
Lycians, and of Venice; upon which Examples, rather for the influence each of
them, at least Athens, may have upon the following Book, than any great
necessity from the present occasion, I shall enlarge in this place.

THE Commonwealth of Athens was thus administered.

Epitome of the Athenian Commonwealth.
THE Senate of the Bean being the proposing Assembly (for that of the
Areopagits, called also a Senate, was a Judicatory) consisted of four hundred
Citizens chosen by Lot, which was performed with Beans. These were annually
removed all at once: By which means Athens became frustrated of the natural and
necessary use of an Aristocracy, while neither her Senators were chosen for
their parts, nor remained long enough in this Function to acquire the right
understanding of their proper Office. These thus elected, were subdivided by
Lot into four equal parts, called Prytanys, each of which for one quarter of
the year was in office. The Prytany, or Prytans in office, elected ten
Presidents, Proedri, out of which Proedri or Presidents they weekly chose one
Provost of the Council, who was called the Epistata. The Epistata and the
Proedri were the more peculiar Proposers to the Prytans, and to the Prytans it
belonged especially to prepare business Petit. de Leg* At.
((...)) for the Senate. They gave also audience to any that would propose any
thing concerning the Commonwealth, which if, when reported by the Prytans, it
were approved by the Senate, the party that proposed might promulgat the
business; and Promulgation being made, the Congregation assembled, and
determined of it. Sic data concio Laelio est, processit ille, and Graecus apud
Graecos Cic. pro Flac*
non de culpa sua dixit, sed de poena questus est; porrexerunt manus, Psephisma
natum est.

THE Prytans and their Magistrates had right to assemble the Senate, and propose
to them; and what the Senate determined upon such a Proposition, if forthwith to
be offered to the People, as in private cases, was called Proboulema; but if not
to be proposed till the People had a years trial of it, as was the ordinary way
in order to Laws to be enacted, it was called Psephisma; each of which words,
with that difference, signifys a Decree. A Decree of the Senate in the latter
sense had for one year the power of a Law, after which trial it belonged to the
Thesmothetae ((...)) to hang it in writing upon the Statues of the Heroes, and
assemble the Congregation. These Magistrates were of the Ulpi^n. ad Phil. 1.
number of the Archons, which in all were nine; the chief, more peculiarly so
called, was ARCHON EPONYMUS, he by whose name the year was reckoned or
denominated (his Magistracy being of a Civil Poll. l. 8. c. 8.
concernment) the next was the King (a Magistrate of a Spiritual concernment) the
third the Polemarch (whose Magistracy was of a Military concernment) the other
six were the Thesmothetae, who had several Functions common with the nine;
others peculiar or proper to themselves, as ((...)) to give the People (by
Placarts) notice when the Judicatorys were to assemble, that is, when the
People were to assemble in that capacity, and to judge according to the Law
made; or, when the Senate or the People were to assemble upon an (...), a Crime
that was not provided against by the Law, as that of ALCIBIADES (the Wits about
that time in Athens being most of them Atheists) for laughing at CERES,
discovering her Secrets, and shaving of the MERCURYS. If an Archon or Demagog
was guilty of such a Crime, it belonged to the cognizance of the Senate,
otherwise to that of the People, whom the Thesmothetae were also in like manner
to warn, L. 8. c. 16.
when they were to com to the Suffrage.

THESE six, like the Electors in Venice, presided at all Elections of
Magistrates, whether made by the Lot as the Judges, or by Suffrage as the new
Archons, the Strategus or General, and most of the rest. They also had the
hearing and introducing of all Causes into the Judicatorys.

BUT the right of assembling the Ecclesia or Congregation belonged to the
Prytans, by whom the Senate proposed to the People.

THE Congregation consisted of all them that were upon the Roll of the
Lexiarcha, that is to say, of the whole People having right to the City. The
Prytans seated upon a Tribunal, were Presidents of this Assembly; the Assembly
having sacrificed and made Oath of Fidelity to the Commonwealth, the Proedri or
Presidents of the Prytans Authority of the Senate to the People in this manner:
July the 16th POLICLES being Archon, and the Tribe of Pandion in the Prytaneat,
DEMOSTHENES PAEANEUS thought thus, or was of this opinion. The same Custom
whereby the first Proposer subscribes his Opinion or Part with his Name, is at
this day in Venice. Proposition being made, such of the People as would speak
were called to the Pulpit; they that were fifty years of Age, or upwards, were
to com first, and the younger afterward; which custom of prating in this
manner made excellent Orators or Demagogs, but a bad Commonwealth.

FROM this, that the People had not only the Result of the Commonwealth, but
the Debate also, Athens is called a Democracy; and this kind of Government is
opposed to that of Lacedemon, which, because the People there had not the power
of Debate, but of Result only, was called an Aristocracy, sometimes an
Oligarchy: thus the Greecs commonly are to be understood, to distinguish these
two; while according to my Principles, if you like them, Debate in the People
makes Anarchy; and where they have the Result and no more, the rest being
managed by a good Aristocracy, it makes that which is properly and truly to be
called Democracy, or Popular Government. Neither is this Opinion of mine new,
but according to the Judgment of some of the Athenians themselves; for says
ISOCRATES in his Oration to the Areopagits for Reformation of the Athenian
Government, I know the main reason why the Lacedaemonians flourish to be, that
their Commonwealth is popular. But to return. As many of the People as would,
having showed their Eloquence, and with these the Demagogs, who were frequently
bribed, concealed their Knavery; the Epistata, or Provost of the Proedri, put
the Decree or Question to the Vote, and the People gave the Result of the
Commonwealth by their Chirotonia, that is, by holding up their hands: the
Result thus given, was the Law or Psephisma of the People.

Them. Phil. 1.
NOW for the Functions of the Congregation, they were diverse; as first,
Election of Magistrates ((...);) namely, the Archons, the Strategus or General,
the Field Officers, the Admirals, with diverse others, all, or the chief of them
annual, and commonly upon Terms and Vacations; tho it be true, as PLUTARCH has
it, that PHOCION was Strategus four years together, having that Honor still put
upon him by the Congregation, without his seeking. The next Office of this
Assembly was to elect Judges into five Courts or Judicatorys; for the People
being in the Bulk too unweildy a Body for the performance of this duty, they
exercised the supreme Judicature by way of Representative, into which Election
was made by Lottery, in such a manner that five hundred, one thousand, or 1500
of them (according to the importance of the occasion) being above thirty years
of Age, and within the rest of the Qualifications in that case provided by the
Law, became the Soverain Judicatory, called the Heliaea. In all Elections,
whether by Lot or Suffrage, the Thesmothetae were Presidents, and ordered the
Congregation. Furthermore, if they would amend, alter, repeal, or make a Law,
this also was don by a Representative, of which no man was capable that had not
bin of the Heliaea, for the rest elected out of the whole People: this
amounting to one thousand, was called the Nomothetae or Legislators. No Law
received by the People could be abrogated but Nomothetae; by these any
Athenian, having obtained leave of the Senate, might abrogat a Law, provided
withal he put another in the place of it. These Laws the Proedri of the Prytans
were to put to the Suffrage.

FIRST, the old, whether it agreed with the Athenian People, or not? then the
new; and whether of these happened to be chirotoniz'd or voted by the
Nomothetae, was ratified, according to that piece of the Athenian Law cited by
DEMOSTHENES against TIMOCRATES, (...). What has bin said of the Commonwealth of
Athens, in relation to the present purpose, amounts to thus much, That not only
the Senate and the Magistracy in this Policy was upon Rotation, but even the
People also, at least as to the Nomothetae, or their Legislative Power, and the
Supreme Judicatory of the Heliaea, each of these being a Representative,
constituted of one thousand, or fifteen hundred Citizens.

BUT for what follows in the second Book, it is necessary that I observe in
this place the proceeding of certain Divines, who endeavor to make use of this
Commonwealth for ends of their own, as particularly Dr. SEAMAN; who in his Book
called Four Propositions, argues after this manner.

CHIROTONIA (as SUIDAS has it) signifys both Plebiscitum, a Law made by the
People, and Psephisma. Now, says he, Psephisma is the ordinary word used in the
Attic Laws, and in DEMOSTHENES for Senatusconsultum, a Law made by the Senate:
whence he draws this Conclusion; As, when the People make a Law, they are said
to Chirotonize; so may the Rulers, in like manner, in those Laws that are made
by themselves alone.

THESE ways with Divines are too bad. The words of SUIDAS are these ((...))
Chirotonia is Election or Ratification by the Many: which expressly excludes the
Few or the Senate from being otherwise contained by the word Chirotonia, than a
part is by the whole. Nor has the Author the word Psephisma or Plebiscitum in
the place. I would fain know what other word there is in Greec for Plebiscitum
but Psephisma; and yet the Doctor puts it upon SUIDAS, that he distinguishes
between these two, and taking that for granted where he finds Psephisma in
DEMOSTHENES and the Attic Laws, will have it to signify no more than a Decree
of the Senate. It is true that some Decrees of the Senate were so called, but
those of the People had no other name; and whenever you find Psephisma in
DEMOSTHENES or the Attic Laws, for a Law, there is nothing more certain than
that it is to be understood of the People: for to say that a Law in a Popular
Commonwealth can be made without the People, is a Contradiction.

Poll. lib. 8. c. 9.
THE second Passage is a What think you of these words of POLLUX, (...). Which
the Doctor having englished in this manner, The Thesmothetae do privately
prescribe when Judgment is to be given, and promulge public Accusations and
Suffrages to the People, asks you whose Suffrages were these, if not the
Rulers? By which strange Construction, where POLLUX Thesmothetae was common
with that of the nine Archons, coms ((...)) to show you what was peculiar to
themselves, namely, to give notice when the Heliaea or other Judicatorys were
to assemble; the Doctor renders it, they do privately prescribe: as if the
Session of a Court of Justice, and such a one as contained a thousand Judges,
being the Representative of the whole People, were to be privately prescribed.
Then to this private prescribing of Justice, he adds, that they do publicly
promulge ((...)) Citations upon Crimes not within the written Law; as if private
Prescription and public Promulgation could stand together. Next, whereas
Promulgation in the very nature of the word signifys an Act before a Law made,
he presumes the Law to be first made by the Rulers, and then promulgated by the
Thesmothetae to the People, kim kam to the experience of all Commonwealths, the
nature of Promulgation, and the sense of his Author, whose words, as I showed
before, declare it to have bin the proper or peculiar office of the
Thesmothetae to give the People notice when they were to assemble for
Judicature, or when for giving their Chirotonia or Suffrage, by Promulgation of
the Cause ((...)) upon which they were to determine.

FOR the fourth passage, the Doctor quoting a wrong place for these words,
(...), that the Nomothetae (being a Representative, as I showed, of the whole
People, chosen by Lot, and in number one thousand) chirotoniz'd, or gave the
Legislative Suffrage; thence infers, that the Rulers chirotoniz'd, voted or
made Laws by themselves without the People: which is as if one should say, that
the Prerogative Tribe in Rome, or the House of Commons in England, gave their
Vote to such or such a Law, therefore it was made by the Rulers alone, and not
by the People of Rome or of England.

FOR the fourth Passage, STEPHANUS quotes DEMOSTHENES at large in these words,
(...). This the Doctor interprets of an Officer; to which I shall say more,
when he shows me where the Sentence is, or what went before: for as yet I do
not know of an Officer in any Commonwealth, whose Election was indifferently
made, either by the Senate or by the People; nor do I think the Doctor has
looked further for this than STEPHENS, who has not interpreted it.

THE fifth passage is, That a Decree of the Senate in Athens had the force of a
Law for one year, without the People. So had the Edicts of the Praetors in
Rome: but I would fain know, whence the Senate in Athens, or the Praetors in
Rome, originally derived this Right (which was no more than that such Laws
might be Probationers, and so better understood when they came to the vote) but
from the Chirotonia, or Suffrage of the People.

THE sixth passage stops the mouths of such as having nothing to say to the
matter of my writing, pick quarrels with the manner or freedom of it, the
Liberty I take in the defense of Truth; seeing the Doctor takes a greater
liberty upon other terms, while he bids his Antagonist (one that defended the
Cause now in my hand) go and consult his Authors, namely, STEPHENS and BUDAEUS
again: for, says he, you wrong those learned Men, while you would have us
believe that they were as ignorant of the Greec Story as your self, or that
things are to be found in them which are not. To which Confidence I have better
leave to say, that the Doctor should do well to take no worse Counsil

BUT what is become of my Prevaricator? I have quite lost him, else I should
have entreated him to compare his Notes out of my Sermon, with these out of the
Doctor's; or retract that same affectation, in saying, I know not how, but Mr.
HARRINGTON has conceived a great unkindness for the Clergy. As if these their
Stratagems, with which they make perpetual War against the unwary People, did
not concern a man that has undertaken the cause of Popular Government.

THE Policy of the Achaeans consisted of diverse Commonwealths under one, which
was thus administered. The Citys sent their Deputys twice every year of course,
and oftener if they were summoned by their Strategus, or their Demiurges, to the
place appointed. The Strategus was the Supreme Magistrate both Military and
Civil, and the Demiurges being ten, were his Council, all Annual Magistrates
elected by the People. This Council thus constituted, was called the Synarchy,
and performed like Dutys, in relation to the Senate, consisting of the Deputys
sent by their peculiar Soveraintys or Citys, as the Prytans to that in Athens.
The Policys of the Aetolians and Lycians are so near the same again, that in
one you have all. So both the Senats and the Magistracy of these Commonwealths
were upon Rotation. To conclude with Venice.

Epitome of the Commonwealth of Venice. The Great Council.
THE Commonwealth of Venice consists of four parts; the Great Council, the
Senate, the College, and the Signory.

THE Great Council is the aggregat Body of the whole People, or Citizens of
Venice, which, for the paucity of their number, and the Antiquity of their
Extraction, are called Gentlemen, or Noble Venetians. Every one of them at five
and twenty years of age has right of Session and Suffrage in this Council;
which right of Suffrage, because throout this Commonwealth, in all Debates and
Elections, it is given by the Ballot, is called the right of Balloting, whereby
this Council being the Soverain Power, creates all the rest of the Orders,
Councils, or Magistracys; and has constitutively the ultimat Result, both in
cases of Judicature, and the Constitution of Laws.

The Senate.
THE Senate, called also the Pregati, consists of sixty Senators properly so
styled, whereof the Great Council elects six on a day, beginning so long before
the month of October, that these being all chosen by that time, then receive
their Magistracy: it consists also of sixty more, called the Junta, which are
elected by the Scrutiny of the Old Senate, that is, by the Senate proposing, and
the Great Council resolving; the rest of their Creation is after the same
manner with the former. In the Sixty of the Senate, there cannot be above three
of any one Kindred or Family, nor in the Junta so many, unless there be fewer
in the former. These Magistracys are all annual, but without interval, so that
it is at the pleasure of the Great Council, whether a Senator having finished
his year, they will elect him again.

The College.
THE College is a Council consisting more especially of three Orders of
Magistrates, called in their Language Savi; as the Savi grandi, to whose
cognizance or care belong the whole affairs of Sea and Land; the Savi di Terra
ferma, to whose care and cognizance belong the affairs of the Land; and the
Savi di Mare, to whose cognizance appertain Savi grandi, who are six, by three
at a time, with the interposition of three months; and for the Savi di Terra
ferma, and the Savi di Mare, who are each five, after the same manner, save
only that the first Election consists of three, and the second of two. Each
Order of the Savi elects weekly one Provost, each of which Provosts has Right
in any affair belonging to the cognizance of his Order, to propose to the
College. Audience of Ambassadors, and matters of foren Negotiation, belong
properly to this Council.

The Signory.
THE Signory consists of the Duke and of his Counsillors. The Duke is a
Magistrate created by the Great Council for life, to whom the Commonwealth
acknowleges the Reverence due to a Prince, and all her Acts run in his name;
tho without the Counsillors he has no Power at all, while they can perform any
Function of the Signory without him. The Counsillors, whose Magistracy is
annual, are elected by the Scrutiny of the Senate, naming one out of each Tribe
(for the City is locally divided into six Tribes) and the Great Council
approving; so the Counsillors are six, whose Function in part is of the nature
of Masters of Requests, having withal power to grant certain Privileges: but
their greatest preeminence is, that all or any one of them may propose to any
Council in the Commonwealth.

Certain Rights of the Councils.
THE Signory has Session and Suffrage in the College, the College has Session
and Suffrage in the Senate, and the Senate has Session and Suffrage in the Great
Council. The Signory, or the Provosts of the Savi, have power to assemble the
College, the College has power to assemble the Senate, and the Senate has power
to assemble the Great Council; the Signiori, but more peculiarly the Provosts
of the Savi, in their own Offices and Functions, have power to propose to the
College, the College has power to propose to the Senate, and the Senate has power
to propose to the Great Council. Whatever is thus proposed and resolved, either
by the Senate (for sometimes, through the security of this Order, a Proposition gos
no further) or by the Great Council, is ratified, or becoms the Law of the
Commonwealth. Over and above these Orders, they have three Judicatorys, two
Civil and one Criminal, in each of which forty Gentlemen elected by the Great
Council are Judges for the term of eight months; to these Judicatorys belong
the Avogadori and the Auditori, who are Magistrates, having power to hear Causes
apart, and, as they judge fitting, to introduce them into the Courts.

IF a man tells me, that I omit many things, he may perceive I write an
Epitome, in which no more should be comprehended, than that which understood
may make a man understand the rest. But of these principal parts consists the
whole body of admirable Venice.

THE Consiglio de' Dieci, or Council of Ten, being that which partakes of
Dictatorian Power, is not a limb of her but as it were a Sword in her hand.
This Council (in which the Signory has also Session and Suffrage) consists more
peculiarly of ten annual Magistrates, created by the Great Council, who
afterward elect three of their own number by Lot, which so elected are called
Capi de' Dieci, their Magistracy being monthly: Again, out of the three Capi,
one is taken by Lot, whose Magistracy is weekly: this is he, who over against
the Tribunal in the Great Council sits like another Duke, and is called the
Provost of the Dieci. It belongs to these three Magistrates to assemble Capi may
propose to it: the power which they now exercise (and wherein for their
assistance they create three Magistrates called the Grand Inquisitors) consists
in the punishment of certain heinous Crimes, especially that of Treason; in
relation whereto they are as it were Sentinels, standing upon the guard of the
Commonwealth: But constitutively (with the addition of a Junta, consisting of
other fifteen, together with some of the chief Magistrates having Right in cases
of important speed or secrecy to this Council) they have the full and absolute
Power of the whole Commonwealth as Dictator.

THAT Venice either transcribed the whole and every part of her Constitution
out of Athens and Lacedemon, or happens to be framed as if she had so don, is
most apparent. The Result of this Commonwealth is in the Great Council, and the
Debate in the Senate: so was it in Lacedemon. A Decree made by the Senate of
Athens had the power of a Law for one year without the People, at the end
whereof the People might revoke it: A Decree of the Senate of Venice stands good
without the Great Council, unless these see reason to revoke it. The Pryians
were a Council preparing business for the Senate; so is the Collegio in Venice:
the Presidents of the Prytans were the ten Proedri; those of the Collegio are
the three Provosts of the Savi. The Archons or Princes of Athens being nine,
had a kind of Soverain Inspection upon all the Orders of the Commonwealth; so
has the Signory of Venice, consisting of nine besides the Duke. The Quarancys
in Venice are Judicatorys of the nature of the Heliaea in Athens; and as the
Thesmothetae heard and introduced the causes into that Judicatory, so do the
Avogadori and the Auditori into these. The Consiglio de' Dieci in Venice is not
of the Body, but an Appendix of the Commonwealth; so was the Court of the
Ephori in Lacedemon: and as these had power to put a King, a Magistrate, or any
Delinquent of what degree soever to death, so has the Consiglio de' Dieci. This
again is wrought up with the Capi de' Dieci, and the weekly Provost, as were
the Prytans with the Proedri, and the weekly Epistata; and the Ballot is
lineally descended from the Bean: yet is Venice in the whole, and in every
part, a far more exquisit Policy than either Athens or Lacedemon.

A POLITICAL is like a natural Body. Commonwealths resemble and differ, as Men
resemble and differ; among whom you shall not see two Faces, or two
Dispositions, that are alike. PETER and THOMAS in all their parts are equally
Men, and yet PETER and THOMAS of all Men may be the most unlike; one may have
his greater strength in his Arms, the other in his Legs; one his greater Beauty
in his Soul, the other in his Body; one may be a fool, the other wise; one
valiant, the other cowardly. These two, which at a distance you will not know
one from the other, when you look nearer, or com to be better acquainted with,
you will never mistake. Our Considerer (who in his Epistle would make you
believe that Oceana is but a mere Transcription out of Venice) has Companions
like himself; and how near they look into matters of this nature is plain,
while one knows not JETHRO from MOSES, and the

LET a Man look near, and he shall not find any one Order in Oceana (the Ballot
only excepted) that has not as much difference from, or resemblance to any one
Order in Rome or Venice, as any one Order in Rome or Venice has from, or to any
one Order in Athens or Lacedemon: Which different temper of the parts must of
necessity in the whole yield a Result, a Soul or Genius, altogether new in the
World, as embracing both the Arms of Rome, and the Counsils of Venice; and yet
neither obnoxious to the Turbulency of the one, nor the narrowness of the other.

BUT the sum of what has bin said of Venice, as to the business in hand, coms
to no more than that the Senate and the Magistracy of this Commonwealth are upon
Rotation. No more: nay I am well if it coms to so much. For the Prevaricator
catching me up, where I say, that for all this the greater Magistracys in
Venice are continually Consid. p. 93.
wheeled through a few hands, tells me, that I have confessed it to be otherwise. I
have indeed confessed, that tho the Magistracys are all conferred for certain
terms, yet those terms do not necessitat Vacations; that is, the term of a
Magistracy being expired, the Party that bore it is capable upon a new Election
of bearing it again without interval or vacation: which dos not altogether
frustrat the Rotation of the Commonwealth, tho it renders the same very
imperfect. This infirmity of Venice derives from a complication of Causes, none
of which is incident to a Commonwealth consisting of the Many: wherefore there
lys no obligation upon me to discover the reason in this place. But on the
contrary, seeing, let me show things never so new, they are slighted as old, I
have an obligation in this place, to try whether I may get esteem by concealing
something. What is said, every body knew before; this is not said, who knows it?

A Riddle.
RIDDLE me, Riddle me, what is this? The Magistracys in Venice (except such as
are rather of Ornament than of Power) are all annual, or at most biennial. No
man whose term is expired, can hold his Magistracy longer, but by a new
Election. The Elections are most of them made in the Great Council, and all by
the Ballot, which is the most equal and impartial way of Suffrage. And yet the
greater Magistracys are perpetually wheeled through a few hands.

IF I be worthy to give advice to a man that would study the Politics, let him
understand Venice; he that understands Venice right, shall go nearest to judge
(notwithstanding the difference that is in every Policy) right of any
Government in the World. Now the assault of the Considerer deriving but from
some Pique or Emulation which of us should be the abler Politician, if the
Council of State had the curiosity to know either that, or who understands
Venice, this Riddle would make the discovery; for he that cannot easily unfold
this Riddle, dos not understand her.

THE sixth kind of Rotation is when a Commonwealth gos upon it in all her
Orders, Senate, People, and Magistracy. Such a one taking in the Many, and being
fixed upon the foot of a steady Agrarian, has attained to perfect Equality. But
of this an example there is none, or you must accept of Oceana.

THE Rotation of Oceana is of two parts, the one of the Electors Rotation of
Oceana.


SPEAKING of Electors in this sense, I mean as the great Council in Venice are
Electors of all other Orders, Councils or Magistrates. But the Commonwealth of
Oceana taking in the whole People, cannot, as dos the Great Council of Venice
(wherein they that have right are but a few) attain to this capacity at one
step: for which cause she takes three steps; one at the Parishes, where every
fifth Elder is annually elected by the whole People. There is no doubt but
there was some such Order in Israel whereby the monthly Rotation of her
Congregation or Prerogative, by election of two thousand in each Tribe, was
preserved. The next step she takes is at the Hundred, whereby election of
Officers and Magistrates, the Troops chosen at the Parishes, are very near
formed. Her third step is at the Tribe, where the whole body of her Deputys are
in exact Form, Discipline and Function, headed by proper Officers and
Magistrates, these altogether consisting of one fifth part of the whole People.
This Rotation being in it self annual, coms in regard of the body of the People
to be quinquennial, or such as in the space of five years gives every man his
turn in the power of Election.

BUT tho every man be so capable of being an Elector, that he must have his
turn; yet every man is not so capable of being elected into those Magistracys
that are Soverain, or have the leading of the whole Commonwealth, that it can
be safe to lay a necessity that every man must take his turn in these also: but
it is enough that every man, who in the Judgment and Conscience of his Country
is fit, may take his turn. Wherefore upon the Conscience of the Electors, so
constituted as has bin shown, it gos to determine who shall partake of Soverain
Magistracy, or be at the Assembly of a Tribe elected into the Senate or
Prerogative; which Assemblys are so triennial, that one third part of each
falling every year, and another being elected, the Parliament is thereby
perpetuated.

SUCH was the Constitution of those Councils which the Prevaricator has confessed
he always thought admirable, but now the toy takes him to be quite of another
mind; for, says he, That ancient Republics have Consid. p. 90.
through a malicious Jealousy (let them take it among them) made it unlawful even
for Persons of the clearest merit to continue long in command, but have by
perpetual vicissitude substituted new men in the Government, is manifest
enough; but with what success they did this, will best appear by VETURIUS,
VARRO, and MANCINUS. He is still admirable: One would wonder what he means; if
it be that there were but three weak or unfortunat Generals in the whole course
of Rome, how strange is it to urge this as an Argument against Rotation, which
is as strong a one as can be urged for Rotation? If the Romans by this way of
Election having experience of an able General, knew ever after where to have
him; or lighting upon one they found not so fit for their purpose, could in the
compass of one year be rid of him of course, without dishonor or reproach to
him, taking thereby a warning to com no more there; was this a proceeding to
favor malice? or such as one as, removing the cause of malice, left no root for
such a branch or possibility of like effect? Certainly by this assertion the
Prevaricator has jolted his presumtuous Head not only against the prudence of
ancient Commonwealths, but of God himself in that of Israel. VETURIUS, VARRO,
and MANCINUS (tho some of them cannot be at all points excused) by this mark
upon them, may be thought hardlier of than is needful; for which cause there
being that also in their Storys which is neither unpleasant nor unprofitable, I
shall endeavor to make the Reader somewhat better acquainted with them. One of
the greatest blows Rome ever received was by PONTIUS, Captain General of the
Samnits, who having drawn Live. l. 9.
her Consuls, POSTHUMOUS and VETURIUS, by Stratagem into the Straits of Caudium,
a Valley of narrow entrance, and shut up the mouth of it by possessing himself
of the only Passage, the rest being environed with insuperable Rocks, the
Samnit came to have both the Armies, and so upon the matter the whole strength
(in those days) of Rome inevitably at his discretion. Hereupon, having leisure,
and being desirous (in a matter of such moment) of good advice, he dispatched a
Messenger to his Father HERENNIUS, the ablest Counsillor in Samnium, to know
what might be his best course with the Romans now inavoidably at his mercy, who
answered, that he should open the Pass, and let them return untouched. The
young General amazed at this Counsil, desired farther direction; whereupon
HERENNIUS for the second time made answer, that he should cut them off to a
man. But the General, upon the strange disagreement of such opinions, having
his Fathers Age (for he was very old) in suspicion, took a third course, which
neither (according to the first advice of wise HERENNIUS) making Friends, nor,
according to the second, destroying Enemies, became as he prophesied the utter
Ruin of the Commonwealth of Samnium. For the Romans being dismissed safe, but
ignominiously, the Senate upon their return fell into the greatest strait and
consternation that had bin known among them. On the one side, to live and not
revenge such an affront was intolerable; on the other, to revenge it was
against the Faith of the Consuls, whose necessity (the loss of two Armies lying
upon it) had in truth forced them to accept of a dishonorable League with the
Samnits. Now not the Armies, but the Senate it self was in Caudium, not a man of
them could find the way out of this Vale environed with Rocks, but he only that
could not find it out of the other; POSTHUMOUS, who having first showed, that
neither War nor Peace could be so made, as to engage the Commonwealth (injussu
Populi) without the Command of the People, declared that the Senate returning
the Consuls, with such others as had consented to so wicked and dishonorable a
Peace, naked, and bound to the Samnits, were free: nor ceased he till the Senate
(thereto pressed by the necessity of the Commonwealth) resolving accordingly, He,
VETURIUS, and some of the Tribuns were delivered to the Samnits; who,
nevertheless, to hold the Romans to their League, dismissed them with safety. The
Disputes on either side that arose hereupon, and, coming to Arms, ended with
the destruction of Samnium, I omit. That which as to the present occasion is
material, is the Reputation of the Consuls; and VETURIUS, tho he were not the
leading man, being for the rest as deep in the Action as POSTHUMOUS, the People
were so far from thinking themselves deceived in this choice, that the Consuls
were more honored in Rome for having lost, than PONTIUS in Samnium for having
won the day at Caudium.

I DO not rob Graves, nor steal Windingsheets; my Controversys

FOR VARRO, who being Consul of Rome, lost the Battle of Cannae to HANNIBAL,
Captain General for the Carthaginians, tho without Cowardice, yet by Rashness,
he is not so excusable.

Florus, l. ^. c. 18.
BUT for MANCINUS, brought (as was POSTHUMOUS by the Samnits) to dishonorable
conditions by MEGERA, Captain General of the Numantins, there be excuses: As
first, the Numantins, for their number not exceeding four thousand fighting men,
were the gallantest of so many, on which the Sun ever shone.

FOURTEEN years had their Commonwealth held tack with the Romans, in Courage,
Conduct, and Virtue, having worsted POMPEY the Great, and made a League with
him, when she might have made an end of him, e're ever MANCINUS (of whom CICERO
gives a fair Character) came in play: So his Misfortunes, having great
examples, cannot want some excuse. But suppose none of them deserved any excuse,
what is it at which these examples drive? against a Commonwealth? Sure the
Samnits, the Carthaginians, the Numantins were as well Commonwealths as the
Romans; and so wherever the advantage gos, it must stay upon a Commonwealth: or
if it be Rotation that he would be at (for we must guess) granting PONTIUS the
Samnit, and MEGERA the Numantin, to have bin no more upon Rotation, than
HANNIBAL the Carthaginian; yet is it plain that Rome upon her Rotation overcame
not only PONTIUS, HANNIBAL and MEGERA, but Samnium, Carthage, and Numantia. So
much for Rome; but, says he, No less appears by the Rabble of Generals Consid.
p. 91.
often made use of by the Athenians, while men of Valor and Conduct have lain
by the walls:

A RABBLE of Generals did I never hear of before; but not to meddle with his
Rhetoric, whereas each of his Objections has at least some one Contradiction in
it, this has two (one a priori, another a posteriori) one in the snout, another
in the tail of it. For had there bin formerly no Rotation in Athens, how should
there have have bin men of Valor and Conduct to ly by the Walls? And if
Rotation thenceforth should have ceased, how could those men of Valor and
Conduct have don otherwise than ly by the Walls? So this inavoidably confesses,
that Rotation was the means whereby Athens came to be stored with Persons of
Valor and Conduct, they to be capable of Employment, and the Commonwealth to
employ the whole Virtue of her Citizens: And it being, in his own words, an
Argument of much imperfection in a Government not to dare to employ the whole
Virtue of the Citizens, this wholly routs a standing General; for the
Government that dares employ but the Virtue of one, dares not employ the Virtue
of all. Yet he jogs on.

Consid. p. 91.
THOSE Orders must needs be against Nature, which, excluding Persons of the
best Qualifications, give admission to others, who have nothing to commend them
but their Art in canvassing for the suffrage of the People. He never takes
notice that the Ballot bars Canvassing beyond all possibility Rome and Athens
than is laudable, where nevertheless it is the stronger Argument for the
integrity of popular Suffrage, which, being free from any aid of Art, produced
in those Commonwealths more illustrious examples (if a man gos no further than
PLUTARCH'S Lives) than are to be found in all the rest of Story.

Consid. p. 91.
YET, says he, this Law has bin as often broken as a Commonwealth has bin
brought into any exigence; for the hazard of trusting Affairs in weak hands
then appearing, no scruple has bin made to trample upon this Order, for giving
the Power to some able man at that time rendered incapable by the Vacation this
Law requires. The continuation of the Consulship of MARIUS is sufficient to be
alleged for the proof of this, tho, if occasion were, it might be backed by
plenty of examples. His choice confutes his pretended variety, who jests with
edged tools: this example above all will cut his fingers; for by this
prolongation of Magistracy, or, to speak more properly, of Empire (for the
Magistracy of the Consul was Civil, and conferred by the People Centuriatis
Comitiis, but his Empire was Military, and conferred Curiatis) Rome began to
drive those wheels of her Rotation heavily in MARIUS, which were quite taken
off in CAESAR.

I HAVE heretofore in vain persuaded them upon this occasion, to take notice of
a Chapter in MACCHIAVEL, so worthy of regard, that I have now inserted it at
length, as follows:

Macch. Discor. B. 3. c. 24.
THE Procedings of the Roman Commonwealth being well considered, two things
will be found to have bin the causes of her dissolution. The Contention that
happened through the endeavor of the People (always opposed or eluded by the
Nobility) to introduce an Agrarian, and the damage that accru'd from the
prolongation of Empire; which Mischiefs, had they bin foreseen in due time, the
Government by application of fit Remedys might have bin of longer life and
better health. The Diseases which this Commonwealth, from contention about the
Agrarian, contracted, were acute and tumultuous; but those being slower, and
without tumult, which she got by promulgation of Empire, were Chronical, and
went home with her giving a warning by her example, how dangerous it is to
States that would enjoy their Liberty, to suffer Magistracy (how deservedly
soever conferred) to remain long in the possession of the same man. Certainly if
the rest of the Romans, whose Empire happened to be prolonged, had bin as
virtuous and provident as LUCIUS QUINTIUS, they had never run into this
inconvenience. Of such wholesome example was the goodness of this man, that the
Senate and the People, after one of their ordinary Disputes, being com to some
accord, whereas the People had prolonged the Magistracy of their present
Tribuns, in regard they were Persons more fitly opposed to the Ambition of the
Nobility, than by a new Election they could readily have found; when hereupon
the Senate (to show they needed not be worse at this game) would have prolonged
the Consulat to QUINTIUS, he refused his consent, saying, that ill examples
were to be corrected by good ones, and not encouraged by others like
themselves; nor could they stir his Resolution, by which means they were
necessitated to make new Consuls. Had this Wisdom and Virtue, I say, bin duly
regarded, or rightly understood, it might have saved Rome, which through this
neglect came to ruin. The first whose Empire happened to be prolonged was
PUBLILIUS PHILO, his Consulat expiring at the Camp before Palaepolis, while it
seemed to the Senate that he had the Victory in his hand (actum cum Tribunis
Plebis est, ad Populum ferrent ut cum Philo Consulatu abiisset, Proconsul rem
gereret) Live. l. 8.
they sent him no Successor, but prolonged his Empire, by which means he came to
be the first Proconsul. An Expedient (tho introduced for the public good) that
came in time to be the public bane: For by how much the Roman Armies marched
further off, by so much the like course seeming to be the more necessary,
became the more customary; whence insu'd two pernicious consequences: The one,
that there being fewer Generals, and Men of known Ability for Conduct, the Art
with the reputation of the same came to be more ingrost, and obnoxious to
Ambition: the other, that a General standing long, got such hold upon his Army,
as could take them off from the Senate, and hang them on himself. Thus MARIUS
and SYLLA could be followed by the Soldiery to the detriment of the
Commonwealth, and CAESAR to her perdition. Whereas had Rome never prolonged
Empire, she might perhaps not so soon have arrived at Greatness or Acquisition,
but would have made less haste to destruction.

ALL the Dilemma that MACCHIAVEL observes in these words is, that if a
Commonwealth will not be so slow in her acquisition as is required by Rotation,
she will be less sure than is requisite to her preservation. But the
Prevaricator (not vouchsafing to show us upon what reasons or experience he
grounds his Maxim) is positive, That Consid. p. 92.
the Dilemma into which a Commonwealth is in this case brought, is very
dangerous; for either she must give her self a mortal blow by gaining the habit
of infringing such Orders as are necessary for her preservation, or receive one
from without.

THIS same is another Parakeetism: these words are spoken by me, after
MACCHIAVEL, in relation to Dictatorian Power, in which they are so far from
concluding against Rotation, that this in case of a Dictator is more especially
necessary (maxima libertatis custodia Mamercus apud Live. l. 4.
est, ut magna imperia diuturna non sint, and temporis modus imponatur, quibus
juris imponi non potest) which could not be more confirmed than by him, who in
the example of MARIUS shows that the contrary course spoiled all.

THE Romans, if they had sent a Successor to PUBLILIUS PHILO at Palaepolis, it
may be might have let the Victory slip out of his hands, it may be not; however
this had bin no greater wound to the Commonwealth, than that her Acquisition
would have bin slower, which ought not to com in competition with the safety of
a Government, and therefore amounts not to a Dilemma, this being a kind of
Argument that should not be stub'd of one horn, but have each of equal length
and danger. Nor is it so certain that increase is slower for Rotation, seeing
neither was this interrupted by that, nor that by this, as the greatest Actions
of Rome, the Conquest of Carthage by SCIPIO AFRICANUS, of MACEDON by FLAMINIUS,
and of ANTIOCHUS by ASIATICUS, are irrefragable Testimonys.

I WOULD be loath to spoil the Considerer's preferment; but he is not a safe
Counsillor for a Prince, whose Providence not supplying the defect of Rotation,
whether in civil or military affairs, with something of like nature, exposes
himself if not his Empire as much to danger as a Commonwealth. Thus the Sons of
ZERVIAH, JOAB 2 Samuel 3. 39.
Captain of the Host, and ABISHAI his Brother, were too strong for DAVID; thus
the Kings of Israel and of Juda fell most of them Sweden, by his Power and
Command of an Army; and thus SECECHUS came near to supplant BOLESLAUS the Third
of Poland. If WALLESTEIN had lived, what had become of his Master? In France the
Race of PHARAMOND was extinguished by PIPIN; and that of PIPIN in like manner,
each by the Major of the Palace, a standing Magistracy of exorbitant Trust. Go
to the Indys: You shall find a King of Pegu to have bin thrust out of the Realm
of Tangu by his Captain General. Nay go where you will, tho this be pretty
well, you shall add more than one example. But as to the Prevaricator, if he
was not given to make such mouths, as eat up nothing else but his own words, I
needed not have brought any other Testimony to absolve a Commonwealth of Malice
in this order than his own, where he Consid. p. 47, 48.
says, that when some Person overtops the rest in Commands, it is a Disease of
Monarchy which easily admits of this cure, that he be reduced to a less Volum,
and levelled to an equality with the rest of his Order. Now a Prince can no
otherwise level a Nobleman, that excels the rest through Command, to equality with
his Order, than by causing those of the same Order to take their turns in like
command. Good Wits have ill Consid. p. 93.
Memorys. But, says he, I know not what advantage Mr. HARRINGTON may foresee
from the Orders of this Rotation, for my part I can discover no other effect of
it than this, that in a Commonwealth like that of Oceana, taking in the Many
(for in Venice he confesses it to be otherwise) where every man will press
forward toward Magistracy, this Law by taking off at the end of one year some
Officers, and all at the end of three, will keep the Republic in a perpetual
Minority: No man having time allowed him to gain that Experience, which may
serve to lead the Commonwealth to the understanding of her true Interest either
at home or abroad.

WHAT I have confessed to be otherwise in Venice, I have shown Athens or Rome?
where tho every man pressed forward toward Magistracy, yet the Magistrates were,
for illustrious examples, more in weight and number than are to be found in all
the rest of the world.

IF where Elections were the most exposed to the Ambition of the Competitor,
and the humors of the People, they yet failed not to excel all others that were
not popular, what greater Vindication can there be of the natural integrity of
popular Suffrage even at the worst? But this, where it is given by the Ballot,
is at the best, and free from all that pressing for Magistracy in the
Competitor, or Faction of the People that can any ways be laid to the former:
or let the Considerer consider again, and tell me by what means either of these
in such a State can be dangerous or troublesome; or if at worst the Orders for
Election in Oceana must not perform that part, better than a Crowd and a
Sherif. Well; but putting the case the Elections which were not quarreled much
withal be rightly stated, yet this Law for Terms and Vacations, by taking off
at the end of one year some Officers, and all at the end of three, will keep the
Republic in perpetual Minority, no man having time allowed him to gain that
Experience, which may serve to lead the Commonwealth to the understanding of
her true Interest at home or abroad. Because every man will press forward for
Magistracy, therefore there ought not to be Terms and Vacations, lest these
should keep the Commonwealth in perpetual Minority. I would once see an
Argument that might be reduced to Mode and Figure. The next Objection is, that
these Orders take off at the end of one year some Officers, which is true, and
that at the end of three years they take off all, which is false; for whereas
the Leaders of the Commonwealth are all triennial, the Orders every year take
off no more than such only as have finished their three years term, which is
not all, but a third part. Wherefore let him speak out; three years is too short
a term for acquiring that knowledge which is necessary to the leading of a
Commonwealth. To let the courses of Israel which were monthly, and the annual
Magistracys of Athens and Rome go; if three years be too short a term for this
purpose, what was three months? A Parliament in the late Government was rarely
longer lived than three months, nor more frequent than once in a year; so that
a man having bin twelve years a Parlament-man in England, could not have born
his Magistracy above three years, tho he were not necessarily subject to any
Vacation. Whereas a Parliament in Oceana may in twelve years have born his
Magistracy six, notwithstanding the necessity of his Vacations. Now which of
these two are most straightened in the time necessary to the gaining of due
experience or knowledge for the leading of a Commonwealth? Nevertheless the
Parliament of England was seldom or never without men of sufficient Skill and
Ability; tho the Orders there were more in number, less in method, not written,
and of greater difficulty than they be in Oceana. There, if not the Parliament
man, the Parliament it self was upon Terms and Vacations, which to a Council of
such a nature is the most dangerous thing in the world, seeing Dissolution,
whether to a Body natural or political, is Death. For if Parlaments happened to
rise again and again, this was Venice changing Flesh, tho not so often as in a
Commonwealth consisting of the Many were requisite, yet oftenest of any other in
the world, is, both in Body and Soul, or Genius, the most unchangeable Council
under Heaven. Flesh must be changed, or it will stink of it self; there is a
Term necessary to make a man able to lead the Commonwealth to her Interest, and
there is a Term that may enable a man to lead the Commonwealth to his Interest.
In this regard it is, that, according to MAMERCUS, the Vacations are (maxima
libertatis custodia) the Keepers of the Libertys of Oceana.

THE three Regions into which each of the leading Councils is divided, are
three Forms, as I may say, in the School of State: for them of the third, tho
there be care in the choice, it is no such great matter what be their Skill;
the Ballot which they practiced in the Tribe being that in the performance
whereof no man can be out: and this is all that is necessary to their Novitiat
or first year, during which time they may be Auditors. By the second, they will
have seen all the Scenes, or the whole Rotation of the Orders, so facil, and so
intelligible, that at one reading a man understands them as a Book, but at once
acting as a Play; and so methodical, that he will remember them better. Tell me
then what it is that can hinder him for the second year from being a Speaker;
or why for the third, should he not be a very able Leader.

THE Senate and the Prerogative, or Representative of the People, being each of
like constitution, drop annually four hundred, which in a matter of ten years
amount to four thousand experienced Leaders, ready upon new Elections to resume
their leading.

ANOTHER thing which I would have considered is, whether our most eminent men
found their Parts in Parliament, or brought them thither. For if they brought
them, think you not the military Orders of the Youth, the Discipline of the
Tribes, the eight years Orb of the Ambassadors, the provincial Armies of Oceana,
likely to breed men of as good Parts, as to such matters? Nor have Astronomers
that familiarity with the Stars, which men without these Orbs will have with
such as are in them. He is very dull, who cannot perceive that in a Government
of this frame the Education must be universal, or diffused throout the whole
Body. Another thing which is as certain as comfortable, is that the pretended
depth and difficulty in matters of State is a mere cheat. From the beginning of
the World to this day, you never found a Commonwealth where the Leaders having
honesty enough, wanted skill enough to lead her to her true Interest at home or
abroad: that which is necessary to this end, is not so much Skill as Honesty;
and let the Leaders of Oceana be dishonest if they can. In the leading of a
Commonwealth aright, this is certain, Wisdom and Honesty are all one: and tho
you shall find defects in their Virtue, those that have had the fewest, have
ever bin, and for ever shall be, the wisest.

ROME was never ruined, till her Balance being broken, the Nobility

Consid. p. 3^. p. 94.
FOR the close, the Prevaricator, who had judged before, that there was much
reason to expect some of the Clergy (against all of whom Mr. HARRINGTON has
declared War) would undertake the Quarrel, tells me in the last line, that
there be to whom he has recommended the Disquisition of the Jewish Commonwealth.

IT is a miserable thing to be condemned to the perpetual Budget; once turn an
honest man to me. In the mean time, that it may be further seen, how much I am
delighted in fair play, since some Divines, it may be, are already at work with
me, and I have not so fully explained my self upon that Point, which with them
is of the greatest concernment, that they can yet say, they have peeped into my
hand, or seen my game; as I have won this trick, Gentlemen, or speak, so I play
them out the last Card in the next Book for Up.

An Advertisment to the Reader, or a Direction contained in certain Querys, how
the Commonwealth of Oceana may be examined or answered by diverse sorts of men,
without spoiling their high Dance, or cutting off any part of their Elegance,
or freeness of Expression.
To the Scholar that has passed his Novitiat in Story.
I. WHETHER the Balance of Property in Land coming through Civil Vicissitude by
slow and undiscerned degrees, to alter as it did, and to stand as it dos in
Oceana, any other Government could have bin introduced, otherwise than by the
interposition of foren Arms, that could have subsisted naturally without
Violence or Reluctance, or steddily without frequent Changes, Alterations, and
Plunges, except that only of the Commonwealth proposed?

II. WHETHER the Balance in Land so standing, as has bin shown, the
Commonwealth proposed, being once established, were without the immediate hand
of God, as by Pestilence, Famine, or Inundation, to be altered or broken; and
which way?

To the Godly Man.
I. WHETHER Human Prudence be not a Creature of God, and to what end God made
this Creature?

II. WHETHER the Commonwealth of Israel in her main Orders, that is to say, the
Senate, the People, and the Magistracy, was not erected by the same Rules of
human Prudence with other Commonwealths?

III. WHETHER JETHRO were not a Heathen?

IV. WHETHER God did not approve of the Advice of JETHRO, in the Fabric of the
Commonwealth of Israel?

V. WHETHER the natural Body of a Godly Man can any otherwise be said to
support and nourish it self in the Air, or between Heaven and Earth, than by a
figurative Speech? or whether it be any more possible for the Political Body of
a People so to do, than for the natural Body of a Godly Man?

To the Grandee, or Learned Commonwealthsman.
I. WHETHER a noble Housekeeper has a Horsekeeper, that is as well to live as
himself; and whether the Housekeeper, should he lose his Estate, would not be a
Horsekeeper rather than want Bread?

II. WHETHER Riches and Poverty, more or less, do not introduce Command or
Obedience, more or less, as well in a public as in a private Estate?

III. WHETHER the Introduction of Command or Obedience, more or less, either in
a public or private Estate, dos not form or change the Genius of a Man, or of a
People accordingly? Or what is the reason why the Peasant in France is base,
and the lower People in England of a high Courage?

IV. WHETHER the Genius of the People of Oceana has bin of late years, or be
devoted or addicted to the Nobility and the Clergy as in former times?

V. WHETHER the Genius of the People of Oceana, not being addicted to the
Nobility and Clergy as formerly, can be said to be for Monarchy, or against it?

VI. WHETHER the People be not frequently mistaken in Names, while as to Things
they mean otherwise; or whether the People of Oceana desiring Monarchy in Name,
do not in Truth desire a Government of Laws, and not of Men?

VII. WHETHER for these Reasons, not to know how to hold the Balance or
Foundation of a Government steady, nor yet to reform, or vary the Orders of the
same (as the Foundation coms to vary) be not to deliver a Nation to certain
Ruin and Destruction?

To the Rational Man.
I. WHETHER there be any thing in this Fabric or Model that is contradictory to
it self, to Reason, or to Truth?

II. WHETHER a Commonwealth that is framed entire or complete in all her
necessary Orders, without any manner of contradiction to her self, to Reason,
or to Truth, can yet be false or insufficient?

THE SECOND BOOK; OR, A Political Discourse CONCERNING ORDINATION: Against Dr.
H. HAMMOND, Dr. L. SEAMAN, And the Authors they follow.

Optat Aprum aut fulvum descendere monte Leonem.

E. W. Advertisment to the READER.
BOOKS, especially whose Authors have got themselves Names, are Leaders;
wherefore in case any of these err in Leading, it is not only lawful, but matter
of Conscience to a man that perceives it, as far as he is able, to warn others.
This were Apology enough for my writing against Dr. HAMMOND and Dr. SEAMAN; and
yet I have happened to be brought under a farther Obligation to this
enterprise, their Books having bin sent me by way of Objection against what I
have formerly said of Ordination, and am daily more and more confirmed I shall
make good. However, there can be no great hurt in this Essay, Truth being, like
Venison, not only the best Quarry, but the best Game.

Order of the Discourse.
TO manage the present Controversy with the more Clearness, I have divided my
Discourse into five Parts or Chapters.

THE First, explaining the words Chirotonia and Chirothesia, paraphrasticaly
relates the Story of the Perambulation made by the Apostles PAUL and BARNABAS
through the Citys of Lycaonia, Pisydia, etc. by way of Introduction.

THE Second shows those Citys, or most of them, at the time of this
Perambulation, to have bin under popular Government. In which is contained the
whole Administration of a Roman Province.

THE Third shows the Deduction of the Chirotonia from Popular Government, and
of the Original Right of Ordination from the Chirotonia. In which is contained
the Institution of the Sanhedrim or Senate of Israel by MOSES, and of that at
Rome by ROMULUS.

THE Fourth shows the Deduction of the Chirothesia from Monarchical or
Aristocratical Government, and the second way of Ordination from the
Chirothesia. In which is contained the Commonwealth of the Jews as it stood
after the Captivity.

THE Fifth debates whether the Chirotonia, used in the Citys mentioned, was (as
is pretended by Dr. HAMMOND, Dr. SEAMAN, and the Authors they follow) the same
with the Chirothesia, or a far different thing. In which are contained the
diverse kinds of Church Government introduced and exercised in the age of the
Apostles.

I AM entering into a Discourse to run much, for the Words, upon a Language not
vulgar, which therefore I shall use no otherwise than by way of Parenthesis, not
obstructing the Sense; and for the Things, upon Customs that are foren, which
therefore I shall interpret as well as I can. Now so to make my way into the
parts of this discourse, that (whereas they who have heretofore managed it in
English, might in regard of their Readers have near as well written it in
Greec) I may not be above the vulgar capacity, I shall open both the Names
whereof, and the Things whereupon we are about to dispute, by way of Introduction.

A
The INTRODUCTION, OR First Chapter.
THE Names or Words whereof we are about to dispute are Greec, the one
Chirotonia, the other Chirothesia. The first signification of the word
Chirotonia, in SUIDAS, imports a certain lewd action of the hand, which seems
also by the Greec that renders it by the same word, to have bin intimated in
Isa. 5. 9. In the second signification with SUIDAS, it is (...), Election (that
is no say of Magistrates) or Ratification (that is to say of Laws) by the Many:
which amounts both by his Testimony, and that generally of ancient Authors, to
this, that the most usual and natural signification of the word Chirotonia is
Popular Suffrage, whether given, as when they speak of Athens, by the holding
up of hands; or as when they speak (as dos SUIDAS in the place mentioned) of
Rome, and other Commonwealths (whose Suffrage was not given with this Ceremony)
without holding up of hands.

CHIROTHESIA ((...)) is a word that in the strict signification imports laying
on of hands, and no more: but the Jews using to confer their Ordination most
commonly by laying on of hands, and yet sometimes by word of mouth, or by
letter, the word both as it relates to the custom of the Jewish Commonwealth,
and Ordination thence transplanted into the Church of CHRIST, signifys
Ordination conferred by one man, or a few men, that is to say, by some distinct
Order from the People, whether with imposition of hands, or without it.

THESE words thus interpreted, I shall throout my discourse (which else must
have run altogether upon the Greec) presume, as already I have don, to take for
good English, and so proceed to the things whereof we are to dispute; first, by
opening the Scene of this Perambulation, which will be don best by the help of
ERASMUS, a man as for his Learning not inferior to any, so for his freedom not
addicted to Interests or Partys. For the remainder then of this Introduction, I
shall begin with the nineteenth Verse of the eleventh, and continue my
discourse to the end of the fourteenth Chapter of the Acts; interweaving the
Text where it is darker with the Paraphrase of that excellent Author, for
light, and his Paraphrase with the Text, where it is clearer, for brevity, in
manner following.

STEPHEN Acts 11. 19.
had dispersed, traveled through the Citys and Villages as far as Phenice, and the
adjacent Island of Cyprus; as also through Antiochia, which lies between Phenice
and Cilicia, preaching the Gospel received from the Apostles, which
nevertheless they dared not to communicate but to such only as were of the
Jewish Nation, not out of Envy, but a kind of Superstition, they believing that
to do otherwise were to give the Childrens Bread to Dogs, which Christ had
forbid.

BUT some of them that believed, being of Cyprus and Cyrene, when they came to
Antioch, had the boldness to speak of CHRIST to the Greecs, preaching the Lord
JESUS, in which they made such progress through the Blessing of God upon them and
their Labors, that a great number of these also believing the Gospel, were
turned to the Lord. The tidings of these things coming to the ears of the
Church which was at Jerusalem, a man of Apostolical Sincerity, BARNABAS the
Levite, a Cyprian born, was sent by the Apostles to take a view of what was don
upon the places; and if he found it to be according to the will of God, to
approve of it, by authority of the Apostles. So great caution in receiving the
Gentiles to the Gospel was not, that the thing was not greatly desired by the
Apostles; but lest it should afterward be repealed or made void by the Jews,
as don rashly, or that the Gentiles should rely less upon what was don, as
conceiving it needed ratification by the Law. Wherefore BARNABAS so soon as he
came to Antioch, and found the Greecs by Faith, and without profession of the
Law, to have received the same Grace of God with the Jews, was very much joy'd
that the number of Believers increased, and exhorted them to remain constant in
their Enterprise of adhering to the Lord. For he was a good man, and full of
the Holy Spirit, and of Faith. Wherefore through his ministry it came to pass, that
a multitude of other Believers were added to the former. Now Antioch being not
far from Cilicia, the Neighborhood of the place invited him to seek PAUL, the
fittest helper in this work, as chosen by CHRIST to preach his Name to the
Gentiles and Kings of the Earth. For when PAUL fled from Jerusalem, the
Disciples had conducted him to Cesarea of Phenice, whence he went to Tarsus;
whom therefore when BARNABAS had found there, he brought to Antioch, hoping in a
City both famous and populous (but with a confused mixture of Jews and Greecs)
to receive the better fruit through the aid of an Apostle more peculiarly designed
to this work. These two being conversant a whole year in the Church of Antioch,
which by the confluence both of Jews and Greecs became very numerous, so many
were added by their preaching, that whereas hitherto, not exposing the name of
CHRIST to envy, they had bin called Disciples, they now began first at Antioch
from the name of their Founder to be called Christians. In these times certain
Prophets came from the City of Jerusalem to Antioch, whereof one named AGABUS
standing up in the Congregation, signified by inspiration, that there should be
a great Dearth through the whole world; which came to pass under CLAUDIUS CAESAR,
the Successor of CALIGULA. At this time they at Jerusalem, partly because they
were poor at their conversion to the Gospel, partly because they had deposited
their Goods in common, and partly because they had bin spoiled by the Priests
for their profession of CHRIST, ordained that by the contribution of such as
had wherwithal, especially among the believing Gentiles, Money should be sent to
the relief of the Christians dwelling in Judea; but so that this Contribution
was not to be forced but free, and according to every man's ability. This Money
thus gathered was sent by PAUL and BARNABAS to the Elders at Jerusalem, to be
distributed at their discretion to such as were in need. PAUL and BARNABAS were
thus employed, King HEROD, the same that beheaded JOHN, and returned CHRIST
clothed, through derision, in white, to PILAT, being grieved to see this kind of
People increase, and the Name of JESUS King of the Jews to grow famous in
diverse Nations, became concerned to root out such a Faction, and so spreading;
wherefore he stretched forth his hand to vex certain of the Church, killed JAMES
the Brother of JOHN with the Sword; and because he saw it pleased the Jews,
proceeded further to take PETER also, who being imprisoned, was afterward
miraculously delivered. But PAUL and BARNABAS having performed the Trust
committed to them by the Brethren, and delivered the Contribution for relief of
the Poor to the Apostles, returned from Jerusalem to Antioch, taking with them
JOHN, whose Surname was MARC.

NOW the Church of Antioch flourished in such manner, that she had some filled
with the gift of Prophecy, and others with that of Teaching; among whom was
BARNABAS and SIMEON, alias NIGER, together with LUCIAS a Cirenian, and MANAEN
who had bin brought up with HEROD the Tetrarch, whom he left to com to CHRIST:
but the chief of them was SAUL, endowed with all the Gifts and Graces
Apostolical. While all these were intent upon the Ministry of the Church,
employing their several Gifts to the Glory of God, and in his most acceptable
Service, the Salvation of Souls, with fasting and prayer, the Holy Ghost being
stirred up by their Zeal, signified his Will by the Prophets, saying, Separat me
BARNABAS and PAUL for the Work whereto I have called them, namely, to be Doctors
of the Gentiles, that by them I may propagat the Gospel. The command of the
Spirit was obeyed, and BARNABAS with PAUL, to the end that every one might see
who were chosen, were separated from the rest; and when the Congregation had
unanimously implored the favor of God by prayer and fasting, the most eminent
in Authority among them laid their hands upon the Persons so separated, and
sent them wherever the Spirit of God should direct them. By this impulse
therefore BARNABAS and PAUL went to Seleucia, being a Promontory of Antiochia,
and thence sailed into the Island of Cyprus, where they landed at Salamis, a
famous City upon the Eastern part of the Island; they preached not human
Inventions, but the Word of God, nor that by stealth, but in the Synagogs of
the Jews, whereof through the Neighborhood of Syria there was store. This Honor by
the Commandment of CHRIST was always deferred to the Jews* that the Gospel
should be first offered to them, lest they being a querulous and repining
Nation, should complain that they were despised. Thus traveled these Apostles
through the whole Island till they came to Paphos, a City consecrated to VENUS upon
the Western Coast of Cyprus. Here they found a certain Magician called
BARJESUS, that is, the Son of JESUS a Jew, both by Nation and Religion, under
which color he falsely pretended to the gift of Prophesy. This man followed the
Court of SERGIUS PAULUS, Proconsul or Governor of the Island for the Romans,
otherwise a prudent man; but this sort of Vermin insinuats it self into the
best to choose, that so their Corruption may do the greater and more compendious
mischief to mankind. The Proconsul nevertheless having understood the Gospel to
be planting throout Cyprus, not only forbore to stop the ears of others, but by
sending for BARNABAS and PAUL seemed desirous to open his own. Wherefore
BARJESUS indeavoring to resist the growth of the Word, as an Enemy to CHRIST,
and resisting the Truth with Falsehood, a strife arose between the true Prophets
and a false one (for such is the Interpretation Syriac word ELYMAS) whom PAUL
at length confuted of spiritual blindness, by taking away the eyes of his body,
miraculously struck in the presence of the Proconsul, who at the same time
receiving the light of the Gospel, embraced the Christian Faith. This being don
at Paphos, PAUL embarked there with his Associats for the lesser Asia, and came
to Perga, being a City of Pamphylia; here JOHN, whose Surname was MARC, left
them, and returned to Jerusalem, while they, when they had visited Pamphylia,
traveled to Antiochia, a City of Pisidia, where having entered a Synagog, they
sat after the usual manner with the rest, attentive to the Law and the
Prophets; whereof when the Parts appointed were read, and no man stood up, the
Rulers of the Synagog perceiving that the Strangers by their habit were Jews,
and such as by their aspect promised more than ordinary, sent to them, desiring
that if they had any word of exhortation for the People, they would speak.
Whereupon PAUL standing up, preached to them CHRIST; whence came the Word of the
Lord to be divulged throout that Region, tho the Jews out of envy to the
Gentiles, stirring up the devoutest Matrons (an Art not unknown in these times)
and by them the chief of the City, raised such Sedition in it, and Tumult
against the Apostles, that PAUL and BARNABAS being cast out, shook off the dust
from their feet against them, and went thence to Iconium a City of Lycaonia.
Chap. 14.
When they were com to Iconium, entering with the Jews after the custom into the
Synagog, they preached, as they had at Antioch, the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and
with such efficacy, that multitudes both of the Jews and Greecs believed. Here
again the Envy of the Jews became the Author of Sedition, by which means the
City was divided into two Parts or Factions, whereof one stood for the
unbelieving Jews, and the other for the Apostles. At length when such of the
Gentiles as were joined with the Jews, and the Rulers of the City, made an
assault upon the Apostles, to offer violence and stone them; they being aware
of it, fled to Lystra (a City of Lycaonia, which is a part of Pamphylia) and
Derbe. At Lystra there was a man lame of his feet from the Womb, who having
listened to PAUL with great Attention and Zeal, was miraculously cured by the
Apostle; when the People seeing what PAUL had don, cried out, The Gods were
descended in the likeness of men: a persuasion that might gain the more easily
upon the minds of the Lycaonians for the Fable of JUPITER and MERCURY, said to
have descended in human shape, and bin entertained by LYCAON, from whom the
Lycaonians received their name. Wherefore they called BARNABAS, for the gravity
of his aspect, JUPITER; PAUL for his Eloquence, MERCURY: and the Priest of
JUPITER, who dwelt in the Suburbs, brought Bulls and Garlands to the Gates of
the House where the Apostles were, to have offered Sacrifice with the People,
which the Apostles abhorring, vigorously dissuaded. In the mean time certain
Jews by Nation that were Unbelievers, coming from Antioch of Pisidia, and
Iconium, drew the People to the other extreme, who from sacrificing to the
Apostles fell on stoning them; a work which was brought so near to an end, that
PAUL being drawn by them out of the City, was left for dead, tho he soon after
recovered, and went thence with BARNABAS to Derbe: when they had propagated the
Gospel there also, they returned to Lystra, Iconium, and Antiochia, confirming
the Disciples whom they had converted. Now because the propagation of the
Gospel required that the Apostles should be moving through diverse Nations, they
chirotonizing them Elders in every Congregation or Church, that is, ordaining
them Elders by the Votes of the People in every City, left them to perform the
Dutys of the absent Apostles, and when they had fasted and prayed, commended
them to the Lord. These Antioch in Pisidia, when they had perambulated this
Country, they also visited Pamphylia, sowing the Gospel where it was not yet
sow^, and confirming those who already believed, till they came to Perga: where
having ordered their affairs, they proceeded to Attalia, being a maritim City of
Pamphylia; and from thence they sailed back to Antioch of Syria, whence first
they set out, with Commission from the Elders, to preach the Gospel to the
Gentiles, and where by the Chirothesia, or Imposition of hands, Prayer and
Fasting, they had bin recommended to the Grace of God, and designed to the Work
now finished.

IN this Narrative you have mention both of the Chirotonia and of the
Chirothesia, or Imposition of hands, but of the former as of Ordination; for by
that such were made Presbyters or Church Officers as were not so before: of the
latter not, I think, as of Ordination, at least in the sense we now take it;
but as of designation of Persons to an occasional and temporary employment,
that had bin ordained before, for so sure had PAUL at least. However, that
which is offered by this Narrative to present consideration, is no more than
the bare Story.

CHAP. II.
That the Citys, or most of them named in the Perambulation of the Apostles
PAUL and BARNABAS, were at that time under popular Government. In which is
contained the ^dministration of a Roman Province.
THE Romans of all Nations under Heaven were endowed, as with the highest
Virtues, so with the greatest human Glory; which proceeded from this especially,
that they were in love with such as were in love with their Liberty. To begin
with their dawn, the Privernates (a free People inhabiting the City and Parts
adjoining, which at this day is called Piperno, some fifty miles from Rome, and
five from Sesse) being the second time conquered by the Romans, it was
consulted in the Senate what course should be taken with them; where while some,
according to the different temper of men, showed themselves hotter, and others
cooler, one of the Privernates more mindful Live. l. 8. c. 21.
of the condition wherein he was born, than of that wherein he was fallen, happened
to render all more doubtful: for being asked by a Senator of the severer
judgment, what Punishment h^ thought the Privernates might deserve, Such (says
he) as they deserve who believe themselves worthy of Liberty. At the courage of
which answer, the Consul (perceiving in them that had bin vehement enough
before against the Privernates but the greater animosity, to the end that by a
gentler Interrogatory he might draw some softer answer from him) replied, And
what if we inflict no punishment at all, but pardon you; what Peace may we
expect of you? Why if you give us a good one (said the other) a steady and
perpetual Peace, but if an ill one, not long. At which a certain Senator
falling openly upon ruffling and threatening the Privernat, as if those words of
his tended to some practice or intention to stir up the Citys in Peace to
Sedition, the better part of the Fathers being quite of another mind, declared,
That they had heard the voice of a Man, and of a Freeman. For why, said they,
should it be thought that any Man or People will remain longer under such a
Burden as they are not able to bear, than till they can throw it down? There a
Peace is faithful, where it is voluntary; if you will have Slaves, you are not
to trust them, but their Fetters. To this opinion the Consul especially
inclining, inclined others, while he openly professed, That they who had no
thought but upon their Liberty, could not but be thought worthy to be Romans:
whereupon the Decree past by Authority of the Fathers, which was afterward
proposed to the Congregation, and ratified by the Command of the People, whereby
the Privernates were made Citizens of Rome. Such was the Genius of the Roman
Commonwealth; where by the way you may also observe the manner of her Debate
and Result (Authoritate Patrum and Jussu Populi) by the Advice of the Senate,
and the Chirotonia of the People.

BUT that which in this place is more particularly offered to consideration, is
her usual way of proceeding in case of Conquest with other Nations: for tho
bearing a haughty brow toward such as, not contented to enjoy their Liberty at
home, would be her Rivals abroad, she dealt far otherwise, as with Carthage;
this case excepted, and the pilling and polling of her Provinces, which
happened through the Avarice and Luxury of her Nobility, when the Balance of
popular Power being broken, her Empire began toward the latter end to languish
and decline; the way which she to^k with the Privernates was that which she
usually observed with others throout the course of her Victorys, and was after
the Change of Government made good at least in some part by the Roman Emperors,
under whom were now those Citys mentioned in the present Perambulation of the
Apostles PAUL and BARNABAS. STRABO for his credit among human Authors is equal
to any; he lived about the time of this Perambulation, and being a Greec, is
less likely to be partial: Of that therefore which I have affirmed to have bin
the course of the Romans in their Victorys, I shall make choice of this Author
for a witness; first where he epitomizes the Story of Strab. 1. 9.
Athens after this manner: When the Carians by Sea, and the Boeotians by Land
wasted Attica, CECROPS the Prince, to bring the People under shelter, planted
them in twelve Citys, Cecropia, Tetrapolis, Epacrea, Decelea, Eleusis, Aphydna,
Thoricus, Brauron, ^ytherus, Sphettus, Cephissia, Phalerus; which THESEUS is
said to have contracted into one called Athens. The Government of this City had
many changes; at first it was Monarchical, then Popular: This again was usurped
by the Tyrants PISISTRATUS and his Sons, whence recovered, it fell afterward
into the hands of the Few, as when the four hundred once, and again the thirty
Tyrants were imposed by the Lacedaemonians, in the War of Peloponnesus: which
Yoke the Athenians (by means of their faithful Army) shaking off, restored
their popular Government, and held it till the Romans attained to the Dominion
of Greece. Now tho it be true that they were not a little disturbed by the
Kings of Macedon, to whom they were forced to yield some kind of obedience; they
nevertheless preserved the form of their Commonwealth so entire, that there be
who affirm it never to have bin better administered, than at such time as
Macedon was governed by CASSANDER: for this Prince, tho in other things more
inclining toward the Tyrant, having taken Athens by surrender, used not the
People ill, but made DEMETRIUS PHALEREUS the Disciple of THEOPHRASTUS the
Philosopher, chief Magistrate among them; a man so far from ruining their
popular State (as in the Commentarys he wrote upon this kind of Government is
attested) that he repaired it. Nevertheless, whether suspected or envied for
his Greatness without support by the Macedonians, after the death of CASSANDER
he fled into Egypt, while his Enemies breaking down his Statues (as some say)
made homely Vessels of them. But the Romans having received the Athenians under
their popular form, left them their Lavs and Libertys untouched, till in the
war with MITHRIDATES they were forced to receive such Tyrants as that King was
pleased to give them; whereof ARISTION the greatest, when the Romans had retaken
the City from him, being found trampling upon the People, was put to death by
SYLLA, and the City pardoned, which to this day (he wrote about the Reign of
TIBERIUS) not only injoys her Libertys, but is high in honor with the Romans.
This is the Testimony of STRABO agreing with that of CICERO, where disputing of
Divine Providence, he says, that to affirm the World to be governed by Chance,
or without God, is as if one should say that Athens were not governed by the
Areopagits. Nor did the Romans by the deposition of the same Author (or indeed
of any other) behave themselves worse in Asia (the scene of our present
Discourse, where the same PAUL, of whom we are speaking, being born at Tarsus,
a City o^ Cilicia, that had acquired like or greater Privilege by the same
bounty, was also a Citizen of Rome) than in Greece. Asia is understood in three
significations: First, for the third part of the World answering to Europe and
Africa. Secondly, for that part of Asia which is now called Natolia. Thirdly,
for that part of it which ATTALUS King of Pergamum, dying without Heirs,
bequeathed and left to the People of Rome: this contained Mysia, Phrygia,
Aeolis, Ionia, Caria, Doris, Lydia, Lycaonia, Pisidia, and by consequence the
Citys whereof we are speaking. To all these Countries the Romans gave their
Liberty, till in favor of ARISTONICUS, the Bastard of EUMENES, many of them
taking Arms, they were recovered, brought into subjection, and framed into a
Province.

WHEN a Consul had conquered a Country, and the Romans intended to form it into
a Province, it was the custom of the Senate to send (december Legatos) ten of their
Members, who with the Consul had power to introduce and establish their
provincial way of Government. In this manner Asia was formed by MARCUS
AQUILLIUS Consul; afterward so excellently reformed by SCAEVOLA, that the
Senate in their Edicts used to propose his example to succeding Magistrates, and
the Inhabitants to celebrat a Feast to his Name. Nevertheless MITHRIDATES King
of Pontus (all the Romans in this Province being massacred in one day) came to
possess himself of it, till it was recovered at several times by SYLLA, MURENA,
LUCULLUS and POMPEY. The Romans in framing a Country into a Province, were not
accustomed to deal with all the Inhabitants of the same in a like manner, but
differently according to their different merit. Thus diverse Citys in this were
left free by SYLLA, as those of the Ilienses, the Chians, Rhodians, Lycians,
and Magnesians, with the Cyzicens, tho the last of these afterward for their
practices against the Romans forfeited their Liberty to TIBERIUS, in whose
Reign they were for this reason deprived of the same.

TAKING Asia in the first sense, that is, for one third part of the World, the
next Province of the Romans in this Country was Cilicia, containing Pamphylia,
Isauria, and Cilicia more peculiarly so called. Here CICERO was sometimes
Proconsul, in honor to whom part of Phrygia, with Pisidia and Lycaonia, were
taken from the former, and added to this Jurisdiction, by which means the Citys
whereof we are speaking came to be of this Province. Adjoining hereto was the
Commonwealth of the Lycians, which the Romans left free: into this also the
City of Attalia by some is computed, but Iconium both by STRABO ^^ist.
and CICERO; the latter whereof being Proconsul, in his Journey from Laodicea, was
received by the Magistrates and Deputys of this City. Lys^ra and Derbe, being
Citys of Lycaonia, must also have bin of the same Province. Next to the
Province of Cilicia was that of Syria, containing Comagene, Seleucis,
Phoenicia, Coelosyria, and Judea or Palestin. In Seleucis were the four famous
Citys, Seleucia, Antiochia, Apamea (the last entire in her Liberty) and
Laodicea. Comagene and Judea were under Kings, and not framed into Provinces,
till in the time of the Emperors.

THE fourth Province of the Romans in Asia was that of Bithynia with Pontus:
these were all acquired or confirmed by the Victorys of POMPEY the Great.
STRABO, who was a Cappadocian born at Amasia, relates a story worthy to ^e
remembered in this place. From the time, says he, that the Romans, having
conquered ANTIOCHUS, became Moderators of Asia, they contracted Leagues of
Amity with diverse Nations; where there were Kings, the honor of address was
deferred to them, with whom the Treatys that concerned their Countries were
concluded. But as concerning the Cappadocians, they treated with the whole
Nation, for which cause the Royal Line of this Realm coming afterward to fail,
the Romans gave the People their freedom or leave to live under their own Laws:
and when the People hereupon sending Ambassadors to Rome, renounced their
Liberty, being that to them which they said was intolerable, and demanded a
King; the Romans amazed there should be men that could so far despair,
permitted them to choose, of their Nation, whom they pleased; so ARIOBARZANES
was chosen, whose Line again in the third Generation coming to fail, ARCHELAUS
was made King by ANTONY (where you may observe, in passing, that the Romans
imposed not Monarchical Government, but for that matter used to leave a People
as they found them) Thus at the same time they left PONTUS under King
MITHRIDATES, who not containing himself within his bounds, but extending them
afterward as far as Colchis and Armenia the Less, was reduced to his terms by
POMPEY; who devesting him of those Countries which he had usurped, distributed
some part of them to such Princes as had assisted the Romans in that War, and
divided the rest into twelve Commonwealths, of which, added to Bithynia, he
made one Province. When the Roman Emperors became Monarchs, they also upon like
occasions made other distributions, constituting Kings, Princes, and Citys, some
more, some less, some wholly free, and others in subjection to themselves. Thus
came a good, if not the greater part of the Citys in the Lesser Asia, and the
other adjoining Provinces, to be some more, some less free; but the most of them
to remain Commonwealths, or to be erected into popular Governments, as appears
yet clearer by the intercourse of PLINY, while he was Praetor or Governor of
Bithynia, with his Master the Emperor TRAJAN; a piece of which I have inserted
in the Letters following.

PINY to TRAJAN.
SIR;
Plin. Epist. l. 10.
IT is provided by POMPEY'S Laws for the Bithynians, that no man under thirty
years of Age be capable of Magistracy, or of the Senate: by the same it is also
established, that they who have born Magistracy may be Senators. Now because by
a latter Edict of AUGUSTUS, the lesser Magistracys may be born by such as are
above one and twenty; there remains with me these doubts, whether he that being
under thirty, has born Magistracy, may be elected by the Censors into the
Senate; and if he may, whether of those also that have not born Magistracy, a
man being above one and twenty, seeing at that age he may bear Magistracy, may
not by the same interpretation be elected into the Senate, tho he has not born
it: which is here practiced and pretended to be necessary, because it is
somewhat better, they say, that the Senate be filled with the Children of good
Familys, than with the lower sort. My opinion being asked upon these points by
the new Censors, I thought such as being under thirty have born Magistracy,
both of POMPEY'S Laws, and the Edict of AUGUSTUS, to be capable of the Senate;
seeing the Edict allows a man under thirty to bear Magistracy, and the Law, a
man that has born Magistracy, to be a Senator. But as to those that have not
born Magistracy, tho at the age in which they may bear it, I demur till I may
understand your Majestys pleasure, to whom I have sent the Heads both of the
Law and of the Edict.


TRAJAN to PLINY.
YOU and I, dearest PLINY, are of one mind. POMPEY'S Laws are so far qualified
by the Edict of AUGUSTUS, that they who are not under one and twenty may bear
Magistracy, and they who have born Magistracy may be Senators in their
respective Citys: but for such as have not born Magistracy, tho they might have
born it, I conceive them not eligible into the Senate till they be thirty years
of age.


PLINY to TRAJAN.
SIR;
POWER is granted to the Bithynian Citys by POMPEY'S Law, to adopt to
themselves what Citizens they please, so they be not Foreners, but of the same
Province; by the same Law it is shown in what cases the Censors may remove a
man from the Senate: Among which nevertheless it is not provided what is to be
don in case a foren Citizen be a Senator. Wherefore certain of the Censors have
thought fit to consult me, whether they ought to remove a man that is of a
foren City for that cause out of the Senate. Now because the Law, tho it forbids
the adoption of a Forener, commands not that a Forener for that cause should be
removed out of the Senate, and I am informed there be foren Citizens almost in
every Senate; so that many, not only Men, but Citys might suffer Concussion by
the


TRAJAN to PLINY.
WITH good cause, dearest PLINY, have you doubted what answer to return to the
Censors, inquiring whether they ought to elect a man into the Senate that is of
another City, tho of the same Province; seeing on the one side the Authority of
the Law, and of Custom on the other to the contrary, might well disorder you.
To innovat nothing for the time past, I think well of this expedient: they who
are already elected Senators, tho not according to the Law, of what City soever
they be, may remain for the present; but for the future POMPEY'S Laws should
return to their full virtue, which if we should cause to look back, might
create trouble.


THIS might serve, but there will be no hurt in being a little fuller in the
discovery of Provincial Government.

THE Provinces so framed, as has bin shown, were subdivided into certain
Circuits called Dioceses; that of Asia had six, Alabandae, Sardes (anciently
the Senate of CRAESUS) Smyrna, Ephesus, Adramytis, Pergamum. That of Cilicia had
also six, the Pamphylian, Isaurian, and Cilician, the Metropolis whereof was
Tarsus, a free City; to these were taken out of the Province of Asia, Cibyra,
Sinnadae, Apamea: what were the Dioceses of the other two SIGONIUS, whom I
follow, dos not show. At these in the Winter (for the Summer was spent commonly
with the Army) the People of the Province assembled at set times, as at our
Assizes, where the Roman Governors did them Justice.

THE Governors or Magistrates, to whose care a Province was committed, were of
two kinds: the first and chief was Consul or Praetor, which appellations
differed not in Power, but in Dignity, that of Consul being more honorable, who
had twelve Lictors, whereas the Praetor had but six; if the annual Magistracy of
either of these came to be prorogued, he was called Proconsul or Propretor.

THE second kind of Magistrate in a Province was the Questor, Receiver or
Treasurer, who being also annual, was attended by Lictors of his own; if he
died within his year, the Consul, Proconsul, or Praetor might appoint one for
that time in his place, who was called Proquestor. The Power of the Consul,
Proconsul, or Praetor, was of two kinds, the one Civil, the other Military; the
former called Magistracy, the latter Empire.

THE Pomp of these assuming and exercising their Magistracy was reverend; the
Consul or Proconsul had Legates, sometimes more, but never under three, appointed
him by the Senate: these were in the nature of Counsillors to assist him in all
Affairs of his Province; he had Tribuns, Colonels, or Field Officers, for the
military part of his Administration; he had also Secretarys, Sergeants, Heralds
or Criers, Lictors or Insignbearers, Interpreters, Messengers, Divines,
Chamberlains, Physicians; and besides these his Companions, which for the most
part were of the younger sort of Gentlemen or Gallants that accompanied
Paludatus, that is in his Royal Mantle of Gold and Purple, followed for some
part of the way with the whole Train of his Friends, wishing him much joy and
good speed.

IN his Province he executed his twofold Office, the one of Captain General,
the other of the supreme Magistrate. In the former relation he had an Army
either received from his Predecessor, or new levied in the City; this consisted
in the one half of the Legions (as I have elsewhere shown) and in the other of
Associats: for the greatness of the same, it was proportioned to the Province,
or the occasion; to an ordinary Province in times of Peace, I believe an Army
amounted not to above one Legion with as many Auxiliarys, that is, to a matter
of twelve thousand Foot, and twelve hundred Horse. The Magistracy or
Jurisdiction of the Proconsul, or Praetor, was executed at the Metropolitan City
of each Dioecis, which upon this occasion was to furnish the Pretorian Cohort
with Lodging, Salt, Wood, Hay, and Stableroom at the charge of the Country.
These, tho CICERO would hardly receive any of them, were, toward the latter
time of the Commonwealth, extended by the Provincial Magistrates to so great a
burden to the People, that it caused diverse Laws to be passed in Rome (de
repetundis) for restitution to be made to the Provinces, by such as had injured
them. Upon such Laws was the prosecution of VERRES by CICERO. When and where
this kind of Court was to be held, the Consul, Proconsul, ^or Praetor, by
Proclamation gave timely notice. Being assembled at the time, and the City
appointed, in the Townhal stood a Tribunal; upon this the Sella Curulis, or
Chair of State, in which sat the Consul, Proconsul, or Praetor, with his
Pretorian Cohort or Band about him, furnished with all manner of Pomp, and
Officers requisite to the Ornament or Administration of so high a Magistracy.
The Jurisdiction of this Court was according to the Laws made for the
administation of the Province; but because they could not foresee all things
(as appeared by the Questions which PLINY put upon the Laws of POMPEY, to
TRAJAN) it came to pass, that much was permitted to the Edicts of the
Provincial Pretors, as was also in use at Rome with the Pretors of the City:
and if any man had judged otherwise in his Province, than he ought to have don
in the City, made an Edict contrary to the Law of his Province, or judged any
thing otherwise than according to his own Edict, he was held guilty of, and
questionable for a heinous Crime. But what the Law of this or that Province
(which differed in each) was, would be hard particularly to say; only in
general it was for the main very much resembling that of Sicily, called Rupilia.

LEGE Rupilia, or by the Law of RUPILIUS, a Cause between one Citizen and
another being of the same City, was to be tried at home by their own Laws. A
Cause between one Provincial and another being of diverse Citys, was to be tried
by Judges whom the Praetor should appoint by lot. What a private man claimed of a
People, or a People of a private man, Rome, as were present in the same Court)
were to be given. In criminal Causes, as Violence, Peculat, or Treason, the
Law, and the manner of proceeding was the same in the Provinces, as in Rome.

FOR the Tributs, Customs, Taxes, levys of Men, Money, Shipping, ordinary or
extraordinary, for the common defense of the Roman Republic, and her Provinces,
the Consuls, Proconsuls, or Pretors, proceeding according to such Decrees of the
Senate as were in that case standing or renewed upon emergent occasions; in
gathering these lay the Magistracy or office of the Questor: if the Proconsul
were indisposed, or had more business than he could well turn his hand to,
Courts of this nature might be held by one or more of his Legates. With matter
of Religion they meddl'd not; every Nation being so far left to the liberty of
Conscience, that no violence for this cause was offered to any man: by which
means both Jews and Christians, at least till the time of the persecuting
Emperors, had the free exercise of their Religion throout the Roman Provinces.
This the Jews liked well for themselves, nor were they troubled at the
Heathens; but to the Christians they always g^udg'd the like privilege. Thus
when they could no otherwise induce PILAT to put Christ to death, they accused
Christ of affecting Monarchy, and so afrighted PILAT, being a mean conditioned
fellow, while they threatened to let TIBERIUS know he was not Cesar's Friend,
that he complied with their ends. But when at Corinth where GALLIO (a man of
another temper) was Proconsul of Achaia, they would have bin at this sport
again, and with a great deal of Tumult had brought PAUL before the Tribunal,
GALLIO took it not well, that they should think he had nothing else to do than
to judge of Words, and Names, and Questions of their Law; for he cared no more
for the Disputes between the Christians and the Jews, than for those between
the Epicureans and the Stoics Whe^fore his Lictors drove them from the
Tribunal, and the officious Corinthians, to show their love to the Proconsul,
fell on knocking them out of the way of other business.

NOW tho the Commonwealth of the Achaeans, being at this time a Roman Province
under the Proconsul GALLIO, enjoyed no longer her common Senate, Strategus, and
Demiurges, according to the model shown in the former Book; yet remained each
particular City under her ancient form of Popular Government, so that in these,
especially at Corinth, many of the Greecs being of the same judgment, the Jews
could not dispute with the Christians without Tumult. Of this kind was that
which happened at Ephesus, where Christianity growing so Act. 19.
fast, that the Silversmiths of DIANA'S Temple began to fear they should lose
their Trade; the Jews liking better of Heathenism than Christianity, set
ALEXANDER, one of their pack, against PAUL.

THIS place (in times when men will understand no otherwise of human story than
makes for their ends) is fallen happily unto my hand; seeing that which I have
said of a Roman Province, will be thus no less than proved out of Scripture.
For the Chancellor of Ephesus perceiving the Ecclesia (so it is in the
Original) or Assembly (as in our Translation) uncalled by the Senate, or the
Magistracy to Syracusa and other Citys, of meeting) betakes himself to appease
the People with diverse arguments: among which he has these. First, as to matter
of Religion, You have brought hither, says he, these men which are neither
robbers of Temples (Churches our Bible has it, before there was any Church to
be robbed) nor yet blasphemers of the Goddess: In which words (seeing that they
offering no scandal, but only propagating that which was according to their own
judgment, were not obnoxious to Punishment) he shows that every man had liberty
of Conscience. Secondly, as to Law: If DEMETRIUS and the Craftsmen which are
with him have a matter against any man, the Law, says he, is open. Thirdly, as
to the matter of Government, which appears to be of two parts, the one
Provincial, the other Domestic: For the former, says he, there are ((...))
Proconsuls (he speaks in the plural number with relation to the Legates, by whom
the Proconsul sometimes held his Courts; otherwise this Magistrate was but one in
a Province, as at this time for Asia PUBLIUS SUILIUS) and to the latter, says
he, if you desire any thing concerning other matters, that is, such as
appertain to the Government of the City (in which the care of the Temple was
included) it shall be determined in a lawful Ecclesia, or Assembly of the
People. By which you may see that notwithstanding the Provincial Government,
Ephesus, tho she was no free City, (for with a free City the Proconsul had
nothing of this kind to do) had ((...)) the Government of her self (as those
other Citys mentioned in PLINY'S Epistles) by the Senate, and the People; for
wherever one of these is named, as the Senate by PLINY, or the People by LUKE,
the other is understood. When the Chancellor had thus spoken, he dismissed the
Ecclesia. It is LUKE'S own word, and so often as I have now repeated it, so
often has he used it upon the same occasion. Wherefore I might henceforth expect
two things of Divines; first, that it might be acknowleg'd that I have good
Authors, LUKE and the Chancellor of Ephesus, for the word Ecclesia in this
sense; and secondly, that they would not persuade us, the word Ecclesia has
lost this signification, lest they condemn this place of Scripture to be no
more understood. The manner of Provincial Government being thus proved, not
only out of profane Authors, but out of Scripture it self; and the Citys that
were least free having had such power over themselves, and their Territorys;
why, if the Romans took no more of them for this protection, than was paid to
their former Lords, did they not rather undertake the patronage of the World
than the Empire; seeing Venice, and Dantzic, while the one was tributary to the
Turk, the other to the King of Poland, were nevertheless so free Estates, that
of a King, or a Commonwealth that should have put the rest of the world into
the like condition, no less in our day could have bin said? And yet that the
Romans, when the nature of the Eastern Monarchys shall be rightly considered,
took far less of these Citys than their old Masters, will admit of little
doubt. CICERO surely would not ly; he, when Proconsul of Cilicia, wrote in this
manner concerning his Circuit, to his friend SERVILIUS: Two days I staid at
Laodicea, at Apamea five, at Sinnadae three, at Pilomelis five, at Iconium ten;
than which Jurisdiction or Government there is nothing more just or equal. Why
then had not those Citys their Senats and their Ecclesiae, or Congregations of
the People, as well as that of Ephesus, and those whereof PLINY gives an account
to TRAJAN?

CORINTH was in Achaia; Perga of Pamphylia, Antioch of Pisidia, Iconium,
Lystra, Derbe of Lycaonia, were in Cilicia; and with these, as some reckon,
Attalia. Ephesus and the other Antioch were in Syria. Achaia, Cilicia, and
Syria, were Roman Provinces at the time of this Perambulation of the Apostles:
The Citys under Provincial Administration, whether free or not free, were under
Popular Government; whence it follows, that Corinth, Ephesus, Antioch of Syria,
Antioch of Pisidia, Perga, Iconium, Lystra, Derbe, Attalia, being at this time
under Provincial Administration, were at the same time under Popular
Government. There has bin no hurt in going about, for the proof of this; tho
indeed to show that these Citys (had quandam (...)) were under Popular
Government, we needed to have gone no further than the Text, as where the
Chancellor of Ephesus, to get rid of a tumultuous Ecclesia or Assembly of the
People, promises them a lawful one. In Iconium, Lystra, Derbe, and the rest,
you hear not of any King (as where HEROD stretched out his hand to please the
Jews, and vex the Church) but of the People, of their Rulers, of their
Assemblys, and of their Tumults. The People at Lystra are now agreed to give
the Apostles divine Honors: and anon, both at Iconium and Lystra, to stone
them. Now to determine of divine Honor, or of Life and Death, are acts of
Soverain Power. It is true, these nevertheless may happen to be usurped by a
mere Tumult; but that cannot be said of these Congregations, which consisted as
well of the Magistrates and Rulers, as of the People, and where the Magistrates
show that they had no distinct Power whereby to restrain the People, nor other
means to prevail against them, than by making of Partys: Which Passages, as
they prove these Commonwealths on the one side to have bin ill constituted,
evince on the other, that these Citys were under Popular Government.

CHAP. III.
The Deduction of the Chirotonia from Popular Government, and of the Original
Right of Ordination from the Chirotonia. In which is contained the Institution
of the Sanhedrim or Senate of Israel by MOSES, and of that of Rome by ROMULUS.
DIVINES generally in their way of disputing have a bias that runs more upon
Words than upon Things; so that in this place it will be necessary to give the
Interpretation of some other Words, whereof they pretend to take a strong hold in
their Controversys. The chief of these has bin spoken to already: Chirotonia
being a word that properly signifys the Suffrage of the People, wherever it is
properly used, implys Power; wherefore tho the Senate decrees by Suffrage as well
as the People, yet there being no more in a Decree of the Senate than Authority,
the Senate is never said to Chirotonize, or very seldom and improperly, this
word being peculiar to the People. And thus much is implied in what went before.

THE next Word in Controversy is Psephisma, which signifys a Decree Law; and
this always implying Power, always implys the Suffrage of the People, that is,
where it is spoken of popular Government: for tho a Psephisma or Decree of the
Athenian Senate was a Law for a year before it came to the Suffrage or
Chirotonia of the People, yet the Law or Constitution of SOLON, whereby the
Senate had this Power, originally derived from the Chirotonia of the People.

THE third Word ((...)) signifys to constitute or ordain; this in the political
sense of the same implys not Power, but Authority: for a man that writes or
proposes a Decree or Form of Government, may be said ((...)) to propose or
constitute it, whether it be confirmed by the Chirotonia of the People or not;
nay with HALICARNASSAEUS the Word signifys no more than barely to call or
assemble the Senate, (...).

NOW if these Words be sometimes otherwise taken, what Words be there in any
Language that are not often used improperly? But that understood politically,
they must of necessity be understood as I have shown, or will so entangle and
disorder Government, that no man shall either make head or foot of it, is that
which I make little question to evince in the surest way, that is, by opening
the nature of the Things whence they derive, and whereof they are spoken by the
best Authors.

AND because the Words (tho the Things they signify were much more ancient)
derive all from Athens, I shall begin by this Constitution to show the proper
use of them. Chirotonia in Athens, as has bin shown out of SUIDAS (who speaking
of Rome refers to this) was Election of Magistrates, or enacting Laws by the
Suffrage of the People; which, because they gave by holding up their hands,
came thence to be called Chirotonia, which signifys holding up of hands. The
Legislative Assembly, or Representative of the People, called the Nomothetae,
upon occasion of repealing an old Law, and enacting a new one, gave the
Chirotonia of the People: And yet says the Athenian Demost. contra Timocr.
Law ((...)) Let the Proedri give or make the Chirotonia to either Law. The
Proedri, as was shown in the former Book, were the ten Presidents of the
Prytans; which Prytans upon this occasion were Presidents of the Nomothetae.
Again, whereas it was the undoubted Right and Practice of the People to elect
their Magistrates by their Chirotonia ((...)) it is nevertheless Phil. 1.
shown by POLLUX to have bin the peculiar Office of the Thesmothetae ((...)) to
chirotonize the Magistrates. For as the Proedri were Presidents of the People in
their Legislative Capacity, so were the Thesmothetae, upon occasion of
Elections: thus the Chirotonia L. 8. c. 8.
of the Proedri or of the Thesmothetae, signifys nothing else but the Chirotonia
of the People, by which they enacted all their Laws, and elected all their
Civil or Ecclesiastical Magistrates or Priests, as the Rex Sacrificus, and the
Orgeones, except some by the Lot; which Ordination, as is observed by ARISTOTLE,
is equally popular. This, whether ignorantly or wilfully unregarded, has bin,
as will be seen hereafter, the cause of great absurdity; for who sees not that
to put the Chirotonia, or Soverain Power of Athens upon the Proedri or the
Thesmothetae, is to make such a thing of that Government as can no wise be
understood?

Chirotonia, was called Psephisma, an Act or Law. And because in the Nomothetae
there were always two Laws put together to the Vote, that is to say, the old
one, and that which was offered in the room of it, they that were for the old
Law were said ((...)) to pronounce in the Negative; and they that were for the
new ((...)) to pronounce for the Affirmative.

THESE Laws, these Propositions, or this frame of Government, having bin
proposed first by SOLON, and then ratified or established by the Chirotonia of
the Athenian People; ARISTOTLE says of him ((...)) that he instituted or
constituted the popular Government; which Constitution implys not any Power in
SOLON, who absolutely refused to be a King, and therefore the word (...) as to
him implys no more than Authority. I have showed you the Words in controversy,
and the Things together in the Mint; now whether they that as to Athens
introduced them both, understood either, I leave my Reader by comparing them to
judge.

IT is true that the Things expressed by these Words have bin in some
Commonwealths more, in others less ancient than the Greec Language; but this
hinders not the Greecs to apply the Words to the like Constitutions or Things,
wherever they find them, as, by following HALICARNASSAEUS, I shall exemplify in
Rome.

Lib. 2.
(...) ROMULUS, when he had distributed the People into Tribes and Parishes,
proceeded to ordain the Senate: in this manner the Tribes were three, and the
Parishes thirty; out of every Tribe he elected three Senators, and out of every
Parish three more, all by the Suffrage of the People. These therefore came to
ninety nine chosen by the Chirotonia; to which he added one more, not chosen by
the Chirotonia, but by himself only: Which Election we may therefore say was
made by the Chirothesia; for as in this Chapter I am showing that the
Chirotonia is Election by the Many, so in the next I shall show that the
Chirothesia is Election by One, or by the Few. But to keep to the matter in
hand; the Magistrate thus chosen by ROMULUS was (praefectus urbi) the Protector
of the Commonwealth, or he who, when the King was out of the Nation or the
City, as upon occasion of war, had the exercise of Royal Power at home. In like
manner with the Civil Magistracy were the Priests created (tho some of them not
so anciently) for the Pontifex Maximus, the Rex Sacrificus, and the Flamens,
were all ordained by the Suffrage of the People (Pontifex Tributis, Rex
Centuriatis, Flamines Curiatis) the latter of which, being no more than Parish
Priests, had no other Ordination than by their Parishes. All the Laws, and all
the Magistrates in Rome, even the Kings themselves, were according to the Orders
of this Commonwealth to be created by the Chirotonia of the People; which
nevertheless is by APPIAN sometimes called (...), the Chirotonia of the Tribuns,
whether these Magistrates were Presidents of the Assemblys of the People, or
elected by them. Sic Romani Historici non raro loquuntur, Consulem Calv. Inst.
l. 4. cap. 3. ^. 15.
qui comitia habuerit creasse novos Magistratus, non aliam ob causam nisi quia
suffragia receperit, and Populum moderatus est in eligendo.

WHAT past the Chirotonia of the People, by the Greecs is called Dion. Hal. l.
8.
Psephisma: (...)* When the Congregation of the People was to be dismissed, MARCUS
standing up, said, Your Psephisma,

THIS Policy, for the greater part, is that which ROMULUS (as was shown) is
said ((...)) to have instituted or ordained, tho it be plain that he ordained
it no otherwise than by the Chirotonia of the People.

THUS you have another example of the three words in controversy (Chirotonia,
(...), Psephisma) still applied in the same sense, and to the same things. Have
I not also discovered already the original Right of Ordination, whether in
civil or religious Orders? This will be scandalous. How! derive Ordination as
it is in the Church of CHRIST, or as it was in the Church of the Jews, from the
Religion, or rather Superstition of the Heathens! I meddle not with their
Religion, nor yet with their Superstition, but with their Ordination which was
neither, but a part of their Policy. And why is not Ordination in the Church or
Commonwealth of CHRIST, as well a political thing as it was in the Churches or
Commonwealths of the Jews, or of the Heathens? Why is not Election of Officers
in the Church as well a political thing, as Election of Officers in the State?
and why may not this be as lawfully performed by the Chirotonia in the one, as
in the other?

Philo de Inst. Princ.
THAT MOSES introduced the Chirotonia, is expressly said by PHILO; tho he
opposes it to the Ballot, in which I believe he is mistaken, as not seeing that
the Ballot including the Suffrage of the People, by that means came as properly
under the denomination of the Chirotonia, as the Suffrage of the Roman People,
which tho it were given by the Tablet, is so called by Greec Authors. All
Ordination of Magistrates, as of the Senators or Elders of the Sanhedrim, of the
Judges or Elders of inferior Courts, of the Judge or Su^fes of Israel, of the
King, of the Priests, of the Levits, whether with the Ballot or viva voce, was
performed by the Chirotonia or Suffrage of the People. In this (especially if
you admit the Authority of the Jewish Lawyers, and Divines called the
Talmudists) the Scripture will be clear, but their Names are hard; wherefore not
to make my Discourse more rough than I need, I shall here set them together.
The Authors or Writings I use, by way of Paraphrase upon the Scripture, are the
Gemara Babylonia, Midbar Rabba, Sepher Siphri, Sepher Tanchuma, Solomon
Jarchius, Chiskuny, Abarbanel, Ajin Israel, Pesiktha Zotertha. These and many
more being for the Election of the Sanhedrim by the Ballot, I might have spoken
them more briefly; for the truth is, in all that is Talmudical I am assisted by
SELDOM, GROTIUS, and their Quotations out of the Rabbys, having in this
Learning so little Skill, that if I miscalled none of them, I showed you a good
part of my acquaintance with them.

NOR am I wedded to GROTIUS or SELDOM, whom sometimes I follow, and sometimes I
leave, making use of their Learning, but of my own Reason. As to the things in
this present Controversy, they were no other in Athens and Rome than they had
bin in the Commonwealth of Israel.

Numb. 11. v. 16, 24.
WHEN MOSES came to institute the Senate, he asked counsil of God. And the Lord
said, Gather to me seventy men of the Elders of Israel; and MOSES went out and
told the People the words of the Lord: that is, proposed the Dictat of the
supreme Legislator to the Chirotonia of the Congregation. What else can we make
of these words of MOSES Take ye wise men, and understanding, and known among
Deuteronomy. 1. v. 13, 14, 15.
your Tribes ((...)) and I will constitute them Rulers over you. Now how the
People could otherwise take or choose these Rulers or Magistrates thus proposed,
than by their Chirotonia, let Divines -- show; or notwithstanding the
constitution of MOSES, both the Senate of Israel, and the inferior Courts, were
decreed by the Chirotonia of the People. For the People upon this Proposition
resolved in the Affirmative, or answered and said, The thing which thou have
spoken is good for us to do. This then was the Psephisma or Decree of the
People of Israel, whereupon says MOSES ((...)) I constituted or ordained them
Governors. In which example you have the three words, or the three things
again; nor as to the things, is it, or ever was it, otherwise in any
Commonwealth. Whence it is admirable in our Divines, who will have (...),
constituted, to be the word of Power; that they do not see by this means they
must make two Powers in the same Government; the (...) or Constitution of the
Legislator, and the Chirotonia or Suffrage of the People: or else say that the
Commonwealth of Israel was instituted by the Power of the Legislator, and the
Authority of the People, than which there is nothing more absurd. But the
People staid not upon their first Psephisma, or Result, that the thing was good
for them to do, but did accordingly. The manner of their proceeding at different
times was somewhat different; for it was sometimes viva voce, sometimes by the
Lot, without the Suffrage, and sometimes by the Ballot, which confisted not of
the Lot only, but of the Suffrage. Each of these are equally popular (for
neither of them gives an advantage to any Person or Party) but not equally
prudent ways of proceeding; the Lot committing too much to Fortune, except in
some kinds of businesses, as first in the division of Lands, whence the Suffrage
was properly excluded: for the Divisions being made by three Deputys out of
each Tribe, if there happened to fall some advantage or disadvantage to any man
by the Lot, it was equal or impartial; whereas if it had fallen by the Suffrage,
it must have bin inequal, or partial. Such was the cause why the Lot in the
Division of the Land of Canaan was used without the Suffrage. In case of a
Crime committed by an unknown Author, but among many of whom some one or more
must have bin guilty, as in the cases of ACHAN and JONATHAN, the Lot was also
used without the Suffrage, somewhat after the manner of Decimation in an Army,
when many that are guilty throw the Dice, and he on whom the Lot falls is
punished; yet with considerable difference, for whereas Decimation is not used
but for punishment, where the Persons are as well known as the Guilt; this use
of the Lot in Israel was for the discovery of the unknown Author of some known
Crime, that some one of many being put to the question (who if either by his own
confession, or other proof he were found guilty, was punished accordingly,
otherwise not) Men might have less encouragement that their Crimes would be the
more hidden, or less punishable for company, or the shadow of it.

WHEN the People were set upon the introduction of a new Magistracy, and cared
not at all who should be the man, as in the Election of SAUL, at which time the
Phitistins lay hard upon them, and they looked upon the Ease they hoped from a
King, without coveting the trouble which he was like to have; it seems to me
there was a third use of the Lot without the Suffrage.

BUT that the common use of the Lot in Israel implied also the Venice, is
little to be doubted; or you may satisfy your self, when you have considered
the manner how the Senate or Sanhedrim was first elected ((...)) or constituted
by MOSES.

UPON the Psephisma, or decree of the Legislator and the People, The thing
which thou have spoken is good for us to do, they proceeded to election of
Competitors in this manner. Each of the twelve Tribes (to be hereafter as well
locally, as they were yet but genealogically divided) were to make the
Election, not excluding the Thirteenth, nor yet nominally taking it in; for
LEVI, tho genealogically as distinct a Tribe as any of them, yet was not
designed locally so to be, but to have the right of promiscuous Inhabiting,
Cohabiting, or Marriage with all or any of the rest, and with right of Suffrage
accordingly; for this cause the Tribes being Thirteen, are reckoned but Twelve.
So each of the twelve Tribes elected among themselves by their Suffrages, six
wise men, and understanding, and known among them; who being elected, were
written; and being written, were delivered each in a several Scrol to MOSES.
MOSES having received all the Scrols, had seventy two Competitors, which caused
a Fraction; for the Senate, as is plain by the Text (gather me seventy men, that
they may stand with thee) was to consist but of Seventy with MOSES, that is, in
all, of seventy one. So MOSES having two Competitors more than he needed,
caused two Urns to be brought, into one of which he cast the seventy two
Competitors, or Names written in the Scrols; and into the other seventy two
Scrols, of which two were blanks, and seventy were inscribed with the word
Presbyter. This being don, the whole Congregation prayed, and when they had
prayed, gave forth their Lots.

THE Lots were given forth after this manner. First a Lot was drawn out of the
Urn of the Magistracys, then another out of the Urn of the Competitors. The
Competitor to whose name a Blank was drawn, departed: but he to whose name a
Prize was drawn, or given forth, became a Magistrate.

THEY who had thus gained Magistracy were (...), by this Psephisma decreed to
be together of the number of the seventy Elders. But whereas in the Urn of
Magistracys there were two Blanks, two that had bin written Competitors must of
necessity have failed of Magistracy. So ELDAD and MEDAD being of them that were
Numb. 11. 26*
written Competitors by the Tribes, yet went not up to the Tabernacle; that is,
attained not to be ((...)) numbered among the seventy, who were to sit in the
Court of the Tabernacle; as afterward they did in the Pavement, or
stone-Chamber, in the Court of the Temple.

IN this place I shall mind you but once more of the three Words in
controversy. MOSES the Legislator ((...)) constituted, the People chirotoniz'd;
and that which they had chirotoniz'd, was Psephisma, their Decree.

THERE be in these times that are coif'd with such Opinions, that to show
Scripture to be Reason, is to make it lose weight with them; and to talk of the
Talmudists, is to profane it: Of these I shall only desire to know how they
understand that place of ELDAD and MEDAD; for if they can no otherwise make
sense of it than as Talmudists go) of all that I have said. What therefore has
the Hierarchy, and the Presbytery for their opinion that the Sanhedrim was
instituted by the Chirothesia, or Imposition of Hands?

THERE is in the Old Testament no mention of laying on of Hands by way of
Ordination, or Election, but only by MOSES in the designation of JOSHUA for his
Successor: and in this MOSES did first as ROMULUS afterward in the Election of
the Prefect or Protector of Rome, but upon a far greater exigence; for the
Commonwealth of Rome, when ROMULUS did the like, was seated or planted, but the
Commonwealth of Israel, when MOSES did this, was neither seated nor planted,
nor indeed a Commonwealth, but an Army designed to be a Commonwealth. Now
between the Government that is necessary to an Army, and that which is
necessary to a Commonwealth, there is a vast difference. The Government even of
the Armies of Rome, when she was a Commonwealth, was nevertheless Monarchical:
in this regard MOSES himself exercised a kind of Dictatorian Power for his
life; and the Commonwealth being not yet planted, nor having any Balance
whereupon to weigh her self, must either have bin left at his death to the care
of some Man whom he knew best able to lay her Foundation, or to extreme hazard.
Wherefore this Ordination, which was but accidental, regarding the present
military condition of the People, MOSES most prudently distinguishes from the
other; in that he showed them how they should manage their Commonwealth, in
this he bequeaths them the Man whom he thinks the most likely to bring them to
be a Commonwealth: of which judgment and undertaking of MOSES, JOSHUA the next
illustrious Example, most worthily acquitted himself.

THERE is in these Elections another remarkable passage, but such a one as,
being so far from political that it is supernatural, dos not properly appertain
to this discourse, and so I shall but point at it. When the Elders, thus
chosen, were set round about the Tabernacle, Numb. 11. 24, 25.
the Lord came down in a cloud, and took of the spirit of MOSES, and gave it
unto the seventy Elders; and it came to pass, that when the Spirit rested upon
them, they prophesied and did not cease. So JOSHUA Deuteronomy. 34. 9. ^ Tim. 1. 6.
was full of the spirit of Wisdom, for MOSES had laid his hands upon him. And
PAUL minds TIMOTHY, Stir up the gift of God which is in thee by the laying on
of my hands. But the Talmudists themselves do not pretend that their Ordination
was further accompanied with supernatural indowments than the first
Institution; and if Divines were as ingenuous, no less might be acknowleg'd of
theirs. MOSES was a Prophet, the like to whom has not bin in Israel; and has
there bin an Apostle like PAUL in the Christian Church? Every body cannot do
Miracles, we see they cannot. Take heed how you deny Sense, for then bread may
be flesh. If we be not to make choice of a political Institution without a
miraculous test or recommendation; either Ordination was at first accompanied
with supernatural Gifts, and from thenceforth, as I conceive, neither. Divines
methinks as such should not be so much concerned in the Ordination of the
Sanhedrim, or of JOSHUA, who were Magistrates, as the People or the Magistrate:
yet if these should hence infer that their Election, Ordination, or Designation
of persons conferred supernatural Gifts, Divines would hardly allow of it; and
why are the People, or the Magistrate obliged to allow more to that of a Clergy?
To return.

SUCH as I have shown was the Ordination of the Senate, or great Sanhedrim, that
of the lesser Sanhedrim, or inferior Courts, was of like nature, for it
follows; I took the chief of your Tribes, wise men and Deuteronomy. 1. 15.
known ((...)) and made them Heads over you, Captains of thousands, and
Captains of hundreds, etc. which were other Magistrates than, according to our
custom, we should readily expect to be intimated by such words, for they were
the Judges of the inferior Courts, those that sat in the gates of each City,
and others that appertained to the Villages, as in the next Verse: And I
charged your Judges at that Ver. 10.
time, saying, Hear the Causes, and judge righteously.

THE next Magistrate whose Election coms to be considered is the Dictator, or
Judge of Israel. Where it is said of this People, that the Lord raised them up
Judges, which delivered them out of the hands of Judge. 2. 16. De Rep. Heb.
those that spoiled them, it is to be understood, says SIGONIUS, that God put
it into the mind of the People to elect such Magistrates, or Captains over them.
For example, when the Children of Ammon made war against Israel, God raised up
JEPHTHA, whose Election was after this manner: The Elders went to fetch JEPHTHA
out of the Land of Judges 11.
Tob, and when they had brought him to Mizpeh (which in those days was the
place, where (...), the Congregation of Israel usually assembled) the People
made him Head and Captain over them. Now that the Election of the King was as
much in the Chirotonia of the People, as that of the Judge, is past all
controversy, seeing the Law speaking of the People says thus: One from among
thy Brethren shall Deuteronomy. 17. 15.
thou set King over thee; and accordingly when the Government was changed to
Monarchy, it was not SAMUEL, but the People that would have it so; thus SAUL
was chosen King by the Lot. Where the contradiction of GROTIUS is remarkable,
who in this place to show that the Lot is of Popular Institution, quotes
ARISTOTLE; and yet Arist. Pol. B. 6. c. 2.
when he coms to speak of the Lots that were cast at the Election of MATTHIAS,
says it was that it might appear not whom the Multitude, De Imp. S. P. c. 10.
but whom God had ordained; as if the Magistrate lawfully elected by the People,
were not elected by God, or that the Lot which thus falls into the lap were not
at the disposing of the Lord. But if the League by which the People received
DAVID into the Throne, or the Votes by which first the People of Jerusalem, and
afterward the Congregation of Israel (as was shown in the former Book) made
SOLOMON King, were of the Lord; then Election by the People was of the Lord,
and the Magistrate that was elected by the Chirotonia of the People, was elected
by the Chirotonia of God: for as the Congregation of Israel is called in
Scripture ((...)) the Ecclesia or Congregation Judges 20.
of God; so the Chirotonia of this Congregation is called by JOSEPHUS ((...))
the Chirotonia of God, who as I noted Jos. l. 4.
before out of CAPELLUS, was in this Commonwealth Political King, or Civil
Legislator (Sans comparaison) as SOLON in Athens, and ROMULUS in Rome; that is
to propose to the People (Haec est lex quam MOSES proposuit) and whatever was
proposed by God, or the lawful Magistrate under him, and chirotoniz'd or voted
by the People, was Law in Israel, and no other. Nay, and the People had not
only power to reject any Law that was thus proposed, but to repeal any Law that
was thus enacted: for if God intending Popular Government should have ordained
it otherwise, he must have contradicted Josephus, l. 6. c. 5.
((...)) they rejected him (whom they had formerly chirotoniz'd or chosen King)
that he should not reign over them; and elected SAUL. This if God had withstood
by his Power, he must have introduced that kind of Monarchy which he had
declared against; wherefore he chose rather to abandon this sottish and
ungrateful People to the most inextricable yoke of deserved slavery, telling
them, when he had warned them and they would not hear him, that they should cry
to him and he would not hear them, one tittle of whose words passed not
unfulfil'd.

BY this time I have shown that all the Civil Magistrates in Israel were chosen
by the Chirotonia of the People, or, to follow JOSEPHUS, by the Chirotonia of
God, which is all one; for the Chirotonia of the President of the Congregation,
as I have instanced in that of the Proedri, of the Thesmothetae, of the
Consuls, of the Tribuns, and the Chirotonia of the Congregation is the same
thing; and of the Congregation of Israel God, except only at the voting of a
King, was President.

TO com then from the Civil Magistrates to the Priests and Levits, these were
chosen in two ways, either by the Lot, or by the Chirotonia.

THE office and dignity of the High Priest being the greatest in Israel, and by
the institution to be hereditary, caused great disputes in the Election: to
this MOSES by the command of God had designed AARON his Brother; which
Designation, the Command of God being at first either not so obvious as that
relation, or the ambition of others so blind that they could not or would not
see it, caused great combustion. First, through the conspiracy of KORAH, DATHAN,
and ABIRAM; and next by the murmuring of the Princes of the Tribes, all emulous
of this Honor. KORAH being not only a great Numb. 16. Josephus l. 4.
man, but of the Tribe of Levi, could not see why he was not as worthy of the
Priesthood, consideration had of his Tribe, as AARON; and if any other Tribe
might pretend to it, DATHAN and ABIRAM being descended from REUBEN were not
only of the elder House, but troubled to see a younger preferred before them.
Wherefore these having gained to their party three hundred of the most powerful
men of the Congregation, accused MOSES of affecting Tyranny, and doing those
things which threatened the Liberty of the Commonwealth; as under pretense of
Divination to blind the eyes of the People, preferring his Brother to the
Priesthood without the Suffrage of the Congregation: of which charge MOSES
acquitting himself in the Congregation, tells the People that AARON was chosen
both by God, and ((...)) by their Suffrages, which (KORAH being upon this
occasion miraculously destroyed) were thereupon once more given by the People.
Nevertheless the Princes of the Tribes continuing still discontented, and full
of murmur, God decided the Controversy by a second miracle, the budding of
AARON 's Rod: (and so (...)) being thrice confirmed by the Chirotonia of God,
he was confirmed in that honor. Now that the Chirotonia of God in this place of
JOSEPHUS signifys the Chirotonia of the 1 Chronicles. ^9. 22.
People, is plain by that in Scripture, where they made SOLOMON King, and ZADOCK
to be Priest. After the Captivity, as in other things, so in this power the
Sanhedrim came, as I conceive, Grot, ad Hag. 1. 1. Joseph. de Bell, Jud. l. 4.
Maimon. Hal. Cele Hamikdasch; cap. 4, and 5. 2 Chronicles. 24. 5. and 25. 8. and 26.
13.
(as appears by MAIMONIDES) being at the disposing of this Court. Nor could any
inferior Priest serve at the Altar, except he had acquired that right by the
Lot, as is not only delivered by the same Author, and by JOSEPHUS, but in
Scripture. Now the Lot, as was shown, giving no Prerogative either to any
person or party, is as popular an Institution as the Chirotonia. So in election
of Priests, the Orders of Israel differed not from human Prudence, nor those of
other Commonwealths, the Priest of JUPITER having bin elected after the same
manner in the Commonwealth of Syracusa; the Augustales, and the Vestals in that
of Rome: and if the right of bearing holy Magistracy, being in Israel confined
to one Tribe or Order, may seem to make any difference, it was for some time no
otherwise in Athens, nor in Rome, where the Patricians or Nobility assumed
these Offices, or the greatest of them to themselves, till the People in those
Citys disputed that Custom, as introduced without their consent, which the
People of Israel could not fairly do, because it was introduced by their
consent.

TO com to the Levits in their original Ordination, God commanded MOSES saying,
Thou shall bring the Levits before the Tabernacle Numb. 8. 9, 10.
of the Congregation, and thou shall gather the whole assembly of the Children
of Israel, and they shall put their hands upon the Levits. This in the sound of
the words may seem to imply the Chirothesia, or Imposition of Hands, but take
heed of that; Divines will not allow the Chirothesia to be an Act of the
People: but in this proceeding the whole people acted in the Ordination of the
Levits, wherefore the Levits also were ordained by the Chirotonia, Consent,
Vote, or Suffrage of the whole People implied in this action. But for the
Ordination of Priests and Levits, whatever it was, it is not to the present
purpose; Divines deriving not theirs from Priests and Levits, but from Dukes,
Generals and Magistrates, from that of JOSHUA and of the Sanhedrim, always
provided, that this were of the same nature with the former, that is, by the
Chirothesia, or Imposition of Hands, and not by the Chirotonia of the People.
However the Ordination of the Exodus 29*
Magistracy was certainly Political; and so in this deduction they themselves
confess that their Ordination also is a Political Constitution: yet whereas
MOSES is commanded by God to bring AARON and his Numb. 8.
Sons to the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and having washed them
there, to adorn them with the Priestly Robes, with the Miter, and to anoint
them; whereas he is commanded (the Children of Israel having first laid their
Hands upon the Levits) to cleanse them, and offer them for an Offering; Divines
of the Hierarchy and the Presbytery (tho it be otherwise with WALLAEUS and such
as acknowledge Popular Government) give the Congregation, or Consent of the
People for nothing, and put the whole Ordination of the Priests and Levits upon
the washing and cleansing, or other Ceremonys of Consecration: as if to put the
Ordination of SAUL upon the Ceremony of anointing by SAMUEL, tho performed by
the immediate Command of God, were not absolutely contradictory to Scripture,
and to the known Law of Israel, which speaking of the People, expressly says,
One from among thy Brethren shall thou set King over thee; Most wise MOSES
never intended that Philo de inst. principiis.
the Royal Dignity should be acquired by lot, but chose rather that the Kings
should be elected by the Chirotonia, or Suffrage of the whole People. The
Congregations of the People assembled upon this as upon other public affairs,
and required a sign or confirmation from God: forasmuch as by his will Man is
to the rest of Nature, what the Face is to the Body. Whereto agrees that of the
Heathens, Os homini sublime dedit, Coelumque tueri jussit, and their
Divinations upon the like occasions by Intrals, none of which were ever
understood as destructive of the liberty of the People, or of the freedom of
their Chirotonia.

WHERE SOLOMON is made King, and ZADOCK Priest by the People, tho the Ceremony
of anointing was doubtless performed, and perhaps by the Prophet NATHAN, it is
wholly omitted in the place as not worth the speaking of. The opinion that the
Ordination of the Priests and Levits lay in the Ceremonys of their
Consecration, is every whit as sober and agreeable to reason, as if a man should
hold the Kings of England to have bin made by the Unction of the Bishops.
Israel from the institution of MOSES to the Monarchy, was a Democracy, or
Popular Government; in Popular Government the Consent of the People is the
Power of the People, and both the Priests and Levits were ordained by the
Consent of the People of Israel.

TO bring these things to the Citys in the perambulation of the Apostles, which
by the former Chapter I have proved to have bin Ditm. c. 10.
Popular Governments; it is acknowleg'd by GROTIUS to the Citys of Asia, not
only that they used the Chirotonia, but in the strictest sense of the word,
that is, to give their Suffrage by the holding up of Hands. And that they had
the liberty of their Religion, the choice of their Magistrates, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical in their Ecclesi^, or Congregations, has bin also undeniably
evidenced; whence it must needs follow that there were Citys in Asia ((...))
chirotonizing or ordaining them Elders, that is, Magistrates and Priests in
every Congregation (with Reverence be it spoken) long before CHRIST was in the
flesh, or the Apostles any of them were born. Wherefore to sum up what in this
Chapter I conceive to be sufficiently proved, I may boldly conclude, That the
Chirotonia derives from popular Constitution, and that there was a way of
Ordination by the Chirotonia.

CHAP. IV.
The deduction of the Chirothesia from Monarchical or Aristocratical
Government, and of the second way of Ordination from the Chirothesia. In which
is contained the Commonwealth of the Jews as it stood after the Captivity.
WHAT pleases the Prince, says JUSTINIAN, has the force of a Law, seeing the
People in his Creation have devolved their whole Power upon his Person; which
is with the most. But when Popular Government is changed into Monarchical,
either the whole Power of the People, or a great part of it must of necessity
accrue to the King. Hence says SAMUEL, he will appoint him Captains over
Thousands, and Captains over Fiftys: in which words perhaps is intimated the
Judges of the inferior Courts, or Jethronian Prefectures; so that hereby 1 Samuel
8. 12.
SAMUEL tells the People they shall no more have the Election of their Rulers,
but the King will have it; who, it may be, changed the nature of some of these
Magistracys, or added others: for when DAVID came to reign over all Israel,
JOAB was over the Host (his 2 Samuel 8. 15.
Strategus or General) JEHOSHAPHAT was Recorder, ZADOC and ABIMELEC were the
Priests, SERAIAH was the Scribe, and BENAIAH was over the Pelethits, and the
Cherethits; that is, was Captain of his Regiments of Guard, called perhaps by
these names, as those of ROMULUS were called Celeres. But it should seem that
few or none of these Officers were elected by the Chirotonia, that is by the
People, but by the Prince, which kind of Election, as will be shown anon, may
be called Chirothesia. For the deduction of this kind of Ordination, or
Election, we shall do well to hearken first to Dr. HAMMOND; who in his Query,
or Discourse concerning Ordination. 10.
by the Imposition of Hands, puts it thus. To lift up the Hands was a Ceremony
in Prayer, and accordingly to lay hands on any (differing Exodus 17. 11.
no otherwise from lifting up, than by the determining that Action to a
peculiar Object, the Person that was prayed for) was generally among the Jews a
Ceremony of benediction used first by the Father to the Children, in bestowing
the Blessing upon them (and with that the succession to some part of his Estate
or Inheritance) as appears in JACOB'S blessing the Children of JOSEPH: he
stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon EPHRAIM'S Genesis 48. 14.
head, and his left hand on MANASSES, and so he blessed, etc. From thence it was
accommodated among them to the communicating of any part of Power to others as
assistants, or to the deriving of any successive Office from one to another.
Thus when MOSES had from Heaven received, and long used his Commission to be
under God the Ruler of the People, the seventy Elders were by God's appointment
assumed to assist him: Numb. 11. 17.
it being certain from the Jewish Writings, tho the sacred Scripture has no
occasion to mention it, that the succession of the seventy Elders under the
name of Sanhedrim or Council was continued through all Ages by their creating
others in the place of those that died, by this Ceremony of Imposition of
Hands. To this purpose are the clear words of MAIMONIDES: Tit. Sanhed. c. 4.
MOSES our Master created the seventy Elders by Imposition of hands, and the
Divine Majesty rested on them; and those Elders imposed Hands on others, and
others on others, etc. So a little before the departure of MOSES out of this
life, when a Successor was to be provided for him, God commands him to take
JOSHUA, and lay his hands upon Numb. 27. 18, 23.
him. And MOSES laid his hands upon him, and gave him a Charge as the Lord
commanded by the hand of MOSES: that is, derived to him by this Ceremony the
Authority which himself had, and constituted him his Successor in that
Government. And so it is repeated, JOSHUA Deuteronomy. 34. 9.
was full of the spirit of Wisdom, for MOSES had laid his Hands upon him.

THIS is the Doctor's deduction of the Chirothesia, or Ordination by the laying
on of Hands, from the Commonwealth of Israel: and, says he, from the three Uses
of this Ceremony there, that is, first in praying for another; secondly, in
paternal benediction; thirdly, in creating Successors in power, either in
whole, or in part, derive three sorts of things in the New Testament, to which
this Ceremony of laying on of Hands is They shall Mar. 16. 18.
lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover. For Sins they were don away
also by this Ceremony in the absolution of Penitents, to which belongs 1 Timothy
5. 22.
that Exhortation of PAUL to TIMOTHY, Lay hands suddenly on no man, that is, not
without due examination and proof of his Penitence, lest thou be partaker of
other men's Sins. From the second, that of Paternal Mar. 10. 16.
Benediction, was borrowed, first that of blessing Infants with the Ceremony of
Imposition of Hands, as it differed from Baptism. And secondly, that of
confirming those of fuller age, that had bin formerly baptized. Lastly, to the
creating Successors in any Power, or communicating any part of Power to others,
as to Assistants, is answerable that Imposition of Hands in Ordination so often
mentioned in the New Testament, sometimes in Acts 6. 6.
the lower degree, as in the ordaining of Deacons, elsewhere in the highest
degree, setting Governors over particular Churches, as generally when by that
laying on of Hands it is said, they received the Holy Ghost; whereas the Holy
Ghost contains all the (...) required to the pastoral Luke 24. 49.
Function, and so signifys Power from on high: the Authority and Function it
self, so it be given by Imposition of Hands, makes the parallel exact between
this of Christian Ordination, and that observed in the creating Successors in
the Jewish Sanhedrim. So far the Doctor.

Deuteronomy. 1.
NOW say I, if the Scripture be silent as to the Ordination of the Elders in
Israel, what means that place; Take ye wise men, and understanding, and known
among your Tribes, and I will make them Rulers over Numb. 11.
you? Once in their lives let them give us the sense of it, or of that other,
where ELDAD and MEDAD are of those that were written, and yet went not up to
the Tabernacle: Otherwise that we hear no more of these, is from the silence of
Divines, and not of the Scripture. But if the Scripture be not silent in this
point, is there not a great deal of fancy in going on to cure the Sick, to
pardon Sins, to bless Infants, confirm the Baptized, ordain Ministers, nay,
give the Holy Ghost, and all the Graces belonging to the pastoral Function,
from a place that has no such thing in it? for if the Sanhedrim according to
Scripture were not ordained by the Chirothesia, there is no such thing to be
derived by the Chirothesia from the Sanhedrim. The first Chirotonia indeed of
the Sanhedrim was accompanied with miraculous indowments; wherefore if they will
derive these Gifts and Graces from the Sanhedrim, why are they sworn Enemies to
the Chirotonia? Again, the Sanhedrim was a Civil Court or Senate; wherefore then
by this Title should not these Gifts and Graces be rather pretended to by the
Civil Magistrate, than by Divines? what becoms of the Priest AARON and his Lots?
is he left to the Civil Magistrate, while Divines derive themselves from General
JOSHUA and his Chirothesia? But if the Sanhedrim and inferior Judicatorys were
otherwise ordained originally; then no Magistrate in Israel was originally
ordained by the Chirothesia, but only JOSHUA. It is admirable that Divines
should look upon God, as if in the institution of a Commonwealth he had no
regard at all to human Prudence, but was altogether fixed upon their vain
advantages. Who made human Prudence? or to what end was it made? Any man that
understands the Politics, and considers that God was now proceeding according to
this Art (as in his constitution of the Senate, and of the People or
Congregation, is most obvious) must needs see that this Power he indulged to
MOSES of making his own choice of one man, could not possibly be intended as a
permanent Constitution; Chirothesia as a standing Ordinance, had bin to bar the
People of this power? Israel at this time, tho designed for a Commonwealth, had
no Land, no foundation to balance her self upon, but was an Army in a
Wilderness, encompassed about with Enemies. To permit to the People in this
case, the choice of all their Civil Magistrates was nevertheless safe enough,
nay best of all: for at the election of wise men, and understanding, and known
among their Tribes, so far as was needful to civil administration, their skill
must needs have bin at any time sufficient; but the Commonwealth was yet in
absolute necessity of a Protector, and of Dictatorian Power. Now to know who
was fittest in this case to succeed MOSES, required the Wisdom of God, or of
MOSES; and therefore was not yet safe to be ventured upon a People so new in
their Government. For these reasons, I say, MOSES used the Chirothesia for
once, and no more; or let them show me among all the Dictators, Judges, or
Kings, that succeeded JOSHUA, any one that was chosen by the Chirothesia, and be
all Dictators. It is now above three thousand years since the institution of
the Sanhedrim, from which time the ambitious Elders first, then the Talmudists,
and of latter ages Divines have bin perpetually striving for, or possessing
themselves of this same Oligarchical Invention of the Chirothesia pretended to
be derived from MOSES; tho there be neither any such Precept of God or Christ
in the Old or New Testament, nor any unanimous result upon the point, either by
the Talmudists or Divines themselves. And for the clear words quoted by the
Doctor out of MAIMONIDES, they are such to which I shall in due time show
MAIMONIDES to be elsewhere of a clear contrary opinion. But in this Controversy,
without some clearer deduction of the Chirothesia, we shall make no happy
progress; in this therefore I shall follow SELDOM the ablest Talmudist of our
age, or of any.

THE Commonwealth of Lacedemon (if I could stand to show it) has strange
resemblances to that of Israel, not only in the Agrarian, which is nothing to
the present purpose, but in the Senate, which to prevent catching another time,
I do not say was a Judicatory only, but not only a Senate, but a Judicatory
also. For LYCURGUS of all other Legislators was in this the likest to God, or
to MOSES, that his work was so exquisitly perfected at once, and his Laws so
comprehensive, that if the Senate had had no other function than to make or
propose new Laws, there being little or nothing of that wanting, they would
have had little or nothing to do. Now it being thus, and much more than thus in
Israel, the Sanhedrim was not only the Senate, but the supreme Judicatory. And
because one Court in a Territory of any Extent is no where sufficient to this
end; therefore the Sanhedrim had diverse branches distended not only to the Citys
of Judea, but even to the Villages; these were called the Lesser Sanhedrim, or
the Jethronian Prefectures.

Seldom de Syn.
sat first in the Tabernacle, and afterward in the Court of the Temple.

THE Jethronian Prefectures consisted some of three and twenty Elders, and
others but of three. Of the former kind there were two in the gates of the
Temple, and one sitting in the gates of every City; of the latter there was one
almost in every Village.

THE power of the Jethronian Court, consisting of twenty three Elders, was in
matter of Judicature equal with that of the great Sanhedrim, Vid. Grot. ad
Deuteronomy. 17. 8.
only in cases of difficulty they observed this Precept. If there arise a matter
too hard for thee in judgment between Blood and Blood, between Plea and Plea,
between Stroke and Stroke, being matter of Controversy within thy gates; then
shall thou arise, and get thee up into the place which the Lord thy God shall
choose (in the future, for the Commonwealth was yet but designed, not planted)
and thou shall com to the Priests and the Levits, and to the Judge that shall be
in those days, and inquire, and they shall show thee the sentence of Judgment:
That is, thou shall consult the Sanhedrim, or if there be no Sanhedrim, the
Suffes or Judge of Israel. The reason why the Sanhedrim in this Text is
mentioned under the name of the Priests and Levits is, that these about the
beginning of this Commonwealth having (as were also the Egyptian Priests at the
same time) bin the learned Men, whether for Lawyers, or Physicians, there
were scarce any other chosen into the Sanhedrim, tho toward the latter end it
happened to be far otherwise. For whereas sacrificing was feasting, the Priests
enjoying a fat Idleness, became in latter times so heavy, that as to the
Election of the Sanhedrim not only the Levits of inferior rank were upon the
matter wholly laid by, but the High Priest himself sometimes omitted, the rest
of the Tribes far excelling this in Learning.

THE power of the Triumvirats, or three Judges in the Villages, extended no
farther than to inflict stripes to a certain number, and pecuniary mulcts to a
certain sum. These possibly had the same recourse upon occasion of difficulty
to the Judges in the Gates, as the Judges in the Gates had to the Sanhedrim:
but their power is not so much to the present purpose, which regards only their
manner of Election. This having bin institutively exercised, as has bin shown
by the Chirotonia, or Ballot of the People, came sooner or later (I find no man
that can resolve upon the certain time) to the Chirothesia. For tho when a Judge
in the Gates was dead, that Court elected his Successor out of their Disciples
(each Court in the Gates had 99 Disciples that were their constant Auditors) or
out of the Triumvirats; and when an Elder of the Sanhedrim died, the Sanhedrim
elected his Successor out of the Courts in the Gates, more particularly those
in the Gates of the Temple by Suffrages; yet no man was capable of being
elected into any of these Courts that was not a Presbyter, nor was any man a
Mikotzi Misna Gemara.
Presbyter that had not received the Chirothesia: nor could any man confer the
Chirothesia that had not first received it, or bin so ordained a Presbyter
himself: nor tho he were so ordained, could he confer the like Ordination, but
in the presence of two others, whether ordained or not ordained: and no
Ordination could be conferred but either this way, or Abr. Zacuth. Maimonides.
by some one of the Judicatorys. The manner how this Ordination was conferred, if
the party were present, was either by laying on of Hands, or by saying a Verse
or Charm; or if he were absent, by a Letter, or Patent.

AN Elder thus ordained was called Rabbi, might have Disciples, Rab. Jonah.
Rab. Nathan.
or forbidden (which with them was called binding and loosing) ordain others
with the assistance mentioned, or be capable of Election into some one, or any
Court of Justice, according to the nature of his Ordination, the Conditions
mentioned at the conferring of the same, or the gift that was in him by the
laying on of the hands of the Presbytery; which in some extended no farther than
to show how Meat should be killed and dressed, how Uncleanness should be
purified, what were Vices of the body, what might be eaten or drunk, and what
not; in others it extended to some one or more, or all the Facultys expressed:
but I am inclining to believe that a plenary Ordination used not to be conferred
but by the Great Sanhedrim, or at least some one of the Jethronian Courts.

THEY used also to confer this Ordination some time occasionally, and for a
season in this manner. Receive the gift of judiciary Ordination, Maimon. Tit.
San. cap. 4.
or the right of binding and loosing, till such time as you return to us in the
City. Where the Christian Jews still following their former Customs in higher
matters, as the observation of the Sabbath, and of Circumcision, even to such a
degree, that PAUL not to displease them took TIMOTHY and circumcised him, seem
to me to have followed this custom, who when the Prophets at Antioch had
informed them that PAUL and BARNABAS were to be separated to an extraordinary
work, laid their hands upon them, and sent them away: for otherwise Acts 13. 3.
as to Ordination PAUL and BARNABAS had that before; at least PAUL by ANANIAS,
and for any such Precept in the Christian Religion Acts 9. 17.
there was none.

JOSEPHVS, PHILO, and other Authors that tell us the Commonwealth of Israel was
an Aristocracy, look no farther than the introduction of the Chirothesia by the
Presbyterian Party, which must have taken date some time after the Captivity, or
the restitution of the Commonwealth by EZRA, there being not one syllable for
it in Scripture, but enough to the contrary, seeing God introduced the
Chirotonia. By which it is demonstrable that a Presbyterian Party may bring a
Popular Government to Oligarchy, and deface even the work of God himself, so
that it shall not be known to after ages; as also that Ecclesiastical Writers
(for such are the Talmudists) may pretend that for many hundred years together,
as Divines also have don, to be in Scripture, which neither is, nor ever was
there. But have I yet said enough to show that Ordination, especially as in
this Example, not of a Clergy, but of a Magistracy, whether by the Chirotonia,
or Chirothesia, is a Political Institution? or must I rack my brains for
Arguments to prove that an Order or a Law having such influence upon the
Commonwealth, that being introduced or repealed, it quite alters the whole
frame of the Government, must needs be of a political nature, and therefore not
appertain to Divines, or to a Clergy, but to the Magistrate, unless their
Traditions may be of force to alter the Government as they please? All is one,
they can abate nothing of it, let what will com of the Government, the
Chirothesia they must and will have. Then let them have Monarchy too, or
Tyranny; for one of these, according as the balance happens to stand with or
against their Chirothesia, is the certain consequence; either Tyranny as in
Israel, or Monarchy as in the Papacy, and, from that or the like Principle, in
all Gothic Empires: which Examples, to begin with Israel, well deserve the
pains to be somewhat more diligently unfolded.

ALL Elections in Israel, save those of the Priests who were eligible by the
Lot, being thus usurped by the Presbyterian Party, and the People by that means
divested of their Chirotonia; some three hundred years before CHRIST, HILLEL
Senior High Priest, and Archon, or Prince of the Sanhedrim, found means to draw
this Power of Ordination, in show somewhat otherwise, but in effect to himself,
and his Maimon. Tit. San. cap. 4.
Chirothesia: for by his influence upon the Sanhedrim it was brought to pass,
that whereas formerly any man ordained might, in the manner shown, have ordained
his Disciples; it was now agreed that no man should be ordained without the
License of the Prince, and that this Power should not be in the Prince, but in
the presence of the Father of the Sanhedrim, or Speaker of the House. Thus the
Aristocracy of Israel becoming first Oligarchical, took (according to the
nature of all such Governments) long steps toward Monarchy, which succeding in
the Asmonean Family, commonly called the Maccabees, was for their great merit,
in vindicating the Jews from the Tyranny of ANTIOCHUS, confirmed to them by the
universal consent and Chirotonia of the People. Nevertheless to him that
understands the Orders of a Commonwealth, or has read the Athenian,
Lacedemonian, or Roman Story, it will be plain enough that but for their
Aristocracy they needed not to have bin so much beholden to, or to have stood
so much in need of one Family. It is true, both the merit of these Princes, and
the manner of their free Election by the People, seem to forbid the name of
Tyranny to this Institution: but so it is, that let there be never so much
Merit in the Man, or Inclination of the People to the Prince, or the Government
that is not founded upon the due balance, the Prince in that case must either
govern in the nature of a Commonwealth, as did those of this Family, reforming
the policy after the Lacedemonian Model; or turn Tyrant, as from their time,
who lived in the Age of the Grecian Monarchy, did all their Successors, till
under the Romans this Nation became a Province: From which time such Endeavors
and Insurrections they used for the recovery of their ancient Policy, that
under the Emperor ADRIAN (who perceived at what their Ordination, being not of
Priests, but of Magistrates, and of a Senate pretending to Soverain Judicature
and Authority, seemed to aim) there came, says the Talmud, against the
Israelites an Edict out of the Kingdom of the Wicked (meaning the Roman Empire)
whereby whosoever should ordain, or be ordained, was to be put to death, and the
School or City in which such an Act should be don, to be destroyed: whereupon
Rabbi JEHUDA BEN BABA (lest Ordination should fail in Israel) went forth, and
standing between two great Mountains, and two great Citys, and between two
Sabbathdays journys from Osa and Sephara, ordained five Presbyters. For this
Feat the Rabbi is remembered by the Talmudists under the name of Ordinator; but
the same, as it follows, being discovered by the Roman Guards, they shot his
Body through with so many Darts, as made it like a Sive: Yet staid not the
business here, but so obstinat continued the Jews in the Superstition to which
this kind of Ordination was now grown, that whereas by the same it was unlawful
for them to ordain in a foren Land, and at home they could not be brought to
abstain, the Emperor banished them all out of their own Country; whence
happened their total Dispersion. That of a Whereas, says he, they grant, in case
it Halac. San. C. 4. S. 11.
should happen that in all the Holy Land there remained but one Presbyter, that
Presbyter, assisted by two other Israelites, might ordain the seventy, or great
Sanhedrim, and the Sanhedrim so constituted might constitute and ordain the
lesser Courts, I am of opinion that were there no Presbyter in the Land, yet if
all the Wise Men of Israel should agree to constitute or ordain Judges, they
might do it lawfully enoug. But if so, then how coms it to pass that our
Ancestors have bin so solicitous, lest Judicature should fail in Israel? Surely
for no other cause than that from the time of the Captivity the Israelites were
so dispersed that they could not upon like occasions be brought together. Now I
appeal whether the clear Words of MAIMONIDES, where he says, that our Master
MOSES ordained the Sanhedrim by the Chirothesia, be not more clearly and
strongly contradicted in this place, than affirmed in the other, since
acknowleging that if the People could assemble, they might ordain the
Sanhedrim, he gives it for granted, that when they did assemble, they had power
to ordain it; and that MOSES did assemble them upon this occasion, is plain in
Scripture. Again, if the power of Ordination falls ultimatly to the People,
there is not a stronger argument in Nature that it is thence primarily derived.
To conclude, the Chirothesia of the Presbyterian Party in Israel is thus
confessed by the Author no otherwise necessary, than through the defect of the
Chirotonia of the People: which Ingenuity of the Talmudist, for any thing that
has yet past, might be worthy the imitation of Divines.

IN tracking the Jews from the restitution of their Commonwealth after the
Captivity to their dispersion, it seems that the later Monarchy in Israel was
occasioned by the Oligarchy, the Oligarchy by the Aristocracy, and the
Aristocracy by the Chirothesia; but that this Monarchy, tho erected by
magnanimous and popular Princes, could be no less than Tyranny derived from
another Principle, that is, the insufficiency of the balance: For tho from the
time of the Captivity, the Jubilee was no more in use, yet the Virgin MARY as an
Heiress, is affirmed by some to have bin married to JOSEPH by virtue of this
Law: Every Daughter that possesses an Inheritance in any Tribe of the Children
of Israel, Numb. 27. 8.
shall be Wife to one of the Family of the Tribe of her Fathers, etc. By which
the Popular Agrarian may be more than suspected to have bin of greater vigor
than would admit of a well-balanc'd Monarchy.

THE second Presbytery, which is now attained to a well balanced Empire in the
Papacy, has infinitely excelled the pattern, the Lands of Italy being most of
them in the Church. This, if I had leisure, might be track'd by the very same
steps: At first it consisted of the seventy Parish Priests, or Presbyters of
Rome; now seventy Cardinals creating to themselves a High Priest, or Prince of
their Sanhedrim, the Pope, but for the Superstition whereto he has brought
Religion, Chirothesia to hold it, a great and a Reverend Monarch, established
upon a solid Foundation, and governing by an exquisit Policy, not only well
balanced at home, but deeply rooted in the greatest Monarchys of Christendom,
where the Clergy by virtue of their Lands are one of the three States.

THE Maxims of Rome are profound; for there is no making use of Princes without
being necessary to them, nor have they any regard to that Religion which dos
not regard Empire. All Monarchys of the Gothic Model, that is to say, where the
Clergy by virtue of their Lands are a third estate, subsist by the Pope, whose
Religion creating a reverence in the People, and bearing an aw upon the Prince,
preserves the Clergy, that else being unarmed, become a certain Prey to the King
or the People; and where this happens (as in HENRY the Eighth) down gos the
Throne; for so much as the Clergy loses, falls out of the Monarchical into the
Popular Scale. Where a Clergy is a third Estate, Popular Government wants
Earth, and can never grow: but where they die at the root, a Prince may sit a
while, but is not safe; nor is it in nature (except he has a Nobility or Gentry
able without a Clergy to give balance to the People) that he should subsist
long or peaceably: For wherever a Government is sounded on an Army, as in the
Kings of Israel or Emperors of Rome, there the saddest Tragedys under Heaven
are either on the Stage, or in the Tiringhouse. These things considered, the
Chirothesia being originally nothing else but a way of Policy excluding the
People, where it attains not to a balance that is sufficient for this purpose,
brings forth Oligarchy or Tyranny, as among the Jews: And where it attains to a
balance sufficient to this end, produces Monarchy, as in the Papacy, and in all
Gothic Kingdoms.

THE Priests of Egypt, where (as it is described by SICULUS) their Revenue
came to the third part of the Realm, would no question have bin exactly well
fitted with the Chirothesia pretended to by modern Divines. Suppose the
Apostles had planted the Christian Religion in those Parts, and the Priests had
bin all converted, I do not think that Divines will say, that having altered
their Religion they needed to have deserted their being a third Estate, their
overbalance to the People, their Lands, their Preeminence in the Government, or
any part of their Policy for that: and I am as far from saying so as themselves.

ON the other side, as PAUL was a Citizen of Rome, let us suppose him to have
bin a Citizen of Athens, and about ((...)) to constitute the Christian Religion
in this Commonwealth, where any Citizen might speak to the People: Imagine then
he should have said thus: Men of Athens, that which you ignorantly seek I bring
to you, the true Religion; but to receive this, you must not alter your former
Belief only, but your ancient Customs. Your Political Assemblys have bin
hitherto called Ecclesiae; this word must lose the ancient sense, and be no
more understood but of Spiritual Consistorys; and so where as it has bin of a
Popular, it must henceforth be of an Aristocratical, or Presbyterian
signification. For your Chirotonia, that also must follow the same rule;
insomuch as on whomsoever one or more of the Aristocracy or Presbytery shall
lay their hands, the same is understood by virtue of that Action to be
chirotoniz'd. How well would this have sounded in Egypt, and how ill in
Athens? Certainly the Policy of the Church of CHRIST admits of more Prudence
Jews themselves, satisfied the converted Jews that were used to Aristocracy, by
retaining somewhat of their Constitutions, as the Chirothesia; yet when PAUL and
BARNABAS com to constitute in Popular Commonwealths, they are ((...))
Chirotonizing them Elders in every Congregation.

CHAP. V.
Whether the Chirotonia mentioned in the fourteenth of the Acts be indeed, as
is pretended by Dr. HAMMOND, Dr. SEAMAN, and the Authors they follow, the same
with the Chirothesia, or a far different thing. In which are contained the
diverse kinds of Church Government introduced and exercised in the age of the
Apostles.
EITHER I have impertinently intruded upon the Politics, or cannot be said so
much to meddle in Church matters, as Churchmen may be said to have meddled in
State matters: For if the Chirotonia be Election by the many, and the
Chirothesia be Election by one, or by the Few, the whole difference between
Popular and Monarchical Government falls upon these two words; and so the
question will be, Whether the Scriptures were intended more for the advantage
of a Prince, of a Hierarchy or Presbytery, than of the People. But that God in
the Old Testament instituted the Chirotonia, not only in the Commonwealth, as
by the Election of the Sanhedrim, but in the Monarchy, as in the Election of
the Kings, is plain: So if there remains any advantage in Scripture to Kings,
to the Hierarchy or Presbytery, it must be in the New Testament. Israel was
God's chosen People, and God was Israel's chosen King: That God was pleased to
bow the Heavens, and com down to them, was his choice, not theirs; but in that
upon his Proposition, and those of his Servant MOSES, they resolved to obey his
Voice, and keep his Covenant, they chose him their King. In like manner, the
Church is CHRIST'S chosen People, and CHRIST is the Church's chosen King. That
CHRIST taking flesh was pleased to bow the Heavens, and com down in a more
familiar capacity of proposing himself to Mankind, was his own choice, not
theirs: but in that the Church upon his Proposition, or those of his Apostles
sent by him, as he was sent by the Father, resolved to obey his Voice, and keep
his Covenant, she has chosen him her King. Whatever in Nature or in Grace, in
Church or in State, is chosen by Man according to the Will of God, is chosen by
God, of whom is both the Will and the Deed. Which things considered, I wonder
at Dr. HAMMOND, who says, Sure the Jewish and Heathen Citys, to whom the Gospel
by. 36.
CHRIST'S Command was to be preached, were not to choose their Guides or
Teachers. CHRIST was not chosen by them to whom he preached; for says he, ye
have not chosen me. He came from Heaven, sent by his Father on that Errand; and
happy they whom he was thus pleased to choose, to call, To make short work, I
shall answer by explaining his Words as they fall.

A ROMAN choosing whether he would speak to the Senate or the People, chose his
Auditors, and not they him: Nevertheless if it were the Consul, they chose him,
and not he them. It is one thing to be a Speaker to a People, that have the
liberty, when that is don, to do as they think fit; and another thing to be a
Guide, whom the People have consented, or obliged themselves to follow: which
distinction not regarded, makes the rest of his Argumentation recoil upon
himself; while he procedes thus: And they that give up their Names to the
Obedience of the Gospel (chose the Preachers, as I should think, of that Gospel
their Guides) one branch of this Obedience obliges them (by their own consent
it seems, because before they gave up their Names) to observe those that (being
thus placed over them by their consent) are placed over them by God: such not
only are their Civil Magistrates (who succeed to their places by, and govern
according to the Laws which the People have chosen) but also their Pastors,
whom the Holy Ghost either mediatly (according to the Rules of Church Discipline
in Scripture) or immediately (upon some such miraculous Call, as the People shall
judge to be no imposture) has set over them. From which words the Doctor, not
considering those Qualifications I have shown all along to be naturally
inherent in them, concludes that a Bishop is made by the Holy Ghost, and not by
the People.

IF he would stand to this yet it were something; for if the Holy Ghost makes a
Bishop, then I should think that the Holy Ghost ordained a Bishop, and so that
the Election and Ordination of a Bishop were all one. But this hereafter will
appear to be a more dangerous Concession than perhaps you may yet apprehend.
Wherefore when all is don, you will not find Divines, at least Dr. HAMMOND, to
grant that the Holy Ghost can ordain: he may elect indeed, and that is all; but
there is no Ordination without the Chirothesia of the Bishops, or of the
Presbytery. Take the Doctor's word for it.

107. Acts 20. 28.
WHEN St. PAUL says of the Bishops of Asia, that the Holy Ghost had set them
Overseers, I suppose that it is to be understood of their Election or
Nomination to those Dignitys: for so CLEMENT speaks of St. JOHN, who
constituted Bishops of those that were signified by the Spirit; where the
Spirit's Signification notes the Election or Nomination of the Persons, but the
constituting them was the Ordination of St. JOHN.

GOD may propose, as the Electors do to the great Council of Venice; but the
Power of the Council, that is, to resolve or ordain, is in the Bishop, says Dr.
HAMMOND, and in the Presbytery, says Dr. SEAMAN. Indeed that Election and
Ordination be distinct things, is to Divines of so great importance, that
losing this hold, they lose all: For, as I said before, whatever is chosen by
Man according to the Will of God, that is, according to Divine Law, whether
natural or positive, the same, whether in State or Church, is chosen by God, or
by the Holy Ghost, of whom is both the Will and the Deed. To evade this, and
keep all in their own hands, or Chirothesia, Divines have invented this
distinction, that Election is one thing, and Ordination another: God may elect,
but they must constitute; that is, God may propose, but they must resolve. And
yet GROTIUS, who in these things is a great Champion for the Clergy, has little
more to say upon this Point than this. Whether we consider ancient or De Imp.
sum. Pot. c. 10.. 31.
modern Times, we shall find the manner of Election very different, not only in
different Ages and Countries, but in different years of the same age, and places
of the same Country; so uncertain it is to determine of that which the Scripture
has left uncertain. And while men dispute not of Right, but of Convenience, it
is wonderful to see what probable Arguments are brought on all sides. Give me
CYPRIAN and his times, there is no danger in popular Election. Give me the
Nicene Fathers, and let the Bishops take it willingly. Give me THEODOSIUS,
VALENTINIAN, and CHARLES the Great, than Royal Election there is nothing safer.
Upon the heels of these Words treads Dr. HAMMOND in this manner:. 104*
That Election and Ordination are several things, is sufficiently known to every
man that measures the nature of Words either by usage or Dictionarys; only for
the convincing of such as think not themselves obliged to the observation of so
vulgar Laws, I shall propose these evidences. In the Story of the Creation of
the Deacons of Jerusalem, there are two Acts 6.
things distinctly set down, one proposed to the multitude of Disciples to be
don by them, another reserved to the Apostles; that which was proposed to the
Multitude was to elect, etc. Election of the Persons was by the Apostles
permitted to them, but still the ((...)) constituting is reserved to the
Apostles. Then coms Dr. SEAMAN: Be it granted, as it Of Ordinat. p. 13.
is by Protestants generally, that PAUL and BARNABAS made Elders with the
consent of the People, their Consent is one thing, and their Power another.

WHERE in the first place I for my particular, who have had the Books of Dr.
HAMMOND and Dr. SEAMAN sent to me by way of Objection, need not go a step
further. All that I have inserted in my Oceana concerning Ordination, is in
these three Votes acknowledged and confirmed: For the Probationer to be there
sent by a University to a Cure that is vacant, may by a Doctor, or the Doctors
of the same University already ordained, receive Imposition of Hands, if that
be thought fit to be added, and then the Election of the same Probationer by
the People dos no hurt, nay, says GROTIUS, is of De Imp. c. 10*
the right of Nature; for it is naturally permitted to every Congregation to
procure those things which are necessary to their conservation, of which number
is the Application of Function. So Merchants have the right of electing of a
Master of their Ship; Travelers of a Guide in their way, and a free People of
their King. The Merchant, it seems, dos not make the Master of his Ship, the
Traveller his Guide, nor the free People their King, but elect them. As if VAN
TRUMP had bin Admiral, a Robber upon the Highway had bin a Scout, or the Guide
of an Army, or SAUL a King before they were elected. The point is very nice,
which instead of proving, he illustrats in the beginning of the same Chapter by
these three similitudes.

THE first is this, The Power of the Husband is from God, the Application of
this Power to a certain Person is from consent, by which nevertheless the right
is not given; for if this were by consent, the Matrimony might be dissolved by
consent, which cannot be. As if an apparent retraction of Matrimonial Consent,
as when a Wife consents to another than her own Husband, or commits Adultery,
did not deliver a man from the bond of Marriage by the Judgments of CHRIST.
There is an imperfection or cruelty in those Laws, which make Marriage to

THE second Similitude is this: Imperial Power is not in the Princes that are
Electors of the Empire; wherefore it is not given by them, but applied by them
to a certain Person.

1 Pet. 2. 13.
THIS is answered by PETER, where he commands Obedience to every Ordinance of
Man (or, as some nearer the Original, every Power created by men) whether it be
to the Roman Emperor as Supreme, or to the Proconsuls of Asia and Phrygia, as
sent by him; for this is the sense of the Greec, and thus it is interpreted by
GROTIUS. Now if the then Roman Emperor were a Creature of Man, why not the now
Roman Emperor?

THE last Similitude runs thus: The Power of Life and Death is not in the
Multitude before they be a Commonwealth; for no private Man has the right of
Revenge; yet it is applied by them to some Man, or Political Body of Men. But if
a man invades the Life of another, that other, whether under Laws or not under
Laws, has the right to defend his own Life, even by taking away that (if there
be no other probable Remedy) of the Invader. So that men are so far from having
bin vo^d of the power of Life and Death before they came under Laws, that Laws
can never be so made as wholly to deprive them of it after they com under them:
wherefore the power of Life and Death is derived by the Magistrate from, and
conferred upon him by the consent or Chirotonia of the People, whereof he is but
a mere Creature; that is to say, an Ordinance of Man.

THUS these Candles being so far from lighting the House, that they die in the
Socket, GROTIUS has bin no less bountiful than to grant us that the People have
as much right (where there is no human Creature or Law to the contrary) to
elect their Churchmen, as Merchants have to elect their Seamen, Travelers
their Guides, or a free People their King; which is enough a conscience. Nor is
Dr. HAMMOND straiter handed: Election, says he, was permitted by the Apostles
to the Multitude, and therefore the same may be allowed, always provided the
((...)) constituting be reserved to the Pastors, or ordained Doctors and
Preachers. And Dr. SEAMAN, upon condition the People will not say that it was
don by their power, but think it fair that it was don by their consent, is also
very well contented. So all stands straight with what I have heretofore
proposed. Let no man then say, whatever follows, that I drive at any Ends or
Interests, these being already fully obtained and granted; nevertheless for
truth sake I cannot leave this Discourse imperfect. If a Politician should say
that the Election and the Ordination of a Roman Consul or Pontifex were not of
like nature; that the (...), Contract of the Senate of Rome with the People in
the Livy.
Election of NUMA (ut cum populus regem jussisset, id sic ratum esset, si patres
autores fierent) included or impli'd the Soverain power to be in the Fathers;
that the Consent of this People was one thing, and their Power another: if, I
say, he should affirm these or the like in Athens, Lacedemon, or any other
Commonwealth that is or has bin under the Sun, there would be nothing under the
Sun more ridiculous than that Politician. But should men pretending to
Government of any kind be not obliged to some consideration of these Rules in
Nature Greec of the Scripture, for the constitution of the Sanhedrim by MOSES,
and in other Authors for that of the Senate by ROMULUS, each of which was then
elected by the People: whence it may appear plainly that this is no word, as
they pretend, to exclude popular Suffrage, but rather to imply it. And indeed
that it is of no such nature as necessarily to include Power, could not have
bin overseen in the New Testament, but voluntarily where ((...)) they are Acts
17. 15.
signified by it that conducted PAUL. But they have Miracles: such indeed as
have neither words nor reason for them, had need of Miracles. And where are
these same Miracles? why the Apostles by the Chirothesia or laying on of hands
conferred the Holy Ghost. So they did not only when they used that Ceremony in
reference to Ordination, but when they used it not in that relation, as to
those that were newly baptized in Samaria, Men and Women: now it is not
probable, that Acts 8.
these, who should seem to have bin numerous, were all ordained, at least the
Women; and so the Miracle is to be attributed to the Hands of the Apostles, and
not to Ordination in general. JOSHUA was full of the Spirit (not because he had
bin ordained by the Chirothesia, for so had many of them that crucified CHRIST
and persecuted the Apostles, but) because MOSES had laid his hands upon him.

WOULD Divines be contented that we should argue thus; The Chirotonia or
Suffrage of the People of Israel at the first institution was followed with
miraculous Indowments, therefore whoever is elected by the People shall have the
like? Or what have they to show why the Argument is more holding as to their
Chirothesia, seeing for above one thousand years all the Hierarchy and
Presbytery laid together have don no more Miracles than a Parish Clerc?

A CONTINUED Miracle, as that the Sea ebs and flows, the Sun always runs his
admirable course, is Nature. Intermitted Nature, as that the waters of the Red
Sea were mountains, that the Sun stood still in the Dial of AHAZ, is a Miracle.
To continue the latter kind of Miracle were to destroy the former, that is, to
dissolve Nature. Wherefore this is a certain rule, that no continued external
Act can be in the latter sense miraculous. Now Government, whether in Church or
State, is equally a continued external Act. An internal continued Act may
indeed be natural, or supernatural, as Faith.

A NATURAL Man, being even in his own natural apprehension fearfully and
wonderfully made, is by the continued Miracle of Nature convinced that the
World had a Creator, and so coms to believe in that which is supernatural;
whence it is that all Nations have had some Religion: and a Spiritual Man being
convinced by the purity of CHRIST'S Doctrine, and the Miracles whereby it was
first planted, is brought to the Christian Faith. However CHRIST may require
such continued Faith or Spiritual exercise of his Church as is supernatural, he
requires not any such continued Act or bodily exercise of his Church as is
supernatural. But the Government of the Church is a continued Act, or bodily
exercise. It should be heeded that to delude the sense is not to do Miracles,
but to use Imposture. Now to persuade

THE Gospel was intended by Christ to be preached to all Nations, which
(Princes and States being above all things exceeding tenacious of their Power)
is to me a certain Argument that the Policy of the Church must be so provided
for, as not to give any of them just cause of Jealousy, there being nothing
more likely to obstruct the growth of Religion: and truly the nearer I look to
the Scripture, the more I am confirmed in this opinion.

First way of Ordination in the Church Christ. Acts 1.
CHRIST being taken up into Heaven, the first Ordination that we find was that
of the Apostle MATTHIAS after this manner.

THE Aristocracy of the Church, that is the Apostles, assembled the whole
Congregation of Disciples or Believers at Jerusalem, being in number one
hundred and twenty, where PETER (it having as it should seem bin so agreed by
the Apostles) was Proposer; who standing up in the midst of the Disciples,
acquainted them, that whereas JUDAS was gone to his place, the occasion of their
present meeting was to elect another Apostle in his room: whereupon proceeding to
the Suffrage, they appointed two Competitors, JOSEPH and MATTHIAS, whose names
being written each in a several Scrol, were put into one Urn, and at the same
time two other Lots, whereof one was a blank, and the other inscribed with the
word Apostle, were put into another Urn; which don, they prayed and said, Thou
Lord which know the hearts of all men, show whether of these two thou have
chosen. The Prayer being ended, they gave forth their Lots, and the Lot fell
upon MATTHIAS ((...)) and by this Psephisma (the very popular word, and not
only so, but being applied to the Ballot, is the very literal and original
signification) he was added to the eleven Apostles. So you have the first way
of Ordination in the Church, after Christ was taken up into Heaven, performed
by the Election or Chirotonia of the whole Church.

NOW except any man can show that MATTHIAS ever received the imposition of
hands, these several things are already demonstrated. First, that the
Chirotonia is not only the more ancient way of Ordination in the Commonwealth
of Israel, but in the Church of CHRIST. Secondly, that the Chirothesia or
imposition of Hands is no way necessary to Ordination in the Christian Church.
Thirdly, that the Discipline of the Christian Church was primitively Popular;
for to say that in regard of the Apostles it was Aristocratical, is to forget
that there is no such thing, without a mixture of Aristocracy, that is without
the Senate, as a Popular Government in Nature. Fourthly, that Ordination in the
Commonwealth of Oceana being exactly after this pattern, is exactly according
to the Discipline of the Church of CHRIST. And fifthly, that Ordination and
Election in this example are not two, but one and the same thing.

THE last of these Propositions having bin affirmed by Mr. HOBS,. 115.
Dr. HAMMOND tells him plainly, that his assertion is far from all truth: Let us
therefore consider the Doctor's Reasons, which are these; Seeing the
Congregtion, says he, is affirmed by the Gentleman to have ordained, and it is
plain by the words of St. LUKE that God elected, Election and Ordination by
this Example must be distinct things: which in another place going about to
fortify with this Argument, That it was don by Lottery, and SOLOMON says, The
Lot is at the disposing of the Lord, he utterly overthrows without and beyond
help; for in this SOLOMON not denying, but rather affirming that he was chosen
King by the People, plainly shows that Election by the People is Election by
God. Where it is affirmed, that God raised up Judges in Israel, it is not
denied that the People elected them. The Doctor is at it in MAIMONIDES more
than once, that the Divine Majesty rested upon such as were ordained by
Imposition of Hands. But whereas it is affirmed by MAIMONIDES more often, that
when the People (Ecclesia Dei) or Congregation of Israel assembled, then the
Divine Majesty, or the Holy Ghost rested upon them; of this he never takes any
notice. The People, whether in Israel, Athens, Lacedemon, or Rome, never
assembled for enacting of Laws, or Election of Magistrates, without Sacrifice
and imploring the assistance of God, to whom when their work was performed,
they always attributed the whole Result or Election: and would the Doctor have
Christians to allow him but a Piece? For whereas God electing there had in the
sense both of Jews and Heathens, his choice of all, God electing here had in
the sense of Divines, but his choice of two, which were next this or none, but
that indeed where he has not the whole he has none at all. Is that then far
from all truth, which the Gentleman, or that which the Divine has said, either
in this part, or where he adds, that the hundred Dr. H. of Imposition.
and twenty in the Text are never mentioned but once, and then it is in a
Parenthesis? I will but transcribe the place.. 115.


Acts 1. 15.
AND in those days PETER stood up in the midst of the Disciples, and said (the
number of the Names together were about an hundred and twenty) etc. Are the
Disciples in the Parenthesis, or out of it? Are they but once mentioned, and
that is in a Parenthesis? Or are they but once numbered, and that is in a
Parenthesis? If a Gentleman should do thus, what would they say? Or, what were
ill enough to be said? But to mend the Text, and bring the Disciples into the
Parenthesis, they have more ways than one; whereas the Heathen People, while the
Priests were willing, mixed these Dutys with Devotions, Divines will not suffer
a Christian People upon like occasions to pray: for where it is said, They
prayed, it went before, they appointed two, and it follows, They gave out their
Lots; which antecedent and consequent, if the People prayed, must be equally
understood of them, and so they could be no Parenthesis. Therefore pray they
must not, or Divines are lost. But how will they silence them? To show you this
art I must transcribe the Heads of the Chapter.

THE Apostles being returned from Mount Olivet to Jerusalem, went up into an
upper room, where abode both PETER and JAMES, Verse 13.
and JOHN, and ANDREW, JAMES the Son of ALPHEUS, and SIMON ZELOTES, and JUDAS
the Brother of JAMES.

AND in those days PETER stood up in the midst of the Disciples,

MEN and Brethren,

OF these men which accompanied with us all the time that the Lord



JOSEPH and MATTHIAS.



MATTHIAS, (...).

THEY whom PETER acquainted that one must be ordained, one would verily believe
were the hundred and twenty Disciples, in the midst of whom he stood up, and
made the Proposition; and so much the rather, because this was no more than the
Apostles knew before, and (in all right understanding of Government and Sense)
were already agreed upon, it being the Office of the Aristocracy or Senate in a
Commonwealth (and such exactly were the Apostles in the Church) upon all new
Orders or Elections to be made; first, to debate and determine by themselves,
and then to propose to the Chirotonia or ultimat result of the People. But
Divines say absolutely no, which word to make good, They appointed two, and
they prayed, and they gave forth their Lots, being sentences that stand plainly
together, or hunt in couples, must leap sheer over nine Verses, PETER'S whole
Oration (which by this means is no more than a Parenthesis neither) and over
the hundred and twenty Disciples, without touching a hair of their heads, to
light plum upon the thirteenth Verse, and the eleven Apostles! Never man used
his Grammar so since he threw it at a Pear tree! Yet Grotius.
that CHRYSOSTOM (who understood Greec) allows of no such construction, is
confessed by the learned of this opinion; and whereas they fly to the Latin
Fathers, that retreat is wholly cut off by DAVID BLUNDEL in his very learned
Treatise of the right of the People in Church Government.

BUT what do we stand upon words? Are these such whereof the things to which
they relate may be Interpreters? Or to what things can they relate but the
Institution of the Sanhedrim by MOSES? That at the Institution of the Sanhedrim
the Competitors were elected by the Suffrage of the People, and from thence
that the Ballot of Israel consisted not only of a Lot but of a Suffrage too,
has bin already demonstrated out of Scripture; and that the Election of
MATTHIAS was by the Ballot of Israel is no less apparent in it self, than fully
confessed upon the place by GROTIUS.

Demonstration that God never ordained any Policy Ecclesiastical or Civil, but
upon the Principles of Human Prudence. Josh. 9. 11.
THEY that under color of Religion in matter of Government, slight Prudence,
are mistaken, or do not mean honestly. Neither GOD nor CHRIST ever instituted
any Policy whatsoever upon any other Principles than those of Human Prudence.
The Ambassadors sent from the Gibeonits to JOSHUA deliver their Message in this
manner; The Elders and all the Inhabitants of our Country spoke to us, saying,
Go meet them, and say to them, We are your Servants; therefore now make ye a
League with us. They that had power to send Ambassadors, and to make a League
with a foren Nation, had soverain Power; this soverain Power was in the Elders,
or Senate, and in the People of Gibeon: wherefore God constituting his
Commonwealth for the main Orders (that is to say, the Senate and the People)
upon the same Principles on which the Gibeonits had long before built theirs,
laid his Foundations upon no other than human Prudence. So for the inferior
Courts they were transcribed by MOSES out of the Commonwealth of Midian, upon
advice of JETHRO his Father in Law. According to such patterns was Israel
framed, and by that of Israel this first Policy of the Church of CHRIST so
exactly, as (sans comparaison) any man shall show the Commonwealth of Oceana to
have bin transcribed out of Rome or Venice. Let them that would have the
Government be somewhat between Earth and Heaven, consider this place.

NOR is Ecclesiastical Policy only subject to Human Prudence, but to the same
vicissitudes also whereto Human Prudence is subject, both in her own nature, and
as she is obnoxious to the State wherein she is planted, and that inavoidably;
as I com now to demonstrat by the Alterations which happened even in the Age of
the Apostles themselves: for this at the Election of MATTHIAS being altered,
the next form of Ecclesiastical Policy introduced in their times, is resembl'd
by GROTIUS to that of Athens, of which, for the better clearing of what
follows, it is necessary that I first say something by way of Introduction.

THE Thesmothetae, being in number six, were Magistrates of the highest dignity,
power, and rank in Athens. These, says ARISTOTLE, Arist. 2. lib. 2* c. 10.
were elected by the Chirotonia or Suffrage of the People; and says, POLLUX
being elected underwent the Inquisition of the Senate, where they were to answer
to these Interrogatorys, Whether they worshipped the God of their Countries?
Whether they had bin dutiful to their Parents? born Arms for the Commonwealth?
paid Dutys or Taxes? In which Particulars the Senate being satisfied, They were
sworn and Pol. lib. 8. c. 9.
crowned with Myrtle: which coms to this, that the ((...)) or Constitution
being reserved to the Senate, the Thesmothetae were elected by the Chirotonia of
the People. Now tho the Government of Athens throout the Citys of Asia (being
most of them of the like Model) was most known, I will not say that the
Apostles wrote their Orders out of Athens, but seeing all Political
Institutions must needs be according to Human Prudence, and there is nothing to
be written out of this but what will fall even with some other Government that
is or has bin, I may say, as GROTIUS has said before me, that the frame of
Church Government in the ensuing Example was after the manner of Athens.

Second way of Ordination in the Church of Christ.
WHEN the number of the Disciples, or Believers, was multiplied, there arose a
murmuring among such of the Jews as having bin bred in Alexandria or other
parts, were for their Language (which was Greec) partly strangers, against the
Hebrews or converted Jews, that spoke their own Language, as if these indeed
used them like strangers, their Widows being neglected, or not dealt so
liberally withal, as those of the Hebrews in the Contributions due for their
constant maintenance.

HEREUPON the twelve Apostles, after the manner of the Senate, having without
all question debated the business among themselves, as appears by the speech
upon which they were agreed, assembled the People, which is still Senatorian,
or called the multitude of the Disciples to them, and said, It is not reason
that we should leave preaching, or the Word of God, to be taken up with this,
tho charitable, nay, seeing we have introduced Community of goods, most just
and necessary employment of providing Food and Clothing for every one of our
Fellowship or Community (the Christians in these times, much after the manner
of the Lacedemonian Convives, used to eat in public and together) to do this as
it ought to be don, were to become Wherefore, Brethren, (take the wise men and
understanding, and known among you) look out seven men of honest report, full
of the Holy Ghost, and of Wisdom ((...)) whom we may appoint over this business.

THIS Saying, that is, this Proposition of the Senate or Apostles, pleased the
whole Multitude (like that of MOSES, the thing which thou have said is good for
us to do) So they chose STEPHEN, PHILIP, PROCHORUS, NICANOR, TIMON, PARMENAS,
and NICHOLAS, whom being elected, they set before the Apostles, who when they
had prayed, laid their hands upon them.

WHAT fuller demonstration can be given of any thing, than that in this example
Ordination and Election are one and the same, and that this was conferred by the
Chirotonia of the People? If there be any possible way of making this clearer,
it must be by opposition: wherefore let us see what Divines have to say to the
contrary.

GROTIVS gives all we ask from this place, which he gives for nothing, because
it concerns not the Election of Pastors, but of Deacons. As if STEPHEN and
PHILIP had not only bin Preachers of the Gospel, but don Miracles. What Dr.
SEAMAN denis or grants in relation to the same, I have indeavor'd to
understand, but it will not do. Dr. HAMMOND is so plain, that his Objections
may be of use. He, to prove that the Ordination of these Deacons was not in the
Chirotonia of their Disciples, but in the Chirothesia of the Apostles, has
these Arguments.

THERE be two things distinctly set down, Election permitted to the People, and
the ((...)) constituting reserved to the Apostles.

TO which I answer, That there were two things set down by the Athenian Law,
Election of the Thesmothetae by the People, and the ((...)) constituting of
them by the Senate; yet that the Ordination was in the Power, and that the Power
was in the People of Athens: he that makes a doubt, is not resolved whether the
most popular Commonwealth that ever was were a Democracy.

BUT, says he, this looking out of men, or choosing, was permitted to the
Multitude by the Apostles with these three bounds: First, to take seven,
neither more nor fewer: Secondly, those men generally known and well reputed
of: And thirdly, full of the Spirit, and of Discretion or parts ^it for
Government. To which I answer, That the Election of the Thesmothetae was
permitted by the Law to the People of Athens with these three bounds; First to
take six, neither more nor fewer: Secondly, those generally known and reputed
of: Thirdly, in such estimation for their honesty and ability for Government,
as in their consciences (to which also they made Oath) they should judge fittest
for the Commonwealth. Yet is all this so far from any proof that Athens was no
Democracy, or that the Soverain Power, whether in enacting of Laws, or election
of Magistrates by the Lot or the Suffrage (Institutions equally popular) was not
in the People, that it amounts to the strongest argument that the People were
Soverain, and the Commonwealth was Democratical. Could Truth desire greater
advantage than redounds from such opposition? We have another example of the
same Model, in which, because it has bin paraphrased upon already in the
Introduction, I shall be Acts 13.
briefer here. In the Church of Antioch, where the Disciples were now become so
numerous, that they began to be called Christians, Athens when they elected
Ambassadors, or (that I may avoid strife upon a point so indifferent) to choose
two new Apostles, The Holy Ghost said, Separat me BARNABAS and SAUL for the
Work whereto I have appointed them: that is (for so it is rendered by all
Interpreters) the Holy Ghost spoke those words by the mouths of the Prophets.
Now the Prophets being well known for such, this Suffrage of theirs was no
sooner given, than (as one that can allow Prophets to be leading men may easily
think) followed by all the rest of the Congregation: So the whole multitude
having fasted and prayed, the most eminent among them, or the Senatorian Order
in that Church, laid their hands upon PAUL and BARNABAS, who being thus sent
forth by the Holy Ghost, departed to Seleucia.

TO evade this apparent Election, or Chirotonia of the whole Congregation,
whereby these Apostles or Ambassadors to the Churches of the Gentiles were
ordained, Divines have nothing to say, but that they were elected by the Holy
Ghost: As if the Chirotonia of the People were more exclusive to election by
the Holy Ghost, than the Chirothesia of the Aristocracy, for which in the mean
time they contend. But if neither of these were indeed exclusive of the Holy
Ghost, how is it possible in this frame (where tho of natural necessity an
Aristocracy must have bin included, yet the Aristocracy is not in the Text so
much as distinguished from the People, or once named) that the Power, and so
the Ordination should not have bin in the People? The Council of the Apostles,
of the Elders, and of the whole Church at Jerusalem, and other Councils, not of
Apostles, nor of the whole Church, in other times or places, used this form in
their Acts; It seems good to the Holy Acts 15. 22.
Ghost, and to us: But dos this, whether a true or a pretended style, exclude
that Act from being an Act of that whole Council? Or how coms it to pass that
because PAUL and BARNABAS were separated by the Holy Ghost, they were not
ordained by the Chirotonia of the whole Christian People at Antioch?

THE Chirothesia can be no otherwise understood in nature, nor ever was in the
Commonwealth of the Jews, than Election by the few: And so even under the mere
Chirothesia, Ordination and Election were not two, but one and the same thing.
If MOSES ordained JOSHUA his Successor by the Chirothesia, he elected JOSHUA
his Successor by the Chirothesia; and for what reason must it be otherwise with
the Chirotonia? That a Pharisee could do more with one hand* or a pair of
hands, than a Christian Church or Congregation can do with all their hands, is
a Doctrine very much for the honor of the true Religion, and a soverain Maxim of
Ecclesiastical Policy.

Third way of Ordination in the Church of Christ.
THE third Constitution of Church Government in Scripture (whether consisting
of Bishops or Presbyters, between which at this time a man shall hardly find a
difference) runs wholly upon the Aristocracy, without mention of the People,
and is therefore compared by GROTIUS to the Sanhedrim of Israel, as that came to
be in these Grot. ad 1 Timothy 4. 14.
days; from whence Divines also generally and truly confess that it was taken
up: to which I shall need to add no more, than that it is an Order for which
there is no Precept, either in the Old Testament of God, or in the New
Testament of Christ. This therefore thus taken up by the Jews, is a clear
demonstration that the Government of the Church, in what purity soever of the
Times, nay tho under the inspection of the Apostles themselves, has bin
obnoxious to that of the State wherein it was planted. The Sanhedrim, from the
institution of the Chirothesia, for a constant Order, consisted of no other
Senators than such only as had bin ordained by the Imposition of Hands; which
came now to be conferred by the Prince, in the presence, or with the assistance
of the Sanhedrim. The same Order was Grot. ad Mat. 19. 13.
observed by the Jewish Synagogues, of which each had her Archon; nor would the
Jews converted to the Christian Faith, relinquish the Law of MOSES, whereto this
way of Ordination, among other things, tho erroneously, was vulgarly
attributed: whence in the Church, where it consisted of converted Jews,
Ordination was conferred by the Archon, or first in order of the Presbytery,
with the assistance of the rest. Hence PAUL, in one place, exhorts TIMOTHY
thus: 1 Timothy 4. 14.
Neglect not the Gift that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy, with
the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. And in another thus: 2 Timothy 1. 6.
Wherefore I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the Gift of God which is
in thee by the putting on of my hands.

I GRANT Divines, that Ordination by this time was wholly in the Presbytery;
what say they then to the distinction of Ordination and Election? Are these
still two distinct things, or may we hence, at least, compute them to be one
and the same? If they say Yes, why then might they not have bin so before? If
they say No, who in this place, but the Presbytery, elected? Why, says Dr.
HAMMOND,. 106.
it is plain that the Spirit of Prophecy elected. But to give account of no more
than is already performed, were the spirit of History rather than of Prophecy,
to which it appertains to tell things before they be don; as did the Prophets
now living in this Church, that TIMOTHY should com to be ordained: So the place
is interpreted by GROTIUS; and how it should be otherwise understood I cannot
see. But putting the case some Act preceded, as SAUL and DAVID were elected
Kings by Prophecy; yet did ever man say that for this SAUL or DAVID were any
whit the less elected Kings by the People? To the contrary in every
well-ordered Commonwealth (a Jove principium) the disposing of the Lot, and of
the Suffrage too, has universally bin attributed to God.

THE Piety of Divines in persuading the People that God elects. 134.
for them, and therefore they need not trouble themselves to vote, is as if they
should persuade them that God provides their daily Bread, and therefore they
need not trouble themselves to work. To conclude this point with Dr. HAMMOND'S
own words upon the same occasion; this distinction of Ordination and Election
is in Divines the procreative. 111.
Mistake, or Ignorance producing all the rest.

THE reason why PAUL ordained now after this manner among the Jews, is to me an
irrefragable argument that he ordained not after this manner among the Gentiles:
for whereas the first Ordination in the Christian Church, namely that of
MATTHIAS, was performed by the Chirotonia, which by degrees came now in
complacence with the Jews to the Chirothesia; it seems he was contented not to
alter the worst of political Institutions or Customs, where he found them
confirmed by long and universal Practice: and if so, why should any man think
that he would go about to alter, or weed out the best, where they had taken
like root? That this Administration of the Jews was Chirothesia, by which means
this work came to effect in Israel, introduced by the prudence of God, but by
the corrupt arts of Men. Now that the Governments at the same time of the
Gentiles, all balanced by the Chirotonia of the People, were in their nature
more excellent, and indeed more accommodated to ancient Prudence, as it was
introduced by God himself in the Commonwealth of Israel, has bin already
sufficiently proved: nevertheless, to refresh your memory with one example more.

CRETE having bin (as is affirmed by the Consent of Authors) the most ancient,
and the most excellent Commonwealth in human Story, was founded by RHADAMANTHUS
and MINOS, an Age before the Trojan War: These were held to have learnt their
Arts by familiar Discourse with JUPITER, and from point to point to have framed
their Model according to his direction. Nor, tho all acknowledge MINOS to have
bin a King, did he found his Government upon any other than a popular Balance,
or a fundamental regard to the Liberty of the People: For the whole
Commonwealth was made up of these three Epitome of the Commonwealth of Crete.
parts, the College, the Senate, and the People. The College consisted of the
annual Magistrates called the Cosmi: these had the whole extentive Power, some in
leading forth the Armies, and others in judging the People; which Functions were
accordingly assigned by the Orders to each in particular. That which was common
to them all, was to propose such things as they had debated or prepared in
their College or Council, to the Senate. The Senate being elective for life, was
the Council, to which appertained the Debate of whatever was to be proposed to
the Congregation. The Congregation, or Assembly of the People of Crete, had not
the right of Debate; but in enacting of Laws, and election of Magistrates, had
the ultimat Result of the Commonwealth. Such was the Copy after which LYCURGUS
wrote himself so famous a Legislator. And thus stood this Frame to the six
hundred and eighth year of Rome; when this People, having bin too favorable to
Pirates then infesting those Seas, turned the Arms of the Romans upon
themselves; and by these, under the conduct of QUINCTUS METELLUS, thence called
CRETICUS, Crete was made a Province: tho the chief Citys being first freed, it
should seem (by CICERO'S second Oration against Antony) that the whole Island
was at length restored to her ancient Liberty. However by the manner observed
by the Romans, as was shown, in Provincial Government, the Citys under their
Magistrates (who while the Commonwealth was a Province perhaps might have
exercised the Office of the Cosmi) were not yet deprived of their Popular
Assemblys, at least in their distinct Citys, electing all Magistrates for their
((...)) peculiar or domestic Government. Such was the State of Crete, when PAUL
having appealed from the Jews to CAESAR; and being thereupon conducted by Sea
toward Rome, touched in his way upon this Island, where he left TITUS to
constitute Elders in every City. The word ((...)) constitute, our Divines will
have to signify ordain by Imposition of Hands, and Imposition of Hands to
signify an act of Power, excluding the People. But why PAUL, who among the Jews
had compli'd with their Customs, should injoin; or how TITUS, had it bin so
Crete, in whom was the Power, to this new way of Ordination, TITUS must have
spoken to this effect: Men of Crete, MINOS being a King, could not choose but
have a natural inclination to popular Power; wherefore his pretense that JUPITER
told him, Power was to be in the People, may be suspected to have bin imagined
merely for his own ends: or this is a certain sign that JUPITER is no true, but
a feigned God; seeing the true God will have it that the People should have no
Power at all, but that such, upon whom his Ambassadors shall confer power, be
without all dispute obeyed. How! are you starting at this! are you solicitous
for your Commonwealth! It is true, that upon carnal principles or human
prudence, without Power in the People there can be no Commonwealth: but Israel
was a Commonwealth without power in the People; where MOSES made all the Laws
by the power invested in him by God, and created all the Magistrates, not by
popular suffrage, but by his Chirothesia. Wherefore, Men of Crete, know ye, that
on whomsoever I lay my hands, the same is in all spiritual Affairs, or matters
of Church Government, to be obeyed by you, after the same manner that you have
hitherto obeyed such Magistrates or Priests as have bin ordained by your own
Election, or Chirotonia. Of what other nature the Arguments of TITUS to the
pretended purpose could have bin, I am not able to imagine; nor how this should
have don less than provoke the People to a dangerous jealousy of such a
Doctrine. But Divines, to set all straight, think it enough to repeat the words
of PAUL to TITUS in Greec: Tit. 1. 5. De Corond.
For this cause left I thee in Crete ((...)) that thou should ordain Elders
in every City. It is true that DEMOSTHENES speaks somewhat like words concerning
the Expedition of PHILIP of Macedon in Peloponnesus ((...)) when he had
ordained Tyrants in every City: but then PHILIP had an Army; what Army did PAUL
leave with TITUS? Or if he ordained his Elders neither of these two ways, I see
no other than that only by the known and legal Chirotonia or Suffrage of the
People. But if this be clear, the Clergy com from Crete, not upon the Wings of
TITUS, but of ICARUS, whose ambitious Wax is dissolved by the Sun.

SO much, I conceive, is now discovered concerning Church Government, as may
show that it was not of one, but of three kinds, each obnoxious to the nature
of the Civil Government under which it was planted; in as much as the
Chirotonia, or Ballot of Israel, being first introduced pure, and without any
mixture, as at the Ordination of MATTHIAS, came afterward to receive some
mixture of the Chirothesia, as in the Ordination of STEPHEN; and last of all by
excluding the People, to degenerat wholly into the Chirothesia of the
Presbytery, as in the Ordination of TIMOTHY: all this by the testimony of
Scripture, and in the purest times, even the age of the Apostles. Whence my
Undertaking, to show that as CHRIST intended his Doctrine should be preached to
all Nations, so he intended his Discipline should be such as might suit with any
Government (as indeed, if the choice of any of these three be lawful, it dos
exactly) is, I hope, performed. For where the Government is Popular, it is the
same with the first; where it is Aristocratical or Monarchical, it agrees with
the last; and where it is mixed, it is between both, and responsible to the
second. Of these three in the farther exercise of their natural and

THAT any other Ordination than that of the first kind for the original
Authority or Practice of it, whether in the Commonwealth of Israel or in the
Church of Christ, and indeed for the Prerogative of the same in nature, should
have bin introduced by the Apostles, where it might, much less where the nature
of the civil Policy would admit of no other, is neither probable by Scripture
nor Reason; whence it is that in the Citys of Lycaonia and Pisidia, the
Government of these being then Popular, we do not find any mention at all of
the Chirothesia, the Apostles in these places ((...)) chirotonizing Elders in
every Congregation.

TO evade this place, our Adversarys turn tail to the things, and make their
whole flight at the words. In taking one of them into the Disputation, I shall
take in all, for they run all upon the same Quotations, or with little addition.

. 3.
THAT the word Chirotonizing, says Dr. HAMMOND, in this place signifys no more
than ordaining by the Imposition of Hands, is not so generally acknowleg'd by
late Writers, but that it may be useful to give some few Testimonys out of those
Writers which were nearest the times of the Scripture. Thus PHILO JUDAEUS of
JOSEPH ((...)) he was ordained Governor of all Egypt under the King. So again
of MOSES ((...)) he was constituted their Ruler. So of AARON'S Sons ((...)) God
constituted them Priests. ALEXANDER Son of ANTIOCHUS EPIPHANES writes to
JONATHAN ((...)) Joseph. An. L. 13. c. 5.
We (in the regal style) constitute thee High Priest. LUCIAN says of HEPHESTION
((...)) that ALEXANDER made him a God when he was dead. APPIAN (which is added
out of GROTIUS, whence most of the rest is taken) to signify Election of
Magistrates made by the Roman Emperors, uses no other word; and later Writers
speak of some that were chirotoniz'd Emperors by their Fathers. For the use of
the word among Christian Writers, take one place in the Author of the
Constitutions L. 7. c. 45.
for many; CLEMENT after the death of LINUS ((...)) was ordained Bishop of Rome
by PETER. But what need any more? CHRIST'S Disciples are said ((...)) designed
Act. 10. 41.
or foreconstituted by God the witnesses of his Resurrection: by all which that
of PAUL and BARNABAS ((...)) is but constituting or creating Elders in every
Church. Wherefore they that have looked so far back to the Original, as to think
it necessary to render the word to create by Suffrages, are sure guilty of a
very impertinent nicety. I promise you had this bin against one of our Doctors,
it might have bin a rude Charge; but it is only against ERASMUS, BEZA, DIODATI,
and such as took upon them to translate the Switz, French, Italian, Belgic, and
(till the Episcopal correction) the English Bibles. And what apparent cause is
there of such confidence? What necessity is there even in the places alleged
why the word Chirotonia should be understood in the sense imposed? The People
of Egypt, till having sold their Lands they came to lose their Popular balance,
were not Servants to PHARAOH; wherefore when JOSEPH was made Governor over all
Egypt they were free: England, nor pretends the present Protector to any other
title than the like Chirotonia. But that MOSES is said by the same Author (who
affirmed that he introduced the Chirotonia in Israel) to have bin chirotoniz'd
Ruler of the People, can in my judgment be no otherwise than originally and
literally taken, seeing God himself was no otherwise made King in Israel than
by the Suffrage of the People. That the like must be understood of the Sons of
AARON has bin already shown. The Doctor is the first has told me, that the
plural number for the Royal Style is so ancient as EPIPHANES: Sure I am it was
not derived from his Macedonian Predecessors, for in the Letters to the
Athenians and the Thebans De Cor.
recited by DEMOSTHENES, PHILIP of Macedon writes in the singular number. But
the Letter of EPIPHANES to JONATHAN must it seems import that he at single hand
(tho the words carry double) had chirotoniz'd a High Priest of the Jews: Who
can help it? Some Princes have not only given out that their Priests have bin
chirotoniz'd when they were not, but that themselves have bin chirotoniz'd when
there was no such matter. When a Prince says that he was chirotoniz'd or
elected by the People, to talk of Rhetoric is to have none. Divines in this
case commonly understand it to be proper, or literally meant; for to impose a
new sense is to spoil the word; and spoil the word, spoil the Prince. LUCIAN is
a Drol, and intends a Jest, but not so good a one, as that he of all others
should com nearest to help up with a Hierarchy. For the Chirotonia, or Election
of the Roman Magistrates by the Suffrage of the People or of the Army, every man
knows that it is literal: SUIDAS himself interpreting the word by this very
example; where he affirms it to signify Election or Ratification by the Many.
The Quotation out of the Constitutions, with those of Bishop BILSON, and others
out of the Greec Fathers, and out of Councils, do not only imply the word
Chirotonia, but the thing, while they all relate to that kind of Ordination,
which being in those Churches yet administered as at the Ordination of STEPHEN,
was not conferred without the consent of the People. But it is above all, that
laboring to prove the Chirotonia and the Chirothesia to be the same thing, they
should rely most upon the place where the Apostles are said ((...)) to have bin
forechirotoniz'd by God; as if it were clear in this, that God ordained the
Apostles by the laying on of Hands, for so it must be understood, or it makes
no more for them than for us. Or if they mean it only to show that the word
Chirotonia or Suffrage is used for some Ordination that cannot be taken in our
sense; so the word Chirothesia ((...)) or laying on of Hands, where ANANIAS
being neither Bishop nor Presbyter, but only a Disciple, that is, a Christian,
lays his hands upon PAUL, is used for some Ordination that cannot be taken in
their sense; or a man not ordained may ordain as well as they: for to say that
the Call was extraordinary, where the like is, or is pretended, will avail
little. But there is no need that we should go so near the wind; wherefore to
give them all these places in their own sense, even till we com to the Citys in
question. What word in any Language is not sometimes, nay frequently, used in
some other than the proper sense? With what elegance, if this be forbidden, can
any Chirotonia has, as Divines pretend, lost all other but their signification,
how shall we understand it in Isaiah, or where PAUL speaks it of the Brother
((...)) chirotoniz'd, or chosen by 2 Cor. 8. 19*
the Churches? Certainly in this one place at least it is of our sense, and in
the word (...) it is but once yet in all the New Testament of any other; so
that if we gain the place in controversy, we have it twice of our sense in
Scripture for once not in theirs, but in any other: and in human Authors, they
will not so much as pretend to have it once for them of a hundred times for us;
which is pretty well for the vindication of the property of one word, and
somewhat more perhaps than can be don for another. But in the sense of words
that are sometimes properly and sometimes improperly taken, may we admit of the
things whereof they are spoken for Interpreters? Or if Lillys and Roses have bin
almost as often said of Ladys Cheeks, must we understand them no otherwise when
we are speaking of Gardens?

YES, says Dr. HAMMOND, and therefore to say of the Apostles PAUL and BARNABAS,
that they created Elders by their own Suffrages, is no more than to say that
they jointly did create, and indeed being but two, there could be no place for
Suffrages; and to affirm they did it by the Suffrages of others, is not
agreeable to the pretended use of the word; for where it is used of choosing by
Suffrages, as when the People are said to chirotonize, it is certain that their
own, and not others Suffrages are meant by it.

His own words to Mr. Hobbs*. 118.
IT were hardly possible to have contrived a greater number of Affirmations in
so small a compass, nor to have gone farther in them from all truth. Phrases, as
words, are to be understood according to the Rule and Law of Speech, which is
Use: and thus that the Apostles created Elders by their own Suffrage, is not
said; that they did it by the Suffrage of others, is necessarily implied; as
also that the People are understood to chirotonize as well when it is said of
the Presidents of their Assemblys, as of themselves.

Diruit, aedificat, mutat quadrata rotundis.
WHEN a man is said to build a House, or marry a Daughter, he is not understood
to be the Mason, or the Bridegroom: but the Apostles built Churches in these
Citys; therefore the People were not the Masons. The Apostles married CHRIST to
these Nations; therefore the People gave not their Consent or Suffrage: what a
Construction were this in ordinary discourse or writing, and yet in the
Language, as I may say, of a Commonwealth the Phrase is more usual. How often
dos DEMOSTHENES speak of his Laws (see my Psephisma, De Coron.
peruse my Law) and those of other private men? after which Copy the Part, or
Laws in the Commonwealth of Venice, are called by the names of the Proposers,
as were those of Rome, Rupilia, Cornelia, Trebonia; in which manner we have
POYNING'S Law, and some Statutes bearing no other Style than Enacted by the
King's most Excellent Majesty, which nevertheless are known to have bin all
enacted by the Parliament. Thus the Laws of MOSES, RHADAMANTHUS, (leges and
consuetudines quas vulgus elegerit) such as the People had confirmed or chosen
by their Chirotonia. But they may say, granting you this use of speech in
relation to Laws, what have you of this kind for Elections? The Exception is
nice, but to leave none.

THE High Sherifs in England proposing to their Countys the Names of such as
stand, are said to elect Parlament-men. They that thus propose Competitors to
the Great Council in Venice are called Electors, and said to elect the
Magistrates. The Proedri, certain Magistrates to whom it belonged to put the
Question in the Representative of the People of Athens, consisting of one
thousand, were said Demost. cont. Timocrat.
((...)) to give or make the Suffrage. The Thesmothetae, who were Presidents at
the creation of Magistrates, were said ((...)) Pol. l. 8. c. 8.
to chirotonize the Generals. JOSEPHUS renders those words of God to SAMUEL,
Hearken to the Voice of the People ((...)) Ant. l. 6. c. 4.
I command thee to chirotonize them a King; which Authors vindicating LUKE for
his understanding both of the Grecian Customs, and property of Speech, at each
of which he was expert, com up to the full and genuin interpretation of the
place in controversy, where PAUL and BARNABAS ((...)) chirotonizing them Elders
in every Congregation, can be no otherwise understood than that they here, as
MOSES at the institution of the Sanhedrim, SAMUEL at the Election of the King,
the Proedri at the passing of Laws, the Thesmothetae at the creation of
Magistrates, the Electors in the great Council of Venice, and the High Sherifs
in the Countys of England, were no more than Presidents of that Chirotonia,
which was given or made by the Suffrage of the People.

WHEREFORE the Greec is thus rendered by these several Translations of the Bible.

That of Zurich, WHEN they had created them Elders by Suffrages in every
Congregation.



That of Beza, WHEN they had created them Elders by Suffrages in every
Congregation.



The French, WHEN by the advice of the Assemblys they had established Elders.



The Italian, WHEN by the advice of the Congregation they had constituted them
Elders.



That of Diodati, WHEN they had ordained them in every Church by the common
votes of the Elders.



That appointed by the Synod of Dort, WHEN in each Church, by the holding up of
Hands, they had elected Presbyters.



That used in England from the time of the Reformation till the Episcopal
correction of the same, WHEN they had ordained them Elders by Election in every
Congregation.



INDEED the circumstance of the Place forbids any other construction Chirotonia
(which were scarce sense) related to the Apostles only, what needed they have
don that in every Congregation or Church, which they might have don in any
Chamber or Closet? The circumstance of the Action forbids any other
construction; for the People were assembled upon occasion of Election or
Creation of Officers, which thing dos not use to be don in Assemblys gathered
for Divine Service: besides, these Congregations were not always of one mind,
but sometimes for sacrificing to the Apostles, sometimes for stoning them, which
are acts of Power; wherefore they were Political Assemblys. Now these consisting
also of a People, that had in their Citys (quandam (...)) the government of
themselves, hence arises the strongest circumstance of all, forbidding any
interpretation of the Text that might exclude them from election of their own
Magistrates, Priests, or Ecclesiastical Elders, such as had bin the Asiarchs,
tho Heathen Prelates, yet remembered by the Scripture as affectionat Friends to
PAUL; or such as were those, tho Acts 19. 31*
to a better end, now ordained by the Apostles. Wherefore GROTIUS,
notwithstanding all the art he uses in other places to avoid this sense, giving
his note upon the Text, yields, Tho chirotonizing may be said of any Election
made by one, or by the few; yet to the Election in this place it is probable
that the consent of the People was given, no less being impli'd in the
beginning of the Chapter, where the Multitude believed, where they were stirred
up, where they were evil affected, and where part held with the Jews, and part
with the Apostles: Which shows that the People were active in the business.
But, says Dr. SEAMAM, There is difference between the Consent of the People,
and the Power of the People: which is not to understand the case in
controversy, nor to take notice that the People whereof we are speaking were
under Popular Government; for wherever the People are under Popular Government,
between that which is don by their consent, and that which is don (jussu
populi) by their power, there is no difference. How should the People give
their consent, but by their Suffrage? or what difference, where they have
Power, can there be between the Suffrage, and the Power of the People?

Dr. HAMMOND upon this point is far more quaint: where the Scripture says, that
the Multitude were evil effected, and where part held with the Jews, and part
with the Apostles, he thinks it even like enough: But where it is said that a
great Multitude of the Jews, and also of the Greecs believed, he seems to have
no opinion of it: for, says he, It is evident that Believers were at first but
few in every Town or City;. 134.
they were not whole Corporations at once converted, nor consequently could they
act in a common capacity: but as CLEMENS ROMANUS says, they that were by the
Apostles constituted Bishops and Deacons in several Citys and Regions, were
constituted over those that should after believe, there were often so few at the
present. And then, as fast as any did com into the Faith, they readily
submitted themselves to those by and under whom they did com in, and were not
at all troubled (honest men) with the consulation or deliberation about the way
of electing their Teachers and Guides.

COM away, to leave the Scripture a while, and follow CLEMENS; be it so for
discourse sake, that in those days there was no where any such thing as a great
Multitude believing, much less whole States or whereby they might still act in a
common capacity, but only some private or gathered Congregations or Churches; and
that in such it was the Apostles PAUL and BARNABAS chirotoniz'd: yet these, as
they were found, or as afterward they came to be made, must of necessity have
bin Corporations; for what can a number of Men coming into a Society regulated
by certain Laws, Constitutions, or Form, be but a Corporation? Some
Ecclesiastical Policy or Discipline they must have had; and that probably,
seeing the greatest Legislators, even MOSES himself, have written after Copys,
according to some Pattern: what was this Pattern, and whence came it?

. 125.
WHY, says he, not from their Heathen Customs, but from the Metropolis; for it
must be remembered, that whersoever the Gospel was preached, it came originally
from Jerusalem; and then, as AGRIPPA in PHILO. 135.
says of that City, it was the Metropolis, not only of Judea, but many other
Regions, because of the Colonys thence sent into Egypt, Phenice, and both the
Syria's; nay, to Pamphylia, Cilicia, and a great part of Asia, as far as
Bithynia and Pontus. So in reason the Churches in Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch,
where PAUL and BARNABAS ordained Elders, were to follow the pattern at
Jerusalem; and there, we know, it was not by the Suffrage of the People, that
an Elder was assumed into the Sanhedrim, but the Prince or Head of the
Sanhedrim received him in by Imposition of Hands. It will be much more
reasonable to deduce the circumstances of ordaining Elders from the Customs
familiar to them that preached the Faith to them, than from the former usages
of them to whom it was preached, who were not to dispute, but to believe, and
receive the Institutions as well as Doctrins which were brought them.

THESE, methinks, are strange Arguments: The Gospel came to us from Rome, is
Rome therefore the Metropolis of England? It is true AGRIPPA being a Jew, and
writing to CALIGULA in the behalf Philo de legatione ad Caium.
of the Jews, not of the Christians, tells him, That Jerusalem is the Metropolis
of the Jews, and of all their Colonys; so is London of the English, and of all
their Colonys: but dos it follow from hence that either Jerusalem or London is
the Metropolis of Christendom? But the Jews had many Colonys in Asia; and
therefore the Churches of Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch were to follow the
pattern at Jerusalem. The Jews indeed had Synagogs in Iconium and Lystra, as
the French have Churches in England; but is this a good argument, The French
have Churches in England, therefore the English are to follow the Orders of the
French Church? The Jews withstood the Gospel at Iconium; for, Acts 14. 4.
says the Text, the Multitude of the City was divided, and part held with the
Jews, and part with the Apostles: therefore the believing Iconians must have
acknowleg'd Jerusalem to be their Metropolis, and were to follow the pattern of
that City: And what was that? Why there we know it was not by the Suffrages of
the People that an Elder was assumed into the Sanhedrim, but the Prince or Head
of the Sanhedrim received him in by Imposition of Hands. The Government of the
Iconians was Popular, that of the Jews was Aristocratical; therefore the
Iconians receiving the Christian Faith, were bound to change their Democracy
into Aristocracy. The Apostles, to comply with an Oligarchy, had altered that
Ordination, which originally (as at the Election of MATTHIAS) was popular, to
Aristocracy; therefore being now to plant the Gospel in a free State, they might
not alter it from Aristocracy to Democracy: To please the Jews they might
change for the worse; therefore to please the Iconians they might not charge for
the better, That they were not to dispute, but to believe, and receive the
Institutions as well as Doctrins that were brought them from the Metropolis.
How would this sound to a People that understood themselves?

Sic volo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas.
THE right temper of a Metropolitan, to whom Popular Power is a Heathen Custom,
and with whom nothing will agree but Princeing of it in the Senate: But with the
Apostles it was otherwise, who making no words of the Chirothesia where it was
needless, were glad of this occasion to chirotonize, or elect them Elders in
every Congregation by Popular Suffrage. But this, they will say, is not to com
off from the haunt, but to run still upon the People in a common or public
capacity. Tho the Scripture speaks of great Multitudes believing, believe it
there is no such thing: CLEMENS says they were very few, their Assemblys
private, and very scanty things. As private as they were, by the judgment of
Divines they were, it seems, to receive from their Pattern (if that were the
Sanhedrim) a Form that was public enough; and why might not they have received
this from that public Form whereto they were accustomed, rather than from a
foren Policy, and one contrary to their Customs? why should they suffer such
Power in new and private, as they would not endure in their old and public
Magistrates? Or, if they received the Scriptures, why should they choose that
Ordination which would fit them worst, rather than that which would fit them
best? that of TIMOTHY rather than that of MATTHIAS? Or, let their Assemblys
have bin never so private or scanty, yet if the Apostles chirotoniz'd them
Elders in every Congregation, is it not demonstrable that they did receive that
of MATTHIAS, and not that of TIMOTHY?

THUS much for the Propagation of the pure, or first kind of Ecclesiastical
Policy to the Citys of Lycaonia. The mixed or second kind into which (the
Christian Presbytery delighting to follow the steps of the Jewish) the former
might soon degenerat, continued in the primitive Church, to speak with the
least (for WALLEUS brings it down to CHARLES the Great) three hundred years
after CHRIST: which Assertion in Mr. HOBS, proved out of AMMIANUS MARCELLINUS,
Dr. HAMMOND has either willingly overseen, or includes in this Answer, it is
most visibly void of all appearance of Truth.. 138.
Wherefore to the Quotation mentioned I shall add the words of PLATINA: DAMASUS
the second, by Nation a Bavarian, sirnam'd BAGNIARIUS, or as some will POPO,
possessed himself of the Papacy by force, and without consent of the Clergy and
of the People. Now what can be clearer than that by this place the Clergy and
the People had hitherto a right to elect the Pope? The Doctor coms near the
word of defiance to Mr. HOBS, in a matter of fact so apparent to any judgment,
that I need not add what gos before in the Life of CLEMENT the second; where
the Emperor ingages the People of Rome not to meddle with the Election of the
Pope without his express Command: nor what follows after in LEO the Ninth,
where the whole power of Election was now conferred by the Emperor upon the
Clergy. Again, VICTOR the Second, says the same Author, obtained the Papacy
rather by favor of the Emperor, than by free Suffrages of the Clergy and the
People of Rome, who apprehended the power of the Emperor, whose displeasure
they had sometime incurred by creating Popes. So then the People, it is clear,
had hitherto Chirothesia, as it was exercised among the converted Jews, when
TIMOTHY was ordained by the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery.

NOW this is that with which, of all others, Divines are so inamor'd, that they
will not endure it should be said there is any other: It is also propitious
above all the rest to Monarchy, as that which according to the inherent nature
or impotence of Oligarchy, must have a Prince at home or abroad to rest upon,
or become the inevitable Prey of the People. Herein lys the Arcanum or Secret of
that Antipathy which is between a Clergy and a Popular Government, and of that
Sympathy which is between the Miter and the Crown. A Prince receiving a Clergy
with the Monopoly of their Chirothesia, has no more to do than to make a
Metropolitan, by whom he governs them, and by them the People, especially if he
indows them with good Revenues; for so they become an Estate of his Realm, and a
more steady Pillar of his Throne than his Nobility themselves, who as their
dependence is not so strong, are of a more stirring nature. This is the Gothic
Model, from whence we had our Pattern, and in which No Bishop, no King.

THUS for the dignity of Ecclesiastical Policys, whether in Scripture or Human
Prudence, Popular Government you see is naturally inclined to the very best,
and the spiritual Aristocracy to the very worst. It is also remarkable that the
Political Balance extends it self to the decision of the question about
Ordination: For as a People never offered to dispute with a well-balanc'd
Clergy, so a Clergy dismounted never gained any thing by disputing with the
People. As to the question of Empire or Government (I propheti disarmati
Rovivano) the Apostles became all things to all.

His own words to Mr. Hobs.. 122.
THVS beyond all measure improsperous are this Divine's Undertakings against
Mr. HOBS, and the Undertakings of Divines upon this Subject.

Advertisment to the Reader, or Direction to the Answerer.
THE Answer of this Book must ly in proving that the Apostles at the several
times and places mentioned, introduced but one way of Ordination, and that the
same to which Divines now pretend: or if the Apostles divided, that is to say,
introduced diverse ways of Ordination, then the People or Magistrate may choose.

I HAVE taken the more leisure and pains to state, I think, all the Cases of
Controversy that can arise out of the Commonwealth of Oceana, as you have seen
in these two Books, to the end I may be no more obliged to write, and yet not
omit writing on any occasion that shall be offered; for if my Principles be
overthrown (which when I see, I shall most ingenuously confess with thanks to
the Author) such an acknowlegement will ly in a little room; and this failing,
I am deceived if I shall not now be able to show any Writer against me that his
Answer is none, within the compass of three or four sheets.

THIS also will be the fittest way for Boys-play, with which I am sure enough
to be entertained by the quibling University men; I mean a certain busy Gang of
'em, who having publicly vanted that they would bring 40 examples against the
Balance, and since laid their Caps together about it, have not produced one.
These vants of theirs offering prejudice to truth and good Principles, were the
cause why they were indeed pressed to show some of their skill; not that they
were thought fit Judges of these things, but first that they had declared
themselves so, and next that they may know they are not.

An Answer to three Objections against Popular Government, that were given me
after these two Books were printed.
Object. 1.
MONARCHICAL Government is more natural, because we see even in Commonwealths
that they have recourse to this, as Lacedemon in her Kings; Rome both in her
Consuls and Dictators; and Venice in her Dukes.

Answer*
GOVERNMENT, whether Popular or Monarchical, is equally artificial; wherefore to
know which is more natural, we must consider what piece of Art coms nearest to
Nature: as for example, whether a Ship or a House be the more natural; and then
it will be easy to resolve that a Ship is the more natural at Sea, and a House
at Land. In like manner where one man or a few men are the Landlords, a
Monarchy must doubtless be the more natural; and where the whole People are the
Landlords, a Commonwealth: for how can we understand that it should be natural
to a People, that can live of themselves, to give away the means of their
livelihood to one or a few men that they may serve or obey? Each Government is
equally artificial in effect, or in it self; and equally natural in the cause,
or the matter upon which it is founded.

A COMMONWEALTH consists of the Senate proposing, the People resolving, and the
Magistracy executing; so the Power of the Magistrates (whether Kings as in
Lacedemon, Consuls as in Rome, or Dukes as in Venice) is but barely executive:
but to a Monarch belongs both the Result, and Execution too; wherefore that
there have bin Dukes, Consuls, or Kings in Commonwealths (which were quite of
another nature) is no Argument that Monarchical Government is for this cause
the more natural.

AND if a man shall instance in a mixed Government, as King and Parliament; to
say, that the King in this was more natural than the Parliament, must be a
strange Affirmation.

TO argue from the Roman Dictator (an Imperfection which ruined that
Commonwealth, and was not to be found in any other) that all Commonwealths have
had the like recourse in exigences to the like remedy, is quite contrary to the
universal Testimony of Prudence or Story.

A MAN who considers that the Commonwealth of Venice has stood one thousand
years (which never any Monarchy did) and yet shall affirm that Monarchical
Government is more natural than Popular, must affirm that a thing which is less
natural may be more durable and permanent than a thing that is more natural.

WHETHER is a Government of Laws less natural than a Government of Men? or is
it more natural to a Prince to govern by Laws or by Will? Compare the Violences
and bloody Rapes perpetually made upon the Crown, or Royal Dignity in the
Monarchys of the Hebrews and the Romans, with the State of the Government under
either Commonwealth, and tell me which was less violent, or whether that which
is more violent must therefore be more natural.

Object. 2.
THE Government of Heaven is a Monarchy, so is the Government of Hell.

Answer.
IN this, says MACCHIAVEL, Princes lose themselves and their Empire, that they
neither know how to be perfectly good, nor entirely wicked. He might as well
have said, that a Prince is always subject to Error and Misgovernment, because
he is a Man, and not a God, nor a Devil. A Shepherd to his Flock, a Plowman to
his Team, is a better Nature; and so not only an absolute Prince, but as it
were a God. The Government of a better or of a superior Nature, is to a worse
or inferior as the Government of God. The Creator is another and a better
Nature than the Creature; the Government in Heaven is of the Creator over his
Creatures, that have their whole dependence upon him, and subsistence in him.
Where the Prince or the Few have the whole Lands, there is somewhat of
dependence resembling this; so the Government there must of necessity be
Monarchical or Aristocratical: But where the People have no such dependence,
the causes of that Government which is in Heaven are not in Earth; for neither
is the Prince a distinct or better Nature than the People, nor have they their
subsistence by him, and therefore there can be no such effect. If a Man were
good as God, there is no question but he would be not only a Prince but a God;
would govern by Love, and be not only obeyed but worshipped: or if he were ill
as the Devil, and had as much power to do mischief, he would be dreaded as
much, and so govern by Fear. To which latter, the Nature of man has so much
nearer approaches, that tho we never saw upon Earth a Monarchy like that of
Heaven, yet it is certain the perfection of the Turkish Policy lys in this,
that it coms nearest to that of Hell.

Object. 3.
GOD instituted a Monarchy, namely in MELCHIZEDEC, before he instituted a
Commonwealth.

Answer.
IF MELCHIZEDEC was a King, so was ABRAHAM too; tho one that paid him Tithes,
or was his Subject: for ABRAHAM made War, or had the power of the Sword, as the
rest of the Fathers of Familys he fought against. So if CANAAN was a Monarchy
in those days, it was such a one as Germany is in these; where the Princes also
have as much the right of the Sword as the Emperor, which coms rather (as has
bin shown already) to a Commonwealth. But whether it were a Monarchy or a
Commonwealth, we may see by the present state of Germany that it was of no very
good Example; nor was MELCHIZEDEC otherwise made a King by God than the
Emperor, that is, as an Ordinance of Man.

THE ART OF LAWGIVING: In Three BOOKS.

The First, showing the Foundations and Superstructures of all kinds of
Government.

The Second, showing the Frames of the Commonwealths of Israel, and of the Jews.

The Third, showing a Model fitted to the present State, or Balance of this
Nation.

The Order of the Work.
The First Book.
THE Preface, considering the Principles, or Nature of Family Governments.
CHAP. I. Considering the Principles, or Balance of National Governments; with
the different kinds of the same. CHAP. II. Showing the variation of the English
Balance. CHAP. III. Of the fixation of the Balance, or of Agrarian Laws. CHAP.
IV. Showing the Superstructures of Governments. THE Conclusion, observing that
the Principles of Human Prudence being good without proof out of Scripture, are
nevertheless such as are provable out of Scripture.
The Second Book.
THE Preface, showing that there were Commonwealths before that of Israel.
CHAP. I. Showing that Israel was a Commonwealth. CHAP. II. Showing what
Commonwealth Israel was. CHAP. III. Showing the Anarchy, or state of the
Israelits under their Judges. CHAP IV. Showing the state of the Israelits under
their Kings to the Captivity. CHAP. V. Showing the state of the Jews in
Captivity, and after their return from Captivity; or the frame of the Jewish
Commonwealth: and in that the Original of Ordination. CHAP. VI. Showing how
Ordination was brought into the Christian Church, and the diverse ways of the
same at diverse times in use with the Apostles. THE Conclusion, Showing that
neither God, nor Christ, or the Apostles ever instituted any Government
Ecclesiastical or Civil, upon any other Principles than those only of Human
Prudence.
The Third Book.
THE Preface, Containing a Model of Popular Government, proposed notionally.
CHAP. I. Containing the Civil part of the Model, proposed practicably. CHAP.
II. Containing the Religious part of the Model, proposed practicably. CHAP.
III. Containing the Military part of the Model, proposed practicably. CHAP. IV.
Containing the Provincial part of the Model, proposed practicably. THE
Conclusion, Showing how the Model may be proved or examined; and giving a brief
Answer to Mr. WREN's last Book, intitul'd, Monarchy asserted, etc.
THE FIRST BOOK, SHOWING THE FOUNDATIONS AND SUPERSTRUCTURES Of all kinds of
GOVERNMENT.
If this Age fails me, the next will do me Justice.

The PREFACE, Considering the Principles or Nature of Family Government.
DIVINES, and the like studious Assertors of Monarchy, have not laid their
Principles so fairly, while they have concealed one part from the right of
Paternity, or from the Government of Familys, which may be of two kinds; whereas
they have taken notice but of one: For Family Government may be as necessarily
Popular in some cases, as Monarchical in others.

Monarchical Family.
TO show now the nature of the Monarchical Family. Put the case a man has one
thousand Pounds a year, or therabouts; he marrys a Wife, has Children and
Servants depending upon him (at his good will) in the distribution of his
Estate for their livelihood. Suppose then that this Estate coms to be spent or
lost, where is the Monarchy of this Family? But if the Master was no otherwise
Monarchical than by virtue of his Estate, then the foundation or balance of his
Empire consisted in the thousand pounds a year.

Popular Family.
THAT from these principles there may also be a Popular Family, is apparent:
For suppose six or ten, having each three hundred pounds a year, or so, shall
agree to dwell together as one Family; can any one of these pretend to be Lord
and Master of the same, or to dispose of the Estates of all the rest? Or do
they not agree together upon such Orders, to which they consent equally to
submit? But if so, then certainly must the Government of this

Government of Laws, and Government of Men.
YET the one Man in the Monarchical Family giving Laws, and the Many in the
Popular Family doing no more, it may in this sense be indifferently said, That
all Laws are made by Men. But it is plain that where the Law is made by one
Man, there it may be unmade by one man; so that the Man is not governed by the
Law, but the Law by the Man; which amounts to the Government of the Man, and
not of the Law: Whereas the Law being not to be made but by the Many, no man is
governed by another man, but by that only which is the common interest; by
which means this amounts to a Government of Laws, and not of Men.

The facility that is in true Politics.
THAT the Politics may not be thought an unnecessary or difficult Art, if these
Principles be less than obvious and undeniable, even to any Woman that knows
what belongs to housekeeping, I confess I have no more to say. But in case what
has bin said be to all sorts and capacitys evident, it is most humbly submitted
to Princes and Parlaments, whether, without violence or removing of Property,
they can make a Popular Family of the Monarchical, or a Monarchical Family of
the Popular? Or, whether that be practicable or possible in a Nation, upon the
like balance or foundation in Property, which is not in a Family? A Family
being but a smaller Society or Nation, and a Nation but a greater Society or
Family.

The difference between a Soverain Lord, and a Magistrate, tho supreme.
THAT which is usually answered to this point, is* That the six or ten, thus
agreing to make one Family, must have some Steward; and to make such a Steward
in a Nation, is to make a King. But this is to imagine that the Steward of a
Family is not answerable to the Masters of it, or to them upon whose Estates
(and not upon his own) he defrays the whole Charge: For otherwise this
Stewardship cannot amount to Dominion, but must com only to the true nature of
Magistracy, and indeed of annual Magistracy in a Commonwealth; seeing that such
Accounts in the years end, at farthest, use to be calculated, and that the
Steward, Body and Estate, is answerable for the same to the Proprietors or
Masters; who also have the undoubted right of constituting such another Steward
or Stewards as to them shall seem good, or of prolonging the Office of the same.

Where the art of Lawgiving is necessary.
NOW, where a Nation is cast, by the unseen ways of Providence, into a disorder
of Government, the duty of such particularly as are elected by the People, is
not so much to regard what has bin, as to provide for the supreme Law, or for
the safety of the People, which consists in the true Art of Lawgiving.

The art of Lawgiving is of two kinds.
THE Art of Lawgiving is of two kinds; the one (as I may say) false, the other
true. The first consists in the reduction of the Balance to Arbitrary
Superstructures; which requires violence, as being contrary to Nature: The
other in erecting necessary Superstructures, that is, such as are conformable
to the Balance or Foundation; which, being purely natural, requires that all
interposition of Force be removed.

CHAP. I.
Considering the Principles or Balance of National Governments; with the
different kinds of the same.
Psalm. 115. 16. The Original of Property.

Genesis 3. 19.


THE Heaven, says DAVID, even the Heavens are the Lords; but the Earth has he
given to the Children of Men: Yet, says God to the Father of these Children, In
the sweat of thy Face shall thou eat thy Bread. Dii laborantibus sua munera
vendunt. This Donation of the Earth to Man coms to a kind of selling it for
INDUSTRY, a Treasure which seems to purchase of God himself. From the different
kinds and successes of this Industry, whether in Arms, or in other Exercises of
the Mind or Body, derives the natural equity of Dominion or Property; and from
the legal establishment or distribution of this Property (be it more or less
approaching toward the natural equity of the same) procedes all Government.

The balance of Empire consists in Property.
THE distribution of Property, so far as it regards the nature or procreation
of Government, lys in the overbalance of the same: Just as a man, who has two
thousand pounds a year, may have a Retinue, and consequently a Strength, that
is three times greater than his who injoys but five hundred pounds a year. Not
to speak at this time of Money, which in small Territorys may be of a like
effect; but to insist upon the main, which is Property in Land, the overbalance
of this, as it was at first constituted, or coms insensibly to be changed in a
Nation, may be especially of three kinds; that is, in One, in the Few, or in
the Many.

The generation of Absolute Monarchy.
THE overbalance of Land, three to one or therabouts, in one Man against the
whole People, creates Absolute Monarchy; as when JOSEPH had purchased all the
Lands of the Egyptians for PHARAOH. The Constitution of a People in this and
such cases, is capable of entire servitude. Buy us and our Land for Bread, and
we and Genesis 47. 19.
our Land will be Servants to PHARAOH.

The generation of Regulated Monarchy.

1 Samuel 8.


THE overbalance of Land to the same proportion, in the Few against the whole
People, creates Aristocracy, or Regulated Monarchy, as of late in England: And
hereupon says SAMUEL to the People of Israel, when they would have a King, He
will take your Fields, even the best of them, and give them to his Servants.
The constitution of a People in this and the like cases, is Nec totam
libertatem nec totam servitutem pati possunt. Tacit.
neither capable of entire Liberty, nor of entire Servitude.

The generation of Popular Government.
THE overbalance of Land to the same proportion in the People, or where neither
one nor the few overbalance the whole People, creates Popular Government; as in
the division of the Land of Canaan to the whole People of Israel by lot. The
constitution of a People in this and the like cases, is capable of entire
Freedom, nay, not capable of any other settlement; it being certain, that if a
Monarch, or single Person in such a State, through the corruption or improvidence
of their Counsils, might carry it; yet by the irresistible force of Nature, or
the reason alleged by MOSES (I am not able to bear all this People alone, Numb.
11. 14.
he could not keep it; but out of the deep Waters would cry to them, whose feet
he had stuck in the mire.

Of the Militia, and of the Negative Voice.
WHEREVER the balance of a Government lys, there naturally is the Militia of
the same; and against him or them wherein the Militia is naturally lodged, there
can be no negative Vote.

IF a Prince holds the overbalance, as in Turkey, in him is the Militia, as the
Janizarys and Timariots. If a Nobility has the overbalance, the Militia is in
them, as among us was seen in the Barons Wars, and those of York and Lancaster;
and in France is seen, when any considerable part of that Nobility rebelling,
they are not to be reduced, but by the major part of their Order adhering to
the King.

IF the People has the overbalance, which they had in Israel, the Judge. 20.
Militia is in them; as in the four hundred thousand first decreing, and then
waging War against Benjamin: Where it may be inquired, what Power there was on
earth having a Negative Voice to this Assembly? This always holds where there
is Settlement, or where a Government is natural. Where there is no Settlement,
or where the Government is unnatural, it procedes from one of these two causes;
either an imperfection in the Balance, or else such a corruption in the
Lawgivers, whereby a Government is instituted contrary to the Balance.

Imperfect Government.
IMPERFECTIONS of the Balance, that is, where it is not good or down weight,
cause imperfect Governments; as those of the Roman and of the Florentin People,
and those of the Hebrew Kings and Roman Emperors, being each exceeding bloody,
or at least turbulent.

Tyranny, Oligarchy, Anarchy.
GOVERNMENT against the balance in One, is Tyranny, as that of the Athenian
PISISTRATUS: in the Few it is Oligarchy, as that of the Roman DECEMVIRS; in the
Many Anarchy, as that under the Neapolitan MAZINELLO.

The Divine right of Government.
WHEREVER, through Causes unforeseen by Human Providence, the Balance coms to be
entirely changed, it is the more immediately to be attributed to Divine
Providence: And since God cannot will the necessary cause, but he must also
will the necessary effect or consequence, what Government soever is in the
necessary direction of the Balance, the same is of Divine Right. Wherefore, tho
of the Israelits God says, ^os. 8. 4.
They have set up Kings, but not by me; they have made Princes, and I knew it
not; yet, to the small Countries adjoining to the Assyrian Empire, ^^r. 27. 6,
17.
he says, Now have I given all these Lands into the hand of the King of Babylon
my Servant -- Serve the King of Babylon, and live.

CHAP. II.
Showing the variation of the English Balance.
THE Land in possession of the Nobility and Clergy of England, till HENRY 7 th,
cannot be esteemed to have overbalanc'd those held by the People less than four
to one. Whereas in our days, the Clergy being destroyed, the Lands in possession
of the People overbalance those held by the Nobility, at least, nine in ten. In
showing how this change came about, some would have it that I assume to my self
more than my share; tho they do not find me delivering that which must rely
upon Authority, and not vouching my Authors. But HENRY the Seventh being
conscious of infirmity in his Title, yet finding with what strength and vigor
he was brought in by the Nobility, Nondum orbis adoraverat Romam. The Lords yet
led Country lives, their Houses were open to Retainers, Men experienced in
Military Affairs, and capable of commanding; their Hospitality was the delight
of their Tenants, who by their Tenures or Dependence were obliged to follow
their Lords in Arms. So that, this being the Militia of the Nation, a few
Noblemen discontented could at any time levy a great Army; the effect whereof,
both in the Barons Wars, and those of York and Lancaster, had bin well known to
diverse Kings. This state of Affairs was that which inabl'd HENRY the Seventh to
make his advantage of troublesome times, and the frequent unruliness of
Retainers; while, under the pretense of curbing Riots, he obtained the passing
of such Laws as did cut off these Retainers, whereby the Nobility wholly lost
their Officers. Then, whereas the dependence of the People upon their Lords was
of a strict ty or nature, he found means to loosen this also by Laws, which he
obtained upon as fair a pretense, even that of Population. Thus Farms were so
brought to a Verulam. H. 7.
standard, that the Houses being kept up, each of them did of necessity enforce
a Dweller; and the proportion of Land laid to each House, did of necessity
enforce that Dweller not to be a Beggar or Cottager, but a man able to keep
Servants, and set the Plow on going. By which means a great part of the Lands
of this Nation came in effect to be amortiz'd to the hold of the Yeomanry, or
middle People, whereof consisted the main body of the Militia, hereby incredibly
advanced; and which henceforth, like cleaner underwood less choked by their
staddles, began to grow excedingly. But the Nobility, who by the former Laws
had lost their Offices, by this lost their Soldiery. Yet remained to them their
Estates, till the same Prince introducing the Statutes for Alienations, these
also became loose; and the Lords less taken (for the reasons shown) with their
Country lives, where their Trains were clipped, by degrees became more resident
at Court, where greater pomp and expense by the Statutes of Alienations began
to plume them of their Estates. The Court was yet at Bridewel, nor reached
London any farther than Temple Bar. The latter growth of this City, and in
that, the declining of the Balance to Popularity, derives from the decay of the
Nobility and of the Clergy. In the Reign of the succeding King were Abbys (than
which nothing more dwarfs a People) demolished. I did not, I do not attribute
the effects of these things thus far to my own particular observation; but
always did, and do attribute a sense thereof to the Reign of Queen ELIZABETH,
and the Wisdom of her Council. There is yet living Testimony, that the ruin of
the English Monarchy, through the causes mentioned, was frequently attributed to
HENRY the Seventh by Sir HENRY WOTTON; which Tradition is not unlike to have
descended to him from the Queen's Council. But there is a difference between
having the sense of a thing, and making a right use of that sense. Let a man
read PLUTARCH in the Lives of AGIS, and of the GRACCHI, there can be no plainer
demonstration of the Lacedemonian or Roman Balance; yet read his Discourse of
Government in his Morals, and he has forgot it: he makes no use, no mention at
all of any such thing. Who could have bin plainer upon this point than Sir
WALTER RALEIGH, where, to prove that the Kings of Egypt were not elective but
hereditary, he alleges that if the Egypt had bin elective, the Children of
PHARAOH must have Hist. of the World, part 1. p. 200.
bin more mighty than the King, as Landlords of all Egypt, and the King himself
their Tenant? Yet when he coms to speak of Government, he has no regard to, no
remembrance of any such Principle. In Mr. SELDEN'S Titles of Honor, he has
demonstrated the English Balance of the Peerage, without making any application
of it, or indeed perceiving it there, or in times when the defect of the same
came to give so full a sense of it. The like might be made apparent in
ARISTOTLE, in MACCHIAVEL, in my Lord VERULAM, in all, in any Politician: there
is not one of them in whom may not be found as right a sense of this Principle
as in this present Narrative; or in whom may be found a righter use of it than
was made by any of the Partys thus far concerned in this story, or by Queen
ELIZABETH M. D. l. 1. b. 10.
and her Council. If a Prince, says a great Author, to reform a Government were
obliged to depose himself, he might, in neglecting of it, be capable of some
excuse; but reformation of Government being that with which a Principality may
stand, he deserves no excuse at all. It is not indeed observed by this Author
that where by reason of the declination of the Balance to Popularity, the State
requires Reformation in the Superstructures, there the Prince cannot rightly
reform, unless from Soverain Power he descends to a Principality in a
Commonwealth: nevertheless upon the like occasions this fails not to be found
so in Nature and Experience. The growth of the People of England, since the
ruins mentioned of the Nobility and the Clergy, came in the Reign of Queen
ELIZABETH to more than stood with the interest, or indeed the nature or
possibility of a well founded or durable Monarchy; as was prudently perceived,
but withal temporiz'd by her Council, who (if the truth of her Government be
rightly weighed) seem rather to have put her upon the exercise of Principality
in a Commonwealth, than of Soverain Power in a Monarchy. Certain it is, that
she courted not her Nobility, nor gave her mind (as do Monarchs seated upon the
like foundation) to balance her great Men, or reflect upon their Power now
inconsiderable; but ruled wholly, with an art she had to high perfection, by
humoring and blessing her People. For this mere shadow of a Commonwealth is she
yet famous, and shall ever be so; tho had she introduced the full perfection of
the Orders requisite to Popular Government, her fame had bin greater. First, She
had established such a Principality to her Successors, as they might have
retained. Secondly, This Principality (the Commonwealth, The great Council of
Venice has the Soverain Power, and the Duke the Soverain Dignity.
as Rome of ROMULUS, being born of such a Parent) might have retained the Royal
Dignity and Revenue to the full, both improved and discharged of all Envy.
Thirdly, It had saved all the Blood and Confusion, which through this neglect in
her and her Successors, has since insu'd. Fourthly, It had bequeathed to the
People a Light not so naturally by them to be discovered, which is a great
pity. For M. D. l. 1. c. 9.
even as the Many, through the difference of opinions that must needs abound among
them, are not apt to introduce a Government, as not understanding the good of
it: so the Many, having by trial or experience once attained to this
understanding, agree not to quit such a Government. And lastly, It had placed
this Nation in that perfect felicity, which, so far as concerns mere Prudence,
is in the power of human nature to enjoy. To this Queen succeeded King JAMES,
who likewise regardless of this point (into which nevertheless he saw so far as
not seldom to prophesy sad things to his Successors) neither his new Peerage,
which Silo. Nor may we think that they upon whom this Tower fell, were Sinners
above all men; but that we, unless we repent, and look better to the true
foundations, must likewise perish. We have had latter Princes, latter
Parlaments. In what have they excelled, or where are they? The Balance not
considered, no effectual work can be made as to settlement; and considered, as
it now stands in England, requires to settlement no less than the
Superstructures natural to Popular Government: and the Superstructures natural
to Popular Government require no less than the highest skill or art that is in
Political Architecture. The sum of which Particulars amounts to this, That the
safety of the People of England is now plainly cast upon skill or sufficiency
in Political Architecture: it is not enough therefore, that there are honest men
addicted to all the good ends of a Commonwealth, unless there be skill also in
the formation of those proper means whereby such Ends may be attained. Which is
a sad, but a true account; this being in all experience, and in the judgment of
all Politicians, that whereof the Many are incapable. And tho the meanest
Citizen, not informing the Commonwealth of what he knows, or conceives to
concern its safety, commits a heinous Crime against God and his Country; yet
such is the temper of later times, that a man, having offered any light in this
particular, has escaped well enough, if he be despised and not ruined.

BUT to proceed: if the Balance, or state of Property in a Nation, be the
efficient cause of Government, and, the Balance being not fixed, the Government
(as by the present Narrative is evinced) must remain inconstant or floting;
then the process in the formation of a Government must be first by a fixation
of the Balance, and next by erecting such Superstructures as to the nature
thereof are necessary.

CHAP. III.
Of Fixation of the Balance, or of Agrarian Laws.
FIXATION of the Balance of Property is not to be provided for but by Laws; and
the Laws, whereby such a Provision is made, are commonly called Agrarian Laws.
Now as Governments, through the diverse Balance of Property, are of diverse or
contrary natures, Agrarian Laws, that they hinder recess or diminution, at
least in so much as is thereby entailed upon Honor: But Popular Government
requires, that the standard be moderat; and that its Agrarian prevent
accumulation. In a Territory not exceeding England in Revenue, if the It is at
present in more hands; but without fixation may com into fewer.
Balance be in more hands than three hundred, it is declining from Monarchy; and
if it be in fewer than five thousand hands, it is swerving from a Commonwealth:
which as to this point may suffice at present.

CHAP. IV.
Showing the Superstructures of Governments.
The Superstructures of Absolute Monarchy.
THAT the Policy or Superstructures of all absolute Monarchs, more particularly
of the Eastern Empires, are not only contained, but meliorated in the Turkish
Government, requires no farther proof than to compare them: but because such a
work would not ly in a small compass, it shall suffice for this time to say,
that such Superstructures of Government as are natural to an absolute Prince,
or the sole Landlord of a large Territory, require for the first story of the
Building, that, what Demeans he shall think fit to reserve being set apart, the
rest be divided into Horse quarters or Military Farms, for life or at will, and
not otherwise: And that every Timariots.
Tenant for every hundred pounds a year so held, be, by condition of his Tenure,
obliged to attend his Soverain Lord in Person, in Arms, and at his proper cost
and charges, with one Horse, so often, and so long as he shall be commanded
upon service. These among the Turks are called Timariots.

Beglerbegs.
THE second Story requires, that these Horse quarters, or Military Farms, be
divided by convenient Precincts or Proportions into distinct Provinces; and
that each Province have one Governor or Commander in chief of the same, at the
will and pleasure of his Grand Signior, or for three years and no longer. Such
among the Turks (unless by additional honors they be called Bashaws or Viziers)
are the Beglerbegs.

Janizarys and Spahys.
FOR the third Story, there must of necessity be a Mercenary Army consisting
both of Horse and Foot, for the Guard of the Prince's Person, and for the Guard
of his Empire; by keeping the Governors of Provinces so divided, that they be
not suffered to lay their arms or heads together, or to hold correspondence or
intelligence with one another. Which Mercenary Army ought not to be constituted
of such as have already contracted some other interest; but to consist of Men so
educated from their very childhood, as not to know that they have any other
Parent, or native Country, than the Prince and his Empire. Such among the Turks
are the Foot called Janizarys, and the Horse called Spahys.

The Divan and the Grand Signior.
THE Prince accommodated with a Privy Council, consisting of such as have bin
Governors of Provinces, is the Topstone: This Council among the Turks is called
the Divan, and this Prince the Grand Signior.

THE Superstructures proper to a regulated Monarchy, or to the The
Superstructures of Regulated Monarchy.
or of whose Nobility and Clergy hold three parts in four of the Territory) must
either be by his personal influence upon the Balance, or by virtue of Orders.

IF a Prince, by easing his Nobility of Taxes, and feeding them with such as
are extorted from the People, can so accommodat their Ambition and Avarice with
great Offices and Commands, that a Party rebelling, he can overbalance and
reduce them by a greater part of their own Order, he may have greater Power and
less Security, as at present in France.

THE safer way of this Government is by Orders; and the Orders proper to it
specially consist of a Hereditary Senate of the Nobility, admitting also of the
Clergy, and of a Representative of the People made up of the Lords menial
Servants, or such as by Tenure and for Livelihood have immediate dependence upon
them, as formerly in England.

No such thing as pure Aristocracy, or pure Democracy.
AN Aristocracy, or State of Nobility, to exclude the People must govern by a
King; or to exclude a King, must govern by the People: Nor is there, without a
Senate or mixture of Aristocracy, any Popular Government. Whence, tho for
discourse sake Politicians speak of pure Aristocracy, and pure Democracy, there
is no such thing as either of these in Nature, Art, or Example.

The Superstructures of Popular Government.
WHERE the People are not overbalanc'd by one Man, or by the Few, they are not
capable of any other Superstructures of Government, or of any other just and
quiet settlement whatsoever, than of such only as consists of a Senate as their
Counsillors, of themselves or their Representatives as Soverain Lords, and of a
Magistracy answerable to the People, as distributers and executioners of the
Laws made by the People. And thus much is of absolute necessity to any or every
Government, that is or can be properly called a Commonwealth, whether it be
well or ill ordered.

Definition of a well ordered Commonwealth.

Distinction of Magistracy.


BUT the necessary definition of a Commonwealth, any thing well ordered, is,
That it is a Government consisting of the Senate proposing, the People
resolving, and the Magistracy executing.

MAGISTRACY is a style proper to the executive part: yet because in a Discourse
of this kind it is hardly avoidable, but that such as are of the proposing or
resolving Assemblys, will be sometimes comprised under this name or style, it
shall be enough for excuse to say, that Magistracy may be esteemed of two
kinds; the one proper or Executive, the other improper or Legislative.

Senats, and their kinds.
A SENATE may consist of a Hereditary Order, elective for life by it self, or by
some Magistrate or Magistrates of the same; as the Senate of Rome consisted of the
Patrician Order therinto eligible, first by the Consuls, and then by the
Censors. A Senate may consist of Senators elected by the People for life, as
that of Lacedemon: It may consist of Senators eligible by the People for terms,
without any vacation or interval, as the Senate of Venice; or with intervals, as
the Senate of Athens, which also for another difference was elected by lot.

Popular Assemblys, and their kinds.
A POPULAR Assembly may consist of the whole People, as the great Council of
Venice (for the Venetians, tho called, in respect of their Subjects, Nobility,
are all that free People which is comprised in that Commonwealth) or of a
Representative, as in Israel. Again, a Representative Holland, improperly
called Senats; or it may be upon Rotation, that is to say, by changes or
courses, as that of Israel, and the present Representative in England; it may
also be by lot, as the Roman Tribes called the Prerogative, and the Jurevocatae.

Supreme Magistrates, and their kinds.
TO speak of Magistrates in a Commonwealth, and all their kinds, were to begin
an endless discourse; the present I shall therefore confine to such only as may
be called Supreme Magistrates. The Supreme Magistracy of a Commonwealth may be
in one or more; and it may be for life, or for terms and vacations. In one
elective by the People for life; as in the Duke of Venice, whose Function is
Civil and not Military. In two Hereditarily; as in the two Kings of Lacedemon,
whose Function was rather Military than Civil. In nine annually elective by the
People; as in the nine Princes or Archons of Athens. In two annually elected by
the People; as the Roman Consuls, whose Power was both Military and Civil. In a
word, it may be in one or more, for life, or for terms and vacations, as shall
best suit with the occasion.

Other differences in Commonwealths.
SOME Commonwealths consist of distinct Soveraintys, as Switzerland and Holland;
others are collected into one and the same Soverainty, as most of the rest.
Again, some Commonwealths have bin upon Rotation or Courses in the
Representative only, as Israel: Others in the Magistracy only, as Rome. Some in
the Senate and in the Magistracy, as Athens and Venice: Others in some part of
the Magistracy, and in others not; as Lacedemon in the Ephori, and not in the
Kings; and Venice not in the Duke, nor in the Procuratori, but in all the rest.
Holland, except in the Election of States Provincial (which is emergent) admits
not of any rotation or courses. There may be a Commonwealth admitting of
Rotation throout, as in the Senate, in the Representative, and in the
Magistracy; as that proposed in Oceana.

Rotation, or Courses.
ROTATION, if it be perfect, is equal election by, and succession of the whole
People to the Magistracy by terms and vacations.

Popular Election.
EQUAL Election may be by Lot, as that of the Senate of Athens; by Suffrage, as
that of Lacedemon; or by Ballot, as that of Venice, which of all others is the
most equal.

The Ballot.
THE Ballot, as it is used in Venice, consists of a Lot; whence procedes the
right of proposing, and of an unseen way of suffrage, or of resolving.

The different Genius of Commonwealths.
FROM the wonderful variety of parts, and the difference of mixture (hitherto
scarce touched by any) result those admirable differences that are in the
Constitution and Genius of Popular Governments; some being for defense, some for
increase; some more equal, others inequal; some turbulent and seditious, others,
like soft streams, in a perpetual tranquillity.

T^^ (...) ^f Sedition in a Comm nwealth.
THAT which causes innat Sedition in a Commonwealth, is Inequality; as in Rome,
where the Senate oppressed the People. But if a Commonwealth be perfectly equal,
it is void of Sedition, and has attained to perfection, as being void of all
internal causes of dissolution.

Definition of an equal Commonwealth.
AN equal Commonwealth is a Government founded upon a balance which is
perfectly Popular, being well fixed by a suitable Agrarian; and which from the
balance, through the free suffrage of the People given by the Ballot, amounts in
the Superstructures to a Senate debating

The difference between Laws and Orders.
SUCH Constitutions in a Government as regard the Frame or Model of it, are
called Orders; and such things as are enacted by the Legislative Orders, are
called Laws.

TO undertake the binding of a Prince from invading Liberty, and yet not to
introduce the whole Orders necessary to Popular Government, is to undertake a
flat contradiction, or a plain impossibility.

Hazard through the want of Principles.
A PEOPLE or Assembly not understanding true Principles, give least credit to
the best Orders, and so com to cast themselves upon particular persons: for
where Orders are not credited, there Men must be trusted; and where Men are
trusted, they find themselves so well in their power, that they are either for
bringing in a Commonwealth by degrees, or more probably not at all. The desire
of bringing in a Commonwealth by degrees, arises from want of considering that
the whole of a Commonwealth, as to charge or trouble, is less than the half. He
who has a Journey to go, dos not choose to have but half a Bridle, or but one
Boot or Stirrup, tho these be fewer things, and com but to half the charge;
because this would but necessitat him to procure more things, and perhaps more
chargeable or dangerous.

Optimus ille animi vindex, laedentia pectus
Vincula qui rupit, dedoluitque semel.
The Conclusion:
Observing that the Principles of Human Prudence being good without proof of
Scripture, are nevertheless such as are provable out of Scripture.
WHO imagins that the Romans governed by proof out of Scripture? Yet says
PETER, Submit your selves to (Human Prudence, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
or) every Ordinance of Man; which relates more particularly to the Government
of the Romans. The most frequent comparison of a Commonwealth is to a Ship; but
who imagins that a Ship ought not to be built according to the Art of the
Shipwright, or governed according to the Compass, unless these be proved out of
Scripture? Nevertheless, as hitherto I have proved the principles of Human
Prudence in the several parts out of Holy Scripture; so I undertake to vindicat
them in the whole, as to the entire frame of Popular Government, in the ensuing
Book, by the same Authority and undeniable Evidence.

ELOHIM, or the Commonwealth of Israel; AND CABALA, or the Commonwealth of the
Jews.

The PREFACE, Showing that there were Commonwealths before that of Israel.
HVMAN Prudence is originally a Creature of God, and, with respect to its
existence, as ancient as human Nature; nor is it so much younger in any of
those Effects or Ends for which it was ordained by God, that we should think
Israel to have bin the first Commonwealth, or the first Popular Government that
ever was, or that was planted at least in Canaan: for the like Governments, in
the Countries therabout, there were both before and at the same time. It was in
Canaan, that MELCHISEDEC, King and Priest of Salem, had reigned during the time
of ABRAHAM, who paid him Tithes of all that Tithes originally belonging to
Kings. 1 Samuel 8. 15, 17.
he had. Now Tithes before Israel and the institution of the Levits, belonged
not to any sort of Clergy, but to the Prince or State. Whence SAMUEL in the
description of a King, tells the People that he will take the tenth of their
Goods. Thus ABRAHAM in paying Tithes to MELCHISEDEC, acknowledged him for his
Prince. Yet had ABRAHAM The Commonwealth of Salem.
the right of the Sword, and made War with Kings, as those of Sodom, at his own
discretion; whence Canaan may seem to have bin a Commonwealth in those days,
much after the manner of Germany in ours. The Philistines must needs have bin
The Commonwealth of the Philistines.
some Aristocracy at least of Princes joining in one Body or Commonwealth. So
Venice in her first Age was under Lords or Tribuns. It is little to be doubted,
but the Government of JETHRO, King and Priest of Midian, The Commonwealth of
Midian.
was of a like nature with that of MELCHISEDEC, or of the Lacedemonian Kings,
who were also Priests; or that the Counsil he gave to MOSES (being for the
institution of such Judicatcrys as are not proper in a Monarchy) was any other
than according to the Orders of his own Commonwealth. And lest these
Governments should seem less popular, the Ambassadors of the Gibeonits coming
to JOSHUA, say thus; Our Elders The Commonwealth of the Gibeonits.

Joshua 9. 11.


(or our Senate) and all the Inhabitants of our Country (or the popular Assembly
of the same) spoke to us saying, Go meet them, and say to them, We are your
Servants: therefore now make a League with us. To make a League with a foren
Nation evinces Soverain Power; and that this League was made by the Senate and
the People, evinces Gibeon to have bin a Popular Government. Such a thing then
as Popular Government most undeniably there was before Israel. Now whether
Israel were a Popular Government or no, I shall refer to trial by the ensuing
Chapter.

CHAP. I.
Showing that Israel was a Commonwealth.
Exodus 1. 5. The rise of the Israelitish Government.

Of the Princes of the Tribes, and Princes of Familys.


IT is said of the Israelits that went first into Egypt, All the Souls that
came out of the loins of Jacob were seventy Souls. These becoming so many
Fathers of Familys, and governing their own Familys by Paternal Right, it
follows that at first they so governed the whole People; yet not with any
soverain Power (as may be easily thought in a Country that had a Prince of its
own) but by way only of direction and advice. The People being thus accustomed
to this way, as any of these seventy came to die, supplied his place with
another of their Election; at least for the probability of this opinion, we
find mention of MOSES, NADAB, ABIHU, and seventy of the Elders, Exodus 24. 9.
before the institution of the Israelitish Senate or Sanhedrim. To these and to
the People MOSES proposed his Laws. So I am sure in the Haec est lex quam Moses
proposuit, Deuteronomy. 4. 44. and whereas betwixt a Precept and a Command there is a
large difference; in places more than I can stand to number, where the Latin
has it, praecepit Moses, the English has it, Moses commanded.
Latin it is expressly said, where by our English Translation it is thus
rendered, This is the Law (and by the Law here is meant no less than the whole
Book of Deuteronomy) which MOSES set before the Children of Israel, whose
Assemblys were not always without faction. For KORAH, DATHAN, and ABIRAM, with
two hundred Princes of the Assembly, famous in the Congregation, Men of Renown,
bandy'd themselves against MOSES, and his intended Election of his Brother
AARON to the hereditary Priesthood, reproaching him (says JOSEPHUS) Antiq. l.
4. c. 2.
that he went about to dispose of this Honor without the Suffrage of the
Congregation, thereby affecting Tyranny, and a sly Is it a small thing that thou
have Numb. 16. 13.
brought us up out of the Land that flows with Milk and Honey, to kill us in the
Wilderness? except thou make thy self altogether a Prince over us. But whereas
the Scripture in all this presumes these Incendiarys to have That Moses was no
King.
belied MOSES, some will have all they thus laid to his charge, to be no more,
but less than truth; in as much as they will needs have MOSES not only to have
bin a King, but to have bin a King exercising Arbitrary Power, and such
Arbitrary Power as, being without any bounds, fully amounts to Tyranny.

That Moses proposed his Laws to the People and their Suffrage.
THE word King is not a sufficient definition of the Magistrate so styled:
Between a Lacedemonian King and a Persian King, or between either of these and
a King of England, there was a vast difference. Both the Kings in Lacedemon
were but as one Duke in Venice. The Venetians therefore, if it had so pleased
them, might as well have called their Duke a King. Certainly it is, that he is
not so much in the Commonwealth, as are a few of his Counsillors; and yet all
Acts of the Government run in his name, as if there were no Commonwealth.

Deuteronomy. 34. 4. In what sense Moses may be called a King.
IT is said (according to our Translation) MOSES commanded us a Law, etc.
according to the Original, MOSES (proposed, or) gave us a Law, which is an
Inheritance to the Congregation of JACOB. The Duke of Venice has a right to
propose or give Law in the Congregation or great Council of Venice; where he,
who sees him sitting, would believe he were a King. And if MOSES were King in
Jesurun Ver. 5.
(or Israel) it was when the Heads of the People and the Tribes of Israel were
gathered together. PAUL, epitomizing the story of the Acts 13.
People of Israel in his Sermon to the Antiochian Jews, shows how God chose
their Fathers, exalted the People, destroyed (for their sakes) seven Nations in
the Land of Canaan, and divided their Land to them by Lots: but speaks not a
word of any King given to them, till expressly after their Judges. But if MOSES
were a King, yet that he did not propose, but command by his power the Laws
which he gave to Israel, dos not follow. For DAVID was a King, who nevertheless
did no otherwise make any Law than by Proposition to the People, and their ^
Chron. 13.
free Suffrage upon it. DAVID consulted with the Captains of thousands, and
hundreds, and with every Leader (of which Military Discipline of the
Congregation of Israel more in due place will be shown) and DAVID said to all
the Congregation, If it seems good to you, and that it be of the Lord our God
(tho he was a King, and a man after God's own heart, he makes the People Judges
what was of God) let us send abroad to our Brethren every where that are left
in all the Land of Israel, and with them also to the Priests and Levits that
are in their Citys and Suburbs, that they (to the end this thing may be
performed with the greatest solemnity) may gather themselves to us, and let us
bring the Ark of God to us: for we inquired not at it in the days of SAUL. 1 Samuel 4.
In the days of ELI the Ark was taken by the Philistines, who being smitten till
there was a deadly destruction throout all the City, and their Divines
attributing the cause thereof to the detention of the Ark, after seven months
sent it to Bethshemesh; whence it was brought to Kirjath-jearim, and there
lodged in the house of AMINADAB, before SAUL was King, where it remained till
such time as DAVID proposed (in the manner shown) to the People the reduction
of the same. Upon this Proposition, the People giving Suffrage are unanimous
All the Congregation said, that they would do so (not 1 Chronicles. 13. 4.
that they could do no otherwise by a King, for they did not the like by
REHOBOAM, but that) the thing was right in the eyes of all the People. Moreover,
DAVID and the Captains of the Host separated to Chap. 25.
the Service some of the Sons of ASAPH, and of HEMAN, and of JEDUTHUN, who
should prophesy with Harps, with Psalterys and with Cymbals; that is, proposed
these Laws for Church Discipline, or Offices of the Priests and Levits, to the
same Representative of the People: of which more in other places. Thus much in
this, to show, that if MOSES were a King, it dos not follow that he proposed
not his Laws to a Congregation of the People having the power of Result. To say
that the Laws proposed by MOSES were the Dictat of GOD, is not to evade, but to
confirm the necessity of proposing them to the People, seeing the Laws or
Dictats of GOD or of CHRIST, can no otherwise be effectually received or
embraced by a People, or by a private man, than by the free suffrage of the Soul
or Conscience; and not by Force or Rewards, which may as well establish the
Laws of the Devil.

That there lay no appeal from the 70 Elders to Moses.

Numb. 11. 16.


BUT for another way, such a one as it is, of crowning MOSES, Gather to me
seventy men of the Elders of Israel -- that they may stand with thee. Upon
which words let me ask, whether had MOSES thenceforth a distinct or a joint
political Capacity? If the Seventy stood with MOSES, or it were a joint
Capacity, then MOSES was no King in their sense; and if it were distinct, then
lay there to MOSES no appeal, even by his own Law: for thus in the case of
Appeals it is by him directed. If there arises a Controversy too Deuteronomy. 6.
hard for thee in Judgment -- thou shall com to the Priests and Levits (that
is, to the seventy Elders) -- According to the sentence of the Law which they
-- shall tell thee, thou shall do -- And the man that will do presumtuously,
and will not hearken -- even that man shall die. In which words all color of
appeal from the seventy Elders is excluded.

BUT whether MOSES were a King or no King, either his Judge. 20.
thousand. Again, If the Sanhedrim inherited the whole power of MOSES, and yet
had no larger power in Lawmaking than to propose to the People, then had MOSES
never any larger power in Lawmaking than to propose to the People. Now where
there is no King, Israel was a Commonwealth, I com next to show what
Commonwealth Israel was.

CHAP. II.
Showing what Commonwealth Israel was.
Division of the Children of Israel; first Genealogical.
ALL Political Methods that are collective of the People, must necessarily begin
with a distribution or division of the People.

FOR the division of the People of Israel, it was first Genealogical, and then
local. Now these are the Names (of the Ancestors of the Exodus 1.
Tribes, or) of the Children of Israel which came into Egypt, every man and his
Household came with JACOB: REUBEN, SIMEON, LEVI, and JUDAH, ISSACHAR, ZEBULUN,
and BENJAMIN, DAN, and NAPHTALI, GAD, and ASHER. These being eleven in number,
were the Sons of JACOB, who had also one more, Genesis 41. 50, 51, 52.
namely JOSEPH. And to JOSEPH were born two Sons before the years of Famine came,
which ASENAH the Daughter of POTIPHERAH Priest of On, bore to him. And JOSEPH
called the name of the firstborn MANASSEH -- and the name of the second called
he EPHRAIM. Which two (tho but Grandchildren) were adopted by JACOB for Genesis
48. 16.
his Sons, in these words: Let my name be named on them, and the name of my
Fathers ABRAHAM and ISAAC; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of
the Earth. From which addition to the former came the Tribes of Israel,
genealogically reckoned, to be in number thirteen. In the genealogical
distribution of the Tribes there were also observed certain Ranks, Qualitys, or
Degrees, as appears by the Poll Number. 1.
made of Israel in the Wilderness of Sinai, and in the Tabernacle of the
Congregation by MOSES. These Degrees were of two sorts: first, Phylarchs, or
Princes of Tribes; and secondly, Patriarchs, or Princes of Familys: all
hereditary Honors, and pertaining to the Firstborn of the Tribe or of the
Family respectively. That this Poll be more perfectly understood, will be
useful; for which cause I shall be somewhat more particular. First, for the
Phylarchs, or Princes of the Tribes; and then for the Patriarchs, or Princes of
Familys. To begin with the Princes of the Tribes.

Number. 1. 17, 18. Of the Princes of ^^ibes; or the Muster Roll in Sinai.
MOSES and AARON -- assembled the Congregation (or political Convention of the
People) together on the first day of the second month, after their Familys, by
the house of their Fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty
years old and upward, by the poll. Where every Phylarch or Prince of a Tribe,
with the number of men at the age mentioned and upward, throout his Tribe, are
listed much after this manner.

1. OF the Tribe of REUBEN, ELIZUR, Prince. The men of military age in his
Tribe, forty six thousand five hundred.

2. OF the Tribe of SIMEON, SHELAMIEL, Prince. The men of military age in his
Tribe, fifty nine thousand three hundred.

3. OF the Tribe of JUDAH, NASHON, Prince. The men of military

4. OF the Tribe of ISSACHAR, NETHANIEL, Prince. The men of military age in his
Tribe, fifty four thousand four hundred.

5. OF the Tribe of ZEBULUN, ELIAB, Prince. The men of military age in his
Tribe, fifty seven thousand four hundred.

6. OF the Tribe of EPHRAIM, ELISHAMA, Prince. The men of military age in his
Tribe, forty thousand five hundred.

7. OF the Tribe of MANASSEH, GEMALIEL, Prince. The men of military age in his
Tribe, thirty two thousand two hundred.

8. OF the Tribe of BENJAMIN, ABIDAN, Prince. The men of military age in his
Tribe, thirty five thousand four hundred.

9. OF the Tribe of DAN, AHIEZER, Prince. The men of military age in his Tribe,
threescore and two thousand seven hundred.

10. OF the Tribe of ASHER, PAGIEL, Prince. The men of military age in his
Tribe, forty one thousand five hundred.

11. OF the Tribe of GAD, ELIASAPH, Prince. The men of military age in his
Tribe, forty five thousand six hundred and fifty.

12. OF the Tribe of NAPHTALI, AHIRA, Prince. The men of military age in his
Tribe, fifty three thousand four hundred.

THE total sum of which Musterroll in the twelve Tribes, amounts to Princes
twelve; and men of military age six hundred three thousand five hundred and
fifty, besides the Levits.

The Levits Call, Order, or Tribe.

Number. 3. 12, 13.


ALL the firstborn, says God, are mine. In which words is implied took the
Levits from among the Children of Israel, instead of the Firstborn. These being
thus taken, were set apart, and so listed by themselves (to omit their several
Familys, Functions, and Orders in the service of the Tabernacle, and afterward
of the Temple, which would require a Volum) much after this manner.

OF the Tribe of LEVI, AARON High Priest. The number of all the Males of this
Tribe, from a month old and upwards, twenty v. 39.
and two thousand. The manner how God took the Levits, is thus expressed. Thou
shall bring the Levits before the Tabernacle of the Congregation, Number. 8. 9,
10, 11, 12.
and thou shall gather the whole Assembly together -- and the Children of
Israel (after the manner that the Levits lay their hands upon the Bullocks, or
Sacrifice) shall put their hands upon the Levits, in token that they are
sacrificed or separated by the free suffrage of the People to the Lord. For
lest the suffrage of the People be thought hereby to have bin excluded, so
DAVID and the Captains of the Host or Army 1 Chr. 25.
(which Army was the Representative of the People) separated to the service some
of the Sons of ASAPH, of HEMAN, and of JEDUTHUN -- who should prophesy with
Harps. But of the Congregations of the People more in due place.

The Military Orders.

Grot. ad Number. 10.


THE hereditary Right more specially belonging to the Phylarchs, Lacedemon, of
Athens, and of Rome) in the leading of the Armies of the Commonwealth; which was
distributed to them in this manner. The twelve Tribes were divided into four
Brigades, every Brigade consisting of three Tribes. The leading of the first
Brigade pertain'd to Number. 10. 14, 18, 22, 25.
are termed Standards of the Camp, which were as the Roman Eagles. Furthermore,
as the subdivisions of the Roman Legions had their proper Insigns, so had the
Tribes here, which had not the leading of a Brigade of the Camp. The Insigns of
these Tribes were called Staves; as the Staff of the Children of ISSACHAR, the
Staff of the Tribe of ZEBULUN, which followed the Standard of JUDAH: The Staff
of the Tribe of SIMEON, the Staff of the Tribe of GAD, which followed the
Standard of REUBEN: The Staff of the Tribe of MANASSEH, the Staff of the Tribe
of BENJAMIN, which followed the Standard of EPHRAIM: The Staff of the Tribe of
ASHER, the Staff of the Tribe of NAPHTALI, which followed the Standard of DAN.
All which Insigns or Staves in our English Translation are rendered Hosts, or
Armies.

Number. 3.
IN the midst of these four Squadrons or Brigades stood the Tabernacle, with
the Levits divided, and distributed by their distinct Familys to the several
uses and carriages of the same, and lodged upon the four quarters.

WHEN the Ark set forward, or the Camp removed, these words were with solemnity
pronounced by the General, or by the High Priest; Number. 10. 35.
Rise up Lord, and let thy Enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee fly
before thee.

OF the Martial Discipline in which the Youth in Israel were educated to these
ends, there was certainly more than is remaining in story. But that their
Popular Assemblys were all held in Military Order and Discipline, and that the
deserters of the Militia were anathematized, confiscated, or put to the sword,
will in due time be made sufficiently apparent. For the present, you have the
Israelitish Musterroll, being of a like nature with that in Athens called
Lexiarcha, and that in Rome called Census. Nor has any Commonwealth bin well
ordered in its Militia, which has not bin diligent in the institution and
preservation of the like Military Rolls or Registers. Hitherto of the
Phylarchs, or Princes of the Tribes; the next rank or quality in this
Government was that of the Patriarchs or Princes of Familys.

Family in many places of Scripture, is not to be taken The Patriarchs, chief
of the Fathers, or Princes of Familys; with a Catalog of the same.

Number. 26.


for a single Household; but as we take the word in Heraldry, that is, for a
Lineage or Kindred. The Patriarchs in Israel, taken in this sense, were such
as, till of late years in Scotland, were they that could lead the whole Name or
Kindred, and be followed by them. The Familys in Israel of this kind, that were
greatest about the plantation of the Commonwealth, were of REUBEN, the
Henochits, the Phalluits, the Hesronits, and the Charmits.

OF SIMEON, the Namuelits, the Jamnits, the Jachenits, the Zarits, and the
Shaulits.

OF GAD, the Zephronits, the Haggits, the Shunits, the Oznits, the Erits, the
Arodits, and the Arelits.

OF JUDAH, the Shelanits, the Pharzits, the Zarhits, the Hesronits, and the
Hamulits.

OF ISSACHAR, the Tholaits, the Punits, the Shuhits, and the Shimranits.

OF ZABULUN, the Sardits, the Elonits, and the Jahleelits.

OF MANASSEH, the Machirits, the Galeadits, the Jeezrits, the Helekits, the
Asrielits, the Sechemits, the Shemidaits, and the Hepherits.

OF EPHRAIM, the Shuthalaits, the Bachtits, the Tahanits, and the Eranits.

OF BENJAMIN, the Belaits, the Ashbelits, the Ahiramits, the Shuphamits, the
Huphamits, the Ardits, the Heredits, and the Naamits.

OF DAN, the Suhamits.

OF ASHER, the Jimnits, the Jessuits, the Britts, the Heberits, and the
Melchielits.

OF NAPHTALI, the Jazrielits, the Gunits, the Jeserits, and the Shillemits.

OF LEVI, the Gersonits, the Caharits, and the Merarits. The heads of these
were such as are called Patriarchs, Princes, heads of Familys, or chief of the
Fathers.

FAMILYS, tho far less subject than in other Governments to decay or increase,
might at diverse times be different in Israel; as after BENJAMIN was destroyed,
or after DAVID had raised his own and many other: But thus were the Familys at
this time sixty; the Tribes being, as was shown before, thirteen.

IN the first institution of the Tribes of Rome, that is, Ramnenses, Titienses,
and the Luceri, they were also generalogical, but long it held not so;
genealogical divisions in a Commonwealth being for the most part of greater
danger than use: but whether Genealogys be observed or not, the local way of
division is of absolute necessity.

Of the Lot or Ballot of Israel.
TO insert the Geography of the Israelitish Tribes, would be as Canaan by Lot,
and intailing the Lands so distributed upon the Proprietors and their Heirs for
ever, without power of alienation, in any such manner as to deprive their
Posterity. The Lot or Ballot in Israel was specially of three uses; one for
election of Magistrates, another for the discovery of some secret Malefactor, and
a third for the division of Lands. To which three heads I hope to reduce the
whole History of their Government: and this work once performed, it will be
easy to represent the Commonwealth in its Political method.

TO begin with the election of Magistrates, it was performed sometimes by the
Lot, without Suffrage; and sometimes by the Ballot, that is, by a mixture of Lot
and Suffrage. For the clearer discovery of the Order in Elections, I must
invert the Order of the Magistrates elected, and begin with the King; then
proceed to the Judge, and com last of all to the Sanhedrim, and the inferior
Courts.

THE Instruments used upon these occasions, were first Lots, some Blanks and some
Prizes; then Urns (that is, Pots) into which these Lots were cast, and out of
which they were afterward drawn, or given forth; by what Officers, or with
what farther Solemnity, dos not appear.

Manner of electing the King.

1 Samuel 8. 7, 22. 1 Samuel 10. 17.


WHEN the People would needs have a King, SAMUEL being hearkened to the voice
of the People; or obeyed their Vote. Secondly, Called the People together to
the Lord to Mizpeh. The political Assembly, or Congregation of the People
Israel was called Ecclesia Dei, the Congregation of the Lord, as it Judge. 20.
Deuteronomy. 23.
ought to have bin expressed in the Trial of BENJAMIN, and is in some places by our
Translation; as where an Eunuch (or one unfit for marriage with a Daughter of
Israel, which capacity was necessary to the being inrol'd of a Tribe) a Bastard
(as dishonorable) an Ammonite or Moabite (as descended of perfidious Nations)
shall not enter into the Congregation of the Lord: that is, shall not have
right of suffrage with the People of Israel. So SAMUEL, by calling For the
Assembly of the Congregation at Mizpeh, see Judge. 10. 17. and 11. 11. and 20.
1. and 21. 1. 1 Samuel 7. 6, 16.
the Congregation of the Lord, or the People together to the Lord in Mizpeh
(the place, before the taking of Jerusalem, where they always held their
Parlaments or political Assemblys) did the office of the like Magistrates in
Commonwealths. The People being thus assembled (for to be brief, I must proceed
with conjectures, which at first sight will seem bolder than really they are)
SAMUEL causing the Urns to be set forth, pronounced the solemn form of words in
use upon the like 1 Samuel 10. 19.
occasion, which were these: Present your selves before the Lord by your The
Military Order of Political Congregations in Israel, see Chap. 3.
Tribes, and by your thousands. The political Assemblys of the Children of
Israel were held, or gathered (as we say) with Drums beating, and Colors
flying; and if it were an extraordinary Congregation, that is, a Congregation
consisting of the whole People, as this, and that for the trial of BENJAMIN,
the Princes of the Tribes with their Staves, and the Standards of the Camp (in
the order shown) led up the People to the Urns, or Ballot. Wherefore upon these
words of SAMUEL, the Princes marched in their known discipline to the Urns. The
Urns were two: in the one were twelve Lots inscribed with the names of the
twelve Tribes; in the other were also twelve other Lots, whereof eleven were
Blanks, and the twelfth inscribed with some word. What the Israelitish word was,
dos not appear; the Roman word upon the like occasion was Prerogative: wherefore
seeing that which is lost must have bin of a like nature, we may, for discourse
sake, presume it to have bin the same in Israel V. 20. The Prerogative Tribe.
as in Rome. And when SAMUEL had caused all the Tribes of Israel to com near,
the Tribe of BENJAMIN was taken: That is, the name of this Tribe being drawn
out of the one Urn, to it was drawn the word Prerogative out of the other Urn;
which being don, the Urns were changed, or at least the Lots. And whereas in the
enumeration of the Patriarchs, I showed by a catalog of their Names, that the
whole Tribe of BENJAMIN consisted of seven Familys; seven names by that account
should have bin cast into the one Urn, and as many Lots into the other; one of
them being inscribed with the word Prerogative, and the other six being Blanks.
But both the names, and the number of Familys at this Ballot, are most likely
to have bin quite otherwise than in the Judge. 20. 2.
Catalog; because since that time the Tribe of BENJAMIN had in the far greater
part bin destroyed, and piec'd up again out of a Remnant: so for the number of
the Familys, or the names of them, I can say nothing. But the Urns being thus
prepared, came BENJAMIN, as now the Prerogative Tribe, to the Urns by Familys.
And when SAMUEL had caused the Tribe of BENJAMIN to com near by their Familys,
the Family of MATRI (which is a new one) was taken: that is, lighting, in the
manner shown, upon the Prize, became the Prerogative Family. This don, the Lots
were again changed, and so many others as there were Households in the Family of
MATRI (for J^^^. 7. 14, 16, 17, 18.
so you will find it in the trial of ACHAN) were cast into the Urns. Thus the
Household of KISH coming to be the Prerogative Household, King; came the Household
of KISH, man by man, and SAUL the Son of KISH was taken.

That miraculous designation of Magistats in a Commonwealth, was never
understood to exclude the free Suffrage of the People in their Election.
WE find it recorded by LIVY, of TARQUINIUS PRISCUS, Rome, whom the People had
not first commanded to reign over them, to whose Election therefore SERVIUS, tho
in possession of the Throne, thought it his best way to refer himself. Far be
it from me to compare Prodigys among Heathens, to Miracles in the Church: But
each People had of each a like opinion. Both Israel and the Heathens began
their popular Assemblys with Sacrifice. In order to the election of SOLOMON,
the Representative of Israel 1 Chronicles. 29. 21, 22.
sacrificed Sacrifices to the Lord -- even a thousand Bullocks, a thousand
Rams, and a thousand Lambs, with their Drink Offerings, and Sacrifices in
abundance, for all Israel. And when they had thus don, what Magistrates soever
the Israelits, or the Heathens elected, they always understood to be elected by
God. The Lot is cast into the lap, but the Prove. 10. 33.
whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. And indeed, whereas in this manner they
made SOLOMON King, and ZADOC to be Priest, if we will hold otherwise, we must
think that neither the King nor the Priest was elected by God. A man that is
elected to some great Office, by a King rightly qualified, must have little
Religion, or hold himself to be raised up by God. Why then should it be
otherwise, when a Magistrate is elected by a People rightly qualified? Or what
consequence is there in saying, that SAUL was anointed by SAMUEL before he was
elected by the People, or that God raised them up Judges; therefore neither SAUL
nor the Judges were elected by the People? That God elected the Kings in
Israel, is certain; and that the People no less for that did also elect the
Kings, is as certain. One from among thy Brethren shall thou (that is, thou the
People of Israel) Deuteronomy. 17. 15.
set King over thee. That God raised up Judges in Israel, is certain; and that
the People no less for that, did also elect the Judges, is as certain. When the
Children of Ammon made War against Israel, Israel assembled themselves
together, and encamped in Mizpeh, whence the Judge. 10. 17.
Elders of Gilead went to fetch JEPHTA out of the Land of Tob. -- Then Judge.
11. 5, 11.
JEPHTA went with the Elders of Gilead, and the People made him Head and Captain
over them: and JEPHTA uttered all his words before the Lord in Mizpeh. But that
SOLOMON was elected by the Lot, I do not affirm; it being most probable, that
it was by Suffrage only, DAVID proposing, and the People resolving. Nor whether
JEPHTA was elected by Suffrage, or by the Ballot, is it material; however that
the ordinary Magistrates were elected by the Ballot, I little doubt.

Election of Senators, and Judges of inferior Courts.
THE ordinary Magistrates of this Commonwealth (as shall hereafter Deuteronomy. 1. 13.
People, or the Congregation of the Lord, in this manner. Take you wise men, and
understanding, and known among your Tribes ((...)) and I will make (or
constitute) them Rulers over you. Where, by the way, lest MOSES in these words
be thought to assume power, SOLON, says ARISTOTLE ((...)) made, or constituted
the Popular Government of Athens. In which he implys, not that SOLON was a
King, or had Soverain Power, but that he was a Lawgiver, and had authority to
propose to the People. Nor is there more in the words of MOSES; upon whose
Proposition, say Jewish Writers, each of the twelve Tribes, by free Suffrages,
elected six Competitors, and wrote their Names in scrols, which they delivered
to MOSES. MOSES having thus presented to him by the twelve Tribes seventy and
two Competitors for seventy Magistracys, had by consequence two more
Competitors than were capable of the Preferment to which they were elected by
the People: Wherefore MOSES took two Urns, into the one he cast the seventy two
Names presented by the People; into the other, seventy two Lots, whereof two
were blanks, the rest inscribed with the word Elder. This don, he called the
Competitors to the Urn, where the seventy, to whose Names came forth the
Prizes, went up to the Tabernacle, the Sessionhouse See Numb. 11. 26.
being there provided: and the two that drew the Blanks, namely ELDAD and MEDAD,
tho of them that were elected and written by the Tribes, went not up to the
Tabernacle, but remained in the Camp, as not having attained to Magistracy.
Thus, if this place in Scripture can admit of no other Interpretation, so much
as I have cited out of the Talmud (tho otherwise, for the most part, but a
fabulous and indigested heap) must needs be good and valid. In this manner, one
or more Senators happening to die, it was easy for each Tribe, choosing one or
more Competitors accordingly out of themselves, to decide at the Urn which
Competitor so chosen, should be the Magistrate, without partiality, or cause of
feud; which, if a man considers this Constitution, was not perhaps so readily
to be don otherwise. The like, no doubt, was don for the inferior Courts,
except that such Elections (the Commonwealth being once settled) were more
particular, and performed by that Tribe only in whose Gates that Court was
sitting.

The story of the Sanhedrim, and of the inferior Courts, as to their first
institu ion.

Exodus 18. 24, 25.


THE first institution of these Courts came to pass in the manner following.
Before the People were under orders, the whole Judicature lay upon the
shoulders of MOSES, who being overburden'd, was advised by JETHRO. And MOSES
hearkened to the voice of his Father-in-law -- and chose (after the manner
shown) able men out of all Israel, and made them Heads over the People, Rulers
of thousands, Rulers of hundreds, Rulers of fiftys, and Rulers of tens. The
number of which Rulers, compared with the number of the People, as in the
muster roll at Sinai, must in all have amounted to about six thousand. These
thus instituted, while Israel was an Army, came to be the same when the Army
was a Commonwealth: whereof it is said, (...) 16. 18.
Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in all thy Gates which the Lord thy
God gives thee, throout thy Tribes; and they shall judge the People with just
Judgment. Each of these Courts, by the practice of the Jewish Commonwealth,
consisted of twenty three Elders. But JETHRO, in his advice to MOSES, adds
concerning these Judicatorys, this Caution; Let them judge the People at all
seasons: and it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring to thee, but
every small matter they shall Exodus 18. 22.
judge: So shall it be easier for thy self, and they shall bear the burden with
thee. Which nevertheless followed not according to JETHRO'S promise, the
Appeals being such to MOSES that he gos with this complaint to God: I am not
able to bear all this People alone, because it is too heavy for me. Numb. 11.
14, 16.
Whereupon the Lord said to MOSES, Gather to me seventy men, of the Elders of
Israel, whom thou know to be Elders of the People, and Officers over them;
and bring them to the Tabernacle of the Congregation, that they may stand with
thee -- (but Crowns will have no rivals) and they shall bear the burden of the
People with thee, that thou bear it not alone. But a Monarch is one that must
be alone. And MOSES went out, and told Ver. 24.
the People the words of the Lord (which a Monarch needed not to have don) and
gathered the seventy men of the Elders of the People; the manner whereof is
already shown. JETHRO, being a Heathen, informs MOSES of the Orders of his own
Commonwealth, which also was Heathenish. Yet in Scripture is both JETHRO joined
with MOSES, and the Commonwealth of Midian with the Commonwealth of Israel. How
then coms it to be irreverend, or atheistical, as some say, in Politicians (and
while political Discourses cannot otherwise be managed) to compare, tho but by
way of illustration, other Legislators, or Politicians, as LYCURGUS, SOLON,
with MOSES; or other Commonwealths, as Rome, and Venice, with that of Israel?
But the Authors of such Objections had better have minded, that the burden
whereof MOSES here complained, could in no manner be that of ordinary
Judicature, of which he was eased before by the advice of JETHRO; and therefore
must have bin that of Appeals only: so either the Sanhedrim bore no burden at
all with MOSES, or they bore that of Appeals with him. And if so, how say they
that there lay an Appeal from the seventy Elders to MOSES?

Lot, Ordel, or Inquisition by Lot.

Deuteronomy. 13. 12, etc.


BUT I said the Lot was of use also toward the discovery of concealed If thou
shall hear say in one of thy Citys, which the Lord thy God has given thee to
dwell therein, saying, Certain men, the Children of Belial, are gone out from
among you, and have withdrawn the Inhabitants of their City, saying, Let us go
and serve other Gods, which you have not known: then shall thou inquire, and
make search, and ask diligently; and behold, if it be truth, and the thing
certain, that such Abomination is wrought among you, thou shall surely smite
the Inhabitants of that City with the edg of the Sword, destroying it utterly,
and all that is therein, and the Cattle thereof with the edg of the Sword. And
thou shall gather all the spoil of it into the midst of the street thereof, and
shall burn with fire the City, and all the spoil thereof, every whit, for the
Lord thy God: and it shall be a heap for ever, it shall not be built again, and
there shall cleave naught of the accursed thing to thy hand. Among the Citys
that were given by God to Israel, was Jericho. Now tho against this City,
before it was taken, JOSHUA had solemnly Josh. 6. 17.
and publicly denounced the Anathema, or Curses contained in the foregoing Law;
and after the taking of it, had, in all appearance, executed upon it the whole
of the Anathema so pronounced: yet through subsequent losses before the City of
Ai, being sore afflicted, he entered into suspicion, that there might have bin
some failure in the performance rent his Clothes, and fell to the Josh. 7. 6.
Earth upon his face before the Ark of the Lord, till the eventide, he and the
Elders (or Sanhedrim of Israel) and put dust on their heads. The Sanhedrim, in
difficult cases of the Law, inquired of God by Vrim; and the Sanhedrim, or the
People, in cases of high concernment to the State, as in the War against
BENJAMIN, inquired of the Ark. When God was inquired of by Vrim, he gave his
Oracle by the shining of certain Stones or Jewels in the Breastplate of the
High Priest. When he was inquired of by the Ark, he gave his Oracle vocally
from the Mercy seat, which was placed upon the Ark of the Covenant. Whence he
who sat between the Cherubims thus answered JOSHUA: Josh. 7. 10.
Get thee up; wherefore lie thou thus upon thy face? Israel has sinned -- they
have even taken of the accursed thing. JOSHUA thus informed of the Crime, but
not so particularly of the Malefactor as to know Josh. 7. 17.
where to charge it, calls the whole People to the Urns; in one of which it may
be thought that there were eleven white Stones, or Lots, with one black one;
and in the other the twelve Names of the Tribes. So Israel coming first by
Tribes to the Urns, the Tribe of JUDAH was taken; that is, this Tribe lighting
upon the black Lot, was denoted for the Guilty Tribe: Which consisting (as
appeared by the Catalog) of five Familys, whereof the Zarhits were one, came
next by Familys to the Urn; wherein there might be four white Lots, and one
black one, by which the Zarhits were taken. In like manner came the Family of
the Zarhits by Households, and the Household of ZABDI was taken: Last of all came
the Household of ZABDI man by man, and ACHAN was taken. This kind of Inquisition
was performed with such Religion and Solemnity, that a man thus taken, if he
had any guilt, could have no face to conceal it; or, if there were any
Witnesses of his Crime, they could not any longer dissemble it: and whether he
were convicted by testimony, or by his own confession (as now ACHAN) he was put
to death. The like proceeding, in part, 1 Samuel 14.
is implied to have bin in the case of JONATHAN; tho in this, by agreement
thereupon between SAUL and the People, it should seem as if but two Lots were
put into the Urn, whereof SAUL and JONATHAN, on the one part, drew the black: Or
the Prince of the Tribe of JUDAH drawing for the whole People, on the other
part, drew the white one; and that the same being put into the Urn again, to
decide it between SAUL and JONATHAN, JONATHAN drew the black: whereupon, he
being questioned, confessed the fact; and, but that the People rescued him from
SAUL, had bin put to death.

Distribution of Lands, and Agrarian Laws in Israel.
TO conclude with the use of the Lot, in the division of the Land of Canaan.
This (as implying the Foundation or Balance of the Government) ought to have
bin the first in order, but happens here to com last; because these Orders were
instituted in the Wilderness, and so before the People had any Lands to divide.
Nevertheless, this also was proposed by MOSES, and resolved by the People: By
lot was their Josh. 14. 2.
Inheritance, as the Lord commanded MOSES; and now coms (as it was, or should
have bin put in execution by JOSHUA) to be considered.

IT may be true, that the Roman People were the wisest that have bin; and it is
true, that they only of a People, did labor to introduce Agrarian Laws, tho
without effect: Otherwise, Levelling was never introduced, but by the wisdom
and providence of some great Man, as a MOSES, a JOSHUA, or a LYCURGUS; or by some
accident, or England.

Number. 1. 46. Number. 26. 51.
BETWEEN the Muster Roll in Sinai, whereby the men of military age, as was
shown, amounted to six hundred and three thousand five hundred and fifty, in
the twelve Tribes, and the Law for the division of the Land of Canaan, there
happened a Plague, by which the number of the People, upon a new Poll, came but
to six hundred and one thousand seven hundred and thirty. Upon this Poll was
the Law made, which runs thus: To these the Land shall be divided for an
Inheritance, V. 53, 54, 55, 56.
according to the number of names. To many thou shall give the more Inheritance,
and to fewer thou shall give the less inheritance: To every one shall his
Inheritance be given, according to those that were numbered of him.
Notwithstanding, the Land shall be divided by lot: according to the names of
the Tribes of their Fathers, they shall inherit; according to the lot shall the
possession thereof be divided to many and few. This Law, in another place, is
repeated thus: You shall divide the Number. 33. 54.
Land by lot, for an inheritance among your Familys; and to many ye shall give
the more Inheritance, and to the fewer ye shall give the less Inheritance:
Every man's inheritance shall be in the place where his Lot falls, according to
the Tribes of your Fathers ye shall inherit.

IN the making of these Lots consideration was as well had of the goodness of
the Land, as of the measure. Now supposing this Law to have bin in the whole
and methodically executed, the Canaanits must first have bin totally rooted out
of the Land of Canaan; which Land, in that case (as some affirm) would have
afforded to this Commonwealth a Root or Balance, consisting of three millions
of Acres. Hecateus apud Joseph. cont. Ap.
These, reckoning the whole People in the twelve Tribes, at six hundred and two
thousand (which is more than upon the later Poll they came to) would have
afforded to every man four Acres; to every one of the Patriarchs (upon the poll
of the foregoing Catalog, where they are sixty) four thousand Acres; to every
one of the Princes of the Tribes, fourteen thousand Acres; to the Levitical
Citys (being forty eight, each with its Suburbs, of four thousand Cubits
diameter) one hundred thousand Acres; and yet for extraordinary Donations, as
to JOSHUA and CALEB (of which kind there were but few) some eighty thousand
Acres might remain. Now it is true, four Acres to a man may seem but a small
Lot; yet the Roman People, under Romulus, and long after, had but two. And it
may very well be, that one Acre in Canaan was worth two in Italy, especially
about Rome; and four in England, tho of the best sort: and if so it were that
four Acres in Palestin were worth sixteen of our best, such a Lot, at our
account, might be worth about thirty or forty pounds a year; which, for a
popular share, holding that rate through the whole body of a People, was a large
proportion. By this estimat, or what possibly could be allowed to the Princes
of the Tribes and of the Familys, their share came not to a sixth of the whole:
so the rest remaining to the People, the Balance of this Government must have
bin purely popular. It is true, that in the whole this Law of MOSES for the
division of the Land was never executed: but that in the parts some such course
was taken, is plain; for example, in the division to seven Tribes, where JOSHUA
proposes to the People in this manner: Give out from among Josh. 18. 4.
you three men for each Tribe -- and they shall go through the Land and describe
The People having resolved accordingly, these went, and passed through the Land,
and described it by Citys into seven parts in a Book, and came again to JOSHUA
to the Host at Shiloh. And JOSHUA cast Lots for them in Shiloh, before the
Lord: and there JOSHUA divided the Land to the Children of Israel according to
their divisions. It were absurd to think that this Lot determined of
proportions; for so a mean man might have com to be richer than the Prince of
his Tribe: but the proportions allotted to Tribes being stated, tho at first
but by guess, and entered into the Lot Book of the Surveyors (who, says
JOSEPHUS, were most expert in Geometry) the Princes came first to the Urns,
whereof the one contained the names of the Tribes that were to draw, the other
the names of those parcels of Land that were to be drawn first to a whole
Tribe. Thus the name of a Tribe, for example BENJAMIN, being drawn out of one
Urn, to that name a parcel was drawn out of the other Urn; for example, the
Country lying between Jericho and Bethaven. This being don, and the Prince of
the Tribe having chosen in what one place he would take his stated and agreed
proportion, whether of fourteen thousand Acres, or the like, the rest of the
Country was subdivided in the Lot Book, according to the number of Familys in
the Tribe of this Prince; and the Parcels subdivided being cast into the one
Urn, the names of the Patriarchs into the other, the same Tribe came again by
Familys. Thus every Patriarch making choice in what one part of this Lot he
would take his agreed proportion, whether of four thousand Acres, or the like;
the remainder was again subdivided in the Lot Book, according to the number of
names in his Family: if they were more than the parcel would furnish at four
Acres a man, then was that defect amended by addition out of the next parcel;
and if they were fewer, then the overplus was cast into the next parcel. By
such means the People came, or might have com in the whole, and in every part,
to the Lot of their Inheritance; while every Tribe that was thus planted,
became local, Number. 36. 3.
without removal. Neither shall the Inheritance remove from one Tribe to another
Tribe; but every one of the Tribes of the Children of Israel shall keep himself
to his own Inheritance.

The Portion of Levi.

Josh. 21. 4, 5, 6. Number. 18. 20. Deuteronomy. 10. 9. Deuteronomy. 18. 1.


THE Tribes thus planted, or to have bin planted, were twelve. The thirteenth,
or that of LEVI, came in the like manner to the Lot, for their forty eight
Citys with their Suburbs, and received them accordingly; as the Lot came forth
for the Familys of the Kohathits, and the rest. These Israel gave to the Levits
out of their Inheritance: That is, these were such as the twelve Tribes, before
the division, set apart for the Levits, with the Tithes, and the Offerings;
which, tho this Tribe had no other Lands, made their portion by far the best.
The Tribes being henceforth reckoned by their locality, and these forty eight
Citys being scattered throout the twelve Tribes, that of LEVI was no more
computed as a distinct Tribe, but lost as it were the name, yet with advantage:
for to their promiscuous abode they had the right of promiscuous marriage; no
more in this point Ezekiel. 44. 22.
being enjoined any of them, than to take Maidens of the Seed of Israel, or at
least the Widows of Priests. And as in the Tribes where they dwelt they had
promiscuous Marriage, so had they right of promiscuous Election; that is, of
electing, and being elected, into all the Magistracys and Offices of the
Commonwealth: which they so frequently enjoyed, that the Sanhedrim is sometimes
understood by their names. If there arises a matter too hard for thee in
judgment, thou shall com to the Priests the Levits. Between the Law, and the
Religion of Deuteronomy. 17. 8.
this Government, there was no difference; whence all Ecclesiastical persons
were also Political persons, of which the Levits were an entire Tribe, set more
peculiarly apart to God (the King of this Commonwealth) from all other cares,
except that only of his Government. Thus MOSES did that with the safety of
Liberty in Israel, which LYCURGUS could not do in Lacedemon, but by condemning
the Helots to perpetual Slavery: For whereas without these to be Tillers of the
Ground, the Citizens of Lacedemon could not be at leisure for the Commonwealth;
the Children of Israel might employ themselves in their domestic Affairs, as
they required, with safety: while the Levits bore the burden of the Government;
or, in case either their private Affairs permitted, or their Ambition promted,
were equally capable of Magistracy.

Citys of Refuge.

Number. 35.


OF the Levitical Citys, three beyond, and three on this side Jordan, Citys of
Refuge. If a man was slain, the next of kindred, by the Laws of Israel, was the
Avenger of Blood; and to the Avenger of Blood it was lawful to slay him that
slew his Kinsman, wherever he could find him, except only in a City of Refuge.
For this cause, if a man had slain another, he fled immediately to one of these
Sanctuarys; whence nevertheless, the Judges in the Gates, within whose proper
verge the Crime was committed, caused the Malefactor to be brought before them
by a Guard, and judged between the Slayer and the Avenger of Blood. If that
which we call Murder, or Manslaughter, was proved against him by two Witnesses,
he was put to death: but if it was found, as we say, Chancemedly, he was
remanded with a Guard to the City of Refuge; whence if, before the Death of the
High Priest, he was found wandering, it was lawful, not only for the Avenger of
Blood, but for any man else to slay him. The High Priest being dead, he
returned, not home only, but to his Inheritance also, with liberty and safety.
If a Priest had slain a man, his Refuge was the Sanctuary: whence nevertheless
he was taken by the Sanhedrim; and, if upon trial he was found guilty of wilful
Murder, put to death. If a man coms presumtuously upon his Neighbor to slay
Exodus 21. 14.
him with guile, thou shall take him from my Altar, that he may die.

The Jubilee.
INHERITANCES, being thus introduced by the Lot, were immovably Number. 36.
of ZELOPHEDAD, or of his Daughters.

NOW to bring the whole result of these historical parts, thus proved,

The Model of the Commonwealth of Israel.
THE whole People of Israel (through a popular distribution of the Land of Canaan
among themselves by lot, and the fixation of such a popular Balance by their
Agrarian Law, or Jubilee, intailing the inheritance of each Proprietor upon his
Heirs for ever) was locally divided into twelve Tribes.



A TRIBE, in its Military capacity, consisted of one Staff or Standard of the
Camp, under the leading of its distinct and hereditary Prince, as Commander in
chief; and of its Princes of Familys or chief Fathers, as Captains of thousands
and Captains of hundreds.

A TRIBE, in its Political capacity, was next and immediately under the
government of certain Judicatorys, sitting in the Gates of its Citys; each of
which consisted of twenty three Elders, elected for life, by free suffrage.

THE Soverain Power, and common Ligament of the twelve Tribes, was the
Sanhedrim of Israel, and the Ecclesia Dei, or Congregation of the Lord.

THE Sanhedrim was a Senate, consisting of seventy Elders for life, so
instituted by the free Election of six Competitors, in and by each Tribe; every
Elder, or Senator of the Sanhedrim being taken out of this number of
Competitors by the Lot.

THE Congregation of the Lord was a Representative of the People of Israel,
consisting of twenty four thousand, for the term of one month; and perpetuated
by the monthly Election of two thousand Deputys of the People in each Tribe.

THE Sanhedrim, upon a Law made, was a standing Judicatory of Appeal from the
Courts in the Gates, throout the Tribes; and upon a Law to be made, whatever
was proposed by the Sanhedrim, and resolved in the affirmative by the
Congregation of the Lord, was an Act of the Parliament of Israel.

Deuteronomy. 4. 5, 6.
OF this Frame says MOSES to the People (as well he might) Behold, I have
taught you Statutes and Judgments, even as the Lord my God commanded me, that
ye should do so in the Land whither you go to possess it. Keep therefore, and do
them; for this is your Wisdom, and your Understanding in the sight of the
Nations, which shall hear all these Statutes, and say, Surely this great Nation
is a wise and understanding People. In another place, upon the Peoples
observing this form, he pronounces all the choicest Blessings; and in case of
violation of the same, a long enumeration of most dreadful Curses, among which
he Deuteronomy. ^8. 36.
has this: The Lord shall bring thee, and thy King which thou shall set over
th^e, to a Nation which neither thou nor thy Fathers have known; and there
shall thou serve other Gods, Wood and Stone. In which words, first he charges
the King upon the People as a Creature of their own, and next opposes his Form
pointblank to Monarchy; as is farther apparent in the whole Antithesis running
throout that Chapter. To the neglect of these Orders may be applied those words
of DAVID: I have said that ye are Gods -- but ye shall die like Men, and fall
like one of the Princes. But this Government can with no countenance of Reason,
or testimony of Story, give any man ground to argue from the Frame thus
instituted by MOSES, that a Commonwealth rightly ordered and established, may
by any internal cause arising from such Orders, be broken or dissolved; it
being most apparent, that this was never established in any such part as could
possibly be holding. MOSES died in the Wilderness: and tho JOSHUA, bringing the
People into the promised Land, did what he could, during his Life, toward the
establishment of the Form designed by MOSES; yet the hands of the Peopl,e
specially after the death of JOSHUA, grew slack, and they Canaanits, which they
were so often commanded to do; and without which it was impossible their
Commonwealth should take any root. Nevertheless, settled as it could be, it was
in some parts longer lived than any other Government has yet bin; as having
continued in some sort from MOSES, to the dispersion of the Jews in the Reign of
the Emperor ADRIAN; being about one thousand seven hundred years. But that it
was never established according to the necessity of the Form, or the true
intent of MOSES, is that which must be made farther apparent throout the sequel
of the present Book; and first, in the state of the Israelits under their
Judges.

CHAP. III.
Showing the Anarchy, or State of the Israelits under their Judges.
A full Description of the Representative of the People of Israel.

1 Chr. 27.


THE Frame of that which I take to have bin the ordinary Congregation Israel,
is not perfectly shown in Scripture, till the time of DAVID; when, tho it has
nothing in it of a Monarchical Institution, it is found entirely remaining, and
perfectly described in these words: Now the Children of Israel after their
number, to wit, the chief Fathers, and Captains of thousands and hundreds, and
their Officers that served the King in any matter of the Courses, which came
in, and went out month by month, throout all the months in the year; of every
Course were twenty and four thousand men. The Polls of the People, as they have
bin hitherto shown, were taken before their plantation in Canaan, where before
they had Kings, they had grown (according to the account of PAUL) four hundred
and Acts 13. 20.
fifty years; during which time, that they were excedingly increased, appears
by the Poll of Military age taken by DAVID, and amounting 2 Samuel 24. 9.
to one Million three hundred thousand: yet could this Assembly of the Children
of Israel after their number, in one year, by monthly rotation, take in the
whole body of them. How these, being a Representative of the People, and thus
changeable, could be otherwise collected than by the monthly election of two
thousand in each Tribe, is not imaginable. And that both a Representative of
the People they were, and thus changeable, is by the clear words of Scripture,
and the nature of the business upon which occasion they are described,
undeniably evinced: for DAVID proposing, and the People resolving, they make
SOLOMON King, and ZADOC Priest. This Assembly 1 Chr. 29. 22.
(besides the Military Discipline thereof, in which it differed little from the
Customs of such other Commonwealths as have bin great and martial) had not only
a Civil, but a Military Office or Function, as the standing Guard or Army of
this Country; which, tho small, and lying in the very Teeth of its Enemies,
could thus, by taking in every man but for one month in a whole year, so
equally distribute a Burden, to have bin otherwise intolerable to all, that it
might be born by a few, and scarce selt by any. This Epitome of that Body
(already described under the leading of the several Princes of the Tribes, with
their Staves, and Standards of the Camp) seems to have bin commanded by
Lieutenants of the Princes, or Tribuns of the respective Tribes: over the first
course, for the first month, was JASHOBEAM the Ver. 2, 3.
Son of ZABDIEL (of the Children of PEREZ, or of the Family of the Pharzits, in
the Catalog of JUDAH) and of his course were four and twenty thousand.

IN this case the Princes did not lead in person, but resided in their Tribes
for the Government of the same; whence, upon extraordinary occasions, they sent
extraordinary Recruits: or in case of solemn War, or some weighty affair, as the
trial of a Tribe or the like, led up in person, with their Staves and
Standards; an Ordinance, whether we regard the military or civil use of it,
never enough to be admired.

That this Representative was used in the time of the Judges.

Judge. 2. 6. Judge. 3. 3.


IT is true, while, the whole People being an Army, MOSES could propose to them
in body, or under their Staves and Standards of the Camp; as he needed not, so
he used not any Representative. But when JOSHUA had let the People go, and the
Children of Israel went every man to his Inheritance, to possess the Land; how
was it possible they should possess any thing (while the five Lords of the
Philistines, and all the Canaanits, and the Sidonians, and the Hivits, remained
yet among them unconquered) without the wing of some such Guard or Army as this,
under which to shelter themselves? How was it equal, or possible, that a few of
the People upon the guard of the whole, should be without relief, or sustain
all the burden? Or how could every man be said to go to his Inheritance to
possess it, unless they performed this or the like duty, by turns or courses?
These things considered, there is little doubt but this Congregation was,
according to the Institution of MOSES, put in practice by JOSHUA.

The dissolution of the Mosaical Commonwealth.
THUS stood both the Sanhedrim, and the Congregation, with the inferior Courts,
and all the Superstructures of the Mosaical Commonwealth, during the life of
JOSHUA, and the Elders of the Sanhedrim that outlived him; but without any
sufficient root for the Judge. 2. 7, 11.
possible support of it (the Canaanits not being destroyed) or with such roots
only as were full of worms. Wherefore, tho the People served the Lord all the
days of JOSHUA, and all the days of the Elders that outlived JOSHUA; yet after
the death of these, they did evil in the sight of the Lord. And an Angel (a
Messenger or Prophet) of the Judge. 2. 1, 2.
Lord came up from Gilgal to Bochim, and said, I made you go up out of the Land
of Egypt, and have brought you into the Land which I swore to Deuteronomy. 7. 2. chapter
12. 2.
your Fathers; and I said, I will never break my Covenant with you. And ye
shall make no League with the Inhabitants of this Land, ye shall throw down
their Altars: but ye have not obeyed my Voice: Why have you don Josh. 23. 3.
Exodus 23. 33. chapter 34. 12. Antiq. l. 5. c. 2.
this? Wherefore I also said, I will not drive them out from before you: but
they shall be as Thorns in your sides, and their Gods shall be a snare to you.
Upon the several Contents of which places, says JOSEPHUS, The Israelits (after
the death of JOSHUA, and the Elders that outlived him) neglecting their Arms,
betook themselves to Tillage; and effeminated with Peace, gave their minds
rather to what was easy and pleasing, than what was secure or honorable:
forgetful of the Laws of God, and of their Discipline. Whereupon God being moved
to anger, admonished them by a Prophet, that in sparing the Canaanits, they had
disobeyed him; and that in case they persisted, for his Mercys neglected they
should taste of his Justice. But they, tho terrified with the Oracle, were
altogether averse to the War; both because they were bribed by the Canaanits,
and through luxury were become unapt for labor: the form of their Commonwealth
being now depraved, and the Aristocratical part thereof invalid; while neither
the Senate was elected, nor the solemn Magistrates created as formerly. In which
words, Canaanits, had never any Foundation, came now to fail also in her
Superstructures: for proof whereof, the Testimony of Scripture is no less
pregnant in diverse places. As where JUDAH said to SIMEON his Brother, Com up
with me into my Lot, Judge. 1. 3, 27, 29, etc.
that we may fight against the Canaanits, and I likewise will go with thee into
thy Lot: So SIMEON went with him. In which words you have a League made by two
Tribes, and a War managed by them, while other Tribes, that is, EPHRAIM,
MANASSEH, with the rest, sat still: whereas, if there had bin now any common
ligament, as while the Sanhedrim was in being, such leaguing, and such warring
by particular Tribes at their own discretion, could not have bin. Again, whereas
to judge a Tribe pertain'd to the Sanhedrim; in the Judgment given against
BENJAMIN, by the Congregation of four hundred thousand, Judge. 20.
there is no mention of the Sanhedrim at all.

No King, some Senate; no Senate, some King.

Calav. ap. Live. Acts 13.


NOW Government is of such a nature, that where there is no Israel; yet is not
their reckoning valid, who from hence compute the Monarchy of the Hebrews.
First, because PAUL distinguishes between the Kings and the Judges. Secondly,
because GIDEON, when he was a Judge, in refusing to be King, dos the like. Judge.
7. 23.
Thirdly, because the Judges in Israel (as Dictators in other Commonwealths)
were not of constant Election, but upon Emergencys only. Fourthly, because
complaint being made to the men of JUDAH of Judge. 15. 13.
their Judge SAMSON, they delivered him to the Philistines bound; no less than did
the Romans their Consuls to the Samnits. And lastly, because SAMUEL,
distinguishing to perfection between Dictatorian and Royal Power, or between
the Magistracy of the Judge and of the King, shows plainly (in that he hearkened
to the Voice of the People) that the one being without any balance at all, was
at the discretion of the People; and that the other (not to be founded but upon
Property in himself, to which end he must take the best of their Fields, and
give them to his Servants) could no otherwise subsist than by having the People
at the discretion of the King. This difference (being no small one) excepted,
the office of the King and of the Judge was much the same; each consisting in
judging the People, and going forth with their Armies.

Besognia vezzaro speguere.
BUT whatever be the difference between these Magistracys, the Israelitish
Commonwealth under the Judges was both void of natural Superstructures, and of
the necessary Foundation; so the Israelits, when they were weak, served the
Philistines, as is implied in the speech of the men of JUDAH to their Judge:
Know thou not that the Judge. 15. 11.
Philistines are Rulers over us? -- And it came to pass when Israel was strong,
that they put the Canaanits to tribute, and did not utterly drive them out.
Which, as it was contrary to the Command of God, so was it pointblank against
all Prudence; for thus neither made they to themselves Friends, nor did they
ruin their Enemies: which proceeding, as it fared with this Commonwealth, and was
observed by HERENNIUS in that Livy.
Samnits, is the certain perdition of a People.

The Anarchy of Israel.

Judge. 17. 6. 18. 1. 19. 1. 21. 25.


OF the disorder of this People upon the dissolution of the Mosaical
Commonwealth, it is often said that there was no King in Israel: every man did
that which was right in his own eyes. That is, at the times related to by these
expressions, there was neither Sanhedrim, nor Judge in Israel: so every man, or
at least every Tribe governed it self as it pleased. Which, nevertheless, is
not so generally to be understood, Judge. 20.
but that the Tribes (without either Judge or Sanhedrim) marching up with their
Standards and Staves of the Camp, not only assembled the Congregation in the
usual place at Mizpeh, but there condemned BENJAMIN for the rape of the Levits
Concubine; and, marching thence to put their Decree in execution, reduced that
obstinat Tribe, or rather destroyed it by a Civil War.

The rise of the Hebrew Monarchy.

1 Samuel 4. 3.


WHEN in this, and diverse other ways, they had pampered their Enemies, and
exhausted themselves, they grew (as well they might) out of love with their
Policy; especially when after impious expostulation (Wherefore has the Lord
smitten us this day before the Philistines?) they had, as it were, staked their
God (let us fetch the Ark -- that it 1 Samuel 7. 3.
may save us) and the Ark being taken by the Enemy, they fell to Idolatry. To
this it happened, that tho upon Repentance success was better, God having
miraculously discomfited the Philistines before them; yet SAMUEL their Judge was
old, and had made his two Sons (being takers of Bribes, and perverters of
Justice) Judges over Israel. Whereupon, there was no gainsaying, but a King they
must and would have.

CHAP. IV.
Showing the State of the Israelits under their Kings, to the Captivity.
The Method of this part.
FOR Method in this part, I shall first observe the Balance or Foundation, then
the Superstructures of the Hebrew Monarchys; and last of all, the Story of the
Hebrew Kings.

The Balance of this Monarchy.

1 Samuel 8. 11, 14.


THE Balance necessary to Kingly Government, even where it is regulated or not
absolute, is thus described by SAMUEL. This will be the manner of the King that
shall reign over you: He will take your Fields, your Vinyards, and your
Oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to his Servants. That is,
there being no provision of this kind for a King, and it being of natural
necessity that a King must have such an Aristocracy or Nobility as may be able
to support the Monarchy (which otherwise, to a People having equal shares in
property, is altogether incompatible) it follows, that he must take your
Fields, and give them to his Servants, or Creatures.

THIS notwithstanding could not SAUL do, in whose time the Monarchy attained
not to any balance, but was soon torn from him 2 Samuel 8. 1. 1 Chronicles. 11.
like the lap of a Garment. The Prince who gave that balance to this Monarchy,
which it had, was DAVID: for besides his other Conquests, by which he brought
the Moabits, the Syrians of Damascus, the Ammonits, the Amalekits, the Edomits,
to his Obedience, and extended his Border to the river Euphrates; he smote the
Philistines, and subdued them, and took Gath and her Towns, out of the hand of
the Philistines. Now this Country which DAVID thus took, was part of their
Fields, their Vinyards, and their Oliveyards, even the best of them, and gave
them to his Servants, or to a Nobility, which by this means he introduced.

2 Samuel 23. 1 Chronicles. 11.
THE first Order of the Nobility thus instituted, were, as they are termed by
our Translators, DAVID'S Worthys: to these may be added, the great Officers of
his Realm and Court, with such as sprang out of both. But however, these things
by advantage of foren Conquest might be ordered by DAVID, or continued for the
time of his next Successor; certain it is, that the balance of Monarchy in so
small a Country must be altogether insufficient to it self, or destructive to
the People.

A Parallel of the Monarchichal Balances in Israel and in Lacedemon.

Plutarch in Agis and Cleomenes.


THE Commonwealth of Lacedemon, being founded by LYCURGUS Athens, to be
destroyed by Purchasers, and brought into one hundred hands; whereupon, the
People being rooted out, there remained no more to the two Kings, who were wont
to go out with great Armies, than one hundred Lords: nor any way, if they were
invaded, to defend themselves, but by Mercenarys, or making War upon the Penny;
which, at the farthest it would go (not computing the difference in Discipline)
reached not, in one third, those Forces which the popular Balance could at any
time have afforded without Money. This some of those Kings perceiving, were of
all others the most earnest to return to the popular Balance. What Disorders in
a Country no bigger than was theirs, or this of the Israelits, must, in case
the like course be not taken, of necessity follow, may be at large perused in
the story of Lacedemon; and shall be fully shown, when I com to the story of
the present Kings.

The Superstructures of the Hebrew Monarchy.
FOR the Superstructures of DAVID'S Government, it has bin Israel was; and that
without the Congregation of Israel, and their Result, there was not any Law
made by DAVID. The like in the whole, or for the most part, was observed till
REHOBOAM, who, refusing to redress the Grievances of the People, was deposed by
one part of this Congregation or Parliament, and set up by another; to the
confusion both of Parliament and People. And DAVID (as after him JEHOSHAPHAT)
did restore the Sanhedrim; I will not affirm, by popular Election, after the
ancient manner. He might do it perhaps, as he made JOAB over the Host,
JEHOSHAPHAT Recorder, and SERAIAH Scribe. 1 Samuel 8. 15.
Certain it is, the Jewish Writers hold unanimously, that the seventy Elders
were in DAVID'S time, and by a good token; for they say, to him only of all the
Kings it was lawful, or permitted, to enter into the Sanhedrim: which I the
rather credit, for the words of DAVID, where he says, I will praise the Lord
with my whole Heart in the Council, Psalm. 111. 1.
and in the Congregation of the Upright; which words relate to the Senate, and
the Congregation of Israel. The final cause of the popular Congregation, in a
Commonwealth, is to give such a balance by their I will praise the Lord with my
whole Heart in the Assembly of the Upright, and in the Psalm. 82. 1.
Congregation. There are other Allusions in the English Psalms, of the like
nature, shaded in like manner: As, God is present in the Congregation of God
(that is, in the Representative of the People of Israel) he judges among the
Gods, that is, among the seventy Elders, or in the Sanhedrim. What the Orders
of the Israelitish Monarchy in the time of DAVID were, tho our Translators
throout the Bible have don what they could against Popular Government, is clear
enough in many such places.

The Story of the Hebrew Kings.
TO conclude this Chapter with the story of the Hebrew Kings: Till REHOBOAM, and
the division (through the cause mentioned) of the Congregation in his time, the
Monarchy of the Hebrews was one, but came thenceforth to be torn into two: that
of Judah, consisting of two Tribes, Judah and Benjamin; and that of Israel,
consisting of the other ten. From which time this People, thus divided, had
little or no rest from the flame of that Civil War, which, once kindled between
the two Realms or Factions, could never be extinguished but in the destruction
of both. Nor was Civil War of so new a date among them; SAUL, whose whole Reign
was impotent and perverse, being conquered by DAVID; and DAVID invaded by his
Son ABSALOM so strongly, that he fled before him. SOLOMON, the next Successor,
happened to have a quiet Reign, by settling himself upon his Throne in the
death of ADONIJAH his elder Brother, and in the deposing of the High Priest
ABIATHAR; yet made he the yoke of the People grievous. After him, we have the
War between JEROBOAM and REHOBOAM. Then, the Conspiracy of BAASHA against NADAB
King of Israel, which ends in the destruction of JEROBOAM'S House, and the
Usurpation of his Throne by BAASHA, which BAASHA happens to leave to his Son
ASA. Against ASA rises ZIMRI, Captain of the Chariots; kills him with all his
kindred, reigns seven days; at the end whereof he burns himself for fear of
OMRI, who upon this occasion is made Captain by one part of the People, as is
also TIBNI by another. The next Prize is played between OMRI and TIBNI, and
their Factions; in which TIBNI is slain. Upon this success, OMRI outdoing all
his Predecessors in Tyranny, leaves his Throne and Virtues to his Son AHAB.
Against AHAB drives JEHU furiously, destroys him and his Family, gives the
flesh of his Queen JEZEBEL to the Dogs, and receives a Present from those of
Samaria, even seventy Heads of his Masters Sons in Baskets. To ASA and
JEHOSHAPHAT, Kings of Judah, belongs much Reverence. But upon this Throne sat
ATHALIAH; who, to reign, murdered all her Grandchildren except one, which was
JOASH. JOASH being hid by the High Priest, at whose command ATHALIAH was some
time after slain, ends his Reign in being murdered by his Servants. To him
succedes his Son AMAZIA, slain also by his Servants. About the same time
ZACHARIAH King of Israel was smitten by SHALLUM, who reigned in his stead:
SHALLUM by MANAHIM, who reigned in his stead: PEKAHA the Son of MANAHIM by
PEKAH one of his Captains, who reigned in his stead: PEKAH by HOSHEA. HOSHEA
having reigned nine years, is carried by Assyria with the ten Tribes into
Captivity. Now might it be expected that the Kingdom of Judah should enjoy
Peace: a good King they had, which was HEZEKIAH; but to him succeeded his Son
MANASSEH, a shedder of innocent Blood. To MANASSEH succeeded his Son AMMON,
slain by his Servants. JOSIAH the next, being a good Prince, is succeeded by
JEHOAHAZ, who being carried into Egypt, there dys a Prisoner, while JEHOIAKIM
his Brother becoms PHARAOH'S Tributary. The last of these Princes was ZEDEKIAH,
in whose Reign was Judah led away captive by NEBUCHADNEZZAR. Thus came the
whole Enumeration of those dreadful Curses denounced by Deuteronomy. 28.
MOSES in this case, to be fulfilled in this People; of whom it is also said, I
gave them a King in my anger, and took him away in my wrath. Hos. 13. 11.


TO conclude this Story with the Resemblances or Differences that are between
Monarchical and Popular Government: What Parallel can there be beyond the
Storys whereby each of them are so largely described in Scripture? True it is,
that AHIMELEC usurped the Magistracy of Judge in Israel, or made himself King by
the men of Sichem; that the men of Ephraim fought against JEPTHA, and that
there was a Civil War caused by Benjamin: yet, in a Popular Government, the
very womb (as they will have it) of tumult, tho never so well founded that it
could be steady, or take any sufficient root, can I find no more of this kind.

A Parallel of the Tribunitian Storms with those in the Hebrew Monarchys.
BUT the Tribuns of the People in Rome, or the Romans under York and Lancaster,
besides others, has felt. Or, if at length they came indeed to Blood, this was
not till the Foundations were destroyed, that is, till the Balance of Popular
Government in Rome was totally ruined; which is equally in cases of the like
nature inavoidable, be the Government of what kind soever, as of late years we
have bin sufficiently informed by our own sad Experience.


Showing the State of the Jews in the Captivity, and after their return out of
it; with the Frame of the Jewish Commonwealth.
The State of the Israelits in Captivity.
WE left the Children of Israel upon a sad march, even into Captivity. What
Orders had bin anciently observed by them during the time they were in Egypt
(one of which, as has bin already shown, was their seventy Elders) the same, so
far as would be permitted by the Princes whose Servants they were, continued in
practice with them during the time of their Captivity, out of which the ten
Jer. 25. 12. 2 Chr. 36. 22. Ezra 1.
Tribes never more returned. The two Tribes, when seventy years were
accomplished from the time that they were carried away by NEBUCHADNEZZAR, and
in the first year of CYRUS King of Persia, ^eturn'd the best part of them, not
only with the King's leave and liking, but with restitution of the Plate and
Vessels belonging to the Temple.

The Balance of the Commonwealth restored by Zorobabel.

Ezra 2. Ezra 8.


THE first Colony (as I may say) of the two Tribes, or those that returned
under the Conduct of ZOROBABEL Prince of Judah, amounted to forty two thousand
three hundred and threescore, among which there were about one hundred
Patriarchs or Princes of Familys. To these, in the reign of ARTAXERXES, came
sixteen or twenty Princes more with their Familys; among whom the Prophets
HAGGAI, ZACHARIAS, and MALACHI were eminent. Some of Ezra 2. 59.
them could not show their Fathers House and their Seed, whether they were of
Israel. But these were few; for it is said of them in general, That they went
every one to his own City, or to the Inheritance of his Fathers: In which you
may note the restitution of the Balance of the Mosaical Commonwealth; tho to
what this might com without fixation, the Jubilee being not after the Captivity
in use, I cannot say. However, for the present, plain it is that the ancient
Superstructures did also ensue: as in order to the putting away of the strange
Wives, which the People in Captivity had taken, is apparent.

The Superstructures of this Commonwealth in the time of Ezra and Nehemia.
THEIR whole progress hitherto is according to the Law of MOSES; they return
every man to his Inheritance by direction of his Pedigree, or according to the
House of his Fathers; they are led by Princes of their Familys, and are about
to put away strange Wives: for what reason then should a man believe that what
follows should not be according to the Orders of the same Lawgiver? Now that
which follows, in order to the putting away of these foren Wives, is, Ezra 10.
8, 9.
Proclamation was made throout Judah and Jerusalem to all the Children of the
Captivity, that they should gather themselves to Jerusalem; and that whosoever
would not com within three days, according to the counsil of the Princes and
Elders, all his Substance should be forfeited, and himself separated from the
Congregation of those that had bin carried away. This plainly, by the penalty
annexed, is a Law for Banishment; of which kind there was none made by MOSES;
and a Law made by the Princes and the Elders. What doubt then can remain, but
these Elders were the Sanhedrim, or seventy Elders? But whereas neither the
Sanhedrim, nor any other Senate of it self has bin found to make Laws, what
others can these Princes be that are joined with the Elders, than those spoken
of before; that is, the Princes of Familys, or the chief Israel, or the chief
Fathers, and must be understood 1 Chr. 27. 1.
of them; because there is no such thing throout the Scripture to be found, as a
Law made by the Sanhedrim without the People: and if so, then that the
Sanhedrim with the People had power to make a Law, is by this place of
Scripture undeniably evinced. But besides the chief Fathers, which here are
called Rulers of the Congregation, Ezra 10. 14*
and in the time of DAVID were called Captains of thousands and Captains of
hundreds, mention is also made of the Elders of every City, and the Judges
thereof; in which words you have the Judges in the Gates throout the Tribes of
Israel, as they were instituted by MOSES. All which particulars being rightly
sum'd up, com to this total; That the Commonwealth restored by EZRA, was the
very same that (...) was instituted by MOSES.

A Transition to the Cabalistical or Jewish Commonwealth*
SUCH was the Government restored by ZOROBABEL, EZRA, Jewish or Cabalistical
Commonwealth, fathered by the Presbyterian Jews of latter ages upon MOSES or
EZRA, be the same, shall be shown by reducing the invention of these Men to
three heads: as first, their Cabala; secondly, their Ordination; and last of
all, their great Synagog.

The Cabala*
THE Cabala, called also by the Jews the Oral Law, consists of Jews by the
Emperor ADRIAN; when, to save them from being lost, they were digested into
those Volums called the Talmud: which they hold to be, and indeed are as to
matter of Fact, the authentic Records of their Government. Of the Traditions
thus recorded says one of the Rabbis or Jewish Doctors: Think not Rabbi
Corbulensis.
that the written Law (or the Law of MOSES) is fundamental, but that the Oral
or Traditional Law is fundamental, it being upon this that God entered into a
League with the Israelits, as it is written: After the tenor of Exodus 34. 27.
In codice juris Chagiga.
these words, I have made a Covenant with thee, and with Israel. A man (says
another) who returns from the study of the Talmud to the study of the Bible,
can have no quiet conscience, neither was there any peace to him that Zach. 8.
10.
went out or came in. The like whereof is the Talmudical way of applying
Scripture throout. And it was the common Blessing the Pharisees gave their
Children: My Son, hearken to the words of a Scribe or Doctor, rather than to
the Law of MOSES. To whom says CHRIST hereupon, You have made the Commandment
of God of no Mat. 15. 6.
effect by your tradition.

Ordination by Imposition of Hands.
NOW as true as the Talmud, or as this word of a Scribe, or that Talmudists,
that there is no denying of it; but, that as to the seventy Elders it is quite
contrary to Scripture, has already bin Jews procedes not from the Law of MOSES,
but from the Oral Law; which how bad an Authority soever i^ ^e to us of right,
is of fact, or of what the exercise of Ordina(...)s among the Jews, a good and
sufficient testimony. Now thereby the condition of this Ordination (tho in some
times of the Commonwealth it was less restrained) was such, that no man not
having received the same from the great Sanhedrim, or some one of the inferior
Courts by laying on of hands, by word of mouth, or by writing, could be a
Presbyter, or capable of any Judicature or Magistracy in the Commonwealth, or
to give Counsil in the Law, or any part of the Law, or to be of the Assembly of
the great Synagog.

The great Synagog.
WHAT the Assembly of the Princes and Fathers was in the time of EZRA, has bin
shown, and is left to the judgment of others. But this is that which the
Talmudists and their Ancestors the Cabalistical Jews (among which the Pharisees
were of the highest rank) unanimously affirm to have consisted of the seventy
Elders, and of a Juncta of fifty Presbyters not elected by the People; but by
the laying on of hands by the Sanhedrim, or by some other Judicatory. This, they
say, was the institution of their great Synagog, where I leave them: but that,
according to the sense wherein they cite their Authoritys, the like with them
was a constant practice, appears not only by their own Testimony and Records,
but is plain in Scripture; as where CHRIST speaks of the Jews to his Apostles
in this manner, They Grot. ad Mat. 10. 17.
will scourge you in their Synagogs: that is, the Jews, having as yet no Law
made whereby they can invade the liberty of Conscience, or bring you for the
practice thereof to punishment, will call their great Synagog, wherein the
Priests and the Pharisees, or the Sanhedrim, have at least seven to five the
overbalancing Vote over the rest. Which also are their Creatures, and by these
will easily carry, or make such Laws whereby they may inflict upon you corporal
Punishment: which Interpretation of Christ's words, was fulfilled even to a
tittle, or rather with over measure. For upon this occasion the High Priest,
and as Acts 4. 6.
many as were of the kindred of the High Priest, were gathered together at
Jerusalem. That this same Juncta, to be in this case added to the Sanhedrim,
was to consist but of fifty, those fifty not elected by the People, but chosen
by the Elders of the Sanhedrim; and not out of the body of the People, but out
of such only as had received Ordination by the Sanhedrim, or by some other
Court, or indeed were actually Judges in some other Court, was not enough,
unless they might consist also of Acts 5. 21.
as many as were of the kindred of the High Priest. Which Rights and Privileges
being all observed, The High Priest came, and they that were with him, and
called the Sanhedrim, and all the Presbytery of the Children of Israel: that
is, so many of them, as being assembled in the great Synagog, represented all
the Presbytery of the Children of Israel, or all the Children of Israel
themselves. In this Assembly you have the full description of the great
Synagog: and when (in this Synagog) they had beaten the Apostles PETER and
JOHN, they commanded them that Act. 5. 40.
they should not speak in the Name of JESUS, and let them go. Upon these
procedings there are Considerations of good importance; as first, That the
Cabalistical Doctors themselves did never so much as imagine that MOSES had
indu'd the Sanhedrim alone, or separatly considered from the People, with any
Legislative Power; nevertheless, that the Sanhedrim came into the place, and
succeeded to the whole Power of MOSES, they unanimously held: whence, even upon
their Principles, it must follow that in MOSES, distinctly and separatly taken
from the People, there could be no Power of making any Law. The second thing
remarkable in this proceeding, is, That the most corrupt Commonwealth, and in
her most corrupt Age, had not yet the face, without some blind, of pretending to
Legislative Power in a single Council. The last I shall observe, is, That no
possible security is to be given to liberty of Conscience, but in the security
of Civil Liberty, and in that only not by Laws which are otherwise as perishing
as flowers or fruits, but in the roots or fundamental orders of the Government.
What even in these times must have followed, as to the liberty of Conscience,
had there bin an equal Representative of the People, is apparent, in that the
Captain and the Officers, employed by this Synagog to apprehend Acts 5. 26.
the Apostles, brought them without violence; for they feared the People, lest
they should have bin stoned. It is true, there is nothing with us more
customary, even in the solemnest places, and upon the solemnest occasions, than
to upbraid the People with giddiness from the Hosanna and the Crucifige of the
Jews. What may be charged upon a multitude not under orders, the fouler Crime
it be, is the fairer Argument for such Orders, as where they have bin once
established, the People have not bin guilty of such Crimes; at least, it should
seem, that in this case there is great scarcity of Witnesses against them,
seeing the Death of SOCRATES is more laid to one People, than that of all the
Martyrs to Kings: yet were the false Witnesses by whom SOCRATES suffered (and
by the like whereto a man in the best Government may chance to suffer) no sooner
discovered, than they were destroyed by the People, who also erected a Statue
to SOCRATES. And the People who, at the Arraignment of CHRIST, cried, Crucify
him, Mark 15. 11.
crucify him, were such as the chief Priests moved or promted, and such also as
feared the multitude. Now that the People which could be Mat. 21.
promted by the chief Priests, or the People which could fear the People, could
be no other than this pretended Representative of the People, but indeed a
Juncta of Cousins and Retainers, is that which, for ought I know, may be
possible; and the rather, for what happened before upon the Law called among
the Jews, The Law of the Zealot, which was instituted by MOSES in these words:
If thy Brother, the Deuteronomy. 13. 6.
Son of thy Mother -- entice thee, saying, Let us go and serve other Gods --
thy hand shall be first upon him to put him to death -- and afterward the hand
of all the People. By this Law it is plain that, as to the true intent thereof,
it relates to no other case than that only of Idolatry. The Talmud, might be
performed by any number of the People, being not under ten, either apprehending
the Party in the Fact, or upon the Testimony of such Witnesses as had so
apprehended him: yet will it not be found to have bin executed by the People,
but upon instigation of the Priest, as where (they interpreting the Law as they
list) STEPHEN is stoned. Now if the Priests could have made the People do as
much against CHRIST, what needed they have gone to PILAT for help? and if they
could not, why should we think that the Multitude which cried out, Crucify him,
crucify him, should be any other than the great Synagog?

HOWEVER, that it was an Oligarchy, consisting of a Senate and a Presbytery,
which not only scourged the Apostles, but caused CHRIST to be crucified, is
certain. And so much for the great Synagog.

The Model of the Jewish Commonwealth.
THESE parts being historically laid down and proved, it follows that the
Cabalistical or Jewish Commonwealth was much after this Model.

BE the capacity of bearing Magistracy, or giving Counsil upon the Law, or any
part of the Law of this Commonwealth, in no other than such only as are
Presbyters.

BE Presbyters of two sorts: the one general, the other particular.

BE Presbyters general ordained by the laying on of hands of the Prince of the
Sanhedrim with the rest of the Elders, or Presbytery of the same, and by no
other Court without a License from the Prince of the Sanhedrim; and be those
ordained in this manner eligible by the major vote of the seventy Elders into
the Sanhedrim, or into any other Court by the major vote of the Elders or
Presbytery of that Court.

BE Presbyters particular ordained by any Court of Justice; and be these
capable of giving Counsil in the Law, or in some particular part of the Law,
according to the gift that is in them by the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery.

BE all Presbyters capable of nomination to the great Synagog.

BE the Sanhedrim in Law made the supreme Magistracy or Judicatory; and with a
Juncta of fifty Presbyters of their Nomination, the great Synagog.

BE the great Synagog the Legislative Power in this Commonwealth.

SUCH was the Government, where the word of a Scribe or Doctor was avowedly
held to be of more validity than the Scripture; and where the usual appellation
of the People, by the Doctors and Pharisees, was (populus terrae) the Rascally
Rabble.

Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.
Ordination in the lesser Synagog.
THERE were other Synagogs for other uses, as those wherein the Law was read
every Sabbathday; each of which also had her Ruler and her Presbytery, with
power to ordain others to this Capacity.

CHAP. VI.
Showing how Ordination was brought into the Christian Church, and the diverse
ways of the same that were at diverse times in use with the Apostles.
The form introduced by Christ into his Church.

Matthew. 19. 28.


WE do not find that CHRIST (who gave little countenance to Jewish Traditions)
ordained his Apostles or Disciples by the imposition of hands: his Apostles
were twelve, whom he compares to the twelve Princes of the Tribes of Israel;
and his Disciples were seventy, in which number it is received by Divines, that
he alluded to the seventy Elders or Sanhedrim of Israel. So thus far the
Government of the Church, instituted by CHRIST, was according to the form
instituted by MOSES. But CHRIST in this form was King and Priest, not after the
institution of MOSES, who separated the Levits to the Priesthood; but as before
MOSES, when the Royal and Priestly Vid. Grotium, and videat Grotius, in Epist.
ad Hebraeos.
Function were not separated, and after the order or manner of MELCHISEDEC, who
came not to the Priesthood by proving his Pedigree, as the High Priest in
Israel by Father, or as the King Priest in Athens by Mother, but without Father
and Mother. Or be what has bin said of MELCHISEDEC approved or rejected, such
for the rest, as has bin shown, was the form introduced by CHRIST into his
Church.

The first way of Ordination.

Acts 1.


CHRIST being taken up into Heaven, his Disciples or Followers Jerusalem
increased to about one hundred and twenty names; and the Apostles decreased by
one, or by JUDAS, who was gone to his place. PETER, whether upon the Counsil or
Determination of the eleven Apostles (as is most probable) beforehand or
otherwise, stood up and spoke both to the Apostles and Disciples assembled upon
this occasion, That one out of the present Assembly might be ordained an
Apostle: and they (that is, the Congregation, or why was this proposed to
them?) appointed two by Suffrage; for how otherwise can an Assembly appoint?
These were BARSABAS and MATTHIAS, which Names, being written in scrols, were
cast into one Urn; two Lots, whereof one was a blank, and the other inscribed
with the word Apostle, being at the same time cast into another Urn. Which don,
they prayed that God would show which of the Competitors by them so made, he
had chosen: when they had thus prayed, they gave forth their Lots, that is, a
scrol out of the one Urn, and then a name to that scrol out of the other Urn;
and the Lot fell upon MATTHIAS, or MATTHIAS was taken; whereupon MATTHIAS was
numbered, or rather decreed with the eleven Apostles. For (...).
Psephisma, being a word which properly derives from such Stones or Pebbles as
popular Assemblys of old were wont to ballot with or give suffrage by, not only
signifys a Decree, but especially such a Decree as is made by a popular
Assembly. Now if this was Ordination in the Christian Church, and of
Apostolical Right, then may there be a way of Ordination in the Christian
Church, and of Apostolical Right, exactly conformable to the Ballot, or way
used by MOSES in the institution of the seventy Elders or Sanhedrim of Israel.

Jews, a People tho converted, yet so tenacious of their The second way of
Ordination.

Acts 4. 4.


Laws and Customs, that even Circumcision (hitherto not forbidden by the
Apostles) was continued among them; the twelve Apostles called the multitude of
Disciples to them. So MOSES, when he had any thing Acts 6.
to propose, assembled the People of Israel. And when the twelve had thus called
the Disciples, they said, Look ye out among you seven men of honest report,
full of the Holy Ghost and Wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business. So
MOSES said to the Congregation of Israel, Take ye wise men, and understanding,
and known among your Tribes, and I will make them Rulers over you. And the
saying of the Apostles pleased the whole multitude. So the People of Israel
were wont to answer to MOSES, The thing which thou say is good for us to do.
This saying of the Apostles being thought good by the whole multitude, the
whole multitude elected seven men whom they set before the Apostles: and when
they had prayed, they laid their hands on them. To say in this place (as they
do) that the Act of the People was but a Presentation, and that the Apostles
had power to admit or refuse the Persons so presented, is as if one should say,
That the act of electing Parliament men by the People of England, was but a
Presentation, and that the King had power to admit or refuse the Persons so
presented. And seeing the Deacons henceforth had charge of the Word, to say,
that by this choice the Deacons received not the charge of the Word, but the
care to serve Tables, is as if one should say, That Parliament men by their
Election received only the care to levy Money or Provision for the King's Table;
but if upon such Election they debated also concerning Laws, that Power they
received from the King only.

BUT if this was a way of Ordination in the Christian Church, and of
Apostolical Right, then there may be a way of Ordination in the Christian
Church, and of Apostolical Right, consisting in part of the Orders of the
Israelitish Commonwealth, and in part of the Orders of the Jewish Commonwealth.

The third way of Ordination.

1 Timothy 4. 14.


LASTLY, PAUL writing to TIMOTHY concerning his Ordination, has in one place
this expression, Neglect not the Gift that is in thee, which was given thee by
prophesy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. So the Presbytery
of a Jewish Synagog laid their hands on 2 Timothy 1. 6.
the Party ordained. And in another place he has this expression: Stir up the
Gift of God which is in thee by the laying on of my hands. So the Ruler of a
Jewish Synagog did lay his hands also on the Party ordained. Moreover, the
Apostle in these words, The Gift that is in thee by laying on of hands, tho in
relation to Gifts beyond comparison more excellent, uses the Phrase known upon
the like occasion to have bin common with the Jews. Wherefore if this were a way
of Ordination in the Christian Church, and of Apostolical Right, then may there
be a way of Ordination in the Christian Church exactly conformable to the
Jewish Commonwealth, and yet be of Apostolical Right. Nor is it so strange that
the Apostles in matters of this nature should comply with the Jews, of which so
many were converted, seeing it is certain that not only the Apostles, but all
such as in these times were converted, did observe the Jewish Sabbath; nay, and
that PAUL himself took TIMOTHY and circumcised him, because of the Jews; that
is, to comply with them, or to give them no offense. Nor do our Divines any
where pretend imposition of hands to be derived from CHRIST, but unanimously
confess, that it was taken up by the Apostles from the Jewish Sanhedrim.

The Providence of God in the different way of Apostolical Ordination.
NOW in these several ways of Ordination, there is a most remarkable Conge d'
Elire.

THE ways of Ordination or of Church Government lying thus in Scripture, the
not receiving of the Christian Religion is not that whereof any State or Prince
through the whole world can be any ways excusable.

The Conclusion:
Showing, that neither GOD, nor CHRIST, or the APOSTLES, ever instituted any
Government Ecclesiastical or Civil upon any other Principles than those only of
Human Prudence.
Uses of this Book.
TO sum up this second Book in the Uses that may be made of it: Greec and Roman
Storys, that he who has not some good Idea or Notion of the Government to which
they relate, cannot rightly understand them. If the like holds as to the
Scripture Story, some light may be contributed to it by this Book. Again, if some
gifted Men happening to read it, should chance to be of the same judgment, it
is an Argument for acquired Learning, in that for the means of acquired
Learning, and in the means of acquired Learning for Universitys. For how little
soever this performance be, had it not bin the fashion with the English Gentry,
in the breeding of their Sons, to give them a smack of the University, I should
not have don so much.

The present use of this Book.
BUT letting these pass. If there were Commonwealths, or Governments Israel, as
namely, Gibeon: If the inferior Orders and Courts in Israel, as those
instituted by MOSES after the advice of JETHRO a Heathen, were transcribed out
of another Government tho Heathen, as namely, that of Midian: If the order of
the Church introduced by CHRIST in his twelve Apostles and his seventy
Disciples, were after the pattern of Israel, namely, in the twelve Princes of
the Tribes, and the seventy Elders: If there were three distinct ways of
Ordination introduced by the Apostles; one exactly according to the Ballot of
Israel, as namely, in the Ordination of MATTHIAS; another exactly according to
the way of the Jewish Sanhedrim or Synagog, as namely, that of TIMOTHY; and a
third, composed of these two, as namely, that of the Deacons: Then is it a
clear and undeniable result of the whole, That neither GOD, nor CHRIST, or the
APOSTLES, ever instituted any Government Ecclesiastical or Civil upon any other
Principles than those only of Human Prudence.

The Consequence of this Use.
AN Observation of such consequence, as, where it has bin rightly considered,
there the truth of Religion and of Government once planted, have taken root and
flourished; and where it has not bin rightly heeded, there has Religion or the
pretense of it bin the hook and the line, and the State the prey of Impostors
and false Prophets, as was shown in the hypocritical Pharisees, for ever
stigmatized by the word of Truth.

AND for Might, let her be never so much exalted in her self, let her Sword be
never so dreadfully brandished; the Government not founded upon Reason, a
Creature of God, and the Creature of God whose undoubted right in this part is
by himself undeniably avowed and asserted, is a Weapon framed against God; and
no Weapon framed against God shall prosper.

A transition to the next Book.
THE Principles of Human Prudence, and in them the Art of Lawgiving, being shown
in the first Book, and vindicated throout the whole course of Scripture by this
second, I com in the third to show a Model of Government, framed according to
the Art thus shown, and the Principles thus vindicated.

THE THIRD BOOK: CONTAINING A MODEL OF Popular Government, Practically proposed
according to Reason, confirmed by the Scripture, and agreeable to the present
Balance or State of Property in England.

The PREFACE, Containing a Model of Popular Government, proposed Notionally.
THERE is between the Discourses of such as are commonly called Natural
Philosophers, and those of Anatomists, a large difference; the former are
facil, the latter difficult. Philosophers, discoursing of Elements for example,
that the Body of Man consists of Fire, Air, Earth and Water, are easily both
understood and credited, seeing by common Experience we find the Body of Man
returns to the Earth from whence it was taken. A like Entertainment may befall
Elements of Government, as in the first of these Books they are stated. But the
fearful and wonderful making, the admirable structure and great variety of the
parts of man's Body, in which the Discourses of Anatomists are altogether
conversant, are understood by so few, that I may say they are not understood by
any. Certain it is, that the delivery of a Model of Government (which either
must be of no effect, or embrace all those Muscles, Nerves, Arterys and Bones,
which are necessary to any Function of a well ordered Commonwealth) is no less
than political Anatomy. If you com short of this, your Discourse is altogether
ineffectual; if you com home, you are not understood: you may, perhaps, be
called a learned Author; but you are obscure, and your Doctrine is
impracticable. Had I only suffered in this, and not the People, I should long
since have left them to their humor; but seeing it is they that suffer by it,
and not my self, I will be yet Italian Stage, while the Spectators wanted Hoops
for their sides. A Country fellow came with an Apple in his hand; to which, in
a strange variety of faces, his Teeth were undoubtedly threatened, when entered
a young Anatomist brimful of his last Lesson, who, stopping in good time the
hand of this same Country fellow, would by no means suffer him to go on with so
great an Enterprise, till he had first named and described to him all the
Bones, Nerves, and Muscles which are naturally necessary to that motion: at
which, the good man being with admiration plainly chopfallen, coms me in a
third, who, snatching away the Apple, devoured it in the presence of them both.
If the People, in this case whereof I am speaking, were naturally so well
furnished, I had here learned enough to have kept silence: but their eating, in
the political way, of absolute necessity requires the aid of some political
Anatomist; without which, they may have Appe^i^s, but will be chopfallen.
Examples whereof they have had but too many; one I think may be insisted upon
without envy.

THIS is that which was called The Agreement of the People, consisting in sum
of these Propositions:

The Anarchy of the Levellers
THAT there be a Representative of the Nation consisting of four hundred
Persons, or not above.

WHICH Proposition puts the Bar on the quite contrary side; this being the
first example of a Commonwealth, wherein it was conceived, that five hundred
thousand men, or more, might be represented by four hundred. The Representation
of the People in one man, causes Monarchy; and in a few, causes Oligarchy: the
Many cannot be otherwise represented in a State of Liberty, than by so many,
and so qualified, as may within the compass of that number and nature embrace
the interest of the whole People. Government should be established upon a Rock,
not set upon a Precipice: a Representative consisting but of four hundred, tho
in the nature thereof it be popular, is not in it self a Weapon that is fixed,
but has something of the broken Bow, as still apt to start aside to Monarchy.
But the paucity of the number is tempered with the shortness of the term, it
being farther provided,

THAT this Representative be biennial, and sit not above eight Months. But
seeing a supreme Council in a Commonwealth is neither assembled nor dissolved,
but by stated Orders directing upwards an irresistible strength from the root,
and as one tooth or one nail is driven out by another; how is it provided that
this Biennial Council shall not be a perpetual Council? Whereas nothing is more
dangerous in a Commonwealth than entire Removes of Councils, how is it provided
that these shall be men sufficiently experienced for the management of Affairs?
And last of all, whereas dissolution to Soverain Power is death, to whom are
these after their eight months to bequeath the Commonwealth? In this case it is
provided,

THAT there be a Council of State elected by each new Representative, within
twenty days after their first meeting, to continue till ten days after the
meeting of the next Representative. In which the faults observed in the former
Order, are so much worse, as this Council consists of fewer. Thus far this
Commonwealth is Oligarchy: but it is provided,

THAT these Representatives have Soverain Power, save that in some things the
People may resist them by Arms. Which first is a flat contradiction, and next
is downright Anarchy. Where the Soverain Power is not as entire and absolute as
in Monarchy it self, there can be no Government at all. It is not the
limitation of Soverain Power that is the cause of a Commonwealth, but such a
libration or poize of Orders, that there can be in the same no number of men
having the interest, that can have the power; nor any number of men having the
power, that can have the interest, to invade or disturb the Government. As the
Orders of Commonwealths are more approaching to, or remote from this Maxim (of
which this of the Levellers has nothing) so are they more quiet or turbulent.
In the Religious part only, proposing a National Religion and Liberty of
Conscience, tho without troubling themselves much with the means, they are
right in the end.

AND for the Military part, they provide,

THAT no man (even in case of Invasion) be compellable to go out of the Country
where he lives, if he procures another to serve in his room. Which plainly
intails upon this Commonwealth a fit Guard for such a Liberty, even a Mercenary
Army; for what one dos of this kind, may and will (where there is no bar) be
don by all: so every Citizen by money procuring his man, procures his Master.
Now if this be work of that kind which the People in like cases (as those also
of Rome, when they instituted their Tribuns) do usually make, then have I good
reason not only to think, but to speak it audibly, That to sooth up the People
with an opinion of their own sufficiency in these things, is not to befriend
them, but to feed up all hopes of Liberty to the slaughter. Yet the Leveller, a
late A later Pamphlet called XXV Querys, using the Balance of Property, which
is fair enough, refers it to Sir Thomas Smith's 15th chap. (de Repub. populi
ingenio accommodanda) where the Author speaks not one word of Property; which
is very foul.
Pamphlet, having gathered out of Oceana the Principles by him otherwise well
insinuated, attributes it to the Agitators, or that Assembly which framed this
wooden Agreement of the People: That then some of that Council asserted these
Principles, and the reason of them.

BUT Railery apart, we are not to think it has bin for nothing that the wisest
Nations have in the formation of Government as much relied upon the invention
of some one man, as upon themselves: for whereas it cannot be too often
inculcated, that Reason consists of two parts, the one Invention, the other
Judgment; a People or an Assembly are not more eminent in point of Judgment,
than they are void of Invention. Nor is there in this any thing at all against
the sufficiency of a People in the management of a proper Form, being once
introduced, tho they should never com to a perfect understanding of it. For
were the natural Bodies of the People such as they might commonly understand,
they would be (as I may say) wooden Bodies, or such as they could not use;
whereas their Bodies being now such as they understand not, are yet such as in
the use and preservation whereof they are perfect.

THERE are in Models of Government things of so easy practice, and yet of such
difficult understanding, that we must not think them even in Venice, who use
their Commonwealth with the greatest prudence and facility, to be all, or any
considerable number of them, such as perfectly understand the true Reason or
Anatomy of that Government: nor is this a presumtuous Assertion, since none of
those Venetians, who have hitherto written of their own form, have brought the
truth of it to any perfect light. The like perhaps (and yet with due
acknowlegement to LIVY) might be said of the Romans. The Lacedaemonians had not
the right understanding of their Model, till about the time of ARISTOTLE it was
first written DICEARCHUS one of his Scholars. How egregiously our Ancestors
(till those foundations were broken which at length have brought us round) did
administer the English Government, is sufficiently known. Yet by one of the
wisest of our Writers (even my Lord VERULAM) is HENRY the Seventh paralleled
with the Legislators of ancient and heroic times, for the institution of those
very Laws which have now brought the Monarchy to utter ruin. The Commonwealths
upon which MACCHIAVEL in his Discourses is incomparable, are not by him, any
one of them, sufficiently explained or understood. Much less is it to be
expected from a People, that they should overcom the like difficultys, by
reason whereof the wisest Nations (finding themselves under the necessity of a
change, or of a new Government) induced by such offers as promised fair, or
against which they could find no exceptions, have usually acted as men do by
new Clothes; that is, put them on, that, if they be not exactly fit at first,
they may either fit themselves to the body in wearing, or thereby more plainly
show wherein they can be mended even by such, as would otherwise prove but bad
workmen. Nor has any such offer bin thought to have more Presumtion, much less
Treason in it, than if one conscious of his skill in Architecture, should offer
himself to the Prince or State to build a more convenient Parliament house.
England is now in such a condition, that he who may be truly said to give her
Law, shall never govern her; and he who will govern her, shall never give her
Law. Yet some will have it, that to assert Popular Power, is to sow the seed of
Civil War, and object against a Commonwealth, as not to be introduced but by
Arms; which by the undeniable testimony of later Experience, is of all other
Objections the most extravagant: for if the good old Cause, against the desire
even of the Army, and of all men well affected to their Country, could be trod
under foot without blood; what more certain demonstration can there be, that
(let the deliberations upon, or changes of Government, be of what kind soever
which shall please a Parliament) there is no appearance that they can occasion
any Civil War? Streams that are stopped may urge their Banks; but the course of
England, into a Commonwealth, is both certain and natural. The ways of Nature
require Peace: The ways of Peace require Obedience to the Laws: Laws in England
cannot be made but by Parlaments: Parlaments in England are com to be mere
popular Assemblys: The Laws made by popular Assemblys (tho for a time they may
be awed, or deceived, in the end) must be popular Laws: and the sum of popular
Laws must amount to a Commonwealth. The whole doubt or hazard of this
Consequence remains upon one question, Whether a single Council consisting but
of four hundred, indu'd both with Debate and Result; the Keys of whose Doors
are in the hands of ambitious men; in the crowd and confusion of whose Election
the People are as careless as tumultuous, and easy, through the want of good
Orders, to be deluded; while the Clergy (declared and inveterat Enemies of
popular Power) are laying about, and sweating in the throng, as if it were in
the Vinyard; upon whose Benches Lawyers (being feathered and armed, like sharp
and sudden Arrows, with a private interest pointblank against the Public) may
and frequently do swarm, can indeed be called a popular Council. This, I
confess, may set the whole state of Liberty upon the cast of a Die; yet
questionless it is more than odds on the behalf of a Commonwealth, when a
Government labors in frequent or long struggles, not through any certain biass of
Genius or Nature that can be in such a Council, but through the impotence of such
Conclusions as may go awry, and the external force or state of Property now
fully introduced: whence such a Council may wander, but never find any rest or
settlement, except only in that natural and proper Form of Government which is
to be erected upon a mere Popular Foundation. All other ways of proceeding must
be void, as inevitably guilty of contradiction in the Superstructures to the
Foundation; which have amounted, and may amount to the discouragement of honest
men, but with no other success than to imbroil or retard Business: England
being not capable of any other permanent Form than that only of a Commonwealth;
tho her supreme Council be so constituted, that it may be Monarchically
inclined. This contradiction in the Frame is the frequent occasion of
contradictory Expostulations and Questions. How, say they, should we have a
Commonwealth? Which way is it possible that it should com in? And how, say I,
can we fail of a Commonwealth? What possibility is there we should miss of it?

IF a man replys, he answers thus: No Army ever set up a Commonwealth. To the
contrary, I instance the Army of Israel under MOSES; that of Athens about the
time of ALCIBIADES; that of Rome upon the expulsion of the TARQUINS; those of
Switzerland and Holland. But, say they, other Armies have not set up
Commonwealths. True indeed, diverse other Armies have not set up Commonwealths;
yet is not that any Argument why our Armies should not. For in all Armies that
have not set up Commonwealths, either the Officers have had no Fortunes or
Estates at all, but immediately dependent upon the mere Will of the Prince, as
the Turkish Armies, and all those of the Eastern Countries; or the Officers have
bin a Nobility commanding their own Tenants. Certain it is, That either of
these Armies can set up nothing but Monarchy. But our Officers hold not Estates
of Noblemen able upon their own Lands to levy Regiments, in which case they
would take home their People to plow, or make Hay; nor are they yet so put to
it for their Livelihood, as to depend wholly upon a Prince, in which case they
would fall on robbing the People: but have good honest Popular Estates to them
and their Heirs for never. Now an Army, where the Estates of the Officers were
of this kind, in no reason can, in no experience ever did set up Monarchy. Ay
but, say they, for all that, their Pay to them is more considerable than their
Estates. But so much more must they be for a Commonwealth, because the
Parliament must pay: and they have found by experience, that the Pay of a
Parliament is far better than that of a Prince. But the four hundred being
Monarchically inclined, or running upon the Interest of those irreconcilable
Enemies of Popular Power, Divines and Lawyers, will rather pay an Army for
commanding, or for supporting of a Prince, than for obeying. Which may be true,
as was acknowleg'd before, in the way; but in the end, or at the long run, for
the reasons mentioned, must be of no effect.

THESE Arguments are from the Cause; now for an Argument to Sense, and from the
Effect: If our Armies would raise Money of themselves, or, which is all one,
would make a King, why have they not made a King in so many Years? Why did they
not make one yesterday? Why do they not to day? Nay, why have they ever bin,
why do they still continue to be of all others in this point the most averse
and refractory?

BUT if the case be so with us, that Nature runs wholly to a Commonwealth, and
we have no such Force as can withstand Nature, why may we not as well have
golden Dreams of what this Commonwealth may be, as of the Indys, of Flanders,
or of the Sound? The Frame of a Commonwealth may be dreamt on, or proposed two
ways; the one in Theory, or notionally, in which it is of easy understanding,
but of difficult practice: The other practicably, in which it is of difficult
understanding, but of facil use.

The Model proposed notionally.
1. THAT the native Territory of the Commonwealth be divided, so equally as
with any convenience it may, into fifty Tribes or Precincts.

2. THAT the People in each Tribe be distinguished, first by their Age, and
next by the valuation of their Estates: All such as are above eighteen, and
under thirty, being accounted Youth; and all such as are thirty or upwards,
being accounted Elders. All such as have under one hundred pounds a year in
Lands, Goods, or Money, being accounted of the Foot; and all such as have so
much or upwards, being accounted of the Horse.

3. THAT each Tribe elect annually out of the Horse of their number two Elders
to be Knights; three Elders out of the same, and four Elders more out of the
Foot of their number, to be Deputys or Burgesses. That the term of each Knight
and Burgess, or Deputy so elected, be triennial; and that whoever has served
his triennial Term in any one of these Capacitys, may not be reelected into any
one of the same, till a triennial Vacation be expired.

4. THAT in the first year of the Commonwealth there be a Senate so constituted,
of three hundred Knights, that the term of one hundred may expire annually; and
that the hundred Knights, annually elected by two in each Tribe, take in the
Senate the places of them whose Term coms to be thus annually expired.

5. THAT in the first year of the Commonwealth there be a Representative of the
People, consisting of one thousand and fifty Deputys; four hundred and fifty of
them being Horse, and the rest Foot. That this Representative be so
constituted, that the term of two hundred of the Foot, and of one hundred and
fifty of the Horse, expire annually; and that the two hundred Foot, and one
hundred and fifty Horse elected annually, by four of the Foot, and three of the
Horse in each Tribe, take the places in this Representative of them whose terms
coms thus annually to be expired.

6. THAT the Senate have the whole Authority of Debate; that the Representative
have the whole power of Result, in such a manner, that whatever (having bin
debated by the Senate) shall by their Authority be promulgated, that is, printed
and published, for the space of six weeks; and afterward (being proposed by
them to the Representative) shall be resolved by the People of the same in the
Affirmative, be the Law of the Land.

THVS much may suffice to give implicitly a notional account of the whole
frame. But a Model of Government is nothing as to use, unless it be also
delivered practicably; and the giving of a Model practicably, is so much the
more difficult, that men, not versed in this^way, say of it (as they would of
the Anatomy of their own Bodies) that it is impracticable. Here lys the whole
difficulty: such things as, trying them never so often, they cannot make hang
together, they will yet have to be practicable; and if you would bring them
from this kind of shifts, or of tying and untying all sorts of knots, to the
natural nerves and ligaments of Government, then with them it is impracticable.
But to render that which is practicable, facil; or to do my last endeavor of
this kind, of which if I miss this once more, I must hereafter despair: I shall
do two things; first, omit the Ballot, and then make some alteration in my
former method.

THEY who have interwoven the Ballot with the description of a

CHAP. I.
Containing the Civil part of the Model, proposed practicably.
SEEING it has bin sufficiently proved, that Empire follows the nature of
Property; that the particular kind of Empire or Government depends upon the
special distribution (except in small Countries) of Land; and that where the
Balance in Property has not bin six'd, the nature of the Government (be it what
you will) has bin floting: it is very reasonable that, in the proposition of a
Commonwealth, we begin with a fixation of the Balance in Property; and this
being not otherwise to be don than by some such Laws as have bin commonly called
Agrarian, it is proposed,

THAT every one holding above two thousand pounds a year in Land, Agrarian Laws.
Land equally divided among his Sons; or else so near equally, that there remain
to the eldest of them not above two thousand pounds a year in Land so lying.
That this Proposition be so understood, as not to concern any Parent having no
more than one Son, but the next Heir only that shall have more Sons; in such
sort, as nothing be hereby taken from any man, or from his Posterity, but that
fatherly Affection be at all points extended as formerly, except only that it
be with more Piety, and less Partiality. And that the same Proposition, in such
Familys where there are no Sons, concern the Daughter or Daughters in the like
manner.

THAT no Daughter, being neither Heir nor Coheir, have above fifteen hundred
pounds in Portion, or for her preferment in Marriage. That any Daughter, being
an Orphan, and having seven hundred pounds or upwards in Portion, may charge
the State with it. That the State being so charged, be bound to manage the
Portion of such an Orphan for the best, either by due payment of the Interest
of the same; or, if it be desired, by way of Annuity for Life, at the rate of
one hundred pounds a year, for every seven hundred pounds so received. The
manner whereof being elsewhere shown, is not needful to be repeated.

THAT these Propositions prevent the growing of a Monarchical Nobility, is
their peculiar end: Wherefore that this should hold the weight of an Objection
in a popular Balance, already introduced through the failure of a Monarchical
Nobility, or through a level made not by the People but by the Kings or
themselves, were preposterous. Yet upon this score (for I see no other) is
there such Animosity against the like Laws, that wise men have judged it an
Indiscretion, in such as are affected to Popular Government, not to temporize
in this point; at Agrarian, not brought in with the introduction of a
Commonwealth, was never yet known to be brought in after the introduction of a
Commonwealth. And thirdly, Because the change of Balances in States, through the
want of fixation, has bin so sudden, that between the Reign of HENRY the
Seventh, and that of Queen ELIZABETH, being under fifty years, the English
Balance of Monarchical became Popular; and that of Rome, between the Lives of
SCIPIO and of TIBERIUS GRACCHUS, being also under fifty years, of Popular
became Monarchical. Nevertheless, if there remains any cure of Animosity that
may be safe, it must be prudent: And such a cure (if we be not so abandoned to
mere fancy, as to sacrifice all Prudence to it) there may be in the addition of
this Clause;

Additional Clause to the Agrarian.
THAT no Agrarian Law hereby given to this Commonwealth, or to be hereafter
given to the same, or to any Province of the same, be understood to be
otherwise binding, than to the Generation to com, or to the Children to be born
seven years after the enacting of the Law.

UPON the addition of this Clause, it may be safely said of these Agrarian
Laws, that they concern not any man living: and for Posterity, it is well
known, that to enact a Law, is no more in their regard, than to commend a thing
to their choice; seeing they, if so pleased, can no more be divested of the
Power to repeal any Law enacted by their Ancestors, than we are of repealing
such Laws as have bin enacted by ours.

TO this it may be objected, That Agrarian Laws, being once enacted, must have
brought Estates to the standard of the same, before Posterity can com into a
capacity to judge of them. But this is the only means whereby Posterity can com
to a true capacity to judge of them: First, because they will have had
experience of the Laws whereof they are to judge: And secondly, because they will
be void of all such imaginary Interests as might corrupt their Judgment, and do
now certainly corrupt ours.

The first Parallel.
THE Balance of the Commonwealth of Israel, through the distribution of Lands at
the introduction of the same, became Popular; and Deuteronomy. 25. 28.
becoming Popular, was fixed by the Law for the Jubilee. That which was sold,
shall remain in the hands of them that bought it till the year of Jubilee; and
in the Jubilee it shall go out, and he shall return to his possession. The ways
in Israel, and in the Commonwealth proposed, where the Popular Balance is not
made but found, are diverse; but the Agrarian Laws in each, as to the end, which
is the preservation of the Balance, are of a like effect.

TO rise thus from true Foundations to proper Superstructures, the first step
from the Balance thus fixed into the Orders of a Commonwealth, is not otherwise
to be taken than by certain Distributions or Divisions of the People, whereof
some are to be personal, and some local.

Freemen and Servants.
THE first personal division of a People, is into Freemen and Servants. Freemen
are such as have wherwithal to live of themselves; and Servants, such as have
not. This division therefore is not constitutive, but naturally inherent in the
Balance; nor, seeing all Government is in the direction of the Balance, is it
possible for the Superstructures of any to make more Freemen than are such by
the nature

The second Parallel.

Levit. 25. 29.


ALL that could in this matter be don, even by MOSES himself, is contained in
this Proviso: If thy Brother that dwells by thee be grown poor, and be sold to
thee, thou shall not compel him to serve as a bondservant: but as a hired
servant, and a sojourner he shall be with thee, and shall serve thee to the
year of Jubilee. And then shall he depart from thee, both he and his Children
with him, and shall return to his own Family, and to the Possession of his
Fathers shall he return.

THE nature of Riches considered, this division into Freemen and Servants is
not properly constitutive, but as it were natural. To com to such Divisions as
are both personal and constitutive, it is proposed,

Horse and Foot.
THAT all Citizens, that is, Freemen, or such as are not Servants,

Elders and Youth.
THAT all Elders or Freemen, being thirty years of Age or upwards, be

NOW, besides personal divisions, it is necessary in order to the framing of a
Commonwealth, that there be some such as are local. For these therefore it is
proposed,

Precinct of the Parish.
THAT the whole native, or proper Territory of the Commonwealth,

Parochial Congregations and Deputys.
THAT the Elders, resident in each Parish, annually assemble in the December.
That they then and there elect out of their own number every fifth man, or one
man out of every five, to be for the term of the year ensuing, a Deputy of that
Parish; and that the first and second so elected be Overseers, or Presidents,
for regulating of all Parochial Congregations, whether of the Elders or of the
Youth, during the term for which they were elected.

Precinct of the Hundred.
THAT so many Parishes lying nearest together, whose Deputys shall

Assembly or Muster of the Hundred.
THAT the Parochial Deputys elected throout the Hundred, assemble January, at
the Capital of their Hundred. That they then and there elect out of the Horse
of their number one Justice of the Peace, one Juryman, one Captain, one Insign:
and out of the Foot of their number, one other Juryman, one High Constable, etc.

THO our Justices of the Peace have not bin annual; yet that they may so be is
apparent, because the high Sherifs, whose Office is of greater difficulty, have
always bin annual: seeing therefore they may be annual, that so they ought in
this Administration to be, will appear, where they com to be constitutive of
such Courts as, should they consist of a standing Magistracy, would be against
the nature of a Commonwealth. But the Precincts hitherto being thus stated, it
is proposed,

Precinct of the Tribe.
manner cast into Tribes, some Town, Village, or place be appointed to every
Tribe for the Capital of the same. And that these three Precincts, that is, the
Parish, the Hundred, and the Tribe (whether the Deputys, thenceforth annually
chosen in the Parishes or Hundreds, com to increase or diminish) remain firm
and inalterable for ever, save only by Act of Parliament.

THESE Divisions, or the like, both personal and local, are that in a well
ordered Commonwealth, which Stairs are in a good house; not that Stairs in
themselves are desirable, but that without them there is no getting into the
Chambers. The whole matter of Cost and Pains, necessary to the introduction of
a like Model, lys only in the first Architecture, or building of these Stairs;
that is, in stating of these three Precincts: which don, they lead you
naturally and necessarily into all the Rooms of this Fabric. For the just
number of Tribes into which a Territory thus cast may fall; it is not very easy
to be guest: yet, because for the carrying on of discourse it is requisite to
pitch upon some certainty, I shall presume that the number of the Tribes, thus
stated, amounts to fifty; and that the number of the Parochial Deputys annually
elected in each Tribe, amounts to two thousand. Be the Deputys more or fewer by
the alterations which may happen in progress of time, it disorders nothing. Now
to ascend by these Stairs into the upper Rooms of this Building, it is proposed,

Assembly or Muster of the Tribe.
THAT the Deputys elected in the several Parishes, together with their
Magistrates and other Officers both Civil and Military, elected in their several
Hundreds, assemble or muster annually; for example, upon Monday next ensuing
the last of February at the Capital of their Tribe.

HOW the Troops and Companys of the Deputys, with their Military Officers or
Commanders thus assembled, may, without expense of time, be straight
distributed into one uniform and orderly Body, has bin elsewhere In Oceana.
shown, and is not needful to be repeated. For their work, which at this meeting
will require two days, it is proposed,

Magistrates of the Tribe.
THAT the whole Body thus assembled, upon the first day of the Assembly, elect
out of the Horse of their number one High Sherif, one Lieutenant of the Tribe,
one Custos Rotulorum, one Conductor, and two Censors. That the High Sherif be
Commander in chief, the Lieutenant Commander in the second place, and the
Conductor in the third, of this Band or Squadron. That the Custos Rotulorum be
Mustermaster, and keep the Rolls. That the Censors be Governors of the Ballot.
And that the term of these Magistracys be annual.

THESE being thus elected, it is proposed,

The Prerogative Troop.
Lieutenant, Custos Rotulorum, the Censors, and the Conductor, together with the
Magistrates and Officers of the Hundreds, that is to say, the twenty Justices of
the Peace, the forty Jurymen, the twenty High Constables, be one Troop, or one
Troop and one Company apart, called the Prerogative Troop or Company. That this
Troop bring in and assist the Justices of Assize, hold the Quarter Sessions in
their several Capacitys, and perform their other Functions as formerly.

BY this means the Commonwealth at its introduction may embrace the Law as it
stands, that is, unreform'd; which is the greatest advantage of such
Reformations: for to reform Laws before the introduction of the Government,
which is to show to what the Laws in Reformation

The Phylarch
THAT the Magistrates of the Tribe, that is to say, the High Sherif, Custos
Rotulorum, the Censors, and the Conductor, together with the twenty Justices
elected at the Hundreds, be a Court for the Government of the Tribe called the
Phylarch; and that this Court proceed in all matters of Government, as shall
from time to time be directed by Act of Parliament.

BY these Courts the Commonwealth will be furnished with true Channels, whereby
at leisure to turn the Law into that which is sufficiently known to have bin
its primitive Course, and to a perfect Reformation by degrees, without
violence. For as the corruption of our Law procedes from an Art enabled to
improve its private Interest; or from the Law upon the Bench, and the Jury at
the Bar: So the Reformation of our Law must com from disabling it as an Art to
improve its private Interest; or to a Jury upon the Bench, and the Law at the
Bar, as in Venice.

The third Parallel.

Deuteronomy. 16. 18.


JVDGES and Officers shall thou make thee in all thy Gates which the Lord thy
God gives thee throout thy Tribes, and they shall judge the People with just
Judgment. These Courts, whose Sessionhouse was in the Gates of every City, were
shown each of them to have consisted of Book 2.
twenty three Elders, which were as a Jury upon the Bench, giving sentence by
plurality of Votes, and under a kind of appeal to the seventy Elders or Senate
of Israel, as was also shown in the second Book.

THIS, or the like, by all example and beyond any controversy, has bin, and is
the natural way of Judicature in Commonwealths. The Phylarchs, with a Court or
two of Appeals eligible out of the Senate and the People, are at any time with
ease and very small alteration to be cast upon a triennial Rotation: which, in
all things besides proceeding after the manner of the Venetian Quarancys, will
be in this case perfect Orders.

TO return: The first Day's Election at the Tribe being as has bin shown, it is
proposed,

THAT the Squadron of the Tribe, on the second day of their Assembly, Knights
and Burgesses.
and four other Burgesses out of the Foot of their number. That each Knight upon
Election forthwith make Oath of Allegiance to the Commonwealth; or refusing
this Oath, that the next Competitor in Election to the same Magistracy, making
the said Oath, be the Magistrate: the like for the Burgesses. That the Knights,
thus sworn, have Session in the Senate for the term of three years; and that the
Burgesses thus sworn be of the Prerogative Tribe, or Representative of the
People for the like term.

NOW whereas this Proposition is sufficient for the perpetuation of the Senate
and the Assembly of the People, being once instituted, but not sufficient for
the full and perfect Institution of them, it necessitats the addition in this
place, not of a permanent Order, but of an Expedient for the first years
Election only; which may be this:

THAT for the full and perfect Institution of the Assemblys mentioned,
Expedient for the first years Election.
the Squadron of the Tribe in the first year of the Commonwealth elect two
Knights for the term of one year, two other Knights for the term of two years,
and lastly, two Knights more for the term of three years: the like for the
Burgesses of the Horse first, and then for those of the Foot.

BY this Expedient the Senate in fifty Tribes is constituted of three hundred
Knights or Senators, whereof one hundred, by the expiration of their terms, com
annually to fall; and another hundred at the same time to enter. The like for
the Prerogative Tribe or Assembly of the People, which, consisting in the whole
of one thousand and fifty, suffers the like alteration in one third part, or in
the yearly exchange of one hundred and fifty Burgesses: By which means the
Motion or Rotation of these Assemblys is Annual, Triennial, and Perpetual. For
the full dispatch of the foregoing Elections there remains but one Proposition
more, which is this:

Proviso.
THAT a Magistrate or Officer elected at the Hundred be thereby excluded from
being elected a Magistrate of the Tribe, or of the first days Election: that no
former Election whatsoever exclude a man from the second days Election at the
Tribe, or to be chosen a Knight or Burgess. That a man being chosen a Knight or
Burgess, who before was chosen a Magistrate or Officer of the Hundred or Tribe,
delegat his former Office, or Magistracy in the Hundred or the Tribe, to any
other Deputy being no Magistrate nor Officer, and being of the same Hundred and
of the same Order, that is, of the Horse or Foot respectively. That the whole
and every part of the foregoing Orders for Election in the Parishes, the
Hundreds, and the Tribes, be holding and inviolable upon such Penaltys in case
of failure, as shall hereafter be provided by Act of Parliament against any
Parish, Hundred, Tribe, Deputy or Person so offending.

WITHOUT some such Provision as is contained in the former part of this
Proposition, men would be inconveniently excluded from preferment, or the Tribe
obliged to return to the Ballot; and so to spend more time for trifles than is
required by their real business.

The fourth Parallel.

2 Chronicles. 27.


THE Representative of Israel collected monthly by the two thousand out of each
Tribe (if we consider what Method must have bin used in such Elections)
intimats, first, that there were Subdivisions to that end in each Tribe,
perhaps of the nature of our Hundreds and Parishes: Secondly, that there were
qualifications in those Elections as to the Patriarchs or chief Fathers, and as
to the People with their Captains of thousands, and Captains of hundreds; which
is enough thus sar to approve and recommend the foregoing Propositions.

THE Senate, and the Congregation or Representative of the People, are in every
Commonwealth the main Orders. The Stairs or Degrees of ascent to these being
now mounted, it remains that I lead you into the Rooms of State, or the
Assemblys themselves: which shall be performed, first, by showing their Frame,
and next by showing their Uses or Functions. To bring you first into the Senate,
it is proposed,

Frame of the Senate.
THAT the Knights of the Annual Election in the Tribes take their places on
Monday next ensuing the last of March in the Senate. That the like number of
Knights, whose Session determins at the same time, recede. That every Knight or
Senator be paid out of the public Revenue quarterly, one hundred twenty five
Pounds during his term of Session, and be obliged to sit in purple Robes.

THAT annually, upon the reception of the new Knights, the Senate Senatorian
Magistrates.
term of one year; these promiscuously: and that they elect one Commissioner of
the Great Seal, and one Commissioner of the Treasury, each for the term of
three years, and out of the new Knights only.

THIS Proposition supposes the Commissioners of the Seal and those of the
Treasury to consist each of three, wheeled by the annual Election of one into
each Order, upon a triennial Rotation. For farther explanation of the
Senatorian Magistracys, it is proposed,

The General sitting, and the Speaker.
THAT the General and Speaker, as CONSVLS of the Commonwealth,

The General marching.
THAT the General sitting, in case he be commanded to march, receive

THAT the three Commissioners of the Great Seal, and the three Commissioners
Commissioners of the Seal and of the Treasury.
of the Treasury, using their Insigns and Habit, and performing their other
Functions as formerly, be paid quarterly to each of them three hundred seventy
five Pounds.

The Censors.
THAT the Censors be each of them Chancellor of one University by

The Signory.
THAT the General sitting, the Speaker, and the six Commissioners

THIS for the Senatorian Magistrates. For Senatorian Councils it is proposed,

Council of State.
THAT there be a Council of State consisting of fifteen Knights, five

Councils of Religion, of Trade.
THAT there be a Council for Religion consisting of twelve Knights,

Council of War.
THAT there be a Council of War, not elected by the Senate, but elected

The Dictator.
THAT in case the Senate adds nine Knights more out of their own number

The Proposers general.
THAT the Signory have Session and Suffrage, with right also jointly or
severally to propose, both in the Senate and in all Senatorian Councils.

Provosts, or particular Proposers.
Senatorian Council, elect one Provost for the term of one week; and that any
two Provosts of the same Council so elected may propose to their respective
Council, and not otherwise.

Academy.
THAT some fair Room or Rooms well furnished and attended, be allowed at the
States charge for a free and open Academy to all comers at some convenient hour
or hours toward the Evening. That this Academy be governed according to the
Rules of good Breeding, or civil Conversation, by some or all of the Proposers;
and that in the same it be lawful for any man by word of mouth or by writing,
in jest or in earnest, to propose to the Proposers.

FROM the frame or structure of these Councils, I should pass to their
Functions; but that besides annual Elections, there will be some biennial, and
others emergent: in which regard it is proposed, first, for biennial Elections,

Ambassadors in ordinary.
THAT for Ambassadors in ordinary, there be four Residences; as France, Spain,
Venice, and Constantinople: that every Resident, upon the Election of a new
Ambassador in ordinary, remove to the next Residence in the Order nominated,
till having served in them all, he returns home. That upon Monday next ensuing
the last of November, there be every second year elected by the Senate some fit
Person, being under thirty five years of Age, and not of the Senate or popular
Assembly: that the Party so elected, repair upon Monday next ensuing the last
of March following, as Ambassador in ordinary to the Court of France, and there
reside for the term of two years, to be computed from the first of April next
ensuing his Election. That every Ambassador in ordinary be allowed three
thousand pounds a year during the term of his Residences; and that if a
Resident coms to die, there be an extraordinary Election into his Residence for
his term, and for the remainder of his Removes and Progress.

Emergent Elections.
THAT all emergent Elections be made by Scrutiny, that is, by a Council, or by
Commissioners proposing, and by the Senate resolving in the manner following:
That all Field-Officers be proposed by the Council of War; that all Ambassadors
extraordinary be proposed by the Council of State; that all Judges and
Sergeants at Law be proposed by the Commissioners of the great Seal; that all
Barons and Officers of Trust in the Exchequer, be proposed by the Commissioners
of the Treasury: and that such as are thus proposed, and approved by the Senate,
be held lawfully elected.

THESE Elections being thus dispatched, I com to the Functions of the Senate,
and first, to those of the Senatorian Councils: for which it is proposed,

Function of the Senatorian Councils.
THAT the cognizance of all matters of State to be considered, or Law to be
enacted, whether it be Provincial or National, Domestic or Foren, pertain to
the Council of State. That such Affairs of either kind, as they shall judge to
require more Secrecy, be remitted by this Council, and belong to the Council of
War, being for that end a select part of the same. That the cognizance and
protection both of the National Religion, and of the Liberty of Conscience
equally established in this Nation, after the manner to be shown in the
Religious part of this Model, pertain to the Council for Religion. That all
matters of Traffic, and the regulation of the same belong to the Council of
Trade. That in the exercise of these several Functions, which naturally are
Senatorian or Authoritative only, no Council assume any other Power than such
only as shall be settled upon the same by

Function of the Senate.
THAT what shall be proposed to the Senate by any one or more of the

Function of the Dictator.
THAT if upon the motion or proposition of a Council or Proposer

THIS Dictatorian Council (as may already appear) consists fundamentally of the
Signory, with nine Knights elected by the Council of State, additionally of
nine Knights more emergently chosen by the Senate, and of the four Tribuns of
course; as will appear when I com to speak of that Magistracy. Now if
Dictatorian Power be indeed formidable, yet this in the first place is
remarkable, that the Council here offered for a Dictator is of a much safer
Constitution, than what among us hitherto has bin offered for a Commonwealth;
namely, a Parliament and a Council in the interim. For here is no interim, but
all the Councils of the Commonwealth not only remaining, but remaining in the
exercise of all their Functions, without the abatement of any; speed and
secrecy belonging not to any of them, but to that only of the Dictator. And if
this Dictatorian Council has more in it of a Commonwealth than has hitherto
among us bin either practiced or offered, by what Argument can it be pretended
that a Commonwealth is so imperfect through the necessity of such an Order, that
it must needs borrow of Monarchy; seeing every Monarchy that has any Senate,
Assembly, or Council in it, thereby most apparently borrows more of a
Commonwealth, than there is to be found of Monarchy in this Council?

The fifth Parallel.
TO dimiss this whole Senate with one Parallel: The institution of the seventy
Elders in Israel (as was shown in the second Book) for their number related to
an Accident, and a Custom thereupon anciently introduced. The Accident was that
the Sons of JACOB who went into Egypt were so many; these, first governing
their Familys by natural right, came, as those Familys increased, to be for
their number retained and continued in the nature of a Senatorian Council,
while the People were yet in Egyptian Bondage. So we, having had no like
Custom, have as to the number no like Inducement. Again, the Canaan amounted
not to a fourth of our Country; and in Government we are to fit our selves to
our own proportions. Nor can a Senate, consisting of few Senators, be capable of
so many distributions as a Senate consisting of more. Yet we find in the
restitution 2 Chr. 19. 11.
of the Sanhedrim by JEHOSHAPHAT, that there was AMARIAH chief in all matters of
the Lord, that is, in judgment upon the Laws, which, having bin proposed by
God, were more peculiarly his matters; and ZEBADIAH chief in all the King's
matters, that is, in political debates concerning Government, or War and Peace.
Lastly, Judge. 11. 5, 11.
When the Children of Ammon made War against Israel, the People of Israel made
JEPHTHA not only Captain, but Head over them. So the Judge of Israel, being no
standing Magistrate, but elected upon emergencys, supplys the Parallel as to
Dictatorian Power in a Commonwealth.

DEBATE is the natural Parent of Result; whence the Senate throout the Latin
Authors is called Fathers, and in Greec Authors the compellation of a popular
Assembly is Men; as Men of Athens, Men Act. 7. 2. and 22. 1. Luke throout is
perfectly well skilled in the Customs of Commonwealths.
of Corinth, Men of Lacedemon: nor is this Custom Heathen only, seeing these
Compellations are used to the Senate and the People of the Jews, not only by
STEPHEN, but also by PAUL, where they begin their speeches in this manner: Men,
Brethren, and Fathers. To com then from the Fathers to the People, the Popular
Assembly, or Prerogative Tribe; it is proposed,

Fabric of the Prerogative Tribe.
THAT the Burgesses of the annual Election returned by the Tribes, enter into
the Prerogative Tribe upon Monday next ensuing the last of March; and that the
like number of Burgesses, whose term is expired, recede at the same time. That
the Burgesses thus entered elect to themselves out of their own number, two of
the Horse; one to be Captain, and the other to be Cornet of the same: and two
of the Foot; one to be Captain, the other to be Insign of the same, each for
the term of three years. That these Officers being thus elected, the whole
Tribe or Assembly proceed to the Election of four annual Magistrates; two out of
the Foot, to be Tribuns of the Foot: and two out of the Horse, to be Tribuns of
the Horse. That the Tribuns be Commanders of this Tribe in chief, so far as it
is a Military Body; and Presidents of the same, as it is a civil Assembly. And
lastly, that this whole Tribe be paid weekly as follows. To each of the Tribuns
of Horse, seven pounds. To each of the Tribuns of Foot, six pounds. To each of
the Captains of Horse, five pounds. To each of the Captains of Foot, four
pounds. To each of the Cornets, three pounds. To each of the Insigns, two
pounds seven shillings. To every Horseman two pounds, and to every one of the
Foot one pound ten shillings.

FOR the Salarys of the Senate and the People together, they amount not to three
hundred thousand pounds a year; which is cheaper by near two parts in three,
than the chief Magistracy ever did or can otherwise cost: for if you give
nothing (omnia dat qui justa negat) men will be their own Carvers. But to
proceed, it is proposed,

Offices of the Officers.
the Military Discipline of the Tribe. That the Tribuns have Session in the Senate
without suffrage; that they have Session of course in the Dictatorian Council,
so often as it is created by the Senate, and with suffrage. That they be
Presidents of the Court in all cases to be judged by the People.

THAT Peculat or Defraudation of the Public, and all cases tending Appeal to
the People.
Courts, and Councils, whether National or Provincial.

The sixth Parallel.

Judge. 20. Halicar.


THIS Judicatory may seem large: but thus the Congregation of Israel,
consisting of four hundred thousand, judged the Tribe of Benjamin. Thus all the
Roman Tribes judged CORIOLANUS. And thus Duke LOREDANO was tried by the great
Council of Venice, consisting Janot^^.
yet of about two thousand.

THIS is as much as I have to say severally of the Senate and the People; but
their main Functions being joint, as they make one Parliament, it is farther
proposed,

The main Function of the Senate.
THAT the right of Debate, as also of proposing to the People, be

The main Function of the Prerogative Tribe.
THAT the power of Result be wholly and only in the People, without

THAT the Senate having debated and agreed upon a Law to be proposed, cause
promulgation of the same to be made for the space of six weeks Promulgation.
before proposition; that is, cause the Law to be printed and published so long
before it is to be proposed.

Manner of Proposition.
THAT promulgation being made, the Signory demand of the Tribuns,

Act of Parliament.
THAT what is thus proposed by the Senate, and resolved by the People,

The seventh Parallel.
THE Congregation of Israel being monthly, and the Representative proposed
being annual and triennial, they are each upon Courses or Rotation: the
Congregation of Israel consisting of twenty four thousand, in which the whole
number of the Princes of the Tribes and of the Princes of the Familys amounted
not, I might say, to one hundred, but will say to one thousand; it follows,
that the lower sort in the Congregation of Israel held proportion to the better
sort, above twenty to one. Whereas in the Representative proposed, the lower
sort hold proportion to the better sort but six to four; and that popular
Congregation where the lower sort hold but six to four, is by far the most
Aristocratical that is or ever was in any well ordered Commonwealth, except
Venice: but if you will have that Gentry to be all of one sort, or if you allow
them to be of a better and of a meaner sort, Venice is not excepted. The
Sanhedrim made no Law without Ezra 10. 8.
the Congregation, might make Laws; so may the Senate, in our Model, with the
Representative of the People. Lastly, as the Congregation in Israel was held
either by the Princes in person, with their Staves and Standards of the Camp,
or by the four and twenty thousand in Military Discipline; so the Representative
proposed is in the nature of a Regiment.

EXCEPTING Venice, where there is a shadow, and but a shadow of Law made by the
Senate (for the Soverain Power is undeniably in the great Council) and Athens,
where a Law made by the Senate was current as a Probationer for one year before
it was proposed to the People; there neither is nor has bin any such thing in a
Commonwealth as a Law made by the Senate. That the Senate should have power to
make Laws, reduces the Government to a single Council; and Government by a
single Council, if the Council be of the Many, is Anarchy, as in the Assembly
of the Roman People by Tribes, which always shook, and at length ruined that
Commonwealth: Or, if the Council be of the Few, it is Oligarchy, as that of
Athens consisting of the four hundred, who nevertheless pretended to propose to
Thucyd. lib. 8.
five thousand, tho they did not. Of which says THUCYDIDES, This was indeed the
form pretended in words by the four hundred; but the most of them, through private
ambition, fell upon that by which an Oligarchy made out of a Democracy is
chiefly overthrown: for at once they claimed every one not to be equal, but to
be far the chief. Anarchy, or a single Council consisting of the Many, is ever
tumultuous, and dos ill even while it means well. But Oligarchy, seldom meaning
well, is a Faction wherein every one striving to make himself, or some other from
whom he hopes for advantage, spoils all. There is in a Commonwealth no other
cure of these, than that the Anarchy may have a Council of some few, well
chosen, and elected by themselves, to advise them; which Council so instituted,
is the Senate: Or that the Oligarchy have a popular Representative to balance
it; which both curing Tumult in the rash and heady People, and all those
Corruptions which cause Factiousness in the sly and subtle Few, amount to the
proper Superstructures of a well ordered Commonwealth. As, to return to the
example of the Oligarchy in Athens, where the four hundred (whose Reign, being
very short, had bin as seditious) were deposed; and the Soverainty was decreed
to a popular Council of five thousand, with a Senate of four hundred annually
elective upon Courses, or by Lib. 8.
Rotation. Of this says THUCYDIDES, Now first (at least in my time) the
Athenians seem to have ordered their State aright, it consisting of a moderat
temper both of the Few and the Many. And this was the first thing that, after
so many misfortunes, made the City again to raise her Head. But we in England
are not apt to believe, that to decree the Soverainty to thousands, were the
way to make a City or a Nation recover of its Wounds, or to raise its Head. We
have an aversion to such thoughts, and are sick of them. An Assembly of the
People Soverain! Nay, and an Assembly of the People consisting in the major
vote of the lower sort! Why, sure it must be a dull, an unskilful thing. But so
is the Touchstone in a Goldsmiths Shop, a dull thing, and altogether unskil'd
in the Trade; yet without this, would even the Master be deceived. And certain
it is, that a well ordered Assembly of he People is as true an Index of what in
Government is good or great, as tany Touchstone is of Gold.

A COUNCIL (especially if of a loose Election) having not

FOR the remainder of the Civil part of this Model, which is now but small, it
is farther proposed,

Rule for Vacations.
THAT every Magistracy, Office, or Election throout this whole Commonwealth,

Exception from the Rule.
THAT, for an exception from this Rule, where there is but one Elder

OTHERWISE the People, beyond all manner of doubt, would elect so many of the
better sort at the very first, that there would not be of the Foot or of the
meaner sort enough to supply the due number of the Popular Assembly or
Prerogative Tribe: and the better sort being excluded subsequent Elections by
their intervals, there would not be wherwithal to furnish the Senate, the Horse
of the Prerogative Tribe, and the rest of the Magistracys; each of which
Obstructions is prevented by this Exception. Where, by the way, if in all
experience such has bin the constant temper of the People, and can indeed be
reasonably no other, it is apparent what cause there can be of doubt who in a
Commonwealth of this nature must have the leading. Yet is no man excluded from
any Preferment; only Industry, which ought naturally to be the first step, is
first enjoined by this Policy, but rewarded amply: seeing he who has made
himself worth one hundred Pounds a year, has made himself capable of all
Preferments and Honors in this Government. Where a man from the lowest state
may not rise to the due pitch of his unquestionable Merit, the Commonwealth is
not equal: yet neither can the People, under the Limitations proposed, make
choice (as some object) of any other than England have not gone so low in the
election of a House of Commons, as some Prince has don in the election of a
House of Lords. To weigh Election by a Prince with Election by a People, set
the Nobility of Athens and Rome by the Nobility of the old Monarchy, and a
House of Commons freely chosen by the Nobility of the new. There remains but
the Quorum, for which it is proposed,

The Quorum.
THAT, throout all the Assemblys and Councils of this Commonwealth, the Quorum
consist of one half in the time of Health, and of one third part in a time of
Sickness, being so declared by the Senate.

HOW the City Government, without any diminution of their Privileges, and with
an improvement of their Policy, may be made to fall in with these Orders, has
In Oceana.
elsewhere bin shown in part, and may be considered farther at leisure. Otherwise
the whole Commonwealth, so far as it is merely Civil, is in this part
accomplished. Now as of necessity there must be a natural Man, or a Man indu'd
with a natural Body, before there can be a spiritual Man, or a Man capable of
Divine Contemplation; so a Government must have a Civil, before it can have a
Religious part: And if a man furnished only with natural parts can never be so
stupid as not to make some Reflections upon Religion, much less a Commonwealth;
which necessitats the Religious part of this Model.

CHAP. II.
Containing the Religious Part of this Model, proposed practicably.
THERE is nothing more certain or demonstrable to common Sense, than that the
far greater part of Mankind, in matters of Religion, give themselves up to the
public Leading. Now a National Religion rightly established, or not coercive,
is not any public driving, but only the public leading. If the Public in this
case may not lead such as desire to be led by the Public, and yet a Party may
lead such as desire to be led by a Party; where would be the Liberty of
Conscience as to the State? Which certainly in a well ordered Commonwealth,
being the public Reason, must be the public Conscience. Nay, where would be the
Liberty of Conscience in respect of any Party which should so proceed as to
show, that without taking their Liberty of Conscience from others, they cannot
have it themselves? If the Public, refusing Liberty of Conscience to a Party,
would be the cause of Tumult, how much more a Party refusing it to the Public?
And how, in case of such a Tumult, should a Party defend their Liberty of
Conscience, or indeed their Throats from the whole or a far greater Party,
without keeping down or tyrannizing over the whole or a far greater Party by
force of Arms? These things being rightly considered, it is no wonder that Men,
living like men, have not bin yet found without a Government, or that any
Government has not bin yet found without a National Religion; that is, some
orderly and known way of public

A NATIONAL Religion being thus proved necessary, it remains that I prove what
is necessary to the same; that is, as it concerns the State, or in relation to
the Duty of the Magistrate.

CERTAIN it is, that Religion has not seen corruption but by one of these three
causes; some Interest therewith incorporated, some ignorance of the truth of it,
or by some complication of both. Nor was ever Religion left wholly to the
management of a Clergy that escaped these Causes, or their most pernicious
Effects; as may be perceived in Rome, which has brought Ignorance to be the
Mother of Devotion, and indeed Interest to be the Father of Religion. Now the
Clergy not failing in this case to be dangerous, what recourse but to the
Magistrate for safety? specially seeing these Causes, that is, Interest and
Ignorance (the one proceeding from evil Laws, the other from the want of good
Education) are not in the right or power of a Clergy, but only of the Civil
Magistracy. Or if so it be that Magistrates are obliged in duty to be nursing
Fathers and nursing Mothers to the Church; Isa. 49. 23.
how shall a State in the sight of God be excusable, that takes no heed or care
lest Religion suffer by Causes, the prevention or remedy whereof is in them
only? To these therefore it is proposed,

Universitys.
THAT the Vniversitys being prudently reformed, be preserved in their

Joh. 5. 39.
WE are commanded by CHRIST to search the Scriptures: The Scriptures are not
now to be searched but by skill in Tongues: The immediate gift of Tongues is
ceased: How then should skill in Tongues be acquired but mediatly, or by the
means of Education? How should a State expect such an Education (particularly
for a matter of ten thousand men) that provides not for it? And what provision
can a State make for this Education, but by such Schools so endowed and
regulated, as with us are the Universitys? These therefore are a necessary step
toward the prevention of such Ignorance or Interest, as through the infirmitys or
biass of Translators, Interpreters, and Preachers, both have and may frequently
com to be incorporated with Religion; as also to the improvement or acquisition
of such Light as is by the command of CHRIST to be attained or exercised in
searching the Scriptures.

The eighth Parallel. 1 Chronicles. 25. 8. Mal. 2. 12.
THE excellent Learning of the Levits in all kinds, not ordinarily infused, but
acquired (there having bin among them as well the Teacher as the Scholar)
leaves little doubt but their forty eight Citys were as so many Universitys.
These with their Suburbs or Indowments contained in the whole (each of their
Circuits in Land reckoned at four thousand Cubits deep) about a hundred
thousand Acres; that is, if their measure was according to the common Cubit: if
according to the holy Cubit (as with Levits was most likely) twice so much;
which, at the lowest account, I conceive to be far above the Revenues of both
our Universitys.

THESE being ordered as has bin said, it is proposed,

Augmentation of Livings.
THAT the legal and ancient provision for the National Ministry be

The ninth Parallel.
Orders of Israel, as, in our day, may show that a Commonwealth may com too near
that pattern to be liked. We find not indeed that the Apostles either took or
demanded Tithes; in which case the Priests, who were legally possessed of them,
might have had suspicion that they, under color of Religion, had aimed at the
violation of Property. But putting the case that generally the Priests had bin
converted to the Christian Faith, whether the Apostles would for that reason
have enjoined them to relinquish their Tithes? Or what is there in the
Christian Religion to favor any such surmise? To me there seems abundantly
enough to the contrary. For if the Apostles stuck not to comply with the Jews
in a Ceremony which was of mere human invention, and to introduce this, as they
did Ordination by imposition of hands, into the Christian Church; that they
would, upon a like inducement, have refused a standing Law undoubtedly
Mosaical, is in my opinion most improbable. So that, I conceive, the Law for
Tithes now in being, may or may not be continued, at the pleasure of the
Lawgivers, for any thing in this case to the contrary. Confident I am, that the
introducing of this Model in the whole, which is thought impracticable, were
not to willing minds so difficult a work as the abolition of Tithes.

BUT Benefices, whether by way of Tithes or otherwise, being thus ordered; it
is proposed,

Ordination.
THAT a Benefice becoming void in any Parish, the Elders of the same may
assemble and give notice to the Vice Chancellor of either University by a
Certificat, specifying the true value of that Benefice: that the
Vice Chancellor, upon the receipt of this Certificat, be obliged to call a
Congregation of his University: that the Congregation of the University to this
end assembled, having regard to the value of the Benefice, make choice of a
Person fit for the Ministerial Function, and return him to the Parish so
requiring: that the Probationer thus returned to a Parish by either of the
Vniversitys, exercise the Office, and receive the Benefits as Minister of the
Parish for the term of one year: that the term of one year being expired, the
Elders of the Parish assemble and put the Election of the Probationer to the
Ballot: that if the Probationer has three parts in four of the Balls or Votes
in the Affirmative, he be thereby ordained and elected Minister of that Parish;
not afterward to be degraded or removed, but by the Censors of the Tribe, the
Phylarch of the same, or the Council of Religion in such cases as shall be to
them reserved by Act of Parliament: That in case the Probationer coms to fail of
three parts in four at the Ballot, he depart from that Parish; and if he
returns to the University, it be without diminution of the former Offices or
Preferments which he there enjoyed, or any prejudice to his future Preferment:
and that it be lawful in this case for any Parish to send so often to either
University, and it be the duty of either Vice Chancellor upon such Certificats
to make return of different Probationers, till such time as the Elders of that
Parish have fitted themselves with a Minister of their own choice and liking.

IN case it was thought fit that a Probationer thus elected should, before he
departs, receive imposition of hands from the Doctors of the University, I
cannot see what the most scrupulous in the matter of Ordination could find
wanting. But let this be so, or otherwise, it is indifferent. The Universitys
by proposing to the Congregation in every Parish, do the Senatorian Office; and
the People, thus fitting themselves by their Suffrage or Ballot, reserve that
Office

The tenth Parallel.
MOSES (for so far back the Divines reach at Ordination) in the institution of
the Senate of Israel, wherein he can never be proved to have used imposition of
hands, performing the Senatorian Office, caused the People to take wise men,
and understanding, and known among Deuteronomy. 1. Numb. 11.
their Tribes, whereof the Lot fell upon all but ELDAD and MEDAD. And the
Apostles doing the Senatorian Office, in like manner without imposition of
hands, caused the whole Congregation to take two, Acts 1. 26.
whereof the lot of Apostleship fell upon MATTHIAS. So that this way of
Ordination being that which was instituted by MOSES, and the chief or first of
those which were used by the Apostles, is both Mosaical and Apostolical. Nor
has a well ordered Commonwealth See Book 2. chap. 8.
any choice left of those other ways of Ordination, used by the Apostles in
complaisance to worse sort of Government; but is naturally necessitated to
this, that is, to the very best.

ORDINATION being thus provided for, it is proposed,

National Religion; and provision against scandalous Ministers.
THAT the National Religion be exercised according to a Directory in

Liberty of Conscience.
THAT no Religion, being contrary to or destructive of Christianity,

UPON the whole of these Propositions, touching Church Discipline, we may make
these Observations. Thus neither would the Party that is for gifted Men, and
Enemies to Learning, through ignorance (which else in all probability they must)
lose Religion; nor the Clergy be able to corrupt it by Interest. But Decency
and Order, with liberty of Conscience, would still flourish together; while the
Minister has a Preferment he sought, the Parish a Minister they chose, the
Nation a Religion according to the public Conscience, and every man his
Christian Liberty. He therefore that endeavors to confute this Chapter, must
either show how these things may be omitted, or more effectually provided for;
or tithe Mint and Cumin, and neglect the weightier things of Lawgiving.

A COMMONWEALTH having, in the establishment of Religion, made resignation of
her self to God, ought in the next place to have regard to the natural means of
her defense; which introduces the Military part of this Model.


Containing the Military part of this Model, proposed practicably.
THE Military Part, on which at present I shall discourse little, consists in
the Discipline of the Youth, that is, of such as are between eighteen and thirty
years of Age: and for the Discipline of the Youth it is proposed,

Discipline of the Youth.
THAT annually upon Wednesday next ensuing the last of December, the Youth of
each Parish (under the inspection of the two Overseers of the same) assemble
and elect the fifth man of their number, or one in five of them, to be for the
term of that year Deputys of the Youth of that Parish.

Their Troops, and Sports.
THAT annually on Wednesday next ensuing the last of January, the said Deputys
of the respective Parishes meet at the Capital of the Hundred (where there are
Games and Prizes allotted for them, as has bin showed In Oceana.
elsewhere) and there elect to themselves out of their own number, one Captain,
and one Insign. And that of these Games, and of this Election, the Magistrates
and Officers of the Hundred be Presidents, and Judges for the impartial
distribution of the Prizes.

Their Squadrons, and Exercises.
THAT annually upon Wednesday next ensuing the last of February, the Youth through
the whole Tribe thus elected, be received at the Capital of the same, by the
Lieutenant as Commander in chief, by the Conductor, and by the Censors; that
under the inspection of these Magistrates, the said Youth be entertained with
more splendid Games, disciplined in a more military manner, and be divided by
lot into sundry parts, or Essays, according to the Rules In Oceana.
elsewhere given.

The second Essay, or the standing Army.
THAT the whole Youth of the Tribe, thus assembled, be the first Essay. That out
of the first Essay, there be cast by lot two hundred Horse, and six hundred
Foot: that they whom their friends will, or themselves can mount, be accounted
Horse, the rest Foot. That these Forces (amounting in the fifty Tribes to ten
thousand Horse, and thirty thousand Foot) be always ready to march at a weeks
warning: and that this be the second Essay, or the standing Army of the
Commonwealth.

Provincial Guards.
THAT for the holding of each Province, the Commonwealth in the first year
assign an Army of the Youth, consisting of seven thousand five hundred Foot,
and one thousand five hundred Horse. That for the perpetuation of these
Provincial Armies or Guards, there be annually, at the time and places
mentioned, cast out of the first Essay of the Youth in each Tribe ten Horse,
and fifty Foot: that is, in all the Tribes five hundred Horse, and two thousand
five hundred Foot for Scotland; the like for Ireland; and the like of both
orders for the Sea Guards: being each obliged to serve for the term of three
years upon the States pay.

THE standing Army of the Commonwealth consisting thus of forty thousand, not
Soldiers of fortune neither in body nor in pay, but Citizens at their Vocations
or Trades, and yet upon command in continual readiness; and the Provincial
Armies each consisting of nine thousand in pay in body, and possessed of the
Avenues and places of strength in the Province, it is not imaginable how a
Province should be so soon able to stir, as the Commonwealth must be to pour
forty thousand men upon it, besides the Sea Guards. Nor coms this Militia thus
constituted, except upon Marches, to any charge at all; the The eleventh
Parallel.
Constitution of its Armies, whether levied by Suffrage, as in Rome; or by Lot,
as in Israel.

WE will go up by Lot against Gibeah. Judge. 20. 9.


STANDING Forces being thus established; for such as are upon emergent
occasions to go forth, or march, it is proposed,

The third Essay, or Army marching.
THAT the Senate and the People, or the Dictator having decreed or

Poena (...), or the Guardian of Education and Liberty.
THAT an only Son be discharged of these Dutys without prejudice.

A COMMONWEALTH whose Militia consists of Mercenarys, to be safe, must be
situated as Venice, but can in no wife be great. The Industry of Holland is the
main Revenue of that State; whence not being able to spare hands to her Arms,
she is cast upon Strangers and mercenary Forces, through which we in our time have
seen Amsterdam necessitated to let in the Sea upon her, and to become (as it
were) Venice. To a Popular Government that could not do the like, Mercenary
Arms have never failed to be fatal; whence the last Proposition is that which
in every well ordered Commonwealth has bin looked to as the main guard of
Liberty.

The twelfth Parallel.
IN this Israel was formidable beyond all other Commonwealths with a kind of
Fulmination. SAUL when he heard the Cruelty of NAHASH the Ammonit, at the
Leaguer of Jabesh-Gilead, took a 1 S^m. 11. 7.
yoke of Oxen and hewed them in pieces, and sent them throout the Coasts of
Israel, by the hands of Messengers, saying, Whosoever coms not out after SAUL,
and after SAMUEL, so shall it be don to his Oxen. Which amounted not only to a
confiscation of Goods (the Riches of the Israelits lying most in their Cattle)
but to a kind of Anathema, as more plainly appears, where it is said, Curse ye
Meroz, Judge. 5. 23.
curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they came not forth to help
the Lord against the Mighty. Nay this ((...)) desertion of the Israel, was
sometimes punished with total extermination, as after the Victory against
Benjamin, where the Congregation or Political Assembly of that People, making
inquisition Judge. 21.
what one of the Tribes of Israel came not up to the Lord in Mizpeh (the place
where before the taking of Jerusalem they held, as I may say, their Parlaments)
and finding that there came none to the Camp from Jabesh-Gilead, sent thither
twelve thousand men of the valiantest, saying, Go and smite the Inhabitants of
Jabesh-Gilead with the edg of the Sword, with the Women and the Children: which
was don accordingly.

BUT by this time men will shrink at this as a dreadful Order, and begin to
compute that a Commonwealth, let her Prerogatives for the rest be what they
will, must at this rate be but a dear purchase: whereas indeed, if this way
costs something, there is no other that dos not hazard all; forasmuch as
discarding this Order, play your game as you can, you are sometime or other a
Prey to your Enemies, or to your Mercenarys. This certainly is that root in (the
Penetralia) the bowels of a Commonwealth, whence never any Court Arts, or
Politeness, could attain to the gallantry or splendour of the Education in
Popular Governments. For let any man (remembering what it was to be a GIDEON, a
MILTIADES, a TIMOLEON, a SCIPIO, or a Magistrate in a Commonwealth) consider if
there should be no way with us to Magistracy, but by having served three years
at Sea, and three years at Land, how the whole face and genius of Education,
both in the better and in the lower sort, would of necessity be changed in this
Nation, and what kind of Magistrates such experience in those Services must
create to the Commonwealth. Consider, whether the threatened Punishments of
this Order, tho through unacquaintance they may at first sight have some brow,
would not, as they have don in other Commonwealths of like structure, even with
low spirits, expire in scorn and contemt, or through the mere contemplation of the
reward of Honor, nay of the Honor it self, in which point where right has not
bin don, men, under Governments of this nature, have bin much more apt to
heats; as where the men of Ephraim fought against JEPTHA, for an affront in
this kind which they conceived him Judge. 12.
to have put upon them. Wherefore passedst thou over to fight against the
Children of Ammon, and did not call us to go with thee? We will burn thy
house upon thee with fire. Nor is this way so expensive of the Purse, or of
Blood. Not of the public Purse, because it detests Mercenarys; nor of the
private Purse, because the ways of Education thus directed, are all assisted
with the States pay: so that a man in this road might educat three Children
cheaper, and to the most solid ends, than he could any one to trifles in those
which among us hitherto have bin usual. And as to Blood, there is nothing more
certain, than that Idleness, and its inseparable companion Luxury, are
excedingly more wastful as of the Purse, so of Health, nay and of Life it self,
than is War; which nevertheless this Order is such as dos rather prevent than
necessitat, in regard that to be potent in Arms is the way of Peace. But whereas
in a Martial Commonwealth there may be men having exceded the thirtieth year of
their Age, who like those of Ephraim would yet take it ill to be excluded the
Lists of Honor, and it must also be to the detriment of the Commonwealth that
they should; for these, whom we may call Volunteers, it is proposed,

THAT upon Warrants issued forth by the General for Recruits or Volunteers.
employment in Arms, appear before the Phylarch so assembled. That any number of
these, not exceeding one moity of the Recruits or Levys of that Tribe, may be
taken on by the Phylarch, so many of the Youth being at the discretion of this
Council disbanded, as are taken on of the Volunteers. That the Levys thus made,
be conducted by the Conductor of the respective Tribe to the Rendevouz
appointed. And that the Service of these be without other term or vacation,
than at the discretion of the Senate and the People, or such Instructions to the
General, as shall by them in that case be provided.

THUS much for the Military or Defensive part of this Model. For Offenses in
general it is written, Woe unto the world because of Offenses; Mat. 18. 7.
for it must needs be that Offenses com, but woe to that man by whom the Offense
coms. Among Offenses are offensive Wars: now it being out of question, that for
the righteous execution of this Woe upon him or them by whom the Offense coms, a
War may be just and necessary, as also that Victory in a just and necessary War
may entitle one Prince or one People to the Dominion or Empire of another
Prince or People; it is also out of question, that a Commonwealth, unless in
this case she be provided both to acquire, and to hold what she acquires, is
not perfect: which Consideration brings me to the Provincial part of this Model.

CHAP. IV.
Containing the Provincial Part of this Model, proposed practicably.
THE word Province is with Roman Authors of diverse significations. By these it
is taken sometimes for Magistracy; as that of the Consul, which is called His
Province: sometime for any Religion or Country, in which a Roman Captain or
General was commanded to make War; but specially for such a Country as was
acquired and held by Arms, or by Provincial Right. The word is of the like
different use in Scripture; as where it is said, That AHASUERUS Esth. 1. 1.
reigned over a hundred and seven Provinces; by which are understood as well
the divisions of the native, as those of the acquired Territorys. But where
TANAIS the Governor writes to Ezra 5. 8.
the King of Assyria concerning the Province of Judea, it is understood a
Country acquired and held by Arms; which coms to the usual signification of the
word with the Romans, it being in this sense that the Governor FELIX asked PAUL
of what Province he was, Acts 23. 34.
and came to understand that he was of Cilicia, then a Province of the Roman
Empire: and this signification is that in which I take the word throout this
Chapter.

THE mighty load of Empire which happened to the Commonwealth of Rome through the
Acquisition of many and vast Provinces, is that whereto the Songs of Poets, and
the opinions of more serious Writers attribute the weight which they say
oversway'd her. But this Judgment, tho in it self right, is not in the manner
they take it to be swallowed without chewing. For how probable it is that the
Rome, that, she not being sufficiently fortified by Agrarian Laws, Plutarch in
Gra^ch.
the Nobility, through the spoil of Provinces, came to eat the People out of their
popular Balance or Lands in Italy by Purchases; and the Lands that had bin in
the hands of the Many, coming thus into the hands of the Few, of natural and
necessary consequence there follows Monarchy.

NOW that England, a Monarchy, has bin seized of Provinces (one of them, while
France was such, being as great as any one of the Roman) is a known thing; and
that the Militia proposed by the present Model, contains all the causes of
Greatness that were in that of Rome, is to such as are not altogether strangers
to the former, no less than obvious. Now of like Causes not to presume like
Effects, were unreasonable. The safety therefore of the foregoing Agrarian, as
hitherto proposed, or that Lands be divided in their descent, must in this case
be none at all, unless there be some stop also given in their Accumulation by
way of purchase; lest otherwise the spoil of some mighty Province be still
sufficient to eat out the People by purchase.

TO submit therefore in this place (for ought I perceive) to inevitable

Additional Propositions to the Agrarian.
THAT (great Commonwealths having bin overthrown by the spoil of Provinces) an
Estate of two thousand pounds a year in Land, be incapable of any Accumulation
by way of purchase.

DONATIONS and Inheritances will be fewer than to be dangerous; and as some
fall, others will be dividing in their descent. But to resume the Discourse
upon the Agrarian Laws, which, because they were not till in this Proposition
complete, remains imperfect. That to Agrarian Laws some Standard is necessary,
appears plainly enough. This Standard in a well founded Monarchy, must bar
recess; and in a well founded Commonwealth must bar increase. For certain it
is, that otherwise each of the Policys dos naturally breed that Viper which
eats out the Bowels of the Mother: as Monarchy, by Pomp and Luxury, reduces her
Nobility through debt to poverty, and at length to a level with the People, upon
which no Throne ever stood or can stand: such was the case of this Nation under
her latter Princes. And a Commonwealth by her natural ways of frugality, of
fattening and cockering up of the People, is apt to bring Estates to such
excess in some hands, as eating out the rest, bows the Neck of a free State or
City to the yoke, and exposes her to the goad of a Lord and Master; which was
the case of Rome under her perpetual Dictators. But why yet must this Standard
of Land in the present case, be neither more nor less than just two thousand
pounds a year? Truly, where some Standard was necessary to be named, I might as
well ask why not this as well as any other? yet am I not without such Reasons
why I have pitched upon this rather than any other, as I may submit to the
judgment of the Reader in

LET the dry Rent of England (that is, at the rate a man may have for his Land
without sweating) be computed at ten Millions: This presumed, if you set the
Standard at ten thousand pounds a year, the whole Territory can com into no
fewer than one thousand hands. If you set it at five thousand pounds a year, it
can com into no fewer than two thousand hands; and if you set it at two
thousand pounds a year, it can com into no fewer than five thousand hands. It
will be said, In which way you please, it will never com into so few hands as
are capable of having it; which is certain: yet because the Effects in their
approaches would be such as may be measured by their Extremes, I shall pitch
upon these as the readiest way to guide my Computation. The Balance in a
thousand hands might affect the Government with a hankering after Monarchy; in
two thousand hands it might usurp it, as did the Roman Nobility, and thereby
occasion a feud between the Senate and the People. These not only in the
extremes, but with much of a like nature in the approaches.

BUT letting these pass, as also the numbers or compass necessary to the
Rotation of such a Commonwealth (none of which inconveniences are incident to
the Standard of two thousand pounds a year, as that whereby Lands can com into
no fewer than five thousand Proprietors) we will suppose these Standards to be
each of them, as to the safety of the Government, indifferently practicable.

YET it is recorded by Experience, and wise Authors, that the true cause whence
England has bin an overmatch in Arms for France, lay in the communication or
distribution of Property to the lower sort; and for the same cause let it be
considered, if the Commonwealth upon the Standard of two thousand pounds a year
(c^eteris paribus) must not necessarily be an overmatch in the potency of its
Militia for the other two. Such are the advantages, such is the glory of the
like moderation to the public. Money (says the Lord VERULAM) is like muck, not
good except it be spread. Much rather in Popular Government is this holding as
to Land, the latter having upon the State a far stronger influence, at least in
larger Territorys, than Money: for in such, Money, while scarce, cannot
overbalance Land; and were Silver and Gold as plentiful as Brass or Iron, they
would be no more, nor would Land be less worth. And for private men, were it not
that it is easier to fill the belly of a Glutton than his eyes, not only Virtue,
but the Beatitude of Riches, would be apparently consistent in a mean. But what
need I play the Divine or the Philosopher upon a Doctrine, which is not to
diminish any man's Estate, not to bring any man from the Customs to which he has
bin inured, nor from any emergent expectation he may have; but regards only the
Generation to com, or the Children to be born seven years after the passing
such a Law? Whence it must needs follow, that putting the case this Agrarian be
introduced, it is to our Age as if there were none; and if there be no
Agrarian, it is to our Age as if there was one. The difference is no more, than
that in the one way the Commonwealth is at all points secured, and in the other
it is left to its fortune even in the main. Of

Agrarian for Scotland and Ireland.
THAT in Scotland the Standard be set at five hundred pounds a year; in Ireland
at two thousand pounds a year in Land; the rest for each as for England.

NARROWNESS of an Agrarian for Scotland, being a Martial Country, would make
the larger provision of a good Auxiliary Militia; and largeness of an Agrarian
for Ireland, being less Martial, would cast a Sop into the Jaws of the Avarice
of those who should think it too much confined in England. And lest the
Provincials in this case should think themselves worse dealt with than the
Citizens themselves, the sum of the Agrarian Laws being cast up together, any
man in the three Nations may hold four thousand five hundred pounds a year in
Land; and any small Parcel of Land, or mere Residence in England, makes a
Provincial a Citizen. Should the Commonwealth increase in Provinces, the
Estates at this rate both of the Citizens and Provincials, would be more and
greater than ever were those of the ancient Nobility of these Nations; and
without any the least hazard to Liberty. For he, who considering the whole
Roman Story, or that only of the GRACCHI in PLUTARCH, shall rightly judge, must
confess, that had Rome preserved a good Agrarian but in Italy, the Riches of
its Provinces could not have torn up the Roots of its Liberty, but on the
contrary must have watered them. It may be said, What need then of putting an
Agrarian upon the Provinces? I answer: For two Reasons: first is Indulgence to
the Provincials; and the second, Advantage to the Commonwealth. For the first,
it is with small foresight apparent enough, that the Avarice of the Citizen
being bounded at home, and having no limits in the Provinces, would in a few
years eat up the Provincials, and bring their whole Countries (as the Roman
Patricians did Italy) to sound in their Fetters, or to be tilled by their
Slaves or Underlings. And so, for the second, the Commonwealth would by such
means lose an Auxiliary Militia, to be otherwise in Scotland only more worth
than the Indys. These things therefore thus ordered, it is proposed,

Provincial Councils.
THAT upon the expiration of Magistracy in the Senate, or at the annual Recess of
one third part of the same, there be elected by the Senate out of the part
receding, into each Provincial Council four Knights for the term of three
years; thereby to render each Provincial Council (presuming it in the beginning
to have bin constituted of twelve Knights, divided after the manner of the
Senate by three several Lists or Elections) of annual, triennial, and perpetual
Revolution or Rotation.

Provincial Governors or Generals.
THAT out of the same third part of the Senate annually receding, there be to
each Province one Knight elected for the term of one year. That the Knight so
elected be the Provincial General or Governor. That a Provincial Governor or
General receive annually in April at his Rendevou appointed, the Youth or
Recruits elected in the precedent Month to that end by the Tribes, and by their
Conductors delivered accordingly. That he repair with the said Youth or
Recruits to his Province, and there dismiss that part of the Provincial Guard
or Army whose triennial term is expired. That each Provincial Governor have the
conduct of Affairs of War and of State in his respective Province, with advice
of the Provincial Council; and that he be President of the same.

THAT each Provincial Council elect three weekly Proposers, or Provosts,
Provincial Provosts.
term, be President of the Council in absence of the General.

Subordination and Function of Provincial Councils.
THAT each Provincial Council proceed according to Instructions received
England.

IN modelling a Commonwealth, the concernment of Provincial Government coms in
the last place; for which cause I conceive any long Discourse upon these Orders
to be at present unnecessary: But certain things there are in the way which I
am unwilling to let slip without pointing at them.

Whether Men or Money be the Nerve of War.
SOME will have Men, some will have Money to be the Nerve of War; each of which
Positions, in proper cases, may be a Maxim: For if France, where the main Body
of the People is imbas'd; or Venice, which stands upon a Mercenary Militia,
want Money, they can make no War. But it has heretofore bin otherwise with
Commonwealths. Roman Historians (as is observed by MACCHIAVEL) in their
Military Preparations or Expeditions, make no mention of Money, unless what was
gained by the War, and brought home into the Treasury; as the Spoil of Macedon
by AEMILIUS PAULUS, being such, as the People for some years after were
discharged of their Tribute. Not that their Wars were made altogether without
Money; for if so, why should the People at any time before have paid Tribute? Or
why, upon this occasion were they excused? but that the Money in which their
Wars stood them, was not considerable in comparison of that which is requisite
where Money may be counted the Nerve of War; that is, where Men are not to be
had without it. But Rome, by virtue of its Orders, could have raised vaster
numbers of Citizens and Associats than perhaps it ever did, tho during the
Consulat of PAPPUS and REGULUS, she levied in Italy only seventy thousand
Horse, and seven hundred thousand Foot. Should we conceive the Nerve of this
Motion to have bin Money, we must reckon the Indys to have bin exhausted before
they were found; or so much Brass to have bin in Italy, as would have made
Stones to be as good Money. A well ordered Commonwealth dos these things not by
Money, but by such Orders as make of its Citizens the Nerve of its Wars. The
Youth of the Commonwealth proposed are esteemed in all at five hundred
thousand. Of these there is an annual Band, consisting of one hundred thousand.
Of this one hundred thousand there is a standing Army consisting of thirty
thousand Foot and ten thousand Horse, besides such as being above Scotland,
being both Populous and Martial, can afford at any time an equal number of
Auxiliarys.

THESE Orders, thus sum'd up together, render this Commonwealth ordinarily able
to wage War with fourscore thousand men; a Force which, it is known, not any
Prince in Christendom is able to match in Virtue, Number, or Discipline. For
these the Commonwealth in her Sea Guard has always at hand sufficient Waftage,
or at least such a sufficient Convoy as may make any Vessels at hand a
sufficient Transportation: all this, I say, by virtue of Orders. Not but that
the March, the Equipage, the Waftage of so great an Army must cost Money; but
that it will com to no account in comparison of a lingering War made by a matter
of thirty thousand Mercenarys, the very consumtion of a State: whereas fourscore
thousand men so disciplined and so furnished, as has bin shown, being once
transported, must suddenly com to be no Charge, or make the War defray it self.

BUT it is objected, that to reckon upon such a Militia were to suppose a large
Country capable of being a Commonwealth; whereas we hold them learned, who say
that no Commonwealth has consisted of more Whether a Commonwealth has consisted
of more than one City or Town.
than some one City or Town. But in what Language or in what Geography, are the
twelve Tribes of Israel; the ((...)) Peopledoms or Prytanys of Athens, which
THESEUS gathered into one body; the Tribes and Linages in Lacedemon instituted
by LYCURGUS; the five and thirty Roman Tribes planted between the Rivers
Vulturnus and Arno, or between the Citys now called Capua and Florence; the 13
Cantons of the Switzers; the seven United Provinces of the Low Countries,
understood to have bin or to be but one City or Town? Whether were not the
People of Israel under their Commonwealth six hundred thousand? What reason can
be given why the Government that could take in six hundred thousand, might not
as well take in twice that number? How much short came the Country, planted by
the Roman Tribes, of 150 Miles square? Or how much over is England? And what
reason can be given why a Government, taking in 150 Miles square, might not as
well take in twice that Compass? Whether was our House of Commons under
Monarchy not collected from the utmost Bounds of the English Territory? And
whether had the Laws by them enacted not their free course to the utmost limits
of the same? And why should that be impossible or impracticable to a
Representative of the People in a Commonwealth, which was so facil and
practicable to a Representative of the People under Monarchy?

IT is a wonder how the Commonwealth of Rome, which held as it were the whole
World by Provinces, should be imagined by any man to have consisted but of one
Town or City.

BUT to return: It is alleged by others, and as to Provincial Government very
truly, that a Commonwealth may be a Tyranny: Nor do I think that Athens, in
this point, came short of any Prince: Rome, on the other side, was (according
to the merits of the cause) as frequent in giving Liberty as in taking it away.
The Provinces of Venice and of Switzerland, would not change their condition
with the Subjects of the best Prince. However the possibility in a Commonwealth
of tyrannizing over Provinces, is not to be cured; for be the Commonwealth or
the Prince a State or a Man after God's own heart, there is no way of holding a
Province but by Arms.

The thirteenth Parallel. 2 Samuel 8. 5, 6.
WHEN the Syrians of Damascus came to succor HADADEZER King of Zobah, DAVID
slew of the Syrians two and twenty thousand Men: then DAVID put Garrisons in
Syria of Damascus, and the Syrians became Servants to DAVID, and brought Gifts;
and the Lord preserved DAVID whithersoever he went.

WITH this Parallel I draw the Curtain, and close (be it Comedy to such as are
for Tragedy) this Model; appealing to the present, or the next Age, whether
throout I have not had God himself for my Vouchee. In the mean time, there is
nothing hereby proposed which See the Corollary of Oceana.
may not stand with a supreme Magistrate.

The Conclusion:
Showing how the Model proposed may be proved or examined; and giving a brief
Answer to Mr. WREN'S last Book, intitl'd, Monarchy asserted against Mr.
HARRINGTON'S Oceana.
That a Commonwealth not rightly ordered, is less seditious than the best of
Monarchys.
FOR a Nation to be still upon the cast of a Die, to be ever in Roman People are
thought abundantly sufficient. But these having bin without Blood, if with our
Affairs they hold any parallel, are not to be compared with the Barons Wars,
those of York and Lancaster, or the like; but with the Contests or Strivings of
our Parlaments with their Kings, while such Disputes came not to Arms. Or if
the Roman Fields from the time of the GRACCHI grew bloody, we have known a
matter of a dozen years in which ours might have compared with them. The
Seditions under the Commonwealth of Rome to those under the Empire, hold such a
proportion, as the Seditions under the Commonwealth of Israel to See Book 2.
chap. 4.
those under their Kings. I am contented at this time, for discourse sake, that
the Seditions of Venice should pass as they are computed by Mr. WREN: Let those
also which have happened in the Commonwealths of the Switzers, and of the
United Provinces, by the skill of some Man who may be thought more impartial
than my self, be rightly enumerated and added. This being don, let the
Seditious that have happened in the Monarchys of England, France, and Spain, be
as impartially sum'd up; and I may venture to promise you, That you shall not
find the sum of the Seditions which have happened in those three Commonwealths,
to balance the foot of the account with those Seditions which have happened in
any one of those Monarchys: nor are we without sufficient inducement to
believe, that the whole account in this particular of those Commonwealths which
have bin in the World, can com any whit nearer to that of the Monarchys. But
this being so, be it also supposed, tho not granted, that a Commonwealth is a
seditious Government, yet must it be the least seditious Government. The
Republic of Corinth never (...). Lib. 4.
suffered but that one Sedition which is described by Xenophon; and this too
from an external cause.

That Mr. Wren's Opposition of P^pular P^^de^^e amounts to a Consumati^n of it.
to have no less than demonstrated in the proposed Model, that a Commonwealth
rightly ordered is altogether incapable of Sedition, and so consequently of
Dissolution, that is, from any internal cause. To render his Confutation
entire, and the truth of this Assertion the more conspicuous, I shall first
insert those Rules or Maxims whereby a Model of a Commonwealth may be exactly
proved or examined, and then show how they totally enervat and overturn those
Arguments elaborated by Mr. WREN toward the examination and confutation of the
Model proposed.

How a Model of Popular Government may be tried or examined.
THE Maxims or Rules whereby a well ordered Model of Popular Government may be
most exactly proved or examined, are specially two:

1. IT must be wholly void of any Contradiction or Inequality.

2. IT must be such in which no number of Men, having the Interest, can have
the Power or Strength; and no number of Men, having the Power or Strength, can
have the Interest to invade or disturb the Government.

IT is not in the power of Nature that there should be an effect, where there
is not the cause of that effect; and in a Frame of Government that is exactly
according to the foregoing Maxims, there can be no cause of Sedition or
Dissolution. A Model of Government therefore that will hold examination by these
Maxims, must (without ostentation, or with Mr. WREN'S patience) be perfect.

NOW let us observe how he bestirs himself to examine and confute this Model. As
to contradiction, he dos not so much as pretend that there is any Guile in it;
yet will not allow it to have any truth: W. p. 78.
For, says he, as in a Fiction the several Members may be so contrived, as not
to give one another the ly, but be all contained within the limits of
Verisimilitude, and yet the whole remain without the least syllable of Truth;
so in a Model of Government. To which I answer, that there being a truth of
Nature, and a truth of Fact, this way of Mr. WREN'S disputing is mere
equivocation. For the Model is not proposed to show the truth of Fact, or that
there has bin any such exactly in practice; but to show the truth of Nature, or
that such a Model is practicable: wherefore he needed not to have alleged that
it has not the truth of Fact, which we all know; but was to show where it fails
of such a truth in Nature as can any way render it impracticable. But instead
of this, he is gone to the Moon; and will read us a Lecture in Politics by the
Planets, or the various Hypotheses of Celestial Motions, Ibid.
which may be excogitated including no absurdity in themselves, and yet perhaps
not any one of them prove to be the true method of Nature. But may a man
therefore argue in this manner? It is very hard to know certainly which are the
Highways of the Planets, therefore there can be no certain knowledge which are
the Highways to London. Let us even say, Because the Rotation of the World may
as well go upon the Heavens as upon the Earth, therefore a man may as well go
upon his Head as upon his Heels; and a Commonwealth as well stand upon a
Milkwoman's Pattins, as upon the strongest Interest, or the Interest of the
strongest.

W. p. 179.
So much for Contradiction. Now for Inequality, says Mr. WREN, Tho it should be
allowed Mr. HARRINGTON, that his Commonwealth has none in it, yet would it fail
of attaining the perfection of Government, seeing there is an inequality in the
Nature of man, which is not rectified by the Model of his Commonwealth. As if
the equality of a Government was pretended to be such, as should make a crooked
man straight, a wicked man good, or a passionat man a Philosopher; and it were
not perfect, in being sufficient to prevent any influence that Wickedness or
Passion in a man or men, may have upon the Government. But for farther
discovery of these Inequalitys in the Nature of man, that are not rectified by
the Model, Mr. WREN sends us to his eight and ninth Chapters, where he produces
them in such order, as I shall observe in repeating him. Whenever, says he,
under Popular Government Page* 84.
the number of those whose Offenses have rendered them liable to the severity
of Laws, is considerable enough to qualify them for attemt, Popular Government
has no more security than any other, of being free from Sedition. It is very
true: but Mr. WREN was obliged to show how in an equal Commonwealth, or under
the Model proposed, it was possible that the number of such men should com to
be considerable enough to qualify them for such an attemt. But in this kind he
is no otherwise provided than to tell us, That of this Original and Extraction,
as to the main, was CATILIN'S attemt upon the Roman Commonwealth. So
undertaking against Oceana, or the most equal Commonwealth, he is com to
arguing against Rome, or the most inequal Commonwealth; and at such a time too,
when being no longer capable of Liberty, but ready for bonds, there were other
partys besides CATILIN'S, and others besides such as were obnoxious to the
Laws, that lay in wait for her: as POMPEY and his Party, or at least CAESAR and
his, who at length carried it; so that this feat was not so much performed by
men otherwise liable to severity of Laws, as by men puffed up by ambition. But
let these have bin of which sort he will, it remains with him to show, how
there should be of either kind enough in Oceana for a like attemt. It is known
that long before this happened in Rome, the whole of that Commonwealth was in
the hands of three men, CAESAR, POMPEY, and CRASSUS: wherefore he should have
first shown, which way the whole of the Commonwealth of Oceana might com into
the hands of three, or of a few men. But leaving this untouched, he runs making
a dust, and a doubt where the soverain Power of Oceana can be; which even in
Rome, as inequal as it was, is acknowleg'd to have bin in the Assemblys of the
People; and in Athens, THUCYDIDES expressly says, That the Soverainty Lib. 5.
was in the five thousand. Who ever doubted but where the ultimat Result is,
there also must be the Soverainty? and the ultimat Result of Oceana is in the
Prerogative Tribe, or Representative of the People. Then says he, This
Representative thinking it their interest, may Page 84.
dissolve the Government, and perpetuat themselves, and may com to think it
their interest. For the desire of Power being natural to man, a far greater
share of Power remains with every particular man, when the Soverain Power is
divided among so many, than when the same Power is divided among two hundred
thousand. But I showed that this Representative has the whole Soverain Power in
themselves, not divided with any other, or with the five hundred thousand;
which I suppose he means by the two hundred thousand he mentions. Now this
Representative cannot be understood to have the Soverain Power by overbalance
of strength, because they are but one thousand to five hundred thousand; so it
is plain that they have it by consent, or by orders only: wherefore these Orders
they have not the power, or strength, nor the interest to break; because
breaking their Orders (by which only, and not by strength, the Power is in
themselves) they com to divide the Power that was in themselves, with the five
hundred thousand, as they, who, in defect of the Orders, have the far greater
strength, and W. p. 85.
no legal bar. Yet says he, That a Representative is not incapable of making
such an attempt as this, will (it is not improbable) easily find belief with
those who are acquainted with the Actions of these last eighteen years. Which
is as much as to say, That because a Representative, by and with the People,
may have both the interest, and the power or strength to free themselves of a
broken Monarchy; therefore a Representative may, without and against the People,
have both the interest, and the power or strength to break the Orders of the
most equal Commonwealth. But if the Representative of Oceana has not the power
or strength to break their Orders, and perpetuat themselves; much less the
Senate. True it is, if we look upon some other Commonwealths, a Senate might have
the interest to do it; but not where the Senate has bin upon Rotation. To add
then to Mr. WREN'S faculty of opposition greater strength than is in it; if the
Senate of Oceana would do any thing of this kind, their readiest way were by
creating of the Dictator. The Dictator being created, has soverain Power in
carrying on the Orders of the Commonwealth: but those do not perpetuat their
Power; this therefore cannot be don but by Force or Arms. The Arms of the
Commonwealth are both numerous, and in a posture or readiness; but they consist
of its Citizens: and for the Dictator to bring the Citizen to break the
Commonwealth, were for a General to command his Army to cut their own throats.
It is true, the Roman Decemvirs put in for prolongation; but, tho in the most
inequal Commonwealth, they could not make it stand one year, because of the
Citizens in Arms: And for Mercenarys there are none in Oceana; is this news?
there were none in Israel, there were none in Athens, there were none in
Lacedemon, there were none in Rome, while those Commonwealths flourished. But
were there Mercenarys, as he might perhaps reckon Servants, they are unarmed,
undisciplined; they cannot rise through the vast bodies of Citizens in Arms both
Elders and Youth; or if they would rise, they could be nothing in their hands.
The Roman Slaves, and the Lacedemonian Helots, being far of another and more
dangerous nature, never rose against their Lords but to their own destruction.
All this while I say nothing of the security which is in the frame of this
Dictator, beyond any example or interest of prolongation to be found either in
the Roman Dictator or the Venetian Council of ten, each whereof having had the
like power, did never discover any such inclination. It is true, that in the
time of SYLLA, the Roman Dictator began to be perpetual; but this is not to be
attributed so much to the imperfection of the Order, as to the change of the
Balance. But if the Dictator of Oceana cannot have the interest, or, having the
interest, cannot have the power or strength to perpetuat that Magistracy; much
less can the Senate.

THE sum of what has bin said, may be thus cast up, as to the whole
Constitution. If Things or Persons that have neither the right nor the might,
may prevail against Things and Persons who have both the right and the might;
then may one Order of this Commonwealth break the whole System: but the Might,
through the foundation or popular balance of Property, being in the whole People,
and the whole Superstructures of this Commonwealth being nothing else but an
equal distribution of common Right to the whole People, who are possessed of the
Might; they who have the Might, have not the interest to break, but to preserve
the Orders; which therefore no other can have the power or strength to break, or
some other breaking, must but lose that which they pretend to gain, to wit, the
Right, which in this case must still fall to the Might, devolving upon the
People. That Mr. WREN will needs fancy the Tribes or Citys in Oceana, as those
in W. p. 87.
the united Provinces, or the Cantons of Switzerland, to be distinct
Soveraintys, concerns not me, seeing the form of Oceana is far otherwise; nor
indeed him, seeing neither do the Citys in Holland, nor the Cantons in
Switzerland go about to dissolve their Commonwealths or Leagues. The Champion
having thus failed at the head, is contented to play low. Tho there be care
taken, says he, that at the Assembly of the Hundred W. p. 181.
and the Tribe, such and such Magistrates should be elected out of the Horse,
there is no necessary provision there should be any Horse there, out of which
to elect. And where can they be then, if not in some Parish? He might better
have said, that at the Parish there was no care taken, that the People should
not elect too many of the Horse, which being indeed the defect of the former,
is in this Edition rectified. His last See Proposition 44. W. p. 183.
exception is against the place where I say, that They who take upon them the
profession of Theology, Physic or Law, are not at leisure for the Essays,
whereby the Youth commence for all Magistracys and Honors, in the Commonwealth.
To which reason he offers not so much as any Answer: nor pretends any other
Argument against it, than that this excludes Divines, Lawyers, and Physicians,
from those Honors to which their Parish Clerks, their Scriveners, and their
Apothecarys, nay Farriers and Cobblers may attain. And what can I help that, if
it ought nevertheless so to be, for a reason which he cannot answer? Nay, if so
it be in common practice where the reason is nothing near so strong, seeing a
Parish Clerk, a Scrivener, an Apothecary, nay a Cobbler or a Farrier, is not
incapable of being of the Common Council, nor yet of being an Alderman or Lord
Mayor of London; which nevertheless that a Divine, a Lawyer, or a Physician
should be, were absurd to think. Divines have a Plow from which they ought not
to look back: they have above a tenth of the Territory, with which they ought
to be contented; and more than all, Civil Interest contracted by a Clergy,
corrupts Religion. For Lawyers, their Practice and Magistracys are not only the
most gainful, but for life; and in a Commonwealth, neither is accumulation of
Magistracy just or equal, nor the confounding of Executive and Legislative
Magistracy safe. Will Mr. WREN believe one of our own Lawyers, and one of the
learned of them upon this point? It is the Lord VERULAM: They, says he,
Verulam de Aug. Scien. lib. 8. cap. 3.
who have written (de legibus) of Lawmaking, have handled this Argument as
Philosophers, or as Lawyers. Philosophers speak higher than will fall into the
capacity of practice (to which may be referred PLATO'S Commonwealth, Sir THOMAS
MORE'S Vtopia, with his own Atlantis) and Lawyers being obnoxious, and addicted
each to the Laws of their particular Country, have no freedom nor sincerity of
Judgment, but plead as it were in bonds. Certainly the cognizance of these
things is most properly pertaining to political Persons, who best know what
stands with human Society, what with the safety of the People, what with
natural Equity, with ancient Prudence, and with the different Constitution of
Commonwealths. These therefore, by the Principles and Precepts of natural Equity
and good Policy, may and ought to determine of Laws. For Physicians, who (as
such) have in the management of State Affairs no prejudice, if you open them
the door, they will not at all, or very rarely, com in: whereby it appears,
First, that such a bar may in some cases be no violation of Liberty; and,
secondly, that the Divines, who for better causes might be as well satisfied,
and for more unanswerable Reasons ought to forbear, yet are impatient, and give
a full testimony that their meaning is not good.

THUS is the Commonwealth by Mr. WREN opposed, by him asserted. There remains
no more to the full confutation of his Book, than to show how the Monarchy by
him asserted is by him destroyed. This is to be don by the examination of his
ninth Chapter, which is the next of those to which he referred us.

That Mr. Wren's Assertion of Monarchy amounts to the Subversion of it.
and his pretended asserting of Monarchy, run altogether upon Mr. HOBS'S
Principles, and in his very words; but for want of understanding, much
enervated: so that Mr. WREN'S whole ^eat of Arms coms but to have given me a
weaker Adversary for a stronger. In Soverainty, says he, the diffused strength
of the Multitude is united W. p. 97.
in one person; which in a Monarchy is a natural person; in a State, an
artificial one procreated by the majority of Votes. This then is the grand W.
p. 99.
security of all Soverains, whether single Persons or Assemblys, that the
united Forces of their Subjects, with which they are invested, is sufficient to
suppress the beginnings of Seditions. Who reads Mr. HOBS, if this be news? But
what provision is made by either of these Authors, that the Forces of the
Subject must needs be united? Is Union in Forces, or in Government, an Effect
whereof there is no Cause? Or to what cause are we to attribute this certain
Union and grand Security? Why let W. p. 103.
there be such a Nobility as may be a Monarch's Guard against the People. And
lest a Monarch stand in need of another Guard against this Nobility, let none
of these excel the res^ of his Order in power or dignity. Which Effects or
Ends, thu^ commanded* ^ouchsafe not to acquaint us with Ibid.
their ways: Y^s, let the Nobility h^^e no right to assemble themselves for
electing a Succ^ssor to the Monarchy, or for making of War or Peace, or for
nominating the great Ministers of State, or for performing any other Act which
by the nature of it is inseparable from the Soverain Power. But why then must
such a Nobility be a guard against the People, and not rather a guard for the
People, seeing both their Interests and Sufferings at this rate are the same,
and include those very causes for which, in the Barons War, the Nobility became
Incendiarys and Leaders of the People of England against their Kings, and so
those whereby their Captain came to excel the rest of his order in power or
dignity? But for this W. p. 105.
the Prince is to be provided, by having always in pay a sufficient Militia; and
some places of strength where a few may be secure against a number. For places
of Strength, Citadels, or Castles, there were in the time of the Barons Wars,
more than some; yet were they, as to this purpose, none. But a Militia is one
thing, and a sufficient Militia is another; where the Government consists of a
Nobility and of a People, what sufficient part of the Property or Revenue of
the Territory can there remain to the Prince, whereby to have always in pay such
a Militia, as may be sufficient to keep the Nobility and the People from
joining, or to suppress them being joined? If these be small Armies, the like
may befall them, which befell those of the Kings in the Wars of the Barons. And
if they be great Armies, the Prince has not wherwithal to support or content
them; nay if he had, Mr. WREN tells us plainly, W. p. 106.
That Princes who keep great Armies, as Guards to their Persons or Empires,
teach us that this is to walk upon Precipices; there being no possibility of
preventing such an Army (specially if they ly still without employment) from
acquiring an interest distinct from that of the Prince. Wherefore (to follow Mr.
WREN, and no other Leader, in his own words against himself) this Militia being
great, cannot be so instituted, as to have no interest besides the pay it
receives from the Monarch; nor so as to have no hopes of being safe in their
own strength, if they should withdraw themselves from the Service and Obedience
due to him: and being not great, against the whole Order or Orders of the
Nobility and the People they cannot be sufficient. What then remains but to
say, that Mr. WREN having declared the perfection of Monarchical Government W.
p. 107.
to consist in a mixture of Monarchy by a Nobility, and a Monarchy by Arms, has
as to his Model entirely subverted Monarchy? In this way of disputing, I have
rather followed my Leader than Reason; the true Answer being that which was
given in the Preface, namely, that an Army to be effectual in England, must be
such where the Officers have popular Estates, or where they have such Estates
as had the ancient Nobility: in the latter case, they make a King; in the
former, a Commonwealth. But Mr. WREN will have his own way; and therefore, to
conclude, let me but desire him to lay his hand upon his heart, and then tell
me, whether the condition of the Nobility (to whose favor in my exclusion he
pretends a meritorious Title) sharing eminently and according to their rank
with the People in the Commonwealth by me proposed; or the condition of the
Nobility under the insolence and burden of a mercenary Army, sharing equally
with the People in Oppression and Slavery, or reviving the old Barons Wars for
new Liberty, in the Monarchy by him proposed; be the more desirable. And to
speak a word for my Adversary, we will submit it wholly to the present
Nobility, whether Mr. WREN or I be so extravagant in these things, that they
have, or can have any other than the like choice. Yet enters not Mr. WREN Ibid.
into despair of living to enjoy his share (which ought to be a good one) of
the Felicitys which will belong to the Subjects of such a Government. He looks
upon Persons, but Things are invincible.

THE rest of his Book (to which The Prerogative of Popular Government is still
a complete Answer) consists altogether of gross evasion or invective, or of
drawing out of story against Popular Prudence such imaginary Swords as do but
stand bent. To rectify or streighten these, I may hereafter present him (if any
man shall think it worth the while) with a fuller Answer.

A WORD Concerning a House of PEERS.
NO man knowing what is necessary to the Foundation or Being of a Popular
Government, can hope or expect the introduction of any such Form, where
Monarchy is not impracticable. They (where Monarchy is impracticable) who com
first to discover it, and be convinced of it, if Reason be not altogether
deposed, are inevitable Leaders. Hence it is that our Commonwealthsmen are
already renowned throout this Nation for their invincible Reasons, even by the
confession of their Opponents, or such as proceed nevertheless in other ways.
But where Seed is so well sown and rooted, intervening Possession and Interests
are like such Weather as holding back the Spring, yet improves the Harvest:
Commonwealthsmen indeed may have a cold time on it, but upon the Commonwealth it
must bestow Fermentation. Had our incomparable Assertors of public Liberty
appeared before a universal eviction of the necessity which inforces their
Cause, it must have bin through such a reluctance, as would have made them glad to
do things by halves, which is the only Rock to a rising Commonwealth of
Scandal, or of Danger; the whole being such against which there is nothing to
be alleged, and the half what may be easily confuted. These things considered,
what appearance is there but that it must redound to the greater advantage of
our Commonwealthsmen, that we are under the force of a present Humor which
abhors the very name of a Commonwealth? Seeing by this means one of two things
must of necessity happen, and com shortly to public view or discovery: either
that Monarchy is practicable, or that it is not practicable; I mean, in our
state of Affairs, or in this present distribution of the Balance. If Monarchy
be found practicable, Commonwealthsmen are satisfied in their Consciences, and
so ready in fair ways to return, and submit not only for Wrath, but for
Conscience sake. But (let Divines cry Atheism, and Lawyers Treason) if it be
once discovered to common Understanding that Monarchy is impracticable, then in
coms the Commonwealth, not by halves, but with all its Tackling, full sail,
displaying its Streamers, and flourishing with Top and Topgallant.

THE ways whereby it is at hand to be discovered whether Monarchy be practicable
or impracticable, are particularly two; the one quicker, the other slower: The
quicker way will be by the Workmen, the slower by the Work.

IF the Workmen, being willing, be yet overcom by the mere obstinacy of their
Matter, it amounts to a plain confession, that Monarchy is impracticable. And
if they give away the Libertys of the People, they are overcom by the obstinacy
of the Matter; for that is not their Work: nor any other Work than such as must
be useless, not so much in regard of it self (tho that may be true enough) as
by the want of any other Security than what the Prince had before, that is, an
Army. And such an Army, which for security is as good as none at all, nay the
very contrary, as has bin shown already: nor to Art of Lawgiving, p. 433.
be altered with better success than theirs, who became Princes in Grecian and
Sicilian States.

BUT if the Workmen give not away the Libertys of the People, then must they so
limit their Prince, that he can in no manner invade those Libertys; and this by
any other means than the full and perfect introduction of a well ordered
Commonwealth, they will find to be utterly impossible: So either way they are
overcom by the mere obstinacy of their Matter.

IF through some secret Dictat (as when the Senate of Rome was Conviva Caesaris) or
a have to make riddance, this be not perceived by the Workmen, it will be but
the more perceivable by the Work when it coms to wearing or in practice; and
the Flaws or Grievances being found insupportable, the next Parliament, through the
mere want of any other remedy, must introduce a Commonwealth.

GOOD, and egregiously Prophetical! But what say you for all this, if we have a
House of Peers, and that even for the Lord's sake, there being no other way to
secure Liberty of Conscience? Why I say, if we have a House of Peers, it must
be a House of old Peers, or a House of new Peers, or a House of the one and the
other. Moreover I say, Let it be which way you will, such a House may at some
time, or for some reason, be personally affected to Liberty of Conscience; but
is a Constitution in it self naturally averse, and contrary to Liberty of
Conscience, and therefore can be no security to the same, whether the Lords be
Spiritual, or Temporal, or partiperpale.

LORDS Spiritual are inspired with a third Estate, or share of a Realm, which
gives no toleration to any Religion, but that only asserting this point, which
is Monarchy. Setting this Oracle, and some like Reasons of State aside, we may
think that every Soverainty (as such) has Liberty of Conscience: This a King
having, cannot give; and a People having, will not lose. For Liberty of
Conscience is in truth a kind of State, wherein a man is his own Prince: but a
House of Peers sets up another Prince; it cannot stand without a King. If the
Balance be in the Lords, as before HENRY the Seventh, yet must they have a King
to unite them, and by whom to administer their Government; and if the Balance
be not in the Lords, they stand or fall with the King, as the House of Peers in
the Long Parliament: and the King falling, their Government devolves to the
People. Again, a House of Peers having the overbalance, signifys something; in
which case it has not bin known to be for Liberty of Conscience: and not having
the overbalance, signifys nothing; in which case it cannot secure the Liberty
of Conscience. Thus a House of Peers, whether something or nothing, is no way
for the Liberty of Conscience, but every way for a King: and a King is a
defender of the Faith. The Faith whereof a King is defender, must be that which
is, or he shall call his own Faith; and this Faith it concerns his Crown and
Dignity, that he defend against all other Faiths. True it is, that a King for a
step to a Throne, may use what is readiest at hand: Otherwise where there is
Liberty of Conscience, to assert Civil Liberty by Scripture can be no Atheism;
which lames a Prince of one Arm. But where Liberty of Conscience is not at all,
or not perfect, Divines, who (for the greater part) are no fair Huntsmen, but
love dearly to be poaching or clubbing with the secular Arm (tho if we, who
desire no such Advantages, might prosecute them for abusing Scripture, as they
have don this thousand years, to all the ends, intents, and purposes of
Monarchy, they would think it a hard case) Divines, I say, not only brand the
Assertors of Civil Liberty with Atheism, but are some of them studious in
Contrivances, and quaint in Plots to give a check or remove to this or that
eminent Patriot, by the like pretenses or charges; which succeding accordingly
by the power of a Parliament, they may at length com to have a Parliament in
their power. Where there is no Liberty of Conscience, there can be no Civil
Liberty; and where there is no Civil Liberty, there can be no security to
Liberty of Conscience: but a House of Peers is not only a necessary, but a
declared check upon Civil Liberty; therefore it can be no security to Liberty of
Conscience. And so much for this particular.

NOW to make upon the other parts proposed, and in a mere civil sense, some
farther conjecture.

WHEN a House of Peers sets up a House of Commons, as in the Barons Wars, they
will govern the Commons well enough for their own purpose, and not seldom the
King too.

BUT we are to speak of a thing without any example, a House of Peers set up by
a House of Commons; nor, in the want of example, are we thought worthy by our
Adversarys to be furnished with Reason: so the guidance of our Discourse upon
this point is committed to Mother Wit, a notable Gossip, but not so good a
Politician.

NEVERTHELESS, if this House consists of old Peerage only, we have direction
enough to know how that will be; for either the single Person, or the Commons
will be predominant in the Government: if the Commons be so, then it will be
with the Peers, as it was before their last Seclusion; that is, while they do
as the Commons would have them, they may sit; otherwise they are sent home. And
if the single Person be predominant, it can be no otherwise than by an Army; in
which case the old Peers being not in Arms, nor having any help that way, are
as much under the Yoke as the Commons. By which it may be apparent, that it is
the great interest of the present Peerage, that there be a well ordered
Commonwealth; otherwise the Commons being in bondage, the Lords, whom that
least becoms, are but equal with them: and being free, the Lords are not the
head, but at the foot of them; whereas in an equal Commonwealth, that the
Nobility be not at the head, or have not the leading, is quite contrary to all
Reason and Experience.

IF the House consists of new Peers only, it must consist of the chief Officers
in the Army; which immediately divides the Government into two distinct
Governments: the one in the House of Commons, whose Foundation is the Body of
the People; the other in the House of Peers, whose Foundation is the Army. This
Army if it remains firm to the Peers, they not only command the Commons, but
make and unmake Kings as they please; or as ambitious Partys and Persons among
themselves are diligent or fortunat: But if the Army (as is most and more than
most likely) coms off to the Commons, the Peers are nothing, and the Commons
introduce a Commonwealth.

IF the House consists of new Peers and old, the old Peers while they like it,
are Ciphers to new Figures; and when they like it not, may go home again: Nor
whether they stay or go, is this case so different from the former, as to be
any greater obstruction to a Commonwealth.

TO hate the very name of a Commonwealth, or not to see that England can be no
other, is as if men were not in earnest. It is asked of the Commons what the
Protector shall be, and he can be nothing but what they will. It is asked of
the Commons what the other House shall be, and it can be nothing but what the
Commons will. The Commons are asked whose the Army, whose the Militia, whose
the Negative Vote is; nor can these be otherwise determined than as they
please. The Commons are asked whether they will make such a War, whether they
will pay such a Debt, whether they will advance such a Sum; all which are
entirely at their discretion: therefore actually and positively England is a
Commonwealth. Nay, and that there remain not the least doubt, whether it be
safe for any man to say thus much, the present Government has either no legal
denomination at all, or is legally denominated the Commonwealth: the question
of the future state of it coms not one whit upon the matter, which is already
granted, but upon the form only. A Commonwealth for the matter makes it self;
and where they will not bestow upon it the Form necessary, fails not of coming
to ruin, or, at least, to disgrace the Workmen: Or, to speak more properly and
piously, a Commonwealth is not made by Men, but by God; and they who resist his
holy Will, are Weapons that cannot prosper.

Feb. 20. 1659.
Six Political TRACTS Written on Several Occasions.

VIZ.

I. Valerius and Publicola. A Dialog.

II. A System of Politics, delineated in short and easy Aphorisms, now first
published from the Author's own Manuscript.

III. Political Aphorisms.

IV. Seven Models of a Commonwealth, Ancient and Modern, etc.

V. The Ways and Means of introducing a Commonwealth by the Consent of the
People.

VI. The humble Petition of diverse well affected Persons: with the Parlament's
Answer thereto.

Valerius and Publicola: Or, the True FORM OF A POPULAR COMMONWEALTH Extracted
Ex puris Naturalibus.

Quos perdere vult JUPITER, hos dementat prius.


To the READER.
THE way of Dialog being not faithfully managed, is of all others the most
fraudulent; but being faithfully managed, is the clearest and most effectual
for conveying a man's sense into the understanding of his Reader. There is
nothing in this World, next the favor of God, I so much desire as to be
familiarly understood; which because great men have thought below them, has
proved hitherto but the ruin of themselves, and the detriment of the Public:
for which reason, having tried all other means, I now add this. My work, if I
be not given over to utter blindness, is the same with, or nearest, that of the
Nation; and the Work of the Nation being not understood, is in extreme danger
of utter ruin.

Valerius. DEAREST PUBLICOLA, how have I longed to meet you, and in the
favorable silence of this long Walk!


Publicola. What has my noble Friend VALERIUS to command his faithful Servant?


Val. Why really, notwithstanding the tumult of these extravagant Changes, your
last Discourse had so much of my attention then, and has had such a digestion
with me since, that I feel it running in my Veins.


Pub. Do you find in that any temtation to the buckling on of Highshoon?


Val. My thoughts, PUBLICOLA, are quite of another strain; sometimes I fancy I
see England grasping at Empire, like Rome it self.


Pub. Why then VALERIUS, my Discourses are not such as they say; there runs
nothing of them in your Veins, that has imbas'd your noble Blood.


Val. The Heraldry of them is of as high a pitch as the Policy; but I would
have them be a little lower in some things.


Pub. What are those?


Val. The Vulgar complain of you, that you are too learned.


Pub. I thought it was not you, VALERIUS.


Val. For all that, I could be contented to see you raise your Structure by
your own strength, and without the help of other Authors.


Pub. That I dare say you may, when you please.


Val. I must see it then, before I lose the covert of these reverend Elms.


Pub. You take care that the Building should be well situated; and for the
Foundation, I may presume by what has already past between you and me, that we
are long since agreed.


Val. That the threefold Balance, or Distribution of Property is the cause of
the triple way of Government, I fully consent with you; as also, that the
Balance now in England is in the People plainly, and exclusively both of a King
and Lords.


Pub. You are not of them that grant this, and then ask which way a
Commonwealth should be introduced in England.


Val. Why truly yes; seeing not only the People are so wholly unacquainted with
the means, but their Leaders so averse to it.


Pub. Think you that a Plant grows the worse for not understanding the manner
of its Vegetation?


Val. A Plant is not a free Agent; but among Men who are free Agents, the
Introduction of Government seems to be Arbitrary.


Pub. What, where there is no more than Hobson's choice, this or none?


Val. It is true, that if they can have nothing else, they must at length have
a Commonwealth; but tho they can have nothing else to be holding, yet they will
be trying other things.


Pub. There is all the mischief.


Val. And enough to ruin the Nation.


Pub. To hurt it very sore, but not to ruin it; nor yet to evade a
Commonwealth, except they expose us to foren Invasion.


Val. I am glad of your Confidence.


Pub. You may let it pass for Confidence, if you please; but if there be no
other way except that only of Invasion, whereby the present Balance can receive
a change sudden enough to admit of any other Form, the reason why we must have
a Commonwealth is coercive.


Val. And putting the case it be the Will of God to defend us from foren
Invasion, how long will it be ere they see at home the coerciveness of this
Reason, or, which is all one, that all Power is in and from the People?


Pub. Good VALERIUS, how long is it since this was both seen and declared in
Parliament?


Val. Perhaps as they meant, it might be admitted as a Principle even in
Monarchy.


Pub. This with your pardon you will revoke, seeing you well remember that this
their Declaration of Power in the People, has bin exclusive of King and Lords,
and that in express terms.


Val. But in this they related not at all to the Distribution of Property.


Pub. Why then, there is not such a difference between the growing of a Plant
and of a Commonwealth, as you thought; seeing a Commonwealth knowing as little,
dos no less.


Val. This of all others is to me a Consideration fullest of comfort.


Pub. It will in time proceed accordingly, through a mere necessity of nature, or
by feeling; but your desire, I suppose, is to know how it should be rationally
introduced, or by seeing, and that with more ease and greater speed.


Val. If it might please God, I would live to have my share of it, tho I fear I
never shall.


Pub. You carve for your self ill: for by hope a man injoys even that which he
never coms to attain; and by fear he is deprived even of that which he coms not
to lose.


Val. I must confess that our Army has it now in their power to introduce a
Commonwealth.


Pub. And there is no other action in their power that can excuse them.


Val. Putting the case they would hearken to you, what course would you advise?


Pub. The same that I have advised over and over.


Val. As how?


Pub. As how! is that yet a Question? Let them divide the Territory into fifty
equal parts.


Val. They will never make a new division.


Pub. Why then they shall never have an equal Commonwealth.


Val. What ill luck is this, that the first step should be so difficult?


Pub. You speak as if never any Territory had bin divided, whereas there is none
that has not; and Surveyors will tell you, it is a work to be perfectly
performed in two months, and with ease.


Val. Putting the case this were don, what is next?


Pub. The next is, that the Commonwealth were complete.


Val. Say you so? this indeed makes amends: but how?


Pub. With no more addition, than that the People in every distinct division
elect annually two Knights and seven Deputys.


Val. I dare say the People would never stick at this.


Pub. Not sticking at this, they of their own power have instituted the two
great Assemblys, of which every Commonwealth consists.


Val. But in advising these things, you must advise men so that they may
understand them.


Pub. VALERIUS, could I as easily have advised men how to understand, as what
to do, there had bin a Commonwealth ere this.


Val. Com, I will have you try something of this kind, and begin upon some known
Principle, as this, All Power is in the People.


Pub. Content. But the diffusive Body of the People (at least in a Territory of
this extent) can never exercise any Power at all.


Val. That is certain.


Pub. Hence is the necessity of some form of Government.


Val. That is, the People of themselves being in a natural incapacity of
exercising Power, must be brought into some artificial or political capacity of
exercising the same.


Pub. Right. Now this may be don three ways; as first, by a single Person --


Val. How!


Pub. Nay, I am not likely to trouble you much upon this point: but as you were
intimating just now, there are Royalists who derive the original Right of
Monarchy from the consent of the People.


Val. There are so.


Pub. And these hold the King to be nothing else, but the Representer of the
People and their Power.


Val. As the Turc.


Pub. Yes, as the Turc.


Val. The Peoples Power at that rate coms to the Peoples Slavery.


Pub. You say right; and so it may at other rates too.


Val. As how?


Pub. Why as I was about to say, The Power of the People may be politically
brought into exercise three ways: by a single Person; by an Assembly consisting
of a few; or by an Assembly consisting of many.


Val. Or by a mixture.


Pub. Nay, I pray let that alone yet a while: for which way soever you go, it
must com at length to some mixture, seeing the single Person you named but now,
without his Divan or Council to debate and propose to him, would make but bad
work even for himself. But as the Government coms to be pitched fundamentally
upon one of these three, so it differs not only in name, but in nature.


Val. I apprehend you, as Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy.


Pub. Nay, you are out with your Learning, when you have forbidden it me. But
in Countries where there is not a Nobility sufficiently balanced or enriched,
there can be none of your Aristocracy; and yet there may (as long as it will
last) be a Government in a few.


Val. What call you that?


Pub. Nay, what say you?


Val. Com, it is Oligarchy: when all is don, some words of Art we must use.


Pub. I thought you would com to it; and yet seeing I have promised, I will be
sparing. But with your pardon, you have disordered my Discourse, or by this
time I had showed, that if the Power of the People be committed to a single
Person, the common Interest is submitted to that of a Family; and if it be
committed to a few, it is submitted to the Interest of a few Familys.


Val. Which, so many times as they are more than one, is so many times worse
than Monarchy.


Pub. I am not sorry that you are of that mind. For there is no such thing as a
Commonwealth, or, as you say, Democracy in nature, if it be not pitched upon a
numerous Assembly of the People.


Val. What call you numerous?


Pub. Why, an Assembly such for number as can neither go upon the interest of
one single Person or Family, nor the interest of a few Persons or Familys.


Val. How will you constitute such an Assembly?


Pub. Commonwealths for the Constitution of their Popular Assemblys, have had
two ways. The first by inrolling all their Citizens, and stating the Quorum in
such sort, that all to and above the stated number repairing at the time and
place appointed, are empowered to give the Vote of the whole Commonwealth.


Val. The Athenian Quorum was six thousand; which toward the latter end of
that Commonwealth came to five.


Pub. So, so, you may quote Authors: But you may remember also, that Athens was
a small Commonwealth.


Val. How many would you advise for England?


Pub. Put the case I should say, ten thousand?


Val. They will laugh at you.


Pub. What can I help that? or how many would you advise?


Val. I would not go above five thousand.


Pub. Mark you then: they only that are nearest would com; and so the City of
London would give Law to the whole Nation.


Val. Why really that same now is clear; but would there be less danger of it,
in case you stated your Quorum at ten, at twenty, or tho it were at a hundred
or two hundred thousand?


Pub. No: For which cause, as to England, it is a plain case, that this is no
way for the institution of a popular Assembly.


Val. Which way then?


Pub. For England there is no way but by Representative, to be made to rise
equally and methodically by stated Elections of the People throout the whole
Nation.


Val. Needs this to be so numerous as the other?


Pub. No.


Val. Why?


Pub. Because it is not obnoxious to a Party, to any certain Rank, or such as
are soonest upon the spur, or that make least account of their Pains or of
their Money.


Val. Will you be so curious?


Pub. Do you think this a Curiosity? How else will you avoid improvement in the
Interest of the better sort, to the detriment of those of meaner rank; or in
the Interest of the Few, to the detriment of that of the Many?


Val. But even this way there is danger of that foul Beast the Oligarchy.


Pub. Look about you. The Parliament declares all Power to be in the People; is
that in the better sort only?


Val. Stay; the King was to observe Leges and Constitutiones quas vulgus
elegerit: That Vulgus is to be understood of the Parliament; and the Parliament
consisted wholly of the better sort.


Pub. It is true; but then that Commonwealth acted in all things accordingly.


Val. It was, you will say, no Democracy.


Pub. And will you say it was?


Val. No truly: yet this derived in part from the free Election of the People.


Pub. How free? seeing the People, then under Lords, dared not to elect
otherwise than as pleased those Lords.


Val. Something of that is true; but I am persuaded that the People, not under
Lords, will yet be most addicted to the better sort.


Pub. That is certain.


Val. How then will you prevent the like in your Institution?


Pub. You shall see presently. The diffusive Body of the People, in which the
Power is, and is declared to be, consists in the far greater part of the lower
sort: wherefore their Representative, to rise naturally, and to be exactly
comprehensive of the common Interest, must consist also in the far greater part
of the lower sort.


Val. Of what number will you have this Representative?


Pub. Suppose a thousand, or therabout.


Val. What proportion will you have the meaner sort in it to hold to the better?


Pub. Suppose about six to four.


Val. How will you order it, that it shall be so constituted?


Pub. Why thus: Let the People in every Precinct or Shire at Election choose
four under one hundred pounds a year in Lands, Goods, or Money, together with
three at or above that proportion.


Val. I see not but this Representative must be exact.


Pub. It is yet none at all; that is, unless you presume Changes: for one
thousand, without change governing the whole People, amounts neither to a
Representative nor to a Commonwealth, but coms still to your hard name.


Val. How do you order your Changes?


Pub. By annual election of one third part for three years.


Val. So that every year one third part of your Assembly fallsout of it, and a
new third part at the same time enters into the same.


Pub. Even so.


Val. This causes the Representative to be perpetually extant.


Pub. It dos so: But to respit that a little, I should be glad, before I stir
farther, to know which way the Vote of a Representative thus constituted, can
go one hairs breadth beside the common and public Interest of the whole
diffusive Body of the People.


Val. No way in the Earth that I can imagine, except through ignorance.


Pub. No Human Ordinance is infallible; and what is don through mere ignorance or
mistake at one time, will be found and amended at another.


Val. A thousand men, and six to four of the lower sort perpetually extant!
this must be a grievous Charge to the most of them; it will be hard to bring
them, and impossible to hold them together.


Pub. Upon such as are elected and com not, considerable Fines must be levied;
and such as com and stay together must have good Salarys.


Val. Salarys to so many! what will that com to?


Pub. Not, with the rest of the Commonwealth, to three hundred thousand pounds
a year.


Val. Why? the Kings have rarely had above six.


Pub. And did England ever grudg them any part of that proportion?


Val. I must confess the Quarrel grew when they would not be contented with so
little.


Pub. Now if England never did, nor needed grudg a King six hundred thousand
pounds a year, to be spent among Courtiers, why should we imagine she should
grudg a Commonwealth three hundred thousand pounds a year, to be spent among
Magistrates?


Val. But Parlamentmen have taken nothing.


Pub. Have the People given nothing?


Val. That was for the maintenance of Armies.


Pub. And whether had you rather maintain Armies or Magistrates?


Val. But putting the case that this Assembly needed not to be perpetually
extant, this Charge in the whole or in the far greater part might be abated.


Pub. I cannot tell: for how often think you fit that this Assembly should
convene?


Val. Parlaments at most met not above once a year.


Pub. If they had bin perpetually extant, there would have bin no King.


Val. No truly, except in name only.


Pub. Therefore the Popular Assembly in a Commonwealth ought not to be
perpetually extant.


Val. To the end, you will say, that there may be some King.


Pub. Mock not: or what other guard of Liberty is there in any Commonwealth,
but the Popular Assembly?


Val. Com, let them assemble twice a year upon their ordinary Guard.


Pub. And what if there be an extraordinary occasion?


Val. Then, as often as there is any such occasion.


Pub. How much will this abate of their necessary Charge, or of the Salarys?
And how much better were it for a Representative to lead the Life of Statesmen
than of Carriers?


Val. Commonwealths, whose Assemblys have bin of the former kind, have called
them no otherwise than at stated times, or upon extraordinary occasions.


Pub. But then their Assemblys were not equal Representatives, but consisted of
such as being next at hand were still ready upon any occasion.


Val. That makes indeed a considerable difference: But were this Representative
always extant, I cannot see but it would have nothing to do.


Pub. And in case it be not always extant, you imagine that it may have something
to do.


Val. Yes.


Pub. Then whether gos it better with the Commonwealth when the Representative
has something to do, or when it has nothing to do?


Val. This is very quaint.


Pub. No truly, VALERIUS, it is plain, that the Guard of Liberty perpetually
extant, in doing nothing must do much; and not perpetually extant, in doing
much may do nothing.


Val. I am afraid that having nothing to do, they will make work.


Pub. Such I warrant you as the Parliament and the Army made the other day.


Val. Nay, I am not so wide. A civil Council and a standing Army must needs
have Interests much more distinct than two civil Assemblys; and where there is
not a like cause, I know well enough there cannot be the like effect.


Pub. I shall desire no more, than that you will hold to this; and then tell me
what Disputes there used to be between the Senate of Venice and the great
Council, which is perpetually extant, and consists of about two thousand.


Val. Nay, certain it is, that between those two there never was any dispute at
all.


Pub. Then tell me for what cause such a thing should any more happen between
the Assemblys proposed; or, according to your own rule, from like causes expect
like effects.


Val. You put me to it.


Pub. Nay, it is you that put me to it; for you will be presuming that this
Assembly can have nothing to do, before we com to consider what are their
proper Businesses and Functions.


Val. I beg your pardon, and what are those?


Pub. Why surely no small matters; for in every Commonwealth truly Popular, it
is inseparable from the Assembly of the People that first they wholly and only
have the right of Result in all matters of Lawgiving, of making Peace and War,
and in levying Men and Money: Secondly, That the ultimat Result in Judicature ly
to them: and thirdly, That they have right to call to account, and to punish
their Magistrates for all matters of Maladministration of Government.


Val. I assure you this must amount to a great deal of business.


Pub. Certain it is, that in some Commonwealths the Popular Assembly by this
means has bin perpetually employed.


Val. And so I think it might be in England.


Pub. It might; but I do not think it would. However, if it be in the undoubted
right of the Popular Assembly to proceed against their Magistrates for
Maladministration, would you leave it upon the hand of those Magistrates,
whether this Representative should assemble or no?


Val. Com, you have said enough, it were not prudent: but as to the matter of
Appeals, it is certain that in Israel the ultimat Resort was to the Sanhedrim
or 70 Elders.


Pub. I know it very well: nevertheless you shall find that the Congregation
judged Benjamin; and if you mark the Appeal to the 70 Elders, you shall find
that it was not an Appeal of the Party for Relief, but of the Judges in
inferior Courts for further light and direction in difficult cases of the Law.


Val. Let me but know in what manner this Assembly is to perform these
Functions, and I have don.


Pub. Why as to matter of Lawgiving, I told you that they wholly and only have
the right and power of Result.


Val. But to Result, there must necessarily go precedent Debate; seeing a Man,
much less an Assembly, resolves not upon any thing without some Considerations,
Motives, or Reasons thereto conducing, which ought to be first orderly and
maturely debated: and how will you bring a thousand men, especially being six
to four of the lower sort, to debate any thing with order and maturity?


Pub. You say that the Popular Assembly in Athens consisted at the least of
five thousand.


Val. And I said true.


Pub. Yet this Assembly debated: Why may not a thousand men debate as well as
five thousand?


Val. As well! Nay PUBLICOLA, if they debate no better in your Commonwealth
than they did in that, you may know what will become of it. And to tell you
true, I do not think that a thousand men can debate any whit more orderly and
maturely than five thousand.


Pub. And so think I too.


Val. How then?


Pub. How then? Why this is the reason of the Senate in every Commonwealth.


Val. So there must be a Senate, which amounts to thus much; without a Senate
there can be no Commonwealth, and with a Senate there will always be Practices
upon the Liberty of the People.


Pub. How prove you that?


Val. Why by the Senate of Lacedemon in the beginning, and by the Senate of Rome
throout.


Pub. But find you the like by the Senats of Athens and Venice?


Val. No.


Pub. Consider then that these were by Election of the People, and upon
frequent Removes, and that the former were defective in one or in both these
circumstances.


Val. You intend your Senate upon Removes then?


Pub. Right.


Val. And Elective by the People?


Pub. Yes.


Val. How? by the Popular Assembly, or by the body of the People in their
Precincts?


Pub. By the body of the People in their Precincts, at the same time when they
elect their other Deputys, and with the same circumstances, except that these
be all elected out of such as have a hundred pounds a year real or personal.


Val. What hurt, if they were elected by the Popular Assembly?


Pub. They would not derive so immediately, nor rise so equally from the People,
as when chosen in the Precincts; because this way every Shire coms necessarily
to have a share in the Senate: besides, wise men and understanding are better
known in their Tribes than they can be in an Assembly out of their Tribes,
especially while they are new comers; nor will the Popular Assembly afford so
good a choice as the whole People. There are other Reasons.


Val. Enough, enough. Of what number do you constitute this Senate?


Pub. Of three hundred.


Val. Why should not one hundred be full enough for a debating Council,
especially seeing Debate is the more orderly where the Counsillors are fewer?


Pub. You are to bear it in mind, that this Senate is upon annual change in one
third part.


Val. That is, every year one hundred having served three years, go out, and a
new hundred coms in.


Pub. Right: for which cause, to have one hundred well practiced indebate, your
Senate must consist of three hundred.


Val. May not those that go out com presently in again by a new Election?


Pub. Not at all; for that were yet another way of continuing the Government in
a few.


Val. Do you mean that no man shall serve in this Capacity, or in that of the
Popular Assembly, but once in his life?


Pub. I mean that a man, having served his term in one of these, may after a
like vacation or interval be elected again to serve in either of them, and not
before.


Val. At what age do you make a man capable of these Elections?


Pub. Not till thirty.


Val. He stays a great while ere he coms to preferment, and is soon out again:
at which rate a man should have much ado to attain to sufficient knowledge for
the leading of the Commonwealth.


Pub. This was never objected against Parlaments.


Val. It is true: but then the Election of Parlamentmen was not obliged to any
Interval, and diverse have bin of every Parliament that was summoned during their
Lives.


Pub. Parlaments when they were the most frequent, assembled not above once a
year, very rarely so often; and how long, pray, did they usually sit?


Val. Some two or three months.


Pub. I allow you the most you ask: at which rate a man that had sat in twenty
Parlaments, could not have sat above four years complete.


Val. And in your Parliament, at one Election he sits three.


Pub. Mark you that?


Val. Yes, and more: Whereas a Parlamentman without interval could in twenty
years have sat but four complete, in your Assemblys a man observing his
intervals, may in twenty years serve ten years complete.


Pub. You allow that, I hope, to be some advantage toward acquiring knowledge in
conduct; and yet anciently your Parlamentmen were in this point thought able
enough.


Val. Now would I desire no more than to be as fully satisfied, that these
Senators must be honest enough.


Pub. Which way can they be dishonest?


Val. Indeed I am not yet acquainted with their ways: but if nothing can be
proposed to the popular Assembly, except by these only, they should, I think,
propose nothing but what is for their own advantage.


Pub. They are the Senate; and in that they have all the advantages that a well
ordered Commonwealth can give to a Senate.


Val. But they will be still hankering after more.


Pub. As what?


Val. Why Riches or Power.


Pub. All Magistrates are accountable to the Popular Assembly; and so, without
acquisition of Power, I cannot imagine which way they should turn themselves to
the acquisition of Riches.


Val. They will drive then at Power; they will be coordinat.


Pub. In the World there has never yet bin any Senate that durst so much as
pretend to Power.


Val. No? Had not the Senate of Israel, and that of Lacedemon Power?


Pub. Executive Power they had, in as much as they were Judicatorys; but
Legislative or Soverain Power (which is that whereof we speak) they had none at
all.


Val. Other Senats have had other power, as in the managing of foren Affairs,
and the like.


Pub. Which still coms not to the point in hand, because in these and the like
matters, as the creation of diverse Magistrates, the Senate uses to be made
Plenipotentiary by the Popular Assembly, that is, by Law.


Val. I hear them talk of making a coordinat Senate first, and without the
People, and then of assembling a Parliament in the old way to govern with that
Senate.


Pub. Things, VALERIUS, are soon said; but if any Parliament whatever, so it be
elected by the People (and, perhaps, if otherwise) do not make it one of their
first works to pull down a coordinat Senate, I ask no credit to my Politics.


Val. This is to prophesy.


Pub. Then, to reason the case: I say, That the Senate assuming Power, the
popular Assembly falls immediately to debate; and the popular Assembly debating,
the Senate is ipso facto deposed, there being no other necessary use or function
of the Senate but Debate only.


Val. You said but now, That the Popular Assembly could not debate.


Pub. Not orderly and maturely: but upon such an occasion as this, they will do
as they can; nor is it avoidable.


Val. Nay, if there be some occasion in which you allow that the popular
Assembly must and ought to debate, there will hardly be any in which they will
be persuaded that they may not. So this will com to the pulling down of the
Senate as often as the People please.


Pub. Which is so much the rather to be feared, because you shall never find
that popular Assembly which did ever actually depose their Senate.


Val. Our Army has pulled down a good many Parlaments.


Pub. What is that to the purpose? Is our Army a popular Assembly? Yet let them
pull down a Parliament as often as they please, they must set up another; and in
this indeed there may be some resemblance: for let a popular Assembly pull down
the Senate as often as they please, they must set up another.


Val. Or a single Person.


Pub. Right: for that holds both ways too, and (as to our case) will stand
neither.


Val. The People of Athens debated, yet for all that their Senate was not
deposed.


Pub. Not formally; but it remained little better than a Warren, wherein great
Men did, as it were, start hares, to be hunted in the tumult of the popular
Assembly.


Val. Verily, PUBLICOLA, this Model of yours is a most entire thing.


Pub. This with the necessary consequences, as the division of the Senate into
Senatorian Councils, the adorning and actuating of this and the other Assembly
with fit Magistrates, whereof I have sufficiently discoursed in other places,
amounts to an entire thing.


Val. And you offer it freely.


Pub. I do.


Val. Would it not grieve you to see them crop a little of it, and spoil it?


Pub. They had better take it to some purpose.


Val. Nay, what they take will be to some purpose, I warrant you. Com, there is
a Party, a select, a refined Party, a Nation in a Nation, that must and will
govern.


Pub. That is it which I desire to see.


Val. You are of a rare temper; happy in unhappiness.


Pub. O I love frequent Changes.


Val. Is that any of your Virtues?


Pub. Yes, where we are certain never to go right, while there remains a way to
go wrong.


Val. They are confident men. They cannot be persuaded but they can govern the
World.


Pub. Till they have tried. Such as can govern the World, are such as can be
governed by Reason. Now there is no Party refined, select, or what you will in
England, amounting to one twentieth part of the whole People.


Val. One twentieth part of the People, for ought I know, may amount to a
hundred thousand; there is no Party any thing near this account, I dare say.


Pub. A twentieth part of the People can never govern the other nineteen, but
by a perpetual Army.


Val. They do not like that the worse.


Pub. The People having bin governed by a King without an Army, and being
governed by a Commonwealth with an Army, will detest the Government of a
Commonwealth, and desire that of a King.


Val. Yes, such is the spirit of the Nation.


Pub. Such is the spirit in this case of any Nation.


Val. And yet they make it a particular quarrel.


Pub. They make every thing particular: if you speak of Israel, Athens, Rome,
Venice, or the like, they hear you with volubility of countenance; and will not
have it that God ever minded the matter of Government, till he brought them in
play. Nay, tho they have com heels over head for this very thing, I know not
how often, yet they are resolved to take no warning.


Val. PUBLICOLA, you will be shent.


Pub. I am to perform my duty. To flatter is not my duty.


Val. But between you and me, Do you not think that the spirit of the Nation,
or the main body of the People of this Land, desires the restitution of their
ancient Government?


Pub. I make little doubt of it.


Val. How then in case of a Commonwealth are they to be trusted?


Pub. In case of a Commonwealth, it is not the People that are trusted, but the
Orders of the Commonwealth.


Val. The Commonwealth must consist of the People.


Pub. The People under the Monarchy, when that invaded them, invaded it.


Val. True, and in such a manner as has caused the ruin of it.


Pub. What was the spirit of the People then?


Val. But it is now another thing.


Pub. Nay, the very same: for then it invaded a Government that invaded their
Liberty, and now it would invade a Government that invades their Liberty.


Val. But how should this be mended?


Pub. Do you not see that this should not be mended, but encouraged?


Val. How should it be encouraged then?


Pub. By giving them a Form that must preserve their Liberty.


Val. I little doubt but there is in your Form a full security to the People of
their Liberty; but do you think that there is in it any full security that the
People shall not cast off this Form?


Pub. If it secures their Liberty, why should they?


Val. My question is not, why they should, but whether they can.


Pub. They cannot, without going against their own interest.


Val. But they can go against their own interest.


Pub. Nay, remember your self, whether the Form shown be not such, as you have
already granted can in no wise go beside the interest of the whole People.


Val. They that are now in power, have no trust at all in Forms.


Pub. Do they sail in Ships, not upon Planks? Do they ride Horses, not Hogs? Do
they travel in Coaches, not upon Hurdles? Do they live in Houses, not in
Ditches? Do they eat Bread, not Stones?


Val. Enough, enough.


Pub. But in so doing, they acknowledge such a Form to be security for such a
use or action. And must the form of a Commonwealth be the only form in which
they can allow no security for the proper use and action?


Val. They observe none of this.


Pub. Do they observe that there is any security in Men?


Val. That, especially in our times, were somewhat a hard matter.


Pub. And how many Securitys are there?


Val. I know no more, than one personal, or in Men; another real, or in Things.


Pub. Choose you whether you would have.


Val. Well, be the necessary action or use of your Form what it will, I would
see it more plainly and particularly demonstrated how the spirit of the Nation,
or the whole People, being freely eligible into your Assemblys, must presently
lose that inclination which now plainly they have to set up Monarchy, or to
persecute for Conscience.


Pub. You will allow no weight in the Argument, that a People in Liberty,
unless the Orders of their Commonwealth were first fundamentally ruined, that
is, broken in the balance or foundation, did never do either of these.


Val. What weight soever I allow to this Argument, it is no ways to my present
purpose.


Pub. You will put me then beside experience, and to show by what reason it is
that a Peartree must bear Pears, or why men gather not Grapes on Thorns, or
Figs on Thistles.


Val. Poor PUBLICOLA, be the task as hard as it will, I am for this time
resolved to hold you to it.


Pub. What is it then that any Government can be sufficiently founded or
balanced upon, but such an Interest as is sufficiently able to bear it?


Val. Good Sir, a Government ought to be founded upon Justice, I take it.


Pub. Right: and is not that Government which is founded upon an Interest not
sufficiently able to bear it, founded upon Injustice?


Val. I suspect whither this will go. A Government founded upon the overbalance
of Property, is legitimatly founded, and so upon Justice; but a Government
founded upon the underbalance of Property, must of necessity be founded upon
Force, or a standing Army. Is not this that which you mean by Interest
sufficient or not sufficient to sustain a Government?


Pub. You have it right.


Val. O Atheist! this damns the Government of the Saints.


Pub. Look you now, how irreligious a thing it may be made, to speak but with
common honesty. Do you think that such as are plainly Oligarchists, or shall
exercise by a force, and without election by the People, such a Power as is
both naturally and declaredly in the People, and in them only, can establish
their Throne upon Justice?


Val. No.


Pub. Do you think that such as are truly Saints, can establish their Throne
upon Injustice?


Val. No.


Pub. Why then you have granted, that such as are plainly Oligarchists cannot
be truly Saints. Again, do you still think, as you once intimated, that a
Government now introduced in England, exactly according to the Principles of
Prudence and Justice, would rule the Earth?


Val. Yes.


Pub. Do you think, that such as are truly Saints, if they introduce a
Government, ought to introduce it exactly according to the Principles of
Prudence and Justice?


Val. Yes,


Pub. Why then, let such as are truly Saints but see what it is to rule the
Earth, and take the Rule of the Earth.


Val. They will not approve of this way.


Pub. How! not the Saints approve of Prudence and Justice! Who is the Atheist
now, VALERIUS?


Val. Good PUBLICOLA, let us keep to the point in hand. You say, That the
security of Liberty lys not in the People, but in the form of their Government;
so I am yet to expect when you will show, what there is in your form, why it
must be impossible for the People under it to restore Monarchy, or to persecute
for Conscience.


Pub. See you not, that to do either of these under such a form, must be
pointblank against their Interest?


Val. But so either of these is now, and yet in this posture you will confess
that they would do both.


Pub. Mark how I am used. I speak of a Form supported by an Interest
sufficiently able to bear it, and of an Interest contained under a Form
sufficiently able to secure it; and you instance in a Posture which is no form
at all, but such a confusion among, and force upon the People, as creates an
Interest in them to rid themselves which way they can of such a misery.


Val. I did acknowledge and must confess, that your popular Assembly is such as
cannot err, except through ignorance; but through this, you your self have
acknowleg'd, and must confess, that it may err.


Pub. I retract nothing.


Val. Now first, or never, they will restore Monarchy through ignorance.


Pub. But they cannot do this first, therefore they can never do it.


Val. Why cannot the popular Assembly do this first?


Pub. Because it must first be proposed by a Senate, that can neither do any
such thing through ignorance nor through knowledge.


Val. Nay, then have at you; I will set this same Senate and Representative of
yours to work in such a manner, that you shall confess they may set up Monarchy.


Pub. Do your worst.


Val. Your Senate being assembled (I will not have them make long Speeches;


Pub. Nor I)


Val. Rises me up one of the Senators, and says, Mr. Speaker, this Nation has
bin long in labor, but now through the mercy of God, the Child is not only com to
the Birth, but there is also strength to bring forth: In the number of
Counsillors there is strength; the number of this House is good (far better
than has usually bin of late) and their Election has bin very free and fair.
Here is also, I know not how (but the Inventions of men are overrul'd by the
Providence of God) an extraordinary and exceeding great confluence of honest
men, who are not so well here; and if you determine any thing that is good for
your Country, will go home and pray for you. Now, Sir (to be brief) since our
Government consisted of King, Lords, and Commons, the ancient, the only, the
most happy Government that this Nation, nay, that the World ever knew, it is
but too well known, that we have had no Government at all: wherefore my opinion
is, that we propose, as they call it, to these honest men (who you need not
doubt will receive it with glad hearts) the restitution of Right, and of the
Government in this Nation by King, Lords, and Commons.

As sure as you live, PUBLICOLA, thus much being said, your whole Senate will
immediately agree to propose it to the Representative: and thus much being
proposed to the Representative, those People will throw up their Caps for joy,
and immediately return to their Houses.


Pub. But VALERIUS, thus much has bin said in Parliament when the House was
fuller; when they who were for this Restitution were backed by a single Person
in actual possession of the Throne; when over and above the zeal of the
Presbyterians, there were Partys that knew no other means of selfpreservation;
as without, Divines belaboring the Oak of every Pulpit; and within, Laywers,
Officers, and Pensioners: yet was it so far from being carried, that the single
Person has bin forced to dissolve Parlaments, and that through apparent danger of
being overrun by the Principles of a Commonwealth not in being. But if this
were so when a Commonwealth could scarce be hoped, what will it be when the
Commonwealth shall be in such a condition as cannot be withstood? for the Senate
can never com to propose any thing to the People without first agreing upon
debating what it is they will propose; nor is it possible that such Debate
should be brought to any end, but by reasons thereto conducing: now it must not
only be impossible to find reasons for the restitution of Monarchy, but the
reasons why Monarchy ought not to be restored must be obvious; not only in
regard that it is quite contrary to the interest of the Nation, and of these
Assemblys, but to the interest ten to one of every particular man in either of
these Assemblys: nor are or have the reasons bin less obvious, or less
ventilated in Parliament, why Monarchy as to this Nation is impossible in it
self.


Val. Will you say the like for Liberty of Conscience?


Pub. Yes; because without Liberty of Conscience, Civil Liberty cannot be
perfect; and without Civil Liberty, Liberty of Conscience cannot be perfect.


Val. These things are true, but they never will see them, never, PUBLICOLA:
you your self say, That the People cannot see, but they can feel.


Pub. I meant that of the diffusive Body of the People, not of the People under
good Orders; in which case they are the sharpest sighted of any kind of
Government whatsoever: and therefore it is not modest that you, or I, or any
particular Man or Party, blinded with selfconceit, should pretend to see with
such a Constitution; or show me that Ey under the Sun, that sees like that of
Venice. But putting the case it were otherwise as to seeing, these things are
plainly palpable or obvious to feeling.


Val. I have indeed observed, that in Commonwealths there are very few that see
or understand them, and yet their affection to that way of Government is
exceeding vigorous.


Pub. Whence can this otherwise be than from feeling? But one thing, VALERIUS,
I take at your hands extreme heavily.


Val. What is that, PUBLICOLA?


Pub. That you with one little Speech of a single Senator, should run so
regardlesly over these two Assemblys, without taking any notice at all of the
necessary Course of them.


Val. What Course, PUBLICOLA?


Pub. Why you might easily have thought that among three hundred Senators there
might have bin at least one hundred as good Speakers as yours.


Val. Have I said any thing to the contrary?


Pub. And do you or I what we can, ten to one of them will be longer winded
than you have allowed.


Val. For that matter let them please themselves.


Pub. Ay, but then you should not have made an end of your Debate in a minute.


Val. What is all this?


Pub. Why I say, They would have bin debating on that point at least a
fortnight.


Val. Well, and when that had bin don, would never have agreed.


Pub. No.


Val. Did not you say that before?


Pub. Well, but I am now upon another point; that was to the matter in debate,
this is to the manner of proceeding: imagine the matter had bin such upon which
they could have agreed.


Val. What then?


Pub. Then such an agreement had bin a Decree of the Senate.


Val. Is a Decree of the Senate binding?


Pub. If it be upon a Law made, it is binding; if upon a Law to be made, it is
to be proposed to the People. Now every Proposition to the People is to be
promulgated, that is, printed and published to the whole Nation six weeks
before the time that the Representative is to assemble and give the Vote of the
Commonwealth, or that test without which no such Proposition can be any Law.


Val. By this means it must follow, that the whole People both by Discourse and
Letters, debate six weeks together upon the matter.


Pub. You are right.


Val. How is it then that you say, The Representative of the People must not
debate? You allow to these less privilege than to the whole People.


Pub. No less, nor in this point any more.


Val. Yet dos this amount to Debate in those that are of the Representative.


Pub. You say well, but not to any Debate at all in the Representative.


Val. Why this Representative is nothing else but an Instrument or Method,
whereby to receive the Result of the whole Nation with order and expedition, and
without any manner of tumult or confusion.


Pub. And is that any thing the worse?


Val. No; but I am glad you have told it me: for that those of the
Representative would one way or other have Debate, I knew certainly.


Pub. In sum, are you satisfied, that the Spirit of the Nation, or the People,
however they may now under no Form at all, and in detestation of such as having
governed them by force, will let them see no way out of confusion, desire their
old Government, as having never yet known any other; yet under such a Form as
is proposed, can never go about to introduce* Monarchy, without obvious
discovery, that as to their Interest it is quite contrary, and as to it self
impossible?


Val. The satisfaction is pretty good.


Pub. Pretty good! give me but half so good, that the Spirit of the Army, not
formerly obedient to Parlaments, and now dreading or despising them, must
apprehend the restitution of Monarchy to be quite contrary to their interest.


Val. You surprise me: for if the Army will have no Parliament, and a King
restored can now in England without an Army have no Government, they may imagine
this their only way to Greatness and Continuance.


Pub. Had not the Oligarchy then, if they meant well, better to have used sober
expressions, and minded what those true and real Interests are which in the
foundation and preservation of every kind of Government are paramount, than to
have overcast them with the mist of new affected Phrases, and fallen on
conjuring up Spirits?


Val. You have conjured up a Spirit that will keep me waking.


Pub. Set him on pulling down the Law and the Ministry; when that is don, let
him blow up Windsor Castle, Hampton Court, and throw Whitehall into the Thames.


Val. It is the only way, for then there can be no King.


Pub. You may be sure of that, seeing the Count of Holland's Domain, and his
Houses are yet not only standing, but diligently preserved by the Hollanders.


Val. PUBLICOLA, have you any more to tell me?


Pub. VALERIUS, have you any more to ask me?


Val. Not, except why you have not given the Parliament to understand thus much.


Pub. I have printed it over and over.


Val. They take no great notice of Books; you should have laid it, as they say,
in their dish by some direct Address, as a Petition, or so.


Pub. I did petition the Committee for Government.


Val. What answer did they make you?


Pub. None at all.


Val. I would have gone further, and have presented it to the House.


Pub. Toward this also I went as far as I could.


Val. How far was that?


Pub. Why, I think my Petition may have bin worn out in the pockets of some two
or three Members.


Val. Have you a Copy of it about you?


Pub. Let me see -- here are many Papers; this same is it.

To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, etc.
The Humble Petition, etc.
Shows,

THAT what neither is, nor ever was in Nature, can never be in Nature.

THAT without a King and Lords, no Government either is, or ever was in Nature
(but in mere force) other than by a Senate indu'd with Authority to debate and
propose; and by a numerous Assembly of the People wholly and only invested with
the right of Result in all matters of Lawgiving, of making Peace and War, and
of levying Men and Money.

WHEREFORE your Petitioner (to disburden his Conscience in a matter of such
concern to his Country) most humbly and earnestly prays and beseeches this
Parliament to take into speedy and serious consideration the irrefragable truth
of the Premises, and what thereupon must assuredly follow, that is, either the
institution of a Commonwealth in the whole People of England (without
exception, or with exception for a time, of so few as may be) by way of a
Senate, and a numerous Assembly of the People, to the ends, and for the
respective Functions aforesaid; or the inevitable ruin of this Nation, which
God of his mercy avert.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc.

Val. I would it had bin delivered.


Pub. Look you, if this had bin presented to the House, I intended tohave added
this other Paper, and to have printed them together.

The Petitioner to the Reader.
Reader,
I SAY not that the Form contained in the Petition (if we had it, and no more)
would be perfect; but that without thus much (which rightly introduced,
introduces the rest) there neither is, was, nor can be any such thing as a
Commonwealth, or Government without a King and Lords, in Nature.

WHERE there is a coordinat Senate, there must be a King, or it falls instantly
by the People; as the King failing, the House of Peers fell by the Commons.

WHERE there is a Senate not elective by the People, there is a perpetual Feud
between the Senate and the People, as in Rome.

TO introduce either of these Causes, is certainly and inevitably to introduce
one of these Effects; and if so, then who are Cavaliers, I leave you to judge
hereafter.

BUT to add farther reason to experience. All Civil Power among us (not only by
declaration of Parliament, but by the nature of Property) is in and from the
People.

WHERE the Power is in the People, there the Senate can legitimatly be no more
to the Popular Assembly, than my Counsil at Law is to me, that is (auxilium,
non imperium) a necessary Aid, not a Competitor or Rival in Power.

WHERE the Aids of the People become their Rivals or Competitors in Power, there
their Shepherds become Wolves, their Peace Discord, and their Government Ruin.
But to impose a select or coordinat Senate upon the People, is to give them
Rivals and Competitors in Power.

SOME perhaps (such is the temper of the times) will say, That so much human
Confidence as is expressed, especially in the Petition, is Atheistical. But how
were it Atheistical, if I should as confidently foretell, that a Boy must expire
in Nonage, or become a Man? I prophesy no otherwise; and this kind of Prophesy
is also of God, by those Rules of his Providence, which in the known Government
of the World are infallible. In the right observation and application of these
consists all human Wisdom; and we read that a poor man delivered a City by his
Wisdom, Eccles. 9. 14.
yet was this poor man forgotten. But if the Premises of this Petition fail, or
one part of the Conclusion coms not to pass accordingly, let me hit the other
mark of this ambitious Address, and remain a Fool upon Record in Parliament to
all Posterity.


Val. Thou Boy! and yet I hope well of thy Reputation.


Pub. Would it were but as good now, as it will be when I can make no use of it.


Val. The Major of the Petition is in some other of your Writings; and I
remember some Objections which have bin made against it: As, that a non esse nec
fuisse, non datur argumentum ad non posse.


Pub. Say that in English.


Val. What if I cannot? are not you bound to answer a thing, tho it cannot be
said in English?


Pub. No truly.


Val. Well, I will say it in English then. Tho there neither be any House of
Gold, nor ever were any House of Gold, yet there may be a House of Gold.


Pub. Right: but then, a non esse nec fuisse in natura, datur argumentum ad non
posse in natura.


Val. I hope you can say this in English too.


Pub. That I can, now you have taught me. If there were no such thing as Gold
in nature, there never could be any House of Gold.


Val. Softly. The frame of a Government is as much in Art, and as little in
Nature, as the frame of a House.


Pub. Both softly and surely. The Materials of a Government are as much in
Nature, and as little in Art, as the Materials of a House. Now as far as Art is
necessarily disposed by the nature of its Foundation or Materials, so far it is
in Art as in Nature.


Val. What call you the Foundation, or the Materials of Government?


Pub. That which I have long since proved, and you granted, The Balance, the
distribution of Property, and the Power thence naturally deriving; which as it
is in one, in a few or in all, dos necessarily dispose of the form or frame of
the Government accordingly.


Val. Be the Foundation or Materials of a House what they will, the Frame or
Superstructures may be diversely wrought up or shapen; and so may those of a
Commonwealth.


Pub. True: but let a House be never so diversely wrought up or shapen, it must
consist of a Roof and Walls.


Val. That Is certain.


Pub. And so must a Commonwealth of a Senate and of a Popular Assembly, which is
the sum of the Minor in the Petition.


Val. The Mathematicians say, They will not be quarrelsom; but in their Sphere
there are things altogether new in the World, as the present posture of the
Heavens is, and as was the Star in Cassiopoeia.


Pub. VALERIUS, if the Major of the Petition extends as far as is warranted by
SOLOMON, I mean, that there is nothing new under the Sun, what new things there
may be, or have bin above the Sun, will make little to the present purpose.


Val. It is true; but if you have no more to say, they will take this but for
shifting.


Pub. Where there is Sea, as between Sicily and Naples, there was anciently
Land; and where there is Land, as in Holland, there was anciently Sea.


Val. What then?


Pub. Why then the present posture of the Earth is other than it has bin, yet
is the Earth no new thing, but consists of Land and Sea, as it did always; so
whatever the present posture of the Heavens be, they consist of Star and
Firmament, as they did always.


Val. What will you say then to the Star in Cassiopoeia?


Pub. Why I say, if it consisted of the same matter with other Stars, it was no
new thing in nature, but a new thing in Cassiopoeia; as were there a
Commonwealth in England, it would be no new thing in Nature, but a new thing in
England.


Val. The Star you will say in Cassiopoeia, to have bin a new thing in nature,
must have bin no Star, because a Star is not a new thing in nature.


Pub. Very good.


Val. You run upon the matter, but the newness in the Star was in the manner of
the generation.


Pub. At Putzuoli near Naples, I have seen a Mountain that rose up from under
water in one night, and poured a good part of the Lake anciently called Lucrin
into the Sea.


Val. What will you infer from hence?


Pub. Why that the new and extraordinary generation of a Star, or of a
Mountain, no more causes a Star, or a Mountain to be a new thing in nature,
than the new and extraordinary generation of a Commonwealth causes a
Commonwealth to be a new thing in nature. ARISTOTLE reports, that the Nobility
of Tarantum being cut off in a Battle, that Commonwealth became popular. And if
the Powder Plot in England had destroyed the King and the Nobility, it is
possible that Popular Government might have risen up in England, as the
Mountain did at Putzuoli. Yet for all these, would there not have bin any new
thing in nature.


Val. Some new thing (through the blending of unseen causes) there may seem to be
in shuffling; but Nature will have her course, there is no other than the old
game.


Pub. VALERIUS, let it rain or be fair weather, the Sun to the dissolution of
Nature shall ever rise; but it is now set, and I apprehend the mist.


Val. Dear PUBLICOLA, your Health is my own; I bid you goodnight.


Pub. Goodnight to you, VALERIUS.


Val. One word more, PUBLICOLA: Pray make me a present of those same Papers,
and with your leave and license, I will make use of my Memory to commit the
rest of this Discourse to writing, and print it.


Pub. They are at your disposing.


Val. I will not do it as has bin don, but with your name to it.


Pub. Whether way you like best, most noble VALERIUS.


October. 22. 1659.

Published from the Author's own Manuscript.
CHAP. I.
Of GOVERNMENT.
1. A PEOPLE is either under a state of Civil Government, or in a state of
Civil War; or neither under a state of Civil Government, nor in a state of
Civil War.

2. CIVIL Government is an Art whereby a People rule themselves, or are ruled by
others.

3. THE Art of Civil Government in general is twofold, National, or Provincial.

4. NATIONAL Government is that by which a Nation is governed independently, or
within it self.

5. PROVINCIAL Government is that by which a Province is governed dependently,
or by some foren Prince or State.

6. A PEOPLE is neither governed by themselves, nor by others, but by reason of
some external Principle thereto forcing them.

7. FORCE is of two kinds, Natural and Unnatural.

8. NATURAL Force consists in the vigor of Principles, and their natural
necessary Operations.

9. UNNATURAL Force is an external or adventitious opposition to the vigor of
Principles, and their necessary working, which, from a violation of Nature, is
called Violence.

10. NATIONAL Government is an effect of natural Force, or Vigor.

11. PROVINCIAL Government is an effect of unnatural Force, or Violence.

12. THE natural Force which works or produces National Government (of which
only I shall speak hereafter) consists in Riches.

13. THE Man that cannot live upon his own, must be a Servant; but he that can
live upon his own, may be a Freeman.

14. WHERE a People cannot live upon their own, the Government is either
Monarchy, or Aristocracy: where a People can live upon their own, the
Government may be Democracy.

15. A MAN that could live upon his own, may yet, to spare his own, and live
upon another, be a Servant: but a People that can live upon their own, cannot
spare their own, and live upon another; but (except they be no Servants, that
is, except they com to a Democracy) they must wast their own by maintaining
their Masters, or by having others to live upon them.

16. WHERE a People that can live upon their own, imagine that they can be
governed by others, and not lived upon by such Governors, it is not the Genius
of the People, it is the Mistake of the People.

17. WHERE a People that can live upon their own, will not be governed by
others lest they be lived upon by others, it is not the Mistake of the People,
it is the Genius of the People.

18. OF Government there are three Principles; Matter, Privation, and Form.

CHAP. II.
Of the Matter of Government.
1. THAT which is the Matter of Government, is what we call an Estate, be it in
Lands, Goods, or Money.

2. IF the Estate be more in Money than in Land, the port or garb of the Owner
gos more upon his Monys than his Lands; which with private Men is ordinary, but
with Nations (except such only as live more upon their Trade than upon their
Territory) is not to be found: for which cause overbalance of Riches in Money or
Goods, as to the sequel of these Aphorisms, is altogether omitted.

3. IF the Estate be more in Land than in Goods or Money, the garb and port of
the Owner (whether a Man or a Nation) gos more if not altogether upon his Land.

4. IF a Man has some Estate, he may have some Servants or a Family, and
consequently some Government, or something to govern: if he has no Estate, he can
have no Government.

5. WHERE the eldest of many Brothers has all, or so much that the rest for
their livelihood stand in need of him, that Brother is as it were Prince in
that Family.

6. WHERE of many Brothers the eldest has but an equal share, or not so inequal
as to make the rest to stand in need of him for their livelihood, that Family
is as it were a Commonwealth.

7. DISTRIBUTION of shares in Land, as to the three grand Interests, the King,
the Nobility, and the People, must be equal or inequal.

8. EQUAL distribution of Land, as if one man or a few men have one half of the
Territory, and the People have the other half, causes privation of Government,
and a state of Civil War: for the Lord or Lords on the one side being able to
assert their pretension or right to rule, and the People on the other their
pretension or right to Liberty, that Nation can never com under any form of
Government till that Question be decided; and, Property being not by any Law to
be violated or moved, any such Question cannot be decided but by the Sword only.



10. ALL Government is Interest, and the predominant Interest gives the Matter
or Foundation of the Government.

11. IF one man has the whole, or two parts in three of the whole Land or
Territory, the Interest of one man is the predominant Interest, and causes
absolute Monarchy.

12. IF a few men have the whole, or two parts in three of the whole Land or
Territory, the Interest of the few or of the Nobility is the predominant
Interest; and, were there any such thing in nature, would cause a pure
Aristocracy.

13. IT being so that pure Aristocracy, or the Nobility having the whole, or
two parts in three of the whole Land or Territory, without a Moderator or
Prince to balance them, is a state of War, in which every one, as he grows
eminent or potent, aspires to Monarchy; and that not any Nobility can have
Peace, or can reign without having such a Moderator or Prince, as on the one
side they may balance or hold in from being absolute, and on the ot^^r side may
balance or hold them and their Factions from flying out into Arms: it follows,
that if a few men have the whole, or two parts in three of the whole Land or
Territory, the Interest of the Nobility being the predominant Interest, must of
necessity produce regulated Monarchy.

14. IF the Many, or the People, have the whole, or two parts in three of the
whole Land or Territory, the Interest of the Many or of the People is the
predominant Interest, and causes Democracy.

15. A PEOPLE neither under absolute or under regulated Monarchy, nor yet under
Democracy, are under a privation of Government.

CHAP. III.
Of the Privation of Government.
1. WHERE a People are not in a state of Civil Government, but in a state of
Civil War; or where a People are neither under a state of Civil Government, nor
under a state of Civil War, there the People are under Privation of Government.

2. WHERE one Man, not having the whole, or two parts in three of the whole
Land or Territory, yet assumes to himself the whole Power; there the People are
under Privation of Government, and this Privation is called Tyranny.

3. WHERE a few Men, not having the whole, or about two parts in three of the
whole Land or Territory, yet assume to themselves the whole Power; there the
People are under Privation of Government, and this Privation is called
Oligarchy.

4. WHERE the Many, or the People, not having the whole, or two parts in three
of the whole Land or Territory, yet assume to themselves the whole Power; there
the People are under Privation of Government, and this Privation is called
Anarchy.

5. WHERE the Tyranny, the Oligarchy, or the Anarchy, not having in the Land or
Territory such a full share as may amount to the truth of Government, have
nevertheless such a share in it as may

6. WHERE the Tyranny, the Oligarchy, or the Anarchy, have not any such share
in the Land or Territory as may maintain an Army, there the People are in
privation of Government; which Privation is neither a state of Civil
Government, nor a state of Civil War.

7. WHERE the People are neither in a state of Civil Government, nor in a state
of Civil War, there the Tyranny, the Oligarchy, or the Anarchy, cannot stand by
any force of Nature, because it is void of any natural Foundation; nor by any
force of Arms, because it is not able to maintain an Army; and so must fall
away of it self through the want of a Foundation, or be blown up by some tumult:
and in this kind of Privation the Matter or Foundation of a good orderly
Government is ready and in being, and there wants nothing to the perfection of
the same, but proper Superstructures or Form.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Form of Government.
1. THAT which gives the being, the action, and the denomination to a Creature
or Thing, is the Form of that Creature or Thing.

2. THERE is in Form something that is not Elementary but Divine.

3. THE contemplation of Form is astonishing to Man, and has a kind of trouble
or impulse accompanying it, that exalts his Soul to God.

4. AS the Form of a Man is the Image of God, so the Form of a Government is
the Image of Man.

5. MAN is both a sensual and a philosophical Creature.

6. SENSUALITY in a Man is when he is led only as are the Beasts, that is, no
otherwise than by Appetit.

7. PHILOSOPHY is the knowledge of Divine and Human Things.

8. TO preserve and defend himself against Violence, is natural to Man as he is
a sensual Creature.

9. TO have an impulse, or to be raised upon contemplation of natural things to
the Adoration or Worship of God, is natural to Man as he is a Philosophical
Creature.

10. FORMATION of Government is the creation of a Political Creature after the
Image of a Philosophical Creature; or it is an infusion of the Soul or Facultys
of a Man into the body of a Multitude.

11. THE more the Soul or Facultys of a Man (in the manner of their being
infused into the body of a Multitude) are refined or made incapable of Passion,
the more perfect is the Form of Government.

12. NOT the refined Spirit of a Man, or of some Men, is a good Form of
Government; but a good Form of Government is the refined Spirit of a Nation.



14. LANGUAGE is not a more natural intercourse between the Soul of one man and
another, than Religion is between God and the Soul of a man.

15. AS not this Language, nor that Language, but some Language; so not this
Religion, nor that Religion, yet some Religion is natural to every Nation.

16. THE Soul of Government, as the true and perfect Image of the Soul of Man,
is every whit as necessarily religious as rational.

17. THE Body of a Government, as consisting of the sensual part of Man, is
every whit as preservative and defensive of it self as sensual Creatures are of
themselves.

18. THE Body of a Man, not actuated or led by the Soul, is a dead thing out of
pain and misery; but the Body of a People, not actuated or led by the Soul of
Government, is a living thing in pain and misery.

19. THE Body of a People, not led by the reason of the Government, is not a
People, but a Herd; not led by the Religion of the Government, is at an inquiet
and an uncomfortable loss in it self; not disciplined by the conduct of the
Government, is not an Army for defense of it self, but a Rout; not directed by
the Laws of the Government, has not any rule of right; and without recourse to
the Justice or Judicatorys of the Government, has no remedy of wrongs.

20. IN contemplation of, and in conformity to the Soul of man, as also for
supply of those his Necessitys which are not otherwise supplied, or to be
supplied by Nature, Form of Government consists necessarily of these five
parts: The Civil, which is the Reason of the People; the Religious, which is
the Comfort of the People; the Military, which is the Captain of the People;
the Laws, which are the Rights of the People; and the Judicatorys, which are
the Avengers of their Wrongs.

21. THE parts of Form in Government are as the Offices in a House; and the
Orders of a Form of Government are as the Orders of a House or Family.

22. GOOD Orders make evil men good, and bad Orders make good men evil.

23. OLIGARCHISTS (to the end they may keep all others out of the Government)
pretending themselves to be Saints, do also pretend that they in whom Lust
reigns, are not fit for Reign or for Government. But Libido dominandi, the Lust
of Government, is the greatest Lust, which also reigns most in those that have
least right, as in Oligarchists: for many a King and many a People have and had
unquestionable Right, but an Oligarchist never; whence from their own argument,
the Lust of Government reigning most in Oligarchists, it undeniably follows
that Oligarchists of all men are least fit for Government.

24. AS in Houses not differing in the kinds of their Offices, the Orders of
the Familys differ much; so the difference of Form in different Governments
consists not in the kinds or number of the Parts, which in every one is alike,
but in the different ways of ordering

25. THE Orders of the Form, which are the manners of the mind of the
Government, follow the temperament of the Body, or the distribution of the
Lands or Territorys, and the Interests thence arising.

26. THE Interest of Arbitrary Monarchy is the absoluteness of the Monarch; the
Interest of Regulated Monarchy is the greatness of the Nobility; the Interest
of Democracy is the felicity of the People: for in Democracy the Government is
for the use of the People, and in Monarchy the People are for the use of the
Government, that is, of one Lord or more.

27. THE use of a Horse without his Provender, or of the People without some
regard had to the necessitys of Human Nature, can be none at all: nor are those
necessitys of Nature in any Form whatsoever to be otherwise provided for than
by those five parts already mentioned; for which cause every Government
consists of five parts* the Civil, the Religious, the Military, the Laws, and
the Judicatorys.

CHAP. V.
Of Form in the Civil part.
1. THOSE Naturalists that have best written of Generation, do observe that all
things proceed from an Eg, and that there is in every Eg a Punctum saliens, or
a part first moved, as the purple Speck observed in those of Hens; from the
working whereof the other Organs or fit Members are delineated, distinguished,
and wrought into one Organical Body.

2. A NATION without Government, or fallen into privation of Form, is like an
Eg unhatch'd; and the Punctum saliens, or first mover from the corruption of
the Former to the generation of the succeding Form, is either a sole Legislator
or a Council.

3. A SOLE Legislator, proceeding according to Art or Knowledge, produces
Government in the whole piece at once and in perfection. But a Council
(proceeding not according to Art, or what in a new case is necessary or fit for
them, but according to that which they call the Genius of the People still
hankering after the things they have bin used to, or their old Customs, how
plain soever it be made in reason that they can no longer fit them) make
patching work, and are Ages about that which is very seldom or never brought by
them to any perfection; but commonly coms by the way to ruin, leaving the
noblest Attemts under reproach, and the Authors of them exposed to the greatest
miserys while they live, if not their Memorys when they are dead and gone to the
greatest infamy.

4. IF the Punctum saliens, or first mover in generation of the Form be a sole
Legislator, his proceeding is not only according to Nature, but according to Art
also, and begins with the Delineation of distinct Orders or Members.



6. PRECINCTS in absolute Monarchy are commonly called Provinces; and as to the
delineation or stating of them, they may be equal or inequal. Precincts in
regulated Monarchy, where the Lords or Nobility as to their Titles or Estates
ought not to be equal, but to differ as one Star differs from another in Glory,
are commonly called Countys, and ought to be inequal. Precincts in Democracy,
where without equality in the Electors there will hardly be any equality in the
Elected; or where without equality in the Precincts, it is almost, if not
altogether impossible there should be equality in the Commonwealth, are
properly called Tribes, and ought by all means to be equal.

7. EQUALITY or Parity has bin represented an odious thing, and made to imply
the levelling of men's Estates; but if a Nobility, how inequal soever in their
Estates or Titles, yet to com to the truth of Aristocracy, must as to their
Votes or participation in the Government be pares regni, that is to say Peers,
or in parity among themselves: as well likewise the People, to attain to the
truth of Democracy, may be Peers, or in parity among themselves, and yet not as
to their Estates be obliged to levelling.

8. INDUSTRY of all things is the most accumulative, and Accumulation of all
things hates levelling: The Revenue therefore of the People being the Revenue of
Industry, tho some Nobility (as that of Israel, or that of Lacedemon) may be
found to have bin Levellers, yet not any People in the World.

9. PRECINCTS being stated, are in the next place to be formed to their proper
Offices and Functions, according to the truth of the Form to be introduced;
which in general is to form them as it were into distinct Governments, and to
indow them with distinct Governors.

10. GOVERNMENTS or Governors are either Supreme or Subordinat. For absolute
Monarchy to admit in its Precincts any Government or Governors that are not
subordinat but supreme, were a plain contradiction. But that regulated
Monarchy, and that Democracy may do it, is seen in the Princes of Germany, and
in the Cantons of Switzerland: Nevertheless these being Governments that have
derived this not from the Wisdom of any Legislator, but from accident, and an
ill disposition of the matter, whereby they are not only incapable of Greatness,
but even of any perfect state of Health, they com not under the consideration
of Art, from which they derive not; but of Chance, to which we leave them. And,
to speak according to Art, we pronounce that, as well in Democracy and in
regulated as in absolute Monarchy, Governors and Governments in the several
divisions ought not to be Soveraintys, but subordinat to one common Soverain.

11. SUBORDINAT Governors are at will, or for life, or upon Rotation or Changes.

12. IN absolute Monarchy the Governors of Provinces must either be at will, or
upon Rotation, or else the Monarch cannot be absolute. In regulated Monarchy
the Governors of the Countys may be for life or hereditary, as in Counts or
Lords; or for some certain term and upon rotation, as in Viscounts or Sherifs.
In Democracy

13. THE term in which a man may administer Government to the good of it, and
not attemt upon it to the harm of it, is the fittest term of bearing
Magistracy; and three years in a Magistracy described by the Law under which a
man has lived, and which he has known by the carriage or practice of it in
others, is a term in which he cannot attemt upon his Government for the hurt of
it, but may administer it for the good of it, tho such a Magistracy or
Government should consist of diverse Functions.

14. GOVERNORS in subordinat Precincts have commonly three Functions; the one
Civil, the other Judicial, and the third Military.

15. IN absolute Monarchy the Government of a Province consists of one
Beglerbeg, or Governor for three years, with his Council or Divan for Civil
matters, and his Guard of Janizarys and Spahys, that is, of Horse and Foot,
with power to levy and command the Timariots or Military Farmers.

16. IN regulated Monarchy the Government of a County consists of one Count or
Lord for Life, or of one Viscount or Sherif for some limited term, with power in
certain Civil and Judicial matters, and to levy and command the Posse Comitatus.

17. IN Democracy the Government of a Tribe consists of one Council or Court,
in one third part elected annually by the People of that Tribe for the Civil,
for the Judicial, and for the Military Government of the same; as also to
preside at the Election of Deputys in that Tribe toward the annual supply in
one third part of the common and soverain Assemblys of the whole Commonwealth,
that is to say, of the Senate and of the Popular Assembly; in which two these
Tribes, thus delineated and distinguished into proper Organs or fit Members to
be actuated by those soverain Assemblys, are wrought up again by connection into
one entire and organical Body.

18. A PARLIAMENT of Physicians would never have found out the Circulation of
the Blood, nor could a Parliament of Poets have written VIRGIL'S Aeneis; of this
kind therefore in the formation of Government is the proceeding of a sole
Legislator. But if the People without a Legislator set upon such work by a
certain Instinct that is in them, they never go further than to choose a
Council; not considering that the formation of Government is as well a work of
Invention as of Judgment; and that a Council, tho in matters laid before them
they may excel in Judgment, yet Invention is as contrary to the nature of a
Council as it is to Musicians in consort, who can play and judge of any Air that
is laid before them, tho to invent a part of Music they can never well agree.

19. IN Councils there are three ways of Result, and every way of Result makes
a different Form. A Council with the Result in the Prince makes absolute
Monarchy. A Council with the Result in the Nobility, or where without the
Nobility there can be no Result, makes Aristocracy, or regulated Monarchy. A
Council with the Result

20. THE ultimat Result in every Form is the Soverain Power. If the ultimat
Result be wholly and only in the Monarch, that Monarchy is absolute. If the
ultimat Result be not wholly and only in the Monarch, that Monarchy is
regulated. If the Result be wholly and only in the People, the People are in
Liberty, or the Form of the Government is Democracy.

21. IT may happen that a Monarchy founded upon Aristocracy, and so as to the
Foundation regulated, may yet com by certain Expedients or Intrusions (as at
this day in France and in Spain) as to the Administration of it to appear or to
be called absolute; of which I shall treat more at large when I com to speak of
Reason of State, or of Administration.

22. THE ultimat Result in the whole body of the People, if the Commonwealth be
of any considerable extent, is altogether impracticable; and if the ultimat
Result be but in a part of the People, the rest are not in Liberty, nor is the
Government Democracy.

23. AS a whole Army cannot charge at one and the same time, yet is so ordered
that every one in his turn coms up to give the Charge of the whole Army; so tho
the whole People cannot give the Result at one and the same time, yet may they
be so ordered that every one in his turn may com up to give the Result of the
whole People.

24. A POPULAR Assembly, rightly ordered, brings up every one in his turn to
give the Result of the whole People.

25. IF the popular Assembly consists of one thousand or more, annually
changeable in one third part by new Elections made in the Tribes by the People,
it is rightly ordered; that is to say, so constituted that such an Assembly can
have no other Interest whereupon to give the Result, than that only which is the
Interest of the whole People.

26. BUT in vain is Result where there is not Matter to resolve upon; and where
maturity of Debate has not preceded, there is not yet Matter to resolve upon.

27. DEBATE to be mature cannot be managed by a Multitude; and Result to be
popular cannot be given by a Few.

28. IF a Council capable of Debate has also the Result, it is Oligarchy. If an
Assembly capable of the Result has Debate also, it is Anarchy. Debate in a
Council not capable of Result, and Result in an Assembly not capable of Debate,
is Democracy.

29. IT is not more natural to a People in their own affairs to be their own
chusers, than upon that occasion to be provided of their Learned Counsil; in so
much that the saying of PACUVIUS, That either a People is governed by a King or
counsil'd by a Senate, is universally approved.

30. WHERE the Senate has no distinct Interest, there the People are
counsillable, and venture not upon Debate: where the Senate has any distinct
Interest, there the People are not counsillable, but fall into Debate among
themselves, and so into Confusion.

31. OF Senats there are three kinds: First, A Senate eligible out of Rome,
which will not be contented to be merely the Council of the People, but will be
contending that they are Lords of the People, never quitting their pretensions
till they have ruined the Commonwealth. Secondly, A Senate elected for life, as
that of Sparta, which will be a species of Nobility, and will have a kind of
Spartan King, and a Senate upon rotation; which being rightly constituted is
quiet, and never pretends more than to be the learned Council of the People.

32. THIRDLY, Three hundred Senators, for example, changeable in one third part
of them annually by new Elections in the Tribes, and constituted a Senate to
debate upon all Civil matters, to promulgat to the whole Nation what they have
debated, this Promulgation to be made some such convenient time before the
Matters by them debated are to be proposed, that they may be commonly known and
well understood, and then to propose the same to the Result of the Popular
Assembly, which only is to be the Test of every public Act, is a Senate rightly
ordered.

FORM of Government (as to the Civil part) being thus completed, is sum'd up in
the three following Aphorisms.

33. ABSOLUTE Monarchy (for the Civil part of the Form) consists of distinct
Provinces under distinct Governors, equally subordinat to a Grand Signor or
sole Lord, with his Council or Divan debating and proposing, and the Result
wholly and only in himself.

34. REGULATED Monarchy (for the Civil part of the Form) consists of distinct
Principalitys or Countys under distinct Lords or Governors, which if rightly
constituted are equally subordinat to the King and his Peerage, or to the King
and his Estates assembled in Parliament, without whose Consent the King can do
nothing.

35. DEMOCRACY (for the Civil part of the Form) if rightly constituted,
consists of distinct Tribes under the Government of distinct Magistrates,
Courts, or Councils, regularly changeable in one third part upon annual
Elections, and subordinat to a Senate consisting of not above three hundred
Senators, and to a popular Assembly consisting of not under a thousand Deputys;
each of these also regularly changeable in one third part upon annual Elections
in the Tribes, the Senate having the Debate, and the Popular Assembly the Result
of the whole Commonwealth.

CHAP. VI.
Of Form in the Religious part.
1. FORM for the Religious part either admits of Liberty of Conscience in the
whole or in part; or dos not admit of Liberty of Conscience at all.

2. LIBERTY of Conscience entire, or in the whole, is where a man according to
the dictats of his own Conscience may have the

3. LIBERTY of Conscience in part is, where a man according to the dictats of
his Conscience may have the free exercise of his Religion; but if it be not the
National Religion, he is thereby incapable of Preferment or Employment in the
State.

4. WHERE the Form admits not of the free exercise of any other Religion except
that only which is National, there is no Liberty of Conscience.

5. MEN who have the means to assert Liberty of Conscience, have the means to
assert Civil Liberty; and will do it if they are oppressed in their Consciences.

6. MEN participating in Property, or in Employment Civil or Military, have the
means to assert Liberty of Conscience.

7. ABSOLUTE Monarchy, being sole Proprietor, may admit of Liberty of
Conscience to such as are not capable of Civil or Military Employment, and yet
not admit of the means to assert Civil Liberty; as the Greec Christians under
the Turk, who, tho they enjoy Liberty of Conscience, cannot assert Civil
Liberty, because they have neither Property nor any Civil or Military
Employments.

8. REGULATED Monarchy, being not sole Proprietor, may not admit naturally of
Liberty of Conscience, lest it admits of the means to assert Civil Liberty, as
was lately seen in England by pulling down the Bishops, who, for the most part,
are one half of the Foundation of regulated Monarchy.

9. DEMOCRACY being nothing but entire Liberty; and Liberty of Conscience
without Civil Liberty, or Civil Liberty without Liberty of Conscience being but
Liberty by halves, must admit of Liberty of Conscience both as to the
perfection of its present being, and as to its future security: As to the
perfection of its present being, for the Reasons already shown, or that she do
not enjoy Liberty by halves; and for future security, because this excludes
absolute Monarchy, which cannot stand with Liberty of Conscience in the whole,
and regulated Monarchy, which cannot stand safely with it in any part.

10. IF it be said that in France there is Liberty of Conscience in part, it is
also plain that while the Hierarchy is standing this Liberty is falling, and
that if ever it coms to pull down the Hierarchy it pulls down that Monarchy
also: wherefore the Monarchy or Hierarchy will be beforehand with it, if they
see their true Interest.

11. THE ultimat Result in Monarchy being that of one Man, or of a few Men, the
National Religion in Monarchy may happen not to be the Religion of the major
part of the People; but the Result in Democracy being in the major part of the
People, it cannot happen but that the National Religion must be that of the
major part of the People.

12. THE major part of the People, being in matters of Religion enable to be
their own Leaders, will in such cases therefore have a public leading; or, being
debarred of their Will in that particular, are debarred of their Liberty of
Conscience.

13. WHERE the major part of the People is debarred of their Liberty by the
minor, there is neither Liberty of Conscience nor Democracy, but Spiritual or
Civil Oligarchy.

14. WHERE the Major part is not debarred of their Liberty of

15. NATIONAL Religion is either coercive, or not coercive.

16. RELIGION is not naturally subservient to any corrupt or worldly Interest,
for which cause to bring it into subjection to Interest it must be coercive.

17. WHERE Religion is coercive, or in subjection to Interest, there it is not,
or will not long continue to be the true Religion.

18. WHERE Religion is not coercive, nor under subjection to any Interest,
there it either is (or has no obstruction why it may not com to be) the true
Religion.

19. ABSOLUTE Monarchy pretends to Infallibility in matters of Religion,
imploys not any that is not of its own Faith, and punishes its Apostats by
death without mercy.

20. REGULATED Monarchy coms not much short of the same pretense; but
consisting of Proprietors, and such as if they dissent have oftentimes the
means to defend themselves, it dos not therefore always attain to the exercise
of the like power.

21. DEMOCRACY pretends not to Infallibility, but is in matters of Religion no
more than a Seeker, not taking away from its People their Liberty of
Conscience, but educating them, or so many of them as shall like of it, in such
a manner or knowledge in Divine things as may render them best able to make use
of their Liberty of Conscience, which it performs by the National Religion.

22. NATIONAL Religion, to be such, must have a National Ministry or Clergy.

23. THE Clergy is either a landed or a stipendiated Clergy.

24. A LANDED Clergy, attaining to one third of the Territory, is Aristocracy;
and therefore equally incompatible with absolute Monarchy, and with Democracy:
but to regulated Monarchy for the most part is such a Supporter, as in that
case it may be truly enough said, that NO BISHOP, NO KING.

25. THE Soverainty of the Prince in absolute Monarchy, and of the People in
Democracy, admitting not of any Counterpoise, in each of these the Clergy ought
not to be landed; the Laborer nevertheless being worthy of his hire, they ought
to be stipendiated.

26. A CLERGY well landed is to regulated Monarchy a very great Glory; and a
Clergy not well stipendiated is to absolute Monarchy or to Democracy as great
an Infamy.

27. A CLERGY, whether landed or stipendiated, is either Hierarchical or
Popular.

28. A HIERARCHICAL Clergy is a Monarchical Ordination; a Popular Clergy
receives Ordination from Election by the People.

FORM of Government (as to the Religious part) being thus completed, is sum'd
up in the three following Aphorisms.

29. ABSOLUTE Monarchy (for the Religious part of the Form) consists of a
Hierarchical Clergy, and of an Alcoran (or some Book received in the nature of
Scripture) interpretable by the Prince only and his Clergy, willingly
permitting to them that are not capable of Employments a Liberty of Conscience.



31. DEMOCRACY (for the Religious part of the Form) consists of a Popular
Clergy, of the Scriptures (or some other Book acknowleg'd divine) with a
Directory for the National Religion, and a Council for the equal maintenance
both of the National Religion, and of the Liberty of Conscience.

CHAP. VII.
Of Form in the Military part.
1. A MAN may perish by the Sword; yet no man draws the Sword to perish, but to
live by it.

2. SO many ways as there are of living by the Sword, so many ways there are of
a Militia.

3. IF a Prince be Lord of the whole, or of two parts in three of the whole
Territory, and divides it into Military Farms at will and without rent, upon
condition of Service at their own charge in Arms whenever he commands them, it
is the Sword of an absolute Monarchy.

4. IF the Nobility, being Lords of the whole, or of two parts in three of the
whole Territory, let their Lands by good pennyworths to Tenants at will, or by
their Leases bound at their Commands by whom they live to serve in Arms upon
pay, it is the Sword of a regulated Monarchy.

5. IN Countries that have no Infantry, or Militia of free Commoners, as in
France and Poland, the Nobility themselves are a vast Body of Horse, and the
Sword of that Monarchy.

6. IF a People, where there neither is Lord nor Lords of the whole, nor of two
parts in three of the whole Territory, for the common defense of their Liberty
and of their Livelihood, take their turns upon the Guard or in Arms, it is the
Sword of Democracy.

7. THERE is a fourth kind of Militia, or of men living more immediately by the
Sword, which are Soldiers of Fortune, or a mercenary Army.

8. ABSOLUTE Monarchy must be very well provided with Court Guards, or a
mercenary Army; otherwise its Military Farmers having no bar from becoming
Proprietors, the Monarchy it self has no bar from changing into Democracy.

FORM of Government (as to the Military part) being thus completed, is sum'd up
in the three following Aphorisms.

9. IN a regulated Monarchy where there is an Infantry, there needs not any
Mercenary Army; and there the People live tolerably well.

10. IN a regulated Monarchy where there is no Infantry, but the Nobility
themselves are a vast Body of Horse, there must also be a mercenary Infantry,
and there the People are Peasants or Slaves.

11. THERE is no such thing in nature as any Monarchy (whether absolute or
regulated) subsisting merely by a mercenary Army, and without an Infantry or
Cavalry planted upon the Lands of the Monarch, or of his whole Nobility.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Form in the Legal part.
1. IF Justice be not the Interest of a Government, the Interest of that
Government will be its Justice.

2. LET Equity or Justice be what it will, yet if a man be to judge or resolve
in his own case, he resolves upon his own Interest.

3. EVERY Government, being not obnoxious to any Superior, resolves in her own
case.

4. THE ultimat Result in every Government is the Law in that Government.

5. IN absolute Monarchy, the ultimat Result is in the Monarch.

6. IN Aristocracy, or regulated Monarchy, the ultimat Result is in the Lords
or Peers, or not without them.

7. IN Democracy the ultimat Result is in the People.

8. LAW in absolute Monarchy holds such a disproportion to natural Equity, as
the Interest of one Man to the Interest of all Mankind.

9. LAW in Aristocracy holds such a disproportion to natural Equity, as the
Interest of a few Men to the Interest of all Mankind.

10. LAW in Democracy holds such a disproportion to natural Equity, as the
Interest of a Nation to the Interest of all Mankind.

11. ONE Government has much nearer approaches to natural Equity than another;
but in case natural Equity and Selfpreservation com in competition, so natural
is Selfpreservation to every Creature, that in that case no one Government has
any more regard to natural Equity than another.

12. A Man may devote himself to death or destruction to save a Nation, but no
Nation will devote it self to death or destruction to save Mankind.

13. MACCHIAVEL is decry'd for saying, that no consideration is to be had of
what is just or injust, of what is merciful or cruel, of what is honorable or
ignominious, in case it be to save a State, or to preserve Liberty; which as to
the manner of expression is crudely spoken. But to imagine that a Nation will
devote it self to death or destruction any more upon Faith given or an
Engagement thereto tending, than if there had bin no such Engagement made or
Faith given, were nor piety but folly.

14. WHERSOEVER the power of making Law is, there only is the power of
interpreting the Law so made.

15. GOD who has given his Law to the Soul of that man who shall voluntarily
receive it, is the only Interpreter of his Law to that Soul; such at least is
the judgment of Democracy. With absolute Monarchy, and with Aristocracy, it is
an innat Maxim, That the People are to be deceived in two things, their
RELIGION and their LAW; Sibyls Books.

FORM of Government (as to the Legal part) being thus completed, is sum'd up in
the three following Aphorisms.

16. ABSOLUTE Monarchy (for the Legal part of the Form) consists of such Laws
as it pretends God has delivered or given the King and Priests power to
interpret; or it consists of such Laws as the Monarch shall choose or has chosen.

17. ARISTOCRACY (for the Legal part of the Form) consists of such Laws as the
Nobility shall choose or have chosen; or of such as the People shall choose or
have chosen, provided they be agreed to by their Lords, or by the King and
their Lords.

18. DEMOCRACY (for the Legal part of the Form) consists of such Laws as the
People, with the advice of their Council, or of the Senate, shall choose or have
chosen.

CHAP. IX.
Of Form in the Judicial part.
1. MULTIPLICITY of Laws, being a multiplicity of Snares for the People, causes
Corruption of Government.

2. PAUCITY of Laws requires arbitrary Power in Courts, or Judicatorys.

3. ARBITRARY Power (in reference to Laws) is of three kinds. (1) In making,
altering, abrogating, or interpreting of Laws, which belong to the Soverain
Power. (2) In applying Laws to Cases which are never any one like another. (3)
In reconciling the Laws among themselves.

4. THERE is no difficulty at all in judging of any case whatsoever according
to natural Equity.

5. ARBITRARY Power makes any man a competent Judge for his Knowledge; but
leaving him to his own Interest, which oftentimes is contrary to Justice, makes
him also an incompetent Judge, in regard that he may be partial.

6. PARTIALITY is the cause why Laws pretend to abhor Arbitrary Power;
nevertheless, seeing that not one case is altogether like another, there must
in every Judicatory be some arbitrary Power.

7. PAUCITY of Laws causes arbitrary Power in applying them; and Multiplicity
of Laws causes arbitrary Power in reconciling and applying them too.

8. ARBITRARY Power where it can do no wrong, dos the greatest right; because
no Law can ever be so framed, but that without arbitrary Power it may do wrong.

9. ARBITRARY Power, going upon the Interest of One or of a Few, makes not a
just Judicatory.

10. ARBITRARY Power, going upon the Interest of the whole People, makes a just
Judicatory.

11. ALL Judicatorys and Laws, which have bin made by Arbitrary Power, allow of
the Interpretation of Arbitrary Power, and acknowledge an appeal from themselves
to it.

12. THAT Law which leaves the least arbitrary Power to the

13. LAWS that are the fewest, plainest, and briefest, leave the least
arbitrary Power to the Judge or Judicatory; and being a Light to the People,
make the most incorrupt Government.

14. LAWS that are perplexed, intricat, tedious, and voluminous, leave the
greatest arbitrary Power to the Judge or Judicatory; and raining snares on the
People, make the most corrupt Government.

15. SEEING no Law can be so perfect as not to leave arbitrary Power to the
Judicatory, that is the best Constitution of a Judicatory where arbitrary Power
can do the least hurt, and the worst Constitution of a Judicatory is where
arbitrary Power can do the most ill.

16. ARBITRARY Power in one Judge dos the most, in a few Judges dos less, and in
a multitude of Judges dos the least hurt.

17. THE ultimat Appeal from all inferior Judicatorys is to some soverain Judge
or Judicatory.

18. THE ultimat Result in every Government (as in absolute Monarchy, the
Monarch; in Aristocracy, or Aristocratical Monarchy, the Peers; in Democracy,
the Popular Assembly) is a soverain Judge or Judicatory that is arbitrary.

19. ARBITRARY Power in Judicatorys is not such as makes no use of the Law, but
such by which there is a right use to be made of the Laws.

20. THAT Judicatory where the Judge or Judges are not obnoxious to Partiality
or private Interest, cannot make a wrong use of Power.

21. THAT Judicatory that cannot make a wrong use of Power, must make a right
use of Law.

22. EVERY Judicatory consist^ of a Judge or some Judges without a Jury, or of a
Jury on the Bench without any other Judge or Judges, or of a Judge or Judges on
the Bench with a Jury at the Bar.

FORM of Government (as to the Judicial part) being thus completed, is sum'd up
in the three following Aphorisms.

23. ABSOLUTE Monarchy (for the Judicial part of the Form) admits not of any
Jury, but is of some such kind as a Cadee or Judge in a City, or as we say in a
Hundred, with an Appeal to a Cadaliskar or a Judge in a Province, from whom also
there lys an Appeal to the M^phti, who is at the devotion of the Grand Signor
or of the Monarch.

24. ARISTOCRACY or Aristocratical Monarchy (for the Judicial part of the Form)
may admit of a Jury, so it be at the Bar only, and consists of some such kind as
Delegats or ordinary Judges, with an Appeal to a House of Peers; or some such
Court, as the Parliament at Paris, which was at the institution in the Reign of
HUGH CAPET, a Parliament of soverain Princes.

25. DEMOCRACY (for the Judicial part of the Form) is of some such kind as a
Jury on the Bench in every Tribe, consisting of thirty persons or more annually
eligible in one third part by the People of that Tribe, with an Appeal from
thence to a Judicatory residing in the Capital City of the like Constitution,
annually eligible in one third part out of the Senate or the popular Assembly,
or out of both; from which also there lys an Appeal to the People, that is to
the Popular Assembly.


Of the Administration of Government, or REASON OF STATE.
1. AS the Matter of a Ship or of a House is one thing, the Form of a Ship or
of a House is another thing, and the Administration or Reason of a Ship or of
the House is a third thing; so the Matter of a Government or of a State is one
thing, the Form of a Government or of a State is another, and the
Administration of a Government (which is what is properly and truly called
Reason of State) is a third thing.

2. THERE are those who can play, and yet cannot pack the Cards; and there are
who can pack the Cards, and yet cannot play.

3. ADMINISTRATION of Government, or Reason of State, to such as propose to
themselves to play upon the square, is one thing; and to such as propose to
themselves to pack the Cards, is another.

4. REASON of State is that in a Kingdom or a Commonwealth, which in a Family
is called THE MAIN CHANCE.

5. THE Master of a Family that either keeps himself up to his ancient bounds,
or increases his Stock, looks very well to the main Chance, at least if his
play be upon the square, that is, upon his own Abilitys, or good Fortune, or
the Laws; but if it were not upon the square, yet an Estate however gotten, is
not for that a less Estate in it self, nor less descending by the Law to his
Successors.

6. IF a People through their own Industry, or the prodigality of their Lords, com
to acquire Liberty; if a few by their Industry, or through the folly or
slothfulness of the People, com to eat them out, and make themselves Lords; if
one Lord by his Power or his Virtue, or through their Necessity, their Wisdom, or
their Folly, can overtop the rest of these Lords, and make himself King, all
this was fair play and upon the square.

7. REASON of State, if we speak of it as fair play, is foren or domestic.

8. REASON of State, which is foren, consists in balancing foren Princes and
States in such a manner, as you may gain upon them, or at least that they may
not gain upon you.

9. REASON of State, which is domestic, is the Administration of a Government
(being not usurped) according to the Foundation and Superstructures of the same
if they be good, or so as not being good that they may be mended, or so as
being good or bad they may be altered; or, the Government being usurped, the
Reason of State then is the way and means whereby such a Usurpation may be made
good or maintained.

10. REASON of State, in a Democracy which is rightly founded and rightly
ordered, is a thing of great facility, whether in a foren or in a domestic
relation. In a foren, because one good Democracy, weighing two or three of the
greatest Princes, will easily give the Balance abroad at its pleasure; in a
domestic, because it consists not of any more than giving such a stop in
accumulation that the State coms not

11. REASON of State in a Democracy, which is not right in its Foundations, may
flourish abroad, and be one: but at home will languish or be two Reasons of
State, that is, the Reason of the State or Orders of the Nobility, which is to
lord it over the People; and the Reason of the popular State or Order, which is
to bring the Commonwealth to equality: which two Reasons of State, being
irreconcilable, will exercise themselves against one another, first by
Disputes, then by Plots, till it coms at last to open Violence, and so to the
utter ruin of the Commonwealth, as it happened in Rome.

12. REASON of State in an absolute Monarchy (whether Foren or Domestic) is but
threefold; as first, to keep its Military Farmers or Timariots to the first
Institution; next to cut him that grows any thing above his due Stature, or
lifts up his head above the rest, by so much the shorter; and last of all to
keep its Arms in exercise.

13. IN Aristocratical Monarchy Reason of State (as to the whole) is but one
thing, that is, to preserve the Counterpoise of the King and the two or the
three, or the four Estates: For in some Countries, as in Poland, there are but
two Estates, the Clergy and the Nobility; in others, as in Sweden, there are
four, the Nobility, the Gentry, the Clergy, and the Commons; in most others
there are but three, the Lords Spiritual, the Lords Temporal, and the Commons.

14. IN Aristocratical Monarchy Reason of State (as to the parts) is a
multifarious thing, every State having its peculiar Reason of State, and the
King also his Reason of State: with the King it is to balance the Nobility,
that he may hold them under; Reason of State with the Nobility is to balance
the King, lest he should grow absolute; Reason of State both with the King and
the Nobility is to keep down the People; and Reason of State with the People is
to drive at their Liberty.

15. IN Forms that are pure, or in Governments that have no more than an
absolute Prince or one State, as absolute Monarchy and equal or pure Democracy,
there is but one Reason of State, and that is to preserve the Form entire. In
Forms that are mixed (as in an inequal Commonwealth where there are two
Estates, and in Aristocratical Monarchy where there is a King and two if not
three Estates) there are so many Reasons of State to break the Form, that there
has not bin any inequal Commonwealth which either the People have not brought
to Democracy, or the Nobility to Monarchy. And scarce was there any
Aristocratical Monarchy, where (to omit the Wars of the Nobility with their
King, or among themselves) the People have not driven out the King, or where
the King has not brought the People into Slavery. Aristocratical Monarchy is
the true Theater of Expedientmongers and Stateemperics, or the deep Waters
wherein that Leviathan the Minister of State takes his pastime.

16. THE Complaint that the Wisdom of all these latter times in Princes Affairs
consists rather in fine deliverys and shiftings of Dangers or Mischiefs when
they are near, than in solid and grounded courses to keep them off, is a
Complaint in the Streets of Aristocratical Monarchy; and not to be remedied,
because the Nobility being not broken,

17. AN Absurdity in the form of the Government (as that in a Monarchy there
may be two Monarchs) shoots out into a mischief in the Administration, or some
wickedness in the Reason of State, as in ROMULUS'S killing of REMUS, and the
monstrous Associations of the Roman Emperors.

18. USURPATION of Government is a Surfeit that converts the best Arts into the
worst: Nemo unquam imperium flagitio acquisitum bonis artibus exercuit.

19. AS in the privation of Virtue, and in Beggary, men are Sharks or Robbers,
and the reason of their way of living is quite contrary to those of Thrift; so
in the privation of Government, as in Anarchy, Oligarchy, or Tyranny, that
which is Reason of State with them is directly opposite to that which is truly
so: whence are all those black Maxims set down by some Politicians, particularly
MACCHIAVEL in his Prince, and which are condemned to the fire even by them who,
if they lived otherwise, might blow their fingers.

20. WHERE the Government from a true Foundation rises up into proper
Superstructures or Form, the Reason of State is right and straight; but give
our Politician peace when you please, if your House stands awry, your Props do
not stand upright.

21. TAKE a Jugler, and commend his Tricks never so much, yet if in so doing
you show his Tricks you spoil him; which has bin and is to be confessed of
MACCHIAVEL.

22. CORRUPTION in Government is to be read and considered in MACCHIAVEL, as
Diseases in a man's Body are to be read and considered in HIPPOCRATES.

23. NEITHER HIPPOCRATES nor MACCHIAVEL introduced Diseases into man's Body,
nor Corruption into Government, which were before their times; and seeing they
do but discover them, it must be confessed that so much as they have don tends
not to the increase but the cure of them, which is the truth of these two
Authors.

POLITICAL APHORISMS.
Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit. Terent.


1. THE Errors and Sufferings of the People are from their Governors.

2. WHEN the Foundation of a Government coms to be changed, and the Governors
change not the Superstructures accordingly, the People become miserable.

3. THE Monarchy of England was not a Government by Arms, but a Government by
Laws, tho imperfect or ineffectual Laws.

4. THE later Governments in England since the death of the King, have bin
Governments by Arms.

5. THE People cannot see, but they can feel.

6. THE People having felt the difference between a Government by Laws and a
Government by Arms, will always desire the Government by Laws, and abhor that
of Arms.

7. WHERE the Spirit of the People is impatient of a Government by Arms, and
desirous of a Government by Laws, there the spirit of the People is not unfit
to be trusted with their Liberty.

8. THE spirit of the People of England, not trusted with their Liberty, drives
at the restitution of Monarchy by Blood and Violence.

9. THE Spirit of the People of England, trusted with their Liberty, if the
Form be sufficient, can never set up a King; and if the Form be insufficient
(as a Parliament with a Council in the intervals* or two Assemblys coordinat)
will set up a King without Blood or Violence.

10. TO light upon a good Man, may be in Chance; but to be sure of an Assembly
of good Men, is not in Prudence.

11. WHERE the Security is no more than personal, there may be a good Monarch,
but can be no good Commonwealth.

12. THE necessary Action or Use of each thing is from the nature of the Form.

13. WHERE the Security is in the Persons, the Government makes good men evil;
where the Security is in the Form, the Government makes evil men good.

14. ASSEMBLYS legitimatly elected by the People, are that only Party which can
govern without an Army.

15. NOT the Party which cannot govern without an Army, but the Party which can
govern without an Army, is the refined Party, as to this intent and purpose
truly refined; that is, by Popular Election, according to the Precept of MOSES,
and the Rule of Scripture: Take ye wise men, and understanding, and known among
your Tribes, and I will make them Rulers over you.

16. THE People are deceived by Names, but not by Things.

17. WHERE there is a well ordered Commonwealth, the People are generally
satisfied.

18. WHERE the People are generally dissatisfied, there is no Commonwealth.

19. THE Partys in England declaring for a Commonwealth, hold every one of them
something that is inconsistent with a Commonwealth.

20. TO hold that the Government may be managed by a few, or by a Party, is
inconsistent with a Commonwealth; except in a Situation like that of Venice.

21. TO hold that there can be any National Religion or Ministry without public
Indowment and Inspection of the Magistracy, or any Government without a
National Religion or Ministry, is inconsistent with a Commonwealth.

22. TO hold that there may be Liberty, and not Liberty of Conscience, is
inconsistent with a Commonwealth that has the Liberty of her own Conscience, or
that is not Popish.

23. WHERE Civil Liberty is entire, it includes Liberty of Conscience.

24. WHERE Liberty of Conscience is entire, it includes Civil Liberty.

25. EITHER Liberty of Conscience can have no security at all, or under Popular
Government it must have the greatest security.

26. TO hold that a Government may be introduced by a little at once, is to
wave Prudence, and commit things to Chance.

27. TO hold that the Wisdom of God in the formation of a House or of a
Government, gos not universally upon natural Principles, is inconsistent with
Scripture.

28. TO hold that the Wisdom of Man in the formation of a House, or of a
Government, may go upon supernatural Principles, is inconsistent with a
Commonwealth, and as if one should say, God ordained the Temple, therefore it
was not built by Masons; he ordained the Snuffers, therefore they were not made
by a Smith.

29. TO hold that Hirelings (as they are termed by some) or an endowed Ministry,
ought to be removed out of the Church, is inconsistent with a Commonwealth.

30. NATURE is of GOD.

31. SOME part in every Religion is natural.

32. A UNIVERSAL Effect demonstrats a universal Cause.

33. A UNIVERSAL Cause is not so much natural, as it is Nature it self.

34. EVERY man, either to his terror or consolation, has some sense of Religion.

35. MAN may rather be defined a religious than a rational Creature; in regard
that in other Creatures there may be something of Reason, but there is nothing
of Religion.

36. GOVERNMENT is of human Prudence, and human Prudence is adequat to man's
Nature.

37. THE Prudence or Government that is regardless of Religion, is not adequat
nor satisfactory to man's Nature.

38. WHERE the Government is not adequat or satisfactory to man's Nature, it
can never be quiet or perfect.

39. THE major part of Mankind gives it self up in the matter of Religion to
the public leading.

40. THAT there may be a public leading, there must be a National Religion.

41. WHERE the minor part takes away the National Religion, there the major
part is deprived of Liberty of Conscience by the minor.

42. WHERE the major part is deprived of Liberty of Conscience by the minor,
there they will deprive the minor of that Liberty of Conscience which they
might otherwise enjoy.

43. IN Israel there was an endowed Clergy or Priesthood, and a National
Religion under inspection of the Magistrate: whence the Christians in Apostolic
Times, defraying their own Ministry, could have Liberty of Conscience; whereas
if the Christians by going about to take away Tithes, and abolish the National
Religion, had indeavor'd to violat the Consciences of the unconverted Jews,
these being far greater in number, must needs have taken away the Liberty of
Conscience from the Christians.

44. PAVL in Athens could freely and undisturbedly convert DIONYSIUS and
others; therefore in Athens there was Liberty of Conscience: but if PAUL and his
Converts had gone about to drive Hirelings, or an endowed Priesthood or Clergy
out of that Church, who sees not that the Athenians would have driven PAUL and
his Converts out of Athens?

45. THAT there may be Liberty of Conscience, there must be a National Religion.

46. THAT there may be a National Religion, there must be an endowed Clergy.

47. COMMONWEALTHS have had three ways of Union. As the Athenians, by bringing
their Confederats to subjection* As the United Provinces by an equal League: or
as the Romans by an inequal League. The first way is tyrannical. In the second,
one Commonwealth under the League is no more than another, and each one as to
her self has a Negative: which kind of Union is not only obstructive, but tends
(as we have seen both in Holland and Switzerland) toward Division. In the
third way, the Commonwealth uniting other Commonwealths, retains to her self
the leading of the whole League, leaving to each of the rest her own Laws, and
her own Liberty.

48. TILL a Commonwealth be first framed, how such a Commonwealth should make
an effectual Union with another Nation, is not possible to be seen.

49. THE new, unpracticed, and heretofore unheard Union (as it is vulgarly
spoken) with Scotland, by uniting Deputys of diverse Nations, not in a Council
apart, or by way of States General, as in the United Provinces, but in the
standing Councils of some one Commonwealth in the League, is destructve to
Liberty both in England and in Scotland.

50. IF the Commonwealth of England receives Deputys from Scotland in a greater
number than that of her own, she receives Law from a foren Interest, and so
loses her own Liberty.

51. IF Scotland be received in an equal number, it obstructs the freedom of
both, or occasions War or Dissension.

52. IF Scotland be received in an inferior number, she receives Law from
England, and so loses her Liberty. The like is understood of Ireland.

53. WHEREAS a well ordered Commonwealth should give the Balance to her
Confederats, and not receive it from them; the Councils, in which diverse others
are thus united, tho in a far inferior number of Deputys, yet if these ^y in
wait, or lay their heads together, may be overrul'd, obstructed, or
overbalanc'd by foren Interests.

54. WHERE Countries are diverse in their Laws, and yet are to receive Laws one
from the other, neither the Commonwealth giving Law, knows what to give, nor
the Commonwealth receiving Law, understands what she receives: in which case
the Union returns to Force or Confusion.

55. THE best way of holding a Nation different or not different in Laws, is
the Roman, that is, by way of Province.

56. A PROVINCE, especially if she has strong holds, may by defraying of a
small Guard, be kept to a just League, and for the rest enjoy her own Laws, her
own Government, and her perfect Liberty. Other ways of Union will be found more
chargeable, and less effectual, on both sides; for if England has no Army in
Scotland, Scotland will receive no Law from England; and if England has an Army
there, her hold consists not in the Union, but in the Force. The like is to be
understood of Ireland.

57. IF a Country be very small, and not able to subsist of it self, as Wales,
it may be safely united and held: but the advantage that Wales has in
participation of all Magistracys and Offices, is not that which England is able
to afford to such a Country as Scotland, without subjecting her neck to the
yoke.

58. THE order of a Commonwealth requires, that it consists, first, of a Civil;
secondly, of a Religious; thirdly, of a Military; and fourthly, of a Provincial
part. The manner of uniting Provinces or different Nations, pertains to the
last part; and in the formation of a Commonwealth, to begin with that first,
which is naturally last, is to invert the Order, and by consequence the
Commonwealth it self, which indeed is nothing but Order.

59. WHERE there can be any other Government, there can be no Commonwealth.

60. WHERE there can be a Commonwealth, what tumults soever there happen, and
which soever prevail, there can be no other Government; that is to say, without
foren Invasion, which throout I must be understood to except.

61. IF Sir GEORGE BOOTH had prevailed, he must either have introduced a
Commonwealth, or have restored the King.

62. IF the King were restored, he must either govern by an Army, or by
Parlaments.

63. A KING governing now in England by an Army, would for the same Causes find
the same Effects with the late Protector.

64. A KING governing now in England by Parlaments, would find the Nobility of
no effect at all.

65. A PARLIAMENT, where the Nobility is of no effect at all, is a mere Popular
Council.

66. A MERE Popular Council will never receive Law from a King.

67. A MERE Popular Council giving Law to a King, becoms thereby a Democracy, or
equal Commonwealth; or the difference is no greater than in the imperfection of
the Form.

68. A COMMONWEALTH or Democracy to be perfect in the Form, must consist
especially of such an Assembly, the Result whereof can go upon no Interest
whatsoever, but that only which is the common interest of the whole People.

69. AN Assembly consisting of a few, may go upon the Interest of one man, as a
King; or upon the Interest of one Party, as that of Divines, Lawyers, and the
like; or the Interest of themselves, and the perpetuation of their Government.

70. THE Popular Assembly in a Commonwealth may consist of too few, but can
never consist of too many.

71. IN every Commonwealth there has bin a Popular Assembly* This in Israel at
least consisted of twenty four thousand, upon a monthly Rotation. In Athens,
Lacedemon, Rome, it consisted of the whole Citizens, that is, of all such as
had a right in the Commonwealth, whether they inhabited in City or Country. In
Venice it consists of about two thousand. In the Province of Holland only,
which contains eighteen or nineteen Soveraintys, the Popular or resolving
Assemblys consist at least of five hundred Persons: these in the whole Union,
may amount to five or six thousand; in Switzerland I believe they com to a
greater number. And the most of these Assemblys have bin perpetually extant.

72. IF the Popular Assembly consists of so few, and so eminent Persons as are
capable of any orderly Debate, it is good for nothing but to destroy the
Commonwealth.

73. IF the Popular Assembly consists of so many, and for the greater part of
so mean Persons as are not capable of Debate, there must be a Senate to help
this defect.

74. THE Reason of the Senate is, that a Popular Assembly rightly constituted,
is not capable of any prudent debate.

75. THE Reason of the Popular Assembly is, that a Senate rightly constituted
for Debate, must consist of so few and eminent Persons, that if they have the
Result too, they will not resolve according to the Interest of the People, but
according to the Interest of themselves.

76. A POPULAR Assembly without a Senate cannot be wise.

77. A SENATE without a Popular Assembly will not be honest.

78. THE Senate and the Popular Assembly being once rightly constituted, the
rest of the Commonwealth will constitute it self.

79. THE Venetians having slain diverse of their Dukes for their Tyranny, and
being assembled by such numbers in their great Council as were naturally
incapable of Debate, pitched upon thirty Gentlemen who were called Pregati, in
that they were prayed to go apart, and, debating upon the Exigence of the
Commonwealth, to propose as they thought good to the great Council: and from
thence first arose the Senate of Venice (to this day called the Pregati) and the
Great Council, that is, the Senate and the Popular Assembly of Venice. And from
these two arose all those admirable Orders of that Commonwealth.

80. THAT a People of themselves should have such an understanding as when they
of Venice did institute their Pregati or Senate, is rare.

81. THAT a Senate or Council of Governors having supreme Power, should
institute a popular Assembly, and propose to it, tho in all reason it be the
far more facil and practicable, is that which is rarer.

82. THE diffusive body of the People is not in a natural capacity of judging;
for which cause the whole judgment and power of the diffusive Body of the
People must be entirely and absolutely in their collective Bodies, Assemblys or
Representatives, or there can be no Commonwealth.

83. TO declare that the Assemblys or Representatives of the People have power
in some things, and in others not, is to make the diffusive Body, which is in a
natural incapacity of judging, to be in a political capacity of judging.

84. TO bring a natural incapacity of judging to a political capacity of
judging, is to introduce Government. To bring a natural incapacity of judging
to such a collective or political capacity of judging, as yet necessarily must
retain the Interest of the diffusive Body, is to introduce the best kind of
Government. But to lay any appeal whatsoever from a political capacity of
judging, to a natural incapacity of judging, is to frustrat all Government, and
to introduce Anarchy. Nor is Anarchy, whether imposed or obtruded by the
Legislator first, or by the People, or their Demagogs or Incendiarys
afterward, of any other kind whatsoever than of this only.

85. TO make Principles or Fundamentals, belongs not to Men, to Nations, nor to
human Laws. To build upon such Principles or Fundamentals as are apparently
laid by GOD in the inevitable necessity or Law of Nature, is that which truly
appertains to Men, to Nations, and to human Laws. To make any other
Fundamentals, and then build upon them, is to build Castles in the Air.

86. WHATEVER is violent, is not secure nor durable; whatever is secure or
durable, is natural.

87. GOVERNMENT in the whole People, tho the major part were disaffected, must
be secure and durable, because it waves Force, to found it self upon Nature.

88. GOVERNMENT in a Party, tho all of these were well affected, must be
insecure and transitory, because it waves Nature, to found it self upon Force.

89. COMMONWEALTHS, of all other Governments, are more especially for the
preservation, not for the destruction, of Mankind.

90. COMMONWEALTHS, that have bin given to cut off their diseased Limbs (as
Florence) have brought themselves to impotence and ruin. Commonwealths that
have bin given to healing their diseased Limbs (as Venice) have bin healthful
and flourishing.

91. ATHENS under the Oligarchy of four hundred, was infinitely more afflicted
and torn with Distraction, Blood and Animosity of Partys, than is England; yet
by introduction of a Senate of four hundred, and a Popular Assembly of five
thousand, did thereupon, so suddenly as if it had bin a Charm, recover Might and
Glory. See the eighth Book of THUCYDIDES; A Story in these Times most necessary
to be considered.

92. TO leave our selves and Posterity to a farther purchase in Blood or Sweat
of that which we may presently possess, enjoy, and hereafter bequeath to
Posterity in Peace and Glory, is inhuman and impious.

93. AS certainly and suddenly as a good state of health dispels the
peevishness and peril of Sickness, dos a good state of Government the animosity
and danger of Partys.

94. THE Frame of a Commonwealth having first bin proposed and considered,
Expedients (in case such should be found necessary for the safe, effectual, and
perfect introduction of the same) may with some aim be applied or fitted; as to
a House, when the Model is resolved upon, we fit Scaffolds in building. But
first to resolve upon Expedients, and then to fit to them the Frame of a
Commonwealth, is as if one should set up Props, and then build a House to lean
upon them.

95. AS the chief Expedients in the building of a House are Axes and Hammers;
so the chief Expedient in the building of a Government, is a standing Army.

96. AS the House which, being built, will not stand without the perpetual
noise or use of Axes and Hammers, is imperfect; so is the Government which,
being formed, cannot support it self without the perpetual use of a standing
Army.

97. WHILE the Civil and Religious parts of a Commonwealth are in forming,
there is a necessity that she should be supported by an Army; but when the
Military and Provincial parts are rightly formed, she can have no farther use
of any other Army. Wherefore at this point, and not till then, her Armies are by
the practice of Commonwealths, upon slighter occasions, to have half pay for
life, and to be disbanded.

98. WHERE there is a standing Army, and not a formed Government, there the
Army of necessity will have Dictatorian Power.

99. WHERE an Army subsists upon the Pay or Riches of a single Person, or of a
Nobility, that Army is always monarchical. Where an Army subsists not by the
Riches of a single Person, nor of a Nobility, that Army is always popular.

100. THE English Armies are popular Armies.

101. WHERE Armies are popular, and exercise Dictatorian Power in deposing
single Persons, and monarchical Assemblys, there can be no greater, nor needs
any other Expedient for the introduction of a Commonwealth. Nevertheless to
this may be added some such moderat Qualifications as may prune the
Commonwealth, not lop off her Branches. Whom these will not satisfy, it is not
a Commonwealth, but a Party, that can.

102. IF the late King had freely permitted to the People the exercise of the
Power inevitably devolved upon them by the change of the Balance, he had not
bin destroyed. If either of the late single Persons had brought the People into
an orderly exercise of the Power devolved upon them, he had bin great. What
Party soever shall hinder the People from the exercise of the Power devolved
upon them, shall be certainly ruined: who or what Party soever shall introduce
the People into the due and orderly exercise of the Power devolved upon them,
shall be forthwith secure and famous for ever.

103. A MAN uses, nourishes, and cherishes his Body, without understanding it;
but he that made the Body understood it.

104. THE reason why the Nations that have Commonwealths, use them so well, and
cherish them so much, and yet that so few Nations have Commonwealths, is, That
in using a Commonwealth, it is not necessary it should be understood; but in
making a Commonwealth, that it be understood, is of absolute necessity. Caput
Reipublicae est nosse Rempub. CICERO.

105. AS the natural Body of a Christian or Saint can be no other, for the
frame, than such as has bin the natural Body of an Israelit or of a Heathen; so
the political Bodsy, or Civil Governments of Christians or Saints can be no
other, for the frame, than such as have bin the political Bodies or Civil
Governments of the Israelits, or of the Heathens.

106. IT shall be as soon found when and where the Soul of a Man was in the
Body of a Beast, as when or where the Soul or Freedom natural to Democracy, was
in any other Form than that only of a Senate, and an Assembly of the People.

107. IN those things wherein, and so far as Art is directed or limited by the
nature of her Materials, it is in Art as in Nature.

108. THAT Democracy, or equal Government by the People, consist of an Assembly
of the People, and a Senate, is that whereby Art is altogether directed, limited,
and necessitated by the nature of her Materials.

109. AS the Soul of Man can never be in the Body of a Beast, unless GOD make a
new Creation; so neither the Soul or Freedom natural to Democracy in any other
Form whatsoever, than that only of a Senate, and a Popular Assembly.

110. THE right Constitution, Coherence, and proper Symmetry of a Form of
Government gos for the greater part upon Invention.

111. REASON is of two parts; Invention, and Judgment.

112. JUDGMENT is most perfect in an Assembly.

113. INVENTION is most perfect in one Man.

114. IN one Man, Judgment wants the strength which is in a multitude of
Counsillors.

115. IN a multitude of Counsillors, Invention is none at all.

116. THROUGH the defect of Invention, the wisest Assemblys in the formation or
reformation of Government, have pitched upon a sole Legislator.

117. IT is not below the Dignity of the greatest Assembly, but according to
the practice of the best Commonwealths, to admit of any man that is able to
propose to them, for the good of his Country.

118. TO the making of a well ordered Commonwealth, there gos little more of
pains or charge, or work without doors, than the Establishment of an equal or
apt Division of the Territory, and the proposing of such Election to the
Divisions so made, as from an equal Foundation may raise equal Superstructures;
the rest being but paperwork, is as soon don, as said or voted.

119. WHERE such Elections are proposed, as being made by the People, must
needs produce a well ordered Senate and Popular Assembly, and the People (who,
as we have already found by experience, stick not at the like work) elect
accordingly; there not the Proposers of any power in themselves, but the whole
People by their peculiar and natural right and power, do institute and ordain
their whole Commonwealth.

120. THE highest earthly Felicity that a People can ask, or GOD can give, is
an equal and well ordered Commonwealth. Such a one among the Israelits, was the
Reign of GOD; and such a one (for the same reason) may be among Christians the
Reign of CHRIST, tho not every one in the Christian Commonwealth should be any
more a Christian indeed, than every one in the Israelitish Commonwealth was an
Israelit indeed.

Seven Models of a Commonwealth: OR BRIEF DIRECTIONS Showing how a fit and
perfect MODEL OF Popular Government May be made, found, or understood.
THERE is nothing more apparent, than that this Nation is greatly disquieted
and perplexed through a complication of two Causes: The one, that the present
state thereof is not capable of any other Form than that only of a Popular
Government; the other, that they are too few who understand what is the Form or
Model naturally necessary to a Popular Government, or what is required in that
Form or Prudence for the sitting of it to the use of this Nation. For these
Infirmitys I shall offer some Remedy by a brief Discourse or Direction
consisting of two Parts.

THE first showing those Forms or Models of Popular Government, or of
Commonwealths, which have bin hitherto extant, whether fit or unfit for the
present state of this Nation: The second, showing a Model or Form of Popular
Government fitted to the present state of this Nation. In the first part I
shall propose seven Models roughly and generally: In the second, one, but more
particularly and exactly.

THE FIRST PART.
IN every Frame of Government, either the Form must be fitted to the Property
as it stands, and this only is practicable in this Nation; or the Property must
be altered and fitted to the Frame, which without force has bin sometimes, but
very seldom, practicable in any other Nation. Nevertheless, for the better
knowledge of the one way, it will be best to propose in both ways.

THE FIRST MODEL OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT PROPOSED.
The Commonwealth of Israel.
THAT the Nobility, the Gentry, and the People, be persuaded to give up their
whole Lands to the Commonwealth.

THAT if the whole People shall so give up their Lands, they be divided into
twelve equal Precincts, called Tribes.

THAT the man of greatest quality in every Tribe have about ten thousand pounds
a year given to him and his Heirs, with the hereditary Dignity of Prince of his
Tribe.

THAT some ten other men of the next quality under the Prince in every Tribe,
have about two thousand pounds a year in the same given to each of them and
their Heirs, with the hereditary Dignity of Patriarchs, or Chief of the Fathers.

THAT the remaining part of the Lands, except forty eight Citys and their
Suburbs, be distributed to the whole People equally by Lots.

THAT it be not lawful for any Prince, Patriarch, or other, to sell or alienat
his Land, or any part thereof, in such manner, but that upon every fiftieth
year, being for this cause a year of Jubilee, all Lands within that compass sold
or alienated return to the ancient Possessors or lawful Heirs.

THAT there be one other Tribe added to the twelve; that this Tribe so added be
not local, nor suffered to have any Lands at all, except the forty eight Citys
above reserved, with their Suburbs, that is, with a quantity of Land to each of
them, being in depth two thousand Cubits round. That these be settled upon them
and their Heirs for ever, besides the annual Tithe of the whole Territory, and
a piece of Money every year upon every Head under the notion of an Offering, in
regard that other Offerings are now unlawful; and that this Tribe consist of
Clergy, having one hereditary Archbishop, or High Priest, for the Head and
Prince of their Tribe.

THAT there be no other Law than that of the Word of God only; and that the
Clergy being best skilled in this Law, be eligible into all Courts of Justice,
all Magistracys and Offices whatsoever.

THAT the Prince of a Tribe, together with one or more Courts, consisting of
twenty three Judges elected by the People of that Tribe for life, be the
Government of the same.

THAT the People of the twelve local Divisions take by the Ballot wise men and
understanding among their Tribes, and of these constitute a Senate for the whole
Commonwealth consisting of seventy Elders for life.

THAT every local Tribe monthly elect two thousand of their own number; and
that these Elections amounting in all to four and twenty thousand, assemble at
the Metropolis or Capital City, and be the monthly Representative of the People.

THAT the Senate be a standing Judicatory of Appeal from all other Courts, with
power to show the Sentence of the Laws of God.

THAT besides the Law of God, whatever shall be proposed by the seventy Elders,
and resolved by the monthly Representative of the People, be the Law of the
Land.

A SECOND MODEL OF A COMMONWEALTH PROPOSED.
THAT there be a King without Guards.

THAT the Word or Command of this King be the Law.

THAT this King stirring out of his Palace, it may be lawful for any man to
slay him.

IN this Model there wants but Security, that while the People are dispersed
the King can gather no Army, to demonstrat, That either the People must be
free, or the King a Prisoner.

A THIRD MODEL OF A COMMONWEALTH PROPOSED.
The Commonwealth of Sparta.
THAT the Nobility, the Gentry, and the People, having upon persuasion given up
their Lands to the Public, the whole Territory be divided into one hundred
thousand equal Lots, and two more, being each of ten thousand Acres.

THAT the inferior Lots be distributed to the People.

THAT every man possessing a Lot, be a Citizen.

THAT the rest, except only the Children of Citizens, be Servants to, and
Tillers of the ground for the Citizens.

THAT there be no professed Students.

THAT no Citizen exercise any Trade, but that of Arms only; and that the use of
Money, except it be made of Iron, be wholly banished.

THAT there be two Kings hereditary: That each of them possess one of those
Lots of ten thousand Acres.

THAT they be Presidents of the Senate, with single Votes; and that in War they
have the leading of the Armies.

THAT there be a Senate consisting, besides the Kings, of twenty eight Senators,
elected for life by the People.

THAT whatever be proposed by this Senate to the whole People, or any ten
thousand of them, and shall be resolved by the same, be the Law.

THAT there be a Court consisting of five annual Magistrates elected by the
People; and that this Court have power to bring a King, a Senator, or other,
that shall openly or secretly violat the Laws, or invade the Government, to
Justice.

A FOURTH MODEL OF A COMMONWEALTH PROPOSED.
The Commonwealth of Athens.
THAT there be a Representative of the People, consisting of five thousand.

THAT these annually elect by lot a Senate consisting of four hundred, and a
Signory by suffrage consisting of nine annual Princes.

THAT each fourth part of the Senate, for one fourth part of their annual term,
be a Council of State.

THAT the Council of State may assemble the Senate, and propose to the same:
That the Senate may assemble the People, and propose to them. And that what is
proposed by the Senate, and resolved by the People, be the Law.

THAT the executive Power of the Laws made, be more especially committed and
distributed in various Functions, and diverse Administrations, to the nine
Princes.

A FIFTH MODEL OF A COMMONWEALTH, PROPOSED.
The Commonwealth of Rome.
THAT the whole Nation be divided into three distinct Orders: the one
Senatorian, or Nobility; the other Equestrian, or Gentry; and the third
Plebeian, or Popular.

THAT the Equestrian Order be the Cavalry of the Commonwealth, and the Plebeian
the Foot.

THAT there be a Senate consisting of the Senatorian Order, and of three hundred
Senators for life.

THAT there be two Magistrates elected by the People, for five years term,
called Censors.

THAT the Censors have power upon cause shown to remove a Senator out of the
Senate; and to elect a Nobleman, or sometimes a Plebeian, thereby made Noble, into
the Senate.

THAT there be two annual Magistrates elected by the People, called Consuls.

THAT the Consuls be Presidents of the Senate, and have the leading of the Armies.

THAT the Senate (as they shall see occasion) may nominat one person to be
Dictator for some short term.

THAT the Dictator for his term have Soverain Power.

THAT there be a Division of the whole People, of what Orders soever, into six
Classes, according to the valuation of their Estates. For example: That the
first Classis consist of all such as have two thousand pounds a year, or
upwards; the second of all such as have one thousand pounds a year, or upwards,
under two; the third, of all such as have six hundred pounds a year, or
upwards, under one thousand; the fourth, of all such as have three hundred
pounds a year, or upwards, under six hundred; the fifth, of all such as have
under the former proportion; the sixth, of all such as pay no Taxes, or have no
Land, and that these be not used in Arms.

THAT the Senate propose all Laws to be enacted, to an Assembly of the People.

THAT all Magistrates be elected by the same.

THAT this Assembly of the People consist of the five Classes, in such manner,
that if the Votes of the first and second Classes be near equal, the third
Classis be called; and if these agree not, the fourth be called; and so for the
rest.

THAT what is thus proposed by the Senate, and resolved by the People, be the
Law.

IN this Frame the Senate, by the optimacy of the first and second Classes
(which seldom or never disagree) carrys all, to the exclusion of the main Body
of the People: whence arises continual feud or enmity between the Senate and the
People; who consulting apart, introduce Popular Debate, set up some other way of
Assembly, as by Tribes, or by Parishes, with more equality of Votes; elect
Magistrates of their own, make Decrees binding the Senate or Nobility, endeavor
to curb their Power by weakening their Balance, or diminishing their Estates:
All these tumultuously, and to the alteration of the Government, with so
frequent Changes under so diverse shapes, as make a very Proteus of the
Commonwealth, till having bin all her lifetime afflicted with Anarchy, she ends
her days in Tyranny.

A SIXTH MODEL OF A COMMONWEALTH PROPOSED.
The Commonwealth of Venice.
THAT the Soverain Power be estated upon four thousand select men, to them and
their Heirs for ever.

THAT there be a great Council consisting of these four thousand; and that
their Sons at five and twenty years of age have right to the same.

THAT the great Council elect one Duke for life: That the Duke have a Royal
Palace assigned, with a Guard, at the States charge, and a Revenue of fifteen
hundred pounds a year; and that he bear the Soverain Dignity of the
Commonwealth.

THAT this Duke have six Counsillors annually chosen by the great Council. That
he have no power to sign any Writing, tho in his own Name, nor to do any of his
political Functions without his Counsillors. That his Counsillors have power to
sign any Writing in the Duke's name, or to do any of his political Functions
without him; and that the Duke with these six Counsillors be the Signory of the
Commonwealth.

THAT the Signory of this Commonwealth have session and suffrage in all the
Councils of the same, with right also to propose to each or any of them, either
jointly or severally.

THAT one hundred and twenty elected annually by the great Council, together
with other Councils and Magistrates, to whom of course the like Honor is
appertaining, be the Senate.

THAT sixteen other Magistrates proposed by the Senate, and confirmed by the
great Council for the term of six months, be a Council apart, with three weekly
Provosts or Proposers, called the College.

THAT the Signory may assemble the College, and propose to them; that the
College may assemble the Senate, and propose to them; and that the Senate may
assemble the great Council, and propose to them. And that whatever is resolved
by the Senate, and not contradicted, nor questioned by the great Council, be the
Law.

THAT there be a Council of Ten elected annually by the great Council; and that
this Council of Ten, with the Signory, and some of the College, having right of
Session and Suffrage in the same, may upon occasion exercise Dictatorian Power
in this Commonwealth.

THAT the rest of the People under the Empire of this Commonwealth, be
disarmed, and governed by Lieutenants of Provinces. That the Commonwealth have
a standing Army of strangers or others, in Discipline and Pay. And that the City
wherein she shall reside, be founded in the Sea, after such a manner, that it
can no more be approached by a Fleet, than by an Army without a Fleet.
Otherwise, this Commonwealth is exposed both to the Provinces, and to a
mercenary Army.

A SEVENTH MODEL OF A COMMONWEALTH PROPOSED.
The Commonwealth of Holland.
THAT the People in every City, and in every Province or County within these
three Nations, elect to every City, Province, or County of the same, a matter
of twenty, thirty, or forty Magistrates for life. That these Magistrates being so
elected, be the Senate of that respective City, Province or County.

THAT the Senats, thus elected, thenceforth have and enjoy the Soverain Power
within their respective Jurisdiction, for ever. That every Senate annually elect
two or four Burgomasters or Consuls, to be Presidents of the same. That they
also elect seven Magistrates, or present fourteen persons to the Governor of the
Province; and that he elect seven. That the seven so elected be Judges, or have
the Executive Power of the Laws for their term, and within their respective
Jurisdiction.

THAT in case of Affairs of more public and general concern, as War or Peace,
levy of Men or Money, and the like, the Governor of the Province give
information of the things to be considered, to the Nobility, and to the Senats
of that Province; therewith appointing a time and place for the Assembly of the
States Provincial. That each of the Senats, having debated the matter proposed,
delegat one Consul, with some other Senators well informed and instructed with
their Will and Pleasure, to the Assembly of the States Provincial. That the
Nobility of the same Province delegat some of their Order likewise to the
Provincial States. That the Delegats both of the Nobility and of the Senats,
give the Vote of their Principals according to instruction; and that neither
the Nobility, nor any Senate or Soverainty be otherwise bound, than by their own
Vote.

THAT the Provincial Estates elect one Magistrate for life, or during pleasure,
to be Provincial Governor: That they elect one or more other Magistrates for
life, or during pleasure, to be States General.

THAT the States General being elected, and well instructed by their Provinces,
have the direction of the whole League: That each give not his own Vote, but
the Vote of his Province; and that no Province be otherwise bound, than by her
own Vote.

IF these Models (in which I claim to be the first that has laid the whole, and
the highest Mysterys of the ancient Commonwealths, to the lowest capacity of
vulgar Debate) be not all in the mouths of great men, and in Pamphlets, for
Chimeras or Utopias, it is great chance: Yet contain they no less than the
whole Revolution of Popular Prudence. Nor is it more certain, that no one of
them would fit the present state of this Nation, than that he or they, whose
Contemplation and Understanding is not well versed in the most, or in the best
of these, shall never fit a Model of Popular Government to the present state of
this Nation, or of any other. In which assurance, I com to fulfill my promise in
the Second Part, or to propose such a Model as is fitted to the present state
of this Nation.

THE SECOND PART, Proposing a MODEL of A COMMONWEALTH Fitted to the Present
State of this Nation.
BUT so it is ever, that the Humors or Interests of predominant Partys hold
themselves to be National: and that which fits them, can never fit a Nation;
nor that which fits a Nation, ever fit them. This in the introduction of
Government, is always the main difficulty. But where Partys are no better
founded, or fitted for Usurpation, than now in England, they are rather to be
slighted than considered, as those, the stoutest whereof have but given this
Example to the rest, that they who in this state of Affairs shall obstruct an
equal and well ordered Government, shall but ruin themselves. For which cause
it is proposed:

1. THAT all Citizens, that is, Freemen, or such as are not Servants, be
distributed into Horse and Foot. That such of them as have one hundred pounds a
year in Lands, Goods, or Money, or above this proportion, be of the Horse; and
all such as have under this proportion, be of the Foot.

2. THAT all Elders, or Freemen, being thirty years of age or upwards, be
capable of civil Administration; and that the Youth, or such Freemen as are
between eighteen years of age and thirty, be not capable of civil
Administration, but of military only, in such manner as shall follow in the
military part of this Model.

3. THAT the whole native, or proper Territory of the Commonwealth be cast with
as much exactness as can be convenient, into known and fixed Precincts, or
Parishes.

4. THAT the Elders resident in each Parish annually assemble in the same, for
example upon Monday next ensuing the last of December: That they then and there
elect out of their own number every fifth man, or one man of every five, to be
for the term of the year ensuing a Deputy of that Parish; and that the first
and second so elected be Overseers, or Presidents for the regulating of all
Parochial Congregations, whether of the Elders, or of the Youth, during the
term for which they were elected.

5. THAT so many Parishes lying nearest together, whose Deputys shall amount to
one hundred or therabouts, be cast into one Precinct called the Hundred; and
that in each Precinct called the Hundred, there be a Town, Village, or place
appointed to be the Capital of the same.

6. THAT the Parochial Deputys elected throout the Hundred assemble annually,
for example upon Monday next ensuing the last of January, at the Capital of
their Hundred. That they then and there elect out of the Horse of their number
one Justice of the Peace, one Juryman, one Captain, one Insign; and out of the
Foot of their number one other Juryman, one High Constable, etc.

7. THAT every twenty Hundreds lying nearest, and most conveniently together,
be cast into one Tribe; that the whole Territory being after this manner cast
into Tribes, some Town or place be appointed to every Tribe for the Capital of
the same; and that these three Precincts (that is, the Parish, the Hundred, and
the Tribe) whether the Deputys thenceforth annually chosen in the Parishes or
Hundreds, com to increase or diminish, remain firm and inalterable for ever,
save only by Act of Parliament. The Tribes are presumed throout these
Propositions to amount to fifty.

8. THAT the Deputys elected in the several Parishes, together with their
Magistrates and other Officers both Civil and Military elected in the several
Hundreds, assemble or muster annually, for example upon Monday next ensuing the
last of February, at the Capital of their Tribe, for the space of two days.

9. THAT this whole Body thus assembled, upon the first day of their Assembly
elect out of the Horse of their number, one high Sherif, one Lieutenant of the
Tribe, one Custos Rotulorum, one Conductor, and two Censors. That the High
Sherif be Commander in chief, the Lieutenant Commander in the second place, and
the Conductor in the third place, of this Band or Squadron: That the Custos
Rotulorum be Mustermaster, and keep the Rolls; that the Censors be Governors of
the Ballot: and that the term of these Magistracys be annual.

10. THAT the Magistrates of the Tribe (that is to say, the High Sherif,
Lieutenant, Custos Rotulorum, the Censors, and the Conductor, together with the
Magistrates and Officers of the Hundreds, that is to say, the twenty Justices of
the Peace, the forty Jurymen, the twenty High Constables) be one Troop, or one
Troop and one Company apart, called the Prerogative Troop or Company. That this
Troop bring in and assist the Justices of Assize, hold the Quarter Session in
their several Capacitys, and perform their other Functions as formerly.

11. THAT the Magistrates of the Tribe (that is to say, the High Sherif,
Lieutenant, Custos Rotulorum, the Censors, and the Conductor, together with the
twenty Justices elected at the Hundreds) be a Court for the Government of the
Tribe called the Phylarch; and that this Court proceed in all matter of
Government as shall from time to time be directed by Act of Parliament.

12. THAT the Squadron of the Tribe on the second day of their assembly, elect
two Knights, and three Burgesses out of the Horse of their number, and four
other Burgesses out of the Foot of their number: that each Knight upon election
forthwith make Oath of Allegiance to the Commonwealth, or refusing such Oath,
the next Competitor in Election to the same Magistracy, making the said Oath,
be the Magistrate. The like for the Burgesses. That the Knights thus sworn, have
Session in the Senate for the term of three years; and that the Burgesses thus
sworn, be of the Prerogative Tribe or Representative of the People for the like
term.

13. THAT for the full and perfect institution of the Assemblys mentioned, the
Squadron of the Tribe in the first year of the Commonwealth, elect two Knights
for the term of one year, two other Knights for the term of two years, and
lastly two Knights more for the term of three years; the like for the Burgesses
of the Horse first, and then for those of the Foot. And that this Proposition
be of no farther use than for the first years Election only.

14. THAT a Magistrate or Officer elected at the Hundred be thereby barred from
being elected a Magistrate of the Tribe, or of the first day's Election; but
that no former Election whatsoever bar a man of the second day's Election at
the Tribe, or to be chosen a Knight or Burgess. That a man being chosen a
Knight or Burgess, who before was chosen a Magistrate or Officer of the Hundred,
or Tribe, may delegat his former Office or Magistracy in the Hundred, or in the
Tribe, to any other Deputy, being no Magistrate nor Officer, and being of the
same Hundred, and of the same Order, that is, of the Horse or Foot respectively.

15. THAT the Knights of the annual Election take their places on Monday next
ensuing the last of March in the Senate; that the like number of Knights whose
Session determins at the same time, recede. That every Knight or Senator be
paid out of the public Revenue quarterly, one hundred twenty five pounds during
his term of Session, and be obliged to sit in purple Robes.

16. THAT annually on reception of the new Knights, the Senate proceed to
election of new Magistrates and Counsillors. That for Magistrates they elect one
General, one Speaker, and two Censors, each for the term of one year, these
promiscuously; and that they elect one Commissioner of the great Seal, and one
Commissioner of the Treasury, each for the term of three years, and out of the
new Knights only.

17. THAT the General and the Speaker, as Consuls of the Commonwealth, and
Presidents of the Senate, be during the term of their Magistracy paid quarterly
out of the public Revenue five hundred pounds; that the Insigns of these
Magistracys be a Sword born before the General, and a Mace before the Speaker;
that they be obliged to wear Ducal Robes. And that what is said of the General
in this Proposition, be understood only of the General sitting, and not of the
General marching.

18. THAT the General sitting, in case he be commanded to march, receive
Fieldpay; and that a new General be forthwith elected by the Senate to succeed
him in the House, with all the Rights, Insigns and Emoluments of the General
sitting; and this so often as one or more Generals are marching.

19. THAT the three Commissioners of the Great Seal, and the three
Commissioners of the Treasury, using their Insigns and Habit, and performing
their other functions as formerly, have paid quarterly to each of them three
hundred seventyfive pounds.

20. THAT the Censors govern the Ballot; that they be Presidents of the Council
for Religion; that each have a silver Wand for the Insign of his Magistracy;
that each be paid quarterly three hundred seventy five pounds, and be obliged
to wear scarlet Robes.

21. THAT the General sitting, the Speaker, and the six Commissioners
abovesaid, be the Signory of this Commonwealth.

22. THAT there be a Council of State consisting of fifteen Knights, five out
of each Order, List, or Election; and that the same be perpetuated by the
annual election of five out of the new Knights, or those last elected into the
Senate.

23. THAT there be a Council for Religion consisting of twelve Knights, four
out of each Order, and perpetuated by the annual election of four out of the
Knights last elected into the Senate. That there be a Council for Trade,
consisting of a like number, elected and perpetuated in the same manner.

24. THAT there be a Council of War not elected by the Senate, but elected by
the Council of State out of themselves. That this Council of War consist of
nine Knights, three out of each Order, and be perpetuated by the annual
election of three out of the last Knights elected into the Council of State.

25. THAT in case the Senate add nine Knights more elected promiscuously, or not
promiscuously, out of their own number, to the Council of War, the said Council
of War be understood by such addition to be Dictator of the Commonwealth for
the term of three months and no longer, except by farther Order of the Senate
the said Dictatorian Power be prolonged for a like term.

26. THAT the Signory have session and suffrage, with right also jointly or
severally to propose both in the Senate, and in all Senatorian Councils.

27. THAT each of the three Orders or Divisions of Knights, in each Senatorian
Council, elect one Provost for the term of one Week; and that any two Provosts
of the same Council so elected, may propose to the same Council for their term,
and not otherwise.

28. THAT some fair Room, or Rooms well furnished and attended, be allowed at
the States charge, for a free and open Academy to all comers, at some convenient
hour or hours toward the Evening: That this Academy be governed according to
the rules of good Breeding, or civil Conversation, by some one or more of the
Provosts; and that in this Academy it be lawful for any man, by word of mouth,
or by writing, in jest or in earnest, to propose to the Proposers.

29. THAT for Ambassadors in Ordinary, there be four Residences, as France,
Spain, Venice, and Constantinople; and that every Resident upon election of a
new Ambassador in Ordinary, remove to the next Residence in order hereby
mentioned, till having served orderly in all the said Residences, he returns
home. That upon Monday next ensuing the last of November, there be every second
year elected by the Senate some fit person, being above twenty five and under
thirty five years of age, and not of the Senate, nor of the Popular Assembly.
That the Party so elected repair on Monday next ensuing the last of March
following, as an Ambassador in Ordinary to the Court of France, and there
reside for the term of two years to be computed from the first of April next
ensuing his election. That every Ambassador in Ordinary be allowed three
thousand pounds a year during the term of his Residences. And that if a
Resident coms to die, there be an extraordinary Election into his Residence for
his term, and for the remainder of his removes and progress.

30. THAT all emergent Elections be made by scrutiny, that is by a Council, or
by Commissioners proposing, and by the Senate resolving in the manner following:
That all Field Officers be proposed by the Council of War: That all Ambassadors
Extraordinary be proposed by the Council of State: That all Judges and Serjants
at Law be proposed by the Commissioners of the Great Seal: That all Barons and
Officers of trust in the Exchequer be proposed by the Commissioners of the
Treasury; and that such of these as are thus proposed to, and approved by the
Senate, be held lawfully elected.

31. THAT the cognizance of all foren Negotiation, and of all matter of State
to be considered, or Law to be enacted, whether Provincial or National,
Domestic or Foren, pertain to the Council of State. That all such Affairs of
like kind as the Council of State shall judge fit to be carried with more than
ordinary secrecy, be committed by them, and pertain to the cognizance and trust
of the Council of War, to this end consisting of a select Part, or Committee of
the Council of State. That the Cognizance and Protection both of the National
Religion, and of the Liberty of Conscience, equally established in this Nation,
after the manner provided in the religious part of this Model, pertain to the
Council for Religion. That all matter of Traffic, and regulation of the same
pertain to the Council for Trade. That in the exercise of these several
Functions, each being naturally Senatorian or Authoritative only, no Council
assume any other Power than such only as shall be particularly or expressly
estated upon the same by Act of Parliament.

32. THAT what shall be proposed to the Senate by any one or more of the
Signory, or of the Proposers General; or whatever was proposed by any two of
the Provosts, or particular Proposers to their respective Council, and upon
debate at that Council shall com to be proposed by the same to the Senate, be
necessarily debatable, and debated by the Senate.

33. THAT in all cases wherein Power is derived to the Senate by Law made, or by
Act of Parliament, the result of the Senate be ultimat: That in all cases of Law
to be made, or not already provided for by Act of Parliament, as some particular
Peace or War, levy of Men or Money, or the like, the Result of the Senate be not
ultimat, but preparatory only, and be proposed by the Senate to the Prerogative
Tribe, or Assembly of the People, except only in cases of such speed or
secrecy, wherein the Senate shall judge the necessary slowness or openness of like
proceeding to be of detriment or danger to the Commonwealth.

34. THAT if upon the motion or proposition of a Council, or Proposer General,
the Senate add nine Knights, promiscuously or not promiscuously chosen out of
their own number, to the Council of War, the said Council of War be thereby made
Dictator, and have power of Life and Death, as also to enact Laws in all cases
of speed or secrecy, for and during the term of three months and no longer,
except upon new Order from the Senate: And that all Laws enacted by the
Dictator, be good and valid for the term of one year, and no longer, except the
same be proposed by the Senate, and resolved by the People.

35. THAT the Burgesses of the annual Election returned by the Tribes, enter
into the Prerogative Tribe on Monday next ensuing the last of March; and that
the like number of Burgesses whose term is expired, recede at the same time.
That the Burgesses thus entered, elect to themselves out of their own number
two of the Horse, one to be Captain, and the other to be Cornet of the same;
and two of the Foot, one to be Captain, the other to be Insign of the same,
each for the term of three years. That these Officers being thus elected, the
whole Tribe or Assembly proceed to the election of four annual Magistrates, two
out of the Foot to be Tribuns of the Foot, and two out of the Horse to be
Tribuns of the Horse. That the Tribuns be Commanders in chief of this Tribe so
far as it is a Military Body, and Presidents of the same as it is a Civil
Assembly. And lastly, that this whole Tribe be paid weekly as follows: to each
of the Tribuns of the Horse seven pounds, to each of the Tribuns of the Foot
six pounds; to each of the Captains of Horse five pounds, to each of the
Captains of Foot four pounds; to each of the Cornets three pounds, to each of
the Insigns two pounds seven shillings; to every Horseman one pound ten
shillings, and to every one of the Foot one pound.

36. THAT inferior Officers, as Captains, Cornets, Insigns, be only for the
Military Discipline of the Tribe. That the Tribuns have Session in the Senate
without Suffrage: That of course they have Session and Suffrage in the
Dictatorian Council, so often as it is created by the Senate. That in all cases
to be adjudg'd by the People they be Presidents of the Court or Judicatory.

37. THAT Peculat or Defraudation of the Public, and all Cases or Crimes
tending to the subversion of the Government, be triable by the Prerogative
Tribe or the Assembly of the People; and that to the same there ly an Appeal in
all Causes, and from all Courts, Magistrates, or Councils, National or
Provincial.

38. THAT the right of Debate, as also of proposing to the People, be wholly
and only in the Senate, without any power at all of Result not derived from the
People, and estated upon the Senate by act of Parliament.

39. THAT the power of Result be wholly and only in the People, without any
right at all of Debate.

40. THAT the Senate having debated and agreed upon a Law to be proposed, cause
promulgation of the said Law to be made for the space of six weeks before
Proposition; that is, cause the Law to be written fair, and hung up for the
time aforesaid in some of the most eminent places of the City, and of the
Suburbs.

41. THAT promulgation being made, the Signory demand of the Tribuns sitting in
the Senate, an Assembly of the People. That the Tribuns upon such demand of the
Signory, or of the Senate, be obliged to assemble the Prerogative Tribe in Arms
by sound of Trumpet, with Drums beating, and Colors flying, in any Town, Field,
or Marketplace, being not above six miles distant, upon the day, and at the
hour appointed, except the meeting, through inconvenience of the Weather, or the
like, be prorogued by consent of the Signory and of the Tribuns. That the
Prerogative Tribe being assembled accordingly, the Senate propose to them by two
or more of the Senatorian Magistrates thereto appointed, at the first
promulgation of the Law. That the Proposers for the Senate open to the People
the occasion, motives, and reasons of the Senate for the Law to be proposed; and
that the same being don, they put the Law or Proposition by distinct clauses to
the Ballot of the People. That if any material Clause or Clauses of the
Proposition, or Law so proposed, be rejected by the People, the Clause or
Clauses so rejected may be reviewed, altered, and proposed again to the third
time, if the Senate think fit, but no oftener.

42. THAT what is thus proposed by the Senate, and resolved by the People, be
the Law of the Land, and no other, except what is already received as such, or
reserved to the Dictatorian Council.

43. THAT every Magistracy, Office, or Election throout this whole
Commonwealth, whether annual or triennial, be understood of course or
consequence to injoin an interval or vacation equal to the term of the same.
That the Magistracy or Office of a Knight, and of a Burgess, be in this
relation understood as one and the same; and that this Order regard only such
Elections as are National or Domestic, and not such as are foren, or contained
in the Provincial part of this Model.

44. THAT for an Exception from this Rule, where there is but one Elder of the
Horse in one and the same Parish, that Elder be eligible in the same without
interval; and where there be above four Elders of the Horse in one and the same
Parish, there be not above half, nor under two of them eligible at the same
Election.

45. THAT throout all the Assemblys and Councils of this Commonwealth, the
Quorum consist of one half in the time of health, and of one third part in a
time of sickness, being so declared by the Senate.

THE use of the Ballot, being as full of prolixity and abstruseness in writing,
as of dispatch and facility in practice, is presumed throout all Elections and
Results in this Model, and for the rest referred rather to practice than
writing. There remain the Religious, Military and Provincial parts of this
Frame: But the Civil part being approved, they follow, or being not approved,
may be spared.

CONCLUSION; or, the use of these PROPOSITIONS.
THESE Propositions are so laid out to debate or examination, that a man having
the mind to weigh, discourse upon, or object against this Model, may do it in
the parts with the greatest convenience.

ANY examination of, or objection against the whole, or any part in print or in
writing, the Author holds himself bound to acknowledge or answer: But as to mere
discourse upon matters of this compass, it is usually narrow; besides that in
writing a man must put himself upon better aim than he can be obliged to take
in discourse.

ANY one objection lying in writing against any one Order in this part of the
Model, after such manner as to show that the Part or Order so invaded ought to
be expunged, altered, or amended, unless it may be expunged, altered, or
amended accordingly, destroys the whole.

AND any one or more Objections so lying against any one or more of these
Orders or Propositions, that thereby they may be expunged, altered or amended,
must in the whole or in part make a better Model.

IN this case therefore, or in case no Objection lys, the use of these
Propositions will be such, as thereby any Man or any Assembly of men,
considering or debating upon them in order, may find or make a true Model of a
well ordered Commonwealth.

AND that an Assembly can never make or frame a Model of any Government
otherwise than in some such manner, is provable first by a demonstration from
the effect; and secondly by a demonstration from the cause.

THE demonstration from the Effect is, that an Assembly no otherwise frames a
Law or Order, than by having it first penned by some one man, and then judging
upon it; and the Model of a Commonwealth must consist of many Laws or Orders.

THE demonstration from the Cause is, that whereas Reason consists of two parts,
the one Invention, and the other Judgment, a Man may be as far beyond any
Assembly for Invention, as any Assembly can be beyond a Man for Judgment; or
which is more, that the formation of a Model of Government requires a strong
faculty of Invention, and that an Assembly is naturally void of all manner of
Invention.

Nov. 13. 1658.
THE Ways and Means Whereby an Equal and Lasting COMMONWEALTH May be suddenly
introduced, and perfectly founded, with the free Consent and actual
Confirmation of the Whole People of England.
Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter. Pers.

A WORD fitly spoken is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver.

THE Desire of the People of England now runs strongly to have a Free Parliament.

LET there be a free Parliament.

TO the end that the People may be most equally represented, or that the
Parliament may be Freest,

LET there be a new Division of England and Wales, with as much equality as may
stand with convenience, into fifty Shires.

LET every Shire elect annually two Knights to be of one House, and seven
Deputys to be of another House of Parliament, for the term of three years. For
the first year only, let the Deputys in each Division be elected triple, that
is, seven for the term of one year, seven for the term of two years, and seven
for the term of three years. The like for the Knights, save only that the
present Parliament remain; that is, let two Knights in each Division be elected
the first year only for the term of one year, two other Knights at the same
time for the term of two years; and let the present Parliament be the triennial
part of the Knights House for the first Election.

THE House of Knights and the House of Deputys being assembled, let the House
of Knights debate and propose.

LET what is proposed by the House of Knights, be promulgated for the space of
six weeks.

PROMULGATION being thus made, let the House of Deputys meet, and give their
Result upon the Proposition.

LET what was thus proposed by the Senate or House of Knights, and resolved by
the People or House of Deputys, be the Law.

IN this Constitution these Councils must of necessity contain the Wisdom, and
the Interest of the Nation.

IN this method, Debate must of necessity be mature.

IF it be according to the Wisdom and the Interest of the Nation upon mature
debate that there be a King, let there be a King.

IF it be according to the Wisdom and the Interest of the Nation upon mature
debate, that there be a Commonwealth; two Assemblys in this Order are actually
a Commonwealth, and so far a well ordered Commonwealth, that they are
capacitated and inclined to reach to themselves whatever furniture shall be
further necessary in more particular Orders, which also is at hand.

TILL this or the like be don, the Line of the late King and the People must be
fellowsufferers; in which case the impatience of the People must be for the
restitution of that Line at all adventures.

BUT this or the like being once don, immediately the Line of the late King and
the People become Rivals, in which case they will never restore Monarchy.

WILL never, may some say? But if the Senate and the Popular Assembly be both
Royalists, they both will and can restore Monarchy.

THO both Royalists, they neither will nor can: for let them, that look no
further than home or self, say what they will, to affirm that a Senate, and a
Popular Assembly thus constituted can procreat Monarchy, is to affirm that a
Horse and a Mare can generat a Cat; that Wheat being rightly sown may com up
Pease; or that a River in its natural channel may run upwards.

IN the present case of England, Commonwealthsmen may fail through want of Art,
but Royalists must fail through want of Matter; the former may miss through
impotence, the latter must through impossibility. Or where the State is purely
popular, that is, not overbalanc'd by a Lord or Lords; let there be one
Example, or one Reason given that there is, was, or ever can be Monarchy* There
will be this when all fails, for the aftergame, tho the work should fall, as is
like enough, into the hands of Royalists.

CERTAIN it is, that where any private Citizen or Freeman might not (some way or
other) propose, there never was a well ordered Commonwealth.

UPON this encouragement I offered this Paper to good hands, but it was
(according to custom) thrown after me.

SO it went in the Protector's time, in every Revolution since. La fortuna
accieca gli animi de gli huomini; but that is Atheism, that is MACCHIAVEL.

WELL, but now says the Protectorian Family, O that we had set up the equal
Commonwealth! So say broken Parlaments and Statesmen; so say the sadly mistaken
Sectarys; so say the cashiered Officers; so says he that would have no nay, but
Oligarchy was a good word; and so will more say after these, except they learn
to say after another, Aut reges non exigendi fuerunt, aut plebi re, non verbo,
danda libertas; either the Kings ought not to have bin driven out, or the
People to have their Liberty not in word, but in deed: but that is Heathenism,
that is CICERO; well this is Christian, if there will b^ no such saying, I would
there might be no swearing.

Feb. 6. 1659.
THE HUMBLE PETITION OF DIVERSE Well affected Persons, Delivered the 6 th day of
July, 1659. With the PARLAMENT'S Answer thereto.
TO THE SUPREME AUTHORITY, THE Parliament of the Commonwealth of England; The
Humble Petition of diverse well affected Persons,
SHOWS,

THAT your Petitioners have for many years observed the breathings and longings
of this Nation after Rest and Settlement, and that upon mistaken grounds they
have bin ready even to sacrifice and yield up part of their own undoubted
right, to follow after an appearance of it.

AND your Petitioners do daily see the bad effects of long continued
Distractions, in the ruins and decays of Trade foren and domestic; and in the
advantages that are taken to make Confederacys to involve the Nation in Blood
and Confusion, under pretense of procuring a Settlement.

THAT it has bin the practice of all Nations, on the subversion of any form of
Government, to provide immediately a new Constitution suitable to their
condition; with certain Successions and Descents, that so both their Lawgivers
and Magistrates might use their several Trusts, according to the established
Constitution; and the Peoples minds be settled secure, and free from attemts of
introducing several forms of Government, according to the variety of their
Fancys, or corrupt Interests.

THAT God has preserved this Nation wonderfully without example many years,
since the dissolution of the old form of Government by King, Lords and Commons;
there having bin no fundamental Constitutions of any kind duly settled, nor any
certain Succession provided for the Legislative Power; but even at this
instant, if by any sudden sickness, design, or force, any considerable numbers
of your Persons should be rendered incapable of meeting in Parliament, the
Commonwealth were without form of successive Legislature or Magistracy, and
left to the mercy of the strongest Faction. Yet we have reason to remember in
these years of unsettlement, the inexpressible sufferings of this Nation in
their Strength, Wealth, Honor, Liberty, and all things conducing to their
welbeing; and we have like reason now sadly to apprehend the impending ruin.
And we cannot discern a possibility of your Honors unanimous and expeditious
procedings toward our Countries preservation, and relief from its heavy
pressures, while your minds are not settled in any known Constitution of
Government or fundamental Orders; according to which, all Laws should be made:
but diverse or contrary Interests may be prosecuted on different apprehensions
of the Justice and Prudence of different forms of Government, tho all with good
intentions.

YOUR Petitioners therefore conceiving no remedy so effectual against the
present Dangers, as the settlement of the Peoples minds, and putting them into
actual security of their Propertys and Libertys, by a due establishment of the
Constitution under which they may evidently apprehend their certain enjoyment
of them; and thereupon, a return of their Trade and free Commerce, without those
continual fears that make such frequent stops in Trade, to the ruin of
thousands.

AND your Petitioners also observing, that the Interest of the late King's Son
is cried up, and promoted daily, upon pretense, that there will be nothing but
Confusion and Tyranny, till he com to govern; and that such as declare for a
Commonwealth, are for Anarchy and Confusion, and can never agree among
themselves, what they would have.

UPON serious thoughts of the Premises, your Petitioners do presume with all
humility, and submission to your Wisdom, to offer to your Honors their
Principles and Proposals concerning the Government of this Nation: Whereupon,
they humbly conceive, a just and prudent Government ought to be established,
viz.

1. THAT the Constitution of the Civil Government of England by King, Lords,
and Commons, being dissolved, whatever new Constitution of Government can be
made or settled according to any rule of Righteousness, it can be no other than
a wise Order or Method, into which the free Peoples Deputys shall be formed for
the making of their Laws, and taking care for their common safety and welfare
in the execution of them: For, the exercise of all just Authority over a free
People, ought (under God) to arise from their own Consent.

2. THAT the Government of a free People ought to be so settled, that the
Governors and Governed may have the same Interest in preserv^ng the Government,
and each others Propertys and Libertys respectively; that being the only sure
foundation of a Commonwealth's Unity, Peace, Strength, and Prosperity.

3. THAT there cannot be a Union of the Interests of a whole Nation in the
Government, where those who shall sometimes govern, be not also sometimes in the
condition of the Governed; otherwise the Governors will not be in a capacity to
feel the weight of the Government, nor the Governed to enjoy the advantages of
it: And then it will be the interest of the major part to destroy the
Government, as much as it will be the interest of the minor part to preserve it.

4. THAT there is no security that the Supreme Authority shall not fall into
Factions, and be led by their private Interest to keep themselves always in
power, and direct the Government to their private advantages, if that Supreme
Authority be settled in any single Assembly whasoever, that shall have the
entire power of propounding, debating and resolving Laws.

5. THAT the Soverain Authority in every Government, of what kind soever, ought
to be certain in its perpetual Successions, Revolutions, or Descents; and
without possibility (by the judgment of human Prudence) of a death or failure
of its being, because the whole form of the Government is dissolved if that
should happen, and the People in the utmost imminent danger of an absolute
Tyranny, or a War among themselves, or Rapin and Confusion. And therefore where
the Government is Popular, the Assemblys in whom reside the Supreme Authority,
ought never to die or dissolve, tho the Persons be annually changing: neither
ought they to trust the Soverain care of the strength and safety of the People
out of their own hands, by allowing a Vacation to themselves, lest those that
should be trusted be in love with such great Authority, and aspire to be their
Masters, or else fear an Account, and seek the dissolution of the Commonwealth
to avoid it.

6. THAT it ought to be declared as a Fundamental Order in the Constitution of
this Commonwealth, that the Parliament being the Supreme Legislative Power, is
intended only for the exercise of all those Acts of Authority that are proper
and peculiar to the Legislative Power; and to provide for a Magistracy, to whom
should appertain the whole Executive Power of the Laws: and no Case either
Civil or Criminal to be judged in Parliament, saving that the last Appeals in
all Cases, where Appeals shall be thought fit to be admitted, be only to the
Popular Assembly; and also that to them be referred the Judgment of all
Magistrates in Cases of Maladministrations in their Offices.

AND in prosecution of these Principles,

YOUR Petitioners humbly propose for the settlement of this Commonwealth, that
it be ordained,

1. THAT the Parliament or the supreme Authority of England, be chosen by the
free People, to represent them with as much equality as may be.

2. THAT a Parliament of England shall consist of two Assemblys, the lesser of
about three hundred, in whom shall reside the entire power of consulting,
debating, and propounding Laws: the other, to consist of a far greater number,
in whom shall rest the sole power of resolving all Laws so propounded.

3. THAT the free People of England, in their respective divisions at certain
days and places appointed, shall for ever annually choose one third part to each
Assembly, to enter into their Authority, at certain days appointed: the same
days, the Authority of a third of each of the said Assemblys to cease, only in
the laying the first Foundation in this Commonwealth's Constitution: the whole
number of both the Assemblys to be chosen by the People respectively, viz. one
third of each Assembly to be chosen for one year, one third for two years, and
one third for three years.

4. THAT such as shall be chosen, having served their appointed time in either
of the said Assemblys of Parliament, shall not be capable to serve in the same
Assembly during some convenient interval or vacation.

5. THAT the Legislative Power do wholly refer the execution of the Laws to the
Magistracy, according to the sixth Principle herein mentioned.

6. THAT in respect to Religion and Christian Liberty, it be ordained that the
Christian Religion by the appointment of all succeding Parlaments, be taught,
and promulgated to the Nation, and public Preachers thereof maintained: and that
all that shall profess the said Religion, tho of different Persuasions in parts
of the Doctrine, or Discipline thereof, be equally protected in the peaceable
profession, and public exercise of the same; and be equally capable of all
Elections, Magistracys, Preferments in the Commonwealth, according to the order
of the same. Provided always, that the public exercise of no Religion contrary
to Christianity be tolerated; nor the public exercise of any Religion, tho
professedly Christian, grounded upon, or incorporated into the Interest of any
Foren State or Prince.

THESE your Petitioners humbly conceive to be the Essentials of the form of a
free Commonwealth, which if they were made fit for practice by your Honors
appointing the numbers, times, places, and all other necessary circumstances,
and settled as the fundamental Orders of the Commonwealth, would naturally
dispose those that should hereafter be chosen into the Parlaments, from the
love of their own interest to seek the common good, being obliged by the
Constitutions here humbly offered to partake with the whole body of the People,
of the good or evil that shall happen to the Commonwealth, having no probable
temtations or means left to compass any private or factious ends in matters
Religious or Civil. And your Petitioners cannot imagine a greater security for
the Cause and Interest contended for with such effusion of Blood, than by
disposing the free People into this kind of order, whereby the same Cause would
become their common Interest. Yet if your Honors should think it necessary or
convenient for securing the minds of such as are doubtful and jealous that the
People may betray their own Libertys, there may be inserted into the
fundamental Orders of the Commonwealth, these following Expedients, viz.

1. THAT for securing the Government of this Commonwealth, and of the Religious
and Civil freedom of the good People thereof, it may be for ever esteemed and
judged Treason against the Commonwealth, for any Member of either Assembly of
Parliament, or any other person whatsoever, to move or propose in either of the
said Assemblys, the restitution of Kingly Government, or the introduction of
any single Person to be chief Magistrate of England, or the alteration of that
part of the fundamental Order herein contained that concerns the equal freedom
and protection of Religious persons of different Persuasions.

2. THAT about the number of twelve persons of the most undoubted Fidelity and
Integrity, may be authorized and empowered, for some certain number of years
next ensuing, to seize, apprehend, and in safe custody to detain any person or
persons whatsoever, till he or they be in due form of Law delivered, as is
hereafter specified, that shall move or propose in either of the said Assemblys
of Parliament the restitution of Kingly Government, or the introduction of any
single Person to be chief Magistrate of this Commonwealth, or the alteration of
that part of the fundamental Order herein contained, that concerns the equal
freedom and protection of religious persons of different persuasions; but for
no other matter or cause whatsoever. And when it shall happen that any person
or persons shall be arrested or seized for any of the causes aforesaid, in
manner aforesaid, then a Commission of Oyer and Terminer may issue forth in due
form of Law to the said twelve, or any six of them, to proceed in due form of
Law, within one month after the apprehension of any such person or persons, to
the arrainment and public trial of every such person or persons; and upon the
legal conviction of him or them by the testimony of two sufficient Witnesses of
any of the Treasons herein declared, to condemn to the pains of death, and to
cause the same Judgment to be duly executed: and the Keeper or Keepers of the
Great Seal of England that shall be for the time being, may be authorized and
required from time to time during the term of years, to issue out Commissions
to the said twelve or any six of them, authorizing them to proceed as aforesaid.

AND if your Honors shall further judge it convenient, the fundamental Orders of
the Government may be consented to or subscribed by the People themselves, if
their express Pact shall be esteemed any additional security; other Nations,
upon the like occasions of expulsion of their Kings, having taken the Peoples
Oaths against their returning: And the same may be proclaimed as often as our
Ancestors provided for the proclaiming of Magna Charta, and any further
security also added, if any can be found among men, that has a foundation in
Justice.

NOW your Petitioners having, with humble submission to your grave Wisdoms,
thus declared their apprehensions of the present condition of this distracted
Nation, and the only effectual means under God to prevent the impending
Mischiefs; They do must humbly pray,

THAT such speedy considerations may be had of the Premises as the Condition of
this Nation requires; and that such a method may be settled for the debating
and consulting about the Government, that your wise Results may be seasonable
for the healing all the breaches of the Commonwealth, and establishing the sure
foundations of Freedom, Justice, Peace, and Unity.

And your Petitioners shall always pray, etc.
Wednesday July the 6 th, 1659.
THE House being informed that diverse Gentlemen were at the door with a
Petition, they were called in, and one of the Petitioners in behalf of himself
and the rest said, We humbly present you a Petition, to which we might have had
many thousand hands, but the Matter rather deserves your serious Consideration
than any public Attestation; and therefore we do humbly present it to this
Honorable House. Which, after the Petitioners were withdrawn, was read, and was
intitl'd, The humble Petition of diverse wellaffected Persons.

Resolved,

THAT the Petitioners have the Thanks of the House.

THE Petitioners were again called in, and Mr. Speaker gave them this Answer.

Gentlemen,
THE House has read over your Petition, and find it without any private end, and
only for the public Interest; and I am commanded to let you know that it lys
much upon them to make such a Settlement as may be most for the good of
Posterity: and they are about that work, and intend to go forward with it with
as much expedition as may be. And for your parts they have commanded me to give
you Thanks: and in their names I do give you the Thanks of this House
accordingly.

Tho. St. Nicholas Clerc of the Parliament.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
DIscourses concerning Government, by ALGERNON SIDNEY, Son to ROBERT Earl of
Leicester, and Ambassador from the Commonwealth of England to CHARLES GUSTAVUS
King of Sweden. Published from an Original Manuscript of the Author. Price 15 s.

A Complete Collection of the Historical, Political, and Miscellaneous Works of
JOHN MILTON, both English and Latin. With some Papers never before published. In
3 Vol. To which is prefixed, The Life of the Author, containing, besides the
History of his Works, several extraordinary Characters of Men, and Books,
Sects, Partys, and Opinions. Price 35 s.

Both printed by J. DARBY, and sold by the Booksellers.


