A BRIEF DISCOURSE OF MAN'S ESTATE In the first and second ADAM.

Showing these six Points, I Man had a glorious beginning. II Man is much
varied from himself. III Man's sin was caused by himself. IV Man's misery
follows his non-dependence on God. V Man once off from God, and left to
himself wanders irrecoverably. VI Saints by Christ, are in a very happy estate.


Ps. 8.5. What is man that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that
thou so visitest him?

Psalm. 49.12. Man being in honor abides not: but is like the beasts that
perish.

Psalm. 31.19. Oh how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them
that fear thee; which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the
sons of men!

By ROBERT HARRIS once of Hanwell, now President of Trinity College in Oxon,
and Doctor of Divinity.

LONDON, Printed by J. Flesher for John Bartlet the elder, and John Bartlet the
younger, and are to be sold at the Gilt Cup near Austins Gate in the new
Buildings. 1654.

TO Sir ANTHONY COPE Knight and Baronet.
SIR,
YOu are called to a place which I cannot but love, Hanwell, you are yet but
young, Eccles. 11.10.
and youth (God says) is vanity, and vanity feeds upon it self, Job 11.12.
being empty and impatient of Counsel; we were wont to say of you in your
Childhood, that you were a man, we now upon better grounds expect it from you;
and do pray you seriously to mind your self: First, whether you are called:
Secondly, and by whom. It Is true, you are called to a great estate, but that is
made up of such materials as do stand upon two lame feet: 1. Tim. 6.7.
the first is Uncertainty; first outward things are uncertain; 1. to us, they
have wings, ^ov. 23.5.
and are now upon the wing, flying from house to house, and (as I may say to my
cost) from nation to nation; on the other side, 2. we are uncertain to them,
sometimes we play with them as children with birds and send them flying by
unthrifty and ungodly means, at other times death seises us and sequesters
them on the sudden. You need not go from home to learn this, my days are not
many, yet in them, I have buried three of your Fathers, with their respective
wives, besides branches, more then I can name; you are (within few years) the
fourth heir of that ancient house; such is our life, and so uncertain the
supports thereof. But admit a certainty, yet halt these outward, on another
lame leg, Unsufficiency, they will not secure us from any evil, they will
not procure us any good, at least they will not give us any full satisfaction,
we read of some who had more Kingdoms then you have Manors; who enlarged
their desires like hell, and yet were as unsatisfied as hell it self: so true
is Solomon (to say nothing of heathens) the eye is not satisfied with seeing,
Ecceles. 5.10, etc.
etc. and when all is done, all is but vanity, and the vanity of vanities: this
(I confess) is not easily believed, till experience has confuted us. I
remember what your Father told me, upon his death bed, I have often heard you
(said he) speak of creatures vanity, but I could never believe it till I had
tried, upon trial, he found me true. O that Sir Anthony in his youth, would
appeal to Sir Anthony in his age, believe it (said he to his heir, your
Grandfather) all is vanity, mere vanity, so have I, so will you in time find
it; but so much of that. to consider, 2. who has brought you hither; surely
preferment comes not by chance, Ps. 75.6, 7.
it is the Lord that sets up, and pulls down, now in mercy, now in wrath; the
world may seem to run on wheels, but those wheels are full of eyes, Ezekiel. ^^.
and an eye of providence is most visible in these revolutions which relate to
you. When I first knew Hanwell, I found Sir Anthony Cope there, and there I
leave him again, whilst I leave the world, the wheel with eyes is come about,
and ends where it began for my time; and truly it will be no small comfort to
me dying, may I leave the same Sir Anthony in the same place; the Sir Anthony
that I found there, was not only morally good, temperate, sober, continent,
etc. but spiritually good, a man truly zealous for God in his day, worships,
truths, a man who did much countenance all honest Preachers, and (which is not
ordinary) his own most, a man terrible to the wicked, comfortable to the Godly,
a lover of his Countrrey, and with Uzziah a lover of husbandry in that his
Town, who made it his study (as he would say) to employ the poor there, and to
keep thence, such as would either burden or blemish the place; This was the Sir
Anthony that I found there, and my prayer unto heaven is, that the same name
and man, may still and still there live, and be ever like self, that his house
may be far from the curse, Nah. 1.14. and be filled with the presence of the
God, who is both his own, and our blessedness; and here I must now end, having
exceeded my purpose, I say but thus much more, and I have done. The longer I
lived in those parts, the more need I found of laying principles well, these
few are some of those many delivered in a shorter and plainer way, these thus
preserved and enlarged, I tender to you as an expression of my true observance
of that Honorable house, and honest Town, where I spent most of my strength,
and which I commend to the word of grace to be further built up in the faith of
Christ, in whom I would be whilst I am, Sir,

Your ready servant and faithful remembrancer, Robert Harris.
Trinity College Oxf. October. 13. 1653.
A Table of the Texts and Doctrines contained in this Treatise.
A brief discourse of the threefold state of man. Page 1.

Eccles. 7.29. Lo this only have I found, that God has made man upright: but
they have sought out many inventions.

Doct. 1. MAn at first was a very excellent and desirable creature. p. 2.

2 Man is not what he was, he was not what he is, but now there is a vast
distance between himself and himself, betwixt this and that estate. p. 24.

3 Man's sin is from man's self. p. 50.

4 Man's undoing, is from his nondependnce on God. p. 76.

5 When a man is once loose from God, and left to himself, he becomes restless
and endless in his ways. p. 97.

Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, etc. 30.

Doct. Saints in Christ, are in a very happy estate and condition. p. 118.

A BRIEF DISCOURSE OF Man's estate in the first and Second ADAM.
SECTION I. Excellency of man's estate, as created.
ECCLES. 7.29. Lo this only have I found, that God has made man upright: but
they have sought out many inventions.

God has made man UPRIGHT


WE are now come (according to our Method) to the Threefold estate of Man. I
am not ignorant of those difficulties and disputes which occur in this Subject:
Expect not from me in this ^lace, an answer to all Objections, ^or from any man
satisfaction to each ^ans curiosity. Solomon himself ^ould not satisfy himself
in all particulars: Only in the main of man he is very positive, and leaves us
here two main Principles, whereof the first respects man's innocent and
primitive estate; The second, his lapsed and forlorn condition, together with
the cause of both. His order is open and obvious; he had said before, That man
is wholly corrupt and now he delivers the original hereof; Negatively, it is
not God Positively, it is man. We go on in our intended way of delivering
Principles. And first, survey we man's first estate, and there look upon him as
h^ stands in Gods hand, and is of hi^ making til he marred himself. Here we find
his beginning very good by creation. An excellent, a lovely plain, even,
uniforme piece, smoot without knots and slawes, straigh^ without hook or crook;
(...)
So much Salomons comprehensive word im^ports; The result of all is this:

Man at first a very one Hent etc desirable creature.
Man at first was a very excellen and desirable Creature. This the Point; and
this is no more then Scrpture reports of him. Where mention is made of his
first estate, Dav^^ brings him in with a crown upon h^ head, and that crown is
a crown of glory and honor. Thou have crowned him with glory and honor, Psalm.
8.5. His place was little lower then Angels, but far above all other
Creatures: As Job affirms, Job. 35. v. 11. God made him wiser then the beasts
of the earth, then the fowls of heaven. Yea, the Prophet assures us that the
worst piece of him, the very case and outside, was most curiously wrought and
richly embroydered, Psalm. 139.15. Moses goes yet higher, and carries us above
creatures to Gods blessed self, Let us make man, says God, This Creature, in
our image and after our likeness, Genesis 1.26. Thus in Generals we have him set
forth to us. For Particulars, I shall not trouble you with any large discourse
touching his excellencies, either of soul, or body, or estate: Neither can we
in this our decayed condition reach them. We see, we feel what he is; but what
he either was or shall be, we can rather guess then judge, Greg.
as blind men do of colors; only this we are sure of, within there was
nothing but what was desirable; without, nothing but what was amiable; about
him, nothing but what was serviceable and comfortable: his understanding was as
full of light as it was free from darkness; his judgment, sound; his
conscience, clear; his will, conformable to Gods will; his affections regular;
nothing on that side wanting to his present happiness. O^ if we look without
him, 1. His body had nothing of blemish or blushing, or distemper; but rather
clothed with all requisite beauties and abilityes, which might render him
lovely, and commend him to every eye. 2. For his estate, what it was before his
fall we may guess by that which is since restored by Christ, whereof we have a
touch in that 8th Psalm ^ to wit; God gave him a Soverainty over all the
creatures, and stamped such a majesty upon him, that they did all acknowledge
him, and received their several names, as so many acknowledgements from him.
As for his possessions, we need not stand to enlarge upon one Parcel of his
Desmeans, which they call Paradise, since the whole, both of sea and land, and
all the creatures in both, were then his possession, his Paradise. Thus the
case stood with man at first, the creatures were as observant of him as he of
his Creator. More then this I shall not speak in these particulars. This being
a Theme so much treated of by Schoolmen and others, who write of this first
estate. Cleared in his sev^^ causes.
The whole matter will be further cleared if we look upon man in his causes.

If we consider the Efficient cause, Adam, says Luke, was the son of God,
thence he derives his Pedigree. Now from the excellency of the cause, it is not
hard to infer the excellency of the effect, especially since efficients work by
way of assimilation; Natural efficients, necessarily; voluntary causes,
freely: both strive to accomplish their own works to their own ends and
inclinations; now God (a voluntary agent) is all light, and works like himself,
so that from him can come no darkness; he is all goodness, all perfection,
and can do nothing but what is in its kind good and perfect; nay further, God
is not simply to be considered in this work, but with relation to personality.
The three glorious Persons concur in this external work: Es. 54.5. Ps. 149.2.
whence that expression job 35.10. God my makers. This is the joint work of
Father. Son and Holy Ghost, the issue of that power, wisdom, goodness which
is common to them all, so that the glory of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is in
its measure put upon this noble creature.

Formal cause of man created. I mean, the manner in which God made him; and
that is, 1. In the perfection of wisdom and deepes counsel, as being the
Masterpiece o^ his visible works: hence for our better understanding Moses
brings in God consulting with himself, Let us says he, make Man. 2. In
perfection of skill and workmanship, as in that 139th Psalm, who has made him
a curious piece, and bestowed so much art and cost upon him, a^ that the Master
of Physic, Galen, was enforced to frame a song of praise to that Deity that
frame^ man's body. 3. In perfection of power: he created him, without the
contribution of either matter or instrument, and so became the sole and whole
cause of man.

The exemplary cause. And here we pass by that private opinion of Zanchy's
Adam should be made. The text suffices us: God made man is his own image,
according to his own likeness: which passage, having an influence into much
which shall be hereafter said, must a little be opened. See then what is meant
by those words; And the answer is, that image and likeness in this case,
Conser Ps. 58.4. cum Genesis 1.26.
speak one and the same thing; but in an high and strong way: Not as Bellarmine
and others; who, for ends, make the one substantial, the other, not. In our
Image, most like our selves, that is, As near as the matter will suffer; There
can be no proportion between the infinite God, and a finite man; some kind of
resemblance in some degree there may be: In every Beast there are some
footsteps (as they are termed) of a deity, but more in man: some in every man,
but more in some now. At first, of all visible creatures man came nearest to
God. But wherein? not only in regard of his nature; because he had an
understanding, (...) reasonable will, a working immortal spirit in him, as
Papists, and others speak; nor yet only in order to his estate, because he
was made Lord over all creatures, as Socinians would have it; But also and
specially in regard of his Graces and endowments seated in his soul: God made
him wife, holy, just, upright, wherein the Apostle chiefly places Gods Image;
and that most justly, Ephesians. 4.24. That being the chief of Gods Image in the
first Adam, which Christ, the second Adam, does mostly repair and restore. When
then it is said, that God made man like himself, the meaning is, he made him
holy, righteous, spiritual, according to the sampler, Gods blessed self.

Final cause; God made man for most excellent ends and uses; he made him to
be a King of creatures, to be near to his most glorious Majesty, to be that
great piece which should crown the rest of his works, and speak out all his
perfections: he made him capable of an immortal ^state, of true holiness, and
happiness; and designed him for a marriage with the heir, Christ, and for
nearest alliance with himself: and in order to these ends, he put so much
honor upon him at the first. Nor can any man strange at this, since it is the
practice of all wise agents: Every skillful workman (you know) lays out most
of his skill and cost upon that piece which he intends for highest use and
credit, as every builder is more exact in setting out a chimney-piece, then in
making a gutter.

base materials, as dust, etc.

matter contributes least of all causes unto the excellency of the work. And as
much might be said touching the meannesse of it; The truth is: The poorness and
meanness of the matter, does of tentimes most advance and commend the skill of
the workman. That God out of nothing should draw something, out of dead, blind
dumb Clay should draw light, life, and speech, and out of such deformity should
extract such beauty, strength, and excellency: this commends the workman, but
does not at all disparage the work. Be the stuff what it will, God has made a
rich Arras of it; and the work is now honorable, through Gods power though the
materials seem contemptible So much for that objection Other questions of like
nature, we willingly pass over, and come to apply this.

Information concerning man's primitive estate.
Let me call upon you all to be we grounded and Grammar'd in thi^ truth,
touching man's primitive estate The not heeding hereof has let in those
inundations of errors, which now overspread the Christian World. You are not
to look upon man as now he is, but as first he was existing out of his causes.
And here shall commend unto you these principles.

beginning. Though now he be Immortal a part post, yet once he was not; This
is clear by the word and by his continued dependence.

founder and maker was one and that was God. It was a wild and mad blasphemy to
dream of Tw^ beginners of the whole, as some did or at least of Man, as did
others.

own likeness, Against Secinus.
stamping upon him an Impression of Holiness, and as Peter calls it, the divine
nature. These Principles, (as others in other cases, have done) commend I unto
you, nor would I have you once troubled with Socinus his cavils against the
same; being such which scarce deserve an answer.

First, says he, If man had born upon him Gods Image, intrinsecally, then man
had been Immortal.

Sol. So he had, if he had not killed himself, and cast away his life. And
though for the present he had nothing of death in him, yet was he mutable, and
so might contract death.

If man were like God in holiness, then was he free from sin.

Sol. 1. From the Act of sin he was free in his first constitution, though not
from the power of sinning being a voluntary agent.

Secondly, he was like God, but not a God, that is, equal to God, and equally,
incapable of sin.

If man's Image had consisted in holiness, then upon his fall, the whole Image
of God had been lost.

Sol. 1. So it was de jure, if God would have taken the forfeiture.

only in holiness. There indeed we lay it chiefly, but not only We say that
Gods Image is communicated to the whole compositum or Man. We put a difference
between the body of a man, and the body of a beast, whether living or dying: we
yield that a dead man has more o^ God in his body, then a dead beast.

degrees of holiness in this Image of God; and next, that it is not necessary
that man should partake with God in all his attributes whereof some are
incommunicable much less that he should equalize God, though in some measure
he be a representative of God.

now, and man at the first, as Solomon here puts it: as man was changeable
then, so now he i^ changed very much; though some ruins and remnants of that
which they call the substantial Image abide upon him. This you must the rather
be settled in, because Heretics labor tooth and nail, to confound these
different states. Against Papists.
Thus Papists-sweat to prove that man in his pure naturals is as good now as
then: and the same then that he is now, differing no more, at least for
intrinsecals, then a man clothed, and uncloathed differs from himself; or,
then a horse bridled and unbridled; The case was this, God put a bridle of
supervenient righteousness upon him to rein him in; otherwise he had the same
seeds and principles of corruption, conflict, concupiscence then, that he has
now.

Socinus brings his prop to uphold their rotten building; If, says he, there
had not been a conflict betwixt reason and affection, how could man have sinned?

Sol. He should have said, If man could not have wronged himself, silenced
reason, yielded to appetite, how should he sin? But the matter is, man had
power to be naught, (if we may call that power) though for the present he was
actually good.

But what strange men are these, who will fetch in God as an acce^ry to man's
sin at least; in truth, principal? For if God, who sol^ and wholly made man,
so made h^ as that he needed a patch, and an ventitious plaster so soon as
ever was made, does it not reflect up Gods perfection? but if he were made as
that there was a propension against reason, and a rebellion in members from the
first; and if the Rebellion be bad, at least not good is not God the author of
it?



Bellar.
Bellarmines answer in this case given me no satisfaction at all, God, sai^ he,
intended the man: The corrupti^ is but accidental, as when the Gut^ makes a
sword, he minds the sword, n^^ the rust of it.

make the matter, to wit, the Iron or Steel, bu^ only to give that matter a
for^^ And the rust does follow the matter not the form. The sword rusts no
because a sword, but because Iron But now God gives man both; in deed all;
nothing else contributes; and the saying is true, that who gives matter and
form, gives the necessary ^onsequents of both. But wretched ^en care not how
much they depresse God, so they may exalt flesh.

Let them go. And hold we this distance still: man is not so bad now, but once
he was as good. Original righteousness was once as natural as sin is now, if
not more. And this truth carries more in it, then as yet happily you are aware
^f.

Justify God in all his ways: against cavils of flesh and blood.
Learn hence that which Solomon ^ere presses, namely, to justify God ^n all
his ways as holy in all his works. It is a fearful thing to see what proud
man renders to God for ^ill his kindness. God made him a most glorious, happy,
sufficient crea^ure: his own folly has perverted ^is ways, and now his heart
frets, and his mouth chats against the lord: I beseech you, understand your
Original, and preserve your selves from the Pestilent errors of his age, and
know how to plead for God, and to emplead sin. For example.

You shall hear men cry out Blondy doctrine touching Gods D^creeing men to
fall; necessitati^ them to damnation, etc.

S^lomon, God made man good; made hi^ for happiness, put him into possesion of
it, gave him power to ho^ it, but he sought out many invention he he sought out
etc. it was an act man's counsel and choice, hold we this, though we cannot so
well conceive the concurrence of causes not as Adam did then, or as we she
hereafter at the day of the revela^ on of the righteous Judgment God. Romans 2.5.


make God the greatest tyrant living one who gives impossible laws, requiring
impossibilities under the penalty of damnation, unless we wi^ yield that man
can fulfill the law.

Then w^ then: Now is now. When God tranacted with man he required no mo^ then
man could do, now why mu^^ the rule be bended to man? or the debt drawn to his
ability, especial since the bond stands but for evident and man's good? God
commits him, huts him up only to humble him, Gal. 3.23, 24.
and to drive him to seek a surety of ^is own providing.

that this salves not the ^usinesse, since, in our doctrine, more is ^equired
of man lapsed, then of man in ^nnocency; for God requires that faith ^ow, which
he did not then, and exacts what he never gave, gathering where ^e never
strawed. Thus they.

require any thing in the Gospel but upon Gospel terms? that is, that he will
work the thing required when sought unto.

Again what though Adam had not exercise of faith in Christ, as neither of
patience or some other gra^es, yet he had all in the root, seed, and power?
The want was not in Adam, the subject: but the stay was ^he had power to do,
and to believe any thing that then did or after should concern him, and his
place, and condition; and no more is required of us now. I never saw an
Elephant ^n my life, why? not for want of a ^rinciple in the subject; the same
eye that can see an Horse, could an Elephant too, were it presented to (...)
sight. I cannot be said not to see but it is not to be seen.

I am as God made me am choleric, I confess it, but it is ^^ nature: I am
sleepy; Can I help it?

Defects wh^^ follow particular tempers, and ^^ tures, Purely natural; others
wh^^ are sinful flowing from the princip^^ of Poisoned nature: sinful
distempe^ are yours, not Gods: you mig^ once have prevented them, you m^ now
have them healed. It is an (...) gravation to lay our faults upon ^^ natures,
yea hereby we accuse (...) Creator. Therefore in stead of ex^sing our selves or
accusing our man (as Adam and Eve did) let us (...) load on our selves; and
that is the n^ use.

Be humbled, that thou art fallen as thou art.
Where see for humbling, when we are fallen, what we were, what are. Men love
to talk of their An^ stours, thereby to pride themselv^ and can hardly descend
in themselv^ though tumbled down by Gods hat^ Let us, on the contrary, abase
^^^selves to our estate, and befool our ^ves, as we see the Bankrupt does,
^^nce, quoth he, was I well, could I ^ve kept me well; I had money, and, stock,
friends and what not? at now I lie under poverty, scorn, ^^d contempt. Ah
unwise man I! ^^ like manner let each of us say, ^^nce I was light, now
darkness, ^^nce rich in grace, now empty; Once ^^ods favorite, now an enemy;
Once ^^eautifull, now ugly, a very Ichabod, ^^y glory is departed, Ah foolish
^^an, how was I bewitched! Thus ^^t us rate and chide our selves into ^low
conceit of our selves. Howbeit, ^^l this signifies nothing, unless we ^^e this
our misery in the cause thereof. Therefore look upon sin as a thing ^^ost
pernicious and destructive. It is ^^n, (say) that has undone me, that ^^ath
ruined mine estate; cast me into ^^ebt; it is sin that has slain my Cat^ll,
deprived me of my Crop; it is ^^n, my sin in Adam that has for^^ ^^eited mine
honor, undermined my Authority over creatures. Time was when every beast,
every bird, every ^^sh, would have owned me, would ^ave done me homage: Now my
very servants trample upon me, (...) once subjects rise against me, (...) have
against God. Lions are re^ to devour me. Bears to worry ^ horses to brain m^,
yea, every ^ terpillar, worm, flea, makes a p^ of me. It Is sin, that has
marred body. Once I had a body perf^ active, sound, glorious, the more (...)
ked the more shining: now in sta^ of those beauties behold a stench si^ nesse,
shame and whatsoever else^ blushfull. It is sin that has spot^ my soul: at
first I had near Comme^nion with God, close correspond^cy with his will and
Image. T^ peace of God, the joys of God, (...) strength and life of God were
up^ me. Now hell is in my soul, da^nesse and confusion fills every room bear in
stead of Gods glorious mage, the ugly Image of the dev^ himself, and come as
near unto h^ as my nature is capable. Oh cu^^ this accursed thing, Sin, which
ha^ so undermined thee, and resolve against it for the future, as we do(...)
against lesser evils, we decline suc^^ meats as threaten partial miser^ This
rots my teeth, that hurts m^ eyes, this distempers my liver, that (...)
stomach, therefore I must for^ar. Oh fear that sin that destroys ^e, and hand
and head the whole ^dy, the whole soul the whole man. and now bethink thy self
of a reco^y as decayed men do; lie not whi^g under losses, as Jacobs sons in
^eir wants, much less run to base, ^^rking courses, as broken chapmen (...);
But bustle and bestir thy self be^nk thy self, Is there no help? is it ^t
possible to raise my self again? yes, ^^re is hope and help, the Lord ^rist,
the second Adam comes with ^e Image of God upon him, as a re^rer of the breach,
he is come to re^ver what was lost, to pay what ^s owing, to repair our
ruins, to ^ruit us again, he is able, he is wil^g to undertake us. Nay the
thing ^done already, therefore I Will to him, ^ once the bankrupts to David, I
^ll confess with the prodigal, I will ^^g for life, I will cast my self upon
^m, and close with him being offe^^d as an husband, as the only way (...)
decayed fortunes, so shall I he ^e^red in blood and repained in mine ^ate. Thus
resolve, thus do, and cease not doing till thou find his m^ upon thee, his
fruit and life in the so shall thou find more life and (...) pinesse in him,
then there was d^ and misery in the old Adam.

Bless God for the first estate and that little which is left to this day.
Lastly, learn to be thankful this first estate: close with all Saints in that
Song of theirs, Rev^ ult. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to ceive glory and honor
and power: thou have created all things, etc. not little that we owe to God,
this poor estate which yet is left for these poor eyes, these lame lim^ these
frail bodies, these sick so^ which we labor with every d^^ We are much bound
to him, for meanest fare, for the least bit of c^^ sest bread, the least sip of
thin^ drink, and must confess with J^^ that we are less then the least of al^
now forfeited mercies; what tha^ then can we render for our first est^^ which
was every way full, free, ^ rious, whether we look upon sou^ body, or place or
state, or any th^^ appertaining thereto; nor is G^^ goodness and bounty the
less, cause we have foolishly squander away. That greatens our folly
wickedness, yet no way lessens Gods ^^gesse and kindness.

Object. But why did not God put us ^^st danger and loss, but left it in our
^^nds so lose?

Sol. An ungracious question: so ^^e unthrift talks when he has outed ^^mself
of his patrimony, Why did ^^y Father trust me? why did he not ^^tayle his land?
There is no rea^^ning with such froward children, either content full, nor
fasting. A ^^acious heart must and will be thank^^ ^^ll, as for kindnesses
intended, so ^^uch more bestowed, most of all for ^ercies restored in Christ,
who has ^^ended that first estate.

SECTION II. Snfull estate of man, as fallen.
ECCL. 7. ult. But they have sought out many inventions.


HItherto we have seen that man was first good, and well stated; But does he
continue so? No, he (...) made good, but mutably good, ^ so of himself, he fell
from God (...) himself; and so we pass to man's n^^ estate, where we find the
case is m^^ altured with him.

A sinful change in man at now fallen
He is not what he was, he was (...) what he is: but now there is a (...)
distance between himself and h^^ self, betwixt this and that sta^ This the
Point, and this the w^^ plainly proves, Romans 3.10. etc. h^^ are laid down two
received tru^^ 1. There Is no goodness in (...) 2. They are altogether naught;
(...) was in ever thus? No, they have g^^ out of the way, says the Apo^^ they
have corrupted themselves, (...) that from their youth, Genesis 8. (...) They
err, and that from the wom^ Psalm. 58.3. Yea, from their con^ption, Psalm. 51.5.
This better (...) pears, if we may compare estates p^^ and present: I. Man was
good, G^^ 1. ult. now bad, Genesis 6.5. and (...) first he was straight as it is
here, n^^ perverse, Genesis 17.9. first he b^^ Gods Image, now man's, Genesis 5. first
he was glorious, now filth Job. 15.16. abominably filthy. A^^ at this we can
the less marvel, since his beginning, he comes under different hands; At
first he was only Gods workmanship, and then there was nothing in him but what
was Gods, all was right as God is altogether pure: but since, he has de^erted
God and betaken himself to those Inventious which himself has ^atch'd and
Satan fomented, and ^ereby wrought two mischiefs at ^once. First, he has made
an hand of all his holiness. Secondly, he ^ath made way to all evil, sin,
hor^our, shame, confusion, have seized upon all and rendered him most woe^ull,
most hateful; we need not ^ore words to prove a change in ^im. Their dreams of
old who fanied him to be bad from the beginning, either in whole or part, are
^ot worth confutation, we have lear^ed that the devils themselves were ^nce
good, but they kept not their ^tation. Time will be better spent ^n searching
into the Particulars of ^his change, as into the time when it ^as, the nature
of it, the subject and ^tent of it, the cause of it, etc. 1. Time of this
change.


And first for the time; we conclude all in two propositions.

1. The first act of man's will after his creation, was not the first sin and
cause of this his change; we find Adam a while well employed, in receiving laws
from his maker, in marking as it were, his cattle, in acting his calling, in
accepting his Father choice of a wife, and thus far he was right. Nor are
arguments of some Thomists against this, so cogent, tha^ they need to stay us.

2. It Is most reasonable to think that he quickly fell, (though not s^ soon)
from his happy estate, because Satan was very subtle to take him at the
advantage, before he was wel^ settled, and experienced; and secondly, very
active, fired with rage and envy. Because he is said to be a mur derer from the
beginning; or very near to it, which beginning mus^ commence from man, not from
him self. Add hereunto, that he had no^ so easily prevailed, if man had bee^
long rooted, and so better enabled to have made stronger resistance; (for I
make no doubt but Adam should have grown and emproved himself by experience,
as some waye^ the second Adam did) but he took his time, whilst yet they were
unexperienced, as is seen chiesly in Eve, who as yet knew not, as it seems, the
nature of the Serpent: whereto we may add this, that she, the same Eve, had
conceived her first born without sin, had any considerable time been 'twixt
their creation and fall. But I will not be too peremiptory in things more
disputable and less important.

For the second, the nature of this change. Thus we state it. First, 2. Nature
of this change.
the change was not in Essentials, for such cannot be separated from the thing,
without its dissolution: 1. Negatively.
but man was for substance, the same man before and after his change: Christ
was essentially man, though far from sin. So shall we be in heaven. Therefore
if this were the error of Illyricus, it were an error sufficiently gross. We
read, that God made substances, he made no sins. Secondly, it was not in
Supernaturals only, for naturals also are abated and eclipsed in him, neither
was his Original righteousness altogether supernatural at that time; we may
call that (properly enough) natural which is common to the whole species, to
all man kind, and passes along in a way ^ generation, though we cannot
express how. But then the objection is^



Sol. The argument will not follow, because naturals do admit o^ degrees: sight
is natural, speech natural, etc. yet a blind or dumb mar is yet a man; we
may safely say, the righteousness was as natural, as si^ is preternaturall:
and we mean n^ more but that Justice was then as natural, as now sin is. Sin
is either natural or preternaturall, (if you will so call it:) we speak of man
in thi^ case Morally not Physically considered, and heed not what Aristotle
will call him, but what God says of him This for the negative.

2. P^sitively.
Now positively, we say that this change is properly an alteration, consisting
in Qualities and certain respects. Whereas man held a doubl correspondency with
God, one Relative, as he stood in subjection to him, and a dependence upon him
as his maker, master, father, etc. Another Representative, as he bare Gods
Image, which he could not properly bear in a relation of Inferiority: he is
now much varied and changed, in both these. First of a subject, he is become a
rebel, of a son a traitor, of a friend an enemy, and stands now at defiance
with God.

Secondly, whereas he erst much savoured and resembled God, now he is most
removed from him, and opposite to him, of light he is become darkness, as Paul
expresses it in the abstract: Semblably, we may say of wisdom he is become
folly, of goodness, in a sense, sin it self, as the very Heathens use to
express him. And here is the change, in a man's estate both personal and
local. Subjection is turned into Rebellion, Conformity into Dissormity, and so
into Deformity, and consequently, his happiness into unhappiness it self.
Thus for the second Question. Follows the third touching the Subject and
Extent of this change: and this we dispatch in three words.

3. Extent, of this changes.
First, all mankind is changed for the worse, and is warped aside.

Secondly, all of man, every particular both power and part, is now
degenerated; The whole frame of his heart is corrupted. Genesis 6.

And lastly, all men, all alike, a^ involved, and suffer this unhappy change.

4. The cause of it.
The cause of this change. First we exelude not God from any act though from
all sin.

Secondly, we excuse not Satan from the sin, though from some acts in it.

Thirdly, we lay the blame where the fault is, upon man's self. To in large
these a little.

Neutrall in one of the highest works of providence, neither willing non
nilling it.

sought out, so says Solomon, so must we say. Though man would shift it from
himself, and divide it betwixt God and Satan. But it is found upon him, and
there we must leave it.



Sol. The Text tells us, he sought out many inventions: and we must consider,
First, that man was made out of Nothing, and therefore apt enough to return
into his first principles and more prone to privations, such as sin is, then to
positive goods, when he is left to himself.

Secondly, he is a compounded creature mutable.

Thirdly, he is a finite creature, and deficiencies, and so may sin.

Fourthly, he is a creature so bounded diversions and excogitancies.

I, and Fifthly, he is a free creature, act or suspend, use or not use, his
abilities at pleasure. But, it were better happily, leaving these disputes, to
look up to God and admire with Austin, that thing should be against his will,
and yet not altogether besides it; and to bethink our selves how we may rise,
rather then how we did fall. It suffices for the present, that we clear God as
much as Papists or any others: at least we desire to do it; and if they can
teach us how to speak better, and more for the vindication of Gods holiness,
we shall thank them, mean while we mean as well as they, and speak as much for
the vindication of Gods holiness as any Bellarmine, o^ Arminius of them all;
we say, that God is no moral cause of sin, and Physical cause he cannot be:
sin having only a cause deficient, but none efficrent; we do not say that any
precedent decree does force the will or compel the man. Nor on the other side,
do we say that the whole work of sin is only from man, nothing of it from Satan
(as he reports, Estiuslib 2. distmet. 21. Sect. 11. and distinct. 3.
who usually is more modest) but this we do, we set the saddle on the right
horse, and say as Solomon guides us, Man has sought out many inventions. Do
you understand what I have said, or shall I speak it yet more plainly? we yield
a concurrence of many agents in man's change, but with a wide difference, as to
the manner of their working.

First for God; we must not conceive him to be only a spectator, in this high
work of providence, we must acknowledge his disposing hand, his ordering hand,
his decreeing hand, in leaving man to his own choice: but still without the
least shadow of sin.

Secondly, for Satan; we must not excuse him whom God curses, he was certainly
a moral cause of man's sin, and did his utmost to persuade.

Thirdly, for Man's self; we must speak Salomons language, who lays not the
fault upon the devil, as no reason he should: for a moral cause has no
influence, at least no enforcing power upon the subject. Much less does he lay
it upon God, who always seriously disswades from sin, Physically infuseth no
ill, nor withholds requisite strength. It Is true, flesh and blood will cavil
and find this bastard sin many fathers: but man is father and mother both,
himself: so the Word speaks it, and Adam with all his skill could not shift it
off from himself, though never so willing I say in this case, as one said in
another; August. Ep. 48.
In one and the same thing many causes may concur, but no to the same end,
nor in the sam^ thing.

Ever observe this distinction of a good and bad estate.
Now this makes sirst for our information. God, you see here, teaches us a
double estate; learn we both God sets a bound and distinction thus far goes
his work; here begin ours: Now we must keep asunde what he so distinctly
severed, the rather because a confusion here is in ^ self most hurtful, and by
many most industriously endeavored: Oh ho^ do wits sweat to trouble these
waters to this end, that we should not se^ our own faces, nor discern which
which. Hence those uncouth conclusions in both estates. In the first There is
no such thing as Original Righteousness, no such Image of God (...) we fancy,
say the Socinians; Next there is such a thing, say Papists, but was not
natural; it was to man but a clothes and trappings to the body as if man
should not have been bor^ in this spiritual armor, as some spoke of Giants
for other armor; but come into the world as naked of Grace, as a horse does of
a Saddle, etc. till God from without do furnish him. And in the second estate,
how infinitely do men fumble? First, Original sin that is, to many, a very
dream; There is no such thing: Secondly, yes, say others, there is such a
thing, but it is only imputed: Nay, says a third, it is more then imputed, but
yet Without the access of any positive malignity, it is a mere privation.
Fourthly, that privation is rather penal then sinful. Fifthly, if sinful,
yet not in all. Sixthly, if in all, yet is it the least sin, deserving
privation of joy and bliss only. Seventhly, in Saints it is gone, and so gone
that we need not repent of it, nay, we ought not. In short, set aside some
outward priveleges and accoutrements, man is where he was, changed only in
externals. Now what stronger proof of our declension? what a miserable thing is
man become! who rather then he will be beholding to God for his first setting
up, or to Christ for his supplied repaires and recruits; rather then he will
acknowledge himself such a fool such a beast to part with so fair an estate,
cares not what he says or reports, as to Gods work or his own in either
estate. Oh madness! were it not sir for us to say with Solomon God made man
upright, but man hat undone himself? Surely this were fit but then thinks proud
flesh, what will become of free will? what of merit what of fulfilling the Law?
what o^ all fleshly boasting and excellency? were this granted, then must God
be^ justified; then must man be abased But rather then God shall go away with
all the credit, and man with al^ the shame, he will mingle heaven and earth,
light and darkness, and come to this, either he was never good and that
reflects upon God; or else is good still, and then might Christ have saved a
labor; Fevardent.
at least, much o^ his blood, if the Friar be right, who says, that one fear
of Christ could have redeemed all. Good my brethren, admit of light, of truths
so fundamental; know a change, acknowledge what it is, whence it is: It is
from light to darkness, from life to death, from wisdom to folly, from heaven
to hell, from God to Satan. It is an universal apost asie, and it is from your
selves, you were Adam, as the Text here tells you, legally, naturally
considered, you can blame none but your selves, and none could change you, til
your wills or minds did change. If as yet, you know not these things
sufficiently, suffer the word of instruction, submit to Catechizing, confer
with your teachers, peruse the principles of your faith and religion or, if
already you do know these things, freely acknowledge them, justify wisdom
and truth to the face of error, and to the reeth of pride.

Be humbled mightily for this tall in. to sin.
In the second place, let us set upon that hard (but seasonable) work of
humiliation. The poison of Adams first pride, nay of Satan's, sticks yet in our
souls; and the truth is, had man the devils capacities, be would be as proud
as the devil himself; and the least cause, and the more sin there is, the more
proud still. Sin is a leaven that heaves and swells him, and when he is most
sinful, then least humble. And as it puts out his eyes, and hurts his
understanding: so it corrupts his will. Of all things in this world, sinful man
loves not to come down; he would still be in credit with himself, however the
world goes. Four great causes for deep humiliation.
This being our nature, we must set more resolutely against it; and know that
no one work better becomes our condition then the work of humiliation; and
therefore we must break through all impediments, and see what reason we have to
pull down our selves.

The evil, even the evil of all evils; that which does hurt every creature,
and would, if it could, the Creator. Now this sin is found upon us, and should
shame us as the thief, when taken in the manner.

many and mighty, we have done as wickedly as we could, Jer. 3. had we had more
room for more sin, we would have bid it welcome; mean while we are as full as
we can hold, there is not one spare room, Romans 3.

but once offended, one treason were unsufferable; one sin would make a breach
into all order, beauty, peace, reason, religion; and the whole creation. One
finne had let in a legion of devils, a deluge of all miseries: But now we have
exceeded all bounds and dimensions; there is neither number nor measure of our
wickedness.

Fourthly, all this springs from our selves; Es. 59.4. We may pretend
occasions, inticements, enforcements: but when all is done, all these excuses
will prove but so many accusations and aggravations: and therefore let us look
homeward, and strike the right vein, begin where our sin began, at and in our
selves, at the heart, at the spirit.

More cause to be humbled for the first sin, then all that follow.
This must be our course in all our actings and failings; chiefly for the
first sin; till a man comes to that, he is never truly humbled. Other sins are
more private, partial, and seem more pardonable, as issuing out of weakness,
or ignorance or (at the most) of a will surprised and captivated; Oh but the
first sin which is known by the name of original sin, was a strange sin
whether the Subject, or Object, or Ingredients, or Consequents be considered.

Why?
Subject, it is the sin of mankind, never did all Subjects so conspire in a
rebellion; secondly, of all the man, nothing is exempt.

Object, it is the breach of the whole Law, whether in graven or imposed, and
of the whole Covenant, as Hosea expresses it.

Ingredients, it is every sin virtnally, and the death of every grace me
itoriously.

Consequences; it forfeits all goodness, life, creation; and is an inlet to
all misery and confusion. We have read of some who in their vast luxuriousness
have cast away whole Lordships Kingdoms at one throw, Cleopatra.
have drunk up thousands at one draught: but these were toys to Adams fact.
Nero.
His bloudinesse was horrid, who wished all Rome one head, that so he might
dispatch it at one time and blow, beheaded all mankind, and slew at once all
the souls and bodies that ever did, or ever shall descend of him.

Object. But you will say, What Is this to us?

Sol. We are Adam. The sin in speech, is if a man may so speak, specificall.
And it is but an idle question amongst some wanton Schoolmen, Who sinned most,
Adam or Eve; and whether if Eve only had sinned, we had been guilty and
obnoxious. The whole kind, (says good Austin is obnoxious, and in this account
Adam is Eve, and Eve is Adam, and every man is both. I mean it thus: That they
must not here be personally considered, but as parts and representatives of
mankind. God contracted with mankind, and mankind with God. Mankind made;
mankind brake the Covenant. There Is no precedence of sexes and persons in it,
only in the manner and order of conveyance there is some. And so we fall upon
the second thing in this sin, Habiruall corruption, the second part of the
first sin.
viz. Habitual corruption, which follows upon this unhappy act, and this is a
Gulf fadomlesse, the dimensions whereof none can take but God who is the just
measure of himself, and of all things else. Men can take the altitude and
latitude of vastest bodies; but the way of this sin, is like the Eagles in the
air, the ships in the Sea, its height is above all heights; its depth,
breadth, and length be yond all our comprehension. You shall be like God, says
Satan; there is the snare, there is the design. Like him not in nature, but in
state and condition; Absolute, Independent: his will a law, his judgment a
rule: and this poison is in him still; every man has a heart of a God in him,
and is his own God, whilst he is in this estate, and at this pass he is,
whilst he is but natural. But this was but a Gull. What is the event? man is
like not God but Satan, he is all flesh, all brutish, nay, devilish, says the
Apostle, he is a devil in and to himself; devil to his brother, with that
villain in Bodin, he would kill both soul and body, and send all the world to
hell. He is a devil toward God, and hates him infinitely. The difference
between the devil and him, lies only in degrees and capacities; else there is
nothing in us, in a moral sense, but what the devil likes, nothing in the
devil but what we do or would like, if God did not bound us, and tie us up.
Men have labored, and that to good purpose, to set forth the particulars of
this sin, but shall I tell you? man is so bred in it, and maimed by it, that he
cannot well tell what to make of it, where it ends, what a man would be, or
what he would think, say, or do, or wish if he were left to himself: we find
enough for our humbling upon record, I, and in the best Saints. A man would
have been bound for David's good behavior, but Jeremiah has told us, that The
heart of man is desperately wicked. It is not indeed beyond uncreated mercy,
and infinite power and wisdom: but it is beyond all things else. Truths and
virtues have their limits, may be defined, discerned, confined; whether an
angel can say, how far original sin may be extended in particulars, is
more then I can tell. This I can tell, that we have cause to be humbled for
this sin whilst we breath.

Quest. But wherein stands this work of humiliation?

Sol. I will tell you in few. First, in Conviction. Labor to be convinced,
both by Law, and Gospel, of these things.

unspeakable, (as elsewhere I have showed more largely) against all right and
reason, all light and instruction; whereby at once thou have made an hand of
all grace, and have given life to all sin.

Thine own sin, as hereafter I must speak, Thou must own it, and acknowledge an
hand in all sin, as to the seeds of them; and in all miseries, as to the desert
of them.

(...)
Secondly, to Conviction add Contrition: be ashamed of thy self, tremble,
blush, mourn, and as James phraseth it, be miserable. We grieve, and afflict
our selves for other men's unkindnesses, and unreasonable behaviors: bleed
under thine own sins and follies, and understand that none have done thee so
much wrong, prejudice and disgrace, as thou have done thy self, whilst thou
have thus ungraciously risen against thy God.

Confession. Clear God, clear his Law, clear all the Jury, that has been
empannelled against thee. Yea, clear both men and devils in comparison of thy
self. Say, I am The devil to my self, mine is the sin, and the shame.

Submission. Accept of the chastisement of God, Lev. 26. Yield to his rebukes
outwardly, to the lashes of conscience inwardly: tell conscience that he does
but his office; sit down by its checks, by the reproaches of enemies, by the
reproves of friends, and preachers, by all thy losses and crosses. Say, All is
just, all is little. If the Lord throw me into hell it is just, if he spare me
it is grace: I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against
him, Mic. 7.9.

How we may undo (...) bad bargain.
Since we have made a foolish bargain, and changed for the worse, what shall we
do next? is there no way to undo this bargain? That Is the first question
usually in such cases: and blessed be our God we may as yet go back.

Object. Oh! That I doubt is too good to be true. I had rather then all the
world it were to do again.

Sol. That indeed is impossible, it is too late to call back yesterday: but not
too late to improve our losses, and to salve all.

Quest. Why, what must I do?

Sol. 1. Make thy sensible whence thou art fallen, Sol. 1.
and fare as the mary does, who has undone himself, and beggard his by foolish
bargains: he looks upon his wife, and then sighs, looks upon his boy and
shakes his head, looks upon his Girl, the water stands in his eyes; in short
he is ready to tear himself for his former folly. Do thou the same, do as the
wife does, who has wilfully ca^^ away her self, and lost her friends for an
unthrift, that uses her like a beast, she could bite off her very fingers if
that would untie the knot: mean while, she repents with all the veins in her
heart, so do thou. Thou have undone thy self, thy wife, thy child: matched thy
self to a devil, without thy Fathers consent, who will use thee worse then a
drudge, then a dog: mourn for this.

unchilded thy self, but thou have not unfathered him, he has the Bowels of a
father still, and may help thee, with honor enough.

Our children may do an act, which we neither can or may reverse or repair, not
so Gods children: he may lawfully dissolve our covenants, which we have no
authority to make without his consent: he may lawfully forbid the banes, and
sue out our divorce betwixt us and Satan, annull that contract.

Object. But will he?

Sol. I tell thee a father will do much in such a case, for a penitent child,
especially when he sinds fraud and malice both in the cheater. Therefore cry
with David, Lord seek thy lost sheep; Lord dissolve my Covenants with death:
mind him of a former covenant and precontract, as the Church does; Lord, we are
thine, other Lords have no portion in, us no right over us.

Thirdly, and above all, Fly to great Favorite, the Kings Son, who has his
heart and ear, he must speak for thee; I mean, Christ, whose errand it was to
dissolve the works of Satan, and all contracts with him, to bring in a New
Covenant, to save what was lost. It is his place and office, he is the Goel the
next kinsman, he is the second Adam, and came purposely to reduce us to our
primitive Image, state and liberties: and he can do it, Romans 5.20.
Romans 5. there is more grace and life in him, then there can be loss and sin
in Adam: Hold that firmly: nay, hold three things, which I will speak in as few
words, and so end this point.

none other can help thee, None else can make that strait which is crooked, can
speak or work life, but this quickening Spirit.

He can help thee; he is able to save to the uttermost those that come to him.

He will help thee: he never yet put back any that came in truth to him; he
will never undergo, that reproach in Israel. This is the man whose shoe was
plucked off: he will never lose such an opportunity of evidencing his grace and
power: for here is a work fit only for a God; namely, to make the world to go
backward; to undo that which was so long since done; to enforce Satan to throw
in thy bonds; to translate thee from a state of death and bondage, to a state
of life and advantage: rest upon him, who was made for this work, and will
settle thee, (if thou will believe him, and be ruled by him) in a better state
and tenure, then ever thou had in Adam; or could have, if an Angel were thy
Father, or bound for thee. Christ alone is all-sufficient; there is not a
second Adam besides him, neither needs there: If he the Son make thee free,
John 8.36.
thou art free indeed: If he the Son become thy surety. The first Adam, was not
more able to destroy thee, then he is to restore and secure. There stay thy
self. And there is an end of this point.

SECTION. III. Man's sin was caused by himself.
ECCLES. 7. ult. [But THEY have sought out, etc.]


You hear how strangely man is altered. We proceed to the cause of this his
change. Who is in fault? not God; he made man upright: But man himself. They
have sought out, etc. The point is open.

Man's sin is from man's self.
That man's sin is from man's self. Man is the cause of his own naughtiness; the
Author of his own sin and undoing, although not of every particular in it.
Solomon is positive, and makes a just distribution: Man's sin is either from
God, or from himself; not from the former, God: Therefore from the latter,
himself; nay, himself is a free cause of his own change: it is an act of his
own choice. Whose? Man's, and that at large: not this, or that man, but man, all
men sought out sin, all sin, all inventions and ways of sinning. Sum up all,
and the result will be, that all the sins of man issue from man's self. This
will appear, if you consider him in his threefold estate. Cleared by his
threefold estate.


First. God put no ill principle into him; no creature had any compulsive power
over him; he had a true (though not Independent) Sovereignty over his own
actions. He might have stood, but he chose otherwise. No man can speak it more
plainly then Solomon does; which shall save us the labor of further proof,
though further testimony of God, and conscience might be added, attesting this
truth.

Secondly, look upon man in his V. Prove. 19.3. Ged. 8. Jude 13. Jer. 7. Job 5.7.
And so sin flows from him as naturally as waters from a fountain, Jer. 6.7.
as sparkles from a furnace, Job 5.7.

From within, out of the heart of men proceed evil thoughts, Mar. 7.21.
Mark 7.21. And these evil thoughts bedded there, beget adulteries,
fornication, murders, etc. what not? he is a sink, a very Sepulcher, an open
Sepulcher, and what can you expect thence but stenches? Romans 3.13.
Romans 3.13.

Thirdly in his repaired estate; body of sin, Romans 7.24.
Romans 7. consisting of many rotten members, Col. 3. Col. 3.5.
From within he sends forth evil, so says James more then once, Jam. 1.14.
and 4.1.
cap. 1.14. cap. 4.1. So that as sin is In him, so still, you see, sin is
resolved Into him; it issues from principles of his own; from his own darkened
mind, defiled conscience, poisoned heart, and erroneous imagination.

Felo de se; so does Reason too. For every free Agent is Lord of his own
actions, and did he not work freely, he were not a voluntary workman. As things
be in nature, so in operation. Did not man work freely, there were no place for
choice and option. Natural agents are determined to One, as a stone descends
only: But Voluntary, such as man is, have a freedom of choice.

capable of a law, It Is absurd to lay laws upon things, which work by
instinct; To restrain or command by law sire to heat, or not, is absurd. Nay,
more; He would be incapable of good or bad; as a stone is; and consequently
incapable of reward or punishment; nay, incapable of Christ, and an Holy Ghost;
which dwells not in stocks. In short; Deny this, and you must deny man to be
capable of law, of deliberation, of sin, of punishment. A thousand such
absurdities would follow, if man should not be the actor of moral things, yet
objections are raised against all that is said.

Salomons distribution. Datur tertium, videlicet, the Devil.

working agent in his own sphere: yet to man he can be no immediate physical
agent, but only moral: He works not immediately upon the understanding, nor
so as God does; but upon the passions of the body, and images of the fantasy:
All that he can do is, to persuade, incite, suggest, He cannot, without man,
have any Real influence, unless man concur, not only passively but actively
too. True, he can bring poison, as a thief stolen goods, and leave it with
you, if you will receive it: he cannot force you to take it: for none has any
Sovereignty over man but God and himself. The devil may co-work immediately
and physically by the mediations of our passions and distempers: but not so, as
to excuse, or exempt us. Therefore Salomons distribution is sufficient.

Objections raised from man's first estate.
It is further objected against the threefold estate of man. Against the first
thus.

1. It is inconceiveable how man should sin of himself; Either God left him so,
as that he was necessitated to the fall; and then God is involved, man cleared:
Or else which way should sin come in? The devil could not compel him, you
say; neither had he any evil matter in himself: he could not desire his own
unhappiness, and undoing, nor his own error etc.

possible for him to stand: God gave him power and entrusted him with it but
God was not bound to act that power for him; That privilege we have now in the
second Adam; where God works both the will and deed.

compel, yet might he further man's sin and gailt by representing objects.

nothing actually ill in him, yet was he mutable, sinite: and therefore must
view things successively: he might suspend his actions, as we said before. The
first sin imaginable is Independence upon God and cessation from goodness;
which was then in his power.

Object. But the Serpent beguiled them so, that our first parents sinned
ignorantly.

Sol. He beguiled their expectations more then their judgment: there was error
in their being beguiled, as in every sin: but that error was a consequent or
adjunct, not the cause of the sin; Aliud eft peccare ignoranter; and ex
ignorantia. But the silencing answer must be, That Adamthen saw his guilt,
better then we can now. Romans 2.7.
And the last day will clear it Romans 2. Till then we must say as Solomon here,
and stop the mouth of iniquity with this; God made man upright, but they have
etc.

Frommans second estate.
For the second estate it is objected. Man is not now to be charged with sin,
for first, he is held to do Satan's will, 2 Timothy 2. 2 Timothy, 2.26.


Sol. True, but willingly: he sings in that cage.

Object. That dyscrasie now in him is penal, and he is passive in it.

Sol. Not so only, it is not merely penal, but vitions and voluntary: and he
is active: sin is his food, his sleep, his life, Pro. 15.^.14. and 4.16.
as Solomon speaks.

Object. He cannot but sin, Romans 8.7. and Peter speaks of such, Romans 8.7.
who cannot but sin, 2 Pet. 2.14.
2 Pet. 2.14.

Sol. This necessity comes not from any outward cause, but from an inward
principle: it is voluntary, it is not imposed, but contracted.

From man's third estate.
Against the third estate it is objected; That a sanctified man cannot sin, 1 John 3.9.
1 John 3.9. He that is born of God sins not.

Sol. That is not simply said: for the same Apostle assures us, cap. 1. v. 8. ^
Joh. 1.8.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, etc. There is both actual
and habitual sin in all men: but the words are to be restrained to matter and
manner of sinning; he cannot sin some sins: To death, in that degree. And he
cannot sin with the whole man. There is a seed and a principle in him that
resists, he cannot sin, that is, live in a trade of sin, as one inslaved to it.

Object. Bur Paul says Romans 7. Romans 7.20.
not I, but sin etc.

Sol. Paul speaks Not de principio Quod but Quo: not of the Person but
Principle.

Redundare in personam, engage that, God not imputing it: else he denies not
sin to be in him, and sin to flow from that body of sin in him; only it is not
his in regard of his affection, and Gods interpretation. The point then stands
good; Man is the Author of his own sin.

Be informed, that is, Charge thyself with sin, not others.
get a judgment rightly sanctified, and informed touching this truth; man
unsanctified, is all self: sin admits of no search or reflection: the proper
effect of it, is either senslesness, hypocrisy, or impudency: The sinner
yields not the fact, till found upon him, yea even then he will not yield
himself (with Saul) to be in fault, 1 Samuel 1^.
he looks to earth, to hell, to heaven, and will charge, all sooner then
himself.

First, for Earth; that is nearest Prove. 25. 26. Prove. 25.26.
The righteous before the wicked is (...) troubled spring: Though he be a
spring, yet when troubled, it is from his own mud: Jam 4.1.
Whence are brawles, says James, but from your own lusts? Surely wickedness
proceeds from the wicked: 1 Samuel 24.13:
The Saints of old lived in as bad times, and had as bad neighbors; yet never
brake out into our passions: Christ, Paul, others were as badly entertained;
yet never swore, raged, etc.

Again, for natural corruption. How do men shift it off? It is long of Adam.
What can they help it? Thus hypocrisy speaks: but what is the truth? Adam is
every man: the whole species mankind was in that pair; and their act
specificall: so Solomon here: They sought etc. How can this be? naturally they
and we are one; legally we had one covenant, in the propagation there is a
priority, in the contraction of corruption none. So then: other men must not
own our faults: they may tempt, help forward sin: but till we concur, we are
but objects, not subjects.



The devil owed me a shame, and now he has paid me.

Ans. It is a sin to belie the devil; indeed he is stark naught in himself,
and toward all: but his sin, temptations, suggestions, cannot hurt thee
without thy self. Joh. 14.
Unless thou be tinder, he cannot strike fire in thee: thy sin is not the
less for his: therefore David though moved by Satan to number the people,
takes it upon himself. Rebellion is thy witcheraft; in witcheraft there is a
confederacy; in this contract, the witch is not excused in consenting; though
Satan be subtle, and malicious in propounding: so here, the truth is, if there
were neither man on earth, nor devil in hell, thou would be poysonfull and
naught now: Therefore know thy self, Satan may hurt himself by tempting, thee
he cannot, without thee.

I am as God made me, and I do my kind, it is my nature, I am ordained to it
etc. O blasphemy! can any evil come out of heaven? darkness from the Sun?
death from life? God is neither moral, nor physical cause of the evil of
sin: Not the former: he persuades, commands, allows none: but contrarily
disswades, forbids, disclaims it. Not the latter, he infuseth none: things work
as they be: a good tree cannot bring forth bad fruit.

Object. Blasphemy objects. God is a physical cause of sin, as appears by his
acts of Counsel: of Creation: and Providence.

decrees all, and that is infallibly.

Sol. What then? first, decrees do not necessitate: they have no violent
operation; King. 12.15.24.
there is a decree upon things contingent, and most there.

Infallibility and Compulsion are two things: There is an infallible decree
passes upon all we do: yet we do a thousand things freely.

over-bear or exclude the will: but conclude it. If we see it not, let us say,
I am blind, not God is bad.

Ob. Yea, but I am as God made me.

Answ. No says our text, God made man upright, etc.

Object. But he could have prevented sin.

Answ. But he was not bound to it. Was it suitable to our natures? reasonable
creatures? the Question is not, whether God could have made man better, but
whether he did make him bad: Solomon answers, no.

Ob. Yea, but God presents objects, and occasions of sin: yea he hardens the
heart, and blindes the mind, Exo. 9.14.
gives up to lusts; and in our doctrine, smites sin with sin.

Answ. True, and in Paul's doctrine too: we fear not to say, what God reports of
himself. But how does God all this? not by putting in badnesse, but by
withholding goodness undue, Subtrahendo, disponendo, at most, not evocando.
by leaving man to himself, who would be left. Darkness follows upon the
Suns absence; but its from Sublunaries, not the Sun: God is so far from
bearing all man's blame, that he has no finger in it; Indeed omne malum est in
bono; there is a mixture; and what good is, is Gods: what bad, ours. And what
ever malice may say touching our Atheism, making God worse their the Devil; I
know that we mean as well in this as any, and speak as modestly, as any that
quarrel us, touching this point. God then is no physical cause of sin: he
must therefore be either a moral canse or none: but that he is not.

1 King. 20. Genesis 22.
Ob. He commanded the prophet, to be smitten: Abraham to sacrifice Isaac.

Sol. Hence it appears that God cannot sin because the formale of sin cease
upon his command: The prophet owed him his blood; Isaac his life: if he call
for what he gave, it is no injustice, in Arminius his School.

Ob. But these things were against the law of nature.

Sol. Particular nature must yield to universal. It is not against nature to
cut off an hand, when the whole re quireth it.

God is above all law: therefore it is no fault in him to command.

above our nature, and the less law must yield to the greater. Suppose a
Justice sends a warrant for me, and at the same instant the King sends a
Pursevant: It is no disobedience to the inferior magistrate, to prefer the
superior, etc. Let God then be justified, and every man a liar. It Is an
horrible sin to father bastards upon the innocent: it is the highest blasphemy
to charge God with the least sin: and therefore find out the right father.

begin where the disorder began, at Themselves: study themselves, and all is
learned; keep themselves, and all is kept; conquer themselves, and all is won;
blame themselves, and all is right. This concerns men in both estates: but till
God convince men of sin, there is no dealing with unregenerate men: all that we
can say to them, is this.

Instruction to unregenerate.
out of their dreams; and to have its perfect work upon them. Till when, they
will not fall out with themselves, or own their own lusts.

Secondly, that they will stand up from the dead, save themselves from a dead
Generation; Ephesians. 5.4.
beginning with themselves, as he said, Lord deliver me from that wicked man,
my self.

Bethesda, till God shall enliven the means, and heal the spring, and so give
life: this is all I can stay to speak to these.

Instruction to the Saint^.
But for others, we have more to say. Are things amiss with thee? Physician
heal thy self, and see thou be a true Physician to thy self. Begin, where he
does. The Physician runs to the cause of sickness. First, is it from an Inward
cause? or Outward: in the non-naturalia? air? diet? etc. Next if Inward, is it
Universal? or Local? Again: is it from the head, or liver, or whence? is it a
plethora? or quite contrary, an Atrophia? And when he has found the grounds,
then he works. First, Purges, and there begins with Catholics, before
Topicals; then applies to the most affected parts; after strengthens nature
etc. so here. Sick we be: what, is the cause? Outward? as place, times, men,
Satan? these indeed may forward the disease: but the core and root is within:
from within, Mar. 7.21.
says Christ, Mar. 7.21. True, Satan injects? Nay, says Christ, from within;
from man's heart and spirit, proceed evil thoughts etc. So then: have we any bad
thoughts? have we unclean lusts? have we any rising revengefull, any injurious,
any malicious crafty projects? any envious, proud, foolish, idle, unsettled,
nay, hellish, blasphemous thoughts? These, all these come; from whom? not from
one man, but men. So then, there being such a plethora, and redundancy, and
superfluity of naughtiness in the heart, here we must begin; purge the heart,
wash the heart, the whole soul, (for poison is in every part) with Catholic
medicines; go to the sap, as Psalm. 51. Psalm. 51.
David observes his natural Corruption as well as particular distempers of
murder, and uncleanness: This first done, then as any one part is more
weakened, and affected, so accordingly applications must be made of Topicals.
But first, the main frame and constitution must be amended before we meddle
with Symptomaticals; this the first. For it is not the strength of Outward that
spoils us, but our own weakness: therefore the Saints begin here, Job indents
with himself; Agur prays, that vanity, and lies may be removed from him, not
from the things: men bring the vanity to the creatures, Romans 8.20
Romans 8. and put lies upon them: They tell none. The world has no power, but
from us: the corruption is in our lusts, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 1.4.
2 Pet. 1.4. We make them tempting, and Satan strong; whose strength is from
our darkness. Ephesians. 6.12. Col. 1.
Outward infection, must close with inward corruption, before it can distemper
us: Therefore purge well, and that done fortify grace, as Christ says, Hold
possession of your souls by patience, by grace. Thus David dealt with himself,
and kept in his passions, and kept up his hope. Thus must we strengthen the
inward man, Ephesians. 3.16.
Ephesians. 3. Victual well before a Fight, as the soldier does: We have also our
warfare, and must get our weapons, and armor ready: The world has strong
allurements and stratagems; but they are laid in our lusts: strong
discouragements, persecutions, and such like, but their strength is from our
basnesse. Why do you fear, (says our Savior) Oh ye of little faith? The fear
is not from the greatness of the danger, but from the smalnesse of our faith.
Were faith strengthened, it would overcome the world, and be victorious. Think
the same of the Prince of the world. Satan himself. It Is true; he is mighty,
but mighty through us: were we strong in Christ, we were stronger then that
strong one. It cannot be denied, but that the skirmish is for the time sharp,
nay, sometimes there is a long siege, and we beleaguered: then we must do as
soldiers do; repair breaches, and secure all passages, and stand upon our
guard, more then at other times. If within there be any combustible matter,
away with it, out with it; if any false, or suspected party, out with him; and
that done victual, fortify, barracado, make our selves as impregnable as we
can: for that is most certain, which before was hinted, viz. It is our
weakness, not the enemies strength and power, that spoils us. We might
prosecute the comparision further, and call upon you to make sure the gates,
and outworkes, to keep sentinel: but the main of all is, Take in Christ the
Captain of the Lords Hosts; fight with his weapons, fight in his strength,
swear fidelity to him, and engage him in the fight, and victory is ever on his
side. To speak all in few; see whence all our misery came; namely, from our
selves. Had we been true, hell it self could not have scaled us; and there the
cure must begin: Purge self, fear self, guard self, fortify self, gage self.
For the truth is; we are though not all, yet the worst tempters and devils to
our selves. Engage we our selves to Christ, and Christ to us, and there lies
our safety: unless this be done, were we in Paradise with Adam, or in heaven
with Satan, there were no more safety to us, then there was to them.

Gods mercy to be admired.
See here the infinite mercy of heaven toward us; God in Christ is that
husband that will receive a wilful wife, Jer. 3.1. Jer. 3.1.
That shepherd, who gathers the straying sheep; Ezik. 34.11.12.
not only, when she is driven away, but runs away from him, Ez^k. 34. That
father, who when his prodigal runs from him, runs to meet him with a pardon.
Lo! we gave up God in the plain field, preferred his enemy, gave him more
credit then God; we chose sin, death, misery; it was matter of choice; yea, our
secking; yea, we could not satisfy our selves with variety of wanderings. And
when we had done God all the dishonor we could, we showed not the least
sorrow: rather flew out more against him, and all his; taking no course to do
him right. In short; we could do nothing, we would do nothing, for Gods glory,
and our own souls. Now what did God the while for us? he looked after us, he
pityed us, he took our parts against the enemy, he censured all that had any
hand in our hurt whether principal or accessory; and bought us again with
dearest blood, and has now given us a better estate, then ever we had, put us
into a better Adam, set over us a better Guardian, given us better promises,
better covenant, better security then before. Oh that we had hearts to see the
height and depth of this love, the freeness and fullness of this gift! how
shall we do to love God enough? to prize Christ enough? where be our
capacities? our expressions? All that you can do is this.



thou had a better answer from God, follow his steps. Labor to humble them,
and then show them that mercy, which thy self have received. Thou undidst thy
self, and would not take thy fathers counsel: yet God pityed thee. Oh: but
these will never have done, they will be ever needy, ever craving, it is in vain
to help, they cannot keep ought. Think the case thine own, prevent them as God
has thee: Give them by the week, lay it out thy self, be thou their
purse-bearer, as Christ is thine. As for the rest, who see their folly, and are
now willing to work, to submit, to amend; let the same bowels be in thee, which
were in Christ, and so clear thine interest in him: And then,

Comfort in the midst of our great folly. Psalm. 108.17.
Lastly, here is a word of comfort. Be it that my own folly, sin, pride,
unbelief, has cast me into straights: yet in that case. God helps Fools, as
David speaks, Psalm. 107. and therefore I will to him with David, and
acknowledge my folly and brutishness, and give unto him the glory of his
Goodness. Salvation is of him; Psalm. 3. ult. Hos. 13.9.
We have destroyed our selves, says Hosea; but who saves: God in Christ; Death
is ours, life is his: make him our All, and answer all with Him; mine is shame,
and confusion of face, but all righteousness belongs to him; Own thine own,
and let God have his own; Thine own is sin and misery, own that: And yet here
own but thine own; nothing is ours, but what is from us, or accepted by us;
Satan may lay his brats at our doors, but we need not open the doors for
them; he may inject, and cast in sin: but if we reject it, it is his, not ours.
Consent may make another sin mine, dissent may make mine, none of mine. And
let this stay us; There may be use, confess, in some cases of distinguishing
betwixt I^bred corruption, and foreign suggestions: but ordinarily it is
sufficient to mark how sin is entertained, rather then whence it arises. Thou will say happily, that Satan makes a very through-fair of thy heart, and will
not be hedged out; but be thou still repairing the mounds, and call in Christ,
to be thy surety; and he that prevented thee with mercy at the first unsought
to, unthought of on thy part, will keep thee to the last, and crown his own
graces, in his own time, with victory. Mean while never stick with Christ for
any thing, to whom thou owe all, but sin and folly, which thou must call
thine own only.

Conclude with a Caveat for humble walking with God continually. Since the case
is altered with us to our loss, let us bear our selves accordingly: it is hard
to fall, and to bring down the heart to the estate: a man of noble birth can
hardly forget his beginnings, and sit lower, but he must, he must cut his coat
according to his cloth, and conform: so must we. It is with us as with Samson:
now (said he) I Will shake my self as in former times: Quantum mut at us ab illo.
1.
but poor Samson is not now the man, his wings are clipped, his hair cut, his
strength lost, till God repair him; he must be now a captive, a bondslave. I
Sam. 2.3
Oh talk not presumptuously, as he said: leave that to others, to dream of
their innate principles, of their semina and igniculi virtutis, of the
rectitude of their reason, virginity and freedom of their will, of their
native good, of their hearts and meanings, of I know not what power, more then
a passive capacity of good: let us know the case is altered with us: not
presume as some who will not be old, but think to do now as they could in
youth; but rather, with the Heathens Samson, Milo Croton.
have a fear of our selves and say, At hi lacerti jam mortui sunt, and keep a
straighter watch: say, I have not the understanding that once I had, Prove. 30.
and therefore must beg eye salve, and be content with teaching: I have not the
memory that I had, and therefore must be content with line upon line: and my
conscience is not as it was, and therefore I must not build only upon my self:
mine eyes be not as they were, I must set a guard; my strength as it was, I
must not hazard my self to temptation. Once ('it is true) I could have gone
along with God, done all commanded, believed all propounded, performed duty
without weariness, resisted temptation, etc. And therefore as an aged weakened
body concludes, I must not go as I did, nor fare as I did, nor look upon my
self as a young man, but be more sober and watchful then heretofore; so here.
I know now there dwells no good in me, neither can I do as I could have done:
and therefore my rule and wisdom is; First, to humble and abase my self before
God, and to bewail my losses. Secondly, to deny my self, and fear my self in
all. Thirdly, to make out for a repair: here is some difference, An old decayed
body can have no hope of a recovery here, his hope is in the resurrection, but
yet there is hope for us, this hope: First, go to our Father, and desire him to
disanull our covenants with doath. Secondly, to our Advocate to plead our
cause, nay our Surety, nay our God, who was sent to repair us, to dissolve
Satan's works, and by him we may be restored in blood, renewed in part now, at
present have a surer title and tenure then in Adam, and hereafter a more
glorious estate then Adams was and shall find our unhappy fall to prove our
highest preferment.

SECTION IV. Man's undoing is from his nondependence on God.
ECCLES. 7. ult. But they have sought out many inventions.


WE have seen the cause of man's fall, now more particularly, let us inquire
into the steps thereof. How came man thus to ingulfe himself? First, he goes
off from God; leaves his hold there, and betakes himself to himself. Secondly,
being once off, he never comes on again, but rangeth infinitely. These two
Particulars comprise the whole flory, and state of man fallen, from the first
to the last, and conclude all the interpretations made of the words. He had
sought before, and now what finds he? I was casting up my reckoning, says
Solomon, but I find the reckoning past my skill. Numbers may be still
multiplied, and there is no end of man's devices; he still, still busily and
vigorously (as the word in that Conjugation imports) projects more. The Points
might be many. We first pitch upon this.

Man's undoing is from his non-dependence on God.
Man's undoing is from his non-dependence on God; trace him, and you will find
that his ruin first and last is from his Independence upon God. This first
caused; secondly, continues; thirdly, consummates all his misery. Solomon
implies all this.





Thirdly, man is now the vainest of vanities: the very source and seat entrance
of his unhappiness, or in the progress, or in the close of it. All is hence,
that he goes out from God, and stands out to the last. His turning from God
began his misery, his not returning to God perpetuates it. No wonder, if it be
man's case now; it is the condition of all creatures, they all stand by a
manutention. The strongest fall, if left to themselves; as we see not only in
Adam, but in the Devils themselves. Nay, we find it in man now sornewhat healed
and regenerated. Though he has an immortal principle in him, and a better
guard about him, then ever he had, yet stands he no longer, then he holds
dependence upon God: let him once step out from him, and stand High-lone; down
he comes and falls as soon into a Guzzel, as into another place. We see it, in
blessed Abraham, David, Job: In all, at their best, and in their best. We might
be insinite in proofs, but we wave them since the thing is clear to Reason:
for,

all goodness, all wisdom, strength, holiness, comfort, life; not only in
himself, but to the creature.

Psalm. 43.4. (...) Psalm. 36.9.
The joy of our joy, Psalm. 43.4. the life of our life, * the strength of our
strength; lose him, and all is lost: Take away the sun, and where is light? the
fountain, and where is the stream? the root, and where is the tree? The head
and heart, as it were, then what is any member? Obstruct his influence for a
time, what is an Angel?

Esse and porro esse is from God; his being, a mere dependeney. Take him alone,
and he has no bottom of his own; but look how Christ's humane nature had its
subsistence from the God head, by personal union: Col. 1.17.
so has man, by a spiritual union and dependence. Col. 1.17. Join him with
all the creatures, and take in them to his succor, and they without God, are
but so many nothings and ciphers; now put a thousand ciphers together, and add
nothing to nothing, what is the product but nothing? They must all say, Strength
is not in me, help in me. Unless God hear, the heavens, the heavens hear not
us; and there is the same reason of all the rest.

removed from us, but is made against us; yea, all in our selnes is then
against us; wit, memory, strength, or whatsoever may promise most; yea, all in
every creature is against us.

Every thing becomes not only vanity, but vexation: not wind alone, but the
East wind; a piercing, a wounding reed, as well as a broken reed.

Adam and Eve, he makes sad work, but much more, when he can sever God from
man, because man would be of himself, and not lean upon God.

Note the steps of man's downfall.
First, see the steps of man's downfall: he would needs be absolute the first
day, a freeholder, and acknowledge no Supreme, at least would mend his tenure,
and be free from all wardship, and homage, and so quickly outed himself of all.
See secondly, our strange folly, whom long experience has not yet made wise.
Oh how impatient are we still of any yoke! no bird so weary of his cage, no
slave so weary of his bondage: no sooner bound Apprentices, but we must be
made free, like the Prodigal, in the Parable, weary of his father, and must be
presently at his own finding, till he had fooled himself out of all. We may see
our selves in Israel; they could not abide within Gods mounds. They would not
trust to an Uncertain Moses, or Unseen God: they would have one in sight, in
hand; they would not go to God for every penny, and live from hand to mouth
every meal, they would be at their own finding and carving, have wells of
their own, flesh of their own, bread of their own, they would not depend upon
Gods Provision, of a Judge or General: they would have a King of their own.
Just so it is with us in all passages of reliance and dependence. Men will not
rest in Gods Authority and direction. They will superadde inventious of their
own. They will have more words, then written words, Traditions, more Gospels
then one, more Articles then twelve, more Precepts then ten, more Mediators;
more Gods then one. They will not rest in Gods truth and promises; take his
securities and seals; but add more. They will not rest in Gods Wisdom for
time and particulars. They are all for the bird in hand, all for sense, nothing
for faith, Thus they say in plain English, they will trust to themselves not to
God, So for the Providence, and point of protection They dare not put
themselves upon God: he is not strong enough, wise enough: they must shift for
themselves, as sometimes Abraham and David did. And in poine of Provision and
maintenance, they say as the child does: Mother let me have all, be it meat,
money, and what else you can name, in mine own hand, and in mine own keeping.
Hence in Matter of fact, such scambling; men strain wits, conscience, all, to
get all out of Gods hands into their own. Faith then no faith, If wit, if
slattery, if backbiting, if lying, if hell it self will do it, they will have
it, and say it was a good providence too, as Zac. 11.5. Zac. 11.5
Hence in matter of faith, God would be alone in the throne, one God; we upon
that account, refuse him, as the Senate did Christ, because he would be All or
None: we must have (would you think it?) thousands of Gods, as Israel; in
every City, at least one; God would be acknowledged the fountain of all grace,
1 Pet. 5.10
1 Pet. 5.10. Men will divide, Nature shall do somewhat: Freewill somewhat Some
hand, or voice, they will have in Election, Vocation, Justification,
Sanctification, Salvation. They will be partners. As they can do nothing
without God, so God little without them. God would have us own all to him,
depend upon him for the first, second, third, fourth, every grace; yield him
the author and finisher, the Alpha and Omega of all. We trust to our own
provitions, habits, gifts, and would prevail by our own strength: In short;
we would not be confined to his wisdom as only wise, to his care, his means,
his hours, and times: but will shark, anticipate, and either contribute, or
control his proceedings, and call this our wisdom. This the practice, now
consider,

Providence and deny All: and thus to deify our selves. For to be ind pendent,
is to be God. This is to be like Antichrist, lawless; like Satan, a Belialist,
that is, yoke-less.

sountain, for a broken cisterne; we forsake the best comforts, and as Jonah
says, Jona. 2.9.
our own mercies; we leave Gods fire of direction, protection, and consolation,
and walk by a worse light, our own sparks, as Isaiah speaks, Isa. 30. (...)
and so at last lie down in sorrow. It Is a thing, both base Jer. 2.12. and
bitter v. 19. Jer. 2.12. and 19.
a certain forrunner of all misery and confusion. Alas! if we will be thus
alone, we must bear our own sorrows, care our own cares, lie under our own
burdens, as Rebels must, when they withdraw allegiance, and cease to be under
protection. Whilst we go along with God we live upon him, and lie under his
protection: but if we will be alone, God, leaves us to our selves, or sends us
to our Idols, at Judges 10.13, 14. Jud. 10.13, 14.
Think not this, small matter to go a whoring thus from God: 'twill cost a
Saint dear God will break his carnal confidences, Jer. 2. ult. Jer. 2. ult.
he will make our Gods, our own rods; punish us and our Gods together, as once
he did in Egypt; see this and be wise.

Repent, and let God be all again.
Repent we of this our sacrilege restore God to his Crown, give him the entire
glory of his absolute power, wisdom, truth, all. Let him alone be wise,
independent, and himself. All the struggling betwixt God and man, ever was about
this point namely, which should rule, and which obey; which direct, and which
submit. Now do him and thy sell right, give all to him, leave nothing to thy
self, Applied to three sorts of men.
but obedience, which is the portion of Inferiors.

This is applicable to three sorts of men.

To those who went off with Adam, but are not yet come on again. 1. Sort.
Let these understand themselves: they stand guilty of an horrible treason till
they return: they are outlawed and left naked of protection, of direction, of
life, of safety, of all; where they left God, they left all their happiness,
and their way is back again. Their ruin came by deserting God, and it is
continued whilst a distance continues. Their work therefore is to return;
First, for Gods sake, who is their Lord and rightful King, and whom they have
infinitely offended. Were it but a brother that had ought against them, they
should make to him, much more to God, as Luke 15. Luke 15.
Father I have sinned against heaven etc. Secondly, for their own sakes,
whilst they run from God, they run from their own mercies and comforts, into a
miserable maze; there is no end of erring, the heart is restless. They are sure
of nothing, but fear upon fear, till they come home to him. Being thus in
hucksters hands, they still be cheated and vexed, and at the last, as they have
lived without God, so they will dye without God, which is the height of misery;
for to be without him, is to be worse then nothing.

Ob. Oh! but we have God in his Ordinances, Word, Sacraments, etc.

Sol. It Is true, God offers him there: but we have him not till we accept him.



wholly depend, what means then so many inventions? what the use of ill means?
what such adoring of Creatures? so high thoughts when they smile, so base, when
they frown? so much fear when man, so little when God is offended? It Is certain;
a natural man is his own God; he depends upon himself, his own wit, grace,
friends, means, not upon God at all: and the Saints themselves depend but
little; did they wholly rest upon God, they would be glad to please, they would
not sleep, till reconciled, as Joseph's brethren; They would be even and settled
in their way. That indeed is Repentance, namely, the change of your dependence,
when you abhor all that is your own, and put all upon God, do all to him, from
him, and his principles: Here then is the first work, To give up creatures;
say: My bow, my horse, my money, nay, my prayers shall not save me. Salvation
is of the Lord, not from the creatures; these you may use as servants but, not
as Lords; amongst them you may trust some men, with a moral trust, but it must
not amount to a Divine, for fear of that curse, Jer. 17. Jer. 17.
Iron heates not but from an heat put to it, the pen speaks no comfort,
unless some hand guide it, some head prompt it; so think of all creatures;
they cannot so much as think of us, unless God mind them, much less pity, and
help us, unless God give pity and help. He is the God of all comfort; 2 Cor.
3.2.
there we must have it, or no where; unite to him, and close with him, and then
thou art restored.



Luke 15.



Jer. 3.1, 2. Jer. 3.1, 2.
etc.

Object no more: suspend thy comfort no longer by adjourning repentance; thou
make thy return hereby the harder; every step out of the way must be
unstepp'd again.

2 Sort.
To such who are gone out from God the second time, at least in part, these
revolts prove most dangerous and least pardonable. Thou have bin once, as it
were, burnt in the hand already; fear the second time: thou have tried both
estates, now tell me, which is the better? the snow of Lebanon; or dirty
ditches? the waters of Siloah; or troublesome seas? Tell me whether all the
worlds enjoyments be worth one hours communion with heaven: and when thou have
made use of thine own experience, lay down creatures; above all, lay down thy
self: For there is nothing in us that can help us; in truth, nothing but what
will hurt us, without God. We cannot so much as receive and enjoy comfort, so
much as apprehend it, unless God give an apprehension; therefore deny self,
and mortify self. Say, I took my self for a God, but I am a devil: I thought
my self wise, but I am a fool; I conceived my self safe, when I had a little
grace in my own keeping; but I find that I can keep nothing; therefore
henceforward I will despair of my self, know no man after the flesh, have no
confidence in flesh, but bid adieu to all fleshly hopes: and then plant thy
self upon God, there is no other bound or bottom; Every gift, Jam. 1.17.
says James 1.17. Every giving of that gift; The use, continuance,
apprehension, is all of him, he is that principle which communicates all. See
nothing but emptiness out of him, and fullness in him: therefore close with
him by knowledge, by faith, by love: do nothing without him, trust not thy self
in the least: take notice what a treacherous nature thou have, how bent to
backsliding, Hos. 11.7. Hos. 11.7.
How far thou art sunk into it, and gone from thy self; how sweet God was once,
and the creature now; how humble thou once wast, how disdainful now; how once
troubled upon the least estrangement, and how now thou can live without God,
for a long time. And again take notice of thy speed: what thy then happiness
was, what thy now deadness. And so conclude with the Church, Hos. 2. I will
return to my husband again, Hos. 2. ult.
for then was it best with me.



doing justice, of glorifying God. Think what Samuel said to revolting Israel,
1 Samuel 12.
1 Samuel 12. Think what God says to backsliding Judah, Jer. 4. Jer. 4.
Think of Christ's errand, who came to recover straies, and to sive what was
lost. Think of the Prodigalls entertainment, of our forgiving seventy times
seven times in a day. Think of Gods practice with other backsliders, and
believe the prophets, whose work it is to bring thee back to God, as the
expression is 2 Chronicles. 24. And which is also the main of our repentance; and
that is usually expressed by our returning to God, and it stands much what in
the change of principles and dependence, as before was noted: Therefore here
sit down, make God thy All, and depend upon him for first, second, third, every
grace.

3 Sort.
So much to the second sort, now to the third; and they are such as stand in
terms of dependency, but too loosely. I have two words to say to these.

First, let them hold that dependency wit put them off from depending upon Gods
directions; nor pride, from submitting to his Sovereignty; nor unbelief, from
closing with his promises; nor any change of times, from their constant
adherence. It Is. I consesse a very hard thing to hold close to God, in
extremities; when the affliction and the trial is great, then to clasp about
God is difficult, as David and Abraham witness: and no whit easier in much
peace and prosperity, as we see in the same David, Hezekiah and others. In
great divisions, it is a hard thing not to trample and to warp aside, as we see
in Peter Gal. 2. We are cast upon Trying times, times of Antichrists rage: and
then depending graces, as Faith, Patience, and the like, are most seasonable.
Rev. 14.12. Rev. 14.12.
Our care therefore must be to put off all self conceits, and hopes, and
dependencies. We have in this case, but too much wit, strength, considence of
our own. But all our own must down: for so much as there is of our own in us,
so much there is of misery and deceit. Therefore be nothing in thy self,
nothing in any creature, nothing in any Ordinance abstracted from Christ: hang
the whole soul upon him; be no wiser then Christ, no holier, no stronger then
Christ. Make an entire resignation, and let thy dependence be absolute and
universal for all grace, all counsel, all comfort. There is no other bottom
or subsistence.







Ephesians. 4.

of duty, leave to him the care of success.

Secondly, let them strain toward David, to look to the right hand, and to the
left, and to be catching at every sprig. We look upon the world, as if it were
as full of Gods, as the Roman Senate was said to be of Kings. We deisie every
creature. Nay, the truth is, every man would be his own God, his own Christ,
his own holy Ghost, and rather trust himself, then look out to God. This
wickedness must be resisted, and this must be our study, To remove the
creature further from us, and to say still with David, 73. Psalm. ult.
It Is good for me to draw near to God; and conclude, that if it be best, to
come nearer to him, it is best also to keep our selves with him, to do nothing
without him: nay, if it were possible, not to breathe without him, as Ignatius
somewhere.

Lastly,

First, in that he would not lose us when we were loose from him, as men use to
do; Let him go, say they, when a man will not trust them. If he would have put
himself upon me, I would have stuck to him, and provided for him, but since he
will be of himself, let him shift for himself. Thus men; but not so, God:
though we would part with him, he will not lose us; but seeks us out, and takes
us off, from our own bottomes: and this, (were it but only thus much) it were
a great mercy, though it cost us some trouble. When a bone is out of place, it
is a favor to set it, though it cannot be done without pain. Though God stop
our way with thorns, yet if thereby he brings us home to himself, the mercy is
great. And therefore look upon this as such, when God, as a father, takes home
his bankrupts, takes all out of our hands, more then the duty of dependence,
and will trust us neither with soul, nor body, nor estate, nor any thing else.
This is one mercy.

Christ commends us back again to the Father, and both to the Holy Ghost
sealing us; and all make it their joint work to secure soul, body, estate, all,
here and hereafter. This is glorious mercy, here is a blessed change, a secure
estate. God ingageth for thy self, for thy seed, to all eternity: Interest thy
self in him, and there is an end of all thy cares, fears, doubts, perplexities,
Psalm. 94.18, 19.

SECTION V. Man loose from God is restless in his ways.
ECCLES. 7. ult. But they have sought out [MANY INVENTIONS.]


WE come now to the last point. They have sought out many, etc.] [inventions]
say we: and the inventions are not few, which are discovered in the rendering of
the words, Ratiocinia, says Jun.

Quastiones insinitas, says the Vulg.

Cogitationes vanas. Vatab.

Computationes. Pagn.

Cogitationes. Montan.

Cogitationes magnatum, says Lodo. de Dicu.

(...) Sept.

(...) Symmac.

Cogitationes alienas a recto. says Merc. etc.


(...). Our own translation, being full enough, and suitable to the scope, we
shall rest in that, and for the matter, take notice of man's progress in evil,
when once he is off from God; he works himself out of all, he has his devices,
he has many of them; he seeks, and seeks again, and yet again even unto
infinitness. Whence we observe,

That when a man is once loose from God, and left to himself, Man once loose
from God, restless in his ways.
he becomes restless and endless in his own ways. It fares with him, as with
the Seaman, or wayfaring man; when once he has lost his rule and directions,
and is out of his own knowledge, he is, as it were, in a mist or maze, walks
the round, now backward, now forward, now on this hand, now on that, still in
motion, and that swift; but all to no purpose. It will not offend you, I hope,
if I compare him to the Poor Spaniell, which has lost his Master: he cries,
and stands, he runs and stops, he smells and searches, now on this, now on that
side the way; but knows not where he is, nor when to make end. It Is much what
so with man, Trace him from the first to the last, so soon as ever he went off
from God, he began to rove into a world of devices: and herein worse then the
spannill, which runs to find his master, but man runs from him, as we see Adam
hides himself, palliates and transferres his fault, patcheth up a poor
covering, and is as busy, to no purpose, as his then parts and time would
give. Pass from him to Cain his son; so soon as he went out from God, he
became a Rover, and both himself, and his children fell to inventions, some
whereof God has turned to man's good. After that, Ambition came in, and then
Oppression, and what ever else was naught, as a learned man disconrseth. And
all along, Grotius, de Jure belli and pacis.
as the world was peopled, so shops and forges were increased. In the end man's
self was multiplied within himself, in one you had a thousand. V. Varro in Ang.
de civit. dei.
Gods were multiplied, for one there were thousands. Religions and worships
were multiplied, for one Temple, they built many, as Hosea notes; for one
Jehovah, Idols innumerable in every City, in every furrow, in every house,
river, wood, place Gods without number.

And for practicals, it were infinite to particularize; Men were as wicked, as
they could tell how to be, as God complains of his once people, Jer. 2.
Jer. 2.

Come down to the time of Christ's Incarnation; how many religions were then in
the world? how many inventions on the Church, brought in by Pharisees,
Sadduces, Essenes, and I know not whom, since that, how many amongst Jewish
Rabbines? how many amongst Heathenish Gentiles? still, still, as men declined
from the truths of God they added of their own; see it in the books of
Scripture, in the Sacraments, in several confessions and models of religion,
in worships, in Liturgies; How did they, who would be thought the chiefest
Churchmen, beat their brains about new ceremonies and forms? one Pope adds
this, another that, and every one something, till the Church was surcharged.
What should we speak of Heresies, and uncouth opinions? how have the Catalogues
swelled in our hands? Epiphanius mentions some Austin more, and after him, more
and more in every Age. Nay, the Apostle in his time, speaks of endless strifes
and disputes, of many spirits, of different doctrines, which since have swarmed
beyond all account. There is invention upon invention inventions new to confirm
the old: new Additions, and new Editions, and what not? Now the Reasons of
these endless Mazes and pursuits, are many.

God is the Boundary of all things; in him,

consistence of his own: that which is said of fluid things, That they cannot
bound themselves, is true of Man.

too unruly to be held in by any but God; no mounds but Gods mounds will hold
them in.

made up of Ignorances, errors, lusts; and though truths and virtues have their
bounds, yet these have none.

restless, as the needle jogged aside, till he faceth God: he finds all
imperfect, that he deals in; and so must piece and patch up things as he can.
He is made up of Busy principles, and the more busy because now distempered,
and as it were feverish, and hence he runs like a Clock out of order; he is
unwearyed in his own way and inventions, and is still adding, as in Mic. 6.
Wherewithal shall we come before God? will rivers? will thousands serve the
turn?

unsatisfied in all that he can do, like the swift dromedary, still traversing
her ways, Jer. 2. 23. hurried up and down with guilt Cain- like, in the Land
of Nod.

Satan seiseth on him; acts him beyond himself; fills him with a spirit of fury,
of giddiness, and all hellish lusts, fears, objections, scruples, and such
like trash, which multiply like so much vermin.

Admire and bewail this restlesnesse.
For Information; To what a pass man is now brought? he is blind, yet busy
like the Phrantick; then wisest when he is worst of all: he must now be no
less then a God: he is able to make a God of his own, a worship of his own, a
conscience of his own, a Bible of his own; weary of nothing but of dependence
and confinement. Never was bird wearier of a Cage then he of Gods mounds; then
most impatient, when he is not left to himself. See it in all the passages of
his life.

1. In civil affairs.
First, In civil affairs; he must have no superior: A servant in one year
grows weary of that yoke; Marry he must; he must be of himself, else no
bargain. The little apprentice before he has worn out half his time, must buy
his time, set up of himself: and thus it is, for the most part, with all
inferiors; they are weary of all Government, like Israel of old. God himself
could not please them; they must have another King.

2. In spiritual.
Secondly, in the spiritual regiment; where shall you find a man almost that
will submit to any spiritual government? What should I speak of men's carriage
toward their Pastors in that relation? they will not yield to God himself. For
the purpose. God would stand alone, and be sole commander Savior: Man would
share with him. God would be the Only Lawgiver: Men would put in somewhat into
his Laws. God would be Only worshipped: Men will not sit down by this, but
they will have some hand in all his dispensations. We see this every day both
in Doctrinals and Practicals. In the first; How do men sweat to divide with
God? If he bring Grace, they will bring will. If he offer a match with his Son,
they will bring some portion. Whither tend all the points of Popery, Arminians,
Socinians, Anabaptists, but to this, To take us off (in part at least) from a
dependency? So in practicals, whether work or wages be considered, God would
have us live by faith, that emptying grace; we are all for sense; he would have
us be beholding to Christ for all; we will warm our selves with our own sparks.
He would have us stand to his allowance and maintenance, we will shark, and
sift for our selves, and fear that God will be to seek, if we did not help him
out with our supplies. All this while, see what becomes of our wit, and how ill
we provide for our selves. First, we forsake the fountain, and our own mercies.
Secondly, we embrace lyng vanities. Thirdly, we throw our selves into a world
of perplexities: and lastly, pull upon our selves that curse of curses, to be
left to our own counsels and inventions.

Double instruction to Parents for their children.
Of Instruction. Is man thus endless in his wanderings, when he is once left to
himself. Then first, pity your children. They go astray from the womb, and the
longer they go in their own ways, the more work, and misery do they create to
themselves. You may think perhaps that wedlock will tame them, time and
experience will teach them: but that is your error. The longer they live, the
more inventive they will be etc. full of crotchets. Stop them betimes, and be as
merciful to their souls, as you be to their bodies. If a limb be crooked, you
will seek to straighten it, whilst it is tender. If a bone be broken, you will
not say, Time will work it out: You Will rather say; Alas! the child will be a
cripple all his days, if he be not timely looked to: Think the same for their
souls; They are quite disjoynted, and their faces look the wrong way, do your
best to set them right: at least bring them to Gods bone-setters, who may
restore them. Gal. 6. I.

your selves; and the greatest mercy you can show to your selves is, To Parents
for themselver.
To go from your selves to God again. If a man will be ruled by his own reason,
by his own conscience, or rather fancy, he shall never have done; he will work
himself out of his own Geares, run himself quite off his own legs. Therefore
say with David, I hate all vain inventions. They are all vain, Psalm. 119.113.
and I have chosen thy statutes, O Lord. The way is plain simple, even, if we
would follow it, as God chalkes it out; To us, (says the Apostle, in matters
of faith) there is but One God, one Lord, one Master, one Lawgiver, one faith,
Once given to the Saints, Jud. 3^^.
once for all delivered in clearest Scriptures: Here stick, upon these plain
principles, and decline inferences too far fetched in point of practice, the
directions are very clear. I write unto you, says John, that you sin not; we
must plant that resolution in our hearts against all purposed sins; next, if we
do sin besides purpose, make up the breach quickly. We have, says he, an
advocate with the Father. Go to him, follow his counsel, in recruiting our
selves: give glory to God in a way of Confession; give right to man in a way of
Satisfaction; and then for the future, If ye know, says he, that God is
righteous, then know too, that every one that does righteousness, and none
other, is born of him, I John 2. ult. Here Is a plain way; now make now bouts,
nor strain wit to find evasions. In matters of Doctrine; strive not to bring
opinions to our lusts, and make the Word speak what sin would have it: make not
Scriptures servants to our interests. So in matters of life and conversation;
hold to the rule, Sin not, says John, Spare inventions.

necessity dispenses; but God will have mercy, not sacrifice; I must not
sterve my self and my children. Sin not, true: if it be simply and
intrinsecally evil; but this that I do, is not sin in me, sin in this case. So
in the case of repentance; nothing more plain. Repent, say the Prophets;
Repent, says Christ; Repent, say the Apostles. I acknowledge it, but what is
it to repent? a man may be too leg all and slavish. I Will to Christ, and what
needs more? Say, I have offended my neighbor. If Christforgive me, he must
forgive me.

Mat. 5.23, ^4.
else approach not my Altar. Here stay, hear Christ, not wit; that will have
twenty Pleas, It was not wrong, It was but just, It is not against charity, Who
can tell whether he be a Brother or no? or, whether in discretion this be the
best way, all circumstances considered? So again: We must be righteous as he is
righteous: We must do as we would be done by; that is the Royal Law: yield to
this rule, which very Heathens have yielded to; and cast not a mist before
thine own eyes; make not thy self believe, that thou would be so used thy
self, only because thou would have a license to abuse another.

It were infinite to prosecute all particulars. Believe it; there will be no
end of wanderings of fears, doubts, thoughts, till we come in to God. If a man
will believe himself and give way to his own guides and principles, he will
never be quiet: therefore give a flat denial to them all; by name,

self-reasonings. A man would run himself quite out of breath and become mad
with reason, if he will exalt reason above God.

unmortified lusts. They will hurry a man into all precipices.

a scrupulous conscience, which knows no end or mean, till it has wrought out
it self, and wearyed the soul, as it befell a poor soul, whose name I conceal,
who first made conscience (and that justly) of blessing food before received,
and then yielding to some scruples came to this. If must bless God for every
meal, why not then for every second course or dish coming to the Table: and if
so why not then for every bit eaten, and every drop let down: and if I must do
so in case of meats and drinks why not in all other things whatsoever, and
thus that poor soul made life it self a burden.

man's example or authority, especially when it is countenanced with seeming
sanctity. If a man make man his guide and his rule where shall he stay? or
which man shall he follow? Rather follow true Guides: that is to say, Give up
thy self to Christ with true light, I Pet. 2.25. next, make use of thy present
light, whether of nature, or of Grace and next, shut not out any light offered,
but receive all thankfully and humbly. Yet further: hold to the sure Rule of
Scriptures, and there, first to the Fundamentals, to plain places, to the
literal sense, where no incongruity will follow upon it: and for principles;
make neither more nor fewer then the Word makes; only be true to such: and for
inferences and deductions, though they cannot be simply ejected, yet take heed
they be not too far fetched, or too much strained.

B^sse God who gives a stop to our wanderings.
Lastly, if the case be so with us, that the further we depart from God the
worse we be, and the more we divide like a river, when further from the
fountain, or like hayle shot, the further it goes, the more it scatters:
Then bless we God for calling us in, and giving a stop to these our wanderings.

Adam, either father or son, have returned, unless God had laid hand on him?
when would the lost groate or the lost sheep have found themselves, if God had
not first found them? men may talk of works preparatory, of, I know not what,
congruities, improvements of naturals, and such like wonders; but till God put
forth his creating power, and hold forth his Golden Scepter, a wolf will as
soon turn sheep; a Black-more, fair; a devil a Saint; as sinful Adam a
convert. And therefore for this mercy, bless God.

humiliation; but new opinions, forms, questions, ways tending to strife and
contention, to profaneness, and loosnesse, so that Africa it self did not more
abound with monsters, then we naturally do.

Now herein Gods goodness is to be admired, that whilst we are hatching one
unhappy brood or other, he is contriving our return and safety, and in his time
takes us off by degrees from these principles of ours, wit, fancy, deluded
conscience, lust, sense, and the like; which are sufficient to trouble our
selves and all the world.

Mat. 11.

And now we are fallen upon the next estate of man, viz. his Restoration in
the second Adam: and of this we shall say more, if God shall please to give
health and opportunity. In the mean, we shall (if God enable) speak something
in the general, leaving the particulars touching Christ's person, natures,
offices to some other time, as we shall see cause and find leisure.

An end of this Text in Eccles. 7. ult.
SECTION VI. Saints by Christ are in a very happy estate.
ROMANS VIII. I. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus, etc. --


WE have looked upon man in a double estate: we have seen what he was in Gods
hand, what in his own. Now we are to enquire what he is in Christ's: These words
will give us a general hint thereof. Where Three things must be done, (if we
do well.) First, the order; Secondly, the meaning; Thirdly the use of the words
must be found out. For the first, Order of the words.
they come in by way of Inference, that is confessed. But whence they are
inferred, is the question.

De amiss, great. etc. l. 5. c. 7.
Bellarmine, I remember, knits them to the 7th Chapter, especially to those
words. [Not I, but sin, etc.] and his conceit is this. There the Apostle had
proved lust, i. e. residexcies and dregs of Original sin, to be no sin, and
here he concludes, Therefore there is no matter of condemnation in Saints. But
this cannot stand. For, first, the conclusion is too wide for the premises, if
they were true; since other sins may damn, though Original sin did not.
Secondly, the Premises and ground are not true. Paul does not say, That
concupiscence and the relics of original corruption are no sins; he says
the contrary, over and over in that Chapter, in so much as Arminius cannot
believe, that what he says, can agree with a sanctified estate. As for that
verse, [not I, etc.] the Apostle does not dispute, whether there be sin or no
in him, that he yields, but from what principle that sin comes; from a
principle of flesh, not of grace. Let Us set by this then. Ames knits these
words to the fifth Chapter. Others to the seventh. Others, best of all, as I
conceive, to the whole discourse foregoing. The Apostle having proved our
Justification by grace, or faith, or Christ, which upon the matter come all to
one, and taken off some objections, and absurdities in the 6th and 7th
Chapters, which might at first sight seem thence to flow, he now like a good
Artist sums up and infers the main conclusion; as if he had said. Now then
since it is cleared that Christ is a ruits as well as Adam, and as full of life
as he was of death, and puts forth this life effectually to free us from all
manner of deaths, it hence follows, Therefore there is no condemnation to them
that be in Christ. This the order and cobarence.

Meaning of the words.
Now for the words, what is meant, in the first place, by condemnation? Here we
divide again. The Popish sense is this, There is no matter condemnable, nothing
worthy condemnation in Saints. This sense we cannot receive, for then it will
follow that there is nothing worthy absolution and pardon in them: Then were
they free from all sin, for sin, as sin, is deadly, c. 6. at least free from
all mortal sin, which the state and stoty of David, Solomon, Peter, and
thousands more do sufficiently confute. This therefore must not be it, What
then? The word imports a condemnatory sentence, as Mark 10.33. and elsewhere.
There is none such abides the Saints, the law is discharged, and disarmed of
its condemning power, as to Saints, they are removed from under it; the law
borrowes its condemning strength from sin, and that is taken off as to the guilt
and power of it; as the Apostle after speaks. It is Christ, says he, that
justifies, who shall condemn? so then the believing Saints are passed from
death, they come not into condemnation. Some objections are made by the Jesuits
against this interpretation. But it is not worth while to dwell long upon them.



Sentence and Execution.



grace not of merit.





Saints, when there is?

execution or actual condemnation of them.



in Christ, to all as are in him, as once they were in Adam; that is to say, to
all that are branches of him, and members of that body whereof Christ is head,
and a principle of life: For to be in Christ, (to touch that by the way) is not
only to be united to Christ by knowledge, so that we be in the faith, and
Christian Religion: but that we be incorporated into him, by faith and the
spirit, united to him in love and life, so that we have our subsistence and
dwelling in him, 1 John 3. ult. He that is thus in Christ is passed from death
to life, he comes not under a sentence condemnatory, John 3.18. and 5.24. he
shall sit on the bench in the day of Judgment not stand at the bar, there to
be arraigned; but why all this, because they walk aster the spirit? So indeed
our Country man Stapleton would have it, but that is against the whole
discourse of the Apostle in the foregoing Chapters, and that were to confound
Law, and Gospel. The Text does not say, there is no condemnation, because they
walk after the spirit; he meddles not now in the conclusion with the causes of
Justification, those he handles elsewhere, some before, some after, but now he
is upon the subjects, and persons justified, and tells us in this place, not
why they are justified, but who they be, and how qualisied; or if you will, the
cause or ground of their freedom is upon this account, because they are one
with Christ: the evidence and proof of this, because they live under a new
guide or Law, walking not after the flesh, but the spirit. And thus for the
words. Now the result hence is this. Saints by Christ, are in a very happy
estate.


Saints in Christ are in a very happy estate and condition. That Is our Point,
Our renewed estate is as good in Christ, as it was bad in Adam. It is not for
nothing, that Saint Paul makes this his highest ambition to be all in Christ,
and nothing out of him, Phil. 3. 9, 10. or this to be the highest honor and
commendation to be styled Saints in Christ, Phil. 1.1. Brethren in Christ. Col.
1. Churches in Christ, in his first and second Epistle to the Thessalonians.
This the highest dignity the best seniority; They were, says Paul, before me
in Christ, Romans 16. 7. and 11. Our Savior himself makes this the main of his
Ministry. First, to call men to him; then, to persuade an abidance in him: and
to this very end has established an everlasting Ministry that thereby men
might be called into the fellowship of Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 9. Nay, and into the
Glory of Christ, and his most glorious privileges, 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. Now that our
condition is not more desperate out of Christ, then blessed in him, will
further appear. If we consider this estate, either singly or in way of
comparison. To begin with the latter. 1. In comparison of others


First, Adams estate in innocence was (as we have heard) a very rich all the
world, held all of God immediately, he was in the actual possession of all
required Graces, and had in himself a power of perpetuating his estate in Fee
simple upon himself and his for ever: a fair estate, but short of ours now.
Adam had not the heir himself as we have, had not so near an union with God as
we by Christ; he had a good Landlord, but not a Father by marriage; nor had he
that security and warrantise, against all pretenders and claimers that we have:
he held God by the hand, but God holds us. To say nothing of another life in
heaven, which whether Adam heard of, is more then we can tell.

servants; we are members, they are the friends of the bridegroom, we the
bride, they have their personal glory and life, but we the same for substance
with Christ's; Job. 17. They are near to Christ in place and employment, but not
so near as we, who are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone.

Thirdly, the Saints now in heaven. person and in part, we in our proxy and
head Christ; there we also sit, Ephesians. 2. Ephesians. 2.6.
neither shall they be perfected till we come to them. Now then to close this
comparative consideration, If our estate in many things exceeds Adams, in some
things the Angels, if for the main we hold pace with the souls now in bliss,
having the same both heir and inheritance, our estate is certainly good; Adams
was good, the Angels better, he Saints best, and the Saints is ours or the
substance of it.

2. In a single consideration.
Secondly, This further appears if ^e survey the thing in it self, and ^ook
upon it in the causes of it. Seondly, in the subjects, or possessors ^f it.
Thirdly, in the privileges, and enefits of it.

For the causes of it.
For the first, it is an estate of Gods Apostle, of God in Christ, 1 Cor. 1.30,
and for us is Christ, of God, made wisdom, righteousness, redemption all. It
pleased God out of the riches of Grace to take counsel with himself alone, how
to make man, as happy, as man needed to be. And whereas before, though he had a
vast estate yet was he wider then his estate, and thereupon stepped over his
bounds he was pleased to resolve upon a^ estate larger then man, even his own
estate, Glory, Joy so far as communicable, and enters him upon that even upon
his Masters Joy, as it is in the Gospel; and Glory, as it is, 2 Thessalonians. 2 Thessalonians 2.14.
2. And whereas man was not at first himself, but as they were once used to
speak of such as were under Covert without head, God resolved now upon a head
and Guardiar Christ, and the conclusion is, Christ should pay all and have all.
Hereuppon the Father gives the Son, the So^ gives himself to purchase an estate
and to instate us in it. Now consder what price the Father set upon that his
Son, the Son of his love, an thence inferres the greatness of the estate; for
what loving Father wi^ part, with the life shall I say? nay, with one limb of
his child for a whole world? why, Saints in Christ have such an estate as God
was content to redeem with the blood of his Son; a precious purchase, and
therefore a precious state. Consider also Christ and his worth. He looks upon
the estate, when it was to be purchased; and when the matter was propounded to
him, and surveyed by him, he was willing to sell himself to his skin, to his
soul to compass it: now certainly, that state must be very glorious that has
God for its founder, God for its purchaser, God for its price.

For the subjects and heirs of this, For the possessors of it.
estate to speak them all in one, it is Christ mystical. First, Christ, the
heir apparent of all, the Kings eldest, the Kings only son. Secondly,
Christians, that is, the Church in one body, the Kings only Daughter, upon
whom this state is settled, by way of Jointure shall I say? or rather, Dowry:
now when the King of Kings shall drive a match between his only son, who is
heir of all, and his only daughter by adoption, (as the son by nature) as
once he did between Adam and Eve, and settle both worlds upon them, as he did
the first upon Adam, how can it be but that the estate will be very rich, and
every way full? And that will appear yet further to you, if you consider the
last things, viz. The privileges and properties thereof.

spiritual estare, it lies not here in the dirt, For the privileges.
as Adams first estate did, it lies in light, Acts 26. it undefiled, Acts 26.23.
as Peter speaks. And upon that account the more excellent, because it is so
spiritual; ^ Pet. 1.4.
for, of things, spirituals in their natures, are best, as most nearly
approaching the best of all.

free estate, a created senure whereto none can pretend, free from all
encumbrances, all forfeitures, decays, impositions, endowed with all
immunities: here is freedom from the Law, in its rigor, curse, irritation,
sting; though it remain in its directive, and detective, and corrective use,
yet its destructive power is taken away; there is no condemnation, says the
Text. Freedom from wrath, Satan, sting of conscience; in a word, from all
bondage. We were indeed formerly in a state of vassallage, but the Son makes us
free, John 8. Joh. 3.36.


Thirdly, it is a full estate; in Christ complete, Col. 2. Yea, Col. 2.10.
with the Son God gives us all, Romans 8.32.
Romans 8. all things are ours, all persons ours, because Christ is ours, and
Christ is Gods, 2 Cor. 3 ult.

It is a firm estate. All is everlasting, We shall speed as he and the Father
speed, Joh. 17. Now the Son abides for ever, and the Daughter abides for ever,
the estate dies to neither, and neither to other. We are heirs as of the
things promised, so of the promises themselves, Gal. 3. ult. estate, and
writings are all made over to us: by Christ we have right to all; in and with
Christ, we are in the possession of all, in his right, and in our name, livery
and seisin are given and taken. Thus you see the state.

us, us beggars, us bankrupts, us traytrours? I can give you none other then
what the Apostle has given me, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 2 Thessalonians. 1.12.
the motive is, mere grace in God through Christ; the end, that Christ may be
glorified in us his body, and the fullness of him, who is the fullness of all,
Ephesians. 1. ult. and to be admired by us to all eternity. Or, if you will have it
in Christ's own words; Luke 12.32.
Is is the Fathers pleasure to give this estate, which is sometimes called an
Inheritance, sometimes a Kingdom, a glorious kingdom, an heavenly kingdom;
Gods kingdom; Christ's kingdom; The Saints kingdom. We will say no more at
present, though much more might be said tonching the excellency of this estate
in the immunities and prerogatives thereof. We come to Application.

To be happy, come to Christ.
For those who never yet closed with Christ, these must be exhorted, as they
love themselves, to come to First, the necessity of so doing, Not only in
regard of his precept, Come to me, all ye that are heavy laden, etc. but in
order to themselves; for, no Christ, no inheritance, Gal. 4.28. Without Christ
no life. They dye in their sins: he that has, says John, the Son he has life
only, he that has not the Son, has no life, 1 John 5.12. He is the Ark,
without which there is nothing but death; he is the City of refuge; you dye, if
you fly not thither. Adam leaves you under sin, sin calls for Justice, and
Justice will pursue you to the Gates of that City. Other remedy there is none,
the second Adam was only able to remove the hurtfulnesse of the first. There
must be Adam for Adam, as there was serpent for serpent in the wilderness,
covenant for covenant, grace for grace. I know some men talk of another passage
discovered, and opened to heaven: But as Paul said in another case, though
there be Gods many, and Lords many, yet to us there is but one: to us in the
word; to us in this Hemisphere of the Gospel there is but one way made known,
one Lord, one Jesus, one living way; and in this sense also living as well as
in others, that it never dies or changes. What secret ways the Lord is
pleased to betake himself unto, we are not to inquire into; our rule of faith
is not Gods prerogative, but his will revealed in the word. Let us submit to
this rule, and suffer our selves to be convinced by the Gospel, that there is
nothing but sin, and guilt, and death, and slavery, and hell, out of Christ,
but he alone is our life, our way, our truth. If we come to him, he casts out
no man; if we come not, we cast away our selves.

possibility of recovering our selves, and our estate, if we come to him.
Herein man in his lost estate is beyond Devils. Christ has made him capable of
Salvation. He came on purpose to recover him lost, to redeem him sold, and
forfeited; and by the Gospel to bring again to light, what was banished and
buried, to wit, life and immortality. That Is his business, and hereunto he is
all-sufficient, perfectly able, as the Apostle says, Heb. 7.25.
to save to the worlds end, all that come to him. There is no stay on his part,
if any thing hinder, it is from us.



not want of Can, but want of Will, at least it is a wilful imporency, as
Christ lays the charge, You will not come to me, that you might have life,
Joh. 5.40. You will not says he, there is the misery; you will not come that
you may have life, I offer life to your dead souls, you will not receive it.



Joh. 5.25. as he did the dead body, by the touch of the Prophets bones.



woman of Samaria did, and this may thou too. And if thou will suffer thy
self to be drawn thus by these cords of love, Christ will in no wise cast thee
off. For all that the Father gives me, shall come to me, says Christ, Joh.
6.37. And for my part, I came to do my Fathers will, v. 38. And my Fathers will
is this, that I should lose none, v. 39. but give life to all that so come, v.
40.

certainty of speeding if we do come; the estate is already purchased and
settled, writings sealed, and proclamation made to all; Of. 55.1. Rev. 22.17.
Ho! every one that thirsts come and drink sreely. It was Christ's very errand
to bring us in again; he still employes his messengers, and invites us saying,
Come, all things are prepared. He offers marriage with us upon easy terms;
your foreskins will be dowry enough, as Saul said to his Son in law; therefore
come and make no more doubts; I say to thee, as they said to the blind man, Be
of good comfort, arise, he calls thee. Cast away thy rags as he did, and
speed as he did, who immediately received sight, Mark. 10.49. etc.



David did in his case, do as Abigail did with David himself, David wooes her,
she is sensible of her distance, and acknowledges her unworthiness, but yet
she followed the call, accepted the motion, and it proved a match.

Adam, I could promise to my self as much good from this Adam, as I have
received hurt from the other. But now there lie shrewd blocks in my way, first,
this doctrine of particular election does much discourage me.

certainly be saved, then that it is uncertain, whether any at all shall be
saved: for thus runs the doctrine, touching general redemption and general
(if you will speak contradiction) election, viz. Notwithstanding Christ's death
and price paid, salvation is suspended upon man's choice, and it is uncertain
what choice he will make.

Object. Yea, but if we descend to particulars there is no particular word
given out to me.

Sol. Neither is there any particular bar or caveat put in against thee, be
thou Jew or Gentile, Bond or Free, Traitor or Felon, all is one in this case.
There is no exception lies against thy nation, thy condition, thy person in
particular. And as to that particular of Election, thou may have far better
assurance, that thou art elected, then that thou art not.





person, for so it must be in this marriage. Encouragement to match with Christ.
There must be person to person, not person only to the estate; and for thy
further encouragement, take notice what the Gospel offers.

Lord our righteousness. The great redcemer, the mighty deliverer, who comes
Authorized out of Zion to turn away ungodliness from Jacob, Romans 11.26.

Secondly, for the parties delivered, Luke 4.18. So that if thou be lost
enough, poor enough, bad enough, deep enough in hell, the Savior is sent to
thee.

Thirdly, for the means where Judah's Ring and Staff, though no arguments of
Thamars goodness, yet evidences good against Judah.

Fourthly, for the Terms, they None but Christ, J. Lambert.
no husband but Christ, no portion but Christ, none other Lawgiver, Prophet,
King, but Christ alone. Secondly, receive as sole, so whole Christ, to all
intents, and purposes of Salvation. Make him thy ruling Christ, as well as thy
redeeming Christ; he becomes author of Salvation to them that obey him, Heb.
5.9. Give up thy self wholly to be ruled by him, take him for better and for
worse, and the bargain is made. The estate passes with the person, our broken
estate sals to Christ, he stands engaged to all our debts, and his full estate
becomes ours, all his privileges are made over to us, as were Adams
encumbrances. Now then since you are all for good estates, good tenures, clear
titles, labor to be thus instated in Christ's estate, and say as she, Give me
children or else I dye, so Lord give me Christ or else I dye: and as Abraham
once, What does all this avail me, if I have no heir of mine own? so think
thou, what will all the riches, and titles, Believers should keep close to
Christ.
and accommodations in the world avail me, if I have never a Christ? and this
the first use.

For such as are already come home to Christ; Keep you well whilst you are
well, we smart yet for our first fall, though through grace there is some
remedy provided against that; but take heed of a second, if we fall from the
second Adam, there is no more sacrifice, nor sacrisicer, no new word of
Salvation, no new Christ; God has said, and done all that he means to do in
order to Salvation by his Son, Heb. 1.1. Hereupon it is, that our Savior in
the Gospel, and his Apostles in their Doctrines and Epistles, drive mainly at
perseverance in the faith once given, and call thick upon us, for persisting
therein, for standing fast, for standing out, for overcoming and continuing to
the end, in this blessed estate of grace; wherein now we stand; and labor
nothing more then to take us off, from all other Christ's, Gospels, Doctrines,
ways, estates; it is the main drift of all or most of the Epistles. For well
did they see that a continuance was as necessary as an entrance; they well knew
our unsteadinesse and fickleness, and how licorish our nature is after
novelties; nor were they ignorant of Satan's wiles, of perilous times to come,
and therefore have they given us so frequent, and so loud warnings. Now beloved
seeing you know these things beforehand, beware that you be not drawn away
from your own stedfastness, 2 Pet. ult. Rather grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of Christ, and herein be so much the more serious, by how much the
more busy the tempter and his agents be. Let me tell you all the Doctrines of
later Editions drive mostly at this, to wrest you from this estate in Christ,
and to create and establish another title and tenure. Hence those new ways of
happiness without Christ. Hence the revivall of our cracked title in Adam,
hence the denial of Christ's purchase, hence the addition of joint purchasers
with him, hence the adding of more strings to our bow, and the superadding of
our righteousness to Christ's ad corroborandum, yea and the depositing of all
the evidences and assurances with our selves. Look to your standing, and be
true to your colors, Christ has bought you to himself, and has listed you
into his service, betray not his right, who will never, never, never, as he
says Heb. 13. desert you, if you flinch not from him: you know in whom you
have believed, continue in the faith of Jesus, as you have been taught the
truth in him. Abide in the communion of Christ, in the grace of Christ, in the
power of Christ, find all your hopes, joys, life, safety, and subsistence in
him alone, fetch all your strength and life from him, nothing from any other,
hold all of him, fly to no other title, ascribe all to him, and, in a word,
owe to him, and to him only, all wisdom, righteousness, sanctification,
redemption, salvation: whole Christ, or no Christ.

Get children into this good estate.
Having secured our own estate in Christ, let us cast (in the next place) for
our friends, especialy children. Worldly men, who see no higher then the earth,
will travel with their children, whilst they labor under an evil estate
world-ward. If a child be in depth or in prison, they will put under some
rags, to pull out their Jeremy where he sticks. This is no more then they
will do, nay, then we should all do, for an enemy; nay, Exodus 23.5.
for an enemies beast, Exodus 23.5. Therefore as Saul bestirred himself for his
countrymen, Moses for his, nay, David for his sheep, when invaded; so must we
much more for children thus ingulphed, and the rather, because we have been
isntrumental in their misery. In the Law, the slave was to have his liberty
for his eye spoiled: We have put out the eyes of children, and must endeavor in
way of recompense their liberty; and as in case of Justice, there was
heretofore allotted eye for eye, tooth for tooth, etc. So now in mercy and
justice both, we must labor to restore to our undone children eye for eye,
hand for hand, soul and body, for body and soul. But how can this be done?
however it speed, this must be our endeavor, and rest we must not, till we have
done our utmost to repair their estates. This is the common and constant care
of all Parents, to see their children settled somewhere in some estate, and the
quieter, and fuller it is, the more the heart of Parents is satisfied: now it is
certain, that there is no comfortable, no secure estate, till they come to be
stated in Christ.

But they are so already, Christians they are so soon as Baptized. Obsject.


Sol. Sacramentally they are so, and that should encourage us the more, because
God is so far beforehand with us and them: but we must not rest here;
Outward Baptism, is no more then was outward Circumcision, which was nothing
without the new creature; when Christ is formed in thy children when thou see
in them, the eye of Christ, the mouth, and heart of Christ, Christ's Image drawn
quite over them, then are they safe and thou happy; till then thy fears and
cares, (if thou have either, for their souls) are endless, and all thy pains
and cost, are lost upon them, if they be lost. And how this may be done.
But still the question is, what can I do to bring in children:



Sol. Do? do what is incumbent upon thee to do.

First, bring them to Christ in the Baptism, there mourn for that cursed
condition, which thou have brought upon them: pray that God would baptize them
with water and the Holy Ghost.

Next, as they grow up, so teach use of Baptism, and the nature of that
Covenant, whereof that is a seal.

Esau amongst them, yet ordinarily some either in the first or next generation,
prove good: however, this is the best service thou can do to God the best
thanks thou can return to Christ, the best work thou cast perform to the
Church and Ministry, the greatest mercy thou can show to thy posterity, the
wisest way thou can take for thy self: so shall thou engage their hearts more
to thee, Mal. ult. so thou shall more comfortably dye, when thou see them
thus placed with, and matched to, Christ. A poor man may possibly prefer his
child by a good match, none like to this of marrying them to Christ. Since then
a way not only of recovery but of preferment is found out, be not wanting to
God, to Christ, to the Public, to your selves here, to your posterity
hereafter; if they may be happy, leave them not miserable; if they may be found
in Christ, leave them not in Satan, in hell.

Douple instruction.
If this state in Christ be so happy, when we are thus united to him by
vocation, and hold communion with him through justification and sanctification,
and receive perpetual influence and supportance from him, then infer hence
two things.

Beware how we slight so great a Slight not so reat a privilege in others.
Is any a Saint and member in Christ? acknowledge Christ in him, receive him
though in some things differing from us, and in many things inferior to us:
have not the glorious faith of Christ in respect of persons. If Christ be not
ashamed to call them Brethren, Heb. 2. If God be not ashamed to call them
children, Heb. 11.16. why should we be coy of their acquaintance? Think the
same of every faithful Preacher. If Christ own him as his Ambassador, and
gives him the title of the Glory of Christ, why should we slight any such,
because of some differences or infirmities? I go further, If any Church or
society of Christians be in Christ, why should not we look upon them as Paul
did? Grace and peace, says he, be unto the Churches at Thessalonica and
elsewhere, which are in God the Father and in Christ the Savior. Doubtless
the Church of Thessalonica, and at Corinth had their blemishes, errors in some
doctrinals, failings not a few in practicals, yet because they were Churches in
Christ, the Apostle ownes and honors them. The Churches of Galatia were much
declined, yet Paul and the Brethren with him, look upon them as Churches of
Christ. The seven Churches of Asia wanted no faults, and those of no ordinary
alloy, yet are they Golden Candlesticks in Christ's eye, and such as he
conversed withal. And if so, why should we separate from them; or bring up an
ill report of any of them?

is, about the state and constitution of our Churches, if that be
Antichristian, what communion then with Christ?

First, what a grievous thing it is to misname, or misvalue any estate in
Christ. Secondly, whether you dare say, that none of our Churches, or of like
community be in Christ. Study I beseech you, what states a Saint or Church in
Christ, and what nullifies or forfeits that state. Try whether you cannot find
some footsteps of Christ, some Seals of his Ministry amongst us, and if so,
why may not that house and habitation please us that pleases him? why may not
we dwell, where Christ is pleased to dwell? Object not, thousands of failings;
the question is, whether we have a true being in Christ, and if he be amongst
us as head, and root, why should not his be acknowledged members, and branches?

But how can we partake with such, but we shall be partakers of their sins?

Temple, and at Temple Services, amidst the Pharisees, and other Doctors, yet
no way partaker of their errors and abuses: he inwardly distasted them, and
outwardly discountenanced them; do thou the like, and then thy presence (being
only Local, not Moral) does not fetch thee within a guilt.

Object. Oh but we have no power to censure and whip out offenders as Christ
did.

Sol. Consider first, whether any such power be due to us. Secondly, whether we
may take it up of our selves. Thirdly, whether the abuses are such, and so
malignant, as that they will warrant a forsaking of the assemblies. So long as
Christ is there, what fear of being member of that body, which has Christ for
its head?



Answ. That Is an high charge: be sure of thy grounds, before thou layest such
an aspersion upon a society which bears the face of a Church: in judging
rashly thou may possibly sin against the generation of the righteous,
therefore consult, and consider, and then give sentence; for clear it is, that
as we must not partake in sin, nor join ourselves to Harlots, so neither must
we be more strict, and severe then Christ himself: therefore drive things to an
issue; this or that Church so called, either is, or is not in Christ. If not in
Christ, we have nothing to say for it, out of Christ, there is nothing but
death and darkness; If in Christ, it is true it may be, there may be just cause
of mourning, great need of reforming, but when we have done all that l^es
within our power and calling to do, whether then there be ground for a divorce
and desertion, think thou of that: and think advisedly, lest thou condemn
where Christ says, there is no condemnation.

Secondly, let not this consolation Comfort to them that are in. Christ
that we are taken into such an estate. Say, though poor as to the world, say,
a scorn of men, a slave to men, be thy estate as bad as Malice can make it, or
Fancy conceive it, yet if thou be in Christ, thou art in a blessed condition.
Time will not now give, to spread before thee the particulars of this estate;
how unworthy thou wast of it, how freely, and yet how dearly it cost thy
Redeemer, what an infinite gulf and distance there is betwixt thy former, and
this renewed estate; work these things upon thine own heart in private: say,
once I was a slave, now free; once Satan's, now Gods; once an enemy, now a
child; once a limb of Adam, worthy to be hanged up as a traitors quarters,
now a piece of Christ; once cursed, now under blessing; once for hell, now an
^eire of heaven; once a damned creature, now there is no condemation; once
death was terrible, the grave dreadful, but now in Christ, I am more then a
Conqueror. To be under Christ, is a great privilege, he is the Tabernacle of
many coverings to shelter us, and our hiding place; but to be in him, to be
made one spirit with him, And how this may be known.
is to be as high, and as safe as we can be, and therefore enjoy that privilege.



The Word tells thee, He that is in Christ is a new creature, Sol. 1.
old things are passed, the old man crucified, Cor. 5.17.
2 Cor. 5. the old husband buried, Romans 7. ac^ princip.
Romans 7. old lusts mortified, the old world dead to us and we to it, Gal. 5.25.
Gal. 2. and 5. Chapters, and we redeemed from our old conversation, 1 Pet.
1.18. Our old guides and leaders cashiered, 1 Pet. 4.2. Ephesians. 2.2. --. Secondly,
All things are become new, a new mind, a new understanding, a new heart, a new
nature throughout, a new creation to all good works, Ephesians. 2.10. The Holy Ghost
forms whole Christ in us, the mind of Christ, the heart of Christ the tongue
of Christ, whole Christ; we are under a new guide, the Spirit of God, (here
Romans 8.2.) gives Laws, we are led by the Spirit, and walk in that Spirit, Gal.
5. It Is true, Gal 5.2 7.
the flesh sometimes transports, and commits a rape upon us, but the Spirit is
the guide and guardian of choice -- Thirdly, a new aim, and end in all, as
Christ did not please himself, Romans 15.3. but sought the public good, so is it
with his members in their measure. Briefly, all is made new, new hopes, new
joys, new fears, new delights, new desires, all new, all eyeing Christ.

Joh. 15.5.
Joh. 15. Christ has no useless member, every one does its' office, bears
fruit, its own fruit, in its own season, and bears all to Christ; find thy self
thus renewed, thus pruned and made fruitful to an increase of fruitfulness,
then we can tell thee that to thee there is no condemnation, no bondage, no
curse, no hurt, no hell: nay, we can say more then so, then all persons are
thine, all things thine, all times thine, all estates thine, because Christ is
thine, 1 Cor. 3.22.

Object. But I have many objection^ against all this.

Sol. Like enough so; the Apostle foresaw that, and has prevented thee in
this, and the foregoing Chapters: for instance; I am a child, say thou, of
Adams.

Sol. Thou art so by nature, but by the grace of Adoption in Christ thou art a
child of God.

Object. But I am a captive to sin.

Sol. A captive of sin rather then to it: sin surpriseth thee, but fore against
thy will: Thou cryest for help, Oh wretched man! who will resoue me?



there is no condemnation; that sin, says Paul, is not thine, though in thee.



all shall work for thy good in the close, and thou shall find it so.



helps our infirmities, and utters it self, when we cannot utter our selves.



It Is God, says the Apostle, that justifies, and who then shall condemn? it
is Christ that appears for us, who dares appear against us? it is Christ that
has killed death, buried the grave, cowed Satan, overcome all, and who then
shall stand up against us?



Apostle has said all, neither life, nor death, nor Angels, nor devils, nor
persons, nor things present, or to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
creature one or other shall be ever able to separate us from Gods love, which
is in our Christ and Lord.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
B.
BEllarmine confuted. p. 113
C.
A Sinful change in fallen man. p. 24. and seqq. The nature of this change. p.
27 Extent and causes of it, p. 29. and seqq. Comfort amidst our great folly. p.
71 Condemnation what it imports. p. 115 To be in Christ, what? p. 117 Saints in
Christ, are in a happy estate. p. 118. wherein it consists. p. 119 and seqq.
Come to Christ motives. p. 126. and seqq. Objections against it answered. p.
128 What we must do to come to Christ. p. 132. and seqq, Keep close to Christ.
p. 135 Get your children into this happy estate. p. 137 How this may be done.
p. 139 Slight none that are in Christ. p. 141 Comfort to those that are in
Christ. p. How to know whether we be in Christ. p. Objections against it
answered. p.
D.
Man's undoing from his non-dependence on God. 5 Reas. p. 76 Three sorts of men
not depending on God. p. 85 When a man depends upon God. p. 92 Observe the
difference of man's estates. p. 34 The steps of man's downfall, p. 80. the great
evil of it. p. 83
E.
OBserve the difference of man's Estates. p. 34 How some endevor to confound
them. p. ibid. See first.
F.
BE humbled to consider, from whence we are fallen. p. 18 Why God did not put
us past danger of falling. p. 23. A sinful change in man fallen. p. 24. Time
of man's fall. p. 25. Be humbled for our fall into sin. Reas. p. 37. and seqq.
How to recover our fall. p. 45 Be well grounded in the knowledge of our first
estate. p. 10. Principles to be known concerning it. ibid. Answer to Socinian,
and Popish cavile about it. p. 11. To the cavils of carnal men. p. 16. Be
thank full for our first estate, and that which is left of it. p. 23
G.
GOd not the Author of sin. p. 59
H.
HAbitual corruption, the second part of the first sin. p. 41 Saints in Christ
happy. p. 118. comparatively. p. 119. positively wherein this happiness
consists. p. 121 Reas. p. 125 To be happy come to Christ, p. 126 Be humbled to
consider, whence you are fallen. p. 18 Humiliation wherein it consists. p. 43
Carry our selves humbly. p 72
I.
Justify God in all his ways. p. 15 Inventions diversely translated. p. 96
Inventions to be avoided, p. 107
K.
BE well grounded in the knowledge our first estate. p. 10. See first-estate.
M.
MAn at first an excellent creature, p. 2 Man's several causes. p. 5. Man loose
from God restless in his ways. p. 97 The matter whereof he was made derogates
not from his excellency. p. 9 Gods mercy to be admired, who is yet ready to
receive us. p. 68 Gods mercy to man, who departed from him. 93.
P.
PIty our children. p. 103
R.
REpent, and let God be all again. p. 84 Man once loose from God restless in
his ways. p. 97. Reas. p. 100. Bewail this rest lesnesse, which discovers it
self in all passages of our life. 101 pity it in our children. p. 103 What
return we should make to God. p. 70
S.
AGainst Separation. p. 142. and seqq Be humbled chiefly for the first sin, and
why. p. 39. The second part of the first sin. p. 41 Man's sin from himself, p.
50. proved and objections answered. ib. and seqq. Charge sin on our selves not
others. p. 57 God not the Father of sin. p. 59. To remove sin, begin at our
selves. p. 63 What unregenerate men are to do, what regenerate. p 64. Answer
to Socinian cavils. p. 11
T.
TIme of man's fall. p. 25.26
W.
Follow Gods Word, not our owninventions. p. 105. Gods way plain and easy. p.
ibid. Gods mercy to stop our wanderings p. 109
FINIS.
Good Reader, be pleased to mend with thy pen, these few faults escaped in the
ensuing discourse.

PAge 14. l. 14. in the margin leave out Object. page 31. l. 5. r.
accomplished, p. 37. l. 25. for least r. less, p. 38. l. 14. dele we, p. 41.
l. 2. in the margin, leave out why, p. 41. l. 1. at is, p. 43. for I. r. yea,
p. 61. put out not in the margent, p 82. l. 4. for then, r. them, p. 103. l.
13. r. shift, p. 105. l. 13. r. fetched. In p. 108. l. 22. for with. r. that,
ibid. l. 25. put out and next, r. yea shut p. 109, l. 6. r. rejected. p. 110.
l. 6. after what, leave out, p. 114. l. 22. for ruits, r. root, p. 116. l. 13.
after and r. he that makes it might, ib. last line save one, r. a falsehood, p.
117. l. 7. in the margin, put question, p. 118. l. last, r. as our former
estate was.


