THE STUMBLING BLOCK OF DISOBEDIENCE and REBELLION Cunningly imputed by P. H.
unto CALVIN, removed in a Letter to the said P. H. from I. H.
Let no man put a Stumbling Block in his brothers way, Romans 14. 13.
Sir,
I Gave my judgment upon your late book (that I mean against Calvin) in such
manner among some Gentlemen, that they desired me to write something in Answer
to it, which if there happen to be need I may; In the mean time it will,
perhaps, be enough if I acquaint you with as much as I have acquainted them. In
this book of yours you speak some things as a Politician only, others as a
Politician and a Divine too. Now to repeat a few, and yet as many I think as
are needful of each kind, I shall begin with the former.

The Rise, Progress, and Period of the Commonwealth of Lacedemon is observable
in Authors by these steps,

1. The Insufficiency of the Monarchy.

2. The Form of the Commonwealth.

3. An Infirmity in the Form, and a cure of it.

4. The Corruption and Dissolution of the whole.

All which happened within the compass of eight hundred years.

To the first you say, p. 39, 40, 41
That the Spartan Kings were as absolute Monarchs as any in those times, till
Eurytion, or Eurypon, to procure the favor and good will of the Rascall-rabble
( so you commonly call the people) purchased nothing but the loss of Royalty,
beside an empty name unto his Family, thence called the Eurypontidae.

It is true that Plutarch in the Life of Lycurgus says, That Eurypon was the
first, who to obtain favor with the people, let loose the reins of Government,
and this he says there without showing any necessity that lay upon the King so
to do; nevertheless that such necessity there was is apparent in Agis, where he
affirms, That a King of Lacedemon could never come to be equal unto any other
King, but only by introducing Equality among the people; forasmuch as a servant
or Lieutenant of Seleucus, or Ptolomy, was worth more then ever were all the
Kings of Sparta put together. Which latter speech if a man consider the
narrowness of the Laconick Territory, being but a part of Peloponnesus, must
needs evince the former action to have been not so voluntary in Eurypon, as in
prudence unavoidable. But Eurypon having by this means rather confessed the
infirmity of the Monarchy, then introduced any cure of the Government, it
remained that the people not yet brought under fit Orders must needs remain in
disorderrs as they did till the institution of the Commonwealth.

The Monarchy that is or can be absolute, must be founded upon an Army planted
by Military Colonys upon the overballance of Land being in dominion of the
Prince; and in this case there can neither be a Nobility, nor a People to
gratify, at least without shaking the foundation, or disobliging the Army.
Wherefore the Spartan Kings having a Nobility or People to gratify, were not
absolute. It is true, you call the Kings of France absolute, so do others, but
it is known that in the whole world there is not a Nobility nor a People so
frequently flying out or taking Arms against their Princes as the Nobility and
People of France.

The Monarch that is founded upon a Nobility, or a Nobility and the people (as
by the rise and progress of the Norman line in our story is apparently
necessary) must gratify the Nobility or the Nobility and the people with such
Laws and liberties as are fit for them, or the government (as we have known by
Experience, is found in France, and no doubt was seen by Eurypon) becomes
Tyrannical, be the Prince otherwise never so good a Man.

Thus Carilaus in whose Reign the Commonwealth was instituted by Lycurgus, is
generally affirmed to have been a good man, and yet said by Aristotle to have
been a Tyrant; it remains therefore with you to show how a good man can
otherwise be a Tyrant then by holding Monarchical government without a
sufficient balance, or if you please, how he that shall undertake the like, (be
he never so good or well deserving a man) can be any other; Or confess that
not the favor of Princes (by which if they be well balanced they lose nothing)
nor the usurpation of the people (by which without a popular balance they get
nothing) but the infirmity of the Monarchy caused the Common wealth of
Lacedemon, And what less is said by Plutarch, or thus rendered by your self; Not
the people only sent messages to Lycurgus for his counsel, but the Kings were
as desirous he should return from his travels, P. 41.
in hope that his presence would bridle and restrain the people; but Lycurgus
applied not himself unto either, being resolved to frame both into one
Commonwealth.

To the form of this Common Wealth, you say, P. 43.
That whatever the Kings lost, the people got little by this alteration, being
left out of all employment in affairs of state, and forced to yield obedience
unto Thirty Masters, whereas before they had but two.

A strange affirmation seeing the Oracle containing the model of Lacedemon is
thus recorded by your Author, When thou have divided the people into Tribes and
linages, thou shall establish the Senate, consisting with the two Kings of
thirty Senators, and assemble the people as there shall be occasion, where the
Senate shall propose and dismiss the people without suffering them to debate.
Now who sees not that the people having no right to debate, must therefore
have had the right to resolve, or else were to be assembled for nothing? but
the Ultimate result is the sovereign power in every government. It is true the
Greek of the Oracle is obsolete, and abstruse, but then it is not only
interpreted by Plutarch in the sense I have given, but by the Verses of the
Poet Tyrteus, which the Kings themselves, though they would have made other use
of, acknowledged unto the people to be Authentic* They having of Apollo sought,
This Oracle from Delphos brought;
Unto the Spartan Kings, among
The Senators, it does belong
To moderate in Royal Chairs,
And give their Votes in all Affairs;
And when they have proposed these,
The People chose what ere they please.


Of many other Testimonies, I shall add no more then one out of the Isocrates;
I am not ignorant (says he, to the Areopagites) that the Lacedaemonians
flourish for this cause especially, that their government is popular.

To the infirmity of this form, and the cure of it you say; That the Royalty
and power of the Kings being thus impaired, P. 45.
the people absolutely discharged from having any hand at all in public
government, and the Authority of the Senate growing every day more insolent and
predominant by reason that ( albeit the Senators were elected by the people)
they had their places for term of life, the Kings resolved upon a course of
putting the people into such a condition as might enable them to curb and
control the Senators, to which end they ordained the Ephori, Magistrates to be
annually chosen out of the body of the people.

In which first you make that to be a practice of the Kings against the Senate,
which by your Author is plain to have been a combination of the Kings, and the
Senate against the people; for the people upon the insolency and predominancy
of the Kings, and the Senate, fell, as is in that case, the inevitable nature
of them, upon counsel how to defend themselves, and so assumed the power of
debate. Hereupon the Kings Theopompus and Polidore would have added unto the
tenor of the Oracle, that if the people went about by debate to change the
propositions of the Senate, it should be lawful for the Kings and the Senate to
null the result of the people; which practice if it had past, must have made
the Kings and the Senate altogether uncontrollable; wherefore the people
incensed at it, put a bitt into the mouth of the Senate, by the institution of
the Ephori: This is the clear sense of Plutarch, which he takes out of Plato,
De Leg. 3.
who affirms the Ephorate to have been set up against the hereditary power of
the Kings; with whom agree both Aristotle and Cicero; Pol. lib. 2.
the former affirming this Magistracy to contain the whole Common Wealth,
inasmuch as the people having obtained it, were quiet; and the later that the
Ephori in Lacedemon were so opposed to the Kings, De Leg 3^
as the Tribunes in Rome to the Consuls. Now if other Authors attribute the
institution of the Ephori unto the Kings, and there be a story affirmed as well
by Plutarch as others, that Theopompus having thus created the Ephori, and
being told by his Queen he had done that which would leave narrower power to
his children, answered well, that it would leave that which would be narrower,
but longer: This is neither any Riddle nor kind of contradiction to the former
sense: Seeing, when we say that Henry the Third instituted the Parliament to be
assistant to him in his government, we no more doubt of that, then how it is to
be understood. Nor if his Queen had said as she of Lacedemon, and our King had
made the like answer, would that have altered any thing, or proved the woman to
have been, (as you will have it) the better Prophet, seeing either Government
lasted longer for either reformation, nor came to alter, but through the
alteration of the balance, which was nothing to the woman's prophecy.

The ruin of this Balance, and corruption of the Common wealth, you wholly
omit to the end, that picking up your objections against the Government in
vigor, out of the rubbish and dissolution of it, you may cast dust in men's
eyes, or persuade them that the Ephori trusting to the power and interest, P.
55.
they had in the Communalty, came to usurp upon the Kings, and to be Tyrants as
they are called by Plato and Aristotle, so you affirm.

But the truth is thus recorded by Plutarch in the life of Agis. So soon as the
Lacedemmoans having ruined Athens, became full of gold and silver, the Common
wealth began to break; Nevertheless, the lots or division of lands made by
Lycurgus yet remaining, the Equality of the foundation held good, till
Epitadeus an ill-natured fellow became Ephore, and having a mind to dis-inherit
his son, got a Law to pass whereby any man might dispose of his lot as he
pleased: This by him pursued of meet malice to his son, was hurried on by the
avarice of others, whose riches came thus to eat the people so clearly out of
their lands, that in a short time there remained not above an hundred
Freeholders in all Sparta. This he shows to have been the rise of the
Oligarchy: The Oligarchy thus balanced totally excluded the people, and
murdered Agis, the first King that was ever put to death by the Ephori; and to
these times (about which Plato and Aristotle lived) relates that Tyranny,
which they who (as was shown) commended the Ephorate in the Common wealth, now
laid unto it in Oligarchy: Thus have you fetched arguments against a Common
wealth, that are nothing to it. Again, whereas Agis and Cleomenes, by the
restitution of the lots of Lycurgus were assertors of popular power, you
insinuate them to have been assertors of Monarchy; such is your play with
humane Authors, or as a politician. Now let us see, whether you have dealt any
thing better with Scripture, or been more careful as a Divine. In order to this
Discovery, I shall repeat that piece of Calvin, which you call the stumbing
block of disobedience. Calvin having preached obedience to your good
approbation comes at length to this expression. But still I must be understood
of private persons; for if there be now any popular officers ordained to
moderate the licentiousness of Kings (such as were the Ephori, Calv. Inst. lib.
c. 20.. 31.
set up of old against the Kings of Sparta, the Tribunes of the people against
the Roman Consuls, and the Demarches against the Athenian Senate, of which
power perhaps as the world now goes, the three estates are seized in each
several Kingdom when solemnly assembled) so far am I from hindering them to put
restraints upon the exorbitant power of Kings, as their office binds them, that
I conceive them rather to be guilty of perfidious dissimulation, if they
connive at Kings when they play the Tyrants, or wantonly insult on the people;
in that so doing they betray the liberty of the subject, of which they know
themselves to be made Guardians by Gods own ordinance.

What Calvin says of the Athenian Demarches, they having been Magistrates of
another nature, is a mistake, but such an one, as destroys no other part of
his assertion, the rest of the Parenthesis, or that which he says of the
Ephori, and the Tribunes being confirmed as has been already shown by Plato
and Aristotle, by Cicero and Plutarch. Wherefore of the Ephori and the Tribunes
enough; now why the estates in a Gothic Model should be of less power, no
Politician in the world shall ever show a reason; the estates are such by
virtue of their estates, that is of their overbalance in dominion, you are
then either speculatively to show how the overbalance of dominion should not
amount unto Empire, or practically that the overbalance of dominion has not
amounted unto Empire, and that in a quiet Government, or it can be no otherwise
in a quiet Government, then that the overbalance of dominion must amount unto
Empire. This principle being now sufficiently known, is the cause it may be why
you choose in this place to speak rather like a Divine, P. 290.
as you suppose, then a Politician. For you would fain learn, you say, of
Calvin, in what part of the Word of God we shall find any such Authority given
to such popular Magistrates, as he tells us of.

To which by the way I answer, That God founded the Israelitish Government upon
a popular balance, that we find the people of Israel judging the tribe of
Benjamin, and by the Oracle of God, levying War against them, which are acts of
Sovereign power, therefore a popular balance, even by the ordinance of God
himself expressed in Scripture, Judge. 20*
amounted unto Empire.

But you, when you have asked in what part of the Word of God we shall find any
such Authority given to popular Magistrates; P. 290,
answer, Not in the Old Testament you are sure. For when Moses first ordained
the Seventy Elders, it was not to diminish any part of that power which was
invested in him, but to ease himself of some part of the burden lying upon
him, as you will have to appear plainly by the 18th of Exodus, where Moses upon
the advice of Jethro chose able men out of all Israel, and made them Rulers of
Thousands, Rulers of Hundreds, Rulers of Fifties, and Rulers of Tens. Now I am
sure that about this time the number of the men of Israel was above six hundred
thousand, Number. 1. 46.
and so any man may be sure that the elders thus chosen (should we count but
the Rulers of the thousands only) must have come at the least to six hundred,
wherefore, you cannot be sure that this makes any thing to the election of the
seventy elders.

Well, but out of these (say you) God afterward in the Eleventh of Numbers,
willed Moses to choose the seventy Elders.

You may do me a greater favor then you can suddenly imagine, to tell me
really for what cause, or upon what authority your speech is so positive, that
God willed Moses to choose the seventy Elders out of those that were chosen in
the Eighteenth of Exodus; For whereas Moses is willed to choose them out of
such as he knew to be elders, such there were in honor among the people,
though not in power before the election of those advised by Jethro, as appears.
Ex. 3^. 16. and 4. 29. But had this been as you would have it, what is the
necessity, that because there lay an appeal unto Moses from those in Exodus
(that is from the Jethronian Elders, or Courts which sat afterward in the
gates of the Temple, and of every City,) therefore there must needs lie an
appeal from the seventy Elders, or the Sanhedrim unto Moses, especially while
the whole stream of Jewish writers or Talmudists, (who should have had some
knowledge in their own Commonwealth) unanimously affirms that there was no such
thing? Whereupon to the election of the former Elders, Grotius ad Ex. 18. 21.
says Grotius, in the place of these came the Judges in the gates, and in the
place of Moses the Sanhedrim. Nor need we go farther than the Scripture, for
the certainty of this assertion, where the seventy are chosen not to stand
under Moses, but with him, Number. 11.
not to diminish his burden, or bear it under him, with an appeal in difficult
cases to him, as is expressed in the election of the Jethroinan Elders, but to
bear the burden with him, and without any mention of such appeal. Moses before
the election of the Jethronian Judges had the whole burden of Judicature lying
upon him, after their election, the burden of the appeals only, wherefore if
the seventy Elders were indeed instituted to bear the burden with Moses, there
thenceforth lay no appeal unto Moses, which is yet clearer in this precept,
Deuteronomy. 17. 8.
If there arise a matter of controversy within thy gates, (which plainly is
addressed to the Jethronian Courts) too hard for thee in judgment, then shall
thou come unto the Priest and the Levite (by which in the sense of all Authors
Jewish and Christian is understood the Sanhedrim), or to the Judge that shall be
in those days (the Suffes or Dictator) and they shall show thee the sentence
of Judgment; whence by the clear sense of Scripture, all matter of appeal in
Israel, lay unto the Sanhedrim. Your next Argument, that there must be nothing
in all this but easing the supreme Magistrate of some part of the burden,
which was before too heavy for him, P. 292.
without any diminution, in the least respect of his power; is, that when God
had taken of the Spirit which was upon Moses, and put it upon the seventy
Elders, the Spirit yet rested upon Moses in as full a measure as it did at
first: I grant in a fuller, for I believe his wisdom was the greater for this
diminution of his power, it being through the nature of the balance,
apparently impossible that he could be any more then a Prince in a
Commonwealth; but your argument can be of no force at all, unless you will
have him to have been less wise, for not assuming sovereign power, where
without confusion, it was altogether impossible he should have held it: A Pince
in a Commonwealth subsisteth by making himself, or being made of use unto the
free course of popular orders; but a sovereign Lord can have no other
subsistence or security, then by cutting off or tearing up all roots, that do
naturally shoot or spring up into such branches. To conclude, if the
Congregation of the people, in law to be made, had such power as was shown, and
in law, so made, the ultimate appeal lay unto the Sanhedrim; why, are not here
two estates in this Commonwealth, each by Gods own ordinance, and both plain
in Scripture? well, but when they came (you will say) to make unto themselves
Kings, what ever power they had formerly, was now loft. This at best were but
to dispute from the folly of a people against an ordinance of God, for what
less is testified by himself in those words to Samuel, 1 Samuel 8. 7.
They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me that I should not reign
over them. The Government of the Senate and the people, is that only which is
or can be the government of laws and not of men, and the government of laws*
and not of men, is the government of God and not of men: Arist pol. 3. c.
He that is for the government of laws, is for the government of God, and he
that is for the government of a man, is for the government of a beast. Kings,
no question, where the balance is monarchical, are of divine right, and if
they be good the greatest blessings that the government so standing can be
capable of; but the balance being popular, as in Israel, in the Grecian, in
the Sicilian Tyrannies, they are the direst curse that can befall a nation. Nor
are divines, who will always have them to be of divine right, to be hearkened
to, seeing they affirm that which is clean contrary to Scripture, for in this
case says Hosea, They have set up Kings and not by me, they have made Princes
and I knew it not. Pharaoh may impose the making of brick without the allowance
of straw, Hos. 8. 4.
but God never required of any man or of any government, that they should live
otherwise, then according to their estates. It is true if a man's want make him
a servant; there are rules in Scripture that enjoin him the duty of a servant:
But show me the rule in Scripture that obliges a man who can live of himself
unto the duty of a servant. Has God less regard unto a nation then to a man?
Yet the people of Israel, continuing upon a popular Agrarian, though God
forwarned them, that by this means they would make themselves servants, would
needs have a King; Hos. 13.
whence says the same Proph^t. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in
me is thine help, I will be thy King (which foretells the restitution of the
Commonwealth, for) where is any other that may save thee in all thy cities?
and thy Judges of whom thou said give me a King and Princes. I gave thee a
King in mine anger (that is in Saul) and I took him away in my wrath (that is
in the captivity, so at least says Rabbi B^chai, with whom agree Nachmoni,
Gerschome, and others. Kimchi, it is true, and Maimonides are of op^n^on, that
the people making a King, displeased God not in the matter, but in the form
only, as if the root of a tree, the balance of a government, were form only
and not matter: nor do our divines yet, who are divided into like partys, see
more then the Rabbys. Both the Royalists and the Common-wealthsmen of each
sort, that is whether divines or Talmudists appeal unto the letter of the law,
which the Royalists (as the Translators of our Bible) render thus; Deuteronomy. 17. 14.
When thou shall say (the Common-wealthsmen, as Diodati thus, If thou come to
say) I will set a King over me, like all the nations that are about me, thou
shall in any wise set him King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose.
The one party will have the law to be positive, the other contingent, and with
a mark of detestation upon it, for so where God speaks of his peoples doing
any thing like the nations that were about them it is every where else
understood. But let these (which are no nicities) be as you will; who sees not
that to argue from this place, for the necessity of the King, Verse 9.
is as if one from that foregoing should argue for the necessity of the Judges.
The words are these, Thou shall come unto the Priest and to the Levite (which,
as was said, is to the Sanhedrim) and (that is or) to the Judge that shall be in
those days. Yet that the Judge not by any necessity employed in these words, but
through the mere folly of the people came to be set up in Israel, is plain by
Josephus, Book 5. c. 2*
where he shows that the Israelites laying by their Arms. And betaking
themselves unto their pleasures, while they did uot as God had commanded, root
out the Canaanites from among them, but suffered them to dwell with them,
suffered also the form of their Commonwealth to be corrupted, and the Senate
to be broken; the Senators nor other solemn Magistrates being elected as
formerly; which both in word and fact is confirmed also by the Scripture. In
words, as where it is thus written. When Josua had let the people go (that is,
had dismissed the Army, and planted them upon their popular balance) the
children of Israel went every man unto his inheritance to possess the land,
Judge. 26.
and the people served the Lord all the days of Josua, and all the days of
the Elders that outlived Josua (that is, while the Sanhedrim continued after
him, but when the Elders hereof came to dye, and the people elected them no
successors) they did evil in the sight of the Lord (and having broken their
civil orders, forsook also their religion, the government whereof depended upon
the Sanhedrim) and served Balim. And for the matter of fact included in these
words, it farther appears, where Judah said unto Simeon his brother come up
with me into my Lot, Indg. 1. 3.
that we may fight against the Cananites, and I likewise will go with thee into
thy lot; so Simeon went with him. By which the tribes leaguing at their
pleasure one with another, it is plain, that the Sanhedrim their common
Ligament was broken: Now except a man shall say that this neglect of Gods
ordinance was according unto the law of God, Pacuvious apud Livium. lib. 23
there is no disputing from that law to the necessity of the judge, which
happened through no other then this exigence ( quippe aut rex, quod
abominandum, aut quod unuus liberae civitatis consilium est, senatus habendus
est) wherefore the judge of Israel was not necessitated by the will of God, but
foreseen only by his Providence, not imposed by the law, but provided by it as
an expedient in case of necessity, and if no more can be pleaded from the law,
for the judge against whom God never declared, much less is there to be pleaded
from the same for the King, against whom he declared so often. There is nothing
more clear nor certain in Scripture, then that the Commonwealth of Israel was
instituted by God, the judges and the Kings no otherwise then through the
imprudence and importunity of the people. But you who have no better name for
the people in a commonwealth, then the rascal rabble will have Kings at a
venture to be of divine right, and to be absolute; whereas in truth if divine
right be derived unto Kings from these of the Hebrews only, it is most apparent
that no absolute King can be of divine right: for these Kings if they were such
by the law alleged, then by the same law they could neither multiply horses
nor wives, nor silver, nor gold, without which no King can be absolute; but
were to keep all the words of this law and these statutes, and so by
consequence were regulated Monarchs; Dan. 17.
Nay, could of right enact no law, but as those by David for the reduction of
the Ark, for the regulation of the Priests, for the election of Solomon, which
were made by the suffrage of the people, no otherwise then those under the
Kings of Rome, and ours under the late Monarchy. What then is attributed by
Calvin unto popular Migistrates, that is not confirmed by Scripture and reason?
yet nothing will serve your turn but to know what power there was in the
Sanhedrim, to control their Kings: to which I answer, that both Skickardus and
Grotius with the full consent of the Talmudists have assured you, that in case
the King came to violate those laws and statutes it was in the power of the
Sanhedrim, to bring him unto corporal punishment. Moreover it is shown by the
later out of Josephus, De jure B. ac. p. Lib. 1. Cap. 1^
that Hircanus, when he could not deliver Herod from the Sanhedrim by power,
did it by art: Nor is your evasion so good as that of Hircanus, while you
having nothing to say to the contrary, but that Herod when he was questioned,
was no King, shufle over the business without taking any notice as to the point
in controversy, that Hireanus who could not save Herod from the question was
King.

The manner of the restitution of the Sanhedrim made by Jehoshaphat plainly
shows, 2 Chr. 19.
that even under the Monarchy the power of the Sanhedrim was coordinate with
that of the King, at least, such is the Judgment of the Jewish writers, for
says Grotius, the King (as is rightly noted by the Talmudists,) was not to
judge in some cases, Ad Mat. 5.
and to this the words of Zedekia seem to relate, where to the Sanhedrim
demanding the Prophet Jeremiah, Ier. 38. 5.
he said behold he is in your hands, for the King is not he that can do any
thing without you. Nor (except David) had ever any King ^^ssion or vote in this
council: to which soon after he adds, that this court continued till Herod the
great, whose insolency, when exalting it self more and more against the law,
the Senators had not in time as they ought, suppressed by their power; God
punished them in such manner for the neglect of their duty, that they came all
to be put to death by Herod, except Sameas only, whose foresight and frequent
warning of this or the like calamity they h^d as frequently con^emned. In which
words Gr^tius following the unanimous consent of the Talmudists (if they knew
anything of their own orders) expressly attributes the same power unto the
Sanhedrim, and charge them with the same duty in Israel, that is attributed
unto the three estates in a Gothic Model, and charged upon these by Calvin.

Thus that there never lay any appeal from the Sanhedrim, unto Moses nor
(except when the Jews were in captivity, or under provincial government) to any
other Magistrate, as also that they had power upon their Kings, being that your
self say, Is the objection Paramount, and which not answered, ^. 289.
you confess that the three estates coxvened in Parliament, or any other
popular Magistrate Calvin dreams of, notwithstanding (...) discontinuance; or
non usage on their parts, or any prescription alleged by Kings to the
contrary, may resume and exercise that Authority which God has given them when
ever they shall find a fit time for it: And this letter sh^wing plainly that
you have in no wise answered this objection; it remains that your whole book
(even according to your own acknowledgment,) is confuted by this Letter. Or if
you be of another mind, I shall hope to hear farther from you.

London, Printed for D. P^keman, at the Rainbow in Fleetstreet, 1658.


