SOME QUERIES Concerning the Election of Members For the Ensuing PARLIAMENT.
TOGETHER With a REPLY by way of QUERY to the same.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1690.

Some Queries concerning the Election of Members for the Ensuing Parliament.
1. WHether the King has not lately by Actions, as well as Promises, declared
himself for the Interest of the Church of England; and whether those
Republicans, who have always made it their business to libel Kings, can more
effectually abuse his present Majesty, than in traducing him as their Friend,
and in using, as heretofore, a King's Name against his Design and Interest?

2. Whether those are true to the Interest of that Church, who endeavored in
the last Session to incapacitate some of the best Members of it; and who were
so far from granting that Amnesty which the King desired and proposed, that
they carried their Fury back to more than one preceding Reign, and set aside
all Acts of Indemnity, but that, which most of them need, in the Year 1660?

3. Whether since the Dissenters do not now desire a Toleration for themselves,
which we have already granted, but openly threaten and pursue their Revenge on
us, it is not necessary that these apparent dangers, at least, should awaken us
out of our Lethargy; and whether the Negligence of the Church of England, which
on like occasions heretofore, was thought the result of Pity and good Nature,
would not now be esteemed the Effect of Cowardice and Stupidity?

4. Whether those Gentlemen of the Sword, who have Offices in Ireland, would
not be better employed in a Council of War than a Senate House? Whether, if
they think it convenient, it would not be proper for them to make one Visit to
the Remains of their Regiments there, and to contribute by some other means to
the Reducing that Kingdom, than by giving Taxes?

5. Whether those restless Phanaticks, who have been bred up in Rebellion, and
have always since been active Promoters of Sedition, ought not in conscience to
desist now, and to be contented with the single glory of having once ruined
this Kingdom?

6. Whether those Worthy Gentlemen have been justly exposed, in a late impudent
Pamphlet, that were more hasty for sending a speedy Relief into Ireland, See a
List of those that were for the Regency 1690. Land.
than for changing the Right of Succession in an Hereditary Kingdom; and
whether they may not possibly deserve a place again in the House, though they
thought it more expedient for this Nation to beat K. James out of that One
Kingdom, than to Vote his Daughter out of Three?

7. Whether the King be not now sensible, that most of those hasty Abdicators
did not change the Succession out of kindness to him, but out of a farther
Design of bringing in a Commonwealth, or, in other words, of making this an
Elective and precarious Monarchy?

8. Whether the Temper of those Excellent Members deserves Censure, who have
promoted a General Pardon, and in that an Universal Quiet and Satisfaction; and
who were not very active in suspending the Bishops, unwhipping Oats, and in
excepting every body out of the no-Act of Indemnity?

9. Whether any Man can justly stand Recommended to your Choice by no other
Advantages than those of an old Treason, and a long Exile for it? and whether
one may reasonably be thought to have improved his Crime into Virtue, and to
become a Patriot of his Country, by being outlawed into Holland?

10. Whether such men as these may not possibly be Factors for Geneva and
Amsterdam, and more mindful of their late Fellow-Burgers than their old
Countrymen; and whether their frequent protestation, That they are true
Englishmen, would not convince the greatest Sceptick, (if he understands their
veracity) that they are not so.

11. Whether our good Brethren the Dutch, according to their usual kindness,
would not, in all probability, have forborne to arrest us for their Debt, 'till
the Conquest of Ireland had put us in a capacity of repaying them; and whether
those Men, who in the absence of most of the Members, gave 600000 l. to the
Dutch, did not more consider their own good will to the Creditors, than our
ability?

I do not mean Sir R. Nudigate, nor Sir R. Cotton of Cheshire.
12. Whether it was not a strange instance of Justice, in a Knight of the Shire,
to move for a new Assessment of his own County; and whether if the County do
not choose him again, they will not demonstratively show, that they have more
kindness for their Money than their Representative?

13. Whether there ever was a better Parliament in General, than that of K.
James the Second, and whether any body would approve the Re-election of those
worthy Members, who do not wish for a new Monmouth, and another Argyle?

14. Whether many honest Gentlemen, of Nice Principles, did not desist from
standing at the last Election, as having raised more Scruples to themselves
than they could easily answer; and therefore not hoping to untie the Gordian
Knot, put it for once into the hands of those men who could effectually cut it?
And whether now these Gentlemen will not be concerned to redeem their neglect,
and the more diligently to avert the blow, by how much the less careful they
were to prevent the stroke?

15. Whether the Clergy of the C. of E. are not concerned to be as diligent
against Phanatacism now, as of late against Popery; at least, such of them as
have a greater Respect for Pulpits and Chapels, than for Tubs and Barns?

16. Whether if those men who were incapacitated for procuring or consenting to
Surrenders, shall again Vote for their Judges, they will not give a signal
Instance of their forgiving humor, and show to the World, that they have a
great share of good Nature, though perhaps not an equal portion of Sense?

Qu. Whether Mr. Sacheverell.
17. Whether it would not be Heroic for all those Publick-spirited Gentlemen,
to take up Mr. S -- 's Resolution of never standing again 'till they can be
chosen by honest Regulators only?

18. Whether the incapacitating Clause was not brought into the House by Mr.
Sach -- and whether the following List be not a true account of those that
seconded him in it?

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Mayor, Recorder,
Alderman, Steward, Sheriff, Common-Council-man, Town Clerk, Magistrate or
Officer; who did take upon him to consent to, or join in, any such Surrender,
or Instrument purporting such Surrender as aforesaid. Or did solicit, procure,
prosecute, or did pay or contribute to the charge of prosecuting any Scire
Facias, Quo Warranto, or Information in the nature of Quo Warranto, by this Act
declared void, shall be, and is declared, adjudged, and Enacted to be for the
space of seven years incapable, and disabled to all Intents and Purposes, to
bear, or execute any Office, Employment, or Plate of Trust, as a Member of such
respective Body Corporate, or in or for such respective City, Town, Burgh or
Cinque-port, whereof, or wherein he was a Member, at, or before the time of
making such Surrender, or Instrument purporting such Surrender, or the suing
out, or prosecuting such Scire Facias, Quo Warranto, or Information in nature
of Quo Warranto, any thing in this Act contained, or any other Case, Statute,
or any Ordinance, Charter, Custom, or any thing to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

The Honorable Edward Russet, Esquire William Duncombe, Esquire Sir Henry Winchcombe,
Bar. Henry Powle, Esquire Sir Algernoon May, Knight. Sir William Rich, Bar. Sir
Henry Fane, Knight of the Bath. Thomas Tipping, Esquire The Hon. Thomas Wharton,
Esquire Sir Thomas Lee, Bar. Thomas Jews, Esquire William Jephson, Esquire Sir William
Drake, Knight. Richard Hampden, Esquire John Hambden, Esquire Isaac Newton, Magist. Art.
Sir Robert Cotton. Knight. and Bar. John Maynwaring, Esquire Roger Whitley, Esquire Hugh
Boscawen, Esquire William Harbord, Esquire Edward Russet, Esquire Sir Henry Ashhurst, Knight.
Anthony Row, Esquire Hugh Fortescue, Esquire Robert Harly, Esquire Sir Peter Colleton,
Bar. Jonathan Prideaux, Esquire Sir John Lowther of Whitehaven, Bar. Sir Henry
Capell, Knight. Sir Philip Gell, Bar. The Honoura. Anchitell Gray, Esquire Sir George
Treby, Knight. The Honoura. Robert Russel, Esquire Sir Francis Drake, Bar. Sir Walter
Young, Bar. Thomas Reynell, Esquire John Elwell, Esquire Samuel Foot, Esquire Henry
Trenchard, Esquire Thomas Trenchard, Esquire John Burridge, Esquire Sir John Morton, Bar.
John Manly, senior, Esquire Sir Matthew Andrews, Knight. Henry Mildmay, Esquire Isaac
Rebow, Esquire Sir Thomas Middleton, Knight. Sir John Guise, Bar. Sir Ralph Dutton,
Bar. Sir Duncombe Colechester, Knight. Thomas Master, Esquire John How, Esquire Richard
Dowdeswell, Esquire Sir Edward Harly, Knight. of the Bath. Paul Foley, Esquire John Dutton
Colt, Esquire John Birch, Esquire Sir Thomas Pope Blount, Bar. Sir Charles Caesar, Knight.
Sir William Cowper, Bar. Sir Thomas Bide, Knight. The Honorable Sydney Wortley,
alias. Mountague, Esquire The Hon. Sir Vere Fane, Knight. of the B. Sir John
Knatchbull, Bar. Sir William Honywood, Bar. Henry Lee, Esquire Sir Tho Tailor, Bar.
Charles Lord Brandon Gerrard, The Hon. Richard Lord Colchester. Bennet Lord
Sharard. Thomas Babington, Esquire Sir Edward Hussy, Knight. Sir William York, Knight.
Sir John Brownlowe, Bar. Sir William Ellis, Bar. The Hon. Philip Howard, Esquire
Sir Patience Ward, Knight. Sir Robert Clayton, Knight. Sir Thomas Pilkington, Knight. Sir
William Ashurst, Knight. Sir Henry Hobart, Knight. George England, Esquire John Trenchard,
Esquire Serj. at Law. The Hon. Sir Robert Howard, Knight. Sir Thomas Samuel, Knight. Sir
William Langham, Knight. Sir Francis Blake, Knight. Sir Scroop How, Knight. Sir John Cope,
Bar. Sir Thomas Lytleton, Bar. Edward Gorges, Esquire The R. Hon. Charles Marq. of
Winton. The Hon. William Lord Pawlett. Francis Morley, Esquire Fitton Gerrard, Esquire
Henry Wallap, Esquire The Honor. James Russel, Esquire Sir Michael Biddulph, Bar.
Philip Foley, Esquire Henry Boil, Esquire Sir Philip Skippon, Knight. Sir Robert Rich, Knight.
and Bar. Sir John Duke, Bar. Sir Richard Ounslow, Bar. George Evelyn, Esquire John
Arnold, Esquire Thomas Howard, Esquire Foot Onslow, Merchant. Sir John Thompson, Bar.
Denzill Onslow, Esquire Sir John Pelham, Bar. John Machell, Esquire John Lewkener, Esquire
Sir John Fagge, Bar. William Garway, Esquire Sir Richard Newdigate, Bar. Sir Thomas
Mompesson, Knight. Thomas Pits, Esquire Sir Charles Rawleigh, Knight. Morice Bocland, Esquire
Sir William Pinsent, Bar. Charles Godfry, Esquire Thomas Freke, Esquire John Wildman,
senior, Esquire -- Hawles, Esquire John Wildman, junior, Esquire Sir James Rushout, Bar.
Thomas Foley, Esquire William Bremley, Esquire John Summers, Esquire Richard Lord Coote.
Henry H^rbert, Esquire Edward Tompson, Alderman. William Stockdale, Esquire Sir William
Strickland, Bar. William Palms, Esquire Sir Michael Wharton, Knight.
Barons of the Cinque Ports.
Richhard Austen, Esquire James Chadwick, Esquire Julius Deeds, Esquire Tho. Pappillon; Esquire
Sir James Oxinden, Knight. and Bar.
WALES.
Sir William Williams, Knight. and Bar. Bussy Mansell, Esquire Sir Rowland Gwynn, Knight.


Roger L'estrange's QUERIES CONSIDERED; AND Some Queries put, for the
Consideration of those Persons, whose Judgments are in danger of being again
Poisoned by the Snare of smooth Words; calculated to the humor of a Biggot,
for the helping the Indigent Case of King James, and Vindicating the
Non-Abdicators.
1. WHether the Church of England ought not to be content, and very grateful,
that the King has so often declared himself for the Church of England, without
obliging his Majesty on pain of their Displeasure (and no less a Scandal than
Presbyterian in his Heart) to subjoyn a professed Abhorrence and inveterate
Enmity against all his Dissenting Subjects?

2. Whether the Church of England or Dissenters have most made it their
Business to Libel the present King, or whether indeed they ever did Libel him
to the Degree of our Query-maker in his sixth Query; and whether it be the sin
against the Holy Ghost, for the Dissenters to glory in the Friendship of their
King, who has given them his Royal Word for his Favor and Protection in the
Liberty of their Conscience, which is so much repined at, and the King so much
hated for?

3. Whether it be really the Church of England (or our Query-maker only that
makes her so) that makes her self a Sanctuary for all the Offenders of the last
Reign? and if so, What she can answer to her excluding the late King James,
while none of his Instruments are thought guilty enough to suffer, no, nor to
be excluded doing the same things again, if they have Opportunity?

4. Whether also it had not been as mannerly in our Inquirer to have set down a
List of all those Members that stood in need of Indemnity 1660. to make out
that it was a majority? or whether his Credit be good enough to pass without
Proof, who stands in so much need of an Indemnity himself, and of a Pillory now
for traducing 146 Gentlemen of the House of Commons as Republicans or old
Rebels, because against his Will they Voted his present Majesty King, and took
the Sword of Persecution out of the hand of the Church of England?

5. Whether his third Query be not insinuation enough to make the Church of
England loath him, who foster upon them his own Spirit of Blood and War, so
contradictory to the known and practiced Doctrine of the Church, Charitiy and
Passive Obedience? and what but Rebellion can this Libeller insinuate, when he
says the Church of England will be esteemed Cowards and Stupid, if they do not
awake against those his Majesty has taken into his Protection?

6. Whether this Fellow is not a fit Person to be hugged by the Church of
England, that shall boast in Print that our Army in Ireland are but Remains of
Regiments, and proposing other means to reduce Ireland than giving Taxes, (
viz. recalling K. James) if he does not mean that, we desire him to name those
other means, not doubting his Majesty, as well as the Nation, will take it very
kindly of him, to put us in a way to reduce the Kingdom without Money, or a way
for Money without Taxes?

7. Whether any Dissenter ever denied his fifth Query; or what his reason is
for putting it; or how he will prove all those qualifications upon any Member
of the House.

8. Whether it be fit for this Query-maker to call in question the Actions of
Parliament; and if it be, how he will make it out that the House changed the
Right of Succession; and how will the Church of England answer to a Charge
against their boasted Loyalty, for suffering an Impudent Scribler to call the
making his Majesty King, a Voting Queen Mary out of three Kingdoms; or whether
this be not such an Affront to his Majesty and the present Government, as any
Subject that has respect for either cannot but regret?

9. Whether it is not as likely they should be his Majesty's Friends that Voted
for making him King, as those that were against it; and whether ever the King
told this Query-maker, he was sensible they had Republican Designs in doing it?

10. Whether the Temper of those Members does not deserve Censure, who were so
hasty for a General Pardon, that they could not stay to think of making
Inquisition for Blood, that so the guilt of all the Blood spilt in the late
Tyranny might devolve on the Nation, but preferred their own security against
the lash of the Law, to the just retribution that God Almighty expected from
their hands, in whom he had placed the dispensing of Justice, and to the King's
being just to his Declaration.

11. Whether it was not a sign of an excelling Loyalty in those Members who so
carefully provided that the King should swear at his Coronation to protect the
Bishops in all their Episcopal Rights, who at the same time refused to swear
Allegiance to him, or to own him as their Head, and how much it went against
the grain to have them suspended for it, is discernable in every Query he makes?

12. Whether Whipping Oats was not an Instance of Tyranny and Cruelty, in a
Nation that of all the World pretends to Humanity, and to have no Tortmes
practiced; and whether the opposing that reversing Vote, was not more to show
their good Will than any Spleen to the Man himself?

13. Whether if all these things do not unqualifie a Member for a place in the
House, Qu. 6. Why being banished by the Cruelty of an Abdicated Tyrant, should
unfit a Man for the Service of his Country, remains to be proved?

14. Whether the boasting of Loyalty and the Church of England may not evince a
Factor for Popery, as well as saying, I am a true Engilsh Man, proves one to be
none; and whether the Loyalty so lately in Vogue, and the Zeal for the Church,
was not more in the Mouths of those very Men, who since in France and Ireland
went openly to Mass, than in any other; and whether the Church of England are
not now too much awake to be so ridden again?

15. Whether England is reduced to so much Exigence, as to make Composition for
time with the States of Holland, for what they expended on our Account; and
whether this Gentleman is not for lessening our Figure in the World, and our
Value abroad, which is indeed much for our Interest, by having a Message sent
to the States, viz. May it please your High and Mightinesses, your poor and
needy Brethren of England are not able yet to repay you, but if you will have
Patience with them, they will be very honest, and pay you all. And further,
Whether this Gentleman ever looked over the Act for repaying the Dutch, to see
how many Years it will be before they will have their Money?

16. Whether the Gentleman did not design to leave some unanswerable Query in
his Paper, by not telling who did so, that so we might not examine the
particular Case, and whether if any Member saw an Act of Parliament evaded, and
the King cheated, as he was most loyally in that Bill, it was not a Noble and
Generous Honesty to move for a just Review even among his best Friends?

17. Whether his 13th. Query has not a little Nonsense in it; and whether he
can show any particular quality in the Parliament of K. James the second, to
distinguish them from all Parliaments that ever was, save that there was a full
Brigade of Swordmen in it, for which he in particular quarrels at this
Parliament, in which are very few?

18. Whether any Man may not start Questions that no Man can Answer? or what
Scruples any Man made at the Actions of K. James, which he so much repented of
as to make him desist in Point of Conscience from standing at the last Election?

And for a Query by the way; Whether it is not likely they have some other end
than a bare serving their Country in the House, who bid so high for Votes,
that an honest Man that has no self-end cannot afford to give; and that for the
pure and single benefit of Religion, and propagation of the Church of England,
Debauch the Nation with drunken Treats, to engage them to choose them to sit in
Parliament, that they may plead Privilege in Bar of their just I do not mean
Sir Peter Rich
Debts; and whether this was not a grand Reason why a Bill for Regulating
Elections has so often been offered, but could never Pass in the last House?

19. Whether the 15th Query be not the bottom of all the rest, and the only
Card they have to play, who watch for our Division to overturn the Government
once again, in hopes of reaping the sweet Harvest of a common Calamity, to make
amends for their present Poverty, who formerly made great gain of the Pretense
of Religion. Hen! Quantum profuit haec fabula Christi?

20. Whether it is likely this Libeller shall be Judge of the good Nature or
sense of the People of England, or that his Opinion must be the Standard of
Elections to come?

21. Whether his Reflection on Mr. Sachaveril, and publishing a List of
Members, is not more their Honor and Vindication than Reflection, especially
from his sordid Scandal on them in his second Query?

22. Whether, To give one Instance of the Ingenuity and Generosity of the Party
this Fellow pleads for, it be not very remarkable, how our Four new Candidates
for London stood by, and see a profligate drunken Fellow, that calls himself of
the Church of England, bid the Sheriff of London, executing his Office with
unquestionable and indisputable Integrity, Kiss his Posteriors on the Hustings
in Guild Hall, and not so much as Reprove him for it, much less Commit him, as
they ought in Honor to have done? and whether in doing it they had not gained
more Honor, and more vindicable Credit, than by clandestine Calls on the
Livery, forestalling of Votes, and Sunday Cabals, engaging an Interest for
their Election?

23. Whether the Kings late Letter for the Reforming the Clergy and the whole
Nation, has in it any such horrible thing, as to have it publicly called A
damned Phanatical Cant? And whether the Church it self ever pretended to be so
Infallible as to need no such Admonition, or that no Reformation can be made in
it, either in its Hierarchy or in its Members, that can fall short of
Presbytery and Phanatioism?

24. Whether Dr. Sherlock's appearing in the Pulpit after a Deprivation by Act
of Parliament, be not the Effect of the same Spirit; who being advised by the
Learned in the Law, and permitted by his Superiors in the same Circumstances
dare openly affront the Government, and bid Defiance to an Act of Parliament,
as a further Testimony of the Practice as well as Profession of the Doctrine of
Passive Obedience?

Lastly, Why the Church of England, should after all the Public
Acknowledgments of their calling in the P. of O. and after their Solemn Joining
with him in his Enterprise, and thanks to him for performing it, and to God for
the Success, now strive to have it agreed, that he came in by Conquest, which
is past my Learning to unriddle, and very little for the Honor of the Nation
for them to acknowledge.

LONDON, Printed for John Palmer, 1690.


