THE HISTORY OF THE UNION Of the four famous Kingdoms Of ENGLAND, WALES,
SCOTLAND and IRELAND.

Wherein is demonstrated that by the prowess and prudence of the English, those
four distinct and discordant Nations, have upon several conquests been entirely
united and devolved into one Commonwealth, and that by the candor of clemency,
and deduction of Colonies, alteration of Laws, and communication of Language,
according to the Roman rule, they have been maintained and preserved in peace
and union.

Ruis ille tam coufidens, aut tautis cervicibus, qui audeat histeriam
usquequaque veram scribere?

Lips. l. 5. c. 11. Qui non libere veritatem pronunciat, proditor veritatis est?

Cok. l. 11. f. ^3. By a lover of truth and his Country.

London, Printed for Thomas Brewster, and are to be sold at the three Bibles at
the Westend of Paul's. 16^9.

To the Right Honorable William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the PARLIAMENT of the
Commonwealth of England.
Right Honorable,
IT is ascribed to Sir William Paulet for Prudence, that in four several Kings
and Queens reigns, which were obnoxious to perilous Innovations, he demeaned
himself so observantly and cautiously in those tempestuous and dangerous times,
that he constantly held his head above water and augmented his advancement,
when numerous Noble personages were plunged in their abyss: And have not there
happened almost as many pernicious mutations and factions within these four
years in this State, as were in the Roman Republique for the space of five
hundred? wherein your Honor has so circumspectly and vigilantly steered your
course, that you have not only shunned shipwreck, which many others did suffer,
but have also fixed your bottom in the harbor of felicity, and at this present
with the applause and approbation of all men, do sit at the helm of this
Commonwealth.

Istuc est sapere, qui ubicunque opus sit animum possit flectere. Terent. Hecyr.
And the Author cordially wishes that you may equal, Sir Will. Paulet live
within 3 years of one hundred.
if not exceed the years of that famous Councellor of State, that (as he did)
by your grave direction and sage advice to the great Council of this
Commonwealth, and by its provident resolves, Tranquillity and peace may be
settled in these Nations, and a firm Union established and preserved in them. To
which purpose the Author has been induced to present to your Honor this
impolite History concerning the Union of these Nations, as Marcus Terentius
Varro did his Book de origin linguae Latinae to Marcus Tullius Cicero, not by
way of instruction to admonish you, but by way of reference to be censured by
you as an equal arbitrator, whether it be worthy of the public light, and may
tend to the public good, which is the butt and burden of his labors;
wherein he has had an especial care according to his skill; that as Polibius
prescribes soli (...) bentati litaret, he should sacrifice solely to truth;
and that neither for any ^mister conceit he should detract from any, or for any
favorable respect flatter any, but to pou^trait every person according to his
just proportion: And if it be conceived that in some passages he has
accidentally slipped, seeing he has endeavored to ascend the higher and
slippery places, he hops well that your Honor will be pleased to pardon his
slips and over-sights, they proceeding from imbecility and not pertinacy, and
to cover them with his good intentione^ that you will be as equal toward him,
as he is toward the great God, whom he knows not to have given all things to
one man. So beseeching the Almighty to lengthen your days to the great good of
this Commonwealth, he submissively takes his leave.

Your Honors most devoted Servant. M. H.

To the READER.
MOst men are naturally prone to applaud the times behind them, and to vilify
the present, as the Poet, Hoc hodie ingenium est multis, Clapmar.
ut tempora prisca
Anteferant nostris, tantum laudentque quod absit.


And upon the dislike of every present Government are desirous of a change and
like the fish Sepia trouble all the waters wherein they live: Romans 13.1.
whereas all Government is of God^ whether Monarchical, Aristocratical, or
Democratical, Dan. 2.21.
who at his pleasure changes the times and fensons, and removes and se^eth up
Kings; and therefore ought all Gods people to submit and vail to his
irresistible will, and to be obedient to the present God vernment introduced by
h^^ providence: whence may b^^ inferred, that those are of a serpentine and
divelish disposition, who by seducing pamphlets, and captious conceits, employ
their turbulent spirits to scatter the seeds of sedition, and to foment
commotions in such novel states, not with an intention of the public good, as
they gloriously pretend, but to make way for their peculiar interest and
presumptuous preferment; wherein doubtless Coelum irritant armis, they vainly
make War with Heaven, and irritate the divine vengeance to their dismal
confusion, who delighting to fish in such Stygian and troubled waters, Saepe
piscatores capti sunt are commonly catched in their own net, and like ambitious
bees drowned in their own honey. Examples of which we need not seek from
foreign parts, our Nation affording too many, who through such desperate and
dangerous insurrectious have wrought the ruin of their generations and
themselves: and not to speak of the last combustion which is like to produce
the same effects and forfeitures, the Author wishes in General Quodicti
piscatores sapiant, that being struck with this Scorpion they may cautiously
avoid the like danger, and wisely shun such destructive practices: for it is
not his drift to trample on the afflicted, nor to upbraid any one with the
commemoration of their preterit exorbitancies, but to draw every one within the
circumference and list of peace, amity, and union. For what an horrid and
inhumane spectacle has it been, and still is to fee, that the English Nation
which has always been accounted fierce against their foes, and faithful to
their friends, shall now become more fierce and faithless one against another,
and sheath their swords in their own bowels; such an unsociable and unnatural
War, producing the extirpation of many noble families and tending to the
destruction of the whole Nation. Wherefore for our own and countries safety, be
exhorted and persuaded (that whereas by the unanimous valor and constant
circumspection of the English those three valiant Nations of Wales, Scotland,
and Ireland, have been totally vanquished and entirely united into one
Commonwealth with England, and at this present made a firm quaternity and
invincible phalanx against all foreign Forces) to set aside all civil discords
and discontents, and to remove them as far from us.

Quantum Hyspanis Ven^to dissidet Eridano, As far as Scythia dissides from
Italy, or Spain from Britanny, and to bend and unite our national Forces
against our foreign and outlandish Enemies, that thereby we may live in unity
and safety among our selves. For as we are instructed by Philosophy, that there
are two principles of all things, Concord and Discord, the one dissolving and
consuming all things; so are we taught by it is Mistress Experience that petty
states are by Concord and union augmented, and grand ones by Discord and
Disunion brought to confusion, as the Poet pressly.

Discordia gaudet Permiscere fretu^ coelo. Sil. Ital.

Vale atque his utere mecum.
Ode Triumphalis Ad late Dominantem Angliam:
ANgusta laurus palmaque vilior,
Quaecunque priscis gratia honoribus,
Sordesoat ad famam potentis,
Angliae and indomici Britanni.
Jam Roma pallet, jam stupet ardua
Incoepta nostrum, Caesaris and pudet,
Nunc irritos dolens labores
Agricolain tacet and Severum.
Quocunque vertis terribilem manum
(O Diis amata and gens celeberrima)
Spissaeque dehiscunt Phalanges
Et trepidae recidunt catervae.
Dii Terminales sedibus exulant
Arisque cedunt quas sibi saecula
Ignota rite consecrarunt
Atque tuum fugiunt Triumphum.
Fatis negatam pergere, gloria
Honorque nostri Temporis, invidam
Transgressus en tandem Columnam
Asseruit metuendus, Vltra.
Neptunus alto stridet in aequore
Tethysque late brachia porrigit
Nymphas ut omnes consalutet,
Limite nec remoratur ullo.
Se prima victam plorat Hibernia,
Et mox Hiberno Cantaber additus
Post rupta pacis bellique jura
Fadifragus luit inde Scotus
Laetatur Anglus jam numero pari
Cui regna subsunt quatuor, annuant
His Fata, quatuor ut per orbis
Promoveat sua sceptra Parts.
Sic Vaticinatur. J. H. Stu. Eccl. Chr. Oxon.

Errata.
PAge 3 line 21. read abused. p. 20. l. 1^ dele and. P. 35. l. 19. for
praefecto, r. projecte ibid. l. 22. for they, r. that. p 48. l. 2^ for fellows,
r. followers. p. 51. l. 3. r. reprob^vit. p. 53. l. 14. r. and is. p. 80 l. 1.
r. thereth^^ p. 110 l. 19. r. and so. P. 14. l. 2. for affinity, (...) serenity
of air. ibid. l. 18. r. Islands. p. 117 l. 21. dele in the Parliament.

THE HISTORY OF The four famous Kingdoms, ENGLAND, WALES, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND.
Union is the ornament and muniment of the Universe, which is so orderly and
closely conjoined, as no vacuity or breach is therein admittable, which maks it
so perpetual; for which orderly union it is by the Septuagint called (...) and
by the Latins Mundus that is beautiful. For order and union adorn all things,
for which reason that glorious and orderly Artifice is by the holy Ghost Ailed
an Host, or Army, and as the vulgar translation truly terms it, Exercitus:
Itaque perfectisunt coeli, and tarrae, and exercitus little; for no battles or
phalanx can be more firmly ranked and united, or better governed (as Delrius on
that place paraphraseth) then the creatures in Heaven and Earth are disposed
knit together and ruled: and nothing is so comely or constant, nothing so ready
and obedient to their Creator, and King, at whose word and wink they take Arms
against the impious, and (in a heavenly posture) unite themselves to fight his
battles; when, as the Wiseman says, Wisdom. s. 7.
he is pleased to make his creatures his weapons for the revenge of his enemies.

And as the divine power is the general Architector of union in the frame of
the universe, so is he the particular Author of order, and anion among men; to
whom (above all Sublunary creatures) he communicated his similitude, and
natural inclination to order, society, and unity: For after the Lord God had
framed man of the dust of the ground, (or of red earth, as Josephus expounds
it, Joseph Antiq. lib. 1. c. 2.
whence he was called Adam which signifies red,) and instilled and breathed
into him his own image; and then also made him the Monarch and Lord of all the
world, subjecting all things to his power, order, and dominion, as the Psalmist
says, Psalm. 8.
omniae subjecit pedibus ejus, and afterward conjoined unto him as an Adjutor,
like unto himself, the woman as his Associate: From which equality did proceed
a common power to the man and wife over their family, Tholosanus Syntag. lib.
11. cap. 2.
which is called Domestica potestas, or oeconomia, according to the Offices of
each Sex: But because the woman abuse her common power and wrought misthief to
the man, she was (for the suture) made subject to the man, and the man had
Maritalis potestas over the woman. And it is not to at doubted but that if Adam
had ^ersi^ted in his integrity, and being confirmed, had multiplied his
generations, but that God who is Pater ordinis, would that in order one to the
other, there should have been an inferior, Paraeus in Genesis 1. 28.
and a superior And that Adam who was Pater omnium Viventium should have a
paternal power over all mankind, by the law of nature, as over a great family,
and that there should have been a civil dominion, and subjection, but
altogether voluntary and comfortable; and a Politeia and government, and a
decent order and union among men without any servile constraint, or coercion
according to the law of nature in which those that ruled should freely advise,
and those who were subject should freely obey, and no that one man should lord
it, o^ domineer over another. For such lording rule and servile subjection were
introduced after the fall o^ Adam, when servitude began to be a just punishment
for sin, when force and fraud (the venemo^^ seeds of sin) bad spread themselve
over the face of the earth; when latrocinies, and rapines, murders, and
homicides reigned in the hearts and hands of men, and threatened destruction to
all mankind, the sword of each devouring other, which caused a separation and
disunion among the Sons of Men. Then necessity brought in coercive and
controling dominion, which by the sword and force might curb and restrain such
malefactors from perpetrating such violent and inhumane injuries; and either to
punish them with death, or reduce them to a civil life and union. Chrysosostome
Musculus Cornelius de lapide. Paraeus Genes. 10.
To which purpose God raised Nimrod (for all power is of God) who excelling
others in vigor of body and virtue of mind, by his humanity and relief to such
injured and abused persons, procured to himself a potent Army, with which he
subdued all the lawless and mischievous routs and multitudes. And therefore is
he said to be a mighty hunter before the Lord, not only because he excelled in
might, but because that he nutu and ductu Dei through the divine impulse, and
conduct, did subject the rude and barbarous Nations to the sway of his Scepter,
and stoutly ruled them by the power of his sword; Petavius ration. Tomp. lib.
2. fol. 100.
who of the heathen writers is called Belus, as by ours Nimred, and affirmed to
be the same man that did build the Tower, and took upon him a new Empire over
rude people as Petavius observes: Testatus in Genes. 10.
He also by Testatus is said to be the first King, because we read in holy Writ
of none who reigned before him; Petavius ib.
and by other Historians that he was the founder and hood of the Assyrian
Empire, and was the first that composed many barbarous Nations into the civil
and moral body of one Commonwealth: Grotius de J. B. and P. lib. 1. cap. 3.
For as Grotius, plurium populorum idem potest esse caput, there may be one
head of many people, which single people notwithstanding have a perfect
commonalty: for it is not in a moral body as in a natural, where there cannot
be one head of many bodies, but in a moral body the same person may be head of
many distinct bodies: And it were to be wished that the whole world were
governed by one head in unity as it should have been by Adam if he had
persevered in his persection. But sin by his delinquency entering into the
world, has sown the seeds of discord among all Nations, that since one head
could never be established over them all, nor an unity settled by the most
potent and sagest Princes and people, though some have had the ambition to
effect it; and one vainly wished that there were more worlds to conquer and
yet could not settle two Kingdoms in union; for so perverse and crooked are all
Nations and so prone to discordancy and martial occurrents, that no prowess nor
prudence can continually contain them in obedience and unity, nor no compact
nor league can preserve them in mutual amity, but that they will upon some
feigned pretense break out into impious Wars and martial defiances which is an
Epidemical and incurable contagion in this world, as it is Emphatically and
divinely expressed by the Prince of Poets.

Quippe ubi fas versum atque nefas tot bella per orbem. Virg. Georg. l. 1.

Tam multae scelerum facies, non ullus aratro,
Dignus bones, squalent abductis arva colonis,
Et curvae rigidum falces conflantur in ensem,
Hine movet Euphrates, illinc Germania bellum,
Vicinae ruptis interse legibus urbes,
Arma ferunt, saevit tate Mars impius orb.
Howsoever, though it be an attempt above possibility to reduce all Nations
into a conformable unity, yet is it an heroical, and glorious enterprise so far
as may be to proceed in bringing it to perfection that thereby the less
rapins, bloodsheds and slaughters may happen between them, and at the least in
some parts of this Orb there may be a resemblance of another Paradise for peace
and union on earth. And for such atchievments many victorious Heroes have
received immortal praise and glory, and are registered in the monuments of same,
as Nimrod, Ninus, Joshua, David, Cyrus, Alexander, and the martial Romans.
Seeing then it is such a Divine and noble action to unite divided Nations it is
worthy our study and diligence to examine by what means it may be obtained: and
though the Author finds no beaten path to follow, nor public pattern to
imitate, yet it may be collected out of Classick Authors, that there are three
common principles by which Princes and Commonwealths have been instructed to
enterprise that design.

The first is by leagues, of which in Commonwealths there is great necessity
and utility, Scor^ernerius Palit. lib. 4. cap. 34.
for unita virtus fortior, and hosti terribilior, and by the mutual conjunction
of their minds, the one may in danger assist the other and defend each other
against their enemies; and is properly called peace when by treaties and
agreements it is made and established, which was in prime practice among the
Romans, and very profitable unto them. For as Dion says, they by imparting aid
to their friends and confederates obtained the Empire of the whole world; Flor.
li. 2. cap. 16.
the reason of which Florus gives, Quiae summae faederum Romany religie fuit,
for that the Romaus very religiously and devoutly observed their leagues. A
notable example of which we have in Metius Suffetius whom Tulius Hostilius for
breaking of a league commanded to be bound fast between two Chariots, Floras I.
1. c. 3.
and drawn in pieces by swift and violent horses. A formideble example of which
in sacred writ, we also read: as Simeon and Love, the sons of Juceb were cursed
by their father at his denth, for that thy had violated their league made with
Sichem and Hemor when they destroyed them and all their City contrary to their
covenant. Genes. 49.
In like manner the punishment of God upon Saul's posterity was memorable for
his breach of league, which Joshua made with the Gibeonites; when as three
hundred years after Joshua, seven of Saul's children and family were delivered
into the hands of the Gibeonites, and crucified by them in punishment of Saul's
offense. And though leagues among all Nations be honorable, and sacrosanct and
not to be violated by humane and divine Laws, yet are they commonly but
temporary and for a time; and made for utility and not for amity. For as Livy,
Communis utilitas ost nodus, and vinculum federis, common utility is the knot
and band of league. And as the societies of men were first constituted for
utility, so are the unions by leagnes for utilities sake, which failing, that
band and knot is broken or cut in sunder. And there are too many Machivilians
in these latter and impious times, who allow perfidiousness and breach of faith
in Princes, and that it is necessary sometimes for the benefit of a state; which
makes the unions by leagues to be less permanent and obnoxious to mutability,
according to the aforefaid complaint of the ingenious Poet.

Vicinae ruptis inter se legibus urbes Arma ferunt. Virg. Georg. 1.
The second union of Kingdoms is compassed by marriages and affinity, Clapmar.
de arc. imp. lib. 4. cap. 4.
and therefore as an acute Statesman Matrimoniorum maguorum principum maxima
cura esse debet. There ought to be the greatest care of the marriages of great
Princes, for that from them Wars begin and again cease, and unions of Kingdoms
by such descents sometimes happen: But such unions also are not frequent, nor
many times very constant. And though the Kingdom of Spain and House of Austria
have had the felicity to flourish for many years by such unions and affinities,
yet has Portugal lately fallen from them, and the rest may be supposed not to
be perpetual. And in the most flourishing Kingdom of France are such titles of
descent, claiming by the faeminine sex, barred by the law Salique which was
made by Pharamond King of the Franconians, Tholosanus Syntag. lib. 45. cap. 4.
and amended by Clodoreus, Childericus and Lotharius; by reason of which law
always in the Kingdom of France, as the Franconians instituted, the issue
male, the female issue being excluded, have held the Scepter. Which law and
custom having been controverted has been diverse times by sentence confirmed,
and by arms and reasons approved. Especially against Edward the third King of
England, who for that he drew his pedigree by a female (though he was the
nearer in blood;) Philip. le Bell (the next Heir Male) was by the law Salique,
preferred before him: which excluding females was adjudged to exclude all the
descendents by females, and therefore was Philip received and crowned King of
France, and Edward the third, because his Kingdom was not then settled, and he
but young, did homage to King Philip for the Duchy of Guyen and other
territories in France: though afterward when he had arrived to the years of
maturity and manhood, upon more mature deliberation of the partial
interpretation of that law and the instigation of the Earl of Artois (a great
Peer of France) affirming that he had more right to that Crown then the other,
he by Arms attempted to recover and conjoyn that Kingdom to the Crown of
England; and by his invincible sword obtained many wondrous victories. But he
yielding to Fate before he had accomplished his intention, his successors Henry
the 5th. and Henry the 6th. renewed the said honorable War, and by their
victorious Arms so prevailed, that Henry the 6th. was Crowned in Paris King of
France, and had finished that glorious work, whereby the Kingdom of France had
been annexed and united to the Kingdom of England, but that the civil Wars
between the houses of York and Lancaster in England impeded the same, as
Philippus Comineus (Secretary to Lewis the 11th. King of France) ingeniously
acknowledges; by which disaster the hopeful union of the Kingdom of France
with the Kingdom of England by marriage, unhappily was prevented and utterly
frustrated.

And as for the inconstancy and deficiency of such unions. I will only
instance in one which was thought most happy and durable in this Nation; and
that was the union of the two famous Kingdoms of England, and Scotland,
transacted by James the 6. King of Scotland, who was by marriage lineally
descended of the Lady Margaret Eldest Daughter to Henry the 7th. King of
England, and Eldest Sister of King Henry the 8th. Father of Elizabeth Queen of
England, by whose decease she being the last of issue of Henry the 8th. the
Kingdom of England did lineally and rightfully descend to the said James King
of Scetland, by which natural conjunction those two discordant Kingdoms of
England, and Scotland were fortunately and peaceably united under one imperial
Crown.

An union magnified, and applauded of both Nations, and yet not lasting above
one descent; The Scotch revolting first, and then the English to the confusion
of both Kingdoms, and changing them both into one Commonwealth; which verifies
the Italian proverb: Kings may wed, but Kingdoms never.

The third union of Kingdoms is by conquest, which is most general and more
durable. For as Sir Francis Bacon, the most part of unious and plantations of
Kingdoms and Commonwealths have been founded by conquest which is manifested
as well by forraig^ Annals as by native occurrences, as by the sequel will
appear. But not to entrench upon your patience by the tedious relations of the
unions of Nations which were made by the conquests of the Assyrians, Medes and
Persians, and Graecians; I will insist only on those that were gained by the
glorious sword of the Romans, which for extent and durance surpassed all the
rest.

The Roman Commonwealth, and Empire for the extents and dignity of it, is by
the Civilians called Caput and seeds imperii orbis, and by Athaeneus(...), the
head, seat, and Epitome of the Empire of the whole world, according to the
verse.

Orbem jam totum victor Romanus habebat. And therefore did the Emperors
sometimes style themselves Domini mundi, the Lords of the world, Grotius de J.
B. and P. lib. 2. cap. 22.
which speeches though Grotius says are per excessum and excellentiam dicta,
spoken by the excess and excellency, Bodin de Repub. lib. 1. cap. 9.
and Bodin that in Trajans time when it most flourished Vix trigessimam orbis
terrarum partem complecti potuisset, it scarce could contain the thirtieth part
of the whole earth, yet it is doubtful to none but that it did contain the
best and most flourishing parts of Europe, Africa, and Asia in Caesar's time,
Patritius de Princip. lib. 1.
Cujus solum nomen Parthorum and Indorum Reges somnum capere non siuebat: whose
fame only would not permit the Kings of the Parthians and Indians to sleep
which were the remotest parts of Asia; at which time the Roman Empire was in
its youthful strength and robust maturity as Florus says. Hic jam ipsa juventa
imperii, and quasi quaedam robusta maturitas. But to demonstrate how by degrees
it rolled up to such a vast greatness; and first because commonly
irreconcilable contests, and contentions happen between vicine and bordering
Nations as the Poet.

Inter finitimes vetus atque antiqua simultas, Juven Satyr. 15.

Immortale odium, and nunquam sanabile vulnus.
The Romans did first augment their state, by the conquest and unions of their
neighboring Countries as Ninus did, Justin l. 1.
Qui primus bellum intulit finitimis, who first made War with the borderers,
and so as Caesar says, Caesar. l. 6. de Bello Gallico.
did the Germans who deemed it proprium virtutis, an especial virtue to expel
their neighbors from their fields, and not suffer them to dare to consist near
them. For so says he did they think themselves more safe repentinae
incursionis timore sublato, the fear of sudden incursions being taken away, for
which reason Danaeus propounds this for an Aphorism. Danaeus Aphorism fo. 108.
Vicini populi nimiam crescentis potentta mature est quacunque occasion
deprimenda. The power of a too-much-increasing neighbor is speedily upon any
occasion to be suppressed.

Which therefore was the constant course the Romans steered, in their first
march to subdue their potent neighbors, and by which work they made way for
the Conquest of the other parts of the world. For after they within the space
of five hundred years, with much difficulty had brought into subjection the
Sabins, Florns l. 2. c. 1.
the Albanes, the Latins, and all other the adjoining people of Italy, and so
became Caput Italiae and within the two hundred years following, with their
victorious arms did they overcome Africa, Europe, Asia, and all the world, and
were therefore worthily entitled Caput totius orbis terrarum.

And as the Romans by valor did subdue their enemies bodies, so by their
wisdom did they subjugate their minds, which was the greatest victory, and by
degrees reduced them into a sociable union with them, and of enemies made them
their friends and Citizens. As Claudius in Tacitus says of Romulus, Tacit.
Aun. l. 11.
Conditor noster Romusus tanta sapientia valuit, ut pleresque populos codem die
hosts, dein cives habuerit. Our founder Romulus was of so great wisdom that
the same day he handled the same people as enemies, and then entreated them as
Citizens. Live. li. 1. Flor. li. 1. cap. 3.
And so Livy and Florus relate of Tullus Hostilius that after he had subjected
the Albans which a long time before were a dangerous and principal Enemy, he
ruined and dismantled Alba, and tranferred and carried away all the goods, and
the people themselves to Rome, by which the number of the Citizens was doubled,
ita ut prorsus in suum corpus rediisse rursus videretur: so that it altogether
seemed again to have returned into its own body. Many other examples are extant
in the Histories of the Sabins, Latins, and others of Italy, which as Cicero in
the defense of Balbus says, was the foundation of the Roman Empire, Illud
certe sine dubitatione nostrum fundavit imperium, and populi Romani nomen auxit
quod princeps, and creator urbis nostrae Romulus foedere Sabino docuit, etiam
hostibus recipiendis augeri hanc civitatem oportere, cujus authoritate and
exemplo nunquam est intermissa a majoribus nostris largitio, and communicatio
civitatis. That without all doubt did chiefly lay the foundation of the Empire,
and augment the honor of the Roman Empire, that the Prince, and Creator, of
our City, Romulus, did by the Sabine league instruct, that also this City ought
to be increased by receiving enemies by whose authority and example the
largition and communication of the City was never intermitted or discontinued
by our ancestors. For after Cicero's time, the Emperors of Rome did not only
grant their liberties and privileges to particular persons, families and
houses, but to whole Cities, Vide Coke, lib. 7. Calv. case fo. 24. a.
and Conntries, which is manifested by the plea of St. Paul in the 21. and 22.
of the Acts of the Apostles. That he was a Roman by naturalization, though he
was a Jew by Nation, and because he was born at Tarsus in Cilicia under the
obedience of the Roman Emperors he was by birth a Citizen of Rome in Europe,
and that therefore it was allowed unlawful for the Tribune to scourge him being
a Roman and uncondemned, and for the same reason, not long after, his appeal to
Caesar was admitted by Festus; which is also cleared by the constitution of
Antonine, Acts 25.
by which as many as were in Orb Romano within the Roman Globe, and subjects
of that Empire were made Roman Citizens, Grotius de I.B. and P. lib. 2. c. 9.
and as Grotius faith, obtained the same rights which the Colonies and
Municipies and provinces had. So as they were capable of honors and did make
use of the rights and privileges of the Romans. Nay before his age, Caesar the
founder of the Roman Empire not only admitted such alien enemies into the City
but also honored them with the Senators Robe, as it is said, Caesar Gallos in
Triumphum duxit, idem in Curiam.

And when under the Empire of Claudius the question was agitated concerning the
supplement of the Senate, and that the chief of the Gauls called Comata,
having gained the intercourse and freedom of the Roman City, did much desire
also the privilege of obtaining the honors of that City; Tac. Ann. l. 11. fo.
228.
Multus (says Tacitus,) super care varius rnmor, and studiis diversis apud
principent certabatur, There was a great and various report touching that
matter, which with diversity of studies and opinions was disputed and
controverted before the Prince; yet upon the accurate oration and discussion of
Claudius, the chief of the Hedues by the decree of the Senate, did obtain the
privileges of Senators in the City: from which conformity, all Nations under
the obedience and rule of this Roman Emperor were accounted but as one
Country.

But though it was an Act above compare and without example, for the Romans to
conquer so many mighty Princes, yet to keep them all in subjection, exceeds
admiration; for as judicious Florus, Florus lib. 4.
Difficilius est provincias retinere quam parare, and sententious Seneca,
parare and quaerere arduum, tenere difficilius, to whom the second Virgil seems
to allude.

O faciles dare summa deos, eademque tueri, Lucan. l. 1

Difficiles.
It is an high and hard attempt to seek and gain provinces, but a more
difficult and laborious task to defend and retain them; for otherwise no
utility will proceed of our seekings, and would do nothing else but Cribro
haurire labor in vain. And therefore it is worthy our industry to search and
inquire by what victories and policies the Romans for so many hundred years did
keep and retain so many stubborn and stout Nations in an imperious awe, and an
uniformity of obedience.

The prime policy which the Romans used to tame a conquered Nation, and to draw
it into a conjuncture and union with them was clemency, which is the proper
virtue of an Heroic Victor, who Lion like is clement, and merciful to the
devicted. Satis est prostrasse leoni. For though the conqueror has vitae and
necis potestatem, and by the law of War, those who have overcome have power to
rule those whom they have overcome, as they please; yet notwithstanding as
Timoleon in Aemilius Probus, Fol. 20.
Eam praeclaram ducendam victoriam in qua plus est clementiae quam
crudelitatis. That is to be reputed the most renowned victory, in which there
is more clemency then eruelty; and Salust, in his oration to Caefar, Qui
benignitate, and clementia regnum temperavere, his jucunda, and laeta omuia
fuerunt, etiam hosts aequiores quam illius cives: whosoever have tempered
their Empire with benignity and clemency, to these all things were pleasant and
prosperous and their enemies more civil then Citizens. Which was the constant
course of the Romans in all their conquests to entreat their enemies
honorably; Justin. lib. 11.
and as Alexander did non quaesi victos, sed victoriae socios habere, not as
slaves and servants, but as companions and citizens, as has been before amply
and fully declared and therefore surcease to prosecute this point.

But though clemency has a great sway, among many, and conduces much to the
union of States, Coke Com. upon Littl. 392. B.
yet as Sir Edward Coke says, Et si meliores sunt ques ducit amor, tamen
plures sunt ques cogit timor: Though they be the better whom Love does draw,
yet they are the more whom Fear does force. And therefore did the Romans use
more powerful and coercive policies then clemency, that those that would not be
allured by courteous, and civil intreatments should be compelled by severe, and
rigorous courses, as by Arms and Laws without which the un^^ on of
Commonwealths or Empire^ cannot consist; for as the aforesaid Florus, Florus
lib. 4.
viribus parantur, jure retinentur, which therefore I have placed together,
because they mutually protect each other, Just. instit principio.
as Justinian. Illorum alterum alterius au^ilio semper eget, and tani res
militar^ legibus, quam ipsae leges armoru^ praesidio servatae sunt, The o^^
has always wanted the aid of the other, and as well military matter^ are
preserved by Laws, as the Law^ themselves by the force of Arms, without which
they are but as a dead letter, or as a bell without a clapper, without life or
sound.

By whose mutual assistance and power, the Roman Commonwealth and Empire was
established, and maintained in peace and union: And for that reason are they by
the exquisite Poet Claudian conjoined in his Commendations of Rome. Claudian
Stillicon.


Armorum legumque potens quae fundit in omnes
Imperium, primique dedit cunabulae juris.
But now to treat of them distinctly, and first of arms which seem to have the
prerogative, as well in the retaining, as in the gaining of an Empire: for as
Salust, the great Judge of matters of State and manners of Men, Fulb. l. 1. fo.
64.
as Mr. Fulbeck styles him. Imperium facile his artibus retinetur, quibus
partum est, an Empire is easily retained by those Arts it was first gained,

And as Pansa and Hirtius advivised Caesar in Paterculus, ut Principatum armis
quaesitum armis teneret, that he should keep that principality by Arms that he
had gotten by Arms, which afterward he lost by the dismission of the
Praetorian soldiers, and laying his life open to his enemies, perished through
his clemency and security; which therefore is called by that elegant Author
Laudandum experieutia Consilium, A council commended by experience. And
therefore the Romans generally mingled clemency with safety, and prudently by
Colonies secured themselves from contingent commotions: For usually upon their
conquests, did they immediately appropriate the seventh part of the territories
of the conquered, upon old beaten souldien in way of remuneration for their
faithful service, which was called Coloniarum deductio, and the place (...)
self Romana Colonia; and as Seneca, Hic populus speaking of the Roman^ Colonias
in omnes provincias mis^^, Lyps. Pol. li. 4. fo. 7.
ubicunque vicit, Romanus habitat. Which as Lipsius says, was solidu^ and
firmum respublicas provehen^ munimentum, the solid and firm fortification of
promoting Commonwealths. For the Roman Colonie^^ were fortified with trenches,
Rampirs and Bulwarks to defend themselves against the assaults of the
Inhabitants, and as Danaeus, colonies were not deduced into the fields of the
vanquished without great grief, Danaeut Aphoris. fol. 138.
and fear of the inhabitants. Itaq^^ vallis and muris and praesidio firmandae,
nam insidiis and armis primo quoque tempore ab indigenis petuntur. And
therefore are they to be fortified with trenches, walls, and bulwarks, for
especially upon the first sertlement are they by force or fraud assaulted by
the natives, who naturally abhorring servitude, use all their stratagems to
undermine, and overthrow them. And as Florus disertly, non assuetae fraenis
servitutis tumidae gentium inflataeque cer^ices, Florus, li. 4. c. 12.
facile alias ab imposito nuper jugo resilirent. The swelling and arrogant
necks of nations not accustomed to the reins of servitude would easily
otherwise skip back from their new imposed yoke. As the Germans did, who as
Florus says, were vieti magis quam domiti, Florus. ib.
were vanquished rather then tamed, Vita agricol. jo. 66:. and Grotius, de J.
B. and P. lib. 2. cap 9.
and in the end Tacitus says, did shake off the Roman yoke (...) the valor of
Arminius who defeated and slew Varus and his legions, and as Grotius says,
were out of the compass of the Roman Empire whom the Britans did also seem to
emulate, who disdaining the Roman servitude, Domiti ut pareant, non ut
serviant, as Tacitus says, did stoutly attempt, under the conduct of that
valiant Queen Vaodica, to regain their natural freedom; and though in that
kingdom they had planted their Colonies fortified with walls and castles, which
they could never attain to in Germany; yet they universally concurring in one
resolution, jointly took Arms, and on a sudden did set upon the Roman
soldiers dispersed in their castles, and having beaten them from their forts,
invaded the Colonie it self as the seat of servitude, and having obtained the
victory, omitted no kind of rigor and cruelty; in so much as Tacitus says, if
Paulinus had not incontinently repaired to their relief, amissa Britannia
foret, Britanny would have been lost, and could hardly be suppressed and
reclaymed, until Petronius Turpilianus was sent by the Senate, a man of a
milder temper, who by his lenity and clemency composed all differences, and
were, from time to time more humanly and freely entreated by the succeeding
Legates, who by their humanity so prevailed with them, as many thousands of the
stoutest listed themselves in their Legions, and were faithful auxiliaries to
them. Insomuch as when the Romans were called from Britanny into France, to
suppress the Huns who molested that Country, they were drawn to accompany
them in that expedition, and to assist them in their Battails, and for their
valor were gloriously planted in that part of France, which from their name is
called Britain. Thus did the Romans, through the sweetness of their clemency,
and rigor of their Colonies transplanted and dispersed among their subdued
Nations, keep them in quiet and subjection, and reduced them into a sociable
union, which Colonies, Scorborerius polit. lib. 10. c.
as Scorbonerius a noble observer of the affairs of State, were as it were a
small effigies and portraiture of the Amplitude and Majesty of the people of
Rome. For there were one hundred threescore and three Colonies deduced and
dispersed among the Roman Provinces, which did sway and rule them by their
power, and jurisdiction; and as Learned and Laborious Mr. Seldom says, it is
clear that diverse Colonies deduced from Rome were in Britany. In Foites. etc.
fo. 9.
Of which he rendereth the names of four, in which as Sir John Baker Historieth
it, Fol. 3.
were contained no fewer then fourscore thousand Soldiers in pay.

Tuntae molis erat Romanam condere gentem Now follows the imposition of Laws,
for though they inter arma silent, yet after victory and conquest they conduce
much to the union of Nations, which the Romans also used for the completing of
the same. and this is a prerogative inseparably incident to a conqueror, to
give and impose Laws on the conquered, Coke li. 7. Calv. case fo. 17. B.
as Alexander in Curtius, Leges a victoribus dari, accipi a victis. Of which
Sir Edward Coke gives this reason, That seeing he that comes to a Kingdom by
conquest, has vitae and necis potestatem, he may at his pleasure alter and
change the Laws of that Kingdom; Seneca Troas.
for as the Tragaedian -- Quodounque libuit facere, victori licet.

Which was the perpetual practice of the Romans to send their Praetors
Proconsuls, and Praefects into those places, which by force and power of Arms
they had subdued, and to govern them according to their Laws, but quo Jure,
says Minius, Livy, l. 35.
Nihil aliud praefecto dicatis, quam armis superatis, vos iis has leges
impofuisse. Surely you can say nothing else, but they being overcome by Arms,
ye have imposed those Laws upon them: by which means as by the nerves the
Romans conjoined other Nations with them, and made one civil body of them. For
as Livy, multitudo cealescere in unius populi corpus, Livy, li. 1.
nulla alia re quam legibus potest; Coke Com. in Littl. fo. 141.
a multitude by no other means can grow together into the body of one people
but by Laws, and as Sir Edward Coke, the unity of Laws is the best means for
the unity of Countries. In which the Romans excelled all other Nations,
insomuch as their Laws in their flourishing estate were almost the Laws of all
the world. And yet as the Lord Chauncelor Elsemore says, Postnati, fo. 55.
the Roman civil Law is taken to be the most universal and general Law. Such a
deep impression did they make in all Nations who were under the Roman
jurisdiction.

But to come to our Country, though some Zelots of our Common Laws have
labored to clear them from any commixture with the Laws of other Nations,
notwithstanding the several conquests of the same, yet Vincat amor very, Vincat
amor patriae.

And the truth is as Matheus Westmeriensis says, Britannia
Romani Britanuiam per Julium Caesarem in latas leges jurare compulsam magna
dignatione coluerunt, and Camden, Britannis nec legibus suis patriis uti
permissum, sed magistratus a populo Romano cum imperio and securibus missi qui
jus dicerent. The Romans had Britanny in great estimation being compelled by
Julius Caesar to swear to their Laws, neither were they permitted to use their
Country, and municipal Laws, but Magistrates were sent from the people of
Rome, with command and authority to make Laws, and command them to be kept,
whence came the saying of the Ancient Poet quoted by Mr. Seldom. Ib. fo. 11.


Cernitis ignotos Latia sub lege Britannos. Neither is it a disparagement to
our Laws to have participated of the Laws of other Nations, as some supose, but
rather an Elogy for the Roman Laws themselves were composed of the Grecian
Laws, and as Sir Francis Bacon, though our Laws be mixed as our Language,
compounded of Britan, Saxons Danes, and Normans; yet did not this add less to
them then those who would have them to stand out the same in all mutations, for
no tree is so good at the first set as at transplanting. But to proceed,

I suppose it not altogether immaterial to add a fourth instrument which the
Romans used to unite their subjected Nations, to wit, the Communication of
their Language, which as Aristotle says is (...) the Organ of society by whose
Communication necessary affairs pass between man and man. Lib. 1. Polit cap. 2.
And though, Catil. fo. 5.
as Salust says, many of different kind and Languages, convening in one City,
facile coalescunt may easily grow into one body and Language; Yet in remote
Cities and Nations it fares otherwise: which moved the Romans to Communicate
their language to foreign Nations, by rejecting theirs, thereby forcing them
to apply their minds to the knowledge of that without which they could have no
comunication, or correspondence with them, which did very greatly conduce to
the Majesty, utility, and unity of the Roman Commonwealth with other Nations.
Valor. lib. 2. cap. 2.
And therefore as Valerius relates, among other Ceremonies of keeping state,
this did they also with great perseverance observe, that they should not give
any answer to the Graeciaus but in Latin, and also compelled them to speak by
an interpreter, not only in the City of Rome, but also in Greece, and Asia.
Quo scilicet Latin vecis honos per omnes gentes venerabilior diffunderetur, By
which means also the glory of the Latin language should be more honorably
diffused through all Nations: and Phavorinus said that an Emperor might give
the freedom of Rome to Barbarous Nations, but in Barbarous words and language
he could not, because those things which receive their force and property from
that natural usage of Citizens, cannot be changed by the authority of the
Senate. And in such an especial esteem had the Romans their proper and mother
Tongue, that in their public Assemblies, they abstained from the use of
Foreign Languages, though they were not ignorant of them: Suetonius vita
Tiber. fo. 216.
as Suetonius writes of Tiberius that though he could speak the Greek tongue
readily, and fluently, yet he abstained fro the use of it, in the Senate, in so
much, as being about to name the word Monopolium, he first craved pardon, quod
sibi peregrino vecabule utendum esset, that he was to use an Outlandish word.
By which means the subjugated minds of all Nations began to succumbe and
fashion themselves according to the pattern, and example of the Romans who were
then Terrarum Domini, Lords of the world; as the Panegyrical Poet, --
Comp^nitur orbis
Regis ad exemplum. Claud. 4. Houo.

and did not only submit themselves to the observance of their laws but also
to the practice of their Language. For though the Britains were, as Tacitus
acknowledges them -- validissima gens, a most valiant Nation, and more fierce
then the French, and molested the Romans with more dangerous Revolts, being of
all Nations the last that was conquered, and the first were freed; and also at
the beginning did Linguam Romanam abnuere, reject the Roman language, yet did
they at the length, Vita Agric.
concupiscere linguam Romanam, indeque habitus nostri honor, and frequens toga,
as Tacitus speaks, affect the Roman language, Rhetorique, the Roman habit and
the like. And so deep a tincture and impression did the Roman Language stamp
and make in these occidental parts, that to this day, for the most part, they
retain an Etymological sense of it, and in our parts of Britany, after the
departure of the Romans, we deemed it a glory to draw and express all our
writs, declarations, and other proceedings in suits of Law in the Latin
language, until in these latter times they were abro^^ted by Acts of
Parliament, as a badge of our ancient servitude; which Tacitus himself
intimates in these words Itaque humanitas apud imperitos vocabatur cum pars
servitutis erat, Ibid.
and that was called a favor and courtesy by the ignorant, which indeed was a
part of servitude.

A fifth may be added though less pertinent, that is the transmutation of
names, when the victor does change the name of the conquered Country, and
calls it by the name of his own Country.

Of which, among the Roman Writers, I find some change to be made, but not by
the people of Rome, or the Emperors. For though some of the later Writers, have
called all the Nations contained within the Precincts of the Roman Empire, as
Grotius alleges, Romania: Grotius l. 2. fo. 21. Seldom. ib.
and Gildas says of Britanny, non Britanuia, sed Romania censebatur; yet no
such transmutation of names was ever decreed or indicted by the Senate of Rome
or Edict of the Emperor. Clapmar de arcan. imperii.
For a acute Clapmar says, The Romans did little esteem talia inania
simulachra such vain shadows and shows, and were not sollicitous of proud
names, so that they might have the matter it self. Of which there is an example
in the Poet, Virg. Aeneid. 12. fo. 394.
when Juno had left nothing untried whereby she might impede the Trojans from
invading Italy, which finding her self unable to effect it, at the last defired
Jupiter, that forasmuch as the Trojans should possess and enjoy Italy, yet they
should not change the name, but the Latins should retain their ancient name. Ne
velis indigenas nomen mutare Latinos,
Neu Troas fieri jubeas, Teucrosque vocari:
Which Jupiter smiling to himself, casily condiscended to, as a matter of no
moment; for so the Poet proceeds, Olli subridens hominum rerumque repertor,
Do quod vis, and me victusque volensque remitto.
To wind up all in a word; By the premises it is perspicuous, that not only the
Britans, but all other Nations, which by conquest were forced to serve under
the Roman yoke, were by clemency, and arms, imposition of laws, and
transmutation of Language reduced into one moral and civil body, and were, as
it: were, one country, and one Commonwealth, insomuch as by Modestinus it is
called communit patria, and by Claudian, Gens una, Hujus pacificis debemus
moribus omues
Quod cuncti gens una sumus.
But now to compare Rome with Britain, if it be comely to compare great things
with less, which as the Prince of the Roman Poets.

Tantum inter alias caput extulit urbes Virg. Egl. 1

Quantum lenta solent inter viburna cupressi.
So as, though for largeness and extent (it being, as has been said, Caput
totius orbis,) it is incomparable, yet in regard of the quality, and condition
of the abovesaid union, it may admit some comparison; for the conquerours in
our Orb Britanno, did follow the tract and steps of the Roman conquerours,
whereby at the length, upon their conquests, they happily arrived at the like
settlement of the union, between the four discordant Kingdoms of England,
Wales, Scotland, and Ireland.

To begin with William the Conqueror, who though he made an absolute and
entire conquest of England, and might have had all the Lands which he would
have actually seized, yet like a Roman clement conqueror he took ^^ man's
estate from him, Baker's History of England.
neither dispossessed them of any of their goods but from those whose demerit
made them unworthy to hold them and would not adhere unto him^ and the vacancy
of Offices, and filling up the places of those who were slain, or fled, was the
present mean he made for preferring his followers, and as William of Malmsbur
says, in subjects leniter in rebe^^ turbide agens foeliciter omit Angl^^
potiebatur, by entreating his subjects gently, and the rebels rigorously, he
happily enjoyed all England. For as in the body of a living creature, mature
does convert food and nutriment into good blood and by degrees assimilates it
to the body; Sir Fran. Bacon.
So in union of countri^^ by conquest, the conqueror ought to expel any part
of the state conquered, which he finds so contrary, as he cannot convert, and
assimilate it to the civil body of that state: which was the current course of
William the conqueror. And though some Historians, and Chroniclers of those
times seem to vary from this assertion as Matthew of Westminster, that after
William the conqueror had subdued the Enlish, terras Anglorum and
possessiones, apsis expulsis successivis manu distribuit suis commilitonibus,
they being by degrees expelled, he with his hand did distribute all the Lands
and possessions of the English to his commilitions or fellow soldiers, which
Eodin, and Ramatus Choppinus also though they had it at the second hand, relate
it for truth; yet the contrary is manifested by his Act to one Warren a Norman
of principle quality, to whom he had granted the Castle of Sherborn in Norsolk;
But the heir of Sherborn, the ancient inheritour of that Castle, showing to
William the conqueror that he was his subject and leigeman and did inherit the
Castle by the same Law, that the conqueror had allowed, and established in
England, did therefore pray that he might hold the said Castle in peace; Davys
Report. fo: 41.
the conqueror in this case did give judgment for Sherborn against Warren; of
which judgment Cambden makes mention, Davys ib.
in the description of Norfolk. and Justice Calthropp said that he had seen an
ancient copy of that judgment in the library of Sir Christopher Heydon at
Barconsthorp in Norfolk; and as Sir John Da^^ reports, the contrary appeared
by the book of Doomesday, which in this point, is of more credit then all the
disconrses and chroniclers in the world, wherein is contained an exact
description of all the Realm made in the time of the said King, as Henry of
Huntington sets forth, per Angliam ita totus regnabat, quol ibi non una hida
inerat de qua nu sciret cujus esset, He so totally ruled over all England that
there was not one hide of Land in it, of which the knew not whose it was. By
which record it is declared, that he did not take all the lands of the English
into his hands, and confer them on his fellows, for in it is expresse^ what
Lands the conqueror ha^ in demesne, to wit, the Lands which were of St.
Edward, and are entitled Terrae Edwardi Regis, and others which himself had
seized upon the conquest, and were entitled Terrae Regis, without saying any
more, as is noted 49. Ed. 3.23. a And those Lands are now called the ancient
demesne Lands of the King, or of the Crown of England, and in this book, the
possessions of other Lands are put in certain, as well as the possessions of
the King, and those Lands which are under other titles, as Terrae Episcopi de
Exeter, etc. And all other Lands which were in others hands and named in that
book, are frank free, 40. Ed. 3.45. Fitz. N. B. 16. O. And also Roman like what
he had purchased with his sword, he possessed by his sword: For as Sir Edward
Coke, Cok. pref. l. 9.
t^to ejus Regiminis tempore, aut districtus nunquam interquievit gladius, aut
perpetuo manus institit capulo iterato evaginatura. In all the time of his
reign his drawn sword never rested, or otherwise his hand was always on his
hilt ready to draw it again, and at the first, had no other way to make his
victory permanent but by his valor.

But after the Norman conqueror had brought under his yoke and subjection, the
utmost parts of this Island, and by his continual victories tamed the minds of
his formidable enemies; he like a Roman victor, with all diligence labored by
imposition of Laws to reduce the English and the Normans into a peaceable and
sociable union, and accordingly propounded to himself an exact survey of all
the ancient Laws, as the old Laws of the Saxons, which where compounded of the
British customs and their own which mention the Danish Law, Danellage, the
Mercian Law, Mercemlage, and the West Saxon, Westsaxonlage: All these being
considered by William the conqueror, comparing them with the Laws ^ Norway,
Ibid.
which he most affected, as Mr. Seldom supposes, because by them a Bastard of
a Concubine, ^^ himself was, had equal inheritance with the most legitimate
son, as Ger^^se of Tilbury^ in this dialogue de Seaccario says, Quasdam
reprobarit, quasdam autem approbans, illis, transmarinas Neustriae leges quae
ad regni pacem tuendam efficacissimae videbantur, addidit, some he rejected and
some he approving, to them he added the foreign Norway Laws, which seemed most
efficacious for the preserving of the peace of the kingdom. And such laws as he
in writing allowed, though by Roger Hovendon and Iugulphus they were called
Leges Edwardi regis, yet by Matthew Paris, are they properly called, Bonae, and
approbatae antiquae regui leges, the good and approved ancient Laws of the
Kingdom by denomination from the greater part. And sometimes the Laws and
customs of King William. For clearly diverse Norman customs were in practice
first mixed with them, and to these times continue, as Mr. Seldom asserteth, as
that of Coverfeu which was constituted to prevent conspiracies, combinations,
and robberies, which were then very frequent, and commonly contrived and
practiced in the night. And therefore it was ordained that in all towns and
villages a bell should be rung at eight of the Clock in the evening, and that
in every house they should then put out their fire, and lights (which bell was
therefore called Coverfeu) and then to go to bed, which, among many other was
one of the laws much conducing to the preservation of peace. By which so great
a peace was settled in the Kingdom, as by Henry of Huntington he is styled the
Author of peace; whose words are these, Pacis author tantus, quod puella auro
onusta regnum Angliae transire possit impune. He was so great an Author of
peace, that a Virgin laden with gold, might without danger pass through the
Kingdom of England.

And seeing his people to be part Normans, Bacon. uses of the law fol. 31.
and part Saxons, the Normans he brought with him, the Saxons he found here; he
bent himself to conjoin them by marriages in amity; and for that purpose
ordains, that if those of his Nobles, Knights, and Gentlemen, should die
leaving their Heir within age, a Male within one and twenty, and a Female
within fourteen years, and unmarried, then the King should have the bestowing
of such in such a Family, and to such persons as he should think meet, which
was commonly to his Normans, which interest of marriage went still employed,
and does continue at this day in every tenure, is called Knights service.

Then he also commanded all his laws to be written in French, and all causes,
and matters of law to be prosecuted, pleaded and dispatched in the French
language (as the Romans did in Latin) that the English thereby, might be
invited to addict their minds to the knowledge of that Language. That whereas
they were made by Laws, as it were one people, so by this constitution they
might be brought to be of one Language. In this manner (through the prowess and
prudence of the Norman Conqueror) were the English and the Normans so entirely
united that they seemed one Nation and one people without any difference or
distinction of respect and honor, as Dido promised the Trojans, Tros,
Tyriusque mihi nullo discrimine agetur. Which may more effectually be applied
to him; for he and his Progeny reigned over them so united, for the space of
five hundred years.

The next bordering Principality to England is Wales, and therefore first in
order by the English to be conquered, according to the Roman Example, as indeed
it was. A stout and hardy Nation Bellicosissima gens, as Cambden, and indeed
the relics of the ancient Britans, who because they would not subject
themselves to the Tyranny of the Saxous (as the other English did) were forced
by their arms to retreat into the Western Region of that Island for refuge,
surrounded with the muniments of nature as mountains and arms of the Sea,
which anciently was called Cambria, as the people at this present
Cambro-Britauni. In so much as the Saxons were unable by their force to make
way unto them, and to overcome them. And though by some of the Saxon Kings, a
ditch of a wonderful work was framed, which was called King Offa his ditch, by
which they divided that Country from England, and called them Walshmen, that is
to say unto them strangers, yet did they continually with fire and sword,
spoil and depopulate their fields and Cities. And when the Heptarchy of the
Saxons was devolved into a Monarchy could they only by Athelstane (that
victorious King) be made tributary; nay William the Conqueror (the terror of
his time) Cujus nomen (as William of Westminster) exterae and remotae gentes
timebant, whose ruin and downfall the Welsh also conspired, And therefore as
the said William says, though he raised a Copious army against the Welsh with
an intention to subject them to his sword, as he had done the English, yet did
he me^^ with such martial resistance, that he was content to accept of their
homage with faithful hostages to pay him tribute, though after upon their
restless commotions he placed diverse of his Norman Nobility upon the confines
toward Wales, and gave a power unto the persons thus placed, to make such
conquests on the Welsh, as they by their own strength could accomplish, whereby
diverse of those parts were won by the Sword from the Welchmen, which were
planted with English Colonies, and called Barons Marches. Which though his Son
William Rufus seconded, yet was it a great glory for him only to conquer the
Shire of Pembroke which was a very ancient Shire of Wales; so as this parcel of
this Island called Wales, was no parcel of the Dominion of the Realm of
England, but was distinguished from the same, and was, as it were, a Realm of
it self, not governed by the laws of England, Ployd Com. 192.
as the Books of the laws of this Realm do testify: yet nevertheless
afterward was the same Dominion of Wales holden in chief, and in Fee of the
Crown of England, and the Prince thereof being then of their own Nation was
compellable upon Summons to appear in the Parliament of England to do this
homage. And escuage was first invented for them, and the Scots, as Ployden
says, against whom War was made by the Kings of England as rebels, not as
enemies, for that they were subject to England, and were within the Sea. And so
those of Wales were subject to the King of England, Vide Ploid. fol. 129. B.
though they were not parcel of the body of the Realm of England. And hence was
it that Henry the third upon the often revolts of the Welsh endeavored to
assume the territory of Wales, as forfeited, to himself, and conferred the same
upon Edward the Longshank, his Heir-apparent, who took upon him the name of
Prince of Wales, yet could not obtain the possession, or any profit thereby,
for the former Prince of Wales, continued his government, for which cause
between him and the said Edward Wars did rage; whereof the said Edward
complaining to King Henry his Father, An. 1257. fol. 914.
who made him this answer, as Matthew Paris recites it, Quid ad me tu^ terra?
ex dono meo est. Exerce vires primitivas, famam excita juvenilem, and de
caetero timeant inimici, etc. What is your territory to me? it is of my gift.
Advance your primitive forces, stir up your juvenile renown, and as for the
residue, let your enemies fear you, etc. which according to his Fathers
Heroical encouragement, he fortunately enterprised, for as the Comaedian to
that purpose. Vt quisque filium suum vult esse, Terent.
ita est. And not long after, sundry Battails were fought between the said
Edward both before and after he was King of England with Leolan the last Prince
of the Welsh blood, and David his brother, until both the said Prince, and his
said Brother were overcome by the said Edward, after he was King of England,
who thereby first made a conquest of Wales and afterward annexed it to the
Crown of England.

The territory of Wales being thus united, the said King Edward used means to
obtain the peoples good will, thereby to strengthen that which he had gotten by
effusion of blood, with the good will and affection of his subjects: who
promised their most hearty and humble obedience, if it would please the King to
remain among them himself in person, or else to appoint over them a governor
that was of their own Nation, and Country.

Whereupon the cunning King projecteth a pretty policy, and sends his Queen
(being then great with child) into Wales, where she was delivered of a Son, in
the Castle of Carnarvon. The King thereupon sent for all the Barons of Wales,
and remembered them of their submiss assurance tendered according to their former
proffers, if they should have a governor of their own country, and who could
not speak one word of English, whose life and conversation no man was able to
stain or blemish, and required their offered obedience: whereunto they
yiedling, the King presented unto them his said Son born at Carnarvon Castle,
whom thereupon the Barons unanimously embraced for their Prince, and afterward
made their homage to him at Crester. Anno. 29. Edw. 1. as Prince of Wales. And
though the Welsh Nation do not willingly acknowledge the aforesaid conquest,
but refer it rather to this composition, yet as Sir John Davis says, Edward
the first made a conquest of the Dominion of Wales, Davys vep. fol. 41. B.
as it is expressed in his charter, or statute of Rutland, where it is said
Divina providentia terram Walliae cum incolis suis prius nobis jure feodali
subjectam, in proprietatis nostrae dominium convertit, and coronae Regis nostri
annexit.

And thereupon according to the course and power of conquerours, as the same
Author says, he changed their Laws and customs as it is also expressed in the
said charter, or statute. For as to the Laws and customs he says. Quasdam
illarum de concilio procerum regni nostri delevimus, Quasdam correximus, etiam
quasdam alias adjiciendas, and faciend as decrevimus, etc. Some of them by the
council of the Peers of our Realm have we expunged, some have we corrected, and
also some have we determined to be made and added, and as another says,
divided some parts thereof into shires, and appointed Laws for the government
of that people.

Yet though the King had gained the property of that Kingdom, and that the
Inhabitants of it, de Alto and Basso, as it is recited in the said charter, had
submitted themselves to his will: yet it appears, that he did admit all those
who would be ruled and governed by the common Law of England, which he had
established among them, by the said charter, to have Frank Tenement and
Inheritance in their Lands; for there he prescribes a form of the writ de
Assize de novel disseisin, de mort Dauncaster, and de dower to be brought of
Lands in Wales according to the course of the common Law of England, and when
they wanted a writ of form to supply the present case, they used the writ Quod
ei deforceat 2. E. 4.12. A.

Thus was the Dominion of Wales united to the crown of England by the valor
and wisdom of Edward the first, and the principality of it has constantly
since appertained to the Eldest Sons of the Kings of England, Ployd. Com. fol.
126. B.
as Ployden says, from all time that there has been a Prince of Wales: or as
Sir John Doderidge, to the eldest Son or the next succeeding Heir. For Henry
the third first made Edward the first his eldest Son Prince of Wales and gave
to him the Dominion and dignity of it, and also Edward the second after he was
King of England created Edward the third in his life time Prince of Wales; and
the Lady Mary eldest Danghter of King Henry the eight, Doderidge principality
of Wales fol. 39.
and afterward Queen of England did carry the title of Princess of Wales. Et
Sic de Similibus.

Yet notwithstanding this conquest by Edward the first and general submission
of the Welsh, were there diverse insurrections fomented by them against the
former established Government, and especially one which happened in his Reign
raised by Rice up Meredick who rebelled against the King, upon which all the
lands of the said Meredick were confiscated, as forfeited, and seized by the
said King, Doderidge Prince of Wales, fol. 8
and nominally given by his successor Edward the third, to Edward the black
Prince, Prince of Wales for his better maintenance, and honorable support; and
though after the death of the Father they assisted Edward the second his son in
his Wars against the Scots, Herbert. Hen. 6.
and got victories for Edward the third, and stood firm, during all the
differences in this realm, to his Grandchild Richard the second: yet when the
unfortunate, and fatal Wars happened between the two Houses of York and
Lancaster, the Welchmen fell from their fidelity to the Crown, hoping upon that
disasterous mutation to regain their pristine liberty. For as Sir John Baker,
Hist. of England fol. 139.
It was always a custom with that Nation at every change of the Princes of
England to try conclusions, hoping at one time or another to have a day of it,
and to change their yoke of bondage into Liberty; as upon the aforesaid
opportunity they began to lift up their hands and heads, and under the aspiring
command of Owen Glendoer waged a terrible War with Henry the fourth, who
through the combination and confederacy of the Earl of March, and the Lord
Firrcy swallowed in his ambitious mind all Wales and the Lands beyond Severn
Westwards, which were assigned to him for his part; but the King being a
skilful sould^er, having ordered and disposed his Army, suddenly marched
toward the Lords, having a^^especial care that they should by no means join
with the Welsh; and so encountering the Lords singly, obtained an universal
victory; and the Welsh thereupon abandoned Owen Glendoer, who hirking in the
Woods was there famished. And after the Fate of Henry the fourth, Henry the
fifth his son knowing the fashion of the Welsh; Bakers Hist. f. 241
that in time of change they would commonly cake advantage to make Inroads upon
the borders caused forts and bulwarks in fit places to be erected, and placed
Garrisons in them for the preventing, or repelling any such Incursions; yet so
prompt and captious were they continually upon the least opportunity to such
insurrections. Vt nullo modo induci potuerunt (as Cambden says) ut servitutis
jugum subirent, nec ulla ratione res componi, and Funestissimum inter gentes
odium restingui potuit, donec Henricus 7. ab illis oriundus salutarem manum
jacentibus Britannis perrexerit, and Henr. 8. eos in parem juris libertatisque
conditionem atque nos ipsi Angli sumus acceperit; that by no means they could
be induced to undergo the yoke of servitude, neither by any reason could matten
be compounded, and the mo^ mortal hatred between those two Nations be
extinguished, until Henry the Seventh descended of them had extended his
sovereign hand to the forlorn Britans, and Henry the Eight had received them
into the equal condition of right and liberty, even as we Englishmen are. And
indeed He^^y the Seventh was descended of Owen Tuder, who is said to be
descended of Cadwallader a Prince of Wal^ (wherein the Welsh prophecy seemed to
them now to be fulfilled, that one of the Princes of Wales should be Crowned
with the Diadem of Brute, which Prince Leolin before vainly aferibed unto
himself) who therefore was cheerfully assisted by the Welchmen to the title of
the Crown, Herbert. H. 8. f. 369
they being desirous according to the former p^oposition made by them to Edward
the first to have a Prince of their own Nation to rule over them.

Yet were not the Welchmen fully satisfied with this union, but expected a more
entire union by laws; for notwithstanding the Laws which were established in
that Country by Edward the 1. there were 141 Lordships of Marchers, which were
then neither any part of Wales though formerly conquered out of Wales, neither
any part of that Shire of England, who by the license of the Kings then
Reigning, Davis cep. f. 61. B.
had Royal signiories in their severalter itories. 9. H. 6.12. 152. and 11. H.
4.40. and a kind of Palatine jurisdiction and a power to administer Justice to
their tenants in every of their territories, revoking their own Laws and
customs at their pleasure, that the writs of ordinary justice out of the Kings
court were not for the most part current among them, and substituted Officers
at their pleasure, Herb. H. 8. fo. 369.
who practiced strange and discrepant customs, and committed such rapins that
nothing was almost safe nor quiet in those parts; for by reason of the flight
of the offenders from one Lordship to another they had escaped due and condign
punishment: whereupon the noblest and eldest of that Nation supplicating Henry
the eight, Herb. ibid.
did crave to be received and adopted into the same Laws and privileges which
his other subjects of England enjoyed, which moved the King to make the statute
of 27. H. 8. c. 26. by which is ordained and enacted, that the Principality and
Dominion of Wales shall be incorporated, united, and annexed to the Realm of
England, altering in many parts the former jurisdiction and Government thereof,
bringing the same to the like administration of justice, as was and yet is
usual in England, appointing that the Laws of England should take place there,
and all Welsh Laws, sinister customs and tenures not agreeing to the laws of
England, should be thenceforth ever abrogated and abolished: and therefore
whereas before there had been eight several Shires in Wales, besides the County
of Monmouth, and that some other territories in Wales were then no Shire
grounds, by reason whereof the laws of England could have no current passage
therein; by the said Act there were erected in Wales four other, namely the
several Shires of Radnor, Brecknock, Mountgomery, and Denbigh, by which means
the Laws of England there also might be put into execution And further the said
Lord Marchers grounds by the same Act were annexed and united, partly to the
Shires of England, and partly to the Shires of Wales next adjoining, as thought
then by reason of the vicinity of the place and otherwise most convenient to
prevent the perpretating of the aforesaid enormities and odious offenses by
just and lawful punishments.

And to make the Union the more honorable, and that the noblest of the Welsh
Nation might participa^e of the highest privileges and chiefest dignities of
England, according to the Roman precedent, it was also ordained that out of the
said Shires of Wales there should be one Knight, and out of every of the Shire
Towns in Wales named in the said Act there be one Burgess elected after the
English manner; which Knights and Burgesses so elected and duly upon summons
of every Parliament in England returned, should have place and voice. in the
Parliament of England, as other the Burgesses and Knights of England used to
have.

And though the said statute does not make mention of the penalty given upon
the Sheriffs false return for such Knights and Burgesses as shall be lawfully
elected in Wales, and not returned, but that those were given by the statute of
23. H. 6. c. 15. against the Sheriffs of England; yet shall the Knights and
Burgesses of Wales so elected and not returned, have the benefit of it by the
statute of 27. H. 8. because that statute grants that the Country of Wales
shall have, enjoy, and inherit all rights, privileges and laws within it is
Dominions, as other subjects of the King born in this Realm: for the general
words of the statute make all the laws of England as well Common laws as Statute
laws to be of effect in Wales, and shall take place there, and that the
Welchmen shall have the benefic of the English laws for things done in Wales,
as the English shall have for things done in England, and by a Quodei deforceat
the Welsh shall take adv^ntage of all actions real as well given by the common
law as the statutes of this Realm, Vide Com. Ployd. Beckleys case Fo. 128. Fo.
129. and befides because the Welsh use a speech nothing like or consonant to
the Mother tongue used within this Realm, and that some rude and ignorant
people did make a distinction and diversity between the subjects of this Realm,
and the subjects of the other, whereby great division and variance did grow
between the said people, as in the preamble of the said act is expressed;
therefore more naturally toconjoyn those dissonant Nations as well by Language,
as by Laws, it was also by that statute enacted, that none that use the Welsh
Language shall enjoy any office or fees within the Kings Dominions, but shall
forfeit them, unles they use the English Language; by which exception the
Welchmen (who before much gloried in the Antiquity and simplicity of their
British Language) were stirred on to bend their study and practice to the
knowledge and pronunciation of the English Dialect; To the propriety of which
most of them within few years attained, and at this day generally affect, and
use it with delight, which has been an instrumental means of a more amicable
union between these two Nations. And for the execution of the laws, it was
ordained that the County of Monmouth formerly being a shire of Wales should be
governed from thenceforth in like manner, and by the same ludges as other
shires of England were: And for the other t^ elue shires a special
Jurisdiction and Officers were ordained, yet in substance agreeable after the
manner of the English laws. And finally, by that Statute, Gavelkind and all
other sinister customs of Wales were abolished, but all customs which are
reasonable and agreeable to any customs of England preserved. For by the same
Statute it is provided, that a Commission shall issue to examine the Welsh
customs, and that those that shall be found reasonable, upon a Certificate of
the said Commissioners shall be allowed, Davis Rep. f. 40. And accordingly
whereas there was a Custom in Denbigh, that a Feme Covert with her husband
might alien land by surrender, and examination in Court: Wray and Dyer were of
opinion, that it shall bind the feme, and heirs of the feme as a fine, though
th feme after issue make such an alienation, and die; and the reason there
given why the custom is not taken away, is for that it is reasonable and
agreeable to some customs in England, for the assurance of purchasers; for the
title of the Act is for Laws and Justice to be ministered in like form as in
this Realm, Vide Dyer, 363. pl. 26. In like manner was it holden, 19. Eliz.
Dyer. f. 345. pl. 13. that whereas before the subjection of Wales to the Crown
of England, a man did hold lands of the Prince of Wales by service to go in his
War; it was no tenure of which the Common Law might take notice, for the
principality of Wales was not governed by the Common law, but was a Dominion of
it self, and had their proper laws and customs: and for that reason when that
Country was reduced under the subjection of the Crown of England, such tenure
as was of the person of the Prince of Wales could not become a Capite ^enure of
the King of England.

In this manner and by the means of the said Act of 27. H. 8. were the Welsh
Nation, and the English more entirely united by lows then before; of which
union ensued a greater peace, tranquillity and civility, and infinite good to
the inhabitants of the Country of Wales, and so continued during the Reign of
Six succeeding Kings and Queens, until the horrid and irreconcilable War broke
out between the King and Parliament, wherein the Welsh upon changes, being
always Changelings, in the beginning levied Forces in Defense of the Parliament
against the KING; in which War though a prosperous event succeeded, the royal
Brigades being totally vanquished, and the King himself under the power of the
Army, yet assumed they unto themselves their ancient animosity; and being
possessed with a conceit that they were never conquered, but by composition;
now adventured once more to make trial of their British valor under the
Commission of Prince Charles, and under the command of Major General Rowland
Laughorn, Colonel Rice Powel and Colonel John Poyer, who before had been
Commanders for the Parliament, and in a warlike and hostile manner possessed
themselves of diverse Garrisons and Towns against the Parliament; and Laughorn
being a General of great esteem in those parts, raised an Army, which in a
small time increased to the number of 8000 Horse and Foot: which by Colonel
Horton (who was sent by the Parliament to suppress that insurrection) through
the assistance of the Almighty was totally routed, a great slaughter committed,
and three thousand prisoners taken, with all their ammunition. A happy Victory
for the Parliament; their Forces consisting merely of three Thousand men; and a
disasterous commencement for the Welsh; who nevertheless persisted in their
resolution. For Laughorn and Powel escaping by flight got to Poyer into
lembroke Castle, who before kept that strong Hold for the Parliament, and now
having fortified it with a company of malignants, with great courage maintained
it against them: so great was the danger, and difficult the enterprise, that
Lieutenant General Cromwell himself, was sent with some Regiments into Wales to
impede the Welsh as well from rallying and collecting their fugitive and
dispersed Forces, as to dispossess them of the Towns, Garrisons, and Castles,
they had treacherously surprised: who first resolved to besiage Chepstow
Castle, but hastening to Pembrook which was more considerable, he left Colonel
Eure there, who within fifteen days took that Castle, and slew Kemish to whom
before it had been betrayed. But Pembroke Castle was not so facile to be
vanquished, and by Poyer deemed impregnable, who relying on the strength of the
place refused all conditions, ^he Cromwell not enduring the repulse with an
assured confidence besieged it, and through the accommodation of Sir Ceorge
Ascue, who furnished him with great Guns from the Se^, and all things necessary
for a siege forced Foyer, and Laug^orn at the last being brought to extremist,
(though it had been long stouth maintained by them,) to surrender and deliver
up the Castle without conditions, rend^ing themselves prisoners at mercy, for
which deliveries by order of Parliaments public thanksgiving to God was
Solemnized.

And why should I now expostulate the question with the Welsh whether they ever
were conquered by the English, when as now the best and most knowing of them
have ingeniously acknowledged that they were never conquered before. Jamque
habemus Confitentes victos. But what may seem to be the cause why the
insurrections of the Welsh were so frequent, but that Edward the first contrary
to the Roman Garb upon his first conquest did admit all of them to the
possession and inheritance of their Lands and goods, which would be ruled and
governed by the common law of England, and did forbear to settle a Militia, or
deduce Colonies among them, thereby to restrain them from future Commotions:
which the Parliament of England prudently observing were induced to put in
practice the old Roman rule. Parcere subjeciis, and debellare superbos. And
ordained that all persons whatsoever that were in actual Rebellion in the said
insurrections, and all other persons that have willingly by council or force
assisted the same, or contributed any money's, horse or arms, amu^ition, or
other aid or assistance thereof are adjudged delinquents, and that their
estates be sequestered, and that the Commissioners named and appointed in the
said ordinance or such persons as they shall appoint, do seize the estates real
and personal of all and every the said persons, delinquents aforesaid, and also
to make sale, receive and dispose of all and every the Goods, Chattels, Debts,
Rents, and personal estates of all and every the said Delinquents, and let,
set, and improve their Lands at the best rate they can, according to the
ordinance of sequestration etc.

And on some of their Ieaders did they inflict capical punishment, therein also
pursuing the justice of the ancient Roman Empire, Grot. de J. B. and P. l. 9.
c. 11.
Qui de captis hostium civibus vindictam morte sumebant, who did take revenge
of the Captains of their enemies which were taken, by death, for which Constans
the Son of Constantine is commended in the Panegyric.

And further for the securing of the Parliament, and mutual defense and safety
of each other, did they settle and constitute the Militia in those parts, which
had a resemblance of the Roman Colonies: and at this present are there military
Garrisons continued in the chiefest Cities of Wales, by which means ever since
that country has been kept and maintained in peace and tranquillity without
the suspicion of any insurrection, and a constant unity settled between these
two Nations.

The conquest of Scotland in regard of it is vicinity with England is in the
next place to be considered, and especially for that deadly feud and perpetual
wars have time out of mind raged between these two Nations.

Nam rara est inter eos pax dum illi propagari, Hist. Brit^ fol. 7.
hi retinere imperium student: for peace was rare between them while they
endeavored to propagate their Empire and these to retein it; which though the
English for many Ages with all their skill and force have contended to
vanquish, yet could they not until these latter times accomplish. So difficult
a task it was to conquer that valiant Nation, and by force to bring it to an
union; for as the same Author says, Eadem utrisque in bell^ ferocia. And as an
other, Gens virorum fortium fuit quam frugum feracior, It was a country more
abounding in proper men then in goodly fruits. A fierce Nation indeed, which
was never subjugated by the Romans; as Tertullian who lived in the second Age
according to the Christian computation intimates, Apolog.
saying: Evangelium diffusum est in omnes orbis parts, etiam in Britanniam
usque eamque Insulae partem, qu^m Romanae vires nunquam penetrarunt, The Gospel
was diffused through all the parts of the world, also into Britany, and even
into that part of the Island which the Romans never pierced, meaning that part
of the Island which is now called Scotland; But the Romans attempting it, were
continually rebutted and repulsed by them; and in fine were foreed to frame
walls, trenches and bulwarks, to defend their Province from their terrible
incursions, which were first built by Adrian, as Aelius Spartianus; then by
Antoninus Pius, as Julius Capitolinus; and thirdly by Severus, thereby to stop
the furious invasions of the Scots, of which Claudian does mention.

Venit and extremis legio praetentae Britannis
Quae Scoto dat fraena truci.
But whereas Buchanan a partial Trumpeter of his country praises, De jure
regni apud Scot.
says; Nos regnum exiguum quidem, sed jam bis mill annos ab exterar^m gentium
imperio liberum tenemus; we hold our Kingdom, a little one indeed, but now for
the space of two thousand years free from the Dominion of foreign Nations: yet
to the contrary says Matthew of Westminster, Quod Reges Angliae Jure
Superioris and directi Dominii, ab antiquissimis temporibus regno Scotiae and
ipsius regibus praefuerunt, and ab ipsi^ and illorum pr^ceribus regalia homagia
receperunt and fidelitatis debita juramenta, that the Kings of England by the
right of a more superior and direct Dominion, from the most ancient times had
their pre-eminence over the Kingdom of Scotland and their Kings, and have
received legal homages from them and their Nobles, and due Oaths of fidelity.
For after the Saxons had made a Conquest of the Britans, and reduced their
Heptarchy into a Monarchy, changing it is name into England; Scotland by the
power of their victorious Arms, Hollingshed Ed. 3.
was compelled to do homage and fealty to England, and to be tributary to their
sueceeding Kings for Edward the son of Alured ^ad it under his Dominion; Herb.
Hen. 8.
And Athelstane made one Constantine King thereof, Eldreck took homage of
Ericus, and Edgar, of Kinulph, Kings of Scots, Malcome did homage to Knuto, and
Edward the confessor gave the Kingdom to Malcome, who did homage to William the
Conqueror and to William Rufus, and Edgar did homage to Henry the first, and
David did homage to Matilda the Empress, which were without intermission
transacted by the succeeding Kings of Scotland to the succeeding Kings of
England, Herb. ib.
even to the reign of Henry the seventh: which incited Henry the eighth to
claim homage and fealty of James the fourth, which was partly the cause of the
quarrel and famous Battle between him and the King, so as the aforesaid
homages and fealties made by the Kings of Scots were not only for the Earldom
of Huntington as the Scots pretend. For David King of Scots having married the
Daughter and Heir of the Earl of Huntington and Northumberland, and received
the investiture thereof, did not only do homage and owe fealty for the Earldom
of Huntington, as also his son Malcome did; but the said David did also homage
and made fealty for the Kingdom of Scotland to Matilda the Empress; as also
all the succeeding Kings of Scotland did, according to the former expression.

But of all the Kings of England none equalled Edward the first, and none as
Sir Francis Bacon says, is more celebrated with the commendations of War and
Wisdom, and especially for his purpose and enterprise for the conquest of
Scotland, bending his mind not to glorious conquests abroad, but to the
setlement by conquest of a solid union between those two discordant Nations, as
before he had done between Wales and England. For which his heroic Acts the
Fame of his virtue so wrought on the minds of the Scots, that great contention
intervening between them concerning the succession to the crown, Alexander the
King of Scots leaving no Heir, there being twelve competitors, Hollingshed.
who by several titles laid claim unto the crown: all of them referred the
decision of that royal case, without any constraint, and of their own good
will, (as in the Reference is expressed) to the final sentence of Edward the
first, who after six years discussion adjudged the case on Baliols side; who
indeed had the best title, but upon promise to subject the crown of Scotland to
him, and to swear fealty and homage to him as his sovereign Lord; and thereupon
is Baliol crowned King of Scotland: which being done, King Baliol comes to
Newcastle upon Tyne, where King Edward then lay, and there with the chief of
the Nobility did swear fealty, and do homage to him as their sovereign Lord,
except Bruce who was the next Heir to the crown.

King Edward thus became the sovereign Umpire and supreme Judge of Scotland, to
whom the Nobles as the King himself before had done, appealed for Justice
against the King. And because King Edward would not permit King Baliol a
Procurator, but caused him to defend his cause himself in the Ordinary place,
in a rage at his return, he defyeth King Edward, renounceth his allegiance as
illegally made without the Consent of the States. Hollingshed.
For which King Balioll being summoned to appear at Newcastle and refusing to
come, King Edward, triumphantly with a mighty army invaded Scotland: Barwick is
first taken, and afterward the Castles of Dunbar, Roxborrough, Edinborrough,
Sterling, and St. John's; and John Warren Earl of Sussex and Surrey is made
Warden of all Scotland, Sir Hugh Cressingham Treasurer, and Bransly Chief
Justice, to take in his name the homages and fealties of all such at held Lands
of the Crown and to be General Guardian of the whole Kingdom. And
notwithstanding Balioll in Parliament with the consent of the States of
Scotland did tender his submission, and did homage and swear fealty unto King
Edward as his sovereign Lord, yet is he for his former infidelity secured and
sent into England: but not long after though the Scots were without an head,
their King being in England, and all their great men in captivity and
subjection, yet they wanted not an heart to shake off servitude, and animated
by one William Wallis a poor private Gentleman, though nobly descended, made an
audacious and dangerous attempt, who with a forlorn and desperate rabble like
himself, fell suddenly on the English Officers, and slew Sir Hugh Cressingham
with six thousand English, recovered many Castles, and regained the Town of
Barwick. And seconded by success so increased by ranging and rolling up and
down, many of the nobler sort resorting to him, that within a short space his
forces amounted to a copious and Warlike Army; and was in a propinque
possibility to have freed his country from subjection, if the speedy succor
of King Edward had not anticipated him; who removing his Court to York, and
making that City his imperial Seat, (as the Roman Emperors heretofore did)
that with the more convenience he might quell the insulting Scots, there raised
an exquisite and choice Army, and with three thousand men of Arms on barded
horses, and four thousand others armed on horse without bards; and with an Army
of foot answerable, he encountered the confident Army of the Scots, who on the
onset made such terrible shouts, that King Edwards Horse frighted therewith
cast him off and brake two of his ribs, yet nevertheless he gets up again,
goes on, and gains the victory. In which battle Sexaginta Scotorum millia
occisa fuerunt, threescore thousand Scots were slain, as William of Westminster
numbers them, among which there were two hundred Knights; whereupon a
Parliament being called at St. Andrews, most of the great men of that Kingdom
(except Wallis) who had escaped by flight, prostrated their homage and fealty
to King Edward as their supreme head and King, of which William of Westminster
gives this character, Arma parant Scotus regno dolet esse remotus. And King
Edward the better to keep some in subjection, and deter others from
insurrection, did confer most of the estates of the Earls and Barons of
scotland with their titles that stood out, on the English, as a reward of their
valor and virtue. Hollingshed Ed. 3.
And now it would seem that Scotland was quite conquered and subjected to the
Crown of England, they having no King nor Heir in Scotland but the King of
England. But as Cambden says, est Natio servitutis Impatientissimae, Cambd.
Brit.
It is a Nation impatient of servitude, and a breeder of stubborn and
refractory spirits, which to their power would not stoop to the English Yoke:
for though they were twice overthrown by King Edward, and thrice swore fealty
unto him, yet did they as many times falsify their faith, which in military
affairs is principally to be maintained, Postremum est primumque t^eri Inter
bella fidem. And now again go about to contrive new commotions, rejecti^^
Balioll their natural King, for the he received the Crown upon condition to
subject the Crown of Scotland to the Crown of England, f^^ which they recalled
their allegian^^ that they had given to him, and received Robert Bruce come of
the second branch, for their King; because as one of their own writer says, he
had basely condiscende^ to enslave that Nation, to whom their liberty had
always been (...) dear, In the History of the reformation of the Church of
Scotland.
that they have willingly and cheerfully undergone all hazard of life and
means; which if they should have suffered, they had nothing lef^ whereby they
might be called men^ and consequently armed with this resolution, under their
new head and King, forced all the Wardens of Scotland to retire to Barwick,
whereof as soon as the King heard, he sends the Earl of Pembroke and the Lord
Clifford with a strong power to relieve the Wardens of Scotland, whilst he
prepares a potent Army to sollow, making a vow that either alive or dead he
would pour venge^ince on the perfidious Scots. In which expedition, that
magnaninous King falling into a sickness at Carlisle, adjured his son and all
the Nobles about him upon their fealty, that if he died in this journey, they
should carry his corpse with them about Scotland, and not suffer it to be
interred until they had finally conquered the Scots; As Matthew of Malmesbury,
Jussit corpus suum^ibi temauere insepultum dum tota Scotia esset finaliter
acquisita. An heroic resolution worthy the spirit of a conqueror; but he that
never stooped to enemy was forced to submit to Fate; and he that was always
victorious was overcome by death. Quae sola ultricibus armis
Elat^s auimos fraenat, quae fortibus aequat
Imbelles, populisque duces.
By whose immature obit the final and entire conquest of Scotland was
prevented, which in all probability might have prosperously succeeded, if the
envious destinies h^^ not stopped the success of his victories, or his
succeeding son had be^ a trusty Executor of his Fathers T^ stament: but he
resembled his Father in virtue no more, then Dimitian did Vespasian, or
Commode^ A^toninus, and one day of his Fathers, as Tully said of Antony, wa^
more to be desired then an whole Age of his. For he degenerating from his
fathers worth, lost all by sloth and luxury, which his father had won by valor
and industry, permitting the new Scotch King to take all the Garrisons and
Castles in Scotland, and without resistance to enter the English borders, and
to take and burn Towns; that unless he would suffer him to pull his crown from
his head, he could do no less then give him battle; and in a manner forced him
for his honor to levy an Army, who like himself raised one more fit for a
court then a camp, which though it in number exceeded the Scottish Army, was by
it hamefully defeated, the particulars and event of which would I could bury in
oblivion, so much does it eclipse the ancient glory of our Nation. Which
singular victory so encouraged the Scots, that for the space of three hundred
years they were emboldned almost without any intermission, to make War with the
English, to their little loss and prejudice, and could never be thoroughly
quieted and appeased until the happy arrival of James the King of Scots to the
crown of England, upon which ensued a blessed peace and union between those two
discordant and belligerant Nations, an hopeful union of both Kingdoms under one
natural Liege Sovereign; Bacon. discourse of that union.
at which the Scottish Nation at the instant of his Majesty's reign became
Denisons, and the ^ostuati were naturalized Subjects of England from the time
forward; and besides it was a conjunction of Allegiance and Obedience of the
Subjects of both Kingdoms due by nature to their Sovereign, which in substance
is but the uniting of the hearts of the Subjects of both Kingdoms one to the
other under one Head and Sovereign, Cok. L. 7. Calvin's case f. 15.
from which proceeded the union of protection of both Kingdoms, equally
belonging to the Subjects of either of them.

Yet was not this Union so absolute but that there were many separations and
distinctions between them, as that they were distinct Kingdoms governed by
several judicial and municipal laws, and had distinct and separated
Parliaments; for which reason the said King with all the forces and faculties
of his mind, wherein he surmounted his Predecessors, endeavored more entirely
to cement and conjoin them, especially by laws, which are the sinews of
Societies. For as Sir Francis Bacon, naturalization does not take away the mark
of a Forreiner, but union of laws makes us entire as our selves, which takes
away both destruction and separation; and to that end called a Parliament
without which it could not legally be brought to pass. For as Sir Edw. Coke,
Cok. lib. 7. Calvin's case, f. 17.
a King that has a Kingdom by descent, seeing by the Laws of that Kingdom he
does not inherit that Kingdom, he cannot change those laws of himself without
consent of Parliament: which though solenmly propounded and ardently pursued by
his Majesty in Parliament, as also vigorously and judiciously seconded by many
of the ablest members of the house of Commons, yet were the subjects of this
kingdom in this point so refractory and adverse to the subjects of the other
Kingdom, that no union during that Kings reign at any time, in any Parliament,
though often times moved, could be voted, ordained, and established, Augustis
tamen excidit ausis. And therefore this union lasted not long for that it was
not settled and pertected according to the aforesaid principles and rules:
neither had it so long lasted, but that, that provident and circumspect King
did conserve those two Emulous Nations in peace and unity, more by his
magnificency and humanity, especially toward the subjects of the other
Kingdom, then by the politic precepts of union: by whose debonarity and
bounty, the Scottish men's minds were so closely bound and knit unto him, that
as well in Scotlend whilst the King was absent, no distaste or discontent did
break out among them, as also they forsook their stable confederacy with the
French, which for many ages was the Source and Origin of implacable and bloody
battles between the English and Scots; they being thereunto incited and ass^^ed
by the French: whereas whilst the King reigned, the Scots had little
Correspondence with the French, and in civil comport seemed to exceed the
English, being ready with them cheerfully to conjo^n their forces against the
affronts of any enemy whether Spaniard, or French. In this peaceable posture
and union did King James leave the Scots when he left this light; But his Son
succeeding wanted his Fathers Kings craft, and became too rigid toward the
Scots, and though he knew them addicted to the reformed Religion and the Geneva
discipline, yet would he obtrude upon them a book of common prayer framed by
the Archbishops and Bishops, wherein was contained several seeds of idolatry,
superstition and false Doctrine as they averred; and also a Canon annexed
thereunto, that whosoever should oppose the same should incurr the pain of
excomunication, with di^ers other canons fraught with errors and superstitions,
which wonderously inflamed the Scots, and exasperated them to raise seditions
and to rebel against their King; for as Danaeus, propter mutatam a Principe vel
public vel privatim religionem patriam and ob peregrinam susceptam, populus
saepe a principe desciscit, For the changing of the Religion of ones Country
publicly or privately by the Prince, and imposing a strange one, the people
do often rebel against their Prince, as here it happened; which they managed
with such violence and confidence, that a royal and terrible army of the
English could not fright or dismay them, but cunningly by degrees drew the
English into their faction, who unanimously conjoyning did eradicate the
Hierarchy of Archbishops, Bishops, their jurisdiction, book of common prayer
and canons and the like trumpery in both Kingdoms, and for many years adhered
to the Parliament, and maintained a defensive War against those evil
counselors as seduced and withdrew his Majesty from his Parliament. But in the
end the Scots fell into variance with the Parliament for many particular
propositions concerning the interest and power of the King, and chiefly for
going about to diminish the just power and greatness of his Majesty, which they
by their covenant (as was by them pretended,) their allegiance and duty as
subjects were obliged to support; and thereupon in a grievous discontent
without taking their leaves left England and quite deserted the Parliament. But
not long after the fatal doom and death of the King eveening, which was
juridically inflicted on him for his tyranny, to prevent succeeding tyranny; As
in the Declaration of Parliament is expressed.
the Parliament was necessitated to the alteration in Government, and to the
settling the Government in a way of a free state, which according to the
practice of the Romans (whom in this tractate we have chosen for a president)
was adjudged convenient and conducible for the good of this Nation, as it was
for theirs, when for the tyranny of Tarquinius Superbus, they did change their
royal rule into the free commonwealth: neither does such a transmutation alter
the substance and essence of a state, for the form of a commonwealth or city
being changed, the commonwealth or city remains the same, Neque enim (as
Gr^tius says) refert quomode gubernetur an rege, Grotius de I B. and P. l. 2.
c. 9.
an plurium, an multitudinis imperio, Idem enim est populus Romanus sub
Regibus, Consulibus, and Imperatoribus.

Neither is it material how it is governed, whether by a King or by the command
of more, or a multitude; but the formal difference consists in the quality
and virtue of the Governors: for as learned and Judicious Patricius (who was
born in a free City and did compose two elaborate and accurate Volumes, the
first being in commendation of a free State, and the second in praise of
Principality, comparing the one with the other) affirms that if a
Commonwealth be governed by one good man, that kind of Government, as it was
the first so it is the best, Patric. d^ Rep. l. 1. tit. 1.
but if through the vices and tyranny of the Prince, is be devolved into a free
State, such Government is also to be approved and extolled lest the people
being factious, and carried away with lust and avarice, ruin the estates of
the best deserved Citizens and will not be satisfied without the effusion of
blood, or banishment; which as the same Author says was the overthrow of the
Athenian Commonwealth, and concludes with the determination of Xenophon,
Patric. de princ. l. 1. tit. 3.
Omnes civiles civitates vitio eorum ruere, qui illis praesunt, that all civil
Cities are ruined by the vices of those that have authority over them; for if
they be rightly governed they may be omnino perpetuae and immortales,
alto^ether perpetual, and immortal. But to return to the point whence my
Penstarted, the Scors incensed with the dismal and ignominious death of their
King, and total deprivation of his issue from the inheritance of the Crown of
England, began to muster up in their minds hostile thoughts of revenge, and to
dream of the conquest of England, they having a title to it by their King, and
many Cavaliers and Royalists dormant in that State vigorously to assist them.
And therefore his Father being deprived of this life, they treated with CHARLES
his Son and Heir, being then in Foreign parts, upon certain Presbyterian
Covenants, to come and succeed his Father in that Crown; which he accepting,
was royally by them received, and solemnly crowned KING of Scotland. And now
the Scots proud of their Native King, he being indeed a gallant Gentleman, and
by reason of the civil Wars brought up in the field of Mars, began to prepare
an Army for the Invasion of England; of which the circumspect Parliament having
intelligence, all the actions of the Enemy being as equally known to them as
their own; to prevent the imminent danger which was esteemed great, (they being
unanimously united under one Head, who before were divided, and besides aided
by foreign Princes,) upon a serious debate created Oliver Cromwell for their
General, as a man equivalent to so perilous a Design; Sueton.
who Elatus gaudio (as Caesar was when by the consult of the Senate he was
decreed to march against the Gauls the ancient terror of Rome) (to give him
his due, without envy or flattery) with the Caesarean celerity, and a complete
and well disciplined Army marched up into the bowels of Scotland, wisely
projecting to make it the miserable Seat of War, and by provoking the Enemy to
increase confidence in his Commilitons, and to dishearten theirs; with whom was
conjoined Lieut. Genesis Lambert due fulmina belli who in the end thundered them
all in pieces: but they in the beginning, though exceeding them in number,
would not adventure to hazard a battle, but endeavored by Fabian cunctations
and deprivation of necessaries to weaken and diminish their forces, continually
retreating and drawing them into moorish and unsound places, whereby many
perished, and diverse fell into pernicious diseases, so as the General was
constrained to retire with the relics of his Army toward the Sea, with an
intention to ship them for England; which the numerous Scottish Army
conceiving, being well accomplished and furnished with sound and able men, and
sufficient necessaries, pursued them at the heels, and having cooped them up
within a Nook of land and encompassed them within the Arms of the Sea, thinking
themselves sure of spoil and victory, they boldly offered them battle: which
the General and Lambert his Lieut. General, though environed with desperate
extremes, Veget. de mili. l. 3.
cheerfully and courageously embraced ( Clausis in desperatione crescit
audacia) and with more then ordinary vigor and audacity, piously excited their
Commilitons being but a wearied and sick handful of men to that desperate
encounter, who resolving to die or gain the victory rushed with them into the
battle: And the General animating the Foot, and the Lieut. General Lambert the
Horse, under the Word and Name of the Lord of Hosts, obtained a glorious and
wondrous Victory, most of that mighty Army being slain, or taken prisoners,
Dignos laud viros Musa vetat mori. Whereas if the Scots had permitted them to
pass, and not forced them to fight upon such desperate straits, and followed
the military precept, cum desperatis non est pugnandum, they had made an
inglorious return, and the Scots had gained a fortunate opportunity upon a
consequent Invasion to have subdued England.

(...). Homcr. Ib^ad. 1.
But God's will was done, and the General skilful how to use his Victory, with
his victorious Army like an irresistible inundation overran the whole Country,
took Edinburgh, and the Castles of Leith, Dundee, Brent Island; as also St.
Johnstons, and Sterling Castle, a place of incredible strength, and in
conclusion forced their hopeful KING, with the remainder of his forces secretly
to fly into England for Refuge, upon vain hopes of second supplies; but by the
divine providence being prevented, and stopping his course at Worcester, was by
the invincible General, and his courageous Commilitons, who with tedious and
irksome marches at the length overtook him, totally deseated and utterly
vanquished: many Nobles of Scotland being taken, and committed, with many
thousand other inferior persons. By which Victory the conquest of Scotland was
absolutely accomplished, and ever since has been subject to the Commonwealth
of England; which by virtue of that conquest have therein Placed Garrisons and
English Colonies, according to the Roman Rule to contein them in subjection,
peace and union. But to apply my Pen to the other rule which is the union by
laws; and though it is in the power of the Conqueror at his pleasure to alter
and change the laws of the conquered Kingdom, Cok. L. 7. Calvin's case f. 17.
and that without a Parliament as Edward the first did by his Charter of
Rutland, but until he does make an alteration of laws, the ancient laws of that
Kingdom do still remain; yet certainly it is the greater victory to alter and
change the Laws of the conquered with their consent, that there may be a more
intimatc and entire union between them. And therefore did the Parliament in
December, 1651. to the end that the people of Scotland should be united with
the people of England into one Commonwealth and under one Government, send
Commissioners into Scotland to invite the people of that Nation unto such an
happy union; who proceeded so far therein, that the Shires and Burroughes of
Scotland by their deputies appearing at Dalkeith, and again at Edenborough, did
accept of the said union and assent thereunto, which was seconded by the late
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, who by the advice of his council
ordained, April 5. 1654. That all the Dominions of Scotland, of the Isles and
Territories thereunto belonging, are and shall be, and are hereby incorporated
into, constituted and confirmed one Commonwealth with England, and in every
Parliament held successively for the said Commonwealth, thirty persons shall be
called from, and serve for Scotland, which Ordinance was confirmed by the
Parliament in the year 1657. So many Knights, and Burgesses, as before was
expressed, who were called and summoned according to the said Ordinance, were
admitted to sit in the said Parliament, and did vote and jo^n with the English
in the making and enacting of Laws; which Laws so made or hereafter to be made
by them in Parliament, do bind and oblige the Commons of Scotland, as well as
the Commons of England; because the Knights and Burgesses of both Countries,
being chosen by the Assent of the Commons of either Country, do represent the
estates of the several and distinct Commons of either Country: And therefore
as St. German says, every statute there made, Doct. and Slud. li. 2. c. 46.
is of as strong effect in law, as if all he commons were then present
personally at the making thereof. There are many more particular clauses in the
aforesaid Ordinance contained, which concur to the more full effecting of the
said union, all which I refer to the consideration of the supreme council of
this Nation. And though the constitutions of the countries of England and
Scotland be such, that there can hardly in all things be such an obsolute
reconciling and uniting of their laws, no more then there has been between
other country's subject to the obedience and allegiance of the Kings of
England; as Normandy and Aquitany, had several laws different to the laws of
England; Garnesey and Jersey have yet their several laws, which for the most
part were the ancient laws and customs of Normandy; Kent, and Cornwall have
also their several Laws and customs, and so has the county of Palatine of
Chester: yet do not these several Laws make any differences in matter of
subjection and obedience, and are no marks of disunion or several allegiances.

Howsoever as Sir Francis Bacon says, Discourse of the union of England, and
Scotland.
it is to be wished that the Scottish Nation was governed by our Laws which
with some conducement are worthy to govern if it were the world; or else that
Scotland be in the like degree and conditions with Wales, as has been for many
hundred years; those Laws and customs only being in force, which are
reasonable and agreeable to the Laws and customs of England, for it is a matter
too curious to extirpate all particular customs which are consonant to reason,
and it suffices that there be a uniformity in the fundamental Laws.

For language it is not needful to infist upon it, because both Kingdoms are
of one language, though of several dialects, and the difference is so small
between them, as Sir Francis Bacon says, Ibid.
that it promises rather an enriching of our language then a continuance of
two; so as it may seem convenient that as they Originally participate of one
language, they should likewise be under one Government, as heretofore by
ancient Histories they are reported to have been; which is now revived and like
to continue, the premised Roman rules being observed.

But now to waft Englands conquering forces over into Ireland, which though it
was first conquered is placed in the Arrear, for that it is more remote, and
separated from it by the Sea; yet is it by Ptolomy styled Britaunia Minor as an
adjacent Island, and is another Britain, as Britain is said to be another
world, it being not inferior to any part of Britanny for affinity and
fertility, as Tacitus, solum, Coelumque and ingenia haut multum a Britannia
differunt. Vita Agr.
And indeed is endowed with many dowries of nature, with the fruitfulness of
the soil, and plenty of all provision, with the ports, the quarries, the woods,
and other worthy materials. But yet it is under question what King first
subjugated that Island, Sir Edward Coke makes mention of an ancient Charter of
King Edgar, Cokes pre. l. 4. 4th Book of Reports.
in which he blesses the altitonant and omnipotent God for all his victories,
and that he had subjected all the Kingdoms of the Island of the Sea unto
Norway with their fiercest Kings, and the greatest part of Ireland, with its
most noble City of Dublin, to the Kingdom of England: and Henry of Huntington
says, there were five Kingdoms in Ireland, of which the great or greatest
part was conquered by King Edgar, Gambd. Britttan. ^
which Cambden also affirms, Quod maximam Hiberniae partem devicit, yet
because Henry the second made a more absolute conquest of it, the honor of that
conquest is ascribed to him, and was the first was entitled Rex Angliae,
Dominus Haberniae; and as Henry of Huntington Historieth it, at his Arrival
with a potent Army into Ireland, the King of Cork, the King of Limmerick, the
King of Oxery, and the King of Meth submitted themselves to his summons,
recognizing him to be totius Hiberniae dominum, (only the King of Conagh stood
out) which Pope Alexander confirmed to him and his Heirs, and which afterward
by his power was possessed, and detained by English Colonies.

Yet was there no alteration of their Laws till the reign of King ^ohn, who as
Sir Edward Coke says, (...) the twelfth year of his reign went ^^to Ireland,
and there by advice (...) grave and learned men in the ^^aws whom he carried
with him, (...) a Parliament de Communi omni^^ de Hibernia consensu enjoined
and established, that Ireland should be Governed by the Laws of England, Cok.
Com. f. 1. a. 6.
which he left in writing under his seal in the Exchequer of Dublin, and which
afterward was confirmed by the Charter of Henry the third, Davis rep. f. 37. a
6.
in the thirtieth year of his reign, wherein is declared, that for the common
utility of the Lands in Ireland, and the unity of those Lands, that all the
Laws and customs that are holden in the Kingdom of England, be holden in
Ireland; and that the same Lands be subject to the same Laws, and be ruled by
them, as King John when he was there did firmly enjoin; and therefore willed
that all the writs of the common Law, which run in England, likewise run in
Ireland: and accordingly was it resolved Trin. 13. Edw. 1. Coram rege in
Thesaurie in lenge placite, that the same Laws ought to be in the Kingdom of
Ireland, as in the Kingdom of England: and therefore as Sir John Davis says,
every County Palatine as well in Ireland as in England was originally parcel of
the Davis rep. f. 6, 7. B.
same Realm, and derived of the Crown, and was always governed by the Law of
England, and the Lands there were holden by services and tenures, of which the
common law took notice, although the Lord had a several jurisdiction, and a
signiory separated from the Crown; upon consideration of which Sir Edward Coke
infers this conclusion, Cok. Com. f. 14. B.
that the unity of Laws is the best means for the unity of Countries as before
has been premised.

Yet many of the Irish soon after, absolutely refused the English Laws,
preferring their Irish customs, which they call their Brehon Law, because the
Irish call their Judges Brehons; and therefore in the Parliament Anno 40. Ed.
3. Cok. ib.
In the Parliament holden at Kilkenny in Ireland before Lionell Duke of
Clarence being the Lieutenant of that Realm; the Brehon Laws were declared to
be no Law, but a lewd custom, which fot that reason were abolished, Quia malus
usus est abolendus.

And though that by that statute the Brehon Law, which was the common Law of
the Irish, was declared to be no Law, yet was it not absolutely abolished among
the mere Irish, Davis reports, f. 39
but only prohibited and forbidden to be used among the English race, and the
mere Irish were left at large to be ruled by their barbarous customs as before:
And therefore for that by those customs, bastards had their part with the
legitimate, and women were altogether excluded from Dower, and that the
daughters were not inheritable, though their Fathers dyed without Males; by the
same statute it was Enacted, that no compaternity, Education of Infants, or
Marriages, be made or had between the English and others in peace with the
King, with the mere Irish. And though the statute made by King John in Ireland,
and the Ordinance and writ of King Henry the third were general, yet is it
manifest by all the ancient Records of Ireland, that the Common Law of England
was only put in execution in that part of Ireland, which was reduced and
divided into counties and possessed by the English Colonies, Vid. Davis 39. a.
o.
and not in the Irish Counties and territories which were not reduced into
Counties until the time of Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth. For King John made
but twelve Counties, but the other provinces, and territories which are divided
into 21. Counties at large, being then inhabited for the most part by mere
Irish, were out of the limits of any Shire ground by the space of three hundred
years after the making of the former twelve Counties, for it was impossible
that the common Law of England should be executed in those Counties, or
territories; for the Common Law of England cannot be put in execution where the
writ of the King does not run, but where there is a County and Sheriff or
other Ministers of the Law to serve, and return the writs of the King: and for
this cause were the mere Irish out of the protection of the King, because the
Law of the King, and his writs as Littleton says, Littl. Tom. f. 43.
are the things by which a man is protected and aided; and therefore the mere
Irish, (who had no the benefit of the Law until the time of Henry the eight)
where any mention is made of the Wars of Ireland are culled enemies, and the
english rebels but by the 33. H. 8. c. 1. by which it is recited that because
the King of England did not assume the name and style of King, the Irish
Inhabitants have not been so obedient to the King of England and his Laws, as
of right they ought to have been; It was Enacted that King Henry the eight, his
Heirs and Successors shall be for ever Kings of Ireland, and shall have the
name style and title of the King of that land, with all the honors,
prerogatives, and dignities, appertayning to the State and Majesty of a King,
as united, and annexed to the imperial Crown. After which royal union the
said difference of the English rebels and Irish enemies is not to be found on
Record, but all those mere Irish were afterward reputed and accepted subjects
and Leigemen to the Kings and Queens of England, and had the benefit and
protection of the law of England. And afterward the Irish were more averse
from Rebellions, and more ready to forsake their Brehon laws and to be ruled by
ours, the style and title of the King of Ireland being more pleasing and
acceptable to them then Lord of Ireland; the one denoting a tyrannical and
arbitrary Government, Tholos. Syntag. li. 13. c. 1.
and the other a limited power according to law and equity. For such Princes as
arrogate to themselves the name of Lords, seem to usurp an arbitrary and
plenipotentiary power over their subjects, which are Proprietors of nothing but
at the will of their great Lord. And therefore did the wisest of the Boman
Emperors refuse to take upon them that arrogant and absolute title, Davis f.
40. B.
it properly appertaining only to God: but under a King the subjects are free
men, and have property in their Goods and Frank tenements and inheritance; who
does not domineer over them according to his will and pleasure, but rules them
according to Law, for as Bracton, Non est Rex ubi dominatur voluntas, Lib. 1.
c. 4. fol. 9.
and non Lex.

And accordingly the Kings and Queens of England to the intent that the Laws of
England might have a free course in and through all the Realm of Ireland, (as
is expressed in the statute of 11. Eliz. c. 9.) did they provide in several
Parliaments to wit, 3. and 4. Ph. and Mary c. 3. and 11. Eliz. c. 9. that
Commissions should be awarded to reduce into Shires and hundreds all the Irish
Land which were not Shire ground before. And according to it in the several
Governments of Thomas Earl of Sussex, Sir Henry Sidney and Sir John Perott, not
only the Irish territories in the confines of Lemster, but also the entire
provinces of Conagh and Vlster, being out of all Shire ground before, were
divided and distinguished into several Counties and hundreds, and several
Sheriffs, Coroners, and justices of peace, and other Officers and Ministers of
the Law of England have been from time to time constituted in those Counties,
by several patents and commissions under the great seal of England: and by this
means has the common Law of England been communicated to all persons and
executed throughout all that Realm for many years passed; and so continued unto
the reign of the late King James, who also by a special proclamation in the
third year of his reign, declared and published that he had received all the
Natives of the Realm of Ireland into his royal protection, etc. By which it was
clearly resolved, that the common Law of England was established universally
throughout the Realm of Ireland, and that all persons and possessions within
that Realm ought to be governed by the rules of that Law, and that every
subject shall inherit his Lands in Ireland, by the just and honorable law of
England, in that manner and by the same law that the King inherited the Crown
of Irelaud: and by these degrees was the common law of England introduced and
established in Ireland.

And in the same year of that King accordingly, it was by the special order of
the deputy of Ireland, and the justices resolved and declared, that because all
the Irish counties and the Inhabitants of them were to be governed by the rules
of the common law of England, Vid. Davis re. f. 51.52
the Irish customs were void in law, not only for the inconvenience and
unreasonableness of them; but for that they were mere personal customs and
could not alter the descent of inheritance. For all the possessions of the
Irish territories (before the common law of England was established) did run
either in the custom and course of Tanistry, whereby every Lordship or chiefty
with the portion of land which did pass with it, did go without partition to
the tanist and not to the next Heir of the Lord or chieftye, but to the elder
and more worthy of that lineage, who oftentimes was removed and expelled by
another, who was more active and more strong then he. Besides the wives of the
signiory claimed to have a sole property in a certain portion of goods during
the coverture, with power to dispose of them without the assent of their
husbands: Or in the course and custom of Gavel kind, whereby all the inferior
tenancies were partible among the males, in this manner; the Causeny or chief
of that lineage who was commonly most ancient, after the death of every tennant
which had a competent portion of land did assemble all of that lineage, and
having put all their possessions in Hotch Potch, did make a new partition of
all, in which partition he did not assign to the Sons of those that dyed the
portion that the Father had, but he allotted to every one of that lineage
according to his Antiquity the more and greater part; by whom also a new
partition upon the death of every inferior Tenant was made at his will and
discretion. And so by reason of those frequent partitions and translation of
Tenants from one portion to another, all the possessions were uncertain, and
the uncertainty of the possessions was the true cause that no civil habitation
were erected, no enclosure or improvement was made of Lands in the Irish
counties where this custom was in use; especially in Vlster, which seemed
throughout to be a Wilderness before the new Plantation made by the English
Undertakers there.

Also by that custom bastards had their purparty with the English, the women
were utterly excluded from Dower, the daughters were not Inheritable though
their Father died without Issue male: and therefore for the aforesaid
inconveniences and unreasonableness of those customs, were they utterly
abolished; As the customs of Gavel kind in North Wales by Edward the first and
Henry the 8. which were semblable to the customs of the Irish: and therefore
was it adjudged that the lands in Ireland should descend according to the
course of the the common law, that women shall be endowed, that daughters shall
be inheritable for defect of issue male; and the property of such goods should
be in the Irish Lords and not in the feme coverts according to the Irish usage:
which resolution of the Judges, by Order of the Deputy was registered among the
acts of the Council; but this provision was added to it, That if any of the
mere Irish had possessed and enjoyed any portion of land by these customs,
before the commencement of the reign of the late King James, that he shall not
be disturbed in his possession, but shall be continued and established in it;
but that after the commencement of his reign, all land, shall be adjudged to
descend to the Heirs by the Common Law, and shall hereefter be possessed and
enjoyed accordingly. And yet were not the laws of England fully and rotally
established in Ireland, one of the main triangles of the laws of England being
yet excluded, for as Sir Edw. Coke, Cok. Gom. on Litt. 110. B.
the laws of England are divided into common Law, Customs, and Statute law; and
though the common law of England was introduced, and the Irish customs
abolished in Ireland, yet were not the Statutes made in the Parliament of
England current in that country; for the Land of Ireland had Parliaments, made
Law and changed laws, and those of that land were not obliged by the Statutes
of England, because they did not send Knights to it, as Sir Edw. Coke
observes. Cok. Com. f. 141. B.
And though Sir Edward Poynings having both Martial and Civil power given him
by the commission of Henry the seventh above the Earl of Kildare then Deputy of
Ireland, Bacon Hen. 7. f. 138.
called a Parliament in Ireland, wherein was made that memorable Act, which at
this day is called Poynings Law, whereby all the Statutes of England were made
to be of force in Ireland; yet before they were not, neither are any now in
force in Ireland, which were made in England since that time, but have had
Parliaments since holden there, wherein they have made diverse particular Laws
concerning the Government of that Domiuion; wherefore in this particular
Ireland was still a Dominion divided, and separated from England, and the union
between those two Nations in that respect not absolutely perfect; and therefore
did it seem a worthy Act in the late Protector to have ordained by the advice
of his Council, that thirty Knights and Burgesses out of Ireland should be
elected to sit in the Parliament of England, thereby to oblige those of that
country to be subject and obedient to our statute as well as our common Laws,
that as we are one and the same commonwealth so we may be governed by one and
the same Laws, and they participate of the same honors and privileges, which
is the surest means for the consolidation of such a union; for the more entire
the union is, the less apt will they be upon any occasions to break, and the
imperfection of such a union being oftentimes the Origin and cause of Revolts:
a direful example of which is recorded in the Annals of the Roman Republic,
which as it was the best estate in the world, so is it the best example; which
as in the frontispice we have followed, so will we not forsake to the end.

Aneus Martius was the first that conquered the Latins, who having by force
taken many of their Towns, received many thousands of them into the City of
Rome as one body, but because they were not equally entreated, they joined
Arms with the Tarquinians against the people of Rome, and though after a
bloody battle they were reunited, yet was not that union durable, because not
entire; for that the people of Rome had not inserted them in their Tribes, nor
admitted them to participate of their immunities and honors; for which reasons
the Latins conceiving themselves to be undervalued and vilified, were bold to
demand the freedom of the city of Rome, and that one of their consuls be of
their country, which being denied they converted their demands into Arms. Yet
afterward being again reconciled, upon hopes to be enfranchised; first by
Fabius Flaccus one of the consuls who attempted the prorogation of the Law
though impeded by the Senate, and afterward by Livius Brusus, who was also
opposed by the people: at which exasperated seeing themselves deluded, they
made an association with the Hetrurians and the Sabius, who because they were
all by affinity of promiscuous marriages consanguineans, and as Florus says,
Florus l. 3. c. 18.
unum corpus with the people of Rome, and that they had augmented that city by
their valor, and yet were despised, they jointly made War against the City of
Rome, as well those who lived in the City, as those who abided in Italy, which
was called Bellum sociale, but indeed bellum civil, Ibid,
acivil and destructive War both to the people of Rome and the Cities of Italy,
that as Florus says, Nec Annibalis, nec Py^rhi fuit tanta vastatio, the
devastation and depopulation of Hanniball and Pyrrhus was not so great, such
were the fatal fruits of an imperfect union. Whereupon the people of Rome
instructed by fad experience did condiseend to a more entire union with them,
and permitted them to participate of the privileges and honors of Rome, being
according to their worth preferred and placed in the Senate; which Claudius in
Tacitus urges in the like case, for the bringing in of the chiefest of the
French into the Senate in these words, Neque enim ignoro Iulios Alba, Tacit. l.
11.
Caruncanios Camerio, Portios Tusculo, and ne vetera scrutemur, Etruria,
Lucaniaque and omni Italia in Senatum accites. Caeter a quis neseit? And needs
no application.

But in this case the sovereign use of the Law has almost made me to omit the
necessity of Arms, and to demonstrate how through the insufficiency and
debility of English Colonies and the Militia in Ireland, a detestable and
infernal design was hatched and contrived by the rebellious and bloody Papists,
whereby all the Forts and Magazins in that Kingdom were to be surprised in one
day, and all the English Protestants massacred, and all Ireland in one day to
be lost, had it not through the providence of God, the very night before been
discovered by one only Irish man, servant to one Sir John Clotworthy whom
Macmahon had unadvisedly trusted with the Plot: by which Dublin was saved and
the seizure of the Castle, the Kingdoms chief Magazine prevented, to which
purpose many rebels of great note came to the City the day before, who upon the
apprehension of Macmahon escaped with the Lord Macquire that night, to do more
mischief; and with the rest of the conspirators that were that day in all the
country round about, within two months space murdered 200000 protestanes; many
of them being by intolerable tortures brought to their end, besides infinite
numbers who were robbed and spoiled of all they had, and daily driven naked and
almost famished to Dublin for relief; with whom the City was soc filled that
they were enforced for the preservation of themselves and the lives of their
wives, children and families, to fly for succor into the several parts of the
Dominions of England and Wales.

O nullo scelus credibile in avo
Quodque posteritas negot. Sen 'c^ Toyest.

It equalling, if not exceeding in number and cruelty, the execrable and
perfidious Massacre of the Protestants in France and Paris. For Ireland being
destitute of a Deputy and military guards, Hinc Hiberniae calamitas: the Lord
Justices, Sir William Persons, and Sir John Borlace were driven to take those
Arms which they found in Dublin, and to arm whom they could of a ^^^dain to
defend themselves and the places near, against the approach of the enemy. In
this dangerous straight and perilous condition did the estates of the English
in Ireland stand, who for want of a settled station of English Colonies were at
the point to have lost themselves, and that Country; for the English were so
involved in homebred civil Wars, that the Parliament of England for a present
aid could send them but twenty thousand pounds, and though afterward, they
transported some Regiments, yet for the space of ten years were they unable to
free that country from that malignant and pestilent enemy. The Trojan Wars
being incomparable to it for cruelty, for through our daily discords and
distractions their cursed cruel crew continually augmented almost to the
overwhelming and destruction of the English. But when all the malignants were
quelled in England, and the Royalists debelled in Scotland, and that Dublin was
besieged by the Irish with a formidable Army and in danger of a surrender,
General Cromwell was sent by the Parliament of England to relieve Dublin, and
suppress the Irish Rebels; at whose approach Colonel Jones encouraged, made an
unexpected and sudden sally on the enemy, and valiantly repelling them, put
them all to flight; which the General pursuing, within a short space bysnarp
siedges regained those strong Towns and Garrisons which the Irish had
surreptitiously surprised, and by degrees cleared the country of such
seditious Irish as seduced and corrupted the well affected of that Nation, and
having settled it in peace and safety, at his return was honored with the
thanks of the Parliament.

And now the provident Parliament apprehending it more safe and advantageous to
prevent commotions then to suppress them, ordained and appointed English
Colonies to be deduced into Ireland, which they committed first to the charge
of Lieutenant General Ireton, and after his death to the Marshalling of
Lieutenant General Charles Fleetwood, who afterward for his singular care and
vigilance was by the Lord Protector made Deputy of Ireland, both of them being
successively Commanders in chief of a competent Army, and of all the Garrisons
sufficiently fortifyed; and to strike the more terror into Delinquents, they
censured the ringleaders of that Rebellion with Capital punnishment, Vt poena
ad paucos, metus ad omnes perveniat. Cok. Com.
And confiscated all the lands and goods of some, and sequestrated others to
the use of the Commonwealth, by which Roman Model, Ireland ever since has been
ruled and preserved in peace and unity, the English language also being through
continual commerce the common speech among them.

To draw all to period. By this I hope it is made perspicuous that unions of
Kingdoms upon conquest, upon which basis the most parts of such unions have
been founded, being purchased by valor, are possessed and settled by the
sweetness of clemency, power of Arms, severity of clemency, power of Arms,
severity of Laws, and communication of language, which is fully demonstrated by
that universal union of the Roman Orb, as by the particular union of England,
Wales, Scotland, and Ireland, which is by those means so completely perfected,
and by the prowess and prudence of the Parliament and it is Conquering Champions
fetled, that as it was worthily vowed by the late King James, faciam cos In
gentem unam, which indeed he did endeavor to have effected; so it may be truly
averred of the Commonwealth of England, Quod fecit cos in gentem una^, that it
has made those several Countries one Nation, which the premised Roman course
being observed, may so remain and continue, Dum coelum and stellae eandem
rationem obtinent, whilst the Sun and Stars run the same course.

With this hypothetical caution, if union be softred and cherished among our
selves, and ambitious and envious discord shnaned, which as a swelling and
eminent Rock, ^^sheth in pieces, the firmest commonwealth approaching it, and
which was the ruin of the Roman commonwealth it self as the Venusine Poet.
Suis and ipsa Roma viribus ruit. Hor. e. 15.
And therefore let us lay aside all occasions of diffidence and suspicion which
may breed discord and dissension, and remember the animadversion of St. Paul,
that if you bite and devour one another, take heed you be not consumed one of
another; for humana Consilia Castig antur, ubi divinis praeferuntur.

Thus has the Author rudely woven a difficult work, which deserves a finer
thread and a neater Artist, yet proposing truth for his end, he hops it may
countenance the simplicity of the style, Cok. li. 10. ep.
for veritatis sermo simple^ and his labor whatsoever it is, Tacit. Agr.
for the profession of truth aut laudatus, aut excusatus erit, yet respecting
himself, he is so far from the imagination of praise, that he shall conceive
himself favorably dealt withal, if he may find pardon for his presumption.

FINIS.

