THE MISTAKES, OR, The False Report: A TRAGI-COMEDY. Acted by their Majesty's
Servants. Written by Mr. Ios. Harris. The Prologue Written by Mr. Dryden, The
Epilogue by Mr. Tate.

Haec si placuisse erint mihi praemia.
Mart. Licensed according to Order.

London, Printed for Io. Hindmarsh at the Golden-Ball over against the
Royal Exchange. 1691.

To GOD^REY KNELLER Esquire.
IT is common with many Poets to Varnish over the defects of their Poems either
by a little a^^ected Satyr in the Preface and Prologue, or by the Nobility of
the Patron; but for an under-graduate, the fittist Sanctuary to receive and
protect his first fruits, should be the Elder Choire of Poets, for there the
Subject may more aptly improve his Thoughts, and there (if any Genius glimmers
through the Clouds) the Gold is entertained, and the dross either refined or
forgot. I speak not this to excuse the many errors of this indigested, trifle
(for indeed such confusion and uncertainty attended it, both at it is
conception, and birth, that they became unavoidable,) but to render my boldness
more lawful, at least more pardonable, in committing all together to your
Patronage. But yet to entitle you to Poetry, were too mean an acknowledgment,
who have engrost all that can be called A description of Nature. Poets at best
but give a distant View of her to our purblinde imaginatio^s, which often
doubles, or falsifies the object, confounds Chimera's with the most simple
beings, and so rather represent her in her infant Ch^os, than her present
perfection. But you Sir, draw the Veil and expose her bare-face to our senses,
the most proper and Adaequate Judges of it. Here we see Art tryumphing over
her, and waiting Cupids pouring all their mothers Charms into your Pencill;
here we may behold more Divinity in one draught, then in that Piece for which
Apelles ransack't all the Beauties of the Earth and his own fertile imagination
to c^ll out a Veuus. Of this you have given a sufficient evidence, in adorning
the Court with so many Stars, which shall shine through your colors, when time
has faded, and the Grave immured their own. For Painting being at such a noble
height as you Sir have raised it to, carries more prevailing influence, than
all the languid efforts of our enervate Pens. But it were as vain to attempt a
particular Encomium of what I understand not, as to deny it is excellency, which
the greatest Stupidity must confess with silence, and the greatest malice with
a forced admiration.

Pardon me Sir, If in dwelling upon so pleasing a Subject, I have forgot that I
am arguing for what is beyond the Verge of dispute, and kept you long in the
Portall, that I have reason to fear you may be tired before you Survey the
whole building; but if it affords you any diversion, I shall not complain of
any reception it has already, or may meet with in it is more public dress, but
content my self that it gives me this oppertunity to testify how much I am

Your most Devoted Humble Servant, Jos. Harris.

The Preface.
I Might here (as it is very very Customary) beg leave to tell the World the
many inconveniences this hasty* Piece has been exposed to; as the Season of the
being so near Christimas etc. and charge all it is failings upon them; but I am
sufficiently satisfied with it is reception: and what other casualties have
obstructed it is welcome, have been exceedingly made up by Mr. Montfort, Quem
semper honoratum, etc. 'Twou'd be Tautology to mention his extraordinary
favors, which are already sufficiently known, and need not my suffrage: but he
that will sc^n thoroughly the Series of his goodness to me, will find an
unbiased kindness, and generous pity in every step. Nor should I be backward
in acknowledging (I dare not call it the impartial) favors of the pardoning
Audience. What can express a solid judgment, and sincere good nature, more then
to wink at faults, and applaud the least glimmering of Wit. I have only one
thing now to desire, which is, that upon reading this, they who have seen the
more public representation, will not wonder to find the Plot more thick, and
several Scenes which were entirely omitted in the Action, to model it into
the ordinary bulk of a Play. And here is a fresh occasion for my gratitude to
Mr. Montfort, who in the fith Act has not only corrected the tediousness by
cutting out a whole Scene, but to make the Plot more clear, has put in one of
his own, which heightens his own Character, and was very pleasing to the
Audience. But in mentioning the brevity of the Play, I shall slip into
prolixity in the preface, and therefore leave the former to entertain you.

PROLOGUE.
Writ by Mr. Dryden.
Enter Mr. Bright. GEntlemen, we must beg your pardon; here is no Prologue to be
had to day; Our New Play is like to come on^ without a Frontispiece; as bald as
one of you young Beaux, without your Perriwig. I left our young Poet, sniveling
and sobbing behind the Scenes, and cur^ing some body that has deceived him.

Enter Mr. Bowen* Hold your prating to the Audience: Here Is honest Mr.
Williams, just come in, half mellow, from the Rose-Tavern. He swears he is
inspired with Claret, and will come on, and that Extempore too, either with a
Prologue of his own or something like one: O here he comes to his Trial, ^t all
Adventures; for my part I wi^h him a good Deliverance.

Exeunt Mr. Bright, and Mr. Bowen. Enter Mr. Williams. SAve ye Sirs, save ye! I
am in a hopeful way.
I should speak something, in Rhyme, now, for the Play:
But the duce take me, if I know what to say.
(...) stick to my Friend the Author, that I can tell ye,
To the last drop of Glaret, in my belly.
So far I Am sure it is Rhyme -- that needs no granting:
And, if my verses feet stumble -- you see my own are wanting.
Our young* Poet, has brought a piece of work,
(...) which, though much of Art there does not lurk,
It may hold out three days -- And that is as long as Cork.
But, for this Play -- (which till I h^ve done, we show not,)
What may be its fortune -- By the Lord -- I know not.
This I dare swear, no malice ^ere is writ:
It Is Innocent of all things -- even of wit.
He Is no high Flyer -- he makes no sky Rockets,
His Squi^^s are only levelled at your Pockets.
And if his Crackers light among your pelf
You are blown-up: if not, then he is blown-up himslef.
By this time, I Am something recovered of my flust^r'd madness:
And, now, a word or two in sober sadness.
Ours is a Common^Play: and you pay down
A Common Harlots price -- just half a Crown.
You Will say, I play the Pimp, on my Friends score;
But since it is for a Friend your gibes give over:
For many a Mother has done that before.
How Is this, you cry? an Actor write? -- we know it;
But Skakspear was an Actor, and a Poet.
Has not Great Johnsons learning, often failed?
But Shakspear's greater Genius, still prevailed.
Have not some writing Actors, in this Age
Deserved and found Success upon the Stage?
To tell the truth, when our old Wits are tired,
Not one of us, but means to be inspired.
Let your kind presence grace our homely cheer;
Peace and the Butt, it all our business here:
So much for that; -- and the Devil take small beer.
EPILOGUE*
Writ by Mr. N. Tate.
Spoken by Mrs. Bulter in Man's Clothes. AS Malefactors brought to Execution,
Have leave to Harrangue before their Dissolution:
Such favor your poor Criminal beseeches,
Something to say to justify her Breeches.
To strut with Feather, Tilter, Lace and Blue,
I have as good pretense as most of you.
'Twas time to take this Warlike Dress in Vogue,
To guard my dangerous Post of Epilogue;
Where lurching Wits like Rapperees appear:
And Coward Critique still attack's our Rear.
I stand your Shot -- To storm this little Fort,
Let Us see who dares -- I Have that shall find you sport.
Damn your French way of shooting on the Stretch,
Give me the Man bears up and mounts the Breach.
Entrenched in the Pit you sit securely Rageing,
You know who will have the odds in close Engaging.
But this is all exceeding my Commission,
To swagger while our Poet makes Submission:
I told the timorous Fool 'twas not the way,
A worse Mistake then any in his Play,
But he has writ just as you Fight -- for ^ay.
Like you he justifies his Cause -- for Life,
For Fame, for Liberty, for Bratts, and Wife:
He writes, but it is not for the sake of Writing;
When you your Bilbo Scarf and Plume are Dighting,
For Heaven's sake tell me -- is it for love of Fighting?
Money's his Plea; that makes the Lawyer trudge,
The Priest Preach Counter, and Corrupts the Judge.
Mere want our Youn^^^ers to write Plays impowers,
Playing will neither do their Work -- nor Ours.
Then since you are so kind to Their Deserts,
Give, next, Us Women leave to show our Parts:
Let us perceive but the kind Humor seize ye,
We Will ^ry our skill, and do our best to please ye.
Dramatis Personae.
DOn Juan de Mendoza Viceroy of Naples. Mr. Hodgsdon. Alberto, A Nobleman in
Love with Miranda. Mr. Powell. Antonio, His Friend, in Love with Astella* Mr.
Alexander. Ricardo, The Viceroy 's Favorite. A Villain and in Love with
Miranda. Mr. Montford. Lopez, Alberto 's Men Mr. Bowen. Bernardo, Ricardo's Man
Mr. Trefusis* Don Sylvio. Fabio. Gentlemen to the Viceroy. Three Soldiers.
Three Neighbors, A Iaylor. Messengers. Officers, Guards, and Att^ndants.
WOMEN.
Miranda. The Viceroys Daughter, in Love with Alberto. Mrs. Bracegirdle.
Astella, Sister to Alberto, in Love with Antonio. Mrs. Butler. Maria. Miranda's
Confident. Mrs. Richardson.
The Scene NAPLES. ACT I.
SCENE. I. The Street.
Enter Alberto reading a Challenge, followed by his Man Lopez. Alb. THis from
Antonio? forbid it freindship!
He tells me that Miranda's false and loves me not;
If he be then that happy Rival, why should he desire
To take that life her Scorn can look away?

Lop. Goes it there -- I have the business now
[aside But will prevent your designs my noble valiant Don.

Alb. This note's ten thousand daggers to my breast,
Cleaves to my heart like Hercules poisoned shirt,
And tares my Soul in piecemeal.
Shall I go on? my friendship bars the way;
But mighty Love and Honor chide my stay:
Yes, I will go; I Will meet this treacherous man,
And stab her image in his faithless breast,
Or fall my self a Sacrifice to both:

Lop. That I must prevent, my good furious Master.

[aside. Alb. By Heaven he shall not enjoy her. I Will sluice my veins,
Let out a deluge of my blood to drown 'em,
And follow 'em though rocks high as Olimpus,
Oppose and stop my way: Leap Aetna's hideous Va^lt,
Then catch 'em on the brink and plunge 'em in,
But I will have revenge, and such revenge
As Traitors, may the damned themselves yet never knew:
And I Will about it strait. --
[Exit
Lo. So, now is he going to take Horse and Ride Post to the Devil. A plague on
these Female Succ^bu^'s, who of my Conscience are good for nothing else but to
breed and beget quarrels. -- Well faith I Will not lose a good Master so.


Enter Ricardo, and his man Bernardo following. Lop. I Will get some friends and
neighbors to assist me, then go with 'em to all the slaughtering fields about
town and find them out, and so prevent their duelling.


Ric. How Is this! friends and neighbors to assist his Master, that must not
be: Bernardo, do you follow Lopez when he goes from hence, and leave him not
till night: I can away with your diligence till to the morrow.


Ber. Till to morrow Sir?


Ric. Yes, till to morrow: business of importance obl^ges me to attend the
Viceroy: be gone.


[ Bernardo waits at the door. Lop. What a pox has Antonio to do with his
Mistress? or cannot he share her with his friend, I warrant She Will give 'em both
enough, in as hot a Skirmish as this is like to be.


Ric. I must prevent his purpose and design. -- Lopez.


Lop. Bless me! what will become of me now, if this ill-natured Courtier has
or'e-heard me?


Ric. I Have heard from you your Masters rash design, of fighting with Antonio,
and must your faith^^llness and care commend.


Lop. I Would rather you would heard the last Trumpet Summoning you to Hell. Sir you
may commend it, but I can hardly believe that you will reward it.


Ric. Why Lopez, thy Master is My dearest friend;
Our hatred's fled to the air from whence it sprung,
The date is out, and all the bonds are cancelled:
Can thou then think, ^'de tamely see him fall,
And crack those strings which hold Ricardo's heart?
Friendship's a dearer name to me then Honor,
And I Will expose the one to save the other.

Lop. As how Sir?

Ric. I will prevent their ^ighting Lopez;
Or if that fail, I will assist thy Master:
But if his nicety refuse me that,
I Will stake the utmost cast I have to loose,
And run upon Antonio's Sword;
Then hold it close unto my throbbing heart
Until my dearest blood cool on the point,
And blunt the stroke of death to save Alberto.

Lop* Well Sir, since you are so resolved to serve my Master, I Will trust his
safety for once with you, and humbly retire.


Ber. Hist, hist, Lopez.

[Lopez run to Bernardo: [both go off together. Ric. His safety, dull Buffoon,
trust me for that:
Thou coud'st not choose a better Guardian out,
Though thou had ransackt all the worlds below,
To cull a Villain of the blackest dye.
One thing I want to finish forth a Hero
But it is the meanest virtue -- brutall Courage,
Malice I have enough, and witty malice:
These greater qualities may infuse the less,
And then Ricardo has a Titans Soul --
Alberto's death makes way for my pretentions,
Unto the coy Miranda's heart; I will about it strait:
Itali^n spite assist me at this push,
Or bl^st Ricardo, or his Rival crush.
[Exit.
SCENE The Palace.
Enter Miranda, and Astella. Mir. Oh my Astella! what a tide of Joy
Streams in to Crown my yet imperfect Love!
It Is rapture but to think he shall be mine.
To morrows dawn shall light our Loves for ever:
To thee I Will own my Fr^end without a blush
The Vestall fire which guards his Image here.

Ast. My Brother's too much blessed, in your kind Love,
Nor could his utmost wish desire more,
Though it were boundless as are your merits.

Mir. Why do you profane the Dearest of his Sex;
S^re naught that is mortall's worthy of his Love:
Were I made up of yet untasted Charms,
Such as would pose the Painters noblest skill,
And dash his feeble fancy in it is flight,
Yet 't'were too mean a present for Alberto.
Oh! why are you so slow you tedious hours?
Blow fair my hopes, glide with a gentle gale,
To want Alberto to his Mistress Arms.

Ast. With what strange Ecstasies of Joy he will welcome
This so happy news from his Miranda's mouth:
But let me beg you share with me my Sister,
Le^t double passion burst my crowded breast:
My noble Brother has at last consented,
To consummate Antonio's happiness,
And Chain their friendships with another Link,
Soon as your father blesses him with you.

Mir. Soon as my Father gives me heaven in him:
Why comes he not to hear the charming news
Sounds as enchanting as the Theban Lire,
Or all the music of the Spheres at once:
O Love! forgive the extravagance of my desires,
Which have no bounds short of the noblest heart,
That ever yet your golden arrows pierced.

Enter Maria. Mar. My Lord Alberto, Madam, is without,
Desires to know if he may have admittance:

Mir. Fly and conduct him in: -- now help me Sister,
[ Exit. Maria* To unlade my frait of Joys into his breast.

Ast* 'Twere Sin to bar the freedom of your Loves:
And therefore beg leave humbly to retire.
[Exit
Enter Alberto, stands at a distance, and bows. Mir. Welcome my Dear Alberto,
for ever welcome here;
But doubly welcome now.

Alb. To hear my ruin!

[aside Mir. Now I can charm your senses into wonders,
Make your chill blood dance to the tune to Love,
And sing your Soul into Elysian raptures.

Alb. OF fatal Beauty, and oh my cruel Stars!
[sighs. Why was I born to love, and be despised?

Mir. Ha! why this distance, and that heavy sigh!
Why play not thousand Cupids in your eyes
In expectation of 'th approaching bliss?
But I forget, it is I must charm your Soul.
My Father now has warranted our Loves,
Which shall be doubly ratifyed to morrow:
Still senceless! --

Alb. Oh triumphant perjury!
Down, down the anger of my swelling breast
Fix me kind heaven, and clear my reason, lest
[aside. My hand should antidate your vengeance on her,
And cut this beauteous weed of nature down.
[aside. Madam -- Hell and confusion! I know not what to say:
I wish you Joy.

Mir. Ha! wish me Joy, yet mention Hell Alberto,
The greatest blessing twisted with a Curse;
Oh all ye powers! Yet why my Lord, Oh why that wish?
How can you doubt my joy, when you're the Author,
My Heaven, my Paradise, my all I have?

Alb. Oh Siren, Siren!

[aside Mir. Yes, my Loved Lord, you are my Souls desire,
Nor do I blush to speak a noble Truth.
But stay: mine did I say, my Loved Lord? O no!
It was a fond mistake, he is mine no more,
But false to all his Oaths and plighted Vows,
False to Miranda, that unhappy Maid.

[Weeps Alb. Furies and Death! it is downright mockery.
But Madam, know though I appear to you
So still, so calm, so like a suffering Saint,
Yet know (I say) there is a storm lies brooding here,
Will like a furious whirlwind blow to dust
That Bane to Love and Friendship, False Antonio.

Mir. Antonio! unfold this fatal riddle.

Abl. Upon his heart I will.

Mir. By Heaven! by All that is Sacred --

Alb. Hold, hold, thou Lovely Perjured Beauty!
So well I love thee still, thou shall not damn
Thy self to give Alberto satisfaction,
For that Antonio's life must give, not you.

Mir. Hear me Alberto, or I dye with grief;
Hear me before your rashness makes it quite too late
To hear: it is Death to think you may be slain for me,
(For my heart bodes some strange eruption
Of discontent and Passion which tends to ruin;)
And surely I should grieve Antonio's loss
Since Innocent.

Alb. I know thou would.

Mir. Will you be still unjust?
Oh torture! see he fears to let me know the truth,
And Cause of this Disorder, this strange mistake.

[Weeps. Alb. Ha! does she weep! O treacherous Crocodile!
But I Will be calm: Just heaven, why have you lodged
Such lu^king fiends, in this so fair a Mansion?
Why wink not all the Stars, and hide their heads
Since this bright Cinthia's fallen from her sphere?
Can those tears be true? sure it is impossible!
But then if guilty, why should she complain?
Oh! it is the nature of that co^s'ning Sex,
To weep, and smile, and yet be false, and fair:
Thus bigot Love mistakes the genuine Pearl
Deluded with a gaudy, glittering nothing.

Mir. Since then you will not believe my Vows or Tears,
Clear with your Sword my injured Innocence,
And with my blood wash all my stains away.

Alb. Still weeping! Too well I know the cursed Cause,
Those tears yo^ shed to your absent Lover
And only make a show of Sorrow,
To surprise me more.
Ah Cruel Maid, Thou poison to our Loves and Friendship,
The only prop which dying Virtue leans on,
In one unhappy hour thou have quite destroyed,
And broke the Sacred Chain which linked our Souls.

Mir. Will you Condemn me, e're you hear me speak?
What has Antonio do^e, to move your hate?
Or how have I deserved this Jealousy?
Is not Antonio --

Alb. Ha! that name again!
By hell she doats and feeds upon the sound:
Antonio! Oh that word, that names a Charm,
A Charm indeed which has bewich'd Miranda,
And razed Heavens Stamp from out her fickle Soul:
O I could rave and Curse my Cruel Stars
Which have deprived me of my Joys and her:
But Love usurps the Throne and still's my rage.
Madam, I go for ever from your sight,
To meet a death from your Antonio's hands,
Or offer up my self a Victim to appease
His Angry Ghost, and glut Revenge and you.

Mir. Stay, stay Alberto, hear me but speak.

Alb. It cannot be, bid raging Seas to listen
When the Winds heave the billows into Clouds.

Mir. Stay, stay, but to see Miranda dye.

Alb. Away --
Mock not my real griefs with thy false tears.

Mir. False tears! nay then I can endure no more.

[Faints. Alb. Ha! does she faint! Return my fair Apostate,
Return, and hear the story of your Falsehood;
Here I Will produce the clearest Evidence
Will prove you false, and trouble you no more.

Mir. Convinced I Am false, yet give no more, O horror!
Yes, I would rip my heart out of this breast,
And give't a prey for Vultures to devour,
Sooner then wrong my plighted faith in ought.

Alb. No more, but read, read there your Crimes,
[gives her a letter. There marked in Characters too plain and foul.
Farewell for ever Madam, for I dare not stay,
To see your blushes blab my destiny,
But must in silence part and calmly dye.
[Exit.
Miranda Sola. Mir. False to Alberto, this the Evidence;
Is this the Gorgon turns his heart to flint?
I dare not see this narrow Vault of death,
(Not that I fear my death, for that were welcome)
But yet I dread there lies some putrid earth
Couched in the dark abode, lest these black letters
With every turn should curl into a Snake,
Will wind and twist about my dearest honor,
And taint my ^potless truth with infamy.
Thus I secure it then -- nor will I trouble
[Tears the Letter. My conscious innocence with false alarms,
But banish all encroaching passions,
(But Love and Grief,) from out this troubled breast,
And leave the unerring Gods to judge the rest.
[Exit.
Enter Viceroy, Ricardo, and Attendants. V. R. I care not, it is resolved.

Ric. Pardon me Sir,
I have no other interest but your peace,
Which to preserve, I Would shipwreck all my own.

V. R. How is my peace endangered in Alberto?

Ric. I Am hush'^ Sir; he is my friend: only this -- beware*

V. R. Ricardo your words hang ill together:
Disjoynted words speak a disjoynted meaning.
You talk as if there were some mystery
'Twere fit I knew, and yet you're loath to tell.
Is he not Loyal?

Ric. Loyal, he may be Sir, for ought I know,
I never feared the sharpness of his Sword,
Or to defend his Country, or di^turb it:
It Is true in Peace, 'twill hardly rust within* the Sheath,
For ^avern brawls and quarrels in the Stews;
Nor think I there, 'twill rust with too much blood:
Therefore your Daughter --

V. R. Speak, what of my Daughter?

Ric. There must he wound you Sir, there ^ound the* vein*
You think he loves her Sir, perhaps he may,
Who would not love to be the Viceroys Son,
Courted, Esteemed, nay more, Admired by all,
And held the Favorite both of Heaven and Earth?
But if (avert it Heaven) Experience tells you
He courted more tha^ Title then your Daughter --

Vi. R. I know your meaning, but no more of that:
What I Have decreed stands firm, sixth as a Rock,
Not to be shaken with your blustering reason.
Prudence in Rulers is the Helm of State,
Which lost, the wandering Bark's a Prey to fate,
Spl^ts on the Rocks and sinks into the Sand;
Reason that ma^n'd her, cannot then Command:
The Ribs are burst, the helm in pi^^^s torn,
The Rudder lost, the Bark is surely go^e*
Either you argue I Have renounced that Prudence
In taking him into my heart and House,
(After* long wading into his inmost thoughts,
And sounding all the Shallows of his Soul;)
Or there is some hidden Cause for this aversion.

Ric. Pardon my Lord, the hasty zeal I Have shown;
Some brandisht bolt be levelled at my head,
And rivet me to earth, If I have ought
To move me thus but duty -- and my Love.
[aside. Enter Miranda. But see your Daughter, Sir.

Mir. I had forgot,
It Was rashly done to tear the Letter,
Then leave it here;
For which forgive me Credulo^s Alberto.
Ha! my Father here!

[Starts. Vi. R. Miranda.

Mir. My Lord.

V. R. Why does a Father's presence thus surprise you?
But that is a trifle, to those greater wonders
Which amaze me more: Why Child this strange disorder?
What mean those swol'n eyes, and falling tears?
Is this the Picture of Triumphant Love,
Dressed in the Visage of a black despair?
Are shours the Prologue to the rising Sun,
Or Harbingers of an ensuing Storm?

Ric. My Plot has took; thanks to my witty Stars.

[aside. V. R. I cannot guess the meaning, sure Alberto
Must know the Cause, speak, was he here to day?

Mir. He was my Lord, -- Oh fatal interview!

V. R. Fatal, to what? be quick and give me ease:
Is it your speedy Nuptials that are fatal?
By Heaven if such a thought were starting in you,
After all your Pleadings, and my Conquered Pride,
You should be Married in the other World.

Mir. Alas! that heavy Curse comes now too late
Since Love has made me wretched beyond all hopes
Of ever being blessed or happy more.
He came my Lord, but with a face so altered,
He rather seemed the Ghost of my Alberto;
Then eyed me as I were a Basilisk:
Revenge and Love jarr'd in his eyes a while,
But strait the fiercer passion gained the Conquest:
To all the Endearments of my joyful Love,
He answered only with a Gloomy silence:
But soon as I discovered your consent,
He stormed and raved aloud, then wished me joy,
Talked of Antonio, falsehood and revenge,
Whilst all my tears inflamed him but the more.

V. R. I understand you not -- Ha! Ricardo!

Ric. You see my eye was piercing to discern.

V. R. Speak once again, but speak it to the dead,
For they will solve such a riddle soon as I.

Ric. I am no Oedipus, yet can construe this:
He Is false, or thinks her so, which is as bad, if not worse.

V. R. Oh! give me patience Heaven for this affront,
Which thus reflects upon my Masters honor,
And wipes the Sacred Oil from off his head.
There Is never a proud Italian of you all
Shall dare to ro^ze my fiery Jealous rage
And escape it is fury. -- Guards go seize the Traitor.

Mir. Hold, hold Kind Sir, and hear your Daughter speak.

Vi. R. Shame to my blood, would thou excuse the Villain?
Breath but a word for him that dares abuse
Thy Fathers condescension and thy Love,
And I Will proclaim thee Bastard, and not mine.

Mir. I must speak, for Love like mine is invincible,
And like the Palm suppressed, does higher rise:
I would excuse him too, but impossible!
Perhaps some busy ^iend has been at work
To interrupt the Calm which we enjoyed,
And Shipwreck all our hopes with one dire blast.
What Virtue's proof against the assaults of malice?

Vi. R. That ^iend is lodged within his treacherous breast,
There lies the Snake which stings my honor thus:
I^ vain you would bribe my Justice with your tears
The Balance must fall down and crush Alberto.

Mir. Since you're resolved, oh hear me on my knees,
I beg of you this last, this only favor,
Load me with all the chains, his Crimes deserve,
And let my death glut your mistaken rage.

Vi. R. Fond, Lovesick Fool, then would thou dye for him?

Mir. With as much Joy, as Martyrs for their Faith.
Dye to preserve him for another Arms,
And bless the Stroke which gives Alberto life.

Vi. R. I find my resolution Staggers here
and thou have tamed the Lion in my Soul;

[Rise. Ric. It Is well; and fortune hitherto's my friend,
Did he secure him, there would be a search
[aside Deep in the bottom of my close design
And all my industry were countermin'd.
If that my Loyallty were not ill manner'd
I would advise you Sir, to curb your rage,
Till proof imprint the Stamp of Justice on it:
And if your Highness shall think me worthy
I Will be the Argus to your peace and honor.

Vi. R. Thanks my Good friend: and to convince you that
Your service is not thrown away on me,
I accept of your advice; Alberto's free.
Now Daughter let us in, and sound the depth
Of all these wonders. -- Ricardo want me here.

[ Exit Viceroy, Miranda and Attendants Ricardo Solus. Ric. What lucky Planet
ruled when I was born*
And marked me out a second Machiavell?
He Plotted but to gorge his vast ambition,
But I, to satisfy Revenge and Love,
The Darling Passions of the Powers above.
What Is this, a torn note, exposed to view?
I^e join the broken remnants close, and may
[Puts it together and starts. From every pei^^ sprout up a Hydra's head,
To wound and quite destroy the Man I hate.
Ha! Confusion to my eyes! what is this I see?
The very Basis of my Plot overthrown;
The pin plucked out which moved my Studied Engine:
My counterfitted Challenge here, and torn.
What should this mean? -- Let me see!
[Muses. No -- Yes -- Nay it shall be so:
I Will Counterplot the Coward,
And like the Toad suck poison from each Verdant her^
And spit it in Alberto's face.

Enter the Viceroy unattended. V. R. Is there no friend, will ease me of my
doubts?
None to redeem me from this Maze of thoughts
In which I Am lost? Ricardo thou seem Honest,
And can not without trouble see me thus:
Give me some means to rid me of this Torture,
Though never so harsh, though it be a fatal Cord
Or twist of roapy Venom for a Clue.

Ric. The fair Miranda has been at work for me,
And molded him, as if she would gagged my wishes;
[aside Credit me Sir, your grief distracts my Soul,
And all my Friendship must give way to duty.
My weak imagination cannot present
A surer way to fathom his intents,
And punish 'em, then quite to cast him down
From that bright Heaven he once aspired to,
And bar all future claims unto your Daughter.

V. R. Friendship still softly pleads within thy breast;
Has not the Villain baulk't that punishment,
In leaving her, and plagued me with his falsehood?
This mildness in my Friend's almost a Crime
When Titius's Vulture* or the rolling Stone
Are nothing to the torments he deserves.
Were but my fears confirmed by certain proof,
What Patron God should guard him from my vengeance?
Though Thunder backed with lightning fenced him in,
And Charms as great as Circe's did protect him.
Nay --
Though buried from my rage as deep as Hell,
Yet would I force the Lemnian Bulworks; Scale
The Flaming Wall's, then ransack all the world below
To find him out, and having found the Traitor,
Tear out his false, disloyal, treacherous heart,
And grind it into dust, to heal my wounded honor.

Ric. This rage surprises me: I thought your Daughter
Had fully satisfied and cured your Jealousy,
And nothing now remained but to revenge his Crimes.

V. R. By all that is good she has heightened it Ricardo,
Her tameness has but wounded me the more:
Though I had offered all the world to bribe her,
She would but tell me, there was some mistake
And speak the rest in tears.

Ric. It Is wondrous strange,
That Duty urged her not; when other women
Can speak enough unbrib'd, or uncommanded.
But I have happily found out a way
T'untie this Gordian knot.

Vi. R. Speak to the purpose.

Ric. It Was Fate alone, who pitti'd your concern,
And therefore in compassion found a Cure.
When you were gone, I found this torn note
Which put together spells a Challenge -- Read it
With this back-blow I wound 'em both at once.

[aside. Vi. R. reads.] Although the fair Miranda loves you not,
Yet I Will not bear a Rival though unhappy:
Either renounce all title to her Love,
Or meet me single in the Parade
At six this evening, where I Will expect you
With your Sword to do me right, and
Satisfy the honor of the enraged.
Antonio. Ha! what should this mean? my wonder but increases
Still the more by this misterious Challenge:
How could Alberto but in honor go,
When such a dangerous invitation called him?

Ric. Pardon me Sir, my courage would not blush
To wave that Duel, which my Love forbids,
And more your Highness orders put a bar to.
But here is such treason, hell never hatched a greater,
So black a Crime, my Virtue shrinks to name.

V. R. It must be monstrous then, if feared to name

Ric. Monstrous indeed!
Alas! you take this for Antonio's hand*

V. R. Antonio's, yes, why is it not?

Ric. By Heaven and Earth it is mine as much as his.

V. R. Then there is some horrid plot concealed in this:
Tell me the meaning good Ricardo, and
[Gives Ricardo the Letter. Construe these damned infernal Characters.

Ric. I think the words need no interpretation,
The meaning's writ in plain downright Italian,
(It seems he has not politics enough
For a dissembling, false, and treacherous Villain)
Sir, this is but a Counterfeit of his,
With a pretense of fair Miranda^s falshood^
To varnish over his own ingratitude.

V. R. It Is so, it is plain; ye Powers, and must I Live
To see my honors death? to feel my blood
Thus trampled on by an abandoned Slave?

Ric. It works as I could wish.

[aside. V. R. Sure there must be
In young Antonio some grounds for this,
Some glimmering, flas^es of a growing flame;
By all the Gods I Will Crown his utmost wishes,
And date his nuptials from Alberto's death.
O where has all my i^jur'd greatness slept?
In what dull Lethe has my pride been drowned?
Rouse up my Slugger'd fury, wake my rage,
Act such revenge shall fright the wondering Age;
Be like a Torre^t on Alberto hurled,
And like the Deluge to the Infant world.
[Exit.
Ricardo Solus. Ric. Thanks my kind Stars, ye Bawds unto my plot.
This rage will countenance Alberto's murder,
And make it seem an act of Loyallty.
But first I must expose this to the flames;
Then on to build the Fabric I de^ign
Mount Pelion upon Ossa; bravely done,
Thus to ascend the Region of the Sun,
And see my glorious web, by second Causes spun.

Finis Actus Primi.
ACT II.
SCENE. I. The Parade.
Enter Ricardo with Soldiers. Ric. COme on Gentlemen you have your instructions
and your reward, twenty Florins a man.


1. Soul. We have, and it is enough for this same small piece of villainy: Why
Sir, we Soldiers, for half so much would kill our Fathers and Brothers, and
after that Ravish our Mothers and Sisters.


2. Soul. Ay, ay Sir, Ravishing's nothing with us, it is our daily practice.


1. Soul. Why I Will you Sir, an^ of my conscience it is true --


2. Soul. Conscience fellow Soldier, Zounds what have tho^ to do with
conscience?


1* Soul. Who I? why nothing; the Devil I think was in me for having such an
unlucky thought. How a plague came I to think o^ Conscience, that never had any
such thing in all my life?


2. Soul. Zounds how I should know, that know not what it means.


1. Soul. Well; certainly I am the unfortunate'^t Dog in the world -- but Sir,
as I was saying,


Ric. Ay Sir, pray go on.


1. Soul. For twenty more, we would cut your Honors throat, though we are so
much obliged to you for your bounty already.


R^c. How!


1. Sol. If your Honor should hire us, and pay us well for our pains.


Ric. Very likely, that I Would hire you to cut my own throat.


2. Sol. An you did, you would not be the first by twenty, that have done it.


Ric. Come no more fooling.


1. Sol. Fooling! why I tell you Sir, it is our trade, we cannot live but by
murder and cutting of throats: for look you Sir, the blood we drink, and it
makes us fat; the hearts we broil, and eat with Salt and Vinegar, and it is
wholesome food, Sir: as for the rest o'th body, if it be young and tender we
make Venison of it, and present it to our friends and Benefactoas, such as your
worship, but if tuff and old we give it to Dogs, it is not worth our care or
preservation.


Ric. You say true but now to our business: when he comes, retire if you can,
so as to o'rehear us; but if not, I hope those same unknown things called
Consciences, that can digest murder so well, as without making wry faces at it,
will not baulk a little perjury, especially when there is twenty good hard round
pieces of Gold to help it down.


2. Sol. Never fear it Sir, it is another limb of our Trade; alas we should
halt without it: why Sir we every day practice it for Widows, who out of
tender care for their Children will Sequester some of their Manors to
themselves, lest too much plenty should Dabauch 'em.


3. Sol. And for such grave Statesmen as your Worships honor, when they have a
Suit in Law depending, or any Friend at Court whom they would give a good
Character of to the Government.


Ric. These are fit instruments, as Hell could send me,
And though he tamely yields him self a Prisoner
Yet shall these Hell Hounds still outswear him,
And baffle Justice with their Impudence:
Nor will the Viceroy now be backward to believe 'em,
Since rage has blinded him beyond his reason.

1. Sol. Sir, Sir, I hear some body coming, I believe it is our prey:
Now is my Appetite as sharp as my Sword to be at him.

Ric. Retire then and observe the Instructions I gave you.

1. Sol. We Will divide the spoil Boys, shall not we?

Omnes. Ay, ay, Agreed: but come let us go.

[Exeunt. Ric. Now Nemesis assist your Votary.

[stands at a distance. Enter Alberto. Alb. The hour is past, and yet he is not
come,
As (...) in Justice he allowed me time
To think and Steel my Sword for Vengeance:
Yet why ye Cruel Powers!
Why have you doomed me to Revenge,
The Quarrel of my Love upon my Friend?
Was It not enough to hear Miranda false,
(To find a spot in that Meridian Sun,
That Silver-Swan, who once like Leda's twins
Brusht the smooth surface of the azurd Sky
And glid along in gaudy Majesty,
Above the Common Glory of the Stars:)
To see her quenched, quenched in an Asphalites,
And sprout up to the World an Ethiop?
(Oh it is a thought that grates upon my heart,
And screws the jarring string until they crack.
But that my Friend, my Friend should plunge her in,
And be the Tempter of this fallen Angel,
It Is Hell, Damnation, and Eternal horror!

Ric. What a rare poison is this Jealousy?
'That's workt, and almost scorched him into tinder
Apt to be fired with the least spark of passion.

Alb. Durst any other snatch her from my Arms?
How would I hug the Stinging Viper,
Till I crushed out his Poison with his life,
And smile to see his panting Soul
Dance on my bloody point its way to hell.

Ric. Now is the Time -- My Lord!

[comes forward. Alb. Ha! What makes this Court-worm here, This Parasite,
Volume of words, and shadow of a Man?
[aside. Perhaps he has heard me ^ighing out my griefs.

Ric. I have my Lord, and they concern me much;
And urge me to declare it to your face,
Antonio and you must never fight.

Alb. Must never fight? who dares oppose our fighting?
As well they might resist an Angry wind,
Or stop the Current of an Impetuous tide:
Not all the roaring of Carybdi^ Gulf
Shall hush the Clamor of my loud revenge;
Nor Mists engendered by the Queen of Love,
Shall hide her Darling Hero from my Sword.

Ric. To what excess of bravery you're raised,
And spurn your Absent For like worthless dirt*
But once more I must tell you Angry Lord,
Antonio and you must never engage.

Alb. It Is false; Dally no longer with my fury,
Le^t it burst out, and blow thee into Air.
Where is the Man dares combat with my Anger?

Ric. What if the Viceroys Orders should control it?

Alb. I laugh at 'em. --
What has State-Interest to do with me,
When both my Love and Honor are at Stake?

Ric. What if the Fair Miranda should command it?

Alb. The fair Miranda! O thou have hit the vein,
But call not back the Charmer to my mind.
Whom I Have in vain attempted to forget.

Ric. Then still you love her?

Alb. Witness all ye Powers!
How much I love that dear Abandoned Saint!
And with what joy I Would dye to give her ^ase;
But cannot yield Antonio to her Arms:
Still the tough Metal of my heart holds out,
And braves the weak efforts of my Ambiguous will.

Ric. Now then is the time to throw off all disguise.
Know then, I dare, and will prevent your fighting.

Alb. No more, be gone, wake not my sleeping rage,
To tread so poor an Insect into Clay.

Ric. That Insect dares your rage Proud Love-^ick Lord.

Alb. Thou art not worth my Anger: But mark me Statesman,
If thy Tongue breath a Syllable of this,
Or dares prophan^ the business of my Love
I Will rivet it for ever to its roof:
By heaven I Will bath my Vengeance in thy blood,
And send thee Herald of this horrid News
To open the Crackling Gates of Pluto's Realm
And wait Antonio's Coming.

Ric. Insolent!
Know tho^ what I am?

Alb. A Statesman, and by consequence a Villain;
A Common Prostitute to every bribe,
Who Traffiques Justice for all damning Gold.

Ric. I Have blood as pure as thine runs through my veins:
Nay more, I am a Lover, and thy Rival.

Alb. My Rival! Can any Generous passion enter there,
That Impregnable Garrison of Vice?
Or drast thou think to Violate my Love,
And offer up thy spurious Flames with mine?
As for Antonio, he indeed is worthy of her,
Fair as the day, and the first dawn of Light,
Before polluted with the Shades of Night,
And till this cursed Day a Pylades to me.

Ric. Your praise of him inflames but me the more:
It Is I alone deserve her best, and will wear her:
I will possess her, rif^le all her sweets,
Whilst you gaze on, despair, and cursing, Dye.

Alb. Ha! say thou? but this arm shall bar thy way
And send to keep company with Ghosts:
There may thou revell with some Proserpine,
But never think of fair Miranda more:
Draw, if thy trembling hand can hold thy sword:

[Draws. Ric. It can, and fix it in thy heart Alberto --

[Draws. Alb. Come no more words, but prove it by thy deeds,
That side o'th field is more convenient,
Shaded with trees, and undisturbed with noise,
Thither let us repair, but make haste Ricardo,
Le^t thou recover from this fit of Valor by delay.

Ric. On then, and let the Conqueror boast,
I think I am secure.

[Exeunt. [aside. Enter Soldiers. 1. Sol. Hark ye Comrades, why the Devil
should we betray this gallant man (who is our fellow Soldier,) for the pleasure
of a cowardly Statesman, who is of a profession, that is our greatest Enemy,
and still plotting for Peace, and to hinder our glorious rapines abroad, that
they may have the spoil of all at home.


3. Sol. Alas poor Pedro, and art thou troubled with a qualm of conscience?


1. Sol. No faith boy, I Would have you to know that I am a Soldier, and scorn any
such baseness; but why should not we commit this small piece of perjury for a
brave fellow that loves us, rather then for a Coward that hates us?


2. Sol. Ay! but Pedro we have his money, and it would be ingratitude.


3. Sol. Ingratitude! what is that?


1. Sol. Why a sort of current coin at Court Boys, that runs like quicksilver
from one to another: for look ye, don't we daily see what a crowd of Cringers
press there every day, gaping like so many Jack-Daws for preferment, and
commonly such as have spent three parts of their Patrimony in presenting,
treating, and bribing this Lord or that Squire, this Coxcomb or the other Fool,
and at last for amends, get only a large sum of bare promises and shallow hopes
(quite as shallow as his Lordships little-witty quilted noddle:) therefore I Will
have nothing to do with it, but leave you all to the Devil to be advised.


3. Sol. By Saint Iago he speaks sense in that; and I scorn to be backward in
any virtuous act, therefore I declare for the Soldier.


2. Sol. I am half converted and of thy opinion too: but my safety sticks with
me, for this same Lord Alberto is on the other hand too Virtuous, and
overcharged Virtue, you know, is as ugly as when she has nothing but skin and
bones on her back.


3. Sol. Right: and therefore he would thank us for saving of him, but hang us for
betraying the other.


1. Sol. Hum! and i'gad that may be: for faith though I love him very well, yet I
love my self better; therefore to conclude let us kill 'em both, and then we
shall shake hands and part with a merry heart, and a good conscience.


2. Sol, No, no, the best way is to seize and apprehend 'em both for duelling,
then shall we enjoy our prize by Law, and perhaps be rewarded by the Government
for our great Care and circumspection for settling and Securing the affairs of
the Nation.


3. Sol. Well! thou have a rare headpiece, a rare head-peice in faith: I shall
live to see thee one of th^se days on the very pinicle of preferment, for ahy
Policy.


1. Sol. What do mean, the Gallows?


3. Sol. Witty Dog, the Gallows! why faith as thou say, the gallows is a
pinnacle from whence many a weathercock has been whirled off, and with as
handsome a farewell as your protesting Courtier gives his humble Servant, that
is never to see him more*


2. Sol. Well, well, I Have policy enough for a Soldier* and I care for no more.


1. Sol. Ay, ay, and so we have all: but see they are met, and coming this way.


2. Sol. The Soldier drives the Cowardly Statesman lightning before him.


Enter Ricardo driven in by Alberto. 1. Sol. OF Miracle! A Courtier and loose
blood in ^ight: but let us to our work.


[They seize and disarm 'em. Alb. Ha! betrayed! unband me Slaves.


1. Sol. Slave us no Slaves, Sir, we have saved your life,, and you must get your
liberty as well as you can.


Ric. Come, since he is seized return my Sword again,
That I may drein from out his heart his dearest blood
To fill my ebbing Veins: Come let me go.

2. Sol. Ha! ha! ha! what can the roaring Lion do when he has lost his Claws
and Teeh, but roar? Good noble Squire of the Court you must hire Soldiers to
murder a Soldier, and see what comes on it, I thank you we have earned our money
cheaper a great deal.


Ric. What mean the treacherous Dogs?


3. Sol. Mean, why we mean to secure you both: you for bribing us to murder,
and him for not bribing us.


Alb. Thus heaven can save the Innocent,
Against all assaults, and make the worst of men
The instrument of good. But false Antonio,
False man, thus to conspire against my life,
When thou have robbed me of my Love, else how
Should he have known it and prepared the means
For execution: Come Gentlemen, lead the way,
The way to Death, the end of all my greifs.

1. Sol. Our business is to lead you back to prison, since we have given you a
reprieve and are taking you from the place of execution.


Alb. Would you would lead me to some Labrinth,
Where I might loose my piercing woes for ever,
And wander from my self,

[Exit Alberto with two Soldiers. Ric. Ten thousand plagues go with thee.
Did blood affright you Slaves, your daily food
In peace and war? But come, unhand me now.

2. Sol. Ha, ha, ha! you think we are in jest, no faith Sir, you will not find it
so: indeed I could be Jocose enough sometimes, with such a friend as you are,
but that there lags behind (in such a case) hanging in good earnest.


Ric. Hell and furies! they deride me too:
OF that I were a Basilisk for their sakes!
Yet think ungrateful Villains of the Gold.

3. Sol. Prithee talk not to us of gold, when our lives are in danger: The Law
runs thus, he that sees a duel, and does not call for help, or seize the
Combatants, is equally guilty of the breach of the Law, and under the same
penalty, as he that actually engages.


Ric. Does not your Conscience sting you for your ingratitude?


2. Sol. Conscience! we have got some Court Opium of you to lull that asleep.


Ric. Impudent Slaves!
Gods must I then behold my great designs,
Unravelled by so base and common hands?
But this defeat shall heighten my Revenge:
I Will call each fiend to harbor in my breast,
And prompt me to the wittyest Acts of horror:
Nay, I Will pursue him dead, and haunt his Ghost;
And though I Am sunk ten thousand fathoms deep,
Yet I Will be Aetna still, and spout up Flames,
Shall set the Heavens on fire about his Ears,
And with the mighty ruin ease my Cares.

[Exeunt Omnes SCENE The Court.
Enter Viceroy, Antonio, Guards and Attendants. V. R. Antonio, saw you your
friend to day Alberto?

Ant. My Lord I did not, and it much concerns me,
That he should absent himself so long.

V. R. Nor did you meet my friend honest Ricardo?

Ant. Honest Ricardo, and but plain Alberto!
Sir, you surprise me.

Vi. R. I shall surprise you, Sir,
To tell you, he that is your friend, must cease
To be your friend, or I commence your Enemy.

Ant. Forbid it heaven!

V. R. Grant it propitious heaven, thou shoud'st have said.
Would thou defile the e^mine of thy Sou^,
And mix with such a cankered poisonous Beast?
Even birds of prey peck at their Dearest Mates,
When false to them, and common with another.

Ant. Oh hold! my blood chills at these injurious words
And cools the warmth which circles round my heart*
My friend corrupted! no it cannot be,
Alberto's white, purer then driven snow;
The very emblem of Man's infant Nature;
And clear as opening heaven.

V. R. And yet as black as Hell:
^alse to his King, his Country, and to me;
But what is more, false to love and thee.

Ant. Impossible! It cannot be!

V. R. You Will not believe me then?

Ant. Pardon me Sir, if that I say I cannot;
For sure my friend can never prove Disloyal,
^alse to his King, his Country, or to Love:
When Gods cease to be Gods, and heaven is heaven no more,
Then will I cease to adore those Gods for ever;
But oh they are still immortal and unchanged,
So is our friendship kindled by their influence;
Promethean heat did light it from above,
And none but heaven can e're put out the fire.
But Sir, your words imply the knowledge of something
Which for Alberto's sake I Would beg to share in.

V. R. No ripping up of Circumstances, Sir,
It Is most unseasonable to our purpose now:
Dispell those Clouds, which thus hang over your brow,
And now prepare to meet your coming Joy:
To morrows light shall give your longed for Bride
Unto your arms, and tie you fast for ever:
You muse, I did not expect this from a Lover!

Ant. My Love and Friendship are so near akin
That one being hurt, the other feels the smart,
And eccho's to it is grief --
Just like a well-tuned Lute's harmonious strings,
One being broke, makes all the rest to Jarr.

V. R. It Is a fond Echo of a troubled brain
And false as wandering Meteors in the night;
If for your friendship you will be false to Love,
Your guilt will equal to Alberto's prove;
He but a lower friendship does decline,
But you would Almighty Love for him resig^e.

Ant. How can I hope to have my Love secure,
When it is twin-brother friendship wants a Cure:
Besides my happiness depends on his,
Since his consent must consummate my bliss.

V. R. Let his consent give place unto my will
She Is in my power and I will keep her still.

Ant. This Sir, would too severe appear in you,
To hold by force what is another due.

V. R. Alberto's due you mean; young man it is thine
Thy due, nor is it his consent but mine
M^st rule my Daughter.

Ant. Ha! your Daughter Sir!

V. R. My Daughter? Yes; I know you think it strange,
And wonder at this unexpected change,
But I have found that you deserve her best
And it is Antoni^ she must now possess;
I Will fetch her to you strait.
[ Exit Viceroy.
Ant. Guard me ye Powers!
Did he not say, or did I dream he said?
That my friends Mistress should be mine? Oh horror!
Weep heart at such a horid thought, weep blood,
And drown the Demon in the crimson flood;
Watch friendship, guard the fortress of my Soul,
And all this crowding heap of Ill's control:
Fly fond ambition to thy stormy Cell,
Or rather sink into thy native Hell.
Avaunt ye mushroom glories of the earth,
Whose fading is as sudden as your birth:
Leave me t'injoy my Mistress and my Friend,
And let me never, never these offend.

Enter Viceroy and Miranda. Mir. By all your hopes, Great Sir,
By my dear mothers Ghost, I do conjure you,
Revoke this cruel Sentence.

V. R. Come no more:
There Is Fate in every syllable I speak,
And if you prize Alberto's life, receive him
As one who shortly must command you.

Ant. Stand firm my friendship against the mighty shock.

[aside Mir. I k^ow you do but try my constancy,
You Would curse me from your blood were I disloyal,
And false to him, though he is unkind to me.
How did you trembling stand, all struck with horror,
To think he should forget his Vows to me,
And should I copy him?

V. R. You plead in vain,
His doom stands fixed, unless you repeal it;
I have no time to argue, think, and resolve:
Here Is the reward of your long smothered flames,
And fortune gives you an hour unasked,
What you scarce dared to wish for until now.
I leave her here, to clear the rest.

[Exit with Guards and Attendants. Ant. What mean these prodigies? but see she
weeps;
Perhaps she thinks to thaw my nature by her tears,
And wash away my Virtue with the dew

[aside. Mir. Assist me all ye Powers that favor Love.
My noble Lord.

[aside. Ant. O strike me with some leprosy kind heaven,
Blot even natures genuine image out,
That I may be a monster to her eyes.

Mir. This musing gives a Vent unto my hopes,
Perhaps his friendship Struggles still for life,
And with some aid may yet recover breath.
[aside That you are Generous, the World can witness,
Your bravery the haughty French do mourn,
And Naples saved, proclaims Antonio's Valor.

Ant. Oh tempting Charmer!

Mir. But there are virtues, which be^it a Court,
And sound much softer then the rugged style of war.
Love, the prerogative of Heaven and Gods,
The Polisher of yet unfinished Nature,
Which separates and refines the dross of man,
And brings the golden Age upon the Soul:
And friendship bears such sympathy with Love,
You cannot have the one without the other:
Once you did own a friend, and Love him too;
Once your twin-Souls did kindly mix together,
You hearts beat time, and measured every thought;
You squared your actions to each other's will,
And each desire did center in his friend.

Ant. We did, we do, and hope we ever shall:
There is Divinity in all you say?
But yet there still remains a harsh conclusion,
Why would you then seek to destroy that friendship
To cancel all the Sacred bonds, and stain
Your Virgin-beauties with so foul a Crime?

Mir. Ha! what does he mean?

Ant. Think Madam, oh think:
Think of Alberto's worth, his constant Love,
How ill he merits from Miranda this:
But if you have cruelly resolved his death,
Let not Antonio be his murderer:
How would the damned in Hell be ague-struck,
And double all their pains by contraries?
How would they hate the abhorred light,
And think the dismal shades the happier place
Where all such monstrous villainy they shun,
But still repent for what on earth they have done?

Mir. Be witness heaven how Innocent am I,
And oh reflect Antonio on your guilt.
You Have argued justly in your own defense,
Why should you then betray so brave a friend,
And draw such vengeance on your guilty head?
But oh too late, as well I might call back
Times fleeting sand, or bid the laboring Sun
Turn retrogade in its diurnall Course;
For he is gone, for ever lost to me.
Yet think not that I Will quench thy impurer flames,
I Will sooner seek a Satyr of the Woods,
Embrace a Leopard, mix with ravenous Wolves,
For they are more clear, and more relenting far:
But oh! Death is the wellcom'st guest to me,
To embrace a shroud, and kiss the weeping Marble,
Till we are Incorporate, both cold alike,
So turn like Niobe into a Stone.

Ant. Instruct me heaven what means this show of rage:
Madam you load me with a Crime unknown,
And still forestall what I would say to you;
But let these fruitless accusations cease,
And tell me how I have betrayed Alberto.

Mir. Have thou not? --

Ant. What? Speak --

Mir. But here I Am lost again,
My Father charged me not to clear the truth
And Tyrant duty compells me to obey.
Enter Maria. What means that ghastly look; Maria speak:
Do thou bring ought of comfort or despair?

Mar. I Will speak the truth, however it fatal prove:
Just now arrived some Soldiers to your father,
Who say, they have seized Alberto and Ricardo
For Duelling.

Mir. What, and Imprisoned too?

Mar. Worse Madam, your enraged Father swears
His life is forfeit, and it shall be paid,
Yet now has sent to bring Ricardo to him.

Mir. Oh Tyrant Father! greater Tyrant thou,
[ to Ant. Who Triumphs thus, over two bleeding hearts,
Which both expire by thy Treachery.

Ant. I Am at a loss for words to express my wonder;
Madam, I Am hush^, and will accuse no more
Since I Am confirmed you love Alberto still,
But still unkindly you maintain your charge against me,
Fill me with blackest Ideas of a Crime
I loath to name. But I must tell you, Madam,
The fair Astella's Image is rooted here,
And not to be defaced by all your Charms,
Nor think your Fathers grant, or vain Ambition
Can ever blast my love, and make me change.

Mir. Too late this forced Repentance comes from yo^
Since Death's his Doom, and not to be repealed.

Ant. I will make reparation, though not guilty;
Such reparation Madam, will convince you,
That friendship's dea^er to this breast, then life.

Mir. What can thou do to counterveil his death?

Ant. I Will save him though I perish in the attempt:
I Will ransom from him his unjust confinement,
Or leave my life to appease your jealousy.

Mir. This will be noble, and may clear my doubts,
Go, and success attend your brave endeavors.
Away, and give me life or death; since my weak thread
Depends on his, and drops when he is cut off.

[ Exit. Mir. and Mar. Ant. Alberto thus confined? It shall not be;
I Will snatch him from the very jaws of Death,
And shield him from the stroke of angry fate.

[Going. Enter Astella. Ast. Turn thee Antonio, turn Ambitious youth.

Ant. My dear Astella here? O my fair Saint
This is a day of wonders, mighty wonders,
Such as must Separate a while my Soul,
And force me to thy Brother, and my friend.

Ast. Wonders indeed, that such a Votary
As you should turn Apostate unto Love,
And pay your vows unto another Saint.

Ant. Ha my Astella! this is still more strange,
In what perplexity am I involved?
I think the Planets tread in mistick rounds,
And all the Stars are hatching fatal riddles.

Ast. In vain you would seek a shroud to hide your guilt,
Loves jealous eyes with ease can pierce your Soul,
And mak't transparent as a Cristall mirror.

Ant. What a gross fat^ has heaven allotted me,
To make me ignorantly thus a Villain,
A Villain to my Mistress and my friend,
Yet cannot learn my Crime to either?

Ast. Yet my Antonio, why should you prefer
The barren and uncertain joys ambition yields,
Before Loves calmer and more solid sweets?
How have you called yo^ shining Orbs to witness
The purer flame which circl'd in your breast,
And swore the fixed Stars should change their sphere,
E're you forgot Astella for another.

Ant. Was ever love in such a maze as mine,
That all her softness cannot melt my nature?
The rugged figure of Alberto's prison
[aside. Has rac'd out for a while the impressions of my love.
Credit me Madam, I can never change:
Then speak not words so fatal to my peace,
Nor from this sullen temper fondly gather,
I Love no more, but ange^ clouds my Love.

Ast. Heaven knows and you what cloud eclipses it,
But I Will repine no longer at your choice,
Nor think I Am wretched, whilst Antonio's happy.
But let me beg you to defer your joys
Till I am withered by a milder grief,
And languish by a gentle death from you.

Ant. This kindness from her, wounds me but the deeper,
Since I want power to make a fit return:
By heaven my heart is yours, as it was ever
But I must pay a duty to my friend,
Which done I will return, and doubly blessed,
Whilst he shall give your hand, but yo^ the rest.
[Exit.
Ast. This ill-tun'd Joy's but a forced harmony,
These words are all but Mandrakes notes to me:
Yes my Antonio, thou art false, inconstant,
As the leaf that is blown with every wind:
I read it in his eyes, yet cannot chide,
It were not rigor should I blame the false one,
And vent the sorrows of an injured Love
But oh I cannot be so much a Woman!
Ye Powers that formed this piece of Misery
Why made ye me so soft, and him so cruel?
Yet er'e I will proceed some means I Will try,
Which if they fail, there still remains to dye.
Thus I Will r^deem the credit of my Sex,
For when my fatal Story shall be told,
Succeeding times shall change their harsh decree,
And with united Voices all agree,
That Man's the Emblem of Inconstancy.
[Exit.
ACT III.
SCENE. I. A Prison.
Enter Jailer, with Purses. Iay. Be true to thy Profit still say I Stephano.
Ricardo has given me fifty checquins to release him, and says he will save my
throat, and be my friend at Court; when at the same time, her^ are some come
with Orders from the Viceroy to free him, which he knows not of. Again here is
within young Antonio, who has given me a hundred more for his friend, the Lord
Alberto: now it is a Sin to refuse Jove descending in a golden shower into my
lap, and a greater Sin to be hanged: Well Stephano lay thy wits together, and
for once outwit a Statesman, and out-promise a Courtier. -- who is there?


Enter Officers with two or three more. Offi. Is my Lord Ricardo ready yet?

Iay. Sir, he is a little busy at present, and desires no noise near him; but if
you will be pleased to retire and wait at the door facing St. Iaques's, I Will
conduct him to you strait.


Offi. Well make have honest Jailer:


[Exeunt Iay. I think I nick't it, just in the nick: Wit and Policy together,
that is too much for once; but now to my business [goes and unlocks a door.] My
Lord you may come out, if you please.


Enter Alberto. Alb. What means this mercy from my Jailer?


Iay. O my Lord, no complements: but stay a little and I Will fetch you your
sword.

[Exit
Alb. Let fate interpret this misterious dealing,
For I Am invelop'd still in double night;
The light o'th Sun I yet may chance to see;
But oh Miranda!
Miranda's Set, for ever set to me.

Enter Jailer. Iay. Here Is your accoutrements Sir; and he^e's a key which opens
the backdoor leading to Porto Sancto, make have, lest you be discovered and I
suspected.


Alb* Fate niggard gives me happiness by halves, Since I Am unable to requite
this goodness. But here is to reward thee.


[gives him money. Iay. I am sufficiently rewarded, my Lord, in my own
conscience, and your Lordships innocence --


[ and in Antonio's money. Alb. Be silent still the night, and wink ye Stars,
Guide me where I may find this faithless friend,
And all my sorrows shall for ever end.
[Exit.
Iay. So much for him: but now go on and prosper still say I; I shall oblige
'em all three, and cheat 'em all three.


Enter Antonio. Ant. Jailer!

Iay. Who Is there?

Ant* A friend: Is my Lord Alberto dressed yes?

Iay. I Will go see, and if he be ready, I Will bring him to you.
[Ex*
Ant. Now shall we solve this Sophistry of Hell,
And kill the Hydra that invented it.

Enter Jailer leading Ricardo. Iay. He fee'd me to free Alberto, from which I
studied your
Escape, and keep the other still in durance.

Ric. Excellent Engine, I Will improve his fee.
But how shall I escape undiscovered?

Iay. Why Sir, you may traverse your ground here in the dark, and go out
without speaking to him, and at the door, I Have placed some friends, that will
Conduct you to the Viceroy, since you say you're sure of being welcome to him.

Your friend Sir, will come out immediately:

[ to Antonio. Now I Have got a hundred and fifty pieces, I Will fairly run away,
and if I Am caught, it is better to be hanged with satisfaction, then to go to
the Gal^ows with a craving Stomach,

For a full belly will weigh down the Rope,
But p^nury must never a pardon hope.
[Exit.
Ant. I hear some tread; my dear* Alberto, Friend,
Where are you?

Ric. You shall be with your friend, never fear it: so farewell If I can hit
the door.


[goes upon Antonio. Ant. Welcome my dear Alberto, to these Arms,
Welcome to life, to friendship, and to love.

[Ric. stabs Anto. Ric. I hope I Have signed our Friendship Sir in blood.

Ant. Wounded! Oh Heavens! and by Alberto's hand!
Ungrateful Traitor! yet I Will know the cause.

[draws. Ric. You shall not, if I can possibly avoid it:
This is rare mischief, thus with a random blow
To ^ow such Serpents teeth, which when they spring
In hisses will each others requiem sing.
[Exit.
Ant. O Power of destiny to change a breast,
Which virtue seemed to challenge as her own:
That he should fear the presence of his friend,
And seek to give him death, who saved his life;
Horror choaks up my words, and damps my heart,
I feel his hand, and not his Dagger Smart.
[Exit.
SCENE The Palace.
Enter Viceroy and Miranda. V. R. Slighted again? what do the Slaves conspire*
To make a mock of Naples second Monarch?
By all my wrongs I will endur't no longer,
But they shall feel the weight of injured greatness:
Where is Antonio? Guards go fetch him strait;
Hurl him through Hells of torture to my hands,
That I may heighten all his Misery,
And double all the wounds which he gives me.

Mir. O Sir, what villain has inspired this rage,
Or is it I that have inflamed you thus?
Know Royal Sir,
'Twas I that breathed the calm repentance in him,
And called his wandering Love to it is first flame,
Then fixed his friendship to Alberto's name.

V. R. Friendship! I Will hew that title from between 'em;
Eternal Mi^ts shall separate 'em for ever.
Friends; so were bloody Cassius and Brutus,
When they conspired great Caesar's overthrow,
And all the world did mourn the fatal blow.
But Traitress thou that durst oppose my will
Shall be immured for ever from the day,
In some dark Cloister, sigh thy wearied life out;
There may thou tire the Saints with Orisons,
And each return a curse upon thy head.

Mir. Be deaf ye Powers, and hear not his request:
Till these last words you were an Oracle.
Oh! if Alberto's doom be not reversed
Let me be the Companion of his death;
Then I Will enjoy him with a purer flame,
Then hand in hand we will tread the milky way,
Whilst all the Stars shall wonder at our Loves.

V. R. Whilst all the Stars shall ^icken at the ^ight:
Enjoy him! no, by hell you never shall
I Will summon all that Magic art can do,
To ^^og the Soul in it is swift flight away
Tha^ poised equally t'wixt heaven and hell,
Thy body here may rot on earth, thy Soul
Grow to one horrid Mass of black despair,
And hang a threatening Storm amidst the air.
Weep on, weep poison to infect the world,
And plague mankind, as thou'st tormented me.
[ Enter Ricardo. But here is a friend will countervail my griefs
Here let me ease my Soul into thy breast,
[Embraces him. Here find a Subject, and a Child in thee:

Ric. How fares it with my Royal Lord?

V. R. As with the indigested Embrio of the World,
When infant Nature labored with a Chaos,
Wanting as yet the kind Almighty Fiat,
To midwife the rude birth into an order:
My Soul like the Seeds of being in their first mixture
Is grown a piece with grief and madness.

Ric. Trust me I weep for joy, and grief at once,
I grieve your sorows, and I mourn your wrongs,
But pardon me if that I joy to see you thus,
And find my honest nature construed right.
But, ha! the fair Miranda here in tears!

V. R. Mind 'em not friend, they are all but Bastard-seed,
The muddy offspring of a froward mind.
Begone thou Child of night, but mine no more,
Avaunt I say thou Poison to my Eyes:
Leave me, for ever leave me; and may thy breast,
Feel torments great as mine, but never rest.

[ Exit Miran. Ric. But never rest, this to your Daughter, Sir?

V. R. Be thou my Daughter, and enjoy my heart,
For all run Counter to my will, but Thee:
But speak what fortune has detained thee thus?

Ric. I fear to speak, since it sums up a charge
Against two, whom till this night I most respected:
I fought Alberto in my Masters cause,
Whom he had injured by a proud disdain,
When strait some Soldiers seeing us engaged,
Disarmed and led us both to Prison: but
My Jaylors kindness freed me, or his cruelty:
For strait I met Antonio in the dark,
Who with his Rapier made a fruitless pas^,
Glancing over my shoulder: I closed with the Ass^sinate,
And with my dagger wounding him I broke loose.
Thus Sir I purchased my escape to you.

V. R. What, do they mean t'usurp my power then,
By cutting off it is sure^t prop that is left?
Or do they think I am my Masters Log,
A Passive thing for them to tread upon?

Ric. Now all my Plots are ripe; my golden hopes
[aside. Are ready for projection. -- Perhaps my Lord
Miranda was the occasion of this malice.

V. R. What say thou?

Ric. Alas! what have I said indeed?
Per^aps -- [what shall I say?] -- Miranda Sir --

V. R. Miranda Sir, why sticks your story there,
As if it ended in Miranda's name?

Ric. Nothing, but Sir, another thought disturbed me.

V. R. Another? no Sir, it is that thought disturbs you;
You echoed to Miranda with a sigh:
I Will have it out, be quick and do not urge me.

Ric. Oh do not force me Sir to such a Crime!

V. R. A Crime! I Am amazed.

Ric. You will be Sir amazed when I shall tell it;
But spare my life, and grant me a reprieve.

V. R. Your life Ricardo!

Ric. Yes Sir my life, which if I speak is forfeited,
And I must disobey if silent:
Yet it is resolved, I Will dye a thousand deaths,
Rather then brand my Loyalty; but oh!
My words will strike it dead, and silence blasts it,
They blow away my fame so dearly prized,
And all for one rash error of my tongue.

V. R. I Am all dissolved in wonder!

Ric. Yet I will speak you have forced it from my breast,
And pulled my heart strings with it -- [kneels] Sir -- I love her*
Now tread the aspiring worm to its Element,
Now gather in your breath, rally the wandering attoms
To curse this proud Ambitious Traitor dead:
Yet why am I thus my own Accuser,
When I should blame my fate, and not my will?
Forgive my heedless Stars forgetfullness,
And O permit the monster to retire
To the Chaos whence it sprung, and where it ever
Had buried laid, and in perpetual darkness,
But that you Sir, by a Diviner influence,
With one Command like a prevailing Charm
Struck life into the confused heap of matter,
And ushered to the light the unwilling birth.

V. R. Ricardo rise -- I find my Spirits sink,
Trembling to mix my Nobler blood with his;
Yet thus I Would cut Alberto to the heart --
Tying this knot, I untwine his thread of life,
And cheaply gain to rule his fate and him:
It Is done, my anger has ore'come my pride;
And rage has conquered, what De^ert could never.
Ricardo. --

Ric. My Royal Lord.

V. R. Have you considered what you have said,
Or has my goodness thus emboldened you?

Ric. I Have weighed (Great Sir) your goodness, and your high descent;
On the other side, my weak and empty merits:
Your favor was the Air, in which I breathed,
But soon as Justice had near gained the Cause,
Love, Tyrant Love, that Arbitrary Boy
Kick'^ up the balance, broke the Sacred Scales;
And like Divinity without respect
Is equally obeyed by King and Peasant.

V. R. Ricardo, Justice has obtained the Cause:
[Embraces.] My Son -- but take that title without her;
For when I think of her, the thought's a Curse.

Ric. Ha! do I dream, or did you say, my Son!
Let me for ever thus embrace your knees,
For Words would be allay unto my gratitude.

V. R. Rise my best friend; and since it must be so,
To morrow she is yours

Ric. But Sir --

V. R. Yes* Spite of her resistance my Ricardo,
She Is yours, or heavens. But now no more:
The approaching midnight warns us unto rest,
Sleep but this night my Son, secure from harms,
The next you Anchor in Miranda's arms.
[Exit.
Ric. Thus like an Eagle, when he Soars above,
And cuts the yielding Air to seize his quarry,
Basks in the Clouds, and glances toward the earth,
Then seems to drive his flight another way,
But all is to delude his easy prey:
So I, like the new Mariners o'th Court
By different points steer to my wish^t for port;
By being ^animede, I cozen Jove,
But since I Am favored by the Powers above;
Be still the rest, and be Triumphant Love;
[Exit.
The Scene changes to a Yard behind the Prison.
Enter Lopez with a Party of Rabble. Lop. Come my brave Friends let us attack
these saucy Walls that dare con^ine my Master, treacherously betrayed into the
Nooze by a Cowardly Courtier.


1st Rab. What Courtier honest Lopez, I Will spit him upon the point of a needle,
unless he be a friend to our Society, a modish, foppish one.


Lop. Nay, then I have him fast* [Aside.] It Is he that has kept all this coil
about fashions, who to please the Viceroy would metamorphose us all into
Spaniards, that is, would cut your trade shorter by the sleeves.


1st. Rab. Oh how my blood boils against the Villain! what turn us all into
Children with hanging-sleeves? and clip our profit with the shears of his
ambition and avarice? my blood's as hot, as if there were a 100. fleas
stimulating my courage.


2d. Rab. What Is his name, that we may go on? men never commenced Heroes by
talk but action. (Now I think on it these walls are tame things enough, they will
suffer a blow without returning it, nor are there any port-holes to kill a man
unawares; if they within will be Civil, we will deal most manfully with the
o^t-guards.)


Lop. Pray give me leave -- It Is he who would banish long Toledo, and would
bring in a new kind of a harmless Rapier of a foot and a half long to prevent
duells -- nay, he motion'd once, that Gentlemen should wear wooden blades, so
that we should not have had a murder in a whole week.


3d. Rab. OF the Villain, there is my occupation defunct; but who is it all this
while?


Lop. No matter: now to our business, know you for what you came here?


1st. Rab. Yes, to free your master.


Lop. Do you know how he came to prison?


2d. Rab. Upon his legs; our business is to take him from it, and not to
examine how he came to it.


Lop. Then where is the justice of your Cause?


3d. Rab. In our Swords, where should it be? Cause q^otha! why Lawyers deal
with Causes, and they^re no fighting men.


Lop. Very wittily argued, but -- soft, who^s here? are they friends or
enemies? hark^ye my Lads* if these prove foes, stand ^our ground stoutly; while
I valiantly qui^ mine.


[aside. Enter on the other side Bernardo with another Party of Rabble. Ber.
Now Heroes, since we are embark't so far on this honorable expedition, let us
consider further, what we have to do. This is all the contrivance of that
damn^d Rascal Lopez.


Lop. Hum! it is Bernardo, come upon the same design with me, but I Will send him
away -- Come on friends, this is the Servant to that Courtier I told you of,
come to release his master, and hinder our design: he has but two or three
softheads with him; say, shall we let him?


Omn. No, no, knock him down, knock him down.


Ber. Hold, hold, I beg your pardon Seignior Lopez, what I said of you was but
a complement in Masquerade.


Lop. You have it for that ^ine expression; but now I must chastise you for
something else.


Ber. Hold friend, I came not here to fight, nor am I at present in case to
command my army; for I am as impotent as an Eunuch, or a Nobleman of fourscore,
as hungry as a besieged City, and as dry as a Dutch Commentator.


Lop. You Will be the easier conquered: come we will rid you of all your wants.


Ber. How?


1st. Rab. By death Saucy upstart; how dare you ask us questions?


Ber. Death! a pox on it, I care for it the least of any thing in the world: it is
the very bane of greatness; a monster that devours more of all sorts at a meal,
then Tailors halfpenny loaves and pickled cucumbers, or Usurers decayed
Gentlemen in a whole year. -- Gentlemen, I thank you for your love* but I had
rather continue my distemper than take such an Antidote.


1st. Rab. O Rascal! he abuses our calling: my honor's concerned now, and if
you put it up --


Lop. Then am not I fit to command an army of brave Citizens. Come to your
ranks; are you all ready? I begin to grow hoarse with this command, Hum, hum!
what a thirsty thing this valor is?


Ber. What do you mean, will you force your remedies upon me?


2d. Rab. Yes, if you will not take them civilly, or defend your self against them.


Lop. Come, will you choose to dye in the bed of honor, or be buried alive in
the grave of infamy?


Ber. I must think of some means to escape these valiant Dogs: Oh I have it
now! [aside.] General Lopez, to save the innocent blood, let us decide our
differences by single Combat, and engage upon our military honors, that our
men shall not strike a stroke, till one of us falls.


Lop. Agreed, retire brave Soldiers [aside to 'em] and do you hear when his
party^s gone, come you forward and rescue your magnanimous General -- Come
Bernardo

Let you and I,
The Battle Try*

1st. Rab. With all our hearts, for it is cruelty not valor to fight when
there is no need:


Ber. But how shall I trust you?


Lop. Upon my honor.


1st. Rab. By all my Pedigree, by the first founder of our occupation.


Ber. A long Oath Mr. Tailor, stretched from the beginning of the world, 'twill
hold -- And now Lopez, since we are engaged to make our men idle spectators,
let us to our Combat -- but it must be the next time we meet, and so farewell,
ha, ha, ha! [Exit.


Lop. Cowardly Dog! but it is the same thing: let us mind what we came for, and
now how shall we contrive to release my Master?


2d. Rab. Nay, look you to that:


Lop. Why I do look, and may look long enough for ought I see, before I find
any way: you should have considered of that beforehand Mr. Thimble.


1st. Rab. I am not such a fool to make my self mad.


Lop. Why then I think the war's done, so let every Man retire to his quarters
-- but then I loose the hope of a reward and may starve too -- stay friends --
yet I had better grow tall and strait by famine, than monstrous crooked by
hanging: Besides there is a great deal of Pleasure in dying in a whole skin,
and in this adventure I may be Carbonado'd -- go get you home -- but then my
honor -- a pox of honor, it is the most uncivil thing, it never consults a
man's safety -- upon mature deliberation, it is our will and pleasure that you
either go or stay, and if you disobey in our last command, look to it. [Exit.


1st. Rab. Well this is a fortunate business, we shall be accounted Heroes, and
be no more affronted by the Officers; nay, they will tremble to appear before us;
and cease to make assignations with our wives to our fa^es; again, Alberto will
be ours for ever if he escape, and if not we are safe; and all without bringing
our valor to the test, or once confronting the enemy. Come neighbors it is a
rare adventure, ha, ha, ha!


Omn. Ay faith Neighbor so it is; ha, ha, ha!


[Exeunt Omnes. Scene the Pallace-Yard.
Enter Alberto in the Dark. Alb. Thus like a Ghost I wander in the night,
With discontent to seek my murderer,
To thunder in his ears his breach of friendship,
And be the Herald of divine revenge;
Then silently retire to shades again:
But oh they are passable and light as air,
Whilst I Have a mine of lead ^its heavy here,
Presses my heart, and sinks me to despair.

Enter Lopez. Lop. Well I Have dismissed my popular Subjects, since there is no good
to be done: my Master must weather to'ther night out, and perhaps he may sleep
better there, for he will not have the cruelty to wish his Mistress with him;
when in the Palace, he will tire the moon with his sighs and hei-hoes, devour a
bed-post with embraces, and antidate all the real pleasure by forehand wishes
and imagination.


Alb. What voice is this and in the dead of night
That talks of wishes and imagination?
Perhaps it is some Rival in my misery,
That comes to weep his story to the Stars:
But sure they are Bankrupts now, since they have spent
All their malignant influence on me. But I Will listen.

Lop. I Have been considering of a remedy, if my Master will apply it; Cannot he
make use of my blew-ey'd Bianca, my delicate brown Angelica, or my sweet
short-nos'd ^ortia, and think that he has his mistress in his Arms. I have
heard ^ome great Philosophers say, that all the pleasure of Women is but fancy,
and cannot he then as well fancy one woman for another, as fancy that to be a
pleasure which is none. But whilst I think of him, I forget my self: I am very
sleepy, and must take up with the large Canopy of Heaven for once: Well in the
name of Satan, I Will lock up my doors, and converse with my self for a while:


[Lies down and Covers himself with a Cloak. Alb. It is my Servant Lopez
opportunely come,
For I shall have occasion now to use him: Lopez!

Lop. Ha! who is that? Now if this should be the Devil come to take me before
my time, what a pickle should I be in: well I Will cheat the grand Cheater for
once, for I Will lie as if I was Dead, that he may go back to hell, and see for
my Soul, and in the mean time I Will escape.


Alb. Lopez, where^art thou?

Lop. Ah, good Mr. Devil he is gone, quite congealed to a Jelly.

Alb. Rise, Sirrah, here is no Devil.

[Kicks him. Lop. Oh, oh, I feel his cloven hoof scorch me through my breeches.

Alb. Get up, it is I, is the fool mad?

Lop. It Is my Masters voice, it must be so; he has been Murdered in Prison; and
the Devil is come in his shape to Barter with me. I Would fain speak if I durst*

Alb. Do so, and leave fooling.

Lop. Good Mr. Voice and Foot, what are you, to whom do you belong?

Alb. I think the Slave's distracted; I am thy Master, Alberto.

Lop. My Master! Oh no! yet I must be bold and speak.

[Rises. Alb. Go on.

Lop. First Master Devil, I must own you to be a Demon of Quality, by your
good manners, that you come in a shape so familiar to me, and that you don't
bring Hell with you in your eyes: But as for being my Master, you know I have
served him faithfully in this World, and it is too hard to serve him in both, at
least till I am dead, and as pure a Spirit as he, and it is not fair, that an
honest Devil, as I hope you are, should stretch my service beyond the limits
of Matrimony.


Alb. This is Frenzy beyond all patience!
Did ever madness run to such a height?

Lop. Prithee, ^e not so impatient, but hear me out, an hungry Judge, or
Guardian Usurer would be more conscientious than you: if you be come to punish
me for my telling of the Challenge, I answer, that truly I did design to
prevent your fighting, but was or'eheard a plotting, by your friend Ricardo.


Alb. Ha! Ricardo?


Lop. Ay Sir, for he swore h^'d blunt your adversaries sword with his blood; so
I trusting your safety to him, retired. This is the Sum of what I have to say
in my own defense, and I refer my Cause to a Jury of Spirits, but let 'em
appear invisibly, and if they find me guilty, condemn me to the Galleys of
Acheron, if not, resign your black Habeas corpus, and sign my acquittance by
immediate vanishing.


Alb. This might divert another, but not me.
This simple Story carries wonders with it,
For Lopez did not know the place appointed,
Yet was Ricardo ready with his Murderers.
Oh it is too plain! 'twas my false friends design;
But that is but small, for I was slain before
A moving lump of clay without a Soul.

Lop. Now is this Archidiabolo giving Instructions to the invisible Jury.

Alb. Lopez, throw off this fond affected fear:
Feel me, I Am flesh and blood* a Man as thou art,
And not the Demon of the murdered Master.

Lop. Whose Demon are you then Seignior?

Alb. The Slave perverts my words to serve his folly;
I am alive, escapt from Prison;

Lop. That is as much as to say,
From Hell; did you leap the Walls, or shoot the Gulf?

Alb. Sure I Am mistaken all this while; art thou Lopez?

Lop. As sure as you are the Devil. But who the Devil sent you to me?

Alb. Ridiculous! approach me and feel thou Infidel,
And then believe thy Senses.

Lop. Well, so I would, if I were so stout -- but I Will make up that with policy
-- upon these conditions, I Will approach; first, that you do not breath upon me,
and infect me with the air of Hell; 2 dly. That when I Am close to you, you
don't contract your self into a mouthfull of air, then leap down my throat, and
by inspiration get me with Child of a young Beelzebub.


Alb. Will this mad humor never leave him? try me;

Lop. Well, i will take your word for once: -- his worships well dressed flesh and
blood upon my life -- but are you sure you are alive, Sir?


Alb. If ever thou did know me so, I am.

Lop. Hum -- your pardon Seignior, a wiser man than I might mistake, finding
you here at this time of night, and so expert as to break through your prison
walls.


Alb. That misterie's too deep for thee to dive in:
But now retire and sleep, for I perceive thou want it,
And when the morning dawns I will awake you.

Lop. I thank you, Sir.
[Exit.
Enter Antonio. Alb. Hark! Something I hear again tread near this place;
Who should it be? Antonio? no!
He lies secure within Miranda's arms,
Enjoys, and rifles all my hoarded sweets,
Then tired with bliss, and the excess of joy
Leans on her panting breasts, and falls asleep.
Oh my poor heart!

[sighs Ant. How have I changed my state of happiness,
And fallen from all my hopes in one black day?
Like Oedipus I Am innocent, yet guilty,
But feel a punishment as great as his,
My friend and mistress fled away at once;
Astella! Oh my Love!

Alb. By hell, and all it is horrors it is he:
Oh my swollen heart, why do thou tremble thus?
Thou that has faced Grim death in all it is Pageant-greatness:
When here is a greater foe before thee,
The Serpent robbed thee of thy Paradise.

Ant. It is Albert^'s voice: Instruct me heaven
What Is due unto my Honor and my Friendship.

Alb. Antonio! --

Ant. Yes Alberto.

Alb. He that was my friend, I think.

Ant. The same.

Alb. It Is false, thou never were my friend*

Ant. It Is well, proceed Alberto.

Alb. Yes Traitor, I will proceed,
Until thy bloated face proclaim thy Guilt
And bursting, spit thy Venom out.
See^t thou not revenge Triumphant on my Sword,
(Which maugre darkness shines like the Meridian Sun)
Longing to quench its thirsty wishes in thy blood,
And glimmering in the Scarlet sky to set?
Be quick and satisfy it.

Ant. Not for the World,
Or purchase an Eternity of bliss,
Would I Encounter on so light a Cause,
Just like two rushing winds, driven by chance,
Fight one another by a blind impulse.
Give me to know your Sorrows and my Crime,
Or find some other means for satisfaction,
I will not thus.

Alb I Will tell thee when my Sword's imbrued and reeking in thy gore,
But now to speak would pall the Appetite of my great revenge.
Why do thou thus delay?

Ant. Here take thy wishes then.
[ offers Alb. his Sword. Since thou art false, deliberately false
My life's a burden to me.

Alb. Then throw it off;
I Will ease thee of that burden.

Ant. I did resign it, when I resigned my Sword:
Now strike Alberto, strike through my heart
And to assure the Stroke, think on thy wrongs;
But to lift up my Arm against thee were Sacrileg^,
In every wound I should behold Astella wronged,
And shame my Cruelty unto her brother.
But thou delay'st too long, I am prepared!

Alb. Thou art a Fool,
I tell thee that would blunt the edge of Justice:
What cut thee down, as the laborious Hind mows off the grass*
Which by inclining seems to beg a Crop?
Antonio, no, you shall not dye so cheap;
I Have begged of Heaven to make thee as strong as Atlas,
To brave my fury, like a well-grown Oak,
That I might wound and kill until I fainted,
And my desires were baffled by my weakness.

Ant. It Is well ye Powers thus to refuse me death*
When life was Odious to me -- Cursed Fate!
How shall I work him to so brave a deed?
Rather let me fight,
Without the Violation of my Love.
Then ever think --

Alb. Damn thy dull thoughts,
Is this a time for Love? Equivocating slave!

Ant. Ha! Slave?

Alb. Yes, Traitor, Villain, Coward.

Ant. Coward! that stings home, and wounds my honor:

Alb. Honor! thou have none: that Roab of Glory
Thou have quite thrown off, for thou art false and base,
Therefore a Traitor, Villain, and a Coward.

Ant. Thy Sisters Love secures thee still,
She calms the storm which swells within my breast,
And stills the rage of anger and despair.

Alb. My Sister, no Devil no, she never charmed your Soul;
You Idolized another Saint, as false as she was fond:
But she is gone for ever, lost to my remembrance.

Ant. Ha! Gone, whither?

Alb. She Is dead and damned for loving thee.
I Have Signed her pasport for another World,
And wait to send thee to her.

Ant. O give me Patience Heaven!
Astella dead?

Alb. Yes, slain by me Monster.

Ant. Stay fainting Spirits, move not away so fast,
One short recruit before I leave the World;
I come Astella, I Will be with thee strait.
Friendship away; thus let me blow thee from me,
It Is gone with that last sigh for ever fled.
[weeps. Now I can meet thee upon equal Terms,
And like a hungry Lion, loosed from my Chains,
(Friendship and Honor which had tied my hands)
Rush on my prey, and bear thee to destruction.
Why sink thy Arms as if thy rage did cool?

Alb. If this be true, then what a wretch am I;
It is Astella's Cause that steels his Sword,
Whilst false Miranda is the Subject of my rage.
[Aside. Antonio, since one of us, or both may chance to dye,
When dead, 'twill be too late to clear mistakes,
Therefore by all that is good I do conjure you,
Resolve me one thing.

Ant. Be quick, perhaps I may.

Alb. Have thou not betrayed my Love and me,
And treacherously won Miranda's heart?

Ant. If this continue, I shall survive my Love;
I have, therefore now revenge it.

Alb. Yet stay:
Why were you then concerned when I told you --

Ant. I know your meaning; I did it to deceive you:
Therefore fight, or I will kill thee at all Advantages.

Alb. I will Antonio.
Be quick as Lightning to Revenge my wrongs,
Or as the thought that Executes.

Ant. Thou see me ready -- now for thy heart.

[they fight. Enter Lopez. Lop. Ha! what noise is this that Interrupts my rest?
Hark, I think I hear clashing of Swords:

Ant. I think thou have it there:

Alb. Nothing Sir, come on.

[Fight again. Lop. It Is my masters voice; what do you mean? If you are not the
Devil, I think the Devil's in you: now I Will be hanged if this be not some
Smock-quarrell; a pox upon all women, but Whores I say! Murder, help, help,
Murder, Murder!


Enter Miranda in her Nightgown, Gentlemen and Attendants with lights; The
Gentlemen part them. Mir. What Screech-Owl voice is that, that cries out Murder?

Lop. It Is I forsooth, Madam.

Mir. Ha! Alberto and Antonio! Oh Heavens what do I see?
Cracked not my eye-strings, when I viewed this sight?
Is Nature quite dissolved and at an end?
Sure such an Act as this must needs presage it.
Alberto's wounded too; oh horrid night!

Alb. O Spare this cruel show of pity, Madam;
You should have searched your Champion first.

Ant. I am not wounded.

Alb. No matter, it is a Complement stretched too high,
Thus to prefer her manners to her Love.

Mir. Still Jealous! but your wounds are dangerous
Else I would clear the banefull source of all.

Mir. Go on, dear Madam.

Mir. Know then Alberto that your friend is Noble,
If this last Action does not prove him base.

Alb. That word from you does brand him for a Villain.

Mir. 'Twas he released you.

Alb. By heaven it is false, all false as hell.

Ant. It Is false indeed, for he released himself,
Paid me the bloody Fees at his departure,
And like a Coward shrunk and stole away.

Alb. By Heaven a general plot upon my virtue!

Mir. Oh cease your wonder Sir, and hear me out;
Declare the meaning of that Note you left,
For there is the Fatal spring of all this mischief.

Alb. I gave it you to read.

Mir. It Is true you did, but I tore it.

Alb. 'Twas from Antonio, he knows it well.

Ant. By all that is good I writ it not,
Nor know I what he means!

Alb. O were that but true which now thou say --

Ant. How shall I prove the truth?

Alb. I know not since it is torn and lost.

Lop. Sir, I Have been guilty, and I cry peccavi, and I hope I shall before I Have
done, make you cry so, to this fair Lady, and that Gentleman. Ricardo's man
gave me a Note which he said dropped out of his Masters pocket; I read it and
found it a Challenge from Antonio to you: now suspecting that to be the
occasion of your quarrel, I kept it up, and here it is for you; the rest I Will
tell you anon.


[ Gives Alb. the letter. Alb. I thank thee with all my Soul, for you are my
better Genius.
Now read it Antonio, but read it to thy self
[ Gives Ant. the letter. Lest the Contagion should infect the Air,
And blast my understanding with the horrid Sound.

Ant. Oh credulous Man, how have thou been mistaken?
[Read^ This is not writ by me.

Alb. Can thou deny it?

Ant. By all that is Sacred I do Swear, it is not my hand.

Alb. Then I am happy, and yet wretched too,
Happy to find my friend and Mistress true:
But, oh I have profain'd her spotless Virtue,
And played the Tyrant, where I should adore.
Thus let me implore your pardon, Madam,
[Kneels That goodness which could Love me when unmanned
Plead for me now, since I Am restored.

Mir. You cannot ask my Lord what I Would deny.

Alb. Thus then I Seal my pardon though unworthy:
[kisses her hand. Now let me pay my duty to my friend.

[Going to embrace Ant. Ant. That name is fled with my Astella's life,
Then I forsook it, when you renounced Humanity.

Alb. Is that the wound? know then Astella lives.

Ant. Lives! Oh my Joy!

Alb. How could you think i would be so barbarous
To kill my Sister, and doubly wound my friend;
I only did it to excite your rage.

Ant. Then I forgive the rest, since I perceive
'Twas fury workt you to that height to wound m^
When I released you from your prison.

Alb. Ha!
Then here is another riddle to be solved;
I saw, nor spoke to no one but my Jailer,
Who guided me by a back-way from prison.

Ant. Then 'twas Ricardo, whom I met in the dark,
And who is the Cursed Author of all these ills,
Now I can hold thee without fear of stinging,
No Viper hid in this close Embrace.

[Embrace Alb. Oh my brother, let me for ever thus Enfold thee in my Arms;
And you Madam, that could pity my distress,
Let me for ever thus embrace and kiss your feet;
Thus like the Ivy twine about your knees,
And live to all Eternity thus over-blest with joy.

Mir. Oh rise my best, my only dearest Lord;
Rise, and be for ever happy in my Arms.

Alb. Oh it is too much, too much for me my Soul,
Thou only Mirror of all thy God-like Sex,
Sure thou were formed in Heaven by hands divine,
Whilst Quires of Angels hovered round the shrine,
And smiled to see a Saint so good and fair
Born, to enrich the world and be its Heir.

Mir. My dear Alberto you forget your wound:

Alb. It Is but small, and will but serve to punish me
For all my Crimes, and breach of Friendship.

Ant. Come, no more, we have been all too blame,
Thus fondly to believe what was not so;
But now the dire mistakes are known and plain,
And we will never be deceived again.

Lop. Now Sir, pray hear me, when you were gone, I was studying to prevent your
Duel, but Ricardo (how led there to hear me, the Devil and he best knows) came
sneaking behind me, and o're-heard me talking to my self, then told me that he
understood your design of Fighting with Antonio, which he said he would
prevent, so desired me to Entrust him with your Safety, S^^^ring (enough to
damn him, if false) that you were his dearest Friend, and that when your
twatling-strings broke, his heart strings would crack, the rest you know better
then I.


Mir. It Is plain, Ricardo is the Engeneer,
Who has been buzzing in my Fathers ears,
To undermine our peace and comfort.

Lop. If I was not afraid of being hanged for my policy I would contrive to
countermine this fellow.


Ant. We are thine for ever Lopez if thou do.


Lop. Why then Sir, lend me that Suit of Clothes which you have on, with which
I Will personate you for a while (I hope you're not offended at the Comparison)
then I Will seek out Bernardo, his Servant, whom I will so pump and wire-draw,
that you may see through his Master, but leave me ^o manage the rest.


Ant. It has a face indeed.


Alb. To morrow thou shall have it Lopez,
And I will ever acknowledge thy kind Service.

Lop. I humbly thank your Lordship.

Alb. In what a Storm this strange mistake had cast me,
Tossed on the Gloomy billows of despair,
Which heaved by winds of Jealousy and rage,
Had almost racked my harrass'd Soul to ruin:
But since we are now in view of distant Land,
Once more i will beg thee of thy angry Father
And drive away those Clouds oppressed his Goodness:
Grant Heaven a happy issue to our troubles;
Give me but once to touch the promised shore,
And i will embark on this rough Surge no more*

Exeunt Omnes. The End of the Third Act.
The Fourth ACT.
SCENE I. The Palace.
Enter Viceroy, and Ricardo. V. R. THe Mornings cheerful Ray, now guilds ^he
World*
And darts a joyful Omen to my breast:
The Early Lark, tunes his shrill notes to Hymen,
Whilst every Bird does warble out the Chorus,
And deafen all the Murmurings of my grief.

Ric. It Is true, great Sir, but yet this glittering form
May be a painted Cloud that ushers in a Storm.

V. R. Can you suspect your Masters word Ricardo
That thus you mutter out your brooding fears?
Is that a posture for a happy Bridegroom
Clad in that gloomy Visage, and with eyes
Fixed on the Earth, whilst Mounting to the skies?

Ric. Has not last Nights uproar, yet reached your ears
Which so alarmed your Loyal Subjects fears?

V. R. It has not yet.

Ric. Then I must be the Informer;
(Would Heaven, my duty, would excuse my ^ilence;)
Whether their plots have all turned head upon 'em,
And so compelled 'em to this act, I know not;
But once more they have combined Sir, to deceive you,
Hoodwink your reason, and eclipse your Judgment,
And make your ignorance patronize their Crime^*

V. R. As how?

Ric. Just as the Palace Clock struck one,
I am informed there was a busteling noise,
Like the first puffing of an Angry wind,
Which swells and bursts at last into a Storm:
Strait clashing Swords disturbed the Slumbring night
Which (echoed by a dreadful voice of Murder)
Chased Gentle Morpheus from the Princes eyes,
(For by design 'twas done near her Apartment)
She rose, urged by her pity to their danger,
And with a few Attendants, strait descended:
But (heavens!) what was her wonder when she saw
The two disloyal friends engaged in Fight?

V. R. Alberto, and Antonio!

Ric. The same, my Lord.

V. R. What should the meaning of their quarrel be?

Ric. You Will please to judge Sir, when you hear the rest:
To Countenance her pity, Alberto received a wound,
Which when she mourned for and Inquired the Cause
He with a whining Scorn accused her Cruelty,
And bid her help Antonio, whom she loved;
He seemed amazed at the new Jealousy*
And ask't the grounds: the Note was then examined,
Which he (as well he might) denied to be his hand;
Next comes a daubing Scene of flattering Joy,
Alberto kneels, and weeping, begs her pardon
As all had been a Mystery to him:
Nay more (oh heavens what Impudence is this?)
They lay the crime, the spring of all to me,
And have designed this Morning to accuse me,
When he shall beg Miranda Sir, of you.

V. R. Beg her of me, sure it is Impossible!
That they should dare to look me in the face;
As well they might behold an Angry Jove
When grim revenge sits furrowed on his brow,
Ready to scatter ruin on the Assailers,
All Lemnos brandisht in his hands at once.

Ric. But they have a Mist to lay before your eyes,
Will damp the Force of your avenging Thunder,
And melt your rage, to a refreshing dew.

V. R. It Is molded proof, against their weak attempts;
But to begin, I promised you my daughter
And with her take my heart for ever.
[Embraces him. Go call the Princess here.

[Going out. Attend. Great Sir, she has prevented me, she is here.

V. R. Hell and Confusion! what is this I see
Or my sense fails, or it is Alberto with her.
Enter Alberto leading Miranda. By all my wrongs it is he! oh my salt blood
Burst, burst your Channels, overflow your Banks,
And let my veins be filled with Liquid fire,
Quite to devour this Gorgon, that unmans me,
Thus let all Villains dye.

[ offers to kill Alb. Ric. interposes. Ric. Hold Sacred Sir.

V. R. Ricardo off, for it is in vain to stop me.

Ric. My Life Sir be the forfeit for the offense,
Consider Sir who it is, that does oppose you,
It Is I your Faithful Slave, who would rather dye
Then see your honor blemished by this rashness:
How would the censuring World condemn you Sir,
If in your rage you should Sentence one untried,
And be your self the Executioner;
Not but I wish his death, cause he deserves it,
But to dye thus would make him Innocent
And ^ame secure, he is punished but by halves.

Alb. Why this contention for a wretched life?
Villain I know it is the game you hunt for:
[ to Ric. But yet you think it is not toiled enough for death:
You would have me linger out a Hell on Earth
See you possessed of all Miranda's Charms:
Bu^ Traitor know, I have a Sword can reach thee,
And spite of Loyallty, respect, or Duty,
Rip out the heart that violates my Love
And cool the warmth which nourishes thy flame.

Ric. He has guest my wishes.

[aside Mir. Yes, hellish Monster, know,
There Is yet a greater bar to oppose thy way,
A Rock of Adamant, and so Impenetrable
That thou Villain with Legions like thy self,
No, nor the Hell thou carry'st in thy breast,
Can ever melt, or force away.

V. R. Insolent Pair! but now they have doomed themselves,
And by my Masters Soul, they both shall dye.

Alb. Pardon, Great Sir, those unbecoming words
Forced by a just resentment of my wrongs;
I meant not to defend that life which you had proscribed,
Thus I Surrender it unto your Justice.

[Kneels and lays his Sword at the V. R. fee^* Ric. We Will take the forfeit Sir,
you need not doubt.

[Ric. takes it up. Alb. But to dye silent were a guilt too great,
To leave you in a wild of treachery
Lost to your honor, governed by an abject Slave,
And fair Miranda Subject to his treason:
That I confess does make my tongue unruly,
Oh Sir, forgive that beauteous Innocence,
And leave her will as heaven has made it, free:
And here I swear by you bright Sun that Shines,
And by the Eternal Mover of the Spheres,
To hush this rising tempest in my Breast,
And fall a willing Victim to her peace;

Mir. Oh my Alberto, your zeal is too unkind,
Think not your Death can give Miranda ease,
For here I swear, by all the Powers above,
Your life and mine shall have an equal date.

V. R. Damn his hypocrisy, and thy foolish fondness,
by heaven the Spaniard is not in thee Girl,
But I delay: Guards seize that Impious Traitor.

[ Guards seize Alerbto Alb. Yet hear me Sir, before you throw away
That precious Gem upon a thing so vile,
And smear that Diamonds luster with so foul a soil.

V. R. Silence that croaking voice, Perfidious Monster!
He is my Son, and each affront is mine:
But to inhance thy mighty sum of woes
Live to behold thy Juno snatched away
Thy Soul racked in a Dungeon by delay,
A Cloud of darkness for the Suns bright Ray.
But yet in pity, she shall stay a while
And all thy sorrows with her tears beguile.
Pity? Yes Italian pity! may her eyes
Each attome of thee, make their Sacrifice;
Be, like two Basilisks, which may devour
At each remembrance of their cruel Power,
Then flash thee dead, and kill thee every hour.

[Exit with Attendants. Ric. Why this is generous to spare his life:
Nay, let him talk long as he might be heard,
It is not I Am unjust then, but his fate.
[Manent Guards. Well, I Will away to young Antonio,
Tell him -- what? -- let me see! -- his Mistriss's dead,
Slain by Alberto: -- this will work him up,
And of his friendship, make an useless Cipher,
Which I Will fill up with horrid black revenge.
Then in compassion, I Will release Alberto
(Whom I Will infect with some new found Chym^ra)
And grant 'em both an enterview;
By this I make sure my game on either hand,
For both will seek to excuse me to the Viceroy:
Thus like the hidden hand of fate I work,
Kill and destroy whilst none can see the blow,
And friend and Mistress be each others foe.
[Exit.
Alb. Oh my Miranda, 'twas a harsh decree
That I must never, never see thee more
Never (blessed with Love, and surfeiting with joy)
Lean on the rising pillows of thy breast,
And there in gentler raptures dream the rest:
Credit me Madam, but it is wondrous sad.

Mir. Do not despair Alberto, my best, and only Love,
For Fortunes Cruelty, is as inconstant as her favor.
But let her vent her malice, still there is hope;
Time's but a rolling tide, which flows a while,
Stays not, but strait with murmuring joy does ebb,
Into the Ocean of Eternity:
Thither we will launch; there Landed on the shore
Above the reach of Fate, or cruel Fathers,
We Will spend an Immortality of Love.

Alb. Oh my Soul! my blessed Angel speak again,
Thy charming words and sight can cure despair,
They ^ull my griefs asleep, and make me tame
And I am all joy, all ecstasy again.
But oh, I never must behold thee more
An angry Demon hurries me away
And drags me from the Heaven I now possess;
That thought renews my grief, and galls my heart;
There I confess my Courage shrinks and dies,
More than when death was in my view in War,
My crowded breast teemed with a thousand joys,
Which in an Instant are all made abortive,
But yet a single plague's too small for me,
For heaven has doomed Miranda to a Villain.
That beauteous Casket to be rif^'d by a Slave.

Mir. Can you then still suspect my Faith Alberto?
But ^ince (oh torture!) it is the last proof which I can give,
Hear me ye Powers, and you Alberto hear me,
If ever I consent to be Ricardo's
Though all the Tortures hell can e're invent
Combine to force my will, oh may I never --

Alb. Forbear, oh forbear that Cruel Sentence on thy self,
I have been impious, but forgive me heaven;
And oh Miranda live, although Ricardo's;
What have thou done, that heaven should punish thee?
Or how have thou deserved to share my griefs?

Mir. Can Love then be so bad a Counselor,
Or can Alberto wish me so unhappy?
Perhaps you doubt the frailty of my Sex,
And think that death can shake my Female valor;
But know, when danger runs in a Carreer,
Love takes the wing, and soars above all fear.

Alb By heaven I doubt thee not; but do not rob
The world, by taking all that is good away:

Mir. When you are gone, what is left that is worth my stay?

Attend. My Lord, your time is past, you must to Prison:

Alb. I will; but one look more and then I Have done:
Here must I take a long farewell to Love.
[kisses her hand. Oh my Miranda, when the Fates allow,
That false Ricardo must possess thy heart,
When he shall reap the harvest of my joys,
Give but one sigh, one tear, to poor departed me,
And it will crown my wandering shade with peace.

Mir. Think not of dying.

Alb. Yes, I must Miranda;
For Death's the only blessing I have left:
Yet must I blame the malice of my Stars.
Then when I Would wandered through the Coasts of night,
To seek some comfortable streak of Light;
Then when my eye had Paradise in view,
Thus to Eclipse my rising Sun anew:
Or as a Vulture when he ^^ies the round,
To seize some spotless Dove, which havi^g found,
With greedy joy he mounts up to the skies,
Whilst he does Revell on his lovely prize,
And with a scornful Gl^nce the World despise;
When strait some well-arm'd Eagle stops his Flight,
Forces the trembling Quarry from his sight,
And hurles him headlong to the shades of Night.
So, when I had reached thee through a dreadful maze,
And after all my doubts, my Soul found ease;
Midst of my Triumphs for my glorious prey,
The Tyrant Power does snatch thee quite away.

[Exeunt severally* SCENE A Garden.
Enter Antonio, and Astella in man's Clothes. Ast. My Country Sir, I Have told
you is Sicily;
Whence banished by my wants, I Am hither come
To find relief; my name is Florimo.

Ant. What Is this to me? I prithee leave me Boy.

Ast. Alas I cannot Sir: I Have heard so much
Of your Renown and Generosity,
That I must stay, and win your favor.
Besides I Have heard you are a Lover Sir,
And such a one I would desire to serve:
Sure this will sound him.

[Aside Ant. I was indeed a happy Lover once!

[Sighs. Ast. Ha! Once did he say? oh heavens, then it is too true:

[aside. Ant. But now my Love is gone I know not whither:
My Dear Astella, if you are fled to heaven,
Oh let me know^t, that I may follow thee;
If still on earth, I Will pray the whispering winds
That they'de conduct me to thy dark abode,
I Will beg the Trees to bow their leafy heads
And point me out the Mansion of my Love.
What shall I think? for to suspect thy truth,
Or doubt Alberto's words, were sure a Crime.

Ast. I know not what this musing does portend,
But I will try him once again. My noble Lord,
Cast not a wretched youth to the wide world,
Who cannot live a moment absent from you.
Why are you sad? Give me to know the Cause
[Kneels. I Will sit and sing and charm your griefs asleep,
Lie at your feet like weeping Philomell,
And hush your sorrows with my pleasing airs:
And when the morning dawns, I Will be your Lark,
To welcome with my joyful notes the coming day,
Thus we will perform, and pass the time away;
Thus spend the melancholy hours, making grief a pleasure,
And scorning all the follies of the laughing world.

Ant. Such pleasing softness did I never hear;
And still the more I look, the more I still desire;
In every feature methinks I read Astella;
The very air that bears the charming sounds,
Echoes Astella to my wondering ears.
R^se gentle Youth, so sweet an advocate
Must needs obtain the cause though never so hard:
If then (kind Florimo) you would share in a disordered heart,
And be the sad Companion of my woes --
But do not, for they will blast thy tender form,
And wither all thy blooming hopes to death.

Ast. Alas it is all the blessing I would wish
To share your woes, since I Am already
More unfortunate and wretched then you er'e can be.

Ant. Oh it is impossible! but tell me how thou art wretched.

Ast. By Love that soft disturber of my peace,
And by my friend.

Ant. Grant heaven it be not so with me.

[aside. Ast. Doubt not your Mistress safety, nor your Friend,
If conscious innocence says you love her still.

Ant. Love her! thy silly question stabs my very Soul;
None can behold Astella and not love her:
Not Orpheus when he charmed the fiery gates of hell,
And gained an entry to the vast abiss
Had half that Love for his Euridice;
Nor when he rescued from the God of night
His beauteous prize, and the same hour lost her,
Felt half my hell of torture and despair.

Ast. Oh charming words! which like Promethean fire,
Kindles the embers of expiring life and love;
And like the Arabian Chimist can extract
A Ph^nix from the ashes of her Sire!
My Joy's too great to be contained:
Here let me breath my Soul out at your feet
[Kneeling. And fly an Angel to the other world,
Refined by so divine a good as yours.

Ant. What means the Youth? Rise, and resolve my doubts,
Why does my declaration thus affect you?

Ast. Tune to his voice, ye music of the spheres,
To find such virtue amongst corrupted Man,
Is sure a Subject for Fames golden Trumpet;
To find your Love like Vestall fire guarded,
(When every foe does lend a breath against it)
Safe and un^ully'd in that hollowed Shrine.

Ant. So nice a sense of virtue from a Boy
Is strange, and must proceed from ^omething stranger.

Ast I Swore to wander through the spacious world
(Till death would put an end to all my woes)
To find some Lover of so clear a truth,
The same when slighted, or his Mistress dead;
And now I Have found the noblest of our Sex
I Will be your Servant, or your Sacrifice,
And never part, till parted from my self.

Ant. I am amazed at such surprising words,
But it is a pleasing wonder: Come my Boy,
I Will crown thy wishes, you are mine for ever,
[Embraces him. Instruct my Virtue, that seeing thee I may
Read Lectures of Astella every day;
But yet I want to know the Story of thy life,
The many wrongs thou have sustained and passed
And all the pretty murmurings of thy grief.

Ast. By a long Siege I Stormed my Mistress heart,
And took the Guarded Fortress of her Love;
Next when i would got my only friends consent,
The Brother of my destined Bride Lestella,
No Isthmus seemed to bar me from my joys:
When on the fatal Dawn before our Marriage,
Urged by I know not what mistake, my friend
Went to his Mistress, called her false and perjured;
Said, he or I, that Night must leave the World;
At night I heard of his Imprisonment,
Attended with a thundering peal of Curses,
From the fair Mistress of my Friend: At length
I by my vows to free him had appeased her.
Madded with rage I did mind my own
Who with a charming grief reproached my falsehood;
I had not time to answer her Complaints,
But flung away in have unto my friend
Whom I released, but he escaped my sight
Strait I received from him a dreadful Note,
Which stabbed me with the News of my Lestilla's death,
Who fell a Victim to his Jealousy.
Despairing, I abandoned Sicily,
And careless of my fate, am hither come,
To wander like a banished Criminal quite forlorn.
This sure will try him since my other fails.

[Aside Ant. What words are these, or is it but a dream?
A Vision of Astella, thus adorned,
[aside Who comes to try the truth of her suspicions?
If that my wonder (gentle youth) would give me leave
I Would say thou have saved me the unwellcome trouble
Of telling thee the Story of my life,
Since thou have so truly weaved it with thy own.

Ast. Not so I hope Sir, is your Mistress dead?

Ant. There sticks my sat, and leaves me in a maze:
If dead, what then remains, but strait to follow her?

Ast. You speak, my Lord, in riddles;
If she be dead, you would dye to follow her,
And at the same time own you Love her not.

Ant. Thou do not understand me right my Boy*
Be witness all ye Powers that knew our hearts,
How much I loved that dear departed Saint?

Ast. Departed! whither?

Ant. Oh that I could resolve thee!
My Friend enraged told me he had slain her,
But soon recanted, and I as soon believed,
Yet now some strange suggestions press my heart anew,
And fix my wandering fancy to her Image.

Ast. I hope he will not repent of this kind grant:
[Aside. Shall I my Lord, to sooth your sorrows, Sing?

Ant. Do my Boy, whilst I repose me on this bank
And bear a part with thee.

Both sing. After the Song she speaks* Ast. Rise; Rise my Lord, I see one
coming hither,
With a grave pace, as big with some design.

Ant. It is Ricardo; Florimo away
And wait me in the next walk.
[ Exit Astella* Enter Ricardo musing. This is the Cause I fear of all our dire
mistakes,
Now Studying some new Plot: I Will observe him.

Ric. Thus Virtue's ever clouded with disgrace,
A Princes favor cannot dart a beam,
But on a Barren or Infectious land,
And always must be partial in his choice.

Ant. He mutters State Affairs: but let him on.

Ric. Therefore the two young Heroes of the Court,
Envy my Honor, and sicken at my greatness,
As if my rise must be upon their Necks
But still my Virtue shall out brave their little malice:
I will convince the unbelieving world,
There is a man that can be great and good at once,
And then retire to Solitude for ever.

Ant. Why this is strange!

Ric. But oh that cannot be --
There lies some Mystery in the womb of Night,
Which Loyalty Commands me to unravell,
Besides to leave Antonio's Virtue toiled,
Deluded by his friends Hypocrisy --
But that is a Plot, and I Am a base Informer
There Is my reward -- but Virtue pays it self.

Ant. Each word does swell my wonder!

Ric. Alberto's Actions must have some design,
But let Heaven be Judge of that, not I.
This fresh account of Horror I Have received
Antonio must know -- Yes it is resolved,
Though for i^ he call me undermining Traitor,
Yet I Will respect my conscience, not his words.

Ant. Each words a Thunderbolt, and strikes me dead,
No double-meaning can be hid in this.

Ric. Who Is that? my Lord Antonio?

Ant. The same.

Ric. How does your Lordship?

Ant. Why well I think Ricardo;

Ric Long may you be so:

Ant. I thank you Sir* But good Ricardo,
If I may be so bold, what were your thoughts
Employed about?

Ric. It Is an Imp^rtant business which I think of,
How virtue does decay in every age,
And in particular that Cordial Friendship
How Pylades's Examples are quite forgot,
And how the Sign of Gemini above,
(...) ^opied ill by Mortals here below.

Ant. The Consequence.

Ric. Therefore my Lord, beware
How you permit a seeming Friend to creep too close,
Le^t in the bottom there should lurk an Adder.

Ant. Be plainer in your Counsel.

Ric. Yes, too plain;
Too plain I fear for your repose!

Ant. Ha! my repose!

Ric. Yes, so I said:
Your friend Alberto (mark me well) is false
The Wounds he gave, but seemingly he healed,
For they still rankle, fester, and eat the deeper,
And may in time destroy you.

Ant. Oh take heed
You come not with your false deluding Beacons
To warn my easy nature from the Sands
That you may split my friendship on a Rock;
For if thou do, death, hell, and ruin,
And all their black attendants shall not save thee:
You have had the mask on long enough,
Therefore now unveil thy self Ricardo,
And show the villain in his native dye:

Ric. This I expected; and therefore take my leave,
An honest man is never safe at Court;
Sir, you may find flatterers enough
To tell you what you would believe, not what you ought to know*
Who Will varni^h all your losses with a smile;
Nay, make you think the Sun shines in a storm,
When thickest clouds do interpose their shade,
And when the heavens are all in mutiny, rain fire
Rain blood upon your better part, your second self:
But he is a fool, who to convince another
(Whose looks speak hatred, and his words proclaim it)
Will hazard both his person, and his fame:
Such bigoted honor shall have no Prosolite of me.

[Going. Ant. Stay Sir, for to secure that fame you prize so much
It will concern you to inform me more.

Ric. Not when I know, I shall not be believed.

Ant. Now by my Sword, I Will force it from your tongue,
And if thou prov'st not every word thou utterest,
I Will hurl a heavier load of misery upon thee
Than that which Atlas with his weighty Globe
Does groan beneath.

Ric. How fond is Man, and easy to believe,
When words are daubed with flattery, and masked with Love,
But truth in its plain habit will not pass:
My Lord, to show how I despise your threats
I Will ease my conscience of the mighty Secret,
But arm your self against the fierce assault
For horror dwells with every fatal word.

Ant. Why do thou kill me with such cruel doubts?

Ric. I will no more: -- the fair Astella, Sir --

Ant. Astella, Speak; the very name's a Charm.

Ric, It must be Sir the name; that is all that is left.

Ant. Ha! what of her?

Ric. Why she is murdered, base and barbarously murdered.

Ant. Hell and confusion!

Ric. By her own Brother's orders, murdered.

Ant. Patience ye Gods, oh give me patience heaven!
One moments patience, and I Will beg no more.
By all things Sacred, in those fatal words,
Or one, or both of us are doomed to dye;
If they be false, there is something worse then death,
Nay (if possible) then Damnation shall sure attend thee,
If true, then I Am the Victim.

Ric. Hear the rest:
A rough hewn fellow, Servant to Alberto,
Thus with a penitential look, accosted me:
Sir, by my Masters threats, I Have been compelled
To Act a little piece of Villainy,
But my ill-natured Conscience flying in my face,
I thought to ease it by Confession,
I slew a Lady whom ^e ordered me
Veiled in a Wood; but that was nothing Sir,
Till I discovered it to be Astella,
My old dead Masters only Daughter.

Ant. Furries and Devils tear the Barbarous Villain
Oh I am all a burning Aetna her^ within!
But if thou prov'st it, I am satisfied.

Ric. Let the Revenge confirm it which I took
Impatient Virtue forced me to the deed,
I slew him strait, without as much as asking
Where the untimely Sacrifice was laid.

Ant. Enough, I am confirmed she is gone.
Oh Tyrant-friend, was she a Subject for your rage,
Could not those glorious rays from her fair eyes
Melt down thy icy temper to compassion?
But I forget, it is I Am her murderer,
And therefore thus will pay the cruel debt.

[Offers to kill himself* Ric. Hold, hold my Lord!

[Ric. hinders him. Ant. Will thou again give edge to my suspicions,
By hindering me of my desired bliss?
Death doubly is my due.
The morning wheels to gloomy night again,
To give directions where I should reside;
The Sun seems like a faint and beamless fire
To warn the expiring Taper of my Life,
And all but you conspire to work my Joy.

Ric. By all that is good, I will not oppose it,
But yet you are not ripe enough for death,

Ant. Not when despair does call me hence?

Ric. Why no.
Are you Italian born, or some hot Frenchman,
Who when capricious fortune frowns upon him
Strait punishes her crime upon himself;
At least since she does sit above our reach,
Let us revenge it on her instruments.

Ant. Touch not that string, for it inflames my heart,
And kindles wildfire in my troubled breast;
I would not think upon the Villain more,
And therefore I would cease to think at all.

Ric. It Is wondrous well! how will the censuring world
Say Naples is a Den of Caniballs,
Where Paricide and murder is a sport
And go unpunish't by the better sort?
By Mars your tameness does unspirit me
But I Will away, and take revenge my self,
Since such a Cause should arm the world against him.

Enter Astella. Ant. Stay, for I feel a glowing heat within me
Eat up my friendship, and I am all on fire.

Ast. What should this mean?

Ric. Cherish the noble flame
And let your wrongs heighten the generous rage:
If Alexander for a Favorites loss
(Who peri^^t by a Natural Enemy)
Made all the Eastern World his Funeral pile,
And glutted Death with crowded Hecatombs?
What should you do, who see a Mistress slain,
Slain by a Man, who called himself your friend?
Death, Hell, and Vengeance will you suffer it?
Methinks my Arm does tremble to my Sword,
And by instinct Commands me to unsheath it.

Ant. No, no, the brave Revenge belongs to me:
Blood, talk of blood; I will have blood Ricardo,
But there is a Prison bars him from my fury,
Away Impediments, you shall not hinder,
For though he speeds away to Hell, i will after;
Shoot like a flaming Vulture through the dark abyss,
Till I might fix my beak in his false heart:
Nay though the Crystal Gates of Heaven were open
And waiting to receive my Soul to joy,
In Hell i would linger an Eternity,
That I might double all Alberto's Plagues,
And make it hotter with the Flames I bear.

Ast. Alas that Villain has infected him,
But I Have an Antidote will expel the poison.

Ric. Why this my Lord becomes your injuries:
Since you are resolved i will further your revenge;
Wait in this Garden at the approach of Night,
And i will take care to send Alberto to you.

Ant. O kind Ricardo, in this obligation
You Have reached the utmost bounds of my desire:
Wheel on the never-tir'd Post of Heaven,
Fly swiftly to thy wanton Goddess Arms
That I may fly to my revenge: Farewell,
When next we meet, expect to see me changed,
Roab'd like the Setting Sun in bloody red,
Or pale as sickning Stars, and as spent Meteors dead.
[Exit.
Ast. I Will after him, and learn the mystery.
[Exit
Ric. Fly to thy ruin, fond believing Fool,
Thou know not what it is to take revenge,
For Nemesis delights in Woods, not Cities,
In dark Cabals, and not in open War:
Yes my new friend I Will send Alberto to you,
And reconcile your differing Constitutions,
Both shall breath naught but sulphur and destruction;
Therefore some new Chimaera I will study
Which his friend Alberto must be sent to kill.

Enter Lopez, dressed like Alberto. Lop. Well, now I have gotten these Clothes
on, methinks I Am as great a Person as my Master, and for ought I know, it is
the comely person within makes the Gentleman, according to the Proverb, fine
Birds make fine Feathers: Let me see --


[surveighs himself. Ric. If I should tell him that his Mistress's false;
Ric walks off as in the Garden. But stay that Topick's grown too obsolete.

Lop. Clean Limbs, handsome gait, Noble appearance! pity these qualifications
should be thrown away upon a Serving-Man: Well, if my face answers these,
'twill grieve me to retire to my primitive Rascallity, and that this bulk of
Nobility should dwindle to a Valet. [pulls out a Glass. Heavens defend me!
Seignior Lopez I should as soon think it were an Angel: now will I exercise my
parts upon my self, for such an Object must needs inspire Oratory, though I am
brim-full of it already. Seignior, if Jupiter had borrowed one of your eyes for
a dark Lanthorn, he might have fought his Enemies with a double advantage: (
answers) O Dear Sir, a little clear and sharp indeed I must confess; I make use
of 'em sometimes for my diversion to wound and kill poor silly Ladies, but for
the rest -- Nay good sweet Seignior, you ravish me with the Excellency of your
gestures: every part of you dances, as it were, to the Music of the Spheres,
and swims like the Lambent fires above in a Caelestial motion. O Seignior --

Enter Ricardo. Ha! interrupted? what Malicious Star envied me the happiness of
hearing my self praised by so accomplished a person of honor as -- Seignior
Lopez.


Ric. Confusion! what, Alberto here, and free?
Or does my wandering sense deceive me?
That it is he, it is plain; but how escaped,
Or if escaped, how venturing to stay here,
I must confess amazes me to think!

Lop. I Will vex this saucy fellow for disturbing me.

[ walks caresly by Ricardo. Ric. I Am on a R^ck, till I can learn the meaning:
With what a haughty negligence he bears himself?

Lop. I have a good mind to tell him to his face, he is a very uncivil person,
and to make good what I said, if he threatens to beat me, i will beg his pardon.
But then he'de discover who I am: no, no, that must not be.


Ric. There Is no way left to sound this mystery,
But to begin the harrangue which I Have prepared.
My Lord I have a secret of Importance --
Still the same port, that scornful gay behavior!
In what a mist of Error have I been?
A Sacrifice here Staulks in State before me
And sleeping vice, still dreads to give the blow.
The place is silent, and the Aiding Trees,
With bended branches cover the offense;
Besides Antonio's rage will cloak the deed
And they will condemn him for the Murderer:
It shall be so^; the next turns his last:
So --
[ runs at Lopez, and Lopez falls. End thus thy Pride and Love together.

Lop. Ha betrayed! my honor wounded?
Help, Murder, help: I am killed, I Am dead! oh!

Ric. His life is fled away with that last groan:
Now fly Ricardo, manage well this game,
And future Ages shall extol thy fame.
[Exit.
Lop. So, is he gone? pox of his kindness: what is here! My voice has alarmed
some of the Counrtiers, but I Will send 'em away like fools as they come, I
warrant 'em.


[lies down. Enter 3 or 4 Gentlemen. Fabio and Don Silvio. 1. Gent. This way
the d^^adfull voice directed us.

2. Gent. And here is the occasion; Heavens! it is Alberto!

1. Gent. What horrid Mystery is this! how came he free?

2. Gent. And murdered too? a Riddle by my Soul.
Let Us to the Viceroy, who walks in the Garden,
For it is too deep for us to dive into.

[Exeunt. Lop. So, I find I shall have now the whole Court about me: but i will
prepare my self to receive 'em: I may thank my self for letting the sword run
betwixt my arms* I had been spoiled else; I think I defended my self as if I
had eyes behind. Well now for my Glass; I fear this business has disorded me --
pox of your ill-breeding to spoil a good face, and tumble ones perriwig and
Crevat: I must not be seen in this pickle, therefore i will go home and new vamp
my ^elf. A plague of this Nobility, if for a fine Coat one must be continually
in danger of having his throat cut, or spitted through the loins like a Spar-rib
of Pork. I Would rather be hanged than dye an untimely death, there is no
satisfaction in it; but see they are coming, 'twere best for me to be gone, lest
I be taken, and put in the bakers pulpit for counterfeiting.

[Exit.
Enter Viceroy with Attendants. V. R. Impossible! it cannot be Alberto.

1. Gent. Let your own eyes convince you Sir*
[looks about. Ha! where is is the dead man, fled away?
Some hungry Devil sure has seized on him.

V. R. Am I a Subject of your Follies Slaves?

2. Gent. Pray Sir believe us: Alberto did lie here*
But whither it was done designedly,
To color his escape from Prison,
And co^sen us with his pretended death
That you might cease pursuit, I know not.

1. Gent. Or else perhaps the Murderers fearing
His corpse being ^ound, (a narrow search should be about it)
Conveyed it hence and buried it:
But these two Gentlemen can witness,
That they too saw him dead.

3d. and 4th. My Lord we did.

V. R. It Is strange, but yet I will believe it;
Death he deserved for his Ingratitude:
But though my passion boiled a while, I Am glad
He met it from another hand, not mine:
For now with safety I bestow my Daughter,
And crown desert with what it long has sought.
Perhaps it may remove Miranda's Scruples,
And death may set her heart at Liberty:
Thus Providence is always heavens Avenger,
And weilds the Sword of Justice against the unjust.
How'ere the Great resolve, and wise debate,
She rules alone, our happiness or fate.

[Exeunt Omnes. ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Alberto and Lopez. Alb. LOpez have you performed, what you engaged to
do? For in that riddle is my fate Entangl'd.


Lop. I have Sir.


Alb. Thou have! that word is Music to my Soul.


Lop. But first Sir, as a reward, satisfy my inquisitiveness, and inform me
what trick you have got to break through Prisons, and shake off your fetters thus?


Alb. Know then a wedge of Gold has knocked 'em off,
A Golden Key has charmed the Prison doors;
My Jailer too, whom I assured of safety
(To help my escape) has lent me this disguise.
For though my Stars have frowned so long upon me,
I doubt not but they will smile, and look serene again,
And my Innocence shine in its proper sphere
Whilst Treachery is dragged unto the Center,
And sink into the Hell from whence it sprung.

Lop. Well Sir, I have unlockt Bernardo's tongue too, but without a Fee; in
short, he has laid all his Masters damned Villainy as open to me, as if he had
been Ricardo, and I his Ghostly Father; he has confirmed your suspicions of the
Note, and moreover his Masters hiring some hackny bloud-hounds; (whose game is
death, and reward Damnation) to murder you*


Alb. What niggard mixture of Felicity
The angry Gods allow me;
Twice have they snatched me from the jaws of death,
Twice have they freed me from a loathsome Dungeon,
That no Corporeal pain might e're obstruct
My relishing the torment of despairing love;
But now a comfortable dawn of hope
Reflects the promise of a coming day.
Where is Bernardo, that kind Engeneer
Who has blowed the Villain up with his own hellish train?

Lop. Where is he Sir? why I have done with him as spunging Courtiers do with
their Clients, squeezed all the honey out, and then thrown away the useless
comb, and the Drone that made it:


Alb. Why do thou serve they Master still by halves?
Run and conduct him to me, fly quickly:

Lop. As quick as lightning; Sir.
[Exit.
Enter Antonio, Florimo following. Ant. Let these effeminate Sluices be damned up,
It is a grief too light to Solemnize
Murdered Astella's Funeral Exequies:
A silent tear shall trickle from my heart,
At each remembrance of her bloody fate,
But if in spite of me you will play the woman,
Be like the Marble, when the Conquering flames
Dilate its well-knit pores, and drein its moisture,
Spring from an inward Stimulating heat,
Scorching as is the sweat of Heaven, when the air
Is rent asunder, by the warring Clouds.

Alb. Antonio here! Good heavens how kind you are,
To crown my wishes at their very birth!

[approaching him Ast. Take heed Sir, here^s some bold Ruffian in disguise:

Ant. Fear not my boy, my Stars are not so kind.

Alb. Sir, I would entreat a word with you in private.

Alb. takes him apart and discovers himself. Ant. Ha! do I dream, or is the
Villain here?
Away my Boy.

Ast. I cannot leave you here.

Ant. Away you must, you shall, deny me not.

[ Exit Ast. Alb. 'Twas my desire too that he should leave the place,
For now I Have time to tell thee all my fortune,
The various winding of my restless fate.

Ant. What means the Traitor?

[aside Alb. Besides I must enquire,
And you can give me best intelligence;
Why does my Sister thus absent from Court,
And dim its luster by her close retirement?

Ant. Hear Heavens this matchless impudence, and blush,
Does not that name like a loud night alarm
Spread a chill horror through thy trembling veins,
And chase thy blood from out the desert Channels?

Alb. Good Gods this tune again!

Ant. Damnation seize thee:
Do thou not see the Monster that pursues thee?
Look how it yawns like a devouring whirl-pool,
As if it meant to swallow thee alive:
His eyes are burning Glasses, whence proceed
Such sulphurous flames, whose Stench will blast thy senses;
What noisome mists are belcht from his gaping mouth?
His tongue spits floods of Venom, and his reaching tail
Sweeps down whole Mountains: on his Cristed back
So many massy Spheres arise, that you would swear
Whole Armies came to your destruction.

Alb I can see naught.

Ant. It comes Invisible,
Draw and prepare to meet it is fury.

[Draws Alb. I fear you rave; what must I fight with shadows?

Ant. Then to be plain, it lodges here Alberto,
Here is the Den of the Infernal beast,
Which gnaws upon my Bowels, till it finds
Its destined Prey; Its name's Revenge.

Alb. Revenge from you indeed does seem a Monster.

Ant. Curse on your Cowardly delays, will thou draw?

Alb. Not till I know the cause of this strange fury.

Ant. I scarce have so much patience as to tell thee:
Thou had a Sister, I a mistress once.

Alb. And hope I have one yet, why what of her?

Ant. Ha! has that name no horror in it yet;
Can thou remember her without a blush?

Alb. Yes my Antonio, when I think of her
I have less guilt than I expected;
For if my wronging here is my only fault,
Heavens knows I am innocent.

[ Enter Astella. Ant. Hell is then Divine
Less Tyranny and horror harbors there:
If for to kill a Sister be a Virtue
Let me be vicious heaven.

Ast. What means this passion?

Alb. Ha! is she dead then? oh my misconstruing Soul!
By what untimely fate?

Ant. Confusion!
I shall grow mad: give me some temper Gods!
No, No, it cannot be -- her murdered Ghost
Lashes me with her bloody dabled Tresses
And prompts me to revenge; thus I will take it.

Ast. O stay your barbarous hand from this black deed,
Which but to speak of would canker the mouth of fame,
And make your memory infectious.

Ant. Away, or through thy heart i will force a passage.

Ast. Through it then Sir, rip every Artery,
How willingly i would part with all my blood,
To quench this raging fire in your breast;
By all the powers we serve, you shall not pass
Until you tell the cause that moves you thus.

Ant. Insolent feeble thing stand not the blast,
Which dire Revenge is pouring on its prey.

[ pressing to go: Ast. holds him Alb. No, let him come, for I Am prepared to
meet him,
Nor will I stir, unless discharged by death,
[Draws Until I learn the Story of my Sisters fate.

Ast. His Sisters Fate! what means my Brother? [Aside
My Noble Lord, give me to know his crime,
And with this arm i will further your revenge.

Ant. Oh Florimo! thou do renew my grief:
Is It not a crime my Boy to kill a Sister
So beauteous, so divine? (oh my sad Soul!)
That heaven has lost the mould it formed her in,
And grieving at the matchless work it made
In envy cropped her in her early bloom.

Ast. And is it for this, you have grieved since first I saw you?
Was It for her you shed so many tears,
And follow now those showers with a storm?

Ant. Is there not Cause my Boy?

Ast. Oh my Charmed Soul?
Keep still that love, unless you'de have me dye.
But follow not this false deluding Fire,
Which draws you to the ruin of your friend:
Your Mistress is alive, your words have raised her,
And look how in my habit she appears.

Ant. By heaven it is she! oh to my arms my Love,
[Embraces her Yet closer; in this circle let me grow*
Speak once again, speak thou Charmer of my Soul,
Whilst all the Ravished Spheres shall cease their noise,
And listen unto thee: Forgive me Heaven,
Who dared to call your Bounteous care in question.
But speak; Dear Saint, say what relenting God
Has saved thee from those sacrilegious hands
Which sought to ruin so divine a Fabric.

Ast. O forbear thus to reproach your friend,
Some Villain has betrayed you to this rage:
I thought you false when so reserved to me,
And in this habit came to try my fate;
But since I Have found the error of my Jealousy
Let me cement your separated friendship,
And gain my pardon, by restoring him.

Ant. Thy pardon! Oh that word's a dagger to me,
And makes me see the foulness of my crime,
A Crime for which my expiating tears,
Can never merit pardon from Alberto;
How shall I dare to look on so much goodness,
Which I Have profaned with my unjust suspicions?

Alb. Your constancy in love has cancelled all.

Ant. Is such Divinity then left on earth,
Shall these unhallowed arms have leave to embrace thee?

Alb. Thus let us quite forget our dire mistakes.

[Embrace. Ant. We will;
But I must never forgive these credulous ears,
Which listened to Ricardo's painted tale;
Oh! such a dismal Scheme of horror he had drawn
As stifled all consideration in me:
So that when e're a start of reason barred me,
The black Idea flew before my fancy
And drove the murmuring vanquished from my breast.

Alb* But now my friend, since the dire Vision's fled,
Let us away, and Court the Viceroys favor;
For by that happy instrument, my man,
I Have gained a spell to Charm his Spanish rage.

Ant. I will: but thou my Love retire, and appear
No more my Servant, but the mistress of my Soul.

Ast. This habit has befriended me so much,
That 'twere ingratitude to throw it off,
Until my joys complete.

Enter Bernardo and Lopez. Ber. This was a treacherous trick Lopez, but I Will
forgive you, if you will make good your promise. -- Sir since it must be so, I
here stand ready to witness all that I have said.


Lop. Ay Sir, the Devil and your Gold will help him out, [ To Alb. never fear
it; though every word were false:


Alb. It Is well: but yet to gain the Viceroys credit,
It Is requisite the Soldiers should be there:
Art thou acquainted with them Bernardo?

Ber. As well as they are with their Trade of Murder Sir*

Alb. Go find 'em out, and bring 'em to the Palace.
Now Friend and Sister let us have to Court,
And with enflamed desires let us all entreat
The Guardian Powers of innocence above,
To punish Villainy and smile on Love.

[ Exeunt Alb. Ant. Ast. at one door: Lop. and Ber. at the other. Enter
Viceroy, Ricardo, and Atendants. Scene, The Palace. Ric. I beg you Sir,
dismiss these needless fears.

V. R. OF thou'st undone me with they Loyalty,
Thou like a blasting-winde did rove about
To seek a breath of pestilentiall air,
Which having found thou drov'st it not away,
But enviously scattered the death around,
And blew the dire contagion into me.
Mendoza's* family is quite extinct,
The only Branch that is left is withering,
And leaves the Sapless Oak to mourn its loss.

Ric. Not so my Lord, a Virgins tears flow easy
And natural as tides; and like to them
They Have all their ebbs. Though she may mourn awhile,
Time and the grave will banish dea^ Alberto,
And give admittance to another Lover.

V. R. But time and she will not be long allied,
A Winding Sheet must be the geniall bed,
A Funerall-Dirge the Hymeneall Song
And greedy Worms the only joyful guests.
Had thou but seen, how when I did approach her
With rolling eyes she wandered over my Visage,
And learned the story e're I was aware,
But when my foolish tongue explained my looks,
She stood all Pale and motionless, as is a Marble Statue,
And with a silent glance reproacht my joy,
Strait starting as she were upon the wing,
She snatched a Dagger offering at her breast,
Which when our hasty zeal disarmed her of,
Then came the storm: her golden tresses torn,
Two different elements warred in her cheeks
The air that swelled 'em, and the fire enflamed 'em,
Whilst the obstinate strings above, congealed and wanting ven^,
^efus'd a drop to quench the eager flame:
Her breath too, which before was calm and Spicy,
As is Arabia's gentle eastern breeze,
Which fanns and opens all the balmy sweets,
Now sends out naught but rage against the heavens,
Mingled with curses of her cruel Father,
Strait like the dying Portia she exclaimed,
Although this fails, there are a thousand ways to dye,
Kind Death will lend a dart to them that seek it,
Nor will his arrow suffer a repulse,
How'er vain man thinks he is armed against it.

Ric. Oh! how he stings me with his Eloquence,
His rage the hinge on which my fortune hangs,
Will be quite melted by this foolish mourning.
Aside My Lord, you will give me leave to wonder, that
So mild a temper should be thus enraged.

V. R. OF you are a stranger to that fatal passion:
Does not the gentlest Stream when it is opposed,
Break out into a rappid inundation?

Ric. But when the Cause is spent it fed upon
It Is hush't; so may your Daughters sorrow too.
Go to her, and try her Sir; Duty will plead
In my behalf, and since Alberto's dead,
Urge her to accept the man whom you propose.

V. R. Ha! this to me again? O'ye good Gods!
Is thy ambition swelled to such a height,
That thou would have my Daughter spite of death?
Is this thy Love? Lust by my Soul! Damned burning Lust!
But since your Saucy haste has thus provoked me,
I Will to that drooping Flower and there enquire,
What anger did refuse to hear before,
And if I find what I suspect Ricardo
I Will heap such loads of misery upon thee,
Shall crush thy Soul, and sink thee into Hell,
Italian spite, and Spanish Jealosy
Shall twine their Snakes, to lash and torture thee.
[Exit.
Ricardo Solus. Ric. Nay then, I Am ruind, and for ever lost.
How sweet is hope to man's aspiring thoughts,
Which makes 'em like Camelions live on air,
And hug their slender plots? But when that is fled,
Then comes the dismal sad Catastrophe.
Those threats were vain, for I Have a fury here
Begins to lash and sting my guilty Soul,
Conscience that blood-hound, which tracks falling Greatness*
Had but my shafts hit right to my desire,
I would have laughed even in the face of heaven;
And raised in raptures equal to the Gods,
Braved all the force of Hell, made Envy gnas^,
To see me mounted above its reach*
But now Alberto's death beats an alarm
Unto my guilty Conscience: my affrighted blood retires
And leaves my trembling arms, shaking like tender willows
At the northern wind:
My feet the feeble Basis of this tottering Pyramide,
Cleave close unto the Earth, whilst my erected hair
(Stiffer then bristles on a shooting Porcupine)
Stares in the very face of angry Jove,
As I were thunder-stoork.
Enter Alberto, Antonio, Astella. Ha! the ill stomack't earth, vomits her dead
To torture me! Am I environed round with Ghosts?
Hide me ye Powers from their amazing looks,
Spread an eternal darkness over the world
That they may wander still in ignorance,
And never find me out:

Alb. What horrid sounds are these? -- and from Ricardo?
He takes me for a Ghost; away my friend,
Atone the Viceroys anger, whilst I, here
Humor this Villains mistaken penitence.

Ant. We will, and may success attend you.

[ Exeunt Ant. Ast. Ric. Will nothing then conceal me?

Alb. Heaven cannot hide you from my just revenge,
Without the forfeiture of goodness* Murder
That crying Sin, has like a powerful spell
Summoned my scarce cold corpse from out its Urn
To force an accusation of thy Conscience.

Ric. Mount, mount my Soul, and with the swiftest winds
Fly to some unknown Land, where the affrighted Sun
Never yet durst enter, nor the astonished heavens
Think on a place so horrid:
Where Death surfeits his fatal arrow, and
Each funeral knell yel'd by a dying Mandrake
Proves still the dirge of an ensuing frailty.
OF my sick Conscience! is there no cure?
No Sanctuary for my poor relenting Soul?
Let me then sink, sink to the Center,
Release those Captive Giants that now groan
Under the heavy weight of mighty mountains,
And hurl 'em all, all one me, to press me down
Beyond the reach of Register: let me not suffer
Even in their Annalls, but let a sad mortality
Of remembrance seize succeeding times,
That I may fall forgotten by all the world*

Alb. Is this the way to expiate thy Crime?
Are profane wishes thy repentance? Oh take heed!
Do not precipitate thy inclining ruin;
Pull not that hovering Justice on thy head,
Lest it should fall no less than fatal on thee.

Ric. Pardon Blessed Form my rash Devotion!
[Kneels. Entomb Revenge among those Sacred relics,
And let thy incensed Ghost sleep in its peaceful Urn:
Draw hence those looks filled with such killing horror,
And every day shall add new trophys to thy mercy.

Alb. Think thou my patient Ghost can rest secure,
Whilst thy Majestic cruelty does trample
Over the ruins of My Love and Honor?
And shall no pious envy seek to abate
Thy triumph? Shall wronged Innocence lie unrevenged?

Ric. Is their no expiation for my offense?
Withdraw thy anger, and i will renounce my Love,
And yield my title to the fair Miranda;
She shall embalm you with her daily tears
And offer sighs like incense at your Tomb*

Alb. I dare not trust you.

Ric. Hear me ye Powers above:
When next I name my Sacrilegious Love,
[kneels. May I be haunted by thy Murmuring Ghost,
May all the plagues which Crimes like mine deserve,
(Armed with a double force) light on my head:
But have and sign the Warrant of my peace.

Enter Viceroy, Antonio, Astella. Guards and Attendants. V. R. Oh to my Arms,
Thou Noble Generous Youth,
And look a kind forgiveness to thy Father,
Else I shall faint beneath my load of guilt:
What Floods of Penitential tears can e're
Wash off the stains are printed on my brow,
And drown the memory of thy mighty wrongs?

Alb. Oh let me pay my humbler duty thus.
[kneels By heaven my Loyal heart does bow within me,
And I must sink beneath the grave to adore you,
Unless you will raise me by some kinder words.

V. R. Will thou then rob thee of thy Virtues due?
Thus I will pay it on my trembling knees,
Spite of thy obstinate humility.

[kneeling Alb. If you will kneel, kneel to those Guardian Powers
Who Have freed you from the toils and Treacherous snares
Of that false Man.

V. R. O rise, and since thy goodness can forgive me,
Let me put on the Lion once again,
And fix my Justice on that horrid Slave.

Ric. Then he is living, and I am deceived,
Wheedled to ruin by a trick of Conscience:
I thank ye Gods for your little honesty!

V. R. Where are my Guards; go take that Traitor hence,
It Is Justice now, not Tyranny Commands you.

Ric. Stay till I make my peace with this most wronged,
Most innocent, gallant, brave young Man.
[ To Alb. Here let me beg a pardon for my Crimes,
If Gods have power such injuries to forgive;
By all your wrongs I mourn my black designs,
[Kneels. It Is worse than hell to think I did attempt
To Murder you -- and yet to miss my aim --

[ Offers a Pistol at Alberto. Ant. Per^idious Dog!

[Ant. prevents him. V. R. Away with him,
Or he will say my presence shades his guilt.

Ric. 'Twas basely done: for he is Brave and Noble,
And I a Villain thus to abuse his goodness,
And fool to bar that Love which heaven Cements;
Love is a pure and immateriall being,
Which graspt by such polluted hands as mine
Does vanish and leaves an empty Cloud:
Why should I then oppose the Stream?
No, let me to some private Cell resort,
Learn to forget the pleasures of the Court,
My guilt and folly be my Grief and sport.

[Exit with Guards. V. R. Impious Traitor, who with the self-same breath,
Vows penitence to heaven, revenge to hell.

Enter Maria. Mar. Your Daughter Royal Sir,
Desires your Company about some business of importance
Relating to your peace and hers. Alberto here!
Alive! nay then it will not be a barren plot.

[aside. V. R. We will attend her instantly.

Alb. Maria,
How fares my Angel; how does my Life, my Soul?

Mar. You Will know too soon.

[aside. Alb. Ha! not look upon me?
OF my misgiving heart!

V. R. Fear not my Son,
Only some Clouds are gathered by your death,
But soon your presence will dry up her tears
And clear her brow:
Lead on, no longer I Will defer your Joys.

[ Exeunt V. R. Alb. Ant. Mar. OF how I tremble at the dreadful Scene!
[ Ast. and Guards. But since a beam of light does warm her hopes
And has dispelled the Viceroys jealous storm,
Feigned death shall grasp 'em in a pleasing form.
[Exit.
The Scene draws, and discovers Miranda leaning on a Table; A Cup by her. She
rises. Mir. What Is Death, that silly Mortals thus should fear it?
Only a passage to a better Life,
When the imprisoned Soul throws off its fetters,
And flys into immortal Liberty:
Then welcome Death to Love so pure as mine,
Which shall imprint an Angels stamp upon it,
And free my Soul to meet Alberto in the air.
I come my Love, the thoughts of thee so charm me
That yet methinks I feel no pain at all;
The fatal Potion tasted to my pallat
Like the rich Nectar that preserves the Gods,
And I Am methinks in health: only a pleasing faintness
Glides through my fancy with a cold alarm.
Here will I sit, till I can see my Father,
To tell him, fate has granted me a pasport;
Then take the wing and fly to endless bliss.

[Song within. Enter Viceroy, Alberto, Antonio and Astella: Guards and
Attendants. Scene the last. V. R. Weeping Miranda!
Eternal horror Seize me, if she does not smile too:
So the Sun shines amidst the fiercest showers.
But why my Daughter? speak, for it racks my fancy!
Rise and speak.

Mir. OF I must never rise,
Till I mount up an Angel into heaven.

Alb. To heaven! OF my fears!
Wrap me Eternal night:
Are these my promi'st joys?

V. R. OF rise my Child:
I know it well thou mourn'st Alberto's loss,
But here is magic in this face to cure thee.

[ Presents Alb. to her. Mir. Alberto! OF ye Powers, then does he Live?

Alb. He lives, my Fair one: but oh that life's a Curse,
Unless you will raise that beauteous Map of Heaven,
And say, why do thou grieve, that he is alive?

Mir. Have I not cause to grieve and curse my Stars,
Since we must part, for ever part Alberto.

Alb. For ever part -- thou kill'st me with the sound:
Art thou then false? the very thought's a Crime.
Through all this mist, I see thy constant flames
Dart their kind beams into my tortured breast:

V. R. Why do thou talk of parting, when thy Father
Stands here to heal the wounds of injured Love?
Here take Alberto, take him to thy arms.

[ presents Alb. to her. Mir. O Stop that breath of kindness, it is Infectious,
And tortures me more then the working poison.

Alb. The poison, ha!

V. R. What says my Child?

Mir. The fatal deed will out
I thought him dead, and therefore I contrived
To drink a poisonous draught, which working up
Through all the pores of Life, should drive the Soul,
And send it panting to the other World.
Forgive me Love -- that is all I ask -- oh heavens!

Alb. I Will ^ear no more --
Where Is Providence and all those Sacred Powers
That secure Innocence, are they all asleep?
Or is the frame of Nature quite dissolved?
I Have heard how at her latest pangs, the World
Will strait roll up into the endless heap:
The Sun be Extinguished like a Lamp that is spent:
The Moon withdraw its Crescent into Night;
The Stars like pointed Meteors shoot to Chaos*
The Elements shall run to meet each other,
And blindly mix their jarring principles,
And when this beauteous Harmony must dye,
Shall not one Attom of it cease to move?
Yes I Will begin the fatal Sacrifice,
[ Is going to the Cup. The V. R. stays him. And tell the World what is due to
so much beauty.

V. R. Hold, or you heap new loads of guilt upon me:
What must you suffer for my impious rashness?
No let me dye, (the cursed source of all)
The Gods themselves are pleased when Great Men fall.

Mir. Forbear, or you will hurry me away
In a Tempestuous grief. Why Father, why Alberto,
Why should you dye? I charge ye Live,
Or you will torture my departed Ghost,
Which swift as lightning shall avoid your presence.
By heaven you have raised a struggling in my breast,
And peaceful death's become a spectere to me.

Alb. O do not plead against thy self Miranda:
Why art thou poisoned but to follow me?

Mir. Because my Father would have forced my Will,
But now relenting nature yields to Love,
And he has given you all that is left of me.

Enter Maria. Mar. I see it works.

[Aside. V. R. That makes not me less Guilty;
Death, Hell, and Vengeance why was I good too late?
So the fallen Angels saw their wretched state,
Repented, but alas! their heaven was fled,
And left 'em for reward Despair and Hell:
Then shall I, O black ingratitude! shall I,
For all the smarting wounds which I have made
Return him naught, but cold M^^anda's Corse?
A precious Salve to cure a bleeding heart!

Mar. My plots are ripe, and I will give 'em birth:
[aside. Great Sir, upon my knees ^ beg you will hear me;
If heaven restores, your dying poisoned Daughter,
Will you continue in this resolution,
And give her (as sure you ought) to Brave Alberto?

V. R. Why do thou ask that strange untimely question?
Could she be saved -- but it is impossible;
Although the Sighs of injured Love ascend like incense,
Yet my loud Crimes will drown their softer murmures.
By all their wrongs I Would drein my dearst blood
To quench the raging venom in her breast;
Then with my latest breath bequeath her to Alberto.

Mar. OF Sir! these generous words
[Pointing to Miranda. Like Charms shall have the Power to raise the Dead.

Ant. What a Successive change of wonder's here!

Mar. Thus I Will apply their Virtue -- Rise Madam.

Mir. What folly's this?

Mar. I beg you Madam rise:
Think that Alberto may, or will be yours,
And strait your Pulse will beat as brisk as ever,
The blood shall dance and flourish in your cheeks,
Except what too much grief has d^ein'd away.

V. R. Ha! does she Live? speak but that word Maria,
I Will give thee all my treasure:

Alb. I, the World.

Mar. She Lives my Lord.

V. R. OF it is enough Maria!

Alb. It is too much: -- thus let me kneel my Saint,
And look and gaze unto Eternity.

V. R. Not all the transports of your eager Love
Must rob me of the Duty of a Father.

Alb. I was too blame -- Here let us kneel Miranda,
As to a pardoning God, and wait our Doom*

V. R. You take me for the cruel Father still;
OF rise, and do not cloud this Scene of joy*
Come to my arms Miranda -- still thou fear,
But thus I Will crown your happiness, and my peace:

[Gives her to Alberto. Alb. Which thus I Seal. -- But kind Maria, say,
How have thou wrought this Cure? Or do we dream,
Raised by a false imaginary Joy?

Mar. Her fancied pain indeed is but a dream,
But thus I clear your f^ars and doubts, my Lord,
I grieved, Great Sir, your kindness for Ricardo
Must Sacrifice the affections of a Daughter,
And promised to prepare the Potion for her
(When urged by grief to that Extremity:)
But hoping you'de revoke the cruel Sentence,
When fearing the effects by such a loss,
I workt her fancy to believe that Poison
Which only dulled the vigor of the Spirits.

Mir. I was mistaken, but yet so kindly
Id'e wish for ever to be so deceived.

V. R. Antonio, pardon all the wrongs you have born,
And take my friendship as return in part.

[Embraces him Ant. Great Sir, this grace has more than cancelled all:
But let me beg your Highnesses consent,
To make me happy in this fair Ladies Love.

V. R. This Lady?

Alb. Astella Sir, my Sister.

V. R. You have it Sir; but why in this disguise?

Ant. Plunged in the same mistake that threatened all,
She came on some design to try my Love.

Mir. Sister (for so I must for ever call you)
Pardon my forced neglect of you unknown.

Ast. Your own misfortunes are a sufficient plea.

[Salute. Clashing of Swords within: Enter Fabio with his Sword drawn. Fab.
Great Sir, Ricardo breaking from his Prison,
Comes like a Torrent Spite of opposition;
And forcing all the Guards, that barred his way,
With a drawn Sword wrested from their hands
^s entering here. -- But see he comes.

Enter Ricardo with a Sword. V. R. Infernal Monster! was ever sight like this,
That Villainy should make a Coward Valiant?
Can hell breath virtue? -- Yes, a brutall one!
But thus I Will meet and crush the monstrous birth*

Ric. Here Sir, wreak all your fury on this Villain,
Think not i would offer at your Sacred life,
[throws his Sword to the V. R. Death I am come to seek, but since your Guards
Have failed, and I Have the Noblest from your hand,
Strike Sir, for I Am prepared.

V. R. Prepared? it is false:
When Thousand Crimes like weights pressed down thy Soul;
Yes thou art ready Slave, for hell you are ripe:
Lust and Ambition have rac'd out the Man,
And being a Devil thou long'st to be at home.

Ric. It Is true, I Am worse then you can paint me Sir,
Therefore to ask a pardon were to arraign heaven^s Justice
And make its Mercy Pandar to my sins.
Why are you slow then to be Heavens Avenger?

V. R. I will avenge it, but another way,
Guards seize him once again, and mark me all
Your Lives are forfeit for the next escape:
In chains he shall behold Alberto's Nuptials,
That he may swell with envy till he burst.

Ric. By heaven, not all your Armies here should seize me:
Pardon me Sacred Sir, I say they should not,
Not that I dread to see the happy Nuptials,
For every binding word would ease my Soul;
Yes Sir, I joy more for their happiness,
Than I can grieve for my own sordid baseness*
But to lie lingri^g in a lazy prison,
Would rob expecting Justice of its prey,
Therefore to satisfy the hovering Sword,
Thus I Am Ricardo's Executioner.

[offers to stabs himself. Alb. interposes, and takes it from him. Alb. Hold,
and may heaven forgive what is past as I do now.
O Sacred Sir, or if the name of Father
Can plead more strongly, pity this Penitent,
I read a deep Contrition in his eyes;
Let him not fall a Victim to despair,
When one kind breath can blow away his Crimes,
And cause the horrid Leprosy to vanish.

Ric. This goodness from you, Noble, Generous Youth,
Sinks me the deeper; O restore the dagger,
For since all hope of pardon's fled away,
Nothing can torture me like this delay.

V. R. To recompense the wrongs which you have sustained,
What is it I would not do? but Son beware,
Take heed how you believe these new-coin'd looks,
And these false sighs, lest they should prove infectious;
For Proteus-like he can take every shape
Scrue himself up into an humble Saint*
To serve his black designs, and if that miss
Strut like a Peacock in his gaudy trim,
And show all Lucifer; nay, he can make
Even Contradictions meet to gain his ends.

Ric. Therefore kind Sir, kill me lest I work more mischief.

Alb. But now that borrowed habit's quite thrown off,
Stripped by the Vulture Conscience of his Plumes.
Kneel, kneel Ricardo, for methinks I see,
A calm of pity gently chase the Tempest,
And smooth the furrows of his angry brow.
[Both kneel. Think of the power of Love Great Sir; what heart is proof,
What Virtue is so strong and Adamantine
Which the resistless heat of his Attacques
Cannot melt to Vice?

V. R. Rise both; Ricardo rise;
For sure such Generosity must awe thee,
And force each start of Envy to retire;
Therefore I pardon you your life, but for your Crimes
Banish you for ever from our Court.

Ric. Ha! pardon did you say? name it again,
For yet I cannot trust my Credulous ears.

V. R. You may:

Ric. O Sir let me devour your feet,
Gr^w to the Earth in prostrate Adoration,
And end my life in this so happy Transport*
Hence to some gloomy Desert i will retreat,
Black as my Crimes and my deserved fate
Where no kind Cell, or Neighboring Lodge is found
But wild Campain, and bare unhospitable ground;
There from my breast vollies of sighs shall rise
Shall thaw the Avenging Justice of the skies
To mercy; while the pitying Gods shall dain:
To give me back my I^nocence again:
There my last stake in Penitential tears,
In rigid Penance, Fasts, and Midnight Prayers^,
I Will spend, till heaven and you I can atone,
And merit this forgiveness you have shown.

[Exit Guarded. Enter Lopez, Bernardo and Soldiers. 1. Sol. May it please your
Highness --

V. R. What means your Insolence?

1. Sol. This Importunate fellow, because he helped me to save that
Lords life, pretends I owe him something;
Now I make your Highness my Judge;

V. R. I understand you; therefore let each man
Have Twenty Crowns:

Alb. Lopez, I shall reward you for your care.

Ant. And you Bernardo may remain with me.

Ber. I thank you Sir, for I was terribly afraid of my Master.

V. R. But all their Services had been in vain,
Had not Maria brought this last reprieve,
Which I shall Study how to recompense.

Alb. Now my Miranda, since the fates are kind,
We may reflect upon our dangers past:
(As a befriended Traveller returns,
And when his Country's grown familiar with him,
His fancy roves over all the dismal Scene,
The roling Seas, the fearful beasts of prey,
And all the Terrors that beset his way,
Whilst every horror swells his trembling joy,
And still renews those pleasures which would ^^oy:)
Then for a Monument we will Erect this Rule,
And fix it on the Portall of Loves School;
Few Lovers can be always in the Right,
Mistakes and Quarrels heighten their Delight.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. Montfort. STay Gentlemen, and give your Suffrages;
For on your Votes depends Ricardo's pe^ce:
Doomed to be exiled, as I past along
The Poet singl'd me from out the throng;
Frowning, he charged me er'e I went away,
To come and beg excuse for his dull Play:
Which if I gained he promised to repeal
The hasty doom of his Poetic zeal.
But by my have my message I Have forgot;
I must say something, yet I know not what:
But only this, it is to both Sexes sent,
And to the one but a rough complement.
The Men he fears not, for he says he writ
So dull to please, and he is sure it will hit,
Where ten dull Fops are for one Man of Wit;
Who, if the Writer stumbles on a thought,
Dam it they cry, the B^ttle brought that out:
But if insipid, they cry One and All,
Oh it is unaffected, strange and natural:
Like Mahomet, who Whoredom does allow,
Because a Crime which Nature prompts us to*
But from the Ladies on a double Score,
I would a favorable glance implore;
You like an Adamant the M^n attract;
What e're gains your assent, they make an Act:
See how the Critical Committee wait,
From your fair brows the Poets doubtful fate:
Do not for once then blast the infant bud,
Which by your Sunshine may in time grow ripe and good*
But if no favor you design t'impart,
But rather with his numerous foes take part;
He Swears he cares not for your cruelty,
But says, he will go on Pilgrimage with me,
And the whole ^rain of Fops and Beaux defy*

