Love's a Lottery, AND A WOMAN the PRIZE. WITH A NEW MASQUE, CALLED Love and
Riches Reconciled. As it was Acted by His Majesty's Servants at the Theater in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields.

Sors and Amor simili pugnant certamine, vincit
Unus uterque Viros, unus uterque Deos.
LONDON, Printed for Daniel Brown, at the Black-Swan and Bible without
Temple Bar, and Edmund Rumball at the Post House in Russel Street in
Covent Garden. 1699.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY, To the RIGHT HONORABLE, the Countess of Burlington.
MADAM,
THE Noble Character your Ladyship is deserservedly Mistress of, and the
continued Favors you have shown to that STAGE, which I have the Honor to
share your Ladyship's Patronage on, has occasioned the trouble I am now giving
you. And though the Decscription of your Ladyship's Virtues should be the
Employment of an abler Pen, I could not but rejoice in the opportunity of being
the first who should acquaint the Public, with those Excellencies which your
Ladyship is so communicative of, and yet so industrious in concealing.

To do GOOD, Madam, is the Property of several Ladies: But to do GOOD, and be
unwilling to hear of it; to give Assistance and Relief to those that are in
Distress, and withhold the knowledge of their Benefactress from 'em, is a
Character few Persons of Quality can lay the same claim to, as the COUNTESS of
BURLINGTON.

But I forget those Virtues I was just now commending in your Ladyship, and at
the same time that I am telling the World of the reservedness of your Temper,
in your Desires to have your WORTH concealed, I am committing a fault against
it, by giving your Ladyship the knowledge, that I am Partaker of that Secret,
which it is your Ladyship's Pleasure should have no sharer but your self, I
shall therefore, Madam, forbear doing any farther violence to your Modesty, and
only beg your Ladyship's Protection for a Play which stands ranked amongst the
Unfortunate; and whose Author will have all imaginable reason to rejoice for
its want of success, could its misfortunes endear it to your Ladyship's
compassionate Reception.

LOVE is the LOTTERY, Madam, which begs your Acceptance; and your Ladyship that
has drawn its CHIEFEST PRIZE, in the NOBLE LORD, your Ladiship's most EXCELLENT
HUSBAND, will make amends for the Blanks which its Author has drawn in it, by
giving it the Honor of your Ladyship's perusal. And though the judgment your
Ladyship shall make of it, will not (I Am afraid) run Counter with what has been
already given, yet it will be enough to take off from its Censure with the
Public, that it is read by a Lady, whose very perusal is a recommendation to
that of others, and whose Judgment has that accuracy in it, as to permit Her to
read nothing almost, but what deserves the employment of Her leisure.

This, Madam, cannot but lead me into the notice of your Excellent Endowments,
and force me to speak of those Acquisitions of Mind, which are as uncommon to
Persons of your Sex and Quality, as they are particular to your Self. To be
skilled in History, Madam; to be an Accomplished Lady, and an excellent
Christian: To be a Pattern of Behavior at the COURT, and an Example of
Devotion at the CHURCH, is as much beyond my Expression, as it is beyond other
Ladies Imitation. I shall therefore have said all that my Wonder will permit
me, and more than your Modesty would willingly suffer, by concluding your
Character with the Addition of that of an INCOMPARABLE WIFE, an AFFECEIONATE
MOTHER, an INDULGENT MISTRESS, and an UNWEARIED BENEFACTRESS; and I shall join
with the Prayers of your Noble Lord, the tenderest of Husbands; the Wishes of
your Children, the living Instances of the BEST of MOTHER's Perfections, the
Desires of your Servants, and the Entreaties of the many numbers which would
not be living, but by YOUR GOODNESS: If I shall pray that your Ladyship may
long continue to be the GLORY of this Age, as you will be the Admiration of the
next.

But that I may not detain your Ladyship any longer from those obliging Offices
which are so little practiced by others, and so much by your Self, I shall only
ask leave to subscribe,

Madam, Your Ladyship's Most Humble, and most Obedient Servant. JOSEPH HARRIS.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Mr. Maggot, Master of the Lottery. Clytander, A Gentleman in Love with
Amaranta. Mr. Flash, and Mr. Finical, Two Beaus. Trick-well, Clytander's Man.
Brush-beard, A Philosopher. Dr. Non-such, A Mountebank. Mr. Scribble, An
Author.
WOMEN.
Amaranta, Maggot's Daughter, in Love with Clitander. Isbell, Her Maid. Four
Adventurers. Bullfinch. Lack-wit. Noisy. Ninny. Gammer Whiting. A Servant: and
several others, as Mob.
The SCENE, London.

THE PROLOGUE, Writ by a Person of Quality.
FAITH, Gentlemen, to lay aside all Flattery,
I needs must tell ye, the whole World's a Lottery:
And Fortune with her Tickets plays such pranks,
You Have for One Fortunate, a Million Blanks.
But what is all this to the purpose? Yes, for why,
This Farce to Night is called a Lottery:
And it is a Pound to a Penny if it hit,
'Cause Men of Fortune are to judge of it;
And they will never mind your Poet's Wit or Art,
Men of no Fortune for the greatest part.
It Is strange, methinks, to see how some will roar
Against Fortune, still calling her damned confounded Whore!
We have no reason for it, what Lady coyer?
Though all Men court her, very few enjoy her.
Why is our Author then that Fool to venture?
That Is not the Point --
The Stars themselves often wander from their Center:
And to be plain, he is in hopes to find
The Favorites of Fortune obliging kind.
Nothing Profane nor yet immodest here,
Shall dare to wound a Chaste and Virtuous Ear;
Ill manner'd Bawdry shall not here intrude,
The Stage Reformed, shall nothing bear that is rude.
So will triumphant Folly be defaced,
And Vice no longer shine, but be disgraced:
The Fair, and Virtuous then may safely sit,
And, without blushing, judge of Sense and Wit.
LOVE's a LOTTERY, AND A WOMAN the PRIZE.
ACT. I.
SCENE I. The Town.
Enter Mr. Maggot, and several others, as Venturers in the Lottery. Maggot.
INDEED, Gentlemen, I have been a long time ruminating upon this Matter; but at
last an Ingenious Lady put it into my Head, to set up this Lottery for Wives.


1. Man. It should therefore, methinks, have been called, the Ladies Invention.


2. Man. Right; for it is an excellent Contrivance indeed, especially, at such a
time as this, when Lotteries are Al-a-mode.


Maggot. Al-a-mode do you call it? Ay, and an Old Mode too: For I Am sure
Marriage has been a Lottery ever since I can remember.


1. Man. And what is the Reason of that, Sir, but because the Law does not allow
a Month's trial before hand? So that we are forced to take Pigs in Pokes,
contrary to the Custom of all Markets.


Maggot. Well, to the point. -- I knew there were a World of poor Gentlemen in
and about this City, who had Daughters that stuck upon their Hands for want of
Portions.


2. Man. Very true, Sir.


Maggot. So, I sent for a good many of 'em, and told 'em, That I had a great
number of extraordinary Rarities, which I intended to put off by way of
Lottery, (as many others do, now a days, Books and Cakes) and if they would
venture their Daughters, I Would venture my Goods; for I intended that every
Female should have a Lot of Price and Value to carry her off, for Male
encouragement.


1. Man. I Will assure you, Sir, you may be justly called,
The distressed Damsel's Patron:
For I never knew Self-Interest, and public Charity so carnally coupl'd before.


Maggot. Nay, more than this, Gentlemen, I Will have no Blanks -- But a Lot and a
Woman; a Woman and a Lot quite through; 'till all be drawn.


2. Man. By the Temptation of Womankind, this Contrivance must take, Gentlemen.


Omnes. Ay, ay -- This Lottery must hit; it must, it must!


3. Man. But hold a little -- How shall we know, Master of mine, whether these
same Rarities of yours are worth the ready Money we are to lay down?


Maggot. There Is a Question indeed -- Worth, quoth a? Why, I Will tell you what,
Friend, there is one Woman will have a strange Fish, with no less than Twenty
Feet between the Head and Tail. As I hope to be Knighted, Gentlemen, I fetched
it my self out of the Zodiac, not many Leagues from the North Pole, where it is
well known, That the Sun stands still a whole Fortnight together.


1. Man. And that is the Reason, I believe, that we have wanted one Month in the
Summer these several Years past.


2. Man. Not unlikely, truly -- But, Sir, there is one thing more -- I desire
you, if you have any Woman fairer than the rest, pray let me have her -- for I
don't care how simple she is.


1. Man. And let me have the blackest in the whole Pack, for I have heard, That
a Woman's Pride is many times the Guardian of her Honor.


3. Man. I gad, Sir, if I have a Red-hair'd Woman, I Will turn her upon your
Hands again; for I hate to have Fire in the upper Tire.


4. Man. Pray, Sir, let me have a very genteel Woman; That will sit and simper
in the Bar, and draw Customers.


Maggot. A Genteel Woman, say you!
Why, what are you, Friend?

4: Man. A Tapster, Sir, at the Colchester-Inn in Bishop's-gate-street; I am
very well known, Sir, all about that end of the Town; and a pretty Woman will
be the making of me.


Maggot. Look you, Gentlemen,
As for the Complexions and Conditions of your Women,
Ye must be contented with your Lots --
Fortune and Destiny will have their Course --
And so farewell, 'till I see you again.
[Exit Maggot.]
1. Man. Well, Gentlemen, what do you think on it?


2. Man. Why? very well for my part; but then do you hear, Gentlemen, we must be
sure to take the right way, or we are all spoiled.


3. Man. And how is that?


2. Man. Why if we have to do with Fortune, we must renounce our Senses and
Understandings, and turn mere Fools.


3. Man. And what then?


2. Why then if we have not good luck, I Will never trust Proverb more.

[Exeunt Omnes.]
SCENE 2.
Enter Maggot and Isbell. Maggot. I tell thee, Fool, I don't wonder to see thee
look with scorn on all those noble Pieces I have shown thee; for thou art
young, and consequently, the contempt of every thing that bears the resemblance
of Antiquity, is natural to thee.


Isbell. Not always, Sir, for I have known a handsome young Lady of Sixteen,
throw her self into the gouty Arms of Threescore and Ten, when his Medals have
been of the right stamp -- But, Sir, that which vexes me, is to see you ruin
your Estate and Fortune, by purchasing the rubbish of sacked Cities, and so
disable your self of providing for a Figure of your own erecting, a young
handsome Daughter; yet not so young neither, but, I promise you, it is more than
time she were well disposed of.


Maggot. What a walking Statue of Ignorance thou art! Why I tell thee, that any
one of those exquisite Pieces which I have shown thee, is of worth sufficient
to Marry her to an Earl.


Isbell. Yes, if she wanted only a gilded Frame for a Husband: But, alas! the
Custom now adays is, no Money, no Matrimony -- You may talk of Cupid, and his
Quiver, but it is the God of Riches makes the Match.


Maggot. Go to then,
Harken to me with attention, and I Will tell thee a Secret.

Isbell. Lord, Sir! don't burden me with your Secrets --
I tell you before hand I cannot keep 'em.

Maggot. I Will put no constraint upon thee, Child, yet it is something that will
please thee, and thou may tell it to all the World if thou will.


Isbell. Well, well, what is it?


Maggot. Why you must know, that I have set up a Lottery.


Isbell. How! a Lottery! why I hope you are not mad, that you are going thus to
expose all that you are worth, to the figgaries of Fortune.


Maggot. No, no, Child, only a few Trifles that lie dead upon my Hands, that is
all.


Isbell. And what is your highest Lot?


Maggot Thy Mistress and my Daughter, with Five Thousand Pounds in ready Money,
which I will raise by some hundreds of other Curiosities which I have, at Three
Guinea's a Lot -- Nay, and I intend to tack a Woman for a Wife to every one of
my Lots; some Handsome, and some so so; some Wise, and some otherwise -- It Is
no matter for their Conditions, nor their Honesty, for that is Hab-nab, as if
the Choice were their own -- I le take care indeed, that they be Water-tite,
and Wind-tite, and able of Body, and that is all I need to care for.


Isbell Now the Devil take you for putting my Mistress among your Old Trumpery
-- By this means, the next Scoundrel of a Drawer, or Footman that ventures his
Three Guinea's, shall run away with her -- Od'sflesh! would any Cannibal of a
Father but you, commit the well-being of an only Daughter, to be broke upon the
Wheel of Fortune?


Maggot. Never trouble thy Head, Girl; I have taken that care, and given such
Power to Clitander's Man Trick-well, that I have made all cock-sure, I warrant
thee -- but I lose time, bid thy Mistress, since she has such a mind to marry,
prepare to be a Bride, while I go in and get every thing ready for drawing the
Lottery.

[Exit. Maggot]
Isbell. Hold, yonder comes Trick-well; I Will hear what he says --

Enter Trickwell like a Doctor, in a black Gown. Trick-well, well met --
Whither away so fast, Man? prithee stay,
And tell me what thou think of the grand Affair,
Between thy Master and my Mistress;
Will it fadge or no?

Trick-well. Why faith, Isbell, I cannot tell, for Love without Money is like a
Summer Pippin, 'twill never last.


Isbell. Oh, but Mr. Maggot's Lottery will soon supply all those Defects.


Trick-well. I tell thee, once again, Isbell, That Love is hot in the Fourth
Degree, but cold in the Fifti'th; so that it is rank Poison, take it which way
you will.


Isbell. Well, but what do think of the Lottery it self, I hear thou art to
be the chief Manager of it?


Trick-well. Why truly, Isbell, I am contriving all things for the best.

Isbell. That is to say, thou art plotting some cursed piece of Knavery and
Roguery or other.


Trick-well. Alas, Isbell! Roguery and Knavery reigned powerfully in the World
before I came into it; but indeed I got a terrible itch of it when I was young;
and then as I grew up in Years, I became so desperately infected with it, that
I was all over like a Leaper, by that time I was One-and-Twenty.


Isbell. Methinks a Quicksilver Girdle might have cured thee.


Trick-well. Alas! I tried, but I'gad it wrought a contrary effect in me, for
the Mercury got into my Head, and made me ten times worse.


Isbell. But have thou no sense of Reputation or Conscience, when Trust and
Confidence rely on thy Engagements?


Trick well. Why truly, Isbell, now I think on it, I left my Conscience, one
Night drunk, behind me in a Hackney Coach, and could never hear of it since.


Isbell. Well, but I hope you don't intend to shark any of your Tricks upon me;
thou know I Am to be flesh of thy flesh, and bone of thy bone, Man.


Trick-well. No, no, Isbell, never fear: We Serving-Men have all our lucid
intervals of Honesty.


Isbell. Pray then have a care of the grand Lot, that it may fall right without
Coz ning and Deceit.


Trick well. Set thy Heart at rest, Girl, and bid thy Mistress depend upon me.
In the mean time, I Will read thee a List of some of my Lotts, for I foresee that
we shall tumble in Gold, Child.


Isbell. Come on -- Let Us hear a little.

[Trick-well Reads] A general List of Mr. Maggot's Lottery, carried on, and
managed by Squire Trick-well.


Isbell. Squire Trick-well! Marry come up.


Trick well. Yes, why not, as well as the Hangman -- Well, but to the purpose
--

[Reads] Here is first, and Imprimis, a Camphire Shirt, with a Woman's Shift of
the same; the one to mortify rampant Lust in young Fops and Fluttering Beau's,
and the other to keep poor Maids honest whether they will or no.


Isbell. Thou should have a Million of the hirts, but make Tinder of the
Shift; for a Woman has no thanks that is Honest against her will. But come, go
on.

[Trick-well Reads]
Trick. An Enchanted Crystal, which, if looked into by a pure Virgin, or a
Woman with Child, will resolve all Questions touching either Physic, Love, or
News.


Isbell. As for the Women with Child, they may look in your Crystal as long as
they please, but let the Maids have a care what they do, for I warrant you here
are a great many that pass muster in the Rolls of Honesty, but I Am afraid your
Crystal wou d put some of em to the blush.

[Trickwell Reads.]
Trick. Next, here is a Pint of that singular Ladies Milk, that never knew any
Man but her own Husband, which perfectly Cured an Egyptian King of his
Blindness, when all the Women besides, in his Kingdom could not do it.


Isbell. Pray send some of that Milk to those Princes that cannot see their own
Interest, that they may Wash and clear their Eyes --

Well, what is next?
[Trick-well Reads.]
Trick. Why another Venetian Looking-glass, made by the only Artist of the
World.


Isbell. What Is the Rarity of it?
[Trickwell Reads.]
Trick. I Will tell you -- In the first place, if a debauched Chambermaid
dresses her self by this Looking-glass, she will dream the Night following of
Kissing her Lord, and making her Lady a She Cuckold; then to sodder her cracked
Virginity, her kind Lord shall Marry her to his Chaplain, and he have the next
Living that falls.


Isbell. Very good.
[Trick-well Reads.]
Trick. If a stale antiquated Court Lady looks on this Reflection, she will see
her Old Face through her new Complexion.


Isbell. Better still.
[Trick-well Reads.]
Trick. An Usurer cannot see his Conscience in it, nor a Scrivener his Ears.

Isbell. That I believe.
[Trick-well Reads.]
Trick. If a Citizen chance to peep into it, his Brow-Antlers will spread and
fill the Glass -- And lastly, if a Blind-man see his Face in it, it is a sign
he will recover his sight again.


Isbell. What more, good Trick-well?
[Trick-well Reads.]
Trick. Why an indifferent large Viol of the Quintessence of Skull, Chi mically
drawn from Aristotle's Pericranium.


Isbell. Prithee what is it good for?

Trick-well. Oh! it has admirable Virtues, and very strange Operations, assure
you.


Isbell. What are they?
[Trick-well Reads]
Trick. Why if you pour but four drops into a Country Attorny's Ear, they will
make him write true Latin -- Three drops will fill the Capital of an University
Gander -- Indeed ha^f a Dram's enough for the terrestrial Head of a High
Constable; and three Scruples and a half will more than fill the empty Numscull
of a Biggotted- Banbury Brother.


Isbell. Hast' any more?
[Trick-well Reads.]
Trick. Yes, several sorts of Nonparelio Italian Gloves -- There is one pair
that will almost sit any Lawyer -- They are made of an entire Lodestone, and
have a very strange and powerful Virtue to draw Gold unto 'em -- They were
perfumed with the Lavender Conscience of a damned Usurer, and will keep their
Scent 'till wrangling and bawling have left Westwinster-Hall; they are seam'd
with Indentures, by the Needle Work of Mortgage, and both topp'd and stiffn'd
with a Noverint Universi, and caetera -- I would willingly describe the Virtues
of several other pair, but that it is against the Statute -- Besides, few or
none now a days need Gloves, by reason all our Beau's have Cordivant Hands --
But do hear, Isbell, I dare not be too busy, for Truth oftentimes offends.


Isbell. I wonder where Mr. Maggot picked up all these Antiquities and
Rarities? In my mind he had better have laid out his Money upon new Gowns for
my Mistress.


Trick-well. Virtue, Isbell, Virtue's the best Ornament for a young Lady.

Isbell. How like a Fool you talk now --
Will Virtue glitter at the Playhouse?
Will Virtue distinguish her at Church?
Or Cloth her Nakedness?

Trick-well. As good go naked behind as before, the Temptation's the same, and
a Woman's never more acceptable to us Men, than when she is out of her Clothes
-- But here comes my Master with Joy in his Eyes.

Enter Clitander with a Letter.
Clitander. News, good News, Trick-well; good News, Isbell.

Trick-well. Has your Worship found either the Philosopher's Stone, or a
Phoenix's Nest?


Clitander. Yes, both.

Trick-well. Nay, then good News say I -- I have been a long time starving upon
single Tiff, and moldy Cheese, but now I hope I shall revel in Frycassees and
Marrow-Puddings -- Troath, Master, when you have got your Estate, take my
Advice; don't spend it in Whoring and Gameing, as most of our young Sparks do
now adays, but keep a good House, Master; let the Chimnies smoke.


Clitander. Thou art too hasty, Trick-well -- Though the Treasure is found, yet
it is all contained in this Letter.


Trick-well. Oh Sir! an Estate in a Letter, is like a Marchant's Cargo floating
upon some distant Sea -- I wish no Pyrate of a new forged Will may meet with it.


Clitander Oh, but I am Heir at Law.

Trick-well. That Is nothing; if another sets up a new Title, and gives but
double Fees, there are those that will toss your Estate in a Noncupative
Blanket from the Common Pleas to the King's Bench, and thence to the Chancery,
'till they have shook it into a Consumption.


Clitander. No fear of that, Trick-well -- --
Moreover, this Letter assures me, that my Uncle
Lies drawing on, past hopes, quite given over, as they call it;
And that my Aunt is almost in the same condition.

Trick-well. Send 'em a good Deliverance!
I mean from the Cares and Troubles of this World --
I long to be weeping for 'em in Sack and Sugar --
Five Hundred a Year will do very well, Sir.

Clitander. Besides, there is sufficient lying by 'em,
That will serve for the present --
And I tell thee again and again, That
My Uncle is surely going to Heaven.

Trick-well. Or somewhere else -- But that is no matter to you: I Am sure you
young Heirs do so rejoice at the death of your Parents, and Rich Relations,
that it is no wonder your Estates are no better blessed when you have 'em.


Clitander. Prithee, good Trick-well, no more of thy Morality -- I say that
being thus assured as I am of my Uncle's Death, I am going to show Mr. Maggot
my Letter, and demand Amaranta for my Lot.


Trick-well. You cannot make use of a more persuasive Argument --
Mammon is the World's Idol --
Old and Young -- Ugly and Handsome --
Prince and Peasant -- nay, Spiritual and Temporal --
All lie prostrate before it --
But here is the mischief on it, you know
Your Mistress is put among the other Lotts, and
Another may chance to have her as soon as you.

Clitander. Then I Am undone!
Oh Trick-well, where is that Name of Faithful Servant, thou have so often
protested to me in this days Adventure?


Trick-well. Why faith, Sir, I found it worn so thread bare in the
Subscriptions of damned complementing nonsensical Letters, that for my part, I
was quite ashamed on it, and therefore flung it in the Fire -- However I may
chance to prove a Man of Honor for all this, still.


Clitander. But did thou not assure both Isbell and me, that Amaranta should
depend upon thee? Oh, most unfortunate of Men! or rather, most accursed of
Fools, to trust the happiness of my Life with such a Bull-rush of Iniquity as
this!


Trick-well. Pray, Sir, lay not too much upon your poor Servant neither -- Am I
Lord of the Stars, that hardly understand an Almanac? You know, Sir, Wedlock
and Hanging go by Destiny -- How then can I prevent the Influences of the Seven
Planets?


Clitander. Oh Trick-well! Thy mean Soul was never yet acquainted with the
noble Passion of Love.


Trick-well. Yes, yes, I have been in Love up to the Ears; but my wooing
(thanks to Heaven!) never cost me so much as one single blast; no, nor a Pearl
of Salt Water -- She was as coming, as I was forward.


Isbell. Was she so, Mr. Malapert? But she is quite off of you now again, I
assure you -- No Fleshpots of Egypt, unless you prove as good as your word.


Trick-well. Nay, then it shall never be said,
That Trick-well is not a Man of Honor --
Thou shall see me lead Destiny in a string,
As Old Maids do Apes in Hell --
But harkee me, Sir,
Destiny's an honest Old Gentleman,
That love's a Cup of good Conversation.

Clitander. Oh, I understand thee --
Thou would have something to drink
With thy Friend Destiny, as thou call'st him --
There, there is Gold for thee, go and treat him handsomely.
[gives him Money.]
Trick-well. Ay marry, Sir!
This will do --
These are the little Circumferences, that
Incircle all the Temptations of Satan.
Could a Man but wean himself from these Provocations,
There might be some probability, of his
Forsaking the Devil and all his Works --
But then again,
Why is the hunger of Gold called sacred? --
The Devil and Sacred, are two incompatible opposites --
And yet I Am sure it is sacred, because
Priests of all Religions love it,
And they are my Guides -- --
Well, Sir, I Will go drink your health,
And then consider what is to be done.
[Exit Trick-well.
Isbell. And I Will to my Mistress, and
Tell her the good News of your Uncle's dying.
[Exit Isbell.]
Clitander. I Will be with you instantly.
[Exit. Clitander.
The End of the First ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE 1.
Enter Amaranta and Isbell. Ama. WILL Clitander be here, say thou?

Isbell. Yes, Madam, immediately --
Lord! what makes you so melancholy?
Come, I Will sing you a new Song of my own making,
To divert you 'till he comes.

Ama. Prithee, Isbell, how long have thou been a Poetess?

Isbell. Oh, Madam, I love to be in the Mode --
Female Poets are now in Fashion.

Ama. Come, then, let us hear thy Song.

Isbell. You shall.
A New SONG,
set by Mr. Akeroyde, and Sung by Mrs. Willis.
LOving, and beloved again!
How terrible are our pains,
To live under the Roof,
Of a Father's Reproof,
Like so many Slaves in Chains?
Yet Parent Nature, well we know,
Freedom in Love allows to every Creature;
What Duty then do we to Parents owe,
Who break the Laws of their grand Parent, Nature.
''They all forget,
''Their youthful Heat;
''And when grown old,
''Think us as cold:
''But let 'em forget, and dote on,
''By their senseless Morals betrayed,
''For when all their Tittle-tattle is done,
'''Tis Nature must be obeyed.
Enter Clitander.
Clitander. So, Madam, I Am glad to hear you so merry.

Ama. Alas! I was afraid it had been some body else.

Isbel. No, no;
You Are safe enough from being surpised,
As long as Love is your Guard.

Ama. But do thou not consider, Isbell,
That Love is blind;
So that there is no trusting to his Watch --
However I Will trust in Heaven,
I or they say, all Marriages are made there.

Isbell. Yes, all but a Thousand for one that the Devil makes.

Ama. But is there no Faith in Man?
Has not my Father and Trick-well both assured us --

Isbell. Troth, Madam, you are like the Man that believed himself no Cuckold,
because his Wife said so -- But were my Case as yours, I Would trust neither
Father nor Mother, Brother nor Sister, Uncle nor Aunt; no, nor never a
Trick-well, or Lottery in the World -- I Would make sure of the main chance, Marry
the Man I like, and take my pleasure, and then trust Fortune, as Usurers do
their Debtors -- Poor Souls! it is a hard case when two Lovers lie Parent-bound
-- But I Will even leave 'em together; perhaps, when they are alone they may take
one another's Word.

[Exit. Isbell.]
Ama. Well, Clitander, I have discoursed my Father since I saw you, and he is
mightily pleased to hear your Uncle lies a dying.


Clitander. Ay, ay: Your Father's like all the rest of the World; now he smells
an Estate, he is willing I should have his Daughter -- As if 'twere not better
to Marry his Daughter to an honest reclaimed Gentleman with a small Estate,
rather than to a Wild extravagant Spark with a great one; that is resolved to
sell all he has; and so the poor Wife comes home again to earn her living by
stitching to the Sempstresses shops. The remembrance of a short plenty, is but
a light weight to balance the suffering of a long Life in penury and want.

Enter a Servant.
Serve. Madam, Mr. Flash is come to wait upon you.

Amaranta. Say, I Am not within.

Clitander. Oh, he will divert your Melancholy --
Pray admit him.
[Exit. Servant.] Enter Mr. Flash and his Boy.
Flash. Madam, your most humble Servant!
The Learned say, that all our Words, are to
Our Thoughts, but as the Cork is to the Bottle --
As the Wine cannot be sill'd out, 'till the Cork
Is pulled out, so neither can our Thoughts,
'Till the Mouth opens --
And so, as if a Man should say, with a whip
And a jerk, and so forth;
I Am come to give you the honor of my Company,
And to chat a while of things of profundity --
By the way, Madam, you must know,
That I slept bolt upright in my Bed
Last Night, for fear of the Fleas.

Amaranta. Bid him strew his Sheets with Bay Salt.
[Aside to Clitander.
Flash. Do You talk of me, Madam?

Amaranta. By no means, Sir,
The incivility would be unparalled.

Flash. I Am sorry for it, for I love to be talked of --
I Am more plagued to make my self talked of,
Than I am to speak like Cicero, or Demosthenes --
I'gad, I Would be contented to be hanged for a Plotter,
So I might but be talked of.

Amaranta. It Is your modesty, Sir, to say so; for I assure you, the whole Town
rings of you, as if you were the unknown Author of the whole Duty of Man.


Flash. Pshaw, Pshaw, Madam, naw, naw, it is your pleasure to say so, Madam, but
let that pass --

Troth this is a very pretty House --
I swear I saw just such another, when I was at Rome --
Was it built in this City, Madam?

Amaranta. No, sure, I believe 'twas sent by the Post.

Flash. I Will warrant it made the Courier sweat to bring it --
But what Man would not sweat to serve
Such a Lady as you are, Madam!

Amaranta. Oh, Mr. Flash! I find you're a Courtier.

Flash. a Courtier, Madam,
Yes, to my very Sword Knot -- --
This Ribbond I bespoke, Madam, and I desie both
The Universities to invent me such another Motto --
Imperial, Aerial, and Ethereal -- --
Only three Words, Madam, comprehending all
The Perfections of the Female Sex --
Imperial, to show the grandeur of their Authority --
Aerial, to denote the variety and sublimity of their Inclinations; and
Aetherial, to signify the Beauty and Graces, both of their Minds and Bodies.


Clitander. Most superlative indeed, Sir!

Flash. Ay, Sir, you have Fancy,
For I find you apprehend me --
And so do you too, Madam, don't you?

Amaranta. Yes, yes, Sir.

Flash. I thought so; but let that pass --
Pray, Madam, was not that your Picture
I saw in one of the Rooms, as I past along?

Amaranta. Not unlikely, Sir.

Flash. By all the Honor of my Ancestors,
The Painter has outdone Apelles.
I should have known you in the dark,
Though I had never seen you before --
I Will send for him, he shall draw me reading with a loud voice,
And my Footman standing within call,
At a Corner of the Room, where he may not be seen --
Your Painters now adays have no Invention.

Amaranta. Alas, poor Fellows! they mind
Nothing, Sir, but the strokes of their Pencils.

Flash. Now you talk of Pencils, Madam,
Pray, what think you of the times?

Amaranta. I never mind 'em, Sir;
Pray, what are your Sentiments of 'em?

Flash. Why Faith, Madam, the World's turned Topsy-turvy --
The Women wear the Breeches, and the Men the Muffs --
And then in the State --
All things off the Hinges --
The great Thieves, and the rich Rogues, they escape,
But the little and poor ones, they are surely hanged --
Candles rise, and Soap rises --
I find that by my Landladies Bill --
Were I at the Helm --
But enough of this World, I Am almost weary of it -- --
Pray, what think you of the other World, Madam?

Amaranta. Which of 'em, Sir, there are two?

Flash. I mean the lower World, Madam,
To which most Men now adays pay their greatest Devotion.

Clitander. How, Sir!

Flash. No such wonder, Sir,
For where one Man desires Heaven to bless him,
You shall hear a Thousand cry, the Devil setch 'em --
But here come's a Friend of mine,
I must needs go and salute him.

Clitander. Uncivil Blockhead!
Enter Mr. Finical, and his Boy.
Flash. Dear Mr. Finical!
Your most obsequious, very humble Servant!
What are you come to augment the number of the Virtuosi?

Finical. I am come, Sir, but as your shadow,
To make the luster of your worth appear more glorious.

Flash. Lord, Sir! what do you mean?
My Worth! is it for me to pretend
To Worth, or Gallantry, in your presence?

Finical. Nay, pray Sir!

Flash. I beseech you, Sir!

Finical. By no means, Sir.

Flash. I protest, you make me blush.
[After these ridiculous strivings to give each other the upperhand, Finical
adresses himself to Amaranta.
Finical. Madam, this Gentleman's kindness and civility,
Had like to have made me forget my Duty, which now
I pay to your Perfections with a prostrate Devotion.

Amaranta. Oh Sir, you soar too high a Flight for me.

Finical. Madam, it is more than I dare attempt,
Lest the Rays of your Beauty should melt the Wings of my Fancy,
And drop me into an utter oblivion of my self.

Ama. I shall think the better of my self, Sir,
For the value which you put upon me.

Finical. Madam, your humble Servant --
I am just come, Madam, from a rich
Farmer's House in the Country, who had
No reason to repent of my company -- --
He told me, that one of the choicest pieces
Of Ground which he had, was so infested
With Moles, that 'twas almost spoiled --
Presently, out of the quickness of my apprehension,
I bid him pave it with Freestone.

Ama. How, Sir! so young, and so sharp-witted!
Surely, Sir, you must have been a great reader of Books.

Fini. A reader of Books, Madam? Yes Madam,
I have read a hundred Thousand in my time --
But very few pleased me --
A man must have a great Genius that reads Books --
But, Madam, I study Men as well as Books.

Ama. And Moles too --

Fini. Moles and Men, Madam, are the same thing --
They both work underground;
And truly Men of late, have cast up so many
Hillocks of Disputes and Controversies,
As have almost defaced the surface of the Earth.

Ama. Why then, I think 'twould be the best way,
To pave the whole World with Freestone.

Fini Madam, I swear you are so ingenious,
And take a man up so quick at the first rebound, that --

Flash. Lord, Madam, I find you don't know this Gentleman --
Why he is a large Folio of himself, bound up in
Calves Leather, and gilt of the edges.

Fini. This Mr. Flash, Madam, will have his Jests --
But I never take any exceptions at what he says,
By reason he gives such an admirable Tour to all his Expressions.

Flash. Sir, you do me too much honor, I protest --
But let that pass -- --
That Copy of Verses you made upon your Mistresses Needle-case,
Was so sharp, and so well sown together,
That I never heard any thing like it --
But here comes Mr. Brush-beard the Philosopher -- --
Bless me!
What a strange Figure he is?
Enter Brush-beard. By the Ghost of Solon, I Will embrace him,
Were he as ugly as Socrates.
Worthy Sir --

Brush-beard Friend, when you salute a Philosopher,
You ought to do it in form, as thus --
Every Learned Philosopher merits Honor, there is the major;
Now, you Mr. Brush-beard are a Learned Philosopher,
There Is the minor; therefore you deserved
To be honored, there is the Conclusion.

Flash. I don't mind your Majors nor Minors --
I only say that -- --

Brush. You only say, Sir --

Flash. Lord, Sir,
Will Not you give me leave to speak my speech out?

Brush. No, Sir, not 'till your turn comes.

Flash. Then, venerable Sir, I beg your pardon
For this interruption; therefore pray proceed,
And enrich us with the Treasures of your profound Knowledge.

Brush. You don't mind Majors nor Minors --
Go to then, you are a Fool --
Your true Philosophers mind little or nothing else.

Fini. Nay, it is most certain, that you Philosophers
Lead the most delicious lives in the World, for
You are always handling the Secrets of Nature.

Brush. Right -- --
And was it not a most stupendous Invention, to make a Saddle amble upon the
back of a trotting Horse? And was it not, moreover, most transcendently found
out, to tap both sides of a Man's Ribbs, and whilst his own Blood spun out of
one side, to infuse a Rivolet of sheeps Blood into the other? A miraculous
supply of Natures vacuum! And all this, that a Man might never want any other
Clothing, than the Wool of his own growth.


Clitander. Miraculous indeed, Sir!

Brush. Pshaw, This is nothing --
I my self, by computing the Mites in the Liver of a Cod-fish, found out the
full number of all the Men, Women, and Children, alive at one time in the World.


Flash. Prodigious!

Brush. Then again,
I never measure things by Inches and Feet as the vulgar, but by something
extraordinary! as the skips of a Flea --

As for Example, instead of saying England is so many Miles long or broad, I
only say, England is so many skips of a Flea broad or long.


Fini. With submission to your profound Learning,
How may a Man know how far a Flea skips?

Brush. Thou Art a mere Boy --
I Will tell you, roll but a quantity of soft Wax,
As thin as a sheet of Paper, and as large as a
Beau's Cravat, then let a Flea loose upon it,
And your Compasses will tell you.

Flash. Oh, the sublimities of Philosophical Contemplations!

Brush. Then there is Cheese --
Some Men love it, and some Men hate it --
Now I have dived into the nature of Cheese

Clitander. And, pray Sir, what are your sentiments of it?

Brush. Why they that hate it, sucked four Milk from
Their Nurses; that is the Philosophical reason of it --
They that love it --
Let me see --
They that love it --
But stay, who is this coming to disturb us?

Ama. A Friend of my Fathers, Sir, as you are,
That comes to look after his Lot.
Enter Doctor Non-such.
Dr. Non. Madam, and Gentlemen,
I am yours most obsequiously --
May the Fortune of this Days Adventure,
Prove as propiticus to ye all, as the humblest
Of your Admirers, and Servants does heartily wish.

Ama. Ch Doctor, you exceed in Gallantry,
As far as you transcend in Learning and Eminency,
The rest of your wise Metaphysical College.

Doctor. Madam, I am yours eternally.

Clitander. Who is this, I pray, Madam?

Ama. Don't you know him? --
He Is the wonder of our Age, I assure you --
He Is called Dr. Non-such --
He sets up, and pretends to be a Licensed Physician, but is, at the best, but
an Impudent Mountebank -- You Will hear presently by his Rodomontades, what he is.


Doctor. Gentlemen, I find you don't know me -- It Is very strange ye should not
have heard of the Never born Doctor -- Nay, it is very true, I assure ye; for I
was dissected from my Mother's Womb, and commenced Doctor before I came into
the World -- My Art and Experience, since that, has stretched my Fame
throughout the wide Universe, especially in China, where I performed a very
strange and wonderful Operation indeed -- Which was this, a certain Emperor
that was newly dead when I came there -- What do you call him? Let me see --.
Pugh, I cannot think of his Name now --. He that I did the great Cure on that I
told you of just now -- Ye have all heard on it I Am sure.


Clitander. Well, Sir, and what of him?

Doctor. Why I took his Head that had been severed from his Body, and buried a
whole Fortnight, and set it on his Shoulders again, and made him as brisk and
lively, as e're I saw him in all my life --

And yet to think that I should n't remember his Name --
Oh, I have it now --

Prester John: Ay, ay, a Pox on it, Prester John, 'twas he in faith -- I might
have had his Daughter, if I had not been a Fool, and have lived like a Prince
all the Days of my Life -- Nay, perhaps I might have inherited the Crown after
his Death -- But a pox on it, her Lips were too thick for me -- And that I
should n't think of Prester John!


Omnes. Most Prodigious!

Doctor. Ay, ay, Gentlemen, I have done Cures beyond Sea that will not be believed
in England.


Clitander. Very likely, Sir, and Cures in England that will not be believed
beyond Sea, nor here perhaps neither; for, in this respect, half the World are
Insidels.


Doctor. The Great Turk can witness the truth of what I say, though; for I Am sure
the Eyes that he has in his Head, are of my making.


Clitander. Then he was an Eye witness --
But I hope he wears Spectacles.

Doctor. Why, you will not believe it, but I Will tell you, Gentlemen, and it is
matter of fact, I cured the late King of Poland's Uncle of a Wart on his Nose,
as big as a Turky-Egg; and Bethlem Gaber of a Ring-worm.


Flash. The one with raw Beef, and the other with some of Harbins's Royal
shining Ink, I suppose.


Doctor. Pox of your Old Wives Receipts and Medicines; the worst of my
Ingredients is an Unicorn's Horn, or a Bezar's stone --

Raw Beef and Harbins's Ink, quotha.

Finical. No, no, such a wonderful, a wonderful Cure, could not have been done
without Green sauce, or an Oat-meal Poultice at least.


Doctor. In the last Siege of Namur, I gave a certain French Lady that the
Governor had a particular kindness for, an admirable Receipt, to keep her
Linen from being Animated, though she didn't shift her self for a whole
Twelvemonth.


Brush. Believe me, Sir,
And that was beyond Scoggin's Fleas.

Doctor. Why, Sir, there was never a Man in all the Kingdom of Fez, or Morocco,
either French, Spanish, or Italian Doctors, but my self, that would, or durst
undertake to cure that Emperor of his Corns; but I did, and after that, I
drank a Health to him.


Ama. Oh happy Man!
That has conferred Notes with the King of Morocco.

Doctor. Alas, Madam, this is nothing --
I have eat and drank with the Pope and all his Cardinals.

Ama. Indeed, Sir?

Doctor. Yes, indeed;
And they have been very fond and proud of my Company,
And so have many Kings and Princes besides.

Ama. No doubt on it, Sir!

Doctor. Why I Will tell you, Gentlemen, what I did,
A far greater Wonder than any of these --
As I was traveling with a dear Friend of mine in the Canibal's Country,
unfortunately one Day we lost Company -- Well, a while after I happened to fall
into the hands of about Threescore or Fourscore devouring Monsters, that were
feeding on my Friends Body; in short, they had eaten the better half of him --
Well, you must needs imagine that I was not a little concerned at his
misfortune (or rather mine) having lost so dear and worthy a Companion -- Now,
what did me I, but immediately bethought me of a Powder that I had about me --
I put it into their Wine, which they had no sooner drunk of, but they presently
disgorg'd their Stomachs, and fell asleep -- I watched my opportunity, and with
all dexterity, gathered up the miserable morsels of my Friend, and placed 'em
together -- And upon my word, in less than half an hour, I restored him to as
perfect Life, Health and Strength, as e're I saw him since I was born, and if
he were here now, he would tell ye the same.


Omnes. Most amazing!

Clitander. Unheard of Prodigy!

Doctor. Ay, ay,
I can tell you a thousand times more than all this.

Clitander. That you can, I dare swear,
And all as much Truth as what we have heard already.

Doctor. You're in the right, it is so --
But another time shall serve;
Sufficit quod super est, say the Learned, that is to say,
Enough's as good as a Feast.
Enter a Servant.
Servant. Madam, my Master desires the Company to come into the Hall, where
they are beginning to draw the Lottery.


Ama. Come, Gentlemen, I Will show ye the way.

Omnes. We'll wait on you, Madam.
[Exeunt.
ACT III.
SCENE 1. The Town.
Enter Trick-well and Isbell. Trick. FAITH, Isbel, I Am afraid
I shall not answer my Master's Expectations.

Isbell. How, Man!
Why you have promised him so sincerely,
And sworn to him so solemnly, that should you
Not be as good as your word, you would perjure your self
In the Court of your own Conscience.

Trick. That Is true;
But the Court of my Conscience is no Court of Record;
And you know, Isbell, it is such a delicious thing
To be counted a rich Rogue, and be out of the reach of the Law,
That I Am in a great quandary.

Isbell. Thou talk like a Runagate from all Christianity.

Trick. Ay, ay, it may be so --
What of that? I find as little Religion
Among the Christians as among the Turks,
When they act for their own Interest.

Isbell. Who the Devil taught thee this Doctrine?

Trick. Why when bad Company come once
To be pot Companions, they spoil one another --
Now as I was speaking one day to my Lady Fortune,
In my Masters behalf, she asked me
Why I did not speak for my self;
And at last, in the kindness of her Liquor,
Promised me the grand Lot.

Isbell. So far you're in the right,
And then to give it your Master.

Trick. Not so neither --
If Amaranta be good for Clitander,
Amaranta's as good for me -- --
I am not the first Serving-man that has had
His Master's Daughter by the help of Fortune.

Isbell. What, and leave thy own dear Isbell?

Trick. Not so neither -- -- But marry a rich Wise
To maintain a poor Mistress as the Fashion is.

Isbell. By my Troth, Sir, if I cannot be your Wife,
I Will never be your Whore --
So good-buy to you, noble Squire.

Trick. Hold, Isbell, hold -- --
These are but the first Temptations of Satan,
There Is nothing as yet resolved on;
Therefore prithee be patient --
Hold, here come's one of our Customers:
Prithee be gone, and leave him to me.
[Exit Isbell. Enter Mr. Scribble.
Scribble. Friend, a word with you.

Trick. Keep your Friendship and your Distance to your self, Sir -- -- you're a
little too familiar with one of my gravity.


Scribble. You're mistaken, Sir,
For I make bold with all Mankind.

Trick. Say you so, Sir? why what are you?

Scribble. An Author that writes Books.

Trick. Oh Sir! I know you now, your Name is Scribble -- You are one of those
serious Triflers, whose Works are very serviceable for every thing else, but
what they were intended for; and whose worth is never known 'till they come to
the Pastry-Cooks, or Trunk-makers -- Good for nothing while living in the
Booksellers Shops, but many ways useful when pulled to pieces.


Scribble. But do you hear, Sir, my Works are more estimable -- I am now writing
a Book, which I intend to call the Mirror of the Age.


Trick. Then as a Friend, let me advise you to dedicate it to some Noble,
Generous Patron or other, such as my Lord Rattle-brains, Sir Philip Whimsey, or
that eternal Blockhead of a Beau, Tom Starch. I assure you, Sir, one of these
noble Patrons, gave a Friend of mine no less than a whole round Guinea for the
Dedication of one of his Plays; therefore you may judge by that, what your
Reward will be.


Scribble. How, Sir! But one Guinea?
Sure you're mistaken -- --
I have been told 'twas Twenty.

Trick. But one, upon my Honor!
And Nineteen lusty Promises.

Scribble. Well, well, then the rest are in reserve --
He must have patience --
The same Misfortune happen d to my first Endeavors,
'Twas an Essay of Eatables and Potables.

Trick. Oh, I remember it --
'Twas a Manual compiled in Three Volumes,
Which treated chiefly of the Original
Of sower-Whey, and Black-Puddings.

Scribble. You're in the right; 'twas so.

Trick. Sir, I shall be proud to serve you --
What are your Commands?

Scribble. Why, I am come for a Bird
That flies where e're you send it,
And neither eats nor drinks --
I expect it, as coming from this place,
To be a Black Swan --
Rara Avis in Terris --

Trick. You have hit it, Sir --
Your Black Swan is very well, but at roost at present --
You have mistaken the time, Sir, this is no Lottery Day;
Therefore pray be pleased to come to morrow,
And you shall have your Black Swan --
So in great haste, I rest your very humble Servant.

Scribble. Yours intrinsically,
And impatiently 'till then -- Farewell.
[Exeunt severally.
SCENE 2.
Enter Clitander and Isbell: Maggot over-hearing. Clitander. My passionate
Amor for Amaranta, and the uncertainty of enjoying her, drives me almost to
despair.


Isbell. Truly, Sir, I am sorry for it -- but there is no remedy -- My Old Master
indeed might have prevented all this, if he had pleased -- Therefore I wish the
Devil had made Pot-guns of his dry Bones Ten Years ago, for not doing it.

Enter Maggot.
Maggot. Thank you, Mrs. Isbell, thank you kindly, -- I have always your good
word, it seems.


Isbell. No, by my Troth, but you have not; I Would fain know for what -- Would any
Father --


Maggot. Nay, but why so angry, Isbell?

Isbell. Why so inhumane, Master, to expose your only Daughter to some Monster,
for ought I know?


Maggot. Good Mrs. Passionate, no Monsters come to my Lottery.

Isbell. No Sir? But Men as cruel as Monsters, as ugly as Monsters, nay, and as
beastly as Monsters do -- And what if such a one should chance to have her?


Maggot. Why then here is her Perseus to redeem her!

Isbell. Vile Man! Thus to wrong the poor Gentleman's Love, abuse your only
Daughter's Affection, and then laugh at 'em.


Clitander. I must confess, Sir, Isbell's Zeal has carried her a little too
far, thus to provoke you, but yet she speaks nothing but reason.


Maggot. Nay, then it is time to leave you -- Two to one is odds.
[Exit. in haste.
Clitander. What think thou now, Isbell? I Am afraid, as things stand, that
between an Old Fool, and a young Rogue, I shall be left in Erasmus's Paradise.


Isbell. I cannot tell that, Sir, for I have one Project still in my Head, which
is to make the Rogue drunk -- Scrape has promised to assist me, and then I
shall dive into the Secrets of his Heart -- Farewell, Sir; I Am in labor to be
delivered of my Plot.


Clitander. Good luck attend thee, dear Isbell -- So,
[Exit Isbell. Here Is now a Trial of skill -- a Woman's Wit against a Man's;
and it is a Cockpit lay oth' Woman's side for an Amorous Intreague -- she will not
be the first, I Will warrant her, that will disgrace her Sex at a pinch of
necessity.

Enter Amaranta.
Ama. Clitander!

Clitander. Yes, Madam, I was just a coming to wait upon you; and to let you
know that I am quite weary of these lingering dependencies upon Chance;
therefore what think you, Madam, of descending (like a Goddess in a Machine)
from your Window to Night, when your Father's fast asleep; the lawless Churches
are always open for a matrimonial Fee.


Ama. I know, Sir, you would not desire me to transcend the bounds of modesty so
far, to give the World occasion of censuring my Love, as this rash Act would do
-- No, my Clitander, I hope you value my Reputation more than to expose it thus
-- Besides, I Am unwilling to give my Father that advantage over us; therefore
pray be satisfied, for let the Lot fall which way it will, you may be assured
of my Resolution.

Enter Trick-well drunk.
Clitander. How now, Trick-well! how goes the World?

Trick-well. Round -- Round, Sir, -- Hickup -- And the Sun stands still, for I
think 'twill never be Night -- Hickup.


Clitander. Why so hasty for Night, Trick-well?

Trick-well. That I may go to Bed with Isbell, that is all.

Clitander. Are you married then? I wish you Joy!

Trick-well. No, no, Hickup -- Only one of Madam Maintenon's Weddings -- A
Conscience Marriage, only for brevity's sake.

Enter Isbell.
Isbell. Where is he? Oh, where shall I find him? I Am ruined and undone:

Amaranta. What Is the matter, Isbell?

Isbell. Why that Rogue Trick-well, Madam, has stole my Gold-Ring from off my
Finger -- Oh! Are you here, Sirrah? Give me my Ring, you Villain, give me my
Ring, I say.


Trick-well. Hickup -- As I Am an honest Man, Isbell, I have none of thy Ring,
not I.


Isbell. Sirrah, Let me feel your Pockets then -- Slife I would not lose my
Ring for a Hundred Pounds; it was given me by my Grandmother, with a Charm in it
-- I never fell backward since I had it; therefore give it me quietly, or I Will
call the Constable.


Trick-well Why you silly drunken Jade, I tell you, I have none on it; if you
will not believe me, you may try --


Isbell. Ay, ay, come, let us try.
[She feels his Pockets, and pulls out the tip of a Neats-Tongue, a great piece
of Bread and Cheese, and a Bottle of Brandy. Hey day! What Is here, a tip of a
Neats-Tongue, Bread and Cheese, and a Brandy-Bottle! The Rogue's mortally
afraid of Hunger I find -- Here Is Provision for another Siege of Vienna!


Trick-well. Help, help, good Folks: Murder, Murder! Bear witness, Gentlemen
and Ladies, how she ravishes me!

[Isbell at last finds a Ticket-Box, and whips it into her Pocket, then slips
her Ring into Trick-well's Pocket, and pulls it out again.
Isbell. Look ye here, Gentlemen, here it is; and yet this Rogue had the
confidence to outface me, and say he had it not.


Trick-well Well, well, Isbell, come, it is almost dark; will you be as good as
your word, hickup -- and go to Bed?


Isbell. Ay ay, do you go first -- -- When People are lawfully Married, then
indeed the Woman goes to Bed first, but when they only take one another Word,
then, you know, the Man goes first.


Trick-well. Well, well, then I Will go -- --
You Will be sure to come?

Isbell. I will, I will Man; never fear.
[Exit. Trick-well.
Clitander. Incomparable Isbell! 'Twas dexterously done, upon my word.

Isbell. I believe the Rogue would live in the water, he drinks so like a Fish
-- I assure you, if we had not plied him briskly with Wine, we had never
conquered him.


Clitander, Well, well, but where is the Ticket, Isbell, the Ticket, Child?

Isbel. Oh, here it is -- Take it, Sir, and may ye both for ever live, and love
like Angels.


Clitander. Dear Isbell, thou have brought me the Indies: I would not part with
this Treasure, for all the Great Mogul's Territories.


Isbell. Let me advise you now, to let my Master be at the opening of it.

Amaranta. Yes, and I think it very requisite too, that he should open it
himself


Isbell Right, Madam, and see yonder he comes.
Enter Mr. Maggot. Oh Sir! Clitander has got the grand Lot!

Maggot. Well then; now I hope you're both pleased -- you blamed me for taking
this course, but I looked upon it the best way -- I considered how few people
married for Love, how many in a frolic and humor, how many by accident; and
all to their continual plague and discomfort -- so that I was willing Fortune
should dispose of my Daughter, believing that if she had a hand in t, that
she would be kind to a Match of her own making.


Isbell. But in faith, Sir, had I not been too cunning for Fortune and you too;
I Am afraid your Daughter would have had but a bad Bargain -- Come, come Sir, I
tell you there were Rogues abroad, that --


Maggot. The Devil's in these Appendixes to the Dressing Box -- If any thing be
well designed for their Mistresses, they will be sure to assume the praise of it
-- But I say, and say it again, that if Clitander's Uncle had not died, and left
him his Estate, I know Fortune's Mind so well, she would have been hanged
before she would have given the grand Lot to him.


Isbell. By my Troth, I believe you --
No doubt but Fortune and you were agreed upon the Smith-field Maxim, you wou d
have made an excellent No penny, no Paternoster Man.


Maggot. Well Mrs. Manners, you will have the last word, I find, and so take it
-- But come, where is this good luck in a Box, let me see it?


Clitander. Here, Sir, here s the end of all my Troubles.
[Gives him the Box.
Maggot. Why faith, as you say, Clitander, it would have troubled any young Man
to have lost Five Thousand Pounds, and a handsome Bedfellow to boot -- Well,
but who must open it?


Clitander. It Is in very good handsalready, Sir; therefore if you please --

Maggot. No, no, here Isbell, thou love Employment; prithee do thou open it.

Isbell. Not I, by my Maidenhead, Sir; Men were always better at it than
Women, therefore pray excuse me.


Maggot. Come then, to end all contention, I Will open it -- So, now let me pull
out my Spectacles and read --

Hold, hold, let me see, what is here?
A Pouch full of -- of -- of --
Here, Clitander, prithee do you read it, for I believe my Eyes dazzle.

Clitander. 'Sdeath, this is the wrong Ticket -- Oh, Sir! it is Pandora's Box,
for it has let loose upon me, all the Plagues and Miseries upon Earth.


Isbell. How! Trickt thus, in the Devil's Name?
No, it shall n'ere be said a Woman was outwitted --
Come, Sir, let you and I go instantly and find the Villain out, and if I catch
him, I Will pound him to an Electuary in a Drugsters Mortar, but I Will be revenged.

[Exeunt Maggot and Isbell.
Amaranta. How are my Hopes deceived, that am thus fallen from a high imagined
happiness, into a Gulf of endless sorrow!


Clitander. Come, my Love, forbear to grieve or mourn. --
Fate may yet be kind, and give thee to these longing Arms --
If not, I have a Sword, and then let Fortune do her pleasure --
[Exeunt. Enter Trick-well, solus.
Trick. I over-hear'd them as hot as Bell-Founders; but I did not think it safe
to make my personal appearance, out of the tender Affection I bear to my Bones
-- Hold, yonder comes sweet Mrs. Isbell -- Had a Man Gyges's Ring, he could
never be invisible, I believe, from a Chambermaid -- Now will this my Juno
Elect, raise a most strange and hideous storm about my Ears, for I see soul
weather gathering from her Looks.

Enter Isbell, who runs and catches him by the Ears, he crying out, help, help,
murder, murder.
Isbell. Now Sirrah, give me the right Box and Ticket, or I Will pull your Ears
off, you Impostor, Cheating Rogue.


Trick. Hold, hold, dear Isbell, let me go, and I will.

Isbell. Swear then, swear lustily.

Trick. By all my hopes of Paradise I will --
[She lets him go. Now art not thou a Fool, Isbell --
Here am I studying to make thee a great Lady, and for the blood of me, I cannot
make thy mean Soul mount higher than a Chandler's Shop.


Isbell. What, would thou have me turn an Insidel, as thou art?

Trick. I Would have the turn with the Weathercock of the World, Interest; and
steer thy Course as the general Magnet of all Mankind; thy own Profit directs
thee.


Isbell. How Is that?

Trick. Why l'de have thee Cozen, Lie, Swear, and Forswear; betray thy Friend,
only keep out of the Clutches of the Law -- The Law indeed pinches a little too
close, and like another Hercules, choaks a Man, as he did the Giant, by lifting
too high from his Mother Earth.


Isbell. Oh, this is rare Doctrine!

Trick. No Doctrine, Child, but the daily practice of all Professions, even
from the zealous Sect without Hat-bands, to the unbounded Atheistical Libertine.


Isbell. But will you make me a Lady, do you say?

Trick. I tell thee I will; I know where a Barronet's Patent lies to be bought
at second hand -- It Is no matter for Merit, bought Honor will serve our turn
well enough.


Isbell. I tell thee what, Trick-well, thou art such a Faithless Politician,
that one knows not how to Article with thee --

How many Maids shall I have?

Trick. Four at least; it may be the whole Parish-stock for ought I know.

Isbell. But will you make me a Lady indeed, and indeed now?

Trick. Pugh! here is my Hand upon it --
Thou shall be a Lady with all thy appurtenances, a Waiting Woman, a little
Black, a Parrot, and a Monkey -- Thou shall have a leetle, leetle Dog too, if
thou will, to play with while the Child's at Nurse.


Isbell. Swear all this.

Trick. It Is no matter for Swearing --
They that swear most, are the least Performers:

Isbell. Well! what are poor Women?
Now do I begin to give already, like Linen in wet weather.

Trick-well. That Is well said, now I like thee --
There, there is a Kiss in earnest --
But leave me, my dear, at present, for I have business: My Head's as full as a
General's before a Battle -- So, there is one Convert quickly made; and truly I
find no difference; for Men will go to the [Exit Isbell. Devil himself for
Preferment and Honor, and Women to his Damm for their pleasure and
satisfaction -- However, the Jade will serve for a helpmeet, and that is all I
care for --

Now Trickwell, briskly play thy part and thrive,
The tender-Conscienc'd never deserve to live.
[Exit. Enter Mr. Maggot, Clitander, and Amaranta: Isbell meeting them.
Isbell. I cannot find him high nor low -- I have visited all his Haunts, but
the Villain's under a total Eclipse. Had I met him, I had certainly put him to
the charge of a Dog and a Bell.


Maggot. In truth, Clitander, I Am very sorry for this Misfortune, but --

Clitander. Nay, Sir, you might have prevented all this, if you had pleased,
but you would trust to Fortune, and see what comes on it.


Amaranta. Dear Isbell, what shall we do? Can thou contrive no means?
Methinks thou shoud'st make thy last effort, to repair the scandal of such a
gross disappointment.


Isbell. Truly, Madam, I would willingly try another Experiment, but that I
believe the Rogue has made a solemn League and Covenant with the Devil, to keep
him out of the way; it must be some Negromancer or other, that must break the
Charm -- Now what a Jade am I [Aside. to betray this poor, loving and
unfortunate Couple -- But the Hopes and Title of being a Lady, strangely
allures --

Enter Trickwell like a Beggar.
Trick-well. Good your good Worships give a poor Cripple a farthing, or a
halfpenny, and the Laud to bless ye, and restore it ye in Heaven!


Maggot. How now! What more torments to perplex us? Prithee be gone, poor
fellow, we have crosses enough of our own.


Trick-well. Alas, Master, I am but a young Beggar! my Father was as eminent a
Merchant as any in all London, that dealt and traded for Scotch-Eggs, Irish
Potatoes, and Spanish- Chess-nuts -- But Losses, and his own good nature,
ruined both himself and all his Children.


Maggot. Then why don't you keep to your Parish?

Trick-well. An't like your Worship, the Churchwardens, and Overseers of the
Poor, have so many natural Children of their own at Nurse, that there is no room
for us.


Maggot. Then prithee be gone, and make the best of thy Calling somewhere else
-- I tell thee here is nothing for thee.


Trick-well. An't please your Worship, I hope otherwise, or I Am an undone
Beggar.


Maggot. An undone Beggar! how can that be?

Trick-well. Why an't please you, Sir, I laid out a whole Week's Earnings at
your Lottery, and here I have got a Ticket -- They say it is worth something,
but I must confess, I cannot read very well.


Maggot. How, Friend, can thou get Three Guinea's a Week by begging?

Trick well. Oh! yes, Sir, that is nothing; for Charity, since she is turn d
Christian, is like a Birch-Tree, especially to the Poor -- 'Twill bleed freely,
if it be well tapp'd.


Maggot. Well, Friend, come, let me see your Ticket -- Here, Isbell, do you
read it.

[Isbell takes the Box, and opens it, and after reading a little, lets it fall,
and speaks.
Isbell. Oh! Oh! unlace me -- unlace me, I say, or I shall swoon -- quickly,
Oh! quickly -- The Vapors begin to rise already -- My Head swims, and my Eyes
grow dim -- Oh! Oh!


Maggot. How now! what ails the Wench? I Am sure there is never a Gorgon's Head
in the Ticket.


Isbell I know not what you mean by a Gorgon's Head, but I Am sure there is an
Ass's Head in the Ticket, to dispose of your only Daughter to a Beggar.


Omnes. How!

Isbell. Nay, it is too true -- This -- Oh, I saint -- This -- Oh my heart! How
it beats and pants -- This Raw head and Bloodybones, has got the Grand Lot.


Maggot. Impossible!

Clitander. Cursed be my Stars, and doubly cursed those Fools that trust to
Fortune!


Maggot. Come, Isbell, advance thy doleful Countenance, and read it out:

Isbell. Yes, yes, Sir: I Will but wipe my Eyes, that I may see the better --
Hem! Hem!

[Reads. Benefit by the Wheel of Fortune, the Lady Amaranta, and five Thousand
Pound.
Maggot. Well, Clitander, you must have patience, there is no resisting the
Decrees of Fate! And for you, my dearest Daughter, you must now learn to make a
good Nurse, as well as a good Wife -- Come, come, leave off crying, Money hides
all deformities.


Clitander. Hold, Sir, you may submit to Fortune, if you please, I never made
her my Umpress; therefore touch her Villain, if you dare.

Better ten Thousand such Miscreants should suffer, than she perish --

Amaranta. Hold, hold, Clitander.
[Amaranta holds him: Clitander, Maggot, and Amaranta talk a part.
Trick-well. Hist, hist, Isbell -- It Is I --
Remember thou art to be a Lady.

Isbell. Enough, enough -- Let me alone, I Will warrant thee.

Clitander. All Reason's vain, when Love prevails -- I le hear no more.

Isbell. Hold, Sir, let not Folly and Passion over sway you thus -- The poor
Man has done you no wrong -- Had he drawn a meaner Trifle, he must have been
contented.


Trick-well. Ay indeed, Mistress, and so I would.

Isbell. Besides, Sir, it is ungenerous to kill a poor Cripple -- The Law will
certainly revenge his quarrel every way.


Clitander. As how?

Isbell. Why first, if you kill him, you will undoubtedly be hanged -- Or if you
force my Mistress from him, being his Wife, then he admits himself presently in
Forma Pauperis -- And I know so much of the Matter, that you are gone both at
Common Law, and Doctors Commons, if it comes to, that -- Therefore pray be
ruled by me; I have thought of an expedient.


Clitander. No terms of peace, without the resignation of Amaranta.

Isbell. That Is it that I was about to propose -- You shall have Amaranta, and
let him have the Five Thousand Pounds -- He does not care a halfpenny for
Amaranta, not he; it is Money he wants -- Now this is the best way that I can
think of, to divide the Spoil equally between ye.

Clitander. With all my heart -- I am content.
[He puts up his Sword.
Isbell. Come then, Friend, you see I have saved your Life, therefore pray do
something more than ordinary for my sake, and remember the gratitude of the
Blind Beggar of Bednal Green.


Trick well. Well then, for your sake, Mistress, let the Gentleman take the
Young Lady, and let me have the Money -- Agreed, in faith, let it be so.


Maggot. Well said, and so thou shall -- Here Is my hand upon it.

Trick-well. Nay, nay Sir, I must have my whole Lot one way or other, a Wise,
I mean, as well as Money.


Maggot. And so thou shall -- What think thou then of this Girl; I Will
warrant thee, she will serve a Cripple well enough -- Or if she chance to be too
many for thee, thou may call in thy Neighbors to help thee.


Amaranta. Dear Isbell, thou have always made high protestations of thy Love to
me -- Show it now, by laying hold of this opportunity.


Isbell. Lord, Madam, what do you mean? Wou d you have me marry a Beggar, and
disgrace my Parentage?


Amaranta. A Beggar, Isbell! You Are mistaken -- He Is no Beggar, that has Five
Thousand Pounds by him -- I Will warrant thee in a little time, this Beggar, as
thou call'st him, when it is known how rich he is, will be made a Justice of
Peace in Quorum.


Isbell. Say you so? Well then, Madam, for your good, and to oblige you, Sir,
I Will venture on him -- What say you, Friend, is it a Match or no?


Trick-well. Why yes truly, I think thou may serve my turn -- I desire but
one lawfully begotten Son to inherit my Estate, and keep up my Family? as for
the rest, I hope thou have wit enough to contract beforehand, that their
several Fathers shall keep them, or else thou art no true Chambermaid -- And
thus I have got the first and worst part of my Lot -- But how shall I come by
my Money, Gentlemen, let me know that?


Maggot. Why, we will give thee a Note upon a Goldsmiths, to be paid upon demand.


Trick-well. Pray let him be a very sufficient Man then; for since the late
general Reformation of our Coin, we are as much plagued with clipped Credit, as
we were before with Clipped Money: Besides, I hate to go a Hunting in the Mint, of
all the Parks in England.


Maggot. Thou shall have thy Money paid down upon thy Marriage-day.

Trick-well. And both of ye promise me all this upon your Words, and Honors,
and as ye are Gentlemen, and Sons of Gentlemen.


Mag. and Clit. We do, upon our Words and Honors!
[Trick-well pulls off his Plasters, throws away his Crutches, and discovers
himself.
Trick-well. Why then, I Am your humble Servant --
Thus you see what Money can do, Gentlemen --
It can transform Trick-well into a Beggar,
And a Beggar into Trick well!

Omnes. How, Trickwell!

Trick-well. Even so, Master --
Your quondam Honest Servant, poor Trick well;
But now, thanks to my Dexterity, as good a Man as your Worship.

Clitander. The World may now see, what all Lotteries are --
They are Bawds to Fools; Decoys to catch Gulls;
The sport of Knaves, and the Loosers trial of Patience! --
Well, since we had no more Wit, than to let
Thee out-reach us in all our Politics,
I think thou deserve what thou have,
And so much good may it do thee.

Maggot. Nay, nay, take my good Wishes too --
May thou live to cheat all the World,
As thou have fooled us; and may
Fortune prosper thee in all thy Tricks and Villainy,
As it has favored thee in this Day's Adventure.

Trick-well. I thank ye both, good Gentlemen. --
Therefore do hear, Isbell, sweet Spouse that art to be, prithee step in and
fetch me my Gown, that I may appear like a Man of Gravity, and Honor -- Come,
come, my Girl, a Doctor's Wife may take place of a Squire's at any time.

[Isbell goes to the Door, and brings the Gown; as he is putting it on, a noise
within of several People, crying, where is he, where is he? Ha! 'sdeath, what
noise is that -- Quickly, dear Isbell, quickly, or I shall be torn in pieces.

Enter Noisy, Mrs. Proud love, Bullsinch, Lack-wit; Ninny, and several others,
as cheated of their Money.
Noisy. Where is he, I say, where is he? -- Oh, here he is -- seize him
Neighbor Lack-wit, and Master Ninny -- we'll Lottery him, in faith, as he was
never so Lottery'd in all his Life -- We'll teach him to put Tricks upon
Travelers, and honest Tradesmen, I Will warrant ye.


Maggot. Why, what is the matter, Gentlemen?

Noisy. The matter, say you? Why the matter's plain enough -- We have all been
trick't and cheated most abominably, as a Man may say; but now we have found
him, we'll either make him pay us our Money again, or we'll sirk him up up with
a Ciserari.


Maggot. Alas, good Gentlemen, I pity ye -- But what would you have of a poor
Snake, why he is not worth a groat.


Bullfinch. Then we'll have his Bones -- Come, Gentlemen, fall on -- Mrs
Proud-Love, let his Nose be your Province, his Guts and Garbage yours, Brother
Pinch-belly; and his Eyes and Ears yours, Goodman Dash-well.

Maggot. Hold, hold, honest People -- pray be pacified a little, and let us hear
what he has done


Bullfinch. Why, Sir, you-must know that I Am troubled with a Wife (the Lord
help me) that makes more noise with the Clapper of her Tongue, than Bow-Bells
do on my Lord-Mayor's day or London Bridge at low Water -- Now, Sir, I bought a
House of this Villain, which he told me had that peculiar Virtue belonging to
it, that Women never scolded in it, so that I was in hopes to have spent the
rest of my days in peace and quiet -- Now, what did me this impudent Rogue,
think you, but bring me a Cossin, which made my Wife ten times madder than
before.

Enter Gammar Whiteing.
Whiting. Ay, ay, let me come at him --
I Will clapper-claw him, I Will warrant ye.

Maggot. What has he done to you, good Woman?

Whiting. Why, Sir, you must know my Name is Whiting;
I am a Fish-woman, I sold my only Daughter
Into Pensilvania, for Five Pounds, to buy
Me a Cure for all Diseases; hoping to have rid
In my Sedan; and what did me this Villain,
But bring me a Halter for my Money.

Noisy. Ay, ay, come -- We'll hear no more --
Away with him -- away with him.

Trick-well. I'ray, Gentlemen -- Good, Gentlemen --
For Heaven's sake, do but hear me.

Noisy. No, Sir, we have heard too much already --
Come, come, away with him, away with him.

Trick well. Sir, worthy Sir, you seem to have
The chief command of these other Noble Persons --
Therefore, if you please, a word or two with you in private --
Here, Sir, here is something for you in particular.

Noisy. How! Bribe a Man of Honor!
The Rogue takes me for a Solicitor of the City Orphans --
I le have nothing to say to you.

Lack-wit. No, no, we'll have no Bribes --
We are no Jurymen.

Clltander. Come, Sir, I think it is best for us to make off, lest we be brought
in as Accessaries.

[Exeunt Maggot, Clitander, Amaranta and Isbell.
Trick well. Oh, good Sirs as ye are Men,
And lawfully begotten by your Fathers,
Have pity upon the Son of an unfortunate Woman.

Noisy. Yes, yes, all the pity we intend to show you,
Sweet Sir, is fairly to send you to Heaven in a string --
What say you, Gentlemen, is not hanging too good for him?

Omnes. Ay, ay, hang him, hang him!

Whiting. Here, Neighbor Bull-finch, here is the very Halter he sold me, to
cure all Diseases.

[They throw the Halter over his Head.
Trick-well. Hold, Gentlemen, hold, have but
A moments patience --
I have but one short Prayer to make, of an Hour or two long,
And then you may do as your compassion shall direct you.

Noisy. How, Gentlemen,
Does this Rogue look as if he e're said his Prayers? --
Come, come, hang him up, up with him, I say.

Omnes. Ay, ay, hang him, hang him!
[As they are going to hang him up, he slips the Halter, and runs away.
Trick-well. Help, help, Murder, Murder!
[Exit.]
Omnes. Stop him, stop him, stop him.
[Exeunt after him.
SCENE the Last.
Enter: Maggot, Clitander, Amaranta, and Isbell: Trick-well meeting them, as
running, and out of Breath. Maggot. How now Trickwell! How do do, man?
Prithee tell me, how do like the Roman Sport
Of fighting with Wild Beasts?

Trick-well. Gad, I Will get a Warrant, and bind 'em all over --
I Will Crown-Office the Dogs;
And if they don't find it worse, than being buffeted by Satan,
I Will be their Bond Slave.

Isbell. Oh, my Dear, I am glad to see thee
In the Land of the Living --
I was horribly afraid, my Love,
That my Ladyship had been spoiled, and
That I must have put on the Garments of Widdow-hood,
Before thou had made me a Jointure.

Trick-well. Ay, ay, That was my greatest grief, too, Isbell;
For 'twould have vexed any Saint alive,
To have been hurried out of his Matrimony,
And Five Thousand Pounds to boot --
But come, they have had their ends, and all is well --
So that now, if you please, Gentlemen,
We'll have a Song and a Dance or two,
And then every Man to his own Wedlock.

Clitander. With all my Heart!

Maggot. Come then, sit down, and let the Music strike up.
[They sit.
A NEW MASQUE, CALLED Love and Riches Reconciled.
A Symphony begins. Then Enters Plutus on one side of the Stage, attended by
Empire, Labor and Industry; and Cupid on the other, attended by the Graces;
they range themselves on each side of the Stage, and after a while, Plutus and
Cupid advance toward one another. Plutus. POOR silly Diminutive Chit --
What fancy bewitches,
Thy little fantastical Wit,
Now to compare with the great God of Riches?

Cupid. Blind Idol of the World, produced from dirt,
Thou, that neither Temple have, nor Court:
Whilst I both Gods, and Men control,
Enshrined in every Humane Soul.

Plutus. Sure Heaven and Earth did a Governor lack,
When they made a young Fowler,
Their Lord Controller,
That never was worth a rag to his Back.

Cupid. Pride and Envy; makes thee bear me a grudge;
But Plutus, know, I scorn to be my own Judge.

Plutus. How will thou avoid it?

Cupid. Let Momus decide it.

Plutus. Momus!

Cupid. Momus!
Both. Come, come, away.
Chorus. Come, come away,
Make no delay;
Why, why do you stay?
Come, come away.
Enter Momus, attended by Hymen, Hebe, Peace, and Reason. A Symphony of
Haut-Boys.
Momus. Ha! ha! ha! What do I see,
The aged God of Wealth,
With this young little Elf?
Well, and how do you both agree?

Cup. It Is thee we call --

Plu. It Is thee we call.

Cup. By whom the Gods --

Plut. By whom the Gods,

Cup. Are quitted -- --

Plu. Or condemned.

Both. When they are at odds.

Plutus. Be just, and end the strife,
Who bears the greatest sway in humane life;
This little Dandy-prat,
Or I, that am so glorious, plump, and fat?

Momus. I am prepared to hear both sides,
And then to judge as Reason guides.
[Here follows a Dance; then the Graces Address themselves to Momus.]
Euphrosine. Daughters of Jove, and Themis, we
Keep the bright Gates of Heaven, and see
What passes in the Seats above,
Where all the Gods give way to Love.

Thalia. His uncontrolled Commands,
Forced Neptune's Trident from his Hands;
Phoebus his Quiver durst not own,
And Hercules his Club laid down:
Mavors he made his Helmet quit,
Tore Hermes's Wings from off his Feet;
And which was yet a greater wonder,
Great Jove disarmed of all his Thunder.

Aglaia. No wonder then,
That Mortal Men,
So feebly should resist his Charms,
To whom the Gods surrender up their Arms.
Chorus of Cupid's Party. No wonder then,
That mortal Men,
So feebly should resist his Charms,
To whom the Gods surrender up their Arms.

[Here follows a Dance of a little Boy dressed like a Cupid.] After the Dance,
Hebe and Hymen sing the following seven Lines in two Parts. Hebe and Hymen.
Short is what we have to say:
In the Circle of Mankind,
At Cupid's heels you will surely find
Us, always merry, blithe and gay;
None, none can tell,
His steps so well,
For we trace him every day:

Heb. From sporting,

Him. To Courting;

Hebe. From Courting

Him. To Billing;

Hebe. From Billing

Him. To Willing;

Hebe. From Willing,

Him. To Wedding;

Hebe. From Wedding

Him. To Bedding.
Chorus of Cupid's Party. Thus round, round, around, in a circle whirled,
It Is our little God Cupid, sustains the World.
[Here follows a Dance of two Girls.] Momus comes forward and sings.
Momus. Come, I have something to propose,
Will bring ye quickly to a close.
Cupid and Plutus together.
Then to the point, and set us right.

Momus. Two Matches are confirmed this Night;
Love makes the One, the other Gold,
Now which is longest like to hold.

Cupid. The Dowry'd Wife imperious grows,
And fills the House with noise:

Plutus. As loud the Monyless too crows,
For want of my brave yellow Boys.

Momus. Then Plutus, take the Day thy self,
The Night I give this little Elf:
Thus reconciled, shake hands -- It Is more
Then ever Momus did before --
So with a Jolly Dance, dismiss,
The Brides and Bridegrooms to their Bliss.
A general Chorus, with a Dance. So with with a jolly Dance dismiss,
The Brides and Bridegrooms to their Bliss.
After the Masque, Maggot rises and speaks.
Maggot. Well, Clitander, since I find you take your bad Bargain so
contentedly, I Will give thee a brace of Thousands to make thee amends -- My
Daughter shall never be upbraided for a Portionless Wife, I Will tell thee that,
Boy.

Clitander, Kind Sir, I humbly thank you;
Young Men in heat of Blood, their Flames approve,
But when all is done, it is Money binds our Love.

Trick. And for my part, I often have been told,
There Is nothing like dancing to the Music of Gold.

FINIS.

