Imprimatur Hic liber cui Titulus, The Divine Physician.

AB. CAMPION, Rmo. Dno. Arch. Cant. a Sacris Domesticis.
Feb. 22. 1675. ex Aedib. Lambeth.
THE DIVINE PHYSICIAN: Prescribing Rules for the Prevention, and Cure of most
Diseases, as well of the BODY, as the SOUL: Demonstrating by Natural Reason,
and also Divine and Humane Testimony, that, as vicious and irregular Actions
and Affections prove often occasions of most bodily Diseases, and shortness of
Life; so the contrary do conduce to the preservation of Health, and
prolongation of Life.

In two Parts.

By J. H. M. A.

Exodus 15. 26. -- If thou will diligently hearken to the voice of the Lord thy
God, and wilt do that which is right in his sight, and wilt give ear to his
Commandments, and keep all his Statutes, I will put none of these diseases upon
thee, which I have brought upon the Egyptians: for I am the Lord that heals
thee.

Prove. 10. 27. The fear of the Lord prolongeth days: but the years of the
wicked shall be shortened.

Printed for George Rose, Bookseller in Norwich, and are to be sold by him
there, and by Nath. Brook, and Will. Whitwood, Booksellers in London. 1676.

To The right Worshipful, and much Honored ROBERT COKE, Esquire Now a Member of
the High and Honorable Court of Parliament.
SIR,
IT is reported that when one presented unto Antipater, King of Macedon, a
Treatise of Happiness, that he rejected it with this answer, (...), I am not at
leisure: You shall find this a Treatise tending to Happiness here, and
hereafter; yet I assure my self, it shall find better entertainment when it
kisseth your hand; not only in regard of the novelty, and usefulness of the
Design, but also the Author's good intention.

As to the Novelty thereof, though I confess to have met, dispersedly, with
many gleanings in sundry Authors; yet the scattered ears were never heretofore
(so far as I have searched) collected into Order; the large field of this
Argument, lying as a barren soil, or a desolate wilderness, untilled.

As to the Usefulness, since all goods may be reduced to Bona animi, corporis,
and fortunae, The goods of the mind, the body, and of fortune, as Divine
Providence has liberally furnished you with the last, this Manual presents you
with the two former. Which three (and tria sunt omnia) rightly improved, will
add such a luster each to other, as will make you shine, not only as a Star of
the first magnitude in the Sphaere you are in now, but as the Sun it self
hereafter, when you shall be higher and richer in the reversion of a Celestial
Kingdom, whereof your temporal Estate thus sanctified, and made comfortable by
the health of Soul and Body, becomes an earnest. Certes, he is as happy as
Solomon in all his glory, who has health to enjoy his riches, and grace to
preserve his health, and the hope of glory (greater than that of Solomon) to
remunerate his grace. Riches without health, is but like meat without a
stomach, which the best Cook on Earth cannot make relishing or grateful; And
health, unless it relates to Soul as well as Body, is but like a Down-pillow to
a restless head, which the best Chamberlain cannot make easy enough or
refreshing: But when goodness shall run parallel with greatness, and
healthfulness with holiness, they must needs concenter in the Pole of Happiness.

As to the Auhtor's good Intention, though I be a stranger to your Honored
Person; yet receiving my first breath, and part of my Education within the
sensible Horizon of Hill hall in Holkham, and having known, for the space of
more than three lives in the Law, the splendid Family of your Predecessors
there, and receiving from them (I mean the two last of them) no small Favors
and Obligations, and not knowing how, better to testify my Gratitude to them,
than by expressing it to such a person as may be thought worthy in their room
to inherit their praises with their Virtues, as well as their Estate, I have
therefore presumed to make this Dedication of the First Fruits of my Labor,
such as it is, humbly craving your Patronage, or pardon; and also beseeching in
my Orisons, that the Almighty preserver of Men would preserver you and yours in
health and prosperity both of Body and Soul, together with length of days,
(subordinately) by the observation of such Rules as are prescribed in this
Enchiridion; and that He would bless you no less with accumulation of Honors,
and fruitfulness of Loins, that as your Fortunes look green and flourishing, so
may your Name also; to the glory of God, the service of your Country, the hope
of your friends, and the joy of every one who is no less devoted to your
Service than

SIR, Your well-wishing Honorer, J. H.

TO THE READER.
TO let pass threadbare Apology, worn by so many Authors, in their Epistles
Prefatory, (namely) Importunity of Friends; let it suffice, that after I had
drawn up some scattered Notions into a Body, for my private exercise, and
satisfaction; the glory of God, and the public good, were the grand Motives
that encouraged me to permit my Divine Physician to see the light, and to
travel abroad amongst his Patients; though he may chance to meet with as sharp
Censures, as the bodily Physician, upon the miscarriage of his endeavors. I
confess a more accurate and acute Pen might with more confidence have
undertaken, and better success accomplished the design of the following
Treatise: But in regard no full Discourse of this nature has ever presented it
self to the Author's cognizance; it has been my lot to undertake it; and my
endeavor by the natural, and general desire of Bodily Health, to promote the
Health of the Soul; and also by the Health of the Soul, to promote the Health
of the Body: In which two Points, all the lines of our several designs must
concenter; or else the happiness of this Life, and also of the next, will prove
eccentrick, and to lie beyond the Sphaere of our reach. If then thou would
Vivere, and valere, Live, and that in health, and enjoy Gaius his wished
prosperity, 3 Epist. John verse. 2. take this advice, Eschew evil and do good,
shun vice and embrace virtue: For as in the former are lurking the seeds of
Diseases, and mortality; so in the latter is contained such a spring of Divine
sap, as brings forth the blossoms of Health, and the lasting fruit of long
Life. For it must be understood, that as there is an agreement and
correspondence between the Affections of the Soul, and the Temperature of the
Body; and that as, naturally, Mores sequuntur humores, The manners follow the
Crasis and complexion of the humors; So the Affections for their parts have
great power and influence over the Body; and though their Natures differ much
one from another, and we cannot by the Reasons of humane Philosophy comprehend
how Spiritual, and Corporeal Beings are linck'd together, and conjoined in one;
yet experience, and the effects demonstrate their joint influence, and
concurrence in the production either of Health, or Diseases.

Therefore we see that Joy, which is an Affection of the Soul, is as it were a
Medicine to the Body, and food to the Natural heat and moisture; in which two
qualities life chiefly consists: And for this cause Physicians frequently
advise their Patients to nourish that Affection in them, and to avoid the
contrary, (namely) Sorrow and Sadness; which last being cold and dry, and so
hindering the circulation of the Blood, debilitating the Animal, and Natural
virtues, and obstructing the distribution of due nourishment, becomes an Enemy
to life by the consequent Consumption of the Body.

Now upon this agreement and Sympathy between the Body and Soul, the Current of
this Discourse mainly (though not only) proceeds. In which you have the best,
and yet the cheapest Physic, that can be prescribed; brought unto you, not
from the Apothecaries Shop; but the Treasury of the Scriptures, the Closet of
the Holy Ghost; and all this, not with a design of destroying the bodily
Physician's Practice; (for when all is done there will be still need of him, at
one time or other:) but of assisting him by a more Divine, and expeditious
Method in his Cures, as well as preventing some unnecessary trouble, and charge
to the Patient. And so I conclude desiring thee to cover the Imperfections and
Errata's of this Work, (which may happen through the Author's inadvertency, or
the Printer's negligence) with the mantle of Candor and Charity, and to take
that in good part, which is so well intended by

Thy well-wishing Friend, J. H.

To the ingenious Author, Mr. J. H. Upon his DIVINE PHYSICIAN.
WHat in thy serious studies may we meet!
When even thy recreations are so sweet.
Thy Book is Grace and Nature bound together;
Take it which way you will, it answers either:
So prettily, so piously compact,
Divinity and Physic keep one Act.
Strange Treatise I can reach down from my shelf
Consists of Soul and Body like my self!
Thou show thy self (believed) in thy Design,
A good Physician, and a good Divine.
And that Physician to the Mark comes close,
That cures both Soul and Body with a Dose.
Go on and prosper fourth and fifth Edition,
Till John like Luke be the beloved Physician.
M. S.

The Author to his Book.
Go little Book, and try thy fortune where
More good thou may, for least thou can do here:
Whilst to a private shelf thou art confined,
Thou as to public good art still behind,
Then venture forth, and freely show thy skill,
In curing such as shall thy Rules fulfill.
I would have sent thee in a better dress,
Before thou should have tumbled into Press;
But want of time, and have 'pon Life and Death
May plead for thee, when thou art out of breath.
However termed, Fool, or a Physician;
(As suits best with Carpers disposition)
Yet let thou Momus know, a Fool in Print,
May sometime give to wiser Men a hint,
How dexterously to finish and complete
What e're in ruder draught is not so feat,
And to Accomplish what in thee's designed,
(In brief) A Body sound with a sound Mind.
THE DIVINE PHYSICIAN.
THE FIRST PART.
Demonstrating by Natural Reason, and also Divine and Humane Testimony, that
vicious and irregular Actions and Affections do prove often occasions of most
bodily Diseases, and shortness of Life.

THE INTRODUCTION.
BEcause Method is Matter memoriae, The Mother of memory; and words must be
placed as at a Feast, and not as at an ordinary; in this respect I shall
observe some order in the following Tract.

First, Then let us consider the excellencies and commodities of Health, and
long Life; that so by their Encomiums we may be drawn, and encouraged to follow
after the best means, in order to the attainment or enjoyment of them.

Health then, in the first place, is the greatest bodily blessing, which God
bestows upon any in this life: though in regard of its commonness, it be
little regarded. The benefit of this most sweet sause of all other goods, is
scarcely discerned by them that enjoy it, till sickness come: For then, not
only Orpheus his song, but much more our own experience teaches us, that
Nothing is available to men without health: neither Riches, nor Honor, nor the
greatest delights which Solomon's walk can afford. Yea life it self, which is
so precious, that skin for skin, yea all that a man has will he give for it,
Job 2. 4. (as Satan answered the Lord) even that becomes uncomfortable without
health. Besides, health is a special furtherance, and help to us in the service
of God, and in the performance of the duties of our Callings, and the want of
it a great obstruction, and impediment to us therein. For these reasons the
beloved Apostle did earnestly wish his well-beloved Gaius prosperity and
health. Beloved I wish above all things, that thou may prosper and be in
health, 3 Ep. John 2.

This is that blessing which the Lord promises to the obedient. The Lord will
take away from thee all sickness; that blessing which the Apostle Paul thought
worthy to be preserved carefully, as appears, Acts 27. 34. and likewise, 1 Timothy 5. 23. In a word, that blessing whose sweetness is so well experimented
and relished, after the bitterness of sickness, that it were but to light a
Candle before the Sun, to bring forth any further testimony in the praise of it.

Secondly, Long life may be accounted as another blessing, which by its
magnetic and attractive virtue, may not only draw our affections as a
Lodestone, but also by its acuminating power, set an edge upon our endeavors
as a whetstone. Long life is a blessing, and he that shall account it less,
does not only forget his own natural desires, but also God himself, and his
Commandment, which promises length of days, as a reward of dutifulness to
Parents, Natural, Civil, or Ecclesiastical. It was a blessing of God upon
Israel, that being in the Wilderness forty years, their garments did not wear,
as the garment of the Gibeonites: So if in many years, some Men's bodies, which
are as the garmentss of the Souls, hold out longer than other men's; as though
with the Eagle he did renew their youth, and God did add certain years unto
their days, as he did unto Hezekiah, Isa. 37. 5. this is a great blessing: For
though we Christians (as the Lord Verulam says, in his Epistle of the History
of Life and Death) do continually aspire, and pant after the Land of Promise,
yet it will be a token of God's favor toward us, in our journeyings through
this worlds wilderness, to have our shoes, and garments (I mean those of our
frail bodies) little worn, or impaired. Surely, as it is a curse upon the
wicked, not to live out half his days, Psalm. 55. 23. A plague upon the
ungodly, that they die in their youth, Job 36. 14. A punishment upon Eli, and
his Sons, for their sins, that there should not be an old man in his house for
ever; but all the increase of his house should die in the slower of their age,
1 Samuel 2. 32. So on the other side, it is God's blessing, if he increase the
length of our days, and we die with Job, being old, and full of days, and go
in our grave in a full age, as a shock of corn comes in, in his season to the
barn, Job 42. 17. and 5. 26. Therefore that Heathen (Cic. Tusc. 1.) was
mistaken, who said, Optimum est non nasci, proximum quam cito aboleri, The best
thing is never to be born, and the second best to die as soon as we are born.
For, though long life to some be as wearisome, as death is fearful; though old
age in many be a disease not curable, but by death; yet these are but
accidental; life it self is a blessing; and the longer we live, the more
experience we have of God's favor, a greater loathing of the sins of our
youth, and a larger time of repentance, as having space, wherein to grow wiser,
and better, and thereby to make this life a large preparative to Eternal life.

Health then, and long life being now considered as blessings, we will
henceforth follow the means, and leave the blessing to God.

CHAP. 1.
The first means being to avoid Sin in general; which is, supernaturally, an
occasion of bodily Diseases, and shortness of Life.

DIseases are the interests of Sin; till Sin there were no such things: For
this cause (in general) many are weak and sick: Let a Man take the best air he
can, and eat the best food he can, let him eat and drink by Rule, let him take
never so many Antidotes, Preservatives, and Cordials; yet Man by reason of Sin
is but a crazy, sickly thing for all this. For (as one says) all sicknesses of
the body proceed from the Sin of the Fuller's Comment. on 11 Chap. of 1 Cor. p.
79.
Soul: I am not ignorant that the Lethargy arises from the coldness of the
brain, that the Dropsy flows from waterish blood, in an ill affected Liver,
that the Spleen is caused from melancholy wind, gathered in the mid-riff; but
the cause of all these causes, the fountain of all these fountains, is the Sin
of the Soul.

And this Truth, from the Fountain of Sacred Writ, will be clearly derived unto
us: Our Savior said unto the Man, that had been thirty-eight years diseased,
Behold thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee,
John 5. 14. Jesus thus warning him, by showing him the cause of his infirmity,
which was Sin.

Those Physicians that derive all Diseases from natural causes only, do not
well understand that Text; for it is Spiritually discerned.

All sickness is certainly the fruit of Sin; and many Physicians will
acknowledge it, being induced thereunto by a consequence, from an instance of a
particular (though Epidemical) disease; namely, the Plague or Pestilence, which
is concluded, not only from the Word of God, Lev. 26. 25. but also from the
confirmed, constant, and received opinion of all Ages, to be Flagellum Dei pro
peccatis Mundi, The rod of God for the sins of the World: The word Plague (in
the Greek (...)) signifying no less; for it is so furious a disease, as it
disdains any general method of Cure, when it is in its rage. So that we must
needs conclude that (whatever be the natural causes of Diseases) Sin is the
supernatural, and meritorious cause, not only of this, but also of all other
Diseases. Let me instance but one particular disease more; the Palsy, when our
Savior was about to cure a Man sick of that disease (Mark 2. 5.) he first
pronounced forgiveness of Sins to him; to show that his Sins were the cause of
his disease. I confess diseases in the godly are many times God's love tokens,
and he does not always aim at the demonstrating of his justice in punishing
sin, when he lays sickness upon Men; (for sometimes he lays it upon his own
Children for other ends, as for the trial of their Faith, and Patience, etc. as
we see in Job's example) yet it is true, that God does not chastise, or punish
those that are innocent, but such as deserve it by their sins; otherwise he
should be supposed as unjust. Sin then, the Spiritual disease, is the original
and procuring cause of every natural disease, so as if there were no sin, there
should be no sickness.

But here peradventure some may object, and say, how do this appear
experimentally, and exemplarily in some vicious Persons, whose blood danceth in
their veins, and whose bones are moistened with marrow, who are in health, when
he whom Christ loves is sick, John 11. 3. as 'twas said of Lazarus? To this I
answer, that the like matter bad almost stifled, and amazed Job, (Job 21.) and
Asaph, (Psalm. 73.) but they soon understood a reason of the several
dispensations of God's Providence. One general reason might be this; it may
well stand with God's Providence, as he is the Father of Mercies, and the God
of Justice, (as he shall see cause) to let both his Mercy, and his Justice meet
together, both upon the wicked, and the Godly. As for instance, many times he
conferreth benefits upon the wicked, and suffers them to go free from
punishment: there is his mercy; though short, and temporal: but the evil that
is in them, he punishes Eternally; there is his Justice. Again many times he
punishes the sins of his best Servants with temporal afflictions; but their
goodness he rewards with Eternal blessings: there is his Justice in punishing
temporally, his Mercy in rewarding Eternally; and in both these the wisdom of
God's Providence is discovered. So more particularly, God does sometime permit,
the wicked to have a sound body, with a diseased Soul, and the Godly a diseased
body with a more sound Soul. But yet, for the most part, in the revolution of
experience we shall find, that where sin reigns most, there most diseases, as
handmaids are attending upon her: And though every general Rule in Grammar
has its exception; yet take this as general without exception, that Original,
and likewise Actual sins are the seeds of bodily diseases: Though by Gods
Mercy, and Providence all things, even the sharpest, work together for good to
them that love God, Romans 8. 28.

Yea, Sin is not only a Spiritual or supernatural cause of bodily diseases; but
also of shortness of life. For (as one says) through Sin our bodies are become
nothing, but the Pest-houses of diseases, and death. Sin has corrupted Man's
blood, and rendered his body mortal and vile: Before Sin our bodies were
immortal: (for death and mortality came in by Sin) but now Alas! they must
return to dust, and it is appointed to all Men once to die by Statute Law in
Heaven (and it is well if they die but once, and the second death has no power
over them) they must see corruption: and this is the wages that Sin allows to
its Servants; (For the wages of Sin is death, Romans 6. 23.) this is the largess
or congiary that Sin gives to its Soldiers, viz. death of all sorts; this is
the just hire of the least sin; and this hire is seldom long detained from them
that have deserved it most.

As the Lord for the wickedness of the World reduced Man's age, from almost a
thousand, to an hundred and twenty years, Genesis 6. 3. and afterward from that,
to Moses his Arithmetic, three score years and ten, Psalm. 90. 10. So now for
the same cause, he has reduced it to a very little pittance, not only to 70.
but to 7. for in Law, no man's life is valued more: so that the life of Man is
but a span, and the weavers shuttle is no more swift than it is, Job 7. 6.
Especially, when many vices are woven into it; for then God's justice soon cuts
it off, as a Weaver cuts off his web from the Loom, sometimes before it be
finished: For every disorderly Person, that has shortened his days by his
sins, may say as Hezekiah did once: I have cut off like a weaver my life, Isai.
38. 12. i. e. as some Expositors render it, I have shortened my life by my sins.
Thus Er, and Onan, in the 38th. Chap. of Genesis, by their sins contracted
their lives into the wicked man's abridgment, viz. into less than the moiety,
not living out half their days. Yea, so unquestio able is this truth, that it
was taken for granted in Job's days; as appears by Job's interrogation: How
often is the candle of the wicked putout? and how often comes their destruction
upon them? Job 21. 17.

What pleasure has he in his house after him, when the number of his months
is cut off in the mid(...) 21. And in Solomon's days it became a Proverb: The
years of the wicked shall be shortened, Prove. 10. 27.

A truth that is exemplified in most of the wicked Kings of Judah, and of
Israel.

First, The Kings of Judah: Abijam, a wicked King, reigned but three years, 1
Kings 15. 2.

Jehoram, of whom it is recorded, that he did evil in the sight of the Lord, he
reigned but twelve years, four with his Father, and eight alone, 2 Kings 8. 17.

Ahaziah, a wicked King, reigned but one year, 2 Kings 8. 25.

Athaliah, a wicked Queen, an Usurper, she reigned but six years, 2 Kings 11. 3.

Ahaz, a wicked King, reigned but unto the 37th. year of his age, 2 Kings 16. 2.

Amon, a wicked King, reigned but two years, and lived but twenty-four, 2 Kings
21. 19.

To be short, several others of the same Line, are Chronicled with short
Periods; Sin, and a sudden death reigning in them successively.

Secondly, We may instance in the Kings of Israel.

Nadab, the Son of Jeroboam, a wicked King, reigned but two years, 1 Kings 15.
25.

Baasha indeed reigned twenty-four years; but Elah, his Son, reigned but two
years; being slain in his drunken humor, by his Servant Zimri, 1 Kings 16. 8,
and 9.

Zimri, a Conspirator, reigned but seven days: for burning the King's House
over him with fire, he died. Now the cause is recorded: 'Twas for his sins
which he sinned, in doing evil in the sight of the Lord, in walking in the way
of Jeroboam, and in his sin which he did, to make Israel to sin, 1 Kings 16. v.
15. to 20.

Omri, a superlative Sinner, reigned but twelve years, 1 Kin, 16. 23.

Ahaziah, the Son of Ahab, was an Idolatrous King, and reigned but two years, 1
Kings 22. 51. He being sick, sent Messengers to enquire of Baal-zebub, the god
of Ekron, whether he should recover of his disease: but had his judgment by
Elijah, who said, Thou shall not come down off that bed on which thou art gone
up, but shall surely die: which came to pass according to the word of the Lord,
which Elijah had spoken, 2 Kings 1. And now what shall I more say? For the time
would fail me to tell of Jehoram, Zachariah, Shallum, Menahem, Pekahiah, Pekah,
and some others, who through sin lost their lives with their Kingdoms; being
cut off by the hand of God's vengeance, either before, or in their middle age:
And although some of the wicked Kings of Judah, and of Israel, did reign many
years, by the permission of a long suffering God; yet the instances are so few,
that they are much overballanced, by the short lives of those already mentioned.

Much also of this truth might be observed, in the short Periods of the wicked
reigns of sundry Princes, not only of this, but of other Nations: but thus much
shall serve to have delineated, and demonstrated sin to be in general, a
Spiritual or Moral cause of bodily diseases, and shortness of life,
supernaturally effected.

CHAP. II.
Showing that many sins are Natural causes of bodily distempers, and shortness
of life.

Most sins are sins of the flesh; which are so named, because through our flesh
(to wit our seed) or through Carnal generation, sin is conveyed into the whole
Man, Soul, and Body: Also for that the flesh, or body is the instrument to
execute the lusts of our natural concupiscence, Romans 6. 13. Thus Piscator, and
Peter Martyr do judge. Now these fleshly lusts, we must understand, have a
powerful influence and operation, in the production of fleshly or bodily
diseases: And this will appear by an examination, of the numerous offspring of
excess and intemperance, which in many places of Sacred Writs, is deemed no
less than the transgression of the bounds of God's Law.

Now the offspring, or fruits of intemperance are these.

First, It brings upon us almost all diseases.

Secondly, It takes part with diseases, and makes them often incurable.

Thirdly, It shortens our days, and makes us die in Agonies. From whence
comes soreness, and weariness, melancholy and heaviness of Spirits, stiffness
and pain of joints, belchings, crudities, fevers, distastings of meat, loss of
appetite, and other tempestuous evils, but from excess and intemperance? These
experimental effects, who can deny? since almost every Man carries about him,
and within him a convincing argument thereof. Whence is the multitude of
Physicians (says a modern Physician) but from the H. Brook in his Conservatory
of Health.
frequency, and multitude of diseases? and whence that frequency and multitude,
but from excess? This (says he) is generally confessed, but the practice still
continued, the understanding assents, but the affections overruled. Now
Intemperance in general, may be thus described: It is an inordinate and
immoderate appetite, or desire in our affections, pleasures, gifts, and the use
of the Creatures; more particularly, it is taken for an inordinate appetite,
and immoderate desire, and use of meat and drink; and this is when a due mean
is exceeded in the too liberal and excessive use of them; so that Gluttony, and
Drunkenness are the two main supporters of Intemperance, which is the Mother of
most diseases. Democritus said, that intemperate Men were Valetudinis suae
proditores, Betrayers of their own health, and killers of themselves by their
pleasures: He spoke it of intemperance in eating, and drinking; of which, and
also of other sorts of intemperance, I shall further treat in the following
Sections.

SECT. I. Of Gluttony.
THis is such a sin, as Christ gives us a strict Caution against it: Take heed
to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting,
etc. And as it is a sin; so a Mother-sin, fruitful in the production of other
sins, Deuteronomy. 21, 20. yea fruitful also in diseases of the body. The Stoics
imputed all diseases to age; but Erasistratus did not ill to ascribe all, or
most of them to excess in eating: For if a Man feed too much (as a Physician
says) these discommodities arise thereof, all Natural Spirits leave their
several standings, and run headlong to the stomach to perfect Concoction; which
if with all their forces they cannot perform, then brain and body are
over-mastered with heavy vapors, and humors, so that he is ever under the
arrest of some disease, or in danger of it. Multos morbos fercula multa
faciunt, Many dishes bring or cause many diseases: It was the observation of
temperate Seneca; and it is not without reason: For Physicians do affirm, that
crudities (the fruits of repletion) are the nurseries of all those diseases,
wherewith Men are ordinarily vexed. Now that which we call crudities, is the
imperfect Concoction of food; for when the stomach, either through the excess
of Meat, or for the variety taken at one meal, or some other evil quality, does
imperfectly digest what it has received, the juice of the Meat so taken, is
said to be crude, that is to say, raw or to have a cruditie in it, which is the
occasion of many inconveniences.

For in the first place, they do fill the brain with many phlegmatic
excrements, and overheat the bowels, whereupon many obstructions are bred in
the narrow passages of them: Moreover these cruduties do corrupt the temper of
the whole body, and stuff the veins with putrid humors; from whence proceed
many grievous diseases; for when the first Chylus is crude, and what we eat is
malignantly concocted, it is impossible (to speak as to the less Modern
opinion) that any good blood can be bred in the second Chylus of the Liver, for
the second Concoction can never amend the first. Again these crudities are the
cause that the veins through the whole body, are replenished with foul, and
with impure blood, and mingled with many humor, which do break forth into
desperate Diseases. And this may be more fully seen, if we shall make make an
inspection into a Treatise of Doctor Charlton's Exercitationes Pathologicae p.
70. wherein we may observe how, and after what manner, food becomes the cause
or matter of diseases. Or if a sum of what he more largely deliberates upon,
may be satisfactory, take it thus: From an ingurgitation of food, beyond the
strength of Nature, arises a Repletion; from a Repletion flow a Plethora, or
an Exuperance of good humors; and when these by a continual motion have
increased to corruption and putrefaction, there soon follows a Cachochymia, or
a redundance of ill Humors, and out of these two spring a most fruitful field
of diseases. Hence arise Fevers, Inflammations, Tumors, Swellings, Irruption
of the Vessels, bleeding at the Nose, Apoplexies, Cathexy, or ill disposition
of the Body, when the nourishment is converted to ill humors; Scabiness,
Leprosy, and innumerable other diseases: For (says he, p. 71.) quid mali,
precor, est quod a corrupto sanguine non expectes, ac time as? What evil
distemper, I pray, is there, but may be both expected, and feared to arise from
a corrupt blood? Thus you see, Gluttony is a Nurse to innumerable diseases.

But this is not all; it is a cutthroat to innumerable Persons, (according to
the Proverb, Intemperance is a cutthroat) destroying Man's life frequently,
and suddenly, according to that known saying, By Suppers, and Surfeits more
have been killed, than Galen ever cured. Yea by surfeiting have many perished,
as says the Son of Sirach, Eccl. 37. 31. Thus Gluttons dig their graves with
their teeth, whilst their Kitchen is their Shrine, their Cook their Priest,
their Table their Altar, and their Belly their God. Hence also it is said, That
Meat kills as many as the Musket; and that Pluaes pereunt crapula, quam capulo;
lantibus, quam lanteis; The board kills more than the sword. I have read that
the Spartans, to deter others from Luxurious feeding, erected Statues, to
represent the fatal, and fearsul end of those that were given to riot. What
Scholar has not read in Herodotus, of the Minstrel of Megara, (whose girdle
in the wast was three yards and a half long) or of Milo Crotoniates that great
Pamphagus? Athen. l. 10. c. 1. yet they died both very weak Men, and young, by
oppressing Nature. History records of the Scots, that they punished Hector
Boeth. History of Scotland.
their Belly-gods in this sort: First, they filled their bellies as full of
good Meat as ever they could hold, then they gagged them, and threw them into
the next River with their arms pinnion'd, saying, Now as thou have eaten too
much, so drink too much. But they should not have needed to punish them by such
an artificial destruction; for had they waited with a little patience, they
might have observed this sin to be its own natural punishment, destroying more
frequently, and more generally, than any other means: For Life (as one says)
is a lamp, excess in Meat does shorten the one, as too much Oil extinguisheth
the other. The Glutton then turning that into an occasion of death, which was
given for preservation of life, seldom or never lives long: But as he is
hateful unto God in idolizing his belly; so he is hurtful to himself, as a Felo
de se, in hastening his own death.

Now if any should here require some Rules of Temperance in eating, whereby
they may know, how to limit themselves within due bounds; that so they may not
run out upon the borders of Intemperance; I must suspend that enquiry with its
full determination, until I shall have positively treated of Temperance in
general: Only thus much may be inserted here, which Doctor Muffet, a famous
Physician has written in his Book of Health's Improvement. Fools and Idiots
(says he) know you when your Horse, and your Hawk, and your Dog have enough,
and are you ignorant what measure to allow your selves? Who will urge his Horse
to eat too much, or cram his Hawk till she be over-gorged, or feed his Hound
till his tail leave waving? And shall Man, the measurer of Heaven and Earth, be
ignorant, how in Diet to measure the bigness or strength of his own stomach?
Knows he by signs when they are over-filled; and is he ignorant of the signs of
repletion in himself? namely of satiety, loathing, drowsiness, stiffness,
weakness, weariness, heaviness, and belching? But we will pass over this, and
treat of the other branch of Intemperance which follows.

SECT. II. Of Drunkenness.
THat this is a sin, and that of no mean degree, we may plainly perceive by
sundry Texts of sacred Writ, Luke 21. 34. Gal. 5. 21. Ephesians. 5. 18. But most
especially and most notably in that fearful Commination, 1 Cor. 6. 10. where we
are informed, that Drunkards shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And yet
something they shall inherit; namely, diseases not a few, contracted upon them,
partly perhaps from their Parents voluptuousness; but chiefly, and most
certainly from their own habituated disorders. Drunkenness (says one) dolores
gignit in capite, in stomacho, in toto corpore acerrimos; Breeds grievous
diseases in the head, in the stomach, and in the whole body.

Now by Drunkenness, we must understand all excess in drinking with its
degrees, (as it is taken in Scripture Phrase, For overcoming of, or being
overcome with strong drink, Isai. 5. 22. Jer. 23. 9.) which tend to the
alienation of the mind, dulling or clouding of the understanding, inflaming the
blood, and confounding of health. In these and the like respects, Solomon makes
this Interrogation, who has woe? who has sorrow? who has babbling? who has
wounds without cause, who has redness of eyes? Prove. 23. 29. And it is answered
in the following Verse: They that tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek
mixed wine.

More fully we may consider the effects of Drunkenness, as they are described
by Physicians; to whose learning, and experience we owe no small honor, and
credence.

And they are resolution of the Nerves, Cramps, and Palsies.

Inflation of the Belly, and Dropsies,

Redness and Rheums in the Eyes, tremblings in the hands, and joints,
inclination to Fevers, and the Scurvy,

Sicknesses at Stomach, and sower Belchings.

Pains of the Head and Teeth, Crudities in the Stomach, and weakness of the
Stomach.

Pain in the Eyes, or dimness of Sight, trembling of the Heart, weakness of the
Liver, Distillations, the Cough, a corrupt Breath, Tumors, Gouts. These and
many more are the bitter fruits that grow upon that unhappy Tree.

And as this vice produces almost innumerable diseases and distempers; so
consequently it shorteneth life. The Cup kills as many as the Canon; and
therefore those srothie Companions, that pretend such kindness in a too free
and frequent drinking their Friends health do prove miserably unkind to their
own Bodies (as well as Souls) while they drink themselves out of health, and
life in the conclusion. For this cause Drunkenness is said to oppress Nature,
and hasten death, by consuming the natural moisture, and also by its
superfluous moisture drowning the natural heat: And thence it is that Willows
and such like, whose natural place is the Rivers side, and whose natural
property is (as it were) to be always drinking, are of short continuance.
Hence it is that this vice by Matrobius is called, Cita senectus, A sudden old
age; because they that are often drunk soon grow old: Or if some will say it is
a preventer of old age, it must be in its cutting Men off, before they can
attain to it.

Instances, for the illustration of this truth, are not few in History.

Alexander the Great, in the flower of his age, drunk himself to death, and
killed forty-one more by excessive drinking, to get that Crown of one hundred,
and eighty Pounds weight, which he had provided for him that drank most,
Plutarch. Erasinus for the same cause has called Eccius, Jeccius: For as he
lived a shameful Drunkard; so being non-plu'st at Ratisbon by Melancthon, he
drank more than was fit that night, at the Bishop of Mundina's lodgings (who
had store of the best Italian Wines) and so fell into a fever, whereof he
died, Jo. Man. L. Com. page 89.

The same Author, Jo. Manlius, tells us of three abominable Drunkards, who
drank so long till one of them fell down stark dead, and the other two escaped
not altogether free from distempers.

A Modern Author, in his Book entitled The Mirror of Examples, sets down
two or three remarkable Stories, to our present purpose.

At a Tavern in Bread-street, certain Gentlemen drinking healths to the Lords
on whom they had dependence, one of them with an Oath drinks off a Pottle of
Sack to his Lord: after which he could neither rise up, nor speak, but falling
into a sleep, dyed within two hours after.

At a place near Mauldon, five or six appointed a drinking Match, laying in
Beer for the purpose, drank healths in a strange manner; whereof all of them
died within a few weeks after.

Also at the Plough in Barnwel, near Cambridge, a lusty young Man with two of
his Neighbors, and one Woman in their Company, agreed to drink up a Barrel of
strong Beer, which accordingly they did: but within twenty-four hours, three of
them died, and the fourth hardly escaped after great danger and sickness.

Now the events of these Men's lives, and their untimely ends, are not to be
accounted so much accidental, as natural effects, occasioned by their foul
enormities, and frequently attested by the experience of every age: though not
prevalent enough with the sensual, and stupefied Drunkard, whom Austin brings
in, saying, Malle se vitam quam vinum eripi, He had rather lose his life than
his liquor: But did Men seriously (while they are sober) consider, how
injurious this sin is to the health of Body and Soul, how it shormeth Men's
lives, lengthneth their punishment here, and aggravates it hereafter, how it
fills Men brimful with diseases Spiritual, and Corporal; they should (methinks)
respect their welfare better than to buy so small a pleasure at so dear a rate.

But in respect of bodily welfare some may object, that Avicenna, Rhasis, and
Averrhoes, advise the use of Wine, Usque ad ebrietatem, Even to drunkenness,
pretending it to be Physical, as it is a Vomitory to evacuate these ill humors
in the head and stomach, which are the causes of most diseases; and that Seneca
indulgeth thus far, (Sen. de Tranquil. 15.) Nonnunquan ad ebrietatem
veniendum, non ut mergat nos, sed ut deprimat. Eluit enim curas, and ab imo
animum movet: and ut morbis quibusdam, ita tristititiae medetur, Now and then
we may drink more liberally, even unto drunkenness its self, not to overwhelm
our parts but only to depress them a while. For it washes away cares,
exhilarates the mind, and as it cures certain diseases, so likewise sadness.

To which this answer may be returned, that herein many Men foolishly err,
esteeming the cause of a hundred sicknesses to be the Medicine of one, and the
poison of the Soul to be good Physic for the Body: no good Bodily Phisician
will prescribe it, no Spiritual Physician will allow it. Cum turpis est
Medicina sanari pudeat, When the Medicine is so filthy and odious, let us be
ashamed to make use of it. When it is so sinful, let us be afraid to make
trial, whether the destruction of the Soul be the preservation of the Body. Let
us not do evil that good may come, Romans 3. 8. Much less when nothing but evil
comes from thence; as may be still made to appear in this vice; in respect of
bodily distempers. For drunkenness is so far from conferring any thing toward
bodily health, that it rather produces sickness, even by that which amongst
some sottish Physicians is pretended as a cause of health, (namely) vomiting,
which is a symptom of sickness, and also sometimes a cause of dangerous
distempers, when it succeeds a nauseous over-charging the stomach with drink:
So that whatever be the effects of an evacuation by other kind of vomits, this
by drunkenness is often a cause of many distempers, seldom or never a cure of
any; unless it be of the present sickness of stomach which this vice first
caused: But how many other distempers and diseases does it cause, which it
never cures? So that you see drunkenness is a certain cause of many diseases,
and of shortness of life; but seldom a cure (unless it be by accident) of any.

SECT. III. Of Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, etc.
THe works of the flesh (says the Apostle) are manifest, which are these;
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, Gal. 5. 19.

And they which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, Verse 21.

Now as these sins are very injurious to the Soul, so also to the body: (Ezeck.
16. 28.) For Lust not satisfying such Persons as are tainted with it, they soon
fall into immoderation and excess, which has these damages attending it: A
dissolution of strength, and spirits, decay of sight, tainture of the breath,
diseases of the nerves and joints, as Palsies, and all kinds of Gouts, weakness
of the back, involuntary flux of seed, bloody Urine:But then (as a Modern
Physician says) if to immoderation be added the base H Brook's Conservatory of
Health, p. 187.
and sordid accompanying of Harlots and impure Women: what follows? but a
Consumption of Lungs, Liver, and Brain, a putrefaction and discolouration of
the blood: loss of color and complexion: a purulent and violent Gonorrhea, an
ulceration and rottenness of the Genitals: noysom and malignant Knobs,
Swellings, Ulcers, and Fistulaes in the head, face, feet, groin, and other
glandulous and extreme parts of the body. These and many more being the effects
of that detestable sin, when it meets with that detestable disease, the
Venereal Pox, which by God's just judgment has assailed Mankind, not only in
France, but in most parts of the World, as a scourge or punishment, to restrain
the too wanton and lascivious lusts of impure Persons, causing them to receive
in themselves that recompense of their error which was meet, as it is in the
Apostle's Phrase, Romans 1. 27. though in a different sense. To this purpose Mr.
John Abrenethy, in his pious and ingenious Treatise of Physic for the Soul
thus writes, p. 369. This burning lust spends the Spirits and Balsom of
life, as the flame does wast the Candle, whereupon follows corruption of
humors, rotting of the marrow, the joints ache, the nerves are resolved, the
head is pained, the gout increases, and oft-times (as a most just punishment)
there insueth that miserable scourge of Harlots, Lues-Venerea, the French Pox.

Also Carnal Love, or fleshly lust in young Inamoratoes (whose affections are
stronger than their reason) is a branch of wantonness, that is fruitful in the
production of such diseases and distempers, as do extremely afflict, and weaken
the Persons captivated; as may appear in that Example of Amnon, who was sick
with love, (2 Samuel 13. 1. 2.) as the cause, with a consumption, as the effect,
being lean from day to day, by reason of his fair Sister whom he loved. And
hence it is that in such Persons the heat abandons the parts, and retiring into
the brain, leaves the whole body in great distemperature, which corrupting, and
consuming the blood, makes the face grow pale and wan, causes the trembling of
the heart, breeds strange Convulsions, and retires the spirits in such sort
that they seem rather Images of death, than living Creatures, who are possessed
with it. Now for further illustration of this matter, and to revive the mind of
the Reader, I shall briefly and compendiously recite these two instances. The
first is of King Perdiccas, whom Hippocrates observing, and finding him to be
in a Chronical sickness, which made his body to languish exceedingly; after
long inquiry, perceived his pining away to flow from a Spiritual disease, for
the love he had to Phila his Fathers Concubine, Saran in vita Perdic.

The other is of Antiochus, Son of King Seleucus, who burning with an
unspeakeable desire and lust for Stratonice his Stepmother, and being mindful
what dishonest fires he carried in his breast, concealed his inward wound, and
smothered the flame so long, till it reduced his body to the uttermost degree
of a Consumption: and thus lying in his bed like a dying Man, his Father was
presently cast down with grief, as thinking only of the death of his only Son,
and his own miserable condition in being made Childless, Plutarch. Now how
these two, Perdiccas and Antiochus were cured of their languishing distempers,
is inconsistent with my present purpose, to declare.

Also Sodomy, Polygamy, and self-pollution are sins of uncleanness, that by
transgressing the rules of Temperance do prove frequently occasions of many
distempers. Yea likewise the immoderate, and unseasonable use of the Marriage
bed (which is a breach of some Divine Precepts, 1 These. 4. 4. Lev. 18. 19.) is
too fruitful in diseases; not only in respect of those derived to Posterity,
but also of those propagated on the Parents themselves. For, according to the
judgment of Laevinus Lemnius, and other learned Physicians, it can hardly be
expressed, what Contagion and mischief comes thereupon, when such immodest, and
impure conjunctions are indulged: For where the right ends of Marriage are not
observed, there Persons of both Sex, at last, pay dearly for their unruly lust,
when their bodies are tormented with the Leprosy, or Pox, Gouts, Aches, or
other distemperatures: And therefore one advises, That in the private
acquaintance, and use of Marriage there be a seasonable restraint, with a
moderation; that so the pleasure therein be inter-mingled with some regard to
the rules of health, and long life: To both which those forenamed sins of
Wantonness, and Uncleanness are foul Enemies.

Moreover these sins do shorten and contract life: For those that are defiled
and corrupted by them, do very much sin against their own Bodies, wasting their
strength in pleasure, as the flame consumes the Candle, and therefore are like
Sparrows; which Aristotle says, do therefore live but a short time, because of
their insatiable copulation. And I read that the Romans were wont to have their
Funerals at the gates of Venus Temple, (Plut.) to signify, that lust was the
Harbinger and hastener of death. Yea the wisest of mere Men, does in his
Proverbs teach us the praedatory and destructive power of all uncleanness, in
these words: And thou mourn at the last, when thy flesh and thy body are
consumed, Prove. 5. 11. It is a fire (says Job) that consumes to destruction,
Job 31. 12. The Lord Verulam, in his History of Life and Death, p. 57. makes
this observation, That the Goat lives to the same age with the Sheep; (which is
seldom to ten years) and though he be a Creature more nimble, and of somewhat a
firmer flesh; and so should be longer lived; yet because he is much more
lascivious, that shortens his life. How many Examples of Goatish short-lived
Men could I extract out of History? But being confined to brevity, I must
hasten to answer an Objection: And it is this; Some diseases are cured by
Incontinency and Venereal evacuations, as Anorexia, viz. queasiness of Stomach,
Hysterical fits or suffocation of the womb, Spermatick Fevers, most vehement
pains of the Head, Priapismus, Satyriasis Furor Uterinus, etc. Diseases felt
and understood by such unmarried Persons, whose blood is in its Meridian; and
as by this means such diseases are sometimes cured; so consequently life is
prolonged. To which I may return a threefold Answer, like a threefold cord
which is not quickly broken, Eccles. 4. 12.

First, Let all be supposed which is here objected; yet surely it is but an ill
Method to cure the Body, by destroying the Soul, or to endeavor the prolonging
the Natural life, by shortning of the Spiritual, the life of grace. We must not
(as I said before in respect of drunkenness) do evil that good may come: No
necessity of health, or life ought to persuade hereunto. Ludovicus, a King of
France, undertaking a long Pilgrimage, and his Queen not being with him, his
health began to impair; which his Physicians observing, and knowing the reason
of it, persuaded him in the absence of the Queen, to take unto him another
Woman, because his health and safety required it, which he did utterly refuse,
protesting he had rather die, then have his Liie preserved by such an ungodly
means.

Secondly, Let the Objection still be enforced; yet there is no necessity to
make use of an unlawful cure, when there is a lawful one provided, (for every
one that will) in that excellent and Divine Institution of Marriage; which, as
it is intended a good prevention of all lustful, and unlawful burnings, (1 Cor.
7. 2.) so by a more warrantable course it has probably effected some Natural
Cures upon the bodies of some, and also by confining the Senses to one
particular object, far less exhausted the Spirits, and so consequently seldomer
occasioned diseases, than a licentious indulgence and extravagant and
insatiable Luxury has done.

But because all this does not directly meet the Objection, or fully correspond
to the design of my present undertaking; therefore in the last place, I would
answer more pertinently; that if any of the asore-mentioned diseases have been
cured, or prevented by such unlawful evacuations; I verily believe as ill, or
worse have been introduced and nestled into their room or in stead of them: So
that still the stream runs clear from the fountain, viz. that sin, more
particularly the sin of Incontinency and Uncleanness is a cause of diseases,
and consequently of shortness of life; as I have sufficiently demonstrated unto
any, whose reason does not too much truckle under sense.

SECT. IV. Of Idleness, Sloth, and Sluggishness.
IDleness was the sin of Sodom, Ezeck. 16. 49. a sin reproved by the Similitude
of the Laborers in the Vineyard, especially in those words: -- Why stand ye
here all the day idle? Mat. 20. 6. The slothful, and wicked Man join hands, and
go together, as one in the Parable of the Talents: -- Thou wicked and slothful
Servant, etc. Mat. 25. 26. God puts no difference betwixt Nequaquam and nequam,
An idle and an evil Servant. The Sluggard, or he that is slothful in his work,
were there no other respects, is in this much the worse, and that is in the
condition of his estate, as well as soul, for and by reason of the
nonimprovement of his temporal Talent: For (as Solomon says) He is brother to
him that is a great waster, Pro. 18. 9. and therefore is he reproved by the
Wise man, and sent to School to the Ant, (Prove. 6. 6. 10. 12.) to learn prudent
industry and diligence.

I could show you how the aforementioned sins do frustrate the end of our
Creation, become the sinks of all mischief, and evil, and so odious and
detestable, that the very Devils in Hell are not guilty of them: But my design
is only to point out sin briefly, and then more largely to prove it to be an
occasion of bodily diseases, and shortness of life. And of all sins, Idleness,
Sloth, and Sluggishness are not the least occasion, being the sediment and
collection of excremental superfluities: For as standing waters soonest
putrify; so do the humors of the body in stagno, the Pool of Idleness. The
Lacedaemonians would suffer none of their Subjects to spend their time in Sports
or Idleness; and when their Magistrates were told of some that used to walk
abroad in the afternoons, they sent to them, requiring that leaving their
Idleness, they should betake themselves to honest labors and employments: For
(say they) it becomes the Lacedaemonians to procure health to their bodies by
labor, and exercise, not to corrupt them by Sloth and Idleness.

Idleness (says a Modern Author) not only stupifieth the mind, but also
grows upon the body and blood, and betrayeth them to discomplexion, sickness,
and to many infirmities. Yea search the Physicians Library, and observe their
Conclusions upon the six Non-naturals, more particularly upon Motion and Rest,
and you may find the discommodities of this sin, (namely) Crudities,
obstructions, and a multiplication of excrementitious humors, and so
consequently a languishing, loose, slabby, infirm body. Hence it is that such
Persons, corrupted with this vice, are unavoidably in continual Physic, have
need of Issues, and other artificial helps, for the evacuation, and exiccation
of those superfluous moistures, contracted upon them by a sedentary and
slothful life: But especially those Women who have passed their youth
undisciplined, and have been bred up in such a delicacy, that they know no
other business but their pleasures, I say those find sensibly the pernicious
effects of an idle life in those diseases it particularly disposes them too,
as Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Womb, and Breast; and in that grievous
inconvenience it produteth, viz. Long travail, difficulty, and danger in
Childing; as might easily be confirmed by reason; but that probably a great
part of this Sex is sooner convinced by an Argument drawn from sense and their
own dear experience, which is most commonly the Mistress of Fools.

I might add hereunto, that they which ^ead sedentary lives, bear weak and
sickly Children; and also demonstrate such Women to be injurious not only to
themselves, but also their Posterity. But I must hasten to show you another
natural effect of Idleness, even in both Sexes; and that is a disease which is
the leaven of diseases, viz. Melancholy, which proceeds ofttimes from this
vice, and excremental superfluities gathered together in the body: For no
greater cause of Melancholy than Idleness; as Democritus Jun. in his Treatise
of that subject does largely show in place thereof, and most compendiously
conclude in another, (viz. the Epilogue) this Prescription, as an Antidote
against that disease: Be not idle, be not solitary, Burton's Melancholy.

Moreover, there are many other disease that are the excrescences of this sin:
but let it suffice in general terms to denote it as a main occasion of bodily
distempers brooding, and hatching them by a sedentary life: So true is that of
the Poet Ovid

-- Ignavum corrumpunt otia corpus. Idelness corrupts, wastes and destroys the
body. And the learned Galen says as much Otium reddit imbecillas vires
membrorum Com. 3. in lib. de Off. c. 32. Also in another place, Otium
liquefacit, Com. 3. i^ lib. 6. Eped. c. 2. And also Nature's great Explorator,
Lord Verulam, in his History of Life and Death, does denote unto us That an
idle life does manifestly make the flesh soft, and dissipable; and so
consequently an Enemy to long life.

Sluggishness is likewise much of the same Nature, and property, bringing many
from the Couch to the Bed of sickness, and from the Bed to the Coffin. For if
the old Rule be true, Diluculo surgere saluberrimum est, To arise betimes in
the morning be the most wholesome thing in the world; then surely, Regula
contrariorum, by the Rule of Contraries, to play the Sluggard, and to exceed
that convenient measure of rest which Nature allows, must be, if not the most
unwholesom thing in the world; yet one of the most. And this will appear, if we
consider the Inconveniences of immoderate sleep, as they are described by
Physicians.

First, In that the heat being thereby called into the Body, it consumes the
superfluous moistures, and then the necessary; and lastly, the solid parts
themselves, and so extenuates, dries, and emaciates the Body.

And Secondly, It fixes the Spirits and makes them stupid; it hardens the
excrements, and makes the Body costive, from whence follow many inconveniences.

Lastly, The brain being thereby filled with vapors, the Headache is caused,
the natural motions of the humors are hindered and stopped, crude phlegmatic
juices, and all manner of superfluous humors are heaped up and increased;
whence flows a notable Spring of distillations, and such like cold, and long
continuing diseases. I could add hereunto, what the Patrons and Supporters of
Balance Physic write, viz. By too much sleep the strength is suffocated,
concoction diminished, perspiration hindered, the head, and bowels hurt, etc. D.
Sanctor's, and D. Cole's new Art of Physic. But I must not forget my intended
brevity.

SECT. V. Of Immoderate Anger.
ANger, when it is immoderate, becomes sinful, when the Sun goes down upon it,
soon becomes a work of darkness: and therefore the Apostle after a Concession,
Be angry, adds a Restriction, And sin not, let not the Sun go down upon your
wrath, Ephesians. 4. 26. In which Restriction, sinful and remaining anger are
connexed, and prohibited.

Now as this remaining or immoderate anger is sinful, so it is unhealthful: for
the incommodities thereof are many, and evil: as Fevers, Phrensies, and
Madness, Trembling, Palsies, Apoplexies, decay of Appetite, and want of Rest,
Paleness, Collicks, Plurisies, Inflammations, Choleric, Caeliack, and Iliack
Passions, etc. So that not without cause was the saying of Eliphaz, Wrath
kills the foolish man, Job 5. 2. And to this purpose I shall infer what I
find recorded in humane Story. The Emperor Nerva ended his life in a Fever,
contracted by anger. The Emperor Valentinian died by an irruption of blood,
through anger, Cuspianus Chromerus l. 18. Vinceslaus, King of Bohemia, raging
against his Cup Bearer, fell presently into a Palsy, whereof he died. Also L.
Sylla, who in his anger had spilt the blood of many, at last in his fury,
raging, and crying out against one that had broken promise with him, thereby
brake a Vein within him, vomiting out his blood, soul, and anger together,
Valor. Maxim. l. 9. And Ajax through anger fell into a deadly fury.

Now from these Instances, we may conclude the truth of that Sentence in Eccl.
30. 24. -- Wrath shortens the life: And also of that old Medicinal Rule in
Schold Salerni:

Si vis incolumem, si te vis reddere sanum, -- Irasci creed profanum.

If thou will live in health, and free from sickness bane,

Then think thou choler in excess to be profane.

We may add hereunto, that anger in excess inflameth the blood, and increases
choler, which is for the most part the cause of that acute, and dangerous
disease, Cholerica passio, or Choler, which (as the Physicians write) is often
so sharp and vehement, that it does deprive a Man of life within the space of a
day or two, even without a Fever.

Moreover it is observed, that Children most fretful are usually short-lived;
and that anger if it be inveterate, causes the Natural Spirit to feed upon the
juyces of the Body; which must consequently produce Consumptions, and
abbreviate Life.

SECT. VI. Of Envy, Hatred, and Malice.
AMongst many other, These (as the Apostle says, Gal. 5. 20, and 21.) are
works of the flesh. Envy is Cosen german to hatred and malice; and so they
are all three upon the account, of a base and ignoble Race: for the Devil is
their Father, and Concupiscence their Mother. They are in the judgment of the
Holy Ghost, no less than mental Murder; for Whosoever hates his brother is a
murderer, 1 Ep. John 3. 15. v. Now (says Christ) the devil is the father of
murderers, John 8. 44.

As then we may conclude Envy, hatred, and malice to be mortal sins to the
Soul; so I shall prove them to be mortal and destructive to the Body. Envy
(says the Lord Verulam, in the History of Life and Death) is the worst of all
passions; and feeds upon the Spirits; and they again upon the body; and so
much the more, because it is perpetual; and as is said, keeps no holy days.
It is a sin that does fret, and consume the Body; and so is a means to hinder
health, and shorten life; and of this the Wise Man took notice when he termed,
Envy the rottenness of the bones, Prove. 14. 30. And justly it is called the
rotting of the bones, because like a Fever Hectic it does consume a Man, and
bring him to his end, as the rottenness of the marrow that lies within the
bones. Envious Men, cordis sui peste moriuntur, They die by the plague of their
own heart, Gregor. An envious Man is sui ipsius carnifex, His own tormentor and
Executioner. The Grecians call it (...), from the word (...), homicidium,
slaughter; because the envious Man kills his own heart with this passion. Or
it may be derived from the word (...), corrumpo consumo, because it is (...), a
Consumption. Livor tabificus malis venenum.

Yea Envy to the heart is like rust to the Iron, or blasting to the Corn; like
the Vultures eating up continually the heart of Prometheus, or the foolish Be
that loses the life with the sting: it burns the heart, and wastes the
Body, and is like the Worm that breeds in timber, and consumes it: So true
is that of the Son of Sirach, Envy, etc. shorten the life, Eccl. 30. 24.

Hatred also produces the like effects: for what is said of Envy, may as well
relate unto Hatred and Malice. Envy slays the silly one (says Job 5 chapter 2
v.) and so does Hatred and Malice by causing ill humors in the body: For
according to the Modern Philosopher M. Descartes, in his Treatise of the
Passions, The pulse in Hatred is observed to be uneven and weaker, and
oftentimes faster than usual, that a Man feels colds inter-mingled with sharp,
and pricking heat in the breast, that the stomach ceases to do its office, is
inclined to vomit, and reject the Meats it has eaten, or at least to corrupt
them, and convert them into ill humors. All which considered, Hatred can be
profitable unto none: For ill humors are the Springs of most Diseases. Again,
Hatred cannot be so small, but it hurts the Body, because it is never without
Sadness, which brings me to the next Section.

SECT. VII. Of Worldly Sorrow, and Immoderate Grief of mind.
BY those Epithetes Worldly, and Immoderate, the Sorrow to be now treated of,
is distinguished from Godly sorrow which works repentance to Salvation;
(which is neither Wordly, nor Immoderate) and may be thus described: Worldly
sorrow causing death of Body and Soul, is that which is immoderate, and
humbles not the heart kindly, but disquiets, disturbs, and distempers it,
whether it proceed from outward evils and losses, or inward evils, as most from
melancholious humors, and worst from an evil Conscience, and this sorrow may
be termed rather Attrition than Contrition: the sorrow, for our misery or
punishment, being called Attrition, for our sault, Contrition.

But to the Point in hand: Worldly and Immoderate sorrow, though it may be
looked upon as a punishment of sin, rather then a sin it self; yet doubtless it
is little less than both; being a plain aberration from the Rules of
Christianity, so long as it is leavened with Avarice, Despondency, Distrust,
Despair, Discontent. Hence it is that the Apostle Paul interdicts excessive
sorrow for the dead, because it argues despair and want of hope, But I would
not have you ignorant, Brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye
sorrow not, even as others which have no hope, 1 Thessalonians. 4, 13. Excess in sorrow
makes it sinful in Christians. And here also has place the Caveat of the same
Apostle, -- Lest any be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow, 2 Cor. 2. 7. Upon
which place a Modern Expositor (Trapp.) of our own, ventureth to say, that
sorrow for sin, if it so far exceed, as that thereby we are disabled for the
discharge of our duties, it is a sinful sorrow, yea though it be for sin. With
much more confidence then may we term that a sinful sorrow, which the Apostle
says (2 Cor. 7. 10.) works death, (namely) the sorrow of the world; which by
Expositors is understood to be, that sorrow which is proper to Men of the
World, such as are not regenerated by the Spirit of God, whose grief and sorrow
is nothing but the bitter smart of their misery, without any serious and
sincere repentance. Or by sorrow of the World is meant a sorrow only for the
loss of worldly things, or which is caused from the fear of God's Judgments in
Unbelievers, whereupon there follows commonly hardness of heart, and a
reprobate sense, and at length (if not prevented by repentance) despair and
damnation; which do not only bring a Spiritual, and Eternal death, but also by
wasting the Body, hasten a temporal death. And this will appear in respect of
the Body, First by Natural Reason, Secondly by Divine and Humane Testimony.

First, By Natural Reason. And here we must understand, that in sorrow or
sadness the heat and spirits retire; and by their sudden surrounding, and
possession of the heart all at once, (as the Physicians observe) do many times
cause Suffocation: they being likewise by uniting increased, do violently
consume the moisture of the Body, and so beget drought and leanness, and
through long continuance, Consumptions. Or as others thus, in sorrow or sadness
there is a gathering together of much melancholy blood about the heart, which
Collection extinguisheth the good Spirits, or at least dulleth and dampeth
them: Besides, the heart being possessed by such an humor, cannot digest well
the Blood, and Spirits, which ought to be dispersed through the whole Body, but
converteth them into melancholy, the which humor being cold and dry, dries
the whole Body, and makes it wither away; for cold extinguisheth heat, and
drieness moisture, which two qualities principally concern Life.

Secondly, By Divine and Humane Testimony it further appears: For first,
Solomon says, A merry heart does good like a medicine: but a broken spirit
dries the bones, Prove. 17. 22. Also heaviness in the heart of man makes it
stoop, Prove. 12. 25. It makes it stoop, because it wastes the natural vital,
and animal Spirits. Hence also is that prescription of the Son of Sirach:
Remove sorrow far from thee: for sorrow has killed many, Eccl. 30. 23. And
that of the same Author, Of heaviness comes death, and the heaviness of the
heart breaks strength, Eccl. 38. 18. These with the fore cited places out of
St. Paul's 2d. Epistle to the Corinthians, might be thought sufficient to
confirm this truth, did not some Men require a further Illustration of it by
Humane Testimony; and this may be considered in the next place, as useful to
the same end.

(...). It is Euripides.

Sorrows to Men diseases bring. Hence also, and for this cause are those trite
and vulgar sayings:

Sadness and Melancholy the pathway to sickness.

Too much sorrow makes a Man to run mad.

Sorrow is good for nothing but sin.

Hence also is that Conclusion of Aquinas in his Sums, 1. 2. q. 37. 4. o.

Tristitiae magis corpori nocet quam aliae passiones, cum vitalem motum cordis
impediat, i. e. Sadness does more hurt the Body then other passions of the
mind, because it hinders the vital motion of the heart. It likewise takes
away appetite, overheats the heart and lungs, corrupts the nutritious juice,
causes Consumptions, and other cold Diseases. Out of which we may gather, that
this Affection, especially if it be more vehement and inveterate than ordinary,
does bring very many, and those grievous damages unto the Body: some part
whereof may be evidenced in these ensuing Instances.

Plantius the Numidian, at the sight of his dead Wife presently died, Laertius.

Diodorus the Logician died for sorrow, because he could not answer the
question of Stilpo.

Homer died with sudden sorrow, because he was not able to answer a Fishermans
question, Plut.

Aristotle, the Prince of Ancient Philosophers, when he came to Chalcis, and
saw the ebbing and flowing of Euripus, that narrow Sea near Boeotia, seven
times in the twenty-four hours, because he could not find the cause, he fell
into an incurable disease, Caelius.

Phinehas's Wife when she heard the sorrowful tidings of the taking of the Arck
of God, the death of her Father in Law, and Husband, she bowed her self (being
great with child) was delivered, and died through sorrow of heart, 1 Samuel 4.
19, 20.

Queen Mary died (as some supposed by her much sighing before her death) of
thought and sorrow of heart for the departure of King Philip, or the loss of
Calice, Act. and Mon. 1901.

Now in all this Argument we may take notice, what fearful effects immoderate
sorrow does produce upon our Bodies, what a malign, cold and dry Passion it is,
wasting the radical humor, and by degrees quenching the natural heat of the
body; yea thrusting her poison even unto the heart, whose vigor she causes to
wither, and consumes the forces by her bad influence; whereof we may see the
signs after death, when as they come to open those that have been smothered
with Melancholy: For instead of a heart they find nothing but a dry skin like
to the leaves in Autumn: So that all things exactly considered, we may say that
there is not any Passion, which does so much shorten our life, or make it so
infirm and miserable, as this in its excess. Hitherto might be referred
Despair, an evil Conscience, (such as is neither quiet, nor good) and such like
self tormenting sins, which as they are sometimes causes of immoderate and
excessive sorrow; so by the like influence upon the Body, do produce such a
flow of diseases as suddenly ebb in death.

And here lest it should be judged, that Godly sorrow, which works
repentance, (because it is sometimes very intense) should produce the same
Natural effects in the Body that immoderate and vicious does, you must
understand that in true Godly sorrow (though it be sometimes very intense,
vehement and zealous) there are such intervals of Spiritual joy, by reason of
the cherishing hope of pardon, that all excess, with its Natural effects, is
diverted, mitigated, and in due season avoided.

Nocte pluit tot a; redeunt Spectacula mane. Which in a Metaphorical sense may
be rendered thus:

Clouds, and showers of grief may endure a night:
But glympses of joy return at daylight.
Or, as David, thus: -- Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the
morning, Psalm. 30. 5. The acrimony then in Godly sorrow is so corrected by the
sweet ingredient of inward Consolation, that it never proves offensive, or
prejudicial to bodily health, as wordly, and immoderate sorrow has been fully
declared to do.

SECT. VIII. Of Sensual Joy, and Laughter in excess.
SOlomon made trial of sensual joy, mirth and pleasure, thinking therein to
find true content, and Soul-satisfaction; but in the conclusion found nothing
but the husks of vanity, wherewith he at first, like a Prodigal Son, would fain
have satisfied himself, but could not, as appears by his own words, I said in
my heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth, therefore enjoy pleasure;
and behold, this also is vanity, Eccl, 2. 1, and 2.

I said of laughter, it is mad: and of mirth, what does it?

There is a woe denounced by Christ, (of whom St. Augustine notes that, it is
often read that he wept; never that he laughed, St. Aug. Sermon. 35. de Sanctis.)
against all such as rejoice in riot, revelling, carousing, luxury, and other
forbidden pleasures of this World, in that comprehensive Phrase: -- Woe unto you
that laugh now: for ye shall mourn and weep, Luk, 6. 25. All inordinate
rejoicing, or rejoicing in unlawful pleasures, may justly have the Apostle's
reprehension applied to it; -- All such rejoicing is evil, Jam. 4. 16.

Now as it is evil in respect of the Soul; so also in repect of the Body: for
that very often swounding, and sudden death has befallen to sudden and
immoderate joy; and that because the Cordial blood, and Vital Spirits, are
thereby so suddenly diffused to the exterior parts, that Life goes out
therewith, and returns not, as Fernelius notes. Or as Descartes, of this
Passion in its excess thus observes: Opening extraordinarily the Orisices of
the heart, the blood of the veins does so huddle in, and in so abundant a
quantity, that it cannot there be rarefied by the heat soon enough, to list up
the little skins, that shut the entries of those veins; by which means it
smothers the fire, which it used to feed, when it came into the heart in fit
proportion, Descartes of the Passions Artic. 122. Hence I suppose, it is that
the Lord Verulam says, in his History of Life and Death p. 221. Great joys
attenuate and diffuse the Spirits, and shorten life. Instances hereof are many
in History; let these few suffice.

Diagor as Rhodius had his three valiant Sons victors in one Olympiad: who
putting all their three Crowns upon their Fathers head: through too much joy he
presently died, Gellius lib. 3. cap. 15.

Xeuxis the Painter, beholding the vive Picture of an old Wife, which he so
cunningly did paint, burst forth so in laughter, that he presently died.

Sophocles, that worthy Poet, and also Dionisius the Tyrant, after a victory in
a Tragedy, at the whole People's congratulation, through exceeding joy yielded
up their life, Plin. lib. 7. cap. 53.

Chrysippus Philemon, at the sight of an Ass eating Figs, was so overcome with
immoderate laughter, that he died, Valor. Maxim.

Chilo, the famous Lacedaemonian Philosopher, soon expired his last breath,
when as overjoyed he beheld his Son Conqueror in the Olympic games, Ravis.

Philippides the Athenian, an aged Comic, overcoming the rest in Poesy, and
crowned for his great pains, died for his present pleasure, Cael. lib. 3. c. 15.

With such like Instances I might further dilate upon this Point: but lest an
odd Humorist should laugh himself out of breath, to think of them as
improbable, or the significant Caveats deduced from them as unseasonable in sad
times, I here desist.

SECT. IX. Of Servile, Slavish, and all Unlawful Fear in excess.
THere is (as Divines distinguish) a Divine fear, a Filial fear, a Dutiful
fear, a Wise fear; and these are all lawful: But then there is also a Slavish
fear, a False fear, a Distrustful fear, or a Natural fear joined with
diffidence; and these are unlawful.

Servile or Slavish fear, whereby Men do abstain from sin, rather in respect of
the punishments ensuing thereupon, then out of an unfeigned hatred thereof, or a
fear which arises upon the apprehension of God's Justice, and wrath against
sin, and the punishments and plagues for sin, is to be avoided as irregular:
For we ought to serve God without this sort of fear, Luke 1. 74. It is Carnal,
and such as does no wise proceed from the working of the Spirit, but is quite
contrary to the same: For God (says the Apostle) has not given us the Spirit
of fear, but of power of love, etc. 2 Timothy 1. 7. The reason hereof may be in
that the perfect love of God in us excommunicates it: Perfect love (says St.
John) caseth out fear, 1 Ep. John 4. 18.

And as touching False fear; though it be rather a fruit of weakness, and a
punishment of sin, (for so it is threatened as a punishment by the Lord, Lev. 26.
17, and 36.) then a sin in it self; yet, as it is irregular, it is concluded
within the scope of this Discourse, and as it is frequent, or excessive, may
justly deserve reproof.

Distrustful fear is straightly prohibited by those Apostles, Peter (1 Pet. 3.
14.) and John (Rev. 2. 10.) Yea all Natural fear, when it is joined with
distrust and diffidence, or excess, is to be avoided as unwarrantable in Sacred
Writ, Number. 14. 9. 2 Kings 6. 16. And was therefore by Nehemiah resisted, Nehem.
c. 6. v. 11.

Now as all unlawful and immoderate fear is to be avoided in regard of the
Soul; so also in regard of the Body: For it is often the cause of Diseases; as
first of that called in Latin Tremor, in English Trembling or shaking of the
Members. Metus dejicit vires, ac proinde tremorem inducit, says the learned
Galen, Com. 1. in lib. 3. Epid. cap. 4. Fear brings down the strength, and so
causes trembling. His meaning more largely might be thus: (viz.) that the heat
which resides in the Blood and Spirits, being that which supports and fortifies
the members of Man; those members being destitute thereof, can hardly support
themselves, but tremble and shake in that manner; and whereas the hands and
lips show greater signs of alteration then the rest, the reason is, for that
those parts have a more strict bond with the heart, and have less blood then
the rest; and therefore cold does more easily make an impression upon them.
Also it is sometimes the cause of that disease called Cordis Palpitatio,
Panting of the heart, Deuteronomy. 28. 65. or at least of the like Symptoms, and those
as dangerous, especially when they precede a Syncope or Swounding, which is as
proper an effect and Catastrophe of this Passion, as of that disease.

Moreover it is sometimes the extimulating and promoting cause of the Lask or
Diarrhaea: for as the Author of a certain Natural History says, if the Natural
heat leave the heart and go downward, 2d: Part of the French Academy p. 262.
the fear is not only increased, but it brings withal a looseness of the
belly. Therefore it is written (says he) in the Book of Job, where it is
spoken of the fear that Leviathan brings upon Men, That the mighty are
afraid: by reason of breakings they purify (or purge) themselves, (Job 41.
25.) i. e. for fear of him. Neither is this all; but experience teaches us at
a dear rate, that in immoderate fear, through the strength of fantasy, and
imagination, sundry contagious Diseases, as the Small Pox, Measles, etc. are
frequently imprinted in the blood, when guilt makes Men fearful of deserved
punishment; according to that of the Wise man, The fear of the wicked, it shall
come upon him, Prove. 10. 24.

And as it causes Diseases, so consequently shortness of life. Oft-times
present death has followed upon it, through suffocation of the Vital Spirits:
It was almost present death unto the Churl Nabal; he lived not many days
after that he had been stricken with it: It came to pass in the morning, when
the wine was gone out of Nabal, and his wife had told him these things, that
his heart died within him, and he became as a stone, 1 Samuel 25. 37, and 38. And
in the next Verse we find, that he died about ten days after. It put the Watch
at Christ's Sepulcher into such a shaking fit, by an Earthquake under them,
(Mat. 28. 4.) and another within their hearts, that, but for God's Mercy, it
had shaked them into their Graves, when they became as dead Men. It seems to
be a notable contraction of life, by its sudden introduction of the blossoms of
old age, viz. gray hairs, which by the extremity of this Passion, have been
strangely effected in the space of a week or two, (as it is storied of one Mr.
Baynings of London.) Yea, even in one night, as appears by Record of a
memorable example, during the Reign of the Emperor Charles the Fifth. For one
Francis Gonzague having caused a young Man of his house to be committed to
Prison, for that he suspected he had conspired against him; this miserable
young Man was so terrified with his affliction, as the same night he was cast
into Prison, his hair grew all white.

But more fully to the matter; we find the sad and pernicious effect of
immoderate fear in this following Narration. Anno 1568. there was in Breda, one
Peter Coulogue, a Godly Man, who by his Popish Adversaries was cast into
Prison, and his Maidservant daily brought him his food, confirming and
comforting him out of the Word of God, as well as she was able: for which they
imprisoned her also. Not long after, Peter was put to the torment, which he
endured patiently. After him the Maid was fetched to be tormented; Whereupon
she said, My Masters, wherefore will ye put me to this torture, seeing I have
no way offended you? If it be for my Faith-sake, ye need not torment me: For,
as I was never ashamed to make a Confession thereof, no more will I now be at
this present before you: But will, if you please, freely show you my mind
therein, (Vide Clark's Martyrol. p. 305.) Yet for all this they would have her
to the Rack. Whereupon she again said, If I must needs suffer this pain, pray
give me leave to call upon my God first. This they assented to: And whilst she
was fervently pouring out her prayers to God, one of the Commissioners was
surprised with such fear and terror, that he fell into a swound, out of which
he could never be recovered. Many such like Instances might be heaped up, were
it not in vain to evince this Point, Per plura quod potest fieri per pauciora,
By many words which may be done by few: And therefore I shall conclude it with
the Sentence of that Atlas of Experimental Knowledge, Lord Bacon, in his
translated History of Life and Death, page 222. Great fears shorten the life;
for (says he) in fear, by reason of the cares taken for the remedy, and hopes
inter-mixed, there is a turmoil and vexing of the Spirits. And so much shall
serve for this Section.

SECT. X. Of Immoderate Desires, Ambition, excessive Cares, Solicitude,
Covetousness, etc.
OMne nimium vertitur in vitium, All extremes become vicious; and those
Epithites, Immoderate and Excessive, signify as much in relation to Desires,
Ambition, Cares, Solicitude, etc. and therefore the less shall need to be
inferred for the arraignement of them. Know then, briefly, that the abovenamed
are all Diseases of the Soul.

Ambition, which is an immoderate desire or thirst after Honor and Worldly
glory, is a Spiritual Dropsy that is not easily cured; not only a great sin in
it self, but puts Men upon many others. There is nothing (says one, the Author
of the whole Duty of Man, p. 151.) so horrid, which a Man that eagerly seeks
greatness will stick at; lying, perjury, murder, or any thing will down with
him, if they seem to tend to his advancement. And it is the more difficultly
cured, in regard it is (as one calls it) the shirt of the Soul, viz. the last
vice we put off. In a word, it is condemned by many Texts of Sacred Writ: But I
shall instance only upon the 9 th. of St. Luke v. 46, 47, and 48. where we find
it lively reprehended, both by the real Type, or Example of humility in a young
Child set in the midst of the Disciples, and by the Doctrine which Christ urged
to them upon that occasion.

Solicitude and excessive Care is also frequently interdicted: For though a
provident care for the things of this life, when it is moderate, seasonable,
and without distrust of God, be warrantable, and commendable; yet if it be
otherwise, it is evil and forbidden. Take (says our Savior) no thought for to
morrow, Mat. 6. 34. And in St. Luke 10. 41. we find Martha for her immoderate,
or at least unseasonable care, reproved by Christ when even a well-meant
courtesy to her Savior, rather then a love to her self, was the ground and
occasion of that care.

So Covetousness taken in the largest sense, as it consists in an immoderate
desire of filthy lucre, or any thing above ones allotted portion, is not
undeservedly reproved, when by the Apostle it is called Idolatry Col. 3. 5. For
it is (as he says in another place) the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 10. not
only of the evil of sin, but also of the evil of punishment, and that
punishment not only Eternal, depriving a Man of an Heavenly inheritance, 1 Cor.
6. 10. But also Temporal, Piercing him through with many sorrows, as the same
Apostle says in the forecited, 1 Timothy 6. The Covetous Man (says one) has
three Vultures always feeding upon his heart, Care in getting, Fear in
keeping, Grief in spending, and parting with that he has: So that he is, as it
were in the Suburbs of Hell aforehand.

But this is not all the evil that springs from the root of Covetousness; for
it pierces not only the heart with sorrows, but also the whole body with
Diseases; which effect may as well be applicable to Solicitude, excessive
Cares, Ambition, and immoderate Desires. So true is that in Schola Salerni.

-- Si te vis reddere sanum,
Curas toll graves, --
If thou will keep thy self in health,
Then banish carking cares for wealth.
And no less true are the words of a Modern Physician, who largely, and
learnedly reasons upon this Point in Lingua Latina: but to avoid prolixity, I
shall as a Translator give you his sense only in Lingua vulgari, In desire (by
which D. Charton's Exercitationes Path. p. 112.
the Soul is so out of measure run out and dilated upon a good, sometime
represented as it were to come, as by reason of the delay of it, it is presently
as 'twere contracted) this singular occurreth; that it agitates the heart more
violently, and furnishes the brain with more Spirits, then any other of the
Passions. For (as he notes further) out of a longing for the obtaining that
which we ardently desire, Vid. Descartes de Passionibus Artic. 106.
the Spirits from the brain are most speedily sent into all parts of the Body,
that may serve any ways to actions requisite to that purpose; but especially
into the heart and blood contained in it, that being dilated more than
ordinarily, and moved more swiftly, it may send back again a greater plenty of
Spirits to the brain, as well to maintain and fortify the Idaea of this
Desire, as to pass from thence into all the Organs of the Senses, and all the
Muscles which may be set on work, to attain what one desires. And from
Solicitude, which is excited from the delay of enjoying the thing desired, the
same spirits are drawn back again to the brain: whence it comes to pass that
the more subtle blood being withdrawn together from the outward parts, the
heart is as 'twere straightn'd up, the circulation of the blood hindered, and by
consequence the whole Body rendered weak, faint, and sickly. So that it ought
not to seem a wonder to any, that most of those Persons, whom an Amorous
Affection, or Desire, Ambition, Avarice, or any other more fervent longing has
a long time exercised; should be brought through a long continuing Solicitude,
into the deepest languishment of Body, into a contumatious disposition of ill
humors, yea further into a Consumption, and pining and withering away of the
Body, and also into other cold Diseases. Thus He. Immoderate Desire has no
rest, it is endless, and a perpetual Rack. The Ambitious, Si appetitum explere
non potest, furore corripitur, If he cannot satisfy his desire, he runs mad
with a Frenzy.

Hereunto may be referred overmuch Study, or an immoderate desire of humane
Knowledge, which, as it was one sin which that Heluo Librorum, unsatiable
Reader, and Miracle of learning Dr. James usher, Archbishop of Armagh, Dr.
Bernard upon his Life and Death in a Funeral Sermon. p. 27
lamented in himself; that he should be as glad of Monday to go to his Book, as
of the Lord's Day for his Service; so it is no less unhealthful than sinful:
For we find in the History of his Life (I mean the Archbishop's) that he
contracted to himself the Sciatica by sitting up late in the College Library
of Dublin, Ibidem p. 108. Overmuch Study (as Machiavel holds) weakens the Body;
and (as Lemnius says) causes Melancholy; in that by reason of the immoderate
agitation of the mind, the native heat is extinguished, and the Spirits, both
Animal and Vital, being attenuated and weakened, soon decay and perish; by which
it comes to pass, that the Natural moisture being exhausted, the Body does
decline to a cold and dry habit. Yea, when Study is extended unto unseasonable
hours (as is usual with some Students) it becomes very injurious to the Body;
according to that old Sentence in Grammar: Nocturnae lucubrationes long
periculosissimae habentur, Night studies are accounted exceeding dangerous.
They cause dryness of the brain, Frenzy, dotage, emaciate the Body', make the
humors adust, increase choler, inflame the blood, and (as may be added out of
Galen and Avicenna, concerning immoderate watching, Naturalem calorem dissipat,
laesa concoctione cruditates facit, Overthrow the Natural heat, and hurting
concoction cause crudities, Galen. 3. de Sanitate tuenda Avicenna 3. 1. What
shall I say more? amongst many other Diseases, it sometimes produces
Consumptions, and sometimes Madness: And in respect of this last, Festus his
proposition, which was indiscreetly applied to Paul, may truly enough be
referred to many a hard Student, Qui insanit cum ratione. -- Thou art beside
thy self, much learning does make thee mad, Acts 26. 24. Immoderate
bookishness, seeking to fill the curious brain, fills it, and the whole Body
with Crudities, Rheums, and other Maladies, that at last the Scholar had need
be bookish again, and study how to rid himself of diseases. These are the
fruits that some Men reap by their immoderate desire after the Tree of
Knowledge: These are the consequences of that Wisdom which is foolishness with
God, as the Spirit of God terms it, 1 Cor. 3. 19.

But again we will consider all the abovementioned Enormities and
irregularities in this Section, as they cause shortness of Life. The
condensation of the Spirits (as the Lord Verulam, in his History of Life and
Death, p. 227. writes) is effectual to long life, and therefore especial care
must be taken, that the Spirits be not too often resolved; for attenuation
goes before resolution; and the Spirit once attenuated, does not very easily
retire, or is condensed: now resolution is caused by over-vehement Affections
of the mind; overgreat Cares, and carpings, and anxious expectations. Not
without reason then is that Proverbial Sentence; Care will kill a Cat, (though
it be said to have nine lives) or that observation of the Son of Sirach,
Carefulness brings age before the time, Eccl. 30. 24. Cura facit canos, Care
brings gray hairs. i. e. it antidates old Age, and so consequently shorteneth
life. Hence it is, that almost in every Village we shall find a Covetous
Muck-worm drooping, and at length dropping into his Grave; not with pure old
age, but beaten down, and overwhelmed with too much Solicitude and carking
Care, before that he can arrive to that Maturity.

Also immoderate Study, by its subtle, acute and eager inquisition after humane
learning shortens life; for it tireth the Spirit, and wastes it. Solomon
hinteth as much to us in these words: And further, by these, my son, be
admonished; of making many books there is no end, and much study is a weariness
of the flesh, Eccles. 12. 12. That is (as Bishop Hall paraphraseth upon the
place) by these Divine words, O my Son, do thou content thy self to be
admonished; not roving in thy desires after multitude of other Volumes, whereof
there is no end; in the compiling and reading of which there is much toil and
weariness of the flesh, and much expense of the Spirits.

Finally, Many other irregularities and enormities there are; but as most of
them may be reduced to one, or other of the abovementioned Sections; so the
like consequential effects may be deduced from them. And so I conclude the
whole Chapter, having largely showed and demonstrated, that Many sins are
natural causes of bodily Diseases and shortness of Life.

CHAP. III.
Containing an Enumeration of sundry Sins, as they are accidental causes of
bodily Diseases, and especially of shortness of Life.

THat we may term an accidental cause, which produces its effect, not
naturally and immediately by it self, but by accident or chance or fortune, as
the Logicians define it. Now how many sad accidents do sometimes result from
sundry sins; which expose Men to diverse Diseases, and also to shortness of
life, may appear by this following account, which (the greater part thereof) I
must crave leave to draw from, and illustrate by a Collection of several
Instances in History.

First, In relation to Gluttony and Drunkenness, we find these following
recorded, and adapted to our present purpose.

Gregory of Tours reports of Childerick a Saxon, that glutted himself so full
of meat and drink over night, that in the morning he was found choked in his
bed.

Anacreon the Poet, a grand Consumer of Wine, and a notable Drunkard, was
choked with the husk of a grape.

Philostrates, being in the Bathes of Sinvessa, devoured so much Wine, that he
fell down the Stairs, and almost broke his neck with the fall, Martid. lib. 11.

Alexander the Son of Basilius, and Brother of Leo the Emperor, did so wallow
and drown himself in the Gulf of pleasure, and intemperance, that one day
(after he had stuffed himself too full of Meat) as he got upon his Horse, he
burst a vein within his Body, whereat upwards, and downwards issued such
abundance of blood, that his life and soul issued forth withal, Melanct. lib. 4.

Within few years of my own knowledge (says mine Author) three, not far from
Huntington, being overcome with drink, perished by drowning; when being not
able to rule their Horses, they were carried by them into the main stream, from
whence they never came out alive again; but left behind them visible marks of
God's justice, for the terror and example of others, Beard's Theater of God's
Judgments.

Holofernes, while he besotted his senses with excess of Wine, and good cheer,
Judeth found means to cut of his head, Judeth 13.

Yea, woeful experience does make manifest almost every day, in one corner or
other of this Land, that the Lord punishes many with sudden death and
destruction, even in the midst of their drunken fits: although some again (to
show his delight is in Mercy, and not in the sudden destruction of his
Creatures) he punishes with some lingering distempers, whereof this vice of
Drunkenness is often an accidental cause, by exposing such Persons to heats and
colds, (the adventitious causes of most Diseases) to falls, bruises, fractures,
dislocations, wounds, contusions, combustions, etc. which are the occasions or
accidental causes, not only of many Organical Diseases, but also Similar; as
might be made apparent, if right reason, or mature experience were consulted.
And therefore let that Proverbial Sentence, Drunken folks seldom take harm, be
hereafter exploded by all sober Persons; considering how harmful and
prejudicial this enormity has been declared to be, both to Soul and Body.

And now, because Vina parant animos Veneri, Whoredom is usually ushered in by
Drunkeness, we will in the next place consider Lust, Adultery, Fornication,
Uncleanness, etc. as accidental causes of Diseases; but especially, of
shortness of Life. And here I might show how all immoderate, and unseasonable
use of Venus does impede Concoction, and so consequently produce Diseases: But
I shall rather touch upon it, as a contingent cause of Venereal Pox, which, as
in the former Chapter, we considered as a Natural effect, in respect of the
virulent Contagion communicated; so in this, we look upon it as contingent and
accidental, in respect of the Persons communicating in the abovementioned sins.

But I shall choose rather to insist upon those sins, as accidental causes or
occasions of shortness of Life; and to that end shall illustrate the Point by
these ensuing Instances.

Shechem, the Son of Hamor the Hivite, ravished Dinah, Jacob's Daughter, for
which cause Simeon and Levi, her Brethren revenged the injury done unto their
Sister, by slaying Shechem, and with him all the Males that were in the City,
Genesis 34.

In the 19th. and 20th. Chapter of Judges, we read that the Levite's Wife
having forsaken her Husband to play the whore, certain Months after he had
again received her to be his Wife, she was given over against her will to the
villainous and monstrous lusts of the men of Gibeah, who so abused her for the
space of a whole night together, that in the morning she was found dead upon
the threshold: Which thing turned to a great destruction and overthrow, not
only of those Children of Belial in Gibeah, which committed such lewdness and
folly in Israel, but also of their abettors (the Benjamites) who lost above
twenty-five thousand Men in the slaughter, through that occasion. Thus the
first voluntary lust of the Levite's Wife was most justly punished by a second
rape amongst the lustful Gibeonites, whose lust when it had conceived, brought
forth sin: and sin, when it was finished, brought forth death.

Amnon, one of the Sons of King David, was so strongly enchanted with the love
of his Sister Thamar, that to the end to fulfill his lust, he traitorously
forced her to his will: But Absalom, her natural Brother (hunting for
opportunity of revenge for this indignity toward his Sister) invited him two
years after to a Banquet with his other Brethren, and after the same, caused
his Men to murder him for a farewell, 2 Samuel 13.

The same Absalom that slew Amnon, for incest with his Sister, committed
himself incest with his Fathers Concubines, moved thereto by the wicked counsel
of Achitophel: But it was the forerunner, and occasion of his overthrow and
untimely death 2 Samuel 16, and 18 chap.

Rodoaldw. the eight King of Lumbardy, being taken in Adultery, even in the
fact, was slain without delay by the Husband of the Adulteress.

Anno 659. in like sort John Maletesta slew his Wife, and the Adulterer
together, when he took them amidst their embracements, Chron. Phil. Melancton.
So did one Lodewick Steward of Normandy, kill his Wife Carlotta, and her Lover
John Lavernus, as they were in bed together.

At Naples it chanced in the King's Palace, as young King Frederick,
Ferdinand's Son, entered the privy Chamber of the Queen his Mother, to salute
her, and the other Ladies of the Court, that the Prince of Bissenio waiting in
the outward Chamber for his return, was slain by one of his own Servants, that
suddenly gave him with his sword three deadly strokes, in the presence of many
Spectators: Which deed he confessed that he had watched three years to perform,
in regard of an injury done unto his Sister (and in her to him) whom he
ravished against her will, Bemb. lib. 3. Hist. Venet.

The Spaniards that first took the Isle Hispaniola, were for their Whoredoms
and rapes, which they committed upon the Wives and Virgins, all murdered by the
Inhabitants, Benzoni Milan.

Infinite are the Examples that might out of History be collected to this
purpose: But to avoid prolixity, let it suffice only to add hereunto, that for
these and the like sins, many thousands in the World, in every Age, have either
by the rage of jealousy in the Persons wronged, or by the revenging Sword of
the Higher Powers punishing wrong, suffered the condign punishment of death.

Thirdly and lastly, To sum up all further Addition, that might be looked upon
as necessarily relating to this Chapter, consider in few words, that immoderate
Anger, Envy, Hatred, Malice, Selfmurder, unlawful Duels, Treason, Murder of
others, Despair, Rebellion, Theft, Ambition, Covetousness, immoderate Grief,
Atheism, Blasphemy, Witchcraft, and such like, do either immediately by
themselves, or mediately by other sins accumulated, and a succession of
unprosperous events attending them, prove accidental causes sometimes of
Diseases, but most commonly of an untimely death. And so I proceed to the
fourth Chapter as follows.

CHAP. IV.
Containing an Enumeration of sundry Sins as they are, supernaturally,
occasions of bodily Diseases, and shortness of Life.

THis Chapter may seem to have some relation to the First; and so it has in
genere: but in regard it differs from it in specie; I have here placed it, as
one of the chief Corner-stones to adorn and strengthen, yea as a Top-stone to
finish and complete the apiece building of this First Part of my Discourse.

But before I descend to particulars, give me leave here to lay down somewhat
in general terms, as praeliminary to the present design.

Though God be the proper, efficient and supernatural cause of Diseases; yet
as sin is the immediate cause of God's wrath and anger, and a provocation of
his vindictive Justice, in this respect it may be termed a principal (though
not immediate) cause or occasion of Diseases, more especially, of such as
depend not upon the ordinary chain of second causes, but being above the
Sphaere of Nature, are inflicted by the almighty, and unlimited power of God.
And this the great Secretaries of Nature, as Philosophers and Physicians should
do well to observe, according to the advice of Hippocrates, who would have a
Physician to take special notice, whether the Disease came from a Divine
supernatural cause, or whether it follow the course of Nature. How this place
of Hippocrates is to be understood, Paracelsus is of opinion, that such
Spiritual Diseases (for so he calls them) are spiritually to be cured and not
otherwise: But of this by the way in general. I shall now descend to
Particulars; whereof I shall make demonstration de facto.

And First, of the abuse of the Ordinances of God, viz. the Word and
Sacraments. Theopompus a Philosopher, being about to insert certain things out
of the Writings of Moses into his profane Works, and so to abuse the sacred
Word of God, was stricken with a Frenzy; and being warned of the cause thereof
in a dream, by prayers made unto God recovered his senses again, Joseph. Antiq.
lib. 12. cap. 2. This Story is recorded by Josephus, as also another of
Theodectes a Poet, that mingled his Tragedies with the Holy Scriptures, and was
therefore stricken with blindness, until he had recanted his impiety.

In a Town of Germany called Itszith, there dwelt a certain Husbandman, that
was a monstrous despiser of the Word of God and his Sacraments: He upon a time
in the midst of his Cups, railed in most bitter terms upon a Minister of God's
Word, after which going presently into the Fields to overlook his Sheep, he
never returned alive, but was found there dead, with his Body all scorched and
burnt as black as a coal; the Lord having given him over into the hands of the
Devil, to be thus used for his vile profaneness, and abusing Holy things, Dr.
Justus Jonas in Luther's Conferences reports this to be true.

If you shall despise my Statutes (says the Lord) or refuse to hearken unto my
Law, I will visit you with Consumptions, and burning Agues, and heaviness of
heart, Lev. 26. 15, 16. Moses for neglecting the Sacrament of Circumcision
(which is much the same, (see Romans 4. 11. and Col. 2. 11. 12.) in a Spiritual
sense, with that of Baptism) was struck immediately by the Lord, and fell so
sick by the way, that it was thought he would have died: And it came to pass,
by the way in the Inn, that the Lord met him, and sought to kill him, Exodus 4.
24. Which words are by some Elucidators (Bishop Hall, etc.) thus understood,
viz. that the Lord appeared visibly unto him, and sensibly afflicted him with
some sudden and violent disease, which he knew to be done, in regard of his
neglect of his Sons Circumcision.

Eutychus for sleeping at the Sermon, fell down so as he had slept his last
sleep, (Acts 20. 9.) but that a merciful God, by the hands of Paul, did raise
him up again, to teach him (and by him all Churchsleepers) the future danger of
such negligence and irreverence in his House: His deadly fall not being so much
accidental, as a judgment from God.

And as concerning the unworthy receiving the Lord's Supper, St. Paul tells
the Corinthians, (...), For this cause, many are weak and sickly among you, and
many sleep, 1 Corinthians 11. 30. i. e. For these abuses of this Holy
Sacrament, the hand of God has been upon many of you; so as many of you are
afflicted with diverse kinds of Diseases, and many of you are stricken with a
temporal death, here called sleep. Now from the Apostles declaring this to be
the true cause of that sickness and mortality that was amongst them, it is to
be supposed that either they looked not after the cause at all, but took it to
come only as a thing of course, or (which is more probable) that they mistook
the cause, imagined that to be the cause which was not. A great mortality there
was amongst them, many died, but that they thought might proceed from the
distemperature of the Body, or from the corruption of the Air, or from want of
exercise, or from not observing a good diet, or from immoderate labor: Some
they thought might die of one of these causes, some of another. But the Apostle
passes all these over, and makes known unto them, that however these might be
considerable as causes in their due places; yet the true, main, and principal
cause they were utterly ignorant of; and that was their abusive and negligent
receiving of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: For this cause many are weak,
etc.

A truth which had any less than an Apostle delivered, he would have been
esteemed a setter forth of new Doctrine: Or had the Apostle delivered it in any
dark and obscure Phrase, flesh and blood would have found out twenty
Interpretations, before ever they would have thought of this: But the Speaker
is so Divine, and the speech so plain, that it cannot be mistaken: (...), says
the Text, For this cause, because of your unworthy receiving the Body and Blood
of Christ, many are sick, and many sleep. Hence was that speech of Saint
Anselme taken, who says, that many Diseases that reign in the Summer (though
Physicians may impute them to other secondary causes) proceed from Peoples
irreverent receiving that Sacrament at Easter.

That de facto this is a truth, see the 2d. of the Chronicles, and the 30th.
chap. v. 20. where you shall find, that for some abuses and disorders committed
in the Celebration of the Passover, the Jews were smitten with some troublesome
disease: For it is here said, that upon Hezekiah's Prayer the Lord healed the
People: which implies plainly that they were diseased and sick before; and yet
this default was only in the circumstantial Points of that Sacrament: For it is
there also said, that every one had prepared his heart for to seek God. Some
defect there was only in some Ceremonial Rite to be observed. Now what we find
applied to the Passover, we may without fear apply to the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper: For however they differ in circumstances, yet for substance they
are the same. Sickness, we see, was sent for the abuse of that; and therefore
the same punishment appointed for the abuse of this, yea inflicted; witness the
Corinthians, who for this cause were plagued with diverse Diseases, and sundry
kinds of death. And indeed it is not unlike, that since these Corinthians,
there have been many thousands, who for the very same cause have not (as the
Psalmist says) lived out half their days, but have been swept away out of the
Land of the living, and gone down with sorrow into the Grave. True then it is
de facto, God has thus plagued the sinful neglect and abuse of his Sacrament.

I will now also demonstrate, that de jure it must needs be so; and this will
appear, if we consider the sin it self to be Camelinum peccatum, A sin of a
very large size, burdened with those following aggravations; (namely) that it is
a sin immediately against Christ's own Person, robs God of that which he is
most tender of, his honor, and is in the judgment of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor.
11. 27. (I suppose if will-fully committed) no less than a spilling and
shedding of the precious blood of Christ, Heb. 6. 6. In a word, that it is a sin
paramount like Saul higher then his Fellows. And therefore let us judge in our
selves, whether the wages of such a sin unrepented of, can be less than
Corporal plagues, and temporal death. For, if we contemn the sacred Body of
Christ, how can we think that God should take any care of ours? If we make no
reckoning of Christ's death, it is but just with God to disregard ours. Oh then
as we tender our health and our lives, let us never dare to approach unto that
dreadful Table, without due reverence and a competent measure of preparation.

Secondly, Concerning the Profaning the Lord's day, Sacrilege, etc. we read
several Instances of God's wrath upon such, declared in Corporal plagues and
destruction.

A certain Godly Minister preaching, and pressing the sanctification of the
Sabbath, and taking occasion herein to make mention of that Man, who by the
special command of God was stoned to death, for gathering sticks upon the
Sabbath day; Hereupon one in the Congregation stood up and laughed, and made
all the haste he could out of the Church, and went to gathering of sticks,
though he had no need of them: But when the People came out from the Sermon,
they found this Man dead, with the bundle of sticks in his arms, lying in the
Church Porch. This is attested by a credible Author.

Yea, if time would permit, or this Enchiridion extend to it, I could expatiate
upon such Instances, as might likewise demonstrate, that not a few have, upon
the breach of the fourth Commandment, been stricken by the immediate hand of the
Almighty, with lameness, and sore Diseases. And for Sacrilege, that has been
severely punished in like manner: As in Antioches Epiphanes, who fell sick with
grief upon the remembrance of the evils he did at Jerusalem, in taking away the
Vessels of gold and silver that were therein, confessing that for this cause
his troubles came upon him, and so suddenly died, 1 Match. chap. 6. Also it is
recorded that wicked Alcimus, for his violation of the Sanctuary; and his
sacrilegious enterprises, was immediately taken with a Palsy, so that he could
no more speak any thing, but died suddenly with great torment, 1 Match. 9. cap.
54, 55, and 56. v. Again, Ananias and Sapphira his Wife, for their Sacrilege
cloaked with hypocrisy, at Peter's rebuke fell down dead, Acts 5. 5. and 10.

Thirdly, Swearing, Blasphemy, and Perjury do sometimes in a supernatural
manner, occasion Diseases and shortness of Life.

Mr. Fox, Acts and Mon. p. 2101. tells us of one, named John Peter,
Son-in-Law to Alexander that cruel Keeper of Newgate, who being a most horrible
Swearer and Blasphemer, used commonly to say, If it be not true, I pray God I
may rot ere I die: And not in vain, for he rotted away indeed, and so died in
misery.

I read of a Perjuter that forswore himself to the end to deceive and prejudice
another thereby: But he had no sooner made an end of his false Oath, but a
grievous Apoplexy assailed him; so that without speaking any one word he died
within few days.

That Story in Eusebius is very remarkable, concerning Narcissus a good Bishop
of Jerusalem, and three lewd Varlots his Accusers, as it is recited by the
abovenamed Mr. Fox. Narcissus intending to accuse three notable Malefactors of
their misdemeanors, they thought to prevent his accusation by first laying a
grievous Crime to his charge, and to get credit thereunto, each of them bound
it with their severeral Oaths, one wishing to be consumed with fire, if it were
not so, another to die of some grievous disease; the third to lose both his
eyes: Narcissus seeing three to one was odds, gave place; but what became of
these perjured Fellows? the first was consumed by a fire set in his House: the
second was taken with a strange Disease, that overspread his whole Body, which
brought him to a miserable end: the third seeing God's judgments upon his
Brethren in evil, confessed the fault, for which he continually shed such
abundance of tears, that he wept out his eyes, becoming blind thereupon, Eusebius.
lib. 6. p. 101. God who takes notice of Men's Oaths, takes vengeance of their
breach and violation.

Also we find recorded, that in the Reign of the Emperor Anastatius, there was
a certain Arian Bishop, whose name was Olympus, who, as he was washing himself
in a Bath, belched forth many blasphemous speeches against the blessed Trinity;
whereupon lightning fell down from Heaven upon him three times, and he was
burnt and consumed therewith, Paul. Diacon. in the History of Anastatius.

There was also in the time of Alphonsus, King of Arragon, a certain Hermit
called Antonius, a monstrous blasphemer, that belched out vile and injurious
speeches against Christ Jesus, and the Virgin Mary his Mother; but he was
stricken with a most grievous Disease, even to be eaten and gnawn in pieces of
Worms, until he died, Aeneas Silvius of the Acts of Alphonsus.

Fourthly, Pride, Vainglory, Ambition, Haughtiness do sometimes produce the
like effects, in the like manner, as may appear in these following Instances.

Antiochus, (the same with the aforenamed Epiphanes, p. 100.) a notable Tyrant
and Persecutor of the Jews, in his pride and fume said, That he would come to
Jerusalem, and make it a common burying place of the Jews: But the Lord
Almighty, the God of Israel smote him with an incurable and invisible Plague:
For as soon as he had spoken these words, a pain of the bowels, that was
remediless, came upon him, and sore torments of the inner parts, 2 Match. 9.
Howbeit he nothing at all ceased from his bragging, but still was filled with
pride, breathing out fire in his rage against the Jews: But it came to pass
that he fell down from his Chariot carried violently; so that having a sore
fall, all the Members of his Body were much pained; And soon after, the Worms
came out of his Body, and while he lived in sorrow and pain, his flesh fell
away, and the filthiness of his smell was noysom to all his Army: And so the
wrath of God ended this proud Man's miserable days.

The other is that of King Herod, surnamed Agrippa, which put James the Brother
of John to death, and imprisoned Peter, with purpose to make him taste of the
same cup, Acts 12. This Man was puffed with Sacrilegious pride; for being upon
a time seated in his Throne of Judgment, and arrayed in his Royal Robes,
showing forth his greatness and magnificence, in the presence of the
Ambassadors of Tire and Sidon, who desired to continue in Peace with him, as he
spoke unto them, the People shouted and cried, that it was the voice of God,
and not of man: Which titles of honor he disclaimed not, and therefore the
Angel of the Lord smote him immediately, because he gave not God the glory: and
he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost, Acts 12. 23. Josephus relates
the Story, how that Herod not reproving nor forbidding his pernicious
Flatterers, was presently taken with most grievous and horrible gripes in his
bowels; so that looking upon the People he uttered these words: Behold here
your goodly god, whom you but now so highly honored, ready to die with extreme
pain, Jewish Antiq. lib. 19. cap. 1. Thus did this miserable Man exemplarily
verify the Wise man's Proverb: Pride goes before destruction: and an haughty
spirit before a fall, Prove. 16. 18.

Fifthly, Adultery, Fornication and the like, are also sometimes,
supernaturally, occasions of Diseases, and shortness of Life, as may appear de
facto in the succeeding Instances.

Claudius of Asses, Counselor of the Parliament of Paris (a Man very ill
affected to the Professors of the Gospel) committed villainy with one of his
waiting Maids, in the very midst whereof he was taken with an Apoplexy, which
immediately after made an end of him, Beard's Theater of God's Judgments.

In Northamptonshire a Noble Man's Servant, of good credit and place with his
Master, having familiarity with another Man's Wife, as he was about to commit
villainy with her in a Chamber, he fell down stark dead, with his hose about his
heels: which being heard (by reason of the noise his fall made) of those which
were in the lower room, they all ran hastily up, and easily perceived both the
villainy he went about, and the horrible judgment of God upon him for the same,
Ibidem p. 372.

Pliny tells of Cornelius Gallus and Q. Elerius, two Roman Knights, that died
in the very act of filthiness, Plin. lib. 7.

Pharaoh having taken Abram's Wife from him, was plagued with great plagues by
the Lord, and thereby compelled to restore her, Genesis 12. 17. Also Abimelech,
King of Gerar, for taking away the same Woman, even Sarai (afterward Sarah)
from her Husband, though the non-execution of Abimelech's intention might
partly excuse him, and the integrity of his heart, and innocence of his hands
might plead for him, was yet notwithstanding forewarned, and admonished by God
in a dream, saying unto him: Behold thou art but a dead man, for the woman
which thou have taken: for she is a man's wife, Genesis 20. 3. And a little after
God says unto him: Now therefore restore the man his wife: for he is a
Prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shall live: and if thou restore
her not, know thou that thou shall surely die, thou and all that are thine,
Verse. 7.

Also the lustful Sodomites for that sin, which deriveth its name from the
wicked place of their Habitation, were smitten with blindness, Genesis 18. 11. A
just and proper punishment to stop up those lights, that were the windows or
inlets, and outlets of such abominable lust and concupiscence.

Lastly, what shall I more say? (to borrow the Apostle's Phrase, Heb. 11.) for
the time would fail me to tell of Miriam, who for sedition was punished with a
Leprosy, Number. 12. 10. Of Gehazi, that for covetousness and dissimulation; of
King Azariah, who for not removing the high Places, 2 Kings 5. 27. 15. 4, and
5. and King Uzziah, that for invading the Priest's Office, 2 Chronicles. 26. 20.
were smitten with the same virulent Disease: And of Belshazzar, who for rioting
and revelling amongst his pots, had the end of his life, as well as Kingdom,
denounced against him by a bodiless handwriting upon the wall, the Lord's
decree, Dan. 5. and also of a Cloud of witnesses more, in Divine, and Humane
Records, portending a shower of wrath and vengeance from Heaven upon all
impenitent Sinners, even in this life, by Corporal plagues, and destruction. I
shall therefore add only thus much more to the sum, and then give you the
total, viz. that as God is a supernatural Agent, and his Power is not to be
limited to Natural means, in regard it is evident by many instances that he
can, and sometimes does work without means in the production of sundry Diseases
and mortal Distempers: (a truth not much taken notice of by such as would
comprehend all causes and effects within the Sphaere of Nature) so likewise the
Devil, by God's permission, for the punishment of some sins, has power to
cause sickness, and that supernaturally: So he did afflict Saul with the
vehemence of a frenzy and melancholy Distemper, 1 Samuel 16. 23. So he did the
Lunaticks, Mark 9. and many Daemoniacal Persons with strange maladies; Luke 13.
yea, and still does act over his old part in these last days (though not so
frequently as in Christ's) getting possession in many, even in this Nation, as
History, and our own experience can demonstrate. And as he can perform this by
himself, so likewise by his Accomplices, and Instruments, as Witches and
Magicians, who by God's permission can cause most Diseases, yea sometimes death
it self to such as they bear malice; as might more fully appear de facto, by a
Book entitled, The Arraignement and Trial of witches at Lancaster and York:
But yet their power is so limited by an Higher, that not all whom they spleen
are subject to it; but only, or mostly, such as will not be gathered under the
wings of God's Providence and protection, straying so far in sin, as until they
become a prey unto Satan and his Hellish Spies; who will at least infest their
Bodies with Diseases and sudden mortality; though mercy, perhaps, may step in
betimes to redeem their Souls. And thus may we discern the truth of this Point,
that those sundry sins, which I have mentioned in this Chapter, are in a
supernatural way principal occasions of bodily Diseases, and shortness of Life.

A Corollary. The Result of the whole preceding Discourse is, that as the Body
by a powerful influence works upon the affections of the Soul; so the Soul
works most effectually upon the qualities and temperature of the Body,
producing by her Passions and perturbations wonderful alterations, as most
Diseases, and sometimes death it self. For sin is the cause of that excess,
which is in the qualities of which our Bodies are made, and consequently of the
Diseases that proceed from thence, which afterward bring death to the Body. But
this is not all: for sometimes it comes to pass that when those effects are not
produced by such natural means; the mind being corrupted and viciated, does
draw them down from Heaven, being supernaturally wrought, for the greater
testimony of God's power and vengeance upon obstinate Offenders. So then that
is most true which Plato says in his Charmides: Omnia corporis mala ab anima
procedere; All the mischiefs of the body proceed from the soul. And thus much
shall suffice to have run over the First Part of this Undertaking, which was to
demonstrate by Natural Reason, and also by Divine, and Humane Testimony, that
vicious and irregular actions, and affections prove often occasions of most
bodily Diseases, and of shortness of Life.

THE SECOND PART.
Demonstrating by Natural Reason, and also Divine and Humane Testimony, that
virtuous and regular actions, and affections do conduce to the preservation of
Health, and prolongation of Life.

CHAP. I.
In a Transition from the First Part to the Second, the terms, virtuous and
regular, and explained, and the method of the subsequent Discourse is declared.

THe cause of the Disease being known, the Cure is the more readily wrought;
and in this respect I shall be the more brief in this my Second Part; because
Contraria contrariis illustrantur, Contraries are illustrated by contraries;
and that in such a manner, as the First Part being admitted for a truth, the
Second may Regula contrariorum, By the Rule of contraries, succeed as a
necessary consequence. But before I proceed to further illustration, I shall
explicate the terms. By the term virtuous we may understand godliness, honesty
of life, and good manners: For the word (...), virtue, according to the
ordinary known notion of it, signifies probity of manners among Men, as the
generical word that contains all Moral and Christian virtues under it, in which
sense it is used by St. Paul (...), If there be any virtue, Phil. 4. 8. And
also by St. Peter, (2 Pet. 1. 3.) as you may take notice of by viewing the
Original, and the Annotations of the learned Dr. Hammond upon the same. So by
the word regular we understand, such actions and affections as are squared
according to the direction of God's Word, which is a rule to go and work by. As
many (says the Apostle) as walk according to this rule, (or Canon) Gal. 6. 16.
Hence the Scriptures are called Canonical, because they contain, and give a
perfect rule of Faith and manners unto the Church; which is bound to walk
obediently, according to this rule, and to give testimony to it, and not by her
authority to overruled it, and the sense of it, as many do without blushing.
Likewise by this term regular, we may apprehend and comprehend whatsoever is
according to the dictates or rules of right reason, in the whole course and
carriage of a Moral, Prudent, Christian, and Religious conversation. And this I
might easily prove, by showing the great congruity that is between that light,
and the Laws, that God has placed in our Souls; and the duties of Religion
that by the expresness of his written Word he requires from us; and demonstrate
that reason teaches all those, excepting only the two positives, Baptism, and
the Holy Eucharist, as a learned modern Author has said before me in his
Sermon ad Clerum, upon Romans 12. and latter part of the first Verse. -- Which is
your reasonable service. But I shall now proceed to something more proper and
adaequate unto the present purpose; and that is to lay down a Platform of the
succeeding Argument.

In the next Chapter I shall demonstrate in general and particular, that
virtuous and regular actions and affections are, in a supernatural sense,
conducing to the preservation of health, and prolongation of life; and in the
third Chapter shall show you that such actions and affections do in a Natural
sense conduce to the same end of health and long life; and in the fourth
Chapter prove that the same means, through the blessed influence of Divine
Providence, do become occasions of the same Natural effects; and in the last
Chapter shall answer some Objections briefly, and then conclude the whole.

CHAP. II.
Showing in general and particular, that virtuous and regular actions and
affections, are in a supernatural sense, conducing to the preservation of
health and prolongation of life.

IF we search the Scriptures, we shall find a great Cloud of witnesses and
testimonies ushering in this truth, viz. that a life led in Religion, virtue,
and the fear of God, does conduce much to the health of Body, and also length
of days: As for instance, it is written, Ye shall serve the Lord your God, --
and I will take sickness away from the midst of thee, Exodus 23. 25. Also long
life is promised as a blessing unto them that keep the Commandments in these
ensuing words, -- That he turn not aside from the Commandment, to the right
hand, or to the left: to the end that he may prolong his days in his Kingdom,
Deuteronomy. 17. 20. Also in these: That thou may love the Lord thy God, and that
thou may obey his voice, and that thou may cleave unto him: for he is thy
life, and the length of thy days, Cap. 30. verse. 20. Again health is promised
upon like conditions: Be not wise in thine own eyes (says Solomon) fear the
Lord and depart from evil: It shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy
bones, Pro. 3. 7, 8. Thus Jesus Christ, the grand Exemplar of innocence and
integrity, was without sin, and therefore without sickness.

More particularly, these blessings are held forth as temporal rewards of
sundry Moral, Civil, and Religious acts and duties; and this may appear both by
Divine, and Humane Authority.

First, then in respect of obedience to Parents, we find long life promised as
a motive to it in the fifth Commandment: Honor thy father and thy mother; that
thy days may be long upon the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee, Exodus
20. 12. Which the Apostle calls the First Commandment with promise, Ephesians. 6.
1, and 2. viz. the first affirmative Commandment; or the first in the second
Table; or the first of all the Ten with promise, in particular to them that
keep it. Which promise shows that a more plentiful blessing, in this kind,
follows from our obedience to this, than to the other Commandments. And yet I
confess, obedience in general meets with the same blessing; as the Psalmist
does denote unto us: What man is he that desires life, and loves many days,
that he may see good? keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking
guile.

Depart from evil, and do good: seek peace, and pursue it, Psalm. 34. 12, etc.

However there lies a special Emphasis upon the particular observance of the
aforesaid Commandment, by an express and particular promise of long life. But
does this promise always hold? Yes surely, it holds generally and for the
most part, in comparison of the wicked, who do not live out half their days;
Psalm. 55. 23. and if it fail, it is but rarely; and then in exchange for the
better, that (as the Prophet says) The righteous may be taken away from the
evil to come, Isay 57. 1. I say but rarely it fails; for to say otherwise were
to make the promise of no effect, and the tenor of the Commandment very
ambiguous. But do not the disobedient live long also? truly they have no
promise for it; and commonly they are cut off by an untimely death; or if some
of them be reprived until old age, they are but comparatively few, being
reserved only as so many examples of God's mercy and forbearance, as the rest
(being many) are soon cut off, as examples of his justice. Long life then is
most commonly the reward of obedience and piety to Parents; And it must needs
be so, when Divine Providence, which is more then a Wall of brass to encircle
and secure us, takes such especial care in the protection and preservation of
such as are endued with that eminent virtue; as appears by what Aristotle
tells us, viz. how that from the Hill Aetna, there ran down a torrent of
fire, that consumed all the houses thereabout; yet in the midst of those
fearful flames, God's especial care of the Godly and obedient, shined most
brightly: For the River of fire parted it self, and made a kind of lane for
those who ventured to rescue their aged Parents, and pluck them out of the jaws
of death. Ipse dixit, (...), Arist. de mundo cap. 6.

If Providence then wrought so much in a miraculous way for the preservation of
the lives of Heathens, to reward their duty showed toward their Parents;
surely, Christians, the Children of God (whose obedience to Parents springs
originally from their obedience to their Heavenly Father) may with much more
confidence depend upon the same Providence for the like preservation, and so by
consequence the prolongation of their lives, as a reward of the same duty.

Now though I have insisted upon the aforementioned Commandment in a literal
sense, yet by the rules of extension, requisite for the interpretation thereof,
we are to understand there, not only our Natural Parents, but as Spiritual
Fathers, 1 Cor. 4. 15. as Ministers, and political Fathers, Genesis 45. 8. as
Magistrates, and oeconomical Fathers, 2 Kings 2. 12. 5. 13. as Masters, and
matrimonial Fathers, as Husbands, Ephesians. 5. 22. to all which a respective
obedience may, I suppose, claim a share or portion in the promise of long life.

In the Second place, devout and zealous Prayer, in a supernatural way
procures bodily health, and so by consequence length of days, to enjoy the
same. Sick Abimelech was sent to Abraham a Prophet to be healed by prayer: Now
therefore (says God) restore the man his wife: for he is a Prophet, and he
shall pray for thee, etc. Genesis 20. 7. So Abraham prayed unto God: and God
healed Abimelech, v. 17. So then Abimelech was healed by God as the supreme and
efficient cause, by prayer as the instrumental. Hence it is the Son of Sirach
advises us: My son, in thy sickness be not negligent: but pray unto the Lord,
and he will make thee whole, Eccles. 38. 9. And also soon after shows us,
that the good success of Physicians depends upon something beyond the Sphaere
of Natural means; and that is prayer unto the Physician of Physicians, the Lord
omnipotent: There is a time (says he) when in their hands (i. e. the
Physicians) there is good success: For they shall also pray unto the Lord, that
he would prosper that which they give for ease and remedy to prolong life,
Ibidem v. 13, and 14.

This excellent issue of devout Prayer is further declared in these following
Instances. Hezekiah being arrested by a violent and dangerous distemper, for
some arrears due to the great Landlord of Heaven, and Earth, was further
afflicted by a sad message of being turned out of the tenement of his Body by
death: But by his humble supplication and mournful prayer unto his merciful
Lord, he had a Lease of his life granted him for 15. years, subscribed with a
promise, according to God's own order, and sealed with a miracle, to confirm it
further, upon the dial of Ahaz, as you may see more fully by a recourse to the
sacred Text, 2 Kings 20. 1, etc.

I have read, that on a time there was a meeting appointed at Haganaw, upon the
Rhine, where the Reformed Divines were to meet, and in a friendly manner, to
debate differences: But, as Melancthon was going thitherward, he fell sick at
Vinaria: Luther and Cruciger hearing of it, by long journeys hasted to him: and
as soon as Luther saw how miserably he was wasted with his Disease, with sighs
and tears he brake out into this speech: Alas! how precious and profitable an
instrument of the Church is miserably weakened, and ready to perish? And
therewithal, falling upon his knees, he prayed most earnestly for his recovery.
And afterward Melancthon confessed, that if Luther had not come, he had died,
Clark's Lives of the Fathers p. 247.

Yea, it is written of this Luther, that by his prayers he could prevail with
God at his pleasure. Praying for the recovery of Myconius, he let fall this
transcendent rapture of daring Faith: Fiat voluntas mea, Let my will be done;
And then comes off sweetly: Mea voluntas, Domine, quia tua, My will, Lord,
because thy will. Beatus est qui habet quicquid vult, and nihil male vult:
Blessed is he that has what he will, and wills nothing but what he should.

Also I find recorded, that the Lady Ann Henage, lying sick of a violent
fever, which her Physicians deemed to be mortal; Mr. Fox was sent for, to be
present at her ending: and when by instructions and prayer, he had prepared her
for death, he told her, that she had done well, in thus fitting her self for
her dissolution, yet that she should not die of that sickness. A Knight, her
Son-in-law, being by, told him in private, that he had not done well, in thus
discomposing her mind with hopes of life. To whom Mr. Fox answered, That he
said no more then what was commanded him: for it seemed good to God that she
should recover. Which also came to pass, as an effect of fervent prayer, which
prevailed, when Natural means failed, Idem 794.

King Edward the Sixth, as he was constant, and fervent in his private prayer,
so was he as successful therein, witness this Example: Sir John Cheek, his
Schoolmaster, fell desperately sick, of whose condition the King carefully
enquired every day: At last his Physicians told him, that there was no hope of
his life, and that he was given over by them, for a dead Man. Nay (said the
King) he will not die at this time, for this morning I begged his life of God
in my prayers, and obtained it. Which accordingly came to pass, and soon after,
Sir John, beyond all expectation, wonderfully recovered, Full. History of the
Church p. 424.

It is said of St. Augustine, in a Relation of his life, that he was always
powerful in prayer, so that sometimes thereby he cast out devils, and sometimes
restored sick Men to their health.

It would perhaps be tedious to the Reader to annumerate any further instances
to this purpose, as by demonstrating what a wonderful decrease there has been
sometimes observed in the weekly Bills of mortality, in several Places of this
Kingdom, graciously succeeding, upon the humble and devout prayers of God's
People: And therefore I shall content my self to insist only upon St. James his
Canon: Is any sick among you? let him call for the Elders of the Church, and
let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the Name of the Lord: And
the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up: and
if he has committed sins, they shall be forgiven him, James 5. 14, and 15. By
the Elders of the Church we may understand the Pastors, or Ministers of the
Church, who are to be sent for by the sick, that they may pray for him, and
with him: And their faithful prayer shall be a means (ordinarily) to save that
sick Person from the danger of his Disease, and whereas sins are the cause of
his sickness, even those sins of his shall upon humble and devout prayers be
done away and forgiven.

Now as concerning the Ceremony of anointing the sick Body with Oil in the Name
of the Lord, this was an extraordinary thing, communicated to those which had
gifts of Miracles, used by them as an outward Symbol, and sign of the
Spiritual healing; and so we deny not but it was an extraordinary temporary
Sacrament; but now that Miracles are ceased in the Church, still to retain the
outward sign, is a vain supertitious imitation; although St. James his Oil, and
the Popish Ointment do much differ, See Fulke on the Rhem. Test.

Again this usage as a bare Ceremony, was not instituted by Christ, or any way
commanded to be continued by the Apostles or their Successors in the Church,
even while the gifts of Healing did continue amongst them; but was by the
Apostles themselves very frequently omitted in their working of Cures; as the
learned Dr. Hammond has observed in his Annotations.

Prayer then, you see, was the more, yea the only effectual and substantial
performance, or means in the Cure, and the Ceremony of anointing may now
reasonably be omitted.

Obj. But against the use of prayer, some may object the words of Job, Job 7.
1. Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? are not his days also
like the days of an hireling? What need then of prayer, when every Man's time
upon Earth like the Sea, is bounded, so as hitherto shall it come, but no
further?

I answer only hereunto, at present, that this may be a general Objection
against the use of all other means, as well as Prayer, in relation to the cure
of Diseases, and prolongation of life, and therefore shall be answered in its
proper place designed.

A 2d. Object. Against, some lukewarm Christians may object further, and say, I
have often prayed upon the account of health, for my self and others, in time
of sickness; but all my prayers have, like Arrows shot up to Heaven, returned
upon my own head, without doing their errand.

Solut. To this I answer: Our prayers many times come short of Heaven, because
they are not winged with zeal and importunity: It is the importunate Beggar
that gets an Alms: They that faint in their prayers, have such a faint heart
as never wins a fair blessing. And therefore as a Corroborative against such
faintings, let us consider, how often we use a Medicine for the Body, before it
can be whole, how many strokes on Oak must have, before it will fall, how over
and over again we plough our Lands and delve our Gardens, before we can have
our expectation; and also how frequently Earthly Kings must be attended upon,
before Suitors can obtain their suite. Surerely favors and mercies, even from
the King of Kings, would be slighted and undervalued, if fetched with a faint
word. And therefore let us (vis unita fortior) join force to force, prayer to
prayer, and so by a holy violence of zeal, besiege the Kingdom of Heaven; and
in time it will surrender its self to our lawful desires and requests. For
(says the Apostle) the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails
much, James 5. 16. Indeed if our prayers be without life, or come out of fained
lips, or be distracted with wild and wandering thoughts, or if they be tainted
with hypocrisy, pride, or incredulity, we can look for no favorable audience
from Heaven: For God hears not sinners: but if a man does his will, him he
hears, John 9. 31. God hears not Sinners, that is, wilful, presumptuous,
and impenitent Sinners: But if a man does his will, (by active, and passive
obedience) him he hears, that is, either explicitly, by granting the
individual or particular thing requested, or interpretatively, by granting that
which is aequivalent, or far better. Now if a righteous Man prays for health,
and a prolongation of his temporary life; and God still continues him upon his
Bed of sickness, and within a short time, by death gives him Eternal life, in
exchange for his temporary, herein is no severe repulse or denial, but a more
favorable audience, more satisfactory concession, and more Princely donation.
But you will urge, that this last way of granting Requests, does not fully
answer the scope of the present Point. Hereupon I must reply, that though the
return of our most faithful prayers must be determined, and their success
limited by the will of our Heavenly Father, according to the words of Christ
Jesus: Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will, Matthew. 26. 39. yet we must
understand, that it is the will, and usual favor of the Almighty, to grant the
very things we desire, and stand in need of, commonly by means; and herein
chiefly and principally by faithful prayer, which without Natural means is
often found more effectual then Natural means without it. And to encourage us
to make trial of such excellent means, we have a promise from Truth its self: I
say unto you, whatsoever things ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive
them, and ye shall have them, Mark 11. 24. And this brings me to propose or
prescribe.

In the Third place, Faith as an excellent means conducing likewise to the
health of Body, and (consequently) prolongation of life; and this in a
supernatural way also. There was a Woman vexed with an uncomfortable Disease
twelve years, She suffered many things of Physicians, Mat. 9. 20. some
torturing her with one Medicine, some with another, none did her good, but much
hurt, She had spent all her living upon them, Luke 8. 43. and herein, says
Erasmus, was Bis misera Her sickness brought her to weakness weakness to
Physic, Physic to beggary, beggary to contempt. Thus was she vexed in body,
mind, and estate; yet Faith healed her. Her wealth was gone, Physicians gave
her over; but her Faith did not forsake her: Daughter, be of good comfort, thy
faith has made thee whole, Mat. 9. 22. There was a Woman bowed down with the
Spirit of infirmity eighteen years, Luke 13. 11. yet loosed. There was a Man
bedrid eight and thirty years, John 5. 5. and 9. a long and miserable time,
when besides his Corporal distress, he might perhaps conceive from that, Eccl.
38. 15. He that sins before his Maker, let him fall into the hand of the
Physician; that God had cast him away; yet Christ restored him. But may some
say, it is not mentioned that either of th^se two last were cured by Faith. I
answer that doubtless Christ saw the seed of Faith in them, (though it were but
as a grain of mustardseed) and so rewarded them accordingly.

Again, we may instance in the Samaritan, whose Leprosy though hard to cure,
yet Faith was able to do it; Thy faith has made thee whole, Luke 17. 19. But
may some say, it was not properly his Faith, but Christ's virtue that cured
him: Why then does not Christ say, Mea virtus, and not Tua sides, My virtue,
not thy Faith has made thee whole? True it is, his virtue only cures, but this
is apprehended by Man's Faith. The miraculous Cure was attributed to Man's
Faith, not as to the efficient cause, (for that was Christ's Divine virtue) but
as to the instrumental cause, or means by which he apprehended and applied to
himself that Divine power, by which he was healed. Thus in the aforementioned
place, or instance in the 9th. of Math. it is written, that the Woman which was
diseased with an issue of blood twelve years, came behind Jesus and touched the
hem of his garment. For she said within her self, if I may but touch his
garment, I shall be whole. And in Mark 5. 30. we read that when that diseased
Woman had touched him, Jesus knew in himself that virtue had gone out of him,
and he turned him about in the press, and said, who touched my clothes? Yet
speaking to the Woman, he mentions not his virtue, but her Faith; Daughter,
thy faith has made thee whole, Mark 5. 34.

Object. But here some may object, that the gifts of Healing with other
miraculous Gifts are ceased in the Church; and so (consequently) Prayer and
Faith must needs be ineffectual to the Cure of bodily Distempers, without the
conjunction of Natural means.

Answ. To which I answer; It Is true, the Doctrine of the Gospel having been
long since sealed and confirmed by so many Miracles in the Primitive Church,
there is now the less need of them, more particularly, of the gift of Healing;
and therefore I shall not urge those Miracles which the Church of Rome boasts
of, as wrought of late times by some of her Sons, or with her extend the
promise of our Savior, Mark 16, 17, 18. to all future times and Ages of the
Church; yet thus much I may avouch, that as God is still able to work Miracles,
so he has sometimes, even in this latter Age, wrought miraculously, for the
convincing the present times of Atheism, and the further confirmation of our
Faith in the Gospel. And this Mr. Valentine Greatraks, in his Printed Letter to
the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire makes appear: Wherein he gives an Account of
diverse strange Cures by himself performed as the instrument. Whereunto are
annexed about sixty Testimonials of several credible Persons, (most of them
eminent and worthy) of the chief matters of fact therein related. Which printed
Certificates being examined and compared with the Original Testimonials, which
were left in the hands of Mr. Starkey the Stationer to that end, (namely) for a
certain evidence to Mr. Boil, and for the full satisfaction of all those that
are any wise scrupulous, that they might see that they were verbatim the same:
In this respect. I suppose it unreasonable to interrogate with Nicodemus, How
can these things be? John 3. 9. seeing there is such a clear demonstration de
facto, of what was seen done.

I confess (says a learned modern Author of our own) I cannot see any reason,
why God may not yet for the conviction if Insidels, employ such a power of
Miracles, although there be not such necessity of it, as there was in the first
propagation of the Gospel; Yet God may please (says he a little after) out of
his abundant provision for the satisfaction of the minds of men, concerning the
truth of Christian doctrine, to employ good men to do something which may
manifest the power of Christ to be above the Devils, Dr. Stillingfleet's
Origines Sacrae, page 270. To be short, as our Savior being in the flesh had
power on Earth to cure incurable Diseases miraculously, that is without Natural
means; so being in Heaven, his power is no less (but rather greater) over all
bodily Diseases to cure them, with or without means, whenever he will. So
that this may comfort us in time of dangerous sickness, though our Disease be
incurable by Physic, or any Natural means; yet in this case we are to
remember, the absolute power of Christ Jesus our Lord, who can heal us without
means, if he see it expedient for us: And that his will does in this case
frequently concur with his power, note further that Man's extremity is God's
opportunity, where Man's help fails, Christ's help begins. Let us then
seek to him by Prayer, and rest on him by Faith; not neglecting ordinary means,
by a too frequent dependence upon, or expectation of miraculous Cures, nor yet
forgetting, that if the means fail, or cannot be had, his power is not tied to
means, but is above them, and can, and does sometimes, recover us without them,
when he sees it good for us. I conclude the Point then thus, that Gods
blessing upon the Natural means, and his blessing without means, are each
received (most successfully and comfortably) by the hand of Faith; which is the
extraordinary means conducing to the health of Body, as the ordinary to the
health of Soul.

Fourthly, Repentance, if true and sincere, does in the same extraordinary way
conduce to the health of Body, and prolongation of Life. And this may be
proved, First, in express terms, and Secondly, by consequence.

First, In express terms, by sundry Texts of sacred Writ. Miriam by repentance
was freed from the Leprosy, Number. 12. 11. 21. 7. The Israelites repenting
obtained a remedy against the fiery Serpents, and thereby were delivered from
imminent death. David after the death of seventy thousand of his People, by
repentance prevented the destruction of Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 24. 16, and 17.
Rehoboam and the Princes repenting at the preaching of Shemaiah were delivered
from destruction, 2 Chr. 12. 7. Hezekiah having received a message of death,
upon his repentance had his life lengthened by a Lease from above two lives
more, in our Law, Isay 38. v. 1. 10. 6.

Secondly, By consequence. For sublata causa tollitur effectus, the cause,
which is sin, being taken away, the effect, which is bodily sickness and
shortness of Life, (as I have fully declared and evinced in the former part of
this Treatise) must needs cease and be removed, or prevented and avoided. And
therefore Repentance, as you see, may rationally be concluded, effectual for
the health of the Body, and the prolongation of a temporary Life, as it was
always granted propitious to the health of the Soul, in order to ever lasting
Life.

To sum up all, let us not think it incredible, that these virtues and graces
should in such an extraordinary manner conduce to the preservation of bodily
health, removal of sickness, and prolongation of Life, when we consider the
power of God, with whom all things are possible, Mat. 19. 26. and the
manifestation of that power; not only in the sundry miraculous cures of bodily
Diseases, recorded in the Old and New Testament, but also in some such cures
(or very like them) taken notice of in our modern History, and experience. The
miraculous Cures, in both Testaments, the Reader may take notice of at his
leisure: I shall instance now only in Humane Story, and modern Evidence.

A late intelligent Author, and faithful Relator, tells us that to the Kings
of England, quatenus Kings, does appertain one prerogative, that may be styled
super-excellent, if not Miraculous, which was first enjoyed by that pious and
good King Edward the Confessor; that is to remove and to cure the Struma or
Scrofula, that stubborn Disease called The Kings Evil. Which manifest cure
(says he) is ascribed by some malignant Nonconformists, to the power of Fancy,
and exalted Imagination; but what can that contribute to small Infants, whereof
great numbers are cured every year? Dr. Chamberlain in his present State of
England. The manner of the Cure is briefly thus related: There is an appointed
short Form of Divine Service, wherein are read (besides some short Prayers
pertinent to the occasion) two portions of Scripture, taken out of the Gospel,
and at these words [They shall lay This is true when the sore is in the
glandules of the neck: but when it is elsewhere, it is said by some that have
been often touched, that the King gently touches only the cheeks of the party
grieved.
their hands on the sick, and they shall recover.] the King gently draws both
his hands over the sore of the sick Person; and those words are repeated at the
touch of every one.

Again at these words, [That light was the true light, which lights every man
that comes into the world.] pertinently used, if it be considered that that
Light did never shine more comfortably, if not more visibly, than in the
healing of so many leprous and sick Persons. At those words, the King puts
about the neck of each sick Person a piece of Gold, called (from the
impression) an Angel, because in value about two thirds of a French Pistol.
Thus far He.

Now the effect is clear de facta, and from experience, and cannot therefore be
rationally denied; and it is as clear that the cause must be supernatural, in
regard that neither the hands of the King, not the piece of gold given by him,
have any natural or accidental power, or tendency in themselves, to effect or
produce such a Cure; especially in Infants, whose imagination cannot be wrought
upon, and disposed for the furtherance of it by such outward applications as
are then used.

Another Instance to our present purpose, we may find in a modern Collection,
being true and faithful Relation of one Samuel Wallas, who was restored to his
perfect health, after thirteen years sickness of a Consumption, taken from his
own mouth; who for the last four years lay bedridden, and so weak that he could
not turn himself therein without help: By which Distemper his Body was so
parched and dried, that he was almost like a Sceleton, but upon this Cure he
recovered his former health and strength, whereby he was enabled to follow his
Trade, being a Shoemaker, and living at Stamford in Lincolnshire: whereof he
gave a large account, (to which I must refer you for further satisfaction) with
much affection, and sensibleness of the Lord's mercy and goodness to him, upon
April 7th. 1659. Now the Story, as it is at large, being much noised abroad,
diverse Ministers met together at Stamford, to consider and consult about it;
and for many reasons were induced to believe, that the cure was wrought by the
Ministry of a good Angel, Clark's Mirror, vol. 1. p. 18.

More such Instances as these might be inferred and exhibited to the Reader:
but (I suppose) those already mentioned are a full demonstration of God's
omnipotent power, that he can work without means; and also of his
distinguishing mercy, that he sometimes does so, for the benefit, welfare and
encouragement of the Godly, who are made either Administrators, or Receivers of
this gift of bodily health. And this may more fully appear, if we consider that
Edward the Confessor (as Dr. Peter Heylin's Cosmog. notes) was a man of that
holiness in his life, that he received power from above to cure many Diseases,
besides the Kings Evil; and that Samuel Wallas was cured chiefly by observing
the supposed Angel's injunction in these words, But above all, whatsoever thou
do, fear God and serve him; as it is recorded in the afore-mentioned Story,
to which I referred. The consideration of which Instances does assure us, that
God's Children have in a supernatural manner been sometimes agents, and
sometimes Patients, in bodily Cures, and by consequence may be so still.

And as touching longaevity, the time would fail me to tell of Noah, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Aaron, Phineas grandchild of Aaron, Joshua, Job,
Elizeus the Prophet, Isaiah the Prophet, Tobias the elder, and Tobias the
younger, old Simeon, Anna the Prophetess, St. John the Evangelist, Simeon the
Son of Cleoph as, called the Brother of our Lord, and Bishop of Jerusalem,
Polycarpus, Disciple unto the Apostles, and Bishop of Smyrna, Dionisius
Areopagita, contemporary unto the Apostle St. Paul; Aquila and Priscilla, first
St. Paul the Apostle's Hosts, afterward his Fellow-helpers; and some others
whom I could name, who by ancient Record appear all severally (excepting Simeon
that was the Prophet, Luke 2. and St. John the Evangelist) to have survived an
hundred years; and this not so much through strength of nature, as the
extraordinary grace of God thus rewarding their Moral, and Christian virtues.

Now to conclude this Chapter: though we are not to depend wholly upon
Spiritual means, and supernatural assistances for bodily health and length of
days; yet we must principally and chiefly respect them, being as hinges upon
which Almighty God does frequently turn the course of Nature. For in him (as
the Apostle cites it out of Aratus the Poet) we live, and move, and have our
being, Acts 17. 28. And Job testifies as much when he says, I have sinned,
what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? Job 7. 20. Job knew as well
as Paul, that the wages of sin was death, and having sinned, how should he
avoid that death, but by addressing himself to God, who is the preserver of
Men? without him there is no Balm in Gilead sufficient, Jer. 8. 2. no Physician
there that is able to recover the health of the People. Which is true as well
in a natural as in a metaphorical sense. Hezekiah's lump of Figs may be a
sovereign Plaster, but the prolonging of his life came from God; the waters of
Bethesda were in themselves likewise very sovereign, but it was after they were
moved by the Angel from Heaven. We may, yea we must use all honest and good
means to preserve this our Tabernacle of clay from ruin and dilapidation; I say
we must thankfully embrace the good means, which nature or art can minister
unto us, for the preservation or recovery of health; The skill and experience
of the judicious Physician may be made use of: And though it were Job's
complaint, that there were many Physicians of no value, Job 13. 4. And though
such as these be mentioned with ignominy in the Gospel; that instead of taking
away the poor Woman's superfluous blood, they had sucked away her necessary
maintenance: She had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but
rather grew worse; Mark 5. 26. I say though such unskilful Empiricks be
mentioned with infamy, as deserving reverence or reward from none but a Sexton,
who finds most of his employment from such Physicians desperate unskilfulness;
yet those of skill and experience, and of conscience, are worthy of a double
honor, of reward and maintenance. Luke the able, and beloved Physician,
deserves a remembrance in St. Paul's Catalogue, Col. 4. 14. And such a
Physicians skill may be made use of with good success. But yet in the use of
secondary means this proviso must go along, we must ascribe the main honor to
God: For it is from him that health springs forth speedily, as is hinted to
us by the Prophet Isa. 58. 8. Let them therefore who want health, together with
an honest use of the means, address themselves with Hezekiah unto God, who is
the Fountain of health; and he will hear their prayers, see their tears, and
grant them either that which they desire, or that which he knows in his
alwise Providence to be better for them.

And for us that do enjoy the blessing of health, let us return our humble
thanks unto God. The living, the living, they shall praise thee, as we do this
day: the father to the children shall make known thy truth, Isa. 38. 19. And we
cannot praise him better then in the words of our Church: To thee, O God, who
have redeemed our souls from the jaws of death; we offer unto thy Fatherly
goodness our selves, our souls and bodies, which thou have delivered to be a
living Sacrifice unto thee; to thee which do restore the voice of joy and
health into our dwellings, we offer the Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving,
lauding and magnifying thy glorious Name, for such thy preservation and
providence over us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Vid. the two last
Forms of Thanksgiving.

CHAP. III.
Showing that virtuous and regular actions and affections do naturally conduce
to the health of Body, and length of Life.

A Life led in Religion (as the Lord Verulam, in his History of Life and Death,
notes) seems to conduce to long Life. There are in this kind of life, these
things; leisure, admiration, contemplation of Heavenly things; joys not
sensual, noble hopes, wholesome fears, sweet sorrows; lastly, continual
renovations, by observances, penances, expiations; all which (says he) are
very powerful to long Life. Unto which, if we add that austere diet, which
hardneth the mass of the Body, and humbles the Spirits, no marvel, if an
extraordinary length of life do follow; such as was that of Paul the Hermit,
Simeon Stilita the Columna Anchorite; and of many other Hermites and
Anchorites. Now hereunto I may add, that by the same rule or reason, that such
a life does conduce to long life, it does likewise become propitious to bodily
health. More particularly and plenarily these following graces and virtues,
Religious acts and dispositions are to be considered as effectual in some
measure to the end designed.

First, Faith, as it is attended with a confidence of recovery, has naturally
a powerful influence upon the Body: For confidence (as Galen says) does more
good then Physic: And this it does through the strength of imagination. Now
such is the force of imagination, and a Man's conceit in working effects in the
Body, that Hippocrates exhorts Physicians, if two kinds of Meat were to be
ministered to a Patient, the one healthful, and the other a little hurtful, or
not so good as the other, that they should prefer this being much desired,
before that not so well liked: And generally, both Philosophers and Physicians
maintain, that the opinion and confidence of the Patient importech much for the
cure of any malady. The reason is plain; for the imagination herein (though
erroniously conceiving things better then indeed and really they are) causes a
vehement passion of hope, wherewith follows an extraordinary pleasure in the
things: Which two passions awake or rouse up the purer Spirits, and unite them
together, qualifying and refining them in the best manner; which thus combined,
do most effectually cooperate with Nature, and strengthen her in the
performance of any Corporal action or vital operation, in order to the mastery
and expulsion of noxious humors. Which brings me to say somewhat.

In the Second place, of Hope, which of all the passions is most advantageous
for health and long life, in regard the Spirits therein, which corroborate and
quicken all the parts, are moderate, she stops, and keeps them back that they
cannot dissipate, nor make any vehement agitation; for if the Spirits be too
active and violent in their operations, they may produce strong actions, but it
shortens our days, because those Spirits easily scatter, and so consume the
Natural moisture, which Hope uses not to do; because, I say, it keeps the
Spirits in a temperate motion, and preserves them from wasting too fast.
Therefore (as the afore-cited Lord Verulam says) they which fix and propound
to themselves some end, as the mark and scope of their life; and continually,
and by degrees, go forward in the same; are for the most part long-lived: in so
much that when they are come to the top of their hope, and can go no higher
therein; they commonly droope, and live not long after. We may add hereunto,
that this may be one reason why Kings and Sovereign Princes are not commonly so
long-lived as others, because they have fewer things to hope for, and more
things to fear.

Now if hope in general, as it is a Passion of the Soul, be so effectual in
this kind; much more is true Christian Hope, which is at anchor upon more firm
ground, in as much as the Object thereof is more sure, certain, and more
durably satisfactory and delightful, cherishing and encouraging, then can be
fixed upon in the alone expectation of any terrene, temporal enjoyment.

Thirdly, Love which is (^n the sense it may be understood) a duty often
inculcated in sacred Writ, and is Custos utriusque tabulae, The fulfilling of
the Law, Romans 13. 10. is also, by reason of that strict tie between the Soul
and Body, a great promoter of bodily health: For it is observed by an eminent
modern Philosopher, That when this affection is alone, that is, when it is not
accompanied with extreme Joy, Desire, or Sadness, the beating of the pulse is
even, and much greater and stronger than ordinary; that a Man feels a gentle
heat in his breast, and quick digestion of meat; so that this Passion is
profitable for the health, Mr. Descartes in his Treatise of the Passion of the
Soul, Artic. 97. And now I proceed to another Passion, which being managed with
wisdom, will always be found in the track of virtue.

Fourthly, Joy being regulated and moderated by its steers-man Reason, and
sanctified by the Holy Spirit, is a gracious disposition always seasonable in
a Christian course: Rejoice evermore, (says the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16. Yea
always seasonable, because always healtful to Soul and Body: to the Body in
this respect (namely) because by dilating and sending forth to the outward
parts, it enlivens them, and keeps them fresh and active; it beautifies the
complexion, preventeth Consumptions, and some other Distempers, by assisting
the distribution of salubrious nourishment to every part.

From these considerations then we may understand, that Christianity does not
teach us a Stoical Apathie, or take away our Passions; but only rectifies them;
and being thus rectified they conduce not only to the health of the Soul, but
also of the Body, and its longaevity.

Fifthly, Labor, Industry, and Diligence in a lawful calling, is no less
healthful to the Body then Soul. For as by the old sanction we are taught to
labor for our bread, Genesis 3. 19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat
bread; Yea, as Paradise that was Man's Storehouse, was also his Workhouse, He
was put into the garden of Eden, to dress it, and to keep it, Genesis 2. 15. As
also by the fourth Commandment it is implied as a duty, That we should labor
six days, and do all that we have to do; Lastly, as a provident, industrious
and seasonable care and employment is so good and warrantable, that in this
very thing the Wise man prescribes the Pismire, (Prove. 6. 6.) for our
imitation; And in this the Apostle places, not only necessity, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
but also Religion, 1 Timothy 5. 8. so is the same very commendable in respect of
bodily health, it being the Salt of humane life, which dries up those
crudities which otherwise would prove offensive, and preserves the humors
from putrefaction. Yea the commodities of moderate excerise are many,
principally these following.

1. The increase of Natural heat and Spirit.

2. It assists the distribution of our nourishment.

3. It discusses vapors and fuliginous excrements, by the Pores or Spiracles
of the skin, and adds color and vivacity to the whole Body.

4. It makes the juices of the Body hard and compact, and so becomes propitious
to length of life.

5. and Lastly, By consuming and exiccating superfluous moistures in the Body,
it preventeth most Diseases: So that indigent People (as one observes) have
this recompense to their poverty, that their necessitated labors keep them
much in health, and without the need, trouble and charge of Physic. I may add
hereunto, that active and industrious Persons, (be they poor, or rich) as they
are longest free from Diseases; so also most commonly from the long continuance
of those Diseases; the material cause thereof being consumed in such manner, by
former labor and exercise, as there wants sufficient Jewel to maintain the
Distemper, which like the external fire soon dies and is extinct for want of
nourishment; and thereby Nature (in its Sphaere the greatest agent in bodily
cures,) being exonerated of obnoxious humors, is ever in a tendency to reduce
the Body into its pristine, and symmetrical Constitution.

Moreover it has been observed, that Epidemical Diseases, as Pestilential
Fevers, Cathars, Small Pox, Flux, etc. do much easier seize upon such, as by
contracting an evil habit of Body, through a sedentary and idle course of life,
have rendered themselves more obnoxious, and disposed thereunto, in whom
likewise they are more difficultly cured.

And now, before I conclude this Point, I would in kindness admonish those of
the foeminine and teeming Sex, that they would accustom themselves to moderate
exercise, to diligence and industry in some lawful and commendable employment,
thereby to preserve their health, and facilitate their delivery. For it is
observed that those Women which are used to labor, endure Childbearing with
far more ease; and the Irish Women, because of their stirring and active lives,
are quick in delivery; and here in England also the industrious and laborious
Women, in City and Country, are very quick at their labors, and allow
themselves a very short retirement comparatively, with others of a contrary
inclination: So that in this particular also, the active and stirring life is
of no small advantage.

I conclude with the wholesome advice of Syrach: My son, hear me, and despise me
not, and at the last thou shall find as I told thee: in all thy works be quick,
so shall there no sickness come unto thee, Eccl. 31. 22.

Sixthly, Temperanco, a fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 23. and a virtue here
considerable only as it consists in the moderation or regulation of the
appetite, in eating and drinking according to the standard of Nature, which is
content with a little; is of all virtues the most conducible to bodily health
and long life. That saying of the Wise man, It is not good to eat much honey,
Prove. 25. 27. shows unto us, that even the most wholesome and nourishing Meat
of all other, will prove dangerous and hurtful to our health, if it be not
soberly and measurably eaten. Temperance (as one says) being not only the
Carver, but also the Commander at our tables, should always have a room
thereat. Timotheus having supped with Plato, and eaten (contrary to his custom)
very moderately, slept very quietly that night, finding neither Cholick to
awake him, nor belchings in the morning to annoy him; wherefore as soon as he
awaked, he brake forth into this exclamation, with a loud voice: How sweet, how
sweet are Plato's suppers, which make us in the night time to sleep, and in the
morning to breath so sweetly! Marsil. Fic. de Sanis. slud. tu. Yea the benefits
of Temperance are many:

1. Freedom from almost all sicknesses.

2. Length of life, and death without much pain.

3. A mitigation of incurable Diseases.

Instances of these; or some of these, there are not a few in History. Socrates
is said by sobriety, to have had always a strong Body, and to have lived ever
in health; and that by the good order of his diet he escaped the Plague at
Athens, never avoiding the City, nor the company of the infected, though the
greatest part of the City was consumed by it, Aelian. lib. 13. It is also
reported of Galen that famous Physician, that he lived one hundred and forty
years, and that after he was twenty eight years old, he was never grieved with
any sickness, except the grudge of a Fever for one day: His rule was, not to
eat or drink till he had an appetite, nor to eat and drink till he had none.
This rule he observing, was seldom sick, and lived (as Sipontinus writes) to
the abovesaid age.

Cyprian relates that Maximinian the Emperor seldom used to drink betwixt
Meals, and therefore lived in health to the end of his life.

Queen Elizabeth was famous for this virtue. King Edward the Sixth called her
by no other name then his sweet Sister Temperance, Cambd. Eliz. She did seldom
eat but one sort of Meat, rose ever with an appetite, and lived about seventy
years, which is beyond the ordinary Period of Princes and Princesses, who
seldom attain to sum up experimentally Moses his Arithmetic in that Psalm
(Psalm. 90. 10.) appropriated to him.

We read that the Sect of the Esseans, amongst the Jews, did usually extend
their lives to an hundred years: Now that Sect used a single, or abstenious
diet, after the Rule of Pythagoras.

Metaphrastes in the life of Saint John, writes, that he was so abstenious in
the use of meats and drinks, that he took no more then would suffice to
maintain life: He lived (as ancient Record mentions) ninety three years.

St. Paul, the Hermit, lived an hundred and thirteen years: Now his diet was
so slender and strict, that it was thought almost impossible to support humane
Nature therewith.

But most memorable is that of Cornarus the Venetian, who being in his youth of
a sickly Body, began first to eat and drink by measure, to a certain weight,
thereby to recover his health, this cure turned by use into a diet; that diet
to an extraordinary long life; even of an hundred years and better; without any
decay in his senses, and with a constant enjoying of his health.

It Is a common Proverb, which, were it commonly observed, would make most
Physicians sick, and preserve their Patients a long time sound: Use mederation
and temperance, and desie the Physician. A saying that taken with a grain of
allowance, does favor much of truth, though little of Urbanity. No less
observable is that Proverbial Rithme.

Gulaepone metas, ut sit longior tibi aetas. Which may thus be Englished.

To thy appetite set some timely bounds,
For so the longer age to thee redounds.
That Intemperance is the Extinguisher, and Temperance the Prolonger of the
Candle of our life, was long ago taken notice of by the Son of Sirach, in these
words: Be not unsatiable in any dainty thing, nor too greedy upon meats,
Eccles. 37. latter part.

For excess of meats brings sickness, and surfeiting will turn into choler.

By surfeiting have many perished, but he that takes heed prolongeth his life.

Temperance then (as may be gathered from the preceding Instances) is not only
instead of preventive, but also curative Physic. For, as many by Intemperance
have relapsed into their old Distempers; so by Temperance some have
dispossessed their lingering maladies, and recovered their former state of
health: And therefore the best Physicians do always remember, to prescribe to
their Patients a temperate diet, for the accomplishment of their Cures, as
knowing that Temperance alone proves commonly more effectual to that end, than
all their prescriptions and applications without it. For it is to be
understood, that the perfect cuting of the diseased Body, requires not only
the external, but also the internal Physician. The internal Physician vulgarly
is called Nature: but more properly, it is that Interna Mumia seu Balsamum
internum, Our native liquor of life, and inbred balm of vital spirit. This in
all Men is the best and greatest Physician: without the which no Medicine can
avail, no malady can be cured. This is that which does digest, concoct,
maturate, deopilate, purge, corroborate, expel, emitigate, restore, avert, and
dispatch all sort of bodily griefs: unless it be over-burdened by Intemperance,
or extremely debilitated by any other impediment or defect. The outward or
external Physician with all his Art, Method, Simples, Compounds, Antidotes,
Catharticks, Minoratives, Diaphoreticks, Corroboratives, Anodynes, etc. is only
but a Servant, and all his endeavors but service unto the internal Physician,
viz. Nature. As then in curative Physic the principal method of wise
Physicians (whose Canon is Cito, and tuto, Suddenly, and safely) consists in
purgation, and corroboration, thereby first disburdening, and then
strengthening Nature, which in its operations has a constant tendency to the
more benign constitution, so long as it is able to resist the morbifick
humor: So Temperance, which consists in the use of a temperate diet, no way
burdening Nature; (which not over-burden'd, will in time work out the noxious
and superfluous humors) but gradually strengthening it, may worthily be
esteemed a great promoter of health; though not so expeditious, as when it is
conjoined with the assistance of external means. By Temperance alone then it
may seem probable to effect a Cure; and experience has put it out of doubt,
that many who have been unwilling or unable to undergo the trouble and charge
of Physic, have yet by the strength of Nature, and a temperate diet, in a
reasonable time, safely recovered their former health. Aurelianus is said to
have cured all excess by abstinence, and therefore to have had no Physicians.
And I read of the Indians and other barbarous People, who wanting, or at least
neglecting the means of Physic, have yet (many of them) by Temperance giving
Nature its free course, recovered of dangerous Diseases, and also attained to a
great age. Yea, legimus quosdam (says an ancient Father, St. Hierome) morbo
articulari and podagrae humoribus laborantes, proscriptione bonorum ad
simplicem mensam and pauperes cibos redactos convaluisse: We have read of some,
(says he) who being sick of the Gout through abundance of humors, did recover
their health being forced to a poor and slender diet by consiscation of their
goods.

Not that hereby I would derogate from the honor due unto the judicious
Physician, or detract from the use of Medicines which the Lord has created out
of the Earth: (For he that is wise will not abhor them, says the Son of
Sirach, Eccl. 38. 4.) but at present my design is only to enhance the price and
esteem of Temperance, which doubtless is the Mother of health; though it often
stands in need of the Midwisery of Natural means to assist it in its
productions.

To Temperance may be referred Fasting, which, when it is Religious, is thus
desined. Jejunium religiosum est voluntaria abstinentia a cibo and potu
religionis causa, Hommius Disput. i. e. Religious Fasting is a voluntary
abstinence from meat and drink for a Religious end; And thus understood, our
Savior Christ supposed it as a duty sometimes to be performed, when he gave
directions to avoid vainglory in it, Mat. 6. 17, and 18. and also assured us
that if it be performed as it ought, not to please Men but God, it will surely
be rewarded by him. This duty he taught us by his own example, as well as
doctrine: For not to mention Divine Record, so well known to most; Philo says
of him, that he seemed to transform his flesh into the nature of his Spirit, by
fasting and watching. And in imitation of Christ's act in fasting, we read
elsewhere, that the Christians of the Primitive times were generally very
frequent in the practice of it.

Now though this Religious Fasting differs from that which is Moral in
respect of the ends; (Moral fasting being nothing else but temperance and
moderation in eating and drinking) yet in respect of the natural effect
produced in the Body, they are the same, and do equally conduce to bodily
health, and consequently length of life, not only as preventive, but also
curative Physic.

First, as preventive; and this will appear by this following Demonstration,
deducted from the observation of the most judicious Physicians. The deflux of
an humor from the brain is called a Rheum, which is the Mother of most
Diseases. For sometimes it takes course to the eyes, and thereof comes a
dropping and inflammation of the eyes, and a dimness and loss of sight;
sometimes it takes course by the nose, and is called the pose; sometimes to
the mouth, and causes great expuition and spitting, and the falling of the
Uvula, and toothache; sometimes to the windpipe, and thereof comes raucedo,
the hoarsness; sometimes to the lungs, and causes exulceration or
putrefaction, or some great obstruction, which brings a difficulty of
breathing and strangulation: sometimes it takes course by the stomach, and
causes lack of appetite and ill digestion; and if to the guts, then falls
out the flux of the belly called a lask; sometime it setleth in the brain, and
grows into a gross and thick substance, either in the fore part, as in the
nerves optic, which are the conducts whereby the power of seeing does come
unto the eyes, and causes either dimness, or loss of sight; or in the conducts
that convey the power of hearing unto the ears, and there causes a dullness of
hearing or deafness: Also if it settle in the forepart, obstructing the cells
or ventricle^ of the brains; three ill Diseases do grow thereupon, called three
of the dead sleeps, Caros, and coma, and apoplexia. Also if this gross
Rheumatick matter do settle in the hinder part, it causes the Lethargy,
another of the dead sleeps, and the Palsy, and the Fallingsickness, and the
Convulsion, and Oblivion or loss of memory. And if it come down backward into
the neck, it causes a kind of Convulsion called teranos, when as the neck
cannot turn to nor fro, but it stands stiff and stark without motion. If it
flow down to the back, it causes another kind of Convulsion, called
Opisthotonos, wherein the head and the heels are made to meet backward. If it
flow forward into the muscles of the breast, another Convulsion is caused,
called Emprosthotonos, wherein the head and the feet are drawn together
forward. If it go to the joints, it is Morbus articularis, the joynt-gout; if
to the hands and fingers, it is Chiragra, the finger-gout; if to the knees, it
is Gonagra, the knee-gout; if to the feet and toes, it is Podagra, the
feet-gout. Also if it fall upon the kidneys, then the Disease is Nephritical,
as the stone, or gravel in the reins. Thus from the brain, the fountain of
nerves, is derived that morbifick humor, which is the sourse of these, and
many other Diseases: But to obstruct and prevent the current thereof, there is
need of Fasting, and abstinence from excess. For whereas many a Man complains
of his brain, for sending down Rheumes, the springs and foundation of all
dangerous maladies, the brain (as Charron says) may answer him, Desine
fundere, and ego desinam fluere; Cease to pour in, and I will cease to pour out.

Fasting then, by consequence, is an especial prevention of most Diseases; and
it may be further proved and illustrated by this following Instance. A certain
Person lately living in the County of Norfolk, and well known to the Author,
did, in the presence of a Physician, give God thanks, that for the space of
sixty years, he never knew, experimentally, what it was to feel three days
sickness together, worthy complaining of. Whereupon being requested by the
inquisitive Physician, to discover the means he used for such a continued
preservation of his health; he returned this following account. I fast often,
(says he) but then especially, when I find the least indisposition of body:
For then, in such a neutral, or rather sickly constitution, I abstain from all
usual sustenance, (excepting Timothy's allowance, a little Wine for my stomach
sake) two, three, or more days, until I find that Nature works off the matter
and fuel of approaching Diseases. Upon which single Instance we may ground this
observation, that Abstinence and Fasting, so long as it is not in excess, but
from excess, is an especial preventive or preservative against most Diseases,
by attenuating those vicious humors, which are heaped together through
continual crudities, in a manner digesting and wasting them; and also by that
means hastening the circulation of the blood, and then promoting and
facilitating the distribution of the nourishable juice, it renders the whole
Body pervious and open, discharges obstructions, discusseth wind; moves the
excrements of the brain, and all the parts, and brings them down into passages,
through which, by the extimulating force of Nature, they are expelled out of the
Body.

Secondly, It may be considered as curative; and this upon the same, or the
like grounds and reasons whereby it has been asserted as preventive; and
therefore there needs no repetition to confirm the Point. But by way of
illustration, we may take notice that the ancient Egyptians cured their
Diseases either by fasting, or vomiting, which they used either daily, or every
third or fourth day: For they were of opinion, that all Diseases had their
beginning from surfeiting and repletion, and that therefore that is the best
Physic to recover health, which takes away the cause of the Disease.

Moreover, I read that the Sweatingsickness, proper to our English Countries,
at first esteemed incurable, was sithence experienced to be cured by the
cheapest way of the World, even by Abstinence alone; And that in Ireland they
cure their Agues only with fasting four or five days, from all kinds of Meats,
leaving Nature alone to spend out those superfluous humors, which the moisture
of their Western Air breathed into them.

It is reported that a certain poor Man having the Dropsy, did earnestly
entreat the Physician for a remedy of his Disease: The Physician beholding the
poor Man, said merrily to him: Per annum abstine a potu, and sanaberis, Abstain
from drink one year, and thou shall be a sound Man. The poor Man took it as
seriously spoken, and performed it, though with much thirst; And being made
perfectly sound at the years end, he returned to the Physician, and gave him
thanks for his advice, Vid. Cornel. A Lapide in Lucam, page 146.

In a word, and to instance in our selves, or acquaintance, how ordinary it is
for some constitutions to fast away, or starve an Ague, the Palsy, the sickness
of the Stomach, the Dropsy, Gout, and some other Distempers arising from
repletion, I shall leave to the determination of such, as probably by
experience may hereto affix their probatumest.

And now, before I conclude this Point, it must not be forgotten what was in
the former part of this Treatise suspended, and reserved for this place,
namely, a more plenary resolution of this enquiry: How may we confine our
selves within the bounds and limits of Temperance? In performance whereof, we
must make use of the advice of the most judicious and experienced Physicians,
who teach us not to approve, as to general practice, of that Arithmetical
Proportion, or Dieta Statica, the allotment of a certain weight and measure of
Meat and drink, not upon any terms to be exceeded: Because this were to go
about to make a Coat for the Moon, or to fit every foot with the same shoo. For
how can it be but that, where there is difference in constitution, age, sex,
the manner of life, the nature of the Meat, and the season of the year, and so
diversities of heat and ability to concoct and digest, a different proportion
should also be requisite? Leaving therefore the strictness of Lessius and
Cornaro to speculative and monastic Men, I shall prescribe two general Rules
of Temperance, which in a practical observation may well enough suit and agree
with all sorts of Persons.

The first Rule is that of Hippocrates, (...), They that study their health,
must not be satisfied with meat. But as Avicen otherwise expresses it, Must
rise from the table, cum famis reliquiis, with the remainder of their hunger:
By this means (as a modern Author of our own says, Dr. Brook's Conservatory of
Health) the Stomach will well overcome and digest what it has received, and
the remainder of thy appetite will be better employed in perfecting thy
digestion.

The second Rule is, that thou take so much of the Creature, as after it not
to be disabled in the performances of holy duties, or in the duties of
following thy Vocation: For he that gluts his appetite with so much food, as
thereby to hinder the clearer operation of the Fancy, the Understanding and the
Memory, and finds in himself a certain kind of dullness and heaviness in his
Spirit, which before was quick and active, may know for certain that he has
exceeded the bounds of Temperance, and perverted the end of feeding, which is
to refresh the strength and powers of the Body. If therefore thou transgressest
in this point, let thy Abstinence be the greater, and thy care and
circumspection doubled at thy succeeding Meals.

By these two Rules alone may we learn to know the bounds and limits of
Temperance; though in respect of its full praise, there can be no bounds: For
it can never be sufficiently commended, which, in such a superlative sense, is
so advantageous to the health both of Body and Soul. And therefore I shall put
a period to this Point, by referring the Reader, for his further satisfaction,
to the excellent Treatises of Lessius, and Cornaro, who have written large
Encomiums of this virtue of Temperance.

Lastly, I might instance in the reading of good Books, in the good society of
Friends, their honest and wholesome Discourses, exhortatory, and consolatory in
time of sickness, (which are very commendable, and agreeable to Sacred Writ)
and so more largely show that these very things (as Seneca says) Medicinae vim
habuerunt, Have the virtue of Physic, Et quicquid animum erexit, etiam corpori
prodest, whatever has raised and comforted the mind, has also been profitable
to the Body, Seneca Epist. 79th. And also might by many examples illustrate
these things, more especially by that of Alphonsus, King of Naples, who being
abandoned of his Physicians, as in a desperate case, and calling for Quintus
Curtius, took such delight to hear him read, that he recovered his health
again, obtaining that by a little consolation and delight, which could not be
procured by Physic. But to avoid prolixity, I shall here desist, and conclude
the whole Chapter, having (as I suppose) sufficiently proved and demonstrated,
that virtuous and regular actions and affections do naturally conduce to the
health of body, and length of life.

CHAP. IV.
Showing that virtuous and regular actions and affections do, through the
blessed influence of Divine Providence upon means, prove often occasions of
bodily health and long Life.

IT is the duty of a Christian to depend upon God in his Providential
administrations: For happy is that people, whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 144.
15. And this happiness consists partly in that degree of peculiar Providence,
which respects the temporal salvation and preservation of the Children of God
from imminent dangers, more particularly those of mortal Diseases, and sudden
death; and also in the ordination and disposition of means, in order to the
recovery of bodily health, and the proroguing of life. And though there be
swarms of contingencies that might be thought to hinder the success of means;
yet Divine Providence, for the welfare of the righteous, so hiveth them, and
disposes of them in such order, as they unite and combine together to produce
the honey of health and long life. For it must be understood, that as
sometimes, for the punishment of sin, the hand of Providence may be seen in
rendering the means used for health, successless; a College of Physicians,
being Physicians of no value, when and where the Lord, the great Physician,
withdraws his manutenancy or succeeding hand of Providence: Witness this in
Asa, (2 Chr. 16. 12, and 13.) who had his Physicians, but not his cure: So
sometimes the same Providence, for the encouragement of the Godly, is displayed
in raising Persons from the graves mouth, and recovering them when mortally
sick in the judgment of the most accurate Physicians; and this sometimes by
bringing to light such means which are very improbable to Man's reason, though
very proper for the recovery of the Patient, who, like Epaphroditus, was sick
nigh unto death, but God had mercy on him, Phil. 2. 27. Also sometimes it is
displayed in a fortunate concurrence of all needful contingencies, in order to
the end here designed; which some call the Blessing upon the means, as (namely)
when God by the method of his Providence puts it into the heart of the
Patient, or some Friend about him, (if the Disease be dangerous) to make a
timely and seasonable address to a judicious and experienced Physician, whose
heart is providentially (as it were) inspired, and his memory prompted with
such seasonable adaequate and proper prescriptions, as by the Patients
observation thereof, together with the use of other means represented to the
mind by the hints and intercourse of the same Providence, become very
advantageous to health and long life. In this respect, though chiefly in a
Spiritual, I suppose that of the Apostle holds good, All things work together
for good, to them that love God, Romans 8. 28. And that which the Wise man
attesteth, is no less true: The preparations of the heart in man, and the
answer of the tongue, is from the Lord, Prove. 16. 1. Also, A man's heart
devises his way: but the Lord directs his steps, Verse, 9.

Likewise the peculiar and distinguishing Providence of God, in the
preservation of the lives of his Children, is seen through the glass of these
following Instances.

The King of Israel, a wicked Person, disguiseth himself, and has his armor,
(1 Kings 22.) yet an arrow finds its passage between the joints of his harness:
On the other hand Jehoshaphat, King of Judah, a good King, who was in the same
fight, and in greater danger than King Ahab, is preserved: It came to pass
(says the Text) when the Captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat (in his
Royal robes) they said, It is the King of Israel: therefore they compassed
about him to fight. But Jehoshaphat cried out, and the Lord helped him, and God
moved them to depart from him, 2 Chronicles. 18. 32. How often did Saul hunt David's
life, as a Partridge on the mountains? But the hedge of Divine Providence
always hindered Readiness game, and secured David. Yea, though Saul had hedged him
in round about, and gotten him in such a snare, as there was but a little
distance betwixt David and death; yet Saul could not accomplish his designs;
Providence, by way of diversion, had procured another hunting-match, the
Philistines had invaded the Land. wherefore Saul (says the Scripture) returned
from pursuing after David, and went against the Philistines, 1 Samuel 23. 18.

Paul, the Apostle and Servant of Jesus Christ, how often was he in the suburbs
of death, By perils of waters, perils of robbers, perils by his own
countrymen, perils by the heathen, perils in the city, perils in the
wilderness, perils in the sea, and perils among false brethren? 2 Cor. 11. 26.
Yet how often did the Lord preserve his life, by a happy concurrence of
Providential contingencies and casualties? When the Jews went about to kill
him, their design was ineffectual; and Paul gives the reason thereof, saying:
Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this day, Acts 26. 21,
and 22. Which place has reference to another, where it is recorded that, As
they went about to kill Paul, tidings came unto the chief captain of the band,
that all Jerusalem was in an uproar, who immediately took soldiers, and
centurions, and ran down unto them: and when they saw the chief captain and the
soldiers, they left beating of Paul, Chap. 21. 31, and 32. An admirable
example of God's good Providence, who delighted to reserve his hand for a dead
lift, to rescue and save those that are forsaken of their hopes; Yea,
sometimes, even by the hands of such a Person as had no such intention; as we
may see in the following words, verse. 33. Again we read in another place,
(Chap. 23.) of a combination of above forty Conspiratours, who had bound
themselves with direful curses, that they would eat nothing until they had
killed Paul: But Providence revealed the plot and conspiracy to Paul's Sisters
Son; and a sweet Providence it was that this Boy should be by, to detect and
defeat their wicked counsel; whereby Paul escaped as a Bird out of the snare.
Austin relates, how by losing his way, as he was traveling, he thereby saved
his life, escaping an Ambush of the bloody Donatists, who had waylaid him.

The Stories are well known, how Moulin at the time of the Parisian Massacre,
was cherished for a fortnight by a Hen, which came constantly, and laid her
eggs there, where he lay hid. And at Cales, how an Englishman, who crept into
a hole under a pair of stairs, was there preserved by means of a Spider, which
had woven its web over the hole, and so the Soldiers slighted the search in
that place.

No less remarkable is the signal preservation of those virtuous and religious
Potentates, Queen Elizabeth, King James, and our now gracious Sovereign Charles
the Second, through an Ocean of dangers, by that discreet Pilot, Divine
Providence.

All which Instances are a sufficient Comment upon this Text: He that is our
God is the God of salvation, and unto God the Lord belong the issues from
death, Psalm. 68. 20. And the result of the whole Point is this: That as man
lives not by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth
of God; Mat. 4. 4. (that is to say) as bread, though ordinarily it has a
nourishing property inhaerent in it, for the sustaining of man's life; yet so
only, as that the operation of that, and success of other means tending to the
preservation of health, and prolongation of life, is guided by the power of
God's Providence and appointment: So the sweet influence of this Providence is
chiefly and principally intended and extended to the Children of God, in
blessing the means used by them, to that end and purpose. Therefore are those
sacred Texts prescribed as corroboratives to the Servants of God; And ye shall
serve the Lord your God, and he shall bless thy bread and thy water: and I will
take sickness away from the midst of thee, Exodus 23. 25. Also, Are not two
sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the ground
without your Father. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many
sparrows, Mat. 10. 29, and 31. If then the eye of God's Providence be so
watchful, to defend and preserve the meanest of his Creatures, that Sparrows,
which are so cheap and worthless, and also such short-lived Birds, (as
Naturalists observe) shall not perish or die without the permission and
concurring will of God in second causes; then surely we must not asperse our
Savior's Logic, by denying the inference from Sparrows to the Children of
God, seeing this is the scope of the Argument urged by our Savior in that
place; (namely) that if the eye of Divine Providence be so careful and
circumspect in the preservation of the meanest Creatures; Much more is the eye
of the Lord (as David says) upon them that fear him: upon them that hope in
his mercy: To deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine,
Psalm. 32. 18, and 19. And thus much shall serve briefly to have demonstrated in
general, that virtuous and regular actions and affections do, through the
blessed influence of Divine Providence upon means, prove often occasions of
bodily health and long Life.

CHAP. V.
Some Objections briefly answered. And the Conclusion of the whole.

Obj. 1. THe first Objection is of those, who cry up an irresistible Decree, a
fatal necessity predetermining the bounds of Man's life; and so consequently
cry down the use of all means, whether Spiritual, or Natural, as needless and
frivolous, in order to the preservation of health and prolongation of life: And
they bolster up their opinion with the forecited words of Job, (by them
wrested) Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth, are not dis days
also like the days of an hireling? Job 7. 1. Doubtless an error herein has
been very prejudicial, not only to the Physicians Practice, but also the
Patients health: And lest it should likewise obstruct the good effect designed
in this Treatise, we will not let it pass uncontrolled. For whosoever allows
this error, must of necessity disallow the Petition in the Lord's Prayer, for
our daily bread, as also of all the Divine Prayers made for the prolongation of
life, and preservation from mortal danger or sudden death, as likewise of the
dispensation of the gift of Healing to the Physician (whom God has created,
and honored to the same end and purpose) and of all other means whatsoever,
tending to the temporal end and design of this Discourse.

Answ. Now in answer hereunto, I shall endeavor to unfold those Texts of
sacred Writ, wherein the main strength of the Objection lies, as (namely) the
forecited place, and also that in the 14th. of Job v. 5th. Seeing his days are
determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou have appointed his
bounds that he cannot pass. Here then the words of Job, concerning the end of
life limited, set, and appointed, are not to be referred unto causes of
destiny, but to the obedience and disobedience of God's Commandment. Or we may
more largely answer with some, (See Piscator upon Psalm. 55. 23. and Marianus
upon Job 14. 5.) that the term of Man's life is twofold,

1. Supernatural. 2. Natural.
1. Supernatural, As it is decreed from above, in the foresight and
determination of God, which does not always agree with the Natural; and thus,
as Marianus says, A prima die pendet extrema, and in ortu sanxit quantum
quisque victurus est; The last day depends upon the first, and at our birth,
(yea before we were conceived) God has concluded how long every Man should
live, as he that fore-seeth as well the ways that we would go, as the end
which those ways would bring us to.

2. Natural, Which a Man may attain unto by his Natural strength, unless he
does neglect the means, or shorten his own days by some unlawful deeds, and
thus the Godly may be said to prolong their days, when by their upright life,
they have the assistance of the Divine Clemency, to produce them to the
furthest period, that their Natural strength could carry them; So Abraham lived
to a good old age, Genesis 25, and 8. and so diverse of God's Saints became old Men
and full of years: And on the contrary the wicked may be rightly said, to
shorten his days, when for his impiety, the Divine hand of Heaven does abridge
that ample time, which he might have lived, and when, according as he
determined from the beginning when he foresaw his ways, he does measure his
life with a shorter line, then the strength of Nature would have done: So
lascivious Zimri was cut off for his sins in the midst of his age, so the Old
world, so the Sodomites, so the Galileans, so all those Sinners, that do
provoke the hand of God to use the Sword of Justice, to cut them off for their
Murders, Robberies, and the like; and so the wanton Onans, roaring Duellers,
Drunkards, and all others, that are loose in their lives and disorderly in
their diets or behaviors, may be said to be cut off each one of them, In die
non suo, Before his day; that is, before that day, Ad quem per naturam, juxta
hominum opinionem pervenire poterat, To which nature, in the judgment of all
men might have brought him, if he had not prevented the same by his
unseasonable death, Vel gladio, vel morbo, vel aliqua alia causa violenta,
morte non sua, Either by the sword, or disease, or some other violent cause, as
Mercerus says, Mercerus in Job 14. 5.

Or if that Answer suffices not, consider this following: God Almighty, who is
the Creator, and Conservator of all things in the Universe, has appointed to
every created thing both a beginning, and end or termination of subsisting and
moving, and does take notice not only of principal, but also of subsequent
causes of things; governing, moderating, disposing, and ordering them;
according to his free will; and yet all this government is void of fatal
violence, and most commonly comes to effect, mediately and from deputed
causes, which vulgarly are called second causes, which the Divine Majesty does
employ as the instruments of his will, so long as he does so govern all things
which he has created, as also himself may suffer them, to exercise their
proper motions; for the will of Man by Divine ordination is the original of
humane actions, freely electing what seems best for it self; (especially in
externalls) and herein the causes so answer the effects, as if the effects be
necessary, the causes are also necessary, and if contingent, the causes are
contingent; nor does the praescience or foreknowledge of God, which is certain
and not to be deceived, abolish the contingency of Natural events; but the
future effect is disposed as it were by a Divine Providence necessarily, or
contingently; nor does it null the freedom of the agent, nor is the Creator
obliged to the necessity, but moderateth all things freely according to his
free will and pleasure; and though his Omnipotency can dispose of causes, and
life with every kind of death at his own free pleasure, yet it will not urge
any Person to accept that term of life for a fatal determinination, but for a
Divine ordination of various causes, which by the Election of the will, (that
as Descartes says) Can never be constrained, prove occasions either of
sustaining or destroying life.

In brief, if still the curious Objector remains dissatified, I wish him
convinced, Potius verberibus quam verbis, Rather with stripes than stress of
words; and the indicative Story which I have read of, may apologize for me in
my Optative mood. A discontented Gallant having drowned himself, and being much
lamented by the Spectators for youthful comeliness, amongst them was one of this
erroneous opinion, who was pleased to read a lecture to them of the inevitable
decree of the Almighty, and not by him to be avoided, nor by them lamented.
Hereupon a young Man (of the contrary education) gave her a great blow over the
face, which made her challenge him of base cowardice, and as great incivility
to the Feminine Sex; Who returned her in answer, that it was the inevitable
will of God it should be so, and a truth according to her own Doctrine; which
caused her to stagger in her opinion. Let us not then scorn the means: For (as
Solomon says) Judgments are prepared for scroners; and stripes for the back of
fools, Prove. 19. 29.

Obj. 2. Another Objection is of those whom we call Star-peepers,
Nativitycasters, and Fortune Tellers, who by Birthstars, that is, by Stars
which arise at every ones coming into the World, pretend an infallible
prediction of the certain time of their health, sickness, recovery, what shall
chance unto them, and of the time, and manner of their death; and so thereby
endeavor to overthrow the use of all means, tending to the preservation of
health, and prolongation of life.

Solut. Indeed we deny not unto that noble Science, which they name Natural
Astrology, the knowledge of Nature's order, and the motions of Heavenly
Bodies: But we utterly disallow their Superstition, who professing judicial
Astrology, (for with this great and glorious title they deck and garnish their
superstition,) do measure and predict conjecturally every Man's fortune and
success, as touching sickness, life and death, by the hour of his birth. For,
while these Nativity-casters and Fortune Tellers confess, that recourse must be
made from the time of bearing, to the time of begetting; what do they else but
bewray their own vanity? For it is not possible that they should hear and know
for certain the very time of Conception: So that though it be granted that the
Stars have some influence and power upon our Bodies, in respect of health and
sickness, life and death; yet notwithstanding it may be rationally denied that
they can be certainly foretold by any such judicial Astrological predictions:
Because (amongst many other reasons) of the uncertainty of the time of
Conception or instant of begetting. Let not Men then search into their
Almanacks to calculate a Nativity, and in the mean time neglect their Bibles,
which will never be out of date: But let them (as our Savior advises) Search
the Scriptures, John 5. 39. and they may read (Judge. 8. 18.) of many thousands
dying a violent death nigh one and the same time; And if an Astrologer had been
consulted before that time, it is likely that he would have foretold the
instanious deaths of an hundred and twenty thousand, when most of them without
question) had diverse and sundry Birth-stars? Again, had he read of Esau and
Jacob twins born, would he judge them to have been of the same temper and
constitution, and to have died at the same instant of time? It is like he
might; but surely not without error. Yea it may be inferred, and proved also by
strict observation, that other Children (besides twins) have been born at one
instant of time, who notwithstanding died at several times.

Furthermore, if the time, and kind of death depend upon the Stars, then by
consequence, shall sins depend upon them too, (for these are the proper cause
of that) and the promises of God, in respect of bodily health and long life, be
of no effect. Which Consequences whoever grants as Conclusions, without further
examination of the Premises, (I fear) will scarce ever be directed to Christ
by a Star. I shall therefore direct the eyes of such to the reading of that
sacred Irony in Isaiah: Let now the Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the monthly
Prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from the things that shall come upon
thee, Isay 47. 13. And also of that dehortatory Lesson in Jeremiah, Thus says
the Lord, Learn not the way of the Heathen: and be not dismayed at the signs of
Heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them, Jer. 10. 2.

Object. 3. A third Objection may be drawn from the skill of Chiromancy or
Palmistry, which undertaketh by marks and lines in the hands, especially by the
line of Life, to measure the extent of every Man's life, with the time and
degree of every dangerous Disease incident thereunto; and so thereby makes
void the use of all means tending to the temporal end of this Discourse.

Solut. In the confutation of this error, let the Testimony of a late Author
suffice: The lines in the hands, (says he) which are counted Nature's
Manuscripts, are but the folds of the skin when the hand bends inwardly,
neither proper to any who have their feet always extended; by the same reason
we have not those now, which we had in our infancy, but by accidents, Diseases
and labor are changeable; A Book fit for Justices to discover idleness, Dr.
Robinson in his Miscellanious Treatise.

Lastly, Another Objection is from those that pretend, Wizards and Witches,
etc. the Oracles of the Devil, can prophecy or predict the certain term of
Man's life, with the manner of his death; and if so, (say they) then how can
virtue prorogue, or vice abbreviate Man's life?

Solut. I answer briefly, that Satan, though he can give a notable
intelligence to some who are his Oracles; yet his knowledge for the most part
is but conjectural. Indeed his experience, as he is an old Serpent, and his
knowledge, as he is an Angel, are both very great: He can quickly take
cognizance of the position of matters, how things are in their precedent
causes, both Natural and Moral. Thus supposing that it was the Devil in
Samuel's Mantle, that did foretell the precise time of Readiness death, 1 Samuel
28. 19. yet it does not imply the absolute certainty of the Devil's prediction,
or the fatal necessity of Readiness death; nor is it any wonder if the Devil
speaks as he does: For David was anointed, Saul grows worse and worse, and now
the top-stone sin was laid on, namely, his going to a Witch, and a battle was
at hand to be fought, all the prodromi, or forerunners of his approaching
ruin.

The Conclusion. And now to conclude, the Result of the whole, is that of the
Philosopher, Ex sanitate in Anima sit sanitas in Corpore, From health in the
Soul arises health in the Body, Arist. lib. 7. Meta. Or (if you will) taste
the sum and substance of the whole Treatise, in the words of an eminent
Author, (T. H. R. E. Fellow of the Royal Society) in his late Discourse of the
Excellency of Theology, p. 130. which just now saluted mine eye, and gave me
such a fair Prospect, in parvo, of my preceding Discourse, as I will not let
them pass, but shall here insert them, both for strength and ornament
thereunto. He who effectually teaches Men to subdue their Lusts and Passions,
(says he) does as much as the Physician contribute to the preservation of
their Bodies, by exempting them from those vices, whose no less usual than
structive Effects are Wars, and Duels, and Rapines, and Desolations, and the
Pox, and Surfeits, and all the train of other Diseases that attend Gluttony and
Drunkenness, Idleness and Lust; which are not Enemies to Man's life and health
barely upon a Physical account, but upon a Moral one, as they provoke God to
punish them with emporal as well as Spiritual Judgments; such as Plagues, Wars,
Famines, and other public Calamities, that sweep away a great part of Mankind.
And, a little further, he adds, Those Teachers that make Men Virtuous and
Religious, by making them temperate, and chaste, and inoffensive, and calm, and
contented, do help them to those Qualifications, that by preserving the mind in
a calm and cheerful temper, as well as by affording the Body all that
Temperance can confer, do both lengthen their lives, and sweeten them. Thus He.

Wherefore, since Righteousness (as the Wise man says) tends to life; and he
that pursues evil, pursues it to his own death, Prove. 11. 19. let our
chiefest care be, ut sit men's sana in corpore sano, That a healthful mind be in
a healthful Body; that as by the soundness of the one, we enjoy the sweetness
of our Temporal life; so by the soundness of the other, we may have the happy
fruition, both of Temporal here, and of Eternal life hereafter.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL INDEX.
A
Dultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, etc. sins destructive to Soul and Body; and
an Objection for the use thereof answered 33, etc. Ambition and the evils
thereof in respect of Soul and Body. 73, and 77. Anger and its discommodities,
when in excess. 48, etc. Astrology judicial, the vanity thereof, and that
neither the certain time of sickness, nor term of Man's life can be rationally
predicted thereby. 194, etc.
B.
Blasphemy, vide Swearing:
C.
Care excessive and immoderate, hurtful to Soul and Body. 75 Covetousness.
Ibid. Chiromancy and the vanity thereof, showing that the time and degree of
Diseases, and the extent of life can not be infallibly or rationally predicted
thereby. 197.
D.
The Devil, how far he can cause diseases. 110. Diseases sometimes cured
without Natural means. 136, 137. Diligence in our Calling, vide Labor.
Drunkenness prejudicial to the health of Soul and Body, and also long life. 25,
etc. An Objection for the use thereof answered. 31, etc.
E.
Envy a cause of diseases and shortness of life. 51.
F.
Faith a powerful means of bodily health, and this in a supernatural way. 138,
etc. Also in a natural way. 149. Fear if slavish and excessive, dangerous to
Soul and Body. 66, etc. Fasting a religious duty, and both preventive and
curative Physic to the Body. 166, to 174.
G.
Gluttony, the evil effects thereof in Soul and Body. 18, to 25. God, when
Natural means fail, by his Almighty power can cure diseases without them. 140,
144. Grief if wordly and immoderate, an enemy to health and long life. 54, to
62.
H.
Hatred, vide Envy. Health its Encomium, and the commodities thereof. 2. It
comes from God, and therefore thanks to be returned to him for it. 147, 148.
Healing: the gift thereof whether ceased in the Church. 135, etc. Hope very
advantageous to health and long life. 151, etc.
I.
Idleness how injurious to health. 42, etc. Joy sensual and immoderate,
injurious to Soul and Body. 63, to 66. Joy moderate and well-grounded a
promoter of health. 153. Imagination, the power thereof in relation to health.
150. Intemperance and the many discommodities thereof. 17, etc.
K.
Kings and Princes, why commonly they arrive not to any great age. 152. The
Kings Evil miraculously cured, and the manner thereof described. 140, etc.
L.
Labor, the benefit thereof to the Body as well as Soul. 154, to 158.
Laughter, vide Sensual Joy. Learning, vide Study. Long life a great blessing.
3. Whether the bounds of Life be predetermined; with an Answer to an Objection.
187, to 193. The Lord's day profaned, what judgments have ensued upon the
Offenders. 99. Love how it becomes advantageous to the health both of Body and
Soul. 153.
M.
Means, natural means must not be neglected in the cure of diseases, nor
altogether relied upon, 138, 145.
N.
Nature in Man's Body (under God) the best Physician; yet stands in need of
outward assistances. 163, 164.
O.
The Ordinances as the Word of God, and the holy Sacraments, Baptism, and the
Lord's Supper, being contemned, or abused, what bodily plagues, and temporal
destruction have followed. 92, to 99. Obedience to Paronts rewarded with long
life, 117, 118. And how the promise of long life is to be understood, 119. Also
what is meant by Obedience to Parents. 121, 122
P.
Perjury, vide Swearing. The Physician learned, and conscientious, worthy of
double honor, and his skill to be made use of with good success; but yet with
a proviso. 147. Prayer being devout and zealous, a powerfulpromoter of bodily
health and long life. 122. Of anointing the sick Body as a Ceremony annexed to
Prayer; and the judgment of our Church concerning it. 127, etc. Some Objections
against the use of Prayer, answered. 129, etc. Pride punished with bodily
plagues and destruction. 104. Divine Providence, the manner of its influence in
procuring health and long life to the Godly. 178.
R.
Repentance, how it procures health, and long life, how it prevents diseases,
and destruction. 138. Religion or a religious life how it becomes advantageous
to health and long life. 149.
S.
Sin in general an occasion of bodily diseases, and shortness of life, and this
in a supernatural way. 6. Also how it is a Natural cause of diseases, 16, 17,
etc. Item how an accidental cause. 83. The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
unworthily received, how dangerous to Soul and Body, vide The Ordinances.
Sacrilege, the punishment of it declared in corporal plagues and destruction.
100. Saints, the long lives of many Prophets, and Saints in Holy Scripture, and
the cause imputed. 145. Sloth and Slugishness, vide Idleness. Society and good
company how sometimes advantageous to health, by consolatory discourses. 177.
Sorrow, vide Grief. The Soul and Bodies Sympathy, and mutual concurrence in the
production of diseases. 111. Study, if immoderate and unseasonable, an enemy to
health and long life. 78. Swearing, Blasphemy, etc. how punished. 101.
T.
Teachers and Preachers how much they contribute, by their wholesome
Discourses, toward the health and long life of their obedient Auditors. 199,
200. Temperance, and the many commodities thereof, in relation to the
prevention and cure of diseases, and to the proroguing of life. 158, etc. The
bounds of Temperance. 174.
V.
Vainglory, vide Pride. Virtue and virtuous actions and affections explained.
144.
W.
Witches and Magicians how they can sometimes cause diseases and death. 110.
They cannot predict the certain term of Man's life, with the manner of his
death. 198.
FINIS.

