OLD Jacobs Account Cast up and owned by one of his Seed, A young Lady, etc. OR
A SERMON PREACHED At Laurence Jury, Feb. 13. 1654. At the Funeral of the
Honorable and Most Virtuous Lady SUSANNA REYNOLDS Wife to the Honorable
Commiss. Genesis Reynolds.

By THOMAS HARRISON, Preacher of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for Lodowick Lloyd, and H. Cripps, at their
shops next to the Castle in Cornhill, and in Popes head Alley. 1655.

To the truly Noble, Commissary-General Reynolds.
Honored Sir,
I Account this Discourse, as holding no proportion with the Greatness of the
Occasion which brought it forth, nor with the rest of that Evening-Service, on
which it was brought forth (there-being nothing mean in that Funeral but the
Sermon) so also unmeet to make one amongst so many already extant upon this
subject: And the truth is, unless the Law of the Spirit of life, which is in
Christ Jesus set in with it, to free us from the power of sin, and to prepare
us for death, This will (...) prove to some a^ present, an Object to provoke
their contempt, and hereafter a Witness to aggravate their impenitency.
However, I resist not its going forth, so our Lord may in any sort serve
himself therewith; Any of his find any sweetness or helpfulness in it: My great
observance toward your self, be attested by it, and the luster of her Name and
Memory not darkened from it: Who really was, and universally was known to be,
one of the chiefest Ornaments of her Sex, in this Nation.

Sir, You have it now not only under my hand, but before many Witnesses, that
I am

SIR Your affectionate Servant, to love and honor your Person, Graces, and
Virtues. T. H.
Dunstans in the East, this 16th of 12th. Mo. 1654.
Old Jacobs account cast up, and owned by one of his Seed, a young Lady, etc.
GENESIS 47.9. Few and evil have the days of the years of my life been, and have
not attained, unto the days of the years of the life of my Fathers, in the days
of their Pilgrimage.


THese are the words of the Patriarch Jacob, and with what evidence of truth,
might that Daughter of Abraham, whose Exequies we now celebrate, stand up and
say them after him. Few and evil have the days of the years of my life been,
etc. Yea excepting the number of his years (in that indeed more happy then he)
I think we may all repeat them after him, as will better appear in the sequel.

A subject not unseasonable for our thoughts at any time; for our whole life
should be, as Philosophers could say, a continual meditation of death; much
less then unseasonable, when God does offer unto us, either in our selves, or
others about us, some eminent occasions and provocations to such meditations.

The words do present unto your consideration, our common condition, and we may
resolve them into these three Propositions or Conclusions.

1. Our life here is but a Pilgrimage.

2. The days of this our Pilgrimage are but few.

3. These few days of our Pilgrimage are evil.

To begin with the first of these, from the last word in the Text; Our life
here is but a Pilgrimage; this was shaddowed out in the continual flitings of
the Patriarchs, they dwelt but in Tents and Tabernacles, and did never stick to
confess that they were but Pilgrims and strangers upon earth, as the Holy
Ghost bears them witness, Heb. 11.13. Aye they might well say so, may some
think, for they had not yet obtained the Land of promise; but was it so
afterward? yes, mark what David says, when he was King of the Country, King I
say, of that country, in comparison of whose Inhabitants, al Nations besides
were strangers, and that not then, when he was outlawed by Absalom, and went
weeping up the Mount of Olives; but in the time of his solemn joy and
festivity, when his Son Solomon was installed as his successor, 1 Chronicles.
29.14.15. All things (says he) come of thee, and of thine own have we given
thee, for we are strangers before thee, and Sojourners as were all our
Forefathers.

And therefore he calls the Church a Tabernacle, Psalm. 15.1. Lord who shall
dwell in thy Tabernacle: And Peter, the time of our life, a being in this
Tabernacle; 2. Pet. 1.13.

Our Lord Jesus, whose members we are, was born in an Inn, a lodging for
strangers: in his life time, he had not a house where to lay his head, and when
he was dead, he was buried in another man's Sepulcher, and the price of his
blood did buy a field for the burial of strangers, nor were these only
strangers in Israel, for we may all subscribe in the same schedule, every man
is an Hebrew, a Passenger, a Gersham, a stranger in the Land, Hebraei, i.e.
transitores from Gnabar migrare, And no marvel, for while we are here, we are
absent from our Fathers house, whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent
from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6. and from the best of our friends, our elder brother,
Christ Jesus, and all our fellow brethren, the glorified Saints and Angels; we
are absent from our own home, our house is in Heaven: When this Earthly
Tabernacle is dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with
hands, Eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. Houses indeed we have here, as Foxes
have their holes, and Birds their nests, and Bees their hives, to be chased and
driven from them; but here we have no continuing City: In my Fathers House,
says Christ, are many Mansions, or settled dwellings, there must be our abode,
that is our long home, Beth Gnolam, our house of Eternity, and there lies our
means, that Inheritance that fades not away, is reserved for us in the Heavens.
Nany profitable instructions we learn from hence. As,

Use 1. Not to seek great things for our selves; it is the same Use that God by
Jeremy makes upon the like occasion, Jer. 45.4.5. says he to Barach, I will
break down and pluck up this whole Land, it shall be given up into the hands of
strangers, thou must but Sojourn a while in it, and seek thou great things
for thy self, seek them not: Travelers do not seek for honors and offices in
the way as they go, all their care is, how they may pass well and quietly on,
they do not look over every Pale, nor step aside into every corn field, when as
they have enough at home; if we have but as much as will bear our charges by
the way, as will carry us to our journeys end, we need not care much: or if
they do traffic, buy or sell in the way, it is but for some Viands, some
necessaries in the way, or to advance their estate at home: We who are Citizens
of another corporation, must meddle no more with the world, then needs must; if
we have any thing to do with it, it must be to get some competent provision for
the way, or to make us a fairer and surer estate in our Country, to further our
reckoning there, Phil. 4.17.

2. Not to take too much pleasure in the things of the world. Travelers do not
set their hearts upon their Inn, which they know they must leave the next
morning: The Rechabites that lived in Tents as strangers, would not drink wine
or strong drink, to make their hearts merry. If we had all the comforts of this
Inn, yet we must rejoice, but sparingly, remisly in it, as if we rejoiced nor,
as Paul does counsel us, 1 Cor. 7.30. Let them that rejoice, be as though they
rejoice not; for the fashion of this world passes away, it is at the best but
a feast of Tabernacles; do not stay too long upon any thing. Arise, depart this
is not your rest, Micha 2.10.

3. To abstain from fleshly lusts; and this use the Apostle Peter would have us
make of it, 1 Pet. 1.11. Dearly beloved, says he, as strangers and Pilgrims,
abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul; these like thieves will
wound us in our travail; these were they that undid the People of Israel, as
they were going to Canaan, they fell a lusting after the daughters of Moab, and
so fell short of their Country; it is not for Travelers to lie guzling in every
Alehouse, it is not for these Travelers to go a whoring after these earthly
things.

4. To look for hard entertainment; Dogs will be barking at strangers, be they
never so honest, and Travelers must look for foul weather, and ill way, and
homely fare, and strange usage, all these must we look for in this life: many a
cursed Doeg will be barking at us, many a Shimei will be cursing; much hard
measure, and much foul weather, must we have with the world, and yet we must
ride on, and in patience possess our souls, and to that end consider we that
our God has provided us some comfort, to wear out the tediousness of the way:
He has given us his Statutes to be our songs in the house of our Pilgrimage,
Psalm. 119.34. To make merry within our journey, as David speaks: Nay, he
himself will go along and sojourn with us, as he promised to go down with Jacob
into Egypt, his Cloud his presence, shall be our defense, and we may send home
every day, by our prayers, for such things as we want here; and for setting
forward our business at home: Christ our Joseph, is gone before us to make all
ready for us; and we may have an answer at any time from him, we hear from him
every week, and we are within sight of home, and he will at length entertain us
into those Mansions which he is gone to prepare for us, Ioh. 14.3.

5. To set our minds and hearts upon Heaven. Travelers do not much mind men's
sayings or doings by the way: they hear some chiding, see others dancing,
others building, others plowing; they may perhaps cast some light glance upon
them, but these they do not heed much, as your clients in Term time, going to
Westminster, do not much mind whom they meet, or whom they pass by, they have
other business in their heads; Animus vere pius, non vacat ad lauds and
opprobria, a truly pious mind should not be at leisure to think of any thing,
but its Country; our desires should still run upon home, our conversation
should be in Heaven, our earnest groaning should be to be clothed upon with
that house; there is our treasure, there should our hearts be also: when
Nehemiah was in the King of Persias Palace, yet his heart was at Jerusalem,
and Daniel opened his windows toward it every day, when he was in Babylon: why
should not we spend our best meditations upon our Jerusalem which is above? why
should not we open our eyes, the windows of our souls, and cast them upon our
Heavenly Canaan, at least once every day, as Moses on Nebo did once upon that
earthly one: and so with those worthies mentioned in the Hebrews, declare
plainly that we seek a Country, A City which has foundations, whose builder
and maker is God: and that the rather because

2. Conclus. The days of this our Pilgrimage are but few: Hence it is, that our
life is compared to things of the shortest continuance; by James 4.14. to a
Vapor that appears for a little season, and then vanishes away. By
Hezekiah, Isa. 38.12. to a Shepherds Tent, set up for a night, whose cords
perhaps are slacked the next day, and the covering folded up: By David, to a
flying shadow, Psalm. 102.11. To a fading flower, which grows up and is green in
the morning; but is cut down, dried up, and withered in the evening, Psalm.
90.5.6. To a morning dream, which is as soon ended as begun, Psalm. 73.20. To a
tale that is told, or a short meditation, Psalm. 90.9. To dust that is blown
away with every blast, Psalm. 103.14. To a wind that passes away and comes not
again, Psalm. 78.39. By Job, to the motions of a Weavers Shuttle, Job 7.6. to
the riding of a Post, to the Sailing of a Ship, to the flying of an Eagle when
she hastes to the prey, Job 9.25.26. The Holy Ghost has picked out all the
choicest similitudes, whereby to express our momentary condition, and if there
had been any other, more emphatical, it is like he would have used it.

Hence it is also that Jacob in this place calls the years of his life but
days, The days of the years of my Pilgrimage: he reckoned them but days, not by
longer measure, on purpose to signify the shortness of them; And hence it is
also, that the book of the Chronicles, where the ages, Raigns and successions
of all the Kings of Israel and Judah, are set down, is called but verba dierum,
words of days.

Nay indeed our whole life, is but as one day, and therefore our Savior wills
us to work while it is day, that is while we are alive, the night will come,
the bell of our evening song will tole ere long, and then its past working
time; Joh. 9.4.

One reason of this, may be taken from the matter whereof, we be made, and
whereon we consist, and that is Earth: Tabernacles you know are soon taken down
or overthrown, because they are but a covering, they have no foundation to
settle upon, so says Eliphaz of our bodies, they are houses of clay, whose
foundation is in the dust, Job. 4.19. aclay cottage, if it were well underpind,
and had a good grounsil, it might last a pretty while, but having no better
materials, no stronger foundation, no marvel if they so soon moulder away: and
that matter likewise is compounded of contraries, one continually fighting
against another: now a Kingdom or a house thus divided, cannot long continue.

2. To this we may add the many enemies that do beleagure us: there are a
thousand ways to go out of the world, though but one to come in; so that many
a man's candle is blown out before it burn to the socket, many an apple plucked
off, before it be ripe: not one of a thousand has the thread of his life drawn
out to the full length, according to the course of nature: The goodliness of
all flesh is like the flower of the field, Isa. 40.6. not of the garden,
exposed to all hardships and hazards whatsoever.

3. God in his wise providence, has set such limits unto our age least we
should grow into extremities, as namely, into extremity of sinning: in the
beginning of the world, men were more upright and innocent, and then God lent
them a longer time; but afterward when iniquity began to abound he decreed to
shorten their days, least sin should be out of measure sinful: Thou have set
our iniquity before thee, says Moses to God, Psalm. 90.8. and our secret sins
in the light of thy countenance: and then it follows, our days are passed away
in thy wrath, even as a tale that is told, and our years are but threescore and
ten: And our blessed Savior foretelling his Disciples what persecution should
befall them, says unless those days of persecution should be shortened no flesh
should be saved, Mat. 24.22. there would be no living in the world, the malice
of their enemies would know neither bank nor bottom, would not keep within any
bounds.

There would be likewise extremities of miseries if men should live always in
the world, if our days indeed were good, the more they were, we might be the
merrier; but seeing they are so miserable, its well that God in his mercy has
made them so few, Do but think with your selves, if Adam and Eve, our first
Parents, had been tied to have lived until this day, whether they would not
have been the most miserable couple that ever lived, they should have had a
share in all the calamities that have light upon the world, God therefore out
of his goodness will shorten our days, the sooner to put an end to our sorrows.

Object. Some perhaps will here think, that our life is not so short as we make
it, seeing many live till they be Seventy or Fighty years old, which seems to
be a long time.

Answ. To whom I answer, that yet this is nothing in comparison of Eternity: a
thousand years with God are but as one day; nay, it is nothing in comparison of
the time that the Fathers lived before the Flood, to which it seems, Jacob in
this place had reference, though he were an hundred and thirty years old, yet
says he, I have not attained to the days of the years of the life of my
Fathers: In the days of their Pilgrimage: some whereof lived seven, some eight,
some nine hundred years and upwards: Nay of that small pittance of life which
we have, there is a great part of it, which deserves not the name: As the time,

1. Of sleeping, that's but a short kind of death; as anger is a short fury, and
their names are promiscuously used. Our friend Lazarus sleeps: Awake thou
that sleep, and stand up from the dead: I found him dead said Epaminondas,
when he slew the sleeping Sentinal, and I left him dead: and this time is well
nigh the third part of our lives: Vitae fur malus ille mae, says Martial of
sleep.

2. Of Childhood and Old Age, Homo est fatuus usque ad anum quadragessimum,
deinde ubi novit se esse fatuum, vita consumpti est, said Luther, its long
before a man begin to live, childhood and youth are vanity, Eccl. 11.10. and
when he grows in years he dies daily, as the old man Alexis, in Stobaeus, going
easily upon his staff, said to one that asked him, whether he went, pedetentem
morior, I am going step by step into my grave.

3. Of Eating and drinking, these are a repairing, not an enjoying of nature,
and yet how much is bestowed in these reparations, Isa. 5.11. The Germans live
as they pronounce, vivere and bibere, with them is all one thing, and if we ply
our liquor as we begin, they are like to lose their Charter: and how many rich
gluttons are there among us, who fair deliciously every day, and so every day
lose so much more of their life, howsoever usually this time is one part of
twelve.

4. Of Recreations, Amici diem perdidimus, said he, my friends we have lost the
day, which we spent in idleness; yet how many stand all the day idle.

5. Of Sining, Ep. 2.1. You has he quickened who were dead in sins and
trespasses, says Paul to his Ephesians, and he tells Timothy, That a widow
that lives, in pleasures, is dead whiles she lives, 1 Timothy 5.6.

6. Of Sickness or suffering, non est vita vivere sed valere, to live is not to
be, but to be well; we say of some delights that a man cannot live without
them: Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life to the bitter
in soul, says Job 3.20. as if he should say, he had as good be without it, and
speaking of the day of his birth, which was the beginning of his misery, verse.
6. Let not that, says he, be joined unto the days of the years, let it not
come within the number of the Months: and Noah's Ark wherein he was imprisoned,
is called his Coffin, or his ten Months Sepulcher, and the men in Hell are said
to die the death, to wit, because of their sufferings, though there shall be
always a conjunction of soul and body in them;

Now when all this is abstracted, after all these deductions, from the time of
our life, that which remains, will be little or nothing, our days will be
shrunk into a narrow compass.

The meditation of the shortness of our lives, this fewness of our days, will
be useful to teach us.

1. Use. Not to be too much taken with the things of this world: Not with
Honors, when Samuel was to anoint Saul, God gave him for a sign that he would
have him for a Prince over his people, that as soon as he was gone from him, he
should find two men near unto Rachels Sepulcher, 1 Samuel 10.2. God might have
given him some other sign; but he chose rather to give him this, it may be to
quel the pride and haughtiness of his new preferment, that the ashes of so fair
a creature as Rachel was, should mind him what he should be afterward, Not with
wives and children; these which are now the pleasures of thine eyes, shall
shortly be loathsome and stinking carcases, insomuch that Abraham shall desire
that his beloved Sarah might be buried out of his sight, that he may not behold
her: and therefore Isaac on the night of his Nuptials, placed his wives bed in
the Chamber where his Mother did dye, to temper their Nuptial delights with the
remembrance of death, Genesis 24.67. Are these the things ye look upon, said
Christ to his Disciples, when they told him of the goodly buildings of the
Temple: there shall not be left one stone upon another, which shall not be
thrown down; so do ye look upon the world, and the glory and beauty and
pleasure in it; these you must soon part withal, the time is short, as Paul
says, 1 Cor. 7.29. and Esau excuses the selling of his Birthright, because
he saw his death was so nigh: I am at the point to die (says he) and what good
will this Birthright do me, Genesis 25.32. so shall thou say ere long, of all the
Titles, the houses, the riches, the relations thou enjoyest: let therefore
those that have wives, be as though they had none, those that buy as though
they possessed not, those that use this world as not abusing it; modicum and
non videbimur: a little while and we shall not be seen, our places shall know
us no more.

2. Not to be too much cast down with adversities, if our affliction be great,
it shall be but short: Sigravis, brevis, though it hold out to the end of our
life, yet this will not belong: with this you may comfort your selves in all
your troubles, tarry and wait the Lords leisure a very little, and he that
shall come will come, and will not tarry, though the way of your Pilgrimage be
tedious and wearisom, yet the days thereof are but few.

3. Not to make our lives shorter, by neglect or abuses of them: a man may
speak as much in few words as in many, and a man my live more in a day then
another does in a year: our life consists in action, so much as we do, so much
do we live, and so much of our life as is unprofitable, so much of our life
death possesses: take heed therefore of melting away so many hours in
pleasure: he that lives in pleasure is dead while he lives, though he thinks
with the Italians, that only he and such as himself know how to live, 1 Timothy
4.6.

4. Not to defer our repentance, our turning to him who is our life, and the
length of our days, Deu. 30.20 to him who is the resurrection and the life,
Joh. 11.25 seeing our time is so short: there were certain fools in Paul's time,
that said, Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall die; of the same humor is
the Devil, who has great wrath, because his time is short; but the holy
Apostle made no such consequence, but the contrary, Let us awake to live
righteously, and cease to sin, 1 Cor. 15.34. and it is the misery of these times
also, though we all row forward to deaths shore; yet like Watermen we look
backward, we dare not look death in the face, nor trouble our selves with
thinking of it: It may seize upon us before we be aware. Old and young, like
Peter and John, we both run to the Sepulcher, our life is a race thither, and
sometimes John the younger, out-runs Peter, and comes first to it.

God may take you away, while you are in the heat and fury of your youth, and
while your wanton blood boils in your veins, therefore what manner of men ought
ye to be, in all holy conversation and godliness, how should we with Job 14.14.
All the days of our appointed time, wait tell the change came.

3. Conclus. So we have done with the second Conclusion, The days of our
Pilgrimage are but few: few in comparison of Eternity, of the first fathers,
and few in themselves, the greatest part being diverted, and otherwise
employed, and it were well that the old Text were bound up in a lesser and
better Volume, their silver changed into gold: if our lives as shorter, so were
happier then theirs, but it is not so with us; even these few days of our
Pilgrimage are also evil. which is our third conclusion, as there is want of
days, so store of miseries. Job who was well seen in this Theme, ties these two
conclusions both together, Job 9.25. My days are swifter then a Post, they fly
away, and they see no good; and as of himself, so of other men, Job 14.1. Man
that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble: If we look upon
Jacob, we shall find him a very Map of misery, experience he had of many
wearisome winters, in his younger years in his Fathers house, he lived in
continual fear of his brother Esau, and at last was freed to fly the country,
afterward he endured a long and hard service under his Uncle Laban, who
changed his wages ten times in the day the draught consumed him, and the frost
by night: and then had a trick put upon him in his marriage: heard every day
the bitter contentions and emulations of his wives; when he comes home the
first welcome is the death of his Rachel: then follows the news how his Joseph
was devoured, that Dinah was defloured, that Simon and Levi had murdered the
Shechemites, that Ruben had defiled his own bed: I might tell you likewise of
David and all his troubles as he calls them, Psalm. 132.1. But why should I
instance in two or three, as if it were not a common condition, every man is a
Benoni, a son of sorrow: It is a lot which every one must draw in their course,
every man has his task of affliction. We come weeping into the world, tears
are the first presage of our future condition; Nundum loquiter infans (says
Austin) and tamen prophetat; Tears are our first Rhetorique, before we can
speak we prophecy, and by a dumb kind of divination, wail out the story of our
after life. And when we have done our lives, we go weeping or groaning out, our
Genesis and our Exodus, our entrance and our ending do both agree: Nor is that
little point of time that runs betwixt these, any whit happier. Our life, as
you hear before, is a Pilgrimage, subject to colds and draughts, exposed to
dangers of beasts and robbers, and a thousand such like, a continual warfare
upon Earth, where we are encompased with enemies: a Navigation, calamity
follows upon calamity, as one wave treads upon the heel of another: a very
Babylonish captivity, The days of our age threescore years and ten, says the
Psalmist, and just so long lasted the captivity of Israel; We have sold our
selves for naught as slaves, and the world is no better then an house of
correction, where every one of us is set to his labor, and every one of us
must look for his stripes, no state or condition of man is exempted; even Kings
Crowns are so full of cares, that if a man knew them indeed, he would not take
one up, though he found it lying upon the ground.

The life of the Student, which some account a fair idle life, is called by
Solomon a sore travail, Ec. 1.13. which God has given to the sons of men, to
exercise or to afflict them withal, as it is in the Margent, and verse 18. He
that increases knowledge increases sorrow, much sorrow and vexation it costs
before he have got it, and when he has got it, it brings many with it; a wise
man finds many defects, foresees his miseries, and so makes them longer can
look into all the corners of them, and knows how to aggravate them, he sees
many things amiss at home and abroad which he is unable to remedy, and so
increases his sorrow.

And for your Mechanical callings, you are always complaining either of
scarcity or deadness of trading, or hevinesse of taxes, or failing of your
debtors, or of some one thing or other,

The wicked have their evil days, many an Aguish fit, many an inward gripe, and
grudging, many a spice of that burning fever that waits them in Hell.

The Righteous they also have their evil days: days of temptation, wherein they
are to wrestle with Principalities and Powers, days of spiritual desertion,
when by their sins they have caused God to hide his face from them: days of
troubles and opressions from the world. And all these so many, that if a man
for all the good days, should lay down so may white stones, and for all the bad
ones, so many black ones; when we come to cast up the reckoning, we should find
the number of the black ones, to exceed the white, such a thing is our life, as
a man would not take it, if he knew what it were before he took it; if he were
to choose, he would not buy his being upon such conditions: one cries with the
Shunamites son, My head, my head, another with the Prophet, my belly, my belly;
another with Asa, complains of his feet; another with Ezekias of his sore in
the body; another with Esau, of his hunger; one with David, my son my son;
another with Elisha, my Father, my Father; one with Job complains of an ill
wife; another with Abigail, of a churlish Husband, another with Joseph, of
unmerciful brethren: And the reason of all this, why the Lord lays this
mustard, these bitters, upon the Teats of this world, is, least we should hang
too much upon them; he sends dashing showrs, and rainy weather, to make us
hasten our journey, for if our way were fair and good, we would loyter in our
journey, sit us down and hold chat, and so perhaps be benighted; if all things
here went well with us and to our likeing, we should go near with the fool in
the Gospel, to sing a requiem to our souls, here set up our rest, and say with
Peter, it is good being here: God therefore in great wisdom having appointed
man to a more excellent happiness, has mixed all our sweet cups, with bitter
ingredients, that so we might sipple more sparingly of them, and seek elsewhere
for our happiness: He sees how we are wedded to the world, and have our hearts
glued to it, and how we could be content to sit down by its fleshpots, and
therefore he will have us here beaten and evil entreated, to make us long for
that land, where flows milk and honey; he will have the waters of troubles
overflow all things below, that with Noah's Dove, finding no rest for the soals
of our feet here, we might betake our selves to the Ark, and fly as a bird unto
God, the hill of our refuge; When the Heathen had suffered Shipwreck of all his
estate; Well fortune, says he, now I perceive thou would have me become a
Philosopher: By all these things God would have us to become Christians indeed,
and to mind Heavenly things.

1. Use, The consideration of these evil days, may serve to strike a terror
into the hearts of impenitents for these are but the beginning of their
sorrows, who do dye in their sins.

The day of Judgment is most properly called the evil day, and that night of
eternity that follows upon it: The night, John 9.4. in this life the wicked
have now and then some twilight of comfort but after this life, there shall be
a perfect midnight, no glimmering of light, no sun to rise any more upon them.
The clouds of Gods anger, are now but in gathering, but then the great deeps
shall be broken up, and shall overflow them: The days of this life, though they
be miserable, yet they are but few, and that is some help, but that help is not
there to be had, Remember the days of darkness for they are many, Eccl. 11.8.
Nay, they are infinite, they shall never have end: Therefore I say with Solomon,
Remember these days; break off thy sins by righteousness, and take hold of him
who is our peace, otherwise there is not the least of thy troubles, but it is a
certain earnest and pledge of thy everlasting torments.

2. Use, Let all the children of God learn to make that use of the evils of
this present life, that God does intend by them.

To long and breath after that State and Place, where all tears shall be wiped
from our eyes; as that son that endures misery in a far country, does with the
Prodigal, long to be at his fathers house: That Mariner that is tossed and
tumbled betwixt winds and waves striving for him, longs to be at the Haven, as
the wounded Heart brays for, and seeks after the water Brooks, as the watchman
waits for the morning, as the Captive or Prisoner does sigh for deliverance,
that which home is to the Traveller, what the Haven is to the Mariner, what
water to the panting Heart, what the morning to the watchman, what redemption is
to the captive, that is Heaven to the soul that is in misery.

Never therefore read or hear that promise of our Savior, Behold I come
shortly, and surely I come quickly; but let the troubles that here molest and
disquiet thee, cause thee to take up that fervent acclamation, Amen, Even so
come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

FINIS.
Epicedium Upon the death of the most worthy Lady, Susanna Reynolds (Wife to
the Hononrable Commissary-General Reynolds) who dyed at Wanstead House, Jan. 8.
1654.
It Is hard now not to write, if Ink were scant
Or failed now, Tears might supply that want.
Zac. 11.2.
Let Fir trees howl, at this sweet Cedars fall,
Let dry and withered ones, this Funeral,
Attend with fear, and what is to the green on done,
Observe with trembling, shall this radiant Sun
Go unlamented down? Oh no, the loss
Is Universal, and this stroke a Cross,
Psalm. 43.9. and 75.3.
To the whole world; which by her loss now wants
A Shield and Pillar; for such are the Saints
Unto the tottering Earth, to ward off blows,
Bear burdens, and prevent sad overthrows;
Who ever heard her name in time of life,
In either state of Virgin, or of Wife;
But with the Appendix of the higest praise:
A strife t'wixt Grace and Nature, which should raise
Her most, was visible unto those few,
Who had the glory of a nearer view:
Her far famed worth did touch all ears and hearts,
With love and wonder; Virtue, Person, Parts,
Deportment, Wisdom, Sweetness, all combined,
To conquer every Nobler heart and mind.
And who has heard she is dead, without a grief,
And horror, such as scarce admits relief;
Her early, too too early loss of breath,
Gives all our joys an Universal death.
And yet, nor sighs nor tears this equal can,
Although our eyes out flow the Ocean.
In this one instance see the truth of all
Those Sacred Similes, that speak man's fall;
His life is likened to a Vapor vain,
To Shepherds Booth, soon up and down again.
To flying shadows, To a fading flower,
Grows up, is green, plucked withered in an hour.
To dreams in the morning, ended ere begun,
To a short stories Race, that is quickly run.
To Dust that is blown away with every blast,
To Wind that goes and comes no more in have:
To Weavers Shuttle moving fast away,
To flying Eagles, hasting to the prey,
To the swift sailing Ships, that hasten most;
To the swift riding of a winged Post.
All these made good in one so justly dear;
May fill Survivors hearts with care and Fear.
To her worthy Husband.
Y' have lost your softest, sweetest half, a part
Is rent from off that Cawl that hides your heart:
How great's your loss? You but begun to know,
What you to God, for such a Mate did owe.
The Throne of Beauty seated in her Face,
Loves Loadstone, in her pure and peerless grace,
A Soul so full of that diviner flame,
Of love (next God) to you, Oh love her Name,
Her name and memory. And love the Lord,
Who once (though but a while) was pleased to afford
And lend you such a Jewel, but few such
Do shine on Earth; all the earth will say as much.
And now She shines above, behold her there,
By Faith, and follow her, up to that Sphaere,
Where centred both in him, whom we adore,
You Will meet e're long, near to be parted more.
To her Noble Parents.
Y' have lost part of your selves, a Child, a Friend,
The seed of fairest hopes, which might extend
To after times, in her your selves set forth,
In a new Volume, the same Grace and worth;
Might to the world and Saints, have lived still,
When Heaven your souls, and earth your bodies fill:
But why do thoughts against him arise and mount
Who of his matters gives no account:
Death like the Serpent's dieted and must
Meddle no further, only feed on dust:
And give up that at last, as he that is bold,
To chop up morsels, too too hot to hold,
That part which you were Organs to convey,
Shall be restored in that glorious day.
To her Brethren and only Sister.
Y' have lost your selves repeated and no less,
A loss then of a Glass, wherein to dress,
Your souls; you still might learn, a staff, a stay,
She might have proov'd to you another day:
Y' have lost a Right hand and a Non-such friend
When once your precious Parents days shall end.
Strive to make up this Breach, Strive to exceed,
Excel your selves in every worthy Deed.
Resemble her that is gone, pray to inherit,
A double portion of your Sisters Spirit.
Sic deflevit, Hodieque deflet. Thomas Harison.

In Excellentissimam, and Charissimam, Dom. Susannam Reynolds.
Sic Flevit, H. P.
HEr matchless worth had I not known;
My rustic Reed had never blown;
But cause I knew this Phoenix well,
My Tit-mouse joins with Philomel:
And though unskil'd in Sol, Fa, Re,
Can bear a part in Lachrimae.
The little Spanlet of her life
She past a Child, a Maid, a Wife:
The first was such a lovely story,
Her Parents had that joy, that glory;
So sweet it was, that they can tell,
Obedience beyond Parallel:
She could subscribe with guileless breath
Obedient Daughter unto death:
There needed not a Fathers frown,
Or Mothers lowrings to take down
An awless Spirit, where an eye,
Or hint commanded Loyalty.
(Deer heart) so anxious to obey,
She grew all duty (as some say)
She carried duty, or it her,
Unto the Grave, if I don't err.
A Virgin so unsoild, so chaste,
That to be a Wife she made no have;
Such virtue lay in Beauty hid,
That all absurd attempts forbid.
Honor and Greatness came a wooing,
And Riches offered to be doing;
But in her bosom find's no place,
It was so taken up with Grace.
Curled Locks, and powdered Loins,
The Votaries to Beauties shrines:
Painted Puppets, and fine things
Like men, with Watches and with Rings,
Presenting Love in Ryme and Prose,
Were answered, I will none of those
Unless I meant to see some feats,
Played by Baboons or Marmosets.
At length her Nobler thoughts she placed
On one whom Heaven and Earth had graced;
But how like to a Rock she stood,
Against Waves and Seas to make vows good,
And how through thick, thin, hot and cold,
She traveled, and through ways untold.
And how her worth did swim above,
Frowns and disdains to answer love;
Yea how withal she did contest,
To gain a longed for short-lived rest,
Must be the work of a Steeled Pen,
I can but weep it ore again.
A Wife she is: Oh give me back
That word again! though words I lack,
To tell how good she was, and yet,
Whether a Wife, I even forget;
For ere the Sun had run its round,
Nor Child, nor Maid, nor Wife was found:
But dainty Dust, laid up in Clay,
Only (Deer Shade) this must I say.
Religion and not Phancical,
Prudence and meekness not formal.
And faithfulness without deceit,
A spirit most humble, and as great;
Birth worth, and sweetness met in thee,
All strove for place, yet all agree;
But what of these? Alas she dies:
Let other Muses write, mine cries.
For sorrows tears drop not from Pens (blessed Sue)
But hearts and eyes, Adieu, adieu, adieu.
H. P.

In Conjugalem Amicitiam JOHANNIS REYNOLDS SVSANNAE REYNOLDS

I Ask no Muse's help to write,
Nor yet of Venus flame or light.
My Fancie's moved by Nobler love,
Such as virtuous minds approve.
Beauties fair color, and its Shape,
Is Natures gift, or Natures Ape.
By love, which of two Souls made one,
Two Spirits composition;
And Friendships Sacred Bond so knit,
Death's Sword alone, could severe it.
Pythagoras and Plato may
Of Scepticks easily gain the day.
Old Poets some blind Prophets call,
Since love's become Ethereall.
Our Gospel groundwork, and no less,
Then hearts enjoyments, as we guess,
More of Souls love, I cannot rehearse,
In tear's Flood, ends my Swan-like Verse.
In obitum Susanna Piissimae Sponsae magnanimi illius Renoldi Exercitus
imperialis Commissarii publici: Sic allocutus est conjux.
QUo cuis unfaelix, nunquam sat flebile fatum?
Non mala sat sentis nisi sis sub pondere stratus?
Connubiine diem celer es celebrare reversum?
Festinant nimium dicis tua carbasa ventis.
En quid habet thalamus? Lectum mors occupat atra.
Quid facis ah Fatum? Cujus praecordia rumpis?
Clepsydra quid properas graciles diffundere arenas,
Quid peragis; viduum gaza de ludere mundum;
Te nihil attonuit, qui tantis emicat ignis
Ingenii radiis? Te nil tot fulgura mentis:
Nil pietas, nil cara fides; nil inclyta virtus?
Eximius candor nil; nobilitasque parentam:
Suadet, ut infaustum poteris divertere telum?
Parcarum quid sunt nisi nomina vana recenses;
Parcere quae nostrae nondum didicere Renoldae.
Si pietatis opus, Si quid pia numina Spectant:
Omnia circumstant. Nec desunt semina vitae
Ne scia solae ne cis: quae Sancta pascitur aura,
Possumus interne nullum mortale videre;
Sed quod ad huc maneat post vani tempora mundi.
Creditur aeternii hominem vixisse diebus,
Si deerant maculae. Quae sunt hoc pectore mendae?
Pulchra Venus naeros circumtulit: Inclyta nullas,
Continet Haec sorces animo ut sic corpore pura.
Mors injussa venis, non est tibi lata potestas;
Ut sponsa dirimas. In me convertito telum.
Quid facii ah! jaculi fi sit, mea pectora tentet;
Adsum qui morior; me, me, tua spicula sternant.
Siccine faeminio gaudes vicisse triumpho:
Siccine deliciam nostri prosternis amoris:
Viscera quid solitas servatis corpore fedes?
Turgida quid fugiunt cordis ligamina ruptum?
Quid rutilas ocule? extinguatur luminis ictus:
Vel si gratus eris Domino sis fletibus aptas
Vivere quid valeat; pereunt cum gaudia vitae?
Vita, corona, decus, summi quoque gloria vote
Interit. Ah! possis non atque marite perire?
Et juvat, and possum, poteris nec morte revelli.
Te sequar o conjux: tumulo tumulabimur uno.
Et quae vita negat tumulo solatia carpam,
Dixit: and innexis haerens cervice lacertis,
Jam moriturus erat, dilapsum luctibus istis
Sustentat sponsae Genius, Charissime, dicit;
Salve; qualis amor, dolor, aut quoe gratia rara,
Impulit? ut scociam, me sub discrimine tanto
Queras? ah conjux: tua sum, tua dicar, oportet,
Exanimata licet. Te per lata oequora actum
Quaesivi: cupiens junctissima junctior esse.
Oraque nostra tuum frustra clamantia nomen,
Implerun gemitus. Quorum suspiria corpus.
Orbarunt anima. Christi quae brachia versus
Tendit cui solo sis conjux chare secundus.
Cujus ob amplexus sperno tot gaudia terrae.
Ipse mihi Sponsus: propero* Mi Chare, valeto
Terrea terrenis liceant, magnalia capto.
Surge, age, da plausus, lugubres exue vestes:
Die Caelis Christum Terris me habuisse Renoldum
Hoc juvat Angelici resonent connubia caetus
Jo Christ veni decoratum suscipe sponsm?
Laeta dies Jani terra caelisque benigna;
Postera me terris junxitque novissimae caelis.
Postera erat faelix; bao sed faelicior ista.
Talia fata, fugit; Sed non revocanda vocatur.
Sponsa mane, Sponsumque tuum laeto ore saluta.
Quae servare potes, number Tu cruciabis amantem?
Plura dolor prohibet. Sed junctis corpore pennis
Illa fugit: Christi tenerisque amplectitur ulnis.
Quae discessa tegit maesto velamine vultus,
Cordaque tantorum quorum sit digna parentum,
Quae libet haud potuit miseros men's discere luctus
Et patris, matrisque suae, fratrumque, sororis.
Conjugis at fixum remanet sub pectore vulnus;
Formam quod violat, maciemque in corpore fecit.
Nec studiosus amor fuit hic de more parentum:
(Si quis enim reliquus) tanti sit digna doloris.
Sic quoties ponto properat Sol lucidous alto
Discessu fuscum Nox induit atra colorem.
Sed valiant planctus, valiant suspiri^, nosmet
Dilecta propere Satagamus jungere Christo.
Sub umbra conjugis pientissimi Sic flevit. J. M:
Epitaphium.
Vivere non volui; Potui nec fata subire:
Me trahit hinc sponsus; me trahit inde Deus.
Est Mihi sponsus amans; mihi sunt charique parents;
Omnibus at melior Tu mihi Christ, veni.


A Funeral Elogie on the death of his Dear Sister Mrs. Susanna Reynolds.
WHat meant your dim eyed Moralists to praise
The homespun virtues of their former days.
Or what vain Poets when they Deifie
Their gay clothed Nature with Eternity,
Had they but seen thy life and fall
They Would burn their Books, and turn Atheistical.
Away Bablers, here you all may see
Your Goddess stained with Mortality,
Here Is Constance, Prudence, every Deity
Enthrald by death, as much as Piety.
Here Is Greatness, Goodness, or what ere you term,
Your Summum B(...)number found to be infirm
Your active virtues in its operation
Has found an exile by Imposthumation:
Nay more, here is Heaven joy and Earths delight
Robbed of her being, stole away by night.
O Covetons Jales thus to impropriate
The worlds treasure to your own estate,
Stand off prophaner Orgies, weel lament
Our saddest loss in love called penitent,
Since that our joy centered in one
Our loss admits no consolation:
Yet glorious is that Loadstone, sweet that love
That thus extracts her soul for joys above.
Unhallowed conversations disagree
With her whose Element is Piety.
If that an Inquest on her lives account
Had but been made, you might have found her moun
Each day degrees, first in affectation,
And then in a spiritual conversation.
Long since she was above, and now she is gone,
To take complete possession
Not that she wanted here, blind fortune nere
Was more propicious to the worlds Heir.
To say she is blessed is vain, it is but to crowd,
Her vast enjoyments, in a breathed Cloud.
Thus weak eyed Mortals cannot well descry
In bodies chained, her state and gallantry:
Yet if the curious fancy dives to know
Her further Bliss, then let him go;
For only vision can describe the story
Of her Immence, Eternal weight and glory.
Yet whilst we see what she contem'd, we guess
Her portions great, that counted this the less.
She to Christ Coll's gone, where Saints commerse,
Where Christ and such blessed souls take sweet convers.
Whose thread of life, Nature so finely spun
It burst asunder whilst the Glass did run.
Sic flevit, Hen. Milden.

A sad Memorial on the much lamented death of the Right Virtuous Lady, SUSANNA
REYNOLDS, Wife to the Honorable minded Commander, Com. Genesis REYNOLDS, who
exchanged her frailty for a Crown of Immortality, Anno, 1654. JAM CHRISTI
SPONSA. PHOENIX MORIENDO REVIVISCIT.
HEnce true Adorements, let Us see no more,
Of Mortal favors, set upon your Score;
Droop, droop Spectators, Canopy each face,
While Tears like Floods run their Curranto race,
If that you did but rightly understand
This loss of losses, you would straight command
If that it lay within your reach, that all
That Virtue does bestow might have a fall,
Had we not better see that Precious Gold
No sooner kept, but quickly turned to Mold:
Alas we Mortals like the Flower are tossed,
No sooner blown upon but we are lost,
It is no wonder, nor admir't as strange
That Sublunary things must have a change;
Observ't, that fatal death strikes at the best,
And Goodness here can never be at rest
Whilst Rareness strives for to preserve it self
Leaves Us at loss, and gains it self by stealth,
And which is most beloved does glide away
And turn our joys into a mournful day.
Now speak your Minds freely, can you not weep,
This loss will make a Heart of Stone to break,
Could greater Virtue have sustained suspense,
By gashly Deaths overture and offense.
Come to her Shrine, bring Tears and not a Bow,
Astraea never left this Earth til now,
Grace, Wisdom, all Perfections deer
Accomplished fully in her Hemisphere;
Where e're she went, she had attractive force,
Her Love so Vocal was, struck others hoarse:
Each one that knows her, if they had but sense
To value Candor to its full commence,
Must deeply mourn, and say that she is gone
And left all goodness here to be forlorn.
Superiors, Equals, all thy loss lament,
Not so much Thine, as their own loss resent:
Often as thy Spouse repairs to his Widdowed Bed,
And misses that on which affection fed,
He straightway sighs, and bids the World farewell,
As not meet for his future love do dwell:
All with one joint consent of Tears now strive,
T'Embalm that Hearse, which th'honour'd whilst alive,
But what may Tears do, those poor Rivulets
Are but dumb Orators, where Death besets:
But what has death gained, since thy Virtues live,
Which from thy Ashes would thy Name revive
Were that dead with Thee, and convey thy Soul
Beyond the utmost Stars, and farthest Pole,
Thy native home, from whence thou first was sent,
To be to Us a lasting Monument,
Who in thy Marble, may read here does lie
(For our example) Faith, Hope, Charity.
Virgins lament your Youth and Beauties gone,
The Mirror of your Sex is fled alone,
Ladies bemoan your Nuptials for here lies,
Of Married couples, the sad Sacrifice,
Who taking farewell of Her Friends took flight
To Heaven, and bad the world, and her deer Spouse good night.
Y' are all but common Mourners then, it is Thou
Chief Mourner (Noble Reynolds) we allow,
Thou that have smiled on Death in open Field,
And dared his worst, nay, boldly made him yield,
Yet here ar't conquered, mourn, the^ mourn no more
Mourn thy high loss in her, mourn not her store
Of joys, exchanged for under-valued Dross,
Who Triumphs in the Crown of her last Cross,
The wreath, and Palm of Peace impale Her head
She lives and triumphs, though ore come and dead.
HER EPHITAPH.
VIrgins, Matrons Come
Enter this Cold Room:
Search, and find, and See
Loves Epitomie,
Stay, and learn, This Enclosed Clay
With certain Hope waits for the Day
Of Joy, That never shall decay.
When This Precious Urn
Yields up His return,
When these Ashes shall
Quit their Funeral,
In Triumph you shall Then Behold
This Earth Clad in Celestial Gold
With all the Blessed Saints inrou'ld.
In obitum Clarissimae Dominae Susannae Reynolds, quae in Domino placide
obdormivit, octavo Januarii An. 1654. Carmen.
COrripit urna capax Susannam stemmate claram
Insignem meritis, Eusibiesque decus.
Hallu^inor! neque enim foretrum, nec Cymba Charontis,
Nec Mansoleum hanc continuisse potest.
Quod cecidit pulvis fuit, atque umbratile corpus:
Cui tegmen tellus sesquipedale dedit.
Enthea sed Psyche periturae nesecia sortis
Morte triumphata, regnat in arce poli.
Parca quid insanis? dum non vis parcere, habendae
Praedae in perpetuum spes tibi nulla manet.
Prima locum Sanctas Heroidas inter habebat,
Nunc cum corporea hic obruta mole fuit
At nunc egregiis Susanna decora trophaeis
Fulget, and aeternae praemia pacis habet
Parce Hyperaspistes Lachrymis, Raynolde, tryumphis
Pluribus insignis, Parce, Precor, Lachrymis.
Christus Agonochetes prohibet, nam clara brabaea
In Thalami sociam contulit ille tui.
Ambo victores, ambo Paeana Canatis
Laetus amoebaeos reddat uterque sonos.
Et vestras serpant inter mea Carmina lauros
Si vobis munus tam levidense placet.
P. A.

FINIS.

