JAMES HARRINGTON


THE Commonwealth OF OCEANA

Tantalus a labris sitiens, fugientia captat
Flumina: quid rides? mutato nomine, de te
Fabula narratur. --
Hor. LONDON, Printed by J. Streater, for Livewell Chapman, and are to be sold
at his Shop at the Crown in Popes-Head-Alley, 1656.

THE COMMONWEALTH OF Oceana.

Dedicated To His HIGHNESS THE Lord Protector OF The Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland.

By James Harrington.

Epistle to the Reader.
SIR, If this Writing be not acceptable, here is already enough, and too much
of it, but if it be, it is but a rough draught; for I have not been yet two
years about it, nor ever saw all or half my Papers together: And now in the
bringing them to light, they have been dispersed into three Presses, where
because I could not be present at them all, I was present at none, by which
means the weakness of my performance, has been so strangely managed for the
worse, that I am quite out of countenance at my work, which the ensuing errors
mended, will not be perfect, but not mended, is not to be understood: Wherefore
let me entreat you before you cast away the time in beginning to read, that you
mend the Faults according unto the ensuing Correstions: Which done, I dare
promise you that if I have not made you a good flight, I have sprung you the
best Quarry: For though the Discourses be full of crudities, the Model has
had perfect concoction.

Errors of the Impression Page. Line. To be thus Corrected. INTRODUCTION. Thee?
thy. 1 4 Thee, the. The Government. 2 36 That Government. For shaking off the
Yoke. 3 11 For shaking the Yoke. The effects. 4 17 Those effects.
PRELIMINARYS. Translation. 1 10 Transition. Metius. 5 33 Melius. Comes. 6 24
Come. First he holds. 6 32 He holds. Circussians. 8 45 Circassians.
Governments. 9 8 Government. Oposite. 9 35 Opposed. Naturally. 14 21 Maturely.
Their ten. 16 2 Thirteen. Talmudest. 16 19 Talmudists. Of others. 17 21 All
other. The Senate. 18 4 This Senate. Commonwealth. 21 36 Commonwealths. And
foundation. 22 36 Or foundation. Superstructions. 22 36 Superstructures. Had no
sufficient. 26 38 Had sufficient. Distributed them into. 32 24 Distributed
into. Have overwhelmed. 33 6 Overwhelmed. Vavosor. 33 32 Vavasor. Mediately the
Teutons. 34 9 Mediately by the Teutons. Vavosor vavosory. 35 13 Vavasor
Vavasory. Vavosors vavosaryes. 35 34 Vavasors vavasorys. The mighty creaturs.
38 24 The mighty; creaturs. Friends. 40 8 Hiends. That makes. 43 6 Makes.
Mamalines. 43 21 Mamaluc's. Through. 43 32 Though. Corrupt: in a people. 45 40
Corruption. That prudence of. 46 4 That of. Had nothing. 47 20 And had nothing.
MODEL. Gnavan. 56 24 Gnacion. Either the power. 57 2 The power. Sense. 57 4
Cense. Unto. 57 5 Into. Be rang. 60 35 Be rung. Of the Ballot. 63 37 By the
Ballott. The Hall. 79 30 The Halo. A Knight a Deputy. 79 36 A Knight or Deputy.
Unto the same or any other. 79 38 Into the Galaxy of the same or any other. Her
balance. 86 1 Such a balance. As. 86 37 Is. This. 89 14 His. The estate of
the Citizen being as little capable of increase, as that of the Commonwealth.
91 13 The estate of the City being as little capable of increase as that of the
Citizen.

In the fifteenth Order, for the page is wrong marked*

For first Region, line 3. read Third Region. For third Region, line 4. read
first Region. For received the first, line 5. read received the third.

Spread. 94 24 Had spread. The. 101 23 This. Or many. 104 29 Many. Their
children. 109 17 His children. Their brocage. 109 19 His brocage. The Romances.
110 7 Your Romances. These. 112 4 Those. The People. 112 13 That People.
Contain. 121 45 Continue. Seal. 122 7 Seat. Seal. 122 9 Seat. Examined.
131 17 Perused. Of the third. 140 13 Of the first. Another. 140 31 Other. Of
Ballottine. 140 35 Or Ballottine. The model. 143 15 This model. Gentilman. 143
17 Gentilmen. The agent. 143 19 Your agent. Noblisse. 144 2 Noblesse.
Gothickes. 144 22 Gothicke. A leur ayte. 145 20 A leur aise. Deverte. 147 7
Divest. That the Nobility be. 148 24 That the Nobility only be. And. 150 6 For.
Stolo d' Enyo. 151 17 Dolabella d' Enyo. Later. 152 17 Late. Ly they. 152 27
Lies it. The Galaxys. 153 10 Your Galaxys. Provosts. 155 9 Our Provosts. Nime.
155 35 Mine. Dimicantes. 159 24 Demicantes. Which. 164 27 And. Not these. 170
33 Not these only. Cornupedum. 172 12 Cornipedum. The Common w: 173 24 Your
Common w: In the Prerogative. 176 19 In your Prerogative. Porposed. 178 13
Proposed. My. 178 24 May. The Tribunes. 180 14 The Tribunes, if the case be
criminal. The Hawks. 187 27 Your Hawks. In esset. 184 20 In isset. Dieij. 187
22 Dieci. Of her Tapestry. 191 7 Of Tapestry. To nothing. 197 28 For nothing.
And though. 198 14 Though. Bean. 198 24 Beast. Answare. 201 8 Reply. Which.
202 18 What. Amounts. 202 27 It amounts. Pointed. 203 24 Appointed. Waste. 204
2 The waste. Vrbane. 205 7 The Urbane. Obtained. 205 18 Attained. Moysances.
205 34 Nuysances. Tribes. 205 41 Wards. Censors. 206 19 Nine Censors.
Preferred. 206 33 Presented. Make. 209 4 Making. That age. 210 32 The age.
Esaias. 210 34 Essays. Their. 218 14 These. Instance. 220 22 I instance. And
Polemarch. 221 30 And a Polemarch. Flaminus. 222 5 Flamines. Cuntry. 222 14
Cuntrys. To the Elect. 222 21 To Elect. The. 223 6 Your. The. 223 6 Your. They.
223 11 When they. Religion. 223 13 Religion.) Of State.) 223 14 Of State. Du
prete. 224 2 Da prete. The Clergy, 224 5 Your Clergy. Work. 227 26 Worse.

A Mark. -- A Mark. -- A Mark. --

A Spanell questing has sprung my Book out of one Press into two other,
wherefore you will find the Retrieve, or that which follows next, differently
marked from what went before; and the Corollary from this.

RETREIVE. Rubs. 157 16 Rub. Piece. As. 157 20 piece, then. Of the world, which
then. 157 30 Of the world, then. Carcasses. 160 13 Carcass. Have. 160 27
Leave. Have. 160 29 Has. (As the case stood with such.) 165 24 ( As the case
stood.) Be a Patronage. 266 21 Be Patronage. The. 270 22 Your. Charge. 270 32
Change. The matters. 270 32 Your matters. Your Legislators. 281 26 The
Legislators. To hear. 283 15 Where. COROLLARY. But whereas. 191 2 And whereas.
Or. 191 25 Nor. The Train being for. 192 33 The Train, for. Tue. 195 39
Virtue. Out thine. 195 40 Outshine. Shall be. 196 38 Be. Shall be, 196 39 Be.
Shall be. 197 6 Be. Of. 197 23 At. Pulce. 197 35 Pulse. Forth. 200 8 For. Nor
might. 204 27 Not might that. Polymarches. 206 24 Polemarches. Kiera. 207 28
Hiera. Horses. 208 24 Forces. Destraction. 209 13 Detestation. Syracusans. 209
37 Syracusians. Is. 210 12 As. Patrae. 211 1 Patriae. The arms. 233 17 Your
arms. Calamity: whereupon. 234 29 Calamity, whereupon. Captains, Cornets. 239
32 Captains: Cornets.

The Introduction or Order of the Work.
OCeana is saluted by the Panegyrist after this manner; Plinie's Description of
Oceana*
O the most blessed and fortunate of all Countries Oceana! How deservedly has
Nature with the bounties of Heaven and Earth endued thee? thy ever fruitful
womb not closed with* Ice, nor dissolved by the raging Star; where Ceres and
Bacchus are perpetual Twins. Thy Woods are not the harbor of devouring
beasts; nor thy continual Verdure, the ambush of Serpents: but the food of
innumerable herds and flocks presenting thee their Shepherdess with distended
dugs or golden Fleeces. The Wings of thy Night involve thee not in the horror
of darkness, but have still some white feather, and thy Day is that for which
we esteem life, the longest. But this Ecstasy of Plinie's (as is observed by
Bertius) seems to allude as well unto Marpesia and Panopea, now Provinces of
this Commonwealth as unto Oceana her self.

To speak of the people in each of these Countries, this of Oceana for so soft
an one, The Nature of the people: Essay 29.
is the most martial in the whole World. Let States that aim at greatness
(says Verulamius) take heed how their Nobility and Gentlemen do multiply too
fast, for that makes the common Subject grow to be a Peasant and base Swain
driven out of heart, and in effect but a Gentleman's labourer: Even as you may
see in Coppice Woods, if you leave the Staddles too thick, you shall never have
clean underwood, but shrubbs and bushes: So in Countries, if the Gentlemen be
too many, the Commons will be base; and you will bring it to that, that not the
hundredth pole will be fit for an Helmet; especially as to the Infantry which
is the nerve of an Army, and so there will be great population and little
strength. This which I speak of has been no where better seen then by
comparing of Oceana and France, whereof Oceana though far less in territory
and population has been nevertheless an overmatch! in regard the middle
people of Oceana make good Soldiers, which the Peasants in France do not. In
which words, Verulamius (as Machiavill has done before him) harps much upon a
string which he has not perfectly tuned, and that is the balance of Dominion
or Propriety: as it follows more plainly in his praise of the profound and
admirable device of Panurgus King of Oceana, in making Farms and houses of
Husbandry of a Standard, that is, maintained with such a proportion of Land
unto them, as may breed a Subject to live in convenient plenty, and no servile
condition, and to keep the Plough in the hand of the owners, and not mere
hirelings: and thus indeed (says he) you shall attain unto Virgil's Character
which he gives of ancient Italy: Terra potens armis atque ubere glebae.

But the Tillage bringing up a good Soldiery, brings up a good
Commonwealth: which the Author in the praise of Panurgus did not mind, nor
Panurgus in deserving that praise; for where the owner of the Plough comes to
have the Sword too, he will use it in defense of his own; whence it has
happened, that the people of Oceana in proportion unto their propriety have
been always free: and the Genius of this Nation has ever had some resemblance
with that of ancient Italy, which was wholly addicted unto Commonwealths, and
where Rome came to make the greatest account of her Rustic Tribes, and to call
her Consuls from the Plough; for in the way of Parliaments, which was the
Government of this Realm, men of Country Lives have been still entrusted with
the greatest affairs, and the people have constantly had an aversion from the
ways of the Court, Ambition loving to be gay, and to fawn, has been a
gallantry looked upon as having something in it of the Livery; and Husbandry or
the Country way of life, though of a grosser spinning, as the best stuff of a
Commonwealth according unto Aristotle, (Agricolarum democratica respublica
optima) such an one being the most obstinate assertresse of her liberty, and
the least subject unto innovation or turbulency: Wherefore till the foundations
(as will be hereafter showed) were removed, this people was observed to be the
least subject unto shakings and turbulency of any: Whereas Commonwealths, upon
which the City life has had the stronger influence, as Athens, have seldom or
never been quiet, but at the best are found to have injured their own business
by overdoing it. Whence the Urbane Tribes of Rome consisting of the
Turbaforensis, Libertines that had received their freedom by manumission, were
of no reputation in comparison of the Rusticks. It is true, that with Venice it
may seem to be otherwise, in regard the Gentlemen (for so are all such called
as have right unto the Government) are wholly addicted unto the City life* but
then the Turbaforensis, the Secretaries, cittadini, with the rest of the
populacy are wholly excluded; otherwise a Commonwealth consisting but of one
City, would doubtless be stormy, in regard that ambition would be every man's
trade: but where it consists of a Country, the plough in the hands of the
owner, finds him a better calling, and produces the most innocent and steady
Genius of a Commonwealth, such as is that of Oceana.

The Nature of the Marpesians.
Marpesia being the Northern part of the same Island, is the dry nurse of a
populous and hardy people; but where the Staddles have been formerly too thick:
whence their courage answered not unto their hardiness, except in the
Nobility, who governed that Country much after the manner of Poland, save that
the King was not elective, till the people received their liberty, the yoke of
the Nobility being broken by the Commonwealth of Oceana: which in grateful
return is thereby provided with an inexhaustible Magazeen of Auxiliaries:
Panopea, The nature of the Panopeans.
the soft mother of a slothful and pusillanimous people, is a neighbor Island,
anciently subjected by the Arms of Oceana; since, almost depopulated for
shaking off the Yoke, and at length replanted with a new Race. But (through
what virtues of the soil, or vice of the air soever it be) they come still to
degenerate: wherefore seeing it is neither likely to yield men fit for Arms,
nor necessary it should; it had been the interest of Oceana, so to have
disposed of this Province, being both rich in the nature of the soil, and full
of commodious Ports for Trade, that it might have been ordered for the best in
relation unto her purse* Which in my opinion (if it had been thought upon in
time) might have been best done by planting it with Jews, allowing them their
own Rites and Laws, for that would have brought them suddenly from all parts
of the World, and in sufficient numbers; and though the Jews be now altogether
for Merchandise, yet in the Land of Canaan (since their exile from whence they
have not been Landlords) they were altogether for agriculture; and there is no
cause why a man should doubt, but having a fruitful Country and good Ports
too, they would be good at both. Panopea well peopled, would be worth a matter
of four millions dry rents, that is, besides the advantage of the agriculture
and Trade, which with a Nation of that industry comes at least unto as much
more. Wherefore Panopea being farmed out unto the Jews, and their heirs for
ever, for the pay of a Provincial-Army to protect them during the term of seven
years, and for two millions annual revenue from that time forward; besides, the
Customs, which would pay the Provincial Army, would have been a bargain of such
advantage, both unto them and this Commonwealth, as is not to be found
otherwise by either. To receive the Jews after any other manner into a
Commonwealth, were to maim it: for they of all Nations never incorporate, but
taking up the room of a Limb, are of no use or office unto the body, while they
suck the nourishment which would sustain a natural and useful member.

If Panopea had been so disposed of, that Knapsack, with the Marpesian
Auxilliary, had been an inestimable treasure; the situation of these Countries
being Islands, (as appeaas by Venice how advantageous such an one is to the
like Government) seems to have been designed by God for a Commonwealth:
Situation of the Commonwealth of Oceana.
and yet that through the straightness of the place, and defect of proper
Arms, can be no more then a Commonwealth for preservation; whereas this
reduced unto the like Government is a Commonwealth for increase; and upon the
mightiest foundation that any has been laid from the beginning of the World
unto this day.

(Illam arcta capiens Neptunus compede stringit:
Hanc autem glaucis captus complectitur ulnis.)
The Sea gives law unto the growth of Venice, but the growth of Oceana gives
law unto the Sea.

These Countries having been anciently distinct and hostile Kingdoms, came by
Morpheus the Marpesian, who succeeded by hereditary right unto the Crown of
Oceana, not only to be joined under one head, but to be cast, as it were by a
charm, into that profound sleep, which broken at the length by the Trumpet of
Civil War, has produced the effects, that have given the occasion unto the
ensuing Discourse, divided into Four Parts.

Oceana. 1. The Preliminaries, showing the Principles of Government. 2. The
Council of Legislators, showing the Art of making a Commonwealth. 3. The
Model of the Commonwealth of Oceana, showing the effect of such Art. 4. The
Corollary, showing some consequences of such a Government.

The Preliminaries, showing the Principles of Government.
JAnotti, the most excellent describer of the Commonwealth of Venice, divides
the whole Series of Government into two Times or Periods. The one ending with
the liberty of Rome, which was the course or Empire, as I may call it, of
ancient prudence, first discovered unto mankind by God himself, in the fabric
of the Commonwealth of Israel, and afterward picked out of his footsteps in
nature, and unanimously followed by the Greeks and Romans. The other beginning
with the Arms of Caesar; which extinguishing liberty were the Translation of
ancient into modern prudence, introduced by those inundations of Huns, Goths,
Vandalls, Lombards, Saxons, which breaking the Roman Empire, deformed the whole
face of the world, with those ill features of Government, which at this time
are become far worse in these Western parts, except Venice, (which escaping the
hands of the Barbarians, by virtue of her impregnable situation, has had her
eye fixed upon ancient Prudence: and is attained to a perfection even beyond
her Copy.)

Definitions of Government.
Relation being had unto these two Times, Government (to define it ( de jure) or
according to ancient Prudence) is an Art whereby a Civil Society of men is
instituted and preserved upon the foundation of common right or interest, or
(to follow Aristotle and Livy) it is the Empire of Laws and not of Men.

And Government (to define it ( de facto) or according unto modern Prudence) is
an Art whereby some man, or some few men, subject a City or a Nation, and rule
it according unto his or their private interest* which, because the Laws in
such cases are made according to the interest of a man, or of some few
Families, may be said to be the Empire of Men, and not of Laws.

The former kind is that which Machiavill (whose Books are neglected) is the
only Politician that has gone about to retreive: Page 180.
and that, Leviathan (who would have his Book imposed upon the Universities)
goes about to destroy. For, It is (says he) another error of Aristotle's
Politics, Page 377.
that in a well ordered Commonwealth, not Men should govern, but the Laws:
What man that has his natural Senses, though he can neither write nor read,
does not find himself governed by them he fears, and believes can kill or hurt
him when he obeys not? or, who believes that the Law can hurt him, which is
but words and paper, without the hands and swords of men? I confess, that (
Magistratus est lex armata) the Magistrate upon his Bench, is that unto the
Law, which a Gunner upon his Platform is unto his Cannon. Nevertheless I
should not dare to argue with a man of any ingenuity, after this manner: An
whole Army, though they can neither write nor read, are not afraid of a
Platform, which they know is but Earth or Stone* nor of a Cannon, which without
a hand to give fire unto it, is but cold Iron; therefore a whole Army is afraid
of one man. But of this kind is the ratiocination of Leviathan (as I shall show
in diverse places that come in my way) throughout his whole Politics, or worse;
as where he says of Aristotle and of Cicero, Page 111.
of the Greeks and of the Romans, who lived under popular States, that they
derived those rights not from the principles of Nature, but transcribed them
into their books, out of the practice of their own Commonwealths, as
Grammarians describe the rules of Language out of Poets. Which is as if a man
should tell famous Hervey, that he transcribed his Circulation of the blood,
not out of the Principles of Nature, but out of the Anatomy of this or that
body.

To go on therefore with this Preliminary Discourse: I shall divide it
according unto the two definitions of Government relating unto Janotty's two
Times), into two parts: the first treating of the Principles of Government in
general, and according to the Ancients; the second treating of the late
Governments of Oceana in particular, and in that of Modern Prudence,

Government, according to the Ancients, and their learned Disciple Machiavill,
Division of Government*
(the only Politician of later Ages) is of three kinds; The Government of One
man, or of the better sort, or of the whole people: which by their more learned
names are called Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy; these they hold, through
their pronenesse to degenerate, to be all evil. For whereas they that govern,
should govern according to reason; if they govern according unto passion, they
do that which they should not do: Wherefore as reason and passion are two
things, so Government by Reason is one thing, and the corruption of Government
by Passion is another thing, but not always another Government: as a body that
is alive is one thing, and a body that is dead is another thing, but not
always another Creature, though the corruption of one come at length unto the
generation of another. The corruption then of Monarchy is called Tyranny; that
of Aristocracy, Oligarchy; and that of Democracy, Anarchy. But Legislators
having found these three Governments at the best to be naught, have invented
another consisting of a mixture of them all, which only is good; this is the
doctrine of the Ancients.

But Leviathan is positive, that they are all deceived, and that there is no
other Government in Nature then one of the three; as also that the flesh of
them cannot stink, the names of their corruptions being but the names of men's
phansies; which will be understood when we are shown which of them was Senatus
Populusque Romanus.

To go mine own way, and yet to follow the Ancients: The Principles of
Governments are twofold, Internal, or the goods of the Mind; and External, or
the goods of Fortune. Goods of the Mind and of Fortune.
The goods of the mind are natural or acquired virtues, as Wisdom, Prudence and
Courage, etc. The goods of Fortune are Riches. There be goods also of the Body,
as Health, Beauty, Strength, but these are not to be brought unto account upon
this score, because if a man or an Army acquire Victory or Empire, it is more
from their Discipline, Arms, and Courage, then from their natural health,
beauty, or strength, in regard that a people conquered may have more of natural
strength, beauty and health, and yet find little remedy. The Principles of
Government then are in the goods of the mind, or in the goods of fortune. To
the goods of the mind, answers Authority; to the goods of fortune, Power or
Empire. Wherefore Leviathan, Empire and Authority.
though he be right where he says, that Riches are Power; is mistaken where he
says, that Prudence, or the reputation of Prudence is power: for the learning
or prudence of a man is no more power, then the learning or prudence of a book
or Author, which is properly Authority; a learned Writer may have authority
though he have no power; and a foolish Magistrate may have power, though he
have otherwise no esteem or authority; the difference of these two is observed
by Livy in Evander, of whom says he, ( regebat magis Authoritate quam Imperio)
he ruled rather by authority then power.

To begin with Riches, in regard that men are hung upon these, Empire.
not of choice as upon the other, but of necessity and by the teeth: for as
much as he who wants bread, is his servant that will feed him: if a man thus
feed an whole people, they are under his Empire.

Division of Empire. Dominion. Domestic Empire.
Empire is of two kinds, Domestic and National, or Foreign and Provincial.

Domestic Empire is founded upon Dominion.

Dominion is Propriety real or personal, that is to say, in Lands, or in
money and goods.

Lands, or the parts and parcels of a Territory, are held by the Proprietor or
Proprietors, Balance in Lands.
Lord or Lords of it, in some proportion; and such (except it be in a City that
has little or no Land, and whose revenue is in Trade) as is the proportion or
balance of dominion or property in Land, such is the nature of the Empire.

Absolute Monarchy.
If one man be sole Landlord of a Territory, or overballance the people, for
example, three parts in four, he is Grand Signior: for so the Turk is called
from his Property; and his Empire is absolute Monarchy.

Mixed Monarchy.
If the Few or a Nobility, or a Nobility with the Clergy be Landlords, or
overballance the people unto the like proportion, it makes the Gothic balance
(to be shown at large, in the second part of this Discourse) and the Empire is
mixed Monarchy, as that of Spain, Poland, and late of Oceana.

Popular Government.
And if the whole people be Landlords, or hold the Lands so divided among them,
that no one man, or number of men, within the compass of the Few or
Aristocracy, overballance them, the Empire (without the interposition of foree)
is a Commonwealth.

Tyranny. Oligarchy. Anarchy.
If force be interposed in any of these three cases, it must either frame the
Government unto the foundation, or the foundation unto the Government; or
holding the Government not according unto the balance, it is not natural, but
violent: and therefore if it be at the devotion of a Prince, it is Tyranny; if
at the devotion of the Few, Oligarchy; or if in the power of the People,
Anarchy: each of which confusions, the balance standing otherwise, is but of
short continuance; because against the nature of the balance, which not
destroyed, destroys that which opposes it.

But there be certain other confusions, which being rooted in the balance are
of longer continuance, and of greater horror; as first, where a Nobility
holds half the Property, or about that proportion, and the people the other
half; in which case without altering the balance, there is no remedy but the
one must eat out the other: as the people did the Nobility in Athens, and the
Nobility the people in Rome. Secondly, when a Prince holds about half the
Dominion, and the people the other half, which was the case of the Roman
Emperors, planted partly upon their military Colonies, and partly upon the
Senate and the people, the Government becomes a very shambles both of the
Princes and the people. Somewhat of this nature are certain Governments at this
day; which are said to subsist by confusion. In this case to fix the balance
is, to entail misery: But in the three former not to fix it is, to loose the
Government. Wherefore it being unlawful in Turkey, that any should possess
Land but the Grand Signior, the balance is fixed by the Law, and that Empire
firm. Nor, though the Kings often fell, was the Throne of Oceana known to
shake, until the Statute of Alienations broke the pillars, by giving way unto
the Nobility to sell their Estates, (Si terra recedat, Jonium Aegaeo frangat
mare.) Lacedemon while she held unto her division of Land made by Lycurgus, was
immovable, but breaking that, could stand no longer. This kind of Law fixing
the balance in Lands is called Agrarian, and was first introduced by God
himself, who divided the Land of Canaan unto his people by Lots, and is of such
virtue, that where ever it has held, that Government has not altered, except
by consent: as in that unparalleled example of the people of Israel, when
being in liberty they would needs choose a King. But without an Agrarian,
Government whether Monarchical, Aristocraticall, or Popular, has no long Lease.

For Dominion personal or in money, it may now and then stir up a Metius or a
Manlius, which if the Commonwealth be not provided with some kind of
Dictatorian power, may be dangerous, though it have been seldom or never
successful: because unto propriety producing Empire, it is required that it
should have some certain root or foot-hold, which, except in Land, it cannot
have, being otherwise as it were upon the wing.

Nevertheless, in such Cities as subsist most by Trade, Balance in money.
and have little or no Land as Holland and Genoa; the balance of Treasure may
be equal unto that of Land in the cases mentioned.

But Leviathan, though he seem to scew at Antiquity, following his furious
Master Carneades, has caught hold of the public sword, unto which he reduces
all manner and matter of Government; as, where he affirms, this opinion, Page
89.
(that any Monarch receives his power by Covenant, that is to say, upon
conditions) to proceed from the not understanding the easy truth, That
covenants being but words and breath, have no power to oblige, contain,
constrain or protect any man, but what they have from the public sword. But as
he said of the Law, that without this sword it is but paper; so he might have
thought of this sword, that without an hand it is but cold iron. The hand which
holds this sword is the Militia of a Nation; and the Militia of a Nation, is
either an Army in the field, or ready for the field upon occasion. But an Army
is a beast that has a great belly and must be fed; wherefore this will come
unto what pastures you have, and what pastures you have will come unto the
balance of propriety, without which the public sword is but a name or mere
spit-frog. Wherefore to set that which Leviathan says of Arms and of Contracts
a little streighter; Arms and Contracts.
he that can graze this beast with the great belly, as the Turk does his
Timariots, may well deride him that imagines he received his power by covenant,
or is obliged unto any such toy: it being in this case only that covenants are
but words and breath. But if the propriety of the Nobility stocked with their
Tenants and retainers be the pasture of that beast, the Ox knows his Masters
Crib; and it is impossible for a King in such a constitution, to reign
otherwise then by Covenant; or if he break it, it is words that comes to blows.

But, sairh he, when an Assembly of men is made Sovereign, then no man
imagines any such Covenant to have past in the Institution* Page 90.
but what was that by Publicola, of appeal unto the people, or that whereby the
people had their Tribunes? Fie, says he, No body is so dull as to say, that the
People of Rome made a Covenant with the Romans, to hold the Sovereignty on such
or such conditions; which not performed, the Romans might depose the Roman
people. In which there be remarkable things; for first, he holds the
Commonwealth of Rome to have consisted of one assembly, whereas it consisted
of the Senate and the People; That they were not upon covenant, whereas every
Law enacted by them was a covenant between them. That the one Assembly was made
Sovereign, whereas the people who only were Sovereign, were such from the
beginning, as appears by the ancient style of their Covenants or Laws (
censuere Patres, jussit Populus): That a Council being made Sovereign, cannot
be made such upon conditions; whereas* the Decemviri being a Council that was
made Sovereign, was made such upon conditions. That all conditions or covenants
making a Sovereign, the Sovereign being made, Page. 89.
are void; whence it must follow, that the Decemvirs being made, were ever
after the lawful Government of Rome, and that it was unlawful for the
Commonwealth of Rome to depose the Decemvirs: as also that Cicero, if he writ
otherwise out of his Commonwealth, did not write out of Nature. But to come
unto others that see more of this balance.

You have Aristotle full of it in diverse places, B. 5.3.3.9.
especially where he says, that Immoderate Wealth, as where One man or the Few
have greater possessions than equality or the frame of the Commonwealth will
bear, is an occasion of Sedition, which ends for the greater part in Monarchy;
and that for this cause the Ostracisme has been received in diverse places, as
in Argos and Athens. But that it were better to prevent the growth in the
beginning, then, when it has gotten head, to seek the remedy of such an evil.

Machiavill has missed it very narrowly and more dangerously, for not fully
perceiving, D. B. 1. C. 55.
that if a Commonwealth be galled by the Gentry, it is by their overballance;
he speaks of the Gentry as hostile to popular Governments, and of popular
Governments as hostile unto the Gentry; and makes us believe, that the people
in such are so enraged against them, that where they meet a Gentleman they kill
him; which can never be proved by any one example, unless in civil War;
seeing that even in Switz the Gentry are not only safe, but in honor. But the
balance as I have laid it down, though unseen by Machiavill, is that which
interprets him, and that which he confirms by his Judgment in many other as
well as in this place, where he concludes, That he who will go about to make a
Commonwealth where there be many Gentlemen, unless he first destroy them,
undertakes an impossibility: and that he who goes about to introduce Monarchy
where the condition of the people is equal, shall never bring it to pass,
unless he cull out such of them as are the most turbulent and ambitious, and
make them Gentlemen or Noblemen, not in name but in effect, that is, by
enriching them with Lands, Castles, and Treasures, that may gain them power
amongst the rest, and bring in the rest unto dependence upon themselves, to the
end that they maintaining their ambition by the Prince, the Prince may maintain
his power by them.

Wherefore as in this place I agree with Machiavill, that a Nobility or Gentry
overballancing a popular Government, is the utter bane and destruction of it;
so I shall show in another, that a Nobility or Gentry in a popular Government
not overballancing it, is the very life and soul of it.

By what has been said, it should seem that we may lay aside farther disputes
of the public Sword, The right of the Militia stated.
or of the right of the Militia; which, be the Government what it will, or let
it change how it can, is inseparable from the overballance in dominion: nor, if
otherwise stated by the Law or Custom as in the Commonwealth of Rome
(Consules sine lege Curiata rem militarem attingere non potuerunt) where the
people having the sword, the Nobility came to have the overballance; avails
it unto other end than destruction: for as a building swaying from the
foundation must fall, so the Law swaying from reason, and the Militia from the
balance of Dominion. And so much for the balance of National or Domestic
Empire which is in Dominion.

The balance of Foreign or Provincial Empire is of a contrary nature.
Balance of foreign Empire.
A man may as well say that it is unlawful for him who has made a fair and
honest purchase to have tenants, as for a Government that has made a just
progress, and enlargement of it self, to have Provinces. But how a Province
may be justly acquired, appertains to another place; in this I am to show no
more, then how or upon what kind of balance it is to be held; in order
whereunto, I shall first show upon what kind of balance it is not to be held.
It has been said, that National or Independent Empire, of what kind soever, is
to be exercised by them that have the proper balance of Dominion in the
Nation; wherefore Provincial or dependent Empire is not to be exercised by them
that have the balance of Dominion in the Province, because that would bring
the Government from Provincial and dependent, to National and independent.
Absolute Monarchy, as that of the Turks, neither planteth her people at home
nor abroad, otherwise then as Tenants for life or at will; wherefore her
National and her provincial Government is all one. But in Governments that
admit the Citizen or Subject unto dominion in Lands, the richest are they that
share most of the power at home: whereas the richest among the Provincials,
though native Subjects, or Citizens that have been transplanted, are least
admitted to the Government abroad: for men like flowers or roots being
transplanted take after the soil wherein they grow. Wherefore the Commonwealth
of Rome, by planting Colonies of her Citizens within the bound of Italy, took
the best way of propagating her self, and naturalizing the Country; whereas if
she had planted such Colonies without the bounds of Italy, it would have
alien'd the Citizens, and given a root unto liberty abroad, that might have
sprung up foreign or savage and hostile to her; wherefore she never made any
such dispersion of her self and her strength, till she was under the yoke of
her Emperors, who disburdening themselves of the people, as having less
apprehension of what they could do abroad then at home, took a contrary course.

The Mamaluc's, (which till any man show me the contrary, I shall presume to
have been a Commonwealth consisting of an Army, whereof the common Soldier
was the People, the Commission-Officer the Senate, and the General the Prince)
were forraigners, and by Nation Circussians, that governed Egypt; wherefore
these never durst plant themselves upon Dominion, which growing naturally up
into the National interest must have dissolved the foreign yoke in that
Province.

The like in some sort may be said of Venice, the Government whereof is usually
mistaken: for Venice, though she do not take in the people, never excluded
them. This Commonwealth, the Orders whereof are the most Democratical or
Popular of all others, in regard of the exquisite Rotation of the Senate, at
the first institution took in the whole people; they that now live under the
Governments without participation of it, are such as have since either
voluntarily chosen so to do, or were subdued by Arms. Wherefore the Subject of
Venice is governed by Provinces, and the balance of Dominion not standing, as
has been said, with Provincial Government: as the Mamaluc's durst not cast
their Government upon this balance in their Provinces, lest the National
interest should have rooted out the foreign; so neither dare the Venetians
take in their Subjects upon this balance, lest the foreign interest should
root out the National, which is that of the 3000 now governing; and by
diffusing the Commonwealth throughout her Territories, lose the advantage of
her situation, by which in a great part she subsisteth. And such also is the
Government of the Spaniard in the Indies, unto which he deputeth Natives of his
own Country, not admitting the Creolios unto the Government of those Provinces;
though descended from Spaniards.

But if a Prince or a Commonwealth may hold a Territory that is foreign in
this, it may be asked, why he may not hold one that is Native in like manner?
To which I answer, because he can hold a foreign by a Native territory, but
not a Native by a Foreign; and as hitherto I have shown what is not the
Provincial balance, so by this answer it may appear what it is, namely the
overballance of a native Territory to a foreign; for as one Country ballanceth
it self by the distribution of propriety according unto the proportion of the
same, so one Country over ballanceth another, by advantage of diverse kinds. For
example, the Commonwealth of Rome overballanced her provinces by the vigor of
a more excellent Government opposite unto a crazier, or by a more exquisite
Militia opposed unto one inferior in Courage or discipline: The like was that
of the Mamaluc's being an hardy, unto the Aepgytians that were a soft people.
And the balance of a situation is in this kind, of wonderful effect; seeing
the King of Denmark, being none of the most potent Princes, is able at the
Sound to take Tole of the greatest: and as this King by the advantage of the
Land can make the Sea tributary; so Venice; by the advantage of the Sea, in
whose arms she is impregnable, can make the Land to feed her Gulf. For the
Colonies in the Indies, they are yet babes that cannot live without sucking the
breasts of their mother-Cities, but such as, I mistake, if when they come of
age they do not wean themselves: which causes me to wonder at Princes that
delight to be exhausted in that way. And so much for the principles of power
whether National or Provincial, Domestic or Foreign; being such as are
External, and founded in the goods of Fortune.

Authority.
I come unto the principles of Authority, which are Internal, and founded upon
the goods of the Mind; These the Legislator that can unite in his Government
with those of fortune, comes nearest unto the work of God, whose Government
consists of Heaven and Earth: which was said by Plato, though in different
words, as, when Princes should be Philosophers, or Philosophers Princes, the
world would be happy; and says Solomon, Eccl. 10.15. Tacit. Grot.
There is an evil which I have seen under the Sun, which proceeds from the
Ruler, (enimvero neque nobilem, neque ingenuum, nec libertinum quidem armis
praeponere, regia utilitas est,) folly is set in great dignity, and the rich
(either in virtue and wisdom, in the goods of the mind, or those of fortune
upon that balance which gives them a sense of the National interest) sit in
low places. I have seen servants upon horses, and Princes walking as servants
upon the earth. Sad complaints, that the principles of Power and of Authority,
the goods of the mind, and of fortune, do not meet and twine in the wreathe or
Crown of Empire! Wherefore if we have any thing of Piety or of prudence, let us
raise our selves out of the mire of private interest, unto the contemplation of
Virtue, and put an hand unto the removal of this Evil from under the Sun; this
evil against which no Government that is not secured, can be good; this evil
from which the Government that is secure, must be perfect. Solomon tells us,
that the cause of it is from the Ruler, from those principles of power which
balanced upon earthly trash, exclude the heavenly treasures of Virtue, and
that influence of it upon Government, which is Authority. We have wandered the
Earth to find out the balance of power: but to find out that of Authority, we
must ascend, as I said, nearer Heaven, or to the Image of God, which is the
Soul of man.

The Soul of man (whose life or motion is perpetual contemplation or thought)
is the Mistress of two potent rivalls, the one Reason, the other Passion, that
are in continual suit; and according as she gives up her will to these or
either of them, is the felicity or misery which man partakes in this mortal
life.

For as what ever was passion in the contemplation of a man, being brought
forth by his will into action, is vice and the bondage of Sin; so what ever was
reason in the contemplation of a man, being brought forth by his will into
action, is virtue and the freedom of Soul.

Again, as those actions of a man that were sin, acquire unto himself
repentance or shame, and affect others with scorn or pity; so those actions of
a man that are virtue, acquire unto himself Honor, and upon others Authority.

Now Government is no other then the Soul of a Nation or City: wherefore that
which was reason in the debate of a Commonwealth, being brought forth by the
result, must be virtue; and for as much as the Soul of a City or Nation is the
Sovereign power, her virtue must be Law. But the Government whose Law is
virtue, and whose virtue is law, is the same, whose Empire is Authority, and
whose Authority is Empire.

Again, if the liberty of a man consist in the Empire of his reason, the
absence whereof would betray him unto the bondage of his passions: Then the
liberty of a Commonwealth consists in the Empire of her Laws, the absence
whereof would betray her unto the lasts of Tyrants: and these I conceive to be
the principles, upon which Aristotle and Livy (injuriously accused by Leviathan
for not writing out of nature) have grounded their assertion, that a
Commonwealth is an Empire of Laws and not of Men. But they must not carry it
so. For, says he, Page 110.
The liberty, whereof there is so frequent and honorable mention in the
Histories and Philosophy of the ancient Greeks and Romans, and the Writings and
Discourses of those that from them have received All their Learning in the
Politics, is not the liberty of particular men, but the liberty of the
Commonwealth. He might as well have said, that the Estates of particular men
in a Commonwealth, are not the riches of particular men, but the riches of the
Commonwealth; for equality of estates causes equality of power, and equality
of power is the liberty not only of the Commonwealth, but of every man. But
sure a man would never be thus irreverent with the greatest Authors, and
positive against all Antiquity, without some certain demonstration of truth;
and, what is it? Why, there is written on the Turrets of the City of Luca in
great Characters at this day the word LIBERTAS, yet no man can thence infer,
that a particular man has more liberty or immunity from the service of the
Commonwealth there, then in Constantinople. Whether a Commonwealth be
Monarchical or Popular, the freedom is the same. The Mountain has brought
forth, and we have a little equivocation! For to say, that a Luchese has no
more liberty or immunity from the Laws of Luca; then a Turk has from those of
Constantinople; and to say that a Luchese has no more liberty or immunity by
the Laws of Luca, then a Turk has by those of Constantinople, are pretty
different speeches: the first may be said of all Governments alike; the second
scarce of any two; much less of these, seeing it is known, that whereas the
greatest Bashaw is a Tenant as well of his head, as of his estate, at the will
of his Lord; the meanest Luchese that has Land, is a freeholder of both, and
not to be controlled but by the Law, and that framed by every private man unto
no other end, (or they may thank themselves) then to protect the liberty of
every private man, which by that means comes to be the liberty of the
Commonwealth.

But seeing they that make the Laws in Commonwealths are but men, the main
question seems to be, how a Commonwealth comes to be an Empire of Laws, and
not of Men? or how the debate or result of a Commonwealth is so sure to be
according unto reason; seeing they who debate, and they who resolve be but men.
And as often as reason is against a man, so often will a man be against reason.

This is thought to be a shrewd saying, but will do no harm; for be it so, that
reason is nothing but interest, there be diverse interests, and so diverse
reasons.

As first, there is Private Reason, which is the interest of a private man.

Secondly, there is Reason of State, which is the interest (or error as was
said by Solomon) of the Ruler or Rulers, that is to say, of the Prince, of the
Nobility, or of the People.

Thirdly, there is that Reason which is the interest of mankind, or of the
whole. Hooker. B. 1.
Now if we see even in those natural agents that want sense, that as in
themselves they have a Law which directs them, in the means whereby they tend
to their own perfection, so likewise that another Law there is, which touches
them as they are sociable parts united into one body, a Law which binds them
each to serve unto others good, and all to prefer the good of the whole, before
whatsoever their own particular; as when stones or heavy things forsake their
ordinary wont or center, and fly upwards, as if they heard themselves commanded
to let go the good they privately wish, and to relieve the present distress of
Nature in common. There is a common right, Law of Nature, or interest of the
whole; which is more excellent, and so acknowledged to be by the agents
themselves, Grot.
then the right or interest of the parts only. Wherefore though it may be
truly said, that the creatures are naturally carried forth, unto their proper
utility or profit: that ought not to be taken in too general a sense; seeing
diverse of them abstain from their own profit, either in regard of those of the
same kind, or at the least of their young.

Mankind then must either be less just then the creature, or acknowledge also
his common interest to be common right. And if reason be nothing else but
interest, and the interest of mankind be the right interest, then the reason of
mankind must be right reason. Now compute well, for if the interest of popular
Government come the nearest unto the interest of mankind, then the reason of
popular Government must come the nearest unto right reason.

But it may be said, that the difficulty remains yet; for be the interest of
popular Government right reason, a man does not look upon reason as it is right
or wrong in it self, but as it makes for him or against him: wherefore unless
you can show such orders of a Government, as like those of God in nature shall
be able to constrain this or that creature to shake off that inclination which
is more peculiar unto it, and take up that which regards the common good or
interest; all this is to no more end, then to persuade every man in a popular
Government, not to carve himself of that which he desires most, but to be
mannerly at the public Table, and give the best from himself unto decency and
the common interest. But that such orders may be established, as may, nay must
give the upper hand in all cases unto common right or interest, notwithstanding
the nearness of that which sticks unto every man in private, and this in a way
of equal certainty and facility, is known even unto girls, being no other then
those that are of common practice with them in diverse cases. For example, two
of them have a Cake yet undivided, which was given between them, that each of
them therefore may have that which is due: Divide, says one unto the other,
and I will choose; or let me divide, and you shall choose: if this be but once
agreed upon, it is enough: for the divident, dividing unequally loses, in
regard that the other takes the better half; wherefore she divides equally, and
so both have right. O the depth of the wisdom of God! and yet by the mouths of
babes and sucklings has he set forth his strength; that which great
Philosophers are disputing upon in vain, is brought unto light by two silly
girls, even the whole mystery of a Commonwealth: which lies only in dividing
and choosing: nor has God (if his works in nature be understood) left so much
unto mankind to dispute upon, as who shall divide, and who choose, but
distributed them for ever into two orders, whereof the one has the natural
right of dividing, and the other of choosing. For Example:

A Commonwealth is but a civil Society of men: let us take any number of men
(as twenty), The orders of popular Government in Nature.
and forthwith make a Commonwealth: twenty men (if they be not all idiots,
perhaps if they be) can never come so together, but there will be such
difference in them, that about a third will be wiser, or at least less foolish
then all the rest; these upon acquaintance though it be but small, will be
discovered, and (as Stags that have the largest heads) lead the herd; for while
the six discoursing and arguing one with another, show the eminence of their
parts, the fourteen discover things that they never thought on; or are cleared
in diverse truths which had formerly perplexed them: wherefore in matter of
common concernment, difficulty or danger, they hang upon their lips as children
upon their fathers, and the influence thus acquired by the six, the eminence of
whose parts, is found to be a stay and comfort to the fourteen, is (AUTHORITAS
PATRUM) the authority of the Fathers. Wherefore this can be no other then a
natural Aristocracy diffused by God throughout the whole body of mankind, to
this end and purpose; and therefore such, as the people, have not only a
natural, but a positive obligation to make use of as their guides; as where the
people of Israel are commanded to take wise men and understanding and known
among their Tribes, Deuteronomy. 1.13.
to be made Rulers over them; the six then approved of, as in the present case,
are the Senate, not by hereditary right, or in regard of the greatness of
their estates only, which would tend unto such power as might force or draw
the people; but by election for their excellent parts, which tends unto the
advancement of the influence of their virtue or authority that leads the
people. Wherefore the office of the Senate, is not to be Commanders but
Counselors of the people; and that which is proper unto Counselors, is first
to debate the business whereupon they are to give advice, and afterward to
give Advice in the business whereupon they have debated; whence the Decrees of
the Senate are never Laws, nor so called, but SENATUS CONSULTA, and these
being naturally framed, it is their duty (FAR AD POPULUM) to propose in the
case unto the people. Wherefore the Senate is no more then the debate of the
Commonwealth: But to debate is to discern or put a difference between things
that being alike are not the same, or it is separating and weighing this reason
against that, and that reason against this, which is dividing.

The People.
The Senate then having divided, who shall choose? Ask the girls; for if she
that divided must have chosen also, it had been little worse for the other, in
case she had not divided at all, but kept the whole Cake unto her self, in
regard that being to choose too, she divided accordingly. Wherefore if the
Senate have any farther power than to divide, the Commonwealth can never be
equal. But in a Commonwealth consisting of a single Council, there is no
other to choose then that which divided; whence it is, that such a Council
fails not to scramble, that is, to be factious; there being no other dividing
of the cake in that case but among themselves.

Nor is there any remedy but to have another Council to choose. The wisdom of
the Few may be the light of Mankind; but the interest of the Few is not the
profit of Mankind, nor of a Commonwealth; wherefore seeing we have granted
interest to be reason, they must not choose, lest it put out their light; but
as the Council dividing consists of the Wisdom of the Commonwealth, so the
Assembly or Council choosing, should consist of the interest of the
Commonwealth: as the wisdom of the Commonwealth is in the Aristocracy, so the
interest of the Commonwealth is in the whole body of the People: and whereas
this, in case the Commonwealth consist of an whole Nation, is too unweildy a
body to be assembled, this Council is to consist of such a Representative as
may be equal, and so constituted, as can never contract any other interest
then that of the whole people; the manner whereof being such as is best shown
by exemplification, I remit unto the Model. But in the present case, the six
dividing, and the fourteen choosing, must of necessity take in the whole
interest of the twenty.

Dividing and choosing in the language of a Commonwealth is debating and
resolving; and whatsoever upon debate of the Senate is proposed unto the
people, and resolved by them is enacted (AUTHORITATE PATRUM ET JUSSU POPULI) by
the authority of the Fathers, and the power of the people, which concurring
make a Law.

But the Law being made, says Leviathan, The Magistracy.
is but words and paper without the hands and swords of men; wherefore as those
two orders of a Commonwealth, namely the Senate and the people are
Legislative, so of necessity there must be a third to be executive of the Laws
made, and this is the Magistracy; in which order with the rest being wrought up
by art, the Commonwealth consists of the Senate proposing, the People
resolving, and the Magistracy executing: whereby partaking of the Aristocracy
as in the Senate, of the Democracy as in the People, and of Monarchy as in the
Magistracy, it is complete. Now there being no other Commonwealth but this in
Art or Nature, it is no wonder if Machiavill have showed us, that the Ancients
held this only to be good; but it seems strange to me, that they should
hold, that there could be any other: for if there be such a thing as pure
Monarchy, yet that there should be such an one as pure Aristocracy, or pure
Democracy, is not in my understanding. But the Magistracy both in number and
function is different in different Commonwealths: nevertheless there is one
condition of it, that must be the same in Every one, or it dissolves the
Commonwealth where it is wanting: And this is no less then that as the hand
of the Magistrate is the executive power of the Law, so the head of the
Magistrate is answerable unto the people, that his execution be according unto
the Law, by which Leviathan may see, that the hand or sword that executes the
Law is in it, and not above it.

Now whether I have rightly transcribed these Principles of a Commonwealth out
of Nature, The Orders of a Commonwealth in experience, as that
I shall appeal unto God and to the World. Unto God in the Fabric of the
Commonwealth of Israel: and unto the World in the universal Series of ancient
prudence. But in regard the same Commonwealths will be opened at large in the
Council of Legislators, I shall touch them for the present, but slightly;
beginning with that of Israel.

The Commonwealth of Israel consisted of the Senate, the People, Of Israel.
and the Magistracy.

The People by their first division, which was genealogicall, were contained
under their ten Tribes, houses or families; whereof the first born in each was
Prince of his Tribe, and had the leading of it ( Numb. 1.) the Tribe of Levi
only being set a part to serve at the Altar, had no other Prince but the High
Priest. In their second division they were divided locally by their Agrarian,
(Jos. c. 13. to c. 42.). or the distribution of the Land of Canaan unto them by
Lot, the tithe of all remaining unto Levi; whence according unto their local
division, the Tribes are reckoned but twelve.

The People.
The Assemblies of the people thus divided were methodically gathered by
Trumpets (Number. 10.7.) unto the Congregation; which was it should seem of two
sorts. For if it were called by one trumpet only, the Princes of the Tribes
and the Elders only assembled, ( Numb. 10.4.) but if it were called with two,
the whole people gathered themselves unto the Congregation, Number. 10.3.) for so
it is rendered by the English: but in the Greek it is called Ecclesia, or the
Church of God, ( Judge. 20.2.) and by the Talmudist, Synagoga magna. The word
Ecclesia was also anciently and properly used for the Civil Congregations or
Assemblies of the people in Athens, Lacedemon, and Ephesus, where it is so
called in Scripture, ( Acts 19.23.) though it be otherwise rendered by the
Translators, not much as I conceive to their commendations; seeing by that
means they have lost us a good lesson, the Apostles borrowing that name for
their spiritual Congregations, to the end that we might see they intended the
Government of the Church to be Democratical or Popular, as is also plain in the
rest of their constitutions.

The Church or Congregation of the people of Israel, assembled in a Military
manner, ( Judge. 20.2.) and had the result of the Commonwealth, or the power of
confirming all their Laws, though proposed even by God himself, as where they
make him King, ( Exodus 19.) And where they reject or depose him as Civil
Magistrate, and elect Saul, (1 Samuel 8.7.) it is manifest that he gives no such
example unto a Legislator in a popular Government, as to deny or evade the
power of the people, which were a contradiction: but, though he deservedly
blame the ingratitude of the people in that action, commands Samuel, being
next under himself Supreme Magistrate, to hearken unto their voice, (for where
the suffrage of the people goes for nothing, it is no Commonwealth) and
comfort him, saying, They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me,
that I should not reign over them. But to reject him that he should not reign
over them, was as Civil Magistrate to depose him. The power therefore which
the people had to depose even God himself as he was Civil Magistrate, leaves
little doubt, but that they had power to have rejected any of those Laws
confirmed by them throughout the Scripture, which (to omit the several
parcels) are generally contained ( Deuteronomy. 29.) under two heads, those that were
made by Covenant with the people in the Land of Moab, and those which were made
by Covenant with the people in Horeb: which two, I think, amount unto the whole
body of the Israelitish Laws: but if all and every one of the Laws of Israel
being proposed by God, were no otherwise enacted than by Covenant with the
people, then that only which was resolved by the people of Israel, was their
Law; and so the result of that Commonwealth was in the people. Nor had the
people the result only in matter of Law: but the power in some cases of
Judicature, (Jos. 7.16. Judge. 20.8, 9, 10.) as also the right of levying War,
(Judge. 20.8, 9, 10. 1 Samuel 7.6, 7, 8.) cognizance in matter of Religion, (1 Chronicles. 13.2. 2 Chronicles. 30.4.) and the election of their Magistrates, as the
Judge or Dictator, (Judge. 11.11.) The King, (1 Samuel 10.17.) The Prince, (1
Machab. 14.) which functions were exercised by the Synagoga magna, or
Congregation of Israel not always in one manner: for sometimes they were
performed by the suffrage of the people, viva voce, (Ex. 9.3, 4, 5.) sometimes
by the Lot only, (Jos. 7. 1 Samuel 10.) and of others by the Ballot or by a
mixture of the lot with the suffrage, as in the case of Eldad and Medad, which
I shall open with the Senate.

The Senate of Israel called in the Old Testament the seventy Elders: and in
the New the Sanhedrim; The Senate.
which word is usually translated the Council: was appointed by God, and
consisted of Seventy Elders besides Moses, (Number. 11.) which were at the first
elected by the people, (Deuteronomy. 1.) but in what manner, is rather intimated (
Numb. 11.) then shown: nevertheless, because I cannot otherwise understand the
passage concerning Eldad and Medad, of whom it is said, that they were of them
that were written, but went not up unto the Tabernacle; then with the
Talmudists, I conceive that Eldad and Medad had the suffrage of the Tribes, and
so were written as competitors for Magistracy; but coming afterward unto the
Lot, failed of it, and therefore went not up unto the Tabernacle, or place of
confirmation by God, or to the Session-house of the Senate with the Seventy
upon whom the lot fell to be Senators: for the Session house of the Sanhedrim
was first in the Court of the Tabernacle, and afterward in that of the Temple,
where it came to be called the Stone Chamber or Pavement, (John) If this were
the Ballot of Israel, that of Venice is the same transposed: for in Venice the
competitor is chosen as it were by the lot, in regard that the Electors are so
made, and the Magistrate is chosen by the Suffrage of the great Council or
Assembly of the people. But the Sanhedrim of Israel being thus constituted,
Moses for his time, and after him his successor, sat in the midst of it as
Prince or Archon, and at his left hand the Orator or Father of the Senate, the
rest of the bench coming round with either horn like a Crescent, had a Scribe
attending upon the tip of it.

The Senate in regard that the Legislator of Israel was infallible, and the
Laws given by God, such as were not fit to be altered by men, is much
different in the exercise of their power from all other Senates, except that of
the Areopagites in Athens, which also was little more then a Supreme
Judicatory; for it will hardly, as I conceive, be found that the Sanhedrim
proposed unto the people, till the return of the Children of Israel out of
Captivity under Esdras, at which time there was a new Law made, namely, for a
kind of excommunication, or rather banishment, which had never been before in
Israel: nevertheless it is not to be thought that the Sanhedrim had not
always that right, which from the time of Esdras it more frequently exercised,
of proposing unto the people, but that they forbear it in regard of the
fullness and infallibility of the Law already made, whereby it was needless.
Wherefore the function of this Council, The Magistracy.
which is very rare in a Senate, was executive, and consisted in the
administration of the Law made ( Deuteronomy. 17.9, 10, 11.); and whereas the Council
it self, is often understood in Scripture by the Priest and the Levite: there
is no more in that, save only that the Priests and the Levites, who otherwise
had no power at all, being in the younger years of this Commonwealth, those
that were best studied in the Laws were the most frequently elected into the
Sanhedrim. For the Courts consisting of three and twenty Elders sitting in the
gates of every City, and the Triumvirates of Judges, constituted almost in
every village, which were parts of the executive Magistracy subordinate unto
the Sanhedrim, I shall take them at better leisure, and in the larger
Discourse; but these being that part of this Commonwealth which was instituted
by Moses upon the advice of Jethro the Priest of Midian, (Exo. 18.) as I
conceive an Heathen; are unto me a sufficient warrant even from God himself who
confirmed them, to make farther use of humane prudence where ever I find it,
bearing a testimony unto it self, whether in Heathen Commonwealths or others.
And the rather, because so it is, that we who have the holy Scriptures, and in
them the Original of a Commonwealth made by the same hand that made the World,
are either altogether blind or negligent of it, while the Heathens have all
written theirs, as if they had had no other Copy. As, to be more brief in the
present account of that which you shall have more at large hereafter,

Athens consisted of the Senate of the Bean proposing, of the Church or
Assembly of the people resolving and too often debating, which was the ruin of
it, as also of the Senate of the Areopagites, the 9. Archons, with diverse other
Magistrates Executing.

Lacedemon consisted of the Senate proposing, Of Lacedemon.
of the Church or Congregation of the people resolving only, and never
debating; which was the long life of it; and of the two Kings, the Court of the
Effors, with diverse other Magistrates executing.

Carthage consisted of the Senate proposing and sometimes resolving too, of the
people resolving and sometimes debating too, Of Carthage
for which fault she was reprehended by Aristotle, and she had her Suffetes,
and her hundred men with other Magistrates executing.

Rome consisted of the Senate proposing, Of Rome.
the Concio or people resolving and too often debating, which caused her
storms; as also of the Consuls, Censors, Aediles, Tribunes, Praetors,
Quaestors, and other Magistrates executing.

Venice consists of the Senate or Pregati proposing, Of Venice.
and sometimes resolving too, of the great Council or Assembly of the people,
in whom the result is constitutively; as also of the Doge, the Signory, the
Censors, the Dieci, the Quazancies, and other Magistrates executing.

The proceeding of the Commonwealths of Switzerland and Holland is of a like
nature, Of Switz and Holland.
though after a more obscure manner; for the Soveraignties, whether Cantons
Provinces or Cities, which are the people, send their Deputies Commissioned and
instructed by themselves (wherein they reserve the result in their own power)
unto the Provincial or general Convention or Senate, where the Deputies debate,
but have no other power of result then what was conferred upon them by the
people, or is farther conferred by the same upon farther occasion. And for the
executive part they have Magistrates or Judges in every Canton Province or
City; besides those which are more public, and relate unto the league, as for
controversies between one Canton, Province or City, and another, or the like
between such persons as are not of the same Canton Province or City.

But that we may observe a little farther how the Heathen Politicians have
written, not only out of nature, but as it were out of Scripture: As in the
Commonwealth of Israel, God is said to have been King; so the Commonwealth
where the Law is King, is said by Aristotle to be Kingdom of God. And where by
the lusts or passions of men, a power is set above that of the Law deriving
from reason, which is the dictate of God; God in that sense is rejected or
deposed that he should not reign over them, as he was in Israel. And yet
Leviathan will have it, that by reading of these Greek and Latin (he might as
well in this sense have said, Hebrew) Authors, Page 170.
young men and all others that are unprovided of the antidote of solid reason,
receiving a strong and delightful impression of the great exploits of War,
achieved by the Conductors of their Armies, receive withal a pleasing Idea of
all they have done besides: and imagine their great prosperity, not to have
proceeded from the emulation of particular men, but from the virtue of their
popular form of Government: not considering the frequent seditions and Civil
Wars produced by the imperfection of their Policy. Where first the blame he
lays to the Heathen Authors, is in his sense laid unto the Scripture; and
whereas he holds them to be young men, or men of no antidote that are of like
opinions, it should seem that Machiavill the sole retreiver of this ancient
Prudence, is to his solid reason a beardlesse boy that has newly read Livy:
and how solid his reason is, may appear; Where he grants the great prosperity
of ancient Commonwealths: which is to give up the controversy: For such an
effect must have some adequate cause; which to evade, he insinuates, that it
was nothing else but the emulation of particular men; as if so great an
emulation could have been generated without as great virtue; so great virtue
without the best education; the best education without the best Laws; or the
best Laws any otherwise then by the excellency of their policy.

But if some of these Commonwealths as being less perfect in their policy
then others, have been more seditious, it is not more an argument of the
infirmity of this or that Commonwealth in particular, then of the excellency
of that kind of Policy in general, which if they that have not altogether
reached, have nevertheless had greater prosperity; what would befall them that
should reach?

In answer to which question, let me invite Leviathan, who of all other
Governments gives the advantage unto Monarchy for perfection, to a better
disquisition of it, by these three assertions:

The first, That the perfection of Government lies upon such a libration in
the frame of it, that no man or men, in or under it, can have the interest; or
having the interest, can have the power to disturb it with sedition.

The second, That Monarchy reaching the perfection of the kind, reaches not
unto the perfection of Government, but must have some dangerous flaw in it.

The third, That Popular Government reaching the perfection of the kind,
reaches the perfection of Government; and has no flaw in it.

The first assertion requires no proof.

For the proof of the second; Monarchy, as has been shown, is of two kinds,
the one by Arms, the other by a Nobility; and there is no other kind in art or
nature: for if there have been anciently some Governments called Kingdoms, as
one of the Goths in Spain, and another of the Vandals in Africa, where the
King ruled without a Nobility, and by a Council of the people only; it is
expressly said by the Authors that mention them, that the Kings were but the
Captains, and that the people not only gave them Laws, but deposed them as
often as they pleased; nor is it possible in reason that it should be otherwise
in like cases: wherefore these were either no Monarchies, or had greater flawes
in them then any other.

But for a Monarchy by Arms as that of the Turk, (which of all models that ever
were comes up unto the perfection of the kind) it is not in the wit or power
of man to cure it of this dangerous flaw, That the Janissaries have frequent
interest and perpetual power to raise sedition, and to tear the Magistrate,
even the Prince himself, in pieces. Therefore the Monarchy of Turkey is no
perfect Government.

And for a Monarchy by a Nobility as of late in Oceana (which of all other
models before the declination of it came up to the perfection in that kind) it
was not in the power or wit of man to cure it of that dangerous flaw; That the
Nobility had frequent interest and perpetual power by their retainers and
tenants to raise sedition, and (whereas the Janissaries occasion this kind of
calamity, no sooner then they make an end of it) to levy a lasting War, unto
the vast effusion of blood, and that even upon occasions wherein the people,
but for their dependence upon their Lords had no concernment, as in the Fewd of
the Red and White. The like has been frequent in Spain, France, Germany, and
other Monarchies of this kind; wherefore Monarchy by a Nobility is no perfect
Government.

For the proof of the third Assertion, Leviathan yields it unto me, that
there is no other Commonwealth but Monarchical or Popular: wherefore if no
Monarchy be a perfect Government, then either there is no perfect Government,
or it must be popular; for which kind of constitution I have something more to
say, then Leviathan has said, or ever will be able to say for Monarchy; as,

1. That it is the Government that was never conquered by any Monarch, from the
beginning of the World unto this day: for if the Commonwealth of Greece came
under the yoke of the Kings of Macedon, they were first broken by themselves.

2. That it is the Government that has frequently led mighty Monarchs in
Triumph.

3. That it is the Government, which if it have been Seditious, it has not
been from any imperfection in the kind, but in the particular constitution;
which where ever the like has happened, must have been unequal.

4. That it is the Government, which if it have been any thing near equal, was
never seditious; or let him show me what sedition has happened in Lacedemon or
Venice.

5. That it is the Government, which attaining unto perfect equality, has such
a libration in the frame of it, that no man living can show which way any man
or men in or under it, can contract any such interest or power as should be
able to disturb the Commonwealth with sedition; wherefore an equal
Commonwealth is that only which is without flaw, and contains in it the
full perfection of Government. But to return.

By what has been shown in reason and experience it may appear, that though
Commonwealths in general be Governments of the Senate proposing, the people
resolving, and the Magistracy executing; yet some are not so good at these
orders as others, through some impediment or defect in the frame, balance, or
capacity of them, according unto which they are of diverse kinds.

The first division of them is into such as are single as Israel, Athens,
Division of Commonwealths.
Laecedemon, etc. and such as are by leagues, as those of the Achaeans,
Aetolians, Lyceans, Switz and Hollanders.

The second (being Machiavil's) is into such as are for preservation, as
Lacedemon and Venice, and such as are for increase, as Athens and Rome, in
which I can see no more, then that the former takes in no more Citizens then
are necessary for defense, and the latter so many as are capable of increase.

The third division (unseen hitherto) is into equal and unequal, and this is
the main point especially as to domestic peace and tranquillity; for to make a
Commonwealth unequal, is to divide it into parties, which sets them at
perpetual variance, the one party endeavoring to preserve their eminence and
inequality, and the other to attain unto equality; whence the people of Rome
derived their perpetual strife with the Nobility or Senate: but in an equal
Commonwealth, there can be no more strife then there can be overbalance in
equal weights; wherefore the Commonwealth of Venice, being that which of all
others is the most equal in the constitution, is that wherein there never
happened any strife between the Senate and the people.

An equal Commonwealth is such an one, as is equal both in the balance and
foundation, and in the superstructions, that is to say, in her Agrarian Law,
and in her Rotation.

Equal Agrarian.
An equal Agrarian is a perpetual Law establishing and preserving the balance
of dominion, by such a distribution, that no one man or number of men within
the compass of the Few or Aristocracy, can come to overpower the whole people
by their possessions in Lands.

As the Agrarian answers unto the Foundation, so does Rotation unto the
Superstructures.

Rotation.
Equal Rotation is equal vicissitude in Government, or Succession unto
Magistracy conferred for such convenient terms, enjoying equal vacations, as
take in the whole body by parts, succeeding others through the free election or
suffrage of the People.

The contrary whereunto is Prolongation of Magistracy, Prolongation of
Magistracy.
which trashing the wheel of Rotation, destroys the life or natural motion of
a Commonwealth.

The election or suffrage of the people, is freest, Ballot.
where it is made or given in such a manner, that it can neither oblige ( qui
beneficium accepit libertatem vendidit) nor disoblige another; or through fear
of an enemy, or bashfulnesse toward a friend, impair a man's liberty.

Wherefore says Cicero, (Grata populo est tabella quae frontes aperit hominum,
mentes tegit, datque eam libertatem ut quod velint faciant) the Tablet (or
Ballot of the people of Rome, who gave their votes by throwing tablets or
little pieces of wood secretly into Urns marked for the negative or
affirmative) was a welcome constitution, unto the people, as that which not
impairing the assurance of their brows, increased the freedom of their
Judgment. I have not stood upon a more particular description of this Ballot,
because that of Venice exemplified in the model is of all others the most
perfect.

An equal Commonwealth (by that which has been said) is a Government
established upon an equal Agrarian, Definition of an equal Commonwealth.
arising into the superstructures or three orders, the Senate debating and
proposing, the people resolving, and the Magistracy executing by an equal
Rotation through the suffrage of the people given by the Ballot. For though
Rotation may be without the Ballot, and the Ballot without Rotation, yet the
Ballot not only as to the ensuing Model includes both, but is by far the
most equal way; for which cause under the name of the Ballot I shall hereafter
understand both that and Rotation too.

Now having reasoned the principles of an equal Commonwealth, I should come
to give an instance of such an one in experience, if I could find it; but if
this work be of any value, it lies in that it is the first example of a
Commonwealth that is perfectly equal. For Venice though she come the nearest,
yet is a Commonwealth for preservation; and such an one, considering the
paucity of Citizens taken in, and the number not taken in, is externally
unequal: and though every Commonwealth that holds Provinces must in that
regard be such; yet not unto that degree. Nevertheless Venice internally and
for her capacity is by far the most equal; though she has not in my judgment
arrived at the full perfection of equality; both because her Laws supplying
the defect of an Agrarian, are not so clear nor effectual at the foundation,
nor her superstructures by the virtue of her Ballot or Rotation exactly
librated, in regard that through the paucity of her Citizens, her greater
Magistracies are continually wheeled through a few hands. As is confessed by
Janotti, where he says, that if a Gentleman come once to be Savio di terra
ferma, it seldom happens that he fails from thenceforward to be adorned with
some one of the greater Magistracies, as Savi di mare, Savi di terra ferma,
Savi Grandi, Counselors, those of the Decemvirate or Dictatorian Council, the
Aurogatori or Censors which require no vacation or interval: wherefore if this
in Venice, or that in Lacedemon, where the Kings were hereditary, and the
Senators (though elected by the people) for life, cause no inequality (which is
hard to be conceived) in a Commonwealth for preservation, or such an one as
consists of a few Citizens; yet is it manifest, that it would cause a very
great one in a Commonwealth for increase, or consisting of the Many, which by
the engrossing the Magistracies in a few hands, would be obstructed in their
Rotation.

But there be that say, (and think it a strong Objection) let a Commonwealth
be as equal as you can imagine, two or three men when all is done will govern
it: and there is that in it, which notwithstanding the pretended sufficiency of
a popular State, amounts unto a plain confession of the imbecility of that
Policy, and of the prerogative of Monarchy; for as much as popular Governments
in difficult cases have had recourse unto Dictatorian power, as in Rome.

To which I answer, That as truth is a Spark whereunto objections are like
bellows; so, in this, our Commonwealth shines: for the eminence acquired by
suffrage of the people in a Commonwealth, especially if it be popular and
equal, can be ascended by no other steps then the universal acknowledgment of
virtue; and where men excel in Virtue, the Commonwealth is stupid and unjust,
if accordingly they do not excel in Authority: wherefore this is both the
advantage of Virtue, which has her due encouragement, and the Commonwealth
which has her due services. These are the Philosophers which Plato would have
to be Princes, the Princes which Solomon would have to be mounted, and their
Steeds are those of Authority not Empire; or, if they be buckled to the Chariot
of Empire, as that of the Dictatorian power, like the Chariot of the Sun it is
glorious for terms and vacations or intervals. And as a Commonwealth is a
Government of Laws and not of Men; so is this the Principality of the Virtue,
and not of the Man; if that fail or set in one, it rises in another, which is
created his immediate Successor. ( -- Uno avulso non deficit alter,
Aureus, et simili frondescit virga metallo.)
And this takes away that vanity from under the Sun, which is an error
proceeding more or less from all other Rulers under heaven but an equal
Common-w^alth.

These things considered, it will b^ convenient in this place to speak a word
unto such as go about to insinuate to the Nobility or Gentry a fear of the
people; or into the people a fear of the Nobility or Gentry, as if their
interests were each destructive unto other, when in truth an Army may as well
consist of Soldiers without Officers, or of Officers without Soldiers, as a
Commonwealth, especially such an one as is capable of greatness, of a people
without a Gentry, or of a Gentry without a people. Wherefore this (though not
always so intended, as may appear by Machiavill, who else would be guilty) is
a pernicious error. There is something first in the making of a Commonwealth,
Disc. B. 1. C. 55.
then in the governing of her, and last of all in the leading of her Armies;
which, though there be great Divines, great Lawyers, great men in all
professions, seems to be peculiar unto the Genius of a Gentleman. For so it is
in the universal series of Story, that if any man have founded a
Commonwealth, he was first a Gentleman. Moses had his education by the
daughter of Pharaoh; Theseus and Solon of noble birth, were held by the
Athenians worthy to be Kings; Lycurgus was of the Blood Royal, Romulus and Numa
Princes, Brutus and Publicola Patricians, the Gracchi that lost their lives for
the people of Rome, and the restitution of that Commonwealth, were the sons
of a Father adorned with two Triumphs; and of Cornelia the daughter of Scipio,
who being sought in marriage by King Ptolomy, disdained to be the Queen of
Egypt. And the most renowned Olphaus Megaletor; sole Legislator (as you will
see) of the Commonwealth of Oceana, was derived from a noble Family: nor will
it be any occasion of scruple in this case, that Leviathan affirms the
Politics to be no ancienter then his Book De Cive. Such also as have gotten
any fame in the Civil Government of a Commonwealth, or by the leading of her
Armies, have been Gentlemen; for so in all other respects were those plebeian
Magistrates elected by the people of Rome, being of known descents, and of
equal virtues, save only that they were excluded from the name by the
usurpation of the Patricians. Holland, through this defect at home, has
borrowed Princes for her Generals, and Gentlemen for her Commanders, of diverse
Nations: And Switz, if she have defect in this kind, rather lends her people
unto the Colors of other Princes, then makes that noble use of them her self;
which should assert the liberty of mankind. For where there is not a Nobility
to bolt out the people, they are slothful, regardlesse of the world and the
public interest of liberty, as even that of Rome had been without her Gentry:
wherefore let the people embrace the Gentry in peace, as the light of their
eyes, and in War as the trophy of their Arms. And if Cornelia disdained to be
Queen of Egypt, if a Roman Consul looked down from his Tribunal upon the
greatest King; Let the Nobility love and cherish the people that afford them a
Throne so much higher in a Commonwealth, and in the acknowledgment of their
Virtue, than the Crowns of Monarchs.

Unequal Commonwealth.
But if the equality of a Commonwealth consist in the equality first of the
Agrarian, and next of the Rotation; then the inequality of a Commonwealth must
consist in the absence or inequality of the Agrarian, or of the Rotation, or of
both.

Israel and Lacedemon, which Commonwealths (as the people of this in,
Josephus, claims kindred of that) have great resemblance, were each of them
equal in their Agrarian, and unequal in their Rotation, especially Israel,
where the Sanhedrim or Senate first elected by the people, as appears by the
words of Moses, Deuteronomy. 1.
took upon them thenceforth without any precept of God to substitute their
Successors by Ordination; which having been there of Civil use, as
excommunication, community of goods, and other customs of the Esseans, who
were many of them converted, came afterward to be introduced into the
Christian Church. And the election of the Judge, Suffes, or Dictator was
irregular, both for the occasion, the term, and the vacation of that
Magistracy; as you find in the Book of Judges, where it is often repeated, that
in those days there was no King in Israel, that is, no Judge: and in the first
of Samuel, where Ely judged Israel forty years, and Samuel all his life: In
Lacedemon the election of the Senate being by suffrage of the People; though
for life was not altogether so unequal, but the hereditary right of Kings, but
for the Agrarian, had ruined her.

Athens and Rome were unequal as to their Agrarian, that of Athens being
infirm, and that of Rome none at all; for if it were more anciently carried, it
was never kept. Whence by the time of Tyberius Gracchus the Nobility had almost
eaten the people quite out of their Lands, which they held in the occupation of
Tenants and servants: Whereupon the remedy being too late, and too vehemently
applied, that Commonwealth was ruined.

These also were unequal in their Rotation, but in a contrary manner: Athens,
in regard that the Senate chosen at once by Lot, not by suffrage, and changed
every year not in part, but the whole, consisted not of the natural
Aristocracy, nor sitting long enough to understand, or be perfect in their
office, had no sufficient Authority to withhold the people from that perpetual
turbulence in the way which was ruin in the end, in despite of Nicias, who
did what a man could do to help it. But as Athens by the headiness of the
people, so Rome fell by the ambition of the Nobility, through the want of an
equal Rotation, which if the people had had into the Senate, and timely into
the Magistracies; whereof the former was always usurped by the Patricians, and
the latter for the most part; they had both carried and held their Agrarian,
and that had rendered that Commonwealth immovable.

But let a Commonwealth be equal or unequal, it must consist as has been
shown by reason and all experience, of the three general Orders, that is to
say, of the Senate debating and proposing, of the People resolving, and of the
Magistracy executing; wherefore I can never wonder enough at Leviathan, who
without any reason or example will have it, that a Commonwealth consists of
a single person, or of a single assembly; nor sufficiently pity that thousand
Gentlemen, whose minds which otherwise would have waver'd, he has framed, as
is affirmed by himself, unto a conscientious obedience (for so he is pleased to
call it) of such a Government.

But to finish this part of the Discourse, which I intend for as complete an
Epitome of ancient Prudence, and in that of the whole Art of the Politics, as
I am able to frame in so short a time.

The two first orders, that is to say, the Senate and the People are
Legislative, whereunto answers that part of this Science which by Politicians
is entitled DE LEGIBUS, or of Laws; and the third order is executive, to
which answers that part of the same Science which is styled DE JUDICIIS, or of
the frame, and course of Courts or Judicatories; a word unto each of these will
be necessary.

And first for Laws, they are either Ecclesiastical or Civil, De Legibus.
such as concern Religion or Government. (Some body blushes, but I will do no
harm.)

Laws Ecclesiastical or such as concern Religion, according unto the universal
course of ancient prudence, are in the power of the Magistrate, but according
unto the common practice of modern prudence, since the Papacy, torn out of his
hands.

But as a Government pretending unto Liberty, and suppressing the liberty of
conscience, which (because Religion not according to a man's conscience, can as
to him be none at all) is the main, must be a contradiction; so a man that
pleading for the liberty of private conscience, refuses liberty unto the
National conscience, must be absurd.

Now a Commonwealth is nothing else but the national conscience. And if the
conviction of a man's private conscience, produces his private Religion: the
conviction of the national conscience, must produce a national Religion.
Whether this be well reasoned, as also whether these two may stand together,
will best be shown by the examples of the ancient Commonwealths taken in their
order.

In that of Israel the Government of the National Religion appertained not unto
the Priests and Levites, otherwise then as to the Sanhedrim or Senate, to which
they had no right at all but by election. It is in this capacity therefore that
the people are commanded under pain of death, to hearken unto them, Deuteronomy. 17.
and to do according to the sentence of the Law which they should teach; but in
Israel the Law Ecclesiastical and Civil was the same, therefore the Sanhedrim
having the power of one, had the power of both. But as the National Religion
appertained unto the Jurisdiction of the Sanhedrim, so the liberty of
conscience appertained from the same date and by the same right, unto the
Prophets and their disciples; Deuteronomy. 18.10.
as where it is said, I will raise up a Prophet -- and whosoever will not
hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my Name, I will require it of
him; which words relate unto prophetic right, which was above all the orders
of this Commonwealth; whence Elijah not only refused to obey the King, 2 Kings
1.
but destroyed his messengers with fire: And whereas it was not lawful by the
National Religion to sacrifice in any other place then the Temple, 1 King.
18.19.
a Prophet was his own Temple, and might sacrifice where he would, as Elijah
did in Mount Carmel. By this right John the Baptist and our Savior, unto whom
it more particularly related, had their disciples, and taught the people;
whence is derived our present right of GATHERED CONGREGATIONS: Wherefore the
Christian Religion grew up according unto the orders of the Commonwealth of
Israel, and not against them. Nor was the liberty of conscience infringed by
this Government, till the civil liberty of the same was lost, as under Herod,
Pilate, and Tiberius, a three pild Tyranny.

To proceed, Athens preserved her Religion, by the testimony of Paul, with
great superstition: If Alcibiades that Atheistical fellow had not showed them a
fair pair of heels, they had shaven off his head for shaving their Mercuries,
and making their Gods look ridiculously upon them without beards.
Nevertheless, if Paul reasoned with them, they loved news, for which he was
the more welcome; and if he converted Dionysius the Areopagite, that is, one of
the Senators, there followed neither any hurt unto him, nor loss of honor to
Dionysius. And for Rome, if Cicero in his most excellent book, De natura
Deorum, overthrew the National Religion of that Commonwealth, he was never the
farther from being Consul. But there is a meannesse and poorness in modern
prudence, not only unto the damage of Civil Government, but of Religion it
self: for whereas Christian Religion is the farthest of any from countenancing
War, there never was a War of Religion but since Christianity. For which we are
beholding unto the POPE; for the Pope not giving liberty of conscience unto
Princes and Commonwealths, they cannot give that unto their Subjects which
they have not: whence both Princes and Subjects either through his instigation,
or disputes among themselves, have introduced that execrable custom, never
known in the world before, of fighting for Religion, and denying the Magistrate
to have any Jurisdiction of it; whereas the Magistrates losing the power of
Religion, loses the liberty of conscience which has nothing to protect it.
Wherefore if the people be otherwise taught, it concerns them to look about
them, and to distinguish between the shreeking of the Lapwing, and the voice of
the Turtle.

To come unto Civil Laws, if they stand one way, and the balance another, it
is the case of a Government which of necessity must be new modeled; wherefore
the Lawyers advising you upon like occasions to fit the Government unto their
Laws, are no more to be regarded, then your Tailor if he should desire you to
fit your body unto his doublet; there is also danger in the plausible pretense
of reforming the Law except the Government be good, in which case it is a good
tree, and brings not forth evil fruit; otherwise, if the Tree be evil, you
can never reform the fruit; begin with reformation of the Government by the
Laws, but first begin with reformation of the Laws by the Government. The
best rule as to the Laws in general, is, that they be few. Rome by the
testimony of Cicero was best governed under those of the twelve Tables; and by
the testimony of Tacitus, Plurimae leges, corruptissima respublica. You will be
told, That where the Laws be few, they leave much unto arbitrary power; but
where they be many, they leave more; the Laws in that case according to
Justinian and the best Lawyers, being as litigious as the Suitors. Solon made
few; Lycurgus fewer Laws: Commonwealths have fewest at this day of all other
Governments. And to conclude this part with a word de Judiciis, De Judiciis.
or the constitution or course of Courts; it is such in Venice, as the
arbitrary power of them can never retard or do hurt unto business, but
produces the quickest dispatch, and the most righteous dictates of Justice
that are perhaps in humane nature. The manner of them I shall not stand in this
place to describe, because it is exemplified at large in the Judicature of the
people of Oceana. And thus much of ancient Prudence, and the first branch of
this Preliminary Discourse.

The Second Part of the Preliminaries.
IN the Second Part I shall endeavor to show the Rise, Progress, and
Declination of Modern Prudence.

The date of this kind of Policy is to be computed, as was shown, from those
Inundations of Goths, Vandals, Hunnes, and Lombards that overwhelmed the Roman
Empire. But as there is no appearance in the bulk or constitution of Modern
Prudence, that she should ever have been able to come up and Grapple with the
Ancient, so something of necessity must have interposed, whereby This came to
be enervated, and That to receive strength and encouragement: And this was, the
execrable reign of the Roman Emperors taking rise from (that foelix scelus)
the Arms of Caesar, in which storm the ship of the Roman Commonwealth was
forced to disburthen her self of that precious freight, which never since could
emerge or raise the head but in the Gulf of Venice.

The transition of Ancient into Modern Prudence.
It is said in Scripture; Thy evil is of thy self, O Israel! to which answers
that of the Moralists, Nemo nocetur nisi ex se, as also the whole matter of the
Politics; at present this Example of the Romans, who, through a negligence
committed in their Agrarian Laws, let in the sink of Luxury, and forfeited the
inestimable treasure of Liberty for themselves and posterity.

The Agrarian Laws of the Romans. Sigonius de Ant. To.
Their Agrarian Laws were such, whereby their Lands ought to have been divided
among the people, either without mention of a Colony, in which case they were
not obliged to change their abode; or with mention and upon condition of a
Colony, in which case they were to change their abode, and leaving the City to
plant themselves upon the Lands so assigned. The Lands assigned, or that ought
to have been assigned in either of these ways, were of three kinds. Such as
were taken from the enemy and distributed unto the people; or such as were
taken from the enemy, and under color of being reserved unto the public use,
were by stealth possessed by the Nobility; or such as were bought with the
public Money to be distributed. Of the Laws offered in these cases, those
which divided the Lands taken from the Enemy, or purchased with the public
money, never occasioned any dispute; but such as drove at dispossessing the
Nobility of their Usurpations, and dividing the common purchase of the sword
among the people, were never touched but they caused Earthquakes, nor could
ever be obtained by the people; or being obtained, be observed by the Nobility,
who not only preserved their prey, but growing vastly rich upon it, bought the
people by degrees quite out of those shares that had been conferred upon them.
This the Gracchi coming too late to perceive, found the Balance of the
Commonwealth to be lost; but putting the people (when they had least force) by
forcible means unto the recovery of it, did ill, seeing it neither could, nor
did tend unto any more then to show them by worse effects, that what the
Wisdom of their Leaders had discovered was true: for (quite contrary unto what
has happened in Oceana, where, the balance falling unto the people, they have
overthrown the Nobility) the Nobility of Rome under the conduct of Sylla,
overthrew the people and the Commonwealth: seeing Scylla first introduced that
new balance, which was the Foundation of the succeeding Monarchy in the
plantation of Military Colonies; Military Colonies.
instituted by his distribution of the conquered Lands not now of Enemies, but
of Citizens unto forty seven Legions of his Soldiers; so that how he came to
be DICTATOR PERPETUUS, or other Magistrates to succeed him in like power, is no
Miracle.

These Military Colonies, The Balance of the Roman Empire.
in which manner succeeding Emperors continued (as Augustus by the
distribution of the Veterans, whereby he had overcome Brutus and Cassius) to
plant their Soldiery, consisted of such as I conceive were they that are
called Milites beneficiarii; in regard that the Tenure of their Lands was by
way of Benefices, that is for life, and upon condition of duty or service in
the War upon their own charge. These Benefices Alexander Severus granted unto
the Heirs of the Incumbents, but upon the same conditions: And such was the
Dominion by which the Roman Emperors gave their Balance. But to the
Beneficiaries, as was no less than necessary, for the safety of the Prince, a
matter of eight thousand, by the Example of Augustus, were added, which
departed not from his sides, but were his perpetual guard, called Pretorian
Bands; though these, according to the incurable flaw already observed in this
kind of Government, became the most frequent Butchers of their Lords that are
to be found in Story. Thus far the Roman Monarchy is so much the same with that
at this day in Turkey consisting of a Camp, and an Horse-quarter; a Camp in
regard of her Spahies and Janissaries, the perpetual Guard of the Prince,
except they also chance to be Liquorish after his blood; and an Horse-quarter
in regard of the distribution of his whole Land unto Tenants for life upon
condition of continual service, or as often as they shall be commanded at
their own charge by Timars, being a word which they say signifies Benefices,
that it shall save me a labor of opening the Government.

But the Fame of Mahomet and his Prudence is especially founded in this, That
whereas the Roman Monarchy (except that of Israel) was the most imperfect, the
Turkish is the most perfect that ever was. Which happened in that the Roman (as
the Israelitish of the Sanhedrim and the Congregation) had a mixture of the
Senate and the people; and the Turkish is pure: and that this was pure, and the
other mixed, happened not through the wisdom of the Legislators, but the
different Genius of the Nations; the people of the Eastern parts, except the
Israelites, (which is to be attributed to their Agrarian) having been such as
scarce ever knew any other condition than that of Slavery. And these of the
Western having ever ^ad such a Relish of liberty, as through what despair
soever could never be brought to stand still, while the Yoke was putting on
their Necks, but by being fed with some hopes of reserving unto themselves some
part of their Freedom.

Wherefore Julius Caesar (says Suetonius, comitia cum populo sortitus est)
contented himself, in naming half the Magistrates, to leave the rest unto the
Suffrage of the people. And Moecenas, though he would not have Augustus to give
the people their liberty, Dion.
would not have him take it away; (for says he, Neque id existimare debes
autorem me tibi esse, ut tyrannidem in S.P. Q.R. in servitutem redactum teneas:
quod neque dicere meum, neque facere tuum est) whence this Empire being neither
Hawk nor Buzzard, made a flight accordingly; and having the avarice of the
Soldiery on this hand to satisfy upon the people; and the Senate and the
people on the other to be defended from the Soldiery; the Prince being
perpetually tossed, seldom died any other death than by one Horn of this
Dilemma, Prince, cap. 19.
as is noted more at large by Machiavill. But the Pretorian Bands, those
Bestiall executioners of their Captains Tyranny upon others, and of their own
upon him; having continued from the time of Augustus; were by Constantine the
Great (incensed against them for taking part with his Adversary Maxentius)
removed from their strong Garrison which they held in Rome, and distributed
them into diverse Provinces. The Benefices of the Soldiers that were hitherto
held for life, and upon duty, were by this Prince made Hereditary, so that the
whole Foundation whereupon this Empire was first built, being now removed,
shows plainly, that the Emperors must long before this have found out some
other way of support; and this was by Stipendiating the Goths, a people that
deriving their Roots from the Northern parts of Germany, or out of Sweden, had
(through their Victories obtained against Domitian) long since spread their
branches unto so near Neighborhood with the Roman Territories, that they began
to Overshade them; for the Emperors making use of them in their Arms (as the
French do at this day of the Switz) gave them that, under the notion of
stipend, which they received as Tribute, coming (if there were any default in
the payment) so often to distrein for it, that in the time of Honorius they
sacked Rome, and possessed themselves of Italy. And such was the transition of
Ancient into Modern prudence; or that breach which being followed in every part
of the Roman Empire with inundations of Vandals, Huns, Lombards, Franks,
Saxons, have overwhelmed ancient Languages, Learning, Prudence, Manners,
Cities, Machiavil.
changing the Names of Rivers, Countries, Seas, Mountains and Men; Camillus,
Caesar and Pompey, being come to Edmund, Richard, and Geoffrey.

To open the groundwork or balance of these new Politicians. The Gothic
Balance.
Feudum, says Calvine the Lawyer, is a Gothic word of diverse significations;
for it is taken either for War, or for a possession of conquered Lands,
distributed by the Victor unto such of his Captains and Soldiers as had
merited in his Wars, upon condition to acknowledge him to be their perpetual
Lord, and themselves to be his Subjects.

Of these there were three kinds or orders: The first, Institution of Feudatory
Principalities.
of Nobility, distinguished by the Titles of Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and
these being gratified with Cities, Castles, and Villages, of the Conquered
Italians, their Feuds participated of Royal dignity, and were called Regalia,
by which they had right to coin Money, create Magistrates, take Tole, Customs,
Confiscations, and the like.

Feuds of the second order were such as with the consent of the King were
bestowed by these Feudatory Princes upon men of inferior Quality called their
Barons, on condition that next unto the King they should defend the Dignities
and Fortunes of their Lords in Arms.

The lowest order of Feuds were such as being conferred by those of the second
Order upon private men, whether Noble, or not Noble, obliged them in the like
duty unto their Superiors, these were called Vauosors: And this is the Gothic
Balance, by which all the Kingdoms this day in Christendom were at first
erected; for which cause if I had time, I should open in this place the Empire
of Germany, and the Kingdoms of France, Spain, and Poland; but so much as has
been said being sufficient for the discovery of the principles of Modern
Prudence in general; I shall divide the remainder of my Discourse, which is
more particular, into three parts.

The first, showing the Constitution of the late Monarchy of Oceana.

The second, the Dissolution of the same.

And the third, the Generation of the present Commonwealth.

The Constitution of the late Monarchy of Oceana, is to be considered in
relation unto the different Nations, by whom it has been successively subdued
and governed. The first of these were the Romans, the second the Teutons, the
third the Scandians, and the fourth the Neustrians.

The Government of the Romans, who held it as a Province, I shall omit, because
I am to speak of their Provincial Government in another place, only it is to
be remembered in this, that if we have given over running up and down naked and
with dappled hides, learned to write and read, to be instructed with good Arts,
for all these we are beholding to the Romans either immediately, or mediately
the Teutons; for that the Teutons had the Arts from no other hand, is plain
enough by their language, which has yet no word to signify either writing or
reading, but what is derived from the Latin. Furthermore, by the help of these
arts so learned, we have been capable of that Religion which we have long since
received; wherefore it seems unto me, that we ought not to detract from the
Memory of the Romans, by whose means we are as it were of Beasts become Men,
and by whose means we might yet of obscure and Ignorant men ( if we thought not
too well of our selves) become a wise and a great People.

For the proof of the ensuing discourse out of Records and Antiquities. See
Selden's Titles of Honor, from page 593. to page 837.
The Romans having governed Oceana, Provincially, the Teutons were the first
that introduced the form of the late Monarchy: to these succeeded the
Scandians, of whom (because their Reign was short, as also because they made
little alteration in the Government as to the Form) I shall take no notice. But
the Teutons going to work upon the Gothic Balance, divided the whole Nation
into three sorts of Feuds; that of Ealdorman, that of Kings-Thane, and that of
Middle-Thane.

The Teuton Monarchy.
When the Kingdom was first divided into Precincts, will be as hard to show, as
when it began first to be governed; it being impossible that there should be
any Government without some Division. The Division that was in use with the
Teutons, was by Counties, and every County had either his Ealdorman, or high
Reeve. The title of Ealdorman came in time to Eorl, or Earl, and that of high
Reeve to high Sheriff.

Earls.
Earl of the Shire or County denoted the Kings Thane, or Tenant by Grand
Serjeantry or Knights Service in chief or in Capite, his possessions were
sometimes the whole Territory, from whence he had his Denomination, that is,
the whole County, sometimes more then one County, and sometimes less, the
remaining part being in the Crown. He had also sometimes a third, or some other
Customary part of the profits of certain Cities, Boroughs, or other places
within his Earldom. For an Example of the possessions of Earls in ancient
times, Ethelred had unto him and his Heirs the whole Kingdom of Mercia,
containing three or four Counties; and there were others that had little less.

Kings Thane
Kings Thane was also an honorary Title, unto which he was qualified that had
five Hides of Land held immediately of the King by service of personal
attendance; insomuch that if a Churl or Country Man had thriven unto this
proportion, having a Church, a Kitchen, a Bell-house, (that is, an Hall with a
Bell in it to call his Family to Dinner) a Borough-gate with a seat (that is, a
Porch) of his own; and any distinct office in the Kings Court, then was he the
Kings Thane. But the proportion of an Hide-Land, otherwise called Caruca, or a
Plough-land, is difficult to be understood, because it was not certain,
nevertheless it is generally conceived to be so much as may be managed with
one Plough, and would yield the Maintenance of the same, with the appurtenances
in all kinds.

The Middle-Thane was feudall, but not honorary; Middle-Thane.
he was also called a Vavosor, and his Lands a Vavosory, which held of some
Mesne Lord, and not immediately of the King.

Possessions and their tenures being of this Nature, show the Balance of the
Teuton Monarchy; wherein the riches of Earls was so vast, that to arise from
the Balance of their Dominion unto their power, they were not only called
Reguli or little Kings, but were such indeed; their jurisdiction being of two
sorts, either that which was exercised by them in the Court of their Counties,
or in the high Court of the Kingdom.

In the Territory denominating an Earl, if it were all his own, the Courts
held, Shiremoot.
and the profits of that Jurisdiction were to his own use and benefit. But if
he had but some part of his County, then his Jurisdiction and Courts (saving
perhaps in those possessions that were his own) were held by him to the Kings
use and benefit; that is, he commnoly supplied the Office which the Sheriffs
regularly executed in Counties that had no Earls; and whence they came to be
called Vice-comites. The Court of the County that had an Earl, was held by the
Earl and the Bishop of the Diocese, after the manner of the Sheriffs Turns
unto this Day; by which means both the Ecclesiastical and Temporal Laws were
given in charge together unto the Country: the causes of Vavosors or Vavosories
appertained to the Cognizance of this Court, where Wills were proved, Judgment
and Execution given; cases criminal and civil determined.

The Kings Thanes had like jurisdiction in their Thain-Lands as Lords in their
Manours, where they also kept Courts. Halymoot.


Besides these in particular, both the Earls and Kings-Thanes, together with
the Bishops, Abbots, and Vavosors, or Middle-Thanes had in the High Court or
Parliament of the Kingdom a more public jurisdiction; consisting, first,
Weidenagamoots.
of Deliberative power for advising upon, and assenting unto new Laws.
Secondly, of giving Counsel in matters of State; and thirdly, of Judicature
upon Suits, and Complaints. I shall not omit to enlighten the obscurity of
these times, in which there is little to be found of a Methodical constitution
of this High Court; by the addition of an Argument, which I conceive to bear a
strong testimony unto it self, though taken out of a late Writing that conceals
the Author. It is well known (says he) that in every quarter of the Realm a
great many Boroughs do yet send Burgesses unto the Parliament, which
nevertheless be so anciently and so long since decayed and gone to naught,
that they cannot be showed to have been of any reputation since the Conquest,
much less to have obtained any such privilege by the grant of any succeeding
King; wherefore these must have had this right by more ancient usuage, and
before the Conquest; they being unable now to show whence they derived it.

This Argument (though there be more) I shall pitch upon, as sufficient to
prove; First, that the lower sort of the people had right unto Session in
Parliament during the time of the Teutons. Secondly, that they were qualified
unto the same by election in their Boroughs; and (if Knights of the Shire (as
no doubt they are) be as ancient) in the Countries: Thirdly, if it be a good
Argument to say, that the Commons during the reign of the Teutons were elected
into Parliament, because they are so now, and no man can show when this custom
began; I see not which way it should be an ill one to say, that the Commons
during the reign of the Teutons constituted also a distinct house, because they
do so now; unless any man can show that they did ever sit in the same House
with the Lords. Wherefore to conclude this part, I conceive for these, and
other reasons to be mentioned hereafter, that the Parliament of the Teutons
consisted of the King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons of the
Nation, notwithstanding the style of diverse Acts of Parliament, 25 Edw. 3. Cap.
1.
which runs as that of Magna Charta in the Kings name only, seeing the same was
nevertheless enacted by the King, Peers, and Commons of the Land, as is
testified in those words by a subsequent Act.

The Monarchy of the Teutons had stood in this posture about two hundred and
twenty years; Monarchy of the Neustrians.
when Turbo Duke of Neustria making his claim to the Crown of one of their
Kings that dyed Childlesse, followed it with successeful Arms; and being
possessed of the Kingdom, used it as conquered; distributing the Earldomes,
Thane Lands, Bishoprics and Prelacies of the whole Realm amongst his
Neustrians. From this time the Earl came to be called Comes, Consul, and Dux;
(though Consul and Dux grew afterward out of use) The Kings Thanes came to be
called Barons, and their Lands Baronies; the Middle-Thane holding still of a
mean Lord, retained the name of Vavosor.

Their Earls.
The Earl or Comes continued to have the third part of the pleas of the County
paid unto him by the Sheriff or Vice-comes, now a distinct Officer in every
County depending upon the King; saving that such Earls as had their Counties to
their own use, were now Counts-Palatine, and had under the King Regal
Jurisdiction; insomuch that they constituted their own Sheriffs, granted
Pardons, and issued Writs in their own names; nor did Kings Writ of ordinary
Justice run in their Dominions, 27 H. 8.
till a late Statute whereby much of this privilege was taken away.

For Barons, Their Barons.
they came from henceforth to be in different times of three kinds. Barons by
their estates and Tenures, Barons by writ, and Barons created by Letters
Pattents. From Turbo the first to Adoxus the seventh King from the Conquest,
Barons had their Denomination from their Possessions and Tenures: and these
were either Spiritual or Temporal; for not only the Thane Lands, but the
possessions of Bishops, as also of some twenty six Abbots, Barons by their
possessions.
and two Priors were now erected into Baronies, whence the Lords Spiritual that
had Suffrage in the Teuton Parliament, as Spiritual Lords came to have it in
the Neustrian Parliament as Barons: and were made subject (which they had not
formerly been) unto Knights service in chief. Barony coming henceforth to
signify all honorary possessions, as well of Earls as Barons and Baronage, to
denote all kinds of Lords as well Spiritual as Temporal, having right to sit in
Parliament, the Baronies in this sense were sometimes more, and sometimes
fewer, but commonly about 200, or 250, containing in them a matter of sixty
thousand feuda militum, or Knights fees, whereof some twenty eight thousand
were in the Clergy. It is ill luck that no man can tell what the land of a
Knights fee (reckoned in some Writs at 40 l. a year, and in others at 10.) was
certainly worth; for by such an help we might have exactly demonstrated the
Balance of this Government: But says Cook, Cook. 11. Inst. page 596.
it contained twelve plough lands, and that was thought to be the most certain
account: but this again is extremely uncertain, for one Plough out of some Land
that was fruitful might work more than ten out of some other that was barren.
Nevertheless, seeing it appears by Bracton, Balance of the Neustrian
Monarchy.
that of Earldoms and Baronies it was wont to be said, that the whole Kingdom
was composed: as also, that these consisting of 60000 Knights fees, furnished
60000 men for the Kings service, being the whole Militia of this Monarchy, it
cannot be imagined, that the Vavosories, or Freeholds in the people amounted to
any considerable proportion. Wherefore the Balance and Foundation of this
Government was in the 60000 Knights fees, and these being possessed by the 250
Lords, it was a Government of the Few, or of the Nobility; wherein the people
might also assemble, but could have no more than a mere name. And the Clergy
holding a third to the whole Nation as is plain by the Parliament Roll; it is
an absurdity (seeing the Clergy of France came first through their riches to be
a state of that Kingdom) to acknowledge the people to have been a state of
this Realm, and not to allow it unto the Clergy, who were so much more weighty
in the Balance, 4 Rich. 2. Number. 13.
which is that of all other whence a state or order in a Government is
denominated: wherefore this Monarchy consisted of the King, and of the three (
Ordines Regni, or) Estates, the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the
Commons: It consisted of these I say as to the balance, though during the
reign of some of these Kings, not as to the administration.

Administration of the Neustrian Monarchy during the reign of the first kings
For the ambition of Turbo, and some of those that more immediately succeeded
him to be absolute Princes, strove against the nature of their Foundation, and
in as much as he had divided almost the whole Realm among his Newstrians with
some encouragement for a while. But the Neustrians while they were but
foreign Plants, having no security against the Natives, but in growing up by
their Princes sides, were no sooner well rooted in their vast Dominions, than
they came up according to the infallible consequence of the Balance
Domesticke, and contracting the National interest of the Baronage grew as
fierce in the Vindication of the Ancient rights and liberties of the same, as
if they had been always Natives: Whence the Kings being as obstinate on the
one side for their absolute power, as these on the other for their immunities,
grew certain Wars which took their Denomination from the Barons.

This fire about the middle of the reign of Adoxus began to break out; And
whereas the predecessors of this King, had diverse times been forced to summon
Councills; resembling those of the Teutons, Barons by Writ.
unto which the Lords only that were Barons by Dominion and Tenure had hitherto
repaired; Adoxus seeing the effects of such Dominion, began first (not to call
such as were Barons by Writs, for that was according to the practice of ancient
times, but) to call such by Writes as were otherwise no Barons, by which means
striving to avoid the consequence of the Balance, in coming unwillingly to set
the Government straight, he was the first that set it awry. For the Barons in
his reign, and his successors, having vindicated their ancient Authority,
restored the Parliament with all the rights and Privileges of the same, saving
that from thenceforth, the Kings had found out a way whereby to help themselves
against the mighty creatures of their own, and such as had no other support but
by their favor. By which means this Government being indeed the Masterpiece
of Modern Prudence has been cried up to the Skies, as the only invention,
whereby at once to maintain the sovereignty of a Prince, and the liberty of
the people: whereas indeed it has been no other than a wrestling match,
wherein the Nobility, as they have been stronger have thrown the King; or the
King if he have been stronger, has thrown the Nobility: or the King where he
has had a Nobility, and could bring them to his party, has thrown the people,
as in France and Spain: or the people where they have had no Nobility, or could
get them to be of their party, have thrown the King, as in Holland, and of
latter times in Oceana. 49 H. 3.
But they came not to this strength but by such approaches and degrees, as
remain to be further opened. For whereas the Barons by Writs (as the sixty four
Abbots, and thirty six Priors that were so called) were but pro tempore.
Dicotome being the twelfth King from the Conquest, began to make Barons by
Letters Patents: Barons by Letters Patents.
with the Addition of honorary Pensions for the Maintenance of their Dignities
to them, and their Heirs; so that they were hands in the Kings Purse, and had
no shoulders for his Throne. Of these when the house of Peers came once to be
full, as will be seen hereafter, there was nothing more empty. But for the
present, the Throne having other supports, they did not hurt that so much as
they did the King: For the old Barons taking Dicotome's prodigality to such
creatures so ill, that they deposed him; got the trick of it, and never gave
over setting up, and pulling down of their Kings according to their various
interests, and that faction of the White and Red into which they had been
thenceforth divided, Dissolution of the late Monarchy of Oceana.
till Panurgus the eighteenth King from the Conquest was more by their favor
than his right advanced unto the Crown. This King through his natural subtilty
reflecting at once upon the greatness of their power, and the inconstancy of
their favor, began to find another flaw in this kind of Government, which is
also noted by Machiavill; namely, that a Throne supported by a Nobility, is not
so hard to be ascended, as kept warm. Wherefore his secret jealousy lest the
Dissension of the Nobility, as it brought him in, might throw him out,
traveled in ways undiscovered by them, unto ends as little foreseen by
himself: while to establish his own safety, he by mixing water with their Wine,
first began to open those Sluices that have since overwhelmed not the King
only, but the Throne: For whereas a Nobility strikes not at the Throne
without which they cannot subsist, but at some King that they do not like;
Popular power strikes through the King at the Throne, as that which is
incompatible with it. Now that Panurgus in abating the power of the Nobility,
was the cause whence it came to fall into the hands of the people, appears by
those several Statutes that were made in his reign; as that for Population;
those against Retainers; and that for Alienations.

By the Statute of Population, All houses of husbandry that were used with
twenty Acres of ground and upwards, were to be maintained, and kept up for ever
with a competent proportion of Land laid to them, and in no wise, as appears by
a subsequent Statute to be severed. By which means the houses being kept up,
did of necessity enforce dwellers; and the proportion of Land to be tilled
being kept up, did of necessity enforce the dweller not to be a beggar or
Cottager, but a man of some substance that might keep friends and servants, and
set the Plough on going: this did mightily concern (says the Historian of that
Prince) the might and manhood of the Kingdom, and in effect amortize a great
part of the Lands unto the hold and possession of the Yeomanry, or middle
people, who living not in a servile or indigent fashion, were much unlinked
from dependence upon their Lords, and living in a free and plentiful manner,
became a more excellent Infantry; but such an one upon which the Lords had so
little power, that from henceforth they may be computed to have been disarmed.

And as they lost their Infantry after this manner, so their Cavalry and
Commanders were cut off by the Statute of Retainers; for whereas it was the
Custom of the Nobility to have younger Brothers of good houses, metall'd
fellows, and such as were knowing in the feats of Arms about them; they who
were longer followed with so dangerous a train, escaped not such punishments,
as made them take up.

Henceforth the Country-lives, and great tables of the Nobility, which no
longer nourished veins that would bleed for them, were fruitless and loathsome
till they changed the Air, and of Princes became Courtiers, where their
Revenues, never to have been exhausted by Beef and Mutton, were found narrow,
whence followed wracking of Rents, and at length sale of Lands; the riddance
through the Statute of Alienations being rendered far more quick and facile,
than formerly it had been through the new invention of intails.

To this it happened, that Coraunus the Successor of that King dissolving the
Abbeys, brought with the declining estate of the Nobility so vast a prey unto
the Industry of the people, that the Balance of the Commonwealth was too
apparently in the Popular party, to be unseen by the wise Council of Queen
Parthenia, who converting her reign through the perpetual Love-tricks that
passed between her and her people into a kind of Romanze; wholly neglected the
Nobility. And by these degrees came the House of Commons to raise that head,
which since has been so high and formidable unto their Princes; that they have
looked pale upon those assemblies. Nor was there any thing now wanting unto the
destruction of the Throne, but that the people not apt to see their own
strength, should be put to feel it; when a Prince, as stiff in disputes as the
nerve of Monarchy was grown slack, received that unhappy encouragement from his
Clergy, which became his utter Ruin, while trusting more unto their Logic,
than the rough Philosophy of his Parliament, it came unto an irreparable
breach; for the house of Peers which alone had stood in this Gap, now sinking
down between the King and the Commons, showed that Crassus was dead, and
Isthmus broken. But a Monarchy divested of her Nobility, has no refuge under
Heaven, but an Army. Wherefore the dissolution of this Government caused the
War, not the War the dissolution of this Government.

Of the Kings success with his Arms it is not necessary to give any further
account, than that they proved as ineffectuall as his Nobility; But without a
Nobility or an Army (as has been showed) there can be no Monarchy. Wherefore
what is there in Nature, that can arise out of these ashes; but a Popular
Government, or a new Monarchy to be erected by the victorious Army?

To erect a Monarchy be it never so new, unless like Leviathan you can hang it
( as the Country fellow speaks) by Geometry, (for what else is it to say, that
every other man must give up his will unto the will of this one man without any
other Foundation?) it must stand upon old principles, that is, upon Nobility or
an Army planted upon a due Balance of Dominion. Aut viam inveniam aut faciam,
was an Adage of Caesar's; and there is no standing for a Monarchy unless she
find this Balance or make it. If she find it, her work's done unto her hand;
for, where there is inequality of Estates, there must be inequality of Power;
and where there is inequality of Power, there can be no Commonwealth. To make
it, her sword must extirpate out of Dominion all other roots of power, and
plant her Army upon that ground: an Army may be planted Nationally or
Provincially. To plant it Nationally, it must be in one of the four ways
mentioned, that is, either Monarchically in part, as the Roman Beneficiarii; or
Monarchically in the whole as the Turkish Timariot; Aristocratically, that is,
by Earls and Barons, as the Neustrians were planted by Turbo: or
Democratically, that is, by equal lots, as the Israelitish Army in the Land of
Canaan by Joshuah; in every one of these ways there must not only be
confiscations, but confiscations unto such a proportion as may answer to the
work intended.

Confiscation of a people that never fought against you, but whose Arms you
have born, and in which you have been victorious, and this upon premeditation,
and in cool blood, I should have thought to be against any example in humane
Nature, but for those alleged by Machiavill of Agathocles, and Oliverteto da
Fermo: The former whereof being Captain General of the Syracusans, upon a day
assembled the Senate and the people, as if he had something to communicate with
them, when at a sign given he cut the Senators in pieces to a man, and all the
richest of the people, by which means he came to be King. The proceedings of
Oliveretto in making himself Prince of Fermo, was somewhat different in
circumstances, but of the same Nature. Nevertheless Catiline, who had a spirit
equal to any of these in his intended mischief, could never bring the like to
pass in Rome. The head of a small Commonwealth, such an one as was that of
Syracusa or Fermo, is easily brought unto the Block; but that a populous Nation
such as Rome, had not such an one, was the grief of Nero. If Sylla or Caesar
attained to be Princes, it was by Civil War, and such civil War as yielded
rich spoils; there being a vast Nobility to be confiscated; which also was the
case in Oceana, when it yielded earth by Earldoms and Baronies to the
Neustrian, for the plantation of his new Potentates. Where a Conqueror finds
the riches of a Land in the hands of the Few, the forfeitures are easy, and
amount to vast advantage; but where the people have equal shares, the
confiscation of many comes to little; and is not only dangerous, but fruitless.

The Romans in one of their defeats of the Volsci found among the captives
certain Tusculans, who upon examination confessed, that the Arms they bore, were
by command of their State: whereupon information being given to the Senate by
the General Camillus, he was forthwith commanded to march against Tusculum;
which doing accordingly, he found the Tusculane fields full of Husbandmen, that
stirred not otherwise from the Plough, than to furnish his Army with all kind
of accommodations and Victuals; drawing near to the City, he saw the Gates
wide open, the Magistrates coming out in their Gowns to salute and bid him
welcome: entering, the Shops were all at work, and open: the streets sounded
with the noise of School-boyes at their books, there was no face of War.
Whereupon Camillus causing the Senate to assemble, told them, That though the
Art was understood, yet had they at length found out the true Arms whereby the
Romans were most undoubtedly to be conquered, for which cause he would not
anticipate the Senate, unto which he desired them forthwith to send, which they
did accordingly; and their Dictator with the rest of their Ambassadors being
found by the Roman Senators as they went into the house standing sadly at the
Door, were sent for in as friends, and not as Enemies. Where the Dictator
having said, If we have offended, the fault was not so great as is our
penitence, and your virtue. The Senate gave them peace forthwith, and soon
after made the Tusculanes Citizens of Rome.

But putting the case, of which the World is not able to show an Example, that
the forfeiture of a populous Nation, not conquered, but friends, and in cool
blood, might be taken; Your Army must be planted in one of the ways mentioned:
To plant it in the way of absolute Monarchy that is upon feuds for life, such
as the Timars, a Country as large and fruitful as that of Greece, would afford
you but sixteen thousand Timariots, for that is the most the Turk (being the
best husband that ever was of this kind) that makes of it at this day: and if
Oceana, which is less in fruitfulness by one half, and in extent by three
parts, should have no greater a force, whoever breaks her in one battle, may
be sure she shall never rise; for such (as was noted by Machiavill) is the
Nature of the Turkish Monarchy, if you break her in two battles, you have
destroyed her whole Militia; and the rest being all slaves, you hold her
without any further resistance: Wherefore the erection of an absolute Monarchy
in Oceana, or in any other Country that is no larger, without making it a
certain prey unto the first invader, is altogether impossible.

To plant by halves as the Roman Emperors did their Beneficiaries, or military
Colonies, it must be either for life; and this an Army of Oceaners in their own
Country, (especially having states of inheritance) will never bear, because
such an Army so planted is as well confiscated as the people, nor had the
Mamalines been contented with such usage in Egypt, but that they were
Forraigners, and daring nor to mix with the Natives, it was of absolute
necessity to their Being.

Or planting them upon inheritance, whether Aristocratically as the Neustrians,
or Democratically, as the Israelites, they grow up by certain consequence into
the National interest, and this if they be planted popularly comes unto a
Commonwealth; if by way of Nobility unto a mixed Monarchy, which of all other
will be found to be the only kind of Monarchy, whereof this Nation or any other
that is of no greater extent has been or can be capable: for if the
Israelites (through their Democraticall Balance being fixed by their Agrarian
stood firm,) be yet found to have elected Kings, it was because their
Territory lying open they were perpetually invaded, and being perpetually
invaded turned themselves to any thing, which through the want of experience
they thought might be a remedy; whence their mistake in election of their
Kings, (under whom they gained nothing, but to the contrary lost all they had
acquired by their Commonwealth, both Estates and Liberties;) is not only
apparent, but without parallel. And if there have been (as was shown) a
Kingdom of the Goths in Spain, and of the Vandalls in Asia, consisting of a
single person, and a Parliament, (taking a Parliament to be a Council of the
people only, without a Nobility) it is expressly said of those Councills, that
they deposed their Kings as often as them pleased: nor can there be other
consequence of such a Government, seeing where there is a Council of the
people, they do never receive Laws, but give them; and a Council giving Laws
unto a single person, he has no means in the World, whereby to be any more
than a subordinate Magistrate, but force: in which case, he is not a single
person and a Parliament, but a single person and an Army, which Army again must
be planted as has been shown, or can be of no long Continuance.

It is true, that the Provincial Balance being in Nature quite contrary unto
the National, you are no ways to plant a Provincial Army upon Dominion. But
then you must have a native Territory in strength, Situation, or Government
able to overballance the foreign, or you can never hold it. That an Army
should in any other case be long supported by a mere Tax, is a mere Fancy as
void of all reason and Experience, as if a man should think to maintain such an
one by robbing of Orchards: for a mere Tax is but pulling of Plumbtrees, the
roots whereof are in other men's grounds, who suffering perpetual violence,
come to hate the Author of it: And it is a Maxim, that no Prince that is hated
by his people can be safe. Arms planted upon Dominion extirpate enemies, and
make friends; but maintained by a mere Tax, have enemies that have roots, and
friends that have none.

To conclude, Oceana, or any other Nation of no greater extent must have a
competent Nobility, or is altogether incapable of Monarchy: for where there is
equality of estates, there must be equality of power; and where there is
equality of power, there can be no Monarchy.

The generation of the Commonwealth.
To come then to the generation of the Commonwealth; it has been shown how
through the ways and means used by Panurgus to abase the Nobility, and so to
mend that flaw which we have asserted to be incurable in this kind of
Constitution, he suffered the Balance to fall into the power of the people,
and so broke the Government: but the Balance being in the people, the
Commonwealth (though they do not see it) is already in the Nature of them: (
Cornua nota prius Vitulo, quam frontibus extant) there wants nothing else but
time, (which is slow and dangerous) or art, (which would be more quick and
secure) for the bringing those native Arms (wherewithal they are found
already) to resist they know not how every thing that opposes them, unto such
maturity as may fix them upon their own strength and Bottom.

What Prudence is.
But whereas this Art is Prudence; and that part of Prudence, which regards the
present work, is nothing else but the skill of raising such Superstructures of
Government, as are natural to the known Foundations: they never mind the
Foundation, but through certain animosities, (wherewith by striving one against
another they are infected) or through freaks by which not regarding the course
of things, nor how they conduce unto their purpose, they are given to building
in the Air, come to be divided and subdivided into endless parties and
factions, both Civil, and Ecclesiastical: which briefly to open, I shall first
speak of the people in general, and then of their divisions.

A people (says Machiavill) that is corrupt, is not capable of a
Commonwealth: but in showing what a corrupt people is, he has either involved
himself or me; nor can I otherwise come out of the Labyrinth, than by saying,
that the Balance altering a people as to the foregoing Government, must of
necessity be corrupt; but corruption in this sense signifies no more then that
the corruption of one Government (as in natural bodies) is the generation of
another: wherefore if the Balance alter from Monarchy, the corruption of the
people in this case is that which makes them capable of a Commonwealth: But
whereas I am not ignorant, that the corruption which he means is in Manners,
this also is from the Balance. For the Balance swaying from Monarchical into
Popular, abateth the Luxury of the Nobility, and enriching the people, brings
the Government from a more private unto a more public interest, which coming
nearer, as has been shown, unto Justice and right Reason, the people upon a
like alteration is so far from such corruption of Manners, as should render
them incapable of a Commonwealth, that of necessity they must thereby contract
such reformation of manners as will bear no other kind of Government. On the
other side, where the Balance changes from Popular to Oligarchical, or
Monarchical; the public interest with the reason and justice included in the
same, becomes more private, Luxury is introduced in the place of Temperance
and Servitude in that of Freedom; which causes such a corruption of manners
both in the Nobility and the people, as by the Example of Rome in the time of
the Triumvirs, is more at large discovered by the Author to have been
altogether incapable of a Commonwealth.

But the Balance of Oceana changing quite contrary to that of Rome, the
manners of the people were not thereby corrupted, but on the contrary fitted
for a Commonwealth. For differences of opinion in a people (not rightly
informed of their Balance,) or division into parties, while there is not any
common ligament of power sufficient to reconcile or hold them, is no sufficient
proof of corruption in a people: Nevertheless, seeing this must needs be
matter of Scandal and danger, it will not be amiss in showing what were the
parties, to show what were their errors.

The parties into which this Nation was divided, were Temporal or Spiritual;
and the Temporal parties were especially two, the one the Royalists, the other
Common-wealths-men; each of which asserted their different Causes, either out
of Prudence or Ignorance; out of interest or Conscience.

For Prudence, either that of the Ancients is inferior unto the Modern, (which
we have hitherto been setting face to face, The Royalist.
that any one may judge) or that of the Royalists must be inferior unto that
prudence of the Common-wealths-man: and for interest, taking the
Common-Wealths-man to have really intended the public (for otherwise he is an
hypocrite, and the worst of men) that of the Royalist must of necessity have
been more private: wherefore the whole dispute will come upon matter of
Conscience; and this, whether it be urged by the right of Kings, the obligation
of former Laws, or of the Oath of Allegiance, is absolved by the Balance.

For if the right of Kings were as immediately derived from the breath of God,
as the life of man; yet this excludes not death and dissolution. But, that the
dissolution of the late Monarchy was as natural as the death of a man, has
been already shown: wherefore it remains with the Royalists to discover by what
reason or experience it is possible for a Monarchy to stand upon a popular
Balance; or, the Balance being popular as well the Oath of Allegiance, as all
other Monarchical Laws, imply an impossibility, and are therefore void.

To the Common-wealths-man I have no more to say, but that if he exclude any
party, The Commonwealths man.
he is not truly such; nor shall ever found a Commonwealth upon the natural
principle of the same, which is Justice: and the Royalist for having opposed a
Commonwealth in Oceana (where the Laws were so ambiguous, that they might be
eternally disputed, and never reconciled) can neither be justly, for that
cause, excluded from his full and equal share in the Government; nor
prudently, for this, that a Commonwealth consisting of a party will be in
perpetual labor of her own destruction: whence it was, that the Romans having
conquered the Albans incorporated them with equal right into the
Commonwealth: and if the Royalists be flesh of your flesh, and nearer of blood
then were the Albans to the Romans, you are also Christians: nevertheless
there is no reason that a Commonwealth should any more favor a party
remaining in fixed opposition against her, then Brutus did his sons. But if she
fix them upon that opposition, it is her fault, not theirs, and this is done by
excluding them. Men that have equal possessions, and the same security of
their estates and of their liberties that you have, have the same cause with
you to defend; but if you will be trampling, they fight for liberty, though for
Monarchy; and you for Tyranny, though under the name of a Commonwealth; the
nature of orders in a Commonwealth rightly instituted being void of all
Jealousy, because let the parties which she imbraceth be what they will, her
orders are such, as they neither would resist if they could, nor could if they
would, as has in part been already shown, and will appear more at large by the
ensuing Model.

The parties that are Spiritual are of more kinds then I need mention; some for
a National Religion, Religious parties.
and others for liberty of Conscience, with such animosity on both sides, as if
these two did not consist, of which I have already sufficiently spoken, to
show, that the one cannot well consist without the other. But they of all the
rest are the most dangerous, who holding that the Saints must govern, go about
to reduce the Commonwealth unto a party, as well for the reasons already
shown, as that their pretenses are against Scripture, where the Saints are
commanded to submit unto the higher powers, and be subject unto the Ordinance
of man. And, that men pretending under the notion of Saints or Religion, unto
Civil Power, have hitherto never failed to dishonor that profession; the World
is full of Examples, whereof I shall confine my self at the present unto two,
the one of old, the other of new Rome.

In old Rome the Patricians or Nobility, Saints.
pretending to be the Godly party, were questioned by the People for engrossing
all the Magistracies of that Commonwealth, had nothing to say why they did so,
but ( Quod nemo plebeius auspicia haberet) that Magistracy required a kind of
holiness which was not in the people. (Plebs ad id maxima indignatione
exarsit, Livy, 4.8.
quod auspicari tanquam invisi Diis immortalibus negarentur posse) at which the
people were filled with such indignation, as had come to cutting of throats, if
the Nobility had not forthwith laid by the insolency of that plea: which
nevertheless when they had done, the people for a long time after continued to
elect none other than Patrician Magistrates.

The Example of new Rome in the rise and practice of the Hierarchy, (too well
known to require any further illustration) is far more immodest.

This has been the course of Nature: and when it has pleased, or shall please
God to introduce any thing that is above the course of Nature, he will as he
has always done, confirm it by miracle; for so in his Prophecy of the reign
of Christ upon earth, he expressly promises; seeing that the souls of them
that were beheaded for Jesus, shall be seen to live and reign with him, which
will be an object of sense; the rather, because the rest of the dead are not to
live again until the Thousand years be finished. And it is not lawful for men
to persuade us that a thing is, though there be no such object of our sense,
which God has told us shall not be, until it be an object of our sense.

The Saintship of a people as to Government consists in the election of
Magistrates fearing God, and hating covetuousnesse, and not in their confining
themselves, or being confined unto men of this, or that party or profession. It
consists in maing the most prudent and religious choice that they can, but
not in trusting unto men, but, next God, in their orders. Give us good men and
they will make us good Laws, is the Maxim of a Demagogue, and (through the
alteration which is commonly perceivable in men, when they have power to work
their own wills) exceeding fallible. But give us good orders, and they will
make us good men, is the Maxim of a Legislator, and the most infallible in the
Politickes.

But these divisions, (however there be some good men, that look sadly on
them) are trivial things; first (as to the civil concernment) because the
Government whereof this Nation is capaple the Errors of the people are from
their Governors.
once seen takes in all interests. And secondly, (as to the spiritual)
because as pretense of Religion has always been turbulent in broken
Governments, so where the Government has been sound and steady, Religion has
never showed her self with any other face than that of her natural
sweetness, and tranquillity: nor is there any reason why she should; Wherefore
the errors of the people are occasioned by their Governors. If they be
doubtful of the way, or wander from it, it is because their guides misled
them; and the guides of the people are never so well qualified for leading by
any virtue of their own, as by that of the Government.

The Government of Oceana, (as it stood at the time whereof we discourse
consisting of one single Council of the people, to the exclusion of the King,
and of the Lords,) was called a Parliament; how be it the Parliaments of the
Teutons and of the Neustrians consisted as has been showed of the King, Lords
and Commons; wherefore this under an old name was a new thing. A Parliament
consisting of a single assembly elected by the people and invested with the
whole power of the Government, without any Covenants, Conditions, or orders
whatsoever. So new a thing that neither ancient nor modern Prudence can show
any avowed example of the like: And there is scarce any thing that seems unto
me so strange as that ( whereas there was nothing more familiar with these
Counselors than to bring the Scripture to the House) there should not be a man
of them, that so much as offered to bring the house unto the Scripture, wherein
as has been shown is contained that Original, whereof all the rest of the
Commonwealths seem to be copies. Certainly if Leviathan (who is surer of
nothing than that a popular Commonwealth consists, but of one Council)
transcribed his doctrine out of this Assembly, for him to except against
Aristotle and Cicero for writing out of their own Commonwealths, was not so
fair play; or if the Parliament transcribed out of him, it had been an honor
better due unto Moses. But where one of them should have an Example, but from
the other, I cannot imagine; there being nothing of this kind that I can find
in story but the Oligarthy of Athens, the thirty Tyrants of the same, and the
Roman Decemvirs.

For the Oligarchy, Thucidides tells us that it was a Senate or Council of
four hundred, Lib. 8.
pretending to a Ballancing Council of the people consisting of five thousand
but not producing them, wherein you have the definition of an Oligarchy, which
is a single Council both debating and resolving, dividing and choosing; and
what that must come to, was shown by the Example of the Girls, and is
apparent throughout all experience; wherefore the thirty set up by the
Lacedaemonians, (when they had conquered Athens) are called Tyrants by all
Authors; Leviathan only excepted, who will have them against all the World to
have been an Aristocracy; but for what reason I cannot imagine, these also as
void of any Balance having been void of that which is essential to every
Commonwealth, whether Aristocraticall or Popular; except he be pleased with
them in that, by the Testimony of Xenophon, they killed more men in eight
Months, then the Lacedaemonians had done in ten years: oppressing the people
(to use Sir. Wa: Raleighs words) with all base and intolerable slavery.

The usurped Government of the Decemvirs in Rome was of the same kind.
Wherefore in the fear of God let Christian Legislators, (setting the pattern,
given in the Mount on the one side, and these execrable Examples on the other)
know the right hand from the left; and so much the rather because those things,
which do not conduce to the good of the Governed, are fallacious, if they
appear to be good for the Governors. God in chastizing a people is accustomed
to burn his Rod. The Empire of these Oligarchies was not so violent as short,
nor did they fall upon the people but in their own immediate ruin. A Council
without a Balance is not a Commonwealth, but an Oligarchy; and every
Oligarchy, except she be put to the defense of her wickedness, or power,
against some outward danger, is factious: Wherefore the errors of the people
being from their Governors (which Maxim in the Politics bearing a sufficient
testimony unto it self, is also proved by Machiavill) if the people of Oceana
have been factious, the cause is apparent; But what remedy?

In answer to this question, I come now to the Army: The General.
of which the most victorious Captain and incomparable patriot Olphaus
Megaletor was now General: Who being a much greater master of that art,
whereof I have made a rough draught in these Preliminaries, had so sad
reflections upon the ways and proceedings of the Parliament, as cast him upon
books, and all other means of diversion, among which he happened upon this
place of Machiavill. Thrice happy is that people which chances to have a man
able to give them such a Government at once, as without alteration may secure
them of their liberties: Seeing it is certain, that Lacedemon in observing the
Laws of Lycurgus, continued about eight hundred years without any dangerous
tumult or corruption. My Lord General (as it is said of Themistocles, that he
could not sleep for the glory obtained by Miltiades at the battle of Maratho)
took so new, and deep impression at these words of the much greater glory of
Lycurgus, that being on this side assaulted with the emulation of his
illustrious object, on the other with the misery of the Nation, which seemed,
(as it were ruined by his Victory) to cast her self at his feet, he was
almost wholly deprived of his natural rest, until the debate he had within
himself* came to a firm resolution, that the greatest advantages of a
Commonwealth are, first that the Legislator should be one man: and secondly
that the Government should be made altogether, or at once. For the first it is
certain says Machiavill, Des. B. 1. c 9.
that a Commonwealth is seldom or never well turned or constituted, except it
have been the work of one man: for which cause a wise Legislator, and one whose
mind is firmly set, That a Legislator is to be one.
not upon private but the public interest, not upon his posterity but upon his
Country, may justly endeavor to get the sovereign power into his own hands;
nor shall any man that is master of reason blame such extraordinary means as
in that case shall be necessary, the end proving no other, than the
constitution of a well ordered Commonwealth. The reason of this is
demonstrable; for the ordinary means not failing, the Commonwealth has no
need of a Legislator; That a Commonwealth is to be made at once.
but the ordinary means failing, there is no recourse to be had but to such as
are extraordinary. And, whereas a Book or a Building has not been known to
attain to perfection, if it have not had a sole Author, or Architect: a
Commonwealth, as to the Fabric of it, is of the like nature. And thus it may
be made at once; in which, there be great advantages: for a Commonwealth made
at once, takes her Security at the same time she lends her Money; trusts
not her self to the faith of men, but lancheth immediately forth into the
Empire of Laws: and being set straight brings the manners of her Citizens
unto her rule: whence followed that uprightness which was in Lacedemon. But
manners that are rooted in men, bow the tenderness of a Commonwealth coming
up by twigs unto their bent; whence followed the obliquity that was in Rome,
and those perpetual repaires by the Consuls Axes and Tribunes Hammers, which
could never finish that Commonwealth but in destruction.

My Lord General being clear in these points, and the necessity of some other
course than would be thought upon by the Parliament, appointed a Randezvous of
the Army, where he spoke his sense agreeable to these Preliminaries with such
success unto the Soldiery, that the Parliament was soon after deposed; and
himself (in the great Hall of the Pantheon or Palace of Justice, situated in
Emporium the Capital City) created by the universal suffrage of the Army; Lord
Archon, or sole Legislator of Oceana; upon which Theater you have, to conclude
this piece, a Person introduced, whose Fame shall never draw his Curtain.

The Lord Archon being created, fifty select persons to assist him (by
laboring in the Mines of ancient Prudence, and bringing her hidden Treasures
unto new light) were added, with the style also of Legislators, and sat as a
Council whereof he was the sole Director and President.

The Council of Legislators.
OF this Piece, being the greater half of the whole Work, I shall be able at
this time to give no farther Account, then very briefly to show at what it
aims.

My Lord Archon in opening the Council of Legislators, made it appear how
unsafe a thing it is to follow Fancy in the Fabric of a Commonwealth; and
how necessary that the Archives of ancient prudence should be ransackt, before
any Counselor should presume to offer any other matter in order to the Work
in hand, or toward the consideration to be had by the Council upon a Model
of Government. Wherefore he caused an Urn to be brought, and every one of the
Counselors to draw a Lot: by the Lots as they were drawn.

The Commonwealth of Israel, fell unto Phosphorus de Auge. The Commonwealth
of Athens, fell unto Navarchus de Paralo. The Commonwealth of Lacedemon, fell
unto Laco de Scytale. The Commonwealth of Carthage, fell unto Mago de
Syrtibus. The Commonwealth of the Achaeans, Aetolians, and Lycians, fell unto
Aratus de Isthmo. The Commonwealth of the Switz, fell unto Alpester de
Fulmine. The Commonwealth of Holland, and the United Provinces, fell unto
Glaucus de Ulna. The Commonwealth of Rome, fell unto Dolabella de Enyo. The
Commonwealth of Venice, fell unto Lynceus de Stella.
These containing in them all those excellencies whereof a Commonwealth is
capable; so that to have added more, had been to no purpose; upon time given
unto the Counselors by their own studies, and those of their friends to
prepare themselves, were opened in the Order, and by the persons mentioned at
the Council of Legislators; and afterward by order of the same were repeated
at the Council of the Prytans unto the people; for in drawing of the Lots,
there were a matter of a Dozen of them inscribed with the letter P. which the
Counselors that drew became Prytans.

The Prytans were a Committee or Council sitting in the great Hall of
Pantheon, to whom it was lawful for any man to offer any thing in order to the
Fabric of the Commonwealth: for which cause, that they might not be oppressed
by the throng, there was a Rail about the Table where they sat, and on each
side of the same a Pulpit; that on the right hand for any man that would
propose any thing; and that on the left for any other that would oppose him;
and all parties (being indemnify'd by Proclamation of the Archon) were invited
to dispute their own interests, or propose whatever they thought fit (in order
to the future Government) to the Council of the Prytans, who (having a guard of
a matter of two or three hundred men, lest the heat of the dispute might break
the peace) had the right of Moderators, and were to report from time to time
such Propositions or Occurrences as they thought fit, to the Council of
Legislators sitting more privately in the Palace called Alma.

This was that which made the people (who were neither safely to be admitted
unto, nor conveniently to be excluded from the framing of their Commonwealth)
verily believe when it came forth, that it was no other than that, whereof they
themselves had been the makers.

Moreover, this Council sat diverse Months after the publishing, and during the
promulgation of the Model unto the people, by which means there is scarce any
thing was said or written for or against the said Model, but you shall have it
with the next impression of this Work by way of Oration addressed unto, and
moderated by the Prytans.

By this means the Council of Legislators had their necessary solitude and due
aim in their greater Work, as being acquainted from time to time with the pulse
of the people, and yet without any manner of interruption or disturbance.

Wherefore every Commonwealth in her place having been opened by her due
Method; that is, first, by the people; secondly, by the Senate; and thirdly, by
the Magistracy; The Council upon mature debate took such results or orders, out
of each one, and out of each part of each one of them, as upon opening the same
they thought fit; which being put from time to time in writing by the Clerk or
Secretary, there remained no more in the conclusion, than putting the Orders so
taken together, to view and examine them with a diligent Eye, to the end that
it might be clearly discovered whether they did enterfere, or could any wise
come to interfere or jostle one the other; for as such orders jostling, or
coming to jostle one another, are the certain dissolution of the Commonwealth;
so taken upon the proof of like experience, and neither jostling, nor showing
which way they can possibly come to jostle one another, make a perfect, and
(for ought that in humane prudence can be foreseen) an immortal Commonwealth.

And such was the Art whereby my Lord Archon (taking Counsel of the
Commonwealth of Israel as of Moses; and of the rest of the Commonwealths, as
of Jethro) framed the Model of the Commonwealth of Oceana.

THE MODEL OF The Commonwealth OF Oceana.
WHereas my Lord Archon, being, from Moses and Lycurgus, the first Legislator
that hitherto is found in Story to have introduced or Erected an Entire
Commonwealth at once, happened, like them also, to be more intent upon putting
the same into Execution or Action, then into Writing; by which means the Model
came to be promulgated or published with more Brevity and less illustration
then is necessary for their understanding who have not been acquainted with the
whole proceedings of the Council of Legislators, and of the Prytans, where it
was asserted and cleared from all objections and doubts: Unto the end that I
may supply what was wanting in the promulgated Epitome, unto a more full and
perfect Narrative of the whole, I shall rather take the Commonwealth
practically, and as she has now given Account of her self in some years
Revolutions, (as Dicaearchus is said to have done that of Lacedemon, Suidas.
first transcribed by his hand some three or four hundred years after the
Institution) yet not omitting to add for proof, unto every order such Debates
and Speeches of the Legislators in their Council, or at least such parts of
them as may best discover the reason of the Government, nor such ways and
means as were used in the Institution or Rise of the Building, not to be so
well Conceived, without some knowledge given of the Engines wherewithal the
mighty Weight was moved. But through the entire omission of the Council of
Legislators or Workmen that squared Every stone unto this Structure in the
quarries of Ancient Prudence, the proof of the first part of this Discourse
will be lame, except I insert as well for illustration, as to avoid frequent
Repetition, three remarkable Testimonies in this place.

Exo. 18.24. Numb. 1.16. Math.
The first is taken out of the Commonwealth of Israel; So Moses hearkened unto
the voice of (Jethro) his Father in Law, and did all that he had said. And
Moses chose able men out of all Israel, and made them heads over the people,
(Tribunes as it is in the vulgar Latin; or Phylarches, that is) Princes of the
Tribes, sitting ( Sellis Curulibus, says Grotius) upon twelve Thrones, and
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel; and next unto these he chose Rulers of
Thousands, Rulers of Hundreds, Rulers of Fifties, and Rulers of Tens, which
were the steps or rise of this Commonwealth, from her foundation or root, unto
her proper Elevation, or accomplishment in the Sanhedrim, and the Congregation,
already opened in the Preliminaries.

The Second is taken out of Lacedemon, as Lycurgus (for the greater impression
of his Institutions upon the minds of his Citizens) pretended to have received
the Model of that Commonwealth from the Oracle of Apollo at Delphos, the
words whereof are thus recorded by Plutarch in the Life of that famous
Legislator, [When thou shall have divided the People into Tribes, Crag. de Rep.
Lac. Lib. 1. Cap. 6.
(which were six) and Oba's, (which were five in every Tribe) thou shall
Constitute the Senate, consisting with the two Kings of thirty Counselors,
who according as occasion requires, shall cause the Congregation to be
Assembled between the Bridge and the River Gnavon, where the Senate shall
propose unto the People, and dismiss them without suffering them to debate.
The Obae were linages into which every Tribe was divided, and in each Tribe
there was one other Division containing all those of the same that were of
military Age; which being called the Mora, was subdivided into Troops and
Companies that were held in perpetual discipline under the Command of a
Magistrate called the Polemarche.

The Third is taken out of the Commonwealth of Rome, or those parts of it
which are comprised in the first and second book of Livy, where the people
according to the Institution by Romulus, are first divided into Thirty Curia's
or Parishes, whereof he Elected (by three out of each Curia) the Senate, which
from his Reign unto that of Servius Tullius proposed unto the Parishes or
Parochial Congregations, Halicar.
and these being called the Comitia Curiata, had the Election of the Kings, (
Quirites, Regem create; ita patrilus visum est. Again, Tullium Hostilium Regem
Populus Jussit, Patres authors facti) the Confirmation of their Laws ( Ut ab
Romulo traditum, suffragium viritim eadem vi, eodemque jure omnibus Datum est);
and the last appeal in matters of Judicature, as appears in the Case of
Horatius that killed his Sister; Till in the Reign of Servius (non enim ut ab
Romulo traditum caeteri servaverunt reges) the people being grown somewhat,
either the power of the Curiata was for the greater part translated unto the
Centuriata Comitia instituted by this King, which distributed the people
according to the sense or valuation of their Estates unto six Classes, every
one containing about forty Centuries, divided into Youth and Elders; the Youth
for field-service, the Elders for the defense of their Territory, all armed and
under continual Discipline, in which they assembled both upon Military and
Civil occasions. But when the Senate proposed unto the People, the horse only
whereof there were twelve Centuries, consisting of the Richest sort over and
above those of the foot enumerated, were called with the first Classis of the
foot unto the suffrage; or if these accorded not, then the second Classis was
called to them, but seldom or never any of the rest. Wherefore the people after
the expulsion of the Kings, growing impatient of this inequality, rested not
till they had reduced the Suffrage as it had been in the Comitia Curiata to the
whole People again; But in another way, that is to say, by the Comitia Tributa,
which thereupon were instituted, being a Council where the People in Exigencies
made Laws without the Senate; which Laws were called Plebiscita. This
Council is that in regard whereof Cicero and other great Wits so frequently
inveigh against the People, and sometimes even Livy, as at the Institution: (
Hunc Annum insignem maxim Comitia Tributa efficient; res major victoria
suscepti certaminis quam usu, plus enim dignitatis Comitiis ipsis detractum
est, patribus ex Concilio submovendis, quam Virium aut plebi additum aut
demptum patribus) To say truth, it was a kind of Anarchy, whereof the people
could not be excusable, if there had not, through the Courses taken by the
Senate, been otherwise a necessity that they must have seen the Commonwealth
run into Oligarchy.

The Manner how the Comitia Curiata, Centuriata, or Tributa were called,
(during the time of the Commonwealth to the Suffrage, Sigonius.
was by lot: the Curia, Century or Tribe whereon the first lot fell, being
styled Principium, or the prerogative; and the other Curiae, Centuries, or
Tribes, whereon the second, third, fourth Lots, etc. fell, the Jure vocatae;
from henceforth not the first Classis, as in the times of Servius; but the
Prerogative, whether Curia, Century or Tribe, came first to the Suffrage, whose
Vote was called omen Praerogativum, and seldom failed to be leading unto the
rest of the Tribes: The Jure vocatae in the order of their Lots came next: the
Manner of giving suffrage was, by casting wooden Tablets marked for the
affirmative, or the Negative, into certain Urns standing upon a Scaffold as
they marched over it in files; which for the Resemblance it bore, was called
the Bridge; the Candidate or Competitor who had most Suffrages in a Curia,
Century or Tribe, was said to have that Curia Century or Tribe; and he who had
most of the Curiae Centuries or Tribes, carried the Magistracy.

These three places being premised as such upon which there will be frequent
Reflection, I come unto the Narrative, divided into two parts, the first
containing the Institution, the second the Constitution of the Commonwealth;
in each whereof I shall distinguish the Orders, as those which contain the
whole Model, from the rest of the Discourse, which tends only unto the
Explanation or proof of them.

Institution of the Commonwealth.
In the Institution or building of a Commonwealth, the first Work (as that of
builders) can be no other then fitting and distributing the Materials.

The materials of a Commonwealth are the people; And the People of Oceana were
distributed by casting them into certain Divisions, Divisions of the People.
regarding their Quality, their Ages, their Wealth, and the Places of their
residence or habitation, which was done by the ensuing Orders.

Into Freemen, and Servants.
while such; for if they attain unto Liberty, that is, to live of themselves,
they are Freemen or Citizens. This Order needs no proof, in regard of the
nature of servitude, which is inconsistent with Freedom or Participation of
Government in a Commonwealth.

Into Youth and Elders.
being accounted Youth and such as are of 30. and upwards Elders) and
establishes that the Youth shall be the marching Armies, and the Elders the
standing Garrisons of this Nation. A Commonwealth whose Arms are in the hands
of her servants, had need be situated (as is elegantly said of Venice by
Contarini Lontana, dalia ^ede degli huomini) out of the reach of such Clutches;
witness the danger run by that of Carthage in the Rebellion of Spendius and
Matho. But though a City (if one swallow make a Summer) may thus chance to be
safe, yet shall she never be great; for if Carthage or Venice acquired any fame
in their Arms, it is known to have happened through the mere virtue of their
Captains, and not of their Orders: wherefore Israel, Lacedemon, and Rome
intailed their Arms upon the prime of their Citizens, divided (at least in
Lacedemon and Rome) into Youth and Elders; the Youth for the Field, and the
Elders for defense of the Territory.

Into Horse and Foot.
they who have above one hundred pounds a year in Lands, Goods, or Moneys,
being obliged to be of the Horse; and they who have under, to be of the Foot.
But if a man have prodigally wasted and spent his Patrimony, he is neither
capable of Magistracy, Office, nor Suffrage in the Commonwealth. Citizens are
not only to defend the Commonwealth, but according to their Abilities, as the
Romans, under Servius Tullius (regard had unto their Estates) were some
enrolled in the Horse Centuries, and other of the Foot, with Arms enjoined
accordingly; nor could it be otherwise in the rest of the Commonwealths;
though out of Remains that are so much darker it be not so clearly proveable.
And the necessary prerogative to be given by a Commonwealth unto Estates in
some measure is in the nature of industry, and the use of it to the Public, (
Populus Romanus, (says Julius Exuperantius) per Classes Divisus erat, et pro
Patrimonii facultate censebantur; exiis, omnes quibus res erat, ad militiam
Ducebantur: diligenter enim pro victoria laborabant qui ex liberate bona
patriam defendebant: Illi autem quibus nullae opes erant, Caput suum, quod
solum possidebant, censebantur et bel^i tempore in moenibus residebant; facile
enim poterant existere proditores, quia egestas haud facile habetur sine Damno.
Hos igitur Marius, quibus non fuerat Resp. committenda, duxit ad bellum: and
his success was accordingly): There is a mean in things; as exorbitant riches
overthrow the balance of a Commonwealth, so Extreme poverty cannot hold it,
nor is by any means to be trusted with it. The clause in the Order concerning
the Prodigal is Athenian, and a very Laudable one; for he that could not live
upon his patrimony, if he come to touch the public money, makes a
Commonwealth Bank-rupt.

into Parishes, Hundreds, and Tribes.
For except the People be methodically distributed, they cannot be methodically
Collected: but the being of a Commonwealth consists in the methodicall
collection of the people; wherefore you have the Israelitish Divisions into
Rulers of Thousands, of Hundreds, of Fifties, and of Tens; and of the whole
Commonwealth, into Tribes. The Laconick into Oba's, Mora's and Tribes; the
Roman into Tribes, Centuries, and Classes; and something there must of
necessity be in every Government of like nature; as that in the late Monarchy,
by Counties: But this being the only Institution in Oceana, (except that of
the Agrarian) which required any charge, or included any difficulty, engages
me unto a more particular description of the manner how it was performed, as
follows.

The use and method of the Surveyors.
One thousand Surveyors Commissionated and instructed by the Lord Archon and the
Council, being divided into two equal numbers, each under the inspection of
two Surveyors general were distributed into the Northern and Southern parts of
the Territory, divided by the River Hemisua, the whole whereof contains about
Ten thousand Parishes, some ten of those being assigned unto each Surveyor; For
as to this matter there needed no great exactness, it tending only, by
showing whither every one was to repair, and where about to begin; unto the
more orderly carrying on of the work: The nature of their Instructions
otherwise regarding rather the number of the Inhabitants, then of the Parishes.
The Surveyors therefore being every one furnished with a proportion convenient
of Urns, Balls and Ballotting Boxes, (in the use whereof they had been formerly
exercised) and now arriving each at his respective Parishes, began with the
People by teaching them their first lesson, which was the Ballot; and albeit
they found them in the beginning somewhat Froward as at toys, with which,
while they were in Expectation of greater matters from a Council of
Legislators, they conceived themselves to be abused, they came within a while
to think them pretty sport, and at length such as might very soberly be used in
good Earnest; whereupon the Surveyors began the Institution included in The
Fifth Order requiring, That upon the first Monday next ensuing the last of
December, Institution of the Parishes of the Ballot and of the Deputies.
the bigger Bell in every Parish throughout the Nation, be rang at eight of the
Clock in the morning, and continue Ringing for the space of one Hour; and that
all the Elders of the Parish respectively repair unto the Church before the
Bell have done ringing; where dividing themselves into two equal Numbers, or
as near Equal as may be, they shall take their places according to their
Dignities if they be of diverse qualities, and according to their seniority, if
they be of the same, the one half on the one side, and the other half on the
other, in the body of the Church; which done, they shall make oath unto the
Overseers of the Parish for the time being, (instead of these the Surveyors was
to officiate at the Institution or first Assembly) by holding up their hands,
to make a fair Election according unto the Laws of the Ballot, as they be
hereafter Explained, of such persons amounting unto a Fifth part of their whole
number to be their Deputies, and to exercise their power in manner hereafter
explained, as they shall think in their Consciences to be fittest for that
trust, and will acquit themselves of it to the best advantage of the
Commonwealth. And, oath being thus made, they shall proceed unto Election, if
the Elders of the Parish amount unto one Thousand by the Ballot of the Tribe
(as it is in due place Explained): And if the Elders of the Parish amount unto
Fifty or upwards, but within the Number of one Thousand, by the Ballot of the
Hundred (as it is in the due place explained); But if the Elders amount not
unto Fifty, then they shall proceed unto the Ballot of the Parish as it is in
this place, and after this manner explained. The two Overseers for the time
being, shall seat themselves at the upper end of the middle Alley, with a Table
before them, their faces being toward the Congregation: And the Constable for
the time being shall set an Urn before the Table, into which he shall put so
many Balls as there ve Elders present, whereof there shall be one that is
gilded, the rest being white; and when the Constable has shaken the Urn
sufficiently to mix the Balls, tbe Overseers shall call the Elders unto the
Urn, who from each side of the Church, shall come up the middle Alley in two
files, every man passing by the Urn, and drawing one Ball, which if it be
silver, he shall cast into a Bowl standing at the foot of the Urn, and return
by the outward Alley on his side unto his place. But he who draws the
gold-Ball is the proposer, and shall be seated between the Overseers, where he
shall begin in what order he pleases, and name such as (upon his oath already
taken) he conceives fittest to be chosen, one by one unto the Elders; and the
party named shall withdraw while the Congregation is in Ballotting of his name
by the double Box or Boxes appointed and marked on the outward part, to show
which side is Affirmative, and which Negative, being carried by a Boy or Boys
appointed by the Overseers, unto every one of the Elders, who shall hold up a
pellet made of linen rags, between his finger and his thumb, and put it after
such a manner into the box, as though no man can see into which side he puts
it; yet any man may see that he puts in but one pellet, or suffrage; and the
suffrage of the Congregation being thus given, shall be returned with the Box
or Boxes unto the Overseers, who opening the same shall pour the affirmative
Balls into a white Bowl standing upon the Table on the right hand, to be
numbered by the first Overseer; and the Negative into a Green Bowl standing on
the left hand, to be numbered by the second Overseer: and the suffrages being
numbered, he who has the major part in the Affirmative, is one of the Deputies
of the Parish; and when so many Deputies are chosen as amounts unto a full
fifth part of the whole number of the Elders the Ballot for that time shall
cease. The Deputies being chosen are to be listed by the Overseers in order as
they were Chosen, save only that such as are Horse are to be listed in the
first place with the rest proportionably to the number of the Congregation,
after this Manner: Anno Dom. The List of the first Mover.
A. A. ord. eq. 1. Dep. B. B. 2. Dep. C C. 3. Dep. D.D. 4. Dep. E. E. 5. Dep.
of the Parish of -- in the Hundred of -- and the Tribe of -- which Parish at
the present Election contains 20 Elders, whereof one of the Horse or
Equestrian Order.



The first and second in the List are Overseers by Consequence: the third is
the Constable, and the fourth and fifth are Churchwardens; the persons so
chosen are Deputies of the Parish for the space of one year from their
Election, and no longer, nor may they be Elected two years together. This List,
being the Primum Mobile, or first mover of the Commonwealth, is to be
Registered in a Book, diligently kept and preserved by the Overseers, who are
Responsible in their places for these and other Duties to be hereafter
mentioned, unto the Censors of the Tribe, and the Congregation is to observe
the present Order, as they will Answer the contrary unto the Phylarch, or
Prerogative Troop of the Tribe; which, in case of failure in the whole or any
part of it, have power to Fine them or any of them, at discretion, but under an
Appeal unto the Parliament.



For proof of this Order, in Reason: it is with all Politicians past dispute,
that paternal power is in the right of nature; and this is no other then the
derivation of power from Fathers of Families, as the natural Root of a
Commonwealth; and for Experience, if it be otherwise in that of Holland, I
know no other Example of like kind. In Israel, the Sovereign power came clearly
from the natural root, the Elders of the whole people, and Rome was born
Comitiis Curiatis in her Parochial Congregations, out of which Romulus first
raised her Senate, then all the rest of the Orders of that Commonwealth, which
rose so high: Jos. 24.1.
For the depth of a Commonwealth is the just height of it.

Ipsa haeret Scopulis et tantum vertice ad auras
Aethereas, quantum Radice ad Tartara, tendit.
She raises up her head unto the Skies,
Near as her Root unto the center lies.
And if the Commonwealth of Rome were born of thirty Parishes, this of Oceana
was born of Ten thousand. But whereas mention in the Birth of this is made of
an Equestrian Order, it may startle such as know that the division of the
people of Rome at the Institution of that Commonwealth into Orders, was the
occasion of her ruin. The distinction of the Patrician as an hereditary order
from the very Institution, engrossing all the Magistracies, was indeed the
destruction of Rome; but to a Knight or one of the Equestrian Order, says
Horace.

Si quadringentis sex, septem millia desunt Plebs eris. By which it should seem
that this order was no otherwise hereditary then a man's Estate, nor gave it
any Claim to Magistracy; wherefore you shall never find that it disquieted the
Commonwealth; nor does the name denote any more in Oceana, then the Duty of
such a man's Estate unto the Public.

But the Surveyors both in this place and in others, for as much as they could
not observe all the circumstances of this Order, especially that of the time of
Election, did for the first as well as they could; and the Elections being made
and Registered, took each of them Copies of those Lists which were within their
allotments; which done, they produced, The Sixth Order, directing, in case a
Parson or Uicar of a Parish come to be removed by death, or by the Censors,
that the Congregation of the Parish Assemble and depute one or two Elders of
the Ballot, who upon the charge of the Parish shall repair unto one of the
Universities of this Nation with a Certificate signed by the Overseers, and
addressed unto the Uice-Chancellor; which Certificate giving notice of the
death or Removal of the Parson or Uicar, of the value of the Parsonage or
Uicaridge, and of the desire of the Congregation to receive a Probationer from
that University; the Uice-Chancellor upon the Receipt thereof shall call a
Convocation, and having made choice of a fit person, shall return him in due
time unto the Parish, where the person so returned shall receive the full
fruits of the Benefice or Uicaridge, and do the duty of the Parson or Uicar,
for the space of one year, as Probationer; and the space of one year being
expired, the Congregation of the Elders shall put their Probationer to the
Ballot; and if he attain not unto two parts in three of the Suffrage
affirmative, he shall take his leave of the Parish, and they shall send in like
manner for another Probationer: but if their Probationer attain unto two parts
in three of the Suffrage affirmative, he is the Pastor of that Parish. And the
Pastor of the Parish shall pray with the Congregation, preach the Word, and
administer the Sacraments unto the same, according unto the Directory to be
hereafter appointed by, the Parliament. Nevertheless such as are of gathered
Congregations, or from time to time shall join with any of them, are in no wise
obliged to this way of Electing their Teachers, or to give their Uotes in this
Case, but wholly left unto the liberty of their Conscience, and unto that way
of worship which they shall choose, being not Popish, Jewish, nor Idolatrous
and to the end that they may be the better protected by the State in the Free
Exercise of the same, they are desired to make choice in such manner as they
best like, of certain Magistra^es in every one of their Congregations, which we
could wish might be Four in each of them* to be Auditors in Cases of
differences, or distaste if any through variety of opinions, that may be
grievous, or injurious unto them should fall out. And such Auditors or
Magistrates shall have power to examine the matter and inform themselves to the
end that if they think it of sufficient weight they may acquaint the Phylarch,
or introduce it into the Council of Religion; where all such Causes as such
Magistrates shall introduce, shall from time to time be heard and determined
according unto such Laws as are or shall hereafter be provided by the
Parliament for the just defense of the Liberty of Conscience.

This Order consists of three parts, the first restoring the power of
Ordination unto the people, which that it originally appertains unto them, is
clear (though not in English, yet) in Scripture, Act. 14.23.
where the Apostles ordained Elders by the holding up of hands in every
Congregation, that is, by the suffrage of the people which was also given in
some of those Cities by the Ballot; and though it may be shown that the
Apostles ordained some by the Laying on of hands, it will not be shown that
they did so in every congregation.

Excommunication as not clearly proveable out of Scripture being omitted. The
second part of the order implies and establishes a national Religion; for
there be degrees of knowledge in Divine things, true Religion is not to be
attained unto without searching the Scriptures; the Scripture cannot be
searched by us unless we have them to search; and if we have nothing else or
(which is all one) understand nothing else but a translation we may be (as in
the place alleged, we have been) beguiled or misled by the translation, while
we should be searching the true sense of the Scripture, which cannot be
attained unto in a natural way (and a Commonwealth is not to presume upon
that which is supernatural) but by the knowledge of the original, and of
Antiquity acquired by our own studies, or those of some other, for even Faith
comes by hearing. Wherefore a Commonwealth not making provision of men from
time to time, knowing in the original languages wherein the Scriptures were
written and versed in those Antiquities whereunto they so frequently relate,
that the true sense of them depends in a great part upon that knowledge, can
never be secure that she shall not lose the Scripture, and by consequence her
Religion, which to preserve she must institute some method of this knowledge,
and some use of such as have acquired it, which amounts unto a National
Religion.

The Commonwealth having thus performed her duty toward God, as a rational
Creature by the best Application of her reason unto Scripture, for the
preservation of Religion in the purity of the same, yet pretends not unto
infallibility, but comes in the third part of the order, establishing Liberty
of Conscience according to the instructions given unto her Council of
Religion, to raise up her hands to Heaven, for further light, in which
proceeding she follows that (as was shown in the preliminaries) of Israel
who though her National Religion were evermore a part of her Civil Law gave
unto her Prophets the upper hand of all her Orders.

But the Surveyours having now done with the Parishes, took their Leaves so, A
parish is the first division of Land occasioned by the first Collection of the
people of Oceana, Definition of a Parish.
whose function proper unto that place is comprised in the six foregoing Orders.

The next step in the progress of the surveyours was to a meeting of the
nearest of them, as their work lay, by twenties where conferring their lists
and computing the Deputies contained therein, as the number of them in
Parishes, Institution of the Hundred
being nearest neighbors, amounted unto one hundred, or as eaven as might
conveniently be brought with that account, they cast them and those Parishes
into the precinct which (be the Deputies ever since more or fewer) is still
called the hundred and unto every one of these Precincts they appointed a
certain place being the most convenient Town within the same for the Annual
Randezvouz: which done, each Surveyour returning unto his hundred and summoning
the Deputies contained in his lists unto the Randezvouz, they appeared and
received, The Seventh Order, requiring, That upon the first Monday next ensuing
the last of January, the Deputies of every Parish Annually assemble in Arms at
the Randevouz of the Hundred, and there Elect out of their number one Justice
of the Peace, one Iury-man, one Captain one Ensign of their Troop or Century,
each of these out of the Horse; and one Iury-man, one Crowner one High
Constable out of the Foot; the Election to be made by the Ballot in this manner
the Iury-men for the time being are to be Overseers of the Ballot, (instead of
these, the Surveyors are to officiate at the first Assembly) and to look unto
the performance of the same according to what was directed in the Ballot of the
Parishes, save that the High Constable setting forth the Urn, shall have five
several suites of gold-Balls, and one Dosen of every suite whereof the first
shall be marked with the letter A. the second with the letter B. the third with
C. the fourth with D. and the fifth with E. And of each of these suits he shall
cast one Ball into his hat or into a little Urn, and shaking the Balls together
present them unto the first Overseer, who shall draw one, and the suit which is
so drawn by the Overseer shall be of use for that day, and none other: for
Example, if the Overseer drew an A. the High Constable shall put seven gold
Balls marked with the letter A. into the Urn, with so many silver ones as shall
bring them eaven with the number of the Deputies, who being sworn as before, at
the Ballot of the Parish to make a fair Election, shall be called unto the Urn;
and every man coming in manner as was there showed, shall Draw one Ball, which
if it be silver, he shall cast it into a Bowl standing at the (...) of the Urn,
and return unto his place; but the first that draws a gold Ball (showing it
unto the Overseers who if it have not the letter of the present Ballot has
power to apprehend and punish him), is the first Elector: the second the second
Elector* and so to the seventh, which Order they are to observe in their
function. The Electors as they are drawn shall be placed upon the Bench by the
Overseers, till the whole number be Complete, and then be Conducted with the
List of the Officers to be chosen, into a place apart, where being private, the
first Elector shall name a person unto the first office in the List; and if the
person so named being Ballotted by the rest of the Electors* attain not unto
the better half of the Suffrages in the affirmative, the first Elector shall
continue nominating others, until one of them so nominated by him attain unto
the plurality of the Suffrages in the affirmative, and be written first
Competitor to the first office. This done, the second Elector shall observe in
his turn the like order; and so the rest of the Electors naming Competitors
each unto his respective office in the List, till one Competitor be chosen unto
every office: and when one Competitor is chosen unto every office, the first
Elector shall begin again to name a second competitor unto the first office,
and the rest successively shall name unto the rest of the Offices till two
Competitors be chosen unto every office, the like shall be repeated till three
Competitors be chosen to every office: And when three Competitors be chosen to
every office, the List shall be returned unto the Overseers, or such as the
Overseers, in case they or either of them happened, be Electors, have
substituted in his or their place or places: and the Overseers or Substitutes
having caused the List to be read unto the Congregation, shall put the
Competitors in order as they are written, unto the Ballot of the Congregation;
and the rest of the proceedings being carried on in the manner directed in the
Fifth Order, that Competitor of the three written unto each office, who has
most of the Suffrages above half in the affirmative, is the Officer. The List
being after this manner Completed, shall be entered into a Register, to be kept
at the Randevouz of the Hundred, under inspection of the Magistrates of the
same, after this manner: Anno Domini. The List of the Nebulosa.
A.A. ord. eq. Justice of the peace B. B. ord. eq. First Jury-man C.C. ord. eq.
Captain of the Hundred D.D. ord. eq. Ensign E. E. Second Jury-man F. F. High
Constable G.G. Crowner
of the Hundred of -- in the Tribe of -- which Hundred consists at this
Election of 105 Deputies.



The List being entered, the High Constable shall take three Copies of the same,
whereof he shall forthwith Return one unto the Lord high Sheriff of the Tribe;
a second unto the Lord Curios Rotulorum, and a third unto the Censors (or these
through the want of such Magistrates at the first muster, may be returned unto
the Orator, to be appointed for that Tribe.) To the observation of all and
every part of this Order, the Officers and Deputies of the Hundred are all and
every of them obliged, as they will Answer it to the Phylarch, who has power
in case of failure in the whole or any part, to Fine all or any of them so
failing at discretion, or according unto such Laws as shall hereafter be
provided in that Case; but under an Appeal unto the Parliament.



There is little in this order worthy of any further account, then that it
answers unto the rulers of hundreds in Israel, to the Mora or Military part of
the Tribe in Lacedemon, and to the Century in Rome. The Jurymen, being two in
a hundred, and so forty in a Tribe, give the Latitude allowed by the Law for
exceptions. And whereas the gold-balls at this Ballot begin to be marked with
Letters, whereof one is to be drawn immediately before it begin: This is to the
end that the letter being unknown, men may be frustrated of Tricks, or foul
play, whereas otherwise a man might bring a gold ball with him and make as if
he had drawn it out of the Urn. The Surveyors when they had taken Copies of
these lists, had accomplished their work in the Hundreds.

Definition of the Hundred
So, An Hundred is the second division of Land occasioned by the second
Collection of the people, whose Civil and Military functions proper unto this
place are comprised in the foregoing order. Having stated the hundreds, they
met once again by twenties, where there was nothing more easy then to cast
every twenty hundreds, as they lay most conveniently together into one Tribe,
Institution of the Tribe.
so the whole Territory of Oceana, consisting of about ten thousand, Parishes,
came to be cast into one thousand hundreds, and into fifty tribes. In every
Tribe at the place appointed for the Annual Randevouze of the same, were then,
or soon after, put in hand, those buildings which are now called Pavilions, of
the Pavilion.
each of them standing with one open side, upon fair Columns like the porch of
some ancient Temple, and looking into a field, capable of the muster of some
foure-thousand men: before each Pavilion, stand three pillars sustaining urnes
for the Ballot, that on the right hand equal in height to the brow of an
Horseman, being called the Horse urn, that on the left hand, with Bridges on
either side to bring it Equal in height with the brow of a footman, being
called the Foot-urn; and the middle urne* with a bridge on the side toward the
Foot-urn, the other side, as left for the horse, being without one: and here
ended the whole work of the Surveyours who returned unto the Lord Archon with
this Account of the Charge.
Imprimis, Urns, Balls, and Ballotting Boxes for ten thousand Parishes, the
same being wooden ware, l. 20000. s. 0 The whole Charge of the Institution*
Item, Provisions of like kind for a thousand Hundreds 3000 0 Item, Urns and
Balls of Metal, with Ballotting Boxes for Fifty Tribes 2000 0 Item, for
erecting of Fifty Pavilions, 60000 0 Item, Wages for Four Surveyors General at
1000 l. a man 4000 0 Item, Wages for the rest of the Surveyors, being 1000, at
250 l. a man 250000 0 Sum Total, 339000 0

No great matter of charge for the building of a Commonwealth, in regard that
it has cost (which was pleaded by the Surveyors) as much to rigg a few ships,
nevertheless that proves not them to be honest, nor their account to be just;
but they had their money for once, though their reckoning be plainly guilty of
a Crime, to cost him his neck that Commits it another time, it being impossible
for a Commonwealth, without an exact provision, that she be not abused in this
kind, to subsist, if it were not in regard of the charge (though that may go
deep) yet in regard of the debauchery and corruption, whereunto, by negligence
in her accounts, she infallibly exposes her Citizens, and thereby slakeneth
the public Faith, which is the Nerve and ligament of Government. But the
Surveyors being dispatched, the Lord Archon was very curious in giving names
unto his Tribes, which having caused to be written in scroles cast unto an
urne, and presented unto the Councillors, each of them drew one, and was
accordingly sent unto the Tribe in his Lot, as Orators of the same, a
magistracy no otherwise instituted, then for once and Protempore, to the end
that the Council upon so great an occasion might both Congralute with the
Tribes, and assiist at the first muster in some things of necessity to be
differently carried from the established administration and future course of
the Commonwealth.

The Orators being arrived, every one as soon as might be, at the Randevouze
of his Tribe, gave notice to the hundreds, and summoned the muster, which
appeared for the most part upon good horses, and already indifferently well
Armed; as to instance in one for all, the Tribe of Nubia where Hermes de
Caducea, Lord Orator of the same, after a short salutation and an hearty
welcome, applied himself unto his business, which began with (or the Orator
for the first Muster) upon Reception of the Lists of their Hundreds, returned
unto them by the High Constables of the same, forthwith cause them to be cast
up, dividing the Horse from the Foot, and listing the Horse by their names in
Troops, each Troop containing about a hundred in number, to be inscribed first,
second, or third Troop, etc. according to the Order Agreed upon by the said
Magistrates: which done, they shall list the Foot in like manner, and inscribe
the Companies in like order. These Lists upon the Eve of the Muster shall be
delivered unto certain Trumpetors and Drummers, whereof there shall be Fifteen
of each sort (as well for the present as other uses to be hereafter mentioned)
stipendiated by the Tribe: and the Trumpeters and Drummers shall be in the
Field before the Pavilion, upon the day of the muster, so soon as it is light,
where they shall stand every one with his List in his hand, at a due distance,
placed according unto the order of the List; the Trumpeters with the Lists of
the Horse on the right hand, and the Drummers with the lists of the Foot on the
left hand: where having sounded a while, each of them shall begin to call, and
continue calling the names of the Deputies, as they come into the Field, till
both the Horse and Foot be gathered by that means into their due order. The
Horse and Foot being in order, the Lord Lieutenant of the Tribe shall cast so
many Gold Balls marked with the figures 1.2.3.4. etc. as there be Troops of
Horse in the Field, together with so many silver Balls as there be Companies,
marked in the same manner, into a little Urn, whereunto he shall call the
Captains; and the Captains drawing the Gold Balls shall command the Horse; and
those that draw the Silver the Foot, each in the order of his Lot. The like
shall be done by the Conductor at the same time for the Ensigns, at another
Urn; and they that draw the Gold Balls shall be Cornets, the rest Ensigns.

This order may Trash the reader, but tends unto a wonderful speed of the
Muster, to which it would be a great matter, to lose a day in ranging and
martialling, whereas by virtue of this the Tribe is no sooner in the field then
in Battalia, nor sooner in Battalia then called unto the Urns or the Ballot by
virtue of (or the Orator for the first Muster) upon Reception of the Lists of
the Hundreds from the High Constables, according as is directed by the Seventh
Order, are to make their notes for the Urns beforehand, with regard had unto
the Lists of the Magistrates, to be elected by the ensuing Orders; that is to
say, by the first List called the Prime Magnitude, six; and by the second
called the Gallaxy, nine. Wherefore the Censors are to put into the middle Urn
for the Election of the first List twenty four Gold Balls, with twenty six
blanks or silver Balls, in all sixty; and into the side Urns sixty gold-balls
divided unto each according unto the different number of the Horse and the
Foot; that is to say, if the Horse and the Foot be equal, equally; and if the
Horse and the Foot be unequal, unequally, by an Arithmeticall proportion: The
like shall be done the second day of the Muster, for the second List, save that
the Censors shall put into the middle Urn 36. Gold-Balls with 24. Blanks, in
all sixty; and sixty Gold-Balls into the side Urns, divided respectively unto
the number of the Horse and the Foot: and the gold-Balls in the side Urns at
either Ballot are by the addition of Blanks to be brought eaven with the number
of the Ballottants at either Urn respectively. The Censors having prepared
their Notes, as has been shown, and being come at the day into the Field,
shall present a Little Urn unto the Lord High Sheriff, who is to draw twice for
the Letters to be used that day, the one at the side Urns, and the other at the
middle. And the Censors having fitted the Urns accordingly, shall place
themselves in certain moveable Seats or Pulpits, (to be kept for that use in
the Pavilion) the first Censor before the Horse Urn, the second before the Foot
Urn, the Lord Lieutenant doing the office of Censor pro tempore at the middle
Urn; where all and every one of them shall cause the Laws of the Ballot to be
diligently observed, taking a special care, that no man be suffered to come
above once unto the Urn (whereof it more particularly concerns the Sub-Censors,
that is to say, the Overseers of every Parish, to be careful, they being each
in this regard responsible for their respective Parishes), or to draw above one
Ball, which if it be Gold, he is to present unto the Censor, who shall look
upon the Letter; and if it be not that of the Day, and of the respective Urn,
apprehend the party, who for this or any other like disorder, is obnoxious unto
the Phylarch.

This order being observed by the Censors it is not possible for the People, if
they can but draw the Balls, though they understand nothing at all of the
Ballot to be out. To Philosophize further upon this Art, though there be
nothing more rational, were not worth the while, because in writing it will be
perplexed, and the first practice of it gives the demonstration, whence it came
to pass, that the Orators after some needless pains in the explanation of
the two foregoing Orders, betaking himself to exemplify the same, found the
work done unto his hand; for the Tribe as eager upon a business of this
nature, had retained one of the Surveyors, out of whom (before the Orator
arrived) they had gotten the whole mystery by a stolen muster, at which in
order unto the Ballot, they had made certain Magistrates pro tempore,
wherefore he found not only the Pavilion, (for this time a Tent) erected with
three posts supplying the place of Pillars unto the urnes, but the urnes, being
prepared with a just number of Balls for the first Ballot, to become the field,
and the occasion very gallantly, with their covers made in the manner of
Helmets, open at either Ear to give passage unto the Hands of the Ballottants,
and flanting with noble Plumes to direct the March of the people; wherefore he
proceeded to The Tenth Order, requiring of the Deputies of the Parishes, That
upon every Monday next ensuing the last of February, they make their personal
appearance, Horse and Foot in Arms accordingly, at the Randevouz of the Tribe,
where being in discipline* the Horse upon the right and the Foot upon the left,
before the Pavilion; and having made Oath by holding up their hands, upon the
tender of it by the Lord High Sheriff* to make Election without favor, and of
such only as they shall judge fittest for the Commonwealth; the Conductor
shall take 3. Balls; the one inscribed with these words [outward files,]
another with these words [inward files,] and the third with these [middle
files;] which Balls he shall cast into a little Urn, and present it to the Lord
high Sheriff, who drawing one, shall give the words of Command, as they are
thereupon inscribed, and the Ballot shall begin accordingly: For example, if
the Ball be inscribed middle-files* the Ballot shall begin by the middle; that
is, the two files that are middle to the Horse, shall draw out first to the
Horse Urn, and the two files that are middle to the Foot, shall draw out first
to the Foot Urn and be followed by all the rest of the Files as they are next
unto them in order. The like shall be done by the inward, or by the outward
Files, in case they be first called. And the Files, as every man has drawn his
Ball, if it be silver, shall begin at the Urn to Countermarch unto their
places; but he that has drawn a gold-Ball at a side Urn, shall proceed unto
the middle Urn; where if the Ball he draws be silver, he also shall
Countermarch; But if it be gold, he shall take his place upon a form set cross
the Pavilion, with his face toward the Lord High Sheriff, who shall be seated
in the middle of the Pavilion, with certain Clerks by him, one of which shall
write down the names of every Elector, that is, of every one that drew a gold
Ball at the middle Urn, and in the Order, his Ball was drawn, till the Electors
amount unto six in number; and the first six Electors Horse and Foot
promiscuously, are the first order of Electors; the second six (still
accompting them as they are drawn) the second Order; the third six, the third
Order; and the fourth six, the fourth Order of Electors: every Elector having
place in his order, according unto the order wherein he was drawn: But so soon
as the first order of Electors is complete, the Lord High Sheriff shall send
them with a Copy of the following List* and a Clerk that understands the
Ballot, forthwith unto a little Tent standing before the Pavilion, in his eye,
whereunto no other person but themselves during the Election shall approach:
the List shall be written in this manner: ANNO DOMINI, The List of the prime
Magnitude or first days Election of Magistrates.
Institution of the Prime Magnitude.
1. The Lord High Sheriff, Commander in Chief 2. Lord Lieutenant 3. Lord Custos
Rotullorum, Muster-master-Generall 4. The Conductor, being
Quartermaster-Generall 5. The first Censor 6. The second Censor
of the Tribe of Nubia, containing at this present Muster, 700 Horse, and 1500
Foot, in all 2200 Deputies.



And the Electors of the first hand or order being six, shall each of them name
unto his respective Magistracy in the left, such as are not already elected in
the Hundreds, till one Competitor be chosen unto every Magistracy in the List
by the Ballot of the Electors of the first Order, which done, the List with the
Competitors thereunto annexed shall be returned unto the Lord High Mheriff, by
the Clerk attending that order, but the Electors shall keep their places, for
they have already given their Suffrage, and may not enter into the Ballot of
Tribe. If there arise any dispute in an order of Electors, one of the Censors
or sub-Censors appointed by them, in case they be Electors, shall enter into
the Tent of that Order; and that Order shall stand unto his Judgment in the
decision of the Controversy. The like shall be done exactly by each other,
order of Electors, being sent as they are drawn; each with another Copy of the
same List, into a distinct Tent, till there he returned unto the Lord High
Sheriff four Competitors unto every Magistracy in the List; that is to say, One
Competitor Elected unto every office in every one of the four Orders; which
Competitors the Lord High Sheriff shall cause to be pronounced or read by a
Crier unto the Congregation, and the Congregation having heard the whole Lists
repeated, the names shall be put by the Lord High Sheriff unto the Tribe, one
by one, beginning with the first Competitor in the first Order, thence
proceeding to the first Competitor in the second Order, and so to the first in
the third and fourth Orders: and the Suffrages being taken in boxes (by boys
as has been already shown) shall be poured into the Bowls standing before the
Censors, who shall be seated at each end of the Table in the Pavilion, the one
numbering the Affirmatives, and the other the Negative; and he, of the four
Competitors to the first Magistracy, that has most above half the Suffrages of
the Tribe in the Affirmative, is the first Magistrate; The like is to be done
successively by the rest of the Competitors in their order. But because soon
after the Boxes are sent out for the first name, there be others sent out for
the second, and so for the third, etc. by which means diverse names are
successively at one and the same time in ballotting; the Boy that carries a Box
shall sing or repeat Continually the name of the Competitor for whom that Box
is carrying, with that also of the Magistracy unto which he is proposed. A
Magistrate of the Tribe happening to be an Elector, may substitute any one of
his own Order to execute his other Function: the Magistrates of the Prime
Magnitude being thus elected, shall receive the present charge of the Tribe.



If it be objected against this order, that the Magistrates to be elected by
it, will be men of more inferior rank then those of the hundreds, in regard
that those are chosen first; It may be remembered, that so were the Burgesses in
the former Government, nevertheless the Knights of the Shire were men of
greater quality: And the election at the Hundred is made by a Council of
Electors, of whom less cannot be expected then the discretion of naming persons
fittest for those capacities, with an eye upon these to be elected at the
Tribe. For what may be objected in the point of difficulty, it is demonstrable
by the foregoing orders, that a man might bring ten thousand men (if there were
occasion) with as much ease, and as suddenly to perform the ballot, as he can
make five thousand men (drawing them out by double files) to march a quarter of
a mile: but because at this Ballot, to go up and down the field, distributing
the Linen pellets unto every Man, with which he is to ballot or give suffrage
would lose a great deal of time, therefore a Man's wife, his daughters or
others make him his provision of pellets before the ballot; and he comes into
the field with a matter of a score of them in his pocket. And now I have as
good as done with the sport. The next is, The Eleventh Order, Explaining the
duties and Functions of the Magistrates, Functions of the Magistrates of the
Prime Magnitude.
contained in the List of the prime Magnitude: And those of the Hundreds,
beginning with the Lord High Sheriff, who over and above his more ancient
Offices and those added by the former Order is the first Magistrate of the
Phylarch, or prerogative Troop: the Lord Lieutenant over and above his Duty
mentioned, is Commander in Chief of the musters of the Youth, and second
Magistrate of the Phylarch; the Custos Rotulorum is to return the yearly
Muster-Rolles of the Tribe, as well that of the Youth as of the Elders unto the
Rolls in Emporium, and is the third Magistrate of the Phylarch: the Censors by
themselves, and their sub-Censors, that is, the Overseers of the Parishes, are
to see that the respective Laws of the Ballot be observed in all the popular
Assemblies of the Tribe: they have power also to put such National Ministers,
as in preaching shall intermeddle with the matter of Government, out of their
livings; Except the party appeal unto the Phylarch, or unto the Council of
Religion where in that case the Censors shall prosecute All and every one of
these Magistrates together with the Justices of Peace: and the Iury-men of the
Hundreds amounting in the whole number unto threescore and six, are the
Prerogative Troop or Phylarch of the Tribe.

Phylarch or Prerogative Troop is five-fold; First, Functions of the Phylarch.
they are the Council of the Tribe, and as such to Govern the Musters of the
same according to the foregoing Orders, having Cognizance of what has passed
in the Congregations, or Elections made in the Parishes or the Hundreds, with
power to punish any undue practices or variation from their respective Rules
and Orders, under an Appeal to the Parliament. A marriage legitimately is to be
pronounced by the Parochial Congregation, the Muster of the Hundred, or the
Phylarch; and if a Tribe have a desire (which they are to express at the
Muster by their Captains, every Troop by his own) to petition the Parliament,
the Phylarch as the Counsel shall frame the Petition in the Pavilion, and
propose it by Clauses, unto the Ballot of the whole Tribe, and the Clauses that
shall be affirmed by the Ballot of the Tribe; and be signed by the hands of the
six Magistrates of the Prime Magnitude, shall be received and esteemed by the
Parliament as the Petition of the Tribe, and no other.

Phylarch has power to call unto their assistance what other Troops of the
Tribe they please (be they Elders or Youth, whose discipline will be hereafter
directed) and with these to receive the Judges Itinerant in their Circuits,
whom the Magistrates of the Phylarch shall assist upon the Bench, and the
Iuries elsewhere in their proper Functions according unto the more Ancient
Laws and Customs of this Nation.

Phylarch shall hold the Court called the Quarter Sessions according unto the
Ancient Custom, and therein shall also hear Causes in order unto the Protection
of Liberty of Conscience, by such Rules as are or shall hereafter be appointed
by the Parliament.

Phylarch, or some of that Troop, and executed by the same respectively.

Phylarchs, and the Phylarchs unto the Exchequer: but if a man have ten
Children living, he shall pay no taxes; if he have five living, he shall pay
but half Taxes; if he have been Married three years, or be above twenty five
years of age, and have no Child or Children Lawfully begotten, he shall pay
double taxes: and if there happen to grow any dispute upon these or such other
Orders as shall or may hereunto be added hereafter, the Phylarch* shall judge
the Tribes, and the Parliament shall judge the Phylarchs; for the rest, if any
man shall go about to introduce the right or power of debate into any Popular
Council or Congregation of this Nation, the Phylarch or any Magistrate of the
Hundred or of the Tribe, shall cause him forthwith to be sent in Custody unto
the Council of War.



The part of the Order relating unto the Rolls in Emporium, Institution of the
Roll called the Pillar of Nilus.
being of singular use, is not unworthy to be somewhat better opened; In what
manner the lists of the Parishes, Hundreds and Tribes are made, has been
shown in their respective orders; whereafter the parties elected, they give
account of the whole number of the Elders or Deputies in their respective
assemblies or musters; the like for this part exactly, is done by the youth in
their discipline (to be hereafter shown): wherefore the lists of the Parishes
Youth and Elders being summed up, give the whole number of the people able to
bear Arms; and the lists of the Tribes Youth and Elders being summed up, give
the whole number of the people, bearing Arms. This account being annually
recorded by the Master of the Rolls is called the Pillar of Nilus, because the
people being the riches of the Commonwealth, as they are found to rise or fall
by the degrees of this Pillar like that River, give account of the public
Harvest.

Thus much for the description of the first days work at the Muster, which
happened, as has been shown, to be done as soon as said: for as in practice
it is of small dificulty, so requires it not much time, seeing the great
Council of Venice consisting of a like number, begins at 12. of the Clock, and
Elects nine Magistrates in one afternoon: But the Tribe being dismissed for
this night, repaired unto their quarters, under the conduct of their new
Magistrates. The next morning returning into the field very early, the Orator
proceeded to The Twelfth Order; directing the Muster of the Tribe in the second
days Election, Institution of the Gallaxy.
being that of the List called the Gallaxy, in which the Censors shall prepare
the Urns according to the directions given in the Ninth Order for the second
Ballot, that is to say, with 36. gold-Balls in the middle Urn, making four
Orders, and nine Electors in every Order according unto the number of the
Magistrates in the List of the Gallaxy, which is as follows: 1. Knight, To be
chosen out of the Horse. 2. Knight To be chosen out of the Horse. 3. Deputy To
be chosen out of the Horse. 4. Deputy To be chosen out of the Horse. 5. Deputy
To be chosen out of the Horse. 6. Deputy To be chosen out of the Foot. 7.
Deputy To be chosen out of the Foot. 8. Deputy To be chosen out of the Foot. 9.
Deputy To be chosen out of the Foot.


The rest of the Ballot shall proceed Exactly according unto that of the first
day: But for as much as the Commonwealth Demands as well the Fruits of a
man's body as of his mind, he that has not been married shall not be Capable of
these Magistracies until he be married; if a Deputy already chosen to be an
Officer in the Parish in the Hundred or in the Tribe, be afterward chosen of
the Gallaxy, it shall be lawful for him to Delegate his Office in the Parish,
in the Hundred, or in the Tribe, unto any one of his own order, being not
already chosen into office. The Knights and Deputies being chosen, shall be
brought unto the head of the Tribe by the Lord High Sheriff, who shall
administer unto them this Oath, [Ye shall well and truly observe and keep the
Orders and Customs of this Commonwealth which the People have Chosen.] And if
any of them shall refuse the Oath, he shall be rejected; and that Competitor
which had the most voices next shall be called in his place; who if he take the
Oath, shall be entered in the List; But if he also refuse the Oath, he who had
most voices next shall be called, and so until the number of nine out of those
Competitors which had most voices be sworn Knights and Deputies of the Gallaxy:
(This Clause, in regard of the late divisions, and to the end that no violence
be offered unto any man's Conscience, to be of force but for the first three
years only:) The Knights of the Gallaxy being elected and sworn are to repair
by the Monday next ensuing the last of March unto the Pantheon or Palace of
Justice situate in the Metropolis of this Commonwealth, (except the
Parliament through Sickness, or some other occasion, have adjourned unto some
other part of the Nation) where they are to take their Places in the Senate,
and continue in full Power and Commission as Senators for the full term of
three years next ensuing the date of their Election. The Deputies of the
Gallaxy are to repair by the same day (except as before excepted) unto the Hall
situated in Emporium, where they are to be listed of the Prerogative Tribe or
equal Representative of the people; and to continue in full power and
Commission as their Deputies for the full term of three years, next ensuing
their Election. But for as much as the term of every Magistracy, or office in
this Commonwealth requires an equal vacation, a Knight, a Deputy of the
Gallaxy having fulfilled his term of three years, shall not be re-elected unto
the same or any other Tribe, till he have also fulfilled his three years
vacation.



Who ever shall rightly consider the foregoing orders, will be as little able
to find how it is possible, that a worshipful Knight should declare himself
in Ale and Biefe, worthy to serve his Country, as how my Lord High Sheriff's
honor, in case he were protected from the Law, could play the Knave. But
though the forgoing Orders so far as they reguard the constitution of the
Senate and the people, requireing no more as to an ordinary election then is
therein explained, that is but one third part of their Knights and Deputies,
are perfect; yet must we in this place, and as to the Institution, of
necessity erect a scaffold: For the Commonwealth to the first Creation other
Councills in full number, required thrice as many as are eligible by the
foregoing Orders; wherefore the Gratour whose aid in this place was most
necessary, rightly informing the people of the reason, staid them two days
longer at the Muster, and took this course. One list containing two Knights
and seven Deputies, he caused to be chosen upon the second day, which list
being called the first Gallaxy, qualified the parties elected of it, with power
for the Term of one year and no longer; another list containing two Knights
and seven Deputies more, he caused to be chosen the third day, which list being
called the second Gallaxy, qualified the parties elected of it with power, for
the term of two years and no longer. And upon the fourth day he chose the
third Gallaxy according as it is directed by the Order, empowered for three
years, which Lists successively falling (like the signs or constellations of
one Hemisphere, that setting cause those of the other to rise) cast the great
Orbs of this Commonwealth into an Annual Trienial and Perpetual Revolution.

The business of the Muster being thus happily finished, Hermes de Caduceo,
Lord Orator of the Tribe of Nubia, being now put into her first Rapture, caused
one of the censors Pulpits to be planted in front of the squadron, and
ascending into the same, spoke after this manner: My Lords the Magistrates, and
the People of the Tribe of NUBIA,
WE have this day solemnized the happy Nuptials of the two greatest Princes
that are upon the Earth, or in Nature; Arms and Councills: in the Mutual
Embraces whereof consists your whole Commonwealth: whose Councills upon
their perpetual Wheelings, Marches, and Counter-marches, create her Armies;
and whose Armies with the golden Vollies of the Ballot, at once create and
Salute her Councills. There be (such is the World now adays) that think it
ridiculous to see a Nation exercising her Civil functions in military
Discipline; while they committing their Buffe unto their Servants, come
themselves to hold Trenchards: For what avails it such as are unarmed, (or,
which is all one, whose Education acquainteth them not with the proper use of
their Swords) to be called Citizens? What were two or three thousand of you,
well affected to your Country, but naked, unto one Troop of Mercenary
Soldiers? If they should come upon the Field and say, Gentlemen, It is thought
fit that such and such men should be chosen by you; where were your Liberty?
Or, Gentlemen, Parliaments are exceeding good, but you are to have a little
patience, these Times are not so fit for them; where were your Commonwealth?
What causes the Monarchy of the Turks but Servants in Arms? What was it that
begot the glorious Commonwealth of Rome, but the Sword in the hands of her
Citizens? wherefore my glad Eyes salute the Serenity and brightness of this
day with a shower that shall not cloud it. Behold, the Army of Israel become a
Commonwealth, and the Commonwealth of Israel remaining an Army! with her
Rulers of Tens and of Fifties, her Rulers of Hundreds, and her Rulers of
Thousands, drawing near, (as this day throughout our happy Fields) unto the Lot
by her Tribes, increased above threefold, and led up by her Phylarchs, or
Princes, to sit (Sellis Curulibus) upon Fifty Thrones, judging the Fifty Tribes
of Oceana. Or, Is it Athens, breaking from her Iron Sepulcher; where she has
been so long Trampled upon by Hosts of Janissaries? For certainly that (nec vox
hominem sonat) is the voice of Theseus, having gathered his scattered Athenians
into one City. -- Haec juris sui
Parere Domino Civitas vni negat:
Rex ipse Populus annuas mandat vices
Honoris huic, illive. --
This Freeborn Nation lives not upon the Dole or Bounty of one Man, but
distributing her Annual Magistracies and Honors with her own hand, is her
self King People -- (At which the Orator was a while interrupted with shouts,
but at length proceeded)

-- Is it grave Lacedemon in her Armed Tribe divided by her Obae and her Mora,
which appears to chide me that I teach the people to talk, or conceive such
Language as is dressed like a woman, to be a fit Usher of the Joys of Liberty
into the hearts of men? Is it Rome in her Victorious Arms (for so she held her
Concio or Congregation) that Congratulateth with us, for finding out that which
she could not hit on, and binding up her Comitia Curiata, Centuriata, and
Tributa in one inviolable League of Union? Or is it the Great Council of
incomparable Venice, bowling forth by the self-same Ballot her immortal
Commonwealth? For, neither by Reason nor by her Experience is it impossible
that a Commonwealth should be immortal; seeing the people being the materials
never dies, and the form which is motion must without opposition, be endless:
The Bowl which is thrown from your hand, if there be no rub, no impediment,
shall never cease: for which cause the glorious Luminaries that are the Bowls
of God, were once thrown for ever; and next these, those of Venice. But
certainly, my Lords, what ever these great Examples may have shown us, we are
the first that have shown unto the World a Commonwealth Established in her
rise upon Fifty such Towers, and so Garnizoned as are the Tribes of Oceana,
containing one hundred thousand Elders upon the Annual List, and yet but an
out-guard; besides her marching Armies to be equal in the discipline, and in
the number of her Youth.

And for as much as Sovereign powers is a necessary, but a formidable creature,
not unlike the Powder, which (as you are Soldiers) is at once your safety, and
your danger, being subject to take fire against you as for you; how well and
securely is She by your Gallaxy's, so collected as to be in full force and
vigor, and yet so distributed, that it is impossible you should be blown up by
your own Magazeen. Let them who will have it, that power if she be confined
cannot be Sovereign, tell us, whether our Rivers do not enjoy a more secure and
fruitful reign within their proper banks, then if it were lawful for them, in
ravishing our harvests, to spill themselves? whether souls not confined unto
their peculiar bodies do govern them any more, then those of Witches in their
Trances? Whether Power not confined unto the bounds of Reason and Virtue, have
any other bounds then those of Vice and Passion? or if Vice and Passion be
boundless, and Reason and Virtue have certain Limits, on which of these
Thrones holy men should anoint their Sovereign? But to blow away this dust, The
Sovereign power of a Commonwealth is no more bounded, that is to say,
Streightened, then that of a Monarch, but is Balanced. The Eagle mounteth not
unto her proper pitch, if she be bounded; nor, if she be not balanced. And
lest a Monarch should think that he can reach farther with his Scepter, the
Roman Eagle upon her Balance spread her wings from the Ocean to Euphrates.
Receive the Sovereign Power; you have received her; hold her fast, embrace her
for ever in your shining Arms: The virtue of the Loadstone is not impaired or
Limited, but receives strength and nourishment by being bound in Iron. And so
giving your Lordships much joy, I take my leave of this Tribe.



The Orator descending, had the period of his speech made with a vast applause,
and exultation by the whole Tribe, attending him, for that night unto his
quarter, as the Phylarch, with some commanded Troops, did the next day unto the
Frontires of the Tribe, where Leave was taken on both sides with more Tears
then Grief.

So, A Tribe is the third division of Land occasioned by the third Collection
of the People, Definition of the Tribe.
whose functions proper unto that place are contained in the five foregoing
Orders.

The Institution of the Commonwealth was such as needed those props and
Scaffolds, which may have troubled the Reader, but I shall here take them away
and come unto the Constitution which stands by it self and yields a clearer
prospect.

The Motions by what has been already shown, are Spherical, Constitution of
the Commonwealth.
and sphericall motions have their proper Center, for which cause, (ere I
proceed further) it will be necessary for the better understanding of the
whole, that I discover the Center whereupon the motions of this Commonwealth
are formed.

The Center or Basis of every Government, is no other then the Fundamental
Laws of the same.

Fundamental Laws are such as state what it is that a man may call his own,
that is to say, Propriety; and what the means be whereby a man may enjoy his
own, that is to say Protection: the first is also called Dominion, and second
Empire or Sovereign power, whereof this (as has been shown) is the natural
product of the former, for such as is the Balance of of the Dominion in a
Nation, such as the nature of her Empire.

Wherefore the Fundamental Laws of Oceana, or the Center of this
Commonwealth are the Agrarian, and the Ballot. The Agrarian by the Balance of
dominion preserving equality in the Root, and the Ballot by an equal
rotation conveying it into the branch, or exercise of Sovereign power: as to
begin with the former appears, by The Thirteenth Order, Constituting the
Agrarian Laws of Oceana, Marpesia and Panopea, whereby it is ordained, First,
for all such Lands as are lying and being within the proper Tercitories of
Oceana, that every man who is at present possessed, or shall hereafter be
possessed of an Estate in Land exceeding the Revenue of two thousand pounds a
year, and having more then one Son, shall leave his Lands either equally
divided among them, in case the Lands amount unto above 2000 l. a year unto
each; or so near equally in case they come under, that the greater part or
portion of the same remaining unto the eldest, exceed not the value of two
thousand pounds Revenue. And no man not in present possession of Lands above
the value of two thousand pounds by the year, shall receive, enjoy, (except by
Lawful Inheritance) acquire or purchase unto himself, Lands within the said
Territories amounting with those already in his possession, above the said
Revenue. And if a man have a daughter, or daughters, except she be an Heir, or
they be Heirs he shall not leave or give unto any one of them in Marriage or
otherwise for her portion above the value of one thousand five hundred pounds
in Lands Gods and Moneys: Nor shall any Friend, Kinsman, or Kinswoman add unto
her or their Portion or Portions that are so provided for, to make any one of
them greater: Nor shall any man demand, or have more in marriage, with any
woman. Nevertheless an Heir shall enjoy her Lawful Inheritance, and a Widow
whatsoever the bounty or affection of her husband shall bequeath unto her, to
be divided in the first Generation, wherein it is divisible according as has
been shown.

Secondly, for Lands lying and being within the Territories of Marpesia, the
Agrarian shall hold in all parts as it is established in Oceana, save only in
the Standard, or Proportion of Estates in Land, which shall be set for Marpesia
at five Hundred pounds.

And thirdly, for Panopea, the Agrarian shall hold in all parts, as in Oceana.
And whosoever possessing above the proportion allowed by these Laws, shall be
lawfully convicted of the same, shall forfeit the overplus unto the use of the
State.



Agrarian Laws of all others have ever been the greatest Bugbears, and so in
the Institution were these, at which time it was ridiculous to see, how strange
a fear appeared in every body of that which, being good for all, could hurt no
body. But instead of the proof of this Order, I shall out of those many debates
that happened ere it could be past, insert two Speeches that were made at the
Council of Legislators, the first by the Right Honorable Philautus de Garbo,
a young man, being Heir apparent unto a very Noble Family, and one of the
Counselors, who expressed himself as follows: May it please your Highness,
My Lord Archon, OF Oceana,
IF I did not (to my Capacity) know from how profound a Counselor I dissent;
it would certainly be no hard task to make it as light as the day; First, that
an Agrarian is altogether unnecessary: Secondly, that it is dangerous unto a
Commonwealth: Thirdly, that it is insufficient to keep out Monarchy: Fourthly,
that it destroys Families: Fifthly, that it destroys Industry: And last of
all, that, though it were indeed of any good use, it will be a matter of such
difficulty to introduce in this Nation, and so to settle that it may be
lasting, as is altogether invincible.

unto a Commonwealth, what clearer testimony can there be, than, that the
Commonwealths which are our Contemporaries ( Venice, whereunto your Highness
gives the upper hand of all Antiquity, being one) have no such thing? And
there can be no reason why they have it not, seeing it is in the Sovereign
Power at any time to establish such an Order, but that they need it not;
wherefore no wonder if Aristotle who pretends to be a good Common-wealths-man,
have long since derided Phaleas, to whom it was attributed by the Greeks, for
this invention.

Agrarian is dangerous unto a Commonwealth, is affirmed upon no slight
Authority, seeing Machiavill is positive, that it was the Dissension which
happened about the Agrarian that caused the Destruction of Rome; Nor do I think
that it did much better in Lacedemon, as I shall show anon.

Monarchy, cannot without impiety be denied, the holy Scriptures bearing
Witness, that the Commonwealth of Israel notwithstanding her Agrarian,
submitted her neck unto the Arbitrary Yoke of her Princes.

Wherefore to come unto my Fourth Assertion, That it is destructive unto
Families; this also is so apparent, that it needs pity rather then proof. Why
alas do you bind a Nobility, which no Generation shall deny to have been the
first that freely sacrificed her blood unto the ancient Liberties of this
People, up-an unholy Altar? Why are the People taught, That their Liberty,
which except our noble Ancestors had been born, must have long since been
buried, cannot now be born except we be buried?. A Commonwealth should have
the innocence of the Dove: Let us leave this purchase of her birth unto the
Serpent, which eats her self out of the womb of her Mother.

GOD is not upon Us for nothing; but take heed how you admit of such assaults
and sallyes upon men's Estates, as may slacken the Nerve of labor, and give
others also reason to believe that their sweat is vain; Or whatsoever be
pretended, your Agrarian (which is my Fourth Assertion) must indeed destroy
Industry: For, that so it did in Lacedemon, is most apparent, as also that it
could do no otherwise, where every man having his 40. Quarters of Barley, with
Wine proportionable, supplied him out of his own Lot by his Labourer or Helott;
and being confined in that unto the scantling above which he might not live,
there was not any such thing as a Trade, or other Art, save that of War, in
exercise; Wherefore a Spartane, if he were not in Arms, must sit and play
with his fingers, whence ensued perpetual War; And, the Estate of the Citizen
being as little capable of increase, as that of the Commonwealth, her
inevitable Ruin. Now what better ends you can propose unto your selves in like
ways, I do not so well see, as that there may be worse; For Lacedemon yet, was
free from civil War; but if you employ your Citizens no better then she did,
I cannot promise you that you shall fare so well, because both they are still
desirous of War that hope it may be profitable unto them; And the strongest
security you can give of Peace, is to make it gainful; otherwise men will
rather choose that whereby they may break your Laws, then that whereby your
Laws may break them; which I do not speak so much in relation unto the
Nobility, or such as would be holding, as to the people or them that would be
getting; the passion in these being of so much the more strength, as a man's
felicity is weaker in the Fruition of things, then in the Prosecution and
increase of them.

Truly (my Lords) it is my fear, that by taking off more hands, and the best
from Industry, you will farther indammage it, then can be repaired by laying on
a few, and the worst: while the Nobility must be forced to send their Sons unto
the Plough; and, as if this were not enough, to Marry their Daughters also unto
Farmers.

Agrarian of Israel, or that of Lacedemon might stand, is no such miracle; the
Lands without any Consideration of the former Proprietor, being surveyed and
cast into equal Lots, which could neither be bought, nor sold, nor multiplied;
so that they knew whereabout to have a man: but in this Nation no such Division
can be introduced, the Lands being already in the hands of Proprietors, and
such whose Estates lie very rarely together, but mixed one with another, being
also of Tenures in nature so different; that as there is no experience that an
Agrarian was ever introduced in such a case, so there is no appearance how, or
reason why, it should: but that which is against Reason and Experience is
impossible.



The Case of my Lord Philautus was the most concerned in the whole Nation; for
he had four younger Brothers, his Father being yet Living unto whom he was Heir
of ten thousand pounds a year: Wherefore being a man both of good parts and
esteem, his words wrought both upon Men's Reason, and Passions, and had born a
stroke at the head of the business, if my Lord Archon had not interposed the
Buckler, in this Oration: My Lords, the Legislators of Oceana,
MY Lord Philautus has made a thing which is easy, to seem hard; if he ought
the thanks unto his Eloquence, it would be worthy of less Praise, then that he
owes it unto his merit, and the Love he has most deservedly purchased of all
men: nor is it rationally to be feared, that he who is so much beforehand in
his Private, should be in Arrear in his Public capacity. Wherefore my Lords
tenderness throughout his Speech arising from no other principle then his
solicitude, lest the Agrarian should be hurtful unto his Country; It is no
less then my duty to give the best satisfaction I am able unto so good a
Patriot, taking every one of his doubts in the Order proposed: And,

Commonwealths of Switz and Holland, I mean of those Leagues, being situated
in Countries not alluring the Inhabitants unto wantonness, but obliging them
unto universal Industry, have an implicit Agrarian in the nature of them: and
being not obnoxious unto a growing Nobility, which as long as their former
Monarchies spread the wing over them, could either not at all be hatched, or
was soon broken; are of no Example unto us, whose experience in this point has
been unto the Contrary. But what if even in these Governments there be indeed
an explicit Agrarian? For when the Law Commands an equal, or near equal
distribution of a man's Estate in Land among his Children, as in those
Countries, a Nobility cannot grow, and so there needs no Agrarian, or is one.
And for the growth of the Nobility in Venice, (if so it be, for Machiavill
observes in that Republic, as a cause of it, a great mediocrity of Estates) it
is not a point that she is to fear, but might study, seeing She consists of
nothing else but Nobility; by which, what ever their Estates suck from the
People, especially if it come equally, is digested into the better blood of
that Commonwealth, which is all, or the greatest benefit they can have by
accumulation; for how unequal soever you will have them to be in their Incoms,
they have Officers of the Pomp, to bring them equal in expenses, or at least
in the ostentation or show of them: And so unless the advantage of an Estate
consist more in the measure then in the use of it, the Authority of Venice, but
enforces our Agrarian; nor shall a man evade or elude the prudence of it, by
the authority of any other Commonwealth; For if a Commonwealth have been
introduced at once as those of Israel and Lacedemon, you are certain to find
her underlayd with this as the main foundation; nor if she have owght more unto
Fortune then Prudence, has she raised her head without musing upon this
matter, as appears by that of Athens, which through her Defect in this point,
Arist. Pol. 1.3. c. 9.
says Aristotle, introduced her Ostracisme, as most of the Democraties of
Greece. [Ob hanc itaque causam civitates quae Democratice administrantur
Ostracismum instituunt:] But not to restrain a Fundamental of such latitude
unto any one kind of Government. Do we not yet see, that if there be a sole
Landlord, of a vast Territory, he is the Turk? That if a few Landlords
overballance a Populous Country, they have store of Servants? That if a People
be in equal balance, they can have no Lords? That no Government can otherwise
be erected, then upon some one of these Foundations? That no one of these
Foundations, (each being else apt to change into some other) can give any
security unto the Government, unless it be fixed? That through the want of
this fixation, potent Monarchies, and Commonwealths have fallen upon the heads
of the People, and accompanied their own sad Ruins with vast effusions of
innocent Blood? Let the Fame, as was the merit of the ancient Nobility of this
Nation, be equal unto, or above what has been already said, or can be spoken,
yet have we seen not only their Glory, but that of a Throne, the most indulgent
to, and least invasive for so many Ages upon the Liberty of a People that the
World has known, through the mere want of fixing her foot by a proportionable
Agrarian upon her proper Foundation, to have fallen with such horror, as has
been a Spectacle of astonishment unto the whole earth. And were it well argued
from one Calamity, that we ought not to prevent another? Nor is Aristotle so
good a Common-wealths-man for deriding the invention of Phaleas, as in
recollecting himself, where he says, Pol. l. 5. c. 3.
That Democraties when a Lesser part of their Citizens overtop the rest in
Wealth, degenerate into Oligarchies, and Principalities: And, which comes
nearer unto the present purpose, that the greater part of the Nobility of
Tarantum coming accidentally to be ruined, the Government of the Few came by
consequence to be changed into that of the Many.

These things considered, I cannot see how an Agrarian as to the fixation or
security of a Government can be less then necessary. And if a Cure be
necessary, it excuses not the Patient, his disease being otherwise desperate,
that it is dangerous; which was the Case of Rome, not so stated by Machiavill,
where he says, That the strife about the Agrarian caused the Destruction of
that Commonwealth. As if when a Senator was not rich (as Crassus held) except
he could pay an Army, that Commonwealth could have done other then Ruin;
whether in strife about the Agrarian, or without it: (Nuper divitiae avaritiam
and abundantes voluptates desiderium per luxum atq, libidinem pereundi
perdendique omnia invexere: Live. in praef.
) If the greatest Security of a Commonwealth consist in being provided with
the proper Antidote against this Poison, her greatest Danger must be from the
absence of an Agrarian; which is the whole truth of the Roman example: For the
Laconick, I shall reserve the farther explication of it, as my Lord also did to
another Place: and first see whether an Agrarian proportioned unto a Popular
Government, be sufficient to keep out Monarchy: My Lord is for the negative,
and fortified by the People of Israel electing a King. To which I say, That the
Action of the People therein expressed is a full Answer unto the Objection of
that example; For the Monarchy neither grew upon them, nor could by reason of
the Agrarian possibly have invaded them, if they had not pulled it upon
themselves by the election of a King; which being an Accident, the like whereof
is not to be found in any other People so planted, nor in this, till as it is
manifest, they were given up by GOD unto infatuation, (for says he to Samuel,
They have not rejected Thee, but they have rejected* Me, that I should not
Reign over them) has something in it which is apparent, by what went before,
to have been besides the Course of Nature, and by what followed: For the King
having no other foundation then the Calamities of the People, so often beaten
by their Enemies, that despairing of themselves, they were contented with any
Change; If he had Peace as in the days of Solomon, left but a slippery Throne
unto his Successor, as appeared by Rehoboam. And the Agrarian, notwithstanding
the Monarchy thus introduced, so faithfully preserved the Root of that
Commonwealth, that it shot oftener forth, and by intervals continued longer
then any other Government, as may be computed from the Institution of the same
by Joshua, 1465. years before Christ, unto the total Dissolution of it, which
happened in the Reign of the Emperor Adrian 135. years after the Incarnation.
A People planted upon on an equal Agrarian, and holding to it, if they part
with their liberty, must do it upon good will, and make but a bad title of
their bounty. As to instance yet farther in that which is proposed by the
present Order to this Nation, the Standard whereof is at 2000 l. a year. The
whole Territory of Oceana being divided by this proportion, amounts unto
5000. Lots. So the Lands of Oceana being thus distributed, and bound unto this
distribution, can never fall unto fewer then Five thousand Proprietors. But
Five thousand Proprietors so seized will not agree to break the Agrarian; for
that were to agree to rob one another; Nor to bring in a King, because they
must maintain him, and can have no benefit by him; Nor to exclude the People,
because they can have as little by that, and must spoil their Militia. So the
Commonwealth continuing upon the balance proposed, though it should come into
Five thousand hands can never alter; And that it should ever come into Five
thousand hands, is as improbable as anything in the World that is not
altogether impossible.

My Lords, other Considerations are more private: As that this Order destroys
Families; which is as if one should lay the ruins of some ancient Castle unto
the Herbs which do usually grow out of them; the destruction of those Families
being that indeed which naturally produced this Order. For we do not now argue
for that which we would have, but for that which we are already possessed of;
as would appear, if a note were but taken of all such as have at this day above
Two thousand pounds a year in Oceana. If my Lord should grant (and I will put
it with the most) that they who are Proprietors in Land, exceeding the
proportion, exceed not Three hundred; with what brow can the Interest of so few
be balanced with that of the whole Nation? Or rather, what Interest have they
to put in such a balance? They would live as they have been accustomed to do:
Who hinders them? They would enjoy their Estates, Who touches them? They would
dispose of what they have according unto the Interest of their Families; It is
that which we desire. A man has one Son, let him be called; Would he enjoy his
Fathers Estate? It is his, and his Sons, and his Sons Sons after him. A man
has five Sons, let them be called, Would they enjoy their Fathers Estate? It
is divided among them; for we have four Votes for one in the same Family, and
therefore this must be the Interest of the Family; or the Family knows not
her own Interest. If a man shall dispute otherwise, he must draw his Arguments
from Custom, and from Greatness, which was the interest of the Monarchy, not
of the Family: and we are now a Commonwealth. If the Monarchy could not bear
with such divisions because they tended to a Commonwealth; neither can a
Commonwealth connive at such accumulations, because they tend to a Monarchy.
If the Monarchy might make bold with so many for the good of one; We may make
bold with one for the good of so many, nay, for the good of all. My Lords, it
comes into my head, that upon occasion of the variety of Parties enumerated in
our late Civil Wars, was said by a Friend of mine coming home from his
Travels, about the latter end of these Troubles; That he admired how it came to
pass, that Younger Brothers, especially being so many more in number then
their Elder, did not make one against a Tyranny, the like whereof has not been
exercised in any other Nation. And truly, when I consider that our Countrymen
are none of the worst natured, I must confess I marveil much how it comes to
pass, that we should use our Children, as we do our Puppies; take one, lay it
in the lap, feed it with every good bit, and drown five. Nay worse; for as much
as the Puppies are once drowned, whereas the Children are left perpetually
drowning. Really, my Lords, it is a flinty Custom and all this for his cruel
Ambition, that would raise himself a Pillar, a golden Pillar for his Monument,
though he have Children, his own reviving Flesh, and a kind of immortality. And
this is that Interest of a Family, for which we are to think ill of a
Government that will not endure it. But quiet your selves. The Land through
which the River Nilus wanders in one stream, is barren, but where he parts into
Seven, he multiplies his fertile shores, by distributing, yet keeping and
improving such a Propriety and Nutrition, as is a prudent Agrarian unto a well
ordered Commonwealth.

Nor (to come unto the fifth Assertion) is a Political body rendered any fitter
for Industry, by having one Gowty, and another withered Leg, than a natural:
It tends not unto the improvement of Merchandise that there be some who have
no need of their Trading, and others that are not able to follow it. If
confinement discourage Industry, an Estate in money is not confined; and lest
Industry should want whereupon to work, Land is not engrossed, nor entailed
upon any man, but remains at her Devotion. I wonder whence the computation can
arise, that this should discourage Industry? Two thousand pounds a year a man
may enjoy in Oceana, as much in Panopea, Five hundred in Marpesia: there be
other Plantations; and the Commonwealth will have more: Who knows how far
the Arms of our Agrarian may extend themselves? and whether he that might have
left a Pillar, may not leave a Temple or many Pillars unto his more pious
Memory? Where there is some measure in riches, a man may be rich; but if you
will have them to be infinite, there will be no end of sterving himself, and
wanting what he has: and what pains does such an one take to be poor!
Furthermore if a man shall think, that there may be an Industry less greasy,
or more noble, and so cast his thoughts upon the Commonwealth, he will have
Leisure for her, and she Riches and Honors for him; his sweat shall smell like
Alexander's. My Lord Philautus is a young Man, who enjoying his Ten thousand
pounds a year, may keep a noble House in the old way, and have homely Guests:
and having but Two, by the means proposed, may take the upper hand of his great
Ancestors; with reverence unto whom, I may say, there has not been one of them
would have disputed his place with a Roman Consul. My Lord do not break my
heart; the Nobility shall go unto no other Ploughs then those from which we
call our Consuls. But says he, it having been so with Lacedemon, that neither
the City nor the Citizens was capable of increase, a blow was given by that
Agrarian, which Ruined both. And what are we concerned with that Agrarian, or
that blow, while our Citizens and our City (and that by our Agrarian) are both
capable of increase? The Spartane if he made a Conquest had not Citizens to
hold it, the Oceaner will have enough: the Spartane could have no Trade, the
Oceaner may have all. The Agrarian in Laconia, that it might bind on Knapsacks,
forbidding all other Arts but that of War, could not make an Army of above
30000. Citizens. The Agrarian in Oceana without interruption of Traffic,
provides us in the fifth part of the Youth an annual source or fresh spring of
100000. besides our Provincial Auxiliaries; out of which to draw marching
Armies; And as many Elders, not feeble, but men most of them in the flowr of
their Age, and in Arms for the defense of our Territories. The Agrarian in
Laconia, banished money; this, multiplyes it. That, allowed a matter of twenty
or thirty Acres to a man; this, two or three thousand: There is no Comparison
between them. And yet I differ so much from my Lord, or his opinion, that the
Agrarian was the Ruin of Lacedemon; that I hold it no less then demonstrable
to have been her main support; For if banishing all other diversions it could
not make an Army of above 30000; then letting in all other diversions, it must
have broken that Army: Wherefore Lysander bringing in the golden spoils of
Athens, irrecoverably ruined that Commonwealth; and is a warning to us, that
in giving encouragement unto Industry, we also remember, that Covetousness is
the root of all Evil. And our Agrarian can never be the cause of those
Seditions threatened by my Lord, but is the proper cure of them, as Lucan
notes well in the State of Rome, before the Civil Wars, which happened through
the want of such an Antidote; Hinc usura vorax, rapidumque in tempore Foenus,
Hinc concussa fides, et multis utile bellum.


Why then are we mistaken, as if we intended not equal advantages in our
Commonwealth unto either Sex, because we would not have women's fortunes
consist in that metal, which exposes them unto Cut-purses? If a man cut my
purse, I may have him by the heels, or by the neck for it; Whereas a man may
cut a Woman's purse and have her for his pains in fetters. How brutish, and
much more then brutish, is that Commonwealth, which prefers the Earth
before the fruits of her Womb? If the people be her treasure, the staff by
which she is sustained and comforted, with what Justice can she suffer them, by
whom she is most enriched, to be for that cause the most impoverished? and yet
we see the gifts of God, and the bounties of Heaven in fruitful Families,
through this wretched custom of marrying for money, become their insupportable
grief and poverty: nor falls this so heavy upon the lower sort, being better
able to shift for themselves, as upon the Nobility or Gentry: For what avails
it in this case, from whence their veins have derived their blood; while they
shall see the Tallow of a Chandler, sooner converted into that beauty which is
required in a Bride? I appeal, whether my Lord Philautus or my self be the
Advocate of Nobility; against which in the Case proposed by me, there would be
nothing to hold the balance. And why is a woman, if she may have but fifteen
hundred pounds, undone? If she be unmarried, what Nobleman allows his Daughter
in that case a greater Revenue, then so much money may command? And if she
marry, no Nobleman can give his Daughter a greater portion then she has. Who
is hurt in this case? nay, who is not benefitted? If the Agrarian give us the
sweat of our brows without diminution; if it prepare our table, if it make our
Cup to over flow; and above all this, in providing for our Children, anoint our
heads with that oil which takes away the greatest of worldly cares, what man,
that is not besotted with a Covetousness as vain as endless, can imagine such
a Constitution to be his Poverty, seeing where no woman can be considerable for
her portion, no portion will be considerable with a woman; and so their
Children will not only find better preferments without their brocage, but more
freedom of their own affections. We are wonderful severe in Laws, That hey
shall not marry without our consent; as if it were care and tenderness over
them: But is it not, lest we should not have the other thousand pound with this
Son, or the other hundred pound a year more in Jointure for that Daughter?
These when we are crossed in them are the sins for which we water our couch with
tears, but not of Penitence; seeing whereas it is a mischief beyond any that we
can do unto our enemies, we persist to make nothing of breaking the affection
of our Children. But there is in this Agrarian an homage unto pure and
spotless Love, the consequence whereof I will not give for all the Romances.
An Alderman makes not his Daughter a Countess till he have given her 20000 l.
nor a Romance a considerable Mistrisse till she be a Princess; these are
characters of bastard Love. But if our Agrarian exclude Ambition and
Covetousness, we shall at length have the care of our own breed, in which we
have been curious as to that of our Dogs and our Horses. The marriage bed will
be truly Legitimate, and the Race of the Commonwealth not spurious.

But (impar magnanimis ausis imparque dolori) I am hurled from all my hopes by
my Lords last Assertion of Impossibility, that the Root from whence we imagine
these fruits, should be planted or thrive in this soil. And why? because of the
mixture of Estates, and variety of Tenures. Nevertheless there is yet extant in
the Exchequer an old Survey of the whole Nation; Wherefore such a thing is not
impossible: Now if a new survey were taken at the present Rates, and the Law
made, that no man should hold hereafter above so much Land as is valued therein
at 2000 l, a year; it would amount unto a good and sufficient Agrarian. It is
true, that there would remain some difficulty in the different kind of Rents;
And that it is a matter requiring not only more leisure then we have; but an
Authority which may be better able to bow men unto a more general Consent,
then is to be wrought out of them by such as are in our capacity: Wherefore, as
to the Manner, it is necessary that we refer it unto the Parliament; but as to
the Matter, they can no otherwise fix their Government upon the right Balance.

I shall conclude with a few words, to some parts of the Order, which my Lord
has omitted. As first to the Consequences of the Agrarian to be settled in
Marpesia, which irrepairably breaks the Aristocracy of that Nation; being of
such a nature, as standing, it is not possible that you should Govern. For
while the People of that Country are little better then the Cattle of the
Nobility, you must not wonder if according as these can make their Markets with
Foreign Princes, you find these to be driven upon your Grounds: And if you be
so tender now you have it in your Power, as not to hold an hand upon them that
may prevent the Slaughter that must otherwise ensue in like Cases, the blood
will lie at your door. But in holding such an hand upon them, you may settle
the Agrarian; and in settling the Agrarian, you give the People not only
Liberty, but Lands; which makes your Protection necessary to their Security;
and their Contribution due unto your Protection, as to their own Safety.

For the Agrarian of Panopea, it allowing such Proportions of so good Land, men
that conceive themselves straightened by this in Oceana, will begin there to let
themselves forth, where every Citizen will in time have his Villa. And there is
no question, but the improvement of that Country by this means, must be far
greater then it has been in the best of former times.

I have no more to say, but that in those ancient and heroical Ages, when men
thought that to be necessary which was virtuous; the Nobility of Athens having
the People so much engaged in their Debt, that there remained no other question
among these, than, which of those should be King; no sooner heard Solon speak
than they quitted their Debts, and restored the Commonwealth: Which ever after
held a Solemn and Annual Feast called the Sisacthia, or Recision in memory of
that Action. Nor is this example the Phoenix; For at the Institution by
Lycurgus, the Nobility having Estates (as ours here) in the Lands of Laconia,
upon no other valuable Consideration, than the Commonwealth proposed by him,
threw them up to be parcel'd by his Agrarian. But now when no man is desired to
throw up a farthing of his money, or a shovell full of his Earth, and that all
we can do, is but to make a Virtue of necessity: We are disputing whether we
should have Peace, or War; For Peace, you cannot have without some Government,
nor any Government without the proper Balance: Wherefore if you will not fix
this which you have, the rest is blood, for without blood you can bring in no
other.



By these Speeches made at the Institution of the Agrarian, you may perceive
what were the Grounds of it. The next is Venice, as it is fitted by several
alterations, and appointed unto every Assembly, to be the constant add only way
of giving suffrage in this Commonwealth.

This is the general Order, whence those branches of the Ballot, some whereof
you have already seen are derived, which with those that follow were all read
and debated in this place at the Institution; when my Lord Epimonus de Garrula
being one of the Counselors, and having no farther patience, (though the Rules
were composed by the Agent of this Commonwealth, residing for that purpose at
Venice) then to hear the direction for the Parishes, stood up, and made way
for himself in this manner: May it please your Highness, my Lord Archon,
UNder Correction of Mr. Peregrine Spy our very Learned Agent and
Intelligencer; I have seen the World a little Venice, and (as Gentlemen are
permitted to do) the Great Council Ballotting. And truly, I must needs say,
that it is for a dumb show the goodliest that I ever beheld with mine Eyes. You
should have some would take it ill, as if the noble Venetians thought
themselves too good to speak to Strangers, but they observed them not so
narrowly: The truth is, they have nothing to say unto their Acquaintance; or,
Men that are in Council sure would have tongues: For, a Council, and not a word
spoken in it, is a Contradiction -- But there is such a pudder with their
Marching and Counter-marching, as, though never a one of them draw a Sword, you
would think they were Training; which till I found that they did it only to
entertain strangers, I came from among them as wise as I went thither -- But in
the Parliament of Oceana you had no Balls, for Dancing, but sober Conversation,
a Man might know and be known; show his parts, and improve 'em. And now if you
take the advice of this same Fellow you will spoil all with his Whimsies. --
Mr* Speaker, -- Cry you merry, my Lord Archon I mean; Set the wisest Man of
your House in the Great Council of Venice, and you will not know him, from a
Fool. Whereas nothing is more certain, then that flat and dull fellows in the
Judgment of all such as used to keep Company with them before, upon Election
into our House, have immediately chitted like Barley in the fat, where it
acquires a new Spirit, and flowed forth into Language, that I am as confident
as I am here, if there were not such as delight to abuse us, is far better then
Tu^ly's: Or, let any body but translate one of his Orations, and speak it in
the House, and see if every body do not laugh at him. This is a great matter,
Mr. Speaker, they do not cant it with your book-Learning; your Orbs, your
Centers, your prime Magnitudes, and your Nebulones, things I profess that
would make a sober man run stark mad to hear 'em; while we, who should be
considering the Honor of our Country, and that it goes now or never upon our
hand, whether it shall be ridiculous to all the world; are going to nine-holes,
or trow- Madam for our Business, like your dumb Venetian, whom this same Sir
Politic your Resident that never saw him do any thing but make faces, would
insinuate into you, at this distance, to have the only knack of State: Whereas
if you should take the pains as I have done to look a little nearer, you would
find these same wonderful things to be nothing else, but mere natural
Fopperies or Capricio's, as they call them in Italien, even of the meanest of
that Nation: For, put the Case you be traveling in Italy, ask your Contadino,
that is, the next Country-fellow you meet some question, and presently he
ballots you an answer with a nod, which is Affirmative; or a shake with his
head, which is the Negative box: Or a shrug with his shoulder, which is the
Bossolo di non sinceri. -- Good! You will admire Sands for telling you, that
Grotta di cane is a Miracle: and I shall be laughed at for assuring you, that
it is nothing else but such a damp (continued by the neighborhood of certain
Sulphur-mines) as through accidental heat does sometimes happen in our
Coal-Pits. But ingratitude must not discourage an honest man from doing good.
There is not, I say, such a tongue-ty'd Generation under Heaven as your
Italian; that you should not wonder if he make signs. But our People must have
something in their Diurnalls, we must ever and anon be telling 'em our minds;
or if we be at it when we raise Taxes like those Gentlemen with the finger and
the thumb, they will swear that we are Cut-purses. -- Come, I know what I have
heard 'em say, when some men had money that wrought hard enough for it: and do
you conceive they will be better pleased when they shall be told, that upon
like occasions you are at Mum-chance or Stool-ball? I do not speak for my self;
for though I shall always acknowledge, that I got more by one years sitting in
the House, then by my three years Travels; it was not of that kind. But I hate
that this same Spy for pretending to have played at Billiards with the most
Serene Commonwealth of Venice, should make such fools of us here; when I know
that he must have had his intelligence from some Corn-Cutter upon the Rialta;
for a noble Venetian would be hanged if he should keep such a fellow Company.
-- And yet if I do not think he has made you all dote, never trust me, my Lord
Archon is sometimes in such strange Raptures. Why good my Lord let me be heard
as well as your Aple Squire, She has fresh blood in her Cheeks, I must
confess, but she is but an old Lady; nor has he picked her Cabinet; these he
sends you are none of her Receipts I can assure you, he bought them for a Julio
at St. Marks of a Mountebank: She has no other wash upon my knowledge for that
same envied Complexion of hers but her Marshes, being a little better sented,
saving your presence, then a Chamber Pot. -- My Lords, I know what I say, But
you will never have done with it, That neither the great Turk, not any of those
little Turks her Neighbors have been able to spoil her! Why you may as well
wonder that Wees^ls do not suck Eggs in Swans-Nests. -- Do you think that it
has layn in the Devotion of her Beads; which you that have pe^ked so much at
Popery, are now at length resolved, shall Consecrate M. Parson, and be dropped by
every one of his Congregation, while those same whimsicall Intelligences your
Surveyors (you will break my heart) give the turn unto your Primum Mobile? and
so I think they will, for you will find, that Money is the Primum Mobile, and
they will turn you thus out of some three or four hundred thousand pounds. A
pretty Sum for Urns, and Balls, for Boxes and Pills, which these same
quacksalvers are to Administer unto the Parishes, and for what disease I
mervail! Or how does it Work? Out comes a Constable, an Overseer, and a
Churchwarden! Mr. Speaker, I am amazed!



Never was there Goose so stuck with Lard as my Lord Epimonus's Speech with
laughter, The Archon having much ado to recover himself, in such manner as
might enable him to return these thanks: IN your whole lives (my Lords) were
you never entertained with so much Ingenuity; my Lord Epimonus having at once
mended all the faults of Travelers. For first, whereas they are abominable
Liars, he has not told you (except some malicious body have misinformed him,
concerning poor Spy) one syllable of falsehood. And Secondly, whereas they
never fail to give the upper hand in all their Discourses unto Foreign
Nations, still justling their own into the Kennell; he bears an Honor unto his
Country that will not dissolve in Cephalonia, nor be corrupted with Figs, and
Melons, which I can assure you is no ordinary Obligation: and therefore hold it
a matter of public concernment, that we be no occasion of quenching my Lords
Affections; nor is there any such great matter between us, but might me thinks
be easily reconciled: for though that which my Lord gained by sitting in the
House, I steadfastly believe, as he can affirm, was gotten fairly; yet dare I
not, nor do I think, that upon consideration, he will promise so much for other
Gamesters, especially when they were at it so high, as he intimates not only to
have been in use, but to be like enough to come about again. Wherefore (say I)
let them throw with boxes; for unless we will be below the Politics of an
ordinary, there is no such bar unto Coging. It is known unto his Lordship,
that our Game is, Most at a throw, and that every cast of our Dice is, in our
Suffrages; nor will be deny, that partiality in a Suffrage is downright
Cogging. Now if the Venetian boxes be the most sovereign of all Remedies
against this same Cogging: Is it not a strange thing that they should be thrown
first into the fire by a fair Gamester? Men are naturally subject unto all
kinds of Passion; Some you have that are not able to withstand the brow of an
Enemy; And, others that make nothing of this, are less of proof against that
of a Friend; So that if your Suffrage be barefaced, I dare say you shall not
have one fair cast in twenty. But what ever a man's fortune be at the box, he
neither knows whom to thank, nor whom to Challenge. Wherefore (that my Lord
may have a Charitable opinion of the choice Affection which I confess to have
above all other beauties, for that of incomparable Venice) there is in this way
of Suffrage no less then a demonstration that it is the most pure; and the
purity of the Suffrage in a popular Government is the health, if not the life
of it; seeing the Soul is no otherwise breathed into the Sovereign Power, then
by the Suffrage of the People. Wherefore no wonder if Postellus be of opinion,
that this use of the Ball is the very same with that which was of the Bean in
Athens; or, that others, by the Text concerning Eldad and Medad, derive it from
the Commonwealth of Israel. There is another thing, though not so material
unto us, that my Lord will excuse Me, if I be not willing to yield, which is
that Venice subsisteth only by her Situation; It is true, that a man in time of
War, may be more secure from his Enemies, by being in a Citadell; but not
from his Diseases; wherefore the first cause, if he live long, is his good
Constitution, without which his Citadell were to little purpose; and it is no
otherwise with Venice.

With this speech of the Archon, I conclude, the proof of the Agrarian; and of
the Ballot, being the Fundamental Laws of this Commonwealth: and come now
from the Center to the circumferences or Orbs, whereof some have been already
shown; As how the Parishes annually pour themselves into the Hundreds, the
Hundreds into the Tribes, and the Tribes into the Gallaxy's, the Annual
Gallaxy of every Tribe consisting of two Knights, and seven Deputies, whereof
the Knights constitute the Senate; the Deputies, the Prerogative Tribe commonly
called the people: and the Senate and the people constitute the Sovereign
Power, or Parliament of Oceana. Wherefore to show what the Parliament is, I
must first open the Senate, and then the people, or Prerogative Tribe.

To begin with the Senate, of which (as a man is differently represented by a
Picture drawer, and by an Anatomist) I shall first discover the face or aspect,
and then the parts, The face of the Senate.
with the use of them. Every Munday-Morning in the Summer, at seven, and in
the Winter at eight, the great Bell in the Clockhouse at the Pantheon
begins, and continues Ringing for the space of one hour, in which time the
Magistrates of the Senate, being attended according to their quality, with a
respective number of the Balotines, Doore-keepers, and Messengers, and having
the Ensigns of their Magistracies borne before them, as the Sword before the
Strategus, the Mace before the Orator, a Mace with the Seal before the
Commissioners of the Chancery, the like with the Purse before the Commissioners
of the Teasury; and a Silver wand, like those in use with the Universities,
before each of the Censors being Chancellors of the same. These with the
Knights, in all Three hundred, Assemble in the House or Hall of the Senate.

The House or Hall of the Senate, being situated in the Pantheon or Palace of
Justice, is a room consisting of a Square and a half: in the middle of the
lower end is the door, at the upper end hangs a rich State overshaddowing
the greater part of a large Throne, or half pace of two Stages, the first
ascended by two steps from the floor, and the second about the middle, rising
two steps higher. Upon this stand two Chaires, in that on the right hand sits
the Strategus, in the other the Orator, adorned with Scarlet Robes, after the
fashion that was used by the Dukes in the Aristocracy. At the right end of the
upper Stage, stand three Chaires, in which the three Commissioners of the Seal
are placed, and at the other end sit the three Commissioners of the Treasury,
every one in a Robe, or habit like that of the Earls, of these Magistrates of
this upper Stage consists the Signory. At either end of the lower Stage
stands a little Table, to which the Sacreteries of the Senate are set with
their tufted sleeves in the habit of civil Lawyers. Unto the foure-stepps,
whereby the two Stages of the Throne are ascended, answer foure-long Benches,
which successively deriving from every one of the stepps contain their
respective height, and extend themselves by the side Walls toward the lower
end of the house, every bench being divided by numerall Characters into the
Thirty seven parts or places. Upon the upper benches sit the Censors in the
Robes of Barons; the first in the middle of the right hand bench, and the
second directly opposite unto him on the other side. Upon the rest of the
Benches sit the Knights, who if they be called unto the Urnes distributing
themselves by the fiugres come in equal files, either by the first seal which
consists of the two upper benches on either side; or by the second seal
consisting of the two lower benches on either side; beginning also at the
upper, or at the lower ends of the same according to the Lot whereby they are
called for which end the benches are open, and ascended at either end with easy
stairs, and large passages. The rest of the ballot is conformable unto that of
the Tribe; the Censors of the house sitting at the side Urnes, and the youngest
Magistrate of the Signory, at the middle; the Urnes being placed before the
Throne, and prepared according unto the number of the Magistrates to be at that
time chosen by the rules already given unto the Censors of the Tribes. But
before the benches of the Knights on either side stands one being shorter; and
at the upper end of this, sit the two Tribunes of the Horse; at the upper end
of the other, the two Tribunes of the foot in their Arms; the rest of the
benches being covered by the Judges of the Land in their Robes; but these
Magistrates have no suffrage, neither the Tribunes, though they derive their
presence in the Senate, from the Romans; nor the Judges, though they derive
theirs, from the ancient Senate of Oceana. Every Monday, this assembly sits of
course; at other times, if there be occasion, any Magistrate of the House by
giving order for the Bell or by his lictor, or ensigne-bearer calls a Senate;
And every Magistrate or Knight during his session has the Title, Place, and
Honor of a Duke, Earl, Baron or Knight respectively. And every one that has
borne the same Magistracy ( tertio) by his third session, has his respective
place, and Ti^e during the term of his Life, which is all the Honor conferred
by this Commonwealth, except upon the Master of the Ceremonies, the Master of
the Horse, and the King of the Heralds, who are Knights by their Places. And
thus you have the Face of the Senate, in which there is scarce any feature that
is not Roman or Venetian; nor do the Horns of this Crescent extend themselves
much unlike those of the Sanhedrim, on either hand of the Prince, and of the
Father of that Senate. But upon Beauty in which every Man has his phansy, we
will not otherwise Phylosophize then to remember that there is something more
then decency in the Robe of a Judge, that would not be well spared from the
Bench; and that the gravest Magistrate unto whom you can commit the Sword of
Justice, will find a quickness in the spurrs of Honor, which if they be not
laid unto virtue, will lay themselves unto that which may rout a Commonwealth.

To come from the Face of the Senate, unto the Constitution and use of the
parts: It is contained in the peculiar Orders. Constitution of the Senate.
And the Orders which are peculiar unto the Senate, are either of Election, or
Instruction.

Elections in the Senate are of three sorts, Annual, Bienniall, and
Extraordinary.

Annual Elections are performed by the Schedule called the Tropic: and the
Tropic, consists of two parts; the one containing the Magistrates; and the
other the Counsels, to be yearly elected. The Schedule or Tropic of the
Magistrates, is as follows in The Fifteenth Order, requiring, That upon every
Monday next ensuing the last of March, Tropic of the Magistrates:
the Knights of the Annual Gallaxy's taking their places in the Senate, be
called the first Region of the same; and that the House having dismissed the
third Region, and received the first, proceed unto Election of the Magistrates
contained in the first part of the Tropic, bp the ensuing Schedule, The Lord
Strategus. Annual Magistrates. The Lord Orator. Annual Magistrates. The first
Censor. Annual Magistrates. The second Censor. Annual Magistrates. The third
Commissioner of the Seal. Trienniall Magistrates. The third Commissioner of the
Treasury. Trienniall Magistrates.


The Annual Magistrates (provided that no one Man bear above one of those
Honors during the term of one Session) may be elected out of any Region. But
the Trienniall Magistrates may not be elected out of any other, then the third
Region only, lest the term of their Session expire before that of their Honor;
and (it being unlawful for any man to bear Magistracy any longer then he is
thereunto qualified by the Election of the People) cause a fraction in the
Rotation of this Commonwealth.

The Strategus is first President of the Senate, and General of the Army, Of
the Strategus.
if it be commanded to March; in which case there shall be a second Strategus
elected to be first President of the Senate, and General of the second Army:
and if this also be Commanded to March, a third Strategus shall be chosen; and
so as long as the Commonwealth sends forth Armies.

The Lord Orator is second and more peculiar President of the Senate, Of the
Orator.
unto whom it appertains to keep the House unto Orders.

Of the Censors.
The Censors, whereof the first by consequence of his Election is Chancellor of
the University of Clio, and the second of that of Calliope; are Presidents of
the Council for Religion and Magistrates, unto whom it belongs to keep the
House unto the order of the Ballot. They are also Inquisi^tors into the ways
and means of acquiring Magistracy; and have power to punish indirect
proceeding in the same, by removing a Knight or Magistrate out of the House,
under appeal unto the Senate.

Of the Commissioners. of the Seal.
The Commissioners of the Seal being three, whereof the third is annually
chosen out of the third Region, are Judges in Chancery.

Of the Commissioners of the Treasury.
The Commissioners of the Treasury being three, whereof the third is annually
chosen out of the third Region, are Judges in the Exchequer; and every
Magistrate of this Schedule, has right to propose unto the Senate.

Of the Signory.
But the Strategus with the six Commissioners are the Signory of this
Commonwealth having right of Session and Suffrage in every Council of the
Senate, and power either jointly or severally, to propose in all or any of them,



I have little in this Order to observe or prove, but that the Strategus is the
same honor both in name and thing that was borne, among others, by Philopaenen
and Aratus in the Commonwealth of the Achaeans; the like having been in use
also with the Aetolians (Quem ut Achaei Strategon nominabant, says Emmius).
The Orator, called otherwise the Speaker, is with small alteration the same
that had been of former use in this Nation. These two, if you will, may be
compared unto the Consules in Rome, or the Suffetes in Carthage, for their
Magistracy is scarce different.

The Censors derive their power of removing a Senator, from those of Rome; the
Government of the Ballot, from those of Venice; and that of animadversion upon
the Ambitus, or canvace for Magistracy, from both.

The Signory with the whole right and use of that Magistracy, to be hereafter
more fully explained, is almost purely Venetian.

The second part of the Tropic is directed by Constitution of the Councils. Of
the Council of State.
is rendered conformable in their Revolutions unto that of the Senate. As first,
by the annual election of five Knights, out of the third Region of the Senate,
into the Council of State, consisting of fifteen Knights, five in every
Region. Secondly by the annual election of three Knights out of the third
Region of the Council of State, to be proposed by the Provosts and elected by
that Council, into the Council of War, consisting of nine Knights, Of the
Council of War.
three in every Region not excluded by this election from remaining members
also, of the Council of State: the four Tribunes of the people have right of
Session and Suffrage in the Council of War. Thirdly by the annual election
of four Knights out of the third Region of the Senate into the Council of
Religion, consisting of twelve Knights, Of the Council of Religion.
four in every Region: of this Council, the Censors are Presidents. Fourhly by
the annual election of four Knights out of the third Region of the Senate,
into the Council of Trade, consisting of twelve Knights, four in every Region.
And each Region in every one of these Councils thus constituted, Of the Council
of Trade. Of the Provosts.
shall weekly and interchangeably elect one Provost, whose Magistracy shall
continue for one week, nor shall he be re-elected into the same till every
Knight of that Region in the same Council have once borne the same Magistracy.
And the Provosts being* one in every Region, three in every Council, and
twelve in all, besides their other Capacities, Of the Council of the Provosts:
shall assemble and be a Council or rather an Academy apart; to certain ends
and purposes to be hereafter farther explained with those of the rest of the
Councils.

This Order is of no other use then for the frame and turn of the Councils,
and yet of no small one: for in motion consists Life, and the motion of a
Commonwealth will never be current, unless it be circular. Men that, like my
Lord Epimonus, not enduring the resemblance of this kind of Government unto
Orbs and Spheres, fall on Physicking and purging of it, do no more then is
necessary; for if it be not in Rotation both as to Persons and Things, it will
be very sick* The People of Rome, as to Persons, if they had not been taken up
by the wheel of Magistracy, had overturned the Chariot of the Senate. And
those of Lacedemon as to Things, had not been so quiet when the Senate trasht
their business, by incroaching upon the result, if by the institution of the
Ephors they had not brought it about again. So that if you allow not a
Commonwealth, her Rotation, in which consists her equality, you reduce her to
a party, and then it is necessary that you be Physicians indeed, or rather
Farriers; for you will have strong Patients, and such as must be halterd and
cast, or your selves may need bone-setters. Wherefore the Councils of this
Commonwealth, both in regard of their Elections, and, as will be shown, of
their Affairs, are uniforme with the Senate in their Revolutions, not as
Whirle-pits, to swallow, but to bite, and with the scrues of their Rotation,
hold and turn a business like the Vice of a Smith, unto the hand of the
Workman; Without Engines of which nature it is not possible for the Senate,
much less for the people, to be perfect Artificers in a Political capacity.
But I shall not hold you longer from Constitution of the Biennial Election or
Orb of Ambassadors in ordinary.
consisting of four Residences, the Revolution whereof is performed in eight
years, and preserved through the election of one Ambassador in two years by
the ballot of the Senate to repair unto the Court of France and reside there
for the term of two years; and the term of two years being expired, to
remove from thence unto the Court of Spain, there to continue for the space of
two years; and thence to remove unto the State of Venice; And after two years
residence in that City* to conclude with his residence at Constantinople, for
a like term of time, and so to return. A Knight of the Senate or a Deputy of
the Prerogative may not be Elected Ambassador in Ordinary, because a Knight or
Deputy so chosen, must either lose his Session, which would cause an
unevenness in the motion of this Commonwealth, or accumulate Magistracy,
which agrees not with the equality of the same. Nor may any man be elected
into this Capacity that is above five and thirty years of age, lest the
Commonwealth lose the Charge of his education, by being deprived at his
return of the fruit of it, or else enjoy it not long* through the defects of
nature.

This Order is the perspective of the Commonwealth whereby she foreseeth
danger; or the Traffic, whereby she receives every two years the return of
a Statesman enriched with eight years experience, from the prime Martes of
Negotiation in Europe. And so much for the Elections in the Senate that are
ordinary, such as are extraordinary follow in Constitution of Election
Extraordinary, or by the Scruteny.
or that kind of Election, whereby a Council comes to be a fifth Order of
Electors. For example, if there be occasion of an Ambassador Extraordinary, the
Provosts of the Council of State, or any two of them shall propose unto the
same, till one Competitor be chosen by that Council: and the Council having
chosen a Competitor shall bring his name into the Senate, which in the usual
way shall choose four more Competitors unto the same Magistracy; and put them
with the Competitor of the Council, unto the Ballot of the House, by which he
of the five that is chosen, is said to be elected by the Scruteny of the
Council of State. A Uice-Admiral, a Polemarch, or of the Council of War. A
Judge or Sergeant at Law by the Scruteny Field-Officer shall be elected after
the same manner, by the Scruteny of the Commissioners of the Seal. A Baron, or
considerable Officer of the Exchequer by the Scruteny of the Commissioners of
the Treasury. Men in Magistracy, or out of it are equally capable of election
by the Scruteny; But a Magistrate or Officer elected by the Scruteny unto a
Military employment; if he be neither a Knight of the Senate, nor a Deputy of
the Prerogative ought to have his Office confirmed by the Prerogative, because
the Militia in a Commonwealth* where the people are Sovereign, is not lawful
to be touched injussu Populi.

The Romans were so curious that though their Consuls were elected Centuriatis,
they might not touch the Militia, except they were confirmed Curiatis Comitiis:
for a Magistrate not receiving his power from the People, takes it from them;
and to take away their Power is to take away their Liberty. As to the Election
by the Scruteny it may be easily perceived to be Venetian, there being no such
way to take in the knowledge, which in all reason must be best in every Council
of such men as are most fit for their turns, and yet to keep them from the
bias of particular affection or interest under that pretense: For the cause why
the great Council, in Venice scarce ever elects any other then the Name that is
brought in by the Scruteny, is very probable to be; that they may. This
election is the last of those appertayning unto the Senate, the Councils being
chosen by the Orders already shown; It remains that we come unto those
whereby they are instructed; and the Orders of Instruction unto the Councils
are two; The first for the subject Matter, whereupon they are to proceed; and
the second, for the Manner of their proceeding. The subject matter of the
Councils, is distributed unto them by The Nineteenth Order, distributing unto
every Council such businesses as are properly to belong unto their Cognizance,
Instructions for the Councils as to their Subject Matter.
whereof some they shall receive and determine; And others they shall receive,
prepare and introduce into the House, as first,

The Council of State is to receive all Addresses, Intelligences and Letters of
Negotiation; For the Council of State.
to give audience to Ambassadors sent unto, and to draw up Instructions for
such as shall be sent by this Commonwealth; to receive propositions from, and
hold intelligence with the Proviniall Councils; to consider upon all Laws to be
Enacted, amended, or Repealed; and upon all Leavies of men, or money, War, or
Peace, Leagues or Associations to be made by this Commonwealth, so far forth
as is conducible unto the orderly preparation of the same to be introduced by
them into the Senate. Provided that all such affairs, For the Council of War.
as, otherwise appertayning unto the Council of State are, for the good of the
Commonwealth, to be carried with greater Secresy, be managed by the Council
of War, with power to receive and send forth Agents, Spys, Emissarys,
Intelligeneers, Frigots; And to manage affairs of that nature, if it be
necessary without communication unto the Senate, till such time as it may be
had without detriment unto the business. But they shall have no power to
engage the Commonwealth in a War, without the consent of the Senate and the
People. It appertains also unto this Council to take Charge of the Fleet as
Admiral; and of all Storehouses, Armourys, Arsenalls, and Magazines
appertayning unto this Commonwealth. They shall keep a diligent record of the
Military expeditions from time to time reported by him that was Strategus or
General, or one of the Polemarchs in that action; or at least so far forth as
the experience of such Commanders may tend unto the improvement of the Military
discipline, which they shall digest, and introduce into the Senate: and if the
Senate shall thereupon frame any Article, they shall see that it be observed in
the Musters or education of the Youth. And whereas the Council of War is the
Sentinel or Scout of this Commonwealth, if any Person or Persons shall go
about to introduce* Debate, into any Popular assembly of the same; or otherwise
to alter the present Government, or strike at the root of it, they shall
apprehend, or cause to be apprehended, seized, imprisoned; and examine,
arraigne, acquit, or condemn, and cause to be executed any such Person, or
Persons, of their proper Power and Authority, and without appeal.

The Council of Religion; For the Council of Religion.
as the Arbiter of this Commonwealth in cases of conscience more peculiarly
appertayning unto Religion, Christian Charity, and a pious Life; shall have the
care of the national Religion, and the protection of the Liberty of
Conscience, with the Cagnizance of all causes relating unto either of them. And
first as to the National Religion; They shall cause all places or preferments
of the best Revenue in either of the Universities to be conferred upon none
other then such of the most learned and pious men, as have dedicated themselves
unto the study of Theology. They shall also take an especial care that by such
Augmentations as be, or shall hereafter be appointed by the Senate, every
Benefice in this Nation be improved at the least unto the value of One hundred
pounds a year. And to the end that there be no interest at all, whereby the
Divines or Teachers of the National Religion, may be corrupted, or corrupt
Religion, they shall be capable of no other kind of Employment or Preferment in
this Commonwealth. And whereas a Directory for the administration of the
National Religion, is to be prepared by this Council, they shall in this and
other Debates of this nature proceed in manner following: A question arising in
matter of Religion shall be put and stated by the Council in writing; which
Writing the Censors shall send by their Beadles (being Proctors chosen to
attend them) each unto the University whereof he is Chancellor; and the
Uice-Chancellor of the same receiving the writing, shall call a Convocation of
all the Divines of that University being above forty years of age; And the
Universities upon a Point so proposed, shall have no manner of Intelligence or
Correspondence one with another, until their Debates be ended, and they have
made return of their Answers unto the Council of Religion by two or three of
their own Members, that may clear their sense if any doubt should arise, unto
the Council; which done, they shall return, and the Council having received
such information, shall proceed according unto their own Judgments, in the
Preparation of the whole matter for the Senate. That so the interest of the
Learned being removed, there may be a right Application of Reason into
Scripture, which is the Foundation of the National Religion.

Secondly, this Council as to the Protection of the liberty of Conscience,
shall suffer no coercive Power in the matter of Religion to be exercises in
this Nation. The Teachers of the National Religion being no other then such as
voluntarily undertake that calling; and their Auditors or Hearers, no other
then are also voluntary. Nor shall any gathered Congregation be molested or
interrupted in their way of Worship (being neither Jewish nor Idolatrous) but
vigilantly, and vigorously protected and defended in the enjoyment practice and
profession of the same. And if there be Officers, or Auditors appointed by any
such Congregation, for the introduction of Causes into the Council of Religion,
all such Causes so introduced shall be received, heard and determined by the
same, (with recourse had if need be unto the Senate.)

Thirdly, every Petition addressed unto the Senate, except that of a Tribe,
shall be received, examined, and debated by this Council; and such only as they
upon such examination and debate had shall think fit may be introduced into the
Senate.

The Council of Trade being the Vena Porta of this Nation shall hereafter
receive Instructions more at large: For the Council of Trade.
For the present, their experience attaining unto a right Understanding of
those Trades, and Mysteries that feed the veins of this Commonwealth, and a
true distinction of them from those that suck, or exhaust the same; they shall
acquaint the Senate with the Conveniences, and Inconveniences, to the end
that encouragement may be applied unto the one, and remedy to the other.

For the Academy of the Provosts.
The Academy of the Provosts being the affability of the Commonwealth, shall
assemble every day toward the evening in a fair Room, having certain
withdrawing Rooms thereunto belonging. And all sorts of Company that will
repair thither for Conversation or discourse, so it be upon the matter of
Government, News* or Intelligence, or to propose any thing unto the Councils,
shall be freely and affably received in the Outer Chamber, and heard in the way
of civil Conversation, which is to be managed without any other Awe or
Ceremony, then thereunto is usually appertaining; to the end that every man may
be free; and that what is proposed by one, may be argued or discourses upon by
the test, except the mat^et hereof secrecy; in which Case the Provosts, or some
of them shall take such as desi^^ Audience into one of the withdrawing Rooms;
And the Provosts are to give their minds, that this Academy be so governed,
adorned, and preserved, as may be most attractive unto men of parts, and good
Affections unto the Commonwealth, for the excellency of the Conversation.

Furthermore, If any man not being able or willing to come in Person, have any
advice to give which he judges may be for the good of the Commonwealth, he
may write his mind unto the Academy of the Provosts, in a Letter signed or not
signed; which Letter shall be left with the doorkeeper of the Academy: Nor
shall any Person delivering such a Letter be seized, molessed, or detained,
though it should prove to be a Libell: But the Letters so delivered shall be
presented unto the Provosts; and in case they be so many that they cannot well
be examined by the Provosts themselves, they shall distribute them as they
please to be read by the Gentlemen of the Academy, who finding any thing in
them material, will find matter of Discourse: Or if they happen upon a
business that requires privacy, return it with a note upon it unto a Provost.
And the Provosts by the Secretaries attending shall cause such notes out of
Discourses or Letters to be taken as they please, to the end that they may
propose as occasion serves what any two of them shall think fit, out of their
notes so taken unto their respective Councils: to the end that not only the Ear
of the Commonwealth be open unto all, but that men of such Education being in
her Eye, She may upon emergent Elections or occasions, be always provided of
her Choice of fit Persons.

Every Council being adorned with a State for the Signory shall be attended by
two Secretaries, For the Attendance of the Councils.
two Door-keepers, and two Messengers in ordinary, and have Power to Command
more upon emergencies, as occasion requires. And the Academy shall be attended
with two Secretaries, two Messengers, and two Door-keepers; this with the other
Councils being provided with their farther Conveniences at the charge of the
State.

But whereas it is incident unto Commonwealths upon Emergences, requiring
extraordinary speed, or secrecy, For the Dictator.
either through their natural delays, or unnatural haste to incur equal danger
while holding unto the slow pace of their Orders they come not in time to
defend themselves from some sudden blow, or breaking them for the greater
speed; they but haste unto their own Destruction: If the Senate shall at any
time make Election of nine Knights extraordinary to be added unto the Council
of War, as a Juncta for the term of three months. The Council of War, with the
Juncta so added* is for the term of the same; Dictator of Oceana having power
to levy men and money, to make War and Peace, as also to enact Laws, which
shall be good for the space of one year, (if they be not sooner repealed by the
Senate and the People) and for no longer time, except they be confirmed by the
Senate and the People. And the whole Administration of the Commonwealth for
the term of the said three Months shall be in the Dictator; Provided, that the
Dictator shall have no power to do any thing that tends not unto his proper
end and institution; but all unto the Preservation of the Commonwealth as it
is established; And, for the sudden restitution of the same unto the natural
channel, and common course of Government. And all Acts, Orders, Decrees or
Laws of the Council of War with the Juncta, being thus created, shall be
signed,

Dictator Oceanae.



This Order of Instructions unto the Councils, being (as in a matter of that
nature is requisite) very large, I have used my best skill to abbreviate, in
such manner as might show no more of it then is necessary unto the
understanding of the whole; though as to the parts, or further duties of the
Councils; I have omitted many things of singular use in a Commonwealth. But it
was spoken to at the Council by the Archon in this manner: My Lords, the
Legislators,
YOur Councils (except the Dictator only are proper and native Springs and
Sources you see, which (hanging a few sticks and strawes, that, as less
considerable, would otherwise be more troublesome, upon the banks of their
peculiar channels) derive the full stream of business into the Senate, so
pure, and so far from the possibility of being troubled, or steined (as will
undeniably appear by the Course contained in the ensuing Order) with any kind
of private interest or partiality, that it shall never be possible for any.
Assembly hearkening unto the advice or information of this or that worthy
Member, either instructed upon his Pillow, or while he was making himself
ready, or by the Petition or Ticket which he received at the Door; to have half
the Security in his Faith, or advantage by his Wisdom: Such a Senate, or
Council being through the incertainty of the Winds, like a wave of the Sea; nor
shall it otherwise mend the matter by flowing up into dry ditches, or referring
Businesses to be better examined by Committees, then to go farther about with
it to less purpose; if it do not ebb back again with the more mudd in it. For
in a Case referred to an occasional Committee, of which any Member that is
desirous may get himself named, and to which nobody will come, but either for
the sake of his Friend, or his own Interest; It fares little better as to the
Information of the Senate, then if it had been referred unto the Parties.
Wherefore the Athenians being distributed into four Tribes, out of which by
equal numbers they Annually chose Four hundred men, called the Senate of the
Bean, (because the ballot at their Election was performed by the use of Beans)
divided them by Fifties, into eight parts. And every Fifty in their turn; for
one eight part of the year was a Council apart called the Prytans: the Prytans
in their distinct Council receiving all Comers, and giving ear unto every Man
that had any thing to propose concerning the Commonwealth, had power to debate
and prepare all the Businesses that were to be introduced into the Senate. The
Achaeans had ten selected Magistrates called the Demiurgs, constituting a
Council apart called the Synarchy, which with the Strategus prepared all the
Business that was introduced into their Senate: But neither the Senate of the
Athenians, nor of the Achaeans, but would have wondered if a man should have
told them, that they had been to receive all Comers, and Discourses to the end
that they might refer them afterward unto the Prytans or the Synarchy: much
less unto an occasional Committee, exposed unto the catch that catch may, of
the parties interested. And yet Venice in this (as in most of her Orders,)
excells them all by the constitution of her Councils, that of the College, and
the other of the Dieci. The course of the College is exactly described in the
ensuing Order: And for that of the Dieci it so little differs from what it has
bestowed upon our Dictator, that I need not to make any particular description
of it. But to Dictatorian power in general, and the use of it, because it must
needs be of difficult digestion unto such as, peuking still at ancient
Prudence, show themselves to be in the Nursery of Mother-wit; it is no less
then necessary to say something. And first, in a Commonwealth that is not
wrought up, nor perfected, this Power will be of very frequent, if not
continual use; Wherefore it is said more then once upon defects of the
Government in the Book of Judges, That, in those days there was no King in
Israel; Nor has the Translator (though for no King, he should have said no
Judge) abused you so much; seeing that the Dictator, (and such was the Judge of
Israel) or the Dictatorian Power being in a single Person, so little differs
from Monarchy, which followed in that, that from the same cause there has been
no other effect in any Commonwealth, as in Rome was manifest by Scylla and
Caesar, who to make themselves Absolute or Sovereign, had no more to do, then
to prolong their Magistracy; for Dictatoris imperium quasi Numen. Livy.
Nevertheless, so it is, that without this Power which is so dangerous, and
subject to introduce Monarchy, a Commonwealth cannot be safe from falling into
the like Dissolution; For unless you have an Expedient in this Case of your
own, and bound up by your providence from recoyling; Expedients in some Cases
you must not only have, but be beholding for them unto such whom you must trust
at a pinch, when you have not leisure to stand with them for Security; which
will be a thousand times more dangerous. And there can never be a Commonwealth
otherwise then by the Order in debate wrought up unto that perfection; but this
necessity must sometimes happen in regard of her natural slownesse and
openness, and the suddainess of Assaults that may be made upon her, as also the
secrecy which in some cases may be of absolute necessity unto her affairs.
Whence Machiavil concludes it positively, That a Commonwealth unprovided of
such a Refuge, must ruin; for her course is either broken by the blow, in one
of those cases; or by her self, while it startles her out of her Orders. And
indeed a Commonwealth is like a Greyhound, which having once coasted, will
never after run fair, but grow sloathful; and when she comes to make a common
practice of taking nearer ways then her orders, she is dissolved; for the
being of a Commonwealth consists in her Orders. Wherefore at this lift, you
will be exposed unto danger, if you have not provided beforehand for the
safety of your resort in like cases: nor is it sufficient that your resort be
safe, unless it be as secret, and quick; for if it be slow or open, your former
inconveniences are not remedied. Now for our imitation in this part, there is
nothing in experience like that of the Council of Ten in Venice; the benefit
whereof would be too long to be shown in the whole Piece, and therefore I shall
take but a pattern out of Janotti: In the War (says he) which the Venetians
had with Florence in Casentine, the Florentines finding a necessity in their
affairs far from any other inclination in themselves to ask their Peace, sent
Ambassadors about it unto Venice, where they were no sooner heard, then the
bargain was struck up by the Council of Ten; and every body admiring (seeing
this Commonwealth stood upon the higher ground) what should be the reason of
such haste; the Council upon the return of the Ambassadors imparted Letters
unto the Senate, whereby it appeared, that the Turk had newly launched a
formidable Fleet against their State; which had it been known to the
Florentines, it was well enough known they would have made no Peace: Wherefore
the service of the Ten was highly applauded by the Senate, and celebrated by
the Venetians. Whereby may appear, not only in part what use there is of
Dictatorian Power in that Government, but that it is assumed at the discretion
of that Council; Whereas in this of Oceana it is no otherwise entrusted then
when the Senate, in the Election of nine Knights extraordinary, gives at once
the Commission, and takes security in a balance added unto the Council of
War, though securer before by the Tribunes of the People, then that of Venice;
which yet never incurred Jealousy: For if the younger Nobility have been often
girding at it, that happened not so much through the apprehension of danger in
it unto the Commonwealth, as through the Awe of it upon themselves: Wherefore
the Graver have doubtlesly shown their Prudence in the Law: Whereby the
Magistracy of these Counselors being to last until their Successors be
created, the Council is established.



The Instructions of the Councils for their Subject matter being shown, it
remains that I show the Instructions for the manner of their proceeding, as
they follow in The Twentieth Order, Containing the Method of Debate, to be
observed by the Magistrates, and the Councils, successively, Instructions for
the Councils as to their Manner of Proceeding.
in order to a Decree of the Senate.

The Magistrates of the Signory as Counselors of this Commonwealth, shall
take into their Consideration all matter of State, or of Government; and having
right to propose in any Council May any one or more of them propose what
Business he or they please in that Council whereunto it most properly
belongs: And that the Councils may be held unto their duty, the said
Magistrates are super-intendents, and inspectors of the same, with right to
propose unto the Senate.

The Censors have equal power with these Magistrates, but in relation unto the
Council of Religion only.

Any two of the three Provosts in every Council may propose to and are the more
peculiar Proposers of, the same Council; to the end that there be not only an
inspection and super-intendency of Business in general, but that every work be
also committed unto a peculiar hand.

Any one or more of the Magistrates, or any two of the Provosts respectively
having proposed; the Council shall debate the business so proposed, to which
they of the third Region that are willing shall speak first in their order;
they of the second, next; and they of the third, last; and the opinions of
those that proposed or spoke as they shall be thought the most considerable by
the Council, shall be taken by the Secretary of the same in writing, and each
of them signed with the name of the Author.

The opinions being thus prepared, any Magistrate of the Signory, Censor, or
any two of the Provosts of that Council, upon this occasion may assemble the
Senate.

The Senate being assembled, the Opinions (for example, if they be four) shall
be read in their Order, that is, according unto the order or dignity of the
Magistrates or Counselors by which they were signed. And being read, if any of
the Council introducing them will speak, they as best acquainted with the
Business, shall have precedence, and after them the Senators shall speak
according unto their Regions, beginning by the third first, and so continuing
till every man that will, have spoken: and when the opinions have been
sufficiently debated, they shall be put altogether unto the Ballot after this
manner.

Four Secretaries carrying each of them one of the opinions in one hand, with a
white box in the other, and each following another, (according unto the order
of the opinions) shall present his Box, naming the Author of his opinion unto
every Senator; and one Secretary or Ballotine with a green Box shall follow the
four white ones; and one Secretary of Ballotine with a red Box shall follow the
green one: and every Senator shall put one Ball into some one of these six
boxes. The Suffrage being gathered and opened before the Signory: If the red
box or Non-sincer had above half the Suffrages, the opinions shall be all cast
out, for the Major part of the House is not clear in the business. If no one
of the four opinions had above half the Suffrages in the Affirmative, that
which had fewest shall be cast out, and the other three shall be Ballotted
again. If no one of the three had above half, that which had fewest shall be
cast out, and the other two shall Ballotted again. If neither of the two had
above half, that which had fewest shall be cast out, and the remaining opinion
shall be Ballotted again. And if the remaining opinion have not above half, it
shall also be cast out. But the first of the opinions that arrives at most
above half in the Affirmative is the Decree of the Senate. The opinions being
all of them cast out by the Non-cincer, may be reviewed (if occasion permit) by
the Council, and brought in again. If they be cast out by the Negative, the
Case being of Advice only, the House approves not, and there is an end of it:
the Case being necessary, and admitting delay, the Council is to think again
upon the Business, and to bring in new opinions, but the Case being necessary,
and not admitting delay; the Senate forthwith electing the Juncta shall create
the Dictator. (Et videat Dictator ne quid Resp. detrimenti capiat.)

This in case the Debate conclude not in a Decree: but if a Decree be past, it
is either in matter of State, or Government according to Law enacted already,
and then it is good without going any farther: or it is in matter of Law to be
enacted, repealed, or amended, and then the Decree of the Senate, especially if
it be for a War, or for a Levy of Men or Money, is invalid, without the result
of the Commonwealth, which is in the Prerogative Tribe, or Representative of
the People.

The Senate having prepared a Decree to be proposed unto the People, shall
appoint their Proposers: and no other may propose for the Senate unto the
People but the Magistrates of the House; that is to say, the three
Commissioners of the Seal, or any two of them; the three of the Treasury, or
any two of them; or the two Censors.

The Senate having appointed their Proposers, shall require of the Tribunes a
muster of the People at a set time and place: and the Tribunes, or any two of
them having mustered the People accordingly; the Proposers shall propose the
sense or Decree of the Senate by Clauses unto the People. And that which is
proposed by the Authority of the Senate, and resolved by the Command of the
People, is the Law of Oceana.



To this Order, implicitly containing the sum very near of the whole civil
part of the Commonwealth: My Lord Archon spoke thus in Council: My Dear Lords,
THere is a saying, That a man must cut his Coat according to his Cloth. When I
consider what God has allowed or furnished unto our present Work, I am amazed.
You would have a Popular Government, He has weighed it unto you in the present
balance as I may say to a drag me; you have no more to do, but to fix it. For
the Superstructures of such a Government, they require a good Aristocracy: You
have, or have had a Nobility or a Gentry the best studied, and the best
Writers, at least next that of Italy, in the whole World; nor have they been
inferior when so exercised, in the leading of Armies. But the people are the
main body of a Commonwealth; show me (a Gadibus usque Auroram et Gangem) from
the treasuries of Snow (as it is in Job) unto the burning Zone, a people whose
shoulders so universally and so exactly fit the Corselet. Nevertheless it were
convenient, to be well provided with Auxiliaries: There is Marpesia through her
fruitfulness inexhaustible, of men, and men through her barrenness not only
inured unto hardship, but bucked in your Arms. It may be said that Venice, save
only that she takes not in the People, is the most incomparable Situation of a
Commonwealth. You are Venice taking in your People and your Auxiliaries too.
My Lords, the children of Israel were makers of brick, before they were
builders of a Commonwealth: But our brick is made, our mortar tempered, the
Cedars of Lebanon are hewed and squared unto our hands. Has this been the work
of man? or is it in man to withstand this work? Shall he that contendeth with
the Almighty instruct him? He that reproves God, let him answer it. For our
parts, every thing is so laid, that when we come to have use of it, it is the
next at hand; and unless we can conceive that God and Nature do any thing in
vain, there is no more for us to do, but to dispatch. The Piece which we have
reached to us in the foregoing Orders, is the Aristocracy. Athens, as has been
shown, was plainly lost through the want of a good Aristocracy: but the
sufficiency of an Aristocracy goes demonstrably upon the hand of the Nobility
or Gentry: for that the Politics can be mastered without study, or that the
people can have leisure to study, is a vain imagination; and what kind of
Aristocracy, Divines and Lawyers would make, let their incurable run upon their
own narrow bias; and their perpetual invectives against Machiavill (though in
some places justly reproveable, yet the only Politician, and incomparable
Patron of the people) serve for instruction. I will stand no more unto the
Judgment of Lawyers and Divines in this work, then unto that of so many other
Tradesmen; but if the Model chance to wander abroad, I recommend it unto the
Roman Speculativi; (Garbatissimi Signori) the most Complete Gentleman of This
Age; for their censure; or, with my Lord Epimonus's his leave, send three or
four hundred Copies unto the Agent at Venice, to be presented unto the
Magistrates there; and when they have considered them, to be proposed unto the
debate of the Senate, the most competent Judges under Heaven; who though they
have great Affairs, will not refuse to return you the Oracle of their Ballot.
The Counselors of Princes I will not trust, they are but Journy-men. The
wisdom of these later times in Princes Affairs (says Verulamius) is rather
fine deliveries and shiftings off dangers when they be near, then solid and
grounded courses to keep them aloof. Their Counselors do not derive their
proceedings from any sound root of Government, that may contain the
demonstration, and assure the success of them, but are expedient-mongers,
givers of themselves to help a lame dog over a style; else how comes it to
pass, that the same of Cardinal Richelieu has been like thunder, whereof we
hear the noise, but can make no demonstration of the reason? But to return, if
neither the People, nor Divines and Lawyers can be the Aristocracy of a Nation,
there remains only the Nobility, in which style, to avoid farther repetition, I
shall understand the Gentry also; as the French do by the word Noblisse.



Now to treat of the Nobility, in such sort as may be less obnoxious unto
mistake; it will be convenient, and responsible unto the present occasion, that
I divide my discourse into four Parts.

The first treating of Nobility, and the kinds of it. The second, of their
capacity of the Senate. The third, of the diverse kinds of Senates. The fourth,
of the Senate, according unto the foregoing Orders.
Nobility may be defined diverse ways, for it is either ancient riches, or
ancient virtue, or title conferred by a Prince or a Commonwealth.

Nobility of the first kind may be subdivided into two other, such as hold an
overbalance in Dominion or Propriety unto the whole People: or such as hold
not an overbalance. In the former Case a Nobility (such was the Gothicks, of
which sufficient has been spoken) is incompatible with popular Government; for
unto popular Government it is essential, that power should be in the people,
but the overballance of a Nobility in Dominion, draws the power unto
themselves; wherefore in this sense it is that Machiavill is to be understood,
where he says, ( Questi tali sono pernitiosi in ogni Republica, and in ogni
Provincia); that these are pernicious in a Commonwealth; and of France, Spain,
and Italy, that they are Nations ( lequali tutte inscieme sono la corruttela
del mondo) which for this cause are the corruption of the world: for otherwise
Nobility may according unto his definition, which is, That they are such as
live upon their own revenues in plenty, without engagement either unto the
tilling of their Lands, or other work for their livelihood; hold an
underballance unto the people: In which case they are not only safe, but
necessary unto the natural mixture of a well-ordered Commonwealth. For how
else can you have a Commonwealth that is not altogether Mechanic? or what
comparison is there of such Commonwealths, as are or come nearest to
Mechanic; for example, Athens, Switz, Holland, unto Lacedemon, Rome, and
Venice, plumed with their Aristocracies. Your mechanics, till they have first
feathered their nests, like the Fowls of the Air, whose whole employment is to
seek their food, are so busied in their private concernments, that they have
neither leisure to study the public, nor are safely to be trusted with it, (
quia egestas haud facile habetur sine damno) because a man is not faithfully
imbarqued in this kind of ship, if he have no share in the freight. But if his
share be such as gives him leisure by his private advantage, to reflect upon
that of the Public: what other name is there for this sort of men (being a
leur ayte) but (as Machiavill you see calls them) Nobility? especially when
their families come to be such as are noted, for their services done unto the
Commonwealth, and so take into their ancient riches ancient virtue, which is
the second definition of Nobility, but such an one as is scarce possible in
nature without the former. For as the Baggage (says Verulamius) is to an Army;
so are riches to Virtue; they cannot be spared nor left behind, though they be
impedimenta, such as not only hinder the march, but sometimes through the care
of them lose or disturb the Victory. Of this later sort is the Nobility of
Oceana; the best of all other, because they having no stamp whence to derive
their price, can have it no otherwise then by their intrinsic value. The third
definition of Nobility, is Title, Honor, or Distinction from the people,
conferred or allowed by the Prince, or the Commonwealth; and this may be in
two ways, either without any stamp or privilege as in Oceana, or with such
privileges as are inconsiderable, as in Athens after the battle of Plateae,
whence the Nobility had no right, as such, but unto religious offices, or
inspection of the public games, whereunto they were also to be elected by the
people: or with privileges, and those considerable ones* as the Nobility in
Athens before the battle of Plateae, and the Patricians in Rome, each of which
had right, or claimed it, unto the Senate and all the Magistracies; wherein for
some time they only by their stamp were current.

But to begin higher, and speak more at large of Nobility in their several
capacities of the Senate; ( a Jove Principium) The Phylarchs or Princes of the
Tribes of Israel, were the most renowned; or, as the Latin, the most noble of
the Congregation, ( Numb. 1.16.) whereof by hereditary right they had the
leading, and judging. The Patriarchs or Princes of Families according as they
declared their pedigrees, ( Numb. 1.18.) had the like right as to their
Families; but neither in these nor the former was there any hereditary right
unto the Sanhedrim; though there be little question but the wise men, and
understanding and known among their Tribes which the people took or elected
into those or other Magistracies, and Moses made Rulers over them, ( Deuteronomy.
1.13.) must have been of these, seeing these could not choose but be the most
known among the Tribes, and were likeliest by the advantages of education to be
the most wise and understanding.

Solon having found the Athenians neither Locally nor Genealogically, but by
their different ways of life, divided into four Tribes, that is, into the
Soldiery, the Tradesmen, the Husbandmen, and the Goat-herds, instituted a new
distribution of them, according unto the Cense or valuation of their Estates
into four Classes; the first, second, and third consisting of such as were
Proprietors in Land, distinguished by the rate of their free-holds, with that
stamp upon them, which making them capable of honor unto their riches, that is
to say, of the Senate and all the Magistracies, excluded the fourth, being the
body of the people, and far greater in number then the former three, from other
right as to those capacities, then the election of these, who by this means
became an hereditary Aristocracy or Senatorian Order of Nobility. This was that
course which came afterward to be the destruction of Rome, and had now ruined
Athens; the Nobility, according to the inevitable nature of such an one, having
laid the plot how to devert the people of the result, and so to draw the whole
power of the Commonwealth unto themselves; which in all likelihood they had
done: if the people, coming by mere chance to be victorious in the battle of
Plateae, and famous for defending Greece against the Persian, had not returned
with such courage, as irresistibly brake the Classes, unto which of old they
had born a white tooth, brought the Nobility unto equal terms, and the Senate
with the Magistracies to be common unto both; the Magistracies by Suffrage, and
the Senate which was the mischief of it, as I shall show anon in that
constitution, by lot only.

The Lacedaemonians were in the manner, and for the same cause with the
Venetians at this day, no other than Nobility* even according to the definition
given of Nobility by Machiavill; for they neither exercised any Trade, nor
labored their Lands or Lots, which was done by their Helots; wherefore some
Nobility may be far from pernicious in a Commonwealth, by Machiavill's own
testimony, who is an admirer of this; though the servants thereof were more
then the Citizens. To these servants, I hold the answer of Lycurgus, when he
bad him who asked, why he did not admit the people unto the Government of his
Commonwealth, go home and admit his servants unto the government of his
Family, to relate; for neither were the Lacedaemonians servants, nor farther
capable of the Government, unless, whereas the Congregation had the result, he
should have given them the debate also; every one of these that attained unto
sixty years of age, and the major vote of the Congregation, being equally
capable of the Senate.

The Nobility of Rome and their capacity of the Senate, I have already
described by that of Athens, before the battle of Plateae, save only that the
Athenian was never eligible into the Senate without the suffrage of the people,
till the introduction of the lot, but the Roman Nobility ever; for the
patriPatricians were elected into the Senate by the Kings, by the Consuls, or
the Censors; or if a plebeian happened to be conscribed, he and is posterity
became patrician: nor, though the people had many disputes with the Nobility,
did this ever come in controversy, which if there had been nothing else might
in my judgment have been enough to overturne that Commonwealth.

The Venetian Nobility, but that they are richer, and not military, resemble at
all other points the Lacedemonian, as I have already shown; these, Machiavill
excepts from his rule, by saying, that their Estates are rather personal then
real, or of any great revenue in Land: which comes unto our account, and shows,
that a Nobility or party of the Nobility not overballancing in Dominion, is not
dangerous, but of necessary use in every Commonwealth, provided that it be
rightly ordered; for if it be so ordered as was that of Rome, though they do
not overballance in the beginning, as they did not there, it will not be long
ere they do, as is clear both in reason, and that experience toward the later
end. That the Nobility be capable of the Senate, is there only not dangerous,
where there be no other Citizens; as in this Government, and that of Lacedemon.

The Nobility of Holland and Switz though but few, have privileges not only
distinct from the people, but so great, that in some Soveraignties they have a
Negative voice; an example which I am far from commending, being such as if
those Governments were not Cantonized, divided and subdivided into many petty
Soveraignties that balance one another, and in which the Nobility except they
had a Prince at the head of them, can never join to make work, would be the
most dangerous that ever was; but the Gothic, of which it savours. For in
ancient Commonwealths you shall never find a Nobility to have had a negative
but by the pole, which, the people being far more in number, came to nothing;
whereas these have it, be they never so few, by their stamp or order.

Ours of Oceana, have nothing else but their education and their leisure for
the public, furnished by their ease and competent riches; and their intrinsic
value, which according as it comes to hold weight in the Judgment or Suffrage
of the People, is their only way unto honor and preferment: wherefore I would
have your Lordships to look upon your Children as such, who if they come to
shake off some part of their baggage, shall make the more quick and glorious
march: for it was nothing else but the baggage sordidly plundered by the
Nobility of Rome, that lost the victory of the whole World in the midst of her
Triumph.

Having followed the Nobility thus close, they bring us, according unto their
natural course and diverse kinds, unto the diverse Constitutions of the Senate.

That of Israel (as was showed by my right noble Lord Phosphorus de Auge in the
opening of the Commonwealth) consisted of seventy Elders, elected at the first
by the people; but whereas they were for life, they ever after (though without
any Divine precept for it) substituted their Successors by Ordination, which
ceremony was most usually performed by imposition of hands, and by this means a
Commonwealth of as popular institution as can be found, became, as it is
accounted by Josephus, Aristocratical. From this ordination, deriveth that
which was introduced by the Apostles into the Christian Church; for which cause
I think it is, that the Presbyterians would have the Government of the Church
to be Aristocraticall; albeit the Apostles, to the end, as I conceive, that
they might give no occasion unto such a mistake, but show, that they intended
the Government of the Church to be popular, Ordained Elders (as has been
shown) by the holding up of hands (or free Suffrage of the people) in every
Congregation, or Ecclesia; for that is the word in the Original, being borrowed
from the civil Congregations of the people in Athens and Lacedemon, which were
so called; and the word for holding up of hands in the Text, is also the very
same, which signified the Suffrage of the people in Athens, (...); and the
Suffrage of the Athenians was given per (...), says Emmius.

The Council of the Bean (as was shown by my Lord Navarchus de Paralo, in his
full discourse) being the proposing Senate of Athens (for that of the
Areopagites was a Judicatory) consisted of four, some say five hundred
Senators, elected annually, all at once, and by a mere lot without suffrage;
wherefore albeit the Senate, to correct the temerity of the lot, had power to
cast out-such as they should judge unworthy of that honor; this related to
manners only, and was not sufficient to repair the Commonwealth, which by such
means became impotent; and for as much as her Senate consisted not of the
natural Aristocracy, which in a Commonwealth is the only spur and rein of the
people, was cast headlong by the rashness of her Demagogs or Grandees into
ruin; while her Senate, like the Roman Tribunes, (qui fere semper regebantur a
multitudine magis quam regebant) proposed not unto the Result only, Livy.
but unto the Debate also of the people, who were therefore called unto the
Pulpits, where some vomited, and others drunk poison.

The Senate of Lacedemon (most truly discovered by my Lord Laco de Scytale)
consisted but of 30 for life, whereof the two Kings having but single votes,
were hereditary, the rest elective by the free Suffrage of the people, but out
of such as were sixty years of age; these had the whole debate of the
Commonwealth in themselves, and proposed unto the result only of the people:
and now the riddle which I have heretofore found troublesome to unfold, is out;
that is to say, why Athens and Lacedemon consisting each of the Senate and the
People, the one should be held a Democracy, and the other an Aristocracy, or
laudable Oligarchy, as it is termed by Isocrates; (for that word is not, where
ever you meet it, to be branded, seeing it is used also by Aristotle, Plutarch,
and others, sometimes in a good sense)* The main difference was, that the
people in this had the result only, and in that the debate and result too. But
for my part, where the people have the election of the Senate, not bound unto a
distinct order, and the result which is the Sovereign power, I hold them to
have that share in the Government, (the Senate being not for life) whereof,
with the safety of the Commonwealth, they are capable in nature, and such a
Government for that cause to be Democracy; though I do not deny, but in
Lacedemon the paucity of the Senators considered, it might be called Oligarchy,
in comparison of Athens; or, ^f we look upon their continuance for life, though
they had been more, Aristocracy.

The Senate of Rome (whose fame has been heard to thunder in the Eloquence of
my Lord Stolo de Enyo) consisting of 300, was in regard of the number, less
Oligarchicall then that of Lacedemon, but more in regard of the Patrician, who
having an hereditary capacity of the same were not elected unto that honor by
the people: but being Conscribed by the Censors, enjoyed it for life: wherefore
these if they had had their wills, would have resolved as well as debated;
which set the people at such variance with them, as dissolved the
Commonwealth: whereas if the people had enjoyed the result, as well that about
the Agrarian, as all other strife, must of necessity have ceased.

The Senates of Switzs and Holland (as I have learnt of my Lords Alpester, and
Glaucus) being bound up, like the sheaf of Arrows which this gives, by
leagues, lie like those in their quivers; But Arrows when they come to be
drawn, fly some this way, and some that: and I am contented that these concern
us not.

That of Venice (by the faithful testimony of my most excellent Lord Linceus de
Stella) has obliged a world, sufficiently punished by its own blindness or
ingratitude, to repent and be wiser: for whereas a Commonwealth in which there
is no Senate, or where the Senate is corrupt, cannot stand: the Great Council
of Venice like the Statua of Nilus, leans upon an Urn or Water-pot, which
pours forth the Senate in so pure and perpetual a stream, as being unable to
instagnate, is for ever incapable of corruption. The fuller description of this
Senate is contained in that of Oceana; and that of Oceana in the foregoing
Orders. Unto every one of which, because something has been already said, I
shall not speak in particular. But in general, your Senate (and the other
Assembly, or the Prerogative, as I shall show in due place) are perpetual, not
as Lakes or Puddles, but as the Rivers of Eden; and are beds made, as you have
seen, to receive the whole people, by a due and faithful Vicissitude into their
current. They are not, as in the later way, alternate. Alternate life in
Government, is the alternate death of it.

Ut fratrem Pollux alterna morte redemit. This was the Gothic Work, whereby
the former Government was not only a ship, but a gust too; could never open her
sails, but in danger to overset her self: neither make any Voyage, nor lie
safe in her own Harbor. The Wars of later Ages (says Verulamius) seem to be
made in the dark, in respect of the glory and honor, which reflected upon men
from the Wars in ancient times. Their shipping of this sort was for Voyages,
ours dare not launch: nor lie they safe at home. Your Gothic Politicians seem
unto me rather to have invented some new ammunition* or Gunpowder, in their
King and Parliament ( duo fulmina belli) then Government. For what is become of
the Princes (a kind of people) in Germany? blown up. Where are the Estates, or
the Power of the people in France? blown up. Where is that of the people in
Aragon, and the rest of the Spanish Kingdoms? blown up. On the other side,
where is the King of Spain's power in Holland? blown up. Where is that of the
Austrian Princes in Switz? blown up. This perpetual peevishness and jealousy,
under the alternate Empire of the Prince and of the People, is obnoxious unto
every Spark. Nor shall any man show a reason that will be holding in prudence,
why the people of Oceana have blown up their King, but that their Kings did not
first blow up them: The rest is discourse for Ladies. Wherefore your
Parliaments are not henceforth to come out of the bag of Aeolus, but by the
Gallaxy's, to be the perpetual food of the fire of Vesta.

Your Gallaxy's which divide the House into so many Regions are three, one of
which constituting the third region is annually chosen, but for the term of
three years; which causes the house having blooms, fruit half ripe, and others
droping off in full maturity, to resemble an Orange-Tree: such as is at the
same time an education or spring, and an harvest too; for the people have made
a very ill choice in the man, who is not easily capable of the perfect
knowledge in one year of the Senatorian Orders; which knowledge allowing him
for the first to have been a Novice, brings him the second year unto practice,
and time enough; for at this rate you must always have two hundred knowing men
in the Government: and thus the vicissitude of your Senators is not
perceiveable in the steadiness and perpetuity of your Senate, which, like that
of Venice, being always changing, is for ever the same: and though other
Politicians have not so well imitated their pattern, there is nothing more
obvious in nature, seeing a man who wears the same flesh but a short time, is
nevertheless the same man, and of the same Genius; and whence is this but from
the constancy of nature in holding a man unto her Orders? Wherefore hold also
unto your Orders; but this is a mean request, your Orders will be worth little,
if they do not hold you unto them: wherefore imbarque. They are like a ship, if
you be once aboard, you do not carry them, but they you; and see how Venice
stands unto her tacklin, you will no more forsake them, then you will leap into
the Sea.

But they are very many, and difficult. O my Lords, what Seaman casts away his
Card because it has four and twenty points of Compass? and yet those are
very near as many, and as difficult as the Orders in the whole Circumference of
your Commonwealth. Consider; how have we been tossed with every wind of
Doctrine, lost by the glib tongues of your Demagogs and Grandees in our own
Havens? A Company of Fiddlers that have disturbed your rest for your groat; two
to one, three thousand pounds a year to another, has been nothing: and for
what? is there one of them that yet knows what a Commonwealth is? And are you
yet afraid of such a Government in which these shall not dare to scrape, for
fear of the Statute? Themistocles could not fiddle, but could make of a small
City a great Commonwealth: these have fiddled, and for your money, till they
have brought a great Commonwealth to a small City.

It grieves me, while I consider how, and from what causes, imaginary
difficulties will be aggravated, that the foregoing Orders are not capable of
any greater clearness in discourse or writing: But if a man should make a
book, describing every trick or passage, it would fare no otherwise with a game
at Cards; and this is no more, if a man play upon the square. There is a great
difference (says Verulamius) between a cunning man and a wise man, (between a
Demagog and a Legislator) not only in point of honesty, but in point of
ability: As there be that can pack the Cards, and yet cannot play well; so
there be some that are good in canvasses and factions, that are otherwise weak
men. Allow me but these Orders, and let them come with their Cards in their
sleeves, or pack if they can. Again, (says he) it is one thing to understand
persons, and another to understand matters; for many are perfect in men's
humors, that are not greatly capable of the real part of business: which is
the constitution of one that has studied men, more then books: but there is
nothing more hurtful in a State, than that cunning men pass for wise. His
words are an Oracle. As Dionysius, when he could no longer exercise his tyranny
among men, turned Schoolmaster, that he might exercise it among boys: Allow
me but these Orders, and your Grandees so well skilled in the baits and
palates of men, shall turn Rat-catchers.

And whereas Councils (as is discreetly observed by the same Author in his
time) are at this day, in most places but familiar meetings, (somewhat like the
Academy of Provosts) where matters are rather talked on then debated; and run
too swift to order an Act of Council: Give me my Orders, and see if I have not
trashed your Demagogs.

It is not so much my desire to return upon haunts, as theirs that will not be
satisfied; wherefore if notwithstanding what was said of dividing and choosing
in our Preliminary discourses, men will yet be returning unto the question, Why
the Senate must be a Council apart; though even in Athens, where it was of no
other constitution then the Popular Assembly, the distinction of it, from the
other, was never held less then necessary: this may be added unto the former
reasons, that if the Aristocracy be not for the Debate, it is for nothing; but
if it be for the Debate, it must have convenience for it: and what convenience
is there for debate in a crowd, where there is nothing but jostling, treading
upon one another, and stirring of blood, than which in this case there is
nothing more dangerous? Truly, it was not ill said of my Lord Epimonus, That
Venice plays her Game as it were at billiards or nine-holes; and so may your
Lordships, unless your ribs be so strong, that you think better of football;
for such sport is debate in a Popular Assembly, as, notwithstanding the
distinction of the Senate, was the destruction of Athens.

This Speech concluded the Debate which happened at the Institution of the
Senate: the next Assembly is that of the People, or Prerogative Tribe.

The Face, or nime of the Prerogative Tribe for the Arms, The Face of the
Prerogative Tribe.
the Horses, and the Discipline, but more especially for the select Men, is
that of a very noble Regiment, or rather of two; the One of Horse, divided into
three Troops, (besides that of the Provinces, which will be shown hereafter)
with their Captains, Cornets, and two Tribunes of the Horse at the head of
them. The other of Foot in three Companies (besides that of the Provinces) with
their Captains, Ensigns, and two Tribunes of the Foot at the head of them. The
first Troop is called the Phoenix; the second the Pelican; and the third the
Swallow. The first Company the Cypress; the second, the Myrtle; and the third
the Spray. Of these again, (not without a near resemblance of the Roman
Division of a Tribe) the Phoenix and the Cypress constitute the first Classis;
the Pelican and the Myrtle, the second; and the Swallow with the Spray the
third, renewed every Spring by The change, or Election of the Triennial
Officers of the Prerogative.
the Deputies of the annual Gallaxy arriving at the Pavilion in the Halo, and
electing one Captain and one Cornet of the Swallow (Trienniall Officers) by and
out of the Cavalry at the Horse Urn, according unto the Rules contained in the
Ballot of the Hundred: And one Captain with one Ensign of the Spray (Trienniall
Officers) by and out of the Infantry at the Foot Urn, after the same way of
ballotting: Constitute and become the third Classis of the Prerogative Tribe.

Seven Deputies are annually returned by every Tribe, whereof three are Horse,
and four are Foot; and there be fifty Tribes, so the Swallow must consist of
150 Horse, the Spray of 200 Foot; and the rest of the Classes being two, each
of them in number equal^; the whole Prerogative (besides the Provinces, that
is, the Knights and Deputies of Marpesia and Panopea,) must consist of 1050
Deputies, It is right. And these Troops and Companies may as well be called
Centuries as those of the Romans; for the Romans related not, in so naming
theirs, unto the number: And whereas they were distributed according unto the
valuation of their Estates, so are these; which by virtue of the last Order,
are now accommodated with their Triennial Officers; but there be others
appertaining unto this Tribe, whose Election being of far greater Importance is
Annual, as follows in The Change, or Election of the Annual Magistrates of
the Prerogative.
The Twenty second Order; Whereby the first Classis having Elected their
Trienniall Officers, and made Oath unto the Old Tribunes, That they will
neither introduce, cause nor to their power suffer debate to be introduced into
any popular Assembly of this Government, but to their utmost be ayding and
assisting to seize and deliver any Person or Persons in that way offending and
striking at the Root of this Commonwealth unto the Council of War; are to
proceed with the other two Classes of the Prerogative Tribe to Election of the
New Tribunes, being four Annual Magistrates, whereof two are to be elected out
of the Cavalry at the Horse-Urn, and two out of the Infantry at the Foot-Urn,
according unto the Common ballot of the Tribes: And they may be promiscuously
Chosen out of any Classis, provided that the same Person shall not be capable
of beating the Tribunitian Honor twice in the term of one Gallaxy. The
Tribunes thus chosen shall receive the Tribe (in reference to the power of
Mustering and Disciplining the same) as Commanders in Chief: and for the rest
as Magistrates, whose proper function is prescribed by the next Order. The
Tribunes may give leave unto any number of the Prerogative not exceeding one
hundred at a time, to be absent, so they be not Magistrates, nor Officers, and
return within three months; If a Magistrate or Officer, have necessary
occasion, he may also be absent for the space of one month; provided, that
there be not above three Cornets or Ensigns, two Captains or one Tribune so
absent at one time.

To this the Archon spoke at the Institution, after this manner* My Lords,
It is affirmed by Cicero in his Oration for Flaccus, That the Commonwealths
of Greece were all shaken or ruined* by the intemperance of their Comitia, or
Assemblies of the People. The truth is, if good heed in this point be not
taken, a Commonwealth will have bad Legs. But all the World knows he should
have excepted Lacedemon, where the People (as has been shown by the Oracle)
had no power at all of Debate, nor (till after Lysander, whose Avarice opened a
Gulf* that was not long ere it swallowed up his Country) came it ever to be
exercised by them: Whence that Commonwealth stood longest and firmest of any
other, but this, in our days, of Venice; which having underlaid her Self with
the like Institution, owes a great, if not the greatest part of her steadiness
unto the same principle; the great Council, which is with her the People, by
the Authority of my Lord Epimonus, never speaking a word. Nor shall any
Commonwealth where the People in their political capacity is talkative, ever
see half the days of one of these: But being carried away by Vainglorious Men
(that, as Overbury says, Piss more then they drink) Swim down the sink; as
did Athens, the most prating of these Dames, when that same ranting fellow
Alcibiades fell on Demagoging for the Sicilian War. But whereas Debate by the
Authority and experience of Lacedemon and Venice, is not to be committed unto
the People in a well ordered Government; It may be said, That the Order
specified is but a slight bar in a matter of like danger; For so much as an
Oath, if there be no recourse upon the breach of it, is a weak tie for such
hands as have the Sword in them. Wherefore what should hinder the People of
Oceana if they happen not to regard an Oath, from assuming Debate, and making
themselves as much an Anarchy as those of Athens? To which I answer, Take the
Common sort in a private Capacity, and except they be injured, you shall find
them to have (Verecundiam Patrum) a bashfulnesse in the presence of the better
sort, or wiser Men; acknowledging their abilities by attention; and accounting
it no mean Honor to receive respect from them. But if they be injured by them,
they hate them, and the more for being wise, or great, because that makes it
the greater injury. Nor refrain they in this Case from any kind of intemperance
of speech, if of Action. It is no otherwise with a People in their political
Capacity; You shall never find that they have assumed Debate for it self, but
for something else: Wherefore in Lacedemon where there was, and in Venice where
there is, nothing else for which they should assume it, they have never shown,
so much as an inclination to it. Nor was there any appearance of such a desire
in the People of Rome, (who from the time of Romulus had been very well
contented with the Power of Result either Comitiis Curiatis, as it was settled
upon them by him; or Centuriatis, as it was altered in their regard for the
worse by Servius Tullius) till news was brought some fifteen years after the
exile of Tarquine their late King (during which time, the Senate had governed
passing well) that he was dead at the Court of Aristodemus the Tyrant of Cumae.
(Eo nuncio erecti patres, erecta Plebs. Sed Patribus nimis luxuriosa ea fuit
laetitia: Plebi, Live. l. 2.
cui ad eam diem summa open inservitum erat, injuriae a Primoribus fieri
coepere) Whereupon the Patricians, or Nobility began to let out the hitherto
dissembled Venom, which is inherent in the root of Oligarchy, and fell
immediately upon injuring the People beyond all moderation: For whereas the
People had served both gallantly and contentedly in Arms, upon their own
Charges, and though joint Purchasers by their Swords of the conquered Lands,
had not participated in the same, to above two Acres a man, the rest being
secretly usurped by the Patricians: they through the meannesse of their
support, and the greatness of their expense, being generally indebted, no
sooner returned home with Victory to lay down their Arms, then they were
snatched up by their Creditors the Nobility, to cram Goales: Whereupon (but with
the greatest modesty that was ever known in the like case) they first fell upon
debate ( Se foris pro liberate and imperio dimicantes, domi a civibus captos
and oppressos esse: tutioremque in bello quam in pace, inter hosts quam inter
cives, libertatem plebis esse): It is true, that when they could not get the
Senate (through fear, as was pretended by the Patricians) to assemble and take
their grievances into Consideration, they grew so much warmer, that it was glad
to meet: Where Ap. Claudius, a fierce Spirit, was of opinion, That recourse
should be had unto Consular power, whereby some of the brands of Sedition being
taken off, the flame might be extinguished: Servilius being of another temper,
thought it better and safer to try if the People might be bowed, than broken.
But this debate was interrupted by tumultuous news of the near approach of the
Volsci, a case in which the Senate had no recourse but to the People, who
contrary unto their former custom upon like occasions would not stir afoot, but
fell on laughing, and saying, ( Patres militarent patres arma caperent, ut
penes eosdem pericula belli, penes quos praemia, essent) Let them fight that
have something to fight for. The Senate that had purses, and could not sing so
well before the Thief, being in great perplexity, found no possible way out of
it, but to beseech Servilius, one of a Genius well known to be Popular, That he
would accept of the Consulship, and make some such use of it as might be
helpful to the Patrician interest. Servilius accepting of the offer, and making
use of his Interest with the people, persuaded them to hope well of the good
intention of the Fathers, whom it would little beseem to be forced unto those
things which would lose their Grace, and that in view of the enemy, if they
came not freely; and withal published an Edict, That no man should withold a
Citizen of Rome by Imprisonment from giving his Name (for that was the way, as
I shall have opportunity hereafter to show more at large, whereby they drew out
their Armies) nor seize, nor sell any Man's Goods or Children that was in the
Camp; Whereupon the people with a mighty Concourse immediately took Arms,
marched forth, and (which to them was as easy as to be put into the humor,
and that as appears in this place was not hard) totally defeated the Volsci
first, then the Sabines, (for the neighbor Nations, hoping to have had a good
bargain of the Discord in Rome were up on all sides) and after the Sabines, the
Aurunci. Whence returning victorious in three Battles, they expected no less
then that the Senate would have made good their Words. When Appius Claudius the
other Consul of his innate Pride, and that he might frustrate the faith of his
Colleague, caused the Soldiers (who being set at liberty had behaved themselves
with such valor) to be restored at their return unto their Creditors, and
their Gaoles. Great resort upon this was made by the People unto Servilius,
showing him their Wounds, calling him to witwitnesse how they had behaved
themselves, and minding him of his promise. Poor Servilius was sorry, but so
over awed with the headiness of his Collegve, and the obstinacy of the whole
faction of the Nobility; that not daring to do any thing either way, he lost
both Parties: the Fathers conceiving that he was Ambitious, and the People that
he was False: while the Consul Claudius continuing to countenance such as daily
seized and imprisoned some of the indebted People, had still new, and dangerous
Controversies with them, insomuch that the Commonwealth was torn with horrid
Division, and the People (because they found it not so safe, or so effectual in
Public) minded nothing but laying their heads together in private
Conventicles. For this A. Virginius, and Titus Vetusius the new Consuls were
reproved by the Senate as slothful, and upbraided with the Virtue of Ap.
Claudius. Whereupon the Consuls having desired the Senate, that they might know
their pleasure, showed afterward their readiness to obey it, by summoning the
People according unto command, and requiring Names whereby to draw forth an
Army for diversion, but no man would answer. Report hereof being made unto the
Senate, the younger sort of the Fathers grew so hot with the Consuls, that they
desired them to abdicate the Magistracy, which they had not the courage to
defend.

The Consuls, though they conceived themselves to be roughly handled, made this
soft Answer: Fathers Conscript, that you may please to take notice it was
foretold, some horrid Sedition is at hand: We shall only desire, that they
whose valor in this place is so great, may stand by us to see how we behave
our Selves, and then be as resolute in your Commands as you Will: Your
Fatherhoods may know if we be wanting in the performance.

At this, some of the hot bloods returned with the Consuls unto the Tribunal,
before which the People were yet standing, and the Consuls having generally
required Names, in vain, (to put it unto something) required the name of one
that was in their eye particularly; on whom, when he moved not, they commanded
a Lictor to lay hands; but the People thronging about the party summoned,
forbad the Lictor who durst not touch him; at which the Hot-spurs that came
with the Consuls, enraged by the affront, descended from the Throne to the aid
of the Lictor; from whom in so doing they turned the indignation of the People
upon themselves with such heat, that the Consuls interposing, thought fit by
remitting the Assembly, to appease the Tumult; in which nevertheless there had
been nothing but noise. Nor was there less in the Senate, being suddenly
rallied upon this occasion, where they that received the Repulse, with others,
whose heads were as addle as their own, fell upon the business as if it had
been to be determined by Clamor, till the Consuls, upbraiding the Senate, that
it differed not from the Marketplace, reduced the House unto Orders: And the
Fathers having been consulted accordingly, there were three Opinions. P.
Virginius conceived, that the Consideration to be had upon the matter in
question, (or aid of the indebted and imprisoned people) was not to be farther
extended then unto such as had engaged upon the promise made by Servilius: T.
Largius, that it was no time to think it enough, if men's merits were
acknowledged, while the whole People, sunk under the weight of their debts,
could not emerge without some commmon aid; which to restrain by putting some
into a better Condition then others, would rather more inflame the Discord then
extinguish it* Ap. Claudius (still upon the old haunt) would have it, That the
People were rather wanton then fierce: It was not oppression that necessitated,
but their Power that invited them unto these Freaks; the Empire of the Consuls
since the Appeal unto the People (whereby a plebeian might ask his Fellows if
he were a Thief) being but a mere Scar-crow. Go to, (says he) Let us create
the Dictator, from whom there is no appeal, and then let me see more of this
Work; or him that shall forbid my Lictor. The advice of Appius was abhorred by
many, and to introduce a general Recision of Debts with Largius, was to violate
all Faith: That of Virginius as the most moderate would have past best, but
that there were private Interests (that same bane of the Public) which
withstood it; So they concluded with Appius; who also had been Dictator, if the
Consuls and some of the graver sort had not thought it altogether unseasonable,
at a time when the Volsci and the Sabins were up again, to venture so far upon
Alienation of the People; for which cause Valerius, being descended from the
Publicola's, the most Popular Family, as also in his own person of a mild
nature, was rather trusted with so rigid a Magistracy. Whence it happened, that
the People, though they knew well enough against whom the Dictator was created,
feared nothing from Valerius; But upon a new promise made to the same effect
with that of Servilius, hoped better another time, and throwing away all
Disputes, gave their Names roundly, went out, and (to be brief) came home again
as Victorious as in the former Action, the Dictator entering the City in
Triumph. Nevertheless when he came to press the Senate, to make good his
promise, and do something for the ease of the People, they regarded him no more
as to that point then they had done Servilius. Whereupon the Dictator, in
disdain to be made a stale, abdicated his Magistracy, and went home. Here then
was a Victorious Army without a Captain, and a Senate pulling it by the beard
in their Gowns. What is it (if You have read the Story, for there is not such
another) that must follow? Can any Man imagine, that such only should be the
opportunity upon which this People could run away! Alas, poor men, the Aequi
and the Volsci, and the Sabines were nothing, but the Fathers invincible! There
they sat some three hundred of them armed all in Robes, and thundering with
their Tongues; no hopes in the earth to reduce them unto any tolerable
Conditions: Wherefore, no thinking to abide long so near them; away marches the
Army, and encamps in the Fields. This Retreat of the People is called the
Secession of Mount Aventine, where they lodged, very sad at their Condition,
but not letting fall so much as a word of Murmur against the Fathers. The
Senate by this time were great Lords, had the whole City unto themselves; but
certain Neighbors were upon the way that might come to speak with them, not
asking leave of the Porter. Wherefore their minds became troubled, and an
Orator was posted unto the People to make as good Conditions with them as he
could; but, whatever the terms were, to bring them home, and with all speed:
And here it was covenanted between the Senate, and the People, That these
should have the Magistrates of their own Election, called the Tribunes; upon
which they returned.

To hold you no longer, the Senate having done this upon necessity, made
frequent attempts to retract it again; while the Tribunes on the other side, to
defend what they had gotten, instituted their Tributa Comitia, or Council of
the People; where they came in time, and as disputes increased, to make Laws
without the Authority of the Senate, called Plebiscita: Now to conclude in the
Point at which I drive; such were the steps whereby the People of Rome came to
assume Debate: nor is it in Art or Nature to debar a People of the like
effect, where there is the like cause: For Romulus having in the Election of
his Senate squared out a Nobility for the support of a Throne, by making that
of the Patricians a distinct and hereditary Order, planted the Commonwealth
upon two contrary Interests, or Roots, which shooting forth in time produced
two Commonwealths, the one Oligarchical in the Nobility, and the other a mere
Anarchy of the People, which thenceforth caused a perpetual feud and enmity
between the Senate and the People, even to death.

There is not a more noble, or useful question in the Politics, then that
which is started by Machiavil, Whether means were to be found whereby the
Enmity that was between the Senate and the people of Rome, might have been
removed. Nor is there any other in which we, or the present occasion, are so
much concerned, particularly in relation unto this Author; For as much as his
Judgment in the determination of the question standing, our Commonwealth
falls. And he that will erect a Commonwealth against the Judgment of
Machiavill, is obliged to give such reasons for his enterprise as must not go
on begging. Wherefore to repeat the Politician very honestly, but somewhat more
briefly: He disputes thus;

There be two sorts of Commonwealths, Match. disc* B. 1. C. 6.
the one for Preservation, as Lacedemon and Venice. The other for Increase, as
Rome.

Lacedemon being governed by a King and a small Senate, could maintain it self
a long time in that Condition, because the Inhabitants, being few, having put a
bar upon the reception of Strangers, and living in strict observation of the
Laws of Lycurgus, which now had gotten reputation, and taken away all occasion
of Tumults, might well continue long in Tranquillity: For the Laws of Lycurgus
introduced a greater equality in Estates, and a less equality in Honors;
whence there was equal Poverty, and the Plebeians were less Ambitious,
because the Honors, or Magistracies of the City could extend but unto a few;
and were not communicable unto the People; nor did the Nobility by using them
ill, ever give them a desire to participate of the same: This proceeded from
the Kings, whose Principality being placed in the midst of the Nobility, had no
greater means whereby to support it self, then to shield the People from all
Injury; Whence the People not fearing Empire, desired it not. And so all
occasion of enmity between the Senate and the People was barred. But this union
happened especially from two causes, the one, that the Inhabitants of Lacedemon
being few, could be governed by the Few. The other, that not receiving
Strangers into their Commonwealth, they did not corrupt it, nor increase it,
unto such a Proportion as was not governable by the Few.

Venice has not divided with her Plebeians, but all are called Gentlemen that
be in administration of the Government; for which Government She is more
beholding unto Chance, then the Wisdom of her Lawmakers; For many retiring
unto those Islands, where that City is now built from the inundations of
Barbarians that overwhelmed the Roman Empire, when they were increased unto
such a number, that to live together it was necessary to have Laws: They
Ordained a form of Government, whereby assembling often in Council upon
Affairs, and finding their number sufficient for Government, they put a bar
upon all such as repairing afterward unto their City should become
Inhabitants, excluding them from participation of Power. Whence they that were
included in the Administration had right; and they that were excluded, coming
afterward, and being received upon no other Conditions to be Inhabitants, had
no wrong, and therefore had no occasion; nor were they trusted with Arms, and
therefore had no means to be tumultuous. Wherefore this Commonwealth might
very well maintain her Self in Tranquillity.

These things considered, it is plain, that the Roman Legislators to have
introduced a quiet State, must have done one of these two things; Either shut
out Strangers, as the Lacedaemonians; Or, as the Venetians, not allowed the
People to bear Arms. But they did neither. By which means the People having
power and increase, were in perpetual Tumult. Nor is this to be helped in a
Commonwealth for Increase, seeing if Rome had cut off the occasion of her
Tumults, She must have cut off the means of her Increase, and by consequence of
her Greatness.

Wherefore let a Legislator consider with himself, whether he would make his
Commonwealth for Preservation, in which Case She may be free from Tumults; or
for Increase, in which case she must be infested with them.

If he make her for Preservation she may be quiet at home; but will be in
danger abroad. First, because her foundation must be narrow, and therefore
weak; as that of Lacedemon, which lay but upon 30000 Citizens; or that of
Venice, which lies but upon three Thousand. Secondly, such a Commonwealth must
either be in Peace, or in War; If She be in Peace, the Few are soonest
effeminated and corrupted, and so obnoxious also unto Faction: If in War,
succeeding ill, she is an easy prey; or succeeding well, ruined by Increase* a
Weight which her Foundation is not able to bear. For Lacedemon when she had
made her self Mistress, upon the matter, of all Greece, through a slight
accident, the rebellion of Thebes, occasioned by the Conspiracy of Pelopidas
discovering this infirmity of her nature, the rest of her conquered Cities
immediately knocked off, and in the turn as it were of an hand reduced her from
the fullest Tide, unto the lowest Ebb of her fortune. And Venice having
possessed Her self of a great part of Italy by her Purse, was no sooner, in
defense of it, put unto the trial of her Arms, then She lost all in one
Battle.

Whence I conclude, That in the Ordination of a Commonwealth, a Legislator is
to think upon that which is most honorable; and laying aside the Modells for
Preservation, to follow the example of Rome conniving at, and temporizing with
the enmity between the Senate and the People, as a necessary step unto the
Roman Greatness. For that any man should find out a balance that may take in
the Conveniences, and shut out the inconveniences of both, I do not think it
possible. These are the words of the Author, though the Method be somewhat
altered, to the end that I may the better turn them unto my hand.

My Lords, I do not know how you hearken unto this sound, but to hear the
greatest Artist in the modern World, giving Sentence against our Commonwealth;
is that, with which I am nearly concerned. Wherefore, with the honor due unto
the Prince of Politicians, let us examine his ratiocination, with the liberty
which he has asserted to be the right of a free people. But we shall never
come up to him, except by taking the Business a little lower, we descend from
effects to their causes. The Causes of Commotion in a Commonwealth are either
external or internal. External are from Enemies, from Subjects, or from
Servants. To dispute then what was the Cause why Rome was infested by the
Italian, or by the Servile Wars, why the Slaves took the Capitol: why the
Lacedaemonians were near as frequently troubled with their Helots, as Rome with
all those? Or why Venice, whose Situation is not trusted unto the faith of Men,
has as good or better quarter with them whom She Governs, then Rome had with
the Latins; were to dispute upon external Causes: the question put by
Machiavill, is of internal Causes; Whether the enmity that was between the
Senate and the People of Rome might have been removed; And to determine
otherwise of this question then he does, I must lay down other Principles then
he has. To which end I affirm, that a Commonwealth internally considered is
either equal, or unequal. A Commonwealth that is internally equal has no
internal cause of Commotion, and therefore can have no such effect, but from
without. A Commonwealth internally unequal has no internal cause of quiet,
and therefore can have no such effect, but by diversion.

To prove my Assertions, I shall at this time make use of no other then his
examples. Lacedemon was externally unquiet, because She was externally
unequal, that is as to her Helots; and she was internally at rest, because she
was equal in her Self, both in root and branch; In the root by her Agrarian,
and in branch by the Senate, in as much as no man was thereunto qualified, but
by election of the People: Which Institution of Lycurgus is mentioned by
Aristotle, where he says, That rendering his Citizens aemulous (not careless)
of that Honor, Arist. Pol. B. 2*
he designed unto the People the Election of the Senate. Wherefore Machiavill
in this, as in other places, having his eye upon the Division of Patrician and
Plebeian Families as they were in Rome, has quite mistaken the Orders of this
Commonwealth, where there was no such thing. Nor did the Quiet of it derive
from the Power of the Kings, who were so far from shielding the People from
injury, of the Nobility, of which there was none in his sense, but the Senate,
that one declared end of the Senate at the Institution, was to shield the
people from the Kings, who thenceforth had but single Votes: Neither did it
proceed from the straightness of the Senate, or their keeping the People aloof
from the Government, that they were quiet, but from the equality of their
administrations, seeing the Senate (as is plain by the Oracle, their
fundamental Law) had no more then the Debate, and the Result of the
Commonwealth belonged unto the People. Wherefore when Theopomp and Polydore
Kings of Lacedemon, would have kept the people aloof from the Government,
Plutarch in the Life of Lycurgus.
by adding unto the ancient Law this Clause ( Si prave populus rogassit,
Senatui Regibusque retractandi jus esto), If the determination of the People be
faulty, it shall be lawful for the Senate to resume the Debate; the people
immediately became unquiet, and resumed that Debate, which ended not till they
had set up their Ephors, and caused that Magistracy to be confirmed by their
Kings. Val. Max. l. 4.
( Theopompo Spartanorum regi moderationis testimonium reddamus. Nam cum primus
instituisset ut Ephori Lacedemone crearentur, ita futuri regiae potestati
oppositi, quemadmodum Romae Tribuni Plebis consulari imperio sunt objecti:
atque illi uxor dixisset, id egisse illum ut filiis minorem potestatem
relinqueret: Relinquam, inquit, sed diuturniorem. Optime^ quidem. Ea enim demum
tuta est potentia, quae viribus suis modum imponit. Theopompus igitur legitimis
regnum vinculis constringendo, quo longius a licentia retraxit, hoc propius ad
benevolentiam civium admovit). By which it may appear, that a Commonwealth for
Preservation if she come to be unequal, is as obnoxious unto enmity between the
Senate and the People, as a Commonwealth for Increase: and that the
Tranquillity of Lacedemon derived from no other Cause then her Equality.

For Venice, to say, that she is quiet because she disarms her Subjects, is to
forget, that Lacedemon disarmed her Helots, and yet could not in their regard
be quiet; wherefore if Venice be defended from external causes of commotion, it
is first, through her situation, in which respect her Subjects have no hope,
(and this indeed may be attributed unto her fortune) and secondly, through her
exquisite Justice, whence they have no will to invade her: but this can be
attributed to no other cause then her prudence: which will appear to be
greater, as we look nearer; for the effects that proceed from fortune (if there
be any such thing) are like their cause, unconstant; but there never happened
unto any other Commonwealth, so undisturbed and constant a tranquillity and
peace in her self, as is that of Venice; wherefore this must proceed from some
other cause then Chance. And we see that as she is of all others the most
quiet, so the most equal, Commonwealth. Her body consists of one Order, and
her Senate is like a rolling stone (as was said) which never did, nor, while it
continues upon that rotation, ever shall gather the moss of a divided or
ambitious interest; much less such an one as that which grasped the people of
Rome in the talons of their own Eagles. And if Machiavill, a verse from doing
this Commonwealth right, had considered her Orders, (as his reader shall
easily perceive he never did) he must have been so far from attributing the
prudence of them unto Chance, that he would have touched up his admirable work
unto that perfection, which, as to the civil part, has no pattern in the
universal World, but this of Venice.

Rome, secure by her Potent and Victorious Arms from all external causes of
commotion, was either beholding for her peace at home, unto her Enemies abroad,
or could never rest her head. My Lords, you that are Parents of a
Commonwealth, and so freer Agents then such as are mere natural, have a care.
Fo, ras no man shall show me a Commonwealth born straight, that ever became
crooked; so, no man shall show me a Commonwealth born crooked, that ever
became straight: Rome was crooked in her birth, or rather prodigious, her twins
the Patricians and Plebeian Orders came, as was shown by the foregoing story,
into the world, one body, but two heads, or rather two bellies; for,
notwithstanding the Fable out of Aesop, whereby Menenius Agrippa the Orator
that was sent from the Senate unto the People at Mount Aventine; showed the
Fathers to be the belly, and the people to be the Arms and the Legs; which
except that, how sloathful soever it might seem, were nourished, not these but
the whole body must languish and be dissolved; it is plain, that the Fathers
were a distinct belly, such an one as took the meat indeed out of the peoples
mouths; but abhorring the Agrarian, returned it not, in the due and necessary
nutrition of a Commonwealth. Nevertheless, as the people that live about the
Cataracts of Nilus are said not to hear the noise; so neither the Roman
Writers, nor Machiavill the most conversant with them, seem among so many of
the Tribunitian storms, to hear their natural voice: for though they could not
miss of it, so far as to attribute them unto the strife of the People for
participation in Magistracy; or, in which Machiavill more particularly joins,
unto that about the Agrarian; this was to take the business short, and the
remedy for the disease.

(Cujus levamen mali, Plebes, nisi suis in summo imperio locatis, Live.
nullum speraret.) A People when they are reduced unto misery and despair,
become their own Politicians, as certain beasts when they are sick become their
own Physicians, and are carried by a natural instinct unto the desire of such
herbs, as are their proper cure; but the people, for the greater part, are
beneath the beasts in the use of them: Thus the people of Rome, though in their
misery, they had recourse by instinct as it were unto the two main Fundamentals
of a Commonwealth, Participation of Magistracy, and the Agrarian; did but
taste, and spet at them, not (which is necessary in Physic) drink down the
potion, and in that their healths. For when they had obtained participation of
Magistracy, it was but lamely, not to a full and equal rotation in all
elections; nor did they greatly regard it in so much as they had gotten: And
when they had attained unto the Agrarian, they neglected it so far as to suffer
the Law to grow obsolete; but if you do not take the due dose of your
Medicines, (as there be slight tastes which a man may have of Philosophy that
incline unto Atheism) it may chance be poison, there being a like taste of the
Politiques that inclines to Confusion, as appears in the Institution of the
Roman Tribunes, by which Magistracy, and no more, the people were so far from
attaining unto peace, that they in getting but so much, got but heads for
eternal feud; whereas if they had attained in perfection either unto the
Agrarian, they had introduced the equality and calm of Lacedemon; or unto
Rotation, they had introduced that of Venice: And so there could have been no
more Enmity between the Senate and the People of Rome, then there was between
those Orders in Lacedemon, or is in Venice. Wherefore Machiavill seems unto
me, in attributing the peace of Venice more unto her luck then her prudence; of
the whole stable to have saddled the wrong horse, for though Rome, (quae non
imitabile fulmen
Aere, et cornupedum cursu simularat Equorum)
in her Military part could beat it better, beyond all comparison, upon the
sounding hoof; Venice for the Civil, has plainly had the wings of Pegasus.

The whole Question then will come upon this Point, Whether the People of Rome
could have obtained these Orders: And first, to say, that they could not have
obtained them without altering the Commonwealth, is no argument; seeing,
neither could they, without altering the Commonwealth, have obtained their
Tribunes; which nevertheless were obtained: And if a man consider the posture
that the people were in when they obtained their Tribunes, they might as well,
and with as great ease, (for as much as the reason why the Nobility yielded
unto the Tribunes, was no other, then that there was no remedy) have obtained
any thing else. And for experience, it was in the like case, that the
Lacedaemonians set up their Ephors, and the Athenians after the battle of
Plateae, bowed the Senate (so hard a thing it is for a Commonwealth that was
born crooked to become straight) as much the other way. Nor, if it be objected,
that this must have ruined the Nobility, and in that deprived the Commonwealth
of the Greatness which she acquired by them; is this opinion holding, but
confuted by the sequel of the story, showing plainly, that the Nobility
through the defect of such Orders, that is to say, of Rotation and the
Agrarian) came to eat up the people; and battening themselves in Luxury, (to be
as Salust speaks of them, Inertissumi nobiles, in quibus sicut in statua,
praeter nomen, nihil erat additamenti) to bring so mighty a Commonwealth, so
huge a glory, unto so deplorable an end. Wherefore, means might have been
found, whereby the enmity that was between the Senate and the People of Rome
might have been removed. My Lords, --

If I have argued well, I have given you the comfort and assurance, that
notwithstanding the judgment of Machiavill, your Commonwealth is both safe and
sound: but if I have not argued well, then take the comfort and assurance which
he gives you, while he is firm, That a Legislator is to lay aside all other
examples, and follow that of Rome only, conniving and temporizing with the
enmity between the Senate and the People, as a necessary step unto the Roman
Greatness. Whence it follows, that your Commonwealth at the worst, is that
which he has given you his word is the best.

I have held your Lordships long, but upon an account of no small importance,
which I can now sum up in these few words: Where there is a lickerrishnesse in
a popular Assembly to Debate, it proceeds not from the constitution of the
People, but of the Commonwealth: Now that the Commonwealth is of such
Constitution as is naturally free from this kind of intemperance, is that which
to make good, I must divide the remainder of my Discourse into two Parts.



The First, showing the several Constitutions of the Assemblies of the People
in other Commonwealths. The Second, comparing of Our Assembly of the People
with Theirs; and showing how it excludes the inconveniences, and embraces the
conveniences of them all.
IN the beginning of the first Part I must take notice, that among the Popular
error of our days it is no small one, That men imagines the ancient
Governments of this kind to have consisted for the most part of one City, that
is, of one Town; whereas by what we have learnt of my Lords that opened them,
it appears that there was not any considerable one of such a constitution but
Carthage, till this in our days of Venice.

For to begin with Israel, it consisted of the twelve Tribes; locally spread or
quartered throughout the whole Territory; these being called together by
Trumpets, constituted the Church or Assembly of the people. The vastness of
this weight, as also the slownesse, thence inavoidable, became a great cause
(as has been shown at large by my Lord Phosphorus) of the breaking that
Commonwealth; notwithstanding that the Temple, and those religious Ceremonies
for which the people were at least annually obliged to repair thither; were no
small ligament of the Tribes; otherwise but slightly tacked together.

Athens consisted of four Tribes, taking in the whole People both of the City,
and of the Territory; not so gathered by Theseus into one Town, as to exclude
the Country, but to the end that there might be some Capital of the
Commonwealth: though true it be, that the Congregation consisting of the
Inhabitants within the Walls, was sufficient to all intents and purposes,
without those of the Country; these also being exceeding numerous, became
burdensome unto themselves; and dangerous unto the Commonwealth: the more for
their ill education, as is observed by Xenophon and Polybius, who compare them
unto Mariners, that in a calm are perpetually disputing and swaggering one
with another, and never lay their hands unto the Common tackling or safety,
till they be all endangered by some storm: Which caused Thucydides, when he saw
this people through the purchase of their misery, become so much wiser, as to
reduce their Comitia or Assemblies unto five thousand, to say, (as in his
eighth Book) And now (at least in my time) the Athenians seem to have ordered
their State aright; consisting of a moderate temper both of the Few (by which
he means the Senate of the Bean) and of the Many, or the five thousand; and he
does not only give you his judgment, but the best proof of it; for this (says
he) was the first thing, that after so many misfortunes past, made the City
again to raise her head. The place I would desire your Lordships to note, as
the first example, that I find, or think is to be found, of a popular Assembly
by way of Representative.

Lacedemon consisted of thirty thousand Citizens dispersed throughout Laconia,
one of the greatest Provinces in all Greece, and divided (as by some Authors is
probable) into six Tribes; of the whole Body of these being gathered, consisted
the great Church or Assembly, which had the Legislative power; the little
Church, gathered sometimes for matters of concernment, within the City,
consisted of the Spartans only: these happened like that of Venice to be good
constitutions of a Congregation, but from an ill cause the infirmity of a
Commonwealth which through her Paucity was Oligarchical.

Wherefore, go which way you will, it should seem, that without a
Representative of the people, your Commonwealth consisting of an whole Nation,
can never avoid falling either into Oligarchy or confusion.

This was seen by the Romans, whose rustic Tribes extending themselves from
the river Arno, unto the Vulturnus, that is, from Fesulae or Florence unto
Capua, invented a way of Representative by Lots; the Tribe upon which the first
fell, being the prerogative, and some two or three more that had the rest, the
Jure-vocatae: These gave the Suffrage of the Commonwealth ( binis Comitiis);
the Prerogative at the first Assembly, and the Jure vocatae at a second.

Now to make the parallel, All the inconveniences that you have observed in
these Assemblies are shut out, and all the conveniences taken in, to your
prerogative; for first it is that for which Athens, shaking off the blame of
Xenophon and Polybius, came to deserve the praise of Thucydides, a
Representative; and secondly, not as I suspect in that of Athens, and is past
suspicion in this of Rome, by lot, but by suffrage, as was also the late House
of Commons, by which means in the prerogatives, all the Tribes of Oceana are
Jure Vocatae; and if a man shall except against the paucity of the standing
number, it is a wheel, which in the revolution of a few years turns every
hand that is fit, or fitteth every hand that it turns, unto the public work:
Moreover, I am deceived, if upon due consideration, it do not fetch your Tribes
with greater equality and ease unto themselves, and unto the Government, from
the frontiers of Marpesia; than Rome ever brought any one of hers out of her
Pomaeria, or the nearest parts of her adjoining Territories. To this you may
add, That whereas a Commonwealth, which in regard of the People is not of
facility in execution, were sure enough in this Nation to be cast off through
impatience; Your Musters and Gallaxy's are given unto the people, as milk unto
babes, whereby when they are brought up through four days election in an whole
year, (one at the Parish, one at the Hundred, and two at the Tribe) unto their
strongest meat, it is of no harder digestion, then to give their Negative or
Affirmative as they see cause. There be gallant men among us that laugh at such
an appeal or umpire; but I refer it, whether you be more inclining to pardon
them or me, who I confess have been this day laughing at a sober man, but
without meaning him any harm, and that is Petrus Cunaeus, where speaking of the
nature of the people, he says, that taking them apart, they are very simple,
but yet in their Assemblies they see and know something, and so runs away
without troubling himself with what that something is. Whereas the people taken
apart, are but so many private interests, but if you take them together, they
are the public interest; the public interest of a Commonwealth (as has been
shown) is nearest that of mankind, and that of mankind is right reason; but
with the Aristocracy, whose reason or interest when they are all together, as
appeared by the Patricians, is but that of a party, it is quite contrary; for,
as taken apart they are far wiser then the people, considered in that manner;
so being put together, they are such fools, that by deposing the people, as
did those of Rome, they will saw off the branch whereupon they sit, or rather
destroy the root of their own greatness: Wherefore Machiavill following
Aristotle, and yet going before him, may well assert ( Che la multitudine e piu
savia et piu costunte che un Prencipe) the Prerogative of Popular Government
for wisdom. And hence it is, that the Prerogative of your Commonwealth, as
for Wisdom, so for Power, is in the People: which (albeit I am not ignorant,
that the Roman Prerogative was so called a Praerogando, because their Suffrage
was first asked) gives the denomination unto your Prerogative Tribe.

The Elections whether Annual or Triennial, being shown by the Twenty second,
that which comes in the next place to be considered, is The Constitution
Function and Manner of Proceeding of the Praerogative.


The Power or function of the Prerogative is of two parts, the one of Result,
in which it is the Legislative Power, the other of Judicature, in which regard
it is the highest Court, and the last appeal in this Commonwealth.

For the former part, the people by this Constitution, being not obliged by any
Law, that is not of their own making; or Confirmation by the Result of the
Prerogative, their equal Representative: It shall not be lawful for the
Senate to require Obedience, from the people, nor for the people to give obe
obedience unto the Senate in or by any Law that has not been promulgated or
printed and published for the space of six weeks* and afterward porposed by the
Authority of the Senate unto the Prerogative Tribe, and resolved by the Major
Uote of the same in the affirmative. Nor shall the Senate have any power to
levy War, Men, or Money, otherwise then by the consent of the People so given,
or by a Law so Enacted, except in cases of exigence, in which it is agreed,
thar the Power both of the Senate, and the People shall be in the Dictator, so
qualified, and for such a term of time as is according unto that Constitution
already prescribed. While a Law is in Promulgation the Censors shall animadvert
upon the Senate; and the Tribunes upon the People, that there he no laying of
heads together; Conventicles, or Canvassing to carry on, or oppose any thing;
but that all my be done in a free and open way.

For the latter part of the Power of the Prerogative or that whereby they are
the Supreme Iudicatory of this Nation, and of the Provinces of the same, the
Cognizance of Crimes against the Majesty of the People, as high Treason, as
also of Peculate that is robery, of the Treasury, or Defraudation of the
Commonwealth appertains unto this Tribe, and if any Person or Persons,
Provincialls or Citizens shall appeal unto the people, it belongerh unto the
Prerogative to Judge and determine the Case, Provided that if the Appeal be
from any Court of justice in this Nation or the Provinces, the Appellant shall
first deposite one hundred pounds in the Court from which he appealeth, to be
forfeited unto the same, if he be cast in his Suite by the people. But the
Power of the Council of War being the expedition of this Commonwealth, and the
Martial Law of the Strategus in the Field, are those only from which there
shall lie no Appeal unto the People.

The Proceeding of the Prerogative in case of a Proposition, is to be thus
Ordered: The Magistrates proposing by Authority of the Senate, shall rehearse
the whole Matter, and expound it unto the People, which done, they shall put
the whole together unto the Suffrage* with three Boxes, the Negative, the
Affirmative, and the Non-sincere: and the Suffrage being returned unto the
Tribunes, and numbered in the presence of the Proposers, if the Major Uote be in
the Non-sincere, the Proposers shall desist, and the Senate shall resume the
Debate. If the Major Uote be in the Negative, the Proposers shall desist, and
the Senate too. But if the Major Uote be in the Affirmative, then the Tribe is
clear, and the Proposers shall begin and put the whole matter, with the
Negative and the Affirmative, (leaving out the Non-sincere) by Clauses; and the
Suffrages being taken and numbered by the Tribunes in the presence of the
proposers, shall be written and reported by the Tribunes unto the Senate, and
that which is proposed by the authority of the Senate, and confirmed by the
Command of the People, is the Law of Oceana.

The Proceeding of the Prerogative in a case of Judicature is to be thus
ordered. The Tribunes being Auditors of all Causes appertaining unto the
Cognizance of the people, shall have notice of the Suit or Trial, whether of
appeal or otherwise, that is to be Commenced, and if any one of them shall
accept of the same, it appertains unto him to introduce it. A Cause being
introduced, and the people Mustered or Assembled for the Decision of the same,
the Tribunes are Presidents of the Court, having power to keep it: unto Orders,
and shall be seated upon a Scaffold erected in the middle of the Tribe: upon
the right hand shall stand a seat, or large Pulpit assigned unto the
Plaintiff, or the Accuser; and, upon the left, another for the Defendant, each
if they splease with his Counsel. And the Tribunes being attended upon such
occations with so many Ballotines, Secretaryes, Door-keekers, and Messengers of
the Senate as shall be requisite; One of them shall turn up a Glass of the
nature of an hour-glasse, but such an one as is to be of an hour and a halfe's
running; which being turned up, the party, or Counsel on the right hand may
begin to speak to the People; if there be Papers to be read, or witnesses to be
examined, the Officer shall lay the Glass sidewayes until the Papers be read,
and the Witnesses examined, and then turn it up again; and so long as the
Glass is running the Party on the right hand has liberty to speak, and no
longer. The Party on the right hand having had his time, the like shall be done
in every respect, for the Party on the left. And the Cause being thus heard,
the Tribunes shall put the question unto the Tribe with a white, a black, and a
red Box (or non-sincere), Whether Guilty, or not Guilty? And if, the Suffrage
being taken, the Major Uote be in the Non-sincere, the Cause shall be re-heard
upon the next juridicall day following; and put unto the question in the same
manner. If the Major Uote come the second time in the Non-sincere, the Cause
shall be heard again upon the third day: but at the third hearing the question
shall be put without the Non-sincere. Upon the first of the three days in
which the Major Uote comes in the white box, the party accused is absolved; and
upon the first of them in which it comes in the black box, the party accused is
condemned. The Party accused being condemned, the Tribunes shall put with the
white and the black Box, these questions, or such of them, as, regard had unto
the Case, they shall conceive most proper.

1. Whether he shall have a writ of ease. 2. Whether he shall be fined so
much, or so much. 3. Whether he shall be Confiscated. 4. Whether he shall be
rendered incapable of Magistracy. 5. Whether he shall be banished. 6. Whether he
shall be put to Death.
These or any three of these questions whether simple or such as shall be
thought fitly mixed, being put by the Tribunes, that which has most above half
the Uotes in the black Box is the sentence of the people, which the Troop of
the third Classis is to see executed accordingly.

But whereas by the Constitution of this Commonwealth it may appear that
neither the Propositions of the Senate, nor the Judicature of the people, will
be so frequent as to hold the Prerogative in continual employment; the Senate,
a maine part of whose Office it is to teach and instruct the people, shall duly
(if they have no greater affairs to divert them,) cause an oration to be made
unto the Prerogative by some Knight or Magistrate of the Senate, to be chosen
out of the ablest men, and from time to time, appointed by the Orator of the
House; in the great Hall of the Pantheon, while the Parliament resideth in the
town; or in some Grove or sweet place in the field, while the Parliament for
the heat of the year shall reside in the country; upon every Tuesday, morning
or afternoon.

And the Orator appointed pro tempore unto this office shall first repeat the
orders of the Commonwealth with all possible brevity; and then making choice
of one, or some part of it, discourse thereof unto the people. An Oration or
discourse of this nature being afterward perused by the council of State, may
as they see cause be printed and published.



The Archon's Comment upon the Order, I find to have been of this sense: My
Lords,
TO crave pardon for a word or two in farther explanation of what was read; I
shall briefly show how the Constitution of this Tribe or Assembly answers unto
their Function; and how their function, which is of two parts, the former in
the Result or Legislative Power; the later in the Supreme Judicature of the
Commonwealth, answers unto their Constitution. Machiavill has a Discourse,
where he puts the question, Whether the guard of liberty be with more security
to be committed unto the Nobility, or to the People. Which doubt of his arises
through the want of explaining his term; for the guard of liberty can signify
nothing else but the result of the Commonwealth* so that to say, that the
guard of liberty may be committed unto the Nobility, is to say, that the result
may be committed unto the Senate, in which case the People signify nothing:
Now to show it was a mistake, to affirm it to have been thus in Lacedemon,
sufficient has been spoken; and whereas he will have it to be so in Venice
also; (Quello, says Contarini, appresso il quale e la somma autorita di tutta
la citt^, el dalle leggi, et decreti de i quali pende l'autoritata cosi del
Senato come ancora di tutti i Magistrati, e il Consiglio Grande.) it is
institutively in the great Council by the Judgment of all that know that
Commonwealth; though for the reasons shown it be sometimes exercised by the
Senate. Nor need I run over the Commonwealths in this place for the proof of a
thing so doubtless, and such as has been already made so apparent, as that
the result of each was in the Popular part of it. The Popular part of yours, or
the Prerogative Tribe, consists of seven Deputies (whereof three are of the
Horse) annually elected out of every Tribe of Oceana, which being fifty,
amounts unto one hundred and fifty Horse, and two hundred Foot; and the
Prerogative consisting of three of these Lists, consists of four hundred and
fifty Horse, and six hundred Foot, (besides those of the Provinces to be
hereafter mentioned) by which means the overbalance in the Suffrage remaining
unto the Foot by one hundred and fifty Votes, you have unto the support of a
true and natural Aristocracy, the deepest root of a Democracy that has been
planted. Wherefore there is nothing in Art or Nature better qualified for the
result then this Assembly. -- It is noted out of Cicero by Machiavill, That the
People, albeit they are not so prone to find out truth of themselves, as to
follow Custom, or run into error; yet if they be shew^d truth, they not only
acknowledge and embrace it very suddenly, but are the most constant and
faithful Guardians and Conservators of it. It is your Duty and Office,
whereunto you are also qualified by the Orders of this Commonwealth, to have
the People as you have your Hawks and Greyhounds, in leases and slips, to range
the fields, and beat the bushes for them; for they are of a nature that is
never good at this sport, but when you spring or start their proper quarry:
think not that they will stand to ask you what it is, or less know it then the
Hawks and Greyhounds do theirs; but forthwith make such a flight or course,
that a Huntsman may as well undertake to run with his dogs, or a Faulkoner to
fly with his Hawk, as an Aristocracy at this game to compare with the People.
The People of Rome were seized upon no less prey then the Empire of the World,
when the Nobility turned tails and pearched among Dawes upon the Tower of
Monarchy. For though they did not all of them intend the thing, they would none
of them endure the remedy, which was the Agrarian.

But the Prerogative Tribe has not only the Result, but is the Supreme
Judicature, and the ultimate Appeal in this Commonwealth. For the Popular
Government that makes account to be of any standing, must make sure in the
first place of the Appeal unto the People. (Ante omnes de provocatione adversus
Magistratus ad Populum, sacrandoque cum bonis capite ejus, qui regni occupandi
concilia inesset.) As an Estate in trust becomes a man's own, if he be not
answerable for it, so the Power of a Magistracy not accomptable unto the People
from whom it was received becoming of private use, the Commonwealth loses her
Liberty; Wherefore the right of Supreme Judicature in the People (without which
there can be no such thing as Popular Government) is confirmed by the constant
Practice of all Commonwealths; as that of Israel in the Cases of Achan, and of
the Tribe of Benjamin, adjudged by the Congregation. The Dicasterion or Court
called the Heliaia in Athens, which (the Comitia of that Commonwealth
consisting of the whole People, and so being too numerous to be a Judicatory)
was constituted sometimes of Five hundred, at others of One thousand, or,
according to the greatness of the Cause, of Fifteen hundred, elected by the
Lot out of the whole body of the People, had with the nine Archons, that were
Presidents, the Cognizance of such Causes as were of highest importance in that
State. The Five Ephors in Lacedemon, which were Popular Magistrates, might
question their Kings, as appears by the Cases of Pausanias and of Agis, who
being upon his Trial in this Court, was cried unto by his Mother, to appeal
unto the People, as Plutarch has it in his Life. The Tribunes of the People of
Rome, like in the nature of their Magistracy, and for sometime in number, unto
the Ephors; as being according unto Halicarnasseus and Plutarch, instituted in
imitation of them; had power (diem dicere) to Summon any Man, his Magistracy at
least being expired, (for from the Dictator there lay no Appeal) to answer for
himself unto the People. As in the case of Coriolanus, which was going about to
force the People by withholding Corn from them in a famine, to relinquish the
Magistracy of the Tribunes. In that of. Sp. Cassius for affecting Tyranny. Of
M. Sergius for running away at Veii. Of C. Lucretius for spoiling his Province.
Of Junius Silanus for making War against the Cimberi, in jussu Populi; with
diverse others. And the Crimes of this nature were called Laesae Majestatis.
Examples of such as were arraigned, or tried for Peculate, or Defraudation of
the Commonwealth, were, M. Curious, for intercepting the money of the Samnites.
Salinator, for the unequal division of Spoils unto his Soldiers. M.
Posthumous, for Cheating the Commonwealth by a feigned Shipwreck; Causes of
these two kinds were of more Public nature; but the like Power upon Appeals
was also exercised by the People in private Matters, even during the time of
the Kings; As in the Case of Horatius. Nor is it otherwise with Venice, where
Doge Loridano was Sentenced by the great Council; and Antonio Grimani;
afterward Doge, questioned, for that he being Admiral, had suffered the Turk
to take Lepanto in view of his Fleet.

Nevertheless, there lay no Appeal from the Roman Dictator unto the People;
which if there had, might have cost the Commonwealth dear, when Sp. Moelius
affecting Empire, circumvented and debauched the Tribunes; whereupon T.
Quintius Cinninatus was created Dictator. Who having chosen Servilius Alaha to
be his Lieutenant or Magister Equitum, sent him to apprehend Moelius, whom
while he disputed the Commands of the Dictator, and implored the aid of the
People, Alaha cut off upon the place: By which example you may see in what
cases the Dictator may prevent the blow, which is ready sometimes to fall ere
the People be aware of the danger. Wherefore there lies no Appeal from the
Dieii in Venice unto the Great Council nor from our Council of War to the
People. For the way of proceeding of this Tribe, or the Ballot, it is, as was
once said for all, Venetian.

This Discourse (de Judiciis) whereupon we are fallen, brings us rather
naturally then of design from the two general Orders of every Commonwealth;
that is to say, from the Debating part, or the Senate; and the Resolving part,
or the People; to the third, which is the Executive part, or the Magistracy;
whereupon I shall have no need to dwell: For, the Executive Magistrates of this
Commonwealth are the Strategus in Arms, the Signory in their several Courts;
(as the Chancery, the Exchequer) as also the Councils in diverse Cases within
their Instructions, the Censors as well in their proper Magistracy, as in the
Council of Religion: the Tribunes in the Government of the Prerogative, and
that Judicatory: And the Judges with their Courts; Of all which so much is
already said or known as may suffice.

The Tuesday-Lectures or Orations unto the People, will be of great benefit
unto the Senate, the Prerogative, and the whole Nation. Unto the Senate,
because they will not only teach your Senators Elocution, but keep the Systeme
of the Government in their memories. Elocution is of great use unto your
Senators; for if they do not understand Rhetoric, (giving it at this time for
granted, that the Art were not otherwise good) and come to treat with, or
vindicate the cause of the Commonwealth against some other Nation, that is
good at it; the advantage will be subject to remain upon the merit of the Art,
and not upon the merit of the Cause. Furthermore, the Genius or Soul of this
Government, being in the whole and in every part; they will never be of ability
in determination upon any particular, unless at the same time they have an
Idea of the whole. That this therefore must be, in that regard, of equal
benefit unto the Prerogative, is plain; though these have a greater concernment
in it. For this Commonwealth is the Estate of the People: and a man (you know)
though he be virtuous, yet if he do not understand his Estate, may run out or
be cheated of it. Last of all, the treasures of the Politics will by this
means be so opened, rifled, and dispersed, that this Nation will as soon dote,
like the Indians, upon glass Beads, as disturb your Government with whimsies,
and freaks of mother-wit; or suffer themselves to be stutter'd out of their
Liberties. There is not any reason why your Grandees, your wise men of this
Age, that laugh out, and openly, at a Commonwealth, as the most ridiculous
thing, do not appear to be, as in this regard they are, mere Idiots; but that
the People have not Eyes.



There remains no more appertaining unto the Senate and the People, than
Marpesia to have 30. Knights of their own election continually present in the
Senate of Oceana together with 60. Deputies of Horse, Constitution of the
Provincial part of the Senate, and the People.
and 120. of Foot in the Prerogative Tribe, endued with equal power (respect
had unto their quality and number,) in the Debate and result of this
Commonwealth: Provided that they Observe the Course or Rotation of the same by
the Annual Return of 10. Knights, 20. Deputyes of the Horse, and 40. of the
Foot The like in all respects is lawful for Panopea and the Horse of both the
Provinces amounting unto one Troop, and the Foot unto one Company; one Captain,
and one Cornet of the Horse shall be annually chosen by Marpesia; and one
Captain and one Ensign of the Foot shall be annually chosen by Panopea.

The Orb of the Prerogative being thus Complete is not unnaturally compared
unto that of the Moon, either in consideration of the Light, borrowed from the
Senate as from the Sun; or of the ebbs and floods of the People, which are
marked by the Negative or Affirmative of this Tribe, And the Constitution of
the Senate and the People being shown, Constitution of the Parliament.
You have that of the Parliament of Oceana, Consisting of the Senate proposing,
and of the People resolving; which amounts unto an Act of Parliament. So the
Parliament is the Heart, which consisting of two Ventricles; the one greater
and replenished with a grosser store; the other less and full of a purer;
sucketh in, and gusheth forth the life blood of Oceana by a perpetual
Circulation. Wherefore the life of this Government is no more unnatural or
obnoxious for this, unto dissolution, then that of a Man; Nor unto giddiness
then the World, (seeing the Earth whether it be it self, or the Heavens that
are in Rotation, is so far from being giddy that it could not subsist without
the motion.) But why should not this Government be much rather capable of
duration and steadiness by a motion? than which GOD has ordained no other
unto the universal Commonwealth of Mankind: seeing one Generation comes, and
another goes, but the Earth remains firm for ever; that is in her proper
Situation or Place, whether she be moved or not moved upon her proper Center.
The Senate the People and the Magistracy, or the Parliament so Constituted (as
you have seen) is the Guardian of this Commonwealth, and the Husband of such a
Wife as is elegantly described by Solomon. She is like the Merchants Ship,
Prove. 31.
She brings her food from far. She considers a Field and buyeth it: With
the fruit of her hands She Planteth a Vineyard: She conceived that her
Merchandise is good: She stretches forth her hands to the poor: She is not
afraid of the Snow for her Household, for all her household are clothed with
Scarlet: She makes her self Coverings of her Tapestry; Her clothing is Silk
and Purple; Her Husband is known (by his Robes) in the Gates, when he sits
amongst the Senators of the Land. The Gates, or inferior Courts were branches
as it were of the Sanhedrim or Senate of Israel. Nor is our Commonwealth a
worse houswife, or has she less regard unto her Magistrates; as may appear
by, The Twenty fifth Order. That, whereas the Public Revenue is through the
late Civil Wars dilapidated; the Excize, being improved or improveable to the
Revenue of One Million, be applied for the space of Eleaven years to come, unto
the reparation of the same, and the present Maintenance of the Magistrates,
Knights, Deputies, and other Officers, who according unto their several
Dignities and Functions shall annually receive toward the Support of the same,
as follows: The Lord Strategus Marching, is upon another account to have
Field Pay as General.
The Lord Strategus sitting 002000. li. per Annum. The Lord Orator 002000. li.
per Annum. The three Commissioners of the Seal 004500. li. per Annum. The three
Commissioners of the Treasury 004500. li. per Annum. The two Censors 003000.
li. per Annum. The 290. Knights, at 500 l. a Man 145000. li. per Annum. The 4.
Ambassadors in Ordinary 012000. li. per Annum. The Council of War for
Intelligence 003000. li. per Annum. The Master of the Ceremonies 000500. li.
per Annum. The Master of the Horse 000500. li. per Annum. His Substitute
000150. li. per Annum. The 12. Ballotines for their winter Liveries 000240. li.
per Annum. For their Summer Liveries 000120. li. per Annum. For their
board-Wages 000480. li. per Annum. For the keeping of three Coaches of State,
24 Coach-horses with Coachmen, and Postilions 001500. li. per Annum. For the
Grooms, and keeping of 16. great Horses for the Master of the Horse, and for
the Ballotines whom he is to govern and instruct in the Art of Riding, 000480.
li. per Annum. The 20. Secretaries of the Parliament 002000. li. per Annum. The
20. Door-keepers who are to attend with Pole-axes; For their Coats, 000200. li.
per Annum. For their Board-wages 001000. li. per Annum. The 20. Messengers,
which are Trumpeters; For their Coats, 000200. li. per Annum. For their
Board-wages, 001000. li. per Annum. For Ornament of the Masters of the Youth
005000. li. per Annum. Sum, 189370. li. per Annum.


Out of the Personal Estates of every man who at his death bequeatheth nof
above Forty shillings unto the Master of that Hundred wherein it lies, shall be
levied one per Cent, until the solid Revenue of the Muster of the Hundred
amount unto 50. l. per annum; for the Prizes of the Youth.

The twelve Ballotines are to be divided into three Regions according unto the
Course of the Senate, the four of the first Region to be elected at the Tropic
out of such Children as the Knights of the same shall offer, not being under
Eleven years of age, nor above 13. And their Election thall be made by the Lot
at an Urn set by the Serjant of the house for that purpose in the Hall of the
Pantheon. The Livery of the Commonwealth for the fashion or the color may be
changed at the Election of the Strategus according unto his phantasy. But every
Knight during his Session shall be bound to give unto his Footman or some one
of his Footmen, the Livery of the Commonwealth.

The Prerogative Tribe shall receive as follows:
The 2. Tribunes of the Horse 000014 li. by the Week. The 2. Tribunes of the
Foot 000012 li. by the Week. The 3. Captains of Horse 000015 li. by the Week.
The 3. Cornets 000009 li. by the Week. The 3. Captains of Foot 000012 li. by
the Week. The 3. Ensigns 000007 li. by the Week. The 442 Horse at 2 l. a man
000884 li. by the Week. The 592 Foot at 1 l. 10 s. a man 000888 li. by the
Week. The 6. Trumpeters 000007 li. 10 s. by the Week. The three Drummers 000002
li. 5 s. by the Week. Sum, by the Week 001850 li. 15. s. Sum, by the Year
096239 li. The Total of the Senate, the People, and the Magistracy, 287459 l.
15. s.
The dignity of the Commonwealth, and ayds of the several Magistracies and
Offices thereunto belonging being provided for as aforesaid, the Overplus of
the Excize with the Product of the Sum rising shall be carefully managed by
the Senate and the People through the diligence of the Officers of the
Exchequer; till it amount unto Eight Millions, or to the purchase of about four
hundred thousand Pounds solid Revenue. At which time, the term of eleven years
being expired, the Excize, (except if be otherwise ordered by the Senate and
the people) shall be totally remitted, and abolished for ever.



At this Institution the Taxes (as will better appear in the Corollary) were
abated about one half, which made the Order when it came to be tasted, to be of
good relish with the People in the very beginning; though the Advantages then
were no-wise comparable unto the Consequences to be hereafter shown.
Nevertheless, my Lord Epimonus, who with much ado had been held till now,
found it Midsummer Moon, and broke out of Bedlam in this mood, My Lord Archon,
I Have a singing in my head like that of a Cart wheel, my brains are upon a
rotation; and some are so merry, that a man cannot speak his griefs; but if
your high-shod Prerogative, and those same slouching Fellows your Tribunes, do
not take my Lord Strategus's, and my Lord Orator's heads, and jole them
together under the Canopy, then let me be ridiculous unto all Posterity: For
here is a Commonwealth, to which if a man should take that of the Prentices in
their ancient administration of Justice at Shrove-tide, it were an
Aristocratie. You have set the very Rabble with Troncheons in their hands, and
the Gentry of this Nation like Cocks with scarlet gills, and the golden combs
of their Salaries to boot, lest they should not be thrown at.

Not a Night can I sleep for some horrid Apparition or other; One while these
Myrmidons are measuring silks by their quarter-Staves; another stuffing their
greasy Poutches with my Lord High-Treasurer's Jacobus's: For they are above a
thousand in Arms to three hundred, which, their Gowns being pulled over their
ears, are but in their doublets and hose. But what do I speak of a Thousand?
there be two thousand in every Tribe, that is an hundred thousand in the whole
Nation, not only in the Posture of an Army, but in a Civil capacity sufficient
to give us what Laws they please: Now every body knows, that the lower sort
of People regard nothing but money; and you say it is the duty of a Legislator
to presume all men to be wicked, wherefore they must fall upon the richer, as
they are an Army; or lest their minds should misgive them in such a villainy,
you have given them encouragement that they have a nearer way, seeing it may be
done every whit as well by the overballancing Power which they have in
Elections. There is a Fair which is annually kept in the Center of these
Territories at Kiberton, a Town famous for Ale, and frequented by
Good-Fellowes; where there is a solemnity of the Pipers, and Fiddlers of this
Nation, (I know not whether Lacedemon, where the Senate kept account of the
stops of the Flutes and of the Fiddlestrings of that Commonwealth, had any
such Custom) called the Bull-running, and he that catches and holds the
Bull, is the annual and Supreme Magistrate of that Comitia, or Congregation,
called King-Piper; without whose License it is not lawful for any of those
Citizens to enjoy the liberty of his Calling; nor is he otherwise legitimately
qualified (or civitate donatus) to lead Apes, or Bears in any Perambulation of
the same. Mine Host of the Bear, in Kiberton, the father of Ale, and Patron of
good Football and Cudgel-players has any time since I can remember been
Grand-Chancellor of this Order. Now say I, seeing great things arise from small
beginnings, what should hinder the People prone to their own advantage, and
loving money, from having Intelligence conveyed unto them by this same
King-Piper and his Chancellor, with their Loyal Subjects the Minstrills and
Bear-wards: Masters of Ceremonies, unto which there is great recourse in their
respective Perambulations, and which they will Commission and instruct, with
directions unto all the Tribes, willing and commanding them, That as they wish
their own goods, they choose none other into the next Primum Mobile, but of the
ablest Cudgel and Football Players: which done as soon as said, your Primum
mobile consisting of no other stuff, must of necessity be drawn forth into
your Nebulones, and your Galimofrys, and so the silken Purses of your Senate
and Prerogative being made of Sowes-ears, most of them Black-Smiths, they will
strike while the Iron is hot, and beat your Estates into Hob-nailes; Mine Host
of the Bear being Strategus, and King-Piper Lord Orator. Well, my Lords, it
might have been otherwise, expressed, but this is well enough a conscience. In
your way, the wit of Man shall not prevent this or the like Inconvenience; but
if this, (for I have conferred with Artists) be a Mathematical demonstration; I
could kneel to you, that ere it be too late we might return unto some kind of
Sobriety.

If we empty our Purses with these Pomps, Salaries, Coaches, Lacquays, and
Pages, what can the people say less, then that we have dressed a Senate and a
Prerogative to nothing, but to go unto the Park with the Ladies?



My Lord Archon, whose meekness resembled that of Moses, vouchsafed this
Answer: My Lords,
FOr all this, I can see my Lord Epimonus every night in the Park, and with
Ladies; nor do I blame this in a young man, or the respect which is and ought
to be given unto a Sex that is one half of the Commonwealth of mankind, and
without which the other would be none; howbeit our Magistrates I doubt may be
somewhat with the oldest to perform this part with much acceptance: (and,
Servire et non gradire, e cosa da morire) Wherefore we will lay no certain
obligation upon them in this point, but leave them (if it please you) unto
their own fate or discretion. But this, for I know my Lord Epimonus loves me,
and though I can never get his esteem, I will say, If he had a Mistress should
use him so, he would find it a sad life: or I appeal unto your Lordships, how I
can resent it from such a friend, that he puts King Piper's Politics in the
balance with mine. King Piper, I deny not, may teach his Bears to dance, but
they have the worst ear of all creatures; now how he should make them keep time
in fifty several Tribes, and that two years together, for else it will be to
no purpose, may be a small matter with my Lord to promise; but it seems unto
me of impossible performance: first, through the nature of the Bean; and
secondly, through that of the Ballot; or what he has has hitherto thought so
hard, is now come to be easy: but he may think, that for expedition they will
eat up these Balls like Apples; however, there is so much more in their way, by
the constitution of this, than is to be found in that of any other
Commonwealth, that I am reconciled; it now appearing plainly, that the points
of my Lords arrows are directed at no other white then to show the excellency
of our Government above others; which as he proceeds farther, is yet plainer:
while he makes it appear, that there can be no other elected by the people but
Smiths, (Brontesque Steropesque et nudus membra Pyracmon.) Othoniel, Aod,
Gideon, Jephtha, Samson, as in Israel. Miltiades, Aristides, Themistocles,
Cimon, Pericles, as in Athens. Papyrius, Cincinnatus, Camillus, Fabius, Scipio,
as in Rome. Smiths of the fortune of the Commonwealth, not such as forged
hobnails, but Thunderbolts. Popular Elections are of that kind, that all the
rest of the world is not able either in number or glory to equal those of these
three Commonwealths. These indeed were the ablest Cudgel and Football
players; bright Arms were their Cudgels, and the World was the Ball that lay
at their Feet. Wherefore we are not so to understand the Maxim of Legislators,
which holds all men to be wicked, as if it related to mankind or a
Commonwealth, the interests whereof are the only straight lines that they have
whereby to reform the crooked, but as it relates unto every man or party under
what color soever he or they pretend to be trusted apart, with or by the
whole. Hence then it is derived, which is made good in all experience, that the
Aristocracy is ravenous, and not the People: Your high-way-men are not such as
have Trades, or have been brought up unto industry; but such whose education
has pretended unto that of Gentlemen. My Lord is so honest, he does not know
the Maxims that are of absolute necessity unto the arts of wickedness; for it
is most certain, if there be not more purses then Thieves, that the thieves
themselves must be forced to turn honest, because they cannot thrive of their
Trade: but now if the people should turn thieves, who sees not that there would
be more thieves then purses; wherefore that an whole People should turn robbers
or Levellers is as impossible in the end as in the means. But that I do not
think your Artist mentioned, Astronomer or Arithmetician which he be, can tell
me how many barley corns would reach unto the Sun, I could be content he were
called unto the account, with which I shall conclude this Point: when by the
way I have chidden my Lords the Legislators, who as if they doubted my tackling
would not hold, leave me to flag in a perpetual calm; but for my Lord Epimonus,
who breathes now and then into my sails and stirs the waters. A Ship makes
not her way so briskly, as when she is handsomely brushed by the waves, and
tumbles over those that seem to tumble against her; in which case I have
perceived in the dark, that light has been stricken even out of the Sea, as in
this place, where my Lord Epimonus faining to give us a demonstration of one
thing, has given it of another, and of a better. For the people of this
Nation, if they amount in each Tribe unto two thousand Elders, and two thousand
Youth upon the annual Roll, holding a fifth unto the whole Tribe; then the
whole of a Tribe (not accounting women and children) must amount unto twenty
thousand; and so the whole of all the Tribes, being fifty, unto one million.
Now you have ten thousand Parishes, and reckoning these one with another, each
at one thousand pounds a year dry rent; the Rent or Revenue of the Nation as it
is or might be let to farm, amounts unto ten millions; and ten millions in
revenue divided equally unto one million of men, comes but to ten pounds a year
unto each whereupon to maintain himself, his Wife and Children. But he that
has a Cow upon the Common, and ernes his shilling by the day at his labor,
has twice as much already as this would come unto for his share; because if
the Land were thus divided, there would be no body to set him on work: my Lord
Epimonus's Footman, who costs him thrice as much as one of these could thus
get, would lose by this bargain. What should we speak of those innumerable
Trades whereupon men live not only better then others upon good shares of
Lands, but become also purchasers of greater Estates? Is not this the
demonstration which my Lord meant, that the Revenue of Industry in a Nation, at
the least in this, is three or fourfold greater then that of the mere rent? If
the people then obstruct Industry, they obstruct their own livelihood; but if
they make a War, they obstruct Industry. Take the bread out of the peoples
mouths, as did the Roman Patricians, and you are sure enough of a War, in
which case they may be Levellers; but our Agrarian causes their Industry to
flow with milk and honey. It may be answered, (O fortunati nimium, bona si sua
norint Agricolae) That this is true, if the people were given to understand
their own happiness; but where do they that? Let me answer with the like
question, Where do they not? They do not know their happiness it should seem
in France, Spain, and Italy: teach them what it is, and try whose sense is the
truer. But as to the late Wars in Germany, it has been affirmed unto me there,
that the Princes could never make the people to take Arms while they had bread,
and have therefore suffered Countries now and then to be wasted, that they
might get Soldiers: This you will find to be the certain pulse and temper of
the people; and if they have been already proved to be the most wise and
constant order of a Government; why should we think, when no man can produce
one example of the common Soldiery in an Army, mutinying because they had not
Captains pay; that the Prerogative should jole the heads of the Senate
together, in regard that these have the better Salaries, while it must be as
obnoxious unto the People in a Nation, as to the Soldiery in an Army, that it
is no more possible, their emoluments of this kind should be afforded by any
Commonwealth in the world to be made equal with those of the Senate, then that
the Common Soldiers should be equal with the Captains: it is enough to the
common Soldier that his virtue may bring him to be a Captain, and more unto
the Prerogative, that each of them is nearer to be a Senator.

If my Lord think our Salaries too great, and that the Commonwealth is not
Houswife enough; whether is it better huswifery that she should keep her family
from the snow, or suffer them to burn her house that they may warm themselves*
for one of these will be; do you think that she came off at a cheaper rate, when
men had their rewards by a thousand, two thousand pounds a year in Land of
Inheritance? If you say, that they will be more godly then they have been, it
may be ill taken; and if you cannot promise that, it is time we find out some
way of stinting at least, if not curing them of that same Sacra Fames. On the
other side, if a poor man (as such an one may save a City) give his sweat unto
the public, with what conscience can you suffer his Family in the mean time to
sterve. But he that lays his hand unto this plough, shall not lose by taking
it off from his own* and a Commonwealth that will mend this, shall be
penny-wise. The Sanhedrim of Israel being the Supreme, and a constant Court of
Judicature could not choose but be exceeding gainful. The Senate of the Bean in
Athens, because it was but annual, was moderately salariated, but that of the
Areopagites being for life bountifully; which advantages the Senators of
Lacedemon had, where there was little money or use of it, was in honor for
life. The Patricians having no profit took all; Venice being a situation, where
a man goes but to the door for his employment, the honor is great, and the
reward very little: but in Holland a Counselor of State has fifteen hundred
Flemish pounds a year, besides other accommodations. The States General have
more. And that Commonwealth looks nearer her penny, then ours need to do.

For the Revenue of this Nation, besides that of her industry, amounts, as has
been shown, unto ten millions, and the Salaries in the whole, come not unto
three hundred thousand pounds a pear; the beauty they will add unto the
Commonwealth will be exceeding great, and the people delight in the beauty of
their Commonwealth, the encouragement they will give unto the study of the
public very profitable, the accommodation they will afford unto your
Magistrates, very honorable and easy. And the sum, when it or twice as much
was spent in hunting and housekeeping, was never any grievance unto the
people. I am ashamed, to stand huckling upon this point; it is sordid. Your
Magistrates are rather to be provided with farther accommodations. For what if
there should be sickness? whither will you have them to remove? and this City
in the soundest times, for the heat of the year, is no wholesome abode: have a
care of their healths unto whom you commit your own. I would have the Senate
and the People, except they see cause to the contrary; every first of June, to
remove into the Country air, for the space of three months: you are better
fitted with Summer houses for them, then if you had built them to that purpose;
there is some twelve miles distant the Convallium upon the River Halcionia, for
the Tribunes and the Prerogative, a Palace capable of a thousand men; and at
twenty miles distant you have Mount Celia, reverend as well for the antiquity
as state of a Castle, completely capable of the Senate, the Proposers having
lodgings in the Convallium, and the Tribunes in Celia; it holds the
correspondence between the Senate and the People exactly. And it is a small
matter for the Proposers, being attended with the Coaches and Officers of
State, besides other conveniences of their own, to go a matter of five or ten
miles (those Seats are not much farther distant) to meet the people upon any
Heath or Field that shall be pointed: where having dispatched their business,
they may hunt their own Venizon, (for I would have the great walled Park upon
the Halcionia to belong to the Signory, and those about the Convallium unto the
Tribunes) and so go to supper. Pray my Lords, see that they do not pull down
these houses to sell the lead of them; for when you have considered on it, they
cannot be spared. The founders of the School in Hiera, provided that the boys
should have a Summer seat. You should have as much care of these Magistrates.
But there is such a selling, such a Jewish humor in our Republicans, that I
cannot tell what to say to it; only this, any man that knows what belongs to
a Commonwealth, or how diligent every Nation in that case has been, to
preserve her ornaments, and shall see waste lately made, the Woods adjoining
unto this City which served for the delight and health of it, cut down to be
sold for three pence; will tell you, that they who did such things would never
have made a Commonwealth: The like may be said of the ruin or damage done
upon our Cathedrals, ornaments in which this Nation excels all others: nor
shall this ever be excused upon the score of Religion; for though true it be,
that God dwells not in houses made with hands, yet you cannot hold your
Assemblies but in such houses, and these are of the best that have been made
with hands. Nor is it well argued that they are pompous, and therefore
profane, or less proper for Divine service, seeing that the Christians in the
Primitive Church chose to meet with one accord in the Temple; so far were they
from any inclination to pull it down.



The Orders of this Commonwealth, so far, or near so far forth, as they
concern the Elders, together with the several Speeches at the Institution,
which may serve unto the better understanding of them as so many Commentaries,
being shown; I should now come from the Elders unto the Youth, or from the
Civil Constitution of this Government unto the Military, but that I judge this
the fittest place; where into by the way to insert the Government of the City,
though for the present but perfunctorily.

THe Metropolis or Capital City of Oceana is commonly called Emporium, The
Government of Emporium.
though it consist of two Cities distinct, as well in name as in Government,
whereof the other is called Hiera: For which cause I shall treat of each apart,
beginning with Emporium.

Emporium with the Libertyes, is under a twofold division, The City Tribes and
Wards.
the one regarding the National and the other, Urbane or City Government; it
is divided in regard of the National Government into three Tribes, and in
respect of the Urbane into Twenty six, which for distinction sake are called
Wards, being contained under the three Tribes but unequally, wherefore the
first Tribe containing ten Wards is called Scazon, the second containing eight
Metoche, and the third containing as many, Telicouta: the bearing of which
names in mind concerns the better understanding of the Government.

Every Ward, has her Wardmot, Court or Inquest, Wardmot*
consisting of all that are of the clothing or Liveries of Companies, residing
within the same.

Such are of the Livery or Clothing as have obtained unto the dignity to we are
Gowns and Part Colored Hoods or Tipets according unto the Rules, and ancient
Customs of their respective Companies. The Liveries.


A Company is a Brotherhood of Tradesmen, The Companies.
professing the same Art, governed, according unto their Charter, by a Master
and Wardens: Of these there be a matter of sixty, whereof twelve are of greater
dignity then the rest, that is to say the Mercers, Grocers, Drapers,
Fishmongers, Goldsmiths, Skinners, Merchant-Taylors, Haberdashers, Saliers,
Ironmongers, Vinters, Cloth-workers, which with most of the rest have common
Halls, Common-Halls.
diverse of them being of ancient and magnificent Structure, wherein they have
frequent meetings at the summons of their Masters, or Wardens, for the managing
and regulation of their respective Trades and Mysteries. These Companies; as I
shall show, are the roots of the whole Government of the City: for the Liveries
that reside in the same Ward, meeting at the Wardmot inquest, unto which it
belongs to take cognizance of all sorts of moysances, and violations of the
customs and Orders of the City, and to present them unto the Court of Aldermen;
have also power to make election of two sorts of Magistrates or Officers; the
first of Elders or Aldermen of the Ward; the second of Deputies of the same,
otherwise called Common Council men.

The Wards in these Elections, because they do not elect all at once, Election
of Aldermen and of the Common Council men.
but some one year, and some another, observe the distinction of the three
Tribes; for example, the Scazon consisting of ten Tribes, makes election the
first year of ten Aldermen, one in each Ward, and of one hundred and fifty
Deputies, fifteen in each Ward: all which are Trienniall Magistrates or
Officers, that is to say, are to bear their dignity for the space of three
years.

The second year, the Metoche, consisting of eight Wards electeth eight
Aldermen, one in each Ward; and an hundred and twenty Deputies, fifteen in each
Ward; being also Trienniall Magistrates.

The third year Telicouta, consisting of a like number of Wards, electeth an
equal number of like Magistrates for a like term: So that the whole number of
the Aldermen, according unto that of the Wards, amounts unto twenty-six; and
the whole number of the Deputies, unto three hundred and ninety.

The Court of Aldermen.
The Aldermen thus elected have diverse capacities; for first, they are Justices
of the Peace, for the term, and by consequence of their election; secondly,
they are Presidents of the Wardmot, and Governors, each of that Ward; whereby
he was elected; and last of all these Magistrates being assembled together,
constitute the Senate of the City, otherwise called the Court of Aldermen: but
no man is capable of this election, that is not worth ten thousand pounds: this
Court upon every new Election makes choice of censors out of their own number.

The Common-Councill.
The Deputies in like manner being assembled together, constitute the
Prerogative Tribe of the City; otherwise called, the Common-Councill: by which
means the Senate and the People of the City were caught in as it were by the
rapture of the National Government, to the same wheel of annual, trienniall,
and perpetual revolution.

The Common Hall.
But the Liveries over and above the right of these elections by their
divisions mentioned; being assembled altogether at the Guild of the City,
constitute an other Assembly called the Common Hall.

The Election of the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs.
The Common Hall has right of two other elections; the one of the Lord Mayor,
and the other of the two Sheriffs being annual Magistrates. The Lord Major can
be elected out of no other then one of the twelve Companies of the first ranks,
and the Common Hal agreeeth by the plurality of Suffrages upon two names; which
being preferred unto the Lord Mayor, for the time being, and the Court of
Aldermen: they elect one by their scruteny, for so they call it, though it
differ from that of the Commonwealth: The Orator or Assistant unto the Lord
Major in the holding of his Courts is some able Lawyer elected by the Court of
Aldermen, and called the Recorder of Emporium.

The Lord Major being thus elected, has two capacities; the one regarding the
Nation, the other the City: in that which regards the City, he is President of
the Court of Aldermen, having power to assemble the same, or any other Council
of the City, as the Common-Councill or Common Hall, at his will and pleasure;
and in that which regards the Nation, he is Commander in Chief, of the three
Tribes, whereinto the City is divided; one of which he is to bring up in person
at the National Muster unto the Ballot; as his Vice Comites, or High-Sheriffs,
are to do by the other two, each at their distinct pavilion, where the nine
Aldermen elected Censors, are to officiate by three in each Tribe, according
unto the Rules and Orders already given unto the Censors, of the rustic
Tribes: And the Tribes of the City have no other then one common Phylarch,
which is the Court of Aldermen, and the Common-Councill; for which cause they
elect not at their muster the first List called the Prime Magnitude.

The Conveniences of this alteration of the City Government, besides the bent
of it unto conformity with that of the Nation, were many; Some conveniences in
this alteration.
whereof I shall mention but a few, as first, whereas men under the former
administration, when the burden of some of these Magistracyes, lay for life,
were oftentimes chosen not for their fitness, but rather unfitness, or at
least unwillingnesse to undergo such a weight, whereby they were put at great
rates to fine for their ease; a man might now take his share in Magistracy,
with that equity which is due unto the public, and without any great
inconvenience unto his private affairs. Secondly, whereas the City, in as much
as the Acts, of the Aristocracy or Court of Aldermen in their former way of
proceeding, were rather Impositions, then Propositions, was frequently
disquieted, with the inevitable consequence, in the power of debate exercised
by the popular part or Common Council; the right of debate being hence forth
established in the Court of Aldermen and that of result in the Common Council,
killed the branches of division in the root, which for the present may suffice
to have been said of the City of Emporium.

That of Hiera consists as to the National Government of two Tribes, the
first called Agoraea, the second Propola: The Government of Hiera.
but as to the peculiar Policy of twelve Maniples, or Wards divided into three
cohorts each cohort containing four Wards, whereof the Wards of the first
cohort elect for the first year four Burgesses, one in each ward; the Wards of
the second cohort, for the second year four Burgesses, one in each Ward; and
the wards of the third cohort for the third year four Burgesses, one in each
Ward; all trienniall Magistrates: by which the twelve Burgesses, making one
Court for the Government of this City, according unto their instructions by act
of Parliament, The Court.
fall likewise into an annual, triennial, and perpetual revolution.

The High Steward.
This Court being thus constituted, makes election of diverse Magistrates; as
first of an High Steward, who is commonly some person of quality, and this
Magistracy is elected in the Senate by the scruteny of this Court; unto him
they choose some able Lawyer to be his Deputy, and to hold the Court; and last
of all they elect out of their own number six Censors.

The High Steward is Commander in Chief, of the two Tribes, whereof he in
person brings up the one at the National Muster unto the Ballot, and his
Deputy the other, at a distinct pavilion; the six Censors chosen by the Court
officiating by three in each Tribe at the Urnes, and these Tribes, have no
other Phylarch, but this Court.

As for the manner of elections, and suffrage both in Emporium and Hiera, it
may be said once for all, that they are performed by the Ballott, and according
unto the respective rules already given.

There be other Cities and Corporations throughout the territory, whose Policy
being much of this kind, would be tedious and not worth the labor to insert,
nor dare I stay. Juvenum manus emicat ardens.

I return with the method of the Commonwealth, unto the remaining part of her
Orbs which are military and provincial, the military except the Strategus,
and the Polemarchs or field Officers consisting of the youth only, and the
Provincial consisting of a mixture, both of the Elders and of the Youth.

To begin with the Youth, or the military Orbs, they are Circles unto which
the Commonwealth must have a Care to keep close; A man is a Spirit raised up
by the Magic of Nature; if she do not stand safe, and so that she may set him
to some good and useful work, he spets fire, and blows up Castles; for where
there is life, there must be motion or work and the work of idleness is
mischief, ( Non omnibus dormit) But the work of industry is health. To set men
unto this, the Commonwealth must begin early with them, or it will be too
late: and the means whereby she sets them unto it, is education; the Plastic
art of government. But it is as frequent as sad in experience, whether through
negligence, or which in the consequence is all one, or worse, overfondnesse in
domestic performance of this Duty, that innumerable Children come to owe their
utter Perdition unto their own Parents; in each of which, the Commonwealth
loses a Citizen; Wherefore the Laws of a Government how wholesomesoever in
themselves, being such as if men by a congruity in their Education be not
brought up to find a relish in them, they will spit at: The education of a man's
Children is not wholly to be committed or trusted unto himself. You find in
Livy the Children of Brutus, having been bred under Monarchy, make faces at the
Commonwealth of Rome, A King (say they) is a Man, you may prevail with him
when you have need there should be Law, or when you have need there should be
no Law. He has favors in the right, and he frowns not in the wrong place; he
knows his friends from his Enemies. But Laws are deaf inexorable things,
such as make no difference between a Gentlemen and an ordinary fellow: a Man
can never be merry for them, for to trust altogether to his own innocence is a
sad Life: unhappy wantons! Scipio (on the other side) when he was but a Boy
(some two or three and twenty) being informed that certain Patricians, or
Roman Gentlemen, through a qualme upon the defeat which Haniball had given
them at Cannae, were laying their heads together and contriving their Flight
with the transportation of their goods out of Rome; drew his sword and setting
himself at the door of the Chamber where they were at Council, protested, That
who did not immediately swear, not to desert the Commonwealth he would make
his Soul to desert his Body, Let men argue as they please for Monarchy, or
against a Commonwealth, the world shall never see any man so sottish or wicked
as (in cool blood) to prefer the education of the Sons of Brutus, before that
of Scipio; and of this mould, except a Melius or a Manlius was the whole youth
of that Commonwealth though not ordinarily so well cast. Now the health of a
Government, and the education of the youth being of the same pulse, no wonder
if it have been the constant practice of well ordered Commonwealths to commit
the Care and feeling of it unto public Magistrates. A duty that was performed
in such manner by the Areopagites, as is elegantly praised by Isocrates. The
Athenians, says he, write not their Laws upon dead Walls, nor content
themselves with having ordained punishments for Crimes, but provide in such
manner by the education of their youth, that there be no Crimes for punishment:
he speaks of those Laws which reguarded manners, not of those orders which
concerned the administration of the Commonwealth, least you should think he
contradicts Xenophon and Polibius. The Children of Laetdemon, at the seventh
year of their Age, were delivered unto the paedonomi, Schoolmasters, not
Mercenary but Magistrates of the Commonwealth, unto which they were accomptable
for their charge: by these at the age of fourteen they were preferred unto
other Magistrates called the Beidiaei, having the inspection of the Games, and
exercises, among which that of the Platanista was famous, a kind of Fight in
squadrons, but somewhat too fierce; when they came to be of military age, they
were listed of the Mora, and so continued in readiness for public Service
under the Discipline of the Polemarches. But the Roman Education and Discipline
by the Centurys and Classes is that unto which the Commonwealth of Oceana has
had a more concerned eye in her three Essays, being certain degrees by which
the youth commence as it were in Arms for Magistracy, as appears by The
Twenty Sixth Order, instituting that if a Parent have but one Son, the
Education of that one Son shall be wholly at the disposing of that Parent,
but (whereas there be Free-Schools erected and endowed, or to be erected and
endowed in every Tribe of this Nation, to a sufficient proportion for the
Education of the Children of the same; which Schools, to the end that shere be
no detriment or hindrance unto the Scholars upon case of removeing from one
unto another, are every of them to be Governed by the strict inspection of the
Censors of the Tribes, both upon the Schoolmasters their manner of life and
teaching, and the Proficiency of the Children; after the Rules and method of
that in Hiera). If a Parent have more Sons then one, the Censors of the Tribes
shall animadvert upon and punnish him that sends not his Sons within the
ninth year of their age unto some one of the Schools of a Tribe, there to be
kept and taught if he be able at his Charges, and if he be not able, Gratis
till they arrive at the age of fifteen years. And a Parent may dispose of his
Sons at the fifteenth year of their age, according unto his choice or ability,
whether it be unto Service in the way of Apprentices unto some Trade, or
otherwise, or unto farther study, as by sending them unto the Inns of Court, of
Chancery, or unto one of the Universities of this Nation; but he that takes
not upon him some one of the Professions proper unto some one of those places,
shall not continue longer in any of them till they have attained unto the age
of eighteen years; and every man having not at that age of 18. years taken
upon him, or addicted himself unto the profession of the Law, Theology, or
Physic; and being no Servant, shall be capable of the Essay of the youth, and
no other Person whatsoever; except a man having taken upon him such a
Profession, happen to lay it by, ere he arrive at three or four and twenty
years of age, and be admitted unto this Capacity by the respective Phylarch,
being satisfied that he kept not out so long with any design to evade the
service of the Commonwealth, but that being no sooner at his own disposing it
was no sooner at his own choice to come in. And if any Youth or other Person of
this Nation have a desire to travel into Foreign Countries upon occasion of
business, delight, or farther improvement of his Education; the same shall be
lawful for him upon a pass obtained from the Censors in Parliament, putting a
convenient limit unto the time, and recommending him unto the Ambassadors by
whom he shall be assisted and unto whom he shall yield honor and obedience in
their respective residences. Every Youth at his return from his travel, is to
present the Censors with a Paper, of his own writing, containing the interest
of State or form of Government of the Countries or some one of the Countries
where he has been; and if it be good, the Censors shall cause it to be printed
and published, prefixing a Line in Commendation of the Author.

Every Wednesday, next ensuing the last of December, the whole Youth of every
Parish, that is to say every man (not excepted by the foregoing part of the
Order) being from eighteen years of age to 30. shall repair at the found of
the Bell unto the respective Church, and being there assembled in presence of
the overseers, who are to govern the Ballot, and the Constable who is to
officiate at the Urne, shall after the manner of the Elders, elect every fifth
man of their whole number, (provided that they choose not above one of two
Brothers at one Election, nor above half if they be four or upward) to be a
Stratiot or Deputy of the Youth; And the list of the Stratiots so elected being
taken by the overseers shall be entered in the Parish Book, and diligently
preserved as a record, called the first Essay. They whose estates by the Law
are able, or whose Friends are willing to mount them, shall be of the Horse,
the rest are of the Foot. And he who has been one year of this list is not
capable of being re-elected till after one years intervall.

Every Wednesday, next ensuing the last of January, the Stratiots being Mustred
at the Rendevouz of their respective hundred, shall in the presence of the
Iury-men, who are overseers of that Ballot, and of the High-Constable who is to
officiate at the Urne, elect out of the Horse of their Troop, or Company one
Captain, and one Ensign or Cornet, unto the Command of the same; And the
Iury-men having entered the List of the Hundred into a Record to be diligently
kept at the Rendevouz of the same; the first public Game of this Commonwealth
shall begin and be performed in this manner. Whereas there is to be at every
Rendevouz of an Hundred, one Cannon, Culverin, or Sakre; The prize Arms, being
forged by sworn Armorours of this Commonwealth, and for their proof, besides
their beauty, viewd and tried at the Tower of Emporium, shall be exposed, by
the Justice of Peace appertayning unto that Hundred; the said Justice, with the
Iury-men being Judge of the Game: And the Judges shall deliver unto the
Horseman that gains the Prize at the carrier, one suit of Arms being of the
value of twenty pounds: Unto the Pikeman that gains the Prize at throwing the
Bullet, one suit of Arms of the value of ten-pounds: Unto the M^squetier that
gains the Prize at the Mark with his M^squet, one suit of Arms of the value
of ten pounds; And unto the Canoneer that gains the Prize at the Mark with
the Cannon, Culverin, or Sakre, one Chain of Silver being of the value of ten
pounds. Provided, that no one Man at the same Muster play above one of the
Prizes. Whosoever gains a Prize is bound to wear it (if it be his lot) upon
Service; and no man shall sell, or give away an Armor thus won, except he have
lawfully attained unto two or more of them, at the Games.

The Games being ended, and the Master dismissed, the Captain of the Troop or
Company shall repair with a Copy of the List unto the Lord Lieutenant of the
Tribe, and he High-Constable with a Duplicate of the same unto the Custos
Rotulorum, or M^ster-Master-Generall, to be also communicated with the Censors;
in each of which the Iury-men giving a note upon every name of an only Son
shall certify that the List is without subterfuge or evasion; or, if it be not,
upon whom the evasion or subterfuge lies, unto the end that the Phylarch or
the Censors may animadvert accordingly.

And every Wednesday next ensuing the last of February, the Lord Lieutenant,
Custos Rotulorum, the Censors and the Conductor shall receive the whole M^ster
of the Youth of that Tribe at the Rendevouz of the same, distributing the Horse
and Foot with their Officers, according unto the directions given in the like
case for the distribution of the Elders, and the whole squadron being put by
that means in Batalia; the second Game of this Commonwealth shall begin, by
the exercise of the Youth in all the parts of their military discipline
according unto the Orders of Parliament, or direction of the Council of War in
that Case: And the hundred pounds allowed by the Parliament for the ornament of
the Muster in every Tribe, shall be expended by the Phylarch, upon such
artificial Castles, Citadels, or like devices, as may make the best and most
profitable sport for the Youth and their spectators. Which being ended, the
Censors having prepared the Urnes by putting into the Horse Urne, 220. Gold
Balls, whereof ten are to be marked with the Letter M. and other ten with the
Letter P. Into the Foot Urne, 700. Gold Balls, whereof; 50. are to be marked
with the Letter M. and 50. with the Letter P. and made up the Gold Balls in
each Urne by the addition of Silver Balls unto the same, in number equal with
the Horse and Foot of the Stratiots: the Lord Lieutenant shall call the
Stratiots unto the Urnes, where they that draw the Silver Balls shall return
unto their Places; and they that draw the Gold Balls shall fall off to the
pavilion, where, for the space of one hour they may chopp and change their
Balls according as one can agree with another, whose Lot he likes better* but
the hour being out the conductor seperating them, whose Gold Balls have no
letter, from those whose Balls are marked; shall cause the Crier to call the
Alphabet, as first A. whereupon all they whose Gold Balls are not marked, and
whose sirnames begin with the Letter A. shall repair unto a Clerk appertayning
unto the Custos Rotulorum, who shall first take the names of that Letter: then
those of B. and so forth; till all the names be Alphabetically enrolled; and
the Youth of this List being six hundred in a Tribe Foot, that is 30000 Foot in
all the Tribes; and two hundred in a Tribe Horse, that is 10000. Horse in all
the Tribes, are the second Essay of the Stratiots, and the standing Army of
this Commonwealth to be always ready upon Command to march. They whose Balls
are marked with M. amounting by 20 Horse, and 50. Foot in a Tribe unto 2500
Foot and 500. Horse in all the Tribes; And they whose Balls are marked with P.
in every point correspondent are parts of the third Essay; they of M. bring
forthwith to march for Marpesia and they of P. for Panopea, to the ends and
according to the further directions following in the order for the Provincial
Orbs.

If the Polemarchs, or Field Officers be elected by the Scruteny of the Council
of War, and the Strategus Commanded by the Parliament or the dictator to
march, the Lords Lievtenants (who have power to Muster and Discipline the Youth
so often as they receive Orders for the same from the Council of War) are to
deliver the second Essay, or so many of them as shall be Commanded unto the
Conductors, who shall present them unto the Lord Strategus at the fime and
place appointed by his Excellency to be the General Rendevouze of Oceana where
the Council of War shall have the accommodation of Horses and Arms for his
men in readiness, and the Lord Strategus, having armed, mounted, and
distributed them, whether according unto the recommendation of their Prize
Arms, or otherwise; shall lead them away unto his Shipping, being also ready,
and provided with Uictualls Ammunition, Artigliery, and all other necessarys,
commanding them, and disposing of the whole conduct of the War by his sole
power and authority: and this is the third Essay of the Stratiots, which being
Shipped, or marched out of their Tribes, the Lords Lievtenants shall re-elect
the second Essay out of the remaining part of the first; and the Senate another
Strategus.

If any veterane or veteranes of this Narion, the term of whose Youth, or
militia is expired, having a desire to be entertained in the further Service of
the Commonwealth shall present him or themselves at the Rendevouz of Oceana,
unto the Strategus, it is in his power to take on such and so many of them as
shall be consenfed unto by the Polemarchs, and to send back an equal number of
the Stratiots.

And for the better managing of the proper Forces of this Nation the Lord
Strategus by appointment of the Council of War, and out of such Levies as they
shall have made in either or both of the Provinces, unto that end, shall
receive Auxiliarys at Sea, or elsewhere at some certain place, not exceeding
his proper Arms, in number.

And whosoever shall refuse any one of his three Essays, except upon cause
shown he be dispensed withal by the Phylarch, or if the Phylarch be not
assembled, by the Censors of his Tribe, shall be deemed an Helot or public
Servant, pay one fifth of his yearly revenue besides all other Taxes unto the
Commonwealth for his Protection, and be incapable of bearing Magistracy except
such as is proper to the Law. Nevertheless if a man have but two Sons, the
Lord Lieutenant shall not suffer above one of them to come unto the Urne at one
election of the second Essay: and though he have above two Sons, there shall
not come above half the Brothers at one Election; and if a man have but one
Son, he shall not come unto the Urne at all without the consent of his Parents,
or his Guardians nor shall it be any reproach unto him, or impediment unto his
bearing of Magistracy.



This for Expoditions that are Foreign will be proved, and explained together
with The Twenty Seventh Order, Providing in case of invasion apprehended, that
the Lords High-Sheriffs of the Tribes upon Commands received from the
Parliament, or the Dictator, distribute the bands of the Elders into divisions
after the nature of the Essays of the Youth, and that the second division or
Essay of the Elders being made and consisting of 30000 Foot, and 10000 Horse be
ready to march with the second Essay of the Youth, and be brought also by the
Conductors unto the Strategus.

The second Essay of the Elders and Youth being marched out of their Tribes, the
Lords High-Sheriffs and Lievtenants shall have the remaining part of the
annual Bands; both of Elders and Youth in readiness, which if the Beacons be
fired, shall march unto the Rendevouz to be in that case appointed by the
Parliament or the Dictator, and the Beacons being fired, the Curiata Comitia or
Parochial Congregations shall elect a fourth, both of Elders and Youth to be
immediately upon the Guard of the Tribes, and dividing themselves as aforesaid
to march also in their divisions according unto Orders, which method in case of
extremity shall proceed unto the election of a third, or the leavy of a second,
or of the last man in the Nation, by the power of the Lords High-Sheriffs* to
the end that the Commonwealth in her utmost pressure may show her trust that
God in his justice will remember mercy; by humbling her self, and yet
preserving her courage, discipline and constancy, even unto the last drop of
her blood, and the utmost farthing.

The Services performed by the youth, or by the Elders in case of Invasion, and
according unto this Order, shall be at their proper cost and charges that are
any ways able to endure it, but if there be such as are known in their
Parishes to be so indigent that they cannot march out of their Tribes, nor
undergo the burden, in this case incumbent, the Congregations of their
Parishes shall furnish them with sufficient sums of money to be repaid upon
the Certificate of the same by the Parliament when the action shall be over.
And of that which is respectively enjoined by this Order, any Tribe, Parish*
Magistrate, or Person that shall fail, is to answer for it at the Council of
War, as a Desertor of his Country.



The Archon being the greatest Captain of his, (if not of any) Age, added much
unto the Glory of this Commonwealth, by interweaving the Militia with more Art
and Luster then any Legislator from, or before, the time of Servius Tullius.
But as the bones or Skeleton of a man, though the greatest part of his beauty
be contained in their proportion or Symmetry, yet shown without flesh, are a
spectacle that is rather horrid; so without Discourses, the Orders of a
Commonwealth: which if she go forth in that manner, may complain of her
friends that they stand mute, and staring upon her: Wherefore this Order was
thus fleshed by the Archon: My Lords,
DIogenes, seeing a young Fellow drunk, told him that his Father was drunk when
he begot him: For this in natural, I must confess I see no reason; but in
Political Generation, it is right: The Vices of the People are from their
Governors. Those of their Governors, from their Laws or Orders; and those of
their Laws or Orders, from their Legislators. ( Ut male posuimus initia, sic
caetera sequuntur;) What ever was in the womb imperfect as to her proper work,
Cicero.
comes very rarely, or not at all to perfection: And the formation of a Citizen
in the Womb of the Commonwealth, is his Education.

Education by the first of the foregoing Orders is of Six kinds; At the School,
in the Mechannicks, at the Universities, at the Innes of Court or Chancery, in
Travels, and in Military Discipline: Some of which I shall touch, and some I
shall handle.

That which is proposed for the erecting, and endowing of Schools throughout
the Tribes capable of all the Children of the same, and able to give unto the
Poor the Education of theirs Gratis, is only matter of direction in a case of
very great Charity, as easing the needy of the Charge of their Children from
the Ninth to the Fifteenth year of their Age; during which time their work
cannot be profitable, and restoring them when they may be of use, furnished
with tools, whereof there be advantages to be made in every work, seeing he
that can read, and use his pen, has some convenience by it in the meanest
Vocation; and it cannot be conceived, but that which comes (though in small
parcels) to the advantage of every Man in his Vocation, must amount unto the
advantage of every Vocation; and so unto that of the Commonwealth: Wherefore
this is commended unto the Charity of every wise-hearted, and well-minded man
to be done in time; and as GOD shall stir him up or enable him: there being
such provision already in the Case, as may give us leave to proceed without
obstruction.

Parents (under animadversion of the Censors) are to dispose of their Children
at the fifteenth year of their Age unto something; but what, is left, according
to their abilities or inclination, in their own Choice: This, with the Many,
must be unto the Mechanics, that is to say, unto Agriculture or Husbandry;
unto Manufactures; or unto Merchandise.

Agriculture is the Bread of the Nation, we are hung upon it by the teeth; it
is a mighty Nursery of Strength, the best Army, and the most assured Knapsack;
it is managed with the least turbulent or ambitious, and the most innocent
hands of all other Arts. Wherefore I am of Aristotle's opinion, That a
Commonwealth of Husbandmen (and such is ours) must be the best of all others.
Certainly, my Lords, you have no measure of what ought to be, but what can be
done for the encouragement of this Profession: I could wish I were Husband good
enough to direct something to this end; but racking of Rents is a vile thing in
the richer sort, an uncharitable one to the poorer; a mark of slavery, and nips
your Commonwealth in the fairest Blossom: On the other side, if there should
be too much ease given in this kind, it would occasion Sloth, and so destroy
Industry the nerve of a Commonwealth* But if ought might be done to hold the
balance eeven between these two, it would be a Work in this Nation equal unto
that for which Fabius was called Maximus by the Romans.

In Manufactures and Merchandise the Hollander has gotten the start of us; but
at the long-run it will be found, that a People Working upon a Foreign
Commodity, does but f^rm the Manufacture, and that it is entailed upon them
only, where the growth of it is native: As also that it is one thing to have
the Carriage of other men's Goods, and another for a man to bring his own unto
the best market. Wherefore Nature having provided encouragement for these Arts
in this Nation above others, where the people growing, they of necessity must
also increase, it cannot but establish them upon a far more sure and effectual
Foundation then that of the Hollanders. But their Educations are in order unto
the first things or necessities of nature; Cicero.
as Husbandry unto the Food; Manufacture unto the Clothing; and Merchandise
unto the Purse of the Commonwealth.

There be other things in Nature, which being second as to their Order, for
their dignity and value are first, and such to which the other are but
Accommodations; of this sort are especially these, Religion, Justice, Courage,
Wisdom.

The Education that answers unto Religion in our Government is that of the
Universities. Moses the Divine Legislator was not only learned in all the
Learning of the Egyptians, but took into the Fabric of his Commonwealth the
Learning of the Midianites in the advice of Jethro: and his Foundation of an
University laid in the Tabernacle, and finished in the Temple, became that
Pinnacle from whence all the Learning in the World has taken wing; as the
Philosophy of the Stoics, from the Phariseet; that of the Epicureans, from the
Sadduces; and from the Learning of the Jews, so often quoted by our SAVIOR,
Acts 17..18.
and fulfilled in Him, the Christian Religion Athens was the most famous
University in her days and her Senators, that is to say, the Areopagites were
all Philosophers. Lacedemon (to speak truth) though she could write and read,
was not very bookish. But who disputes hence against Universities, disputes
in the same Argument against Agriculture, Manufacture, and Merchandise, every
one of these having been equally forbidden by Lycurgus, not for it self, (for
if he had not been Learned in all the Learning of Crete, and well traveled in
the knowledge of other Governments, he had never made his Commonwealth) but
for the diversion which they must have given his Citizens from their Arms, who
being but few, if they had minded any thing else, must have deserted the
Commonwealth. For Rome, she (had ingenium par imperio) was as Learned as
Great, and held her College of Argurs in much reverence. Venice has taken her
Religion upon trust: Holland, cannot tend it to be very studious: Nor does
Switz mind it much; yet are they all addicted unto their Universities. We cut
down Trees to build Houses, but I would have some body show me, by what reason
or experience, the cutting down of an University, should tend unto the setting
up of a Commonwealth. Of this I am sure; the perfection of a Commonwealth is
not to be attained unto without the knowledge of ancient Prudence; nor the
knowledge of ancient prudence without Learning; nor Learning without Schools of
good Literature; and these are such as we call Universities. Now though mere
University-Learning of it self, be that which (to speak the words of
Verulamius) Crafty men contemn, and simple men only admire, yet is it such as
wise men have use of; for Studies do not teach their own use, but that is a
wisdom without, and above them, won by observation. Expert men may execute,
and perhaps judge of particulars one by one; but the general Counsels and the
plots, and the marshalling of affairs, come best from those that are learned.
Wherefore if you would have your children to be Statesmen, let them drink by
all means of these Fountains, where perhaps there was never any. But what
though the water a man drinks be not nourishment? it is the vehiculum without
which he cannot be nourished. Nor is Religion less concerned in this point
than Government; For take away your Universities, and in a few years you lose
it.

The Holy Scriptures are written in Hebrew and in Greek, they that have neither
of these Languages may think leight of both; But find me a man that has one in
perfection, the study of whose whole Life it has not been. Again, this is
apparent to us in daily Conversation, that if four or five Persons that have
lived together be talking, another speaking the same Language may come in, and
yet understand very little of their Discourse: in that it relates unto
Circumstances, Persons, Things, Times and Places which he knows not. It is no
otherwise with a Man, having no insight of the times in which they were
written, and the Circumstances unto which they relate, in the reading of
ancient Books, whether they be Divine or humane. For example, when we fall upon
the discourse about Baptism and Regeneration, that was between our Savior and
Nicodemus where Christ reproacheth him of his Ignorance in this manner: Art
thou a Doctor in Israel, and understandest not these things? What shall we
think of it? or, Wherefore should a Doctor in Israel have understood these
things more then another, but that both Baptism and Regeneration (as was
showed at large by my Lord Phosphorus) were Doctrines held in Israel? Instance
in one place of a hundred, which he that has not mastered the circumstances
unto which they relate, cannot understand. Wherefore to the understanding of
the Scripture, it is necessary to have ancient Languages, and the knowledge of
ancient times, or the aid of them who have such knowledge: and to have such as
may be always able and ready to give such aid, (unless you would borrow it of
another Nation, which would not only be base, but deceitful) it is necessary
unto a Commonwealth that She have Schools of good Literature, or Universities
of her own. We are Commanded (as has been said more then once) to search the
Scriptures; And whether do they search the Scriptures that take this pains in
ancient Languages and Learning? or they that will not, but trusting unto
Translations only, and to words as they sound unto present Circumstances? than
which nothing is more fallible, Or certain to lose the true sense of
Scriptures, pretend to be above humane understanding, for no other cause then
that they are below it? But in searching the Scriptures by the proper use of
our Universities, we have been heretofore blessed with greater Victories and
Trophies against the purple Hosts, and golden Standards of the Romish
Hierarchy, than any Nation; and therefore, why we should relinquish this upon
the presumption of some, that because there is a greater Light they have it, I
do not know. There is a greater Light then the Sun, but it does not extinguish
the Sun, nor does any Light of GOD's giving extinguish that of Nature, but
increase and Sanctify it. Wherefore, neither the honor borne by the
Israelitish, Roman, nor any other Commonwealth that I have shown, unto their
Eclesiasticks consisted in being governed by them, but in consulting them in
matter of Religion; upon whose responsa, or Oracles, they did afterward as
they thought fit. Nor would I be mistaken, as if by affrming the Universities,
to be in order both unto Religion and Government, of absolute necessity, I
declared them or the Ministry in any wise fit to be trusted so far as to
exercise any power not derived from the civil Magistrate, in the
administration of either. If the Jewish Religion were directed and established
by Moses, it was directed and established by the civil Magistrate; or if Moses
exercised this administration as a Prophet, the same Prophet did invest with
the same administration, the Sanhedrim, and not the Priests; and so does our
Commonwealth, the Senate and not the Clergy. They who had the supreme
Administration or Government of the National Religion in Athens, were the
first Archon, the ( Rex Sacrificus, or) High Priest, and Polemarch; which
Magistrates were ordained or elected, ( per (...)) by the holding up of Hands,
in the Church, Congregation, or Comitia of the People. The Religion of
Lacedemon was governed by the Kings, who were also high Priests, and officiated
at the sacrifice, these had power to substitute their Pythii, Ambassadors or
Nuncios by which not without concurrence of the Senate they held intelligence
with the Oracle of Apollo at Delphos. And the Ecclesiastical part of the
Commonwealth of Rome was governed by the Pontifex Maximas, the Rex
Sacrificulus, and the Elaminus, all ordained or elected by the people, the
Pontifex, Tributis; the King, Centuriatis; and the Flamines or Parish Priests,
Curiatis Comitiis. I do not mind you of these things, as if for the matter
there were any parallel to be drawn out of their superstitions to our Religion;
but to show that for the manner, ancient prudence is as well a rule in divine
as humane things; nay, and such an one as the Apostles themselves, ordaining
Elders by the holding up of hands in every Congregation, have exactly followed;
for some of the Congregations where they thus ordained Elders were those of
Antioch, Iconium, Lystra, Derbe, the Country of Lycaonia, Pisidia, Pamphylia,
Perga, with Attalia. Now that these Cittys and Countries when the Romans
propagated their Empire into Asia, were found most of them Commonwealths, and
that many of the rest were endued with like power, so that the people living
under the protection of the Roman Emperors, continued to the elect their own
Magistrates, is so known a thing; that I wonder whence it is, men quite
contrary unto the universal proof of these examples, will have Ecclesiastical
Government to be necessarily distinct from civil power; when the right of the
Elders ordained by the holding up of hands in every Congregation, to teach the
people, was plainly derived from the same civil power by which they ordained
the rest of their Magistrates. And it is no otherwise in our Commonwealth;
where the Parochial Congregation electeth or ordains her Pastor. To object
the Commonwealth of Venice in this place were to show us that it has been no
otherwise, but where the civil power, has lost the liberty of her Conscience
by embracing of Popery: as also that to take away the liberty of conscience in
this administration from the civil power, were a proceeding which has no
other president, than such as is Popish. Wherefore your Religion is thus
settled; the Universities are the seminaries of that part which is national,
by which means others withal safely may be permitted to follow the liberty of
their consciences, in reguard that however they behave themselves, the
ignorance of the unlearned in this case cannot lose the religion, nor disturb
the Government; which otherwise it would most certainly do, and the
universities with their Emoluments, as also the Benefices of the whole Nation
are to be improoved by such Augmentations, as may make a very decent and
comfortable subsistence for the Ministry, which is neither to be allowed Synods
nor Assemblies, (but upon the occasion shown in the Universities, they are
consulted by the Council for Religion, suffered to meddle with affairs of
State) nor to be capable of any other public preferment whatsoever; by which
means the interest of the learned can never come to corrupt your Religion, nor
disturb your Government; which otherwise it would most certainly do. Venice,
though she do not see, or cannot help the corruption of her Religion, is yet so
circumspect to avoid disturbance in this kind of her Government, that her
Council proceeds not unto election of Magistrates, till it be proclaimed, Fora
Papalini, by which words such as have consanguinity with red hats, or relation
unto the Court of Rome, are warned to withdraw. If a Minister in Holland meddle
with matter of State, the Magistrate sends him a pair of shoes, whereupon if
he do not go, he is driven away from his charge. I wonder why Ministers of all
men should be perpetually tampering with Government, first because they as well
as others have it in express charge to submit themselves unto the Ordinances
of men; and secondly, because these Ordinances of men must go upon such
Political Principles; as they of all others (by any thing that can be found in
their writings or actions) least understand: whence you have the suffrage of
all Nations unto this sense: An ounce of wisdom is worth a pound of Clergy:
Your greatest Clerks are not your wisest men: and when some foul absurdity in
State is committed, it is common with the French, and even the Italians, to
call it Pas de Clerc, or, Governo du Prete. They may bear with men that will be
preaching without study, while they will be governing without Prudence. My
Lords, if you know not how to rule the Clergy, you will most certainly be like
a man that cannot rule his Wife; have neither quiet at home, nor honor abroad.
Their honest Vocation is to teach your Children at the Schools and the
Universities, and the people in the Parishes; and Yours is concerned to see
that they do not play the shrewes: of which parts consists the Education of
your Commonwealth, so far forth as it regards Religion.

To Justice, or that part of it which is commonly executive, answers the
Education of the Inns of Court, or Chancery. Upon which (to Philosophize)
requires a peculiar kind of Learning that I have not. But they who take upon
them any Profession proper unto the Educations mentioned, that is, Theology,
Physic, Law, are not at leisure for the Essays: Wherefore the Essays being
Degrees, whereby the Youth Commence for all Magistracies, Offices and Honors
in the Parish, Hundred, Tribe, Senate, or Prerogative; Divines, Physicians, and
Lawyers, not taking these Degrees, exclude themselves from all such
Magistracies, Offices, and Honors. And whereas Lawyers are likest to exact
farther reason for this: They growing up from the most gainful Art at the Bar,
unto those Magistracies upon the Bench, which are continually appropriated to
themselves; and not only endowed with the greatest Revenues, but held for
life; have the least reason of all the rest to pretend unto any other;
Especially in an equal Commonwealth, where Accumulation of Magistracy, or to
take a Person engaged by his Profit unto the Laws as they stand, into the
Power which is Legislative, and should keep them unto what they were, or ought
to be, were a Soloecisme in Prudence. It is true, that the Legislative power
may have need of Advice and Assistance from the executive Magistracy, or such
as are learned in the Law; for which Cause the Judges are, (as they have
heretofore been) Assistants in the Senate. Nor, however it came about, can I
see any reason why a Judge, being but an Assistant, a Lawyer, should be a
member of a Legislative Council.

I deny not, that the Roman Patricians were all Patrons, and that the whole
People were Clients, some unto one family, and some unto another, by which
means they had their Causes pleaded and defended in some appearance gratis; for
the Patron took no money; though if he had a daughter to marry, his Clients
were to pay her portion: nor was this so much. But if the Client accused his
Patron, gave testimony or Suffrage against him, it was a crime of such nature,
that any man might lawfully kill him as a Traitor: and this, as being the nerve
of the Optimacy, was a great cause of ruin unto that Commonwealth: for when
the people would carry any thing that pleased not the Senate, the Senators were
ill provided if they could not intercede, that is, oppose it by their Clients;
with whom, to vote otherwise then they pleased, was so high a Crime. The
observation of this bond till the time of the Gracchi (that is to say, till it
was too late, or to no purpose, to break it) was the cause, why in all the
former heats and disputes that had happened between the Senate and the People,
it never came to blows; which was good: but withal, the people could have no
remedy, which was Evil: Wherefore I am of opinion, that a Senator ought not to
be a Patron or Advocate; nor a Patron or Advocate to be a Senator; for if his
practice be gratis, it debaucheth the people; and if it be mercenary, it
debaucheth himself: take it which way you will, when he should be making of
Laws, he will be knitting of Nets.

Lycurgus, as I said, by being a Traveller, became a Legislator; but, in times,
when Prudence was another thing: Nevertheless we may not shut out this part of
Education, in a Commonwealth which will be her Self a Traveller; for those of
this make, have seen the World; especially, because this (though it be not
regarded in our times, when things being left to take their chance, it fares
with us accordingly) is certain; No man can be a Politician, except he be first
an Historian or a Traveller; for except he can see what Must be, o^ what May
be, he is no Politician: Now if he have no knowledge in story, he cannot tell
what has been; and if he has not been a Traveller, he cannot tell what is:
but he that neither knows what has been, nor what is; can never tell what
must be, or what may be. Furthermore, the Embassies in ordinary by our
constitution, are the Prizes of young men, more especially such as have been
Travelers. Wherefore they of these inclinations, having leave of the Censors,
owe them account of their time, and cannot choose but lay it out with some
ambition of Praise, or Reward, where both are open: whence you will have eyes
abroad, and better choice of Public Ministers: your Gallants showing
themselves not more unto the Ladies at their balls, than unto your Commonwealth
at her Academy, when they return from their Travels.

But this Commonwealth being constituted more especially of two Elements,
Arms, and Councils, drives by a natural instinct, at Courage and Wisdom,
which he who has attained, is arrived at the perfection of humane nature. It
is true, that these Virtues must have some natural root in him that is capable
of them; but this amounts not unto so great a matter as some will have it.
For if Poverty make an industrious; a moderate Estate, a temperate; and a
Lavish fortune, a Wanton Man; and this be the common course of things; Wisdom
is rather of necessity, than Inclination. And that an Army which was meditating
upon Flight, has been brought by Despair to win the Field, is so far from
being strange, that like Causes will evermore produce like Effects. Wherefore
this Commonwealth drives her Citizens like Wedges, there is no way with them
but through; nor end, but that Glory whereof Man, is capable by Art or Nature.
That the Genius of the Roman Families preserved it self throughout the line: as
to instance in some, that the Manlii were still severe; the Publicolae lovers;
and the Appi^ haters of the people, is attributed by Marchiavill unto their
Education: nor, if interest might add unto the reason, why the Genius of a
Patrician was one thing, and that of a Plebeian another* is the like so
apparent between different Nations, who according unto their different
Educations have yet as different manners. It was anciently noted, and long
confirmed by the French, that in their first assaults their courage was more
then that of men; and for the rest less then that of women: which
nevertheless through the amendment of their discipline, we see to be
otherwise. I will not say, but that some Man or Nation upon equal improvement
of this kind may be lighter then some other; but certainly, Education is the
scale without which no Man or Nation can truly know his or her own weight or
value. By our Histories we can tell when one Marpesian would have beaten ten
Oceaners; and when one Oceaner would have beaten ten Marpesians. Marc Anthony
was a Roman, but how did that appear in the embraces of Cleopatra? You must
have some other Education for your Youth; or they, like that passage, will show
better in Romance, then true Story.

The Custom of the Commonwealth of Rome in distributing her Magistracies
without respect of age, happened to do well in Corvinus and Scipio; for which
cause Machiavill (with whom that which was done by Rome, and that which is well
done, is for the most part all one) commends this course. Yet how much it did
work at other times, is obvious in Pompey and Caesar; examples by which
Bocalini illustrateth the Prudence of Venice in her contrary practice,
affirming it to have been no small step unto the ruin of the Roman Liberty,
that these having tasted in their Youth of the Supreme Honors; had no greater
in their age to hope for, but by perpetuating of the same in themselves, which
came to Blood, and ended in Tyranny. The opinion of Verulamius is safe, The
Errors (says he) of Young Men are the ruin of Business; whereas the errors
of aged men amount but to this, that more might have been done or sooner. But
though their Wisdom be little, their Courage is great. Wherefore (to come unto
the main Education of this Commonwealth) the Militia of Oceana is the Province
of Youth.

The distribution of this Province by the Essays is so fully described in the
Order, that I need repeat nothing. The Order it self being but a Repetition or
Copy of that Original, which in ancient Prudence is, of all other, the
fairest; as that from whence the Commonwealth of Rome, more especially derived
the Empire of the World; And there is much more reason in this age, when
Governments are universally broken, or swerved from their Foundations, and the
People groan under Tyranny, that the same causes (which could not be withstood
when the World was full of Popular Governments) should have the like effect.

The Causes in the Commonwealth of Rome, whereof the Empire of the World was
not any miraculous, but a natural (nay I may safely say necessary) consequence
are contained in that part of her discipline which was domestic, and in that
which she exercised in her provinces or conquest. Of the latter I shall have
better occasion to speak when we come unto our Provincial Orbs; the former
divided the whole People by Tribes, amounting, as Livy shows, at their full
growth unto thirty five; and every Tribe by the Cense or valuation of Estates
into five Classes, for the sixth being Proletary that is, the Nursery, or such
as through their Poverty contributed nothing to the Commonwealth but Children,
was not reckoned nor used in Arms: And this is the first point of the Militia;
in which Modern Prudence is quite contrary unto the Ancient; for where as we
excusing the rich, and arming the Poor, become the vassalls of our Servants,
they by excusing the Poor and Arming such as were rich enough to be Freemen,
became Lords of the Earth. (The Nobility and Gentry of this Nation, who
understand so little what it is to be Lords of the Earth, that they have not
been able to keep their Lands; will think it a strange education for their
Children to be common Soldiers, and obliged unto all the duties of Arms;
nevertheless it is not for 4, s. a week, but to be capable of being the best
man in the Field or in the City: the latter part of which consideration makes
the Common Soldier in this, a better man then the General of any Monarchical
Army. And whereas it may be thought, that this would drink deep of Noble Blood;
I dare boldly say, take the Roman Nobility in the heat of their fiercest Wars,
and you shall not find such a shambles of them as has been made of ours by
mere luxury and slothfullnesse; which killing the body; (Animalsque in vulnere
ponunt.) kill the Soul also; whereas Common right is that which who stands in
the vindication of, has used that Sword of Justice for which he receives the
purple of Magistracy: the glory of a man on Earth can go no higher, and if he
fall he rises, and comes sooner unto that reward which is so much higher as
Heaven is above Earth. To return unto the Roman example.) Every Classis was
divided (as has been more then once shown) into Centurys, and every Century
was equally divided into Youth and Elders; the Youth for Foreign Service, and
the Elders for the Guard of the Territory. In the first Classis were a matter
of eighteen Centurys of Horse being those which by the Justitution of Servius
were first called unto the suffrage ( Centuri^tis.) But the delectus, o^ Levy
of an Army (which is the present business) proceeded according to Polybius in
this manner.

Upon a War decreed, the Consuls elected four and twenty military Tribunes or
Colonels; whereof ten, being such as had merited their tenth Stipend, were
younger Officers. The Tribunes being chosen, the Consuls appointed the day unto
the Tribes, when those in them of military Age were to appear at the Capitol;
The day being come, and the Youth Assembled accordingly, the Consuls ascended
their Tribunal, and the younger Tribunes were forthwith divided into four parts
after this manner: four were assigned unto the first Legion, (a Legion at the
most consisted of 6000 Foot, and 300 Horse) three unto the second, four unto
the third, and three unto the fourth; the younger Tribunes being thus
distributed, two of the Elder were assigned unto the first Legion, three unto
the second, two unto the third, and three unto the fourth. And the Officers of
each Legion thus assigned, having drawn the Tribes by Lots, and being seated
according unto their divisions at a convenient distance from each other; the
Tribe of the first Lot was called: whereupon they that were of it knowing the
business, and being prepared, presently bolted out four of their Number, in
the choice whereof such care was taken, that they offered none that was not a
Citizen; no Citizen that was not of the Youth; no Youth that was not of some
one of the five Classes, nor any one of the five Classes that was not expert at
his Exercizes. Moreover, they used such diligence in matching them for age and
stature, that the Officers of the Legions, except they happened to be
acquainted with the Youths so bolted, were forced to put themselves upon
fortune, while they of the first Legion chose one; they of the second, the
next; they of the third, another; and the fourth Youth fell to the last Legion,
and thus was the election (the Legions and the Tribs varying according unto
their Lots) carried on till the Foot were complete. The like Course with little
alteration was taken by Horse Officers till the Horse also were complete. This
was called giving of Names (which the Children of Israel did also by Lot) and
if any Man refused to give his Name, Judge. 20.9.
he was sold for a slave, or his Estate confiscated to the Commonwealth (
Marcus Curious Consul cum subitum delectum edicere coactus esset and juniorum
nemo respondisset conjectis in sortem omnibus, Valerius.
Polliae (it is the name of a Tribe) quae proxima exierat, primum nomen urna
extractum citari jussit, neque eo respondente, bona Adolescentis has^a
subjecit, which was conformable unto the Law in Israel, according whereunto
Saul took a yoke of Oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent them throughout
the Tribes, saying, Whosoever comes not forth (unto battle) after Saul and
Samuel, so shall it be done unto his Oxen. 1 Samuel 11.7.
By which you may observe also, that they who had no cattle were not of the
Militia in Israel. But the age of the Roman Youth ( Lege Tullia) determined at
30. and by the Law (though it should seem by Machiavill and others, that this
was not well observed) a Man could not stand for Magistracy till he (was miles
emeritus) had fulfilled the full term of his Militia; which was complete in his
tenth stipend or Service: nor was he thence forth obliged under any penalty to
give his name, except the Commonwealth were invaded, in which case the Elders
were as well obliged as the Youth, Livy.
( Quod per magnos tumultus fieri solitum erat, justitio indicto, delectus sine
vacationibus habitus est) The Consul might also Levy (Milites evocatos)
commanded-Men out of such as had served their term, and this at his
Discretion. The Legions being thus complete, were divided by two unto each
Consul; and in these no man had right to serve, but a Roman Citizen; Now
because two Legions made but a small Army, the Romans added unto every one of
their Armies an equal number of Foot, and a double number of Horse Levied
among their Latin or Italian Associates; so a Consular Army with the Legions
and Auxiliaries, amounted to about Thirty thousand: and whereas they commonly
levied two such Armies together, these being joined made a matter of 60
thousand.

The Steps whereby our Militia follows the greatest Captain, are the three
Essays; the first elected by a fifth man ( Curiatis) in the Parishes, amounting
in the whole unto One hundred thousand, choosing their Officers ( Centuriatis)
at the Hundreds, where they fall also unto their Games, or Exercises, invited
by handsome Prizes, such as for themselves and the honor of them will be
coveted; such as will render the Hundred a place of Sports, and exercise of
Arms all the year long; such as in the space of ten years will harnoyse you
30000 Men Horse and Foot, with such Arms for their Forge, proof, and beauty, as
(notwithstanding the Argyraspides, or silver shields of Alexanders guard) were
never worn by so many; such as will present marks of Virtue and direction unto
your General or Strategus in the distribution of his Army, which doubles the
value of them, unto the Proprietors, who are bound to wear them, and eases the
Commonwealth of so much Charge, so many being Armed already. But here will be
the Objection, now. How shall such a Revenue be compassed? Fifty pounds a year
in every Hundred is a great deal, not so easily raised: men will not part with
their money; nor would the sum as it is proposed by the Order of Pomp, rise in
many years. These are difficulties that fit our Genius exactly: And yet a
Thousand pounds in each Hundred once levied, establishes the Revenue for ever.
Now the Hundreds one with another are worth ten thousand pounds a year dry
rent, over and above Personal Estates, which bring it unto twice the value. So
a twentieth part of one years Revenue of the Hundred, does it. If you cannot
afford this while you pay Taxes, though from henceforth they will be but small
ones, do it when you pay none: If it be then too much for one year, do it in
two: If it be too much for two years, do it in four. What Husbands have we
hitherto been? What is become of greater Sums? My Lords, if you should thus
cast your bread upon the waters, after many days you would find it: stand not
huckling, when you are offered Corn and your money again in the mouth of the
Sack.

But to proceed: The first Essay being Officer'd at the Hundreds, and mustred (
Tributis) at the Tribes, where they are entertained with other Sports, which
will be very fine ones; Proceed unto the Election of the second Essay, or
standing Army of this Nation consisting of thirty thousand Foot, and ten
thousand Horse; and these (upon a War decreed) being delivered at the
Rendezvous of Oceana unto the Strategus, are the third Essay, which answers
unto the Roman Legions. But you may observe, that whereas the Consuls elected
the Military Tribunes, and raised Commanded men out of the Veteranes at their
own discretion: Our Polemarchs or Field-Officers are elected by the Scruteny of
the Council of War; and our Veteranes not otherwise taken on, than as
Volunteers, and with the consent of the Polemarchs, which may serve for the
removal of certain Scruples which might otherwise be incident in this place,
though without encouragement by the Roman way of proceeding, much less that
which is proposed. But whereas the Roman Legions in all amounted not in one
Army to above 30000 Men, or little more, you have here Forty thousand; and
whereas they added Auxiliaries, in this regard it is that Marpesia will be of
greater Revenue unto you, then if you had the Indies; for whereas heretofore
She has brought you forth nothing but her native Thistle: ploughing out the
rankness of her Aristocracy by your Agrarian, you will find her an
inexhaustible Magazine of Men, and to her own advantage, who will make a far
better Account by the Arms, then by the Pins of Poland: Wherefore as a Consular
Army consisted of about an equal number of Auxiliaries added unto their
Legions by their Latin or Italian Associates, you may add unto a
Parliamentary Army an equal number of Marpesians, or Panopeans, as that Colony
shall hereafter be able to supply you. By which means the Commonwealth will be
able to go forth to Battle with Fourscore thousand Men. To make Wars with
small Forces is no Husbandry, but a waste, a disease, a lingering and painful
Consumption of Men and Money; the Romans making theirs thick, made them short,
and had little regard unto money, as that which they who have men enough, can
command where it is fittest that it should be Levied. All the ancient
Monarchies by this means got on wing, and attained unto vast Riches. Whereas
your Modern Princes being dear Purchasers of small parcels, have but empty
Pockets. But it may be that some will accuse the Order, of rashness; in that
it commits the sole Conduct of the War unto the General; and the Custom of
Venice by her Proveditori, or Checks upon her Commanders in Chief, may seem to
be of greater Prudence; but in this part of our Government neither Venice, nor
any Nation that makes use of mercenary Forces, is for our Instruction. A
mercenary Army, with a standing General, is like the fatal Sister that Spins:
But proper Forces, with an annual Magistrate, are like Her that cuts the
thread. Their Interests are quite contrary, and yet you have a better
Proveditor then the Venetian, another Strategus sitting with an Army standing
by him; whereupon that which is marching, if there were any probability it
should, would find as little possibility that it could recoyl, as a Foreign
Enemy to invade you. These things considered, a War will appear to be of a
contrary nature unto that of all other reckonings, in as much as of this, you
must never look to have a good account if you be strict in imposing Checks. Let
a Council of Hunts-men assembled beforehand, tell you which way the Stagg
shall run, where you shall cast about at the fault, and how you shall ride to
be in at the Chase all the day: but these may as well do that, as a Council of
War direct a General. The hours that have painted wings, and of different
colors, are his Counsel: he must be like the eye that makes not the scene,
but has it so soon as it changes. That in many Counselors there is strength,
is spoken of civil Administrations; As to those that are Military, there is
nothing more certain, then that in many Counselors there is weakness. Joint
Commissions in Military affairs are like hunting your Hounds in their Couples:
In the Attick War, Cleomenes and Demaratus, Kings of Lacedemon, being thus
coupled, tugged one against another; and while they should have joined against
the Persian, were the Cause of the calamity: whereupon that Commonwealth took
better Counsel, and made a Law, whereby from thenceforth there went at once but
one of her Kings unto Battle.

The Fidenati being in rebellion, and having slain the Colony of the Romans;
four Tribunes with Consular power were created by the people of Rome, whereof
one being left for the guard of the City, the other three were sent against the
Fidenati, who through the division that happened among them, brought nothing
home but dishonor: whereupon the Romans created the Dictator; (and Livy gives
his judgment in these words: Tres Tribuni, potestate Consulari, documento
fuere, quam plurimum imperium bello inutile esset; tendendo ad sua quisque
consilia, cum alii aliud videretur, aperuerunt ad occasionem, locum hosti) When
the Consuls, Quictius and Agrippa, were sent against the Aequi, Agrippa for
this reason refused to go forth with his Colleague, (saying; Saluberrimum in
administratione magnarum rerum, summam imperii apud unum esse) And if the ruin
of Modern Armies were well considered, most of it would be found to have fallen
upon this Point: it being in this case far safer to trust unto any one Man of
common Prudence, then to any two or more together of the greatest Parts. The
Consuls indeed being equal in Power, while one was present with the Senate, and
the other in the Field with the Army, made a good Balance; and this with us is
exactly followed by the Election of a new Strategus upon the march of the old
one.

The Seven and twentieth Order, Whereby the Elders in case of Invasion are
obliged unto equal duty with the Youth, and each upon their own Charge, is
suitable unto reason; (for every Man defends his own Estate); and unto our
Copy, as in the War with the Samnites and Tuscans. (Senatus justitium indici,
delectum omnis generis hominum haberi jussit: nec ingenui modo, et juniores
Sacramento adacti sunt, sed seniorum etiam cohortes factae.) This Nation of all
others is the least obnoxious unto Invasion. Oceana (says a French Politician)
is a Beast that cannot be devoured but by her Self; Nevertheless, that
Government is not perfect which is not provided at all points; and in this (ad
Triarios res rediit) the Elders being such as in a martial State must be
Veterans; the Commonwealth invaded gathers strength (like Antaeus) by her
fall, whilst the whole number of the Elders consisting of five hundred
thousand, and the Youth of as many (being brought up according unto the Order)
give twelve Successive Battles, each Battle consisting of Eighty thousand Men,
half Elders, and half Youth: And the Commonwealth whose Constitution can be no
stranger unto any of those virtues which are to be acquired in humane life,
grows familiar with Death ere She dye. If the hand of God be upon her for her
transgressions, She shall mourn for her sins, and lie in the dust for her
iniquities, without losing of her manhood.

(Si fractus illabatur orbis Impavidam ferient ruinae.)

The remaining part being the Constitution of the Provincial Orb is partly
Civil, or consisting of the Elders; and partly Military, or consisting of the
Youth. The Civil part of the Provincial Orb is directed by The Twenty-Eighth
Order; Whereby the Council of a Province being constituted of twelve Knights,
Constitution of the Civil part of the Provincial Orb.
divided by four into three Regions (for their term and revolution conformable
unto the Parliament) is perpetuated by the annual election at the Tropic of
four Knights (being trienniall Magistrates) out of the Region of the Senate
whose term expireth; and of one Knight out of the same Region to be Strategus,
or General of the Province, which Magistracy is annual. The Strategus or
Magistrate thus chosen, shall be as well President of the Provincial Council
with power to propose unto the same, as General of the Army. The Council for
the rest shall elect weekly Provosts, having any two of them also right to
propose, after the manner of the Senatorian Councils of Oceana. And whereas all
Provincial Councils are members of the Council of State, they may and ought to
keep diligent correspondence with the same; which is to be done after this
manner; Any opinion or opinions Legitimately proposed and debated at a
Provincial Council; being there upon signed by the Strategus, or any two of
the Provosts, may be transmitted unto the Council of State in Oceana: and the
Council of State proceeding upon the same in their natural Course (whether by
their own Power if it be a matter within their instructions, or by authority of
the Senate, thereupon consulted, if it be a matter of State which is not in
their instructions or by authority of the Senate and Command of the People, if
it be a matter of Law, as for the Levys of Men or Money upon common use and
safety) shall return such answers, advice, or Orders, as in any of the ways
mentioned shall be determined upon the Case. The Provincial Councils of
Marpesia and Panopea respectively shall take especial care that the Agrarian
Laws, as also all other Laws that be or shall from time to time be enacted by
the Parliament of Oceana, for either of them, be duly put in execution; They
shall manage and receive the Customs of either Nation for the Shipping of
Oceana being the Common Guard; they shall have a care that moderate and
sufficient pay upon the respective Province be duly raised for the support and
maintenance of the Officers and Soldiers, or Army of the same in the most
effectual constant and convenient way. They shall receive the Regalia, or
public Revenues of those Nations, out of which every Counselor shall have
for his term, and unto his proper use, the Sum of 500 l. per annum; and the
Strategus 500. l. as President, besides his pay as General, which shall be
1000 pounds: the remainder to go unto the use of the Knights and Deputies of
the respective Provinces; to be paid if it will reach, according unto the rates
of Oceana; if not, by an equal distribution, respectively; or the overplus, if
there be any, to be returned unto the Treasury of Oceana. They shall manage
the Lands (if there be any such holden in either of the Provinces by the
Commonwealth of Oceana, in Dominion) and return the Rents into the Exchequer.
If the Commonwealth come to be possessed of richer provinces, the pay of the
General or Strategus, and of the Council is may be respectively increased. The
People for the rest shall elect their own Magistrates, and be governed by their
own Laws having power also to appeal from their Native, or Provincial
Magistrates if they please unto the People of Oceana. And whereas there may be
such as receiving Injury are not able to prosecute their appeals at so great a
distance: Eight Serjants at Law being sworn by the Commissioners of the Seal
shall be sent by four into each Province once in two years, who dividing the
same by Circuits, shall hear such Causes, and having gathered and introduced
them shall return unto the several Appellants, Gratis, the Determinations and
Decrees of the People in their several Cases.

The terms of a Knight in a Provincial Orb as to domestic Magistracies shall
be esteemed a Uacation and no bar unto present Election into any other Honor,
his Provincial Magistracy being expired.

The Quorum of a Provincial Council, as also of every other Council or
Assembly in Oceana, shall in time of health consist of two parts in three, of
the whole number proper unto that Council or Assembly; and, in a time of
Sickness, of one part in three; But of the Senate there can be no Quorum
without three of the Signory: nor of a Council without two of the Provosts.



The Civil part of the Provincial Orb being declared by the foregoing Order;
The military part of the same is constituted by Constitution of the Military
part of the Provincial Orb.
having drawn the Gold Balls marked with the Letter M. and being ten Horse and
fifty Foot in a Tribe, that is to say, five hundred Horse, and two thousand
five hundred Foot in all, the Tribes shall be delivered by the respective
Conductors unto the Provincial Strategus, or General, at such a time and
place or Rendevouz as he shall appoint by Order and Certificate of his
Election; and the Strategus having received the Horse and Foot mentioned, which
are the third Classis of his Provincial Guard, or Army, shall forthwith lead
them away unto Marpesia, where the Army consisting of three Classes each
Classis containing three thousand Men, whereof five hundred are Horse; and
receiving the new Strategus with the third Classis; the old Strategus with the
first Classis shall be dismissed by the Provincial Council. The same method with
the Stratiots of the Letter P. is to be observed for the Provincial Orb of
Panopea: and the Commonwealth coming to acquire new Provinces, the Senate and
the People may erect new Orbs in like manner consisting of greater or less
numbers according as is required by the respective occasion. If a Stratiot have
once served his term in a Provincial Orb, and happen afterward to draw the
Letter of a Province at the Election of the second Essay; he may refuse his
Lot, and if he refuse it, the Censor of that Urn shall cause the files
balloting at the same to make an hault; and if the Stratiot produce the
Certificate of his Strategus or General, that he has served his time
accordingly; the Censor throwing the Ball that he drew into the Urn again, and
taking out a blank, shall dismiss the Youth, and cause the Ballot to proceed.

To perfect the whole structure of this Commonwealth: some drections are given
unto the third Essay, or Army marching, in When thou go to battle against
thine enemies and see Horses and Chariots, and a people more then thou; be
not afraid of them, Deuteronomy. 20 2 Samuel: 30.24.
for the Lord thy God is he that goes with thee to fight for thee against
thine enemies: And when thou dividest the spoil, it shall be as a statute and
an Ordinance unto thee, that as his part is that goes down to the battle, so
shall his part be that tarryeth by the Stuff: that is, as to the Commonwealth
of Oceana; The spoil taken of the enemy (except Clothes, Arms, Horses,
Ammunition and Uictuall, to be divided unto the Soldiery by the Strategus and
the Polemarchs upon the place according unto their Discretion) shall be
delivered unto four Commissaries of the Spoils elected and sworn by the
Council of War, which Commissaries shall be allowd shipping by the State and
convoyes according as occasion shall require by the Strategus; to the end that
having a bill of lading signed by three or more of the Polemarchs they may Ship
and bring or cause such spoils to be brought unto the Prize Office in Oceana,
where they shall be sold, and the profit arising by such spoils shall be
divided into three parts whereof one shall go unto the Treasury, another shall
be paid to the Soldiery of this Nation, a third unto the Auxiliaries, at their
return from their service, provided that the said Auxiliaries be equal in
number unto the proper forces of this Nation, otherwise their share shall be so
much less as they are fewer in number: the rest of the two thirds to go unto
the Officers and Soldiers of the proper forces; and the spoils so divided
unto the proper forces shall be subdivided into three equal parts, whereof one
shall go unto the Officers, and two unto the common Soldiers, the like for the
Auxiliaries: and the share allotted unto the Officers, shall be divided into
four equal parts whereof one shall go to the Strategus, another unto the
Polemarchs, a third unto the Colonels, and a fourth unto the Captains,
Cornets, Ensigns and under Officers, receiving their share of the spoil as
common Soldiers. The like for the Auxiliaries: and this upon pain in the case
of failure, of what the people of Oceana, unto whom the Cognizance of Peculate
or Crimes of this nature is properly appertaining, shall adjudge or decree.

Upon these three last orders the Archon seemed to be haranging at the head of
his Army, in this manner.

My dear Lords and Excellent Patriots
A Government of this make, is a Commonwealth for increase. Of those for
preservation, the inconveniences, and frailties have been shown: their roots
are narrow, such as do not run, have no fivers, their tops weak and
dangerously exposed unto the weather; except you chance to find one (as
Venice) planted in a flowerpot, and if she grow, she grows top-heavy, and
falls too. But you cannot plant an Oak in a flowerpot: She must have earth for
her root, and heaven for her branches.

Imperium Oceano famam quae terminet astris. Rome was said ( Mole sua ruere) to
be broken by her own weight, but Poetically. For that weight by which she was
pretended to be ruined, was supported in her Emperors, by a far slighter
foundation. And in the Common experience of good Architecture, there is nothing
more known, than that buildings, stand the firmer and the longer for their own
weight; nor ever swerve through any other internal cause, than that their
materials are corruptible; but the people never dies, nor, as a Political Body,
are subject unto any other corruption than that which deriveth from their
Government. Unless a man will deny the chain of causes in which he denies
God, he must also acknowledge the chain of effects; wherefore there can be no
effect in Nature, that is not from the first Cause, and those successive lincks
of the chain, without which it could not have been. Now except a man can show
the contrary in a Commonwealth, if there be no cause of corruption in the
first make of it, there can never be any such effect. Let no man's
superstition, impose profaneness upon this assertion; for as Man is sinful,
and yet the world is perfect, so may the Citizen be sinful, and yet the
Commonwealth be perfect. And as man seeing the World is perfect, can never
commit any such sin as can render it imperfect, or bring it unto a natural
dissolution; so the Citizen, where the common Wealth is perfect can never
commit any such crime, as can render it imperfect; or bring it unto a natural
dissolution. To come unto experience, Venice, notwithstanding that we have
found some flaws in it, is the only Commonwealth, in the make whereof, no man
can find a cause of dissolution; for which reason we behold her (albeit she
consist of men that are not without sin) at this day with one thousand years
upon her back, for any internal cause, as young, as fresh, and free from decay,
or any appearance of it, as she was born, but what ever in nature, is not
sensible of decay by the course of a thousand years, is capable of the whole
age of nature: by which calculation for any check that I am able to give my
self; a Commonwealth rightly ordered, may for any internal causes be as
immortal, or long-lived as the World. But if this be true, those Commonwealths
that are naturally fallen, must have derived their ruin from the rise of them.
Israel and Athens, died not natural, but violent deaths, in this manner the
World is to dye; we are speaking of those causes of dissolution which are
natural unto government; and they are but two, either Contradiction or
Inequality, if a Commonwealth be a contradiction she must needs destroy her
self; and if she be unequal, it tends to strife, and strife to ruin. By the
former of these fell Lacedemon, by the latter Rome. Lacedemon being made
altogether for war, and yet not for increase, her natural progress, became her
natural dissolution, and the building of her own victorious hand, too heavy for
her foundation; so she indeed fell by her own weight.

But Rome through her native Inequality, which how it inv^terated the bosoms
of the Senate and the people each against other, and even unto death has been
shown at large.

Look well unto it my Lords, for if there be a contradiction or inequality in
your Commonwealth it must fall; but if it have neither of these, it has no
principle of mortality, do not think me impudent; if this be truth, I should
commit a gross indiscretion, in concealing it. Sure I am that Machiavil, is
for the immortality of a Commonwealth upon far weaker principles. Dis. B. 3. C.
22. B. 3 C. 29.
If a Commonwealth (says he) were so happy as to be provided often with men,
that when she is swarving from her principles should reduce her unto her
institution, she would be immortal. But a Commonwealth, as we have
demonstrated, swarveth not from her Principles, but by and through her
institution, if she brought no byasse into the World with her, her course for
any internal cause, must be straight forward, as we see is that of Venice, she
cannot turn unto the right hand, nor to the left, but by some rubs, which is
not an internal but an external cause, against such she can be no way
fortifyed, but through her situation as is Venice, or through her Militia as
was Rome; by which examples a Commonwealth may be secure, or those also; Think
me not vain, for I cannot hold; a Commonwealth that is rightly instituted can
never swarve, nor one that is not rightly instituted be secured from swarving
by reduction unto her principles, wherefore it is no less apparent in this
place, that Machiavil understood not a Commonwealth as to the whole piece. As
where having told you, Dis. B. 1. C. 18
That a Tribune or any other Citizen of Rome, might propose a Law unto the
people, and debate it with them, he adds this order was good while the people
were good, but when the people became evil, it became most pernicious; as if
this Order, through which with the like, the people most apparently became
evil, could ever have been good; or that the people, or the Commonwealth could
ever have become good, by being reduced unto such principles as were the
Original of their evil. The disease of Rome was, as has been shown, from the
native inequality of her balance, and no otherwise from the Empire of the
World, which then as this falling into one scale, that of the Nobility (an evil
in such a Fabric inevitable) kicked out the People, wherefore a man that could
have made her to throw away the Empire of the World, might in that have reduced
her unto her principles, and yet have been so far from rendering her immortal,
that going no farther he should never have cured her. But your C. W. is
founded upon an equal Agrarian; and if the earth be given unto the Sons of
men, this balance, is the balance of justice, Prove. 20.14
such an one as in having due regard unto the different industry, of different
men, yet faithfully judges the poor. And the King that faithfully judges the
poor, his Throne shall be established for ever, much more the Commonwealth;
seeing that equality which is the necessary dissolution of Monarchy, is the
generation, the very life and soul of a Commonwealth; And now, if ever, I may
be excusable, seeing that the Throne of a Commonwealth may be established for
ever, is consonant unto the holy Scriptures.

The balance of a Commonwealth that is equal, is of such nature, that what
ever falls into her Empire, must fall equally, and if the whole earth fall
into your scales, it must fall equally, and so you may be a greater people, and
yet not swerve from your principles one hair. Nay you will be so far from that,
that you must bring the world in such a case, unto your balance, even unto the
balance of Justice. But hearken, My Lords, Are we on earth? Do we see the Sun?
or are we visiting those shady places which are fained by the Poets? (Continuo
audita voces, vagitus and ingens.) These Gothic Empires that are yet in the
world, were at the first, though they had legs of their own, but an heavy and
unweildy burden, but their foundations being now broken, the Iron of them
enters even into the souls of the oppressed, and hear the voice of their
Comforters. My father has chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you
with scorpions. Hearken, I say, if thy brother cry unto thee in affliction,
will thou not hear him? This is a Commonwealth of the fabric, that has an
open ear, and a public concernment, she is not made for her self only, but
given as a Magistrate of God unto mankind, for the vindication of common
Right, and the law of Nature. Wherefore says Cicero of the like, that of the
Romans (Nos magis patronatum orbis terrarum suscepimus, quam Imperium) we have
rather undertaken the Patronage than the Empire of the world. If you, not
regarding this example, like some other Nations that are upon the point to
smart for it, shall, having attained unto your own liberty, bear the sword of
your common Magistracy, in vain, sit still; and fold your arms, or which is
worse, let out the blood of your people unto Tyrants to be shed in the defense
of their yoaks, like water, and so not only turn the grace of God into
wantonness, but his justice into wormwood.

You are not now making a Commonwealth, but heaping coals of fire upon your own
heads. A Commonwealth, I say, of this make is a Minister of God upon earth, to
the end that the world may be governed with righteousness. For which cause
(that I may come at length unto our present business) the orders last rehearsed
are buds of Empire, such as with the blessing of God, may spread the arms of
your Commonwealth, like an holy Asylum unto the distressed world, and give the
earth her Sabbath of years, or rest from her labors under the shadow of your
wings. It is upon this point where the writings of Machiavil having for the
rest excelled all other Authors, come as far to excel themselves.

( Commonwealths, says he, have had three ways of propagating themselves, One
after the manner of Monarchies, Disc. B. 2. C. 4.
by imposing the yoke, which was the way of Athens, and toward the latter
times of Lacedemon; Another by equal leagues, which is the way of Switz (I
shall add of Holland though since his time) A third by unequal leagues, which
to the shame of the world, was never practiced; nay nor so much as seen, or
minded by any other Commonwealth, but that only of Rome. They will each of them
either for caution, or imitation, be worthy to be well weighed, which is the
proper work of this place. Athens and Lacedemon, have been the occasion of
great scandal to the world, in two, or at least one of two regards. The first
their emulation, which involved Greece in perpetual wars, the second their way
of propagation, which by imposing yoaks upon others, was plainly contradictory
to their own principles.

For the first, Governments be they of what kind soever, if they be planted
too close, are like trees, that impatient in their growth to have it hindered,
eat out one another. It was not unknown unto these, in contemplation, or (if
you read the story of Agesilaus) in action, that either of them with thirty
thousand men might have mastered the East, and certainly, if the one had not
stood in the others light, Alexander had come too late to that end, which was
the means (and would be if they were to live again) of ruin, at the least unto
one of them: wherefore with any man that understands the nature of
Government, this is excusable; so it was between Oceana and Marpesia; so it is
between France and Spain (though less excusable) and so it ever will be in
like cases. But to come unto the second occasion of scandal by them given,
which was in the way of their propagation, it is not excusable: for they
brought their confederates under bondage; by which means Athens gave occasion
of the Peloponesian war, the wound of which she died stinking, when
Lacedemon, taking the same infection from her carcasses, soon followed.

Wherefore my Lords, let these be warnings unto you, not to make that liberty
which God has given you, a snare unto others, in using this kind of
enlargement of your selves.

The Second way of Propagation or enlargement used by Commonwealths, is that
of Switz and Holland, equal leagues; this, though it be not otherwise
mischievous, is useless to the world, and dangerous unto themselves; useless
unto the world, for as the former governments were Storks, these are blocks,
have no sense of honor, or concernment in the sufferings of others. But as the
Aetolians a state of the like fabric, were reproached by Phillip of Macedon,
prostrate themselves, by letting out their arms unto the lusts of others: while
they have their own liberty barren, and without legitimate issue. I do not
defame the people, the Switz for valor have no superior, the Hollander for
industry no equal: but themselves in the mean time shall so much the less
excuse their Governments, seeing that unto the Switz it is well enough known,
that the Ensigns of his Commonwealth have no other Motto then ( in te converte
manus) and that of the Hollander, though he swear more gold than the Spaniard
digs, let us him languish in debt, for she her self lives upon charity, these
are dangerous unto themselves, precarious governments, such as do not command,
but beg their bread from Province to Province; in Coats that being patched up
of all colors are of none. That their Cantons and Provinces are so many
arrows, is good; but they are so many bows too, which is naught.

Like unto these was the Commonwealth of the ancient Tuscans, hung together
like Bobbins, without an hand to weave with them, therefore easily overcome by
the Romans, though at that time; for number, a far less considerable people.
If your liberty be not a root that grows, it will be a branch that withers,
which consideration brings me unto the Paragon, the Commonwealth of Rome.

The ways and means whereby the Romans acquired the Patronage, and in that the
Empire of the world, were different, according unto the different Condition of
their Commonwealth in her rise, and in her growth; in her rise she proceeded
rather by Colonies, in her growth by unequal Leagues. Colonies without the
bounds of Italy she planted none (such dispersion of the Roman Citizen, as to
plant him in foreign parts, til the contrary interest of the Emperors brought
in that practice, was unlawful) nor did she ever demolish any City within that
Compass; or divest it of liberty, but whereas the most of them were
Commonwealths, stirred up by emulation of her great felicity, to war against
her, if she overcame any she confiscated some part of their Lands that were
the greatest incendiaries, or causes of the trouble, upon which she planted
Colonies of her own people, preserving the Lands and Liberties for the rest,
unto the natives or inhabitants. By this way of proceeding, (that I may be
brief as is possible) she did many and great things. For in confirming of
Liberty, she propagated her Empire, in holding the inhabitants from rebellion,
she put a curb upon the incursion of Enemies; in exonerating her self of the
poorer sort, she multiplied her Citizens, in rewarding her veterans, she
rendered the rest less seditious, and in acquiring unto her self the reverence
of the Common parent, she from time to time became the Mother of Newborn
Cities.

In her farther growth the way of her propagation, went more upon Leagues,
which for the first division were of two kinds, Social and Provincial.

Again, Social Leagues, or Leagues of Society, were of two kinds.

The first called, Latinity or Latin; The second Italian Right.

The League between the Romans and the Latins, or Latin Right, approached
nearest unto ( Jus Quiritium) the right of a native Roman, The Man or the City
that was honored with this Right was ( Civitate donatus cum suffragio) adopted
a Citizen of Rome, with the right of giving suffrage with the people in some
cases, as those of Confirmation, of Law, or Determination in Judicature, if
both the Consuls were agreed, not otherwise; wherefore that coming to little,
the greatest and most peculiar part of this Privilege was, that who had born
Magistracy (at least that of Aedile or Quaestor) in any Latin City, was by
consequence of the same a Citizen of Rome at all points.

Italian Right was also donation of the City, but without Suffrage; they who
were in either of these Leagues, were governed by their own Laws and
Magistrates, having all the Rights, as to liberty of Citizens of Rome, yielding
and paying to the Commonwealth as head of the League, and having the Conduct of
all Affairs appertaining to the Common Cause, such aid of Men and Moneys as
were particularly agreed upon the merit of the cause, and specified in their
respective Leagues, whence such Leagues came to be called equal or unequal
accordingly.

Provincial Leagues were of different extention, according unto the Merit and
Capacity of a conquered people, but of one kind, for every Province was
governed by Roman Magistrates, as a Praetor or a Consul, according to the
dignity of the Province, for the Civil Administration, and conduct of the
Provincial Army: And a Quaestor for the gathering of the public Revenue, from
which Magistrates, a Province might appeal unto Rome.

For the better understanding of these particulars, I shall exemplify in as
many of them as is needful: And first, in Macedon.

The Macedonians were thrice conquered by the Romans, first under the conduct
of T. Quintus Flaminius, secondly under that of L. Aemilius Paulus; and
thirdly, under that of Q. Caecilius Metellus, thence called Macedonicus.

For the first time (Pax petenti Philippo data, Graeciae libertas) Philip of
Macedon, who (possessed of Acro Corinthus) boasted no less than was true, that
he had Greece in fetters, being overcome by Flaminius, had his Kingdom
restored unto him, upon condition that he should forthwith set all the Cities
which he held in Greece, and in Asia at liberty; and that he should not make
war out of Macedon, but by leave of the Senate of Rome, which Philip (having no
other way to save any thing) agreed should be done accordingly.

The Grecians being at this time assembled at the Istmian Games, where the
concourse was mighty great, a Crier, appointed unto the office by Flaminius,
was heard among them proclaiming all Greece to be free; to which the people
being amazed, at so hopeless a thing, gave little credit, till they received
such testimony of the truth as put it past all doubt, whereupon they fell
immediately on running unto the Proconsul, with Flowers and Garlands, and such
violent expressions of their admiration and joy, as if Flaminius a young man
(about some thirty three) had not also been very strong, he must have dyed of
no other death then their kindness, while every one striving to touch his hand,
they bore him up and down the field with an unruly throng, full of such
Ejaculations as these; How! Is there a people in the world, that at their own
Charge, at their own Peril, will fight for the liberty of another! Did they
live at the next door unto this fire! Or what kind of men are these, whose
business it is to pass Seas, that the World may be governed with righteousness!
The Cities of Greece and of Asia shake off their Iron fetters at the voice of a
Crier! Was it madness to imagine such a thing, and is it done! O Virtue! O
Felicity! O Fame!

In this example your Lordships have a Donation of Liberty, or of Italian Right
unto a people, by restitution to what they had formerly enjoyed, and some
particular Men, Families, or Cities, according unto their merit of the Romans,
if not upon this, upon like occasions were gratified with Latinity.

But Philips share by this means did not please him, wherefore the League was
broken by his son Perseus. And the Macedonians thereupon for the second time
conquered by Aemilius Paulus, their King taken, and they sometime after the
Victory, summoned unto the Tribunal of the General; where remembering how little
hope they ought to have of pardon, they expected some dreadful sentence. When
Aemilius in the first place declared the Macedonians to be free, in the full
possession of their Lands, Goods, and Laws, with right to elect annual
Magistrates, yielding and paying unto the people of Rome one half of the
Tribute which they were accustomed to pay unto their own Kings. This done he
went on, making so skilful a division of the Country, in order to the
methodizing of the people, and casting them into a form of popular Government.
That the Macedonians being first surprised with the virtue of the Romans, began
now to alter the scene of their Admiration, that a stranger to them should do
such things for them in their own Country, and with such facility, as they had
never so much as once imagined to be possible. Nor was this all, for Aemilius,
as if not dictating to conquered Enemies, but to some well-deserving friends,
gave them in the last place Laws, so suitable, and contrived with such care and
prudence, that long use and experience (the only Correctress of works of this
nature) could never find a fault in them.

In this Example you have a Donation of Liberty, or of Italian Right, unto a
people that had not tasted of it before, but were now taught how to use it.

My Lords, The Royallists should compare what we are doing, and we what
hitherto we have done for them, with this example. It is a shame that while
we are boasting up our selves above all, we should be so far from imitating
such examples as these, that we do not so much as understand, that if
Government be the parent of manners, where there be no Heroical Virtues, there
is no Heroical Government.

But the Macedonians rebelling (at the name of a false Philip) the third time
against the Romans, were by them judged incapable of Liberty, and reduced by
Metellus unto a Province.

Now whereas it remains, that I explain the nature of a Province, I shall
rather choose that of Sicely, because having been the first that the Romans
made, the descriptions of the rest relate to it.

We have so received the Sicilian Cities into amity (says Cicero) that they
enjoy their ancient Laws, and upon no other condition than of the same
obedience unto the people of Rome, which they formerly yielded unto their own
Princes or Superiors. So the Sicilians, whereas they had been parcelled forth
unto diverse Princes, and into diverse States, the cause of perpetual Wars,
whereby hewing one another down, they became Sacrifices unto the ambition of
their Neighbors, or of some Invader, were now received at the old rate into a
new Protection, which could hold them, and in which no Enemy durst touch them;
nor was it possible (as the case stood with such) for the Sicilians to receive,
or for the Romans to give more.

A Roman Province is defined by Sigonius, a Region having Provincial Right.
Provincial Right in general, was to be Governed by a Roman Praetor, or
Consul, in matter, at lest, of State, and of the Militia. And by a Quaestor,
whose Office it was to receive the Publicks Revenue. Provincial Right in
particular, was different, according unto the different Leagues, or Agreements
between the Commonwealth, and the People reduced unto a Province. (Siculi hoc
jure sunt, ut quod civis cum cive agat, domi certet suis legibus, Cicero.
quod Siculus cum Siculo non ejusdem Civitatis, ut de eo Praetor Judices, ex P:
Rupilii Decreto, Sortiatur. Quod privatus a Populo petit, aut populus a
privato, Senatus ex aliqua Civitate, qui judicet, datur, cui alterna Civitates
rejectae sunt. Quod civis Romanus a Siculo petit, Siculus Judex datur; quod
Siculus a cive Romano; civis Romanus datur. Ceterarum rerum selecti Judices. ex
civium Romanorum conventu proponi solent. Inter aratores and decumanos lege
frumentaria, quam Hieronicam appellant, judicia fiunt.) Because the rest would
oblige me unto a discourse too large for this place, it shall suffice that I
have showed you how it was in Sicely.

My Lords, Upon the Fabric of your Provincial Orb I shall not hold you;
because it is sufficiently described in the Order, and I cannot believe that
you think it inferior to the way of a Praetor and a Quastor. But whereas the
Provincial way of the Roman Commonwealths was that whereby she held the
Empire of the World, and your Orbs are intended to be capable at the least of
the like use; there may arise many Controversies. As whether such a course be
lawful, whether it be feizable? and seeing that the Romans ruined upon that
point, whether it would not be unto the destruction of the Commonwealth?

For the first, If the Empire of a Commonwealth be a Patronage, to ask
whether it be lawful for a Commonwealth to aspire unto the Empire of the
World, is to ask whether it be lawful for her to do her duty, or to put the
World into a better condition than it was before.

And to ask whether this be feizable, is to ask why the Oceanar, being under
the like administration of Government, may not do as much with two hundred men
as the Roman did with one hundred, for comparing their Commonwealths in their
rise, the difference is yet greater. Now that Rome (seris Avaritia Luxuriaque)
through the natural thirst of her constitution, came at length with the
fullness of her Provinces, to burst her self, this is no otherwise to be
understood, than as when a man that from his own evil constitution, had
contracted the Dropsy, dies with drinking: It being apparent that in case her
Agrarian had held, she could never have been thus ruined; And I have already
demonstrated that your Agrarian being once poysed, can never break or swarve.

Wherefore to draw toward some Conclusion of this Discourse, let me inculcate
the use, by selecting a few considerations out of many. The regard had in this
place unto the Empire of the World, appertains to a well-ordered
Commonwealth, more especially for two Reasons.

1 The facility of this great enterprise, by a Government of the Model
proposed. 2 The danger that you would run, in the omission of such a
Government.
The facility of this enterprise, upon the grounds already laid, must needs be
great, forasmuch as the Empire of the World has been, both in reason and
experience, the necessary consequence of a Commonwealth of this nature only,
for though it have been given unto all kinds to drive at it, inasmuch as that
of Athens, or Lacedemon, if the one had not hung in the others light; might
have gained it, yet could neither of them have held it; not Athens, through the
manner of her propagation, which being by downright Tyranny, could not
preserve what she had; nor Lacedemon, because she was overthrown by the
weight of a less Conquest. The facility then of this great Enterprise, being
peculiar unto that popular Government; I shall consider it, First, In gaining;
And secondly, In holding.

For the former (Volenti non fit injuria) it is said of the people under
Eumenes, that they would not have changed their subjection for liberty,
wherefore the Romans gave them no disturbance.

If a people be contented with their Government, it is a certain sign that it
is good, and much good do them with it. The sword of the Magistracy is for a
terror unto them that do evil.

Eumenes had the fear of God, or of the Romans before his eyes, concerning such
he has given you no Commission.

But till we can say here are the Romans, where is Eumenes? Do not think that
the late appearances of God unto you, have been altogether for your selves; he
has surely seen the affliction of your Brethren, and heard their cry, by
reason of their taskmasters. For to believe otherwise, is not only to be
mindlesse of his ways, but altogether deaf. If you have ears to hear, this is
the way in which you will assuredly be called upon: for if while there is no
Stock of Liberty, no sanctuary of the afflicted, it be a common object, to
behold a people casting themselves out of the pan of one Prince, into the fire
of another: what can you think, but if the world should see the Roman Eagle
again, she would renew her age, and her flight? nor ever did she spread her
wing with better Omen, then will be read in your Ensigns, which if called in by
an oppressed people, they interpose between them and their Yoke; the people
themselves must either do nothing in the mean time, or have no more pains to
take for their wished fruit than to gather it, if that be not done for them.
Wherefore this must needs be easy, and yet you have a greater facility, than
is in the arm of flesh; for if the cause of mankind, be the cause of God; the
Lord of Hosts will be your Captain, and you shall be a praise unto the Earth.

The facility of holding, is in the way of your Propagation; if you take that
of Athens and Lacedemon; you shall rain snares, but either catch or hold
nothing. Lying lips are an abomination unto the Lord, if setting up for liberty
you impose yoaks, he will assuredly destroy you; On the other side, to go
about a work of this nature, by a League without an head, is to abdicate that
Magistracy, wherewithal he has not only endued you, but whereof he will
require an account of you; for cursed is he that does the work of the Lord
negligently. Wherefore you are to take the course of Rome: if you have subdued
a Nation that is capable of liberty, you shall make them a present of it, as
did Flaminius unto Greece, and Aemilius unto Macedon; reserving unto your
selves some part of that revenue, which was legally paid unto the former
Government, together with the right of being head of the League, which
includes such Levyes of men and money as shall be necessary for the carrying
on of the public work, for if a people have by your means attained unto
freedom, they owe both unto the cause and you, such aid as may propagate the
like fruit unto the rest of the world. But whereas every Nation is not capable
of her liberty unto this degree, lest you be put, to doing and undoing of
things, as the Romans were in Macedon, you shall diligently observe what Nation
is fit for her liberty unto this degree, and what not; which is to be done by
two marks, the first if she be willing to help the Lord against the mighty;
for if she have no care of the Liberty of mankind, she deserves not her own;
but because in this you may be deceived by pretenses, which continuing for a
while specious, may afterward vanish; the other is more certain, and that is,
if she be capable of an equal Agrarian; which that it was not observed by
excellent Aemilius, in his Donation of Liberty, and introduction of a Popular
State among the Macedonians, I am more then moved to believe, for two reasons,
the first because at the same time the Agrarian was odious unto the Roman
Patricians; the second, that the Pseudo-Phillip could afterward so easily
recover Macedon, which could not have happened, but by the Nobility, and their
impatience having great estates, to be equalled with the people, for that the
people should otherwise, at the mere sound of a name, have thrown away their
liberty, is incredible; Wherefore be assured* that the Nation where you cannot
establish an equal Agrarian, is incapable of her liberty, as to this kind of
Donation. For example, except the Aristocracy in Marpesia, be dissolved,
neither can that people, have their liberty there, nor you govern at home, for
they continuing still liable to be sold by their Lords, unto foreign Princes,
there will never (especially in a Country of which there is no other profit to
be made) be want of such Merchants and drovers, while you must be the market
where they are to receive their second payment.

Nor can the Aristocracy there be dissolved but by your means, in relation
whereunto, you are provided with your Provincial Orb, which being proportioned
unto the measure of the Nation that you have vindicated or conquered, will
easily hold it; for there is not a people in the world more difficult to be
held than the Marpesians, which though by themselves it be given unto their own
nature, is truly to be attributed unto that of their Country: Nevertheless you
having nine thousand men upon the continual guard of it, that threatened by any
sudden insurrection, have places of retreat; and an Army of forty thousand men
upon a days warning ready to march unto their rescue, it is not to be
rationally shown, which way they can possibly slip out of your hands; and if a
man shall think, that upon a Province more remote, and divided by Sea, you have
not the like hold; he has not so well considered your wings, as your talons,
your shipping being of such nature, as makes the descent of your Armies almost
of equal facility in any Country, so that what you take, you hold, both because
your Militia being already populous, will be of great growth in it self, and
through the confederates, by whom in taking and holding, you are still more
enabled to take and hold.

Nor shall you easilier hold, then the people under your Empire or Patronage be
held (My Lords, I would not go unto the door; to see whether it be (rimarum
plena) close shut, this is no under-board dealing, nor game, at which he shall
have any advantage against you that sees your Cards, but to the contrary the
advantage shall be your own) for with eighteen thousand men (which number I
put, because it circulates your Orb by the annual charge of six thousand)
having set the matters in the order shown, you will be able to hold the
greatest Province, and eighteen thousand men, allowing them greater pay than
any Prince ever gave, will not stand the Province in one Million revenue; This
by the pay of a Parliamentary Army, is demonstrated in the Corrollary.
In consideration whereof, they shall have their own estates free unto
themselves, be governed by their own Laws and Magistrates; which if the Revenue
of the Province be in dry rent (as there may be some that are four times as big
as Oceana) forty millions, will bring it with that of industry (to speak with
the least) unto twice the value, so that the people there, who at this day are
so oppressed, that they have nothing at all whereupon to live, shall for one
Million paid unto you, receive at the least seventy nine unto their proper use,
in which place I appeal unto any man, whether the Empire described, can be
other than the Patronage of the world.

Now if you add unto the propagation of Civil Liberty, (what is so natural
unto this Commonwealth that it cannot be omitted) the Propagation of the
Liberty of Conscience, this Empire, this Patronage of the world, is the
Kingdom of Christ. For as the Kingdom of God the Father, was a Commonwealth,
so shall be the Kingdom of God the Son; The people shall be willing in the day
of his power, Psalm. 110.3.

Having showed you in this, and other places some of those inestimable benefits
of this kind of Government, together with the natural and facile emanation of
them from their fountain. I come (lest God, who has appeared unto you, for he
is the God of Nature, in the glorious Constellation of these subordinate
causes, whereof we have hitherto been taking the true elevation, should shake
off the dust of his feet against you) to warn you of your dangers, which you,
not taking the opportunity, will run by omission.

Machiavil speaking of the defect of Venice, through her want of proper Arms,
cries out (Questo tagliogli le gambe da montar in cielo) this cut her wings,
and spoiled her mount unto heaven. If you lay your Commonwealth upon any other
foundation, then the people, you frustrate your self of proper Arms, and so
lose the Empire of the World; nor is this all, but some other Nation will have
it.

Columbus offered gold unto one of your Kings, through whose happy incredulity,
another Prince has drunk the poison, even unto the consumption of his people;
but I do not offer you a nerve of war that is made of purs-strings, such an one
as has drawn the face of the earth into convulsions, but such an one as is
natural unto her health and beauty. Look you to it, where there is tumbling and
tossing upon the bed of sickness, it must end in death, or recovery. Though the
people of the world in the dregs of Gothic Empire, be yet tumbling and
tossing upon the bed of sickness, they cannot dye, nor is there any means of
recovery for them, but by ancient prudence, whence of necessity it must come to
pass, that this drug be better known. If France, Italy and Spain, were not all
sick, all corrupted together, there would be none of them so, for the sick
would not be able to withstand the sound, nor the sound to preserve her health
without curing of the sick. The first of these Nations (which if you stay her
leisure, will in my mind be France) that recovers the health of ancient
Prudence, shall assuredly govern the world; for what did Italy when she had
it? And as you were in that, so shall you in the like case be reduced unto a
Province, I do not speak at random. Italy, (L. Aemilio Papo. C. Atilio Regulo
Cos.) armed upon the Gallick Tumult that then happened of her self, and without
the aid of foreign Auxiliaries, Seventy thousand Horse, and Seven hundred
thousand Foot; but as Italy is the least of those three Countries in extent, so
is France the greatest in Population.

I, decus, I nostrum, melioribus utere fatis.

My dear Lords, Oceana is as the Rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the Valley.
As the Lilly among thorns, such is my Love among the Daughters. She is comely
as the Tents of Kedar, and terrible as an Army with Banners. Her neck is as the
Tower of David, builded for an Armory, whereon there hang a thousand Bucklers,
and Shields of mighty men. Let me hear thy voice in the morning, whom my soul
loves. The South has dropped, and the West is breathing upon thy Garden of
Spices. Arise Queen of the earth; Arise holy Spouse of Jesus, For lo the Winter
is past, the Rain is over and gone. The Flowers appear on the earth, the time
of singing of birds is come, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land.
Arise I say, come forth, and do not tarry; ah! wherefore should mine eyes
behold thee by the rivers of Babylon, hanging thy harpes upon the willows, thou
fairest among women?

Excellent Patriots. If the people be sovereign, here is that which
establishes their Praerogative. If we be sincere, here is that which
disburdeneth our souls, makes good all our engagements. If we be charitable,
here is that which imbraceth all Parties. If we would be settled, here is that
which will stand.

If our Religion be any thing else but a vain boast, scratching and defacing
humane nature or reason, which being the image of God, makes it a kind of
murder, here is that Empire, whence Justice shall run down like a river, and
judgment like a mighty stream, Amos 5.24. who is it then that calls us? or
what is in our way? a Lion, is it not the Dragon that old Serpent? for what
wretched shifts are these? Here is a great deal, might we not have some of
this at one time, and some at another?

My Lords, permit me to give you the sum or brief Epitome of the whole
Commonwealth.
THe Center or Fundamental Laws are first the Agrarian proportioned at two
thousand pounds a year in Land, Epitome of the whole Common wealth.
lying and being within the proper territory of Oceana, and so stateing
Propriety in Land at such a balance, that the Power can never swarve out of
the hands of the many.

Secondly, The Ballot conveying this equal sap, from the root by an equal
election or rotation, into the branches of Magistracy or Sovereign power.

The Orbs of this Commonwealth being Civil, Military, or Provincial, are as
it were cast upon this Mold or Center, by the Divisions of the People; first
into Citizens and Servants: Secondly, Into Youth and Elders: Thirdly, Into such
as have one hundred pound a year in Lands, Goods, or Moneys, who are of the
Horse, and such as have under, who are of the Foot. Fourthly, by their usual
residence into Parishes, hundreds, and Tribes.

The Civil Orbs consist of the Elders, and are thus Created, every Monday next
ensuing the last of December, the Elders in every Parish, elect the fifth man
to be a Deputy, half a days work, every Monday next ensuing the last of
January, the Deputies meet at their respective hundred, and elect out of their
number one Justice of the Peace, one Iury-man, one Coroner, and one
High-Constable of the Foot; one days work.

Every Monday next ensuing the last of February, the Hundreds meet at their
respective Tribe, and there elect the Lords High-Sheriffe, Lieutenant, Gustos
Rotulorum, the Conductor, the two Censors out of the Horse, the Magistrates of
the Tribe, and of the hundreds, with the Iury-men constituting the Phylarch,
assist in their respective Offices at the Assizes, hold the Quarter Sessions,
etc. The day following the Tribe elects, the annual Galaxy, consisting of two
Knights, and three Deputies out of the Horse, with four Deputies of the Foot,
thereby endued with Power, as Magistrates of the whose Nation for the term of
three years: an Officer chosen at the Hundred, may not be elected a Magistrate
of the Tribe, but a Magistrate or Officer, either of the Hundred or of the
Tribe, being elected into the Galary may substitute any one of his own Order,
unto his Magistracy or Office in the Hundred, or in the Tribe; This of the
Muster is two days work, so the body of the People is annually at the charge of
three days work, and an half, in their own Tribes, for the perpetuation of
their power, receiving over and above the Magistracies so divided among them.

Every Monday next ensuing the last of March; The Knights being an Hundred in
all the Tribes, take their places in the Senate; The Knights having taken their
Places in the Senate, make the third Region of the same; and the house proceeds
unto the Senatorian Elections. Senatorian Elections are annual, biennial, or
emergent.

The Annual are performed by the Tropic.

The Tropic is a Scedule consisting of two parts, the first by which the
Senatorian Magistrates are elected, the second, by which the Senatorian
Councils are perpetuated.

The first part is of this Tenor.

The Lord Strategus. The Lord Orator. The first Censor. The second Censor.
Annual Magistrates, and therefore such as may be elected out of any Region;
the term of every region, having at the Tropic one year at the least unexpired.

The third Co^missioner of the Seal. The third Co^missioner of the Treasury.
Triennial Magistrates, and therefore such as can be chosen out of the third
Region only, as that alone, which has the term of three years unexpired.

The Strategus and the Orator sitting are Consuls, or Presidents of the Senate.

The Strategus marching is General of the Army, in which case a new Strategus
is elected to sit in his room.

The Strategus sitting with the six Commissioners being Counselors of the
Nation, are the Signory of the Commonwealth.

The Censors are Magistrates of the Ballot, Presidents of the Council for
Religion, and Chancellors of the Universities.

The second part of the Tropic, perpetuateth the Council of State, by the
election of five Knights, out of the first Region of the Senate, to be the
first Region of that Council, consisting of fifteen Knights, five in every
Region.

The like is done by the election of four into the Council of Religion, and
four into the Council of Trade, out of the same Region in the Senate, each of
these Councils consisting of twelve Knights, four in every Region.

But the Council of War consisting of nine Knights, three in every Region, is
elected by and out of the Council of State, as the other Councils are elected
by and out of the Senate; And if the Senate add a Iuncta of nine Knights more,
elected out of their own number, for the term of three months, the Council of
War by virtue of that addition, is Dictator of Oceana for the said term.

The Signory jointly or severally has right of Session, and Suffrage in every
Senatorian Council, and to propose either unto the Senate, or any of them. And
every Region in a Council electing one weekly Provost; any two of those
Provosts, have power also to propose unto their respective Council, as the
proper and peculiar proposers of the same: for which cause they hold an
Academy, where any man either by word of mouth, or writeing, may propose unto
the Proposers.

Next unto the elections of the Tropic, is the Biennial Election of one
Ambassador in ordinary, by the Ballot of the House, unto the Residence of
France, at which time the Resident of France, removes to Spain, he of Spain, to
Venice, he of Venice, to Constantinople, and he of Constantinople returns. So
the Orb of the Residents, is wheeled about in eight years, by the Biennial
election of one Ambassador in Ordinary.

The last kind of Election is emergent. Emergent Elections are made by the
Scruteny. Election by Scruteny, is when a Competitor being made by a Council,
and brought into the Senate: The Senate chooses four more Competitors unto
him, and putting all the five unto the Ballot, he who has most above half the
Suffrages is the Magistrate. The Polemarches, or Field Officers, are chosen by
the Scruteny of the Council of War: An Ambassador extraordinary by the
Scruteny of the Council of State: the Judges and Serieants at Law by the
Scruteny of the Seal, and the Barons, and prime Officers of the Exchequer, by
the Scruteny of the Treasury.

The opinion, or opinions that are legitimately proposed unto any Council must
be debated by the same, and so many as are resolved upon the debate, are
introduced into the Senate, where they are debated and resolved, or rejected by
the whole house: that which is resolved by the Senate is a Decree, which is
good in matter of State, but no law except it be proposed unto, and resolved
by the prerogative.

The Deputies of the Galaxy being three horse and four foot in a Tribe, amount
in all the Tribes unto one hundred and fifty horse, and two hundred foot, which
having entered the Prerogative* and chosen their Captains, Gornet and Ensign
(triential Officers,) make the third Classis consisting of one Troop, and one
Company, and so joining with the whole Prerogative, elect four annual
Magistrates, called Tribunes, whereof two are of the Horse, and two of the
foot, these have the command of the Prerogative Sessions and Suffrage in the
Council of war, and Sessions without Suffrage in the Senate.

The Senate having past a Decree which they would propose unto the people,
cause it to be printed and published, or promulgated for the space of six
weeks, which being Ordered, they choose their Proposers, The Proposers must be
Magistrates, that is, the Commissioners of the Seal, those of the Treasury, or
the Censors. These being chosen, desire the Muster of the Tribunes, and appoint
the day. The people being assembled at the day appointed, and the Decree
proposed, that which is proposed by authority of the Senate, and commanded by
the People is the Law of Oceana, or an Act of Parliament.

So the Parliament of Oceana consists of the Senate proposing, and the People
resolving.

The People, or Prerogative are also the Supreme Iudicatory of this Nation,
having power of hearing and determining all Causes of appeal from all
Magistrates, or Courts Provincial, or Domestic, as also to question any
Magistrate, the term of his Magistracy being expired: if the Case be introduced
by the Tribunes or any one of them.

The Military Orbs consist of the Youth, that is, such as are from eighteen to
thirty years of age: and are thus created.

Every Wednesday next ensuing the last of December, the Youth of every Parish
assembling, elect the fifth of their number to be their Deputies, the Deputies
of the Youth, are called Stratiots, and this is the first Essay.

Every Wednesday next ensuing the last of January, the Stratiots assembling at
the hundred, elect their Captain and their Ensign, and fall to their game.

Every Wednesday next ensuing the last of February, the Stratiots are received
by the Lord Lieutenant their Commander in Chief, with the Conductors and the
Censors, and having been disciplined and entertained with other Games, are
called unto the Urnes, where they elect the second Essay, consisting of two
hundred horse and six hundred foot in a Tribe, that is, often thousand Horse,
and thirty thousand foot in all the Tribes, which is the standing Army of this
Nation, to march at any warning; they also elect at the same time, a part of
the third Essay, by the mixture of balls marked with the letter M. and the
letter P. for Marpesia and Panopea, they of either mark being ten Horse and
fifty foot in a Tribe, that is, five hundred horse and two thousand foot in all
the Tribes, which are forthwith to march to their respective Provinces.

But the third Essay of this Nation more properly so called, is when the
Strategus with the Polemarches (the Senate and the People, or the Dictator
having Decreed a War) receive in return of his Warrants the second Essay from
the hands of the Conductors at the Randezvouz of Oceana, which Army marching
with all Accommodations, Provided by the Council of War, the Senate elects a
new Strategus, and the Lords Lieutenants, a new second Essay.

A Youth except he be an only son, refusing any one of his three Essays
without sufficient cause, shown unto the Phylarch, or the Censors, is incapable
of Magistracy, and is fined a fifth part of his yearly rent, or of his Estate
for Protection. In case of Invasion the Elders are obliged unto like duty with
the Youth, and upon their own Charge.

The Provincial Orb consisting in part of the Elders, and in part of the
Youth, is thus created.

Four Knights out of the first Region falling, are elected in the Senate, to
be the first Region of the Provincial Orb of Marpesia, these being triennial
Magistrates, take their places in the Provincial Council, consisting of twelve
Knights, for in every Region, each Region choosing there weekly Provosts, of
the Council thus constituted, one Knight more chosen out of the same Region in
the Senate, being an annual Magistrate is President, with power to propose, and
the opinions proposed by the President, or any two of the Provosts are Debated
by the Council, and if occasion be of farther power or instruction, than they
yet have transmitted unto the Council of State, with which the Provincial is to
hold Intelligence.

The President of this Council is also Strategus, or General of the Provincial
Army, wherefore the Conductors upon notice of his Election, and appointment of
his Randezvous, deliver unto him the Stratiots of his Letter, which he takes
with him into his Province: and the Provincial Army having received the new
Strategus, with the third Classis, the Council dismisseth the old Strategus
with the first Classis. The like is done for Panopea, or any other Province.

But whereas the term of every other Magistracy or election in this
Commonwealth, whether annual or triennial, requires an equal Uacation, the
term of a Provincial Counselor or Magistrate, requires no vacation at all.
The Coram of a Provincial, as also that of every other Council and assembly,
requires two thirds in a time of health, and one third in a time of sickness.



-- (Insula Portum
Efficit objectu laterum, geminique minantur
In coelum scopuli, quorum suo vertice late
Aequora tuta silent)
I think I have omitted nothing, but the Props and Scaffolds which are not of
use but in building. And how much is here? Show me another Commonwealth in this
compass? How many things? Show me another entire Government consisting but of
thirty Orders. If you go to suit there lie unto some of your Courts two hundred
original Writs; If you stir your hand, there go more nerves and bones unto the
motion; If you play, you have more Cards in the pack; nay you could not sit
with your ease in that chair, if it consisted not of more parts, will you not
allow unto your Legislator, what you can afford your Upholdster; unto the
Throne, what is necessary to a Chair?

My Lords, If you will have fewer Orders in a Commonwealth you will have more,
for where she is not perfect at first, every day, every hour will produce a
new Order, the end whereof is to have no Order at all, but to grind with the
clack of some Demagoge; Is he providing already for his golden Thumb? Lift up
your heads; Away with Ambition, that fulsome complexion of a Statesman,
tempered like Sylla's (Luto cum sanguine) with blood and muck. And the Lord
give unto his Senators wisdom, and make our faces to shine, that we may be a
light unto them that sit in darkness, and the shadow of death, to guide their
feet in the way of peace. -- In the Name of God, What Is the matter! --

Philadelphus the Secretary of the Council, having performed his task in
reading the several Orders, as you have seen, upon the receipt of a Packet, it
should seem from his correspondent Boccalini, Secretary of Parnassus, in
reading one of the letters, burst forth into such a violent passion of weeping,
and downright howling, that your Legislators being startled with the
apprehension of some horrid news; one of them had no sooner snatched the letter
out of his hand, then the rest crying Read, Read, he obeyed in this manner.

The third instant, his Phaebean Majesty, having taken the nature of free
States into his Royal consideration, and being steadily persuaded, that the
Laws in such Governments are incomparably better, and more assuredly directed
unto the good of mankind, than in any other, Trajno, a Boccalini, Centuria 1.
Ragnal. 21.
that the courage of such a people is the aptest tindar, unto noble fire, that
the genius of such a soil is that wherein the roots of good literature are
least worm-eaten with Pedantisme, and where their fruits have ever come unto
the greatest maturity, and highest relish, conceived such a loathing of their
Ambition and Tyranny, who usurping the liberty of their native Countries,
become slaves to themselves, in as much as be it never so contrary unto their
own nature or consciences, they have taken the earnest of sin, and are engaged
to persecute all men that are good. (For, Nemo unquam imperium flagitio
quaesitum bonis artibus exercuit) with the same or greater rigor, than is
ordained by Laws for the wicked, assembled all the Senators residing in the
learned Court at the Theater of Melpomene, where he caused Caesar the Dictator
to come upon the Stage, and his Sister Actia; his Nephew Augustus, Julia his
Daughter, with the children which she had by Marcus Agrippa, Lucius, and Cajus
Caesar's, Agrippa Posthumus, Julia, and Agrippina, with the numerous Progeny
which she bare unto her renowned husband Germanicus, to enter. A miserable
Scene in any, but most deplorable in the eyes of Caesar, thus beholding what
havoc his prodigious ambition, not satisfied with his own bloody ghost, had
made upon his more innocent Remains, even unto the total extinction of his
Family. For it is (seeing where there is any humanity, there must be some
compassion) not to be spoken without tears, that of the full branches deriving
from Octavia, the elder sister, and Julia the Daughter of Augustus, there
should not be one fruit or blossom that was not cut off, or blasted, by the
Sword, Famine, or Poison. Now might the great soul of Caesar have been full;
and yet that which powered in as much or more, was to behold that execrable race
of the Claudii, having hunted, and sucked his blood with the thirst of Tygars,
to be rewarded with the Roman Empire, and remain in full possession of the
famous Patrimony: A spectacle to pollute the light of heaven. Nevertheless as
if Caesar had not yet enough, his Phaebean Majesty caused to be introduced on
the other side of the Theater, the most illustrious and happy Prince Andrea
Doria, with his dear posterity, embraced by the soft and constant arms of the
City Genoa, into whose bosom, ever fruitful in her gratitude, he had dropped
her fair liberty like the dew of heaven, which when the Roman Tyrant beheld,
and how much more fresh that Laurel was worn with a root in the hearts of the
people, than that which he had torn off; he fell into such horrid distortion
of limbs and countenance; that the Senators who had thought themselves steel
and flint at such an object, having hitherto stood in their reverent snow like
thawing Alps, now covered their faces with their large sleeves.

My Lords (said the Archon rising) witty Philadelphus, has given us a grave
admonition in a dreadful Tragedy (Discite justitiam moniti, and non temnere
divos) Great and glorious Caesar, the highest character of flesh, yet could not
rule but by that part of man, which is the beast, but a Commonwealth is a
Monarchy, to hear God is King, in as much as reason his dictate, is her
Sovereign Power.

Which said, he adjourned the Council. And the Model being soon after
promulgated (Quod bonum foelix, faustumque sit huic Reipub, Agite quirites,
censuere patres, jubeat populus) The Sea roared, and the Floods clapped their
hands.

LIBERTAS The Proclamation of his Highness the Lord Archon of Oceana, upon
Promulgation of the Model.
WHereas his Highness and the Council, in the framing of the model
promulgated, See the course of the Decemvirs in the promulgation of the first
ten of their twelve Tables in Livy.
have not had any private interest, or ambition, but the fear of God, and the
good of this people before their eyes, and it remains their desire, that this
great work may be carried on accordingly, this present greeting is to inform
the good people of this Land, that as the Council of Prytans sat, during the
framing of the model, to receive from time to time, such propositions as should
be offered, by any wise hearted or public spirited man, toward the
institution of a well ordered Commonwealth, so the said Council is to sit as
formerly in the great Hall of the Pantheon, during Promulgation, which is to
continue for the space of three months, to receive, weigh, and as there shall
be occasion, transmit, unto the council of Legislators, all such objections as
shall be made against the said Model, whether in the whole, or in any part.
Wherefore that nothing be done rashly, or without consent of the people, such
of what party soever, with whom there may remain any doubts or difficulties,
are desired with all convenient speed to address themselves unto the said
Prytans, where if such objections, doubts, or difficulties receive solution
unto the satisfaction of the auditory, they shall have public thanks, but if
the said objections, doubts, or difficulties, receive no solution unto the
satisfaction, of the auditory, then the model promulgated shall be reviewed,
and the party that was the occasion of the review, shall receive public
thanks, together with the best horse in his Highnesses Stable, and be one of
the Council of Legislators. And so God have you in his keeping.

I should now write the same Council of the Prytans, but for two reasons, the
one, that having had but a small time for that which is already done, I am
over-laboured; The other, that there may be new objections: Wherefore if my
Reader have any such as to the Model, I entreat him to address himself by way
of Oration, as it were unto the Prytans that when this rough draught comes to
be a work, his speech being faithfully inserted in this place, may give, or
receive correction unto amendment. For what is written will be weighed but
conversation, in these days is a game, at which they are best provided that
have light Gold

It is like the sport of women that make flowers of straws, which must be stuck
up, but may not be touched? Nor, which is worse, Arist. Rhet.
is this the fault of conversation only. But to the Examiner, I say, If to
invent method, and to teach an art, be all one, Let him show that this Method
is not truly invented, or this Art is faithfully taught.

I cannot conclude a Circle, (and such is this Commonwealth) without turning
the end into the beginning. The time of Promulgation being expired, the
Surveyors were sent down, who having in due season made report that their work
was perfect, the Orators followed, under the administration of which officers,
and Magistrates the Commonwealth was ratified and established by the whole body
of the people, Curiatis, Centuriatis, and Tributis Comitiis. And the Orators
being by virtue of their Scroles or lots, members of their respective Tribes,
were elected each first Knight of the third List, or Galaxy: Wherefore having
at their return, assisted the Archon in putting the Senate, and the People or
Prerogative into motion, they abdicated the Magistracy both of Orators and
Legislators.

The Corollary.
FOR the rest (says Plutarch closing up the story of Lycurgus) when he saw
that his Government had taken root, and was in the very Plantation strong
enough to stand by it self; he conceived such a delight within him, as GOD is
described by Plato to have done, when he had finished the Creation of the
World, and saw his own Orbs move below him: For in the Art of Man, being the
imitation of nature, which is the Hobb
Art of GOD, there is nothing so like the first Call of beautiful Order, out
of Chaos and Confusion, as the Architecture of a well ordered Commonwealth.
Wherefore Lycurgus seeing in effect, that his Orders were good, fell into deep
Contemplation how he might render them, so far forth as is in humane
providence, unalterable and immortal. To which end he assembled the People,
and remonstrated unto them, that for ought he could perceive, their Policy was
already such, and so well established, as was sufficient to entayle upon them
and theirs, that virtue and felicity whereof humane Life is Capable.

Nevertheless, there being another thing of greater Concernment then all the
rest, whereof he was not yet provided to give them a perfect account, nor
could, till he had consulted the Oracle of Apollo; he desired that they would
observe his Laws, without any change or alteration whatsoever, till his return
from Delphos; unto which all the People cheerfully and unanimously engaged
themselves by promise, desiring him that he would make as much have as he
could. But Lycurgus before he went, began with the Kings and the Senators, and
thence taking the whole People in Order, made them all swear unto that which
they had promised, and then took his Journey. Being arrived at Delphos, he
sacrificed unto Apollo, and afterward enquired if the policy which he had
established, were good and sufficient for a virtuous and an happy Life. (It
has been a Maxim with Legislators, not to give Checks unto the present
Superstition, but to make the best use of it, as that which is always the most
powerful with the People; otherwise though Plutarch being a Priest, was
interested in the cause, there is nothing plainer then Cicero in his Book De
Divinatione has showed it, that there was never any such thing as an Oracle,
except in the Art of the Priests. But to be civil unto the Author.) The God
answered Lycurgus, that his policy was exquisite, and that his City holding
unto the strict observation of his form of Government, should attain unto the
height of fame and glory. Which Oracle Lycurgus causing to be written, failed
not to send unto his Lacidemon. This done, that his Citizens might be for ever
inviolably bound by their Oath, that they would alter nothing till his return,
he took so firm a Resolution to dye in the Place, that from thence forward
receiving no manner of food, he soon after performed it accordingly. Nor was
he deceived in the Consequence, for his City became the first in glory and
excellency of Government in the whole World. And so much for Lycurgus according
to Plutarch.

My Lord Archon when he beheld not only the rapture of motion, but of joy and
harmony, into which his Spears without any manner of Obstruction or
enterfering, but as it had been naturally were cast, conceived not les of
exultation in his Spirit, but saw no more necessity or reason why he should
administer an Oath unto the Senate and the People, that they would observe his
Institutions, then unto a Man in perfect health, and felicity of Constitution
that he would not kill himself. Nevertheless whereas Christianity though it
forbid violent hands, consists no less in Self denial then any other
Religion, he resolved that all carnal Concupisence should dye in the Place, to
which end that no manner of Food might be left unto ambition, he entered into
the Senate with an unanimous Applause, And having spoken of his Government as
Lycurgus did when he assembled the People, abdicated the Magistracy of Archon.
The Senate as stricken with astonishment continued silent, Men upon so sudden
an Accident being altogether unprovided of what to say; till the Archon
withdrawing, and being almost at the door, diverse of the Knights flew from
their Places offering as it were to lay violent hands on him, while he escaping
left the Senate with the tears in their eyes of Children that had lost their
Father, and to rid himself of all farther importunity, retired unto a Country
house of his, being remote and very private, in so much that no Man could tell
for some time what was become of him. Thus the Lawmakers happened to be the
first object and reflection of the Law made: For as Liberty of all things is
the most welcome unto a People, so is there nothing more abhorrent from their
nature then ingratitude. We accusing the Roman People of this Crime against
some of their greatest Benefactors, as Camillus, heap mistake upon mistake, for
being not so competent Judges of what belongs unto Liberty as they were, we
take upon us to be more competent Judges of virtue. But whereas virtue for
being a vulgar thing among them, was of no less rate then Jewels are with such
as wear the most; we are selling this stone which we have ignorantly raked out
of the Roman ruders, at such a rate as the Switz did that which they took in
the Baggage of Charles of Burgundy: For that Camillus had stood more firm
against the Ruin of Rome then her Capitol, was acknowledged: But on the other
side that he stood as firm for the Patricians against the Liberty of the
People was as plain; wherefore he never wanted of the People that would dye at
his foot in the Field, nor that would withstand him to his beard in the City.
An example in which they that think that Camillus had wrong, neither do
themselves right nor the People of Rome, who in this signify no less then
that they had a scorn of slavery beyond the fear of Ruin, which is the height
of Magnanimity. The like might be shown by other examples, objected against
this, and other Popular Government, as in the Banishment of Aristides the Just
from Athens, by the Ostracisme, which first was no punishment, nor ever
understood for so much as a disparagement, but tended only to the Security of
the Commonwealth, through the removal of a Citizen, whose Riches or Power
with a party was suspected, out of harms way for the space of ten years,
neither to the diminution of his Estate or Honor. And next though the virtue
of Aristides might in it self be unquestioned, yet for him under the name of
the Just to become Universal Umpire of the People in all cases, even to the
neglect of the Legal ways and orders of the Commonwealth, approached so much
unto the Prince, that the Athenians doing Aristides no wrong, did their
Government no more then right in removing him, which therefore is not so
probable to have come to pass as Plutarch presumes, through the envy of
Themistocles: seeing Aristides was far more popular then Themistocles, who soon
after took the same walk upon a worse occasion. Wherefore as Machiavill for any
thing since alleged has irrefragably proved that Popular Governments are of
all other the least ungrateful, so the obscurity (I say) into which my Lord
Archon had now withdrawn himself, caused an universal sadness and cloud in
the minds of Men upon the glory of his rising Commonwealth.

Much had been ventilated in private discourse, and the People (for the Nation
was divided into Parties that had not yet lost their animosities) being
troubled, bent their eyes upon the Senate, when after some time spent in
devotion, and the solemn Action of Thanksgiving, his Excellency Navarchus de
Paralo in the Tribe of Dorean, Lord Strategus of Oceana (though in a new
Commonwealth a very Prudent Magistrate) proposed his part or Opinion in such
manner unto the Council of State, that passing the Ballott of the same with
great unanimity and applause, it was introduced into the Senate, where it past
with greater. Wherefore the Decree being forthwith Printed and Published,
Copies were returned by the Secretaries unto the Phylarches (which is the
manner of Promulgation) and the Commissioners of the Seal, that is to say, the
Right Honorable Phosphorus de Auge in the Tribe of Eudia, Dolabella d' Enyo in
the Tribe of Turmae, and Linceus de Stella in the Tribe of Nubia being elected
Proposers pro tempore, bespoke of the Tribunes a Muster of the People to be
held that day 6 weeks, which was the time allowed for Promulgation, at the Halo.

The Satisfaction which the People throughout the Tribes received upon
promulgation of the Decree, loaded the Carriers with weekly Letters between
Friend and Friend, whether Magistrates or private Persons. But the day for
Proposition being come, and the Praerogative upon the Place appointed in
Discipline, Sanguine de Ringwood in the Tribe of Saltum Captain of the Phoenix
marched by Order of the Tribunes with his Troop unto the Piazza of the
Pantheon, where his Trumpets entering into the great Hall by their Blazon gave
notice of his Arrival, at which the Serjant of the House came down, and
returning informed the Proposers, who descending were received at the foot of
the Stairs by the Captain, and attended unto the Coaches of State, with which
Calcar de Gilvo in the Tribe of Phalera Master of the Horse, and the Ballotins
upon their great Horses stood waiting at the Gate*

The Proposers being in their Coaches, the Train being for the Pomp the same
that is used at the reception of Ambassadors, proceeded in this order, In the
Front marched the Troop with the Cornet in the van, and the Captain in the
rear: next the Troop came the twenty Messengers or Trumpets; the Ballotins upon
the Corvet with their Usher in the van, and the Master of the Horse in the
Rear: Next the Ballotins Bronchus de Rauco in the Tribe of Bestia King of the
Herraulds with his fraternity in their Coats of Arms; And next unto Sr Brochus,
Boristenes de Holiwater in the Tribe of Ave Master of the Ceremonies: The Mace
and the Seal of the Chancery went immediately before the Coaches, and on
either side the doore-keepers or Guard of the Senate with their Pole-axes,
accompanied with some three, or four hundred Footmen, belonging unto the
Knights or Senators; The Trumpeters Ballotins, Guards, Postilions, Coach-men,
and Footmen being very gallant in the Liveries of the Commonwealth, but all
except the Ballotins without hatts, in lieu whereof they wore black velvet
calots being pointed with a little peake at the forehead. After the Proposers,
came a long file of Coaches full of such Gentlemen as use to grace the
Commonwealth upon like occasions. In this posture they moved slowly through the
Streets, affoarding in the Gravity of the Pomp, and the welcomeness of the end,
a most reverent and acceptable Prospect unto the People from the Pantheon to
the Halo, being about half a mile, arrived at the Halo, where they found the
Prerogative in a close body environed with Scaffolds that were covered with
Spectators: The Tribunes received the Proposers, and conducted them into a seat
placed in front of the Tribe, like a Pulpit, but that it was of some length,
and well adorned by the Herraulds, with all manner of Birds and Beasts, save
that they were ill Painted, and never a one of his natural color. The
Tribunes were placed at a Table that stood below the long seat, those of the
Horse in the middle, and those of the Foot at either end, with each of them a
bowl or basin before him, that on the right hand being white, and the other
green: in the middle of the Table stood a third which was red. And the
Housekeeper of the Pavillion who had already delivered a proportion of linen
balls or pellets unto every one of the Tribe, now presented boxes unto the
Ballotines. But the Proposers as they entered the Gallery, or long Seat, having
put off their Hats by way of Salutation, were answered by the People with a
shout, whereupon the younger Commissioners seated themselves at either end, and
the first standing in the middle, spoke after this manner.

My Lords, the People of OCEANA.
WHILE I find in my self what a felicity it is to Salute you by this Name, and
in every face anointed as it were with the Oil of Gladness, a full and
sufficient testimony of the like sense. To go about to feast you with words,
who are already filled with that food of the mind, which being of pleasing and
wholesome digestion, takes in the difinition of true joy, were a needless
enterprise. I shall rather remember you of that thankfulness which is due,
then puff you up with any thing that might seem vain. Is it from the arms of
flesh that we derived these Blessings? Behold the Common wealth of Rome falling
upon her own victorious Sword. Or is it from our own Wisdom, whose Counsels
had brought it even to that pass that we began to repent our selves of
Victory? Far be it from us (my Lords) to Sacrifize unto our own Nets, which we
our Selves have so narrowly escaped; Let us rather lay our mouths in the dust,
and look up, (as was taught the other day when we were better instructed in
this Lesson) unto the Hills with our gratitude. Nevertheless seeing we read
how GOD upon neglect of his Prophets has been provoked unto wrath; it must
needs follow that he expects Honor should be given unto them by whom he has
chosen to work as his Instruments. For which cause nothing doubting of my
warrant, I shall proceed unto that which more particularly concerns the
present occasion, the discovery of my Lord Archons virtues and merit to be ever
placed by this Nation in their true Meridian.

My Lords,
I Am not upon a subject which persuades me to balk, but necessitateth me to
seek out the greatest examples. To begin with Alexander erecting Trophies
common with his Sword and the Pestilence; to what good of Mankind did he infect
the air with his heaps of carkases? The sword of war, if it be any otherwise
used then as the sword of magistracy for the fear and punishment of those that
do evil, is as guilty in the sight of GOD, as the Sword of a Murderer; nay
more, for if the blood of Abel, of one innocent Man, cried in the ears of of
the Lord for Vengeance, What shall the blood of an innocent Nation? Of this
kind of Empire, the Throne of Ambition, the quarry of a mighty Hunter, it has
been truly said, that it is but a great Robbery. But if Alexander had restored
the Liberty of Greece, and propagated it unto Mankind, he had done like my Lord
Archon, and might have been truly called the Great. Alexander cared not to
steal a victory, that would be given. But my Lord Archon has torn away a
victory which had been stolen, while we were tamely yielding up Obedience unto
a Nation reaping in our Fields, whose fields he has subjected unto our Empire,
and nailed them with his victorious Sword unto their native Caucasus.

Machiavill gives an handsome Caveat, Let no man (says he) be circumvented
with the Glory of Caesar, from the false reflection of their pens, who through
the longer continuance of his Empire in the name then in the family, changed
their freedom for flattery. But if a man would know truly what the Romans
thought of Caesar, let him observe what they said of Catiline.

And yet by how much he who has perpetrated some heighnous Crime, is more
execrable then he who did but attempt it: by so much is Caesar more execrable
then Catline. To the contrary let him that would know what ancient and
heroical times, what the Greeks and Romans would both have thought and said of
my Lord Archon; Observe what they thought and said of Solon, Lycurgus, Brutus,
and Publicola. And yet by how much his virtue that is crowned with the
perfection of his work, is beyond theirs, who were either inferior in their
aim, or in their performance, by so much is my Lord Archon to be preferred
before Solon, Lycurgus, Brutus, and Publicola.

Nor will we shun the most illustrious example of Scipio; this Hero, though
never so little less, yet was he not the founder of a Commonwealth, and for
the rest allowing his tue to have been of the most untainted ray, in what did
it out thine this of my Lord Archon? But if dazzling the eyes of the Magistrates
it overawed Liberty, Rome might be allowed some excuse that She did not like
it, and I, if I admit not of this comparison. For where is my Lord Archon? Is
there a Genius, how free soever, which in his presence would not find it self
to be under power? He is shrunk into Clouds, he seeks obscurity in a Nation
that sees by his light. He is impatient of his own Glory, least it should stand
between you and your Liberty.

Liberty! What is that, if we may not be grateful? And if we may, we have
none: For who has any thing he does not owe? My Lords, there be some hard
conditions of virtue: If this debt were exacted, it were not due; whereas being
canceled, we are all entered into Bonds. On the other side, if we make such
payment as will not stand with a free People, we do not enrich my Lord Archon,
but Rob him of his whole estate, and of his immence glory.

These Particulars had in due deliberation, and mature debate, according unto
the orders of this Commonwealth. It is proposed by Authority of the Senate to
you my Lords the People of Oceana.

I. THat the Dignity and Office of Archon, or Protector of the Commonwealth of
Oceana, be, and is hereby conferred by the Senate and the People of Oceana, upon
the most Illustrious Prince, and sole Legislator of this Commonwealth, Olphaus
Megaletor (Pater Patriae) whom God preserve, for the term of his natural Life.

II. That three hundred and fifty thousand pounds per annum yet remaining of
the ancient Revenue, be estated upon the said illustrious Prince, or Lord
Archon, for the said term, and to the propper and peculiar use of his
Highness.

III. That the Lord Archon have the reception of all Foreign Ambassadors, by
and with the Council of State, according unto the orders of this Commonwealth.

IV. That the Lord Archon have a standing Army of twelve thousand Men, defrayed
upon a monthly tax, dureing the term of three years, for the Protection of
this Commonwealth, against dissenting Parties, to be governed, directed, and
Commanded by, and with the advice of the Council of War, according unto the
Orders of this Commonwealth.

V. That this Commonwealth make no distinction of Persons or Parties, but
every man being Elected and sworn, according unto the Orders of the same, shall
be equally capable of Magistracy; or not Elected, shall be equally capable of
Liberty, and the enjoyment of his Estate free from all other then common Taxes.

VI. That a man putting a distinction upon himself, refusing the Oath upon
Election, or declaring himself of a party, not conformable to the civil
Government, may within any time of the three years standing of the Army,
transport himself and his Estate, without molestation or impediment, into any
other Nation.

VII. That in case there remain any distinction of Parties not conforming unto
the civil Government of this Commonwealth, after the three years of the
standing Army be expired, and the Commonwealth be thereby forced to prolong
the term of the said Army, the pay from thenceforth of the said Army, shall be
levied upon the Estates of such parties so remaining unconformable unto the
Civil Government.

The Proposer having ended his Oration, the Trumpets sounded, and the Tribunes
of the Horse being mounted to view the Ballot, caused the Tribe which thronging
up to the Speech, came almost round the Gallery, to retreat a matter of twenty
paces, when Linceus de Stella receiving the Propositions, repaired with
Bronchus de Rauco the Heralt, unto a little Scaffold erected in the middle of
the Tribe, where he seated himself, the Herrault standing bare upon his right
hand. The Ballotines having their boxes ready, stood before the Gallery, and at
the Command of the Tribunes marched, one unto every Troop on Horsback, and one
unto every Company on foot, each of them being followed by other Children that
bore red boxes, (this is putting the Question whether the Question should be
put.) And the Suffrage being very suddenly returned unto the Tribunes of the
Table, and numbered in the view of the Proposers, the Votes were all in the
Affirmative; whereupon the red, or doubtful Boxes were laid aside, it
appearing that the Tribe whether for the Negative or Affirmative, was clear in
the matter. Wherefore the Herrault began from the Scaffold in the middle of the
Tribe to pronounce the first Proposition, and the Ballotines marching with the
Negative and Affirmative only: Bronchus with his voice like Thunder, continued
to repeat the Proposition over and over again so long as it was in Balloting:
The like was done for every Clause, till the Ballot was finished, and the
Tribunes assembling had signed the points, that is to say, the number of every
Suffrage, as it was taken by the Secretary upon the tale of the Tribunes, and
in the sight of the Proposers; for this may not be omitted, it is the pulce of
the People. Now whereas it appertains unto the Tribunes to report the
Suffrage of the people unto the Senate, they cast the Lot for this Office with
three silver Balls, and one gold one, and it fell upon the Rt Worshipful Argus
de Crookhorne, in the Tribe of Pascua, first Tribune of the Foot. Argus being a
good sufficient Man in his own Country, was yet of the mind that he should make
but a bad spokes man, and therefore became something blank at his Luck, till
his colleagues persuaded him that it was no such great matter, if he could but
read, having his Paper before him. The Proposers taking Coach, received a
volley upon the Field, and returned in the same Order, save that being
accompanied with the Tribunes, they were also attended by the whole
Praerogative unto the Piazza of the Pantheon, where with another volley they
took their leaves. Argus, who had not thought upon his Wife and Children all
the way, went very gravely up, and every one being seated, the Senate by their
silence seemed to call for the Report, which Argus standing up, delivered in
this wise.

Right Honorable Lords and Fathers Assembled in Parliament,
SO it is, that it has fallen unto my Lot to report unto your Excellencies the
Votes of the People, taken upon the third instant, in the first year of this
Commonwealth, at the Halo; the Rt Honorable Phosphorus de Auge, in the Tribe
of Eudia, Dolabella d' Enyo, in the Tribe of Turmae, and Linceus de Stella, in
the Tribe of Nubia, Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal of Oceana, and
Proposers pro temporibus -- Together with my Brethren the Tribunes, and my Self
being present. Wherefore these are to certify unto your Fatherhoods, that the
said Votes of the People were as follows; that is to say.

Unto the first Proposition, Nomine Contradicante -- Unto the second Nomine
Contradictante -- Unto the third, the like. Unto the fourth 211 above half.
Unto the fifth 201 above half. Unto the sixth 150 above half, in the
Affirmative. Unto the seventh, Nomine again, and so forth --
My Lords, it is a Language that is out of my Prayers, and if I be out at it,
no harm --

But as concerning my Lord Archon (as I was saying) these are to signify unto
you, the true-heartednesse, and good will which is in the People, seeing by
joining with you, as one Man, they confess that all they have to give, is too
little for his Highness. For truly (Fathers) if he who is able to do harm,
and does none, may well be called honest. What shall we say unto my Lord
Archon's Highness, who having had it in his power to have done us the greatest
mischief that ever befell a poor Nation, so willing to trust such as they
thought well of, has done us so much good, as we should never have known how
to do our selves? which was so sweetly delivered by my Lord Chancellor
Phosophorus, unto the People, that I dare say there was never an one of them
could forbear to do as I do -- An't please your Fatherhoods they be tears of
Joy. Ah my Lord Archon shall walk the streets (an it be for his ease I mean)
with a Switch, while the People run after him, and pray for him: he shall not
wet his foot, they will strew flowers in his way: he shall sit higher in their
hearts, and in the judgment of all good Men, then the Kings that go up stairs
unto their seats, and one of these had as good pull two or three of his
Fellows out of their great Chaires, as wrong him, or meddle with him; he has
two or three hundred thousand Men, that when you say the word, shall sell
themselves unto their shirts for him, and dye at his foot. His Pillow is of
Down, and his grave shall be as soft, over which they that are alive shall
wring their hands. And to come unto your Fatherhoods, most truly so called, as
being the loving Parents of the People; truly you do not know what a feeling
they have of your Kindness, seeing you are so bound up, that if there come any
harm, they may thank themselves: And (alas! poor souls) they see that they
are given to be of so many minds, that though they always mean well, yet if
there come any good, they may thank them that teach them better. Wherefore
there was never such a thing as this invented, they do verily believe that it
is none other then the same which they always had in their very heads, if they
could have but told how to bring it out: As now for a sample, My Lords the
Proposers had no sooner said your minds, then they found it to be that which
heart could wish. And your Fatherhoods may comfort your selves, that there is
not a People in the world more willing to learn what is for their own goods,
nor more apt to see it, when you have showed it them: Wherefore they do love
you as they do their own selves, Honor you as Fathers, resolve to give you as
it were Obedience forever; and so thanking you for your most good and excellent
Laws, they do pray for you as the very Worthies of the Land, Right Honorable
Lords and Fathers assembled in Parliament.

Argus came off beyond his own expectation, for thinking right, and speaking as
he thought, it was apparent by the House, and the thanks they gave him, that
they esteemed him to be absolutely of the best sort of Orators, upon which
having a mind that till then misgave him, he became very Crounse, and much
delighted with that which might go down the next week in Print unto his Wife,
and his Neighbors. Livy makes the Roman Tribunes to speak in the same style
with the Consuls, which could not be, and therefore for ought in him to the
contrary, Volero and Canuleius might have spoken no otherwise forth their
style, then Argus. However they were not created the first year of the
Commonwealth; and the Tribunes of Oceana are since become better Orators then
were needful. But the Laws being Enacted, had the Preamble annexed, and were
delivered unto Bronchus, who loved nothing in the Earth so much as to go
staring and bellowing up and down the Town, like a Stagg in a Forest, as he
now did, with his Fraternity in their Coats of Arms, and I know not how many
Trumpets, Proclaiming the Act of Parliament, when meeting my Lord Archon (who
from a retreat that was without Affectation, as being for Devotion only, and to
implore a blessing by Prayer and Fasting, upon his labors, now newly Arrived
in Town) the Herault of the Tribe of Bestia, set up his throat, and having
chaunted out his Lession, past as haughtily by him, as if his own had been the
better Office; which in this place was very well taken, though Bronchus for his
high mind, happened afterward upon some disasters (too long to tell) that
spoiled much of his Embroidery.

My Lord Archons arrival being known, the Signory acompanyed by the Tribunes,
repaired unto him, with the news he had already heard by the Herrauld: to
which my Lord Strategus added, That his Highness could not doubt upon the
Demonstrations given, but the minds of men were firm in the opinion, that he
could be no seeker of himself, in the way of earthly Pomp and Glory; and that
the Gratitude of the Senate, and the People, could not therefore be understood
to have any such reflection upon him; But so it was, that in regard of dangers
abroad, and Parties at home, they durst not trust themselves, without a
standing Army, nor a standing Army in any man's hands, but those of his
Highness.

The Archon made answer, that he ever expected this would be the sense of the
Senate, and the People, and this being their Sense, he should have been sorry
they had made choice of any other then himself for a standing General; First,
because it could not have been more unto their own safety, and secondly,
because so long as they should have need of a standing Army, his work was not
done. That he would not dispute against the Judgment of the Senate, and the
People, nor ought that to be: Nevertheless, he made little doubt, but
experience would show every Party their own Interest in this Government, and
that better improved, then they could expect from any other; that men's
animosityes should over balance their Interest, for any time, was impossible,
that humor could never be lasting, nor through the Constitution of the
Govermment, of any effect at the first charge. For supposing the worst, and
that the People had chosen none other into the Senate, and the Prerogative,
then royalists, a matter of Fourteen hundred men must have taken their Oaths at
their Election, with an intention to go quite contrary, not only to their Oaths
so taken, but to their own Interest; for being estated in the Sovereign Power,
they must have decreed it from themselves, (such an example as for which there
was never any experience, nor can be any reason) or holding it, it must have
done in their hands as well every whit, as in any other. Furthermore, they must
have removed the Government from a Foundation that apparently would hold, to
set it upon another which apparently would not hold, which things if they could
not come to pass, the Senate and the People, consisting wholly of Royallists,
much less by a parcel of them elected. But if the fear of the Senate and of
the People, derived from a party without such an one as would not be elected,
nor engage themselves unto the Commonwealth by any oath: this again must be
so Large, as would go quite contrary to their own Interest, they being as free
and as fully estated in their liberty, as any other, or so narrow that they
could do no hurt, while the People being in Arms, and at the beck of the
Strategus, every Tribe would at any time make a better Army, then such a Party,
and there being no parties at home, fears from abroad would vanish. But seeing
it was otherwise determined by the Senate, and the People, the best course was
to take that which they held the safest, in which with his humble thanks for
their great bounty, he was resolved to serve them with all duty and obedience.

A very short time after, the Royallists now equal Citizens, made good the
Archons Judgment, there being no other that found any thing near so great a
sweet in the Government. For he who has not been acquainted with affliction
(says Seneca) knows but half the things of this world.

Moreover they saw plainly, that to restore the ancient Government, they must
cast up their Estates into the hands of three hundred men; wherefore in case
the Senate, and the Prerogative consisting of thirteen hundred men, had been
all Royallists, there must of necessity have been, and be for ever, one
thousand against this or any such Vote. But the Senate being informed by the
Signory, that the Archon had accepted of his Dignity and Office, caused a third
Chair to be set for his Highness, between those of the Strategus, and the
Orator in the House, the like at every Council; to which he repaired, not of
necessity, but at his pleasure, being the best, and as Argus not vainly said,
the greatest Prince in the World; for in the Pomp of his Court he was not
inferior unto any, and in the Field he was followed with a force that was
formidable unto all: Nor was there a cause in the Nature of this constitution,
to put him unto the charge of Guards, spoil his stomach or his sleep: Insomuch
as being handsomely disputed by the wits of the Academy, whether my Lord
Archon, if he had been ambitious, could have made himself so great, it was
carried clear in the Negative; not only for the Reasons drawn from the present
balance, which was Popular, but putting the case the balance had been
Monarchical. For there be some Nations (whereof this is one) that will bear a
Prince in a Commonwealth, far higher then it is possible for them to bear a
Monarch. Spain looked upon the Prince of Aurange as her most formidable Enemy,
but if ever there be a Monarch in that Country, he will be her best friend. For
whereas a Prince in a Commonwealth, deriveth his greatness from the root of the
People, a Monarch deriveth his from one of those balances which nip them in
the root; by which means the Low Countries under a Monarch, were poor and
inconsiderable, but in bearing a Prince could grow unto a miraculous height,
and give the glory of his actions by far the upper hand of the greatest King in
Christendom. There are Kings in Europe, to whom a King of Oceana would be but
a Petit Companion. But the Prince of this Commonwealth is the terror, and the
Judge of them all.

That which my Lord Archon now minded most, was the Agrarian, upon which debate
he uncessantly thrust the Senate, and the Council of State, to the end it might
be planted upon some firm root, as the main point and Basis of perpetuity unto
the Commonwealth.

And these are some of the most remarkable Passages that happened in the first
year of this Government. About the latter end of the second, the Army was
disbanded, but the Taxes continued at thirty thousand pounds a month, for three
years and an half. By which means a piece of Artigliery was Planted, and a
portion of Land to the value of 50. l. a year purchased for the maintenance of
the Games, and of the Priz-arms for ever, in each Hundred.

With the eleventh year of the Commonwealth, the term of the Excise, allotted
for the mayntenance of the Senate and the People, and for the raising of a
Public Revenue, expired. By which time the Exchequer over and above the
annual Sallaryes, amounting unto three hundred thousand pounds, accumulating
every year out of one Million income, Seven hundred thousand pounds, in
Bancho, brought it with the Product of the Sum, riseing to about eight
Millions in the whole, whereby at several times they had purchased unto the
Senate and the People, Four hundred thousand pounds per annum, sollid Revenue:
which besides the Lands holden in Panopea, together with the Perquisites of
either Province, was held sufficient for a public Revenue. Nevertheless,
Taxes being now wholly taken off, the Excize of no great burden, and many
specious Advantages not vainly proposed in the heightening of the Public
Revenue, the Excise was very cheerfully established by the Senate and the
People, for the term of ten years longer: and the same course being taken, the
Public Revenue was found in the One and twentieth of the Commonwealth, to be
worth one Million in good Land; Whereupon the Excise was so abollished for the
present; as with all resolved to be the best, the most fruitful and easy way
of raising Taxes, according unto future Exigencies. But the Revenue now such,
as was able to be a yearly Purchaser, gave a jealousy that by this means the
balance of the Commonwealth, consisting in private Fortunes, might be eaten
out; whence this year is famous for that Law whereby the Senate and the People
forbidding any farther Purchase of Lands unto the Public, within the
Dominions of Oceana, and the adjacent Provinces, put the Agrarian upon the
Commonwealth her self. These increases are things which men, addicted unto
Monarchy, deride as impossible, whereby they unwarily urge a strong Argument,
against that which they would defend: For having their eyes fixed upon the Pomp
and Expense, by which not only every Child of a King being a Prince, exhausteth
his Fathers Coffers; but favorites and servile spirits devoted unto the
flattery of those Princes, grow insolent and profuse, returning a fit Gratitude
unto their Masters, whom while they hold it honorable to deceive, they suck
and keep eternally poor. It follows that they do not see now it should be
possible for a Commonwealth to cloth her self in Purple, and thrive so
strangely upon that which would make a Prince's hair grow through his hood,
and not afford him bread. As if it were a Miracle that a careless and Prodigal
Man should bring ten thousand pounds a year to nothing, or that an industrious
and frugall Man brings a little unto ten thousand pounds a year. But the fruit
of a man's industry and frugality, can never be like that of a Commonwealth,
first because the Greatness of the increase, follows the greatness of the
Stock or principal: and secondly, because a frugall Father is for the most
part succeeded by a Lavish Son, whereas a Commonwealth is her own Heir.

This year a part was proposed by the Right Honorable Aureus de Woolsacke in
the Tribe of Pecus, first Commissioner of the Treasury; unto the Council of
State, which soon after past the ballot of the Senate and the People: by which
the Lands of the Public Revenue amounting unto one Million, were equally
divided into five thousand Lots, entered by their names and parcells into a
Lot-booke preserved in the Exchequer: and if any Orphant being a Maid should
cast her Estate into the Exchequer for Fourteen hundred pounds, the Treasury
was bound by the Law to pay her quarterly Two hundred pounds a year, free from
Taxes for her Life, and to assign her a Lot for her Security; if she married,
her Husband was neither to take out the Principal without her consent
(acknowledged by her self unto one of the Commissioners of the Treasury who
accoridng as he found it to be free, or forced, was to allow or disallow of it)
nor any other way engage it, then to her propper use: But if the Principal
were taken out, the Treasury was not bound to repay any more of it then One
thousand pounds; nor might be repaid at any time, save within the first year
of the Marriage: the like was to be done by a half or quarter Lot respectively.

This was found to be a great Charity unto the weaker Sex, and as some say, who
are more skillful in like Affairs then my self, of good Profit to the
Commonwealth.

Now began the Native Spleen of Oceana to be much purged, and men not to affect
sullenness and Pedantisme. The Elders could remember that they had been Youth.
Wit and Gallantry were so far from being thought Crimes in themselves, that
care was taken to preserve their innocence. For which cause it was proposed
unto the Council for Religion, by the Right Honorable Cadiscus de Clero, in
the Tribe of Stamnum, first Censor, That such women as living in Gallantry and
view about the Town, were of evil fame, and could not show that they were
maintained by their own Estates or Industry; or such as having Estates of their
own, were yet wastfull in their way of life, unto others, should be obnoxious
unto the animadversion of the Council of Religion, or of the Censors: In which
the proceeding should be after this manner. Notice should be first given of the
scandal, unto the party offending, in private; if there were no amendment
within the space of six Months, she should be summoned and rebuked before the
said Council or Censors: And if after other six Months it were found that
neither this avayled, She should be Censured not to appear at any Public
Meetings, Games or Recreations, upon Penalty of being taken up by the
Doorkeepers, or Guards of the Senate, and by them to be detained, until for
every such offense, five pounds were duly paid for her enlargement.

Furthermore, if any Common-Strumpet should be found, or any scurrility or
profaneness represented at either of the Theaters, the Prelates for every such
offense should be fined Twenty pounds, by the said Council, and the Poet for
every such offense on his part, should be whipped. This Law relates unto another,
which also was enacted the same year upon this occasion.

The Youth and Wits of the Academy having put the business so home in the
defense of Comedies, that the Provosts had nothing but the Consequences
provided against by the foregoing Law to object, prevailed so far, that two of
the Provosts of the Council of State, joined in a Proposition, which after much
ado came to a Law, whereby one hundred thousand pounds was allotted for the
building of two Theaters, one on each side of the Piazza of the Halo, and two
annual Magistrates called Prelates, chosen out of the Knights, were added unto
the Tropic, the one called the Prelate of the Buskin, for inspection of the
Tragic Scene called Melpomene, and the other the Prelate of the Socke, for the
Comic called Thalia, which Magistrates had each of them five hundred pounds a
year, allowed out of the Profits of the Theaters, the rest (except 800 a year
to four Poets) payable into the Exchequer. A Poet Laureate created in one of
these Theaters, by the Strategus receives a wreath of five hundred Pounds in
Gold, paid out of the said Profits. But no man is capable of this Creation,
that had not two parts in three of the Suffrages at the Academy, assembled
after six weeks warning, and upon that occasion.

These things among us are sure enough to be censured, but by such only as do
not know the nature of a Commonwealth; for to tell men that they are free, and
yet to curb the genious of a People in a lawful Recreation unto which they are
naturally inclined, is to tell a tale of a Tub. I have heard the Protestant
Ministers in France, by men that were wise, and of their own profession, much
blamed in that they forbad Dancing, a Recreation to which the genious of that
air is so enclining, that they lost many who would not loose that; nor do
they less then blame the former determination of rashness, who now gently
connive at that which they had so roughly forbidden. These sports in Oceana are
so Governed, that they are pleasing for private diversion, and profitable unto
the Public: For the Theaters soon defrayed their own Charge, and now bring in
a good Revenue. All this so far from the Detriment of virtue, that it is to the
improvement of it, seeing Women that heretofore made havoc of their Honors,
that they might have their pleasures, are now incapable of their pleasures, if
they loose their Honors.

About the one and fortieth year of the Commonwealth, the Censors according
unto their Annual Custom, reported the Pillar of Nilus, by which it was found
that the People were increased very near one third. Whereupon the Council of
War was appointed by the Senate to bring in a State of War, and the Treasurers
the State of the Treasury. The State of War, or Pay, and Charge of an Army, was
soon after exhibited by the Council, in this Account.

The Field Pay of a Parlamentary Army.
The Lord Strategus, Marching 0010000 L. per ann. Polymarches. General of the
Horse 0002000 L. per ann. Polymarches. Lievtenant-Generall 0002000 L. per ann.
Polymarches. General of the Artigliery 0001000 L. per ann. Polymarches.
Commissary-Generall 0001000 L. per ann. Polymarches. Major-Generall 0001000 L.
per ann. Polymarches. Quarter-Master-Generall 0001000 L. per ann. Two Adjutants
to the Major General 0001000 L. per ann. Forty Colonells 0040000 L. per ann.
100 Captains of Horse, at 500. l. a man 0050000 L. per ann. 300 Captains of
Foot, at 300. l. a man 0090000 L. per ann. 100 Cornets, at 100. l. a man
0010000 L. per ann. 300 Ensigns, at 50. l. a man 0015000 L. per ann. 800
Quarter Masters 0020000 L. per ann. 800 Serjants 0020000 L. per ann. 800
Trumpeters 0020000 L. per ann. 800 Drummers 0020000 L. per ann. 10000 Horse, at
2. s. 6. d. a day each 0470000 L. per ann. 30000 Foot, each at 1. s. the day
0500000 L. per ann. Chyrurgeons 0000400 L. per ann. Sum 1114400 L. per ann.
40000 Auxilaries, amounting unto (within alittle as much 1100000 L. per ann.
The Charge of mounting 20000 Horse 0300000 L. per ann. The Train of
Artigliery, holding a 3d to the whole 0900000 L. per ann. Summa totalis 3414400
L. per ann.
Arms and Ammunition are not reckoned, as those which are furnished out of the
Store or Arsenall of Emporium. Nor Waftage, as that which goes upon the Account
of the Fleet, maintained by the Customs, which Customs through the Care of
the Council for Trade, and growth of Traffic, were long since improved unto
about a Million Revenue. The House being informed of a State of War, the
Commissioners brought in The state of the Treasury this present year, being the
One and fortieth of the Commonwealth.
REceived from the one and twentieth of this Commonwealth, by 700000. l. a
year in bank, with the Product of the sum rising L. 16000000
Expended from the one and twentieth of this Commonwealth.
IMprimis, For the Addition of Arms for 100000 Men, unto the Arsenall, or Tower
of Emporium L. 01000000 For the storing of the same with Artigliery L. 00300000
For the storing of the same with Ammunition L. 00200000 For beautifying the
Cities, Parks, Gardens, Public Walks, and Places for Recreation, of Emporium
and Kiera, with Public Buildings, Aquaduets, Statues, and Fountains, etc. L.
01500000 Extraordinary Embassies L. 00150000 Sum L. 03150000 Remaining in the
Treasury, the Salaries of the Exchequer being defaulked L. 12000000


By Comparison of which Accounts, if a War with an Army of 80000 Men were to be
made by the penny, yet was the Commonwealth able to maintain such an one above
three years, without levying a Tax. But it is against all experience, sense and
reason, that such an Army should not be soon broken, or make a great Progress;
in either of which Cases the Charge seaseth, or rather if a right course be
taken in the latter, Profit comes in; for the Romans had no other considerable
way, but Victory, whereby to fill their Treasury, which nevertheless was
seldom empty. Alexander did not consult his Purse, upon his design for
Persia. It is observed by Machiavill, that Livy arguing what the event in
reason must have been, had that King invaded Rome, and diligently measuring
what on each side was necessary unto such a War, never speaks a word of Money.
No man imagines, that the Gauls, Goths, Vandalls, Huns, Lombards, Saxons,
Normans, made their inroads or Conquests by the strength of the Purse; and if
it be thought enough according unto the Dialect of our age, to say in Answer
unto these things, that those times are past and gone. What money did the late
Gustavus, the most victorious of modern Princes, bring out of Sweden with him
into Germany? An Army that goes upon a golden Leg, will be as lame as if it
were a wooden one; but proper Horses have Nerves and Muscles in them, such for
which having four or five Millions, a sum easy, with a Revenue like this of
Oceana, to be had at any time in readiness, you need never, or very rarely
Charge the people with Taxes. What influence the Commonwealth by such Arms has
had, upon the world, I leave unto Historians, whose custom it has been of
old, to be as diligent Observers of Foreign Actions, as careless of those
Domestique Revolutions, which (less pleasant it may be, as not partaking so
much of the Romance) are unto Statesmen of far greater profit; and this fault
if it be not mine, is so much more frequent with Modern Writers, as has caused
me to undertake this work, on which to give my own judgment, it is performed
as much above the time I have been about it, as below the dignity of the matter.

But I cannot depart out of this Country, till I have taken leave of my Lord
Archon, a Prince of immense felicity, who having built as high with his
Councels, as he dug deep with his Sword, had not seen fifty years measured
with his own unerring Orbs.

Plutarch in the Life of Timoleon.
Timoleon, so great a hater of Tyrants, that not able to dissuade his Brother
Timophanes, to relinquish the Tyranny of Corinth, he slew him; was afterward
Elected by the People, (the Sicilians groaning unto them from under the like
burden) to be sent unto their relief: Whereupon Teleclides the Man at that time
of most Authority in the Commonwealth of Corinth, stood up, and giving an
Exhortation unto Tim^^eon, how he should behave himself in his Expedition, told
him that if he restored the Sicilians unto Liberty, it would be acknowledged
that he had destroyed a Tyrant; if otherwise, he must expect to hear that he
had murdered a King. Timoleon taking his leave, with a very small Provision for
so great a design, pursued it with a Courage not inferior to, and a felicity
beyond any that had been known unto that day in mortal flesh, having in the
space of eight years utterly rooted out of all Sicely, those Weeds of Tyranny,
through the destraction whereof Men fled in such abundance from their Native
Country, that whole Cities were left desolate; and brought it unto such a
pass, that others through the fame of his Virtues, and the excellency of the
soil, flockt as fast from all Quarters unto it, as to the Garden of the World.
While he being presented by the people of S^racusa, with his Town house, and
his Country retreat, the sweetest Places in either, lived with his Wife and
Children, a most quiet, happy, and holy life; for he attributed no part of his
success unto himself, but all unto the blessing and providence of the Gods. As
he past his time in this manner, admired and honored by mankind, Laphystius an
envious Demagog, going to summon him upon some pretense or other, to answer for
himself before the Assembly, the people fell into such a Mutiny, as could not
be appeased but by Timoleon, who understanding the matter, reproved them, by
repeating the pains and travail which he had gone through, unto no other end
then that every Man might have the free use of the Laws. Wherefore when
Demaenetus another Demagog, had brought the same design about again, and blamed
him impertinently unto the people, for things which he did when he was
General, Timoleon answered nothing, but raising up his hands, gave the Gods
thanks for their return unto his frequent prayers, that he might but live to
see the Syracusans so free that they might question on whom they pleased.

Not long after being old, through some natural imperfection, he fell blind;
but the Syracusans by their perpetual visits held him, though he could not
see, their greatest object; if there arrived strangers, they brought them to
see this sight. Whatever came in debate at the assembly, if it were of small
consequence, they determined it themselves, but if of importance, they always
sent for Timoleon, who being brought by his Servants in a Chair, and set in the
middle of the Theater, there ever followed a great shout, after which some time
was allowed for the Benedictions of the People; and then the matter proposed
when Tinolcon had spoken to it, was put to the Suffrage, which give^, his
Servants bore him back in his Chair, accompanied by the People, clapping their
hands, and making all expression of joy and applause, till leaving him at his
House, they returned unto the dispatch of their business. And this was the
life of Thimoleon, till he dyed of age, and dropped like a mature fruit, while
the eyes of the people, were as the showers of Autumn.

The Life and Death of my Lord Archon, save that he had his senses unto the
last, and that his Character is not the Restorer, but the Founder of a
Commonwealth, was greater, is so exactly the same again, that (seeing by Men
wholly ignorant of Antiquity, I am accused of writing Romance) I shall repeat
nothing; but tell you that this year the whole Nation of Oceana, even unto the
women and children, was in mourning, where so great or sad a pomp of Funeral,
had never been seen or known. Sometime after the performance of the Exequies, a
Colossus mounted upon a brazen Horse, of excellent Fabric, was erected in the
Piazza of the Pantheon, ingraved with this Inscription on the Eastern side of
the Pedestall.

HIS NAME IS AS Precious Ointment.

And on the Western, with this.
Grata Patra Piae et perpetuae memoriae

D. D. Olphaus Megaletor Lord Archon, and sole Legislator of OCEANA. Pater
Patriae.

Jnvincible in the Field. Jnviolable in his Faith. Unfeigned in his Zeal.
Jmmortall in his Fame.
The Greatest of Captains. The Best of Princes. The Happiest of Legislators.
The Most Sincere of Christians.
Who setting the Kingdoms of the Earth at Liberty,
Took the Kingdom of the Heavens by Violence.
Anno Aetat: suae: 116. Anno Hujus Reipub: 50.

