Christ's Righteousness Imputed, THE Saint's Surest PLEA FOR Eternal Life: OR,
The Glorious Doctrine of Free-Justification, by the Imputation of the Pure and
Spotless Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST, Stated, Cleared, Vindicated, and made
Plain to the meanest Capacity. Being the Substance of Several SERMONS, On
Isaiah XLV. 24, 25. By MICHAEL HARRISON, Minister at Potters-Pury, near
Stony-Stratford in Northamptonshire.

LONDON, Printed for William and Joseph Marshal, and Sold by them at the Bible
in Newgate-street; Price 3 d. Where you may be supplied with Caryl on Job, and
Mr. Bunyan's Works, and most of Dr. Owen's Works; and likewise Lockyer's Pills
rightly prepared.

TO THE Christian READER.
THis Glorious Doctrine of Justification, which V. Chemnitius terms Arx and
Propugnaculum Religionis Christianae, i. e. The very Strength and Bulwark of
the Christian Religion; and further calls, Articulus stantis and cadentis
Ecclesiae, i. e. That Article with which the Church stands or falls, is now so
furiously attacked on every side; Satan and his Instruments being so very busy
to deprave it, that it is very necessary, that every one of Sion's Watchmen
should give Notice of the Danger, and labor to fortify himself and Flock,
against the Devices of the Common Enemy: If we lose this Doctrine, we lose our
Hopes of Salvation, and therefore all that is Valuable in Religion; we have
then no Way left of approaching to God, for Pardon and Salvation; nor any right
Means for comforting afflicted Consciences.

This Doctrine is the Glory of the Protestant Churches, one of the Grand
Differences between them and the Romish Antichrist, the Avowed Doctrine of the
Church of England, and all other Protestant Churches; and therefore we have a
great Deal of Reason to contend earnestly for this Doctrine, once so clearly
delivered to the Saints, and afterward sealed by the Blood of so many Martyrs.

It is now about Ten Years, since I published a small Tract upon this Subject
with great Success; which was then approved to the Press, by that Reverend Man
of God, Mr. Henry Cornish now in Heaven; which through God's Blessing, was of Use
to many Souls, whose Thanks I have often received; but that Discourse being
quite out of Print, and the Bookseller refusing to reprint it, but on Terms not
to be admitted by me; I have therefore, here in this Discourse, set forth the
same Doctrine in Substance, and almost in the same Method; but with
considerable Additions, Alterations and Enlargements; which through God's
Blessing, I hope, may yet be of further Use, especially to Christians of meaner
Capacities, who cannot read larger Volumes; Now that it may be blessed, to the
Enlightening the dark Minds of Men, so that God may have the Glory, and his
Church the Comfort, is, and shall be the Hearty Prayer of thy Soul's Friend,

M. Harrison.

Christ's Righteousness Imputed, THE SAINT's Surest Plea FOR Eternal Life.
Isaiah XLV. 24, 25. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I Righteousness and
Strength; even to him shall Men come, and all that are incensed against him
shall be ashamed.

In the Lord shall all the Seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory.


THis Chapter contains a Double Prophecy: The First concerning the Redemption
of the Jews out of Babylon, the Re-edification of the Temple, and the
Restitution of the Temple-Worship.

The Other concerning the Calling and Conversion of the Gentiles in the Days of
the Gospel, of which the Words of the Text are the Conclusion; in Ver. 23. you
have God's Oath to assure us of the Certainty of the Conversion of the
Gentiles; I have sworn by my self, the Word is gone out of my Mouth in
Righteousness, and shall not return unto me void; every Knee shall bow, and
every Tongue shall swear.

To bow the Knee, intimates an humble Adoration of the Divine Majesty.

And Swearing, a Solemn Part of God's Worship, intimating, that the Converted
Gentiles shall reverently Adore, and solemnly Worship God in Christ.

Now the Text gives a farther Account of the Change, that Converting Grace
shall make upon the Converted Gentiles.

In the Text observe,

I. The Person speaking: It is the Lord Jehovah. The Lord that speaks in
Righteousness, v. 19. He, who is God alone; a Just God, besides whom there is
no Savior.

II. Here are the Persons spoken to, or of; Namely, the Gentiles.

1. The Converted Gentiles: Shall one say. One, is not in the Hebrew Text, but
(Liamor:) dixit, He says, or shall say; i. e. One and every one of the
Converted Gentiles spoken of, ver. 23. Again, v. 25. They are called the Seed
of Irael, which is a Term proper and peculiar not only to the Jews, but to all
Believers, whether Jews or Gentiles, who are frequently called God's Israel in
Scripture; as Psalm. 24.6. Romans 9.6, etc.

Or, 2. The Unconverted amongst them, who were not changed by the Gospel, but
were rather Enemies to Christ, that are incensed against him, rebel against
him, not submitting to his Rule and Government.

III. Here are the Things predicted, or spoken of these Persons; And those are,

1. The Solemn Glorious Benefits which they shall enjoy by the Gospel, that are
changed by it; they shall have Righteousness and Strength; and by that
Righteousness they shall be justified.

2. That Righteousness Believers have from Christ i^ Twofold: A Righteousness
for their justification, whereby they are accounted, and esteemed righteous at
God's Bar: And an Inherent Righteousness of Sanctification, though the latter is
not here excluded, yet the former is principally intended; because it is that
Righteousness whereby we are justified, v. 25. The Righteousness of
Sanctification being rather hinted to us in the Word, Strength; whereby the
Holy Spirit begins and carries on a Saving, Regenerating Work in the Soul;
whereby we are enabled to repent, believe, and walk in Newness of Life.

IV. Here is the Change Regenerating Grace makes upon these Persons and the
Profession, that shall upon their Conversion be made by them.

1. They shall come to Christ and believe on him; To him shall Men come, i. e.
believe in Christ; for Coming to Christ is Believing on him, Mat. 11.28.

2. They shall be justified by him, i. e. Their Sins pardoned, and their
Persons clothed with the Imputed Righteousness of Christ, whereby they shall
stand righteous at God's Bar.

3. They shall Glory, q. d. They find a Gracious Change upon their Hearts by
Sanctification; a Change in their State by Justification; this shall raise
their Hearts into a Thankful Frame, they shall believe in him, rejoice and
glory in him as their God and Portion.

Doct. It Is the Duty and Character of justified Believers, to acknowledge and
profess, that, that Righteousness whereby they are justified, is in the Lord,
not in themselves.

This precious Doctrine of Justification, is the very Marrow of the Christian
Religion; it is that Doctrine as Luther observes, with which the Church stands
or falls; it is that Doctrine (the Devil) of all Gospel Truths, most hates, and
endeavors to corrupt; in the Beginning of the Reformation, it was looked on as
the Grand Difference between the Protestants and Rome. Yea, it is that Doctrine,
that will only help to settle an awakened, convinced, believing Sinner, in a
sweet and lasting Peace; and therefore in speaking to it, I shall show you,

I. Who are the Persons, that shall be made Partakers of this Blessed
Privilege of Justification. II. The Nature of Justification, what it is? III.
What that Righteousness is, for, and by which we are justified at God's Bar.
IV. The Time when God's Children are made Partakers of this Blessed Privilege.
V. How we are justified by Faith? VI. Objections against the Doctrine of
Justification answered.
I. Who are the Persons justified?

Answ. 1. Negatively, not fallen Angels; they have indeed sinned, and by Sin
thrown themselves into an Eternal Abyss of Misery; but their Case is hopeless
and remediless, God has left them in the Ruins of their Fall, without
discovering to them any Way of Deliverance, Heb. 2.16. He took not on him the
Nature of Angels, (...), He did not catch, or lay hold on the Angel, but when
they were falling, he let them go.

2. Positively: But fallen Man, not Man in Innocence, but Man under the
Sentence of Condemnation for Sin; but yet it is not all Sinners that shall be
justified; For all the World are become guilty before God, Romans 3.19. but all
the World are not saved, no, in the Text you find some that are incensed
against Christ, that are angry with him, these shall be ashamed; there are a
World of Sinners, that notwithstanding the Gospel discovering Salvation, shall
be Eternally damned; Rev. 21.8. but such as are justified must be,

1. Elected and Chosen of God to be Heirs of Eternal Life, Ephesians. 1.4. Chosen
before the Foundation of the World.

2. They must be Sinners, whoever is justified, must first be ungodly, Romans 4.5.

3. They must be given to Christ, John 6.37. All the Father has given me shall
come.

4. Whoever is justified must first be accused, the violated Law puts in a Plea
against the Sinner, John 5.45. Think not I will accuse you to the Father, there
is one that accuses you, even Moses, in whom you trust; i. e. The Law of
Moses, by the Works whereof they hoped to be justified; St. Paul had found the
accusing, condemning Power of the Law in his own Conscience, before he pleaded
the Righteousness of Christ, Romans 7.9.

5. One justified must be a repenting and returning Sinner; for though Repentance
be no meritorious Cause of Justification, yet it is absolutely necessary for
Pardon, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way and the unrighteous Man his
Thoughts, and return unto the Lord, and he will have Mercy on him, and to our
God, and he will abundantly pardon: It Is a fruitless Dispute whether
Justification or Sanctification be first in Order of Nature, for they both
spring from one and the same Root; viz. Free Grace, and never go alone; and
it is certain, none can have the one without the other.

6. Whoever is justified must believe; For we are saved by Faith, Ephesians. 2.8.
justified by Faith, Romans 3.28. It Is very absurd to say we are justified before
we believe, or without Faith.

II. I am now to show you the Nature of Justification what it is?

Des. Justification is in Acquittance or Discharge at God's Bar, from all that
the accusing Law has to lay to our Charge; and the giving such a
Righteousness, by Virtue whereof, we can lay Claim to Eternal Life as ours.

Here are two Parts of Justification,

1. A Discharge from what the Condemning Law has to lay to our Charge; now the
Law pronounces a Curse, Gal. 3.10. For as many as are of the Works of the Law
are under a Curse; for it is written, Cursed is every one, that continues not
in all Things, written in the Book of the Law to do them: By the Law here is
meant the Covenant of Works, as appears from Deuteronomy. 27.26. whence the Apostle
borrows this: So to be under the Curse of the Law, is to be liable to all the
Penalties the Law threatens. Now Eternal Separation from God, is what the Law
threatens to the Breakers of it; For that first Threatening, Genesis 2.17. In the
Day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye; is Threefold, involving a
Temporal, a Spiritual and an Eternal Death. Now from this Curse and Death we
must be acquitted, this is the Pardon of Sin, Isa. 55.7. Ephesians. 1.7. -- In whom
we have Redemption through his Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sin; and this
Forgiveness is of mere Grace, Ephesians. 1.7 -- According to the Riches of his Grace.

2d. Branch of justification is by pleading a Righteteousness, or a
Satisfaction at God's Bar.

We are by Nature Sinners, and by the Law accused or impleaded at God's Bar; to
which Accusation we must plead guilty or not guilty; Not-guilty can none plead,
For we are all under Sin, Romans 3.9. All the World is become guilty before God,
v. 19. therefore the accused Sinner must plead guilty; and in Order to bring
him off at God's Bar, he must plead either,

1. Mere Sovereign Mercy: q. d. Lord, I have sinned and deserved thy Wrrth and
Curse, but thou art a Merciful and Gracious God, ready to pardon, willing to
forgive; a God which take no Pleasure in the Misery and Sufferings of thy
Creatures, I therefore plead Free and Sovereign Mercy. Thus the condemned
Creature throws himself upon the Mercy of the Judge; but this is not properly
to plead but to beg: I do not say, God could not have saved the Sinner this
way, by passing a mere Act of Sovereign Grace without respect to his Justice;
but I do say, God will not do it, he will save Sinners in such a way, as his
Justice as well as Mercy shall be glorified in their Salvation; therefore mere
Mercy cannot be pleaded. Therefore,

2. The Accused Sinner must plead a Satisfaction to the Law, a Righteousness,
such as the Law and Justice of God requires.

This is indeed the Way, in which we are to look for Justification; we must
plead a Satisfaction made to Divine Justice, and a Righteousness, in which we
may stand righteous at God's Bar; and this must be either a Righteousness
inherent in our own Persons, which is the Righteousness of Sanctification; or
without us the Merits and Righteousness of another.

1. Inherent in our selves: It Is true, all God's Saints are inherently
righteous, for by that blessed Work of Regeneration and Sanctification, they
are truly, though not perfectly righteous; as it is said of Zachary and Elizabeth,
Luke 1.6. They were both righteous before God, walking in all the Ordinances
and Commandments of the Lord blameless. They were not sinle^^ and Legally
righteous, but they allowed no Sin, sincerely endeavoring to keep a good
Conscience both toward God and Man. All regenerate Believers are thus
righteous, God testifies of Noah, Genesis 7.1. Thee have I seen righteous before
me in this Generation: But this inherent Righteousness of Sanctification,
cannot be pleaded at God's Bar for our Justification.

1. Because the Holy Scripture does abundantly assure us, that none ever yet
were, nor ever yet shall be justified by any Righteousness in them, of wrought
by them, Phil. 3.9. And be found in him, not having on my own Righteousness,
which is of the Law; but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the
Righteousness which is of God by Faith; and Romans 10.3. The Jews are said to be
ignorant of God's Righteousness, and went about to establish their own
Righteousness. Now that which the Scripture calls our own Righteousness, is the
Grace of God in us by Sanctification; that New Obedience we are helped to
perform by the Holy Spirit, given us in Regeneration; which is elsewhere called
the Deeds of the Law: Romans 3.20. by which none ever yet were, nor ever will be
justified in his Sight.

2. None can be justified by their own inherent Righteousness, or sincere
Obedience to the Gospel; because to be thus justified, would be to be justified
by Works; for what else is Sanctification, but a new Creation by the
sanctifying Virtue of the Holy Spirit unto good Works, Sincere Obedience, what
else is it but good Works, or the Works of Righteousness? We read therefore, of
the Work of Faith and Labor of Love.

Now the Holy Scripture excludes all Works from Justification, Romans 4.5. To him
that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, etc. Every
Believer is a Worker, he is still laboring to work the Works of God, to yield
sincere Obedience to God's Law: But he worke^h not with a Design to be
justified by his Works, thus Faith without Works justifies.

3. That Righteousness that must justify us at God's Bar, must be a sinless
and spotless Righteousness; there must be no Blemish in it, but it must
perfectly answer the Law that accuses and condemns us: But our own inherent
Righteousness of Sanctification, is full of Spots and Blemishes, and no way
answers the Terms of the Law; which requires Perfect Obedience, and curses
every One that does not answer its Demands in every Point, Gal. 3.10. For if we
keep the whole Law, and fail in one point, we are guilty of all.

Now our inherent Holiness being weak, spotted and imperfect, 1 Kings 8.46.
There is no Man that does good and sins not: 1 John 1.8. If we say we have
no sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us: Therefore we cannot
be justified by our own sincere Obedience.

4. If we are justified by any thing in our selves, then have we something to
glory in, in our selves; Romans 4.2. If Abraham was justified by Works, he has
whereof to glory, but not before God. But all that are justified at God's Bar,
are justified in such a way, as they have nothing to glory in, in themselves;
Romans 3.27. Where is boasting then? it is excluded, etc. Ephesians. 2.8. By Grace ye
are saved.

5. If we are justified by any thing in our selves, then we are not justified
by Grace, Romans 4.4. Now to him that works, the Reward is not reckoned of
Grace, but of Debt; but all that are justified, are justified by mere Grace,
Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by his Grace.

Objection. If God accepts us as Righteous, for our own sincere Obedience to
the Gospel, as if it were Legal and Perfect, merely for the Satisfaction of
Christ; is not this of mere Free Grace?

Answ. Though it be granted, that all that is wrought in us in our Regeneration,
or done by us in a Course of Holy Obedience, is all of mere Grace; whatever we
are, It is by the Grace of God we are what we are; 1 Cor. 15.10. And though some
think, Jesus Christ purchased for us a Remedial Law, whereby our Faith and
sincere Obedience to the Gospel, shall be accepted (through Christ's Merits) as
if it were Legal and Perfect; and we thereby justified and accepted at God's
Bar; yet it must also be observed and granted, that when ever in Scripture, we
are said to be saved by Grace, justified by Grace; in those Places Grace is
opposed to all manner of Works, as well Evangelical as Legal; he that has any
thing in himself to plead, and to bring him off at God's Bar, may challenge
Justification as due to it; so that to be justified by Free Grace, or by Faith,
which is all one, is to be accounted righteous at God's Bar, not for any Works,
Righteousness or Obedience of our own; but only by, and for the Active and
Passive Obedience of Jesus Christ received by Faith, Who of God is made unto us
Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30.

6. If Abraham, who was the Pattern of Justification, was not justified by
Works, or by any Acts of Evangelical Obedience, then none else: But Abraham was
not justified by Works, Romans 4.4. therefore none ever was or can be so
justified.

Objection. The Apostle James says, Jam. 2.21. Abraham was justified by Works;
and ver. 24. he says, Ye see then how that a Man is justified by Works, and
not by Faith only.

Now how shall we reconcile these two Apostles Paul and James; whereas one
says, We are justified by Faith only without Works; and the other says, We
are not justified by Faith only, but by Works also.

Answ. These two Apostles may be reconciled, by rightly distinguishing and
understanding these two Terms: Justification and Faith.

1. If we rightly understand this Term Justification: There is a twofold
Justification, The One at God's Bar, the Other before Men, or in our own
Consciences.

1. There is a Justification at God's Bar, and that is an Acquitting or
Absolving the Sinner at God's Bar from the Guilt of all Sin, and the Accepting
the Person so acquitted as righteous, for the Righteousness of another imputed:
This is not for any Works done by the Persons themselves, but of Free Grace; as
the Apostle proves, Romans 4.4, 5, And when St. Paul speaks of Justification, in
Romans 3, 4, 5 Chapters; and in the Epistle to the Galatians, and elsewhere, he
speaks of it in this Sense: We are in this sense justified only by Faith,
apprehending the Righteousness of another; Works bear no part in our
Justification at God's Bar. But,

2. Sometimes Justification is taken for a Declaration of a Man's Righteousness
before Men, or an Evidence of one's Justification in his own Conscience, and
this is by Works. For how shall I appear to others to be a righteous, justified
Person, but by my Good Works; our Lord has directed to judge of the Tree by the
Fruit, by their Works you shall know them, or how shall a Christian know that
he is justified at God's Bar, but by an Internal Evidence in his own Soul, that
he truly loves God, believes in Christ, and sincerely obeys the Gospel, 2 Cor.
1.12. This is our rejoicing, the Testimony of our Consciences bearing us
Witness, that in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, not by Fleshly Wisdom, but by
the Grace of God, we have had our Conversations in the World.

Now St. James, Jam. 2. speaks not of Justification before God; for Abraham was
justified at God's Bar, at least twenty five Years before he offered up his
Son, as appears Genesis 15 6. So that James speaks only of a Declarative
Justification before Men, and in our own Consciences; and so when Abraham is
said to be justified by offering up Isaac, the Meaning is, by this his
Sincerity was made known to him; he had a full and clear Discovery, that his
Faith was a saving, justifying Faith: Genesis 22.12.

2. This seeming Difference between St. Paul and St. James may be reconciled,
by considering and rightly distinguishing the Meaning of this Term Faith.

Now Faith is taken sometimes,

1. For a True, Saving, Lively Faith, which works by Love, and is productive of
all Holy Obedience, and this is that Faith St. Paul means, when he says, We are
justified by Faith only.

2. The Word Faith is sometimes taken for a false, dead and barren Assent to
the Gospel; and this is such a Faith, as Devils and Hypocrites may be supposed
to have, and this is the Faith St. James opposes in Justification. We are not
justified by Faith, i. e. by a dead, barren, unactive Assent to the Gospel: But
Abraham and Rahab were justified by Works, i. e. Their good Works justified
their Faith, or proved then Faith to be a truly Lively, Saving and Justifying
Faith.

Thus these two Apostles are reconciled, St. Paul separates Works from
Justification, but not from Faith. St. James joins Works to Faith, but not for
Justification at God's Bar, but before Men, and in our own Consciences.

Now by what has been said, it is abundantly evident, that we have no
Righteousness in our selves, by which we can be justified at God's Bar, but
that Righteousness, by which we are justified before God, must be a
Righteousness of another, performed for us, and in our stead. Now my next Work
is to show you what that is.

III. That Righteousness, by and for which, we are esteemed righteous at God's
Bar, is, the Active and Passive Obedience of Jesus Christ, performed by him in
our stead, imputed to us, and received only by Faith.

This is very clear from Holy Scripture. For,

First, As we by Sin are under the Curse of the Law, Gal. 3.10. and deserve
Hell; so Christ by his Death, has redeemed us from that Curse, Ephesians. 1.7. In
whom we have Redemption by his Blood, the Forgiveness of Sin; so Gal. 3.12, 13,
14. There is no other way, for a Sinner to be brought from under the Curse of
the Law and Wrath of God, but by the Merits, Death and Satisfaction of Christ.

Secondly, The Righteousness of Christ is imputed to us for our Justification.

Now here Consider these Two Things,

1. What is meant by the Righteousness of Christ?

2. That Christ's Righteousness is that Righteousness, by which we are
justified before God.

1. What are we to understand by the Righteousness of Christ?

Answ. That Righteousness of Christ which is imputed to us for our
Justification, is the Active and Passive Obedience of Christ to the Law as our
Mediator and Surety. For the Moral Law required two Things.

First, Sinless and Perfect Obedience.

Secondly, In Case of Sin and the Law broken, the Law required Satisfaction.

Now the Lord Jesus Christ as our Mediator and Surety, did both these for us.

1. Christ's Active Obedience to the Law was for us, that forasmuch as we had
broken the Law, Christ obeyed and fulfilled it for us, Gal. 4.4. When the
Fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under
the Law; and the Reason is given, v. 5. To redeem (or satisfy Divine Justice
for) those which were under the Law: Romans 8.3, For what the Law could not do in
that it was weak through the Flesh; God sending his own Son in the likeness of
sinful Flesh, v. 4. That the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us,
etc. The Law could not justify because we could not keep it; therefore God
sent his Son in our stead to do it for us; and this Active Obedience of Christ
is imputed to us for our Justification.

2. The Law broken threatens a Curse, Gal. 3.10. Christ came from Heaven and
endures this Curse for us; the Death he dyed was for us, Gal. 3.12, 13. he dyed
the Death, and suffered the Penalty due to us, and By his S^ripes we are
healed, Isa. 53.4, 5, 6. He was delivered for our Sins, and raised again for
our Justification; Romans 4. last* and as he suffered the Curse, so fulfilled the
Righteousness of the Law for us: Romans 8.3. For what the Law could not do, in
that it was weak, etc. God sending his own Son in the Likeness of sinful flesh,
and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might
be fulfilled in us. The Law not being able to justify us, because we we were
unable to keep it; God pitying us in this State, sent his Son in our stead or
place to fulfill the Law; which being done by Christ in our Nature as our
Surety, is done in us. This is that Righteousness, by and for which we are
justified, and accounted righteous at God's Bar.

Now this Righteousness of Christ is called the Righteousness of God, Romans
1.17. because it is the Righteousness of him who is God: And the Righteousness
of Faith, Romans 4.11. because that Righteousness that Faith eyes, and looks at
in Justification, The Righteousness of the Law, Romans 8.3, 4. because it is such
a perfect Righteousness as the Law requires.

2. Now this Active and Passive Obedience of Christ, is that Righteousness, by,
and for which, we are justified at God's Bar.

And this is the Meaning of all those Scriptures, which speak of our Pardon,
Acceptance and Justification at God's Bar, to be of Grace, mere Free Grace,
Romans 3.24, 25. Romans 5.1.

We read of Righteousness imputed, Romans 4.6. Blessed is the Man, to whom the
Lord imputes Righteousness, etc. v. 9. Faith was reckoned for Righteousness;
so v. 11, 22, 23, 24. Now what was imputed? it was Faith, i. e. the Object of
Faith, the Righteousness of Christ, which Faith looked at; and that was not an
inherent Righteousness in the Person of the Believer, but an Objective
Righteousness in the Person of Christ.

So then the only Plea the Arraigned, Accused Sinner can make for himself at
God's Bar is this;

O Lord, I readily confess I have sinned, and by Sin deserve to be Eternally
damned; yet in Love to lost Sinners, thou have given Christ, who by his Active
Obedience has fulfilled the Law, and by his Sufferings has purchased Eternal
Redemption for all them that believe in him, obey and receive him as offered in
the Gospel: I see my self lost and undone by Sin, I sly by Faith to him, and
rest upon him alone for Pardon, Justification and Eternal Life: He is the Lord
my Righteousness, I resolve upon New Obedience and Holiness, but I will not
trust to any Thing in my self, but to the Merits and Righteousness of Christ
alone.

This is the Believer's Plea at God's Bar for Pardon and Justification; and
there are two Considerations, that will much clear the Manner of this
Imputation.

1. As Adam's Sin is imputed to his Posterity, whereby they are all become
Sinners, Romans 5.12. In him all have sinned; even so is Christ's Righteousness
to all his, whereby they become righteous; Romans 5.19. As by one Man's
Disobedience, many ( i. e. all Mankind) were made Sinners; so by the Obedience
of one, many ( i. e. all the Spiritual Seed of Christ, for the Apostle is there
speaking of the two Seeds) were made righteous.

2. As the Sins of the Elect were laid upon, or imputed to Christ; as Isa.
53.4, 5, Romans 4. last. He was made Sin for us. So the Obedience or
Righteousness of Christ is imputed to us, 2 Cor. 5. last. We are made the
Righteousness of God in him.

IV. Let us now Consider the Time when, we are made Partakers of this blessed
Privilege, Justification.

And here Consider,

1. From Eternity God has decreed to justify all the Elect; for it must be
granted, that all those blessed Privileges the Saints enjoy in Time, is settled
upon them in God's Eternal Purpose, Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in him before
the Foundation of the World, that we should be holy and without blame before
him in Love. V. 5. Having predestined us to the Adoption of Children by Jesus
Christ, to himself, according to the Good Pleasure of his Will; so that
Adoption, Justification, Sanctification, and all other Spiritual, Heavenly
Blessings are settled upon us in God's Eternal Election before Time; but yet it
can in no propriety of Speech be said, We are justified from Eternity; there
being not one Syllable in the whole Bible that says so: We must distinguish
between a Purpose in God to do such a Thing in Time, and the Thing actually
done; we are no more justified from Eternity, then we are sanctified and
glorified from Eternity; God having from Eternity equally purposed to give
these Benefits to all the Elect.

2. The Lord Jesus Christ has at his Death purchased the Pardon of Sin,
Justification and Eternal Life for all Believers, God laid on him the
Iniquities of us all, Isa. 53.4, 5, 6. and Romans 5.12, ad finem; yet these
purchased Privileges are reserved for us, not applied to us until we actually
come to, and believe in Christ, John 3.36. He that believes on the Son has
Everlasting Life, and he that believes not the Son, shall not see Life.

2. We are actually justified by Faith, Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith we
have Peace with God; Romans 3.28. A Man is justified by Faith without the Deeds
of the Law: Now if we are justified by Faith, we are not justified before
Faith, nor without it; the Being of Faith in the Soul being absolutely
necessary to Justification.

4. In Death we have a further Manifestation of our Justification, when the
Soul of a Believer appears at God's Bar; it is then acquitted and finds it self
more immediately in the Arms of Mercy. Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which
dye in the Lord, they rest from their Labors, and their Work do follow them.

5. The Last and Great Day of Justification will be the Day of Judgment; the
Saints shall then by Jesus Christ himself, be declared Just and Righteous
before Angels and Men, Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you.

V. How we are justified by Faith? The very Papists and the Rankest Arminian
will not deny, but own we are justified by Faith; let them but Explain the Term
Faith as they please: Therefore, it will be very necessary to show how Faith
justifies.

1. Negatively: We are not justified by Faith in a proper, but in a figurative
Sense; not by Faith as it is a Work in us: In this manner, Papists, Socinians
and Arminians plead for Justification by Faith; nay, some would have Faith bear
away the Bell, and have the Honor of justifying us; it is singled out by God
from all other Graces, and God of mere Mercy looks on Faith say some, Faith and
sincere Obedience to the Gospel, say Others; as if it were a Perfect and Legal
Righteousness, though they own this Acceptance to be of Grace.

But all this is nothing but Popery refined, the Doctrine of Justification by
Works dressed in neater Terms, the Devices of Satan to darken and obscure the
old Protestant Doctrine of Justification.

2. Positively: Faith justifies with respect to its Object; Now the Object of
Faith is,

1. General: The whole Word of God Historical, Mandatory, Promissory, Monitory,
it looks at all the Parts of the Divine Law: Thus Faith purifies the Heart,
produces Holy Obedience; but in this sense Faith justifies not.

2. Faith has a special and peculiar Object, and that is the Promise or
Covenant of Grace, or rather Christ in the Promise: thus Faith justifies as it
looks to and eyes the Promises, Faith is the Right Hand, whereby we look unto
Christ, and receive Christ offered to us.

Now this Saving Faith has a twofold Act: An Act ad Extra, and an Act ad Intra;
Ad Extra, it looks and puts forth Acts of true Evangelical Obedience, Holiness
of Heart and Life; so it justifies not: But Ad intra, it looks to Christ, and
rests upon him alone; in this Sense Faith justifies.

So that upon the whole we may say,

1. That the Internal, Moving Cause of our Justification is mere Grace, Romans
3.24. Being freely justified by his Grace.

2. The External, Moving Cause is Jesus Christ God-man, who as Mediator has
purchased this Gift for us.

3. The Material Cause is the Active and Passive Obedience of Christ, whereby
he both obeyed the Law, and made Satisfaction for Sin.

4. The Formal Cause is the Imputation of our Sins to Christ, and his
Righteousness to us.

5. The External, Instrumental Cause of Justification is the Gospel, in which,
Christ and Justification by the Imputation of his Righteousness, is revealed
and offered to us, 2 Cor. 5.22.

6. The Internal, Instrumental Cause is Faith, which justifies instrumentally,
as it apprehends Christ: Thus we are said to be justified by Grace, by Faith,
by Christ, i. e. through God's Grace, by Christ's Merits apprehended by Faith.

7. The Declarative Cause of Justification is Good Works, whereby our Faith is
declared to be not a dead, but a true and living Faith.

8. The Final Cause of our Justification is the Glory of God and our own
Salvation.

VI. Objections answered.

Object. 1. If Christ's Righteousness imputed be the only Cause of our
Justification, what need then of Repentance, Holiness or New Obedience?

Answ. 1. Repentance and true Holiness, is by God himself made indispensably
necessary to Salvation; Acts 17.30. God commands all Men every where to repent:
And Heb. 12.14. Without Holiness no Man shall see God.

2. I do not say Repentance, Holiness and New Obedience are no Cause at all;
but they are neither the External nor Internal Moving Cause, they are neither
the Efficient, Formal, Instrumental, Material or Meritorious Cause; yet they
are the Evidential or Declarative Cause, there being no other ordinary Way, to
evidence to our own Souls the Truth of our Faith, and the Certainty of our
Justification, but by sincere Obedience and true Holiness; Romans 8.1. They that
are in Christ walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.

3. It Is very strange, Persons can find no place for, or reason of Holiness,
unless they must place them in Christ's Throne, and make them their justifying
Righteousness; our Holiness does not merit Heaven, but it makes us fit for it;
it does not give us a Title, but it is our Evidence for Heaven.

Obj. 2. But does not this Doctrine of Justification by imputed Righteousness
introduce Carelessness; for if we are justified by Christ's Obedience, what need
we be exact or careful about our own Obedience?

Answ. Indeed this is an old Objection made against this Doctrine, Romans 6.1.
Shall we continue in Sin, that Grace may abound? But,

1. Consider, Justification and Sanctification always go together, to
whomsoever Christ is made Righteousness, To them is he made Sanctification
also; 1 Cor. 1.30.

2. Nothing more engages the Soul to Christ and Holiness, then a sense of
Free Grace in Justification, Romans 1.8.

Obj. 3. This Doctrine of Justification by Christ's Righteousness imputed,
seems to dissolve the Law as if it did no longer oblige to Obedience.

Answ. This is also an old Objection made against St. Paul's Preaching, Romans
3.31. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid, yea, we rather
establish the Law: The Apostle's Answer is, that the Doctrine of Justification
by imputed Righteousness, is so far from destroying the Law that it establishes
it.

1. The Law is established in Christ, in that he has fulfilled the Law, and
that both in the perfect Holiness of his Life, and also in the Sufferings and
Satisfaction of his Death; because Christ did all this as our Head and
Representative, and hence the Righteousness of the Law is said to be fulfilled
in us; Romans 8.3, 4.

2. The Law to a Believer is become void, as to its being the Way of our
Justification before God, yet it is established as a Rule of Life: We must obey
it, not to be justified by it, but to testify our Thankfulness to God, not as
a Cause but as an Evidence of our Justification; not to give us a Title to
Life, but a Meetness for it.

Obj. 4. If we are righteous before God in the Righteousness of Christ, then
God sees no Sin in his People.

Answ. True: God sees not Sin in a Saint with a Vindictive Eye, he does not so
see Sin in a justified Person, as to revoke their Justification, and condemn
them for it; Romans 8.1. No Condemnation to them that are in Christ.

But with an intuitive Eye God does both see and punish Sin in his own People;
Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32, 33, 34.

Obj. 5. This Doctrine of Justification by imputed Righteousness, is a Doctrine
very pleasing to Flesh and Blood, every Carnal Man will be glad of it, because
he need not be much concerned about his own Righteousness, etc.

Answ. There is no Doctrine in the Bible more contrary to Flesh and Blood than
this is; Romans 10.3. The Jews could not submit to it, it is Foolishness to Carnal
Men, Flesh and Blood is for Setting up something of its own to be justified by;
no Doctrine does so empty the Creature as this does, it makes Men abhor
themselves, and renounce their own Righteousness, and make Christ all in all,
Phil. 3.6, 7, 8.

Obj. 6. The Scripture every where attributes our Justification to the Death
and Blood of Christ; therefore not to his Active Obedience as you do.

Answ. 1. It Is true, Mention is frequently made of the Death and Sufferings of
Christ, as the Cause of our Justification and Salvation; but the Blood and
Sufferings of Christ are mentioned, not with a Design to exclude Christ's
Active Obedience, but Synecdochically, Pars pro toto, a Part for the whole; for
where only mention is made of the Blood of Christ, as Ephesians. 1.7. all that Christ
did and suffered is to be understood, Christ shedding his Blood, being the
concluding Act, includes all the rest.

2. We find Justification attributed frequently to his Active as well as to his
Passive Obedience; as Romans 8.3, 4. where Christ's Active as well as his Passive
Obedience is mentioned, etc.

3. The Person of Christ is the Object of justifying Faith, we must not look
altogether it Christ's Holy Life or bitter Sufferings, but at both; as 1 Pet.
1.19. The precious Blood of Christ, there is his Passive; As a Lamb without
Blemish, there is his Active Obedience; we were under the Curse of the Law,
Christ's passive Obedience frees us from that: Also we want Conformity to the
Law, Christ's Active Obedience is our Legal Righteousness.

Obj. 7. The wretched Socinian objects against all this, That we need no
Satisfaction at all, but are saved by mere Sovereign Mercy.

Answ. 1. The Old Testament Believers were not so distinct as to the way of
Salvation by a Satisfaction, as we now are in the Days of the Gospel, though this
was not unknown to them, as is evident, by Psalm. 51. and Isa. 53. All their
bloody Oblations plainly pointed to a Satisfaction; but the Gospel way of
Salvation not being yet revealed, in that Brightness it was afterward to be,
Old Testament Believers spoke more darkly and generally, but when they speak of
Salvation by Mercy and Grace, they mean the Gospel way of Salvation, which
being now clearly revealed and fully opened, is in the New Testament generally
called Redemption by the Blood of Christ; That he is a Propitiation for our
Sins, 1 John 2.1, 2. And if the Harmony of the Divine Attributes be consulted,
we shall find, that God is just as well as meriful, and will by no means clear
the guilty: The Sinner of an hundred Years old shall be accursed, the Justice
of God calls for a Satisfaction, and indeed when we consider, that the very
Strain of the New Testament, runs so much upon Exalting the Free Grace of God
in Christ, that We have Redemption through his Blood, Ephesians. 1.7. that The Lord has
laid upon him the Iniquity of us all; That By his Stripes we are healed; Isa.
53.4, 5, 6. We must fling away our Bibles, and renounce the Christian Religion;
nay, all Hopes of Eternal Life, if we let go the Doctrine of Satisfaction.

APPLICATION.
Is this so? That it is the Character of justified Believers, to acknowledge
that that Righteousness whereby they are justified, is in the Lord not in
themselves: We may make a Threefold Use of it.

1. By way of INFORMATION. 2. CAUTION.. 3. EXAMINATION.
1. By way of INFORMATION, in these Ten Things;

1. If this be so, then it informs us, how sincere and right Protestants may be
discerned and distinguished from Popish Socinians, Arminians, Quakers, and the
whole Tribe of Hetrodox Persons; the Name Protestant was given to the
Professors in Germany in Luther's Time, for protesting against the Errors of
Popery, whereof Justification by Works is the chief; therefore he that
symbolizeth with Papists, Socinians and Arminians in this Doctrine, deserves
not the Name of a Protestant; for whoever opposes this Doctrine, opposes Christ
and the Gospel way of Salvation, as has bin proved.

2. This informs us, what a miserable State all Men by Nature are in, that have
no Righteousness, nor are capable of doing any thing to justify themselves;
no, neither Men nor Angels can furnish us with a Righteousness, to present us
righteous at God's Bar; but it must be a Righteousness of God's providing, yea,
the Righteousness of his own Son; none else will do us any Good. O how far was
Man gone from God! How deep was he sunk into the deep Abyss of Misery! Without
Christ and his Righteousness we perish for ever, Acts 4.12.

3. See here the infinite Mercy and Kindness of God to undone Sinners, to
provide us such a Righteousness when we had none of our own, John 3.16. God so
loved the World, as to give his Son; Romans 10.4. He is the End of the Law for
Righteousness. O Let us admire Grace! Psalm. 103.1, 2.

4. This gives us a Reason, why Satan and his Instruments are, and have always
been so busy in depraving and corrupting this Doctrine: Wicked Herod did not
more desire to have killed Christ in the Cradle, than Satan and Seducers do to
crucify this Heavenly Doctrine. Learned Chemnitius says, he could not but
tremble to think of a Passage of Luther, who said, That he foresaw after his
Death, the Doctrine of Justification would be corrupted: This was Ominous and
proved too true, how did the Galatians warp from this Doctrine, which is like
its Master, crucified among Thieves; the Arminian and Antinomian on the one
hand, the Socinian and Papist on the other.

5. Inference. That if we would preserve this Glorious Doctrine, we must keep
close to Scripture, and have a Care of making our own Carnal Reason the
Standard of this Doctrine; God's Thoughts are above our Thoughts, and his Ways
above our Ways; the Socinian will believe nothing, but what accords with his
own depraved Reason, though in the Gospel there is nothing contrary to sound
Reason, yet there are many things above Reason, whereof this of Justification
by imputed Righteousness is one; it is utterly impossible that any thing short
of Divine Revelation, should discover the way of a guilty Sinner's becoming
righteous before God.

6. This informs us, that Pardon of Sin is not the all of Justification; for in
Justification there is two Parts.

1. A Discharge from the Curse of the Law, the Guilt of Sin, this is properly
the Pardon of Sin.

2. It Is possible one might be pardoned and annihilated: Therefore in
Justification, there must be a Righteousness, which must constitute us
righteous at God's Bar, and give us a Title to Eternal Life, 2 Cor. 5.22.

7. This informs us whence it is, that this Doctrine of Justification is so
little understood, even amongst Professors; who have a good measure of
Knowledge, and can talk hansomely of other Truths, yet are very dark and muddy
in this: The Reason is, this is one of the Mysteries of the Gospel, that Flesh
and Blood, Carnal Reason cannot fathom.

8. If this be so, then a justified Believer may walk very comfortably, and
enjoy a sweet sense of the Love of God and Eternal Life, notwithstanding
remaining Infirmities, which do still cleave to the best of God's Children; we
may, and ought to be humble for remaining Infirmities; but our remaining
Infirmities do not make void our Justification, we stand accepted at God's Bar,
not for our own but for Christ's Obedience; No Condemnation to them that are in
Christ, Romans 8.1. 1 John 2.1. If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father.

2. Use of CAUTION.

If this be so, then are we justified by nothing in our selves, but only by the
Righteousness of Christ imputed to us. Then,

1. Take heed of resting in a mere Doctrinal Soundness in this Point, without a
renewed and sanctified Heart; Some please themselves with this, that they are
right in Point of Opinion, they disclaim Works in Justification, expect to be
justified only by Faith; but in the mean time, that which they call Faith is
nothing but Opinion, a dead Faith that bears no living Fruit; this is what St.
James does so much set himself against, Jam. 2.17. Faith if it has not Works,
is dead being alone: O see that your Faith be a living, working Faith.

2. On the other Hand, take heed of relying or trusting to your own Duties,
Graces of Holiness; Without Holiness you can never see God, Heb. 12.14. and yet
you must not trust to, or make Saviors of your Holiness, Faith looks only to
Christ.

3. Take heed of confounding Faith with Obedience, as too many do; our
Justification consists in receiving from God, not giving any thing to him:
Christ is offered in the New Covenant, Faith is the Hand whereby we receive
Christ.

3. Use of EXAMINATION*

Now let us search our Hearts, whether we are made Partaker of this blessed
Privilege or no: But how shall I know that?

First, If you are justified then your Sins are pardoned, and if your Sins are
pardoned, Then,

1. You have been truly humbled and melted down for Sin, Isa. 57.15. Isa. 66.2.
Mat. 5.3.

2. If your Sins are pardoned, you have abandoned and forsaken all Sin, and
that both in Practice and Affection, Isa. 55.7. Let the Wicked forsake his Way,
and the Unrighteous Man his Thoughts, and return to the Lord, and he will have
Mercy on him, and to our God, and he will abundantly pardon.

3. A pardoned Soul hates all Sin, Genesis 39.9. How shall I do this great
Wickedness, and sin against God? Psalm. 119.113. I hate vain Thoughts, but thy
Law do I love.

4. A pardoned Soul is an humble Soul, i. e. One who has very low Thoughts of
himself, of Parts, Duties, Graces, Phil. 3.5. Romans 7.24.

5. A pardoned Soul is a thankful Soul, 1 Cor. 15.10. By the Grace of God I am
what I am, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3.

6. A pardoned Soul is one, who has used in a due manner, all the Means
appointed by God, in Order to obtain the Pardon of Sin; as True Repentance, a
constant Use of all Ordinances, Hearing the Word preached, Reading, Prayer,
Reformation, Luke 13.3. Isa. 55.7. Confession and Acknowledgment of Sin, 1 Kin.
8.30, 33, 34.

Secondly, Some Rules to know when you are Partakers of the Righteousness of
Christ; and if you believe in Christ then are you Partakers of Christ's
Righteousness. John 3.36. He that believes on the Son, has Everlasting Life:
Look well to your Faith that it be not Common, but a Special and Saving Faith.

Now True Faith may be known.

1. By the Manner, how the Holy Spirit works Faith in the Soul: The Spirit
finds us dead, Ephesians. 1.2, 12. dark, blind, Enemies to God and Christ; his first
Work is to Convince of Sin, John 16.8. Acts 2.37. He Enlightens the Mind, Ephesians.
4.23. He Bows the Will, Psalm. 110.3. makes the Soul willing to part with all
Sin, and to have Christ upon his own Terms.

2. By its Activity for God and Holiness: True Faith is obedient, the Language
of Faith is, Lord, What will thou have me to do? Acts 9.6.

3. Saying Faith is never alone, but always accompanied with all other Graces;
as Love to God, Gal. 5.6. Faith which works by Love; Self-denial, Gal. 2.20. I
live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, etc.

4. Saving Faith is a prayerful Grace, so soon as Paul believes he prays; see
in Jacob, how Faith spirits him in Prayer, Genesis 32.9, 10.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of BOOKS, newly Printed for William and Joseph Marshal, and Sold
by them at the Bible in Newgate-street.
In FOLIO.
1. CAryl's Exposition on the whole Book of Job, in Quires 30 s. bound 40 s. 2.
Mr. Pool's Synopsis Criticorum, in two Volumes, with the New Testament, Latin,
with the Index, in quires 20 s. bound 30 s. 3. Mr. Keach's Exposition of all
the Parables, contained in the Four Evangelists. 4. Mr. Bunyan's Works,
containing 20 Books, 18 s. You may likewise be supplied with most of Mr.
Bunyan's small pieces.
In QUARTO.
1. SIkes Exposition of Ecclesiastes, or the Preacher. Price bound 3 s. 2. The
Catechism of the Kingdom of Christ in the Thousand Years: The Second Edition
with Additions. By T. B. Price 6 d. 3. A Discourse of several Sermons on the
Sacrament. Price 6 d. 4. A Sermon on the Death of the Queen. price 6 d. 5.
Faith by which we are justified in Scripture Sense. price 1 s. 6. A Discourse
of Evangelical Repentance. price 1 s. 6 d. 7. A Discourse of the Powers of the
World to come. By T. B. price 6 d. 8. Christianity the Great Mystery. price 1
s. 9. The Loss of the Soul. price 6. 10. Davis's Vindication of the Doctrine of
Justification and Union before Faith. price 6 d. 11. Christ made Sin: By Crisp.
price bound 2 s. 6 d. 12. A Parable of the Ten Virgins. price 2 s. 13. Wight's
Devout Man described. price 6 d. 13. Claridge's Looking-glass for Religious
Princes. price 6 d. 15. Davis's True Spring of Gospel Sight and Sense of Sin.
price 6. 16. The General Exercise. price 2 d. 17. Dr. Chauncy's Works. price 5
s. 18. Beverley's Praise of the Glory of Grace. price 1 s. 19. -- His Good Hope
through Grace. price 1 s. 20. His Indiction or Accounting by Fifteens, the Great
Style of prophetic Time. price 1 s. 21. -- His Appendix to a Discourse of
Indiction. price 6 d. 22. -- His Grand Apocalyptic Question debated with Mr.
Fleming. price 1 s. 23. A true second Spira, Or, a Soul plunged in his Case.
price 6 d. 24. Edwards, Esquire Parabselene dismantled of her Cloud, or
Baxterianism barefaced, drawn from a Literal Transcript of Mr. Baxter's, and
the Judgment of others, etc. 25. A new methodized Concordance. price 6 d. 26.
The Young Man's Guide for Drawing, Limning, and Etching, with printed
Directions. price 1 s. 27. Bunyan of Election and Reprobation unfolded and
explained. price 6 d. 28. Coo^k's Marrow of Chyrurgery, with Anatomy, and the
Marrow of Physic, showing the Causes, Signs and Cures of most Diseases: The
Fourth Edition enlarged with 12 Copper Cuts. price bound 6 s.
In Octavo and Twelves.
1. THo. Cole, of Christian Religion, in sundry Points. price bound 2 s. 6 d.
2. Eyres Free Justification of a Sinner. price 2 s. 3. Keach's Jewish Sabbath
abrogated. price 2 s. 4. Wight's Gospel Description of a New Creature. price
bound 1 s. 5. Collin's Temple repaired. price bound 1 s. 6. Chauncy's
Alexipharmacon: Or, a fresh Antidote against Neonomian Bane and Poison to the
Protestant Religion. price bound 2 s. 7. Ayres's: Aesop Fables. price bound 2
s. 6 d. 8. Flemings Fulfilling of the Scripture: The third Edition with an
Appendix. price 2 s. 6 d. 9. -- His second part of the Fulfilling of the
Scriptures. price bound 1 s. 6 d. 10. Elisha Cole's Discourse of God's
Sovereignty: The fifth Impression. price bound 2 s. 11. Youth's Comedy, or, The
Soul's Trials and Triumph. By T. S. price 1 s. 12. Thomas Barnes's Safe Conduct
to the Christian's Resting Place: With a Preface by Timothy Rogers, M. A. price
bound 1 s. 6 d. 13. An Essay for Reformation of Manners. price 6 d. 14. Beams
of Diviine Light. price 3 d. 15. The Psalm-singer's Guide, or, The Tutor to
singing, set forth by Mr. Tate and Mr. Brady. price 1 s. 6 d. 16. Sikes
Evangelical Essays: Being a Discovery of the Everlasting Gospel Life of Christ:
The second Edition. price bound 1 s. 17. A Declaration of the Congregational
Ministers in and about London, against Antinomian Errors. Second Edition. price
6 d. 18. Bunyan's Doctrine of the Law and Grace unfolded: Second Edition
corrected. price bound 1 s. 6 d 19. A necessary Apology for the baptized
Believers, by Joseph Hook. price bound 1 s. 20. Sendell's Benefit and
Excellency of Christian Love and Unity. price 6 d. 21. Does Collection of
Experiences of the Work of Grace on several Persons. price 6 d. 22. Gammon^s
Christ a Christian's Life: Or, A practical Discourse of a Believers Life: The
second Edition corrected, and recommended by three Divines of London. price
bound 1 s. 6 d. 23. Worden's Leper, and the Leper's House cleansed, divided
into ten Parts. price bound 1 s. 24. A Guide to Parish Clarks, the Treble and
Bass of the singing Psalms useful for all Learners. By H. Playford. price 3 s.
25. Hunt's Excise Man's Pocket Companion. price 6 d. 26. A brief View of the
state of Mankind, in the first, and in the second Adam. By T. B. price 6 d. 27.
Cowper's Instruction for the Ignorant. price 6 d. 28. Stated Christian
Conference asserted to be a Christian Duty. price 6 d. 29. Ames's Marrow of
Sacred Divinity. price bound 1 s. 6 d. 30. Hymns on several Subjects, in 4
parts: By R. Davis. Third Edition corrected. price bound 1 s. 31. An awakening
Call, or an Alarm from Heaven to the Wise and Foolish Virgins. price 6 d. 32.
The Bonds of Love and Peace, or the Duties of Christians One to another. price
6 d. 33. A Confession of Faith, put forth by the Elders and Brethren baptized,
upon profession of their Faith in London, and the Country. The third Edition.
price bound 1 s. 34. A Sermon preached before the Societies for Reformation of
Manners in Dublin. By Tho. Emlyn. price 3 d. 35. Observations on several Books:
1. A Letter to Mr Look. 2. A Refutation of some false Conceits in Mr. Lock's
Essays. An Answer to Gerardins de Vries. 4. An Answer to six Arguments produced
by Dupin, in a Letter to Mr. C. G. By Mr. Elys. price 6 d. 36. Bunyan's
Heavenly Footman, or, a Description of the Man that gets to Heaven. 37. Holy
Zeal against Sin, shown to be an acceptable and seasonable Duty in a Sermon. By
J. E. price 6 d. 38. A true Narrative of God's Dealings with the Soul of
Shalome Ben Shalamoh a Jew, with an Account of his Conversion. The second
Edition with some Addition. price 4 d. 39. A summary Relation of the Historical
Part of Holy Scripture, plainly and familiarly comprised for the help of
Memory, and Instruction of the Ignorant. By E. G. Master of Arts. The Fourth
Impression. price 6 d. 40. The Display of Glorious Grace, or, The Covenant of
Peace opened: In 14 Sermons. price 2 s. 41. The Glory of a true Church: By Mr.
Keach. price 6 d. 42. Clare's Via Naturalis, or, The natural Way to learn the
Latin Tongue, composed for the Use of Schools. price 3 d. 43. The pious Man's
Companion. price 1 d. or 9 d. a dozen 44. The Beams of the Spirit. Jos. Caryl.
price 1 d. or 9 d. a dozen. 45. God's Exaltation in the Glorious Work of Man's
Salvation through Christ. By Sam. Blower. price 6 d. 46. De Jure Regni apud
Scotos: Or, the due Privilege of the Scots Government. price bound 1 s. 47.
The Slaughter House, or, a brief Description of the Spanish Inquisition, in
which is laid open the Tyranny, and barbarous Cruelty of that Tribunal. By J.
S. price bound 1 s. 48. Selectoe Sementioe: Or, a short Treatise composed of
useful Sentences for the younger sort. By J. S. price bound 6 d. 49. The
Funeral of the Mass, or, the Mass dead and buried without hope of Resurrection.
price bound 1 s. 50. The Tomb of Semiramis Hermetically sealed, which if a wise
Man open (not the Ambitious, Covetous Cyrus) he shall find the Treasures of
Kings, inexhaustible Riches to his Content. price 3 d. 51. An Arrow against
Idolatry, taken out of the Quiver of the Lord of Hosts. By H. A. price bound 1
s. 52. Cook's select Observations on English Bodies of Eminent Persons in
desperate Diseases. price bound 2 s. 6 d. 53. Norcott of Baptism: The third
Edition corrected by Will. Kissin and Rich. Claridge. price bound 6 d. 54.
Chauncey's Doctrine which is according to Godliness, with a Treatise of
Church Government; being an entire body of Divinity. price bound 2 s. 55. The
Old Man's Legacy to his Daughter, in 2 parts: Published by D. Crosly. price
bound 6 d. 56. The Child's Delight: Containing a Scripture Catechism. by Ben.
Keach. price bound 6 d. 57. The Christian Catechism for the Instruction of
Youth. price 2 d. 58. A Treatise on Justification. By Michael Harrison. price 3
d. 59. Dr. Owen's Esbcol: Or, Rules of Direction for the walking of the Saints
in Fellowship. price 6 d. 60. Dr. Owen of Communion. price bound 5 s. 61. An
Account of some of the dying Sayings of Susanna Yeats, with a Sermon preached
at her Funeral. price 6 d. 62. A Treatise of Baptism: Wherein that of
Believers, and that of Infants, is examined by the Scriptures; with the History
of both out of Antiquity, making it appear, that Infants Baptism was not
practiced for near three hundred Years after Christ; with the History of
Christianity amongst the Ancient Britains and Waldensians: The second Edition
with large Additions. By Henry Danvers.
At the Bible in Newgate-street, you may be supplied with Dr. Owen's Effigies,
Mr. Caryl's, Mr. Mead's, Mr. Baxter's, Mr. Bunyan's, Dr. Crisp's, Mr. Calamy's,
Mr. Janeway's, Mr. Keach's, King William's and Queen Mary's, Mr. Clark's, etc


