THE CITY BRIDE: OR, The Merry Cuckold.

A COMEDY, Acted at the New Theater, in Little Lincolns Inn-Fields.

BY His Majesty's Servants.

Spero Meliora.

LONDON: Printed for A. Roper and E. Wilkinson at the Black-Boy, and R. Clavel
at the Peacock, in Fleet Street. 1606.

TO THE HONORABLE Sir John Walter, Bar.
SIR,
UNder the present License of the Press, and Freedom of Religion, Two very fair
Established English Liberties; methinks I have the Umbrage even of a Law on my
side, to Authorize my Presumption, in paying this public Devotion, to so
Worthy a Patron; and fixing so fair a Name, in the Frontispiece of so poor a
Trifle.

You must pardon me, Sir, if I lay hold of all occasions, and every Argument to
warrant my Ambition: Besides, I have a stronger Charter than Poetic
Privilege, it is my Gratitude that dictates to my Pen; You have already
vouchsafed to Honor me with your Smiles, (and where such Goodness descends,
it is natural for our Pride to aspire) whilst warmed and animated by that only
Encouragement, I am emboldened to make you this Dedication; insomuch that my
present Devoirs have more of the Thanksgiving, than the Prayer; a Duteous
Acknowledgment for Blessings already received. And here I must avow to the
World, That in Addressing to a person Enriched with so many Generous
Accomplishments, I* set not out a Discoverer, a Columbus to any unknown Golden
Coast: No, Sir, Your past Favors have swelled my Sails, whilst I am carried
by a fair Levant to an open free Port, and a Hospitable Shore.

That Sweetness of Temper runs through all Your Conversation, so free from any
Allay of Pride, (that too common Taint of Prosperity,) that You have all the
Sweets of the Rose, without the prickles. Your Goodness so Frank, and so
diffusive, and the Access to it so Easy, that those who have the more
particular happiness of Your nearest Intimacay, and Friendship, find those
Charms in Your Conversation, that they are scarce (pardon the seeming
Contradiction,) to be enjoyed: For the more they are possessed, the more they are
desired.

HONOR, and GALLANTRY are not only Born, but bred up with You. You Challenge
not only all the Advantages of a Fair and Generous Birth, but You have all the
Improvements of a Generous and Sprightly Genius too, with so forward, so
hopeful, and so growing a Merit (that ample Addition to your Hereditary Desert)
that the Stem is a Grace to the Root.

If Providence does ever Study for her Fair Creations, she Thinks when she
makes a Complete Gentleman. And Fortune in the Donations of her Golden Favors
upon You, has not Showered them at Random; she found that WORTH, that challenged
her Smiles, and her Graces are not her Gift, but her Reward.

But to all Your other Felicities there is the chief one yet wanting, to
complete the Sum; the Charms of LOVE, that double Heaven of Joy, where You
must give Blessings when You receive them. And here I must beg your leave, to
wish You that truly fair and Virtuous Choice, That like the Famous Youth of
Troy, You may have Rival Beauties all waiting when your kind Hand shall give
the Prize, and bestow the Ball of Gold. And truly, the Generous and the Brave
should ever make Love, their nearest Care. For indeed, Love is the only
Foundation of Immortality. For though Noble Virtues, a Sweet Fame, and Fragrant
Memory may keep a fair Name alive; yet to make Your self live for Ever, You
only want a Lovely Feminine Partner, to draw Living Copies from so Excellent an
Original.

But I must not dwell too long upon this Subject, For as Dedications are by
Custom, only the Panegyricks upon the Patron's Virtues, possibly to so much
Modesty, (one of your most shining Perfections,) I may make but ungrateful
Music on that Theme. Yet why should WORTH and HONOR any more Blush to hear
their own just Praises, then the Hero, or Monarch his Triumph, or Coronation
Song. The Theme on this side may be as Copious, and as inspiring as that;
Desert and Applause are not confined only to Palaces and Thrones; the Chapplet
sometimes may Sparkle, as well as the Diadem. It Is true the Encomiums of
Extraordinary Desert; are what my poorest of Quills should not presume to
attempt, as being a Province for the Elder Sons of Apollo; and yet when I
consider, that the Airs that are tuned but to an Oaten Pipe, may be as
cheerfully and heartily Sung, though not so sweetly and loud as to a Silver
Trumpet; I have that only Plea for this Boldness, which gives me the Honor of
Subscribing my self,

Sir, Your most Obliged, Most Devoted, And Obedient Servant, Joseph Harris

PROLOGUE:
Spoke by Mr. THURMOND.
THREE Ways there are, and all accounted fair,
To gain your Favor: Begging, Borrowing, Prayer.
If as a Beggar, I your Alms implore
Methinks your Charity should aid the Poor;
Besides, I never begged of you before.
If I address by Prayer, and loud Complaints
I then oblige ye, for I make you Saints;
And sure none here can think it Superstition,
To pray to Saints that are of no Religion!
If Invocation will not do my Work,
A Man may borrow of a Jew or Turk;
Pray lend me Gentlemen your Applause and Praise,
I Will take it for as good as Current Bays;
And if I never repay it, it is no more,
Than many of you Sparks have done before:
With this distinction, that you ran indebt
For want of Money, we for want of Wit.
In vain I plead! a Man as soon may get
Milled Silver, as one favor from the Pit.
-- Hold then -- now I think on it,
I Will even turn Thief, and steal your kind Affection,
And when I Have got your Hearts, claim your protection:
You cannot Gazette me sure for such a crime,
Since neither Mare nor Lap-dog, I purloin:
While you Rob Ladies Bosoms every day,
And filch their precious Maiden-heads away;
I Will plead good nature for this Brat the Play:
A Play that plagues no more the threadbare Theme
Of powdered Beaux, or tricks of the Godly Dame,
But in your humors let us ye all alone,
And not so much as Fools themselves runs down.
Our Author tried his best, and Wisemen tell,
It Is half well doing to endeavor well:
What though his poor Allay runs not so fine;
Yet, let it pass as does our present Coin;
For wanting fairer Ore, and riches mould
He stamps in Brass, what others print in Gold:
Smile on him but this time, the next perhaps,
If he guess right he may deserve your Claps.
Dramatis Personae.
Bonvile, The Bridegroom. Mr. Boman. Friendly, His Friend, in Love with Clara.
Mr. Thurmond. Justice Merryman, Father to Arabella. Mr. Bright. Summerfield. A
Gentleman, but Younger Brother, necessitated to take the Highway. Mr.
Scudemore. Mr. Ventre, A Merchant. Mr. Arnold. Mr. Spruce, A City Beau. Mr.
Bailey. Compass, A Master of a Vessel. Mr. Freeman. A Councellor. Mr. Davis.
Pettifog, Two Attorneys. Mr. Trefusis. Dodge, Two Attorneys. Mr. Eldred.
Sailers, Neighbors, Drawers, Servants, Boys, Singers and Dancers. Arabella,
The Bride. Mrs. Boman. Clara, Friendly's Mistress, but secretly in Love with
Bonvile. Mrs. Boutell. Mrs. Ventre, The Merchant's Wife. Mrs. Lacy. Peg.
Compasses Wise. Mrs. Perin. Nurse. Mrs. Lawson. Lucy, Clara's Maid. Miss
Prince. Women Neighbors.
SCENE London.

THE CITY BRIDE: OR, THE Merry Cuckold.
ACT I.
SCENE the I.
The Curtain draws up, and discovers several sitting at a Banquet. An
Entertainment of Instrumental Music, Composed by Signior Finger: Then a Song*
set by Mr. John Eccles, and Sung by Young La Roche. SONG. MANY I Have liked, and
some Enjoyed,
But if I said I Loved, I ly'd.
Inconstant as the wandering Be,
From once touched Sweets I used to flee;
Nor all the Power of Female Skill,
Could curb the freedom of my Will:
Clarinda only found the Art,
To Conquer and to keep my Heart.
After this a Dance, and then the Scene shuts. Enter Friendly and Clara.
Friend. THis is is a Day of Mirth and Jollity my Clara.


Clara. It Is so, for such as can be merry, Mr. Friendly.


Friend. Why not for us my Love, we have a Noble President, and methinks should
Imitate (through Envy) this their happiness.


Clara. I am not of your Opinion.


Friend. Why not my Fair?


Clara. I Will tell you, because I purpose not to Marry.


Fri. Prithee be serious, and reform that Thought: Think of my past Service,
and judge by that my future; weigh all the respect I have paid you long, and
ever loved you beyond my self.


Cla. I know your Weakness, and will reward it too.


Fri. I am sure you will, you must be kind; And can you think an Answer of this
killing Nature, a just return for all my faithful Love?


Cla. As to that I have already said.


Fri. Oh speak, from whence this Coldness does arise! Be at least so kind as to
tell me that; Is it some late Disgust you have conceived of my Person; or
rather your desire, (I fear) of some unworthier, happy Creature, base in the
Attempt, as you unkind in thinking of a Change; If neither.

I must impute it to your Woman's Will,
Still pleased with what it fancies, Good or Ill.

Clara. Be It what it will, thus it is, and with this Answer pray rest
satisfied; there is but one way ever to win me, and draw me unto Marriage,
which whosoever finds, it is like he may have me, if not, I am still my own.


Fr. Oh name it then! Thou dearest Treasure of my Life! my Soul! my All! I am
in a maze of Ecstasy, to think there is any means to gain you, and hope you will be
so kind to tell me how I may be happy.


Cla. I Will retire a while; and with my self resolve what must be done, and in
the tend send you my Resolution.


Exit Clara. Fri. I Will here expect it: What more can I desire, than now be
satisfied and know my Dooom.

Suspense is the worst Torment we endure.
It Is Knowledge makes the Wound both safe and sure.

Enter Spruce and Mr. Venture. Spru. How now Jack! What all alone Man?


Fri. No, for I have heard some say, Men are never less alone, then when alone.
The reason I suppose is this, because they have Crowds of Thoughts, that still
perplex the Mind; which would be like the Soul retired and free, thereby to
enjoy that sweet Repose, which naught but that can Grant.


Spr. Pshaw! Pox of this Morality and dull Stuff; Prithee let us be Merry, and
Entertain the Bride and Bridegroom. Ods fish there a parcel of rare Creatures
wihin! But of all Mrs. Clara for my Money.


Mr. Ven. And truly, I am of your Opinion Mr. Spruce; for setting aside her
present Melancholy and Discontent, I think she is beyond Comparison with any
other.


Spr. Od's nigs, I know the Cause of her Disorder.


Vent. What I pray?


Spr. Why, I Will tell ye; In all Conditions of Estates, Professions, and
Degrees, in Arts or Sciences, ye know there is a kind of Envious Emulation.


Mr. Ven. Right.


Spr. So in this of Arabella's Marrying; for Clara being Lady of much the same
Birth and Quality, Grieves I -- suppose to see her Rival get the start of her.


Mr. Ven. Troth like enough.


Fri. You Are Pleasant Gentlemen -- Or else because she having had so many
Courtiers --


Spr. And you among the rest Jack.


Fri. She now perhaps does cast a more favorable Eye upon some one that does
not like her.


Spr. Why Faith, and that may be too.


Enter Lucy with a Letter. Lucy. Sir, my Mistress presents her humble Service
to you, and has sent you this Letter; pray Heaven it be to your liking Sir.


Fri. I thank the kind Lucy: There, there is for the Postage Girl: [Gives her
Money.] She has kept her Promise for once I see; I Am resolved to read it, tho I
were sure my Death was Comprehended in it.

Reads. Try all your Friends, and find out the best and nearest to your Heart,
That done, be sure to kill him for my sake. This fail not to do, if you respect
and Love (as you pretend.)

Clara.




It Is as I feared, and what I know she most desires: Mischief, and Murder, are
all her Sexes Practice, and Delight? Yet such is the Extravagancy of my
Passion, I must obey the Mandate, tho to my certain Ruin: It Is strangely
difficult, and does require Mature Deliberation. Exit.


Spr, What has Friendly left us?


Mr. Ven. I believe the Letter was the occasion, it may be it was a Challenge.


Spr. A Challenge! No, no; Women don't use to bring Challenges, I rather
believe it is an Amor; And that Letter as you call it a Billet Deux, which is
to Conduct him to the place appointed, and in some Sense you may take that for
a Challenge.


Mr. Ven. And she the Civil Embassadress to usher him in.


Spr. Yes, yes, but see the Bride and Bridegroom, with the rest of the good
Company.


Enter Justice Merry-man, Bonvile, Arabella, Mrs. Venture and others, as Guests
Invited to the Wedding. Mer. Son Bonvile, what call ye the Gentleman we met at
the Garden Door?


Bon. Friendly Sir, a most approved and worthy Gentleman, and one of my
chiefest Guests.


Mer. Ay, ay, it may be so: But yet me thought he seemed somewhat displeased,
tho Son, Hah, What think you?


Bon. No sure Sir, he cannot be Angry, when his Friend's so happy.


Mer. I cannot tell Boy, but I believe there is something more than ordinary in
the matter, Why should he leave the Company else? And Mrs. Clara I miss her
too; Why Gentlemen, why do you suffer this?


Ara. Unknown to any Sir, she withdrew soon as we rise from Table.


Mer. Sick of the Maid perhaps; because she sees you Mrs. Bride her Quondam
Play-fellow Married before her, Heh Gentlemen; heh!


Mr. Ven. 'Troth like enough Brother Merry-man.


Mer. Go, go, find her out for shame Gentlemen; and do not stand idle thus,
Od's bobs, when I was a Young fellow and invited to a Wedding, I used to frisk
and Jump, and so bestir my self, that I made all the Green Sickness Girls in
the Room blush like Rubies. Ah, hah! I was a brisk Fellow in those Days,
In Faith, and used to Cut Capers a Yard high: Nor am I yet so Old, but I can
take a round or two still -- Come, come Gentlemen, lets in again and firk it
away, shall we not?


Sp. Withal my Heart Mr. Justice.


Mer. Why that is well said Mr. Spruce, Ods bobs it was, and I thank you
heartily.


Sp. Come Madam, you must along with us, without you all is nothing.


Arab. I Will wait on you Gentlemen; if you will give me leave Sir. To Bonvile.


Bon. Oh my best Joy! This Day you may Command.


Mer. That Is right, that is right In Faith Gentlemen! This Day she Commands, and
he for ever after. Ods bobs I have done so my self, and hope I shall do so
still. Sister Venture, May I presume to ask if my Brother can say as much? Exit
Bonvile, Arab. Spruce, and the rest of the Guests.


Mrs. Vent. Yes Brother, I think he may, I freely Give him leave.


Mer. Observe that Brother, she freely gives you leave: But who Gives leave the
Master or the Servant?


Mr. Ven. You are Merry Brother, and truly you have reason, having but one
Daughter and see her Married as you would have her.


Mer. Yes, I have one thank Heaven! You would be glad Sister you could say so,
but your Barrenness does give your Husband leave (if he please) to look for
Game elsewhere.


Mrs. Ven. Well, well Sir, tho you jeer me, and make a scorn of my Sterility --


Mer. No, no, not I Sister, I scorn not your Sterility, nor your Husbands
Virility neither.


Mrs. Ven. My Husband's Virility! Pray spare my Husband; for he has not been so
Idle as you imagine; He may have an -- Offspring abroad for ought you know, that
you never heard of.


Mr. Ven. Oh fie Wife, You will not make it public will you?


Mrs. Ven. And yet he keeps himself within compass for all that.


Mr. Ven. If you love me Winny --


Mrs. Ven. Na, I say no more, but thereby hangs a Tale.


Me. Say thou so old Girl? What and has he been straggling then? Nay, nay I
know he is a Ventersome Man; And a -- Merchant of small Wares sometimes,
especially when he can get a good Commodity: I love him the better for it
In Faith, Ods bobs I do -- A notable spark with a Young Wench in a corner, Is he
not? A true Chip of the old Block, his Father I warrant him -- But Sister, I
have something to say to you in private, concerning my Daughter.


Enter Nurse. Nurse. By your leave Good Folks, Is Master Venture the Merchant
here I pray?


Mr. Ven. Oh Nurse! I am glad to see thee, How does my Boy?


Nurse. Very well, I thank Heaven Sir! He grows bravely I assure you. It Is a
Chopping Lad I promise you, and as like your good Worship; As if he had been
spit out of your Mouth.


Mr. Ven. Softly, Nurse softly.


Nurse. I protest it is one of the forward'st Infants in the Universe; Lord! how
it will Crow, and Chirup like a Sparrow! I am afraid Sir he is about Teeth, for
he Dribbles extremely, if so, Your Worship must provide him a Silver Corral
with a Whistle and Chain.


Mr. Ven. Well, well, he shall have every thing Nurse, my Wife shall send them
to ye; in the mean time, there, there is a Piece, to buy the a Pair of Gloves,
and so leave us, for I am busy at present, therefore steal away behind me, and
slip out at the back Door.


Nurse. Yes Sir, I am gone, Heavens bless your Worship, a Piece! Marry! and
that is a sufficient Charm to lie up any Nurses Tongue in Christendom. Ex. Nurse.


Just. Mer. Well well, it shall be done. Come Brother we are mist I warrant you
amongst the Young Fry, let us to 'um and, Dance till our Legs ache again, come
I Will lead the way.


Mr. Ven. We follow you. Exeunt.


Enter Friendly Reading the the Letter. Fr. Heaven in its excess of Goodness,
bestowed no greater Blessing on Mankind than that of Friendship -- To Murder
any one is a Crime unpardonable! But a Friend! -- And of all Friends the
nearest to my Heart, -- It Is such an Imposition that Hell it self 'till now
could never parallel; And yet this Devil of a Woman has power over me beyond
all Virtue. I am distracted in my Thoughts, and know not what to do; yet
something must be done without delay, or else I lose her quite: And yet I fear
it is most Impossible, for Friendship left the World, when Justice fled, and all
who now do wear that Name are the worst of Hypocrites,

Like Counterfeited Coin on which is seen,
The formal Stamp; but sordid Dross within.

Enter Bonivile. Bon. My Friend alone and Thoughtful? say for what
That you alone appear with Discontent,
When all my Friends Congratulate my Bliss?
Is it because (which I durst never suspect)
Your Love to me was not entirely true?
Or else perhaps, this Crown of Happiness
You think Misplaced, and Envy it not yours.

Fri. Forbear such cruel Words --
How can you entertain a Thought so Vile
Of him whom so long you have called your Friend*
May all the Blessings Heaven can bestow
On us poor Mortals in this World below,
Crown all your Days, and may you nothing see
But flowing Tides of sweet Felicity;
But I, alas! --

Bon. Alas! What means my Friendly?
Much hidden Grief that wretched Word portends,
Which thus disturbs the Quiet of my Friend?
But come disclose it to me,
And since the Burden is too much for one,
I Will bear a part to ease thy troubled Breast.

Fri. Oh Bonvile!
Seek not to force this Fatal secret from me --

Bon. I must know it, by my best hopes I must.

Fri. Oh no! I cannot, Nay I dare not --

Bon. How dare not trust a secret to a Friend?

Fri. Oh Bonville, Bonville! Call me not your Friend,
That Names strikes horror to my very Soul.

Bon. Ha! Art thou then a Stranger to that Name?

Fri. Indeed I am, and must be so for ever now.

Bon. Yet hear me Friendly; Deny me if thou can,
Fixed as a Rock, I vow I Will here remain,
Until I have forced this Dire secret from thee.

Fri. Pardon me Sir, I hope you soon will hear it,
But I -- [Offers to go.]

Bon. Yet stay, and since entreaty cannot prevail,
By all the Friendship which you once professed,
By all that is Holy, both in Heaven and Earth,
I now Conjure thee to impart it to me,
Or by this Life --
Hold, hold, and since I can no longer hide it
Know it is my Honor then which lies at Stake.

Bon. Thy Honor! How? Proceed.

Fri. By chance a Quarrel happened to arise
Betwixt another and my self, The Field,
Time, Place, and all appointed,
Nay Seconds must assist us in the Deed:
I have relied on many seeming Friends,
Such as profess the bare and empty Name)
And all refuse to venture in my Cause.

Bon. Is this all?

Fri. All, Is it not enough? To see my Reputation, (the Life's Blood of my Soul)
Nay all that is Dear, in Danger to be lost.

Bon. Not while thy Bonvile lives and wears a Sword:
May all things frown that I would have to smile,
May I live Poor, and Dye despised by all,
If I out live the ruin of thy Honor!
Tell me the time my Friend?

Fri. Oh, spare me that, for, if once known the time,
You Will Cancel this your promise, and recall
Your Friendly proffer.

Bon. Away with these Excuses, come the time

Fri. At Seven this Evening

Bon. The place?

Fri. Barn-Elms:
Oh the fatal place! Where I too well foresee,
The certain fall and Ruin of my Honor!

Bon. No, Thou shall not stay to forfeit thy loved Honor,
Come I Am ready to assist my Friend; and will along with you.

Fri. Alas! What mean you?
Of all my Friends on you I never Relied;
But sure I Dream, I Rave, by Heavens I Am Mad!
My Bonvile leave his Wife? And on his Wedding Day?
His Bride whom he perhaps may never Enjoy?
And all for me? O most unhappy Man!

Bon. Pleasure before my Friend I Will never prefer,
Nor is it lost, tho for a while delayed.

Fri. Are you then resolved to go?

Bon. I am, as fixed in my Resolve, as is the Libertin in Vice,
Which Death alone can part.

Fri. Yet stay, and think what it is you undertake,
Recall this Rash and sudden Resolution,
Least you repent, alas when it is too late.

Bon. This were enough to shake a weaker Soul,
But mine it moves not; like to a Mighty Oak,
I Am placed above the Storms of Fear or Doubt.

Enter Arabella. Fri. Sir no more, the Bride,

Ara. Oh, Heavens defend me!

Bon. What ailes my Dearest Life?

Ara. I Have lost the Key of this Chain I wear about my Neck
And of these Bracelets, Oh! Unhappy Omen!

Bon. No, no, my Love; I found it as it lay at Random in your Chamber, and
fearing it might be forgot, or lost, have laid it by; It Is safe my Love.


Ara. Indeed I Am very glad you have found it, but yet -- sighs.

Bon. Yet, What my Dear? from whence proceeds that sigh?

Arab. Alas, I know not!
Some busy Genius Whispers to my Soul,
The loss of this upon my Wedding Day
Portend's a greater e're the Day be past.

Bon. Banish such Fears, let us in and see our Friends.

Ara. Indeed they all expect you; come I Will lead the way.

Bon. I Will go with you. Barn-Elms you say? Aside to Friendly.

Fri. Yes that is the place, at Seven precisely;

Bon. I Will meet you on the Exchange, and go together;
If you are there before me, Take a turn or two. Exit Bonvile, and Arabella.

Fri. Oh my Dear Bonvile! Art thou then the Man?
The only, only Man that I can call Friend,
And only Friend that I am bound to Kill?
A Friend, that for my sake would stake his Life,
Leave a Chaste Brid! and untouched Nuptial Bed
For me base Man, nay worse than Savage Beast:
The generous Lion, never kills his kind
They say, although provoked to utmost rage;
Yet I vile Monster, more ungrateful Man,
Thus unprovoked, must kill my Brother Creature,
And which is worse, my Dear and only Friend!
All for the pleasure of a Foolish Woman.
O cruel Woman thus to Command
A Task so hard, Yet what I cannot withstand!
Oh! thou rare Copy of the Original,
By which free Man at first received his fall;
For she not only would her self undo,
And all her Sex, but Damn all Mankind too. Exit.

The End of the First Act.
ACT the Second.
SCENE the First. The Fields.
Enter Summerfield solus. Sum. A Younger Brother! It Is a poor Title, and very
hard to bear with: The Elder Fool inherits all the Land, whilst we are forced
to follow Legacies of Wit, and get 'um when we can. Why should the Law, by
which we are deprived of equal Portion with the First-begotten, not bind our
Fathers to cease from Procreation, and so as well deprive us of a wretched
Being, as of the Thing we cannot be without: No, no, our Mothers never will
consent to that, they love to groan and squall, tho at the same time the
Gallows eccho's to their Groans, and both together labor for us. From the
first we travel forth -- to'thers our Journey's End. All this I know, yet I
must forward: To beg, my Birth will never consent to; and borrowing is quite
out of date -- Yet starve I cannot, nor murder I would not: It must be the
Highway then, the old Trade we poor honest Rogues are forced too -- This Place
will serve for a Beginner well enough -- A Beginner did I say? Yes; for this is
the very first day I open Shop -- Fortune, they say, uses to help the Bold, I
hope she will be kind to me. Ha! who have we here? A Gentlewoman well rigged,
and only a Servant with her, She may be a Prize worth the boarding, and faith
I Will venture hard but I Will carry her. He retires to a corner of the Stage.


Enter Arabella in great disorder, looking about her, with Simon her Servant.
Arab. This way, say thou Simon, with Friendly?


Sym. Yes forsooth Mistress, with Mr. Friendly.


Arab. Alas! I Am tired and cannot travel further; my Heart is full of Fear, and
yet I know not why, nor can I tell why he should use me thus; -- It is not
common sure for Men to leave their Brides upon the Wedding Day: And yet I
cannot tell but it may be so! O wretched State of Marriage, and of Love, if
this be Love! Here will I lie me down, and rest a while [Lies down.] my wearied
Limbs, unused to these sad Frights and Fears -- But prithee do thou run after
him, and if it be possible overtake him too: Tell him the strange Disorder thou
do leave me in; and let him know my Father's Anger, his Friends Concern, and
what is more, his Arabella's sad Complaint; tell him, I grieve, I faint, I die;
tell him any thing that may stay him.


Sym. Yes Forsooth.


Arab. Entreat him to return; nay, urge him all thou can to make him come
again: Nay haste, good Simon, fly if thou can, for I can stir no further.


Sym. Well, well, Forsooth, I am gone. Exit Simon.


Arab. Alas, how wretched and forlorn am I!

I she whom once so many did admire,
Whose Wit and Charms the coldest Hearts could fire!
Now wretched Maid, and most unhappy Wife,
In Sighs and in Complaints must end my Life.
Abandoned by my Husband* e're enjoyed,
With thoughts of Pleasure, yet untasted, cloyed.
He leaves me now to my sad Frights a Prey;
O, my dear Bonvile! whither do thou stray?
Unheard, alas! I make my amarous Moans;
The Winds and Waves refuse to bear my Groans:
Echo her self cannot suffer my Complaint,
But with repeated Sighs grows tired and faint.
Where to find him, good Heaven direct me!
For losing him, I more than lose my self. Rises, and Exit.

Sum. I must after her, she is worth my Acquaintance, and has good Movables
about her I perceive, what e're the Ready is. The next Turning has a most
convenient Hollow for the Purpose, and there I Will make her sure. Now Luck, or
never.


Exit after Arabella. Reenter Arabella, and Summerfield after her. Ara. I Am at
a stand already, and know not where I am.


Sum. I Will direct you, Madam; Well overtaken.


Ara. Bless me, Sir, What are you?


Sum. A Man.


Ara. An honest Man, I hope?


Sum. Yes faith in some Respects, I Am very honest, but not altogether so; I
were not fit to live in the World if I were too honest, Child.


Ara. Alas! then I begin to fear: Pray tell me what you are?


Sum. Why, faith, an honest Thief.


Ara. How, honest, and yet a Thief? I never heard they were of Kin before;
Pray, Heaven, I find it now.


Sum. Indeed I a very honest Thief.


Ara. Well, Sir, since that is your Title, pray use me kindly: Nay, I Am sure you
will, there is something in your Looks which speaks you mild and noble.


Sum. Yes, I am a Gentleman, and you shall find me so; for I Will not offer you
the least show of Violence, or offer to corrupt your Chastity; tho indeed you
are tempting Eair, and might inflame a colder Heart than mine: Yet Ravishing's
no part of my Profession as yet; or if it were, you look so charming Innocent,
you would disarm my wildest Thoughts.


Ara. Blessings on your Goodness!


Sum. Are you a Maid, or Wife?


Ara. I am both, Sir.


Sum. Then this it seems is your Wedding Day, and these the Hours of Interim
that keep you in that double State?


Ara. Indeed you are in the right.


Sum. Come then, I Will be brief, and hinder not your desired Hymen. You have
some superfluous Toys I see about you, which you must deliver; I mean, that
Chain of Gold and Pearl about your Neck, and those pretty Bracelets about your
Arms, (pray, Heaven, they prove not Emblems of the combined Hemp which is to
halter mine); come, Madam, pray deliver 'em.


Ara. Nay, I entreat you, Sir, to take 'em, for I cannot give 'em, they are
locked you see, and truly I have not the Key about me; it may be you are
furnished with Instruments that may unloose 'em, I pray do.


Sum. No faith, Madam, I Am but a Beginner in this same Business, and am wholly
unprovided of any Pick-lock Tools besides this Sword. Draws his Sword.


Ara. O, good Sir, do not show me that, it is too frightful; pray hurt me not,
for I do yield them freely: Use your Hands, perhaps their strength will serve
to tear 'em from me without more ado. Some Pain I Will quietly endure, provide
you do not hurt me much.


Sum. Alas, dear Lady, I Will use you as gently as I can He endeavors to break
the Chain about her Neck. upon my Word; but it is devilish strong -- if I hurt
you, pray speak.


Ara. Not much, Sir.


Sum. I am glad on it, -- God's Death, I cannot do it. She draws his Sword, and
stands upon her Guard.


Ara. No Sir, nor shall not now: You a Highway-man and guard your self no
better: Come, Sir, what Money have you? Deliver quickly.


Sum. Not a Cross by this foolish Hand of mine!


Ara. How, no Money, 'twere pity then to take this from thee; Gives him his
Sword again. Here, take it again, I know you will use me never the worse for what
I have done.


Sum. No, by my Life!


Ara. I do believe you, and now pray hear me -- Here on my Knees, in sight of
Heaven, I make this solemn Protestation, That if you will but forbear the Rifling
of this Chain and Bracelets, and go but with me Home, by all the Vows which I
this Day have plighted to my dearest Husband, I will deliver you in Money the
full Value of these I wear, and cannot for my Life get off.


Sum. Ha! Ready-money is the Prize I look for; it passes without suspicion
every where, when Chains and Jewels are often stopped and called for before the
Magistrate: But --


Ara. Nay never doubt! You saw I gave you my Advantage up, and questioned not
my safety at your hands, pray fear not yours in mine.


Sum. I know not what to do.


Ara. Pray tell me, Sir, did you ever think a Woman true?


Sum. I have heard of some, but very few.


Ara. Will you add one more to your belief?


Sum. I think I may, for they were fewer than the Articles of my Faith,
therefore I have room for you, and will believe you -- Yet stay, you say you will
ransom your Jewels with Ready-money when you come Home; so you may, and then
discover me.


Ara. Shall I repeat the Vows I made?


Sum. No, for I Will trust you; and if you do betray me, then Mercy upon me, and
Farewell. I knew a Gentleman that had been a Courtier at Whitehall fifteen
Years, and he was buried e're he took a Bride: It Is very strange you will say; and
may be my Case in another way.


Ara. Come, Sir, never fear: A Man and afraid; Fie, fie!


Sum. Give me your Hand, I Will wait on you; and if you are (as I believe you)
True and Just, you are the World's Wonder! Come, Madam. Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Enter two Boys, one with a Child in his Arms. Compass on the other side. 1
Boy. Jack, Who Is this?


2 Boy. O Ieminy! I Will be hanged if it ben't Goodman Compass, that they said
was dead three Years ago.


1 Boy. Od's Life, and so it is!


Comp. O London! sweet London! Do I live to see thee once again? My Eyes are
full of Brine for Joy. And if my dear Peggy be but living still, I shall cry
'em out.


1 Boy. Goodman Compass, I am glad to see you; You are welcome home.


Comp. Thank you, good Lad: Honest Jack here too? Why, thou art grown a little
Man since I saw thee last: What, is that thy own, heh?


2 Boy. I am fain to keep it, you see, whoever got it; it may be other Men's
Cases as well as mine.


Comp. Thou say true Jack: But whose pretty Knave is it?


2 Boy. My Dame's where I live.


Comp. And not thy Master's?


2 Boy. Nay, nay, I cannot tell that neither: My Master loves it as well as if
it were his own, and for ought I see better than my Dame.


Comp. A very good Lad by my Troth!


2 Boy. But, Goodman Compass, I can tell you News, Your Wife has a brave Boy
too of her own, not above a Quarter old, as big as two of this.


Comp. Ha! say thou so, Jack? Ha, ha, ha, by my Troth I am heartily glad to
hear it: I Will give thee a dozen of Ale, and thy News be true, Boy.


1 Boy. I assure you it is very true: All your Neighbors can tell you the same.


Comp. Ha, ha, ha! But a Quarter old, and so lusty, say you? What plaguey
thundering Boys are got nowadays: I Gad, I shall split my Sides with
Laughing; Ha, ha, ha. -- But, Jack, I have been loath to ask thee all this
while, for fear of ill News, how does my Wife?


2 Boy. O never better, nor ever so lusty and handsome -- And truly she wears
better Clothes than she was wont, especially on Holy Days: she has Silk-Gowns,
and Lac'd-Petticoats, and fine Holland-Smocks too, they say, that have seen
'em: And some of our Neighbors say, they were taken up in Cheat


Comp. Like enough, Jack; and there they must be paid for -- Well, good Lads,
go and tell my Wife the joyful Tidings of my Return.


2 Boy. That I will with all my Heart, for she heard you were dead long ago.


1 Boy. Nay, I Will go along with you Jack.


2 Boy. Come then. Exeunt 2 Boys.


Comp. Well, Peggy, if I am one of the Livery, I thank thee for it: The
Cuckolds are the greatest Company in all the City: And we have more Aldermen
among us, than all the other put them together.


Enter Peg, Compass 's Wife. Peg. O my dear sweet Honey-suckle! Art thou alive?
I am glad Runs and kisses him. to see thee with all my Heart and Soul, so I am.


Comp. O, ho! good Spouse, give me leave to shed a few pearly Tears; the
Fountain of Love will have its Course: And tho I cannot Sing at first sight,
yet I can Cry you see. I am as it were new come into the World; and Children
Cry before they Laugh, a long time you know.


Peg. Yes; and so thou art new born indeed to me, my Numpy; for I was told you
were dead long since, and never thought to see this dear sweet Face of thine
again: I heard thou were dived to the bottom of the Sea, and that you never did
intend to see poor Peggy more.


Comp. He, he, he, I was going down, as you say Peg, but I thought better on it,
and turned back: I heard an ill Report of my Neighbors there; the devouring
Sharks, and other Sea Monsters, whose Company, to tell you the Truth, I did not
like; and therefore resolved to come home and bide with thee my Girl -- Come
kiss thy poor Hubby, kiss me I say, for Sorrow begins to ebb apace.


Peg. A thousand, thousand Welcomes home dear Numpy!


Comp. An Ocean of Thanks, kind Peggy: Well, and how goes all at Home? What
Lank still, poor Peg? Will It never be full Sea at our Wharf?


Peg. Alas, Husband, what do you mean?


Comp. A Lass is it, or a Lad, Wench? I should be glad of both; I looked for a
pair of Compasses long before now.


Peg. What, and you from home, Love?


Comp. I from home? Why tho I was from home, and other of our Neighbors from
home, does that follow that every body else is from home?


Peg. I am pleased you are so merry, Husband.


Comp. Merry, nay I Will be merrier yet; why should I be sorry? I hope my Boy's
well, is he not? Od's fish, I look for another by this Time.


Peg. Boy, what Boy, Deary?


Comp. What Boy! why the Boy I got when I came home in the Cock-boat one Night,
about a Year ago; You have not forgotten it, I hope, I think I left behind me
for a Boy, and a Boy I look for.


Peg. I find he knows all -- What shall I do? [Aside.]
O dear Husband, pray pardon me. [Kneels.]

Comp. Pardon thee; why I hope thou have not made away with my Boy, have thou?
Od's death I Will hang thee, if there were never a Whore more in London, if thou
have.


Peg. O no; but your long Absence, and the Rumor of your Death, [Cries.] made
me think I might venture.


Comp. Venture, quoth a, I cannot blame thee Peg; for Wapping, if it were twice
Wapping, cannot hold out always, no more than Redriff, Limehouse or Shadwel, nay
or the strongest Suburbs about London; and when it comes to that, woe be to the
City too, Girl.


Peg. Consider, Husband, I Am but a Woman, neither the first or last that have
done the same; and truly I will not deny but I have a Child.


Comp. Have you so? And what by Consequence must I have then, I pray?


Peg. If you will forgive me this Time, it shall be so no more, indeed and indeed,
now.


Comp. Well, well, I will forgive thee, Peg, upon this Condition, that you tell
me who it was that fell foul aboard thee, and sprung this Leak in thee.


Peg. O dear Husband!


Comp. Nay, no Excuses, for I must know.


Peg. Why then truly it was Mr. Venture the Merchant.


Comp. I am beholding to him, and would requite his Civility, if his Wife were
but as willing, tho he be one of our Merchants at Sea, he shall give me leave
to be Owner at home; and where is my Boy? what, shall not I see him?


Peg. Yes if you please, good Husband: He Is nursed at Bednal green; it is now
too late, to Morrow will be better.


Comp. Come then we will home and to bed.

Let other Fools repine at Scoffs and Scorns,
I Will teach the Cuckold how to hide his Horns. Exeunt.

Enter Justice Merryman, Mr. Venture, Spruce, Mrs. Venture and Clara. Mer. Was
the like ever known, that a Bridegroom should absent himself on his Wedding Day?


Mr. Ven. It Is somewhat strange indeed.


Mer. And the Bride too my Daughter, she is out of the way: Why what should be
the meaning of all this, Od's bobs I cannot tell?


Mrs. Ven. Perhaps they are busy Brother, privately conferring Notes together:
You cannot tell but that the young Man may have a stomach to his Supper, and
fall too unawares, and we never the wiser.


Spr. Od's nigs, very true; what would you say then Sir, if they should be
stolen away, and a-bed together seriously?


Mer. What would I say? marry I would say, Speed 'em well: And if no worse News
ever comes to me, I Will be hanged if e're I cried for it.

Enter Nurse. How now, what is the Business with you?


Nurse. Business enough, Forsooth; for I have the strangest Tidings!


Mer. Of any One that is lost, Woman?


Nurse. No forsooth, of One that is found again, an't please you.


Mer. O, he was lost then it seems.


Mr. Ven. Her Business is with me, I believe Brother; is it not, Woman?


Nurse. Yes, Sir.


Mr. Ven. Come hither then, [ Nurse whispers Mr. Venture.]
How, returned?

Nurse. Yes indeed, Sir, and all discovered.


Mr. Ven. Ah Curse on the Wind that blew him ashore.


Nurse. Aye* so say I Sir, and did not sink him when he was going.


Mr. Ven. Well, well, be sure you do not let him come near the Child.


Nurse. I warrant you, Sir, if you charge me to the contrary.


Mr. Ven. Yes, I do strictly charge you as you tender my Displeasure.


Nurse. Well then let me alone -- Besides, Sir, he intends to come to morrow
morning with his Wife and see him.


Mr. Ven. I Will meet him there; and if he chance to be there before me, be sure
to keep the Child safe, and not let him touch it.


Nurse. I warrant you, let me alone. Exit Nurse.


Enter Summerfield and Arabella. Mer. So, so, Heaven be praised, they are not
both lost I see, here is the Bride, my Daughter, come again.


Ara. Father, and Gentlemen, I desire ye to treat this Stranger here with all
Respect and Generosity: He Is a loving Kinsman of my Bonvile's, who kindly came
to congratulate our Wedding.


Mer. Sir, you are heartily welcome, Od's bobs you are.


Mr. Ven. Welcome to all of us.


Spruce. Seriously, Sir, and so you are.


Mer. But where is the Bridegroom, Girl? Od's bobs we are all at a Nonplus here,
at a stand, quite out; the Musicks ceased, and we all look as tho there were
neither a light Heart or Heel among us; nay, my Cousin Clara too as cloudy as
on a washing Day.


Clara. It Is then because you will not dance with me, Sir.


Ara. It Is I alone have cause to be sad, if this Day's Happiness could admit of
any: But I Have long reasoned with my pressing Thoughts, and from them drawn some
Symptoms of Relief. Suppose this Day has been long since appointed by my dear
Bonvile, to meet some foe, and right his injured Reputation: Nay, say he
fights, alas! Why should I fear, when all the Powers above, that guard true
Love and Innocence, will never see him fall.


Mer. Prethce peace, good Girl hold thy tongue; Od's bobs thou wilt make us all
Cowards, to hear a Woman preach up Valor thus.


Ara. Well, Sir, I have done: But pray entertain this Gentleman kindly for my
sake. Indeed I was afraid when I saw him first.


Sum. Ha! what does she say? Od's Death she will tell!


Ara. Being in search of my dear Bonvile, I had quite lost my Way when he most
opportunely came unto my Aid, and gave me many marks of his Esteem in my
distress of Fears; nay more than this, which I Will declare at large.


Sum. Death and Hell, she will betray me.


Ara. Well, Gentlemen, since the Bridegroom's absent, I must supply his Place:
Come, when I have waited on you to your Pleasure, I will return to [ To
Summerfield.] you, Sir, we must discourse more of my Bonvile yet.


Exeunt all but Summerfield. Manet Summerfield solus. Sum. What a trembling
Trade's this, when Conscience, that should be our only Guide, flies and leaves
us to our accusing Guilt. A Thief! the very Name and Thought chills my Blood,
and makes me tremble like an Ague-fit. A Dog, nay every Bough that moves, puts
us in fear of present Apprehension. Sure I shall never thrive on this Trade:
Perhaps I need take no further Care, I may be now near to my Journey's End, or
at least in a fair way to Newgate, and from thence to Tyburn, the only Place
that we poor Rogues can claim for an Inheritance. Trust a Woman, and with a
Matter of such Importance, what a simple Dog am I? I could find in my Heart to
run away: And that were base to run from a Woman; I can lay claim to nothing
but her Vows, and those the Women seldom or never mind.


Enter Arabella. Ara. So, Sir, now you shall find a Woman as good as her
Promise; Here are 20 Pieces, the full Value, on my Life, of what they cost.


Sum. Pray, Madam, do not thus suspend my doubtful Soul; but if you do design
to ensnare my Life, speak, speak freely: Or if the Constable be at the Door,
let him show his Staff of Authority, perhaps I may corrupt him with a Bribe.


Ara. How! base ungrateful Man, do you suspect my Faith? Nay then, Father,
Uncle, and Gentlemen, where are you?


Enter all as before. Mer. How now, how now! What Is the matter, Girl?


Ara. For shame, will you not entertain your Kinsman here a little better; you
leave him here alone, as tho you despised his Company.


Mer. Is that all? I thought the Bridegroom had been returned: Sir, pray pardon
this Rudeness; But indeed I had quite forgot you, quite forgot you, as I hope
to be saved: But what makes you tremble, Sir, are you ill disposed.


Ara. Think you he has not reason to be ill-disposed at this cold Aside to
Justice Merryman. Entertainment? for my part I blush for shame.


Spr. Come pray, Sir, shake off this Dullness, and participate of our
Mirth, Od's nigs do.

Sum. I am very well, Sir, I thank you, only the Gentleman is a little under a
Mistake.


Mer. It may be so, Ay, ay, it may be so; I vow I thought you had trembled, but
I believe it might be my own Hand; you must pardon me, I was stiffer once.


Sum. Sir, your humble Servant.


Mer. But, Gentlemen, what think you of an Adventure?


Spr. Adventure whither?


Mer. Why, to the East Indies? I have a Vessel, Gentlemen, called the
Seahorse, bound thither, and to morrow I do expect her to sail. Now,
Gentlemen, if you will venture, ye shall have fair Dealing, that I Will promise you.
And for the French, you need not fear them* for she is a smart new Vessel: Nay,
she has a Letter of Mart too, and twenty brave roaring Boys on both Sides her,
Starboard and Larboard: And I intend to go as far as Marget down with her,
'twill be as good as Physic to me.


Spr. A very good Motion, Sir, I begin, there is my ten Pieces.


Sum. And, Sir, if a proffered Love may be accepted, be pleased to take my ten
Pieces with you.


Mer. Yours above all the rest, Sir.


Ara. That Is kindly said, Sir, and I thank you: Now pray venture Ten more for
my sake.


Sum. Alas, Madam, it is a younger Brother's Portion.


Ara. At my Request, Sir, venture the other Ten; if you want, I Will supply you
with as many more.


Sum. With all my Heart then: Come, Sir, if you please, I Will double mine: So
now she is got her Gold again, and I am now no Thief, (aside) Sir, I have a Suit
to you,

To Merryman.
Mer. You may command it, for I am always at your Service: But pray your
Pleasure?


Sum. My Request, Sir, is, to have the Honor of keeping you Company to Sea,
for I have a great desire to see Marget.


Mer. Sir, I shall be very happy in your good Company.


Ara. I hope you will be both better acquainted e're you return; and by that
time your Kinsman may be here to make you more welcome.

And for the Gold at my Request you lent,
I Will double it to give you more content.

Sum. Why should I fear, since she is proved so just?
I Will quit my Trade: Now Jack Catch do thy worst.

Exeunt. The End of the Second ACT.
ACT the Third. A Wood.
Enter Bonvile and Friendly. Bon. COME my brave Friendly, I think we are here
the first: Your Enemy is not yet in the Field; let us walk a Turn or two, perhaps
by that time he may arrive.


Fri. I Am very confident that he is here already.


Bon. Thy Looks, methinks, speak Conquest sure thy own; an ardent Rage has
kindled both thy Cheeks.


Fri. Like a red Morning, Friend; which still foretells a stormy Day to follow
-- And now I well observe your Face, methinks it waxes pale, there is Death in
it already.


Bon. How, Friendly, do you then take me for a Coward? My face look pale, and
Death in it already? By Heaven, should any but my Friendly dare to tell me what
thou have said, my Sword should ram the base Affront down the cursed Villain's
Throat. But you are my Friend, and I must only chide your Error. But prithee
tell me who is it you are to fight with, for as yet I am ignorant both of the
Cause and Person.


Fri. Ha, his Name! Did you enquire his Name?


Bon. Yes.


Fri. I dare not yet reveal it for fear of --


Bon. For fear of what?


Fri. O Confusion! I know not what to say!


Bon. How, afraid to tell his Name? Then I begin to doubt the Justice of your
Quarrel.


Fri. Too well you may, for by yon' setting Sun, that Globe of heavenly Light I
swear, I come to kill the only Man that strives to save my Life -- Man did I
say? Nay more than common Man, for those the World abound with; but such a Man
besides, all this vast Land affords not.


Bon. By this your large Encomium of your Friend, I Am afraid 'twas Wine first
made your Quarrel, and thereupon this Challenge did ensue.


Fri. O no! I call the Powers above to witness, that in all the Course of our
unhappy Friendship, I to my knowledge never did receive the least Affront or
Injury from him.


Bon. How came this Challenge then?


Fri. O dear Friend, the noblest that Man could ever boast of: [embraces him]
When first my rigid Fate threw on me this Command to fight, I had recourse to
many whom I always thought my Friends* but when the Touchstone of my Danger
tried 'em, I found 'em like the cursed Fruit of Sodom, fair without, but rotten
at the Heart: But then I found out Bonvile, my only dearest Friend. Bonvile no
sooner heard of my Engagement, but flew unto my Succor with as much Bravery,
as a great General hastened by Alarms, marches to meet the Foe: You left your
Nuptial Bed perhaps to meet your Death. O unheard of Friendship! My Father gave
me Life, it is true; but you, my Friend, support my Honor. All this for me,
while I, ungrateful Man, thus seek your Life: For to my eternal Horror be it
spoke, you are the Man whom I come here to kill.


Bon. Ha!


Fri. Too true alas! there read the Warrant for your Death. Gives him the
Letter.


Bon. It Is a Woman's Hand.


Fri. Yes, and a bad One too, they all speak fair, write foul, but mean worse.


Bon. How! kill me? Sure, I dream, and this is all Delusion, or else thou do
it only to try thy Friend.


Fri. O, from my Soul, I wish it were no more. But read, read on, see how I Am
fettered in a Circe's Charms -- I love beyond Imagination, love even to
Madness, and must as madly do a Deed will damn me to the hottest Flames of Hell.


Bon. And woo't thou kill thy Friend for such a Woman?


Fri. Alas! I must, you see I am commanded, commanded too by Love; Love more
powerful than all the Sacred Ties of Friendship, therefore draw, and guard thy
self. Draws.


Bon. Not I by Heaven! What would thou have me draw and kill my Friend?


Fri. There thou stab'st my Soul. O where, where is now my Resolution fled? A
fatal Blast has struck me; a sudden Horror shot me through the Heart; a Trembling
seized my Knees, that I can hardly stand, and all my Vital Powers methinks seem
dead; yet Love's the Fire must kindle all again, therefore I charge thee draw,
or naked as thou art, I will assail thee.


Bon. I am defended against all that thou can do, in having Justice on my
Side, and Friendship too to back it.

But since Humanity now bears so sway,
To this unguarded Breast come make your way.
Strike home be sure. Opens his Bosom.


Fri. That were a barbarous Murder.


Bon. How can the Effect prove different from the Cause? Or how can any thing
but damned Barbarity ensue a Woman's much more damned Design? Who would expect
Reason from one that raves, or hope for Mercy in a Tyger's Den? Believe me,
Friendly, all this may sooner be; Mercy may sooner dwell among the Salvage
Wolves and Bears, than in a Woman's Breast.


Fri. O, my too rigid Fate, to place me thus on such a dangerous Precipice,
that wheresoever I turn my self for help, I see my Ruin still before mine Eyes.
Seems to weep.


Bon. [Pausing.] Stay -- The Command which thy Medea sent thee, was to kill thy
only dearest Friend, was it not?


Fri. Alas! it was.


Bon. Then here, all Friendship dies between us; thus have thou killed thy
Friend, and satisfied that infernal Hag, thy cursed Mistress, who thus
commanded thee: Away, I say, begone, and never see me more.


Fri. Ha!


Bon. Yes, base ungrateful Wretch, farewell, (Offers to go) -- Yet stay, and
since that Sacred Tie of Friendship's broke, know thou, most vile of Men, that
Bonvile's now thy Enemy; therefore do thou draw and guard thy spotted Life.


Fri. How, Friend!


Bon. Friend did thou call me? On forfeit of thy Life that word no more; the
very Name of Friend from thee, shall be a Quarrel: How can I tell but that thou
love my Wife, and therefore feigned this damned Design to draw me from her
Arms?


Fri. How! wrong thy Wife? O no, I never had a Thought so vile! Yet you must
forgive me, indeed you must, by all that once was dear to me; and what I dare
not mention more, by Love and Honor, I implore thy Pardon -- Still art thou
deaf to my Complaints? -- Nay, then upon my Knees I will enforce thy Pity.
Behold me, Bonvile, prostrate at thy Feet, crawling for Mercy, swimming in
Tears, and almost drowned with Shame; extend thy Arm to help me, as you are a
Man, be God-like in thy Nature, and raise me from the Grave; turn thy Eyes on
me, and sink me not with Frowns; O save me, save me, or I fall for ever.


Bon. As soon shall Heaven reverse the Fate of Hell, as I recall what I have
said, or plant thee in my Breast again.


Fri. Nay, then I am lost to thee, and all the World besides. Rises.


Bon. Thou art indeed for ever lost to me; see what a miserable Wretch thy
Folly now has made thee: A Creature so far below my Pity, that I despise and
scorn thy base Submission, and will never hear thee more, more.


Fri. Say but thou have forgiven me, and I will ask no more.


Bon. I never will.


Fri. O cruel Bonvile!


Bon. More barbarous Friendly: Hold off, or I will use thee like a Dog, tread
thee to Earth, and spurn thee like a Slave, base as thou art.


Fri. Still thou art my Friend --


Bon. Thou lie, I have abjured the Name.


Fri. Let me but go with thee.


Bon. Not for the World; I Would rather venture my self with Crocodiles, catch the
last dying Gasps of some poor Wretch infected with the Plague, than trust my
self with thee.

Farewell, I leave thee with the greatest Curse,
Condemned to Woman, Hell affords no worse.

Exit, breaking from him. Friendly solus, rising in a Passion. Fri. Death and
Destruction, am I thus despised! Condemned to Woman's Lust, and scorned by Man.
By Bonvile too, after imploring, like a Schoolboy, at his Feet -- My Blood
boils high, and scalds my very Heart! My inward Grief calls on me for Revenge,
and I am all on fire! O that I had the proud Bonvile here now at my Feet, I Would
use him worse than he did me before.

But since that open Force yields no Relief,
Private Revenge shall ease my swelling Grief.
With Thoughts of Iealousy I Will fill his Soul,
Which shall its Powers of all their Rest control.
Thus for a Woman I Have begun a War,
And for her sake must damn my Soul like her. Exit.

SCENE the Second.
Enter Nurse, Compass, and his Wife. Nurse. Indeed you must pardon me, I cannot
let ye see the Child; to tell you the Truth, I am commanded to the contrary.


Comp. Commanded! Prithee who commanded thee?


Nurse. The Father.


Comp. The Father, Why who am I?


Nurse. Not the Father sure, the Civil Law has found it otherwise.


Comp. The Civil Law found it otherwise! Why then the Uncivil Law shall make it
mine again, I Will be as dreadful as a Shrove-Tuesday to thee; for I Will besiege
thy squalling catterwauling Castle, with my Friends the Mob, and gut thy
stinking Nursery, but I Will both see and have my Child.


Nurse. Harkee, Goodman Swabber, say but half so much again, and I Will call the
Constable, and lay Burglary to your Charge. You would not be so hot if the
Enemy were in view, nor if you had to do with any body but a poor innocent
Woman, so you wou'd'nt.


Peg. Good Husband be patient, and let me alone with her: Come, come, good
Nurse, let him see the Boy.


Nurse. Indeed I dare not Goody Compass: The Father first you know delivered me
the Child, and ordered me to let no body see it. He pays me well and weekly for
my Pains, and therefore I Will do as he bad me, so I will.


Comp. Why thou white Bastard-breeder; Is not this Woman here the Mother?


Nurse. Yes; I grant you that.


Comp. Do you so? Well, and I grant it too; And is not the Child then my own by
the Wives Copyhold?


Nurse. The Law must try that.


Comp. The Law! What then you think I Will be but its Father-in-Law? I tell thee,
all the Wit and Law 'twixt Cuckolds-Point and Westminster Hall, shall not keep my
own dear Flesh and Blood from me, I warrant you that. No an't does, I Will be
hanged at the Main-yard: Why, who, do think, uses to get my Children but my
self?


Nurse. Nay, I cannot tell, you must look to that, for my part I never knew you
get any.


Comp. Say thou so? Why, look you, do but put on a clean Smock, and try me,
if thou dare, I Will hold thee three to one I get thee with Child before I leave
thee: Heh! what say thou? Offers to lay hold on her.


Nurse. I Will see you hanged first -- Nay, pray be quiet, and don't offer to
spoil my Milk. Lord, you are as boisterous as my Husband was the first Night we
were married: Pray, Goody Compass, take off your Cur, or else he will bite me.


Peg. No never fear him, Nurse, he is not so furious I assure ye.


Enter Mr. Venture and his Wife. Nurse. O! here is my Master, the Child's Father,
now talk with him.


Mr. Ven. Good morrow Neighbor, good morrow to ye both.


Comp. Both! Good morrow to you and your Wife too, if you go to that.


Mr. Ven. I would speak calmly with you, Friend, if you think fit.


Comp. I know what belongs to Calm, and a Storm too; and if you please, a cold
word or two wi' you.


Mr. Ven. With all my Heart.


Comp. I understand that you have tied your Mare in my Ground.


Mr. Ven. My Mare, Friend, nay I assure you 'twas only my Nag.


Comp. Your Nag? Well your Nag then let it be: Hark, Sir, to be short, I Will
cut off your Nag's Tail, if-e're I catch him there again.


Mr. Ven. Pray hear me, you are too rough to maintain --


Comp. I say, Sir, you shall maintain no Child of mine; my Wife does not bestow
her Labor for that purpose.


Mr. Ven. You are too passionate --. I will not maintain --


Comp. No marry shall you not.


Mr. Ven. The Deed I have done to be lawful, I have repented it, and given
Satisfaction to the Law, my Purse has paid for it; therefore I would treat
milder with you if you would be pleased.


Comp. Yes, yes, I am very well pleased, and shall be better pleased if you can
serve me so still: For, look you Sir, one of these Days I shall to Sea again,
you know where my Wife lives; yet you will but lose your labor, for get as many
Children as you can, I assure you, you shall keep none of them.


Mr. Ven. I think you are mad.


Comp. Why, if I am Horn mad, what is that to you?


Mr. Ven. Nay then, since you are so rough, I tell you plainly you are -- a --


Comp. A what? What am I, heh?


Mr. Ven. A Coxcomb.


Comp. A Coxcomb! a Cuckold you mean, and you a Fool for your pains.


Mr. Ven. The Child is mine, I am the Father of it, and will keep it.


Comp. Yes if you can, I know you will. But pray tell me, is not my Wife the
Mother? You may be as far from being the Father as I am, for my Wife's
acquainted with more Whore-masters besides your self; ay, and as crafty
Merchants too, let me tell you that.


Peg. No indeed Husband, I had to do with no body else, 'twas he begot, indeed
and indeed now. Yet for all that, the Child's mine, I bred it and bore it, and
I Will have it and keep it, so I will.


Mrs. Ven. Pray hold there Mrs. Jill-flurt, the Child's my Husband's, and he
shall have it, or I Will tear your Eyes out, ye Whore you.


Comp. Good Words, Mistress; do you hear, give good Words you would best, or I shall
tell you your own.


Mr. Ven. I Will have no more to say to ye, the Law shall determine it; in the
mean time Nurse keep the Child for me, there, there is Money for thee. Gives her
Money.


Comp. There Is Money for me too, keep it for me, Nurse; give him both thy Duggs
at once, I pay thee for the right one, Girl.


Nurse. I have two Hands, you see Gentlemen; this does but show ye how the Law
will hamper ye; even thus you will be used, Gentlemen, if you go to Law.


Mr. Ven. It cannot be helped, for I will not lose my Right.


Comp. Nor I mine for all you're a Merchant.


Mrs. Ven. Nor I mine for all I did not bear it.


Peg. Nor I, tho but a poor Sailer's Wife.


Mr. Ven. Well, fare ye well, we shall meet in another Place -- Come Winny.


Exit Venture and his Wife. Comp. Ay, ay, I Will meet you when and where you dare,
and do your worst, I fear you not: By the Lord Harry the World's come to a fine
Pass, that we must go to Law for our Children. No wonder the Lawyers are all so
rich, yet e're the Law shall have a Limb, a Leg, a Joint or Nail of this same
Boy,

'Tshall cost me more than a whole Child in getting,
Some win by play, and standers by with Betting.

Exeunt. SCENE the Third.
Enter Spruce, Arabella with a Letter in her Hand, Clara, Mr. Venture, and Mrs.
Venture. Mr. Ven. From whence came that Letter, Niece?


Ara. From Putney, Sir, and from my Husband.


Mr. Ven. And pray be free; Does he tell ye the Cause of his leaving you so
abruptly on his Wedding Day?


Ara. Yes, Sir, yet this had been sufficient to have let me known what he is
gone about, without the formal Addition of an Epistle.


Spruce. That, why what is that I pray Madam?


Ara. His Will, Sir, wherein he makes me his sole Executrix.


Spr. Will! why what the Devil does he mean, seriously I cannot find it out?


Ara. Why, Sir, he is gone to fight.


Spr. How fight, Madam! On my Soul then I believe Friendly's Second.


Ara. You're in the right, he is so, and I am lost for ever!


Cla. O foolish Friendly, this thy Mistake has made me the most wretched of
Womankind! Such variety of Thoughts load my afflicted Breast, that I know not
what to think: I rave, am mad, not knowing what my Folly may produce; I fear
for both, for both my Heart does bleed.


Ara. Miserable Maid! nay, miserable Wife! but much more miserable Widow! O my
dear Bonvile!


Spr. Duce take me, if e're I saw a Company so Phlegmatic in all my Life: Mr.
Venture, prithee let us have a Song to pass away the Time, and put Life into the
Bride.


Mr. Ven. With all my Heart, Mr. Spruce: Here, who waits? -- Servant Enter and
Exit. Call in the Music, and desire 'em to oblige the Ladies with a new Song.


Cla. Your self, Sir, you mean?


Spr. Nay all of us I protest.


Mr. Ven. Ay, ay, all of us.


Enter Music and others who sing. A Dialogue set by Seignior Baptist. Man. A
Woman's Love

Woman. And Man's is such,

Man. Still too little,

Wom. Or else too much.

Wom. Men are Extremes,

Man. And Women too,

Wom. All, all are false,

Man. All, all like you.

Wom. You Will swear and lie,

Man. If you will believe,

Wom. And sigh and die,

Man. Yet still deceive.

Wom. Your Vows and Oaths,

Man. Your Smiles and Tears,

Wom. Are all but Baits,

Man. Are all but Snares.

Wom. To win a Heart,

Man. And then destroy,

Wom. The easy Fool,

Man. The promised Joy.

Another Strain. Wom. I Will have you offer no more your Pretending,


Man. Nor will I suffer your modish Dissembling:


Wom. For Honor commands,


Man. And Freedom withstands,


Wom. What you?


Man. And you.


Wom. I know would have me be, your Slave,


Man. I know would have me be, your Slave.


Wom. O, no, no, no!


Man. No, no, no, no!


Wom. I never will agree,


Man. I ever will be free.


After the Song enter Justice Merryman, Summerfield, and three or four Sailers.
Mer. Daughter, Daughter! Where Is my Daughter? I say, Where Is my Daughter? O
Girl, I have the best News to tell you --


Ara. What of my Husband, Sir?


Mer. No, no, of your Cousin, Girl, of your Cousin.


Ara. What of him, Sir?


Mer. Such a Cousin, Girl, such a dear Cousin he is, as Alexander the Great, if
he were alive, might be proud and boast of.


Ara. You're welcome here again, Sir; You Have made but a short Voyage, pray what
occasioned your Return so speedily?


Sum. Madam, I render you ten thousand Thanks; Your Generosity and Goodness has
wholly made me yours; I am the humblest of your faithful Admirers.


Ara. Forbear such lavish Gratitude; You Are too profuse in your Acknowledgment
of your small Favors. But pray be brief, and let me know the happy Occasion of
this your sudden Return, I long methinks to hear it.


Sum. Madam, you may command me -- Not to molest the Company with the Recital
of every vain and needless Circumstance; 'twas briefly thus. Scarce had we
passed by Marget on our Course, when on a sudden, from the Topmast head, a
Sailer cries, All hands Aloft, three Sails ahead: With that we rumidg and clear
our Deck, our Gun-room armed, and all things now are ready for a Fight. The
Ships before descried, with warlike Stems cut the resisting Waves, whilst from
their Pendants fluttering in the Air, we found they were three Dunkirk
Privateers; they having made our English Cross advanced, salute us with a
Broadside, to make us strike and yield: But we, who never knew as yet what
'twas so cowardly to yield, and not regarding their unequal Odds, fell boldly
on, returning Fire for Fire. The Engagement then grew desperate, for they on
either Side fired in amain, whilst we withstood their Force. At length they
boldly grappled, and laid us close aboard, and we as bravely beat them off
again.


Mer. But now, Daughter, mark what follows, for that is worth all, I faith it
is; therefore go on, dear Cuz go on.


Sum. Sea-room at length we got; when (as Fate would have it) an unlucky Shot
struck both the Captain and Lieutenant dead. Then we began to fear, and all our
noble Hearts were trembling with despair.


Mer. No, no, not all Daughter -- But you shall hear more -- Ods bobs you shall.


Sum. How could it be otherwise, when both our Commanders now were lost?
therefore to strike was all the Talk --


Mer. Ay, ay, now Daughter, now comes the Play, the other was only the Prologue.


Sum. But Fortune favoring, and the Wind springing a fresh Gale, we got clear
off and tried to make a running Fight.


Mer. Ay, but Cuz, how did we do all this? by whose Order and Direction?


Sum. Pardon me, Sir, 'twas of so small Moment, that already it has slipped my
treacherous Memory.


Mer. Oh, ho! has it so! Ha, ha, ha! But it has not mine, I thank you, no marry
has it not, as you shall hear -- Then he, with an undaunted Spirit, started up
amongst the Sailors, and --


Sum. Nay pray Sir --


Mer. By the Foot of Pharaoh I Will not be balkt; he, I say, with an Heroic
Voice cried out, Courage brave Boys, Charge and Discharge amain; come I Will
supply your fallen Captain's place. At this blessed News they all fell on again,
with ten thousand times more Fury than before: Victory, Victory, was all their
cry, whilst he my Cousin here, whom I shall never forget, for by the Lord,
methinks, I see him in the Fight this very Instant, now running this way, now
running that way, now down to the Gun-room to encourage those that fought
there; now upon the Deck again, still crying out, Fear not, brave Boys, the Day
will soon be our's.


Sum. O pray, Sir, let me entreat you to forbear, you make me ashamed, I
protest, to hear you.


Mer. Ashamed, say you? Ha, ha, ha.


Ara. Good Sir, go on.


Mer. I will, I will -- At length the proud French swallowing too many of our
English Balls, two of 'em very fairly cried, Your Servants Gentlemen, farewell,
and down they went. The other having lost most of her Men, resolved to leave
us; but we being too nimble, overtook her, clapped some Men aboard, and brought
her in a Prize: And this my brave Man of War here, was the first that boarded
her with Sword in Hand.


1 Sailer. Of all this I was an Eyewitness.


2 Sailer. And so was I.


3 Sailer. And I, and all of us.


Mer. Yes, and many more stout Boys besides.


Spruce. Sir, we are all indebted to your Valor; such Voyages as these, from
small Venturers, in time may make us great Merchants.


Mer. Well, never was Fight better managed before, that is certain.


1 Sail. No, never, never!


2 Sail. Better, say you? No nor half so well.


3 Sail. If it were in our Power, we'd make him Admiral, so we would.


Sum. Gentlemen, it is to your Valors all, that I am indebted for the Honor I
have gained: And that I may not seem wholly ungrateful, there, there is
something in token of my Thankfulness. Gives 'em Money.


1, 2, 3 Sailers. Heaven bless your Worship.


Ara. Come Cousin, we will withdraw into the Parlour: And if these honest Friends
will be pleased to drink what our House affords, they shall be welcome.


1 Sail. Thank you Mistress with all our Hearts. Exeunt all but Sailers.


2 Sail. Well, this Mr. Summerfield is a brave Fellow, Gadzooks he is.


3 Sail. Ay Tom so he is; had it not been for him, we had all been taken on my
Conscience.


1 Sail. On my Soul and so we had: O if you had but seen him when he boarded
the Monsieur, 'twou'd have made you laugh 'till you had split your Sides. He
came up to the Captain of this fashion with a Slap -- ha! and gave him such a
back-handed wipe, that he cut off his Head as genteely, as tho he had served
seven Years Apprenticeship to it.


Enter Servant with a Bowl of Punch. Serve. Gentlemen, Mr. Summerfield desires
ye to be merry, and has sent you this to drink his Health.


1 Sail. O, the Lord bless him, he is a fine Gentleman, and so pray tell him,
and withal give him our hearty Thanks; Do hear Boy?


Serve. Yes, yes, I will. Exit.


2 Sail. What is it Brother?


3 Sail. Punch by this Light!


Omnes. Hoo-ra, Hoo-ra, Viva Mr. Summerfield, Viva, Hoora.


[The first Sailer takes the Bowl of Punch, walks in state round the Stage, and
sings; the others all follow.] Here Is a Health to jolly Bacchus,
Here Is a Health to jolly Bacchus,
Hi ho, hi ho, hi ho.
For he will merry make us,
For he will merry make us,
Hi ho, hi ho, hi ho.
Then sit ye down together,
Then sit ye down together.
They all sit down with the Bowl in the middle. 2 Sail. Pshaw! Pox of the this
old Song, prithee let us have a Dance.


3 Sail. With all my Heart; strike up Music.


The Sailers and their Wives dance. After the Dance. 1 Sail. So, well done my
Lads, now let us aboard amain,
And suck our Faces over and over again.
Brandy we have got enough, by this blessed Chance,
We Will nothing drink but Punch, when we get France.

Omn. Hoora! Hoora! Exeunt omnes.

The End of the Third ACT.
ACT the Fourth. A Tavern. 2 Tables, three Chairs to each.
Enter Compass, Peg, and Pettifog. A Drawer meets them. Drawer, WElcome
Gentlemen. Please to walk into a Room?


Compass: Aye Boy. Come Mr. Pettifog, please you sit.


Pettifog: With all my Heart; Come Mistress.


Draw. What Wine will you be pleased to drink, Gentlemen?


Pett. Ask the good Woman: speak Mistress.


Com. Canary for her; I know what relishes her Palate best. A Quart of brisk
Canary, Boy.


Draw. Ye shall have the best in England. -- Coming, Coming, Sir. Exit.


Com. What call you this same Tavern, Mr. Attorney?


Pett. The King's Head, Sir.


Com. The King's Head: Marry, it has a good Neighbor of Guild Hall. It takes
many a fair Pound upon that 'n Account, I warrant you.


Draw. (within) A Quart of Canary in the King's head, score.


Enter Drawer, fills a Glass, and gives it Compass. Draw. Sir, Here Is a Glass
of the richest Canary that ever came over, the very Quintessence of the Grape I
assure you.


Com. Say thou so? Why then there is a Tester for thee, and so leave us --.
Come, Mr. Pettifog, [Exit Drawer] and 't please you my Service to you. Drinks.


Pett. I thank you kindly, Sir. -- Mrs. my Service to you, your Husband's good
Health. Drinks.


Peg. With all my Heart indeed, Here my dear black eyed Rogue, thy n'own good
Health. Drinks.


Com. Thank you Peg, thank you, so now let us mind our Business.


Enter Mr. Ventere, his Wife, and Dodge, to another Table in the same Room. Mr.
Ven. Show a Room, Drawer.


Draw. Here Sir.


Mr. Ven. Never a private Room?


Draw. No Sir, the House is full.


Com. Ods fish, whom have we here, my Wife's Merchant, with his Lawyer?


Pett. Ye know we promised to give him a Meeting here.


Comp. It Is true we did so, -- but come to the Business in hand.


Pettifog and Compass talk privately. Mr. Ven. Well, bring us a Bottle of your
best Red.


Draw. You shall have it, Sir. Exit Drawer.


Mr. Ven. And what do you think of my Cause, Mr. Dodge?


Dodge. O we shall carry it most certainly: You have Money to go through with
the Business; and never fear but we'll trounce them swingingly.


Mr. Ven. I warrant you think it very strange, Mr. Dodge, that I am at this
Charge and Expense to bring a farther Charge upon me.


Dodge. Not I, I assure you, Sir, for I know you are a wise Man, and know very
well what you do; besides you have Money, Money enough, Sir.


Mr. Ven. Why the short and the long of the Business is this; I made a Purchase
lately, and in that I did estate the Child (about which I Am sued)
Joint-Purchaser with me in all the Land I bought.


Mrs. Ven. Right Husband; and you know 'twas I that advised you to make the
Purchase, and therefore I Will never give my Consent to have the Child brought up
by such a stinking Tar-barrel as now sues for him; he would only bring him up to be
a Swabber; no, no, he was born a Merchant and a Gentleman, and he shall live
and die so.


Dodge. You are a worthy Gentlewoman upon my word, there are but few of such a
noble Temper: But what makes the Fool of the Husband then so troublesome; does
he not know when he is well?


Mrs. Ven. So it is a sign.


Dodge. A Blockhead, to proclaim his own Disgrace, and make himself laughed at.


Mr. Ven. That Is not it, he hopes to be the better by what is settled on the
Boy.


Dodge. O, God's so, that is true: But never fear, I Will be hanged if he carry
it, for you have Money, as I told you, Sir, before: but see, Sir, there they
are.


Mr. Ven. Yes, Yes, I saw them before: but come, where is our Wine?


( Within) the Bell rings as at the Bar. Enter Drawer with a Bottle of Wine.
Draw. Here Sir, -- Coming, Coming, Sir: Philip, speak up in the Mermaid, and
bid Jack light a Fire. Exit Drawer.


Comp. Well Mr. Pettifog, and what think you of my Suit, Sir?


Pett. Why look you Sir, the Defendant you know was arrested first by a Latitat
in an Action of Trespass.


Comp. Yes, and a Lawyer told me, it should have been an Action of the Case,
did he not, Wife?


Peg. I have no Skill in the Law you know Husband, but the Gentleman did say so,


Pett. Aye, but your Action of the Case in this Point is too ticklish.


Comp. Well, but pray tell me, do you think I shall overthrow my Adversary?


Pett. Without all doubt, the Child he says is none of yours, What of that! I
marry a Widow, and am by Consequence possessed of a Ward. Now shall not I have
the Management of that Ward? Now Sir you lie at a stronger Ward, for Partus
sequitur ventrem, says the Civil Law: So that if you were within the Compass of
the four Seas, as the Common Law goes, the Child must be yours, that is certain.


Comp. Say you so, Sir, Why then the Child's my own, for I have been a Coaster
these five Years and more; and so my Service to you: [Drinks]. O your Attorneys
in Guild Hall have a rare time on it, by the Lord Harry.


Peg. They are as it were both Judge and Jury themselves.


Comp. And O how they will laugh at their Clients when they sit in a Tavern,
and call them Fools, Blockheads and Coxcombs, and then whip up their Causes as
nimbly as a Barber trims his Customers on a Christmas-Eve; a Snip, a Wipe and
away.


Pett. That Is very common, you shall have the like at a Nisi prius.


Enter Drawer. Draw. Here Is a Gentleman, one Mr. Justice Merryman, enquires for
Mr. Ventere the Merchant.


Mr. Ven. Here Boy, desire them to walk up. [ Exit Drawer.] It Is my Brother,
and a Counselor, to make an End of this same Business.


Enter Justice Merryman and a Counselor: Both Tables rise and join together.
Merr. Your Servant, Gentlemen, your Servant: Counselor Blunder and I have been
canvasing the Business of this your Difference; and I believe, Brother, the Law
will determine it as we have done; for it is point blank against you.


Mr. Ven. If it is, I must be contented: Well Sir, the Child's your Wife's, and
you shall have it; and to endear you the more to 't, I Will settle my part of the
Estate on you and yours for ever: Give me your Hand. They shake Hands.

We now are Friends.


Merr. Why that is well said.


Couns. We all are Witness to the Agreement.


Omnes. All, all.


Comp. Nay I scorn to be outdone in Civility; therefore if you please I have a
Gallon or two of Prize-Wine, and half a Dozen of good sound Bruges-Capons,
which I Will treat you and this good Company with at Supper; but no more Mutton,
no not a bit.


Merr. Well Brother, I Am glad you're Friends: Ods bobs I am. But come, let us
home now, and see what is become of the Bride and Bridegroom: Farewell Friend,
farewell: Come we'll pay at the Bar.


Exeunt Merr. Mr. Vent. and his Wife, Couns. and Dodge. Comp. Come Peg, Come
and kiss me. Compass kisses Peg. I am Friends with thee too now.


Pett. Aye, aye, you have Reason, she has earned you a good Fortune; and need
not venture to Sea any more: Yet one thing let me advise you, it is Counsel
worth a good Fee, for it cures Cuckoldom.


Comp. Say thou so, come let us hear it.


Pett. This it is, Make a flat Divorce between your selves, be you no longer
her Husband, nor she your Wife: Two or three Hours after meet again, salute,
woo and wed afresh, and so the base Name of Cuckold's blotted quite. This has
been experienced and approved by many.


Comp. It Is excellent I faith, -- There, there is for you, and I thank you. Peg,
I renounce thee, -- nay and I renounce my self too from thee; thou art now a
Widow, Peg; I Will go hang my self two or three Hours at one of the Main Yards,
and so long thou shall go drown thy self. Then we'll meet in
White-Chappel-Fields, as it were by chance, and woo and wed again.


Peg. With all my Heart, kind Sir, fare you well.


Comp. Farewell Widow, remember Time and Place; and d' you hear, Put on your
Sabbath Day best Clothes.


Peg. I will, I will. Exit Peg.


Comp. Sir, I am beholding to you for your good Counsel.


Pett. No, Sir, you have paid me for 't, but I hope you do not intend to follow
your own.


Comp. What is that?


Pett. Why, you said you would hang your self.


Comp. No no, I have thought better on it, for I Will go drink my self dead drunk,
then wake again, wash my Face, and meet the Bride.


Pett. That Is well said, and I Will accompany you, and wish you Joy.


Comp. Joy, Sir, I have it Sir already, in a good Estate got by a Chopping Boy.


Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter Friendly solus. Fri. Was ever Fortune like to this of mine? Who for the
Smile of a vile simple Woman, have acted thus against my very Soul, all to
please a Creature, whose next Command perhaps will higher mount, it may be
light on my self, as now it did on Bonvile.


Enter Clara. Cla. Ha! Friendly, here alone. Now, now, my Fears begin. Aside.
So, Sir, you are returned I see. To him.


Fri. Madam, I am, and like those noble Knights in former times, after subduing
all their Ladies Foes, returning with the joyful News of Conquest, receive her
trembling to their longing Arms, and claim her as their own, so I --.


Cla. What mean you, Sir?


Fri. Madam, You are obeyed, your hard Commands fulfilled; at your Request I Have
killed my Friend, nay and my best of Friends.


Cla. How? killed your Friend for me.


Fri. Indeed it is true.


Cla. Then thou art truly wretched: But say, say quickly, who is this unhappy
Man whom thy Mistake has thus untimely killed?


Fri. Bonvile.


Cla. Bonvile said you? My Blood with an unusual Course runs backward from my
Heart! Horror has seized my Soul! A thick black Mist has overcast my Sight, and
I am not the same: but speak, O speak again, Was it Bonvile?


Fri. Why should you seek to iterate my Guilt, by a Rehearsal of that dreadful
Name? Too sure, alas! it was: Bonvile 's the Friend I Have killed.


Cla. Cursed be the Tongue that spoke it, but doubly cursed the Hand that did
the barbarous Fact.


Fri. Why Madam, was it not your Command to kill my Friend; nay more, my best
of Friends?


Cla. Yes, and I thought my self your best of Friends.


Fri. I hope you would not have had me murdered you?


Cla. No Monster, no.


Fri. These are Riddles.


Cla. Fool, our whole Sex is made of nothing else: Thou may sooner untie the
Gordian Knot, expound the Problems of the monstrous Sphynx, and read what is
decreed in the mysterious Book of Fate, than unfold a Woman's sly malicious
Meaning.


Fri. Very well; she first set me on to do this most accursed of Deeds, and now
upbraids me; nay would hang me for 't: These are the Tricks of all her damning
Sex. O Woman, Woman, Woman, dear devilish Woman, farewell. Offers to go.


Cla. Stay Friendly, all I have said was only to try your Constancy; and
whether you would repent of what you have done. But tell me truly, is Bonvile surely
dead?


Fri. Indeed he is.


Cla. It Is bravely done, and I adore thee for 't. By Heaven I love thee now,
even unto Dotage!


Fri. Was ever Change like this? The subtlest Labyrinth Wit could ere invent,
Aside affords not half so many Turnings as a Woman's Mind.

What mean you, Madam, by this seeming Transport?


Cla. O Friendly, Friendly, I am all over Ecstasy! Thou have done a Deed that
ravishes my Soul. At once thou have killed my dear and only Friend, and slain
the fatal'st Enemy I had.


Fri. What more Riddles Madam, pray explain your self.


Cla. I will; I will declare a Secret which till now I never did disclose: I
loved that Bonvile whom thou now have slain, not as I ought to do, but with a
Woman's Love, which he never did know: And Yesterday when I beheld the fatal
Marriage ended, then like a Merchant walking on the Downs, sees a rich Vessel
of his own engaged, and after took, and born away a Prize: So I, after I Would seen
my Bonvile lost, (for so he was to me) resuming all the Malice of a Woman,
resolved never to entertain one Thought of Love again; but lead a Life as
Lapland-Witches do, only on others Ruins: Then when you approached me with the
hateful Sound of Love, to dash your Hopes, and put a Period to your growing
Passion, I bid you kill your best and dearest Friend?


Fri. True.


Cla. Now the best Friend to one in Love, is Love it self.


Fri. O my cursed Stars, that wrapped me up in such a black Mistake, What have I
done?


Cla. Done! Why you have done bravely, why do you tremble?


Fri. An inward Guilt lies heavy on my Soul, and Horror with all her dreadful
Forms still haunts my Sight. And did you love this Bonvile?


Cla. The Queen of Beauty never doted more on her beloved Adonis than I on him.


Fri. And now as much you hate him: O the unheard of Inconstancy of Women! All
that they have is feigned; their Teeth, their Hair, their Blushes, and their
Smiles; nay their very Conscience (if any such they have) is feigned; all
counterfeit and false: Let them wash, patch and daub themselves with all the
Helps for Nature that Art could e're invent, still they are Women: And let 'em
rob all India of its store to adorn themselves therewith, still are they not
all that thing called Woman: I know not what to do, for I love and hate this
Creature both at once.


Cla. What ails my Friendly?


Fri. But Bonvile yet must feel his Enemies Rage; shall he succeed in Love,
whilst I am crossed in mine? No, it must not, cannot, nay it shall not be.

Four Heads I have, to make a Plot not common;
Malice, Revenge, the Devil, and a Woman.

Offers to go. Cla. What will you leave me then?


Fri. Leave thee; yes, for ever: Fly thee as I would a Blast from Hell. Thou
art thy self a Hell; thy base detested hateful Woman's Breath infects the
purest Air:

May my Friend's Blood, which I for thee have spilt,
Light on thy Head, and yours be all the Guilt.

Exeunt severally. Enter Compass new clothed, Pettifog, and two or three Men
Neighbors. Comp. Gentlemen and Neighbors, as you have been Witnesses to our
Divorce, so shall ye now be Evidences to our next Meeting, which I look for
every Minute.


1st Neigh. I came for that Intent, Neighbor.


Comp. I thank you: well, I do not think but you will all see me come off with as
smooth a Forehead, and make my Wife as honest a Woman as a Man would desire
sometimes, I mean of her Rank; and a teeming Woman, as you know she has been:
Nay, I do not think but the Child too will be found to be as lawful a Child as
any Couple of unmarried People can beget.


2d Neigh. We long to see it Neighbor Compass, that so some of us may do the
like upon the same occasion.


Comp. You 're in the right, old Stitch of the World: But soft, see where she
comes with a whole Bundle of as good sound Maidens as her self.

Enter Peg new clothed, with three or four Women Neighbors. Stand aside a
little, and mind me I pray.


Omnes. Agreed, agreed.


Comp. Good Morrow fair Maid.


Peg. In truth Sir you are mistaken in both, for I am neither fair, nor yet a
Maid.


Comp. No, what are you then I pray, a Wife?


Peg. That indeed I was, but alas, -- I am now a Widow.


Comp. A Widow say you? Nay then I must make bold with you; for look you, your
Case is somewhat like mine, I being a Husband without a Wife.


1st Neigh. Aye marry, this is something like.


Pett. They begin well, let them go on.


Comp. How long have you been a Widow, good Woman? Nay pray do not weep
forsooth.


Peg. I cannot choose but cry, to think of the great Loss I had.


Comp. Why, was he an honest Man?


Peg. Honest quoth a', I vow and protest he was as honest a Man as e're broke
Bread. O I shall never have such another. Cries out.


Comp. By my Faith now Mistress you have had a great Loss indeed, for an honest
Man is not to be found every where, nor in every Street.


Pett. The Rogue's witty.


2d Neigh. Aye, aye, let 'em go on.


Comp. And how long is it since you lost this honest Husband?


Peg. O dear, his Memory is too fresh; and the Sight of you doubles my Sorrow.


Comp. The Sight of me, say you; why, was he so like me?


Peg. As one Apple to another; your two Hands are not more alike.


Comp. Nay then I cannot blame thee to weep: An honest Man he was I warrant
him; and you have had a mighty Loss, that is the Truth on it: But was he
proportioned like me, so well limbed, and of such a wholesome Complexion, heh!


Peg. No Twins were ever more alike.


Comp. Well I love, his Memory is still better and better: and how many
Children did he leave behind him?


Peg. Only one, Sir.


Comp. A Boy or a Girl?


Peg. A dainty fine Boy, Sir.


Comp. Just my own case still; my Wife (rest her Soul) left me a Boy too, a
lusty chopping Boy of his Age (as they tell me, for I never saw it).


Peg. So is mine.


Comp. And what Profession was your Husband of?


Peg. A Seaman.


Comp. Heigh! my own Faculty too! And can you like a Man of that Profession
again?


Peg. Yes surely, for his dear sake, whom I loved so tenderly, I shall always
esteem a Sailer.


Comp. Shall you so? why then here is your Man: What say you, Is It a Match?


Peg. Dear me, I am so ashamed, and yet to speak the Truth, I do like you
hugely, and would like you better still, if it were not for one thing, which a
little troubles me.


Comp. What Is that?


Peg. Why, you know sometimes we are forced to endure the Absence of our
Husbands a long while, me happen many Years, and then if there be any Slip in
us, (as long Vacations will make Lawyers hungry) the World is apt to censure
and scandalize us; and brand us with wanton Living and Incontinency; when alas!
if they would but consider our Condition, and the mighty Longings we often
naturally have for Flesh and Blood, they would not blame us, so they would not.


Comp. Come, come, no Matter, can thou love me, Widow?


Peg. Ah, if I durst but speak my Mind, I know what I would say.


Comp. Durst, why who do you fear? here is none but an honest Gentleman, some
few Friends and Neighbors; let them hear a God's Name what you would say, and
never blush for the Matter.


1st W. Neigh. Aye, aye, speak Neighbor, pray speak your Mind, and fear not.


Peg. I shall be thought too weak to yield at first Sight.


2d W. Neigh. Paw! paw! that is only Nicety.


Peg. Well then I do love him dearly and dearly, so I do. Runs and kisses him.


Comp. And I thee with all my Heart and Soul. Comp. kisses Peg. Now we'll be
merry, and have a Song, shall we not my Neighbors?


3d Neigh. Marry will we, Neighbor Luff and Mrs. Bride, will ye give us a Song?


Peg. With all my Heart, come Neighbor.


A DIALOGUE. Man: Faith and Troth I love thee dearly,
Tho I do but bluntly woo,
Prithy then resolve me clearly,
Whether I am beloved by you.
Long I shall not keep a pother,
Like a senseless whining Beau;
If you will not I Will court another
Who will never say me no.

Woman: Friend, your self, nor Humor neither
With my Fancy disagree,
Yet I must find clearer Weather,
Er'e I venture out to Sea.
Court another at your Pleasure,
Win her in the Honey moon,
She may chance repent at leisure,
For believing you too soon.

Man: Leave your damned Fantastic Trials,
Which procure a Lover's Pain,
Pox upon these sham-Denials,
It Is but spending time in vain.
With Embraces happy make me,
Nature framed you to be kind;
Kiss me, and the Devil take me
If I ever change my Mind.

Woman: I Will pursue the good old Fashion,
Practice still by those are wise,
Thoroughly try my Lover's Passion,
E're I let him grasp the Prize.
Spite of Oaths you would forsake me,
Should I let you once embrace:
If I kiss, the Devil take me,
Till the Parson has said Grace.
Chorus. Since then the Nation
Has made it a Fashion,
Let Us send for a Black-Coat, whilst we are in the Mind.
But it is damned Slavery,
And Priestly Knavery,
That Parsons must conjure e're Lovers be kind.

Com. So, so, here now shall we be Man and Wife again to Morrow, as good as
ever. What tho we met as Strangers, we may happen to love never the worse for
all that -- Gentlemen and Neighbors, I invite ye all to my Wedding.


Omnes. We Will not fail you, and wish you Joy.


Com. Did not I tell you that I would fetch it cleverly off?
Let any Man call me Cuckold if he dares now.

Petti. It Is slander in him I assure you who-ever does.

Com. Nay it will be Petti Lacenary at least, and without Compass of the
General Pardon too: And for the Child, let me hear him that dares say, I am not
the Father.


Petti. Sure none will dare dispute it.


Com. Or that my Wife that is to be, is not as honest a Woman as some other
Men's Wives are.


Petti. No question of that.


Com. O how fine and smooth my Brows are now!


1 M. Neigh. Aye but when you're married, they will come to themselves again I
warrant ye.


Com. My Friends, if you please, you may call me Mr. Bridegroom now, for the
Guests are all bidden to the Wedding.


1 M. Neigh. We know it, Mr. Bridegroom, they are indeed, and we'll not fail
you upon our Words.


Comp. Come then, brisk Widow, e're the next Ebb and Tide,
I Will be thy Bridegroom, and thou shall be my Bride.

Exeunt omnes. The End of the Fourth ACT.
ACT the Fifth.
Enter Arabella on one Side. Summerfield meeting her from the other. Ara. MR.
Summerfield, I now am truly happy, my Prayers at last are heard; and Heaven has
restored my Husband to my Arms.


Sum. I just now heard the joyful News, and thought to have been my self the
welcome Messenger of his Return, but find I Am come too late; have you seen him?


Ara. No; as yet I have not.


Sum. It Is somewhat stange!


Ara. Others perhaps may judge it so, but my uncommon Joy for his Return, admits
no other Thought, but those of Transport for his Safety.


Sum. O happy Bonvile! How I admire and wonder at thy Choice! Enter Friendly.
Madam, a Wife like you, exceeds the greatest Blessing sure on Earth.


Fr. The nearest way to a secure Revenge, is private Malice, which, like a
Spark long lying hid amongst neglected Ashes, by the least Blast of Wind
becomes it self a Flame -- Ha! who have we here? Thrice blessed Occasion! which
thus have offered me at once the Scope of my revengeful Wishes. It Is Aside.
Arabella and her Darling Summerfield, one who, in the Bridegroom's Absence, is
grown thus intimate with his beloved Bride. A strong Foundation on which I Will
now erect a brave Revenge; I Will step aside and observe them.


Retires to one side of the Stage. Ara. Sir, I hope he will soon be here, and
return the Kindness you have shown me; so I take my leave, with hourly
expectation of a much-long'd for Husband.


Sum. And I, with a Gratitude never to be forgotten, kiss your fair Hand, and
hope that all things will answer your Expectation. Exit Arabella.


Fri. Ay, it is so, now must I counterfeit a friendly Face to make a farther
Discovery. Aside. Sir, your humble Servant: without Offense, may I be so bold
as to beg the Favor of your Name?


Sum. The Question I must confess is somewhat familiar, and in my Opinion
improper for a Stranger at first sight; but yet I never disowned it to a
Gentleman -- it is Summerfield.


Fri. Summerfield! Sir, I kiss your Hands; and must congratulate your good
Success, but more admire your Valor. Had we many such noble Commanders on
board our Fleet, we need not fear it where e're it sails.


Sum. Pray, Sir, stretch not your Love into Flattery, 'twill make me then
suspect your Kindness. And the Author of this Story was too much my Friend I
see, since he has given you this so very partial Account, the more to augment
my Fame.


Fri. O! that is your Modesty, Sir: But if I might be so happy as to be honored
with your Acquaintance --


Sum. Sir, the Honor (if any) would be wholly on my Side; therefore I desire
to know your Name.


Fri. Friendly, Sir.


Sum. An Acquaintance, I suppose, of Mr. Bonvile's.


Fri. One that thinks himself much honored in being styled his Friend.


Sum. I have often heard your Name indeed before; but till now Fortune never
afforded me the sight of you.


Fri. You of all Men ought to bless Fortune, who still has been indulgent to
you on all Occasions; and scattered her Favors on you, with as prodigal a Hand
as tho you were her sole Care and only Minion.


Sum. What mean you, Sir? Again you exceed the Bounds of Love and Friendship; I
never thought any of Bonvil's Friends could be guilty of so base and vile a
thing as Flattery: But, pray, unfold your meaning.


Fri. It Is this; I just now saw you part with the Bride, with such courteous
Actions, as spoke no small Esteem in her kind Favor; and therein I think you
the happiest of Men.


Sum. How!


Fri. Mistake me not, I only as a Friend applaud your Happiness, bless the
Influence of your kinder Stars, and praise your Fortune that has given you
this sweet Occasion.


Sum. What Occasion, Sir?


Fri. Of being serviceable to the fair Virgin Bride in her extremest need,
after her being so unkindly left, nay, on her Wedding Day, by an ungrateful
Husband, in doing her those neglected Duties, her Youth and Beauty justly did
demand.


Sum. On my Life some Plot against the Bride: I Will sound him 'till I find the
very Bottom -- [Aside.] -- Sir, you are merry: But suppose the Case your own,
would you have missed so tempting an Occasion?


Fri. No, Sir, they are too precious to be omitted: But I hear you two call
Cousins, comes your Kindred by the Merryman's or the Bonvile's?


Sum. Neither! we were wholly Strangers 'till of late, and it is a word of
Courtesy only interchang'd between us for some private Reasons.


Fri. This goes as I could wish. [Aside.]


Sum. I desire you not to grow too inward with me, on so short an Acquaintance:
Not that I Would have you think the Lady of so base a Disposition to grant me any
thing beyond the Rules of Decency and Honor. The only Favor I e're received
from her, was a Present of those Bracelets she wears about her Arms, and that
Chain of Gold and Pearl she has about her Neck; all which either of us may own
without a Blush.


Fri. How, the Chain and Bracelet, say you! Those were the first Tokens of her
Husband's Love.


Sum. Methinks you look concerned at what I Have said; yet I have said no more
than what I am obliged in Honor to maintain, and will: therefore I hope, as
you are a Gentleman, you will not turn Informer.


Fri. O pray think not so poorly of me.


Enter a Servant who whispers Summerfield. Sum. Tell her I Will wait on her
immediately. Exit Servant. Sir, some Business of Importance calls me hence;
therefore some other time I hope I shall have the Happiness of enjoying your
Company longer. Exit Sum.


Fri. Sir, your humble Servant.

Tell her I Will wait on her immediately, said he; this must be Arabella that
he is going to: Better still.

The Work's begun, now I am made or lost;
He runs the best who holds out to the Post:
And all the Comfort in Adversity,
Is to see others as miserable as me.
Who have we here? Old Merryman! As I live it is he!


Enter Justice Merryman. Mer. O Master Friendly, you're happily returned: But
where is my Son-in-Law?


Fri. Alas, Sir, the unhappy Bonvile is --


Mer. Is, is, what is he? Heh! speak* is he living, or is he dead; or what is
become of him?


Fri. O! that I had the Marble Niobes Heart! Or that I had sucked the Milk of
Wolves and Tigers; so that I might have told, without the least remorse of
Sorrow, what now I dare not, nay, I cannot speak, for fear at once I melt my
self in Tears, and break your aged Heart. Seems to weep.


Mer. Then I suppose he is killed; say, is he not? Have thou enticed him from
his Bride for this, thou inhumane Wretch? Yet speak, and tell me truly, for I Am
prepared to hear the worst of Ills; Is he then slain?


Fri. No, Sir, but dangerously wounded.


Mer. Not mortally, I hope; but whereabouts is he so desperately wounded? In
his Arms, his Legs, or Body?


Fri. Neither, Sir, but in as perfect Health as when he left you.


Mer. Strange! sure thou art all over a Mystery, and form'st these Riddles to
try my Wit.


Fri. No, Sir, for all I have said, you in effect will surely find I told you
he was wounded, did I not?


Mer. Yes, you did.


Fri. And so he is.


Mer. But where, where about, I ask you once again?


Fri. I see you force the unwilling Secret from me -- Why, he is wounded.


Mer. He Is wounded, he is wounded; but where, where is he wounded?


Fri. In his Fame, Honor and Reputation, more mortal than a thousand fleshy
Wounds.

For such slight Baubles, Cures are often obtained;
But injured Honor never can be regained.

Mer. How! how! how is this! wounded in his Honor, say thou? Tell me the
Villain that has defamed him, and this good old Sword shall slit the Rascal's
Windpipe.


Tri. O, Sir, your Daughter, your Daughter, Sir --


Mer. Ha! what is that? what is that? is she injured too?


Fri. No, no Sir, my falling Tears quite drown my feeble Voice, I cannot utter
what I fain would speak -- Your Daughter's false, false to her Bonvile! And by
the help of her beloved Summerfield, has robbed my Friend of all he could call
Dear, I mean his Fame. Seems to weep.


Mer. A Pox of your Crocodile's Tears. Why, Sirrah, Sirrah, do you call my
Daughter Whore? Hey, Swords and Daggers, Blunderbusses and Pistols, shall I
bear this? Hark you, you my Friend, and no Friend, what a Kin do you take me to
be to this Gentlewoman, Heh?


Fri. Her Father, Sir.


Mer. Audacious Villain, O that I had thee in some private Corner, where none
could either see or hear us, this Sword should justify my Daughter's Honor;
I Would Whore you with a Pox to you, so I would.


Fri. Your Pardon, Sir, I only did inform you as a Friend, that by your
fatherly Admonitions, you might refrain her from her undecent Course.


Mer. Pox of your friendly Intelligence.


Fri. The Jewels which her Husband did present her, as the first Sign and
Confirmation of the happy Contract, she to my certain Knowledge has given to --


Mer. To whom, to whom thou wicked Slanderer? tell me, Sarrah, quickly, quick,
quick.


Fri. To Summerfield.


Mer. Ha, ha, ha, the Fool makes me laugh; Ha, ha, ha, why 'twas but just now
that I saw them on her Neck and Arms.


Fri. She was no Woman, had she not the Sense to get them against her Husband's
coming.


Mer. But pray tell me, how is it possible that she could part with them, when
they are locked on, and the Key with her Husband?


Fri. O, Sir, that is no Question to be asked in these Times: Women have found a
way to make use of other Keys besides their Husbands: And no doubt but
Summerfield has got a Key will open your Daughter's Lock as well as Bonvile 's.


Mir. Sirrah you lie, you lie Sirrah; and I Will tell thee thou lie, again and
again, so I will. Nay, and I were to pay a 100 Pounds for every Lie I give
thee, as Men do Twelve-pence for every Oath they swear, I would spend all the
Thousands I am worth, in giving thee the Lie. It Is likely indeed, that such a
brave Gentleman as Summerfield, that fought at Sea like a Dragon to save my
Life, should shorten my Days on Land in ruining my Daughter; therefore once
more I tell you you Lie.


Fri. It Is very well.


Mer. Do you hear Sir, have you told this Lie to any body else but me?


Fri. I am no Informer, Sir.


Mer. Why then for fear you should, do ye see, draw, [Draws] Draw, I say, I am
not so old but I can make a shift to cut your Throat still; I Will spoil your
Cackling I Will warrant ye. Enter Bonvile and Clara. A Pox on it, here is my
Son-in-Law come to hinder me, Duce take him could he not stay a little longer?
D' ye hear Sir, begone, leave this Place immediately, or I Will -- I Will -- I Will --
Gad I could find in my Heart, so I could, but be gone.


Fri. Bonvile here with Clara too, excellent. This goes to Arabella, and may it
increase the Storm. Exit Fry.


Bon. My Father in Anger.


Mer. O Son, Son, Son! dear Boy, welcome home, Od's bobs you are.


Bon. I humbly thank you, Sir; but am sorry to see you so disturbed.


Mer. Nothing, nothing, only Mr. Freindly and I have had a Word or two, that is
all, that is all.


Bon. About my going with him, I suppose; but that is past, and I hope, Sir,
you will be so kind as at my Request to pardon him.


Mer. Indeed Son it was something else; By the Lord Harry I cannot forbear
laughing at the Coxcomb, Ha, ha, ha; He told me, Ha, ha, ha, that one
Summerfield, a very honest Fellow as ever lived, is grown exceeding familiar
with my Daughter, your Wife.


Bon. Ha! my Wife.


Mer. Yes, your Wife, and that he had received Love Tokens from her.


Bon. How, Love-Token from her!


Mer. Aye, aye, Love Tokens I called 'em when I was a young Man: Nay, the Rogue
was so impudent to tell me, that she had given him those Jewels which are
locked about her Neck; Ha, ha, ha.


Bon. The Jewels about her Neck, said you?


Mer. Aye, what ails you Man that you change Color so? It Is all a Lie Boy I
warrant thee: And had thou not come just in the Nick of Time, I think of my
Conscience I should have cut his Throat.


Bon. As I will your Daughters if I find her false: Death, Hell, and Furies, am
I made a Monster already?


Cla. What, Sir, are you returned for this?


Mer. Hark y' Son, hark you; suppose that this Mr. Friendly should have a
secret Inclination to your Spouse, d' ye see; and therefore, by reason he cannot
obtain his Desire, possesses you with Jealousy to make a Breach 'twixt you and
your Wife. Od's bobs, I don't know, I cannot tell what should be the meaning of
his carrying you away on your Wedding Day else, heh, Son, heh.


Cla. Has the Italian Plague then infected you, that you stand thus unmoved?

Enter Summerfield leading Arabella. But see here is your Bride.


Bon. And her beloved Adulterer with her! Death and Damnation, must I stand
still and see this?


Mer. Hey day! what the Matter now?


Ara. Bonvile here with Clara! Alas too true I find what before I scarce dared
to think was so. Is Bonvile then a Traitor, and false to Arabella? Aside.


Cla. Madam, at last I Have found the precious Jewel that you so long have sought
in vain. To Arab.


Ara. Wear it your self Madam, I lost it, and it must be mine no more.


Cla. What means this sudden Alteration?


Mer. Ods bodikins, as you say, what does she mean? Are ye both mad, heh?


Sum. Sir, I Am come to pay my Respects to you, and humbly beg a farther
Knowledge of --.


Bon. Of whom, sweet Sir, my Wife or me?


Sum. Ha! your Wife.


Bon. Yes Sir, my Wife, I think the word needs no explaining.


Mer. Pray, Sir, at my Request bear with him, he is strangely out of Order I
assure you.


Bon. The Jewels are as I left 'em; but the Jewel of her Heart is lost and
thrown away. -- Madam, I sent you my Will, did you receive it.


Ara. Yes, I did.


Bon. Let me see it.


Ara. You shall. Exit. Ara.


Bon. Sir, I desire a Word or two in private with you, to Summer.


Sum. With all my Heart, Sir.


Mer. What Is that, what is that, I Will have no Whispering, Gentlemen.


Enter Arabella with the Will. Ara. There Is your Will, Sir. -- Throws it down,
Bonvile takes it up.


Bon. It Is well now as you have changed your Mind, I Will change this too, and find
another to supply your Place: There Is no harm done, the Marriage is not yet
consummated, and you are free to enjoy any, so am I.


Ara. As you please for that: A Man may make a Garment for the Moon, count all
the Stars which twinckle in the Skies, or empty the vast Ocean, Drop by Drop,
sooner than please a Mind so light, so various as yours.


Mer. Ods bobs, what is this you talk of, altering your Will?


Bon. Yes, Sir, I am so resolved, and will see 't performed within this Hour:
My Lawyer lives hard by, and so farewell. Exit. Bon.


Mer. Farewell thou peevish Boy, I can alter my Will too so I can, marry can I;
I had left him 20000 Pound after my Death, and he shall see I can find another
Executor too. Within this Hour did he say, Gad I Will be with one as soon as he,
unless he rides Post to the Devil, and that is the nearest way to a Lawyer.


Sum. I Will follow him, and assuage his Passion.


Mer. By no means, Sir. -- But now I think on it, I Will go with you, and find him
out: But did you ever see the like, did you ever see the like? Come Sir, come
follow me. Exit. Merr. and Summer.


Cla. Dear Arabella, what can all this mean?


Ara. Can you be doubtful of the Effect, who are your self the Cause?


Cla. I the Cause, Inform me how?


Ara. O Clara, Clara, your Sirens Voice has drawn my Bonvile from these
spotless Virgins Arms, and made me ever wretched!


Cla. Who (if thou ever lov'dst me, as once you caused me to believe you did)
has taxed me with a Crime so foul, as I abhor to hear it only named?


Ara. Friendly.


Cla. O Arabella, forgive and pity me, who am indeed the innocent unhappy Cause
of all those Griefs which now afflict you both; which I Will relate in brief, if
you will please to withdraw one Moment with me.


Ara. With all my Heart.


Cla. Come then:

And since your Ruin I did first conspire,
I Will all appease; thus Fire's expelled by fire.

Exeunt. Enter Justice Merryman and Summerfield. Mer. Sir, do you take me for
your Friend?


Sum. Why d' you ask me such a Question, Sir? 'twere base Ingratitude to
entertain any other Thought.


Mer. Why then d' ye see, Sir; as you are my Friend, you must not fight my Son
Bonvile.


Sum. Not fight him Sir! you amaze me.


Mer. Aye, aye, aye; that is all one: I understand your dumb Signs and your low
Whispers, the French Mode all over, to smile and grin a Man in the Face, and at
the same time privately cut his Throat. Therefore prithe be ruled by me, and
don't fight him, for should you kill him, my poor Girl would break her Heart,
quite break her Heart. [Sobs and cries.] I grant that you are wronged, and so I
dare swear is my dear Child: but he 's her Husband, and must be born with, ods
bobs he must.


Sum. Heaven be my Witness, I never entertained a Thought like it!


Mer. That Is well, that is well, I am heartily glad on 't, ods bobs I am
heartily glad. Enter Friendly. But here comes one that has made all this
Mischief; and him I Will fight my self for all I Am a Justice of the Peace. Come,
come, Sir, Draw, draw; you will belie my Daughter again will you? Come, draw, I
say, Draw. Draws.


Fri. Sir, as I am a Gentleman, I scorn to deny my Words, but there is my
Author, whether good or ill.


Mer. Who, he? He, do ye mean him?


Fri. Yes, Sir.


Sum. True, Sir, I am; For at his Return to Town from Barn-Elms, it was my
Chance to meet him; and after a ceremonious Complement or two, I found him
diving into my private Thoughts concerning the Bride your Daughter: I, not to
be behind-hand with him, joined Wit with Wit to sound his shallow Soul. I told
him then, how her Jewels once were mine; but the manner of my obtaining them, I
for my own sake did conceal from him; and now, if you're disposed, I Will here
relate it.


Enter Bonvile leading Arabella, Clara and Spruce, Mr. Venture and Mrs. Venture.
Mer. Let it be before all this Company then: What, and my Son and Daughter too
so loving again? Nay then all 's well, ods bobs it is, and they shall hear it,
ods bobs they shall.


Bon. I have heard the Story, Sir, already; and Friendly, you I pardon too, for
Enemies in War take all Occasions to undo each other; yet tho I am your Enemy,
I Will be generous still, and make you Master of your wished for Mistress. To
Clara. Come, Madam, receive this worthier Passion of your Friendly, whom I know
you both admire and love. Gives her to Friendly. Next I must obtain your Pardon
for my Rashness.


Sum. Sir, it is what I first ought to have begged of you: And that the World
may not tax this innocent Lady of a Crime to her purest Thoughts unknown, I Will
here begin my Story from my first Acquaintance to this happy Hour.


Mer. Prithy do.


Sum. The first time that I e're beheld her Face, I would have robbed her.


Mer. Ah Rogue! What, a Thief, a Thief, what would you have robbed her of?


Sum. Not her Honor, I assure you, Sir, but only of those Jewels which she
wears.


Mer. Ods bobs, thou were an honest Thief, for that I faith he was.


Sum. They being fast, I could not get 'em off without some Harm and Pain to
her: which for the Indies I Would not have done. And she, in answer to my Civility,
brought me home, and ransomed them with the full Price in Gold, (with which I
made my Venture) and the more to hide my Shame, she honored me with the Title
of her Kinsman.


Mer. Ay, ay, and so she might well, for she was a little cunning Thief too, to
steal the Gold she gave you from her Husband; 'twas all his now, but that is no
matter, proceed.


Sum. The rest you know already, Sir.


Mer. Ay, so I do, ods bobs I do, thy Valor my brave Boy, thy Valor, for
which I Will do for thee, that thou shall never need to rob again I warrant thee;
ods bobs I will. But come, come, we lose time, for we have another Wedding yet
to see performed, but that shall be done within.


Sum. Then farewell all ye treacherous Paths of Vice,
Which lead Men blindfold to their End,
In time like me repent you that are wise,
And by Restraint your vicious Courses end.

Ara. Were I to ask of Heaven its greatest Bliss
On Earth, it could bestow not one like this.
After a Storm the Sun still shines most bright,
And from the Chaos sprung the purer Light.

Bon. A Day like this sure yet has never been,
Wherein such various Changes e're were seen.
Fortune to Day that worked my Overthrow,
Has made me happy in a Minute now.
Blessed with a virtuous Wife my Days I Will spend,
And never trust Man, lest I mistake my Friend.

EPILOGUE, Spoke by the City-Bride.
YOU met with good Intention to be witty,
And rally the Grave Cuckolds of the City;
But disappointed of your Recreation,
I in your Looks can read the Play's Damnation.
Lord! how ye stare to find an honest Bride,
A thing you think a Monster in Cheapside.
Whither you boast that you so often come,
And leave your Footmen to perform at home.
Yet it is no little Comfort to us however,
You oftener bring the Estate than get the Heir.
Unjustly therefore you your Fortune blame,
She Is kinder to your Blood than to your Name.
After all this, I know you think it Pity,
That I should break the Custom of the City:
I hear a Beau cry, it is some damned Mistaker;
A Cheap Side Virtue, City-Cuckold maker.
This is a Fault no Gentleman can pardon,
It gives Cheapside the Sins of Covent Garden:
We must refine on Vice, and take new Measures,
Since dull chained Cits invade our darling Pleasures.
Take my Advice, employ at home your Backs,
Or Locket's Revels may revenge Pontack's:
This Cuckolding to you's a losing Trade,
That pay for making, and for being made.
The Ladies will my Character excuse,
And not condemn a Virtue which they use.
If any here be guilty of Transgression,
It Is of Necessity, not Inclination:
They Would be contented in their proper Houses,
Could they reform their unperforming Spousess
Yet if some wanton Appetites there be,
How many are there that can fast like me.
Those are enough, if I have their Applause,
The Poet has his End, and I my Cause.
FINIS.

