Two Essays of LOVE AND MARRIAGE. Being A LETTER Written by a Gentleman to his
Friend, to dissuade him from Love. And an ANSWER thereunto by another
Gentleman. Together with some Characters and other Passages of Wit. Written by
Private Gentlemen for recreation.

-- Si quando gravabere curis,
Haec lege, pro moestae medicamine mentis Hebeto.
London, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Hand in Paul's Churchyard, 1657.

THE STATIONER To the READERS.
Gentl:
THese scattered Papers coming to my hands, I thought fit upon good Reasons, to
communicate them to you. I might tell you they are delightful and ingenuous;
but you will not take me for a competent Judge, being neither learned, nor
indifferent; Laudat venales -- The truth is, my aim is as the Scots was, for
all your geuds, And to please you, and profit my self, is the ambition and
design of

Your Servant, H. B.

To his honored Friend on his being in love.
I.
True Friend,
BUt that I know heresy is fashionable, and madness the time-Livery, thou
would force me to no little wonder, which way possible thou should stumble
into Love, be sick and sottish in Love, lost as well to reason as good company,
locked up from all the World but thy own thoughts, and only conversant with thy
self; yet formerly pleasant and affable, desirous and desired of Society, and
one that I know has lived no Anchorite upon Earth; nor yet have had thine eyes
tied up to any one face, but have both viewd and discourst with variety of
Beauties; nay, I dare say, not guilty of the ignorance of more: yet that after
so many Antidotes, thou should be so far fallen from thy primitive goodness,
as to lose thy self in dotage, and that dotage on one creature, and that
creature a woman, and call it Love too, really next to a miracle, is my only
admiration. Prithee do not miscall thy disease, and be sick of lust, and
complain of Love; I can never believe that that noble passion can be the ruin
of its subject; neither will I so much disparage it, as to make a woman its
object. If there be love, it is to Heaven, Virtue, thy Country, Parents, Kindred,
Friends, or what is of worth: but to the femall Sex, and in thy sense where
sensuality cannot but have an interest, though licensed by an Ordinance, it is
only Love scandall'd, it being (to the pity of the poor passion I speak it)
but concupiscense handsomely burnisht, or a carnal appetite speciously in
titled. And therefore could I never win my judgment to affirm, that the most
eager of sinners were in love with sin, but only temptingly seduced to a
vicious doting; they did rather erroneously affect, then truly love. But let me
inquire into thy passion: what, is it from the paint of nature, those
beautiful flowers of red and white? methinks thou should as well be
enamoured with thy Mistris's picture as her body; for even that too is not
excusable from art, and may be the worst drawn. Frank, he that marries for a
face, marries for a year; it is not a Summer since thy desires wrought as
strongly upon Mistress M. R. as now on this, and may be on as good a cause; yet
how soon did a little disease wither both her beauty, and thy love? and I hope
thou have not indented either with sickness or time for this. Can thou be so
prodigal of thy affection as to waste it on such incertainties? bind up thy
self to love for an age, when the cause of that love may perish in a month?
But I tell thee Frank, beauty is a Chimera, and has no being in nature: Every
man makes his own Mistress, and just so much luster does he find in her, as
first his fancy gives her. For I dare challenge thee to show me but one face in
the whole world, that all opinions will give in for beautiful; so that Lovers,
as thou call'st them, are but in the number of Pagans; they but worship that
Idol which themselves have made. May be thou will tell me of manners, carriage,
and virtue; I am very glad to hear of it; but let not thy passion hang in thy
eyes when thou lookst on them; for many of them, their gestures are but
School-postures, and seem rather like a motion then a carriage. Consider that
in the presence of their Servants they are on the Stage, and it is rather action
then behavior: it may be were thou a peeper on them in their withdrawing
rooms, thou would as much wish thine eyes closed then, as now open. For their
virtues, as I will not disallow the judgment of that reverend Doctor, That
it is possible to find some virtue in some women: so I cannot believe there is
such a grand stock of it in any of them, as to command any man out of his
senses for the love of it; but I suppose, as we more wonder to find a Diamond
on the shore then on the rock: so but a spark of virtue in a woman, gets
greater reverence then a bodied luster in the nobler Sex; for it is our humor
to admire the more where we expect the less. The cause then of thy love is
either from beauty or virtue; if from beauty, how will thou love her when she
is old? If from virtue, why do thou covet to lie with her? there needs not
that low act of generation to the high communion of virtues; and I should
scarce take thee for a platonic Lover, to warm a bed with her. But shall I
tell thee the cause? don't be afraid of truth then; thou first love her to
satisfy thy lust; and if thou after continue to lie with her, it is either for
want of a better, or 'cause thou can not be rid of her. For I look on all the
perfections in females but as so many encouragements to desire; and that the
best of women, like the best of sallads, procure the strongest appetite; and in
truth it is the woman is affected, not this, the Sex being the substance, and
the Mistress but the shadow; or that the rule of thy affection, and this the
instance. But then thou will be goring of me with that common goad of
objection, thy so much curiosity in choice, and rather my Lady then Jone.
Prithee tell me, be thy appetite never so good, does thy meat relish the worse
for being the cleanlier dressed? I never knew that good cookery did turn the edge
of a good stomach; and especially if thou limitest thy fancy to one dish, thou
had need to be both long in choosing, and neat in dressing, as well to avoid
nauseating, as to continue provocation. Remember that July holds not all the
year, nor youth all thy life; there is a December and Winter of age that
attends on both; and that passion that in its Spring will take fire at any
face, will in its Autumn be frost at all; a bed-ridden palate is scarce
sensible of sauce, much less meat; not the best of weapons, how brisk and keen
soever at the first, but after long using grows dull, and requires a whetting:
so that this studious culling of bed-fellows, argues but the serious
contemplations of mortality, and is no more then a wise provision for futurity.
Where Frank is your love then? Call'st thou that love, that ebs and flows with
the blood? that is the brat of a goatish humor, merely servient to the body,
and often dead before it? No, the essence of that passion is as pure and
lasting as the soul it waits on; a sacred Vestall flame, perpetually torrid and
unextinguishable; it is thy under-girdle love that's mortal, of flames gross and
transitory, which moving in a region lower then thy heart, prove rather flashes
then steady fires. I know thou art no stranger to multitude of examples that
have been hotter then Italians in the chase of their games, and more frozen
then Scythians after the taking it, that in the same year have been ready to
die of contraries, both love and hate; and with the same eagerness studied both
a marriage and divorce; that have not more longed to obtain, then having
obtained, to desert their hopes, and their loves perished together, the
fruition of one the expiration of the other. But may be thou will add to thy
other motive, that of wealth, she is rich. Nay now I hear thee, and do so far
allow thee to court the Lady for her fortune, as I would the Chambermaid for
her Mistress; but have a care of loving in earnest, or letting in of love
farther then thy tongue; a sigh or two in the presence if thou will, but no
ejaculations in private; remember a difference betwixt acting and suffering a
passion, be nothing the sadder though nothing the richer; like a good Soldier
rise not so repulst from one Leaguer, but to retain strength enough presently
for another, that in a while thy soul will become face-proof, the later beauty
the pellet of the former, till variety give the mastery to thy judgment, and
make thee a Catholic Servant, but no particular Lover. But thou will justify
yet farther; thou have a fortune of thine own, and the weightiness of that
requires a partner in the managing it. I don't gainsay it; nay I am so much of
thy side, that I think a wife in no case more allowable, then either for the
getting or preservation of an Estate. As, for thy love-marrying, I reckon it
both the paradise and purgatory of fools. But yet this Frank is only an
Apology for a wife, not love, and think me no enemy to marriage, but to the
fondness of thy desire; I would have thee get a wife, but not to lose thy self;
to serve thy occasions, but to master thy passions; so to love with reason, as
not to woe without sense. Credit me, I do not at all think it to savor of
impossibility, seriously to court and marry too, and yet uncing'd by any spark
of love, though I cannot but acknowledge the temptations of the other Sex; for
I reckon them amongst their studies: yet that reason, or the soul and gallantry
of man, should be basely prostituted to them, I should as soon believe an Eagle
to stoop at flies, or Divinity at toys. I conceive Frank, the necessity of thy
marrying streightens not thy judgment to this one Lady; I would have thee to
look on her as not without companions, and then if thou make an unlucky cast
of it, thy fortune will have this comfort, thou art no loser, though no winner.
Prithee why should not a woman be viewed with as little ardour as an handsome
Statue? or what is the influence of flesh, as to the eye, above that of marble?
If thou come into a spacious Gallery variously behung, thou can walk it
round, look on this Picture and like it, then turn thy face and forget it in
the beauty of another; there needing no more to the aspect of a face, then of
Imagery, but only the complacency of the beholder, and the commendation of the
Author. Women are a kind of traffic too: If thou come to a shop, see a
commodity and likest it, thou cheapen'st it; if thou bargainest, thou take
it, if not, to the next standing, the Markets full and free. I tell thee it is
an injury no less to nature then reason, to impale all perfection within the
circuit of one creature. Now after all this, do I expect thou should bid me
turn the Tables and play my self the question, Was I never in love? Troth
Frank I cannot excuse my self from the vanities of youth, may be I have; but
let me remember thee, I have had rattles and hobbi-horses too in my days, but
I have left them, and now look on them and thy thoughts with the same disdain.
That Mariner that has escaped a rock, may be a Pilot to the next passenger.
It Is my faith now, that it is as possible to be sick of the plague a year, as of
love a day; and I doubt not, when time shall ripen both thy judgment and age,
but thou will then sit a most strict judge upon thy self, and think no censure
too severe to thy present follies, or charity too bountiful to the true advice
of

Thy true Friend, J. H.

II.
Prithee, dear Friend, do not burn Diana's Temple only to be talked of: Modern
wits (like spirits of the lower Region) once conjured up, must be set on work,
though of mischief. I must confess thou venturest hard on the paradoxology of
thy brain, that dare enter the Lists Athanasius-like, contra mundum;
disputing that with thy pen, which the World from Adam, and thy self by thy
practice provest undeniable. What is said in case of Religion, a little
Philosophy makes men Atheists, but enough confirms them in the truth, is true
of thee in point of love; of which and its objects thou art no more competent a
Judge, then a Redcoat is of a Moot-case. Did I not know that all wonder
proceeded of ignorance, and that people most admire what they least understand,
I should wonder at thy wonder, that a man of thy parts and complexion, and born
of a Mother, should call that stumbling, which is so graceful and natural a
motion; fall out with Love and Women, yet by thy own confession, understand
neither. Thou turnest Andabate and fightest blindfold, not knowing against
whom, or for what. I prithee, Friend, what Country Girl has slighted thy
Madrigals, and disentertained thy affections, that thou quarrellest and fallst
at defiance with the whole Sex? He that said all Crecians were liers, was
himself a Crecian: and thou condemnest all Lovers as mad, yet art thy self a
Lover, and consequently mad, or else more mad that thou art not a Lover. I
never yet knew any despise Monarchy, but those that could not be Monarchs.
Every man in this is a Huntsman, who coming short of the Hare, cries, Hang her,
it is dry meat. Among the rest of thy wonders, thou may put this for one, that
I who am unconcerned, should at this distance take up the cudgels in defense of
a friend, whom thou have laughed into silence; but the proverb excuses me, He
whom sorrow makes dumb, deserves double pity. For my part, I must confess I
love to sleep in a whole skin, and not to engage in another quarrel, unless
he will lend me his skull to bear the blows: but this being the common cause,
it is pity truth should be out-worded, and her innocence be suspected to want
clearness, merely for want of clearing. There is no man more unfit for this
work then I, having been ever as atheistical in love as thy self; and so far
from being an Opponent to thy Thesis, that I have ever been a noted Assertor of
thy Doctrine, till experience reformed my judgment, and makes me look on my
former error with regret and disdain. It Is so far from being a wonder to me,
that one pleasant, affable and sociable, one that has viewed variety of
beauties, should fall in love with one woman, that I wonder how it could be
otherwise: none being fitter for love then one so qualified; nor can any find
a best, that have not viewed all. That Love per se is the ruin of its subject,
I deny; yet I allow it may be accidentally true, and be a passion not the less
noble. And as I would not have it only restrained to woman for its object: so
I would not have them totally excluded. And truly I am so far from believing
that Sex not an object of love, that I can hardly admit of any besides. That
Love has several objects, as Heaven, Virtue, and the rest which you reckon up,
with many more, I deny not. But all they, as oblique objects, are so far from
being adaequate, that they draw love in several denominations, as piety, duty,
friendship, etc. And but that seriousness would be thrown away on thee, and any
thing here but sophistry useless, I could tell thee from the learned, that Love
is only an expansion of the soul to its object; which is, whatever is
attractive: and that naturally man loves himself best and first, and all other
things in subordination to himself; and that whatever is most like man in
nature and habit, is the properest object of his love. Then 'twill follow
(whether you will or no) that no object is so proper as woman. But thou wilt
laugh at these old-fashioned grounds, and account them like Harry's codpieces.
To abstract Love from sensuality in a natural sense, is both impossible and
needless, it deriving a greater influence from the sensitive soul, and being a
passion from which bruits are not exempt. Nay that very thing which you call
sensuality, and will allow it to derive its legitimation only from an
Ordinance, may show an ancienter coat then Ordinances; it being the only way
chalked out by nature for propagation and preservation of every species. So
that your Epithites and Synonoma's of concupiscense and carnal appetite, etc. I
attribute to the luxuriance of your fancy; and must tell you, we can easily
give you and your ways the like terms without the help of a Sylva. (...) your
main besitancy is, (...), are you causes of love? It Is not bare red and white
that are either causes of, or colors for it, but the situation and contexture
of both. I never loved my Mistress face, because fair, but because I liked it,
and thereby thought it so, and I therefore thought it so, because hers: so that
should time or accident (from which no face has a protection) alter the
complexion in the eye, I Would retain the same Idea still in mine. Next, for the
Gentleman's change (with which you upbraid him) much may be pleaded in excuse:
for besides the great delight in variety, I know no reason why, if a man find
himself in an error, he may not repent and take a new course. Nor may you call
it prodigality of affection; he that grounds his love right, is above
uncertainties, in regard the true cause of love, which is sympathy, cannot
perish before its object. And because you say, Beauty is a Chymaera, and every
man a pigmation that carves to himself a Mistress; will you from thence infer;
that because all men do not think one face beautiful, no man should think any
so? And I appeal to the Synod of Divines, whether for a Lover to choose his own
Mistress, and love her, or court her, be a piece of ignorance or paganism. Nor
can you deny that manners, carriage and virtue, are incentives to love; and
that these things are really visible in that Sex by any that look not through
spectacles of prejudice. But he that has an ill sight dislikes all objects.
Thou have an humor in thine eyes, whereby thou can not discern action from
behavior; I like it not the worse if acquired; no more then I do a good
Scholar that speaks Latin by the Grammar. That there are arcana imperii among
them, as well as us, is undeniable; for if all were as they appear, they would
be rather Angels then women. It Is true, much action and deceptio visus is in
both Sexes in point of Courtship, whereby they reciprocally draw their
expectations to a height unobtainable, and succeeding enjoyments convince both
Sexes of a handsome (but commonly an equal) cheat. I shall not only allow of
that Doctors charity, that held, That it is possible some virtue may be found in
some women: but also shall experimentally add, That much virtue may be found
in many. It Is not for nothing that all virtues are declined by Grammarians with
haec, and fancied by Painters in female shadows. Virtues are like Diamonds,
rare and small; nor should we esteem them were they to be bought by the pound.
I take virtue and beauty to be causes of affection; but I mean not by beauty
the mere superficies of a visage, but the symmetry of parts; and he that
grounds his affection rightly on that, finds a becoming beauty, even in old
age. Virtue also I conceive a cause of love, and love a motive of copulation.
Nor is generation for the communion of virtues, but propagation of issue; since
it is an undoubted law of nature, that all creatures desire and endeavor
perpetuation. You call lust the cause of love; it is true, if you take all
altitudes by your own Jacobs staff, it is so to you: so the Wolf conceives all
creatures to eat raw flesh, because he does. I cannot imagine such a stoical
apathy in men, unless in Eutopia, but that we do and may make that which you
call lust, a part of love. Nor is that passion it self blameable, but
circumstances may make it so: for the Stoics themselves got children, and did
not deny the being of desires in men, but their domineering over Reason. Nor is
it the work of a wise man to be without passions, but above them. Consider man
as with a soul compounded of Will and Reason, the conquest of the will in this
life, can be but by synechdoche; which being considered, it will follow, That
men abstracted from desires of this nature, are rather to be looked for, then
found. And for your erratical love, that is so planitary and unfixed, it shows
its own weakness, but not your strength; though it be peripatetical, it makes
not you a Philosopher; since Love, like Sunbeams, being diffused, are but
faint: but contracted to one Object, are fervent and calefactory. Wives are not
Quelque chores, in whom only variety breeds delight, but are solid food which
never nauseate sound stomachs. For a man to love Virtue abstracted from its
subject, is to fancy a Chymaera; but Virtue in a woman is an undoubted motive.
As to your similitude of Joane and my Lady; take the whole Proverb; put in (in
the dark) and you are answered, It Is not want of difference, but due discerning;
nor is she as good, but seems so. The Cuckoo once sang better then the
Nightingale; but remember who was Judge. Times swift motion, and youths
transitoriness are common places in the beaten roads, where ever traveling wit
baits and refreshes himself in his pilgrimage. But yet Desires being part of
the soul, and so immortal, do not decay in age, but only alter their motives
and object. Nor is the world barren of examples of aged men, eagerly desiring
and performing rites of conjuncture with women. As for those changeable and
quicksilver minds which love and loath in a moment, it is their vice, and may
give you this notion, That as their love can so soon and easily change into
disdain: so your present scorn may turn to a dotage on the like ground. And
though perhaps you have not yet been in love, it is commune malum (since you
will call it so) like the small pox, every one has been, or must be troubled
with it; and bodies unacquainted with lesser diseases, are irrecoverably
swallowed up of greater. Your wary advice to your friend, to love with
discretion, I allow and commend; and for my part were I to love again, would
not go a foot further then my counterpart should meet me; but where I found
real love, I would scorn to be out-vied, being of Alexander his resolution,
No creature should conquer me with love or hatred. It Is not good to, play the
Butcher with that naked Sex that have no arms but to embrace with, nor
Emprick-like, kill them by wholesale. I never yet met any of either Sex good
at the sport, but at last they met with a requital. It Is within the memory of
man since a pregnant Spark furnished with two of your Cardinal Virtues, wit
and disdain, slung his fireballs of contempt on the whole Sex, courted some
into dotage, and then jeered 'um; who at last fell foul on a Kitchin-wench, and
doated, who repayed him with the same devices; and which was worst, at last in
despite married him. Homicida is of both Genders, and belongs to both Sexes.
Your other points of marrying for wealth and yoke-fellowship, I shall agree to
with silence. But I would not make wealth my Mistris's Master, while woman
stands by like the Chambermaid with a broom to attend her. Let my Mistress be a
figure, and her portion the Ciphers; which added to her, advance her much, but
of themselves signify nothing. Passionate Courtship should, but cannot, be
avoided by all; every one is not Hercules: but dissimulation may and must be
shunned by all. There is no Soldier, beleaguers a Garrison, but with hopes to
come off untouched: no Lover attempts a Mistress, but hopes for fruition without
bloodshed; yet the Soldier may receive a shot, and the Woer a repulse; and
that which he intends for a sin, often proves a punishment. He that lives a
Catholic Woer, may at last come to the purgatory of a general contempt. But
methinks (Friend) you wheel about and approve that which at first you decried;
there might be some hopes of agreement and hand-shaking between us. Allow love
and marriage and I will join with thee against dotage; and would have Love
sequestered from dotage, as much as thy mind from this obstinacy. But I see the
Devil has alwais a cloven foot; you would now allow of marriage without love,
and confound love and dotage, as if the same. To wed without love, is to be
tied by the loins like a Monkey to a bedpost; neither is it possible to court
or marry without love, as you write, for that want of love turns courtship to
flattery, and marriage to a bargain. That Women are Natures Errata, with
Aristotle I acknowledge; and that they study temptations, is undoubtedly true:
but yet that they do it not alone, your own example proves; who by this fancy
of Antiwomanism tempt the Sex so much, that I could wish my self one to dote on
thee. Do not call the lawful and necessary intermixture of both Sexes to be a
base prostitution of the Reason, Soul, and Gallantry of a man; it is so false
and groundless, it deserves no answer but the lie. Let thy friend alone with
his choice, and if he think her so, she is pieceless; only I admit your
Caution, While he seeks to win her, let him not lose himself; nor shoot away
all his shot at one volley, but keep a reserve for a fresh encounter; it is but
discretion. And now to answer your similitudinary Question, Why a woman cannot
be viewed with as little ardour as a Statue? it is because a Statue is not a
Woman, nor directly like a Woman; if it could be, Pigmation will tell you there
may be like affection, nor is the influence different as to the eye, but the
power that actuates it; if a man view a thousand Pictures, he generally likes
one best, and having perused all, returns to that; and though the Market be
free, and Wares various, a good Chapman sticks to what he best fancies, and
deals in it. Neither is all perfection thereby impaled in one Creature; but
there may be enough supposed in one, to content one. That your self has ever
loved, I question; but that you have fancied, and mist, may be true; but you
cannot thereby go out a cometetent Tutor. Nor should I ever take that Mariner
for my Pilot, who has no other experience then splitting his own Ship; first
guide your own Vessel to the Port, before you take another to your management
and steerage. What it is to be sick of Love or the Plague, you know much alike,
and so shall be believed, having studied both but in shape; for my part, I have
known many sick of Love, and yet recovered; but the Plague I have no skill in.
My desire is, that you participate of your own counsel; suspend your severe
censure to your friend, and sit first a strict Judge on your self, till time
and experience ripen your judgment and change your mind. Which I hope I shall
not longer expect, then until you have seriously perused and weighed the
experimental directions and wholesome advice of,

Thine, and thy Friends Friend. A. B.

A Letter to a Friend, delivering an Opinion concerning the Scotch Rising.
SIR,
THat you may receive an account of the Scotch business, and that there has
been such irresolute alteration about the Treaties lately, it is fit you know
this Northern storm, like a new Disease, has so far posed the Doctors of
State, that as yet they have not given it a name; though perchance they all
firmly believe it to be rebellion; and therefore, Sir, it is no wonder if these
do here as the learned in Physic, who when they know not certainly the grief,
prescribe Medicines sometimes too strong, sometimes too weak. The truth is, we
here judge concerning the Scotch Affairs much after the rate as Mortals do of
the Moon; the simple think it no bigger then a bushel, and some likewise think
it a vast World, with strange things undiscovered in it; two ill ways of
casting it up; sure the first will make us too secure; the other too fearful.
I confess I know not how to write in the middle, and set it right; nor do I
think you know; since I should believe the question rather to be, A King or no
King? then A Bishop or no Bishop? In great mutinies and insurrections of this
nature, pretenses speciously conscionable were never wanting; and indeed they
are necessary; for rebellion is of it self so ugly, that did it not put on the
vizard of Religion, it would affright rather then draw people unto it; and
being drawn, could not hold them without it. Imaginary cords that seem to
fasten man to Heaven, have tied things here below faster then any other
obligation. If it be liberty of conscience they ask; it is a foolish request,
seeing they have it already, and must have in despite of power. For as
Theodoret says to the Jews, Nemo cogitur credere invitus. If they exercise
that liberty, it is dangerous; for not three men are of the same opinion in all;
and then each Family must have a War within it self. Look upon the long
Preparations, and consider withal that Prophecies are ceased, and therefore
they could not foretell this ^ook should be sent to them, and you will conclude
they rather employed conscience then conscience them. Inquiry after the
Leaders, and you will hardly find them Apostles, or men of so high sanctity,
that they should order Religion; Lesley himself if his sore were searched,
would certainly be found one, who because he could not live well there, took up
a trade of killing men abroad; and now is returned to kill men at home. If you
will have my opinion, I think their quarrel to the King is the same they have
to the Sun that he does not warm them so much, nor visit them so often as he does
others. God and Nature placed them in the shade, and they are angry with the
King for it: To conclude, this is the case; the great and wise Husbandman has
placed these Beasts ^^ out-fields, and they would needs break hedges to come
unto the Garden. This is the belief of

Yours, J. S.

A Whore
IS one of Sampson's Foxes, that carries fire in the tail, to destroy the
standing corn, She goes under the name of a decayed Gentlewoman; and indeed she
is gentle enough, a half Crown will make her come to hand. The Devil and she
are copartners in undoing, for one spoils the body, the other the soul.
Turn-up she affects above all roots in the Garden. She cares not for the
Bridewell, having lain often at the common Ward. Her walk is Covent Garden; and
her Exchange a Tavern. He that goes to salute her, is deceived, for she is very
coy of her lips, and therefore bulwarks them about with paint. Her breath
stinkes worse then a Bear-garden; her furniture consists of a Playster-box, a
Periwig, and a Looking-glass; besides a Pimp, which she accounts one of her
necessary implements. She is a she-Bias, and can say, Omnia mea mecum porto.
She is a preservative against a hard frost; and a Regiment of them will beggar
Newcastle, for they carry fire about them. Her children, if any, are like
windfalls, and found in the Kings highway. She is not ambitious, but delights
in fallings; yet by her falling her Stallions rise. She is a hackney Jade, and
lets every fool ride her; a Barbers chair, as soon as one is out, another is
in. She is a very Butcher, and sells her flesh by the stone; one may buy her
awhole at the price of damnation. She is like a Medlar, never ripe till rotten;
like Camomile, she thrives the better the more she is trod. About thirty she is
in her Zenith, and then from thence she declines; for the pox, or rotten teeth,
etc. will write her stale, or ugly, and trading will decay; and then her only
preferment is the degree of a Bawd, where three Strong-water bottles, an ounce
of Tobacco, and two Country Wenches, sets her up; and she drives a trade till
Shrove-tuesday; and a Cart and a bunch of Turnips is the reward of her labors;
and the Bridewell the limbo of both body and bones.

A Patentee
WAs sometimes a Gentleman of Fortunes, but being cast overboard by his own
riot or folly, lays hold of the next thing he meets with. He is begot like a
Mule, between a Courtier and a Citizen, but turns Parricide to both. No air
nips him so much as a West wind coming from the Parliament House, for that
brings him to the Falling Sickness; the Republique and his re-private never are
in conjunction; but like Castor and Pollux, when one sets the other rises. He
is an excellent Alchymist, and can draw Gold out of Soap, Candles, and
Marrow-bones, and what not? Nothing angers him so much as the sound of a
Reformation; for then he is projecting to procure a Patent to hang himself.
Like a Louce, he shrowds on the shoulders of Greatness; for that is his main
protection. All honest men shun his company, and he theirs; in which regard you
may call him a Separatist. His walk is Westminster Hall, or the Court, with his
handful of Papers, because he would be taken for a man of note. The Monopolist
and he, like Hippocrates twins, both live and die together. In his chamber his
Glass and he are in a deep consultation, how to set his face that it may go
even with the times; like a Watch, whereof his tongue is the Alarm. His
pretenses are fair, for the benefit and ease of the Subject; To reform some
grievance (meaning his own poverty;) to increase Trade, (meaning of Patentees)
and to prevent disorders; to which he rather adds a sail then a ballast. He
has little skill in the Law, but only in the penal Statutes, and that in a
defensive way to play the knave in a circle, and yet keep out of their bounds
to prevent hanging: and less in the Gospel, unless to fish by Peter's example,
for such fish as have Money in their mouths. His Religion is commonly but
skin-deep, it may appear in his countenance, but it never comes near his heart;
it is writ upon changeable Taffata, for good and lawful considerations; his
Religion and his Practice make him like the new invented Pictures, one way an
Angel, another way a Devil. All his life is a continued Cataline's Conspiracy;
he and the Commonwealth are like two feet, if one rise, the other falls; if
both chance to rise together, it is but a leap, that the fall may be the
greater. He feeds upon new Projects; his drink is the tears of the poor
Laborers; and commonly his Livery is the ruin of some Corporation. His
disease lies in his ears, for he is commonly infected with a Pillory; which at
last comes into his neck, and Tiburne ends him; where his only glory is, that
he died for the Commonwealths good.

A Politic
IS one that makes Heaven bow to Earth; he places his summum bonum in Earths
felicity, and depends on no other Providence but the reach of his own brain.
His Religion is but the vizard of his policy; and whatever virtue he has, craft
is the keeper of it. His looks are candid, and hypocrisy is the only Saint he
adores. All his discourses are obscure and ambiguous; like the Devils in the
Delphick Oracle; you may understand the words, but not the meaning. He is like
an Aspen-tree, every wind of Greatness blows him, and he bends. Is his
Prince valourous? he is daring; covetous? he is sparing; lascivious? he is
wanton; religious? he pretends much; his heart is a Theater, wherein all
humors are presented, and his face pantomimicall. He is of that man's Religion,
with whom he talks; a Caesarean, a Pompeian, which soever prevails; he will cry,
Up with them, and, Down with them, all in a breath. Like a Water-man, he looks
one way and rows another; or like a Lapwing, keeps most noise when she is
farthest from her nest; or a cunning Fencer, that seldom makes a blow without a
falsify; suller of Questions then Answers; rather desiring to know another
secrets, then bewray his own. Pleasures he is not much delighted in, but only
like the Dog at Nilus, laps as he runs, for fear of the Crocodile. Every one
that he deals with, he supposes has the Master-reach in cunning; and
therefore still carries both eyes open. His sight is strong enough to apprehend
dangers in Embrio, and so quells them before shape or form make them terrible.
If a Contract blow favorably, he hoiseth sails, and with it steers his
Voyage; if a cross gale comes to his main underground Design, he thrusts out
the Oars of fair Pretenses through the Port-holes of his conseience. He would
be accounted every man's friend, that he might know his secrets. All his actions
are tipped with fair Pretenses, yet are directed to himself; and therefore
looks no higher. Whatever his Theme be, his Application is his own ends: yet he
is often contented to do any cheap courtesies; and makes himself very joyful
and happy in an opportunity, so as he be sure to be no loser by it. His cap and
knee, his smiles and good words, are all at a minutes warning, to be dealt
about on all occasions. In a word, he is one that loves no man, but with a
reservation; nor will trust any; nor indeed any wise man him, farther then he
sees him.

A Clubber
IS a Hogs-head set on two stumps, fit for no use but to hold Liquor; the
Tavern only is his ubi and the proper place of his residence; any other where
he is like a Fish out of the water, who does nothing but gape. He thinks Nature
gave him a mouth, not to speak, but to drink off his Liquor, for that is the
main use he puts it to; he drinks not to live (as Nature commands) but lives to
drink. Of all the Miracles that ever Christ did, he thinks none so meritorious
for the salvation of his soul, as the turning water into Wine; and he in
imitation can work a miracle too; for he can turn a whole Shop of Wares into a
Pint-pot. His only enquiry is, where dwells the best Sack or Claret? You shall
find him and his Tribe about the declining part of the day, at rendezvous,
like a Constellation fixed in the lower Region of a known Tavern; where their
noses appear like Comets, and portend drough; there they are accommodated with
a private Room, a half-Pint, some clean Pipes, and a Jordan. Their first
Discourse is a general Vote about the goodness of the Wine; the next pair of
half-Pints produces News; where each puffs over the inside of a Diurnal; but
for want of that, the main Scene is, who were drunk the night before, and how
they reeled home. They are internally Pharisees, and very exact in making clean
the inside of the Glass; their strictest Criticisme is, Drink off your Cup. At
last, when it strikes twelve, they make a liquor'd Reckoning, drink their Wives
Health, in whose defense they are dutifully drunk, till they lose their own;
and then they stagger home to bed, and find it in small beer in the morning.

A politic Citizen
IS a lump of combustible ignorance, whom the least spark of news fires into a
blaze of unlikely conjectures; he measures all the designs of Foraign News by
the line of Stow's Chronicle; which he never hears read, but out flies a piece
of nonsense, which he miscalls State Policy, able to confound Machiavel. He
much haunts the Posthouse to note into what forms men concoct their faces at
the reading of Letters; he frequents the Exchange in the Postmeridian hours,
because then men empty themselves of intelligence; his only factorage is news;
viewing a Bill of Exchange, he swears it is a Libell. Tell him of a Curranto and
he is in Heaven; he takes an Almanac of foul weather for one of Merlin's
Prophesies. Upon hearing of a Victory, or loss of a Sconce, he is enraged, and
blames the State that he was not a General; he extolls the Low Countries
Government above any Monarchy, because the fat Citizens rule the roast; he
holds it impossible for the State ever to be ruined, because it swims in
Butter. His face is a piece of Stenography, where all Bicheliews designs are
writ in shorthand. He keeps a common place-book of hard State-words, which
though nor he nor his English Dictionary understand, he after an Aldermans
Plumb-broth Feast spews out among the learned Fraternity; and is therefore
slandered with the name of a Politician, and he turns Heretic and believes it;
for they had rather ignorantly admire his speeches, then go to the price of
understanding them. All the passages he hears are Stratagems; if he hear but a
Ballad, he smells Treason in it; he cannot endure Plays, because there are
Plots in them; ask him a question, you undermine him; answer him with silence,
he takes you for a State Informer; he tells news by tale, not by weight. There
is no way to strike him dumb but drawing out your Table Book; every man is a
fool that is not of his opinion, but he takes him for an undoubted wise man
that applauds his conjectures; he seldom approves any thing that he
understands, and yet he approves most things; he meditates on an old Manuscript
more then the Pentateuch; he wonders why the Apocalypse is put in the end of the
Bible, and thinks it a disgrace; he takes Brightman for a better Interpreter
then Daniel; he cuts the Apocrypha out of his Bible, for fear of infection; yet
cannot tell why he hates it, but because it is Apocrypho; and thinks Solomon but
a fool in suffering his wisdom to be put there. Monarchy he cannot abide, but
says it is against Christian Liberty; but thinks Anarchy is as old as the Chaos.
He takes Malchus's Servant to be a Saint, because he had his ear cut; yet
thinks him not right of his opinion, because he had one left. He takes Peter
for a Popish Bishop, because he cut off that ear. Where'ere the Scripture says
strive, he takes it for fighting; that makes him so in love with Civil War.
Among his Superiors he is dumb; to his inferiors deaf; the one he offends by
silence, the other by prating; to both he is ridiculous. In a word, he is the
State Incendiary, the Cities bane, and Kings evil.

A. Schismatic.
IS one of those rash Servants that will not let the Wheat and the Tares grow
together; but crops off his hair, or rather weeds it up, lest it should hinder
the growth of his ears, that when the harvest of tribulation comes, they may be
reaped by handfulls for good Considerations. He thinks it impossible to be
saved if ones hair transcends his teeth in longitude. He is in the head an
Hermaphridite, between a Friar and a Turk, the one shaves round the head, the
other the crown, he both; he hopes to be pulled up to Heaven by the ears, like
a pitcher. He is a Papist turned the wrong side outward, and so strongly
denies their tenets, that he grants their maximies; his Religion and theirs run
round in a circle till they meet. He is fallen out with Learning so, that he
thinks ignorance his main saving grace; and would be content to speak no
Language but sanctified Bulls, but that the Pope uses them; he stands much for
Christian liberty, yet will tie all men from the use of ceremonies; free will
he cries down in a Papist, yet maintains that a Protestant may do what he
please. All his discourse is the sand of zeal bound together without the lime
of reason; for he calls that humane Traditions, and protests the Brethren do
not use it. You cannot vex him more, then to tell him his soul is Gods Image;
for he hates idolatry. To speak Languages (he says) is to glory in the
confusion of Babel; and to talk sense, is to advance carnal reason above the
Spirit. He wears his soul, as a Gallant that has put on his Periwig the back
part foremost; for whereas his will should be judicious, his judgment is
wilful. He flies humane Learning as from a Serpent; three words of Latin will
give him nine stools. His knowledge, how small soever, never sinks into his
heart, but only swims in his brain; standing bare at a Sermon makes his zeal
catch cold, and that brings snuffling in the nose. He is one of the Attorneys
of Dovers Court; and can with more patience talk five hours, then hear one. In
company he is excellent Physic; for he will either purge your gall with anger,
or your spleen with laughter. Against every new meeting, he takes in store of
new Arguments to maintain some newfangled opinion; which when he vents, his
proselytes are ravished with admiration, and think him inspired with strange
revelations, that he can speak English and they not under stand him. He will
cross the Kings Highway rather then view a Cross there. Aristotle was never so
corrupted with Dutch Comments, as the Scripture is with his; his brain is like
the puddle at Oxford, into which Aristotle's Well dischannels it self, and
becomes stinking water. When he takes a Bishop in his mouth, it is in that sense
as a Wolf takes a Lamb; not (...), but simpliciter. Tell him of a High
Commission, and he holds his ears, and says there is a mystery in that Posture.
Set but his zeal on fire, and it will flame, though it smother a Kingdom; the
only way to confute him is silence or laughter. He is all for Independent
Church Government, yet wishes all the Orthodox Clergy hanged. He holds a
Stable as holy as a Church; but holds a Chamber holier then both, if it be well
furnished; that is, with a Bed and a Sister; and then he cares not how long he
stands. He that would draw the character of his Religion, had need have a Map
of all the Earth, and of Hell too, where his Principles are deeply rooted. He
will not believe that Christ ever descended into Hell, but intends to take a
Journey thither himself to dispute with the Devil. There let him go for me.

A Gallant
IS one that Nature made while the World was in a Chaos, and therefore detests
order ab origin. He dares use his tongue against Heaven; but scarce his hands
against a Butterfly. Is he sober? his care is how to be drunk, is he drunk? his
next task is how to shift the reckoning. All his Discourses are buttered with
Oaths, which he uses Euphoniae gratia. He has worn out all his friends, but the
Hangman; and all his Apparel, but his Sword; which he hacks sometimes against
a Mantlepost, and swears he has been in a desperate encounter; coming from a
Bawdy House, he swears he has been in hot service, though his courage be soon
taken down. Two French postures he has naturally, viz. to have his Flanks and
his hair fall off; which last defect he supplies with the mercenary
Auxiliaries, a Periwig. His face speaks him no true Subject, because of its
frequent risings; to which Rebels his nose is Standardbearer, and carries the
colors. His common Notion or Titlepage is a Low Country Soldier; under which
vizard he boasts of Victories and Adventures which he heard discoursed of at
the last Tavern. He sets his faith to sale, and cries, Who will give most? His
Loyalty lasts no longer then his Money. His threats are like Thunderclaps, or
the motions of Mountains; and if a blow be brought forth, it is like a Mouse; in
the midst of his fury, if you care not for his menaces, nor fear his blows, he
will shake hands with you. 'Twere fearful if his valor were as great as his
wickedness; or if his power echoed his will. Though he be an Infidel himself,
he would have others believe his Oaths when he promises payment. You cannot do
him a greater discourtesie, then to make his Chyrurgeon drunk, for then he
bewrays his secrets. He keeps good quarter with his Landress, lest she should
discover the spots of his conversation. The first thing he does in morning, is
to bid a Pox take those Fleas that bit him at night; which is sure to be
granted; and the last thing he does at night, is to curse the Gentleman that
cudgelled him that day. In the morning, imitating the Sun immediately after his
rise, he passes into an Alehouse; or if he can get one to spend for him, to a
Tavern; so passes from sign to sign, through a whole Zodiac in a day, till
he comes to Aquarius; and then goes by water to a Bawdy House, and comes out by
fire. He believes there is no Sign of Virgo left in the World. In the end you
shall find him kicked by his Companions for having no Money about him, which
he swears is in his other pockets, when as he has but only one Suit; and that
is threadbare before the Tailor is paid. Thus when he has gone his round, and
been abused by his Companions for abusing them, he reels into the mouths of the
Watch, and from thence is rolled into the Counter; where to his credit, many
great Actions are imputed to him.

A Ballad-maker
IS a Volume of Rhyme composed by the hand of nonsense; or a musical
Instrument, not yet tuned. An Alehouse he accounts the only Helicon; and the
Ale-drapers Wife one of the nine Muses. His wit runs thick or clear, like the
Ale-barrell. He is a second Charon; for none are wafted over by the way of
Tiburn, but he receives money for their passage. He exceedingly longs for
blazing Stars, Earthquakes, Dearths, or strange accidents. The Brethren keep
constant correspondency with him, that he may compose their Libels into Meter;
and being whipped or Pillory'd for it, he rejoices, saying that he suffers for
the truth. His Companions call him Poet at every word, but it is in a jeer; and
being patient to bear all slanders, believes it, and bears it. Call him Goose
or Wood-cock, he is enraged; but yet had rather eat your words, then you
should. He is sensible of no Argument but beating; and that alone drives him
out of your company. He is in pay by the Country Wenches, to write Love
Stories to lamentable Tunes, which they sing to the Cows, and make them weep
milky tears to hear them. His common Vaticans where his Books are preserved,
are the windows and walls of an Alehouse in the Country. He like the
Emblematists, is beholden to an Engraver; but only his Wood carver has certain
common Places; a man and a woman serve like Panpharmacons, for all occasions.
He is a dutiful Son of the Church, and loves no innovations in Musicks; but
they go like Hopkins and Wisdom, to the Tune of the same. He is in no better
cue to write a lamentable Story, then when he is Mawdlen-drunk; his brain is
the common-shore of Poetry; the streams which he sucks from Poets, he defiles
with the muddy stinking puddles of his Additions. There is many a man is made a
Martyr by his Elegies; wherein his Encomiasticks persecute the very ashes, and
hypocritically tear the dead body of Hercules with a smiling countenance. In a
word; he is the Suburbs of a Poet; whose Sepulcher is the Stocks, and his
Monument a Pillory.

The Character of a self-conceited Fellow.
HE is, I dare not say a Man, nor Boy; but in the Parenthesis of both; yet he
thinks only a beard is wanting to proclaim his manhood; because he has taken
up Women's Smocks, he writes sumpta virili toga, when indeed his wit is hardly
out of the clouts. He is an Ape, that imitates both, but wanting the wit of the
one, acts naturally the folly of the other. He thinks himself of deep
judgment, yet has nothing deep about him, but the pits of his nose; which
makes him boast of hills and dales in his own possession. He affects two
contraries; for he will be a laughing stock to good company, where his highest
ambition is to be told he talks like an Apothecary; or else is the Bellweather
of children, fools, or Frenchmen; who have neither English enough to reprove
his nonsense, nor to approve his no-wit; but pas it over for jests by ignorant
laughter. He is an ignis fatuus to mislead fools by a shining nothing that is
in him or a blazing Star placed in the lower Regions of a Tavern; and a Cup in
his brain portends the birth of some prodigious Conceit. To ingratiate himself
into good company, he keeps constantly in pay a Regiment of jests and hard
words, to salute their ears with a volley of nonsense; which if they be not
graced with laughter, he is nonsuited. But being disroabed of this store, he
whispers them of a Wench; and rather then want employment, will turn Pimp. You
cannot please him unless you praise him; nor praise him, unless you flatter
him, It is his summuni bonum to move laughter; and if his jests will not do it,
his gesture must; if neither, you may laugh at the Jestor. He most commonly
procures friendship with some wit, whom he enjoins to be the foreman in the
peale of laughter; who both to his face, and behind his back, laughs at him.
Much he affects to speak some Foraigne Language, because in all his Discourse
he would overreach the capacity of an Englishman. He whispers How do you, as if
'twere Treason, in the ears of any new acquaintance, to make others think he
is privy to their secrets. He always detracts from other men's worth behind
their backs; as if he knew by instinct others dispraised him; and it goes hard
if a man wears any clothes, but he will pick a hole in his coat. He has not
exchanged two words with Nature in love (I had almost said since he was of
understanding) because she made him so low, that he cannot overlook other men's
actions; but to help this defect, he has gotten the faculty of taking the wall
of his betters; having nothing in himself worth this knowledge; he scorns
noscere seipsum. The thing is sometimes Poetical wherein he casts up his
ignorance, to make it seem of high account; he writes like the Egyptian
darkness, wherein he shows cunning; for when men laugh at his Verses, he may
say they laugh at they know not what; and can boast of more then any Modern
Poet, that he writes above humane apprehension. He carries such a deep conceit
of his own conceits, that he thinks no man worthy to understand them; nay he is
such a nigard, that he grudgeth himself the benefit. The Subject of his Fancy
is himself; wherein he truly shows himself poetical, if Fictions can do. He
mislikes every man after the first acquaintance; nay grows weary of his native
Country, and will travel; and his actions and carriage therein, not tongue
can express but his own, for he may lie by Authority. Himself is gone beyond
the limits of my Paper, where my Pen nor can nor will follow him.

The Character of a City Wit.
HE is a gaudy Vacuum, gilded over with a few hard words, which he imagines to
have a deep meaning, because his dull sense cannot dive into it; which with
much pains he has weeded from Authors, and placed in Garrison in a common
place-book, that he might draw out a Regiment of Recruits when his wit is
routed. His Discourse is a Line of Sand, or a composition of so many foot and
half-words, which being put together, spell nonsense. He admits not a word
into his Society, under the degree of a Tetrasilable; and takes all Discourse
by measure, not weight. He were the only man to be Minshew's Son, and compose
another Dictionary of hard words, had he but wit enough to spell them, or
learning to tell their signification. Yet he thinks his nose a Jacobs Staff,
able to calculate the height of any man's fancy. By his tedious Discourses of
Herauldry, he would make you believe he were a Gentleman. And to gain Honor,
he dares be a Soldier; and has taken up Arms on his Signet, for defense of
his little finger; but intends only to fight by the Heralds Book, where his
valor will be seen by the miserable hanging, drawing, and quartering of his
innocent Coat. He had been preferred to a Trumpeters place, but that he could
sound no Alarm, but his own praise. Had he but Poetry, he would out-vaper Ben;
but he will not speak a Verse, lest they should be taken for children of his own
begetting, and known by their long legs. Besides his speeches are so
masterless, they think it against the Liberty of the Subject to be chained in a
Verse. In his Arguments his Solutions are more intricate then the Question; and
that man needs a deep reach that would define his definition. After many
Pleonasmes and Circumlocutions, he is delivered at length of a non-sequitur;
yet makes no Conclusion, for his Discourse is endless. You may be sick of a
Consumption, and cured before he has finished a Complement; and it is a wonder
if the Palsy in his tongue procure not the frenzy in his head. Shows he
prefers before substance; and esteems an Alchoran in Folio before a pocket
Bible. He uses much to discommend himself; which we must interpret as a
praise, the clean contrary way; yet rather then lose a drop of his praise, he
will lick it up with his own tongue. The way to gain his favor, is neither to
understand him, nor be understood by him; he will then applaud the depth of
your judgment; for it is his property to think nothing deep, unless it be
muddy. He accounts no man rich in wit, that does not gingle with it in every
fools company; he thinks not that a man's Warehouse may be full, whose Shop is
empty; and a Fountain of Learning in that head, where there is no channel in
the tongue. He would fain be a Philosopher, for he is very peripateticall; and
because his wit is bald, he Periwigs it with stolen Comings, which he calls his
own, because he bought them, and says he studied hard for them; but it was
only to remember them; and if by chance any word do put out his head in
company, and is not conceived, he will swear it is an admirable conceit. Because he
is tall, he thinks his fancy is predominant, and therefore is apt to insult
over any short man, though he has more understanding. He thinks every man
barren of Worth, that has not his tongue tipped with selfe-praise; and those
unacquainted with wit, that have not their fancies writ in their faces,
perspicuous to every Reader. He is mighty glad if he be in company with a fool,
and thinks him his foil, though indeed he be his Looking-glass. From the
ruins of good Buildings he erects the Babels of his own conceit, and enriches
his brain; which indeed is no other but a confusion of Languages, where scarce
one syllable understands another. In the Church we must look for him in the
highest Pew; but I am loath to stay his coming out, lest he offend my stomach
with some tedious Paraphrase upon the Sermon; but there I leave him praying
against a handsome Wife, lest he be made a Cuckold; and against a witty
Companion, lest he be made a Coxscomb.

J. B.

The Character of a Humourist.
HIs principal humor shall be my excuse; that is, inconstancy; it is hard to
draw his Picture, that will not settle his countenance; therefore expect it
rather in a Landscape then Statua. He is unsettled both in his actions and
opinions; which shows his fancy to predominate in him, rather then judgment;
yet can it not be denied, but that he is master of a sound judgment, but he
makes others, not himself the subject of it; being better able to inform
others, then reform his life; and more able to declaim against others vices,
then reclaim his own. His anger is more active then hot, rather scorching then
burning; soon kindled, and as soon quenched. And though that man must needs make
a strange combustion in the State of his soul, that upon the landing of every
Cockboat sets the Beacons on fire; yet because his Reason stands Centinell,
it is rather a disorder then a mutiny. Virtue he more gazeth after then follows;
or if he do follow, it is rather with his tongue then feet; choosing to talk
with her sooner then walk after her; and prefers a dram of Theoricks before a
pound of Practicks. At the Game of unlawful Pleasures he had rather be an
Actor then a Spectator; seldom forsaking them till teeth like he be forced to
drop off through too much satiety. Melancholy he will be in the midst of mirth;
certainly when he and his serious thoughts meet together (for they are
strangers) they are excellent company. Venus he esteems above all the seven
Planets; but had rather worship her in a Bawdy House then in any of the twelve
Celestial Signs. In his Materials he is a Gentleman; but Fortune has cast
him in the City Mould. No doubt but age will reclaim his unstay'dness; it is no
great fault in a young Horse to use unreasonable mounting. To his friends he is
rather formal then real; apt to trust them with his person, not secrets. In a
falling out of two friends, he will rather side with one, then bring both
agreed; which is an Index of some indiscretion; thereby he being sure of two
friends, to make one his enemy. He is no stranger to Poetry, which is Music in
words; nor to Music, which is Poetry in sound; yet rather makes them his Sauce
then Meat. For Logic, which gives Speech substance; or Rhetoric, which gives
it Beauty; or Grammar, which gives a Tongue to Speech it self; he has only
taken a cursory view of the first of the three; but has ruminated on the two
last. But lest I make my Garment to big for the Body which I took measure of;
and being something in haste, I conclude with his own Proverb, By -- I cannot
stay.

J. B.

The Character of a FUDLER.
WE will only take a cursory view of him as he is in company, being not yet so
unhappy to know him farther; but we may guess at the bulk of Hercules by his
foot. He is a confused lump molded when Nature did all things in the dark; a
Cub of the Chaos not licked into form, rolled from Tavern to Tavern only to be
drunk and laughed at; where he grunts out words as illshap'd and gross as his
person; and if his speeches do chance to quarrel, you must take them as they
fall out. His body is built like Babel, but never with an intent to reach
Heaven; the Workmen were confounded, and put Mortar where Gold should be. His
ordinary Discourse is only scurrility and profaness in a miscellany, boiled
together in huge quantities of Sack, which he carves to his friends as prime
Dainties. Rather then his Jests shall want fire, he will light them at Gods
Altar; and though a Conceit grow on the Banks of Hell, he will adventure to
fetch it; not caring to gain his Conceit, though he lose his soul. In company
he monopolizeth all the Discourse to himself; not regarding if his tongue keep
on a gallop before, how far his understanding loyters behind. Sometimes his Wit
stumbles on a Jest, as he that shoots thick, sometimes may hit; and then you
will do him a great discourtesie, if you do not laugh; but the main body of his
Discourse is a Wild-goose chase after some printed wit, which he cannot catch.
When he speaks, it is not the motion of his tongue, but the rattling of his
brains; and it is worth our wonder, that his belly should be so full, and head
so empty; but the fullness of the one is the emptiness of the other. His belly,
like the great Fish, eats up all the rest of his limbs, yet his wit is as fat
as that. He has spent much time in travel to learn to be an Ass; all that he
has seen is the Tun at Hadleburgh, which he studies to imitate; and all that he
has brought away, is the exact managing of his Fork at Table. He walks in the
streets like a Rundlet of Sack on two posts; and where'ere he goes, he carries
a fool with him. His study is old Jests and Tales; his recreation, Drinking;
and his main occupation is Wenching. But I fear I have been too long in his
company; by this time he is drunk, it is time to leave him lest he spue in our
faces.

A Solicitor
IS one of the blades of Corn that springs from the Ilian ruins, whose ears
grow up for the Harvest of a Pilory. His Profession is originally like a
Cuckoo, from the Nest of another Trade; where he has learned wrangling and
knavery enough in his own Causes to spoil another man's. With the sweetened
Ingredients of City fraud he compounds himself (though simple enough) for any
villainy. He is truly said to follow a Cause; but a small Bribe will lame him
so, that he will never come near it. He is one of Sampson's Foxes, that fires
all about him; but that his fire is generally in his nose, as well as his tail.
His ambition is so low, not to have his Chamber in an Innes of Court, but in an
Alehouse of the City; a Tavern is his form, and licking of Pots his Law. Most
of his Actions are Assaults, or Slanders; which are broached where his Ale is,
in a Cellar; and after a long circumstance, center themselves where they begun;
where his foolish Client, being weary of his fruitless endless Suit, and
repenting the idle expense of his Money for an imaginary va^num, called getting
the day; like the Chemist, that blows away his Silver and Lungs, for that Fools
(rather then Philosophers) Stone; does by his wholesome advice, when his Money is
spent, refer his Suit to Arbitrators and Vmpires; whose Verdict is, after long
debate, A Supper for themselves, at the equal charge of both Parties; That
both must be sony for what they have done (as they have good cause) and sit
down by their losses. He seldom gets any considerable preferment, but among
Fish-wives or Watermen, or in a Country Village, where all stand in awe of
him, and slander him with the Title of Master Lawyer. Ignorance and beggary
makes him resolute, that he dares thrust his head into any employment. At last,
having run through the Zodiac of all Courts, if he escape the preferment of the
Gallows, he casts Anchor in a Goal, or a Bridewell; and there we leave him.

FINIS.

