The Censure of the ROTA Upon Mr MILTONS Book, ENTITLED, The Ready and Easy
way to Establish A Free Commonwealth.

Die Lunae 26. Martij, 1660. Ordered by the Rota, that M. Harrington be desired
to draw up a Narrative of this days proceeding upon Mr. Miltons Book, called,
The Ready and Easy way, etc. And to cause the same to be forthwith Printed and
Pulished, and a Copy thereof to be sent to Mr. Milton.

Trundle Wheeler, Clerk to the ROTA.

LONDON, Printed by Paul Giddy, Printer to the Rota, at the sign of the
Windmill in Turne-againe Lane.

1660.

The Censure of the ROTA Upon Mr. Milton's Book, ENTITLED, A Ready and Easy
way to Establish a Free COMMONWEALTH.
SIR,
I Am commanded by this ingenious Convention of the Rota, to give you an
account of some Reflections that they have lately made upon a Treatise of
yours, which you call, The ready and easy way to establish a Free
Commonwealth; in which I must first bespeak your pardon, for being forced to
say something, not only against mine own sense, but the Interesse which both
you and I carry on; for it is enjoined me to acquaint you with all that was
said, although I take as little pleasure to repeat it, as you will do to hear
it. For whereas it is our usual custom to dispute every thing, how plain or
obscure soever, by knocking Argument against Argument, and tilting at one
another with our heads (as Rams fight) until we are out of breath, and then
refer it to our wooden Oracle the Box; and seldom any thing, how slight soever,
has appeared, without some Patron or other to defend it. I must confess, I
never saw Bowling-stones run so unluckily against any Boy, when his hand has
been out, as the Ballots did against you, when anything was put to the
question, from the beginning of your Book to the end. for it was no sooner read
over, but a Gentleman of your acquaintance said, he wished for your own sake,
as well as the Cause you contend for, that you had given your Book no name
(like an Anabaptist's child) until it had come to years of discretion, or else
that you had got some friend to be Gossip, that has a luckier hand at giving
Titles to Books than you have: For it is observed, you have always been very
unfortunate that way, as if it were fatal to you to prefix Bulls and Nonsense
to the very fronts of your learned Works, as when you call Salmasius, Claudius
Anonymus, in the very Title of that admired piece, which you writ to confute
his Wife and his Maid. As also in that other learned Labor of yours, which you
style Tetrachordon, that is to say, a Fiddle with four strings; but, as you
render it, a Fourfold Cord, with which you undertake (worse then Captain
Ottor, and Cuthbert the Barber) not to bind, but (most ridiculously) to unty
Matrimony. But in this Book, he said, you were more insufferable; for you do
not only style your Declamation, The ready and easy way, as if it were the
best or only way, to the disparagement of this most ingenuous Assembly, who
are confident, they have proposed others much more considerable; but do very
indiscreetly profess in the same place, to compare the Excellencies of a
Commonwealth with the inconveniences and dangers of Kingship; this, he said,
was foul play, and worse Logic: For, as all conveniences in this world carry
their inconveniences with them, to compare the Best of one thing with that
Worst of another, is a very unequal way of comparison. He had observed, that
Comparisons were commonly made on the wrong side, and so was this of yours, by
your own confession. To this, another added, He wondered you did not give over
writing, since you have always done it to little or no purpose; for though you
have scribled your eyes out, your works have never been printed but for the
Company of Chandlers and Tobacco-men, who are your Stationers, and the only
men that vend your Labors. He said, that he himself reprieved the Whole Defense
of the People of England for a groat, that was sentenced to vile Mundungus, and
had suffered inevitably (but for him) though it cost you much Oil and Labor,
and the Rump 300 I. a year, to whose service it was more properly intended;
although in the close, you pronounce them to be as very Rascals as Salmasius,
and all the Christian world calls them, if ever they suffered any of their
Fellow Members to invade the Government (as O. Cromwell and others have since
dove) and confess your self fooled and mistaken, and all you have written to
be false, howsoever you give your self the second lie in writing for them
again. After this, a grave Gentleman of the long Roab, said, You had broken the
heads of all the Sages of the Law, and played false in the very first word of
your Treatise. For the Parliament of England (as you call the Rump) never
consisted of a packed Party of one House, that by fraud and covin had disseaz'd
the major part of their Fellows, and forfeited their own right, by abetting the
ejectment of the whole House of Peers, and the greater part of their own (which
was always understood to be the whole House) with whom they had but a joint
Right. That they had been several times justly dissolved by the Army, from
whom they really derived their Authority; and the general Voices of the
People, in whom they had declared the supreme Power to reside; and their own
confession upon Record in their Journall-Book. But this, he said, you stole
from Patriot Whitlock, who began his Declaration for a Free State with the same
words; and he wondered you would filch and pilfer Nonsense and Fallasies, that
have such plentiful store of your own grouth. Yet this was as true as that
which follows, That a great number of the faithfullest of the People assisted
them in throwing off King ship; for they were a very slight number in respect
of the whole, and none of the faithfullest that forswore themselves, to
maintain and defend that which they judged dangerous, and resolved to abolish.
And therefore they turned Regal Bondage (as you word it) into a Free
Commonwealth, no more justly and magnanimously, than other Knights of the Post
do their feats, by plain downright perjury. And the Nation had little reason
to trust such men with their Liberty or Propriety, that had no right to their
own ears, but, among the rest of their Cheats, had defrauded the very Pillory
of its due. This being put to the Ballot was immediately carried on in the
Affirmative, without a diffenting Pellet. When presently a Gentleman, that has
been some years beyond-Seas, said, He wondered you would say any thing so false
and ridiculous, as that this Commonwealth was the terror and admiration of
France it self; for if that were true, the Cardinal and Council were very
imprudent to become the chief Promoters of it, and strive by all means to
uphold that, which they judged to be dangerous to themselves, and for the
Interesse of a Nation, which they hate and fear so much as they do us; for if
this Free State be so terrible to them, they have been very unwise in assisting
it to keep out the King all this while; especially if they saw the people of
Paris and Bordeaux disposed (as you say) to imitate us, which appears very
strange; for by their history, any man would judge we had caught the disease
of them. As for our actions abroad, (which you brag of) he said, he never heard
of any where he was, until O. Cromwell reduced us to an absolute Monarchy under
the name of a Free state; and then we beat the Potent and flourishing
Republique of the United Provinces. But for our actions at home, he had heard
abroad, that they savoured much of Goth and Vandall barbarism, if pulling down
of Churches, and demolishing the noblest Monuments in the Land, both Public
and Private, (beside Religion and all Laws, Human and Divine) may amount to so
much. And yet, he said, he granted what you affirm, That they were not
unbecomming the rising of a glorious Commonwealth, for such are usually
founded in Faction, Sedition, Rebellion, Rapine, and Murder. And how much
soever you admire the Romans, -- ab infami gentem deducis Asylo, if you
remember, they were at first but a Refuge for Thieves and Murderers. In all
Asia, Africa, and the New World, there is no such thing as a Republic, nor
ever was; but only that of Carthage, and some paltry Greek Colonies upon the
skirts of Asia minor; and (...) (...) Commonwealth there have been a hundred
King(...) world, which argues, they should be the more agreeable to Mankind. He
added, Commonly Republics arise from unworthy causes, not fit to be mentioned
in History; and that he had heard many Persons of Honor in Flanders affirm,
That it was not the Tyranny of Spain, nor the cruelty of Duke D' Alva, nor the
blood of their Nobility, nor Religion, nor Liberty, that made the Dutch cast
off their obedience to their Prince; but one penny Excise laid upon a pound of
Butter, that made them implacably declare for a Commonwealth. That the
Venetians were banished into a Free State by Atila, and their glorious Liberty
was at first no other, then he may be said to have that is turned out of his
house. That the Romans were Cookolded into their Freedom, and the Pisans
Trepand into theirs by Charles the eighth. That as Commonwealths sprung from
base Originalls, so they have ruined upon as slight occasions. That the same
Pisans, after they had spent all they had upon a Freak of Liberty, were sold
(like Cattle) by Lewis the 12 th. The Venetians Hectored, and almost ruined by
Maximilian the first, a poor Prince, for refusing to lend him money, as they
were not long before by Francesco Sforza about a Bastard. The Florentines
utterly enslaved for spoiling an Embossador's Speech, and disparaging Petro de'
Medici's fine Livereys. The Genoeses -- But as he was going on, he was
interrupted by a Gentleman that came in and told us, that Sir Arthur Hazlerig,
the Brutus of our Republique, was in danger to be torn in pieces (like a
Shrovetuesday Bawd) by the Boys in Westminster Hall; and if he had not shown
himself as able a Footman as he that cudgelled him, he had gone the way of
Doctor Lamb infallibly. This set all the company a laughing, and made the
Traveller forget what he was saying. After a little pause, a learned Gentleman
of this Society stood up, and said, He could not but take notice of one
absurdity in your Discourse, and that is, where you speak of Liberty gloriously
fough for, and Kingly Thraldom abjured by the people, etc. for if by liberty,
you mean Commonwealth, (as you do) There was never any such thing, as either
the one, or the other; unless you will state the Quarrel at the end of the
War, which is very senseless, and directly contrary to all Oaths and
Engagements: or can prove that Hanging, Drawing, and Quartering of some of the
People, and selling others as Slaves, for taking up Arms in all parts of the
Nation for the King, are abjurations of his Authority; and he wondered, you
could be so weak, or impudent to play foul in matters of Fact, of which there
are so many thousands witnesses to disprove you. But he was of opinion, that
you did not believe your self, nor those reasons you give in defense of
Commonwealth, but that you are swayed by something else, as either by a
Stork-like Fate, (as a modern Protector-Poet calls it, because that Foul is
observed to live no where but in Commonwealths) or because, you have
unadvisedly scribled your self obnoxious, or else you fear such admirable
eloquence as yours, would be thrown away under a Monarchy, (as it would be)
though of admirable use in a Popular Government, where Orators carry all the
Rabble before them: For who knows to how Cheap a rate this goodly Eloquence of
yours, (if well manadg'd) might bring the price of Sprats, as no wiser Orators
then your self have done heretofore, in the petty factions, Greek Republiques,
whom you chiefly imitate; for all your Politiques are derived from the works of
Declamers, with which sort of Writers, the Ancient Commonwealths had the
fortune to abound, who left many things behind them in favor, or flattery of
the Governments they lived under, and disparagement of others, to whom they
were in opposition, of whom we can affirm nothing certain, but that they were
partial, and never meant to give a true account of things, but to make them
finer or worse then they really are; Of which men, one of their own
Commonwealth Poets, gives a just Character, by sorting them among the worst of
men.

-- (...),
(...) --
All which you have out-gone, (according to your Talent) in their several
waves, for you have done your feeble endeavor to Rob the Church, of the little
which the Rapine of the most sacrilegious Persons has left, in your learned
work against Tithes; You have slandered the Dead, worse then envy it self, and
thrown your dirty outrage, on the memory of a Murdered Prince, as if the
Hangman were but your Usher. These have been the attempts of your stiff
formal Eloquence, which you arm accordingly, with any thing that lies in your
way, right, or wrong, not only begging, but stealing questions, and taking
every thing for granted, that will serve your turn; For you are not ashamed to
rob O. Cromwell himself, and make use of his Canting with signal Assistances
from Heaven, and answering Condescensions: The most impious Mohammedan
Docttrine, that ever was vented among Christians, and such as will serve as
well to justify any prosperous villainy amongst men. He said, when God punishes
a Nation for sin, The Executiones of his Judgments, are commonly but
M^lefactors reprieved, as they are usually among men; For when he punished the
Israelites for Idolatry, he made use of greater Idolaters then themselves: And
when he afflicts a people for their disobedience, to a just Government, and
fantastique longing after imaginary Liberty, it is with infallible Slavery, for
their deliverers always prove their Tyrants. This the Romans found true, for
they had no sooner banished their Kings, but they were in few years glad to
banish themselves, from the Tyranny and oppression of their Patriots, the
Assertors of their Liberty, and that very Contest furnished their Free State
with Sedition, and Civil War for 500 years, and never ended, until they were
reduced to an absolute Tyranny, under the power of that faction, that took upon
it to vindicate their Liberty; He added, that he could not but smile at one
thing you said, and that is, That King and Bishops will encroach upon our
Consciences, until we are forced to spend over again all that we have spent,
and fight over again all that we have fought, etc. For if you did not look very
like a Cunning man, no body would believe you, nor trust your predictions of
the future, that give so ill an account of things past. But he held you very
unwise to blab any such thing, For that party you call, We have gained so
abundantly much more then they have spent, that they desire nothing more, then
to fight over the same fights again, at the same rate; and if you could but
make your words good, he would undertake, they should be the first men that
should set Bishops about your Consciences: for how vile soever you make the
Blood of faithful English men, they have made such good markets of it, that
they would be glad at any time to broach the whole Nation at the same price,
and affor'd the treasure of Miraculous deliverances, (as you call it) into the
Bargin. This he added, was easier to be understood then your Brand of
Gentilism, upon King-ship, for which you rest Scripture most unmercifully, to
prove, that though Christ said, His Kingdom was not of this world, yet his
Commonwealth is. For if, the Text which you quote, The Kings of the Gentiles
exercise Lordship over them, and they that exercise authority over them, are
called Benefactors: But it shall not be so among you, etc. be to be understood
of Civil Government, (and to infer Commonwealth (as you will have it right or
wrong) and not to be meant of his spiritual Reign, of which he was then
speaking, and expressly calls so; You must prove that he erected a Republique
of his Apostles, and that notwithstanding the Scripture, every where calls his
Government the Kingdom of Heaven, it ought to be Corrected, and Rendered the
Commonwealth of Heaven, or rather the Commonwealth of this World; and yet the
Text, does as well prove Benefactors heathenish as Kings, for if our Savior
had meant to brand Kingship with any evil Character, He would never have styld
himself King of the Jews, King of Heaven, King of Righteousness, etc. as he
frequently does, but no where a State-holder, or Keeper of the Liberties.

To this, a young Gentleman made answer, that your writings are best
interpreted by themselves, and that he remembered in that Book, wherein you
fight with the King's Picture, you call Sir Phillip Sydnes, Princes Pamela, who
was born and bred of Christian Parents in England; A Heathen woman, and
therefore, he thought that by Heathonish, you meant English, and that in
calling Kingship, Heathenish, you inferd, it was the only proper and natural
Government of the English Nation, as it has been proved in all Ages. To which
another objected, that such a sense was quite Contrary to your purpose, to
which he immediately replied; That it was no new thing, with you to write that,
which is as well against us for your purpose: after much debate, they agreed to
put it to the Ballot, and the young Gentleman carried it without any
Contradiction. That done, a Gentleman of good credit here, taking occasion from
the former discourse, said, you had shown your self as able a Divine, as a
Statesman; For you had made as politic provision for spiritual, as civil
Liberty in those pious and Orthodox, (though seeming absurd and Contradictory)
grounds you have laid down in order thereunto, which being rightly interpreted,
do say, or by consequence infer thus much. That the Church of Christ ought to
have no Head upon Earth, but the Monster of many heads, the multitude, who are
the only supreme Judges of all matters that concern him; a Privilege they
claimed, when he was upon Earth, when they took upon them to condemn him, and
cried Crucifige: That all Christian Laws and Ordinances have a Co-ercive
power, to see themselves put in Execution, and yet they ought to be subject to
every Man's will and humor, (which you call his best light) and no man to them
but in his own sense. That the Scripture only ought to interpret it self,
(just as it can read it self) and every man is to take the interpretation in
such a sense, as best suites with his own capacity, or his occasions; That
every man may do what he pleases in matters of Religion, but only those that
are in Authority, who ought not to meddle in such matters, as being of so
different a nature from their Cognizance, (or any other) that if it be their
will to Command the only true Religion to be observed, it presently becomes
inchristian inhuman, and Barbarous. That no man can serve God, nor save his
own Soul, but in a Commonwealth, in this certainty, you go after your own
invention, for no man ever heard it before: But if it should be true, it is a
sad thing to think, what is become of the Apostles themselves, and all the
Saints in the Primitive times, when there was never a Christian Commonwealth
in the World? That any man may turn away his Wife, and take another as often as
he pleases, as you have most learnedly proved upon the Fiddle, and practiced in
your Life and Conversation, for which you have achieved the honor to be Styld
the Founder of a Sect. All this you call Liberty of Conscience, and Christian
Liberty, which you conclude no Government is more inclinable, not only to
favor, but protect, then a Free Commonwealth. In this, (he said) you say
right; For it is notorious enough, that since we have been but called a
Commonwealth, such pious Doctrines as these, have been so wonderfully
propagated, that England does now abound with new Christians, no less then
Spain did of late years, and of the same mungrell breed; all which agree in
nothing, but the extripation of Christian Religion, and subversion of
Government, to which your Discipline does naturally conduce. For certainly, the
most ready and easy way to root out Religion, is to render it contemptible,
and ridiculous, which cannot be sooner done then by giving License, and
encouragement to all manner of Frenzies, that pretend to new discoveries in
matters of Faith, these will quickly make it become a sport and mockery to the
People, until it be utterly extinct; And this, some of the Church of Rome
found true, who give a greater check to the growth of Reformation, by clothing
some of the new professers in Fools Coats, and exposing them to the derision of
the multitude, then by persecuting, and putting thousands to death. And this is
the way you go which will never fail you, as long as there are Fools and mad
men to carry on the work. And with this if you could but introduce the wholesome
Cannons of the Council of Munster it would make an admirable Model for the
Ecclesiastical part of the Republique, if it were not for one unlucky
Circumstance, and that is that Knipper Dolling Proclaimed John of Leyden King,
and not State-holder. This (he said) was an unhappy mistake and no less out of
your way then that of the Fifth Monarchy Men, who would have been admirable for
your purpose if they had but dreamed of a fifth Free State.

By this time they began to grow weary of your perpeuall falsehoods and
mistakes, and a Worthy Knight of this Assembly stood up and said that if we
meant to examine all the particular fallacies and flawes in your writing we
should never have done, he would therefore (with leave) deliver his judgment
upon the whole, which in briese was thus. That it is all windy foppery from the
beginning to the end, written to the elevation of that Rabble and meant to
cheat the Ignorant. That you fight always with the flat of your hand like a
Retorician, and never Contract the Logical fist. That you trade altogether in
universals the Region of Deceits and falacie, but never come so near
particulars, as to let us know which among diverse things of the same kind you
would be at. For you admire Commonwealths in general, and cry down Kingship as
much at large, without any regard to the particular Constitutions which only
make either the one or the other good or bad, vainly supposing all flavery to
be in the Government of a single Person, and nothing but liberty in that of
many, which is so false that some Kingdoms have had the most perfect form of
Common wealths as ours had, and some Republiques have proved the greatest
Tirannies, as all have done at one time or other. For many if they combine have
more Latitude to abuse power then a single Person, and less sense of shame,
conscience, or honor to restrain them, for what is wickedly done by many is
owned by none, where no Man knows upon whom in particular to fix it. And this
we have found true by experience in your Patriots and Assertors (as you call
them) for no one person could ever have done half the mischief they have done,
nor outlived the infamy they have suffered without any sense of shame. Beside
this, as all your politiques reach but the outside and circumstances of things
and never touch at realties, so you are very solicitous about weeds as if they
were charms, or had more in them then what they fignifie: For no Conjurer's
Devil is more concerned in a spell, then you are in a mere word, but never
regard the things which it serves to express. For you believe liberty is safer
under an Arbitrary unlimited power by virtue of the name Commonwealth, then
under any other Government how just or restrained soever if it be but called
Kingship. And therefore very prudently you would have the Name Parliament
abolished, because it signifies a Parley of our Commons with their Norman Kings.
But in this you are too severe a Draco to punish one word for holding
correspondence with another, when all the liberty you talk so much of consists
in nothing else but mere words. For though you brag much of the Peoples
Manageing their own affairs, you allow them no more share of that in your
Utopia (as you have ordered it) then only to set up their throats and Baul
(instead of every three years, which they might have done before) once in an
Age, or oftener, as an old Member drops away, and anew one is to succed, not for
his merit or knowledge in State affairs, but because he is able to bring the
greatest and most deep mouthed Pack of the Rabble into the field; a more wise
and equal way (in your opinion) of choosing Counselors, then any King is
capable of. But he added, you had done worst of all, where you are most like
your self, and that is in that false and malicious aspersion of Popish and
Spanish Councels which you cast on the present King. For it is well known to
all the world, he has preferred h sConscience before three Crowns, and
patiently endured to live so many years in exile, rather then change his
Religion; which if he would have done, or been moved with such Councels, he
might long since have procured all the Forces of the Catholic world upon us,
whereas it cannot be denied of his greatest opposers, That they are so jealous
of their ill-gotten Purchases bought with their Crimes, that rather be in
danger of loosing a Pigge, they would (with the Gergosens) defire Christ to
depart out of their Coasts. After this said, he moved the Assembly that I might
be desired to deliver my judgment upon the Book, as he and others had done,
which being immediatlypast; I knew not (though unwilling) how to avoid it; and
therefore I told them as briefly as I could, That that which I disliked most in
your Treatise was, That there is not one word of the balance of Propriety, nor
the Agrarian, nor Rotation in it, from the beginning to the end: without which
(together with a Lord Archon) I thought I had sufficiently demonstrated, not
only in my writings but public exercises in that Coffee-house, that there is
no possible foundation of a Free Commonwealth. To the first and second of
these (that is the Balance and the Agrarian) you made no objection, and
therefore I should not need to make any answer. But for the third (I mean
Rotation) which you implicitly reject in your defigne to perpetuate the present
Members, I shall only add this to what I have already said and written on that
subject, That a Commonwealth is like a great Top, that must be kept up by
being whipped round, and held in perpetual circulation, for if you discontinue
the Rotation, and suffer the Senate to settle, and stand still, down it falls
immediately. And if you had studied this point as carefully as I have done, you
could not but know, there is no such way under Heaven of disposing the
Vicissitudes of Command and Obedience, and of distributing equal Right and
Liberty among all men, as this of Wheeling, by which (as Chauser writes) a
single Fart has been equally divided among a whole Covent of Friars, and every
one has had his just share of the favor. I told then, I could not but be
sorry to find so learned a man so ignorant in the nature of Government, as to
make disproportionate Parallels of Councills as you do, where you compare the
Senate of Rome with the Grand Council of Venice, between which there is no
Analogy at all: for the Senate of Rome was never the supreme Power of the
People, as the Grand Council of Venice is, but merely a Council of State. But
I wondered most of all at what politic Crack in any man's Scull the imagination
could enter of securing Libery under an Oligarchy, Seized of the Government for
term of life, which was never yet seen in the world. The Metropolitan of all
Commonwealths the Roman did but once adventure to trust its whole Power and
Authority in the hands of one Council, and that but for two years, and yet
they had like to have lost their Liberty for ever; whereas they had frequently
in all ages left it wholly in the power of a single Person, and found it so far
from danger or inconvenience, that the only Refuge they had in their greatest
extremity was, to create a Dictator. But I could not but laugh (as they all had
done) at the pleasantness of your fancy who suppose our noble Patriots, when
they are invested for term of life, will serve their Country at their own
charge: This (I said) was very improbable, unless you meant as they do, that
all we have is their own, and that to prey and devour is to serve, in which
they have appeared so able and industrious, as if they had been made to no
other purpose, but, like Lobsters, were all Claws and Belly. For though many
laugh at me for accounting 300000l. in wooden ware toward the erecting of a
Free State (in my Oceana) but a trifle to the whole Nation,) because I am most
certain that these little Pills the Ballots are the only Physic that can keep
the Body Politic soluble, and not suffer the humors to settle) I Will undertake
that if the present Members had but a lease of the Government during life
(notwithstanding whatsoever impeachment of Waste) they would raise more out of
it to themselves in one year, then that amounts to; beside the charge we must
be at in maintaining of gaurds to keep the boys of them, and before half the
term be expired, they would have it untenantable. To conclude, I told them, you
had made good your title in a contrary sense; For you have really proposed the
most ready and easy way to establish downright slavery upon the Nation that
can possibly be contrived, which will clearly appear to any Man that does but
understand this plain Truth. That wheresoever the Power of Proposing and
Debating, together with the Power of Ratifying, and Enacting Laws, is
entrusted in the hands of any one Person, or any one Council (as you would
have it) That Governnent is inevitable Arbitrary and Tyrannical, because they
may make whatsoever they please lawful or unlawful. And that Tyranny has the
advantage of all other that has Law and Liberty among the Instruments of
Servitude.

J. H.


