SOME REFLECTIONS Upon a TREATISE, called PIETAS ROMANA and PARISIENSIS Lately
Printed at OXFORD. TO WHICH ARE ADDED I. A Vindication of PROTESTANT CHARITY,
In Answer to some Passages in Mr. E. M's. Remarks on a late Conference. II. A
Defense of the OXFORD REPLY to two Discourses there Printed. A. D. 1687.


Shall vain words have an end? or what imboldneth Thee that Thou answerest?

Job. XVI. 3.

OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER, Anno Domini 1688.

Imprimatur.

GILB. IRONSIDE. Vice-Can. Oxon.
August 13* 1688.
To The READER
IF the drudgery of writing were a Penance imposed upon this Author, he may now
at last hope for a release; having sacrificed so much credit, with so great
disadvantage to his Cause, that the Interest he designed to serve is concerned
to sue for his Quietus. For though the scarcity of tolerable writers for the
Papists did in some measure cover the meaneness of his other performances, it
will hardly recommend these last Essays, which have sunk below the level of
Catholic Pamphlets, and (what is yet harder to imagine) degenerated even from
his own. His first efforts were indeed weak, but they aimed at our Capitol; and
though neither the strength nor conduct, yet the boldness of the Adversary made
them considerable: but now the Man that once attacqu'd our establishment both
in Church and State, is dwindled to an insidious hinter; disdains not to
Transcribe two little hotheaded Enthusiasts; and to show the profoundness of
his humility challenges nothing to himself but that which vitiates the work,
the mixture of Reflections. His former pieces had something of grandeur in the
Title; and looked like one of his Italian Hospitals; Such is the Hospital of
Fateben Fratelli Piet. Romans p. ^4. It is a fair, hospital and has no yearly
Revenue. So p. 30. a fair house but has nothing at all of competent Revenue.
which though worse endowed than an English Almshouse have a stately Portico,
and a magnificent Frontispiece: but Title.
this Faithful Relation, this Pref. page 3.
little book is all of a piece; and has a Portal exactly proportionable to the
Fabric. Heretofore his Style too, though obscure and intricate, discovered rather
an ill management than want of sense: now it is generally somewhat below
plainness; and when it is imbellisht, it is with See Piet. Par. p 56. They
watch amidst the ghastly horror of the night where death's domineering in the
Hall. p. 4. Mayds who run great hazard to loose that which may never after be
recovered, are kept out of harm's way. Pref. p. 3. The divine Sergeants came
for his Soul that night. Piet. To. p. He that tumbles out of his Coach, sends
away his Soul in Posthaste.
such childish flowers as the meanest Schoolboy would be whipped for.

Is this then at last the great result of his leisure after so long
deliberation? Is this that for which the four parts of Church Government must
still be postpon'd? and give way to the naked Epitome of a Spittle-Sermon? I
confess I cannot imagine why he submitted to such an inglorious undertaking,
unless he had some hope, *this book might prove too mean to be regarded; and by
its unworthiness escape the hard fate of confutation which has fallen so heavy
on his other works. And this had certainly secured him; but that he was lately
pleased to administer fresh Provocation; after a long silence had almost
persuaded the world he began to understand his strength. But if He persevere in
publishing, We shall always be ready to do him reason; and hope to convince
him too (if it be possible) that he spoils everything he undertakes.

I hope the Reader will expect no Apology for the slowness of these Reflections;
which should have appeared much earlier, had we meant to meddle with this
subject. But late as they are, I believe they will come to most men, before
they have seen his Treatise; and by consequence, before an answer to it is
expected. For as it is this Author's peculiar happiness that his works are
never known till they are answered; so this in particular has been so little
inquired after, that it rather seemed to be exposed than published.

Some Reflections, etc.
THERE have been many ingenuous Criminals, who have had little sense of
Religion, but some of Honor; who, when they forgot to be Christians, remembered
they were Englishmen; and though they were no good observers of the Laws of
their Country, yet preserved a sense of those inbred obligations to it, which
of all propensities to virtue, are the last shaken off. But so much generosity
as this amounts to, is not frequent among our Roman Proselytes, who learn not
only to defy the force of civil constitutions, but cancel the common instincts
of Nature; and though they can by no statutes be induced to abjure the Kingdom,
are easily persuaded to renounce their allegiance to it. Campian and Sanders
first began, Parsons and Garnet carried on this holy war against their common
Mother; which has since been successively continued by all members and
candidates of that Fraternity; men that have lost all claim to the title of
Englishmen, unless we allow an Englishman to be what they define him, a
Feudatory Vassal of Rome. And yet, though many of this Author's Predecessors have
thus industriously aspersed their Country, they have been still so prudent as
to spread their Calumnyes at a distance: Antwerp and Rheims heard sad relations
of our Sacrilege; Pasquin and Marforio, talked largely of our impiety; But it
was a fresh piece of assurance to libel the English charity at Oxford, where
the very walls confront the accusation, and our Author's own annual revenues
proclaim it to be false and ungrateful. For it is not the Protestant Devotion
only, against which these Reflections are designed, but the English liberality;
and we are obliged to answer, not only as Sons of the Church, but as Natives of
the Soil, and (what is more) as the heirs of a despised Munificence.

To charge England with a want of Charity, and commend the most common
exercises of it as new discoveries in this Island, is the Complement of the
Preface; and seems to look like a kind admonition: but afterward to prefer the
Roman charity as more exalted, and the French piety as more refined than ours,
and to carry on the jest in a mortified style with a show of gravity and
seriousness; of so flat a Lampoon is the most virulent that ever was written.
These groundless slanders of our Fathers and Benefactors, coming from one, who
is maintained by them, would naturally force us to some harshness of
Expression; and that notorious eminence of our Ancestors works, which has made
it no difficult task to refute these calumnies, has made it the more hard to
refute them with candor, and to mollify an answer. It was therefore once
thought requisite (that all occasion of contest might be avoided) barely to set
the Monuments of English Charity in their true light; and to give them no other
advantage than what they must necessarily receive, by being opposed to the
French and Italian. But this would be a work of leisure, unless we would use no
more exactness than this Author does in his; and though it is but due to the
merits of our Ancestors, is far more than this Pamphlet can deserve. At present
therefore it shall be sufficient to make some short Reflections on this
Treatise; and to justify the necessity of making them; and that. First by
Exposing the malice of the design; and 2dly by Proving the falsity of the
insinuations in it.

First then, I am not insensible, that some men, not only those who are
influenced by prejudices, but others too of an easy nature, and an obedient
reason, may esteem of this, as an inoffensive Treatise; and such as should
rather excite our Emulation, than require our Censure. For there are some
virtues so transcendent, that, as the necessity of them never enters into
dispute; so ought neither the exercise, nor the due praise of them, wherever
Exercised, to be prejudiced by our Contests. And if Charity and Devotion be the
chief of those, in which all Parties center, and agree, and which all equally
think commendable; what ill nature would it be in the Levite to Envy and lessen
the praise of the Charitable, though dissenting, Samaritan? There can therefore
be no sinister intention in the Commendation of Liberality, and a Panegyric on
Devotion; or, if there should have been any seeming Grounds for suspicion, the
Good well-meaning Author has removed all occasion of jealousy; and openly
protested, that the Scene of such public Pieties, being either Rome, or Paris,
cannot in his judgment, give any just cause of offense: I confess therefore, I
have not only this Author's word for it, that he is of this opinion; but his
reasons that inclined him to it; and having considered both the weight of his
Arguments, and made all just allowances for the measure of the Capacity, they
were to work on, I must yet beg his Pardon, If I cannot believe him. And though I
am far from apprehending any danger from the force of his reasons, yet to
prevent the influence, they may have on some men's credulity; I shall be as much
concerned to detect the artifice of the reflections, as the falsity of the
slander.

It is evident then, that ever since the first Reformers began to protest
against the doctrine of Merits; and chose rather to rely on an imputative, than
an inherent justice; those, who little understood the Energy of an active
faith, represented them, as open Libertines; and the professed enemies of those
works, which they could not think meritorious: This Calumny, that had scarce
foundation enough to make it seem plausible, was yet universally received; and
promiscuously used against the Lutherans in Germany; the Calvinists in France;
and the Disciples of Cranmer in England. In all the Challenges from See Willet.
Syn. Pap. p. 960. Full. Ec. Hist. l. 10. and Dr. Potters Answer to Charity
mistaken. p. 13.

See Stapylton. p. 2. c. 10. Tom. 2. Quid tandem Protestants in Anglia pro tot
Monasteriis; Ecclesiis, Capellis, Xenodochiis, nosocomiis dirut is erexerunt?
vix unum pro mill destructis dabunt. These will not appear to be new
discoveries in England to any one that will read,


Rheims, and Doway, they have still waved the defense of their faith and
appealed to the test of works; and, with the obsolete arts of Porphyry, and
Julian, fell from opposing the Christians Faith, to traducing their Morals.
This Author now, having succeeded no better in his Arguments, than his
Predecessors, betakes himself to this last asylum; He repeates the old
slanders; but managed with more closeness and dexterity; and proves him-self
Master of as much malice, but somewhat less ingenuity. For, when we have fair,
and open accusations, we know the extent of the Charge; but in doubtful
Sarcasms, secret Ironies, and expressive Hints it is hard to fathom the depth
of the Calumny. The doubt of things Evident is worse than the denial; and the
uncertainty of the Skepticism is not designed as a favor to us; but a
subterfuge to him-self. In the beginning then, like a Man of art, he will
graciously allow, that some of our old Forefathers (K. Pref. p. 4.
Alfred perhaps, or St. Cuthbert) have left us rich in the variety of the
Public Monuments of their Munificence: Yet -- This now is such a Concession,
as only makes more room for the slander; and the Civility of the Preface
imbitters the Satyr: it makes the ignorant Reader think him in earnest; and
gives authority to the scandal; it is one of those gifts, that are snares; and
is the kiss, that consecrates the treachery. For least the greatness of this
Charity, which in general words is allowed, should gain any credit with the
Reader, it is presently limited with the Yet that succeeds it; the grant is
invalidated by the number of the Exceptions; and men are left to make an
estimate of what we have, from what we want. He therefore proposes to our
imitation Some Inventions of foreign Charity; which seem either not to be at
all, or not so frequent here at home; and which happily may be thought worthy
to be transplanted hither; Such are these; The Pref. p. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.
18 Eliz. cap. 3. See Dalton. Tit. Poor. p. 129 etc. Shepherd and Bond 16. and
Stow. Surv. Land. p. 97.
Provision for exposed Infants; The Sea the History of the Charterhouse.
Relief of Indigent Tradesmen, and decayed Gentlemen; The Sea Burnet. Ref. l.
2. p. 222.
Maintenance of poor Orphans; The Erection of See Wase's History of
Free-Schools.
Free-Schools: The Sea Coke Case Su^t. Hosp. fo. 20. 6. and see 19. Car. c. 4.
releasing of men imprisoned for small debts; The Sea Bp. Hall Dec. 6. Ep. 8.
Stow. p. 102.
Visitation of the condemn*d Criminals; The Stat 11. H. 7. c. 12.
Giving advice to the Poor, Gratis; The Coke 10. R^^. fo. 20. and Stow's Surv.
of Land. p. 100. and p. 110. p. 95. p. 106.
providing Pref. p. 5. and p. 4.
dowries for young Maids; and Workhouses Stat. 7. ^ac. c. 4. 39. El. c. 4.
etc. And if This Author still please to read over Stow's Survey of London; and
Willet's relation of the Charitable works of Protestants; and Sr. Fran. Moore
on Charitable uses; He will find all the several species of Charities, which he
mentioned, practiced as well in England, as Italy.
for idle Beggars.

These now are the New Devices, and Patterns of foreign Charity; and the want
of these only, and some few more, which he does, and many more, which he could
name, is the small defect; which, we are guilty Pref. p. 8. Praef. p. 1.
of; who otherwise are rich in the famous works of our Forefathers here at home.

Here then ought we to breath a little; and admire the happy wit of these
Frenchmen, and Italians; who could so luckily hit on these New Devices, these
ingenious exercises of Charity; which we, that are so far removed from the Sun,
never Yet have, nor indeed ever could have dreamed of. And now, if a man were
in love with digressions, he had never better opportunity to expatiate on the
advantages, which travail has brought to this Nation. To see how this
Gentleman refines upon the dull heavy Patterns of domestic Charity, which though
they were as like to these as the Poor would wish; yet they wanted the belle
air of the French, and Italian bounty. Our Charity is promoted by monthly
meetings, Quarterly Sessions, yearly Feasts; but where are our Confraternities,
Compagnia's, and Sodalities? The London Piety has been lately so great, that
their Churches and Hospitals gained by their Conflagration; Yet still our Poor
Hospitals are neither Pi. Pa. p. 57.
Sees, nor Pi. To. p. 1.
Towns; nor is our Bishop's Pi. To. p. 2.
Palace as big as a City. Oxford would buy out all the Roman Colleges; But yet
must as justly yield to Sapienza, as Bethlehem to Pi. To. p. 2.
Pazzorella;

Now unless there be some new Charity in imposing well-sounding names on the
Acts of it; and the munificence of the Donor is to be tried by the Pomp of the
Title; it will not be easy to discern the preeminence c Pi. To. p. 100. and so
Bozius de sign. Eccl. L. 5. c. 3. Leo 4tus Urbem condidit in Vaticano.
d P. 67. R. Pa.
of foreign liberality; and therefore as hard to pardon the denial of the most
apparent works of English and most of them, of Protestant Charity; which no man
can be ignorant of, that has breathed English air; that has travailed ten
miles in this Island; and knows a Free School, or an Almshouse, when he sees
it.

Since therefore the Reflections are so severe; let us see what Ground there is
for them; Let us see what preeminence the Romanists can justly claim in the
Exercise of all Good Works, and of that chiefly, which they more Particularly
insist on, Charity.

See Soave's Hist. Con. Tr. l. 2 and Decrees of of Con. Tr. 6. Can. 32. etc.
First, then it is the known Doctrine of the Trent Council, that Charity is not
only declaratory of our Faith; but Effective of our Justification; That He, who
gives to the Poor, literally lends to the Lord; and is the Creditor of Heaven:
as indeed he is by virtue of God's free promise but not for the merit of his
works. Now the Notions of the Romanists in this point of Merit are so gross,
and extravagant, that a Man, who is not inclined to Paradoxes, may reasonably
doubt, whether any one act of true Charity ever was, or indeed can be founded
on those Principles. For Charity exerts itself in Free-gifts; and nothing is
properly given; where the pretended Donor can demand an Equivalent. To give is
to part with Right; and every Benefactor must necessarily put himself, if not
out of the hope of receiving, yet out of the Capacity of requiring retribution.
Whoever distributes his Mammon, and leaves him-self the Power of Exacting a
greater return; is no more liberal, than he, who puts his money to interest,
and buys a title to an Estate in Reversion. If therefore we would make an exact
Parallel between the Roman, and Protestant Charity; we ought not only to
consider the largeness of the Expense, but the Generosity of the design; since
Good Deeds are to be measured by the Ends, and Intents for which they are done;
and there may be great Contributions, where there is no liberality. He that
conveys alms to the Poor with an unwarrantable design, is an instrument of
Providence but is no more charitable for being so, than the Raven, that fed
Elijah. Our bounty therefore, should it be found more frugal, is yet more
heroical, generous, and disinteress'd: and neither can be the result of our
Covetousness, nor the occasion of our Pride. But, upon an exact scrutiny, we
shall find; that these different Speculations have not the expected influence
on our Practice; and that the Giver not only distributes more freely, but more
largely than the Purchaser.

For (that we may use some Method in reflecting on this undigested heap of
Calumnies) all Charity either respects the Christian, or the Man; either
assists our Brother in his Spiritual wants; or supplies his temporal necessity.

First then as to See Pie. Romans 96. 97 etc. Pi. Paris. P ^. etc.
Spiritual Charity; which is the less Popular, yet certainly the Greater Virtue.

Pi. R. p. 63.
If the instructing Novices in the mysteries of the Christian faith be the
first of all the Spiritual works of Charity; he that reads our Rubric,
considers our C^n. 59. and 61. Jac. 1. 1603.
Canons views our Practice, will have little reason to accuse our care of young
Christians, or See Pi. Pa. p. 3. Pi. To. p. 63.
(because it sounds bigger) of Neophytes and Catechumeni. We use Manuals
therefore as much as the Romanists; and esteem them as necessary, but not so
sufficient; we teach them these only, as Preparatory instructions, and such as
illustrate the Scripture, not supersede it; And till the Sacred Oracles shall
speak intelligibly, till those Prohibited Books shall be licensed; their
Adversaries will say, and that without either Pi. Pa. p. 3.
affected malice, or Manichean Impudence, that they nuzle up their disciples in
ignorance; though their Sermons should be as See Pi. To. p. 80.
frequent as their Holydays; and their Manuals as numerous, as the Ave's in
them. And yet the Preaching at Paris too, is not so assiduous; but that it may
be easily eclipsed, when Geneva is so near; and See Dr. Reynold's Sion's
Praise: and Dr. Potter's answer to Charity mistaken p. 14.
London at no greater distance. We might wonder therefore, that the Frequency
of their Sermons should be recommended to our imitation; were it not done by
the same pen, that praises the Sea Pi. To. p. 83.
Eloquence of their Preachers; who, unless eloquence consists See l. 2. Hist.
Conc. Trid. of the Roman Preaching. Of which another writer gives this account.

Predicatori usano vari artifici per commovere il suo auditorio monstrando
d'esser rapiti in ispirito; and che Christo parli lo^^; and riveli, ponendosi
all volte cord al* collo, portando test di morti: and in lu^go d' instruire
il popolo consumano l^ maggior part della Predica* volg^nd^ il paralare a Dio,
al Crocefisso, and alla Madonna and il Popolo, per tale l' accet^ a persuaso,
che quello, che dice il Predicatore venga da Dio etc. Relatione ^^llo stato
della Religione con Aggiunt* Genesis 1625. See also Sr. Edwin San^ys. c. 3. etc.
19.


in bold Enthusiasms, affected confidence, and antic postures, may generally
be ranked in the same Class of Orators, with this Author. Sure I am that in one
more lasting method of Instruction, which is the printing of Nervous Sermons;
we have outdone not only all Popish, but to speak impartially, all reformed
Countries* and that more have been published at London within these twenty
Years, than Paris can boast of within a Century; And this cannot be probably
thought to proceed from the French Modesty, whith has seldom been famous; but
from a due sense of the meaneness of those Prones, and Postills, when divested
of the Garn^ture of Action.

See Pi. To. p. 87. and 88.
The Oratorians are not the only men, that visit the sick; nor are there
wanting The Fathers of the Agonizants in England: only our Visitation, which is
no less comfortable to the dying, is yet less dangerous to the living: it
frightens not men into enriching an order, by See Weavers Fun. Mon. p. 158.
impoverishing their heir; nor into expiating the sins of their life by a worse
at their death. In short, They have little Reason to boast of Spiritual
Charity, if they Pi. Pa. p. 2. Pi. To. p. 98.
administer the Sacrament frequently to the People, but administer not all; Pi.
Par. p. 3. Pie. To. p. 81.
if the Sermons, which they give, are Extraordinary, and yet not equal to the
Scripture they withold; if Pi. To. p. 98. Pi Pa. p. 3.
their Prayers are often repeated, and yet no more understood by their Hearers,
than Saint Bede by his Auditory of Stones.

This then is their Spiritual Charity. The next thing, which this Author
chiefly insists on, is the magnificence of their Churches and Hospitals; some
of which we willingly own to be sumptuous, and shall assign the reason of their
Foundation.

When Rome had engrossed the riches of most Nations in Europe, and had made the
other Provinces as tributary to their Bishop, as they had been before to their
Emperors; some methods were thought on, which might still improve this
profitable devotion, and maintain the revenues of the Chamber, And since it was
evident, that their treasure was much advanced by the offerings of Pilgrims,
while there; and more by their favorable relations, when they returned; humane
prudence advised them to consider, what motives, would most invite such
advantageous guests to the City; and most oblige them in it. Stately, and
Pompous Churches adorned with some reputed Relics, and feigned images were the
most likely things to attract them; Good Hospitals, and kind receptives, the
most probable motives, to induce them to a good opinion of the Place, and a
Panegyric on those, that entertained them. Thus See Onup. Panv. of the 7
Churches. And Warcup. p. 160. and Schrader. in Monum. Romae Edi. 1592.
the vast Churches, and Rich Shrines of Rome were built; thus the large Inns,
and magnificent Hospitals were endowed, as things, that would certainly turn to
account; and repay the Undertaker with interest.

And as every Nation contributed to this Common Bank of the Treasures of
Europe; so was it but reasonable that the Bank should maintain a College for
the receipt of her liberal Votaries. But how can it be justly expected, that we
should make equal provisions for Knights Errant in England, unless they brought
equal gains to our Coffers? England was a Se Mat. Paris in H. 3. est puteus
inexhaustus etc.
Mine inexhaustible; and paid as much to Rome, as to her King; and if Rome
would return the civility, we should not be backward to give a Roman College
here in exchange for the English one there.

Ne^* ^ubium, quin omnibus certis and Acciden^ariis computatis, Papa singulis
annis d^cem milliones Coronatorum undequaque corraserit: Hen. Took Leg. Arch.
M^gdeb.
The Churches therefore and the Hospitals of Rome were built with design; and
are instances not of the Popes liberality, but their Policy. They are indeed
Viscata dona; not the gifts of a generous Bishop, but the baits of a Miser. The
Masters of Ecclesiastical Policy undertook a new Trade; their rich Altars, and
Shrines succeeded in the place of their Circi, and Amphitheatres; And the
latter show was far the more gainful.

This Author then is very much deceived, when he mistakes them for Roman
Hospitals, which are Ours; which were bought with our money; and with less than
the Tenths of it; and which are not the Monuments of Italian Piety, but of
English Folly.

Thus these Fabrics were erected for bad Ends; nor are they applied to better
uses. Some of which as our Author professes, are receptacles for Bastards only,
and See Pi. Romans p. 108.
converted Whores.

To use no discrimination in Charity between the good and the bad has once
been thought blameable; but to make a difference, and to exclude all honest
Christians, is a crime, that has not usually been accused, because hardly
supposed. But the Popes revenues depending on the stews; it is but just, and
grateful that those places should receive Prostitutes, which rose up at their
Cost; and, like one of the Pyramids, were built with the price of sin. Rome
found in its infancy the advantage of this Trade; and therefore still continues
to be the Asylum of sinners. These Provisions then, however warmly recommended
by this Author to us in England, will probably be thought unnecessary, till the
return of the Celibate.

But since we are not willing to insist on so ungrateful a Topic; we will
proceed to consider, whether Rome may justly boast, if not of the good
employment, yet at least of the wise management, and greatness of her Charity.

First then, the care of the Poor is equally imposed on all Christian
Communities; But the Method of that care is wholly undetermined, and arbitrary.
For that the Impotent should be relieved is the injunction of Christianity; and
consequently fixed, and settled: But that such Quota's should be assess'd and
thus distributed, such Funds raised and thus employed, is the dictate of
Prudence; and therefore, upon the difference of Circumstances, admits
alteration. A Defect in the former is a sin; a Failure in the latter but a less
degree of wisdom; and, which may probably be the best management of Alms, is
not the Dispute of a Divine, but a Politician. Some States, especially those
who affect Pomp, and magnificence, have heaped up the national Charity in one
Common Bank, or Prytaneum; and thence have solemnly distributed their Alms, or
rather Pensions. Others have been more pleased with a shorter Circulation of
Charity, and permitted it to be occasionally Expended within those Precincts,
where it was levied. The former Economy of Almsgiving is more stately and
Majestic; and, like the Inundation of Nile, makes a noise when it blesses the
Land: the Latter, like a neighboring Fountain, supplies Each small quantity of
ground with a proportionate moisture; and carries with it less pomp, but more
convenience. There have been those again, who have been induced by the
generosity of their temper (I hope) rather than by any sinister motives of
Pride and Ambition, to erect stately structures for Infirmaries; to change a
Palace i^ to an Almshouse, and build an Escurial for a Monastery; These
naturally attract men's eyes; and the magnificence of the Fabric, the number,
and garb of the Inhabitants, give the advantage in some Fanciful men's esteem to
this mass of Cumulative Charity; Others in the mean time have not seen the
necessity of crowding all the Poor of a Nation into one Hospital; but, giving
them a comfortable salary, have permitted them to live in their old private
habitations; where, among their known neighbors, and Relations, they may
probably meet with better attendance, at less Charge; and live within meaner
walls, with more complacency, and satisfaction. This then at present seems one
great difference between the Roman, and English Charity; that the one consists
of more Parts, but dispersed and diffused; the other of a less number, but
those united into a whole: Their's is not so much, but looks bigger; ours is
less Compact, but of larger extent, and if not more creditable to the Giver,
yet more Profitable to the Receiver. The Author may be satisfied of the truth
of this from a very Authentic, though perhaps not a very acceptable Book; See 43
Eliz. c. 2. 1 Jac. c. 3. 3 Car. 4. (2 Jac. c. 28.) 14 Eliz. c. 3. 14 Car. 2. c.
12. see More in his Reading on Charitable uses. Land. 1676. 14 Car. 2. c. 9.
Shesch c. 124. and Hern's Law of Charitable Uses explained. See Holinshed 3d
Book Deser. of Britt. c. 5.
that of the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; If he would have been pleased to
have perused those; consulted our Overseers, examined our Rates, took account
of the Sea 2 Ja. c. 7. 22 Jac. c. 18. 1 Jac. c. 27. 3 Jac. c. 4. Dalton. Tit.
Poor p. 130. Tit. Stock of the Shire: And see particularly Prim. Eliz. and XIV
Car. 2.
forfeitures, he might then have libelled his Country more considerately. For
is not the 43d of Elizab. the largest Hospital for the Poor? and the best
Infirmary for sick in the World? Are not more Revenues settled on that one
Protestant Statute, than on the Annunciata of Naples, and S. Spirito of Rome?
or, to speak deliberately, on all the Hospitals of Rome, and Paris jointly? And
if that pious Law, and those that Second it, have not always in all their
branches, and the largest extent of their words been fully executed; had it not
been a more suitable Office for one that pretends to be an Advocate for Charity
to press the execution of those noble, and more than Agrarian Laws, than to
amuse himself, and upbraid us with the French Caprices, and Italian Inventions?

So great therefore and so discreet is the Public Provision for the Poor;
that, though in this bountiful Nation it cannot prevent, yet it might perhaps
justly supersede our private, and occasional Charity. And here for the Honor of
our Country I must observe, that whosoever builds an Hospital in England, only
gives somewhat more to the Poor at his Private Expense, than what they ought ^o
have at the Public Charge; and is not more properly a Benefactor to them, than
to the Nation. Whether now these Legal Provisions are the best methods of
maintaining the Poor, and most conducive to their Interest; is a Question, that
needs not be decided by the nice Enquiry of our Reason, but the plain Evidence
of our Senses. For if the Happiness of the Poor be the End of our Laws, and
ought to be the design of their Hospitals; we may then, from their better or
worse Estate ordinarily make an estimate of the defect, or increase of Charity
in a Nation. And here though the miserable state of the Poor in France, when
heightened by no Extraordinary Barbarities, be notorious from the Consent of all
Travelers, and Historians; and expressly owned by Card. Perron in Per. p. 233.
Paysans en Angleterre boivent t^us de bonne bierte, mangent de bon baeuf, and
on n'en voit pas un qui ne soit vestu de drap. In Fran^ ils sont miserables
deschirez. les Roy ^evroient avoir quelque respect. See (...) same in
Gainsford's glory of Englan^ c. 24.
one of their most eminent Cardinals, who openly declames upon the misery of
the Poor in France, and the happiness of those in England: yet I shall be
contented at present to wave better authority, and to take a Specimen of their
happiness from this Author's own Pen.

In the Deanery of Guise were found near upon five hundred People so
excessively miserable, that they seize upon dead Dogs, and Horses which are the
Wolves leavings: And in the very To^n of Guise there are above 500 sick Persons
who a^ lodged in Caves, and Dens. Some of them have eaten no Bread in six, or
seven weeks, not so much, as ^at, which they make of barley bran, which is the
diet of those, which fare best; but their meat is Lizards, Frogs, and wild
herbs. Pi. Par. p. 18. We have only met with rigorous dealings from our
Creditors, cruelty from the Soldiers, who forcibly robbed us of the small
quantity of Bread, which we had. Page 14. There are above an hundred at St.
Michael, who appear any Skeletons covered with skin,and their skins are like
tawny Marble, and so dried up, that their teeth seem to be dry, and discovered.
Page 16. 17. There are abundance, who are afflicted with Fluxes, and Fevers;
others covered with Scabs and Purple-spots, Tumors, and Imposthumes: These
infirmities were caused by eating wild Roots, and bread of Bran. Our ears are
filled with pitiful lamentations, and outcries for Bread. Page 17.

These now are such horrible spectacles, as take our gifts by violence; and
would extort a largess from a Nabal or a Judas. These make such sensible
impressions on human nature, as compel us to sacrifice an alms to our own
uneasiness, and the mere power of Sympathy. These force us to give by instinct;
nor permit us to expect the slow dictates of Reason, much less the Commands of
Christianity. So that, though it is not my design to undervalue the latest Acts
of almost outdated Charity; yet we must necessarily own, that when the Motives
are so forcible, there is a greater crime in the neglect of the duty, but less
glory in the Performance: And here however it may be for Vincent de Paul's
Credit to have taken some care of the sad remains of this Wretched Band; it is
not much certainly for the honor of the French Nation, or of the Pi. Par. p. 11.
Saintly Bishops thereof to leave such unheard of calamities to the poor relief
of a Private Collection. And were there ever now in this Uncharitable Island
such Patterns of unparalled miseries, as perhaps have not been seen in the
world, since the siege of Jerusalem? If not; if our Laws take care not to
remedy such calamities, but to prevent them; if they rather send Bread to the
Poor when they are Hungry, than give them burial, when they are famished; Upon
what grounds can any senseless Projector question the wisdom of his Prudent
Ancestors, which, if once received in his beloved Country's would weigh down
all their Carita's, and Lazaretto's? Private Foundations may perhaps succeed
well, though they are the results of Fancy, and Caprice; But the Public Charity
of a Nation is not to be founded on the tricks and devices of little designs,
but upon solid maxims, and lasting Constitutions, which are really made for
use, not show, and are more truly great, than stately. For Pi. To. p. 1. This
Hospital s^ems to to be rather a whole Town than one house.
Hospitals may easily swell into Towns, Pi. Par. p. 51. Hotel Dieu, is a Sea,
where it is continual High Water.
Infirmaries into Seas, and the Banks Se Ritratto di Roma Moderna p. 211. of
the Moute della Pieta: -si paga una poca cosa per cento, per Mantenimento di
quest opera. Which is thus expressed p. 39. Pi. To. No or at least, no
considerable use paid; and in Theod. Amyd* nulla saltem considerabili pro
mutuata pecunia recepta usura: p. 93 Malines Lex Mecat. c. 13. p 34. In Italy
there are Montes Pietatis, where the Poor may borrow upon pawns, and pay after
the rate of 3 or 4 per Cent.
of Usurers into Mountains of Piety; but the Poor are not to be fed, nor the
lame to be cured by a s^retch of the Pen, and a senseless Hyperbole.

We have hitherto ^^en on which side the Preeminence ly's not only in the End,
and Scope but the Measure, and good management of Charity in General; we will
now so much fav^r this Author, as to descend to his own Particular branch of
it, and take a view of our Infirmaries, and Hospitals, and Schools, which are
with us only the products of a Private, not a National Charity.

When the Abbeys then were here dissolved, and See 37 H. 8. c. 4. 1 Ed. 6. c.
14. see Dugd. Monast. Angl. p. 390. and p 406. Godw. Ann. H. 8. ad An. 1535.
Antiq. Britan. in Cranm. Hospin. de orig. Mon. p. 273. -Propter graves, and
multiplices eorum enormitates. Weev. Fun. Mon.
the crimes of the Religious industriously laid open; those apparent abuses of
their Ancestor's Charity had naturally such an influence on most men, as would
rather incline them to distribute their alms occasionally on their Neighbors,
than bestow much on any lasting Foundation; which might soon be made a
receptacle and seminary of impiety, and consequently obnoxious to dissolution.
The Monks therefore were doubly injurious to the Poor of this Nation; first by
intercepting the Alms of the former ages: and 2dly by preventing the bounty of
the Latter. And yet such was the efficacy of our Faith, and so great the
liberality of our young Josiah, that it broke through all these Reasonable
prejudices, and Burn. Hist. Ref. l. 1. A. 1553. p. 222.
signalized the beginnings of the Reformation with the most noble instances of
unparalled Charity: Of the yearly number of those that are maintained in the
Hospitals; see the Spittle Sermons, particularly Dr. Still lingfleet's, Dr.
Tenison's, and Dr. Hicks's.
Then rose that great Hospital of Christ-Church, which has in this short
space, maintained, and Educated above 12000. Children; and that without forcing
them to beg their Bread in the Highways, The young Boys of Letterd John's
Foundation beg alms of good People. Pi. To. p. 30. see p. 42.
More Romano: or to be Children of the Hospitals of les Enf^nts as well as the
Blew-boys gain part of their livelihood by carrying Torches, etc. Pi. Par. p.
36.
Common Link-boys for their livelihood, which is the ingenuous method of
French Education. Then were founded the two famous Infirmarys of St. Thomas,
and St. Bartholmew, in both which near 4000. Patients are yearly cured and
discharged, besides those that die under the care of the Hospital. Then lastly
the Palace See Pi. Par p. 47.
of Bridewell was changed into an Hospital, which yearly receives near a 1000.
indigent, and miserable Vagrants. All these were the great, and yet not the
only Foundations of the first of our Protestant Kings; all settled in one City
only, upon the incitements of a Martyr of this Church; all built, or endowed in
his first years, as an earnest only of his future Munificence. These noble
Precedents of Royal bounty were so well copied out by Protestants of an
inferior Rank, Willet. Syn. p. 962. Camd. in Cantio.
Lambert, 1 bid. and 1 Ed. 6. c. 14.
Cobham, Camb. An. p. 286. and 189. Willet. 16.
Gresham, Willet. 16. Coke in Le Case de Sutton's Hosp. Full. l. 10. p. 65. and
Hern's Domus Carthusiana.
Sutton, Willet. 16. Fuller. 16. Sr. Jo. Harr. of Bishops p. 9.
Whitgift, Fuller. l. 10. p. 65. and p. 26. Quis nescit eum nobile
Gerontocomium extruxisse, stipendioque dotasse; inibi multi pauperes utriusque
sexus aluntur, and Catechisantur. Holland in Rob. Dud. p. 77. see also 13 Eliz.
c. 13. see also Dugd. 3 Tom. Mon.
Leicester, etc. that almost 50 Hospitals were founded immediately upon the
Reformation in little more than the same number of years; and, after due
Scrutiny, I can justly not only repeat but continue the memorable assertion of
an eminent See Dr. Potter's answer to Charity mistaken. p. 13. Ld. C. J. Coke's
Pref. 10. Vol. Rep. See Willet. Synopsis Papismi 19. Cont. Qu. 2. p. 961. and
962.
Judge; That more good works of Piety and Charity have been founded within this
Realm during the Reign of our late Queen Eliz. than in many ages before. Indeed
from the Era of our late Reformation we may justly date the Progress of true
Charity in this Island. And though the late execrable Rebellion (the original of
which we now know) must necessarily put a stop to it during a considerable part
of that Period; yet I dare deliberately affirm, that, within this short space,
more and greater Acts of well-directed Charity have been seen among us, than
from the arrival of St. Augustine to the Death of K. Henry 8th. And yet though
these noble Results of Protestant Charity are so notorious; we need not however
wonder that he should still reflect on our Hospitals, who is pleased to upbraid
us with Foreign Schools, and Colleges. Never was a slander more unluckily
fixed on us, who See Wase's Essay to the hist. of Free-Schools.
are the happiest of all Nations in Europe in the large Endowments settled on
our Schools, and Universities, by our generous Ancestors; some of them
Protestants, many of them Kings, and Prelates of another Persuasion. And as no
difference in Opinions can withdraw us from paying the most profound respects
to their memory, so we can hardly with patience hear their noble works
slighted, and ridiculed by one who rather chooses to write a Panegyric on the
petty alms of a p. 14. p. 19. 29. Pi. Pa.
Spanish Bookbinder, a French Inkeeper, and a p. 14. p. 19. 29. Pi. Pa.
Sicilian Gentleman Usher.

Here now, if we would insist on the vast Foundations of See Duck's Gesta
Chich. Wood in Coll. om. An. and Sti. Joh.
Chichely, Wood in Coll. Aedis Christi.
Woolsey, Jo. Budden. in vita Gu. Patteni. Full. Churc. Hist. l. 4. p. 188.
Wainfleet, Willet. Syn. Pap. p. 960. Full. Hist. Camb. 146.
Mildmay, Willet ib. Fuller. 16. p. 153.
Sidney. The mean Donatives of Piet. Romans p. 14. p. 55. c. p. 77.
Capranica, Salviato, and Palotta would make but a very small figure; and He
that would equal foreign Colleges to their's, must use a far larger Hyperbole,
than when he increases the number of the German Students, and augments the
Revenues of S. Spirito. But it is not my design at present to transcribe Woods,
or Fuller: The Proof of things Evident is then only neceslary, when it is
extorted by the Impudence of a Flat denial; and till then, it need not be
granted to the timorous malice of sly Reflections.

But in common justice to our Protestant Founders and Benefactors, we must
acquaint the Reader (if he know it not) that even most of those Colleges, which
derive their first Foundation from Catholic Kings, and Prelates, owe their
present magnificence to Reformers; who have copied out herein Augustus's
Pattern, and have changed Popish Brick into Protestant Marble. Few Foundations
there are, that stand upon their original basis, without Protestant Supporters:
where Halls only were left; they have been since Endowed; that is, changed from
Italian into English Colleges: where mean Colleges were built; their
structures, and Revenues have been so sensibly advanced, and improved, that
apparently more is owing to the concurrence of Rivulets, than the greatness of
the Fountain. Even that College, which has the Happiness to be governed by
this Editor, owes more to a Protestant Benefactor, than a Catholic Founder;
and is less fortunate in it is birth, than adoption. It boasts it self indeed of
an ancient date, but proves it rather by old rolls* than tenures; so that as to
the revenues of it, like Jason's Ship, it wholly consists of Additions. I am
sensible this Gentleman is not much acquainted with the learned languages, but
being of the Latin Church, and University College, I presume he may understand
four Verses which are there gratefully preserved; and I recommend 'em to his
consideration.

Vana suum jactet Benedictum Roma; Benettum
Ordo Reformatae Religionis habet.
Ergo Domum qui Front octoque ornavit alumnis
Aeternum nobis hic Benedictus erit.
Nor have the Reformers more promoted learning by the Colleges, they have
built; than by the Libraries they have founded; having herein as much the
advantage of their Catholic Ancestors, as Sr. Thomas Bodley's Library has of
Duke Humfrey's. When the third part of the Revenues of this Nation were spent
in a Cloister; when the Clergy frequently engrossed the white Stave's, and
challenged the Seals by Prescription: When the wealth of the Kingdom was in the
hands of the learned, (or rather, the less ignorant) part of it: then might it
have been justly expected, that our Libraries should have surpassed that of
Alexandria; and that little would have been left to be added by a Bodley, a
Laud, or a Seldom.

But Learning was never restored, till Religion was reformed: The Monkish
Barbarity had the same Exit with their superstition: And then at last Libraries
were increased and Learning advanced; when there came in a Religion that could
bear the test of it; I am not ignorant there were some few Desks of Books in
their Abbeys; which as our antiquaries frequently complain, were lost, and
scattered in the General dissolution: and yet if the Quality of these
Musaeolum's may be seen in their remains; and a true Idea of the Fabric may be
taken from it is ruins; we have good reason to imagine that the treasure was
such, as rather received it is price from the antiquity of the stamp, than the
Intrinsic value of the Metal. Most of their Libraries may be reduced* to some
few See Bale and Pits de Scriptor. Anglic. who both borrowed their Catalogues
from Leland, appointed by H. 8. to Survey the Libraries of the Monasteries.
Officials; the Legends of their Saints; a Catalogue of their Relics; the
Charters of their foundation; the Annals of their Monasteries; and, above all,
the Lieger Books and Rolls of their Mannours. The Comparison of these little
repositories of Learning with the Protestant Libraries, especially with that of
the University of Oxford; would give us an easy, but a despicable victory;
since, if we would draw a Parallel between His, and the most eminent Libraries
elsewhere, we shall find, that, this younger Brother, like Benjamin, has the
greater portion. See Dr. James. Ecloga Oxonio-Cantabrigiensis. and Bellum
Papale.
Here the Fathers appear in their genuine dress; and are unacquainted with a
Sponge. No Authors here suffer under the Inquisition; nor are maimed by an
Index Expurgatorius. Not a leaf wanting in any of our Books, but what has been
cut out by some honest Gentlemen, who saw it was not wisdom to attacque 'em by
any other method. Our Adversaries too are received into our Arsenal; nor do we
fear, that our Soldiers should be dismayed at the sight of the Sons of Anak.
So that if this, by reason of its far later date, should hardly equal the
Vatican (which yet it surpasses) in the number of it is Books; yet certainly in
the freedom of access, and the ingenuity of the Management, it must be allowed
to exceed it.

But however Few and Mean, their Colleges are, Their Monasteries, we own, want
neither Nello Stato Ecclesiastic. in Italia Conventi di* Monache 272. Conventi
di Maschi 388. Greg. Leti. Ceremon. Pa. 5. p. 155. Amstel. 1685. See Pi. Romans
part 3. cap. 3. p. 103. In England, says Bozius, Dena, millia Monasteria
numerabantur (which is not much above 9000, more than ever were) but he is the
same man that says there are in Rome Templorum tria millia. See Boz. de sign.
Eccl. l. 11. c. 3. See Sir Edw. Sandys. c. 7. See Hosp. de orig. Monach. p.
274. Council. Tom. 3. Del. Card. Conventuales ordines abolendos esse putamus
omnes.
number nor riches. But here we are concerned to know, under what species of
Charity, we should rank these Religious Houses, whose design is unwarrantable;
whose rules are sometimes senseless, and more often impious, which usually
proceed from a Caprice, and He la Politica degli Ecclesiasiici e stata quella;
Che ha introdotto nella Chiesa Romana tanti Conventi di Frati, e tanti
Monasteri di Monache, non gia il solo Zelo della Religione, come altri pensano.
(to say no more) nourish Enthusiasm.

At best Quando in una famiglia si trovano set o otto fratelli poveri, a
quali non se e permesso per la nobilita della lor nascita d'abbracciar
professioni basse, e una gran Commodita quella di pateri far Frati etc. Dial.
Polit. Genev. Chovet. 1666. Si Caenobia in Anglia florerent, haereditates
manerent penes primogenitos indicisae. Reiner. de Antiq. Bened. in Angl. p. 230.
they are esteemed among themselves the results rather of Policy, than
Religion, and consequently more subservient to convenience, than Piety. They
only give men opportunity of keeping up that, which the Italians so much
admire, the Grandezza of a Family; and of making a Cheap and Gentile Provision
for a supernumerary Son, and an Odd daughter. For an Honest Trade will taint
Roman Blood; but a Cowl, and a Veil consists with Gentility. This is then the
only piece of Charity which we want; or rather neither have nor want: This is
that, the very footsteps of which our Prudent Ancestors have not suffered to
remain among us; and yet this is that, which is the overweaning hope of this
Pamphleteer and the great design of this Treatise to introduce. For to what
other purpose are all parts of it filled with the Praises of Persons single,
disengaged, and sequestered from the world: Pi. Pom. p. 107.
using no Beds but instead thereof Sacks, or bare boards; Pi. Par. p. 66.
having one common habitation, one Purse, one Pantrey, and who are at such a
distance from any real Propriety, that those cold words Meum and Tuum (the
Sourse of all Dissentions) are banished out of their Society.

These are the old and obsolete Praises of a Monastic life; and shall therefore
receive an answer of no little standing, in the words of our Church 3d. Part of
the Homily of Good Works.
.

As for their wilful Poverty it was such; that when in Possessions, Jewels,
Plate, and Riches, they were equal to or above Merchants, Gentlemen, Barons,
Earls, and Dukes; yet by this subtle Sophistical* term Proprium in Communi,
they mocked the world, persuading that notwithstanding all their Possessions,
and Riches; yet they kept their vow, and were in wilful Poverty. But for all
their riches they might See this proved in Crusii Ep. Jesuit. 2 n. 7. and 8.
neither help Father nor Mother; nor other that were indeed very needy, and
Poor without the license of their Father Abbot, Prior, or Warden yet they might
take of every man; but they miggt not give ought to any man, no not to them,
whom the Laws of God bound them to help.

Here we have the exact copy of the Pharisaical Corban; and as this, and the
other Impieties of the Regulars, Burnet Hist. Ref Pa. 1. l. 3 p. 189.
discovered at the dissolution of their houses in England, will not permit us
to have any great opinion of their devotion; so the Present weakness of Spain
and ^eramente il veder le Citta del Pontefice le meno popolate di tutta
l'Italia Dial. Polit Gen: Chovet. 1666.
Italy, Nello Regno di Napoli Conventi di Monache 533 Conventi di Frati 680.
Leti. p. 156. see p. 159.
which apparently proceeds from the vast numbers of the Religious there, hardly
suffers us to think, that there is any Politic Convenience in maintaining them.

Now then; if we had leisure to recapitulate the Charge, and the defense; we
might see how justly Protestants are accused of defect of Charity, who alone
can be properly said to exercise any; how deservedly Englishmen are exhorted
to a constant exercise of liberality, and a Prudent management of it, whose
Legal Provisions are alone, and only are sufficient to answer it is true, and
great designs; how ingenuously at last we are Charged with want of Hospitals,
Schools, and Colleges; who in the former come behind few, in the latter exceed
all Countries in Europe.

For if we had an Index Expurgatorius to strip this little Book of it is
Rhetorical Flourishes; the Roman Colleges, and French Hospitals would ly in a
far less compass. For then first he would probably have omitted those
structures, Such is Hospitale D. Mariae in Portico. see also p. 57.
which are only proved to have been by doubtful Inscriptions; and which are
now extant in no other Rome, but Sotterranea. And again, he would scarce have
suffered the Reader to be troubled with See Pi. Pa. p. 10. Mr Vincent had at
first one only Companion; which soon after increased to 10 or 12, and ere this
( as we may guess with probability) amounts even to thousands Pi. Par. p. 59. I
am told there is a design to build eight or ten fair Halls; all to be furnished
with beds; with white Fustian Curtains; with each one a Straw Bed, and a
Feather Bed, and a Good Quilt etc. see also p. 60. and p. 61.
Platonic Structures; such as have no other Foundation, but in the mind of the
Donor, or rather in the wishes of the Beggar. But it was an agreeable task for
him, that would overthrow our Doctrine with (...), and future treatises, to
depress the Honor of our works by Utopian Charity, and Intentional Hospitals;
which we could easily have answered by giving him a large description of Mr.
Cowley's College, and Mr. Milton's School. And lastly we should possibly have
not so much receded from the Pattern of that Good Steward, whom he commends in
the Preface, as instead of Entrate, Che bastano per mantener* Cento giovani
Tedeschi. P. 264. Ritratto di Roma Moderna: in Roma 1652. con licenza de Sup
Compare this with Pi. Romans p. 71. The Alumni of this College are 150 more or
less.
100 to set down 150 more or less; or in the place of A Rome il y a un hospital
qui a 100 mil escus de fonds; ou mesmes les Gentilhomes, lors qui'ls sont
malades, se font porter. Scaliger in Sca. Edit. Fabr. Groningae 1669. p. 206.
Vide Praef. p. 2. Theod. Am. p. 16. Annuus hic cen sus ad centies mill aureos
fere ascendit.
100000 Crowns to put down about 37500l sterling.

We see therefore that this Author is just in the Main; and does not keep what
he takes from us, but only transports it; he annihilates indeed and extenuates
Hospitals at home; but then he erects, and augments them abroad; and so only
robs Paul to give to Peter.

We have already then taken a survey of the Foreign, and English munificence;
It remains that we enquire whether his pretenses to Devotion are better
grounded, than those to Charity; and whether those Praef. p. 4.
who pretend to enjoy more light of truth are inferior in the true fruits of
truth, Good-works. And here it is only necessary to make this Author speak
intelligibly; to perform the office of an Expositor, and in it, that of an
Answerer.

A constant Practice then of a Right and Regular Devotion is certainly an
evidence of a true, and lively Faith, because a necessary result of it, The
Essence undoubtedly discovers it self in it is Property; and is not only shown
by it, but appears in it. If in this sense therefore, this Author would infer
the sincerity of men's faith from the goodness of their works; he would be no
more singular in his arguments, than in his discoveries, and this might
deservedly be ranked among one of his new Italian Inventions. But now, because
the reality of our Faith is to be judged by the intrinsic goodness of our
works; is therefore the truth of our tenets to be tried by the outward
appearance of our Actions? External Acts are as fallible signs of Piety, as
Verbal expressions; we see no more men's devotion in the one, than we hear it
in the other; and both may probably flow from an holy zeal; and both may
possibly proceed from a gross Hypocrisy.

But if we should admit, (which without fear of the consequences we safely may)
That the truth of a Doctrine is to be tried by the outward Good works of it is
Professors, it was certainly to be hoped that such works should be assigned, as
a Common Standard, which were evidently, and indisputably Good, or at least not
apparently Bad. But now for this Author, to produce See p. 2. Piet. Romans
the Italian Idolatry and p. 2 etc. Pi. Par.
French Superstition, as the best specimen of their Devotion, and Piety; is a
frank confession indeed, which gives him for once the title of a faithful
Relator; but a very unhappy Arguer. For when See Praef p. 4.
in this whole treatise the Regularity of the Practice is proposed as a Proof
of the truth of their Doctrine; here the truth of doctrine is assumed to
justify the regularity of the Practice. And so to fill up the circle of the
Argument, the Principles are apparently true, because they produce Good works;
and the works are as apparently Good, because they flow from true Principles.

This is such ridiculous Sophistry, as a man would not probably have been
guilty of, that had never seen the famous University of Sapienza, nor reprinted
See Ars Rationis. Ox. 1673.
Occham. We allow him therefore, that there are See Pi. To. c. 8 p. 93.
Dirige's and Trentals at Rome, and that there is no Sodality of the suffrage
in England. We put the same limits to our Prayers, that God has set to his
mercy; and dare not ask that refrigerium for our Friends, which Abraham
despaired of obtaining for his son. We own again that Pi. Romans p. 4.
their Churches are beauteously graced with the sacred furniture of Pictures;
whereas our walls are plainly adorned with some holy admonitions only; and,
among them, usually with the second Commandment. We willingly grant him
therefore the whole credit of this Piety: we own their Obits, and their Images,
their See Pi. To. p. 90, and 91.
Confessional Chairs, and satisfactory Penance; we come not in as sharers in
this Praise, nor envy them the monopoly of it. Thus far therefore the Author
has made Good his Claim: but has thereby gained such a right, as will only
prejudice his title to the true acts of genuine devotion. This Leaven
insinuates it self into each part of the Mass, and a multitude of Erroneous
acts will not arise to an accumulative virtue. The failure therefore of the
Romanists in the Exercise of almost every act of Piety might easily be proved,
were it not a task not long since anticipated by a See a Discourse concerning
the Devotions of the Church at Rome, especially as compared with those of the
Church of England. Printed Land. 1687.
Treatise, which is yet unanswered, and which is so full that it needs not be
enlarged, and so late, that it needs not be repeated. However, since some men
will not easily imagine so much Confidence, as the Papists always show in this
Cause, to proceed from no shadow of advantage on their side; it will be
requisite to consider, on what seeming grounds this assurance may probably be
thought to be founded.

Many men then, that measure things by the length of their shadows, take the
dimensions of their Charity and Devotion from the Grandeur of Almsgiving, and
the Pomp of Piety. The Pageantry of Images and See Pi. Pa. p. 41.
Relics; the outward Severity of their Asceticks, and solitude of their
Hermits; the Austerity of some of their Religious, and the Enthusiasm of
others, naturally make a deeper impression on Fanciful men, and Easy women,
than the strict, and regular exercise of a wise rational, and manly Devotion. A
silent Groan, an inward sorrow, a long, and that a necessary and indispensable
contrition make a less show, than the ceremony of a Fast, and the Luxury of a
Fish-entertainment. The secret worship of an invisible object is a less popular
act of Religion, than the adoration of an Image at Paris, and of the Pi. To. p.
6.
Volto Santo at Rome. To feed the Hungry, and to relieve the Sick is the homely
method of Northern Charity; But to build a stately Pi. To. p. 14.
unendow'd Hospital for the Poor to starve in gentilely, is, the more
magnificent instance of Italian Liberality. When the Pi. Romans p. 62.
Florentines go before the Condemned Criminal two by two, covered over Head to
the very Feet with black Frocks of Buckram; when the Pi. Pa. o. 25.
Ladies of Paris carry the Porridg-Pot between two of them upon a staff all up
and down the Parish; which they keep as bright as the Hollander does his
Andirons; it is natural for some men, that are pleased with odd sights; to
judge of the truth of a Religion by the brightness of the Porridg-Pot, and the
blackness of the Buckram. And seriously those are guilty of no better
inferences, who pretend to be converted to Popery by the sight of a Religious
Cavalcade, and the solemnity of a Procession. The Advantage therefore of this,
as of all Superstition, lies only in outward appearance, and ceremony; and
they, the essence of whose Religion consists in a show, are careful to keep up
the shadow, that is, the Substance of it.

Thus have I rather chosen to reflect upon the Work, than expose the Author;
though the latter were not only a more easy task, but as justifiable an
undertaking: for one that has dealt with us as he has, must not look for that
quarter we can give a fair and open enemy. But it will not be advisable for him
to make too bold with our good nature; or try the utmost extent of civility:
especially one that lies so open, should take care not to be too provoking. Let
it suffice that he has left us, and let us be quite rid of him; but let him not
believe himself privileged by his desertion to libel our Church and University.
If he must be busy, let him add examples to an old Rhetoric; or glean the
Jansenists Logic; or pick straws out of Il Maestro di Camera; or busy himself
with Immanuel Thesauro's bees: these are employments suitable to his capacity;
and such as he may pursue without interruption. But if he will rise above his
Form, tamper with Controversy, pretend to manage an Argument, degrade Kings,
and asperse Countries; he must expect to be made acquainted with himself; and
receive due correction for Assuming. It reflects upon the wisdom, which his
long experience should have taught him, that when he designs to beg somewhat
toward the finishing of Works already begun and attemted, he should lard his
petition with the slander of his Country; and think to purchase at the expense
of our reputation. But I hope the event will convince him of his mistake. For
though I would exhort all men, and especially Englishmen to the constant
exercise of Charity; I would likewise advise them, to know into what hands they
deposit their money; for there may be Mountains of piety so unlike those at
Rome, that instead of Interest gained, the Principal may be lost. If I can
obtain this just request of the prudent Reader, I shall rest satisfied with the
success of these Reflections; as being hereby indifferently well assured, that
however the Particulars of this Treatise have been answered, the main design of
it will be frustrated.

FINIS.
A Vindication of Protestant Charity, in Answer to some Passages in M. M's.
Remarks on a late Conference.
SInce the Protestant Churches, Hospitals, and Schools, are so frequent in this
nation; and so obvious to every man's eye; we have just reason to imagine, that
they, who still pretend to be ignorant of them, do not in one point only
decline the use of their senses. For is it otherwise possible that the Roman
Lazaretto's should be more visible than the English Hospitals? unless by some
new rule of optics, the Object appears larger, when it is at a greater
distance. Whatever respect therefore others may have for this Gentleman, I
cannot think him very careful of his own reputation, who is the Author of so
severe, and yet so groundless a Calumny. Where there is a considerable distance
either of time or place, where the matter of Fact is secret, or the Witnesses
scarce, a slander is more readily believed, or at least more hardly confuted.
But the plain, and bold denial of things done in our own Nation, in our own
time, is a Poison that carries with it it is own Antidote. Wherefore though the
confutation of such evident, and notorious falsehoods be a very easy task;
perhaps it may be difficult to excuse the impertinence of confuting them.
However because, this Topic has been confidently See Boz. de sign. Eccl. tit.
Magnif. and Stapylton. p. 2. 10. to 2. etc. and Tho. Car. Pi. Par. p. 242. and
Hill against Abbot. p. 145.
insisted on by many eminent Papists; and because an error long asserted with
more than ordinary assurance, often gains a proportionate belief among the
inconsiderate, it may seem worth while to undeceive well meaning men, who are
not parties to the slander, but misled by an Implicit Faith.

As to the other part of Mr. M's. Remarks, it is not my business to consider
it; much less shall I concern my self to lessen the repute of the Author. I
shall only observe, that, since he confidently affirms so much, and proves so
little; they very well understood his Talent, who in these late Contests,
employed him not as a Disputant, but an Evidence. Had he kept within that
Sphere, we should not have thought our selves concerned with him; But since, he
has been pleased to show his reading in the Oxford Treatises; and among his
Remarks, to insert this following Observation; we shall only examine the truth
of it, and then commit him into better Hands.

See Remarks. p. 21. see also p. 17. 15, 19, 20, 22.
I am not ignorant, that some Hospitals, Almshouses, and Churches have been
built by Protestants: For some proof of what is here said, see a book lately
printed at Oxford, called Pietas Romana and Parisiensis; By which in some
measure the rest may be guessed. Marginal note upon this Observation Remarks.
p. 21.
But there is no more Proportion between Dr. Tenison's two Parishes and a
couple of the poorest Vicariges in Wales, than there is between the Monuments
of Catholic Zeal, and whatever of that kind has been done by Protestants. It
will be a great while before the Reformation builds the fortieth part of what
it has pulled down. Nay, (supposing that this poor Nation is not to return to
it is ancient Religion) there is more likelihood, that Reformations following
one another, like Egyptian plagues, the succeeding ones should still devour
what the preceding left; than that men, who have taken Sacrilege for the
service of God should endeavor to repair any part of what is already destroyed.

This Remark now, if divested of the Usual Civilities, will amount to these two
Propositions.

1. That the Monuments of Catholic Zeal were pulled down by Protestants; and
that consequently they have taken Sacrilege for the service of God. 2 That the
Protestant Alms will not be equivalent to the fortieth part of Catholic Charity
before the Reformation.
That both these assertions are false, any one knows, that is less ignorant
than this Gentleman seems; and therefore it is for his satisfaction chiefly,
(for few will be exempted out of the other Predicament) that I Will prove them so.

First then; were it not the custom of some men to give the title of Catholic
Princes to Reformers; and, when it seems advantageous, to return the
Complement; it might justly be wondered, upon what account, the first Defender
of the Catholic Faith bears the Character of a Protestant. He was a Man too
much wedded to his own notions, to espouse Luther's Doctrine, which he had
pretended to confute; and too little forgetful of injuries, to patronize his
cause, who had treated him, rather like a Disputant, than a King. The
Protestants were never more exposed to the fiery trial than in his time; and
had as little reason to think him a Reformer, as the Jews once had to mistake
their Persecutor* for Messiah. The Dissolution of Abbeys, least it should seem
the act of a Protestant, was immediately seconded by the 6 Articles; and even
that was no more, than what had been attempted by Popish Parliaments; and in
some measure See of Ed. 2. alienations of Chapter Lands, in Johnston's Assurance of
Abbey Lands. p. 40.
completed by Precedent Kings; the suppression of Religious houses being only
a copy drawn from Protestant Henry the Centum Prioratus Monachorum
alienigenarum Henricus 5tus ante dissolverat. Cambd. 1 Bri. p. 11. See Fabians
Chr. A. 1414. and 2 H. 5. and see also in A. D 1410.
5ths original. Either Hen. 8th was of the same Religion with Gardener and
Bonner; or, (what little commends those pillars of Catholicism,) they pretended
to be of the same with him. There is no color then for calling K. Hen. 8. a
Protestant; but that this Gentleman has somewhat to say against him, and
therefore wishes him to have been so. If all are Protestants, that deny the
Popes Supremacy, we may stortly expect the reestablishment of the Edict of
Nants; If all are Reformers, that are esteemed Sacrilegious, Charles Martel,
and Boniface the 7th would be in our Number, and as many Bishops, as would
probably make out our Succession. Wherefore none of our Considerable
Historians, though they were no great Friends to Abbeys, have ever claimed Hen.
8th; and those Popish writers, who have had no good opinion of his Acts,
Reiner. de Ant'q Benedict. in Angl Aperte constat ipsum in iis solum articulis
doctrinae Christianae discessisse ab avita fide, quae ipsius libidini, and
avaritiae contraibant; nempe in Primatu Pontificis, and vitae communis
Monachorum and Regularium suppressione. See also p. 226. Even Sanders dares not
call him Protestant, but with his usual modesty, Alter quidam Mahumetes. l. 1.
de Schism. Angl.
have not yet dared wholly to disown him. They were Papists only that first by
their See Nic. Clemang. de corrupto Eccl. stat c. 2 21 and 23. Erasm. in (...).
in Epist. ad Rust Mon.
corrupt manners drew down the odium of all good men upon those noble
Foundations; they were Popish Parliaments that offered the revenues of them
Vid. Hist. Walsingh. in Rich 2. de Parl. Gloc.
to Rich. 2d, and actually gave them to H. 8th: They were Popish Heads who See
Rob. de monte de immutatione ordinis Monach. and W. Thorn in his Chron. p.
1781. Edit. Twisd. Lon. 1652 Temporibus Henr. 8 nullum ^ere repertum est.
monesteriam ubi non adulteriorum, stuprorum, incestarum libidinum, sodomiae,
nefandorumque flagitiorum plurima non reperirentur vestigia, eaque and testibus
comprobata. Hosp. de orig. monaster p. 273. See Antiq. Britan. in Cranm. and
Pol. Virg. p. 121.
being partly obnoxious for their Crimes, and partly corrupted See Dugd. Hist.
Warw p. 803 etc. L. Herb p. 442. Godw. An. 1589 and and 1535.
by the prospect of a greater allowance See Weever Fun Mon. p 100.
basely resigned even before the Act of Parliament, and treacherously gave up
the bounty of their Founder, and betrayed the Rights of their Successors. It
was lastly a Popish Prince that enforced, and a See Dugdale Hist. Warw. p. 802.
and the Oxford Editor is of opinion that even Cromwell was a Papist too. See
Church Gov. part v.
Popish Bishop, that was a main Agent in contriving those surrenders: and all
the part that Latimer acted in that fatal Catastrophe, was only a persuasive,
that the Revenues of those religious Houses might still remain entire to the
Church, and be appropriated to better uses. That the suppression of Abbeys
therefore should be imputed to Protestants is part of the same figure, by which
we are charged with the Cecilian Plot; and the murder of King Charles the
first.

However if Sacrilege, and want of Charity did not come into the world with the
Reformation, this Gentleman is so civil, as to say, ( if we please) that it
only usherd it in. It went before it, it is true, as bad manners go before good
Laws: but where a natural connection should be shown; to infer a necessary
agreement from a bare Precedence of matter of Fact, is Logic which this
Gentleman never learnt at Oxford. The Papists thought they had some reason to
hope that See More in hist. Prove. Angl. Soc. Jesu l. 10. Non immerito
augurantur omnem quae nuper facta est rerum mirandarum conversionem non ad
restituendam sed ad abulendam cum tempore haeresin pertinere: p 503. See also
D. du Moulin's Epistle.
the late Civil war would have usherd in their Religion. And yet had I no other
grounds to think them rebellious, my reason would have hindered me then, as my
civility does now, from giving them that title.

But Secondly, the Subject of our next Inquiry, is the comparison of Popish and
Protestant See Remarks p. 17.
Charity, as to Almshouses, Hospitals and Churches. And here it might be
justly expected, that the disproportion of years should be accounted for; and
that no man would think our Hospitals any more than those of Rome should be
built in a day. However because the conquest is the greater, by how much larger
the allowances are; we are willing, that the ancient Charity should show it
self in it is full growth; in which certainly if at any time it appeared before
the dissolution of Abbeys. At that time there were in England This is the exact
number of the Hospitals in England according to Harpsfield, Cambden, Speed
Weever etc. and in Rome there are only viginti quinque Hospitia Publica aegris
curandis aptata etc. Stap. de magn. Romans Ecc. l. 12. c. 11.
110 Hospitals, if we take in all that bore the name; otherwise, considering
the Revenues, very few of them will bear proportion to an English Almshouse,
or to some of the famed Infirmaries of Italy; the revenues of some of them
amounting to 1l; of others to 2l, 3l, 4l, and of some even to 6l and upwards.
And most of these being either Appendages to Monasteries, or at least under the
government of Regulars; those who were designed Assistants to the Sick,
engrossed the Revenues, and distributed to the others only some mean largesses,
some Pepper Corns, as acknowledgments of Right. And whereas not only those
Hospitals but most of the Monasteries too, had been chiefly designed ( See
their Charters in Dugd. Mon. 1, 2, etc. ad Pauperum Hospitalitatem -- ad
susceptionem Pauperum and infirmorum.
as appears in their Charters) to keep up hospitality, c Bona in usus alios
damnabiliter conversa contra dicti hospitalis fundationem. Dugd. Monast. Angl.
p. 390, and p. 406. Cum Hospitale S. Bartholomaei ad sustentationem infirmorum
antiquitus fundatum erat, and jam de fratribus sanis and validis contra ipsam
fundationem occupatum existat etc. See. 3. Tom. Monast. p. 95.
and to supply the defects of alms, and national contributions; the Practice of
the Religious was so little agreeable to the intents of their Founders; that (as
Giral. Itin. Camb. l. 1. c. 3. De 13 ferculis vel 14 quae sibi de solo
consuetudinis jure deberi contendunt, tempore famis, and inediae priusquam unum
ad tempus intermitterent, aut a consuetudine vel in modico recederent, terras
monasteriorum and mansiones in faenebrem praedam perditum ire, and quod
crudelius est, Pauperes ad januas catervatim obire permitterent. and perire.
See also p. 83. 16. Masson. de Ep. Urb. l. 6. in Cl. 5. Religiosi quam professi
videntur, paupertatem prae cunctis mortalibus exosam habent.
ancient and one of their own writers observes) they would not purchase the
lives of the famished poor at their gates, with the retrenchment of the least
part of their luxury. Sic patrimonia Regum Eleemosynae Pauperum profligantur:
And if any person will impartially consider the just complaints in Paris, and
See Knyghton l. 2. c. 14. Talibus abstrahere nocentes divitias opus est
charitatis. Apud nos Christiani mendicant ut apud eos panem Paterini manducent.
See M. Paris in H. 3. p. 346. and p. 596. and p. 727. and passim. Edit. Tiguri
1589. p. 727. Si pauperum Esurientium clamor insonuit haec erat illius (prioris
de Thetford) pectore cura minor.
Knyghton against the Regulars avarice, he will easily make a just estimate of
the sad condition of the Poor of this nation; when their revenues were managed
by stewards, who seldom were so just as instead of 50 to set down 5. Nay even
those of them, who seemed a little more conscientious than the rest, did seldom
distribute more than the Se Dugd. in Warw. He that brought the complaint upon
the suppression of Abbeys in Holinsh. p. 1050 says it was much amiss, that a
great part of the land that was given for alms to the Poor should be spent on a
few superstitious Monks, who gave not 40l in alms, when they should have given
200 etc.
45th part of their annual revenues.

Thus had the Monks promiscuously used the treasures of the poor, as their own;
and therefore that Popish Prince, who first seized on their revenues made too
little a distinction between them: leaving nothing for the Reformers to do, but
either to restore to the poor that share of the Lands, whereof the Monks first,
and afterward the Popish Parliament had deprived them; or to give them an
equivalent in See 43. Eliz. c. 2. 1. Ed. 6 c 14.
Legal Provisions. The former method was more suitable to the opinion of our
See Godw. An. ad An. 1540. And in Rerum Eccles Com. p. 158. Poterant, lnquiunt
Nostri, aedificia scholis ac literis praebere domicilia, opes ac possessiones
in pios egentium usus conferri, colendae hospitalitati destinari
Divines; who upon the supposal (I believe) of some inherent sanctity, always
pressed a restitution in specie: the latter was embraced by our Statesmen; as
being the less specious; yet more safe. For had Ed. 6th redeemed some of those
Monasteries, and converted them into Hospitalls, or Bishops Sees, we may
plainly discern, from the fortune of Westminister Abbey, what a Revolution they
must have expected under Qu. Mary. Fabrics, if kept entire, might have
reverted; but the Rates of the poor will not probably be employed to the
maintenance of Regulars.

I shall repeat nothing of what I formerly said concerning those excellent
Laws: but may add, that even the Penal Statutes which now seem so dreadful to
some men, are so many instances of our Charity to the poor, and only force the
obnoxious to a compulsive liberality.

This has been our national munificence. And if M. M. will be pleased to
peruse the Autorities which I See Dr. Willet in his Synopsis Papismi who p.
1219. has wrote a faithful account of 600000l distributed in alms within 60
years after the Reformation in the City of London only. Stow and, he that
contiuued him, have made another Catal. true for what it mentions, but
defective, and only chargeable with faults of omission. Sr. Fr. More, and his
Editor Geo. Duke Esquire have in the reading on 43 Eliz. c. 2. given great
instances of the Protestant Liberality. See also Hol. p. 1313. p. 1962 and
1376. Read also Herns Domus Curthusiana, and particularly p. 200. See Sr. Ed.
Coke 10 lib. Rep. who himself founded an Hosp. in Norfolk. Fuller Ecc. Hist. l.
9. p. 185. p. 212. l. 10. p. ^. and those Authors, which are cited before
here present him with, he may easily be satisfied, that the Charity of Private
Persons was not inferior to that of their Representatives. How many Diocesses
and Shires are there now in England which have not so much as one Almshouse
and Hospital? Yet to want both was the unhappiness of In the Catalogue of Hosp.
in Speed and Hurpsfield; you will find none in Westmorland, Lancashire.
Cheshire, Carlisle. Hereford-shire etc.
more than one Shire or Diocese, before the general Dissolution. The redemption
of Captives, the enlargement of Prisoners, the dowry of poor Maids, the
erection of Free-schools, the restitution of Tithes, and other more ordinary
works of Charity, were not only the constant attendants, but the necessary
results of the Reformation.

But since I have formerly insisted upon these, I shall purposely avoid all
repetition; and shall only take leave to answer a common and that a plausible
objection. For since there were See 27. H. 8. c. 25. and 22. H. 8. c. 12* 1 Ed.
6. c. 14.
few Laws made for the relief of the Poor before the Reformation, and there is
no probability that they were not then maintained tho without Laws; It has
been hastily concluded, and too easily granted; that whatever small Stipends
the Monks allowed to the Poor, their Hospitality was extraordinary; and that,
upon the failure of that, the pressures of the Poor first required a
Parliamentary remedy.

I will not deny, but some indigent Persons might receive a sensible loss at
the overthrow of Abbeys; and though that might be one, yet I think, what I am
going to assign was the chief Cause of that sudden alteration. Anciently, when
every inferior person; that could probably be reduced to extremity, depended on
some Baron, either as a Servant, or Villain; every such Lord lay under an
indispensable obligation, especially in those days of Hospitality, to support
him in his weakness, who had employed his strength in his service. But when H.
7th's Law diminished this dreadful power of the Nobility, by setting up almost
an equal balance in the Commonalty, the Tenures were altered; and dependencies
almost every where ceased: so that no man having a particular obligation to
succor him that had lived independent, the Charge necessarily fell upon the
Community. Poverty therefore entered in upon the change of Tenures, not of
Religion; nor was the result of our Ecclesiastical, but our Civil liberty.

2. That the Churches of this Island suffered much by the Reformation,
signifies no more to any one that understands this Author's sincerity, than
that they were increased by it. For if we speak in reference to the Fabrics,
few men that have either seen or read of our Ancient Churches will deny the
(...) to our Modern Architecture. The Sea Speed. p. 801. Lord Herb. p. 444. nd
Willet. p. 1220.
Building of so many Churches immediately after the Reformation; the repair of
almost all of them under K. James; the late, and sudden erection of so many in
London; and the daily progress of that stately Temple of St. Paul; are no very
convincing arguments of the Sacrilege of Protestants. And since amidst our
present unhappy Contests, our Charity to the building of that magnificent
Edifice does not cease, I cannot but compare it to the courageous Purchase of
that Roman, who bought the Ground in the Suburbs, while Hannibal laid siege to
the City. Pompous Edifices were always the works of a secure, and flourishing
Church: and that the Primitve ages of Christianity erected no more, was not
their crime, but their Adversaries; not the result of their covetousness, but
insecurity. And therefore though it be some men's interest to foment jealousies,
and then to accuse them; there is no rational man but will see, that Men that
still carry on so noble works, do firmly rely on his Majesty's promise; and
give Him more thon a Paper assurance of their confidence in it. c See Stows
Chronicle continued by Hows page 892. at the year* 1607. See also Gainsfords
Glory of England. lib. 2. cap. 17.


But since there is reason to suppose, that the notion of Church extends
farther, than to the stones of it; we may conclude, he that Charges the
Reformation with the decay of Churches, conceives part of their revenues to
have been diminished by it. Happy had the Church of England been if some that
discoursed much of Sacrilege, had been careful to avoid it; and not alienated
those settled revenues, of which God even in Heathen Countries is esteemed the
Proprietary. But Seldom, Linwood, and Dugdale will assure us, that not only
Exemptions, and Modes, but even Appropriations of Tithes, and that to Orders
originally (...), were of an elder date than the Reformation. See 3. Appropr.
to an Hosp. Dugd. Monast. p. 43^. Ecclesiae Appropriatae dicuntur, quae populi
intercedente autoritate cum Regis, and Episcopi consen^u, Monasteriis, and
Hospitalibus exiliter dotatis concessae ^amd. Brit. p. 1116.
Most of the Monasteries and Hospitals were built upon the ruins of the
Seculars; and it was an easy, but unacceptable Charity, that only presented God
with Achan's wedge, Ananias's land, and Belshazzars Vessels. Appropriations,
then, Exemptive Bulls, Conveyances of all the Tithes, or of part of them, were
the sad inventions of another Communion; Our business it has been, (as Sr H.
Spelman, and Mr. Fuller can inform him,) to redeem their crimes, and repair the
sad ruins of this Church. Many Protestants have voluntarily surrendered up
those Tithes, which the Monks first invaded; more have increased the Sea Dr.
Ryves's Vicars Plea. and Dugd. Hist. Warw p. 20.
stipend of those poor Vicars, who before were forced to live on the errors of
their flock; with design perhaps, that they mightly under the greater
obligation of deluding them. That our Clergy then is in a better condition than
those Seculars were, is well known both to us, and them; and perhaps this
Consideration has chiefly engaged Mr. M. to cast a favorable eye on Dr.
Tenison's Parsonage. Remarks. p. 119.
Might not this Parsonage of St. Martins keep 30 Regulars who always were
maintained for very little, at least with the Convenience of an house to dwell
in? The frugality of the Regulars, is notorious; but the Charity of this
supposition puts me in mind of as frugal a manager of Ointment; Mark. 14. 5. 3.
which might have been sold for 300 pence, and given to the Poor.

Lastly, The Schools of this Nation, on which this Author was so prudent, as
not to insist, were then rare, and unendow'd; nor could it be justly expected,
that Religion, should much promote Learning, which it self was advanced by
Ignorance. He need not therefore be much skilled in Antiquity, that would write
the history of English Schools, few of which will be found to antedate the
latest rise of the Reformation. And were not this evident from Authentic
Histories, the gradual improvement of Learning among us would sufficiently
assure us of the increase of this Charity. For what did that age produce, that
did not savor of the Cloister, and carry with it a relish of Monkish
Barbarity? The Regulars were very rich, and equally ignorant; the Seculars were
like them in all things but their wealth; and the Laity had only learning
enough to contemn the Clergy. So that if the Jesuit Mr. M's friend prove no
better a Schoolmaster than the Ancient Regulars did; the Youth of this Nation
will gain by his Instructions, as his own Cause does by his Arguments.

Since the Protestant Charity therefore is much superior to the Popish, it can
want nothing to appear so, but only Ostentation, We are better at giving Alms*
which our Savior strictly commands; They at sounding the trumpet, which He as
solemnly forbids. We keep not so much, as the plain Memoirs of our Alms, and
decline the justice of History; while theirs are constantly improved by all the
artifices of Rhetoric. In hoc Xenodochio ingenui Cives suis sumptibus
tractantur. (viz S. Spiritus) Bossard. Top. Romans p. 19. and of the Lateran.
Multi nullius rei indigentes, eo se deportari curant; ac propriis impensis
curari Ib. p. 372. and Scal in Scaligerianis p. 206. ' En Payant irs y sont
fort bien traitez etc.
The Inns that receive Guests, are called Hospitals, and the reckoning that is
exacted, an acknowledgment, or gratuity. Malyne*s Lex Mercatoria c. 13.
Usury is too gross a name for Mountains of Piety; but a Contribution of four
in the Hundred is a necessary support of the Charges of the Bank. The Pomp of
the Rich Temples is painted in full; but Sed per totum orbem nulla templa
incultiora sunt, and ruinam magis minitantia, quam Cardinalium. Schrader: in
Mon Romans imp. 1592.
the ruins of others are cast into a shade. Warcup. Schrader.
The Bounty of Gregory XIII. appears on the Stage; but the Sacrilege of Sixtus
V. lies behind the Scenes. ^anson counts 300 Churches in Rome Others 305. But
Bozius tria Millia. Boz. de sign. Eccl. l. 9. c. 5.
300 Churches may easily arise to 3000; and he is no well willer to Rome, that
will not contribute a Cipher. Nor are their Edifices, less deceitful, than
their Orators; but seem designed to countenance the Hyperbole; and, like fires,
that rather shine then warm, are more pleasing in their aspect, than profitable
in their influence. Their Alms is fitted to the eye of the Spectator, and
therefore easier seen; Ours to the necessity of the Receiver, and consequently
better felt. The Seas of their Charity (for so they are styled) appear more
diffusive, as having a larger surface; Ours are less noisy, as flowing in a
deeper Channel; which therefore necessarily seem less, at a transient view; and
have never the advantage; till they are fathomed.

FINIS.
A VINDICATION OF THE Oxford Reply To two Discourses there Printed A. D. 1687.
Concerning the Adoration of our Blessed Savior in the Eucharist, From the
Exceptions Made to it in the Second Appendix to a Compendious Discourse on the
Eucharist Published from the same Press.

A Vindication of the OXFORD Reply, etc.
IT is now a twelvemonth, since there was published at Oxford a Reply to two
Discourses there printed, concerning the Adoration of our Blessed Savior in the
Eucharist; and a Copy of that Reply presented to the Publisher of those
Discourses. Since he cannot pretend to the common excuse of avocations (for he
has not so much business God be thanked as he once expected) I ought not to
think it fair, that he has stayed his Answer till the Pamphlet he replies to
would in all probability be forgotten; and now returns such costive
animadversions upon a piece of it: yet I neither complain of the fewness of his
exceptions taking it for granted he could make no more; nor yet of his delay,
because what we have at last, is I hope the more considered and the Gentleman
has now done his best. His whole Appendix contains twenty six pages whereof
near one half is taken up with a long Harangue very wide from the purpose of
answering my Reply; and fitter to create a new Controversy than determine the
old. What it will do we shall see in due time; but first let us examine in
what condition the Reply is.

The Appendix tells us there were printed at Oxford, * Ad. p. 191.
two Discourses, the Design whereof was to show the incertitude and inconstancy
of the Church of England, from whence it will follow that none can trust or
rely upon her authority etc.And then complains p. 191.
that both the London Answerer, and I spend our Learning against
Transubstantiation, he cannot say altogether from, but not much to the purpose.
The harder our fate, who must be led out of the way by the Discourser, and then
accused of straying by the Publisher. But how should we fathom such a deep
contrivance, as the writing of a Book with a design which the Book never says
one word to? Dull as we were! we guessed at the Design by the Title! and
thought we were to confute the Book, which we did, Paragraph by Paragraph; and
now it seems we might do so without ever hurting the Design. This it is to deal
with men of intrigue, that have Designs and Religions which cannot be
discovered by any thing they say or do. Yet as luck would have it, the word
waveringly though but once mentioned, gave the Replyer some suspicion; who
thereupon invited the Publisher to produce what he could upon the subject, with
assurance it should be Answered. Now after a twelvemonths consideration out it
comes -- the Author took those two articles to be a manifest and sufficient
instance. We that have not a twelvemonth to bethink our selves, must return
this sudden answer, that as we take it the case is otherwise; and so for ought
I see it must rest, till our Author is at leisure for something else besides
taking. As for Transubstantiation* I confess I thought and so I told him, it
was nothing at all to his purpose; but why should he say so? For if he be the
Papist he pretends, he ought to think it very much to the purpose: which I hope
will be considered by them whom it may concern; that hereafter they may gauge
his head, before they trust a Controversy in his hands.

These unhappy miscarriages have put him into very ill humor, which breaks out
so often and so indecently, 'twill go near to spoil the sale of his Book of
Education. Sometimes it entertains him to think we shall be Damned; at others,
that we may be turned out; or at least reproach't by our Founders at the day of
Judgment, as malae fidei possessores: which hint would have better become
another mouth; for if his rule hold, Sr. Simon Bennet will have something to
object to University College, which St. Cutbert will not be able to answer.
Sometimes he is transported beyond the temper he affects, and falls into
downright scolding, when he thinks upon the freedom wherewith his follies were
exposed in the Reply. Though it is I if any one that have reason to complain; who
had much rather meet a man with whom I might be serious; but am forced by a
trivial objecter to fall into a low way of answering; and to weigh against my
adversary am fain to waste. But for my part I pardon him my share of all his
hard thoughts and speeches, since he owns I am a true member of the present
Church of England; an honor I prefer to whatever can be offered by him that
tempted my Antagonist to desert her; and think it will more than balance all
the calumnies that either of them can invent. Our Church too will pardon him
the reproachful appellation of New, since he seems to bestow it at random; and
gives it in the same breath to his own old Church the Puritans. Neither shall
we be concerned when he reminds us of our Antipuritan Predecessors, whom it
seems the Puritans accused as being Popishly affected; as if those good men
could not slander, nor those wise men be mistaken, Our present Church has been
traduced upon the same score by the Party that set on the Puritans: but thanks
be to p. 191.
God, the scandal is now so manifest that even this Gentleman with all the
liberty he takes, dares not fasten it upon our present Church. When the edge of
these Satyrs is rebated; there remains nothing but the cry of Zuinglianism,
which recurrs in these papers like the Ave Maria in the Rosary, repeated as
often in proportion to as little purpose. To answer it once for all we must
acquaint our Author, that if the Zuinglians hold as Mr. Hooker says they do
(whose authority for once we may safely prefer to the Discourser's) they and
we are agreed about the Eucharist in all that is essentially necessary: but
then they hold more than a bare reception of the Benefits of our Savior's
passion. But if they hold no more than such a bare reception (which is often
affirmed in this Apendix, but never reconciled with the note upon Reply p. 14.)
then the name of Zuinglian is impertinently and falsely put upon the Church of
England, for She holds more as is proved at large in the Reply.

It seems it was long deliberated, whither it were p. 192.
requisite to answer the Reply; upon which occasion we have a very Catholic
discourse; for it is equally fitted for all Books and Arguments whatever; I find
my self no farther concerned in it than to thank him for the word deturned;
because till now I wanted a name for his Conversion. At last it was resolved,
not to leave his Religion (which he calls Truth) to defend it self; which would
have been hard upon it, being weak and all alone; and therefore he has
published first, a short Treatise written many years ago, of an hundred and
two and forty pages, which contains nothing but the two Discourses shortened
into five times more room, and so may now be called old, p. 192.
for one reason more than he assigns. To this he has added two Appendixes: in
which he says so little to his Adversaries, that we must correct the Title of
his Book, and call it a Discourse with two Compendious Appendixes; The second
of these which is levelled against half my Reply, is short and meek in
comparison of that of the first; but as short as the Entertainment is, it has a
long grace of six leaves before it: wherein I allow the Author to show his
modesty p. 193
in applauding his own pious endeavors; and his prudence in collecting the
righteousness of his Cause;for if to be ridiculous be the Index of a righteous
Cause he has acquired a Title that admits of no competition: but of all loves
let him not twit us with his Loyalty; because we know when it was objected, Do
you hold then that Kings may be deposed? and who it was that answered Why what
should we do with 'em else?

Reserving the Harangue to be considered in its proper Ad. p. 203.
place, let us now pass to his Examen of some few particulars of the Reply;
which begins p. 203. He omits the first Chapter, and he does prudently; there is
a great deal in it too notorious to deny, which yet it is not wisdom to own.
To the second he is so very obliging as to grant it seems to be to purpose; but
he dislikes the words little alterations, and that for diverse reasons.

1. Nothing is little in the Churches Terms; especially in our most venerable
and solemn worship etc. True; but if the greatness lie not in the words, but in
the end and meaning; that being preserved, we want to be instructed, why it is
so great a matter to change the words; especially when the words have been
abused, and deturned from their genuine signification.

2. Not little that Article upon which they chiefly p. 203.
justify their departure from the Church etc. It seems then, we do justify our
departure; should we grant that He can justify his desertion, we would own it
were no little concession. But to come to his Argument, it will then be sense,
and not before, when he proves that our Churches practice in reference to that
Article argues a change in her Doctrine; which it does not, as we shall see
immediately.

3. Not little, which contains the Terms of the Churches Communion, etc. This
looks the likest sense, and pertinence, of any thing this Paper urges; and
shall therefore receive the more full and distinct Answer. And first to prevent
all cavil about words, it must be noted, that Terms of Communion are of two
sorts. 1. Terms of Catholic Communion: i. e. such as are necessary to our
holding Communion with the whole Catholic Church. 2. Terms of particular
Communion; i. e. Such as any particular Church may require her Members to
submit to. The former are Essentials of Faith and Worship; appointed by God
himself; which no Church has power to add to, alter, or diminish: the latter,
are a kind of Bylaws; such as every particular Church has power to make, and
does make, for the sake of Order, and the well governing those of her
Communion, in things left undetermined by Almighty God. These in accurate
speaking are Rules of Government; but are called Terms of Communion; because
the Church that makes them, has power to exclude from her Communion all her
Members that obstinately refuse them; as all Government essentially implies a
power to punish the transgression of its just Laws. It Is with reference to the
former, that we justly accuse the Papists for imposing devices of their own,
some unnecessary, other ungodly Articles, p. 203.
as Terms of Communion in the first sense: and with reference to the latter,
that we justify our Churches power of imposing, against the exceptions made by
Protestant Dissenters. For it is evident that Terms of Communion in the first
sense, are of unchangeable obligation; but taken in the second, they are
variable, according as the exigence of affairs in a Particular Church shall
require, and the wisdom of its Governors direct.

Now an explicit Declaration and Subscription of the Article of the Real
Presence, is at most but a Term of Communion in the second sense; because that
Article contains not the essentially-necessary Doctrine of the Catholic Church
concerning the Eucharist but only a Corollary drawn from that Doctrine: which
though it be true as the Church of England holds it, and the Popish notion be
very false; yet an explicit knowledge and profession of either of these things,
is not necessary to Salvation: nor is any Church bound to extend the Terms of
her Communion so far as the explicit owning every truth; or explicit rejecting
every thing that is false. From whence it follows 1. That our Church might
lawfully require or wave an explicit Declaration and Subscription of this
Article: require it, because true; wave it, because not essentially necessary.
2. That her doing either one, or the other, or both alternately, argues no change
or wavering in her Doctrine; for to take or not take notice of a Corollary,
does not change the Proposition it depends upon.

But to justify yet farther the Proceedings of our Church in this matter, the
Replyer told him (p. 4.) that she had not allways thought it requisite to make
the Declaration and Subscription of this Article a Term of her Communion; as
indeed she had not; but rather p. 203.
used it like a Civil Test, to discern who were qualified to bear Office in the
Church; And to make and impose such Tests as may enable the Government to
confide in them they employ, is a piece of wisdom which all Governments
practice; and which no man can accuse if the matter of the Test be not evil.
Besides our Church did not do this out of pure choice, but absolute necessity.
For finding all endeavors used to ruin her, by two seeming contrary Parties;
which alternately prevailed as the Court-Interest varied; she saw it necessary
to cut these Diamonds with one another; and so far countenance the weaker, as
might help to balance the prevailing party: not despairing, but in time, by
God's blessing upon good endeavors, the honest-minded men on both sides might
be brought to see their Error, and return to the Unity of the Church. Now the
Article of the Real Presence was at that time a very proper Test, to discover
who inclined to either Party: for men had not yet learned to hold Communion
with Us, and receive our Sacraments against their Conscience; nor to declare
their Assent and Consent to our Establishment, and make the most solemn
protestations that they are of Us, while their heart is at Rome: though we have
since learned that all this may be done; and I wonder the Examiner knowing by
whom, never urged it for a Spirits being in two places at once; since it seems
to be a better instance than any he has given in his Pamphlet.

4. 5. His two last Reasons are in effect already answered. For [4.] Whatever
it is lawful to impose, it is lawful to secure the observance of by what
Penalties the Government thinks fit. And [5.] If the Church did vary from any
old Form, it was because p 203.
that Form had been abused to conntenance Superstition and Idolatry.

In the next Paragraph He Is grieved, that we think p. 204.
that design impertinent, which he says was the very primary intention of the
Author as is plain enough. It might be impertinent for all that: and it was so
plain and primary that the Author never spoke to it; so that to know it we must
know his heart; See below p. 57.
which the Publisher of all men living ought not to expect of us. He adds, that
the Author proves irrefragably, that our Church has waver'd in her Doctrine: I
suppose he means unanswerably; for nothing being urged he might well conclude
nothing could be answered. After this, he repeats his old Narrative of what
befell the Real Presence; the Doctrine whereof was according to him thrown out,
and in his cleanly phrase licked up again: thus desparing to convince our
understandings he tryes to work upon our Stomachs. But we have already said
enough to the charge of wavering; and Tautology which is nauseous in it self,
becomes more so by his example. Having finished his Narrative, he adds a
politic, though not so pertinent a Reflection about persecuting Dissenters; who if
they would be eased, must fee him to hold his tongue; for if such a manager
undertake it, their cause is irrecoverably lost.

His next Remark is, that Either the Replyer knows p. 205.
that all Catholics declare they detest the adoration of any creature, etc.
The Replyer never judges of the Examiners Catholics by what they declare. But
if all true Papists detest the adoration of a creature, that Gentleman is none,
who proffered for a halfpenny to declare that he terminated his worship upon
the p. 205.
very Image it self.

I reserve the next Paragraph till I come to the fellow of it page 209. and
must now admire the Examiners constancy, who having been so often taken in the
very act of misquoting, follows the trade still with so great assurance as to
falsify my own Reply, to my face. If there be (says he) no real participation,
as this Replyer afterward every where confesses etc. I wish for the Readers
ease he had named somewhere; but to supply that defect I will name him a place
or two. -- The Body which now exists, whereof we partake -- is therefore verily
and indeed received, and by consequence said to be really present; because a
real participation etc. Reply p. 14. And by virtue of this Spiritual and
Mystical yet real participation we receive the benefits consequent to it. p.
18. -- the Church of England, which does not hold a bare reception of the
benefits but a real participation of the Body etc. p. 31. Which passages (to
name no more) confess no real participation just as he confessed Popery, when he
writ and signed a paper (yet in being) that denied it. If the Reader desire a
farther taste of his sincerity, the note upon p. 13. will furnish him
sufficiently. We are p. 213.
there ranked among them that pierced, or deny, or disbelieve our Savior's
words, though the charge be as false as the English. We are there charged with
owning our receipt of the dead Body, and dead Blood of our Lord; though in the
place by him quoted we say expressly, that since the Body broken and the Blood
shed* neither do nor can now really exist, they neither can be really present,
nor literally eaten or drank, nor can we receive them, etc. It is there found
necessary to declare that that the same Body which was immolated whilst upon
earth, remains (though now glorified) till the end of the world; as if the
Replyer had denied this, or had not said that the Glorified Body now sits at
the right hand of God, and shall there continue till the restitution of all
things page 13. and the Body that is glorified, is numerically the same that
was broken page 14. Nay he spares not his own dear self, but in kindness to the
Replyer for whom App. p. 193.
he is ready to sacrifice his life and all that he has,he says that he and his
Catholics content themselves to believe and know that our Lord in this
Sacrament is become to us a quickening Spirit; though they know they shall scarce
content the Pope and the Council of Trent, unless they believe and say a great
deal more. These and many more such passages that occurr in this Appendix will
probably amaze the Reader, if he know not the Examiner's avowed principle,
which he says is to lie, and to forswear himself deliberately for a good
purpose.

We have seen in this last Paragraph how he proves p. 205.
by the Replyer's own confession that there is no Real Presence. But this being
the main point of difference upon which this Replyer insists, the Examiner
resolves to search a little deeper: that is, to repeat the old Tale, with as
little truth and judgment as he told it us before. Though to do him right, he
has added some Sentences which afford a large field of fresh matter. For a
sample, we will run over one of 'em. Now p. 206.
it cannot be imagined that the Liturgy-makers should translate the words of
the Mass -- Why the words of the Mass? if the Form was older than the Mass? as
it must be if it were of that Antiquity he allows it: or Why translate? when he
just before owns the addition of diverse words, which is contrary to the rule of
translating, unless the words added explain and p. 206.
illustrate the Original. He says indeed these words more effectually conclude
the Popish notion; but it is by asserting the quite contrary. For the form is
The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee etc. i. e. the Body
which was offered for thee upon the Cross, the Sacrament whereof the Priest
holds in his hands. But to return to his charge against the Liturgy-makers;
it is that they should intend to give the English words a quite different
signification from the Latin, without giving any notice of it to the People.
Should we for argument's sake suppose, we cannot with truth grant, that the
true signification of the Latin is as he pretends; because that form was in
use before Transubstantiation was thought of; and indeed the Reformers did not
introduce a new meaning of the form, but restored the old. But of this too they
should have given notice. So they did, if Writing, Preaching, Printing*
suffering Imprisonment and Martyrdom were sufficient to give notice: at least
they gave such effectual notice, that the very Mechanics in those days
understood both the Popish and Reformed Doctrine, much better than the
Publisher and his Catholics do in ours. He goes on; -- That the people who had
been brought up to understand (not the Latin Service I hope, 'twas well if the
Priest did that; no, but) the Real Body of our Lord by corpus Domini --
custodiat etc. (as they still understand by the Body of our Lord in the English
Form, if they are of the Church of England) that they the next day should
hearing the same words in English understand only the Real benefits etc. (which
they never were taught to understand) and not understand how these benefits
could be eaten (which they need not and perhaps no man can understand) or given
by the p. 206.
Priest or how they were given for, rather than to the people (since they knew
that only the Elements were given by the Priest, to the people, as Symbols of
the Body and Blood which were given for the people) as neither how they should
preserve the receivers Body ( i. e. to everlasting Life, which they knew they
did not; but that it was one of the benefits of receiving Christ's Body that it
should preserve the Receiver's Body and Soul to everlasting Life; which neither
the Elements, nor the natural Body it self if received only by oral manducation
could do) -- that all these things should be done, (of which not one was
pretended) looks so heinous that truly our Author and the Catholics have too
great a kindness for the Church of England than to impose upon her (He means
charge her with) such abominable prevarication, sufficient to drive away all
men from her Communion. In good time. I suppose the false English was put in to
salve the lies: for not only our Author but our Editor too, has both for the
Church and himself too great a kindness than to accuse her for prevaricating:
No; he detests prevarication, more than Image Worship: no halfpenny shall
induce him to declare for that; for he knows by experience what it is; and left
the Church of England's Communion only to avoid it.

Thus we see how much work a man of art can cut us out, when he searches a
little deeper. The Reader who I doubt before this is tired as well as I am,
will dispense with so particular a search of the rest of this deep Paragraph;
wherein every sentence in proportion to it is length is no less obnoxious than
this. The aim of the whole is to convict the Church of England of wavering, and
the proof is, that He says it; p. 205. p. 2^^.
which to any man that knows him, is a sufficient argument he does not mean it.

And so we might dismiss this Paragraph, if it were not p. 2^7.
for one passage, in which it is hard to determine whither Folly or Blasphemy
be most conspicuous. To K. Edward's second, which is the latter part of the
present form, Take and eat this etc. He excepts and says This what? Individuum
vagum, or perhaps nothing, if nothing consecrated as it seems. But why it
should seem so to Protestants, who have not renounced their senses he does not
tell us. They see well enough, that This is a piece of the Consecrated Bread,
which the Priest holds in hand when he says take and eat; and are astonished
that a seeming Christian should object to their form, what will equally make
against our blessed Saviors own words. When he said Take, eat, this is my Body;
do this etc. they are satisfied none of the Apostles ever said This what?
individuum vagum, or perhaps nothing; or if any one did, it was Judas.

The Examiner repeats this irreverence p. 211. where he says this form is
nonsense, or to most unintelligible. And though our Blessed Savior said This is
my Body which is given (or broken) for you, our Examiner calls the dead body An
irreverent (to say no worse) expression p. 196. repeats the censure p. 213. and
cannot forbear to call the use of this expression an honor; of which let him
enjoy the shame, for never was Irony more unseasonable. Such irreverence is too
great a crime to be chastis'd by a private hand; it is an iniquity to be punished
by the Judge. But what better can we hope for from that bold man, who alleging
in behalf of Popery that our Savior said this is my body; and being answered
that according to the Fathers, he meant the Figure of his body; replied without
more ado Why then he ly'd.

I cannot now stay to inquire the meaning of that p. 207.
uncouth word Genevized which he afterward interprets by being infected with
Geneva, but leaves us to seek what disease Geneva is the name of. Nor shall I
accuse, but applaud him for his false English; for a man that can write no
Sense, is safest when he writes no Language. But I hasten to the next
Paragraph, p. 208.
which begins with a few untruths, said and answered before; and so proceeds to
examine the Replyer's instances How a real reception may be of a thing really
absent: Locally absent good Sr. if it be possible for once to leave an old
wont; for Locally was the word the Replyer used in the place cited Reply. p 14,
15.
; and thought it the properer word for this purpose, having no design till he
becomes one of your Catholics, to prove that a thing can be really present at
the same time that it is really absent. You might have spared your attemt to
explain away the instances, had you considered what the Replyer says p. 14.
That there may be a real reception, though the thing received be not locally or
circumscriptively present, or literally grasped in the arms of the receiver.
And again p. 16. That a thing may be said to be really received, which is so
consigned to us, that we can readily employ it to all those purposes for which
it is useful in it self, and we have occasion to use it. For if these things
be true, as till they are confuted I must think they are, the Reader will
easily perceive, that the instances retain their force, notwithstanding your
different exposition; and that it will not serve your purpose to pretend they
may bear another interpretation, unless you prove that they cannot bear mine.

2 App. p. 205.
A leaf or two before he takes it ill to be taught what he should say; and we
that he should put us upon the hopeless task of instructing him. I know no
remedy p. 205.
but either his saying what he should say, or ceasing his pretenses to be what
he is not. But if this advice displease him, may we tell him what he should not
say? If we may, we will advise him not to say those men he cannot answer are
men of no authority, without a better reason than that it must suffice he
thinks 'em so; for we doubt in this particular he imploy's his avowed
Principle. Cranmer, Bradford, and Fox are so justly valued by all men of
understanding, that it would be too assuming in a puny Discourser to scorn
their authority in any case: but in this, where all the question is about their
opinion, to reject them as incompetent witnesses of what they hold* is a plain
indication to what straits the Examiner is driven. So likewise the Book of
Homilyes whose authority is so venerable with us, is by him disregarded as a
book designed only pro tempore to serve a turn. It has served that turn above
one Century, and I hope will serve it many more; after the Discourses have
served another turn. To carry on the humor the Book called Foxes and
Firebrands, which p. 209.
gives us the account we quote, from original papers of Qu. Marye's own, is a
dirty pool, which the Replyer has fished and found nothing. Not so much indeed
as he finds in this dirty Appendix; but something, which it seems the Author of
it cannot answer. However Dr. Burnet shall not escape for saying that It was not
thought fit to cast off Superstition all at once. Superstition then (says the
Examiner) that ancient form was, which notwithstanding had remained so many
hundred years already, and the whole Church for all that time was guilty of
Superstition. No; the form was not superstition, but had been abused to
countenance superstition and something worse, for as many of those hundreds of
years, as had passed since the Defining p. 2^9.
of Transubstantiation: though not by the whole Church neither; but only by a
Faction in the corrupt Roman part of it -- But how came it to pass that they
tolerated Superstition so long? Because they were to wait their Superiors time
to abolish it; and not reform by Bellarmine's Popish rule, of Rebelling quando
aderant vires. -- But must ill be done that good may come of it? Not by our
Principles; but by other men's it may, unless lying and forswearing be no ill.
-- But why would Q. Elizabeth introduce superstition again when once ejected?
Q. Elizabeth did no such thing; but took care when she restored the form, that
the people should be taught the wholesome use of it, according to the sense of
Antiquity, long before Popish superstition was devised.

In the next place he condems Policy (that is common Prudence) as an evil
ingredient in Church Matters; and if we may judge by his Conduct, is in
earnest. And will now prove that They ( i. e. in Grammatical construction the
Reformers, though I suppose he means their Proceedings) were neither Political,
Expedient, nor Lawful, For 1st. It was not Political, to introduce a Division
which -- raised Commotions and Civil wars. The Alterations were not Papists;
and Take our Author's own words. And the same thing may be collected from the
many risings in several Countr^s that were in K. Edward's days, chiefly for
matter of religion. First in Somersetshire and Linc^lnshire; then in Essex,
Kent, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cornwall, Devonshire; and afterward also in Yorkshire.
Which risings of the Laity in such numbers for their former way of Religion
would ^ot have been, had no their Clergy justified it unto them Church
Government. part. V. p. 139.
we read of no Rebellion then raised in England, upon that score, but what was
raised by Papists. Perhaps it was not Policy in the Church of England not to
suspect them; but it was Charity; and it is no great Policy at this time, to
reproach her with it though it were impolitic. 2d. Not expedient, to introduce
Antimonarchical Principles; By what? by the alterations of the Rubric? this
consequence is as obscure as the Design of the Discourser. Unhinging men's
consciences; an effect the Examiner never felt; his, turns so easily, we may
conclude it is well hinged, and the hinges very well oiled. But the Reformers
diminished the power of the Clergy. i. e. They would not let them pretend to
make God, and trample upon the neck of his Vicegerent: but how this does
manifestly oppose Kingly Government, will remain a secret, till Popery has
banished common sense out of the world. When that is done, probably we may know
too, how the people might be, and were kept in obedience to God and their
Sovereign by the Popish Clergy; notwithstanding the men that adhered to them
were the only Rebels that we read of. 3d. Nor were the alterations lawful;
because not made by the lawful Ecclesiastical Magistrates. This argument, were
it sifted to the bottom, would go near to be ill taken; but I shall content my
self with what is said to it in the Answers to Church Government. part. V.

Another argument of the change of the Doctrine was p. 205.
the omission of diverse significant if not necessary Ceremonies, particularly
taking of the Bread or Patten etc. This argument is out in matter of fact; for
we deny that the true Church of England men did omit this Ceremony.
Particularly Bishop Jewel did not; in whom the Replyer instanc't, both as a
competent witness of the Churches sense; and one who by our Adversaryes own
confession, was not guilty of that omission. He will oblige us if he name but
one so Authentic a man that did omit it. If he cannot we shall conclude they
all practiced it; especially since the nature p. 210.
of the action(as the Replyer told him) implies the use of that Ceremony, But
Therefore the more shame (says the Examiner) on them who made it not necessary.
No; the sillier they (if there were any) that needed an express direction; and
the wickeder they, that with design consecrated so aukwardly as to omit it.
Such particularities are not requisite, unless to direct some Monks who scarce
know their right hand from their left; and accordingly we meet 'em in the
Mass Book: or to some such Conformists as the Examiner once was, who perverted
the common usage with a dishonest intent; and so made it afterward necessary
to restore even this direction. Which (as the Replyer farther told him) now it
is restored, is but as it was in K. Edward's first book, a marginal note,
directing when to use the Ceremony, not a Rubric to enjoin the use of it. For
even in the present Common Prayer Book the use is not enjoined, but supposed,
as is manifest from the Rubric before the Prayer of Consecration.

That Telesphorus put the Gloria in Excelsis in the Mass, is a Monkish legend,
younger than the Mass, which is yet much younger than Telesphorus.That this
hymn was the Angels congratulation for our Savior's coming into the world; or
rather that the hymn now so called begins with the Angelical congratulation, we
need not to be told, for we are allowed to read the Bible: but that the
Benedictus qui venit was their (i. e. the Angels) congratulation for our
Saviors triumphant entry into Jerusalem, is a thing I did not know before. Had
the Examiner consulted Aquinas, he might have saved this blunder, and learned a
better reason why these two Hymns are made use of. Populus devote laudat
divinitatem Christi cum Angelis dicens Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus; and
humanitatem cum pueris dicens Benedictus qui venit, etc. Aquinas apud
Cassandrum. Liturg. cap. 25. page 54. But I am not yet satisfied that
Benedictus qui venit etc. is so pertinently put into the beginning of the
Office, if according to the Examiner it be said to congratulate Christ's coming
to be present upon the Altar. For the Papists say he does not come till a good
while after: at the precise nick of time when the Priest has pronounced the
last Syllable of Hoc est enim Corpus meum. Wherefore Benedictus qui venit would
do better in the Postcommunion, when they think he is there; than to
congratulate his being there when they declare he is not.

It Is impertinent to tell me what the Sanctus has been p. 211.
called, since it is commonly called the Trisagium now; as is manifest to any
one that reads, unless we must renounce our senses in every thing relating to
the Eucharist. And there is very good reason to call it so, if (...) signify
thrice, and (...) holy; which perhaps the Examiner might have known, but that
Graecum est etc. is an old Maxim of the Monks. He should have known too, or not
pretended to any skill in Antiquity, that Sunt autem hoc loco duo quaedam
advertenda unum quod duplex est Trisagion. Istud nimirum de quo nunc agimus
omnibus Ecclesiis commune: and illud quod Graeci quotidie, Latini semel in anno
Graece simul and Latin concinunt in magna Parasceue; nempe Sanctus Deus,
Sanctus fortis, Sanctus immortalis etc. Card. Bona. Rerum Liturg. lib. 2. cap.
10.. 5. page 555.
the name Trisagium is given to two several forms; both mentioned in a
Synodical Epistle of Felix III. In these words. (...) etc. Labbe. Council. Tom.
IV. p. 1063.
where he likewise tells a fine tale that has past upon diverse other writers,
how the later (the Examiner's) Trisagium, being miraculously sent from Heaven,
the use of it was first appointed by Proclus Archbishop of Constannople: p.
211.
though the Reader that is not fond of Legends may find a more rational account
in Photius's Collections Cod. 222. p. 314. Editionis Graecae Haeschelii.
out of Jobius Monachus. But the Trisagium most anciently used in the
Celebration of the Eucharist, is yet extant in the Apostolic Constitutions
Labbe Council. Tom. I. p. 479.
and is this; (...). So exactly does the truly ancient agree with our present
form: and so little truth is there in what the Examiner would insinuate, that
the other (introduced by Proclus) was the ancienter form; as if (to use a
Convert's expression,) he were fated to be allways in the wrong.

The Replyer doubted ( p. 7.) that some of the Discourser's quotations were not
very judiciously chosen, though the thing for which they were quoted, at the same
time he granted to be true. The place in Eusebius he expressly showed to be
impertinent; which made him suspect the other two, which he had neither leisure
nor the books by him to examine. Now the Appendix saying nothing of Eusebius,
the Author plainly gives him up: and he says it is not worth while to Vindicate
the others, and for once is not mistaken. Notwithstanding he will add what he
finds in S. Ambrose's works, l. 4. c. 5. de Sacramentis. I will not now return
that this book is so notoriously spurious that the Examiner himself durst not
ascribe it to S. Ambrose; nor will I except to the matter quoted, which is
true, and agreeable to the doctrine of the Church of England, if we take it in
the Author's, not the Quoter's sense: for our present inquiry must be, not
whether it be true, but pertinent; which it cannot be, if the form to which we
answer Amen be a prayer: and the form is The body of our Lord Jesus p. 211.
Christ which was given for thee, preserve the Body and Soul to everlasting
life. Now admitting the form implies this assertion, what thou now receivest is
the body of our Lord, which he that answers Amen, confesses to be true: yet
still the whole form is a prayer, and he that says Amen to it, answers Amen to
a prayer; unless the Examiner believe that the implying something assertory,
makes a petition cease to be a prayer; which would be so ridiculous a notion as
never dwelt in the same head with common sense.

Concerning the omission of these words [ in these holy mysteries] the Replyer
who pretended only to guess the true reason, said it might be purely
accidental. And it might not be so says the Examiner: For they have a
signification contrary etc. If they have so, the Reply there told him, that was
cause enough to omit them, because they would assert an Opinion contrary to
sound doctrine, and the declared judgment of the Church: to which I find
nothing returned.

The Replyer observed ( p. 7.) that no fault was found with the second form,
which is entirely agreeable to the words and end of the Institution. Wherefore
now it is decreed that some fault shall be found with it. And first it is
Faulty enough certainly because contrary to the former book; which to prove was
the Author's chief intention; wherefore he never urged one word in proof of it.
But we want from the Examiner a better reason than the variety of expression,
to prove a contrariety in the matter; least among other inconveniences, this
Appendix which is all Tautology, prove only a heap of contrarieties. Of his
second exception I have given my opinion already; and shall neither repeat
that, nor consider the two next Paragraphs wherein there is as much truth and
pertinence as there is good manners. p. 211.
The Examen gives me no occasion to add to what I said in my Reply. I say and
prove; the Examiner denies and calls names; and who takes the better method
must be left to the Reader to determine.

He proceeds and tells us that Calvin and Beza are p. 212.
mentioned, because by them were the English Reformers much directed, though
our Author does not tie himself to speak only of the Church of England men. No;
if he did he would speak to some purpose, which to do is no part of his
Character. Whither our Reformers were so much directed by Calvin and Beza may
be questioned: the Replyer fished a shrewd reason, out of that dirty pool Foxes
and Firebrands why they were less directed, than otherwise they might have
been. But if they were so much directed, it is the more probable, their
direction was not approved where it was not followed. And if this be true it is
still the more trifling and impertinent to oppose their judgment to the Church
of England, which is all that the Reply contended for. That which follows about
Conciliators in general, I dare trust to do it is own business; and come to Mr.
Thorndike, for whose memory I have a great and just esteem, though I think him
no proper man to determine the point in question, for the reasons mentioned,
page 19. and 61. of the Reply. What I say of him, is partly from his writings,
and partly of my own certain knowledge, as, if it be requisite, I can prove: but
the Examiner only pretends that he was rightly quoted by the Discourser; which
I think I acknowledged plain enough in the Reply; and I now acknowledge it
again, not without some satisfaction, that the Examiner dares not say so much
of any other Author quoted by him. For what relates to Dr. Tailor in the next
Paragraph, viz.

The quotations out of Dr. Tailor are most true, is p. 212
undoubtedly a fault of the Compositor, and would have been among the Errata,
if the Printer as well as the Writer had delcar'd against Prevarication. The
Discourser was charged with misquoting Dr. Tailor; because he quoted him by
halves, and as Patron of an opinion he expressly declares and writes against.
If this be true, the quotations out of Dr. Tailor are most false: If the
Examiner did not think it true, what need of bringing off the Discourser by a
Calumny upon Dr. Tailor? But since it is lawful to calumniate for a good end,
we are told that Dr. Tailor was an inconstant, forgetful, ignorant man, and one
that vented many indigested and incoherent notions. Well but how is this
proved? No, it is not to be Proved, but it seems so. But perhaps we are once
more mistaken in our Author's Design: we thought him to be quoting, and he good
man, was only weeding, and picking out the tares from the wheat: and he was in
the right of it; for if what he calls tares be suffered to grow among the
wheat, it will go near to spoil his harvest.

He does not remember Dr. Tailor any where sustains p. 213.
(as this Replyer does) that Protestants may use the same terms as the
Catholics, and yet in a quite different sense. Great judgments have sometimes
bad memories; the more the pity that the trade the Examiner drives, requires a
very good one. But to help his memory, I referr him to Dr. Taylor's book of the
Real Presence; the first section; from the eighth Paragraph to the end: where
he will find that Dr. Tailor considers one by one the Terms that the Papists
use; and shows that Protestants use the same but in another sense which he
defends; from whence we gather, that he sustained they might do this; and very
good reason they had for it, since the Fathers did so before them. For the
truth is (as abundance of Protestant books, that neither are p. 213.
nor can be answered, have demonstrated) that the Popish Faction in the Latin
Church, having perverted the language of Antiquity, and given it a novel and
absurd meaning, the Reformers as in other cases so in this too restored the
primitive usage, and taught the people what the Fathers meant as well as what
they said. Now instead of this the Examiner would have had them tell the world
that their words were like Jacob's, but their intention (which is vulgar Latin
for their hands) like Esau, for then they had come over to his Party, which now
looks melancholy for want of company and plainly confess their haeresy; for
else they are never like to be convicted.

In the entrance of the next Paragraph, he gives us an ill name; in the close
he comforts himself with the hope of our damnation; which is the best argument
I find in him, of his being a true Papist. I wonder what has discomposed him;
but sure his passion has a little hurt his understanding, he gives so perverse
an account of the Doctrine asserted in the Reply. To prevent the errors into
which he may betray the common Reader, I shall once more give him this short
and plain account of what I said there. The words of institution require us to
eat the Body broken, and drink the Blood shed; which we cannot do literally,
because the body broken and the blood shed neither do nor can now really exist.
But the worthy receivers of the Sacrament, do figuratively eat that body, and
drink that blood, when they really eat and drink the Symbols of them. And the
good effect, which God has annexed to this by his gracious institution, and
accomplishes by his marvelous power, is a real Union with the living, glorified
body, whereby the Communicants are made partakers of the Spirit of Christ their
Head; and receive the benefits p. 213.
purchased by the Sacrifice of the dead body, by being united by that Spirit to
the living body. Which living glorified body is therefore verily and indeed
received; and by consequence may be said to be really present in the Eucharist.
This I thought had been declared and proved plain enough in the Reply. The
Examiner confutes it by saying he does not understand it. But if all must be
rejected that is liable to that exception, there will be as little sense in the
world, as there would be honesty if his other Principles prevailed. For a
farther explication (if it be requisite) I referr him to the famous Sermon
Preached by Archbishop Usher before the house of Commons Feb. 18. A. D. 1620.
And to a late admirable Treatise called a Summary of the Controversyes between
the Church of England, and the Church of Rome. Sect. IV. and V. which when he
has perused, if he does not yet understand, I can only tell him in his own
words that the fault is in the organ, not the object. For to understand his
notion, is not more impossible to a man of sense, than not to understand our
Doctrine after so much plain Demonstration.

If the Lutherans are the only men that are truly called Protestants, then the
Papists call the rest of their Adversaries out of their names. But this
reflection is something worse than that upon the Trisagium; for Protestant comes
a protestando, and that is not Greek.

The Zuinglians assert no real presence of our Lord's body at all, but of the
benefit only of his passion: but they believe all that is requisite to assert
it; all the grounds that the assertors pretend for it: and it seems the
Examiner knows this, and gives notice of it to the Replyer, as if he had not
said it himself in the Paragraph under consideration.

The note upon page 16. is so choice a heap of Confusion, p. 214.
that it seems to be the Author's Masterpiece. If it be not too presumtuous to
guess at his Design (which it may be, like that of the Discourses, would be
incognito) I should think he had a mind to confute the latter part of the
sixteenth page of the Reply. His method confirms my suspicion; for he neither
gives my words, nor my meaning, nor confutes what he substitutes in their room.
For example. A thing may be really present two ways, is the point the Examiner
incounters. A thing thus really received may be said to be really present two
ways, are the words of the Reply. The objection is there are many other ways of
presence. But are there not those that I assign? which are sufficient for my
purpose of explaining how the Sacrament and the res Sacramenti, are, the one
Physically, the other Morally but both really present? To this he answers with
his leg. A Physical presence is a local presence says the Examiner. A Physical
presence (now we speak of a natural body) is local, says the Replyer. And is
this true? If it be, (as I find it not denied) I am safe though it should be
true, that the presence of a Spiritual body is not local: which answer and the
other that is tacked to it, are yet more absurd upon another score; because
they assert the point that I contend for, viz. that our Savior's body is not
locally present.

But to wave the impertinence, and examine the truth of this Argument. That
there is both a natural and a spiritual body; and that each of 'em has
properties diverse from the other; we are very well satisfied; because this is
very intelligible in it self, and plainly revealed in Scripture. But still both
the one and the other is a body; and therefore must have all the Essential
properties of a body. A body divested of these, yet a body still (i. e. the
Examiners spiritual body) is no real being, but an p. 214.
absurd inconceivable notion; and no more a body than one of his many passages
that have neither Grammar nor meaning in 'em is a Proposition. Now one of those
Essential properties without which a body cannot really exist, is to have
dimensions; for matter and quantity are not really distinct. Another is to be
finite; for every body is a creature. A third is to be Unum numero; for
whatever really exists is so. And it is utterly inconceivable how these three
essential properties can be attributed to a body, unless that body be supposed
to exist in some one determinate finite space: which space the Philosophers
(speaking of a body) call a circumscriptive Ubi, or in one word, place; so that
locality or being in a place, cannot possibly be removed from a body, without
removing those properties, without which a body cannot exist. We may indeed
allow a precisive, but not a negative abstraction of them; for a body may be
considered, but cannot exist by halves: we may choose whither we will consider
more than one or two properties; but the body really existing cannot choose but
have them all: wherefore though we may consider it, not as having them; we
cannot consider it as not having them. But cannot God by his Omnipotence,
remove all these properties of a body? Yes undoubtedly; but then it ceases to
be a body. God can create, annihilate, and change at his pleasure: he can make
that which is a body cease to be so; but he cannot continue it a body, when he
has removed that which makes it be a body, unless he can verify a
contradiction. Now the question depending is concerning a body really existing,
and continuing still a body; which the Examiner would (as he calls it)
spiritualize; that is, abstract it into nothing. For if a body occupy no place,
it has no dimensions; if no dimensions, no quantity; if no quantity, no matter;
if no p. 214.
matter, it is no body. If it be not unum numero it does not really exist.
Abstract all these, and what remains is the Examiner's notion of a body really
existing.

And as no man of sense can ever frame a notion of such a body, so no
Philosopher ever thought of a name for the Ubi that belongs to it. We read of a
circumscriptive Ubi, that belongs to a body; a definitive Ubi to a spirit; the
repletive Ubi of Almighty God. But the Ubi that belongs to the Examiner's
spiritual body wants a name: and if I were to give it one, I would borrow a
phrase from the Discourser, and call it an Autocatacritical Ubi, which being
explained proves a Nullibi; wherein nothing exists but the Examiner's Body of
Divinity.

Now for the second evasion, of a miraculous presence, effected by the power of
Almighty God. The Protestants (we have often told him) dispute not the power
but the will of God in this particular. Our argument proceeds not upon what God
can do, but upon what he will, and what he has revealed. Wherefore it is
nothing to the purpose though it were proved, that God can do what the Examiner
contends for, unless it appear he will do it, which we doubt is impossible to
be proved. So that it were better to let alone the subject of God's
omnipotence, upon which they often talk Blasphemy, and never advantage their
cause. Of God's not verifying contradictions, we shall have farther occasion to
speak by and by. In the mean time if to be something and nothing be a
contradiction; it implies one that the Examiner's spiritual body should exist.

To proceed. A Moral presence is called Sacramental, says the Examiner: --
either Physically or Morally, to which we reduce Sacramentally, are the words
of the Reply. Now for his objections. This (viz. what he p. 214.
quotes) is a novel interpretation. First how does this appear? secondly if it
did, what is that to the Reply? The Church used Sacramental for real, as opposed
to receiving by Faith. If he mean the primitive Church this is false too; but
how does he pretend to prove it? it is said before: but by whom or where it is
not said: But what is it to be morally present, if not that a moral entity (as
grace holiness etc.) are present? The benefits of our Lord's passion are
present to, and enjoyed by us; but what is this to the real true presence of
his Body? The benefits of our Savior's passion are conferred on us, by virtue
of our real union with his glorified body which is therefore verily and indeed
received, and by consequence said to be really present, notwithstanding it is
local absence; because a real participation and union, must needs imply a real
presence, though they do not necessarily require a local one. Reply. p 14. But
neither are these benefits given us in this Sacrament, but are only apprehended
of us by Faith. I cannot distinguish whether he advance this as his own
doctrine in opposition to ours; or as ours in opposition to our selves; though
it is so inconsistent with the doctrine of all Churches, that it is fit for him
to affirm. One would think he should not deny that the Sacraments conferr
grace; or that grace is one of the benefits purchased by our Savior's passion;
or say that grace is not conferred at all, unless it be conferred all at once:
yet some of these things must be done to make this objection sense. In sum
this Replyer seems to flutter, if he does but seem so, it is well enough; for
it is odds but what seems to the Examiner, neither really is, nor seems to any
other man. Wherefore he heapeth up such a parcel of insignificant words and
distinctions that it is lost time to examine them. And it is little better to
examine p. 214.
the reasoning of one that can no more make a Syllogism than he can a Convert.

However I will not leave this Paragraph yet; it is so very honest, pertinent
and judicious. There is a real presence of a body which is always local. This
is false, but that which the Reply maintains, That the Physical real presence
of a natural body is always local, is true, and not denied. There is also a
spiritual and virtual presence: Who doubts it? Distinct from Real and Moral?
Who ever said it? Spiritual we acknowledge as before; but this is real and not
virtual only. And when we say a spiritual and virtual, we neither say virtual
only, nor exclude real. And what is virtual if not the effects of our Lord's
passion? what are all these to the real presence of our Lord's body, the only
question? the effects of his passion are communicated in such a manner as
inferrs a real presence of his body. This is proved at large in the Reply, page
13. and seqq. where this Real presence is called virtual, not in opposition to
real (as this fond man seems to fancy) for it is mentioned as one sort of real
presence; but to distinguish it from Local which is another sort; and the
reason of calling this virtual, is because it is effected by the communication
of the body's virtue, as the other is called local because effected by the
body's being in loco: and because our Savior's very body is really in Heaven
as in loco; yet really united to us, and received by us, and so imparts it is
virtue upon earth; it is said to be Physically and Locally present in Heaven
only, yet morally and virtually present upon earth; and really present both in
heaven and on earth. Which being observed, we may dismiss the two next
Paragraphs that pretend to take the Replyer in a contradiction; for all that is
p. 215.
farther said in them has been considered already.

Only there remains this passage The Papists allways acknowledge a local
presence; The contrary whereof is true, And so it may be for any thing said by
the Replyer. His words are They, however they express themselves, understand a
Local Presence; which they may do, and not acknowledge the Term. He does not say
they own the word; for he knew it was denied in the Catechism ad Parochos and
he never allows himself to lie for a good purpose; but he says that however
they express themselves they understand the thing; and so they must do if they
see to the bottom of their own notion; because they assert such a presence as
cannot be corporal unless it be local too. Not that I take corporally and
locally for the same; or can think him that App. p. 195.
says I do, so shallow as to believe himself; but corporally in their sense
unavoydably inferrs locally. This See his Letter to P. Martyr in his Scripta
Anglicana p. 547.
Bucer was aware of; and by his example I chose to assign this as the
difference between us and the Papists because it is both a necessary consequent
of their Doctrine, and a most manifest conviction of their error. For really,
essentially, substantially, corporally, may all be used in a sound sense, but
locally can not: yet a Popish Corporal presence must be local; though a local
presence be so manifest an absurdity, that even they disclaim it, who are not
ashamed to renounce both sense and reason, in other points relating to the
Eucharist.

In the note upon page 20. he has found out a pleasant excuse for the
Discourser's stumbling. We talk of the truth of a body, and he turns it to the
truth of a Proposition. It Is pity his Talent went no farther than the Printing
of a Logic; a little Metaphysics would have been serviceable; and prevented
this second stumble. p. 215.
The note upon Ineffable mystery, is to me an example of one; for I cannot
imagine what it drives at. The Discourser misapplyes the words of our Divines;
the Replyer gives their true meaning; the Examiner is angry that the words they
use, and the meaning we assign, are not opposite to one another.

What a choice Remark the next is will appear by p. 216.
setting down the words of the Reply and the Discourse which are as follows.
But admit the Real Presence be ineffable; what then? He conceives it is so
because of something in it opposite and contradictory to reason. Reply. Cap. 4.
page 20. -- Here also I find Protestants, and especially our English Divines
generally to confess the presence of our Savior in the Eucharist to be an
ineffable mystery (which I conceive is said to be so, in respect of something
in it opposite and contradictory to, and therefore incomprehensible and
ineffable by human reason) For thus Calvin etc. Disc. concerning the Rubric.
cap. 3. p. 13.. 20. n. 1. 1. Where is the Replyer's fault now? Why he leaves
out the word seemingly, which was never in; as also he omitts it where it does
come in a good while after,. 21. upon another occasion; where it seems to be
nothing to the purpose. For the question there is, Why we may not believe one
Contradiction as well as another? And it is granted that we may; because we can
believe none at all. That which is a contradiction is impossible; and therefore
that which seems one is incredible: the being, or only seeming may signify
something to the possibility; but to be or seem is all one in respect* of the
credibility. But now to give a full decision in this point Take notice (says
our Examiner) that no Catholic affirms, God can make two p. 2^^.
Contradictories to be true. Here I doubt the word seemingly is left out not
altogether out of inadvertency; as also in that which follows that there is no
Contradiction in their Doctrine of the Eucharist. But if no Papist believe that
God can effect any thing which implies, and not only seems a Contradiction; and
if no points of their Doctrine really are, but only seem contradictory; how
comes it to pass that when we charge them with holding things that contradict,
they instead of denying the charge, accuse us of limiting God's power? why do
they bestow all their pains in setting forth God's omnipotence, which would
better be bestowed in taking of the seemingness of the Contradiction? The
Examiner (to do him right) makes an offer or two App. p. 195.
in his Harangue; let us see with what success.

To be here and not here (he says) may be a Contradiction, but to be here and
there is none. But to be here and there is to to be here and not here --. We
must know that he has Printed a book of Oratory; and that a Comp. Disc. p. 18.
Contradiction in terminis is a thing not unusual with Orators to make the
acuter expression. But if this will not pass; what say we to the Miracle of the
five Loaves? This I take to be an Argument ad hominem; and am sorry I was not
more particular when I mentioned it to one of the Examiner's Correspondents,
and said I wondered that the Papists did not urge it in the dispute about the
Eucharist. But I meant it as a plausible Argument against the testimony of
sense; and now it is judiciously applied as an instance of a seeming
contradiction. It may be the Examiner sees where the Contradiction lies; but to
grieve us keeps the secret to himself; For if we solve it, we must first find
it; which without p. 195.
his assistance we cannot do, and so he is safe enough. In another Discourse,
Concerning Celibacy. p. 11.
he published an acute project for threading of Camels; He is now upon the same
design, and says the thing is possible with God. I am loath to think that any
thing that wears a gown, is either so weak or so ill read, as not to know that
our Savior's words are a proverbial expression of an extreme difficulty, not
an absolute impossibility. But does not the Text add that the things which are
impossible with men are possible with God? Yes it does; but it speaks of
things, not of contradictions: God is able to do any thing; but whatever he
does is something; and what a contradiction pretends to mean is just nothing.
And least the Examiner should cavil because S. Luke says in another place
(...), no word shall be impossible with God; we must tell him, that passage is
quoted from the Septuagint version of Genesis XVIII. 13. and that as (...) in
Hebrew, so (...) in their version frequently signifies a thing; and (...) to do
a thing, as any man will quickly find that looks but in Kircher's Concordance.
To conclude, the Scripture teaches us, and all Christians are agreed, that God
can do many things which man can neither do nor conceive; but it never teaches
us he can do a thing which is nothing; that is, verify a contradiction; I may
say, a seeming contradiction, if we mean that which seems one to a thinking
man; for nothing in Scripture can seem one to a man that considers. And the
sum of what we hold in this particular is briefly this. That which seems a
contradiction, while it seems so, is incredible; because all men are agreed
that if it really be one, it is impossible: and he that will convince us that a
seeming contradiction is possible, must prove that it only seems one, but
really is none at all; which is p. 195.
more than any man does or can do for the seeming contradictions in the Popish
Doctrine of the Eucharist.

His last refuge is from three places in S. John to collect that our Savior
when upon Earth, was also in Heaven; i. e. his natural body was in Heaven and
Earth at the same time. There Is another place in S. John, viz. VIII. 58. of
which he will do well to learn the meaning, and then perhaps in time, he may
come to understand these. And that is all that I think requisite to say at
present. For as for himself, his very quoting these places by an old rule
(taken notice of Reply p. 8.) is to me an argument he mistrusts them: and for
other men I Am pretty well assured, that none who are able to tell twenty, can
read the texts and allow the inference.

To return to the Examen. The Close of the Paragraph p. 216.
last considered looks as if it were a waggish artifice to betray the common
Reader into a distrust of his senses, the better to prepare him for digesting
Transubstantiation. For the words are They (the Papists) believe it (their
Doctrine of the Eucharist to be plainly revealed by our Savior's own words and
S. Paul's (v. foregoing Discourse. p. 18) yet neither in the 18th, nor any
other page of that Discourse, is there one argument from our Savior's or S.
Paul's words to prove a Popish Corporal Presence: at least I found none; though
(to borrow an elegance from the Author) Comp. Disc* p. 23.
I made a Cursory over it. Men may fancy he referrs like other writers, and had
now promised to be awake, and speak to purpose: but he that thinks him capable
of fair dealing, Would to God he would but try him.

The Author may pardon me this resentment, since he has his revenge before
hand; for it cost me the reading his Discourse to find my error, and be fully
satisfied the p. 216.
Press was not in fault, but the Writer; who designed his Reference to belong,
neither to the Clause it was subjoined to, nor yet to the whole Paragraph, but
only to the former part of it concerning seeming Contradictions. Of these
indeed he speaks in that eighteenth page; and determines very learnedly p. 19.
that God cannot verify a formal contradiction; but no man can tell what does
formally Contradict without an express revelation. This proves a mighty
complement to a late Writer; whom I allways took to be a great master of
Reason, but not till now to be inspired; I mean the Author of the absolute
impossibility of Transubstantiation demonstrated. When I hear how the Examiner
evades the formal contradictions that Book exposes, he shall know more of my
mind; till then I leave his Compendious Discourse in those better hands that
have already undertaken it.

Dr. Tailor had said, that The Doctrine of the Trinity does as much violence to
Philosophy, as Transubstantiation: which words being capable of an innocent
meaning, the Reply explains it, and assents to 'em so explained. The Examiner
objects that Transubstantiation is a Contradiction, and wisely leaves it with
the Reader; who he hopes will be heedless enough to infer, that therefore the
Doctrine of the Trinity is a Contradiction too. This, your thoroughpac'd
Papists do not scruple to affirm in print; but our Author is a Neophyte, and
modest; or perhaps he was aware, the Consequence will not hold. For if one does
as much violence as the other, it by no means follows that both of 'em do the
same; no more than he that kills a man with a Sword, does the same violence to
his life, or does it in the same way, though he does as much as he that beats
out p. 216.
his brains. Every Fresh-man knows the meaning of as much in this kind of
speech; and if You tell him that a Straw is as much a substance as Goliath, has
more wit than to return, But Goliath was a giant of six Cubits and a span high.
Nor will any of 'em be persuaded Dr. Tailor meant more than this, that the
Doctrine of the Trinity is as truly too hard for Philosophy to explain, as that
of Transubstantiation; because (as the Reply said p. 22.) natural reason cannot
frame an adaequate notion of either: so they both offer absolute, and in this
respect equal violence; though they do it upon different accounts, and in diverse
ways; which makes a vast alteration in the case, when we come to talk of
credibility. For example; Transubstantiation involves millions of millions of
contradictions, and is therefore both inconceivable, and incredible; for no man
can conceive, or assent to, a thing that has no meaning at all. Again, there
are some Mathematical notions, which no man can fully comprehend; which are
therefore inconceivable, though not only credible, but demonstrable. Once again,
there are some Divine supernatural truths which transcend a finite capacity;
and are therefore inconceivable, yet not therefore incredible, but rather the
contrary: for nothing is more rational than to think that the infinite nature
of God must needs surpass man's finite Understanding; and the narrowness of
human capacity can by no means be the standard of Divine truth. But of this
passage of Dr. Taylor's enough is said in the Reply, without any answer yet
returned: I referr my Reader to it, (p. 21.) and proceed.

It Is a strange antipathy our Examiner has to Greek, and Latin; if he meet but
a line of either it puts him into fits, and makes him talk idly for a whole p.
216.
Paragraph. There Is a line in Bishop Andrews (Praesentiam credimus; nec minus
quam vos veram) which the man had most grievously mistaken; Reply p. 25.
the Replyer without taking advantage of his blundering did but give him the
words, and set him right in the meaning; and see what a remark this produces.

Page 25. Bishop Andrews's famous saying (which the Replyer would falsely
translate or interpret;) The Real Presence which we hold is as Real as the
Corporal which the Papists hold. Which proposition is both false in it self,
and falsely fathered upon Bishop Andrews. For they who believe only a figurative
presence, believe not so much as they who believe a real also. For it is to
say, That he who believes a real absence, believes a real presence.

The Bishops saying would have been a very famous one indeed, had he said what
the Examiner reports; but he never used to word things so unskilfully: so that
though the proposition be not false, yet it is falsely fathered upon Bishop
Andrews, as our Author very honestly confesses. I dare say he neither did, nor
ownes this thing with design; but his fit is strong upon him; else he would not
have betrayed so important a secret, as that he and his Catholics believe a
presence that is only figurative and real also: which is just as Mr. Hobbs, (
Vide 1. Append. p. 156.
to whom he went to school with Bishop Cranmer) held more than Bishop Bramhal;
because the Bishop held only Liberty Mr. Hobbs held that, and Necessity
besides. But the Conclusion of the Paragraph solves all: there we find that a
presence only figurative is a real absence; a few lines before, it was a real
presence; and he that thus takes 'em for (...) same may very well hold 'em
both. If our (...) would have taken advice, and consulted honest Walker's p.
216.
Particles, he had probably found the difference between nec and non, which
might have prevented these mistakes. Or even Mr. P. (as I fancy) could have
served him as far as this goes: who perhaps may have Greek too, enough to
construe (...), which will answer half the next Remark. For the case is this.
Of the words (...) Act. III. 21. I gave this meaning That the heaven of heavens
must contain him (i. e. his Natural body) till the times of restitution of all
things: not aiming at a literal version, but to give the sense of the Original.
Now says our Examiner, with an eye as I suppose on our Translation The word is
not contain, but receive. Neither is it the heaven of heavens, nor his Natural
body, but only whom the heaven must receive. Yet the whom here signifies
Christ's natural body; and the heaven, means the heaven of heavens; and to
receive in this case is all one as to contain. This meaning of the Text and the
Argument from it, are so very plain and common, that I need not farther insist
on 'em. If any man think they are evaded by saying That our Savior's body is
not now indu'd with natural properties, but spiritual; such as being at once in
two places, having no dimensions and the like; I give him joy of his
Understanding; but shall never offer to dispute with him. Wherefore neither
shall I meddle with the former part of this Remark; which only tells us that
Christ in his Incarnation had a natural organical body such as ours; but now in
his Glorification has a spiritual body, such as the Examiner has devised for
him; a veryer Phantome than Marcion made him in his Incarnation.

In the next Note, (which to our exceeding great comfort is the last but one)
we are told that our p. 216.
Author's quotation out of St. Austin's cura pro mortuis is true and pertinent.
But if our Author had so managed it, that St. Austin might seem to say what he
did not say in that place, and plainly contradicts in diverse others, the
quotation is not true; and if St. Austin did not speak of the Martyrs bodies,
it is not pertinent; because the point in question was, Whither a body might be
in two places at once? and St. Austin was quoted in favor of the Affirmative.
But it matters not (says our Examiner) whither the Martyrs bodies are spoken of
by St. Austin. For our Replyer p. 29. seems not to dare affirm, that a Spirit
cannot be in two Ubies: but if it be a contradiction S. Austin needs not
inquire; if not a contradiction, neither is it for a spiritual body to be so.
The Replyer indeed waved disputing about a Spirit's Ubiety, because it was
nothing to the purpose; for* (as he had already intimated) though a Spirit
could be in two Ubies, it will not follow that a Body may be in two places at
once. And the crutch that is now brought to support this lame consequence (I
mean the Examiner's notion of a spiritual body) is the staff of a broken reed,
which instead of removing the absurdity objected, introduces a great many
worse. But to put this case beyond seeming, the Replyer dare and does affirm,
that neither a Spirit nor any other creature either is or can be in two
discontinu'd Ubies or Places at the same time; for he is very well assured he
can prove when there is occasion, that the contrary opinion implies a formal
contradiction. If it be a contradiction (says our honest Examiner) S. Austin
need not inquire; leaving us (if we are so careless) to subsume, that he did
inquire; and therefore thought it Reply page 24.
no contradiction. This is a very great piece of address; p. 216.
for it is certain S. Austin did inquire; but not if a body might be in two
places at once (that, in forty other places he peremtorily denies) but taking
it for granted that the Martyrs did relieve their Votaries, and could not do
this without a Miracle; the thing that he inquired of, was the modus how this
Miracle was wrought. For solution, he assigns diverse modi; of which the most
difficult may (as far as concerns this case) be explained without a
contradiction; or asserting that a Spirit is at one and the same time in two
discontinu'd Ubies: but still the point is so intricate, he professes it is past
his understanding; he cannot determine, and therefore cares not to dispute, but
contents himself with the certainty of the thing. Upon the whole matter, the
point in debate is; Whither S. Austin favor this opinion that a body may be in
two places at once? and it appears, 1. That St. Austin says directly and
frequently that a body cannot. 2. That he no where affirms a spirit can, but
rather the contrary. 3. That if he had said a spirit could, yet the consequence
from a spirit to a body will not hold; 4. That it is not pretended to hold,
except in the case of the Examiner's spiritual body, which is proved an absurd
inconceivable nothing; which there is not the least shadow of appearance that
either St. Austin or any man of reason ever thought of. I know that Cutbert
Tonstall in his dotage about An. 1554. employed his notion of a spiritual body,
to defend the Corporal presence; In his Book de veritate corporis and sanguinis
Domini nostri Jesu Christi in Eucharistia. Lutetiae. apud Vascosanum A. D. 1554.
and for ought I find, he was the first that did so: and he did it with a
tenderness which argued his distrust of it; though his was but a phlegmatic
absurdity in comparison of our Author's highly rectified p. 216.
nonsense. But Cutbert stood alone, till the Discourser joined him, and refined
upon him; and if none beleiving, yet none expressly confuted him, 'twas because
he did what our Author and Publisher shou*d have done, he put his age to his
book.

And since we are so near a Conclusion, that we may the more easily part
friends, we will suppose the Examiner to have done this; and allow the
infirmities of age to plead for those following mistakes, which would hardly be
forgiven to a younger pen. When he said that my quotations from S. Austin do
not in the least contradict the doctrine of the Church; good man he meant the
Church of England, and only forgot he had declared; and 'twas only the frailty
of an old memory made him say and forget to prove that p. 217.
the quotation from Tract. 30. in Joh. is perfectly against the Replyer.
Perhaps it may be difficult to excuse his telling us that S. Austin says that
Homo secundum corpus etc. after having first said that our Savior was in diverse
places (in heaven and earth) in his life time by the omnipotence of Almighty
God; and that he was whilst upon earth in heaven also by the power of God;
since no such thing appears in the context of any of my quotations; nor indeed
in any other passage of S. Austin's writings. However we will impute even this
mistake to old age (which impairs a man's other faculties as well as his
memory) and content our selves to set both him and the Reader right, by giving
him S. Austin's own words Et sic venturus est illa angelica voce testante*
quemadmodum ire visus est in coelum, i^ est, i^ eadem carnis forma atque
substantia, cui pro^ecto imn. or alitat^ d^t, naturam non ab^nlit. Secundum
hanc formam n^n est puta* dus ubique diffusus. Cavendu est enim ne ita
divinitatem astr^mus ^ veritatem corporis (...) And Dardanum. Epist. 187. (
vulgo 57.) 1* p. ^8* Edit nov. Paris.

Nos itaque sic audiamus Evangelium quasi praesentem Dominum -- Quod enim
pretiosum sonabat deore Domini, and propter nos scriptum est, and nobis
servatum, and propter nos recitatum and recitabitur etiam propter posteros
nostros, and donec seculum finiatur. Sursum est Dominus; sed etiam hic est
veritas Dominus. Corpus enim Domini in quo re surrexit, uno loco esse (potest:
or rather a^ ^vo, Gratian, Lombard, and Aquinas read it) oportet: veritas
ubique diffusa est. Idem. Tract. 30. in Joh.. 1. p* 516. 517. ^dit. ejusdem.

Semper enim ibi erat Christus quo fuerat rediturus; sic enim venit ut non
recederet. Unde alio loco ait, Nemo ascendit in coelum nisi qui descendit de
coelo, filius hominis qui est in coelo: non dixit qui fuit in coelo. In terra
loquebatur and in coelo se esse dicebat. Sic venit ut inde non abscederet; sic
rediit ut nos non derelinqueret. Quid miramini? Deus hoc facit. Homo enim
secundum corpus, in loco est, and de loco migrat, and cum ad alium locum
venerit, in eo loco unde venit non erit; Deus au em implet omnia, and ubique
totus est, non secundum ^patia tenetur locis. Erat tamen Dominus Christus
secundum visibilem carnem in terra, secundum invisibilem majestatem in coelo
and in terra. Idem. Tract. and in Joh.. 9. p. 524. Edit. ejusdem.


. For the truth is I Am so heartily tired, that I willingly quit the advantage
this Paragraph affords me, to be at quiet: For the same reason I return nothing
to the last angry remark, but only desire him to put on his Spectacles, and
once more read and consider the places I referr him to Disc. concerning the
Rubric. cap. 3.. 32. page 23. Ars rationis. Oxon. e Theatro. lib. 2. cap. 6.
page 73. Reply. cap. 4. page 29.
. Perhaps the wisdom of second thoughts may show him his mistake; if not, I Will
instruct him in my next.

Having said what I thought was requisite in my own Vindication, some may
possibly now expect my Reflections upon our Examiners Harangue. But I cannot
easily persuade my self to deal with a man of his Character any more than I
needs must: and I hope it may be time enough to consider that Harangue, when
the rest of my Reply is Examined and Vindicated. I am encouraged to expect
another Appendix very speedily; and it may be as this first has in great
measure prevented, so the next may wholly supersede the trouble of a set
Answer. For this Harangue is made up of two parts, answerable to the two
Discourses; the former concerns the Real presence; the latter, the Adoration of
our Savior in the Eucharist. What we have in the Former depends wholly upon a
new and singular notion of a Spiritual body, which (besides many other pretty
tricks it has) can be at once in two places, notwithstanding the seeming
Contradiction. Now of this, the Examen has already given me occasion to say
what I hope may be sufficient: and if it appear to my Reader that there neither
is nor can be such a body, the Examiner may take his new nothing and hang it on
his sleeve, with the rest of his Discourse that hangs upon it; for we have no
farther obligation to trouble our selves about it.

Thus the first part of the Examen has afforded me great relief; if the second
be but as obliging, what would otherwise prove a double trouble 'will then be
dispatched at once, to the Readers ease as well as mine. For I think we may be
equally willing to be rid of an unthinking man, who talks as if his Soul were a
match for his Spiritual body, and as this has neither quantity nor quality, so
that had neither sense nor reason. Wherefore I attend the motions of his next
Examen; and he promises fairly not to weary my expectation. For he says if it
please God to continue their strength, they will not be long in my debt.
Whenever they come out of it, I Will take care (God willing) to give 'em a
receipt; but I hope they will not make such payment as they have done now, all
in clipped money, and three parts in four of it brass.

FINIS.

