SEVERAL SERMONS OF ROBERT HARRIS once of HANWELL, Now President of Trinity
College in Oxon, and Doctor of DIVINITY. BEING A supplement to his works
formerly Printed in Folio; intended for their supply, who have the other
already.

CONTAINING I A brief Treatise of the threefold state of man never before
extant. II A Sermon preached to the Honorable House of Commons. III A Sermon
touching prayer and mercy; preached at the Spittle. IV Abners Funeral,
preached at the Funeral of Sir Thomas Lucie Knight. V Concio ad Clerum.
Preached to the University of Oxford.
Which were not in the former Edition in Folio.

BY ROBERT HARRIS, D.D. Oxon.

LONDON, Printed by James Flesher, for John Bartlet the elder, and Jonh Bartlet
the younger, and are to be sold at the Gilt Cup, on the South side of Paul's
near Austins Gate in the new Buildings. 1654.

TO Sir ANTHONY COPE Knight and Baroner.
SIR,
YOu are called to a place which I cannot but love, Hanwell, you are yet but
young, and youth (God says) is vanity, and vanity feeds upon it self, Eccles.
11.1 Job 11.12.
being empty and impatient of Counsel; we were wont to say of you in your
Childhood, that you were a man, we now upon better grounds expect it from you;
and do pray you seriously to mind your self: First, whither you are called:
Secondly, and by whom. It Is true, you are called to a great estate, but that is
made up of such materials as do stand upon two lame feet: the first is
Uncertainty; first outward things are uncertain; 1. to us, they have wings, 1
Time. 6.17. Prove. 23.5.
and are now upon the wing, flying from house to house, and (as I may say to my
cost) from nation to nation; on the other side, 2. we are uncertain to them,
sometimes we play with them as children with birds and send them flying by
unthrifty and ungodly means, at other times death seises us and sequesters
them on the sudden. You need not go from home to learn this, my days are not
many, yet in them, I have buried three of your Fathers, with their respective
wives, besides branches, more then I can name; you are (within few years) the
fourth heir of that ancient house; such is our life, and so uncertain the
supports thereof. But admit a certainty, yet halt Unsufficiency, they will not
secure us from any evil, they will not procure us any good, at least they will
not give us any full satisfaction: we read of some who had more Kingdoms then
you have Manors; who enlarged their desires like hell, and yet were as
unsatisfied as bell it self: so true is Solomon (to saynothing of heathens) the
eye is not satisfied with seeing, (...)cles. 5.(...), etc.
etc. and when all is done, all is but vanity, and the vanity of vanities: this
(I confess) is not easily believed, till experience has confuted us. I
remember what your Father told me, upon his death bed, "I have often heard you
(said he; speak) of creatures "vanity, but I could never believe it till I had
tried, upon trial, be found me true. O that Sir Anthony in his youth, would
appeal to Sir Anthony in his age, "believe "it (said be to his heir, your
Grandfather) all is vanity, mere vanity, so have I, so will you in time find
it; but so much of that. In the next place, be pleased to Pf. 75.6, 7.
and pulls down, now in mercy, now in wrath; the world may seem to run on
wheels, but those wheels are full of eyes, Ezck. 1.
and an eye of providence is most visible in these revolutions which relate to
you. When I first knew Hanwell, I sound Sir Anthony Cope there, and there I
leave him again, whilst I leave the world, the wheel with eyes is come about,
and ends where it began for my time; and truly it will be no smalk comfort to
me dying, may I leave the same Sir Anthony in the same place; the Sir Anthony
that I found there, was not only morally good, temperate, sober, continent,
etc. but spiritually good, a man truly zealous for God in his day, worships,
truths, a man who did much countenance all honest Preachers, and (which is not
ordinary) his own most, a man terrible to the wicked, comfortable to the Godly,
a lover of his Country, and with Uzziah a lover of husbandry in that his Town,
who made it his study (as he would say) to employ the poor there, and to keep
thence, such as would either burden or blemish the place; This was the Sir
Anthony that I found there, and my prayer unto heaven is, that the same name
and man, may still and still there live, and be ever like self, that his house
may be far from the curse, Nah. 1.14. and be filled with the presence of the
God, who is both his own, and our blessedness; and here I must now end, having
exceeded my purpose, I say but thus much more, and I have done. The longer I
lived in those parts, the more need I found of laying principles well, these
few are some of those many delivered in a shorter and plainer way, these thus
preserved and enlarged, I tender to you as an expression of my true observance
of that Honorable house, and honest Town, where I spent most of my strength,
and which I commend to the word of grace to be further built up in the faith of
Christ, in whom I would be whilst I am, Sir,

Your ready servant and faithful remembrancer, Robert Harris.
Trinity College Oxf. October. 13. 1653.
A Table of the several Sermons, Texts of Scripture, and points of Doctrine,
contained in the following work.
A brief discourse of the threefold state of man. Page 1.
Eccles. 7.29. Lo this only have I found, that God has made man upright: but
they have sought out many inventions.


Doct. 1. MAn at first was a very excellent and desirable creature. p. 2.

2 Man is not what he was, he was not what he is, but now there is a vast
distance between himself and himself, betwixt this and that estate. p. 13.

3 Man's sin is from man's self. p. 26.

4 Man's undoing, is from his non-dependence on God. p. 39.

5 When a man is once loose from God, and left to himself, he becomes restless
and endless in his ways. p. 49.

Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ
lesus, etc. p. 58.

Doct. Saints in Christ, are in a very happy estate and condition. p. 118.

A Sermon preached to the Honorable house of Commons. p.
Luke 18.6, 7, 8. And the Lord said, Hear what the unjust Judge says, And
shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he
bear long with them?

I tell you that he will avenge them speedily; Nevertheless when the Son of
man comes shall he find faith on the earth?


Doct. 1. In point of prayer we must gather all Arguments of encouragement, and
never yield till we have the day. page.

2. The Lord will certainly avenge his own. p.

3 God bears long with adversaries; with worst men. p.

4 God is swift in his help as well as sure. p.

A Sermon touching prayer and mercy. p. 1.
Act. 10.31. And he said, Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thine Alms are
had in remembrance before God.


Doct. 1. God is unspeakably good and gracious toward poor suppliants in point
of prayer. p. 4.

2 God does observe and book every act and work of mercy, that is done by his
Servants. p. 19.

3 No outward disadvantage can excuse us from Gods service, or exempt us from
his acceptance. p. 33.

Abners Funeral. p. 1.
2 Samuel 3.38, 39. And the King said unto his servants, Know you not that there
is a Prince, and a great man fallen this day in Israel?

39 And I am this day weak though anointed King; And these men the sons of
Zerviah be to hard for me. The Lord shall reward the doer of evil according to
his wickedness.

Doct. 1. No greatness will keep from any death. p. 3.

2 When great men are taken from us, we must be affected with it. p. 18.

3 The highest estate may be overtopt. p. 30.

Concio ad Clerum.
Johan. 21. v. 17.18. -- Pasce oves meas. Amen Amen dico tibi, cum esses junior
cingebas te, and ibas quo volebas; quum autem senueris, extendes manus tuas,
and alius te cinget, and transferet quo noles.

-- Pasce oves meas.

Docum. Omnium est ea eniti, quae communis salutis maxim intersint, Spartamque
quam nacti sunt adornare. p. 8.

A Table of such Scriptures, as are cleared in the ensuing work.
Gen 1.26. LEt us make man in our image. page. 3.5. You shall be like God. p.
Job. 9.16. Yet would I not believe, that he had hearkened unto my voice. p. Job.
21.23, 24. One dies in his full strength. p. Job. 35.10. Where is God my
maker. p. Prove. 19.17. He that has pity upon the poor, lends to the Lord.
Prove. 27.8. As a Bird that wandreth from her nest, so is a man that wandreth
from his place. Eccles. 1. Cast thy bread upon the waters, for thou shall find
it after many days. p. Esa. 30.18. The Lord waits that he may be gracious.
page 58.6.7. Is not this the fast that I have chosen, etc. p. Jer. 22.14. And
cutteth him out windows. p. Dan. 9.20. Whiles I was speaking and praying, etc.
p. Job. 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine. p.
16.24. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name. p. Romans 7.20. It is no more I
that do it. but sin. p. 2 Timothy 4.2. Praedica sermonem, insta, tempestive,
imtempestive. p. Jam. 4.9. Be afflicted. p. 1 John 3.9. He that is born of God
does not commit sin. p.
An Alphabeticall Table of the chief matters contained in the foregoing WORK.
A.
DAvid free from Abners blood. p. 2. Abners Funeral. No outward disadvantages
hinder Gods acceptance. p. 33. Of prayer and mercy Those that have all
advantages should hasten to Gods service. p. 34 God will certainly avenge his
people. p. Academici cavendum ne indignos ad S. Ministerium promoveant. p. 18.
ipsi seduli sint. p. 19
B.
BEllarmine confuted. p. 58
C.
A Sinful change in fallen man. p. 13 The nature of this change. p. 15 Extent
and causes of it. p. 16 Comfort amidst our great folly. p. 37 Condemnation what
it imports. p. 59 To be in Christ, what? p. 60 Saints in Christ, are in a happy
estate. p. 61 Wherein this consists, p. ib. and seqq. Come to Christ motives,
p. 65 Objections against it answered. p. 67 What we must do to come to Christ.
p. 68 Keep close to Christ. p. 69 Get your children into Christ. p. 71 How this
may be done. p. 72 Slight none that are in Christ. Comfort to those that are in
Christ. How to know whether we be in Christ. Objections against it answered. p.
Cornelius formerly believed in Christ. p. 3 Comfort for the persecuted Church.
p. Take courage in prayer. p. What is won or lost by courage, or fainting in
prayer. p. See Prayer.
D.
Man's undoing from his non-dependence on God. 5. Reas. p. 39 Three sorts of men
not depending on God. p. 44 When a man depends on God. p. 47 Observe the
difference of man's estates. p. 18 The steps of man's downfall, p. 41 The great
evil of it. p. 43 Enquire the cause of Gods delays both public and private.
How to remedy it. p. Be not discouraged, because of delays. p. Objections
answered p. Two doubts resolved. p. 1 Relig. old way. Doubts should send us to
God in prayer. ib. and p. 13 No greatness can keep from death. p. 3. See
Greatness Abn. fun. Be patient at the death of friends. p. 32 Desire not wordly
greatneses. p. 8. Abn. Fun. Men apt to believe the Devil rather then God. p.
E.
OF Election. Observe the difference of man's Estates. p. 18. See first estate.
F.
BE humbled to consider, from whence we are fallen. p. 10 Why God did not put
us past danger of falling. p. 12 Time of man's fall. p. 14 A sinful change in
man fallen, p. 13 Be humbled for our fall into sin. p. 20. and seq. How to
recover our fall. p. 24. The power of faith. Aright fast. We should have
respect to the meanest in our family. p. 34. Relig. Fear not worldly greatness.
p. 7. Abn. Fun. We must not basely fear death. p. 14. How that may be cured. p.
15 Be well grounded in the knowledge of our first estate p. 6. Principles to be
known concernig it. p. 67. Answer to Socinian, and Popish cavils about it.
ibid. To the cavils of carnal p. 9. Great men apt to be flattered. p. 11. Abn.
Fun.
G.
RVles to be observed in giving. p. 32. Ad Relig. God not the Author of sin. p.
31, 32 How greatly God is provoked p We must not control or confine God. p. No
greatness can keep from any death. p. 3. Moderate your affections to earthly
greatness. p. 7. Fears, hopes, desires. p. 7 8 Great ones should make account
of and prepare for death. p. 11 Abn. Fun. Great men subject to be flattered.
ibid. When great men are taken away, we must be affected with it. p. 18. Reas.
p. 19. Great men should study to be usefully great, how? p. 20 Joyfully
entertain great men. p. 24. Feel the loss of them. p. 25
H.
HAbitual corruption, the second part of the first sin. p. 22 Saints in Christ
happy. p. 66 comparatively with other estates. 62. positively wherein the
happiness of it consists. ibid. Reas. 65 To be happy come to Christ. p. ib.
Make sure of heaven. p. 33 how that may be done. p. 34 The highest estate may
be overtopt. p. 30. Abn. Fun. Be humbled to consider, whence we are fallen. p.
10. Humiliation wherein it consists. p. 23 Carry our selves humbly. p 37
I.
BE humbled for our impatience p. Inventions diversely translated. p. 49
Inventions to be avoided. p. 55 A mercy to have Judges. p. Justify God in all
his ways. p. 8
K.
BE well grounded in the knowledge of our first estate. p. 6. Principles to be
known concerning it. p. 6.7.
L.
VErbum legere non est praedicare. p. 20. Cler. Gods long-suffering toward his
adversaries. p.
M.
MAgistrates must concur with God the Avenger. p. Confide in God to bear them
out. p. Man at first an excellent creature. p. 2 Man's several causes. p. 3 Man
loose from God restless in his ways. p. 50 The matter whereof man was made
derogates not from his excellency. p. 5 Gods mercy to be admired, who is yet
ready to receive us. p. 35 Gods mercy to man, who departed from him. p. 4 God
takes notice of works of merey. p. 19. Ad Relig. Be humbled for our back
wardness to works of mercy. p. 22 Exhortations to mercy; motives. p. 24 How we
may be able to do works of mercy. p. 26 How willing. p. 27. Objections
answered. p. 29. rules to be observed therein. p. 32 Omnibus incumbit munera
sua diligenter obire and quare, p. 8
O.
QUinam Ovium nomine, veniunt. p. 6. Cler.
P.
PArables, their nature and parts. p. Quam dissimilis Petro Papa Romanus. p. 13
Pastoris officium duplex, pascere and pati. p. 2. Cler. Pasce oves meas, non ad
solum Petrum pertinet. p. 3 Nihil hoc ad Pontificem Romanum. p. 4 Munus
pastorale duabus pertibus absolvitur, praedicatione and precatione. p. 17
Pascere per alium non sufficit. p. 14. Excitantur Pastores ad sedulitatem in
officio faciendo. p. 20. Incitamenta. p. 23 Non tantum verbo sed vita
pascendum. p. 22 Nature of Gods patience, grounds of it. p. Presume not on Gods
patience. p. give god the glory of his patience both evil men and good. p. It
should lead us to repentance. p. Be humbled that we have provoked a patient
God. p. Gods patience gives hope of further grace. p. Be, patient at the death
of friends. p. 32. Abn. Fun. Pity our children. p. 53 (...) quid significat. p.
5 We must take courage in prayer, and never give over till we speed. Reas. p.
Be humbled for discouragements in prayer. p. How provoking this is to God. p.
Exhortation to perseverance in prayer. p. How needful to be pressed. p.
Motives to it. p. Means to hold out in prayer. p. Power of joyntprayer. p. How
to set faith on work in prayer. p. Objections against courage in prayer
answered. p. Prayer how Gods, how man's. p. 3. old Relig. Gods graciousness in
time and case of prayer. 4 Ad Relig. Reas. p. 6. Be humbled for our
backwardness to pray. p. 9. Praise God for his graciousness in point of prayer.
p. 10. Make use of it. p. 13. In distresses personal or public. ibid. and p.
14. Obstructions of the success of prayer. p. 15 Verbum legere no est
praedicare. p. 20. (...) p. 3
R.
REpent, and let God be all again. p. 53 Man once loose from God restless in
his ways. p. 49. Reas. p. 51. Bewail this restlesnesse, which discovers it
self in all passages of life. p. 54. pity it in our children. p. 53. Be
resolute in the cause of God. duplex residentia, loci and of officii. p. 15.
Utraque Pastori necessaria. p. 16 What returns we should make to God. p. 36
Forbear private Revenge. p. Right such of Gods people, as we have wronged. p.
S.
CHarge sin on our selves not others. p. 30 To remove sin, begin at our selves.
p. 33. what unregenerate men are to do. ibid. What regenerate. ibid. Against
Separation. p. 74 No outward disadvantage can excuse from Gods service. p. 33.
use. Those that have all advantages should hasten to it. p. 34. dying speeches.
p. 28. Abn. Fun. Be humbled chiefly for the first sin, and why. p. 20, 21 The
second part of the first sin. p. 22 Man's sin from himself, p. 26 proved, and
objections answered. p. 27, 28, 29 God not the Author of sin. p. 31, 32
Studiosis sedulo discendum. p. 10. Cler. Praesertim Theologiae. p. 12.
Excitantur omnes ad sedulitatem. p. 16 Answer to Socinian cavils. p. 6.7. God
swift in his help, as well as sure. p. How. p. Why. p. Objections answered. p.
The cause of Gods slowness in our selves.
T.
OFficium studiosorum Theologiae. p. 10 Time of man's fall. p. 14 Tutores
diligenter instituere debent Adolescentes curae suae commissos. p. 11
V.
MIsery of unmercifull men. p. 21
W.
GOds way plain and casie. p. 54 Gods mercy to stop our wanderings. p. 55 Follow
Gods Word, not our own inventions. p. 53 The vanity of worldly things. p. 31
Expect not great matters from the world. p. 31
A BRIEF DISCOURSE OF Man's first estate in the First and Second ADAM.
SECTION I. Excellency of Man's estate, as created.
ECCLES. 7.29. Lo this only have I found, that God has made man upright: but
they have sought out many inventions.


[ God has made man UPRIGHT]

WE are now come (according to our Method) to the Threefold estate of Man. I
am not ignorant of those difficulties and disputes which occur in this Subject:
Expect not from me in this place, an answer to all Objections, nor from any man
satisfaction to each man's curiosity. Solomon himself could not satisfy himself
in all particulars: Only in the main of man he is very positive, and leaves us
here two main Principles, whereof the first respects man's innocent and
primitive estate; The second, his lapsed and forlorn condition, together with
the cause of both. His order is open and obvious; he had said before, That man
is wholly corrupt; and now he delivers the original hereof; Negatively, it is
not God; Positively, it is man. We go on in our intended way of delivering
Principles. And first, survey we man's first estate, and there look upon him as
he stands in Gods hand, and is of his making til he marred himself. Here we find
his beginning very good by creation. An excellent, a lovely, plain, even,
uniforme piece, smooth without knots and flawes, straight without hook or
crook; (...)
So much Salomons comprehensive word imports; The result of all is this:

Man at first avery excellent and desitable creature.
Man at first was a very excellent and desirable Creature. This the Point; and
this is no more then Scripture reports of him. Where mention is made of his
first estate, David brings him in with a crown upon his head, and that crown is
a crown of glory and honor. Thou have crowned him with glory and honor, Psalm.
8.5. His place was little lower then Angels, but far above all other
Creatures: As Job affirms, Job. 35. v. 11. God made him wiser then the beasts
of the earth, then the fowls of heaven. Yea, the Prophet assures us that the
worst piece of him, the very case and outside, was most curiously wrought and
richly embroydered, Psalm. 139.15. Moses goes yet higher, and carries us above
creatures to Gods blessed self, Let us make man, faith God, This Creature, in
our image and after our likeness, Genesis 1.26. Thus in Generals we have him set
forth to us. For Particulars, I shall not trouble you with any large discourse
touching his excellencies, either of soul, or body, or estate: Neither can we
in this our decayed condition reach them. We see, we feel what he is; but what
he either was or shall be, we can rather guess then judge, as blind men do of
colors; only this we are sure of, within there was nothing but what was
desirable; without, nothing but what was amiable; about him, nothing but what
was serviceable and comfortable: his understanding was as full of light as it
was free from darkness; his judgment, sound; his conscience, clear; his will,
conformable to Gods will; his affections, regular; nothing on that side wanting
to his present happiness. Or if we look without him, 1. His body had nothing
of blemish or blushing, or distemper; but rather clothed with all requisite
beauties and abilityes, which might render him lovely, and commend him to every
eye. 2. For his estate, what it was before his fall we may guess by that which
is since restored by Christ, whereof we have a touch in that 8th Psalm: to
wit; God gave him a Soverainty over all the creatures, and stamped such a
majesty upon him, that they did all acknowledge him, and received their
several names, as so many acknowledgements from him. As for his possessions,
we need not stand to enlarge upon one Parcel of his Desmeans, which they call
Paradise, since the whole, both of sea and land, and all the creatures in both,
were then his possession, his Paradise. Thus the case stood with man at first,
the creatures were as observant of him as he of his Creator. More then this I
shall not speak in these particulars. This being a Theme so much treated of by
Schoolmen and others, who write of this first estate. Cleared in his several
causes.
The whole matter will be further cleared if welook upon man in his causes.

If we consider the Efficient cause, or the Author of man, Adam, says Luke,
was the son of God, thence he derives his Pedigree. Now from the excellency of
the cause, it is not hard to infer the excellency of the effect, especially
since efficients work by way of assimilation; Natural efficients. necessarily;
voluntary causes, freely: both strive to accomplish their own works to their
own ends and inclinations; now God (a voluntary agent) is all light, and works
like himself, so that from him can come no darkness; he is all goodness, all
perfection, and can do nothing but what is in its kind good and perfect: nay
further, God is not simply to be considered in this work, but with relation to
personality. The three glorious Persons concur in this external work: whence
that expression Job 35.10. Es. 54.5. Ps. 149.2.
God my makers. This is the joint work of Father, Son and Holy Ghost, the issue
of that power, wisdom, goodness which is common to them all, so that the
glory of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is in its measure put upon this noble
creature.

Formal cause of man created. I mean, the manner in which God made him; and
that is, 1. In the perfection of wisdom and deepest counsel, as being the
Masterpiece of his visible works: hence for our better understanding Moses
brings in God consulting with himself, Let us, says he, make Man. 2. In
perfection of skill and workmanship, as in that 139th Psalm, who has made him
a curious piece, and bestowed so much art and cost upon him, as that the Master
of Physic, Galen, was enforced to frame a song of praise to that Deity that
framed man's body. 3. In perfection of power: he created him, without the
contribution of either matter or instrument, and so became the sole and whole
cause of man.

exemplary cause. And here we pass by that private opinion of Zanchy's and
others, who conceive that Christ assumed man's nature for a pattern whereby Adam
should be made. The text suffices us: God made man in his own image,
according to his own likeness: which passage, having an influence into much
which shall be hereafter said, must a little be opened. See then what is meant
by those words; And the answer is, that image and likeness in this case, *
speak one and the same thing; Conser Ps. 58.4. cum Genesis 1.26.
but in an high and strong way: Not as Bellarmine and others; who, for ends,
make the one substantial, the other, not. In our Image, most like our selves,
that is, As near as the matter will suffer; There can be no proportion between
the infinite God, and finite man; some kind of resemblance in some degree there
may be: In every Beast there are some footsteps (as they are termed) of a
deity, but more in man: some in every man, but more in some now. At first, of
all visible creatures man came nearest to God. But wherein? not only in regard
of his nature; because he had an understanding, a reasonable will, a working
immortal spirit in him, as Papists, and others speak; nor yet only in order
to his estate, because he was made Lord over all creatures, as Socinians would
have it; But also and specially in regard of his Graces and endowments seated
in his soul: God made him wise, holy, just, upright, wherein the Apostle
chiefly places Gods Image; and that most justly, Ephesians. 4.24. That being the
chief of Gods image in the first Adam, which Christ, the second Adam, does
mostly repair and restore. When then it is said, that God made man like
himself, the meaning is, he made him holy, righteous, spiritual, according to
the sampler, Gods blessed self.

Consider the Final cause; God made man for most excellent ends and uses; he
made him to be a King of creatures, to be near to his most glorious Majesty, to
be that great piece which should crown the rest of his works, and speak out all
his perfections: he made him capable of an immortal estate of true holiness,
and happiness; and designed him for a marriage with the heir, Christ, and for
nearest alliance with himself: and in order to these ends, he put so much
honor upon him at the first. Nor can any man strange at this, since it is the
practice of all wise agents: Every skillful workman (you know) lays out most
of his skill and cost upon that piece which he intends for highest use and
credit, as every builder is more exact in setting out a chimney piece, then in
making a gutter.

Now if it be objected, base materials, as dust, etc.

It Is answered, that the matter contributes least of all causes unto the
excellency of the work. And as much might be said touching the meannesse of it;
The truth is: The poorness and meanness of the matter, does oftentimes most
advance and commend the skill of the workman. That God out of nothing should
draw something, out of dead, blind, dumb Clay should draw light, life, and
speech, and out of such deformity should extract such beauty, strength, and
excellency: this commends the workman, but does not at all disparage the work.
Be the stuff what it will, God has made a rich Arras of it; and the work is
now honorable, through Gods power, though the materials seem contemptible. So
much for that objection. Other questions of like nature, we willingly pass
over, and come to apply this.

Information concerning primitive estate.
Let me call upon you all to be well grounded and Grammar'd in this truth,
touching man's primitive estate. The not heeding hereof has let in those
inundations of errors, which now overspread the Christian World. You are not
to look upon man as now he is, but as first he was, existing out of his causes.
And here I shall commend unto you these principles.

beginning. Though now he be Immortal a part post, yet once he was not; This
is clear by the word, and by his continued dependence.

founder and maker was one; and that was God. It was a wild and mad blasphemy
to dream of Two beginners of the whole, as some did; or at least of Man, as did
others.

own likeness, stamping upon him an Impression of Holiness, Against Socizus.
and as Peter calls it, the divine nature. These Principles, (as others in other
cases, have done) commend I unto you, nor would I have you once troubled with
Socinus his cavils against the same; being such which scarce deserve an answer.

First, says he, If man had born upon him Gods Image, intrinsecally,

Sol. So he had, Sol.
if he had not killed himself, and cast away his life.

And though for the present he had nothing of death in him, yet was he mutable,
and so might contract death.

Secondly, If man were like God in holiness, then was he free from sin.

Sol. 1. Sol.
From the Act of sin he was free in his first constitution,

like God, but not a God, that is, equal to God, and equally incapable of sin.

Thirdly, If man's Image had consisted in holiness, then upon his fall, the
whole Image of God had been lost.

Sol. 1. So it was de jure, Sol.
if God would have taken the forfeiture.

Yet, secondly, the argument holds not, unless we did place only in
holiness. There indeed we lay it chiefly, but not only. We say that Gods
Image is communicated to the whole compositum or Man. We put a difference
between the body of a man, and the body of a beast, whether living or dying:
we yield that a dead man has more of God in his body, then a dead beast.

Thirdly, and in short, to cut off these disputes, we say degrees of holiness
in this Image of God; and next, that it is not necessary that man should
partake with God in all his attributes, whereof some are incommunicable; much
less that he should equalize God, though in some measure he be a
representative of God.

To the former I add this fourth principle. The distance now, and man at the
first, as Solomon here puts it: as man was changeable then, so now he is
changed very much; though some ruins and remnants of that which they call the
substantial Image abide upon him. This you must the rather be settled in,
because Heretics labor tooth and nail, to confound these different states.
Thus Papists sweat to prove that man in his pure naturals is as good now as
then: Against Papists.
and the same then that he is now, differing no more, at least for
intrinsccals, then a man clothed, and uncloathed differs from himself; or,
then a horse bridled and unbridled. The case was this, God put a bridle of
supervenient righteousness upon him to rein him in; other wise he had the
same seeds and principles of corruption, conflict, concupiscence then, that he
has now.

This they tell you, Socinus brings his prop to uphold their rotten building;
If, says he, there had not been a conflict betwixt reason and affection, how
could man have sinned?

Sol. He should have said, Sol.
If man could not have wronged himself, silenced reason, yielded to appetite,
how should he sin? But the matter is, man had power to be naught, (if we may
call that power) though for the present he was actually good.

But what strange men are these, who will fetch in God as an accessory to man's
sin at least; in truth, as aprincipall? For if God, who solely and wholly made
man, so made him, as that he needed a patch, and an adventitious plaster so
soon as ever he was made, does it not reflect upon Gods perfection? but if he
were so made as that there was a propension against reason, and a rebellion in
his members from the first; and if that Rebellion be bad, at least not good; is
not God the author of it?

Call they this Gods Image?

Bellarmines answer in this case gives me no satisfaction at all, Bellar.
God, says he, intended the man: The corruption is but accidental, as when
the Cutler makes a sword, he minds the sword, not the rust of it.

For (to omit other differences) the Cutler undertakes not to make the matter,
Sol.
to wit, the Iron or Steel, but only to give that matter a form. And the rust
does follow the matter, not the form. The sword rusts not because a sword, but
because Iron. But now God gives man both; indeed all; nothing else contributes;
and the saying is true, that who gives matter and form, gives the necessary
consequents of both. But wretched men care not how much they depresse God, so
they may exalt flesh.

Let them go. And hold we this distance still: man is not so bad now, but once
he was as good. Original righteousness was once as natural as sin is now, if
not more. And this truth carries more in it, then as yet happily you are aware
of.

Learn hence that which Solomon here presses, Justify God in all his ways:
against cavils of flesh and blood.
namely, to justify God in all his ways as holy in all his works. It is a
fearful thing to see what proud man renders to God for all his kindness. God
made him a most glorious, happy, sufficient creature: his own folly has
perverted his ways, and now his heart frets, and his mouth chats against the
Lord: I beseech you, understand your Original, and preserve your selves from
the Pestilent errors of this age, and know how to plead for God, and to
emplead sin. For example.

You shall hear men cry out of Bloody doctrine touching Gods Decreeing men to
fall; necessitating them to damnation, etc.

Now here learn an answer of Solomon, Sol.
God made man good, made him for happiness, put him into possession of it,
gave him power to hold it, but he sought out many inventions, he, he sought out
etc. it was an act of man's counsel and choice; hold we to this, though we
cannot so well conceive the concurrence of causes now, as Adam did then, or as
we shall hereafter at the day of the revelation of the righteous Judgment of
God. Romans 2.5.


Again, you hear men say, that we make God the greatest tyrant living, one who
gives impossible laws, requiring impossibilities under the penalty of
damnation, unless we will yield that man can fulfill the law.

Now to this Answer. Then was then: Now is now. Sol.
When God transacted with man he required no more then man could do, now why
must the rule be bended to man? or the debt drawn to his ability, especially
since the bond stands but for evidence and man's good? God commits him, Gal.
3.23.24.
shuts him up only to humble him, and to drive him to seek a surety of his own
providing.

It Is replied, that this salves not the business, since, in our doctrine, more
is required of man lapsed, then of man in Innocence; for God requires that
faith now, which he did not then, and exacts what he never gave, gathering
wherehe never strawed. Thus they.

Wretched men! Sol.
Does God require any thing in the Gospel but upon Gospel terms? that is, that
he will work the sought unto.

Again, what though Adam had not the exercise of faith in root, seed, and
power? The want was not in Adam, the subject: but the stay was the absence of
occasion, and an object. He had power to do, and to believe any thing that then
did or after should concern him, and his place, and condition; and no more is
required of us now. I never saw an Elephant in my life, why? not for want of a
principle in the subject; the same eye that can see an Horse, could an Elephant
too, were it presented to my sight. I cannot be said not to see it, but it is
not to be seen.

Lastly, I am as God made me, I am choleric, I confess it, but it is my
nature: I am sleepy; Can I help it? etc.

Answer. Sol.
There are Defects which follow particular tempers, and natures,
Purely-naturall; others which are sinful flowing from the principles of Poyso
ned nature: sinful distempers, are yours, not Gods; you might once have
prevented them, you must now have them healed. It is an aggravation to lay our
faults upon our natures, yea hereby we accuse the Creator. Therefore in stead
of excusing our selves or accusing our maker (as Adam and Eve did) let us lay
load on our selves; and that is the next use.

Where see for humbling, Be humbled, that thou art fallen as thou art.
whence we are fallen, what we were, what we are. Men love to talk of their
Ancestors, there by to pride themselves, and can hardly descend in themselves,
though tumbled down by Gods hand. Let us, on the contrary, abase our selves to
our estate, and befool our selves, as we see the Bankrupt does, Once, quoth he,
was I well, could I have kept me well; I had money, land, stock, friends and
what not? but now I lie under poverty, scorn, and contempt. Ah unwise man I! In
like manner let each of us say, Once I was light, now darkness; Once rich in
grace, now empty; Once Gods favorite, now an enemy; Once beautiful. now ugly,
a very Ichabod, my glory is departed, Ah soolish man; how was I bewitched! Thus
let us rate and chide our selves into a low conceit of our selves. Howbeit, all
this signifies nothing, unless we see this our misery in the cause thereof.
Therefore look upon sin as a thing most pernicious and destructive. It is sin,
(say) that has undone me, that has ruined mine estate; cast me into debt;
it is sin that has slain my Cattle, deprived me of my Crop; it is sin, ray sin
in Adam that has forfeited mine honor, undermined my Authority over
creatures. Time was when every beast, every bird, every fish, would have owned
me, would have done me homage: Now my very servants trample upon me, my once
subjects rise against me, as I have against God. Lions are ready to devour me,
Bears to worry me, horses to brain me, yea, every Caterpillar, worm, flea,
makes a prey of me. It Is sin, that has marred my body. Once I had a body
perfect, active, sound, glorious, the more naked the more shining: now in stead
of those beauties behold a stench, sickness, shame and whatsoever else is
blushfull. It is sin that has spoiled my soul: at first I had near Communion
with God, close correspondency with his will and Image. The peace of God, the
joys of God, the strength and life of God were upon me. Now hell is in my
soul, darkness and confusion fills every room; I bear in stead of Gods
glorious Image, the ugly Image of the devil himself, and come as near unto him
as my nature is capable. Oh curse this accursed thing, Sin, which has so
undermined thee, and resolve against it for the future, as we do against lesser
evils, we decline such meats as threaten partial misery. This rots my teeth,
that hurts my eyes, this distempers my liver, that my stomach, therefore I must
forbear. Oh fear that sin that destroys eye, and hand, and head, the whole
body, the whole soul, the whole man. And now bethink thy self of a recovery as
decayed men do; lie not whining under losses, as Jacobs sons in their wants,
much less run to base, sharking courses, as broken chapmen do; But bustle and
bestir thy self, bethink thy self, Is there no help? is it not possible to
raise my self again? yes, there is hope and help, the Lord Christ, the second
Adam comes with the Image of God upon him, as a restorer of the breach, he is
come to recover what was lost, to pay what was owing, to repair our ruins, to
recruit us again, he is able, he is willing to undertake us. Nay, the thing is
done already, therefore I Will to him, as once the bankrupts to David, I will
confess with the prodigal, I will beg for life, I will cast my self upon him,
and close with him being offered as an husband, as the only way for decayed
fortunes, so shall I be restored in blond and repaired in mine estate. Thus
resolve, thus do, and cease not doing till thou find his mark upon thee, his
fruit and life in thee: so shall thou find more life and happiness in him,
then there was death and misery in the old Adam.

Bless God for the first estate: and that little which is lest to this day.
Lastly, learn to be thankful for this first estate: close with all the Saints
in that Song of theirs, Rev. 4. ult. Thou are worthy, O Lord, to receive glory
and honor and power: for thou have created all things, etc. It is not little
that we owe to God, for this poor estate which yet is left us; for these poor
eyes, these lame limbs, these frail bodies, these sick souls, which we labor
with every day; We are much bound to him, for the meanest fare, for the least
bit of coursest bread, the least sip of thinnest drink, and must coufesse with
Jacob that we are less then the least of all his now f^i^ed mercies; what
thanks then can we render for our first estate, which was every way full, free,
glorious, whether we look upon soul or body, or place or state, or any thing
appertaining thereto; nor is Gods goodness and bounty the less, because we
have foolishly squandered it away. That greatens our folly and wickedness, yet
no way lessens Gods largess and kindness.

Object. But why did not God put us past danger and loss, but left it in our
hands to lose?

Sol. An ungracious question: so the unthrift talks when he has outed himself
of his patrimony, Why did my Father trust me? why did he not entayle his land?
There is no reasoning with such froward children, neither content full, nor
fasting. A gracious heart must and will be thankful, as for kindnesses
intended, so much more bestowed, most of all for mercies restored in Christ,
who has mended that first estate.

SECTION II. Sinful estate of man, as fallen.
ECCL. 7. ult. [But they have sought out many inventions.]


HItherto we have seen that man was first good, and well stated; But does he
continue so? No, he was made good, but mutably good, and so of himself, he fell
from God and himself; and so we pass to man's next estate, where we find the
case is much altered with him.

He is not what he was, A sinful change in nun as now fallen. 1 Time of this
change.
he was not what he is: but now there is a vast distance between himself and
himself, betwixt this and that state. This the Point, and this the word plainly
proves, Romans 3.10. etc. here are laid down two received truths. 1. There Is no
goodness in any. 2. They are altogether naught; But was it ever thus? No, they
have gone out of the way, says the Apostle, they have corrupted themselves,
and that from their youth, Genesis 8.21. They err, and that from the womb, Psalm.
58.3. Yea, from their conception, Psalm. 51.5. This better appears, if we may
compare estates past and present: 1. Man was good, Genesis 1. ult. now bad, Genesis
6.5. and 12. first he was straight as it is here, now perverse, Genesis 17.9. first
he bare Gods Image, now man's, Genesis 5.3. first he was glorious, now filthy, Job
15.16. abominably filthy. And at this we can the less marvel, since his
beginning, he comes under different hands; At first he was only Gods
workmanship, and then there was nothing in him but what was Gods, all was right
as God is altogether pure: but since, he has deserted God and betaken himself
to those Inventions which himself has hatched and Satan fomented, and hereby
wrought two mischiefs at once. First, he has made an hand of all his
holiness. Secondly, he has made way to all evil, sin, horror, shame,
confusion, have seized upon all and rendered him most woeful, most hateful;
we need not more words to prove a change in him. Their dreams of old who
fancied him to be bad from the beginning, either in whole or part, are not
worth confutation, we have learned that the devils themselves were once good,
but they kept not their station. Time will be better spent in searching into
the Particulars of this change, as into the time when it was, the nature of it,
the subject and extent of it, the cause of it, etc.

1. Time of this change.
And first for the time; we conclude all in two propositions.

1. The first act of man's will after his creation, was not the first sin and
cause of this his change; we find Adam a while well employed, in receiving laws
from his maker, in marking as it were, his cattle, in acting his calling, in
accepting his Fathers choice of a wife, and thus far he was right. Nor are
arguments of some Thomists against this, so cogent, that they need to stay us.

2. It Is most reasonable to think that he quickly fell, (though not so soon)
from his happy estate, because Satan was very subtle to take him at the
advantage, before he was well settled, and experienced; and secondly, very
active, fired with rage and envy. Because he is said to be a murderer from the
beginning; or very near to it; which beginning must commence from man, not from
himself. Add hereunto, that he had not so easily prevailed, if man had been
long rooted, and so better enabled to have made stronger resistance; (for I
make no doubt but Adam should have grown and emproved himself by experience,
as some ways the second Adam did) but he took his time, whilst yet they were
unexperienced, as is seen chiefly in Eve, who as yet knew not, as it seems, the
nature of the Serpent: whereto we may add this, that she, the same Eve, had
conceived her first born without sin, had any considerable time been 'twixt
their creation and fall. But I will not be too peremptory in things more
disputable and less important.

For the second, 2. Nature of this change. 1. Negatively.
the nature of this change. Thus we state it. First, the change was not in
Essentials, for such cannot be separated from the thing, without its
dissolution: but man was for substance, the same man before and after his
change: Christ was essentially man, though far from sin. So shall we be in
heaven. Therefore if this were the error of Illyricus, it were an error
sufficiently gross. We read, that God made substances, he made no sins.
Secondly, it was not in Supernaturals only, for naturals also are abated and
eclipsed in him, neither was his Original righteousness altogether
supernatural at that time; we may call that (properly enough) natural which
is common to the whole species, to all mankind, and passes along in a way of
generation, though we cannot express how. But then the objection is, If
righteousness be any way natural,

Sol. The argument will not follow, Sol.
because naturals do admit of degrees: sight is natural, speech natural, etc.
yet a blind or dumb man, is yet a man; we may safely say, that righteousness
was as natural, as sin is preternaturall: and we mean no more but that Justice
was then as natural, as now sin is. Sin is either natural or preternaturall,
(if you will so call it:) we speak of man in this case Morally not Physically
considered, and heed not what Aristotle will call him, but what God says of
him. This for the negative.

Now positively, 2. Positively.
we say that this change is properly an alteration, consisting in Qualities and
cetain respects. Whereas man held a double correspondency with God, one
Relative, as he stood in subjection to him, and a dependence upon him, as his
maker, master, father, etc. Another Representative, as he bare Gods Image,
which he could not properly bear in a relation of Inferiority: he is now much
varied and changed, in both these. First, of a subject, he is become a rebel,
of a son a traitor, of a friend an enemy, and stands now at defiance with God.

Secondly, whereas he erst much favored and resembled God, now he is most
removed from him, and opposite to him, of light he is become darkness, as Paul
expresses it in the abstract: Semblably, we may say of wisdom he is become
folly, of goodness, in a sense, sin it self, as the very Heathens use to
express him. And here is the change, in a man's estate both personal and
local. Subjection is turned into Rebellion, Conformity into Difformity, and so
into Deformity, and consequently, his happiness into unhappiness it self.
Thus for the second Question. Follows the third touching the Subject and
Extent of this change: and this we dispatch in three words.

First, 3. Extent of this change.
all mankind is changed for the worse, and is warped aside.

Secondly, all of man, every particular both power and part, is now
degenerated; The whole frame of his heart is corrupted. Genesis 6.

And lastly, all men, all alike, all involved, and suffer this unhappy change.

The cause of this change. 4. The cause of it.
First, we exclude not God from any act, though from all sin.

Secondly, we excuse not Satan from the sin, though from some acts in it.

Thirdly, we lay the blame where the fault is, upon man's self. To enlarge these
a little.

Neutrall in one of the highest works of providence, neither willing nor
nilling it.

sought out, so says Solomon, so must we say. Though man would shift it from
himself, and divide it betwixt God and Satan. But it is found upon him, and
there we must leave it.

But how could this be (will some say) how could man so accomplish it,

Sol. Sol.
The Text tells us, he sought out many inventions: and we must consider;

First, that man was made out of Nothing, and therefore privations, such as sin
is, then to positive goods, when he is left to himself.

Secondly, he is a compounded creature, and therefore in and mutable.

Thirdly, he is a finite creature, and borrows all from without, deficiencies,
and so may sin.

Fourthly, he is a creature so bounded that he cannot see diversions and
excogitancies.

I, and Fifthly, he is a free creature, and therefore may act or suspend, use or
not use, his abilities at pleasure. But, it were better happily, leaving these
disputes, to look up to God and admire with Austin, that things should be
against his will, and yet not altogether besides it; and to bethink our selves
how we may rise, rather then how we did fall. It suffices for the present,
that we clear God as much as Papists or any others: at least we desire to do
it; and if they can teach us how to speak better, and more for the vindication
of Gods holiness, we shall thank them, mean while we mean as well as they, and
speak as much for the vindication of Gods holiness as any Bellarmine, or
Arminius of them all; we say, that God is no moral cause of sin, and Physical
cause he cannot be: sin having only a cause deficient, but none efficient; we
do not say that any precedent decree does force the will or compel the man.
Nor on the other side, do we say that the whole work of sin is only from man,
nothing of it from Satan (as he reports, who usually is more modest): but this
we do, Estius lib. 2. distinct. 21. Sect. 11. and distinct. 3.
we set the saddle on the right horse, and say as Solomon guides us, Man has
sought out many inventions. Do you understand what I have said, or shall I
speak it yet more plainly? we yield a concurrence of many agents in man's
change, but with a wide difference, as to the manner of their working.

First, for God; we must not conceive him to be only a spectator, in this high
work of providence, we must acknowledge his disposing hand, his ordering hand,
his decreeing hand, in leaving man to his own choice: but still without the
least shadow of sin. Secondly, for Satan; we must not excuse him whom God
curses, he was certainly a moral cause of man's sin, and did his utmost to
persuade.

Thirdly, for Man's self; we must speak Salomons language, who lays not the
fault upon the devil, as no reason he should: for a moral cause has no
influence, at least no enforcing power upon the subject. Much less does he lay
it upon God, who always seriously disswades from sin, Physically infuseth no
ill, nor withholds requisite strength. It Is true, flesh and blond will cavil
and find this bastard sin many fathers: but man is father and mother both,
himself: so the Word speaks it, and Adam with all his skill could not shift it
off from himself, though never so willing. I say in this case, as one said in
another; In one and the same thing many causes may concur, but not to the
same end, nor in the same thing.

Now this makes first for our information. Ever observe this distinction of a
good and bad estate.
God, you see here, teaches us a double estate; learn we both: God sets a
bound and distinction: thus far goes his work; here begins ours: Now we must
keep asunder what he so distinctly severed, the rather because a confusion here
is in it self most hurtful, and by many most industriously endeavored: Oh how
do wits sweat to trouble these waters! to this end, that we should not see our
own faces, nor discern which is which. Hence those uncouth conclusions in both
estates. In the first, There is no such thing as Original Righteousness, no such
Image of God as we fancy, say the Socinians; Next, there is such a thing, say
Papists, but it was not natural; it was to man but as clothes and trappings to
the body, as if man should not have been born in this spiritual armor, as
some spoke of Giants for other armor; but come into the world as naked of
Grace, as a horse does of a Saddle, etc. till God from without do furnish him.
And in the second estate, how infinitely do men fumble? First, Original sin
that is, to many, a very dream; There is no such thing: Secondly, yes, say
others, there is such a thing, but it is only imputed: Nay, says a third,
it is more then imputed, but yet without the access of any positive malignity,
it is a mere privation. Fourthly, that privation is rather penal then sinful;
Fifthly, if sinful, yet not in all. Sixthly, if in all, yet is it the least
sin, deserving privation of joy and bliss only. Seventhly, in Saints it is
gone, and so gone that we need not repent of it, nay, we ought not. In short,
set aside some outward privileges and accoutrements, man is where he was,
changed only in externals. Now what stronger proof of our declension? what a
miserable thing is man become! who rather then he will be beholding to God for
his first setting up, or to Christ for his supplied repaires and recruits;
rather then he will acknowledge himself such a fool, such a beast to part with
so fair an estate, cares not what he says, or reports, as to Gods work or his
own in either estate. Oh madness! were it not fit for us to say with Solomon,
God made man upright, but man has undone himself? Surely this were fit: but
then thinks proud flesh, what will become of free will? what of merit? what of
fulfilling the Law? what of all fleshly boasting and excellency? were this
granted, then must God be justified; then must man be abased. But rather then
God shall go away with all the credit, and man with all the shame, he will
mingle heaven and earth, light and darkness, and come to this, either he was
never good, and that reflects upon God; or else is good still, and then might
Christ have saved a labor; at least, much of his blond, if the Friar be right,
who says, Fevardent.
that one scar of Christ could have redeemed all. Good my brethren, admit of
light, of truths so fundamental; know a change, acknowledge what it is, whence
it is: It is from light to darkness, from life to death, from wisdom to
folly, from heaven to hell, from God to Satan. It is an universal apostasy,
and it is from your selves, you were Adam, as the Text here tells you, legally,
naturally considered, you can blame none but your selves, and none could change
you, til your wills or minds did change. If as yet, you know not these things
sufficiently, suffer the word of instruction, submit to Catechizing, confer
with your teachers, peruse the principles of your faith and religion, or, if
already you do know these things, freely acknowledge them, justify wisdom
and truth to the face of error, and to the teeth of pride.

In the second place, Be humbled mightily for this tall into sin.
let us set upon that hard (but seasonable) work of humiliation. The poison of
Adams first pride, nay of Satan's, sticks yet in our souls; and the truth is,
had man the devils capacities, he would be as proud as the devil himself; and
the least cause, and the more sin there is, the more proud still. Sin is a
leaven that heaves and swells him, and when he is most sinful, then least
humble. And as it puts out his eyes, and hurts his understanding: so it
corrupts his will. Of all things in this world, sinful man loves not to come
down; he would still be in credit with himself, however the world goes. Four
great causes tor deep humiliation.
This being our nature, we must set more resolutely against it; and know that
no one work better becomes our condition then the work of humiliation; and
therefore we must break through all impediments, and see what reason we have to
pull down our selves.

The evil, even the evil of all evils; that which does hurt every creature,
and would, if it could, the Creator. Now this sin is found upon us, and should
shame us as the thief, when taken in the manner.

many and mighty, we have done as wickedly as we could, Jer. 3. had we had more
room for more sin, we would have bid it welcome; mean while we are as full as
we can hold, there is not one spare room, Romans 3.

but once offended, one treason were unsufferable; one sin would make a breach
into all order, beauty, peace, reason, religion; and the whole creation. One
sin had let in a legion of devils, a deluge of all miseries: But now we have
exceeded all bounds and dimensions; there is neither number nor measure of our
wickedness.

all this springs from our selves; we spin all our poison out of our own
bowels, Es. 59.4. We may pretend occasions, inticements, enforcements: but when
all is done, all these excuses will prove but so many accusations and
aggravations: and therefore let us look homeward, and strike the right vein,
begin where our sin began, at and in our selves, at the heart, at the spirit.

More cause to be humbled for the first sin, then all that follow.
This must be our course in all our actings and failings; chiefly for the
first sin; till a man comes to that, he is never truly humbled. Other sins are
more private, partial, and seem more pardonable, as issuing out of weakness,
or ignorance or (at the most) of a will surprised and captivated; Oh but the
first sin which is known by the name of Original sin, was a strange sin,
whether the Subject, or Object, or Ingredients, or Consequents be considered.

First, for the Subject, it is the sin of mankind, Why? 1.
never did all Subjects so conspire in a rebellion; secondly, of all the man,
nothing is exempt.

Secondly, for the Object, it is the breach of the whole Law, the whole
Covenant, as Hosea expresses it.

Thirdly, for the Ingredients, it is every sin virtually, and death of every
grace meritoriously.

Fourthly, for the Consequences; it forfeits all goodness, life, inlet to all
misery and confusion. We have read of some who in their vast luxuriousness
have cast away whole Lordships, Cleopatra.
Kingdoms at one throw, have drunk up thousands at one draught: Nero.
but these were toys to Adams fact. His bloudinesse was horrid, who wished all
Rome one head, that so he might dispatch it at one blow; But Adam passes, who
at one time and blow, beheaded all mankind, and slew at once all the souls and
bodies that ever did, or ever shall descend of him.

Object. But you will say,

Sol. We are Adam. The sin in speech, Sol.
is if a man may so speak, specificall. And it is but an idle question amongst
some wanton Schoolmen. Who sinned most, Adam or Eve; and whether if Eve only
had sinned, we had been guilty and obnoxious. The whole kind, (says good
Austin) is obnoxious, and in this account Adam is Eve, and Eve is Adam, and
every man is both. I mean it thus: That they must not here be personally
considered, but as parts and representatives of mankind. kind. God contracted
with mankind, and mankind with God. Mankind made; mankind brake the Covenant.
There Is no precedence of sexes and persons in it, only in the manner and order
of conveyance there is some. And so we fall upon the second thing in this sin,
Habitual corruption, the second part of the first sin.
viz. Habitual corruption, which follows upon this unhappy act, and this is a
Gulf fadomlesse, the dimensions whereof none can take but God, who is the just
measure of himself, and of all things else. Men can take the altitude and
latitude of vastest bodies; but the way of this sin, is like the Eagles in the
air, the ships in the Sea, its height is above all heights; its depth,
breadth, and length beyond all our comprehension. You shall be like God, says
Satan; there is the snare, there is the design. Like him? not in nature, but in
state and condition; Absolute, Independent: his will a law, his judgment a
rule: and this poison is in him still; every man has a heart of a God in him,
and is his own God, whilst he is in this estate, and at this pass he is,
whilst he is but natural. But this was but a Gull. What is the event? man is
like not God but Satan, he is all flesh, all brutish, nay, devilish, says the
Apostle, he is a devil in and to himself; a devil to his brother, with that
villain in Bodin, he would kill both soul and body, and send all the world to
hell. He is a devil toward God, and hates him infinitely. The difference
between the devil and him, lies only in degrees and capacities; else there is
nothing in us, in a moral sense, but what the devil likes, nothing in the
devil but what we do or would like, if God did not bound us, and tie us up.
Men have labored, and that to good purpose, to set forth the particulars of
this sin, but shall I tell you? man is so bred in it, and maimed by it, that he
cannot well tell what to make of it, where it ends, what a man would be, or
what he would think, say, or do, or wish, if he were left to himself: we find
enough for our humbling upon record, I, and in the best Saints. A man would
have been bound for David's good behavior, but Jeremiah has told us, that The
heart of man is desperately wicked. It is not indeed beyond uncreated mercy,
and infinite power and wisdom: but it is beyond all things else. Truths and
virtues have their limits, may be defined, discerned, confined; whether an
angel can say, how far orginall sin may be extended in particulars, is more
then I can tell. This I can tell, that we have cause to be humbled for this sin
whilst we breath.

Quest. But wherein stands this work of humiliation? place "marg" Quest. Sol.


Sol. I will tell you in few. First, in Conviction. Labor to be convinced,
both by Law, and Gospel, of these things.

First, that thy sin and corruption is unspeakable, (as elsewhere

Secondly, that this was Thine own sin, as hereafter I must

Thou must own it, and acknowledge an hand in all sin, as to the seeds of them;
and in all miseries, as to the desert of them.

Secondly, to Conviction add Contrition: be ashamed of thy James phraseth it,
(...).
be miserable. We grieve, and afflict our selves for other men's unkindnesses,
and unreasonable behaviors: bleed under thine own sins and follies, and
understand that none have done thee so much wrong, prejudice and disgrace, as
thou have done thy self, whilst thou have thus ungraciously risen against thy
God.

Thirdly, to Contrition add Confession. Clear God, clear The devil to my
self, mine is the sin, and the shame.

Fourthly, to all the rest add Submission. Accept of the Lev. 26. Yield to his
rebukes outwardly, to the lashes of conscience inwardly: tell conscience that
he does but his office; sit down by its checks, by the reproaches of enemies,
by the reproofs of friends, and preachers, by all thy losses and crosses. Say,
All is just, all is little. If the Lord throw me into hell it is just, if he
spare me it is grace: I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him, Mic. 7.9.

Since we have made a foolish bargain, How we may undo this bad bargain.
and changed for the worse, what shall we do next? is there no way to undo this
bargain? That Is the first question usually in such cases: and blessed be our
God we may as yet go back.

Object. Oh!

Sol. That indeed is impossible, Sol.
it is too late to call back yesterday; but not too late to improve our losses,
and to salve all.

Quest. Why,

Sol. I. Make thy self sensible whence thou art fallen, Sol.
and fare as the man does, who has undone himself, and beggard his by foolish
bargains: he looks upon his wife, and then sighs, looks upon his boy and
shakes his head, looks upon his Girl, the water stands in his eyes; in short
he is ready to tear himself forhis former folly. Do thou the same, do as the
wife does, who has wilfully cast away her self, and lost her friends for an
unthrift, that uses her like a beast, she could bite off her very fingers if
that would untie the knot: mean while, she repents with all the veins in her
heart, so do thou. Thou have undone thy self, thy wife, thy child: matched thy
self to a devil, without thy Fathers consent, who will use thee worse then a
drudge, then a dog: mourn for this.

unchilded thy self, but thou have not unfathered him, he has the Bowels of a
father still, and may help thee, with honor enough.

Our children may do an act, which we neither can or may reverse or repair, not
so Gods children: he may lawfully dissolve our covenants, which we have no
authority to make without his consent: he may lawfully forbid the banes, and
sue out our divorce betwixt us and Satan, annull that contract.

Object. But will he?

Sol. I tell thee a father will do much in such a case, for a penitent child,
especially when he finds fraud and malice both in the cheater. Therefore cry
with David, Lord seek thy lest sheep; Lord dissolve my Covenants with death:
mind him of a former covenant and precontract, as the Church does; Lord, we are
thine, other Lords have no portion in us, no right over us.

Thirdly, and above all, Fly to Christ, and so to God through him. Saints and
Angels are but of the Presence chamber. The great Favorite, the Kings Son, who
has his heart and ear, he must speak for thee; I mean, Christ, whose errand it
was to dissolve the works of Satan, and all contracts with him, to bring in a
New Covenant, to save what was lost. It is his place and office, he is the
Goel, the next kinsman, he is the second Adam, and came purposely to reduce us
to our primitive Image, state and liberties: and he can do it, Romans 5. there is
more grace and life in him, Romans 5.10.
then there can be loss and sin in Adam: Hold that firmly: nay, hold three
things, which I will speak in as few words, and so end this point.

First, that none other can help thee. None else can make

Secondly, He can help thee; he is able to save to the uttermost

Thirdly, He will help thee: he never yet put back any that Israel, This is the
man whose shoe was plucked off: he will never lose such an opportunity of
evidencing his grace and power: for here is a work fit only for a God; namely,
to make the world to go backward; to undo that which was so long since done; to
enforce Satan to throw in thy bonds; to translate thee from a state of death
and bondage, to a state of life and advantage: rest upon him, who was made for
this work, and will settle thee, (if thou will believe him, and be ruled by
him) in a better state and tenure, then ever thou had in Adam; or could
have, if an Angel were thy Father, or bound for thee. Christ alone is
all-sufficient; there is not a second Adam besides him, neither needs there:
John 8.36.
If he the Son make thee free, thou are free indeed; If he the Son become thy
surety. The first Adam, was not more able to destroy thee, then he is to
restore and secure. There stay thy self. And there is an end of this point.

SCTION III. Man's sin was caused by himself.
ECCLES. 7. ult. [But THEY have sought out, etc.]


YOU hear how strangely man is altered. We proceed to the cause of this his
change. Who is in fault? not God; he made man upright: But man himself. They
have sought out, etc. The point is open.

That man's sin is from man's self. Man's sin is from man's self.
Man is the cause of his own naughtiness; the Author of his own sin and
undoing, although not of every particular in it. Solomon is positive, and makes
a just distribution: Man's sin is either from God, or from himself; not from the
former, God: Therefore from the latter, himself; nay, himself is a free cause
of his own change: it is an act of his own choice. Whose? Man's, and that at
large: not this, or that man, but man, all men sought out sin, all sin, Cleared
by his threefold estate.
all inventions and ways of sinning. Sum up all, and the result will be,
that all the sins of man issue from man's self. This will appear, if you
consider him in his threefold estate.

First. God put no ill principle into him; no creature had any compulsive power
over him; he had a true (though not Independent) Sovereignty over his own
actions. He might have stood, but he chose otherwise. No man can speak it more
plainly then Solomon does; which shall save us the labor of further proof,
though further testimony of God, and conscience might be added, attesting this
truth.

Secondly, look upon man in his sinful estate. And so sin V. Prove. 10.3. Genesis
8.
Jer. 6. 7. as sparkles from a furnace, Job 5.7.

Mar. 7.21.
From within, Jude 13.
out of the heart of men proceed evil thoughts, Mark 7.2. Jer. 7.
And these evil thoughts bedded there, beget adulteries, Job 5.7.
fornication, murders, etc. what not? he is a sink, a very Sepulcher, an open
Sepulcher, and what can you expect thence but stenches? Romans 3.13.
Romans 3.13.

Thirdly, Romans 7.24. Col. 3.5.
in his repaired estate; body of sin, Romans 7. consisting of many rotten
members, Col. 3. From within he sends forth evil, Jam. 1.14. and 4.1.
so says James more then once, cap. 1.14. cap. 4.1. So that as sin is In him,
so still, you see, sin is resolved Into him; it issues from principles of his
own; from his own darkened mind, defiled conscience, poisoned heart, and
erroneous imagination.

And as Divinity does find him guilty, Felo de se; so does Reason too. For
every free Agent is Lord of his own actions, and did he not work freely, he
were not a voluntary workman. As things be in nature, so in operation. Did not
man work freely, there were no place for choice and option. Natural agents are
determined to One, as a stone descends only: But Voluntary, such as man is,
have a freedom of choice.

Were not man master of his own actions he were not capable of a law. work by
instinct; To restrain or command by law fire to heat, or not, is absurd. Nay,
more; He would be incapable of good or bad; as a stone is; and consequently
incapable of reward or punishment; nay, incapable of Christ, and an Holy Ghost;
which dwells not in stocks. In short: Deny this, and you must deny man to be
capable of law, of deliberation, of sin, of punishment. A thousand such
absurdities would follow, if man should not be the actor of moral things, yet
objections are raised against all that is said.

First against Salomons distribution. Datur tertium; videlicet,

Though the devil be a physical and working agent in his own sphere: Sol.
yet to man he can be no immediate physical agent, but only moral: He works
not immediately upon the understanding, nor so as God does; but upon the
passions of the body, and images of the fantasy: All that he can do is, to
persuade, incite, suggest; He cannot, without man, have any Real influence,
unless man concur, not only passively but actively too. True, he can bring
poison, as a thief stolen goods, and leave it with you, if you will receive
it: he cannot force you to take it: for none has any Sovereignty over man but
God and himself. The devil may co-work immediately and physically by the
mediations of our passions and distempers: but not so, as to excuse, or exempt
us. Therefore Solomon distribution is sufficient.

It is further objected against the threefold estate of man. Objections aised
from man's first estate.
Against the first thus.

1. It is inconceiveable how man should sin of himself; Either God left him so,
as that he was necessitated to the fall; and then God is involved, man cleared:
Or else which way should sin come in? The devil could not compel him, you
say; neither had he any evil matter in himself: he could not desire his own
unhappiness, and undoing, nor his own error etc.

God did not so leave him but that it was possible for him to Sol.
God gave him power and entrusted him with it, but God was not bound to act
that power for him; That privilege we have now in the second Adam; where God
works both the will and deed.

compel, yet might he further man's sin and guilt by representing objects.

nothing actually ill in him, yet was he mutable, finite; and therefore must
view things successively: he might suspend his actions, as we said before. The
first sin imaginable is Independence upon God and cessation from goodness;
which was then in his power.

Object. But the Serpent beguiled them so,

Sol. He beguiled their expectations more then their judgment: Sol.
there was error in their being beguiled, as in every sin: but that error was a
consequent or sadjunct, not the cause of the sin; Alind est peccare ignoranter;
and ex ignorantia. But the silencing answer must be, That Adam then saw his
guilt, better then we can now. And the last day will clear it, Romans 2.5.
Romans 2. Till then we must say as Solomon here, and stop the mouth of iniquity
with this; God made man upright, but they have etc.

For the second estate it is objected. hold to do Satan's will, From man's second
estate.
2 Timothy 2.

Sol. True, but willingly: he sings in that cage.

Object. That dyscrasie now in him is penal, 2 Timothy 2.26.
and he is passive in it. Sol.


Sol. Not so only, it is not merely penal, vicious and voluntary: and he is
active: sin is his food, his sleep, his life, Pro. 15. v. 14. and 4.16.
as Solomon speaks.

Object. He cannot but sin, Romans 8.7.2 Pet. 2.14.
Romans 8.7. and Peter speaks of such, who cannot but sin, 2 Pet. 2.14.

Sol. This necessity comes not from any outward cause, Sol.
but from an inward principle: it is voluntary, it is not imposed, but contracted.

Against the third estate it is objected; sanctified man cannot sin, From man's
third estate.
1 John 3.9. He that is born of God sins not.

Sol. That is not simply said: Joh. 3.9.
for the same Apostle assures us, cap. 1. v. 8. If we say we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, Sol.
etc. There is both actual and habitual sin in all men: 1 John 1.8.
but the words are to be restrained to matter and manner of sinning; he cannot
sin some sins: To death, in that degree. And he cannot sin with the whole man.
There is a seed and a principle in him that resists, he cannot sin, that is,
live in a trade of sin, as one inslaved to it.

Object. But Paul says Romans 7. Not I, Romans 7.20.
but sin etc.

Sol. Paul speaks not de principio Quod but Quo: Sol.
not of the Person but Principle.

Secondly, it is not he, because the sin does not Redundare in personam, engage
that, God not imputing it: else he denies not sin to be in him, and sin to flow
from that body of sin in him; only it is not his in regard of his affection,
and Gods interpretation. The point then stands good; Man is the Author of his
own sin.

Be informed, that is, Charge thy self with sin, not others.
get a judgment rightly sanctified, and informed touching this truth; man
unsanctified, is all self: sin admits of no search or reflection: the proper
effect of it, is either senslesness, hypocrisy, or impudency: The sinner
yields not the fact, till found upon him, yea even then he will not yield
himself (with Saul) to be in fault, 1. Sam. 15.
he looks to earth, to hell, to heaven, and will charge all sooner then himself.

Earth; that is nearest hand. Chide men for defects, it is long of wife,
minister, the word is hard, etc. Charge them with actual sin, it is long of
others, they would anger a Saint, make stones fall out, flesh and blood cannot
bear it; as times and men be, none can do otherwise. Thus sin pleads: but what
says truth? Prove. 25.26.
Prove. 25.26. The righteous before the wicked is a troubled spring: Though he
be a spring, yet when trouble, Jam. 4.1.
it is from his own mud: Whence are brawles, says James, 1 Samuel, 24.13.
but from your own lusts? Surely wickedness proceeds 06 from the wicked: The
Saints of old lived in as bad times, and had as bad neighbors; yet never brake
out into our passions: Christ, Paul, others were as badly entertained; yet
never swore, raged, etc.

Again, for natural corruption. How do men shift it off? It is long of Adam.
What can they help it? Thus hypocrisy speaks: but what is the truth? Adam is
every man: the whole species mankind was in that pair; and their act
specificall: so Solomon here: They sought etc. How can this be? naturally they
and we are one; legally we had one covenant, in the propagation there is a
priority, in the contraction of corruption none. So then: other men must not
own our faults: they may tempt, help forward sin: but till we concur, we are
but objects, not subjects.



The devil owed me a shame,

Ans. It is a sin to belie the devil; Sol.
indeed he is stark naught in himself, and toward all: but his sin,
temptations, suggestions, cannot hurt thee without thy self. Joh. 14.
Unless thou be tinder, he cannot strike fire in thee: thy sin is not the
less for his: therefore David though moved by Satan to number the people,
takes it upon himself. Rebellion is thy witchcraft; in witchcraft there is a
confederacy; in this contract, the witch is not excused in consenting; though
Satan be subtle, and malicious in propounding: so here, the truth is, if there
were neither man on earth, nor devil in hell, thou would be poysonfull and
naught now: Therefore know thy self, Satan may hurt himself by tempting, thee
he cannot, without thee.

And if the devil must not own our faults, must God? I am as God made me, and
I do my kind, it is my nature, I am ordained to it etc. O blasphemy I can any
evil come out of heaven? darkness from the Sun? death from life? God is
neither moral, nor physical cause of the evil of sin: Not the former: he
persuades, commands, allows none: but contrarily diffwades, forbids, disclaimes
it. Not the latter, he infuseth none: things work as they be: a good tree
cannot bring forth bad fruit.

Object. Blasphemy objects. God is a physical cause of sin, Counsel: of
Creation: and Providence.

First, for acts of Counsel. God decrees all, and that is infallibly.

Sol. What then? first, decrees do not necessitate: Sol.
they have no violent operation; 1 King. 12.15.24.
there is a decree upon things contingent, and most there.

Secondly, Infallibility and Compulsion are two things:

Thirdly, decrees do not over-bear or exclude the will: but conclude it. If we
see it not, let us say, I am blind, not God is

Ob. Yea, am as God made me.

Answ. No says our text, Sol.
God made man upright, etc.

Object. But he could have prevented sin.

Answ. But he was not bound to it. Sol.
Was it suitable to our natures? A Prince can bind subjects hand and foot, and
keep them from rising. Are these fit cords for reasonable creatures? the
Question is not, whether God could have made man better, but whether he did
make him bad: Solomon answers, no.

Ob. Yea, but God presents objects, occasions of sin; yea he hardens the heart,
Exo. 9.14.
and blindes the mind, gives up to lusts; and in our doctrine, smites sin with
sin.

Answ. True, Sol.
and in Paul's doctrine too: we fear not to say, what God reports of himself.
But how does God all this? not by putting in badnesse, Subtrahendo, disponendo,
at most, not evocando.
but by withholding goodness undue, by leaving man to himself, who would be
left. Darkness follows upon the Suns absence; but it is from Sublunaries, not
the Sun: God is so far from bearing all man's blame, that he has no finger in
it; Indeed omne malum est in bono; there is a mixture; and what good is, is
Gods: what bad, ours. And what ever malice may say touching our Atheism,
making God worse then the Devil; I know that we mean as well in this as any,
and speak as modestly, as any that quarrel us, touching this point. God then
is no physical cause of sin: he must therefore be either a moral cause or
none: but that he is not.

Ob. He commanded the prophet to be smitten: Abraham to sacrifice Isaac. 1
King. 20. Genesis 22.


Sol. Hence it appears that God cannot sin because the formale of sin cease
upon his command: Sol.
The prophet owed him his blood; Isaac his life: if he call for what he gave,
it is no injustice, in Arminius his School.

Ob. But these things were against the law of nature.

Sol. Particular nature must yield to universal. Sol.
It is not against whole requires it.

God is above all law: therefore it is no fault in him to command.

above our nature, and the less law must yield to the greater. Suppose a
Justice sends a warrant for me, and at the same instant the King sends a
Pursevant: It is no disobedience to the inferior magistrate, to prefer the
superior, etc. Let God then be justified, and every man a liar. It Is an
horrible sin to father bastards upon the innocent: it is the highest blasphemy
to charge God with the least sin: and therefore find out the right father.

Next when we are once humbled for what is past, begin where the disorder
began, at Themselves: study themselves, and all is learned; keep themselves,
and all is kept; conquer themselves, and all is won; blame themselves, and all
is right. This concerns men in both estates: but till God convince men of sin,
there is no dealing with unregenerate men: all that we can say to them, is this.

First, that they will awake, suffer themselves to be startled Instruction
t(...) unregenerate.
and to have its perfect work upon them. Till when, they will not fall out with
themselves, or own their own lusts.

Secondly, that they will stand up from the dead, save themselves Ephesians. 5.4.
as he said, Lord deliver me from that wicked man, my self.

Thirdly, that they will suffer themselves to be brought bed Bethesda, till God
shall enliven the means, and heal the spring, and so give life: this is all I
can stay to speak to these.

But for others, Instruction to the Saints.
we have more to say. Are things amiss with thee? Physician heal thy self,
and see thou be a true Physician to thy self. Begin where he does. The
Physician runs to the cause of sickness. First, is it from an Inward cause? or
Outward: in the nonaturalia? air? diet? etc. Next if Inward, is it Universal?
or Local? Again: is it from the head, or liver, or whence? is it a Plethora?
or quite contrary, an Atrophia? And when he has found the grounds, then he
works. First, Purges, and there begins with Catholics, before Topicals; then
applies to the most affected parts; after strengthens nature, etc. so here.
Sick we be: what is the cause? Outward? as place, times, men, Satan? these
indeed may forward the disease: but the core and root is within: (...). 7.21.
from within, says Christ, Mar. 7.21. True, Satan injects? Nay, says Christ,
from within; from man's heart and spirit, proceed evil thoughts etc. So then:
have we any bad thoughts? have we unclean lusts? have we any rising
revengefull, any in jurious, any malicious crafty projects? any envious, proud,
foolish, idle, unsettled, nay, hellish, blasphemous thoughts? These, all these
come; from whom? not from one man, but men. So then, there being such a
plethora, and redundancy, and superfluity of naughtiness in the heart, here we
must begin; purge the heart, wash the heart, the whole soul, (for poison is in
every part) with Catholic medicines; go to the sap, (...)sal. 51.
as Psalm. 51. David observes his natural Corruption as well as particular
distempers of murder, and uncleanness: This first done, then as any one part
is more weakened, and affected, so accordingly applications must be made of
Topicals. But first, the main frame and constitution must be amended before we
meddle with Symptomaticals; this the first. For it is not the strength of
Outward that spoils us, but our own weakness: therefore the Saints begin
here, Job indents with himself; Agur prays, that vanity and lies may be
removed from him, not from the things: men bring the vanity to the creatures,
Romans 8.20.
Romans 8. and put lies upon them; They tell none. The world has no power, but
from us: the corruption is in our lusts, (...) Pet. 1.4.
as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 1.4. We make them tempting, and Satan strong;
whose strength is from our darkness. Ephesians. 6.12. Col. 1.
Outward infection, must close with inward corruption, before it can distemper
us: Therefore purge well, and that done fortify grace, as Christ says, Hold
possession of your souls by patience, by grace. Thus David dealt with himself,
and kept in his passions, and kept up his hope. Ephesians. 3.16.
Thus must we strengthen the inward man, Ephesians. 3. Victual well before a Fight,
as the soldier does: We have also our warface, and must get our weapons, and
armor ready: The world has strong allurements and stratagems; but they are
laid in our lusts: strong discouragements, persecutions, and such like; but
their strength is from our baseness. Why do you fear, (says our Savior) Oh
ye of little faith? The fear is not from the greatness of the danger, but from
the smalnesse of our faith. Were faith strengthened, it would overcome the
world, and be victorious. Think the same of the Prince of the world, Satan
himself. It Is true; he is mighty, but mighty through us: were we strong in
Christ, we were stronger then that strong one. It cannot be denied, but that
the skirmish is for the time sharp, nay, sometimes there is a long siege, and
we beleaguered: then we must do as soldiers do; repair breaches, and secure
all passages, and stand upon our guard, more then at other times. If within
there be any combustible matter, away with it, out with it; if any false, or
suspected party, out with him; and that done, victual, fortify, barracado,
make our selves as impregnable as we can: for that is most certain, which
before was hinted, viz. It is our weakness, not the enemies strength and
power, that spoils us. We might prosecute the comparison further, and call
upon you to make sure the gates, and outworkes, to keep sentinel: but the main
of all is, Take in Christ the Captain of the Lords Hosts; fight with his
weapons, fight in his strength, swear fidelity to him, and engage him in the
fight, and victory is ever on his side. To speak all in few; see whence all our
misery came; namely, from our selves. Had we been true, hell it self could not
have scaled us; and there the cure must begin: Purge self, fear self, guard
self, fortify self, gage self. For the truth is; we are though not all, yet
the worst tempters and devils to our selves. Engage we our selves to Christ,
and Christ to us, and there lies our safety; unless this be done, were we in
Paradise with Adam, or in heaven with Satan, there were no more safety to us,
then there was to them.

See here the infinite mercy of heaven toward us; Gods mercy be admired. Jer.
3.1.
God in Christ is that husband that will receive a wilful wife, Jer. 3.1. That
shepherd, who gathers the straying sheep; not only, when she is driven away,
but runs away from him, Ezekiel. 34. Ezekiel. 34.11.1.
Thatfather, who when his prodigal runs from him, runs to meet him with a
pardon. Lo! we gave up God in the plain field, preferred his enemy, gave him
more credit then God; we chose sin, death, misery; it was matter of choice;
yea, our seeking; yea, we could not satisfy our selves with variety of
wanderings. And when we had done God all the dishonor we could, we showed not
the least sorrow: rather flew out more against him, and all his; taking no
course to do him right. In short; we could do nothing, we would do nothing, for
Gods glory, and our own souls. Now what did God the while for us? he looked
after us, he pityed us, he took our parts against the enemy, he censured all
that had any hand in our hurt whether principal or accessory; and bought us
again with dearest blood, and has now given us a better estate, then ever we
had, put us into a better Adam, set over us a better Guardian, given us better
promises, better covenant, better security then before. Oh that we had hearts
to see the height and depth of this love, the freeness and fullness of this
gift I how shall we do to love God enough? to prize Christ enough? where be our
capacities? our expressions? All that you can do is this.



thou had a better answer from God, follow his steps. Labor to humble them,
and then show them that mercy, which thy self have received. Thou undidst thy
self, and would not take thy fathers counsel: yet God pityed thee. Oh: but
these will never have done, they will be ever needy, ever craving, it is in vain
to help, they cannot keep ought. Think the case thine own, prevent them as God
has thee: Give them by the week, lay it out thy self, be thou their
purse-bearer, as Christ is thine. As for the rest, who see their folly, and are
now willing to work, to submit, to amend; let the same bowels be in thee, which
were in Christ, and so clear thine interest in him: And then,

Lastly, here is a word of comfort. Be it that my own folly, Comfort in the
midst of our great folly.
yet in that case, God helps Fools, as David speaks, Psalm. 107. and therefore
I will to him with David, Psalm. 107.17.
and acknowledge my folly and brutishness, Psalm. 3. ult.
and give unto him the glory of his Goodness. Salvation is of him; We have
destroyed our selves, Hos 13.9
says Hosea; but who saves? God in Christ; Death is ours, Hos 13.9.
life is his: make him our All, and answer all with Him; mine is shame, and
confusion of face, but all righteousness belongs to him; Own thine own, and
let God have his own; Thine own is sin and misery, own that: And yet here own
but thine own; nothing is ours, but what is from us, OF accepted by us; Satan
may lay his brats at our doors, but we need not open the doors for them; he
may inject, and cast in sin: but if we reject it, it is his, not ours. Consent
may make another sin mine, dissent may make mine, none of mine. And let this
stay us; There may be use, I confess, in some cases of distinguishing betwixt
Inbred corruption, and foreign suggestions: but ordinarity it is sufficient to
mark how sin is entertained, rather then whence it arises. Thou will say
happily, that Satan makes a very through-fair of thy heart, and will not be
hedged out; but be thou still repairing the mounds, and call in Christ, to be
thy surety; and he that prevented thee with mercy at the first unsought to,
unthought of on thy part, will keep thee to the last and crown his own graces,
in his own time, with victory. Mean while never stick with Christ for any
thing, to whom thou owe all, but sin and folly, which thou must call thine
own only.

Quantum mutatus ab ille!
Conclude with a Caveat for humble walking with God continually. Since the case
is altered with us to our loss, let us bear our selves accordingly: it is hard
to fall, and to bring down the heart to the estate: a man of noble birth can
hardly forget his beginnings, and sit lower, but he must, he must cut his coat
according to his cloth, and conform: somust we.

It is with us as with Samson: now (said he) I Will shake my self as in former
times: but poor Samson is not now the man, his wings are clipped, his hair cut,
his strength lost, till God rerepair him; 1 Samuel 2.3.
he must be now a captive, a bondslave. Oh talk not presumptuously, as he said:
leave that to others, to dream of their innate principles, of their semina and
igniculi virtutis, of the rectitude of their reason, virginity and freedom of
their will, of their native good, of their hearts and meanings, of I know not
what power, more then a passive capacity of good: let us know the case is
altered with us: not presume as some, who will not be old, but think to do now
as they could in youth; Milo Croton.
but rather, with the Heathens Samson, have a fear of our selves and say, At hi
lacerti jam mortui sunt, and keep a straighter watch: say, I have not the
understanding that once I had, Prove. 30. and therefore must beg eye salve, and
be content with teaching: I have not the memory that I had, and therefore must
be content with line upon line: and my conscience is not as it was, and
therefore I must not build only upon my self: mine eyes be not as they were, I
must set a guard; my strength as it was, I must not hazard my self to
temptation. Once ('it is true) I could have gone along with God, done all
commanded, believed all propounded, performed duty without weariness, resisted
temptation, etc. And therefore as an aged weakened body concludes, I must not
go as I did, nor fare as I did, nor look upon my self as a young man, but be
more sober and watchful then heretofore; so here. I know now there dwells no
good in me, neither can I do as I could have done: and therefore my rule and
wisdom is; First, to humble and abase my self before God, and to bewail my
losses. Secondly, to deny my self, and fear my self, in all. Thirdly, to make
out for a repair: here is some difference, An old decayed body can have no hope
of a recovery here, his hope is in the resurrection, but yet there is hope for
us, this hope: First, go to our Father, and desire him to disanull our
covenants with death. Secondly, to our Advocate to plead our cause, nay our
Surety, nay our God, who was sent to repair us, to dissolve Satan's works, and
by him we may be restored in blood, renewed in part now, at present have a
surer title and tenure then in Adam, and hereafter a more glorious estate then
Adams was, and shall find our unhappy fall to prove our highest preferment.

SECTION IV. Man's undoing is from his nondependence on God.
ECCLES. 7. ult. But they have sought out many inventions.


WE have seen the cause of man's fall, now more particularly, let us inquire
into the steps thereof. How came man thus to ingulfe himself? First, he goes
off from God; leaves his hold there, and betakes himself to himself. Secondly,
being once off, he never comes on again, but rangeth infinitely. These two.
Particulars comprise the whole story, and state of man fallen, from the first
to the last, and conclude all the interpretations made of the words. He had
sought before, and now what finds he? I was casting up my reckoning, says
Solomon, but I find the reckoning past my skill. Numbers may be still
multiplied, and there is no end of man's devices; he still, still busily and
vigorously (as the word in that Conjugation imports) projects more. The Points
might be many. We first pitch upon this.

Man's undoing is from his non-dependence on God; Man's undoing it from his
non-dependence on God.
trace him, and you will find that his ruin first and last is from his
Independence upon God. This first caused; secondly, continues; thirdly,
consummates all his misery. Solomon implies all this.

First, man of good is become bad, what is the cause? he

Secondly, man is now desperately wicked; there is no sounding of him; what is
the reason? he still continues and inlargeth his estrangement from God.

entrance of his unhappiness, or in the progress, or in the close of it. All
is hence, that he goes out from God, and stands out to the last. His turning
from God began his misery, his not returning to God perpetuates it. No wonder,
if it be man's case now; it is the condition of all creatures, they all stand by
a manutention. The strongest fall, if left to themselves; as we see not only
in Adam, but in the Devils themselves. Nay, we find it in man now somewhat
healed and regenerated. Though he has an immortal principle in him, and a
better guard about him, then ever he had, yet stands he no longer, then he
holds dependence upon God: let him once step out from him, and stand High-lone;
down he comes, and falls as soon into a Guzzel, as into another place. We see
it, in blessed Abraham, David, Job; In all, at their best, and in their best.
We might be infinite in proofs, but we wave them since the thing is clear to
Reason: for,

First, all goodness, all wisdom, strength, holiness, comfort, life; not
only in himself, Psalm. 43.4.
but to the creature. The joy of our joy, Psalm. 43.4. the life of our life,
Psalm. 36.9.
the strength of our strength; lose him, and all is lost: Take away the sun,
and where is light? the fountain, and where is the stream? the root, and
where is the tree? The head and heart, as it were, then what is any member?
Obstruct his influence for a time, what is an Angel?

Esse and porro esse is from God; his being, a mere dependency. Take him alone,
and he has no bottom of his own; but look how Christ humane nature had its
subsistence from the Godhead, by personal union: so has man, by a spiritual
union and dependence. Col. 1.17. Join him with all the creatures, Col. 1.17.
and take in them to his succor, and they without God, are but so many
nothings and ciphers; now put a thousand ciphers together, and add nothing to
nothing, what is the product but nothing? They must all say, Strength is not in
me, help in me. Unless God hear the heavens, the heavens hear not us; and
there is the same reason of all the rest.

Nay, thirdly, we say more. When man is once off from God, removed from us, but
is made against us; yea, all in our selves is then against us; wit, memory,
strength, or whatsoever may promise most; yea, all in every creature is against
us.

Every thing becomes not only vanity, but vexation: not

Add to this, that Satan by Gods just hand for this Apostasy seiseth as it
were upon all strayes, and empty houses, as it is in the Parable. If he can but
a while part Adam and Eve, he makes sad work, but much more, when he can sever
God from man, because man would be of himself, and not lean upon God.

First, see the steps of man's downfall: No e the step of man's downfall.
he would needs be absolute the first day, a freeholder, and acknowledge no
Supreme, at least would mend his tenure, and be free from all wardship, and
homage, and so quickly outed himself of all. See secondly, our strange folly,
whom long experience has not yet made wise. Oh how impatient are we still of
any yoke! no bird so weary of his cage, no slave so weary of his bondage: no
sooner bound Apprentices, but we must be made free, like the Prodigal, in the
Parable, weary of his father, and must be presently at his own finding, till
he had fooled himself out of all. We may see our selves in Israel; they could
not abide within Gods mounds. They would not trust to an Uncertain Moses, or
Unseen God: they would have one in sight, in hand; they would not go to God for
every penny, and live from hand to mouth every meal, they would be at their
own finding and carving, have wells of their own flesh of their own, bread of
their own, they would not depend upon Gods Provision, of a Judge or General:
they would have a King of their own. Just so it is with us in all passages of
reliance and dependence. Men will not rest in Gods Authority and direction.
They will superadde inventions of their own. They will have more words, then
written words, Traditions, more Gospels then one, more Articles then twelve,
more Precepts then ten, more Mediators; more Gods then one. They will not rest
in Gods truth and promises; take his securities and seals; but add more. They
will not rest in Gods Wisdom for time and particulars. They are all for the
bird in hand, all for sense, nothing for faith. Thus they say in plain English,
they will trust to themselves, not to God. So for the Providence, and point of
protection. They dare not put themselves upon God: he is not strong enough,
wise enough: they must shift for themselves, as sometimes Abraham and David
did. And in point of Provision and maintenance, they say as the child does:
Mother let me have all, be it meat, money, and what else you can name, in mine
own hand, and in mine own keeping. Hence in Matter of fact, such schambling;
men strain wits, conscience, all, to get all out of Gods hands into their own.
Faith then no faith, If wit, if flattery, if backbiting, if lying, if hell it
self will do it, they will have it, and say it was a good providence too, Zac.
11.5.
as Zac. 11.5. Hence in matter of faith, God would be alone in the throne, one
God; we upon that account, refuse him, as the Senate did Christ, because he
would be All or None: we must have (would you think it?) thousands of Gods, as
Israel; in every City, at least one; God would be acknowledged the fountain of
all grace, 1 Pet. 5.10.
1 Pet. 5.10. Men will divide. Nature shall do some what: Freewill somewhat
Some hard, or voice, they will have in Election, Vocation, Justification,
Sanctification, Salvation. They will be partners. As they can do nothing
without God, so God little without them. God would have us own all to him,
depend upon him for the first, second, third, fourth, every grace; yield him
the author and finisher, the Alpha and Omega of all. We trust to our own
provisions, habits, gifts, and would prevail by our own strength: In short; we
would not be confined to his wisdom as only wise, to his care, his means, his
hours, and times; but will shark, anticipate, and either contribute, or
control his proceedings, and call this our wisdom. This the practice; now
consider,

First, what a sin it is, thus to depose God: for deny Providence All: and thus
to deify our selves. For to be independent, is to be God. This is to be like
Antichrist, lawless; like Satan, a Belialist, that is, yoke-less.

Consider next, what a folly it is: we commit two absurdities fountain, for a
broken tisterne; we forsake the best comforts, and as Jonah says, Jona. 2.8.
our own mercies; we leave Gods fire of direction, protection, and consolation,
and walk by a worse light, our own sparks, Isa. 50. ult. Jet. 2.12. and 19
as Isaiah speaks, and so at last lie down in sorrow. It Is a thing, both base,
Jer. 2.12. and bitter, v. 19. a certain forerunner of all misery and confusion.
Alas! if we will be thus alone, we must bear our own sorrows, care our own
cares, lie under our own burdens, as Rebels must, when they withdraw
allegiance, and cease to be under protection. Whilst we go along with God we
live upon him, and lie under his protection: but if we will be alone, God
leaves us to our selves, or sends us to our Idols, as Judges 10.13, 14. Jud.
10.13, 14
Think not this a small matter to go a whoring thus from God: 'twill cost a
Saint dear, God will break his carnal confidences, Jer. 2. ult.
Jer. 2. ult. he will make our Gods, our own rods; punish us and our Gods
together, as once he did in Egypt; see this and be wise.

Repent we of this our sacrilege, Repent, and let God be all again.
restore God to his Crown, give him the entire glory of his absolute power,
wisdom, truth, all. Let him alone be wise, independent, and himself. All the
struggling betwixt God and man, ever was about this point; namely, which should
rule, and which obey; which direct, and which submit. Now do him and thy self
right, give all to him, leave nothing to thy self, but obedience, which is the
portion of Inferiors.

Applied to three sorts of men.
This is applicable to three sorts of men.

To those who went off with Adam, Sort.
but are not yet come on again. Let these understand themselves: they stand
guilty of an horrible treason till they return: they are outlawed and left
naked of protection, of direction, of life, of safety, of all; where they left
God, they left all their happiness, and their way is back again. Their ruin
came by deserting God, and it is continued whilst a distance continues. Their
work therefore is to return; First, for Gods sake, who is their Lord and
rightful King, and whom they have infinitely offended. Were it but a brother
that had ought against them, they should make to him, (...)uk. 15.
much more to God, as Luke 15. Father I have sinned against heaven etc.
Secondly, for their own sakes; whilst they run from God, they run from their
own mercies and comforts, into a miserable maze; there is no end of erring, the
heart is restless. They are sure of nothing, but fear upon fear, till they
come home to him. Being thus in hucksters hands, they still be cheated and
vexed, and at the last, as they have lived without God, so they will dye
without God, which is the height of misery; for to be without him, is to be
worse then nothing.

Ob. Oh!

Sol. It Is true, Sol.
God offers him there: but we have him not till we accept him.

I,

So we say, Sol.
but if we do wholly depend, what means then so many inventions? what the use
of ill means? what such adoring of Creatures? so high thoughts when they smile,
so base, when they frown? so much fear when man, so little when God is
offended? It Is certain; a natural man is his own God; he depends upon himself,
his own wit, grace, friends, means, not upon God at all: and the Saints
themselves depend but little; did they wholly rest upon God, they would be glad
to please, they would not sleep, till reconciled, as Josiphs brethren; They
would be even and settled in their way. That indeed is Repentance, namely, the
change of your dependence, when you abhor all that is your own, and put all
upon God, do all to him, from him, and his principles: Here then is the first
work, To give up creatures; say: My bow, my horse, my money, nay, my prayers
shall not save me. Salvation is of the Lord, not from the creatures; these you
may use as sevants, but not as Lords; amongst them you may trust some men, with
a moral trust, but it must not amount to a Divine, for fear of that curse, Jer.
17. Jer. 17.
Iron heates not but from an heat put to it, the pen speaks no comfort,
unless some hand guide it, some head prompt it: so think of all creatures;
they cannot so much as think of us, unless God mind them, much less pity, and
help us, unless God give pity and help. He is the God of all comfort; 2 Cor.
1.2.
there we must have it, or no where; unite to him, and close with him, and then
thou art restored.

Oh! but I doubt he will not receive me.

That Is answered, in the Parable, Luke 15. Sol.


Oh! but I have stood out long, after Covenants,

That Is answered, Jer. 3.1, 2. etc. Jer. 3.1, 2.


Object no more: suspend thy comfort no longer by adjourning repentance; thou
make thy return here by the harder; every step out of the way must be
unstepp'd again.

To such who are gone out from God the second time, 2 Sort.
at least in part, these revolts prove most dangerous and least pardonable.
Thou have bin once, as it were, burnt in the hand already; fear the second
time: thou have tried both estates, now tell me, which is the better? the snow
of Lebanon; or dirty ditches? the waters of Siloah; or trouble some seas? Tell
me whether all the worlds enjoyments be worth one hours communion with heaven:
and when thou have made use of thine own experience, lay down creatures; above
all, lay down thy self: For there is nothing in us that can help us; in truth,
nothing but what will hurt us, without God. We cannot so much as receive and
enjoy comfort, so much as apprehend it, unless God give an apprehension;
therefore deny self, and mortify self. Say, I took my self for a God, but I am
a devil: I thought my self wife, but I am a fool; I conceived my self safe
when I had a little grace in my own keeping; but I find that I can keep
nothing; therefore henceforward I will despair of my self, know no man after
the flesh, have no confidence in flesh, but bid adieu to all fleshly hopes: and
then plant thy self upon God, there is no other bound or bottom; Jam. 1.17.
Every gift, faith James 1.17. Every giving of that gift; The use, continuacce,
apprehension, is all of him, he is that principle which communicates all. See
nothing but emptiness out of him, and fullness in him: therefore close with
him by knowledge, by faith, by love: do nothing without him, trust not thy self
in the least: take notice what a treacherous nature thou have, Hos. 11.7.
how bent to backsliding, Hos. 11.7. How far thou art sunk into it, and gone
from thy self; how sweet God was once, and the creature now; how humble thou
once wast, how disdain full now; how once troubled upon the least estrangement,
and how now thou can live without God, for a long time. And again take notice
of thy speed: what thy then happiness was, what thy now deadness. And so
conclude with the Church, Hos. 2. ult.
Hos. 2. I will return to my husband again, for then was it best with me.

Oh!

Answer; Sol.
be neither ashamed or afraid of doing justice, of glorifying God. 1 Samuel 12.
Jer. 4.
Think what Samuel said to revolting Israel, 1 Samuel 12. Think what God faith to
backsliding Judah, Jer. 4. Think of Christ's errand, who came to recover
straies, and to save what was lost. Think of the Prodigalls entertainment, of
our for giving seventy times seven times in a day. Think of Gods practice with
other backsliders, and believe the prophets, whose work it is to bring thee
back to God, as the exprestion is 2 Chronicles. 24. And which is also the main of
our repentance; and that is usually expressed by our returning to God, and it
stands much what in the change of principles and dependence, as before was
noted: Therefore here sit down, make God thy All, and depend upon him for
first, second, third, every grace.

So much to the second sort, 3 Sort.
now to the third; and they are such as stand in terms of dependency, but too
loosely. I have two words to say to these.

First, let them hold that dependency they have arrived at, as their life. Let
not wit put them off from depending upon Gods directions; nor pride, from
submitting to his Sovereignty; nor unbelief, from closing with his promises;
nor any change of times, from their constant adherence. It Is, I confess, a
very hard thing to hold close to God, in extremities; when the affliction and
the trial is great, then to clasp about God is difficult, as David and Abraham
witness: and no whit easier in much peace and prosperity, as we see in the
same David, Hezekiah and others. In great divisions, it is a hard thing not to
trample and to warp aside, as we see in Peter Gal. 2. We are cast upon Trying
times, times of Antichrists rage: and then depending graces, as Faith,
Patience, and the like, are most seasonable. Rev. 14.12. Rev. 14.12.
Our care therefore must be to put off all self conceits, and hopes, and
dependencies. We have in this case, but too much wit, strength, confidence of
our own. But all our own must down: for so much as there is of our own in us,
so much there is of misery and deceit. Therefore be nothing in thy self,
nothing in any creature, nothing in any Ordinance abstracted from Christ: hang
the whole soul upon him; be no wiser then Christ, no holier, no stronger: then
Christ. Make an entire resignation, and let thy dependence be absolute and
universal for all grace, all counsel, all comfort. There is no other bottom
or subsistence.

But when does a man Depend upon God?

First, Sol.
to rest upon his word through out in the precepts and promises.

Secondly, to draw and derive all our strength from him.

Thirdly, to expect all in his way; and that is, in a subordination Ephesians. 4.

Fourthly, in all the means, use them, but trust him:

Secondly, let them strain toward a further communion; for the best of our
hearts hang too loose from God as yet; We are apt, with David, to look to the
right hand, and to the left, and to be catching at every sprig We look upon the
world, as if it were as full of Gods, as the Roman Senate was said to be of
Kings. We deisie every creature. Nay, the truth is, every man would be his own
God, his own Christ, his own holy Ghost, and rather trust himself, then look
out to God. This wickedness must be resisted, ^3. Psalm. ult.
and this must be our study, To remove the creature further from us, and to say
still with David, It Is good for me to draw near to God; and conclude, that if
it be best, to come nearer to him, it is best also to keep out selves with him,
to do nothing without him: nay, if it were possible, not to breathe without
him, as Ignatius some where.

Lastly,

favor to set it, though it cannot be done without pain. Though God stop our
way with thorns, yet if there by he brings us home to himself, the mercy is
great. And therefore look upon this as such, when God, as a father, takes home
his bankrupts, takes all out of our hands, more then the duty of dependence,
and will trust us neither with soul, nor body, nor estate, nor any thing else.
This is one mercy.

a secure estate. God ingageth for thy self, for thy seed, to all eternity:
Interest thy self in him, and there is an end of all thy cares, fears, doubts,
perplextiies, Psalm. 94.18, 19.

SECTION V. Man loose from God is restless in his ways.
ECCLES. 7. ult. But they have sought out [MANY INVENTIONS.]


WE come now to the last point. They have sought out many, etc. [inventions]
say we: and the inventions are not few, which are discovered in the rendering of
the words, Ratiocinia, says Jun. Quastiones insinitas, says the Vulg.
cogitationes vanas. Vatab. computationes. Pagn. Cogitationes. Montan.
Cogitationes. magnatum, says Lodo. de Dicu. (...). Sept. (...). Symmac.
Cogitationes alienas a recto. says Merc. etc.
(...). Our own translation, being full enough, and suitable to the scope, we
shall rest in that, and for the matter, take notice of man's progress in evil,
when once he is off from God; he works himself out of all, he has his devices,
he has many of them; he seeks, and seeks again, and yet again even unto
infinitness. Whence we observe,

Doct. 5 Man once loose from God, restless in his ways.
That when a a man is once loose from God, and left to himself, he becomes
restless and endless in his own ways. It fares with him, as with the Sea
man, or way faring man; when once he has lost his rule and directions, and is
out of his own knowledge, he is, as it were, in a mist or maze, walks the
round, now backward, now forward, now on this hand, now on that, still in
motion, and that swift; but all to no purpose. It will not offend you, I hope,
if I compare him to the Poor Spaniell, which has lost his Master: he cries,
and stands, he runs and stops, he smells and searches, now on this, now on that
side the way; but knows not where he is, nor when to make end. It Is much-what
so with man, Trace him from the first to the last, so soon as ever he went off
from God, he began to rove into a world of devices: and Herein worse then the
spaniell, which runs to find his master, but man runs from him, as we see Adam
hides himself, palliates and transferres his fault, patcheth up a poor covering
and is as busy, to no purpose, as his then parts and time would give. Pass
from him to Cain his son; so soon as he went our from God, he became a Rover,
and both himself, and his children fell to inventions, some whereof God has
turned to man's good. After that, Ambition came in, and then Oppression,
Srotius, de Jure belli and pacis.
And all along, as the world was peopled, so shops and forges were increased.
In the end man's self was multiplied within himself, V. Varro in Aug. de civit.
dej.
in one you had a thousand. Gods were multiplied, for one there were thousands.
Religions and worships were multiplied, for one Temple, they built many, as
Hosea notes; for one Jehovah, Idols innumerable in every City, in every furrow,
in every house, river, wood, place, Gods without number.

And for practicals, it were infinite to particularize; Men were as wicked, as
they could tell how to be, as God complains of his once people, Jer. 2.
Jer. 2.

Come down to the time of Christ's Incarnation; how many religions were then in
the world? how many inventions in the Church, brought in by Pharisees,
Sadduces, Essenes, and I know not whom? since that, how many amongst Jewish
Rabbines? how many amongst Heathenish Gentiles? still, still still, as men
declined from the truths of God, they added of their own; see it in the books
of Scripture, in the Sacraments, in several confessions and models of
religion, in worships, in Liturgies; How did they, who would be thought the
chiefest Churchmen, beat their brains about new ceremonies and forms? one
Pope adds this, another that, and every one something, till the Church was
surcharged. What should we speak of Heresies, and uncouth opinions? how have
the Catalogues swelled in our hands? Epiphanius mentions some, Austin more, and
after him, more and more in every Age. Nay, the Apostle in his time, speaks of
endless strifes and disputes, of many spirits, of different doctrines, which
since have swarmed beyond all account. There is invention upon invention:
inventions new to confirm the old: new Additions, and new Editions, and what
not?

Now the Reasons of these endless Mazes and pursuits, are many.

God is the Boundary of all things; in him,

And, secondly, man has no consistence of his own: that

Again, he is too unruly to be held in by any but God; no

Add to this, that he is now made up of Ignorances, errors,

Again, he is restless, as the needle jogged aside, till he Busy principles,
and the more busy because now distempered, and as it were feverish, and hence
he runs like a Clock out of order; he is unwearyed in his own way and
inventions, and is still adding, as in Mic. 6. Wherewithal shall we come
before God? will rivers? will thousands serve the turn?

Yet further, he is unsatisfied in all that he can do, like the fer. 2.23.
hurried up and down with guilt Cain-like, in the Land of Nod.

Besides all this, when he is empty of God, Satan seiseth scruples, and such
like trash, which multiply like so much vermin.

For Information; Admire and bewail this restlesnesse.
To what a pass man is now brought? he is blind, yet busy like the Phrantick;
then wisest, when he is worst of all: he must now be no less then a God: he is
able to make a God of his own, a worship of his own, a conscience of his own, a
Bible of his own; weary of nothing but of dependence and confinement. Never was
bird wearier of a Cage then he of Gods mounds; then most impatient, when he is
not left to himself. See it in all the passages of his life.

First, 1. In civil affairs.
In civil affairs; he must have no superior: A servant in one year grows
weary of that yoke; Marry he must, he must be of himself, else no bargain. The
little apprentice before he has worn out half his time, must buy his time, set
up of himself: and thus it is, for the most part, with all inferiors; they are
weary of all Government, like Israel of old; God himself could not please them;
they must have another King.

Secondly, 1. In spiritual.
in the spiritual regiment; where shall you find a man almost that will submit
to any spiritual government? What should I speak of men's carriage toward
their Pastors in that relation? they will not yield to God himself. For the
purpose. God would stand Alone, and be sole Commander, Savior: Man would share
with him. God would be the Only Lawgiver: Men would put in somewhat into his
Laws. God would be Only worshipped: Men will not sit down by this; but they
will have some hand in all his dispensations. We see this every day both in
Doctrinals and Practicals. In the first; How do men sweat to divide with God?
If he bring Grace, they will bring Will. If he offer a match with his Son, they will
bring some portion. Whither tend all the points of Popery, Arminians,
Socinians, Anabaptists, but to this, To take us off (in part at least) from a
dependency? So in practicals, whether work or wages be considered, God would
have us live by faith, that emptying grace; we are all for sense. He would have
us be beholding to Christ for all; we will warm our selves with our own sparks.
He would have us stand to his allowance and maintenance, we will shark, and
shift for our selves, and fear that God will be to seek, if we did not help him
out with our supplies. All this while, see what becomes of our wit, and how ill
we provide for our selves. First, we forsake the fountain, and our own mercies.
Secondly, we embrace lyng vanities. Thirdly, we throw our selves into a world
of perplexities: and lastly, pull upon our selves that curse of curses, to be
left to our own counsels and inventions. Double instruction.


Of Instruction. Is man thus endless in his wanderings, when he is once left to
himself? Then first, pity your children. To Parents for their children.
and the longer they go in their own ways, the more work, and misery do they
create to themselves. You may think perhaps that wedlock will tame them, time
and experience will teach them: but that is your error. The longer they live,
the more inventive they will be, and full of crotchets. Stop them betimes, and
be as merciful to their souls, as you be to their bodies. If a limb be
crooked, you will seek to straighten it, whilst it is tender. If a bone be
broken, you will not say, Time will work it out: You Will rather say; Alas! the
child will be a cripple all his days, if he be not timely looked to: Think
the same for their souls; They are quite disjoynted, and their faces look the
wrong way, do your best to set them right: at least bring them to Gods
bone-setters, who may restore them. Gal. 6. 1.

Secondly, your selves; and the greatest mercy you can show To Parents for
themselves.
If a man will be ruled by his own reason, by his own conscience, or rather
fancy, he shall never have done; he will work himself out of his own Geares,
run himself quite off his own legs. Therefore say with David, I hate all vain
inventions. Psalm. 119.113
They are all vain, and I have chosen thy statutes, O Lord. The way is plain,
simple, even, if we would follow it, as God chalkes it out; To us, (says the
Apostle, Jud. 3.
in matters of faith) there is but One God, one Lord, one Master, one
Lawgiver, one faith, Once given to the Saints, once for all delivered in
clearest Scriptures: Here stick, upon these plain principles, and decline
inferences too far fetched in point of practice, the directions are very
clear. I write unto you, says John, that you sin not; we must plant that
resolution in our hearts against all purposed sins; next, if we do sin besides
purpose, make up the breach quickly. We have, says he, an advocate with the
Father. Go to him, follow his counsel, in recruiting our selves: give glory to
God in a way of Confession; give right to man in a way of Satisfaction; and
then for the future, If ye know, says he, that God is righteous, then know
too, that every one that does righteousness, and none other, is born of him, 1
John 2. ult. Here Is a plain way; now make no bouts, nor strain wit to find
evasions. In matters of Doctrine; strive not to bring opinions to our lusts;
and make the Word speak what sin would have it: make not Scriptures servants to
our interests. So in matters of life and conversation; hold to the rule, Sin
not, faith John. Spare inventions,

True: necessity dispenses; but God will have mercy, not sacrifice; I must not
sterve my self and my children. Sin not, true: if it be simply and intrinsecally
evil; but this that I do, is not sin in me, sin in this case. So in the case
of repentance; nothing more plain. Repent, say the Prophets; Repent, says
Christ; Repent, say the Apostles. I acknowledge it, but what is it to repent? a
man may be too legal and slavish. I Will to Christ, and what needs more? Say, I
have offended my neighbor. If Christ forgive me, he must forgive me.

No, Sol.
says Christ, you must, to your offended brother too, else approach not my
Altar. Mat. 5.23, 24
Here stay, hear Christ, not wit; that will have twenty Pleas, It was no wrong,
It was but just, It is not against charity, Who can tell whether he be a Brother
or no? or, whether indiscretion this be the best way, all circumstances
considered? So again: We must be righteous as he is righteous; We must do as we
would be done by; that is the Royal Law: yield to this rule, which very
Heathens have yielded to; and cast not a mist before thine own eyes; make not
thy self believe, that thou would be so used thy self, only because thou
would have a license to abuse another. It were infinite to prosecute all
particulars. Believe it; there will be no end of wanderings, of fears, doubts,
thoughts, till we come in to God. If a man will believe himself and give way to
his own guides and principles, he will never be quiet: therefore give a flat
denial to them all; by name,

First, to self-reasonings. A man would run himself quite

Secondly, to unmortified lusts. They will hurry a man into

Thirdly, to a scrupulous conscience, which knows to end food before received,
and then yielding to some scruples came to this. If I must bless God for every
meal, why not then for every second course or dish coming to the Table: and if
so; why not then for every bit eaten, and every drop let down: and if I must do
so in case of meats and drinks, why not in all other things whatsoever? and
thus that poor soul made life it self a burden.

Fourthly, to man's example or authority, especially when seeming sanctity. If a
man make man his guide and his rule, where shall he stay? or which man shall he
follow? Rather follow true Guides: that is to say, Give up thy self to Christ
with true light, 1 Pet. 2.25. next, make use of thy present light, whether of
nature, or of Grace: and next, shut not out any light offered, but receive all
thankfully and humbly. Yet further: hold to the sure Rule of Scriptures, and
there, first to the Fundamentals, to plain places, to the literal sense, where
no incongruity will follow upon it: and for principles; make neither more nor
fewer then the Word makes; only be true to such: and for inferences and
deductions, though they cannot be simply ejected, yet take heed they be not too
far fetched, Bless God who gives a stop to our wanderings.
or too much strained.

Lastly, if the case be so with us, that the further we depart from God the
worse we be, and the more we divide like a river, when further from the
fountain, or like hayle shot, the further it goes, the more it scatters:
Then bless we God for calling us in, and giving a stop to these our wanderings.

Adam, either father or son, have returned, unless God had laid hand on him?
when would the lost groate or the lost sheep have found themselves, if God had
not first found them? men may talk of works preparatory, of, I know not what,
congruities, improvements of naturals, and such like wonders; but till God put
forth his creating power, and hold forth his Golden Scepter, a wolf will as
soon turn sheep; a Blackmore, fair; a devil, a Saint; as sinful Adam a
convert. And therefore for this mercy, bless God.

humiliation; but new opinions, forms, questions, ways tending to strife and
contention, to profaneness, and loosnesse, so that Africa it self did not more
abound with monsters, then we naturally do.

Now herein Gods goodness is to be admired, that whilst we are hatching one
unhappy brood or other, he is contriving our return and safety, and in his time
takes us off by degrees from these principles of ours, wit, fancy, deluded
conscience, lust, sense, and the like; which are sufficient to trouble our
selves and all the world.

Teachers in the Church. Parents and Masters in the family. Brethren and
helpers in a community. And above all, settled us upon two never failing
foundations; Doctrinall, the Word truly translated, and soundly expounded to
us; and Personal, the Lord Christ, who is made our Guardian, our Guide, our
Prophet, our surety; who is so faithful, that he will never fail us; so full,
that in him our souls shall find ease and rest, and be secured from starting,
if we will put our selves under his yoke, Mat. 11.

And now we are fallen upon the next estate of man, viz. his Restoration in
the second Adam: and of this we shall say more, if God shall please to give
health and opportunity. In the mean, we shall (if God enable) speak something
in the general, leaving the particulars touching Christ's person, natures,
offices to some other time, as we shall see cause and find leisure.

An end of this Text in Eccles. 7. ult.
SECTION VI. Saints by Christare in a very happy estate.
ROMANS VIII. I. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus, etc. --


WE have looked upon man in a double estate: we have seen what he was in Gods
hand, what in his own. Now we are to enquire what he is in Christ's: These words
will give us a general hint thereof. Where Three things must be done, (if we
do well.) First, the order; Secondly, the meaning; Thirdly, the use of the
words must be found out. For the first, they come in by way of Inference,
that is confessd. But whence they are inferred, is the question.

Bellarmine, Order of the words.
I remember, knits them to the 7th Chapter, especially to those words. [Not I,
but sin, etc.] And his conceit is this. There the Apostle had proved lust, i.
e. residencies and dregs of Original sin, to be no sin, and here he
concludes, Therefore there is no matter of condemnation in Saints. But this
cannot stand. For, first, the conclusion is too wide for the premises, if they
were true; since other sins may damn, though Original sin did not. Secondly,
the Premises and ground are not true. Paul does not say, That concupiscence and
the relics of original corruption are no sins; he says the contrary, over
and over in that Chapter, in so much as Arminius cannot believe, that what he
says, can agree with a sanctified estate. As for that verse, [not I, etc.] the
Apostle does not dispute, whether there be sin or no in him, that he yields,
but from what principle that sin comes; from a principle of flesh, not of
grace. Let Us set by this then. Ames knits these words to the fifth Chapter.
Others to the seventh. Others, best of all, as I conceive, to the whole
discourse foregoing. The Apostle having proved our Justification by grace, or
faith, or Christ, which upon the matter come all to one, and taken off some
objections, and absurdities in the 6th and 7th Chapters, which might at first
sight seem thence to flow, be now like a good Artist sums up and infers the
main conclusion; as if he had said. Now then since it is cleared that Christ is
a root as well as Adam, and as full of life as he was of death, and puts forth
this life effectually to free us from all manner of deaths, it hence follows,
Therefore there is no condemnation to them that be in Christ. This the order
and cohaerence.

Now for the words; what is meant, in the first place, Meaning of the words.
by Condemnation? Here we divide again. The Popish sense is this, There is no
matter condemnable, nothing worthy condemnation in Saints. This sense we cannot
receive, for then it will follow that there is nothing worthy absolution and
pardon in them: Then were they free from all sin, for sin, as sin, is deadly,
c. 6, at least free from all mortal sin, which the state and story of David,
Solomon, Peter, and thousands more do sufficiently confute. This therefore must
not be it, What then? The word imports a condemnatory sentence, as Mark 10.33.
and elsewhere. There is none such abides the Saints, the law is discharged, and
disarmed of its condemning power, as to Saints, they are removed from under it;
the law borrowes its condemning strength from sin, and that is taken off as to
the guilt and power of it; as the Apostle after speaks. It is Christ, says he,
that justifies, who shall condemn? so then the believing Saints are passed
from death, they come not into condemnation. Some objections are made by the
Jesuits against this interpretation. But it is not worth while to dwell long
upon them.

First,

Answer, Sol.
the Saints, (notwithstanding this Jeer,) find it, work enough to believe that
they are not under the condemnatory sentence of the Law: and he might, if he
had pleased, see a wide difference betwixt Sentence and Execution.

I but,

It does so; Sol.
therefore are they freed in Christ, and of grace not of merit.

I,

True, Sol.
not for merit, yet they may in the execution; and if they be inseparable, why
do they in their doctrine of humane satisfaction sever them?

I,

God does not say there is no sin in them, Sol.
no desert of death, that is their saying, God only faith, that for Christ's
sake there is no execution or actual condemnation of them.

Why but then,

To all in Christ, Sol.
to all as are in him, as once they were in Adam; that is to say, to all that
are branches of him, and members of that body whereof Christ is head, and a
principle of life: For to be in Christ, (to touch that by the way) is not only
to be united to Christ by knowledge, so that we be in the faith, and Christian
Religion: but that we be incorporated into him, by faith and the spirit, united
to him in love and life, so that we have our subsistence and dwelling in him,
1. John 3. ult. He that is thus in Christ is passed from death to life, he
comes not under a sentence condemnatory, Joh 3.18. and 5.24. he shall sit on
the bench in the day of Judgment, not stand at the bar, there to be
arraigned; but why all this, because they walk after the spirit? So indeed our
Countryman Stapleton would have it, but that is against the whole discourse of
the Apostle in the foregoing Chapters, and that were to confound Law, and
Gospel. The Text does not say, there is no condemnation, because they walk
after the spirit; he meddles not now in the conclusion with the causes of
Justification, those he handles elsewhere, some before, some after, but now he
is upon the subjects, and persons justified, and tells us in this place, not
why they are justified, but who they be, and how qualified; or if you will, the
cause or ground of their freedom is upon this account, because they are one
with Christ: the evidence and proof of this because they live under a new guide
or Law, walking not after the flesh, but the spirit. And thus for the words.
Now the result hence is this.

Saints in Christ are in a very happy estate and condition. good in Christ,
Saints by Christ, are in a very happy estate.
as it was bad in Adam. It is not for nothing, that Saint Paul makes this his
highest ambition to be all in Christ, and nothing out of him, Phil. 3.9, 10. or
this to be the highest honor and commendation to be styled Saints in Christ,
Phil. 1.1. Brethren in Christ, Col. 1. Churches in Christ, in his first and
second Epistle to the Thessalonians. This the highest dignity, the best
seniority; They were, faith Paul, before me in Christ, Romans 16.7. and 11. Our
Savior himself makes this the main of his Ministry. First, to call men to him;
then, to persuade an abidance in him: and to this very end has established an
everlasting Ministry, that thereby men might be called into the fellowship of
Christ, 1 Cor. 1.9. Nay, and into the Glory of Christ, and his most glorious
privileges, 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. Now that our condition is not more desperate out of
Christ, then blessed in him, will further appear, if we consider this estate,
either singly, or in way of comparison. To begin with the latter. 1. In
comparison of others.


First, Adams estate in innocence was (as we have heard) a all of God
immediately, he was in the actual possession of all required Graces, and had
in himself a power of perpetu-ating his estate in Fee simple upon himself and
his for ever: a fair estate, but short of ours now. Adam had not the heir
himself as we have, had not so near an union with God as we by Christ; he had a
good Landlord, but not a Father by marriage; nor had he that security and
warrantise, against all pretenders and claimers that we have: he held God by
the hand, but God holds us. To say nothing of another life in heaven, which
whether Adam heard of, is more then we can tell.

servants, we are members; they are the friends of the bridegroom, we the
bride; they have their personal glory and life, but we the same for substance
with Christ's; Joh. 57. They are near to Christ in place and employment, but not
so near as we, who are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone.

person and in part, Ephesians. 2.6.
we in our proxy and head Christ, there we also sit, Ephesians. 2. neither shall they
be perfected, till we come to them; now then to close this comparative
consideration, if our estate in many things exceeds Adams, in some things the
Angels, if for the main, we hold pace with the souls now in bliss, having the
same both heir and inheritance, our estate is certainly good; Adams was good,
the Angels better, the Saints best, and the Saints is ours for the substance of
it.

2. In a single consideration.
Secondly, This futther appears if we survey the thing in it self, and look
upon it in the causes of it. Secondly, in the subjects, or possessors of it.
Thirdly, in the privileges, and

For the causes of it.
For the first, it is an estate of Gods own making. We are, says the Apostle,
of God in Christ, I Cor. 1.30. and for us is Christ, of God, made wisdom,
righteousness, redemption, all. It pleased God out of the riches of Grace to
take counsel with himself alone, how to make man, as happy, as man needed to
be. And whereas before, though he had a vast estate, yet was he wider then his
estate, and thereupon stepped over his bounds; he was pleased to resolve upon an
estate larger then man, even his own estate, Glory, Joy so far as
communicable, and enters him upon that, even upon his Masters Joy, as it is in
the Gospel; and Glory, as it is, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2 Thessalonians, 2. 14.
And whereas man was not at first himself, but as they were once used to speak
of such as were under Covert without head, God resolves now upon a head and
Guardian, Christ, and the conclusion is, Christ should pay all and have all.
Hereupon the Father gives the Son, the Son gives himself to purchase an estate,
and to instate us in it. Now consider what price the Father set upon that his
Son, the Son of his love, and thence inferres the greatness of the estate; for
what loving Father will part, with the life shall I say? nay, with one limb of
his child for a whole world? why, Saints in Christ have such an estate as God
was content to redeem with the blood of his Son; a precious purchase, and
therefore a precious state. Consider also Christ and his worth. He looks upon
the estate, when it was to be purchased; and when the matter was propounded to
him, and surveyed by him, he was willing to sell himself to his skin, to his
soul to compass it: now certainly, that state must be very glorious that has
God for its founder, God for its purchaser, God for its price.

For the subjects and heirs of this estate, to speak them Christ, For the
possessors of it.
the heir apparent of all, the Kings eldest, the Kings only son. Secondly,
Christians, that is, the Church in one body, the Kings only Daughter, upon
whom this state is settled, by way of Jointure shall I say? or rather, Dowry:
now when the King of Kings shall drive a match between his only son, who is
heir of all, and his only daughter by adoption, (as the son by nature) as
once he did between Adam and Eve, and settle both worlds upon them, as he did
the first upon Adam, how can it be but that the estate will be very rich, and
every way full? And that will appear yet further to you, if you consider the
last things, viz. The privileges and properties thereof.

spiritual estate, it lies not here in the dirt, For the privileges.
as Adams first estate did, it lies in light, Acts 26. it is undefiled, as
Peter speaks. And upon that account the more Acts 26.23.1 Pet. 1.4.
are best, as most nearly approaching the best of all.

free estate, a created tenure whereto none can pretend, free from all
encumbrances, all forfeitures, decays, impositions, endowed with all
immunities: here is freedom from the Law, in its rigor, curse, irritation,
sting; though it remain in its directive, and detective, and corrective use,
yet its destructive power is taken away; there is no condemnation, says the
Text. Freedom from wrath, Satan, sting of conscience; in a word, from all
bondage. We were indeed formerly in a state of vassallage, but the Son makes us
free, Joh. 8.36.
John 8.

full estate; in Christ we are complete, Col. 2. Col. 2.10.
Yea, with the Son God gives us all, Romans 8. all things are ours, Romans 8.32.
all persons ours, because Christ is ours, and Christ is Gods, 2 Cor. 3. ult.

firm estate. All is everlasting, unchangeable, unmovable, unfading: all
heirs, Joint heirs, with Christ. If the state stand good to him, it will to
us: We shall speed as he and the Father speed, Joh. 17. Now the Son abides for
ever, and the Daughter abides for ever, the estate dies to neither, and neither
to other. We are heirs as of the things promised, so of the promises
themselves, Gal. 3. ult. estate, and writings are all made over to us: by
Christ we have right to all; in and with Christ, we are in the possession of
all, in his right, and in our name, livery and seisin are given and taken. Thus
you see the state.

Now if you ask me a reason, us, us beggars, us bankrupts, us traitors? I can
give you none other then what the Apostle has given me, 2 Thessalonians. 1. the motive
is, mere grace in God through Christ; 2 Thessalonians. 1.12.
the end, that Christ may be glorified in us his body, and the fullness of him,
who is the fullness of all, Ephesians. 1. ult. Luke 12.32
and to be admired by us to all eternity. Or, if you will have it in Christ's
own words; It is the Fathers pleasure to give this estate, which is sometimes
called an Inheritance, sometimes a Kingdom, a glorious kingdom, an heavenly
kingdom; Gods kingdom; Christ's kingdom; The Saints kingdom. We will say no
more at present, though much more might be said touching the excellency of this
estate in the immunities and prerogatives thereof. We come to Application.

For those who never yet closed with Christ these must be exhorted, as they
love themselves, to come to him. To be happy, come to Christ.
For Motives. Consider, First, the necessity of so doing. Not only in regard
of his precept, Come to me, all ye that are heavy laden, etc. but in order to
themselves; for, no Christ, Gal. 4.28. Without Christ no life. They dye in
their sins: he that has, says John, the Son, he has life only, he that
has not the Son, has no life, 1 John 5.12. He is the Ark, without which there
is nothing but death; he is the City of refuge; you dye, if you fly not
thither. Adam leaves you under sin, sin calls for Justice, and Justice will
pursue you to the Gates of that City. Other remedy there is none, the second
Adam was only able to remove the hurtfulnesse of the first. There must be Adam
for Adam, as there was serpent for serpent in the wilderness, covenant for
covenant, grace for grace. I know some men talk of another passage discovered,
and opened to heaven: But as Paul said in another case, though there be Gods
many, and Lords many, yet to us there is but one: to us in the word; to us in
this Hemisphere of the Gospel there is but one way made known, one Lord, one
Jesus, one living way; and in this sense also living as well as in other, that
it never dies or changes. What secret ways the Lord is pleased to betake
himself unto, we are not to inquire into; our rule of faith is not Gods
prerogative, but his will revealed in the word. Let us submit to this rule, and
suffer our selves to be convinced by the Gospel, that there is nothing but sin,
and guilt, and death, and slavery, and hell, out of Christ, but he alone is our
life, our way, our truth. If we come to him, he casts out no man; if we come
not, we cast away our selves.

possibility of recovering our selves, and our estate, if we come to him.
Herein man in his lost estate is beyond Devils. Christ has made him capable of
Salvation. He came on pur pose to recover him lost, to redeem him sold, and
forfeited; and by the Gospel to bring again to light, what was banished and
buried, to wit, life and immortality. That Is his business, and hereunto he is
all sufficient, perfectly able, Heb. 7.25.
as the Apostle says, to save to the worlds end, all that come to him. There
is no stay on his part, if any thing hinder,

Oh, Sol.
but we cannot come to him. When did thou try? what means have thou used?
what prayers? or what pains have thou been at? It is not want of Can, but want
of Will, at least it is a wilful impotency, as Christ lays the charge, You
will not come to me, that you might have life, Joh. 5.40. You will not says
he, there is the misery; you will not come that you may have life, I offer life
to your dead souls, you will not receive it.

I,

Come to him that thou may receive this power, Sol.
he is a quickening spirit to souls, as well as bodies; and if thou unite to
him, he will as easily raise thy soul out of the grave of sin, Joh. 5.25. as he
did the dead body, by the touch of the Prophets bones.

But how can I come to him?

Come to his ordinances, of the word, and in private propose good questions.
This the woman of Samaria did, and this may thou too. And if thou will suffer
thy self to be drawn thus by these cords of love, Christ will in no wise cast
thee off. For all that the Father gives me, shall come to me, says Christ,
Joh. 6.37. And for my part, I came to do my Fathers will, v. 38. And my Fathers
will is this, that I should lose none, v. 39. but give life to all that so
come, v. 40.

Consider the certainty of speeding if we do come; the Es. 55.1.
and proclamation made to all; Ho! Rev. 22.17.
every one that thirsts come and drink freely. It was Christ's very errand to
bring us in again; he still employes his messengers, and invites us saying,
Come, all things are prepared. He offers marriage with us upon easy terms;
your foreskins will be dowry enough, as Saul said to his Son in law; therefore
come and make no more doubts; I say to thee, as they said to the blind man, Be
of good comfort, arise, he calls thee. Cast away thy rags as he did, and
speed as he did, who immediately received sight, Mark. 10.49. etc.

Oh, but I fear he will not accept me.

Well, try as David did in his case, Sol.
do as Abigail did with David himself, David wooes her, she is sensible of her
distance, and acknowledges her unworthiness, but yet she followed the call,
accepted the motion, and it proved a match.

I, but there is one thing sticks with me, Adam, I could promise to my self as
much good from this Adam, as I have received hurt from the other. But now there
lie shrewd blocks in my way, first, this doctrine of particular election does
much discourage me.

And why so, I pray? Is it not more comfortable to hear, Sol.
that some shall certainly be saved, then that it is uncertain, whether any at
all shall be saved? for thus runs the doctrine, touching general redemption,
and general (if you will speak contradiction) election, viz. Notwithstanding
Christ's death and price paid, salvation is suspended upon man's choice, and it
is uncertain what choice he will make.

Object. particular word given out to me.

Sol. Sol.
Neither is there any particular bar or caveat put in against thee, be thou
Jew or Gentile, Bond or Free, Traitor or Felon, all is one in this case. There
is no exception lies against thy nation, thy condition, thy person in
particular. And as to that particular of Election, thou may have far better
assurance, that thou art elected, then that thou art not.

What Is to be done then?

First,

person, for so it must be in this marriage. Encouragement to match with Christ.
There must be person to person, not person only to the estate; and for thy
further encouragement, take notice what the Gospel offers.

Lord our righteousness. The great redeemer, the mighty deliverer, who comes
Authorized out of Zion to turn away ungodliness from Jacob, Romans 11.26.

Luke 4.18. So that if thou be lost enough, poor enough bad enough deep enough
in hell, the Savior is sent to thee.

Thirdly, for the means, where Christ offers himself, he Judah's Ring and
Staff, though no arguments of Thamars goodness, yet evidences good against
Judah.

Fourthly, for the Terms, they are very free and gracious. J. Lambert.
None but Christ, no husband but Christ, no portion but Christ, none other
Lawgiver, Prophet, King, but Christ alone. Secondly, receive as sole, so whole
Christ, to all intents, and purposes of Salvation. Make him thy ruling Christ,
as well as thy redeeming Christ; he becomes author of Salvation to them that
obey him, Heb. 5.9. Give up thy self wholly to be ruled by him, take him for
better and for worse, and the bargain is made. The estate passes with the
person, our broken estate falls to Christ, he stands engaged to all our debts,
and his full estate becomes ours, all his privileges are made over to us, as
were Adams encumbrances. Now then since you are all for good estates, good
tenures, clear titles, labor to be thus instated in Christ's estate, and say as
she, Give me children or else I dye, so Lord give me Christ or else I dye: and
as Abraham once, What does all this avail me, if I have no heir of mine own?
so think thou, what will all the riches, and titles, and accommodations in the
world avail me, if I have never a Christ? and this the first use.

For such as are already come home to Christ; Believers should keep close to
Christ.
Keep you well whilst you are well, we smart yet for our first fall, though
through grace there is some remedy provided against that; but take heed of a
second, if we fall from the second Adam, there is no more sacrifice, nor
sacrificer, no new word of Salvation, no new Christ; God has said, and done
all that he means to do in order to Salvation by his Son, Heb. 1.1. Hereupon
it is, that our Savior in the Gospel, and his Apostles in their Doctrines and
Epistles, drive mainly at perseverance in the faith once given, and call thick
upon us, for persisting therein, for standing fast, for standing out, for
overcoming and continuing to the end, in this blessed estate of grace, wherein
now we stand; and labor nothing more then to take us off, from all other
Christ's, Gospels, Doctrines, ways, estates; it is the main drift of all or
most of the Epistles. For well did they see that a continuance was as necessary
as an entrance; they well knew our unsteadinesse and fickleness, and how
licorish our nature is after novelties; nor were they ignorant of Satan's wiles,
of perilous times to come, and therefore have they given us so frequent, and so
loud warnings. Now beloved seeing you know these things beforehand, beware
that you be not drawn away from your own stedfastness, 2 Pet. ult. Rather grow
in grace, and in the knowledge of Christ, and herein be so much the more
serious, by how much the more busy the tempter and his agents be. Let me tell
you, all the Doctrines of later Editions drive mostly at this, to wrest you
from this estate in Christ, and to create and establish another title and
tenure. Hence those new ways of happiness without Christ. Hence the revivall
of our cracked title in Adam, hence the denial of Christ's purchase, hence the
addition of joint purchasers with him, hence the adding of more strings to our
bow, and the superadding of our righteousness to Christ's ad corroborandum, yea
and the depositing of all the evidences and assurances with our selves. Look to
your standing and be true to your colors, Christ has bought you to himself,
and has listed you into his service, betray not his right, who will never,
never, never, as he says Heb. 13. desert you, if you flinch not from him: you
know in whom you have believed, continue in the faith of Jesus, as you have
been taught the truth in him. Abide in the communion of Christ, in the grace of
Christ, in the power of Christ, find all your hopes, joys, life, safety, and
subsistence in him alone, fetch all your strength and life from him, nothing
from any other, hold all of him, fly to no other title, ascribe all to him,
and, in a word, owe to him, and to him only, all wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, redemption, salvation: whole Christ, or no Christ.

Get children into this good eslate.
Having secured our own estate in Christ, let us cast (in the next place) for
our friends, especially children. Worldly men, who see no higher then the
earth, will travel with their children, whilst they labor under an evil
estate world-ward. If a child be in depth or in prison, they will put under
some rags, to pull out their Jeremy where he sticks. This is no more then
they will do, nay, then we should all do, for an enemy; nay, for an enemies
beast, Exodus 23.5. Exodus 23.5.
Therefore as Saul bestirred himself for his countrymen, Moses for his, nay,
David for his sheep, when invaded; so must we much more for children thus
ingulphed, and the rather, because we have been isntrumental in their misery.
In the Law, the slave was to have his liberty for his eye spoiled: We have put
out the eyes of children, and must endeavor in way of recompense their liberty;
and as in case of Justice, there was heretofore allotted eye for eye, tooth for
tooth, etc. So now in mercy and justice both, we must labor to restore to our
undone children eye for eye, hand for hand, soul and body, for body and soul.
But how can this be done? however it speed, this must be our endeavor, and rest
we must not, till we have done our utmost to repair their estates. This is the
common and constant care of all Parents, to see their children settled somewhere
in some estate, and the quieter, and fuller it is, the more the heart of
Parents is satisfied: now it is certain, that there is no comfortable, no secure
estate, till they come to be stated in Christ.

But they are so already, Christians they are so soon as Baptized.

Sol. Sacramentally they are so, Sol.
and that should encourage us the more, because God is so far beforehand
with us and them: but we must not rest here; Outward Baptism, is no more then
was outward Circumcision, which was no thing without the new creature; when
Christ is formed in thy children, when thou see in them, the eye of Christ,
the mouth, and heart of Christ, Christ's Image drawn quite over them, then are
they safe and thou happy; till then thy fears and cares, (if thou have either,
for their souls) are endless, and all thy pains and cost, And how this may
be done.
are lost upon them, if they be lost. But still the question is, what can I do
to bring in children:

I cannot give grace?

Sol. Do? Sol.
do what is incumbent upon thee to do.

Baptism, there mourn for that cursed condition, which thou have brought upon
them: pray that God would baptize them with water and the Holy Ghost.

use of Baptism, and the nature of that Covenant, whereof that is a seal.

Esau amongst them, yet ordinarily some either in the first or next generation,
prove good: however, this is the best service thou can do to God, the best
thanks thou can return to Christ, the best work thou cast perform to the
Church and Ministry, the greatest mercy thou can show to thy posterity, the
wisest way thou can take for thy self: so shall thou engage their hearts more
to thee, Mal: ult. so thou shall more comfortably dye, when thou see them
thus placed with, and matched to, Christ. A poor man may possibly prefer his
child by a good match, none like to this of marrying them to Christ. Since then
a way not only of recovery but of preferment is found out, be not wanting to
God, to Christ, to the Public, to your selves here to your posterity
hereafter; if they may be happy, leave them not miserable; if they may be found
in Christ, leave them not in Satan, in hell.

If this state in Christ be so happy, Double instruction.
when we are thus united to him by vocation, and hold communion with him
through justification and sanctification, and receive perpetual influence and
supportance from him, then infer hence two things.

Beware how we slight so great a privilege in others; Is any Saint and member
in Christ? acknowledge Christ in him, Slight not so great a privilege in others.
receive him though in some things differing from us, and in many things
inferior to us: have not the glorious faith of Christ in respect of persons.
If Christ be not ashamed to call them Brethren, Heb. 2. If God be not ashamed
to call them children, Heb. 11.16. why should we be coy of their acquaintance?
Think the same of every faithful Preacher. If Christ own him as his
Ambassador, and gives him the title of the Glory of Christ, why should we
slight any such, because of some differences or infirmities? I go further, If
any Church or society of Christians be in Christ, why should not we look upon
them as Paul did? Grace and peace, says he, be unto the Churches at
Thessalonica and elsewhere, which are in God the Father and in Christ the
Savior. Doubtless the Church of Thessalonica, and at Corinth had their
blemishes, errors in some doctrinals, failings not a few in practicals, yet
because they were Churches in Christ, the Apostle ownes and honors them. The
Churches of Galatia were much declined, yet Paul and the Brethren with him,
look upon them as Churches of Christ. The seven Churches of Asia wanted no
faults, and those of no ordinary alloy, yet are they Golden Candlesticks in
Christ's eye, and such as he conversed withal. And if so, why should we
separate from them; or bring up an ill report of any of them?

You will say happily that you meddle not with particular persons,
Antichristian, what communion then with Christ?

Brethren, if there be any amongst you, Sol.
who are indeed tender, and fearful in this case, I beseech you with all the
mercy, mildness, and earnestness that I can, to lay aside all prejudice, and
seriously to consider these things. First, what a grievous thing it is to
misname, or misvalue any estate in Christ. Secondly, whether you dare say, that
none of our Churches, or of like community be in Christ. Study I beseech you,
what states a Saint or Church in Christ, and what nullifies or forfeits that
state. Try whether you cannot find some footsteps of Christ, some Seals of his
Ministry amongst us, and if so, why may not that house and habitation please us
that pleases him? why may not we dwell, where Christ is pleased to dwell?
Object not, thousands of failings; the question is, whether we have a true
being in Christ, and if he be amongst us as head, and root, why should not his
be acknowledged members, and branches?

But how can we partake with such,

How did Christ? Sol.
he was daily in the Temple, and at Temple Services, amidst the Pharisees, and
other Doctors, yet no way partaker of their errors and abuses: he inwardly
distasted them, and outwardly discountenanced them; do thou the like, and then
thy presence (being only Local, not Moral) does not fetch thee within a
guilt.

Object.

Sol. Consider first, Sol.
whether any such power be due to us. Secondly, whether we may take it up of
our selves. Thirdly, whether the abuses are such, and so malignant, as that
they will warrant a forsaking of the assemblies. So long as Christ is there,
what fear of being member of that body, which has Christ for its head?

But the abuses are of so high a nature,

Answ. Sol.
That Is an high charge: be sure of thy grounds, before thou layest such an
aspersion upon a society which bears the face of Church: in judging rashly
thou may possibly sin against the generation of the righteous, therefore
consult, and consider, and then give sentence; for clear it is, that as we must
not partake in sin, nor join our selves to Harlots, so neither must we be more
strict, and severe then Christ himself: therefore drive things to an issue,
this or that Church so called, either is, or is not in Christ. If not in
Christ, we have nothing to say for it, out of Christ, there is nothing but
death and darkness; If in Christ, it is true it may be, there may be just cause
of mourning, great need of reforming, but when we have done all that lies
within our power and calling to do, whether then there be ground for a divorce
and desertion, think thou of that: and think advisedly, lest thou condemn
where Christ says, there is no condemnation.

Secondly, let not this consolation seem small to us, that Comfort to them that
are in Christ.
though poor as to the world, say, a scorn of men, a slave to men, be thy
estate as bad as Malice can make it, or Fancy conceive it, yet if thou be in
Christ, thou art in a blessed condition. Time will not now give, to spread
before thee the particulars of this estate; how unworthy thou wast of it, how
freely, and yet how dearly it cost thy Redeemer, what an infinite gulf and
distance there is betwixt thy former, and this renewed estate; work these
things upon thine own heart in private: say, once I was a slave, now free; once
Satan's, now Gods; once an enemy, now a child; once a limb of Adam, worthy to
be hanged up as a traitors quarters, now a piece of Christ; once cursed, now
under blessing; once for hell, now an heir of heaven; once a damned creature,
now there is no condemnation; once death was terrible, the grave dreadful, but
now in Christ, I am more then a Conqueror. To be under Christ, is a great
privilege, he is the Tabernacle of many coverings to shelter us, and our hiding
place; but to be in him, to be made one spirit with him, is to be as high, and
as safe as; we can be, And how this may be known.
and therefore enjoy that privilege.

I, but how shall I know, that I am in Christ?

The Word tells thee, He that is in Christ is a new creature, Sol. 1.
old things are passed, 2 Cor. 5.17. Romans 7. ad princip.
the old man crucified, 2 Cor. 5. the old husband buried, Romans 7. old lusts
mortified, the old world dead to us and we to it, Gal. 2. and 5. Chapters, and
we redeemed from our old conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18. Our old guides and leaders
cashiered, 1 Pet. 4.2. Ephesians. 2.2. -- Secondly, All things are become new, a new
mind, a new understanding, a new heart, a new nature throughout, a new creation
to all good works, Ephesians. 2.10. The Holy Ghost forms whole Christ in us, the
mind of Christ, the heart of Christ, the tongue of Christ, whole Christ we are
under a new guide, the Spirit of God, (here Romans 8.2.) gives Laws, we are led
by the Spirit, Gal. 5.25.
and walk in that Spirit, Gal. 5. It Is true, the flesh sometimes transports,
and commits a rape upon us, but the Spirit is the guide and guardian of choice.
-- Thirdly, a new aim, and end in all, as Christ did, not please himself, Romans
15.3. but sought the public good, so is it with his members in their measure.
Briefly, all is made new, new hopes, new joys, new fears, new delights, new
desires, all new, all eyeing Christ.

Joh. 15. Christ has no useless member, Joh. 15.5.
every one does its office, bears fruit, its own fruit, in its own season, and
bears all to Christ; find thy self thus renewed, thus pruned and made fruitful
to an increase of fruitfulness, then we can tell thee that to thee there is no
condemnation, no bondage, no curse, no hurt, no hell: nay, we can say more then
so, then all persons are thine, all things thine, all times thine, all estates
thine, because Christ is thine, 1 Cor. 3.22.

Object.

Sol. Sol.
Like enough so; the Apostle foresaw that, and has prevented thee in this, and
the foregoing Chapters: for instance; I am a child, say thou, of Adams.

Sol. Thou art so by nature, but by the grace of Adoption in Christ thou art a
child of God.

Object.

Sol. Sol.
A captive of sin rather then to it: sin surpriseth thee, but sore against thy
will: Thou cryest for help, Oh wretched man! who will rescue me?

Oh! but I have a world of sin.

I, but there is no condemnation; that sin, says Paul, Sol.
is not thine, though in thee.

Oh! but I am compassed with mighty temptations,

Yea, but all shall work for thy good in the close, Sol.
and thou shall find it so.

Oh! but I can do nothing well, not so much as pray,

I, but the Spirit of Christ, helps our infirmities, Sol.
and utters it self, when we cannot utter our selves.

Oh!

It Is God, says the Apostle, that justifies, Sol.
and who then shall condemn? it is Christ that appears for us, who dares
appear against us? it is Christ that has killed death, buried the grave, cowed
Satan, overcome all, and who then shall stand up against us?

But how shall I be able to hold out,

The Apostle has said all, neither life, nor death, Sol.
nor Angels, nor devils, nor persons, nor things present, or to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any creature one or other shall be ever able to separate
us from Gods love, which is in our Christ and Lord.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT;
At a Public Fast, May 25. 1642.

BY ROBERT HARRIS late Pastor of Hanwell, Doctor of DIVINITY, and President of
Trinity College in Oxon.

Published by Order of that House.

PSALM. 10 14, Thou have seen: for thou beholdest mischief, and spite to
requite it with thy hand. The poor leaves himself to thee. Thou art the help
of the fatherless.

17. Lord, thou have heard the desire of the humble: Thou will prepare thy
heart: thou will cause thy ear to hear, etc.

LONDON, Printed for John Bartlet, dwelling at the Sign of the gilt Cup near
St. Austins Gate, 1653.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS, Now assembled in PARLIAMENT.
I Now tender what you are pleased to own: sooner I could not, because wanting
time and health, I had only broken notes. I am now come as near my self, as
my notes will help me. It was my resolution from the first, to hold me to the
work in hand, the work of the day, the work of my calling; accordingly I made,
and pursued my choice, waving all disputes Sacred, or Civil. Things ever move
best in their own Sphere: And O that all things might ever run in their
right channel! My work was to Mourn, to Preach; not to Parliament-it: and I
never brought a sadder heart to a business. Nay, The divisions of Reuben still
stick, and have lest those impressions, which will not off. Judge. 5.15.
I bleed still in the breaches of Dying Ireland, and in our Home-Jealousies.
Alas! That Brethren who promise and purpose so well, work and sweat so hard,
should so hardly understand each other. There is, I fear, a Divine displeasure
in it. Where Unity is, Psalm. 133.3.
the blessing is. The spirit of Iealousy and division is a Messenger of wrath.
Judge. 9. etc.
And then most, when All complain of it, and No one will own it. For this My
soul shall weep in secret; and in Rebaccahs case, I will take up her
complaint; Why is it thus! As for you Noble gentlemen, What can I say now? It
is wisdom (you know) to know ones own Compass, and you are far above me.
Your Place is high, your Task great; and yet your strength not infinite. By
Place, Psalm. 82.
you are Gods: and yet Men; you must Fall (and may fail) like others. Queid
est Ecclesia? Viri and mulieris. Ohey in Ephesians. 5.
Gods own Synod (the Church) is made up of men: and men be Men, in the Greatest
Councels. Compare them to the Highest God, their greatest agitations, are but
as the busy sweatings of so many Ants in a Molehill. Your work is also great.
As your Place, so your Work is Gods. Your business lies about Laws, and
Orders. Order is a Sacred thing, Law, the work of a God. No man can see, or say
All in his Law; Sin will evade; witness our good Laws touching the Lords day,
Swearing, and Drinking. Now (for sooth) you must tell us what Profaneness is,
what Swearing you mean, and when a man is Drunken. Nay, when a Law is with
some difficulty conceived and with more brought forth, it is not an easy thing
to teach it to Speak plainly: nor are men so happy in their expressions as was
S. Paul, who wrote, 2. Cor. 1.
nor more, nor less then we Read. I speak not this in a Discouraging way. Et
nescit reme are leo Crand. (...) etc. Eurip.
Noble Spirits know not what that means. Only they know from the Poet, That it
makes a man less then nothing. Laws therefore must be; else all goes to loss.
Leave men to themselves, each man's lust will be a Law; each man's Opinion, a
Bible. My speech only tends to this, to provoke you and my self to prayer and
dependence. He that will undertake the work of God, with the wit and strength
of a man, will but shame the work, and break himself. My hope is, That you
will begin and end with God: that you will do all in his strength, and do his
best work first. Men's Consciences are miserably perpelxed between Command and
Command. Our Congregations are as much divided, between Teacher, and Teacher.
The conclusion in time will be, 1 Cor. 1 12.
We are of Christ, We will believe none of them all. Let me assure you, The
case betwixt Pastor and Flock will be very sad, if there be not a timely
settlement. But things of this nature I had rather speak in Private, then in
Press, or Pulpit; And there rather to God, then to Man. I therefore reine in
and betake my self with aged Jerome to my Tuguriolum, and there bless God,
that I dare sleep, and can say, that ought is my own, and there deplore my
barren ministry for almost twice twenty years, and implore the blessing of
heaven upon my Dear Sovereign, and his Great Council. Now the Great
Counselor give you a right understanding, Esaias 9.2 Tim. 2.
in all things: And the God of Peace himself (he alone can do it) give you
peace, 2 These. 3.16.
in all things, by all means. So will pray

From my poor Study June 13.164. The unworthiest of those that serve you in
the faith ROBERT HARRIS.

A SERMON PREACHED TO THE Honorable House of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT,
At a Public FAST, May 25.1642.
LUKE 18.6, 7, 8. 6. And the Lord said; Hear what the unjust Judge says.

7. And shall not God avenge his own Elect, which cry day and night unto him;
though he bear long with them?

8. I tell you, that he will avenge them speedily: nevertheless, when the Son
of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth?


WE are in a Parable. A Parable delivers some excellent truth under a
comparison. That truth is now Prefixed, now Affixed; It is here prefixed, and
it is this. In prayer we must not faint, nor flagge. This the point. And this
is pressed from the success, and that is argued ab Impari, thus. If constant
and faithful prayer carry it with the worst, much more with the best: If with a
bad man, then with our gracious God. This is the Sum.

The parts of the Parable are ordinary.

1. A Proposition. 2. A Reddition.
In both we have 1. Persons represented, 2. The success mentioned.


In the first part, the persons on the one side are, 1. Praying; a poor,
shiftlesse, friendlesse widow, who had no advocate but misery and importunity.
2. Prayed to; a sour, sullen, froward piece, a man without sense of Piety, or
Humanity, one who presents as ill as may be, whether Place or Person be
considered. Yet see, this woman prevails with this man.


In the second part you have, for one woman, many men; for one stranger, many
children: for occasional petitions, uncessant suit: and for a bad Judge, a
good Father, who can no more deny his own, then himself. If then she, a woman
so weak, overcame a man so harsh: what may not children so many, do with a
Father so good?

1. You have the Parable. Our work lies in the Reddition, where 1. Our blessed
Savior prefaces and premises, (Hear what the unrighteous Judge says) Hear
it to your comfort; He speaks some comfort, and (in him) God speaks more. 2. He
assumes, and that most strongly, as the question shows; Shall not God avenge,
etc. as if he had said, It is out of question, he will. 3. He concludes God
will hear, will certainly hear, nay, will seasonably hear, with a non
obstante; notwithstanding he is seemingly slow in his answers, and we certainly
weak in our faith and dependence. I will say no more, as yet, to the words.


Something I have to say to you, from them; and I hold it my happiness, that
I, who have no breath to spare, shall speak to those who will conceive faster,
and see farther, then I can speak.

For my Errands; the first and maine results from the whole, and this it is;

In point of Praver, we must gather all arguments of encouragement, and never
yield, till we have the day. Prayer is a mastery, Col 4.12. Romans 15 30.
and that mastery is a wrestling, and wrestle we must, whiles we can stand.
When we are once drawn forth upon this service, where we pitch, there we must
make good our ground, without flight, (...) Militaria verba, ut vult Eust at
aliique.
or fainting; as one word in the first verse here, and another in the last
verse, Heb. 10. is conceived to imply. This the Lesson our Master is now
teaching, and he charges it upon us as a duty in the first verse. And for
farther proof and encouragement, I present you only with three Arguments.

1. The first is drawn from God; where he gives we may, we must take all
encouragements: Here God gives all, as 1. He offers himself to us as a Father;
Psalm. 66.2. Can. 2.14. Psalm. 141.2. Ephesians. 3.20.
as a Father hearing Prayer, as a Father begging Prayer, as a Father loving
Prayer, as a Father able to exceed all prayers, needs, thoughts. 2. He binds
himself as much by promise, as us by precept. Those promises of his are full,
are free; Romans 10.12. Deuteronomy 4.7. Luke 11.10.
He is rich to all that call upon him: Every one that seeks, finds, and
such like: And those promises are made to Christ, founded on Christ, sealed in
blood, backed with an Oath. 3. He commands us to beg, and that without wavering;
Jam. 1.6. Hob. 4 16. and 10.22. Ephesians. 5.12. Luke 11.
nay with all boldness, with all confidence of boldness, and fullness of
assurance. 4. He arms us with Parables, experiments, and all arguments of
comfort; Indeed such Topics, as that it is impossible for God to recede, if we
stand our ground: And thus from God.


2. Next to God, I present you with a cloud of Petitioners, who have stirred up
themselves to take hold of God, and it has taken well.

1. I begin with Moses. If a man would have been discouraged, Exodus 32.10.
Moses had been the man.

1. The people were stark naught, and passing froward. 2. God seems to take him
off, and to give him a discharge, Let me alone, says he. 3. He seems to take
off all objections, I will make of thee (says he) in stead of them, a great
people. 4. He suspends his answer, day after day, as if he were unwilling to
condescend. Yet Moses stands to it: God cannot get him gone; away he will not
without his errand, his errand he has.
To him I add Jacob our Father, Hos. 12.4. Genesis 32.24.
who concludes Us, as Hosea says; In him God spoke with, us. This Jacob knows
not what discouragement means: God seemed to give him his answer, in Esau's
expedition against him; but he will not take it: God was willing to put him
off; but he will not admit of any Putiffs: he seems to take his leave: but
Jacob, by his leave, will not part so: he seems angry, and willing to shake him
off; but Jacob holds his hold: nay, he seems to crush him, to maime him,
Cynegirus in Justin.
to begin Esau's quarrel against him; but he, like him in story, when he was
maimed on one hand, holds the Ship with the other, and when he was handlesse,
held with his teeth, whilst breath held: So our Champion: Froun God, smite he,
wound he; Jacob is at a point. A Blessing he came for, and a Blessing he will
have. I will not let thee go, (says he) unless thou bless me. His limbs,
his life might go: but there is no going for Christ without a pawn, without a
blessing. This is the man: Now what is his speed? The Lord admires him, and
honors him to all generations? What is thy name; (says he) q.d. I never met
with such a fellow. Titles of honor are not worthy of thee: Thou shall be
called, not Jacob, a shepherd with men: but Jacob, a Prince with God. Nay not
Jacob, a wrastler with man: but Israel, a prevailer with God.

To these men, I add one Woman, March. 15. who, like another Gorgonia, Nazianz.
threatens heaven, and is (as her brother said of her) modestly impudent, and
invincible. Nothing can discourage her: Not her Sex, not her Nation, not her
Misery, not her Delays, but she gathers strength by her wounds, and comfort
out of discouragements. Will Christ give no answer? Good, thinks she: this is
no denial yet. Gives he a discouraging answer? That Is well, says she: I have
obtained words, expect deeds too: he that opens his mouth, will open his hand
also. Calls he her dog? all the better. Dogs some way belong to the family,
some interest and right they have to some crumbs, to some scraps; and something
she makes of it. You hear the Conclusion. O Woman! Great is thy faith: Be it
unto there, as thou will. I never met with such a Woman: have it she will, and
have it she shall, and that instantly, (this very hour;) and that fully,
she is her own carver. And this is our second Argument.

A third this parable furnishes me withal: Courage in prayer draws on
importunity. Both carry it with man; much more with God: Mark the Widow: She
stood in no relation to the Judge; She had no promise from him; his place and
person promised little: There was little honesty in him, and as little hope,
either from or for her: yet she scraes him up, and makes him weary of denials.
What! a Woman in these circumstances Mascutine! and We Womanish! Consider, I
beseech you, how much is won, or lost, by holding up, or letting fall our
spirits in prayer.

Are we Confident? Then consider, that prayer is the strength of the Creature,
(for it engages Gods strength) and confidence is the strength of our prayer,
and of our selves: It doubles our strength; It contributes to the Public: It
sets God on his throne, nay, us in a sort: for so (with Jacob) we reign with
God: That made Jacob, Israel. Other ways and things might make him Jacob: but
Prayer denominates him Israel. By this, he, and we, reign over heaven, and
earth, and carry the world in our hand; As the Boy at Athens sometimes said (I
bring it only for illustration) He could command all Athens. His reason: He
could do any thing with his Mother; his Mother with his Father; Plut.
his Father with that State: So here, Faith can do any thing with Prayer;
Prayer with Christ; Christ with his Father; his Father with All.

But now, on the other side, Faint-heartednes in prayer 1. Hurts us. 2. Robs
the Public. 3. Wrongs God.


1. For God. It is a true Maxim, True defects in the Creature come from
falsely. conceited defects in the Creator. Thence our faith fails, because we
have so low, so narrow, and so poor conceits of Almighty God, whose glory is
so much eclipsed, as we bate any thing of his Al-sufficiencie, and prayers
Omnipotency.

2. For our selves. Heb. 12 13.
Discouragement robs us of our strength: A discouraged man is but half a man.
He lies open, to every temptation, is soon beaten down, and from halting soon
turns aside. Either he prays not at all, or not constantly: at best, his
prayers are fearful, soon receive a check, and take their answer. And as it
makes God but half a God, and Man's self but half a Man, so

3. For others, Qui timide regat, doset negave. Son: Deuteronomy. 20.8.
It is not only wanting to the Public: but it has an ill influence upon all.
The truth is (if I may speak it all at once) It teaches God to Deny: our
fellow soldiers to Fly: (as the fearful did in Israel) andour selves only to
Object and to make difficulties, and in the end to Die for fear of Dying,
Nabal-like.

1. Before I Exhort, I cannot bat blush at this baseness of spirit, in my
self, in our nature. You are as willing as I to take shame to your selves this
day, and to sit before God (as Ezra did) confounded. Tell me, (I beseech you)
for the furthering of our humiliation, Tell me, Is not Cowardice blushfull?
Will not men rather Die, then hear Cowards? and what is that but fear and
Boldness misplaced? And what is this but our Temper? who are Daring, where we
should Fear; and there only Fear, where we should be Valiant. I instance in
the present work. We have Gods Pass, and Patent for Prayer, and dare not plead
it: and yet elsewhere presume without License. For I demand, Have not we as
good warrant to pray, as to curse? to bless, as to blaspheme? yet here we
fear not, we doubt not: there we do nothing else. I bring the case nearer to
our purpose. What think you? Have not we as good warrant to beg of G^d, as
Rogues and Vagrants of us? They are strangers; They have no promise from us;
none the least invitation: Nay, they trouble us, they charge us, they are in a
disobedience, there is Law against them Asking, and us Giving: yet say, do,
what you please, they will not off. Send to them; they will sooner make your
Child or Servant their spokesman, then make away. Threaten them with Stocks, on
Officer, or what you please, it is all one. And shall these put forth in such a
tempest, in a contrary wind, when all makes against them? and we sit still,
when wind, and tide, and all is for us? when we have Law on our sides, and
Gospel on our sides, and all the world on out sides? For Prayer ingrosses all
the World, Heaven, Earth, All. I put it yet a little farther.

Have not we as many encouragements from Heaven as from Earth? Is not God as
rich as Man? as able, as willing, as Free? yet see our practice. We have suits;
these to God, those to Men. What Is our deportment? With men it is our work to
strengthen the heart; our labor to gather encouragements. Is it a man we Never
troubled? That is made an argument of encouragement, I never troubled him yet,
and for Once he will never deny me. Have we tried, him Often? That is an
argument of encouragement, Such an one is my Old friend, my tried friend; he
Never failed me, and therefore I Will to him. Is he a Kinsman? That encourages;
For shame he will not deny his Own flesh and bone. Is he a Stranger? why then
he will take it well, that I conceive better of him, then of my own kindred. Is
he, Poor? He Will the better feel me, and the sooner pity me. Is he Rich? He
may the better spare it. Thus with men, we have still somewhat to say for the
support of hope, though they be poor, hard, strangers, men no way engaged by
Covenant, or the like.

But now when we deal with God (How can we speak of it without blushing!) we
can do little else then Fear, Object, Despair. " Sure be does not love me; He
will do nothing for me; well "may I go, and try; but it will be to no
purpose. I shall get no pardon, "no power, no comfort, no acceptance!

O cursed Unbelief! Can we conceive hope without promises? None with them? Can
we find Plea's for Men? None for God? Can Poverty help us, and not Wealth?
Weakness, and not Strength? Will cruelty pity us and not mercy? not Grace? Be
abashed thus to set Earth above Heaven; men above God.

Yet I have not done. I cannot without horror and trembling. Put the case as
the case is; What think you? Have we not reason to believe the God of Truth
rather then the Father of Lies. Let the Devil promise safety, secrecy any
profit or content in a sinful way; we rest in his word we make no doubt of the
faccesse: All the threats and curses in the book of God cannot dismay us. On
the other side: Suppose God promises, and the Devil in the mean time threaten
us: which is believed? All the Promises, Sacraments, Oaths, Performances of God
cannot establish us. There is nothing but Presuming, when Satan promises;
nothing but Objecting, when God promises. O blasphephemous Unbeliese! How does
this sin debase God! belly God! as the word says, provoke Ged beyond all
provocations! How angry was his Majesty with Israel, for this sin? How angry
with Moses? How angry with Zachary? for this one particular, and in a lower
degree. O, how low must we cast our selves before our God this day, for this
capital sin! which is so much the worse, by how much the more Spiritual it is,
and Any.Evangelical. Seems it a small thing to us, to make God worse then man?
but we must make him worse then the worst in Hell? What! Tertul.
Shall our unbelieving hearts not only impute Lying to him, but put Perjury
upon him also? Has not he sworn, that We shall not seek him in vain? And
shall we begin and concludein unbelief? is it not enough before prayer to say
He will not hear; but after prayer to saywhen he has heard, Has not heard? as
Jobs words sound, to some men's sense. Job 9.16. But here let us sit down in our
confusion a while; And then let us advance, and think it long before we have
wiped off this disgrace, and approved our valor.

2. And here, what shall I entreat; but the perusal of the Text? You hear the
Lesson, We must hold, out in Prayer. You hear

The Teacher, the only Master upon earth. I look upon you, as upon S. Lukes
Theophilus, as men grounded in the truth; and therefore willingly decline the
Common Place of prayer, and wave old errors happily buried, with the unhappy
disputes of this age. Aug. haeres. 57 and epist. 121. etc.
How, and in what form the widow petitioned I dispute not. Written or not
written, a petition, is a petition, still. The thing I am to press, is a
resolute perseverance in prayer. And this will need some pressing. For, 1. We
have a dull, base, feeble spirit, ready to receive all impressions of
discouragement. 2. Next, from without we shall not want discouragements, if we
will listen to them.


First, our own guilty and unworthy hearts (as before I intimated) will cast a
thousand perils.

Secondly, Vid. Erz. and Nehem.
profane spirits will entertain us, as the enemies did the Church, with a
thousand, scorns.

Thirdly, Friends ( carnal and spiritual) will tell us, that it is all in
vain, too late, and impossible to prevail.

Fourthly, Satan will roar upon us. Thou pray, O Hypocrite! Thy person is
unwelcome, thy prayers abominable, thy heart, mouth, and hands loathsome; the
pure eyes of the most holy God cannot but loath thee, his glorious Majesty will
confound thee.

Lastly, The Lord himself will sometimes seem an adversary: he will hide
himself, when thou seek him: run from thee as fast as thou runnest after
him: now he will chide, now frown, now delay, now seem to reject thee, and to
scorn thy services: in a word, quite to shake thee off, as Naomi seemed to
beat off Ruth, when yet he desires thy company, as she Ruths. In this case thou
must not show thy self a dastard, but gather spirit from the opposition.

Next the, Times call upon us. The Children are come to the birth, Ier. 30.7.
and there is no strength to bring forth. It is the time of Incohs trouble, and
therefore we must not, with Jacobs children, Gen 42.
sit as men amazed, but make out, as the old man advised them; the rather
because there are so few, that either will, or dare, or can lift up one
faithful prayer.

In the third place consider the thing it self, I mean Prayer. It is our
life, our strength. All the world is a dead body, till God act it: and all
(within and without us) lies dead till we act God by prayer: all the comfort in
the creature sleeps, till we extract it with this Limbeok: all our graces,
Dormit sides, dormit Christ us etc. Aug. in Psalm. 25.
nay all the perfections of God, till weawaken him and them. You sinde it, we
seele it: you have tried what Wit can do, what Eloquence, what Policy, what
Resolution and Endeavor; yet we stick. Now try another way; Set Heaven on work;
till that move, the earth stirs not. Set God on work; till he act, nothing is
done: and when you have won him, you have won all. Whilst there is but
creature to creature; wit to wit; created strength to strength created, the war
is doubtful, the issue unoertaine: But, when by prayer the great God is made,
and so there is the Creator to the creature, and strength to weakness; then
the victory is in sight. My meaning is not to take yoa off, from other means;
only this I say, that a good Engineere is not the worst Soldier; nor a good
prayer the worst Parliament Man. Faith can do more then wit: Numa apud Plut.
This brings men into the Field; but that God; and he only secures the heart.
(...), said the Heathen, in his greatest extremity; and there is our best
Anchor-hold.

Go on in this your strength, and your spiritual enemies shall melt before you,
as once the Canaanites before Israel, and the Gaul, before the Germans face.
What more shall I say to you, in a way of persuasion? Nec vultum, nec oculorum
aciem far, etc.
Shall I mind you of Chrysostoms argument? It is your honor, your happiness,
that yoa may thus dwell in Gods presence, and express yoar desires. Do but
think what it is to deal with great Personages, Chrysostom. de orando Deum l 1.
in way of petition. 01 I. There is time spent in going to them: Then more in
waiting on them: After sundry days waiting, we may happily receive that proud
Prelates answer, We are not yet at lecsure: When we have access, Hildebr. to
Henry 4.
we must be brief, we may offend: The answer is doubtful; sometimes instead
of Bread, men either give, or speak Stones; however, no man can give all to all
Petitioners. But now when we deal with the high God, we need not travel far,
every place is a Sanctuary; nor need we abridge our selves, come when we will,
in the day, in the night: speak whilst we will, so long as we speak his
language, he will hear us at large, yea he will help us out, and make English
of that which to our seeming wants sense. And should not this encourage us?
Were they blessed that stood continually before Solomon? And is it not our
happiness that we may have Gods ear, Gods heart, hand, face, help, all? Chrysostom.
lib. 2. de Orat.
Or, shall I tell you, that Prayer is to us, what the wate 01 to the Fish, the
only Element of safety, and our utmost refuge?

Truly the Lord has reserved diverse things to this ordinance of prayer; some
devils will not out, some temptations will not off, some obstructions will not
be removed, some difficulties will not be conquered, some mercies will not be
obtained, bat by prayer. What other key will unlocke the clouds in this
drought? or turn about the hearts of men, in this distraction, bat only
prayer? And who knows but that therefore God has futured other hopes, and
frustrated other means, to the intent that he might honor this ordinance?

For Motives I will say no more. Only give leave to tell you in few, how you
shall hold up the heart, from fainting in the work: The way is this.

1. Come well appointed into the field. Assure the main point: That your
persons are accepted, and that you are Gods own, as it is in the Parable; for,
till this be resolved, that God is yours, and you his, all particular doubts
will resolve themselves into this. "It is true (will you heart say) God is good
to his: But am I "his? His promises are gracious; but do they belong to me?
And therefore lay that as a foundation, I am thine; Psalm. 119 94.
and then it will follow, as David infers, therefore save me.

2. Assure your Prayers, that they be acceptable.

1. For the Root; They must be issues of Grace; not of wit or nature. 2. For
the Rule; They must 1. For matter; bear the stamp of God, his precept or
promise. 2. For Order; they must be tendered in the hand of a Mediator, the Lord
Christ, and 3. For end; The object of prayer Gods self must be the end
thereof. And the more we secure both Person, and Prayer, the more courage we
shall have to stand it out.
3. Come well appointed: both for 1. Weapons, and 2. Company.

For company; The more the better; whereas in other fights and fields sometimes
multitude mars all. There is a special promise upon joint prayers, Mat. 18. And
could we second one another, as Bathsheba and her friends did, in her address
to the King, I Kin. 1. I should not doubt of as good an issue of our Petitions
as she found of hers.

O that we could meet! if not always in the same place, at the same time, yet
in the same requests. If one widow can do so much alone; what might not an
army of Children do, Text.
if they would close?

2. As for weapons; The Lords own are most approved, and will be only
available. He is a mighty Prince, who will be served only with his own. Look
how it was in the Law: All must be Gods own: The Priest his, the Sacrifice
his, the Altar his, the Place his, All his; to the very knife, and meanest
tools: so is it still. The Person praying must be his own, the Praver his,
the Mediator his, the Petitions his, the Reasons his, All his. And when you
press him with his own, and say (as she to Judah) Whose are these? he cannot
deny himself.

Being thus armed, Genesis 38.
and entered the lists, play themen, and be victorious. There is but one thing
more to be done. Set Faith on work, and that will be your victory.

If you ask me, How?

The answer is, Pitch faith upon God. Consider

1. What he is. Why, he is a God, says christ. That is all that can be said.
Not an Idol, that has a dead ear, and a dry hand: Not a man, that has but
little, and can do little, and will do less: But he is 1. A God, that is,
Power it self, Wisdom, Mercy, Goodness it self. View him well: for all in
God makes forencouragement, when once we are his. 2. He is not a God simply,
but a God in covenant; and that Covenant is made with christ; and by virtue of
the same covenant Christ and we are both heard. 3. By virtue of this Covenant
he is a Father; and what will not a Father do, an heavenly Father for so many
children, when all pray, and all in each child prays? for we make to him, as
the child to the breast; all speaks, and works at once, hands, feet, mouth,
all, there and here.


2. What his promises be. How free, how fit, how attempered to our exigencies,
and needs. 1. They are made to the lowest degree of grace, Math. 5. 2. They are
made to grace mingled with many wants and corruptions, to bruised Reeds.


3. What he is in his deeds. Esa. 65.24. Dan 9.
1. He gives us two Mediators; His Some, his Spirit. 2. He gives more then is
asked, never less. 3. He gives cheerfully. Before we end, he begins. 4. He
gives to many for our sakes; maintains a world of men and creatures for our
use. And so long as we see one of them alive, we cannot justly doubt of his
faithfulness to us.


4. Lastly, consider what he is in his Parables. Here he shows us what Prayer
can do with a Judge. Luke 11. He tells us what Prayer can do with a Neighbor,
what with a Father; and infers encouragement from all.

Is be a Judge? A Judge may be overcome with importunity.

Is be a friend? A Friend may be raised out of his bed with entreaties.

Is be a Father? And are we Fathers, and do not we feel the force of that
argument? If ye that are but sorry Fathers, will give good things to a child:
will not your heavenly Father much more?

Now having by an eye of Faith thus looked upon God, in his Perfections,
Relations, Promises, Performances, Parables: Gather upon God, and hold him to
it, as Jacob did. Did not thou command me? Said thou not thus unto me?
etc. Press him with his Precept, whith his Promise, which his Hand, with his
Seal, with his Oath, till we do (...), as some Greek Fathers do boldly
speak: that is (If I may speak it reverently enough after them) Put the Lord
out of countenance; Put him (as you would say) to the blush, unless we be
Masters of our requests.

O,

There is a lawful impudence, Savior his phrase, Luke 11.8. (...).

O, but God is a great God.

Yea, But he will pity, and hear like a man,

O, But he is a Glorious Majesty.

Yea, But he is a Father.

O, But is it too late.

Come in the Night, if the Day be lost. Luke 11.

O, But my prayers be simple.

And here is a simple suitor in the Parable. Art thou a Child? A Father accepts
of small, broken and imperfect speeches from a child.

O,

The woman had to do with a Judge in the Text. Job did.

O, But?

No more O Buts. Help this and Help all: Awaken this, and Awaken all.
Remember the Story of another Widow, 2 King. 4. She had little: She needed
much. Borrow (says the Prophet) of all thy neighbors: But shut the doors
upon thee. It was time to shut the doors, when many greater vessels must be
supplied from one little one. I say the like to you. Shut the Doors: Shut out
sense, shut out all discouragements, which would put faith out of countenance:
And if God fill not every vessel, Psalm. 81.10.
challenge him upon that his word, Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. And
take this with you, The Cruse never ceased running, till there was no more
room. As elsewhere God never ceased bating, till Abraham left begging.

I have spoken to the Point. Now the Lord enlarge you in private. I am sensible
of your occasions. I am unwilling to abridg my Worthy Brother. And therefore I
will say as much as I can at Once, to the particular following, and contract my
self.

The Judge in the Prothesis we pass. The comparison E Medio imitates a mercy
in Having Judges. Ci^. pro. Milone.
I add only the Orators qualification, Movo audeant quae sentiunt.

The Assumption comes on with great strength, and holds out this to us.

The Lord will certainly avenge his own.

For the Terms this may suffice. His own by Election, as it is added.

Election is either to Glory, or Office.

We exclude neither: we prefer the former, God has a Peculiar (not a Puccian)
choice. The Number, whether Materially, or Formally considered, is to him
Certain. The Persons known. And them he will Avenge. (Avenge,) that is, 1.
Vindicate them, and 2. Retaliate their enemies.


For proof thus.

1. Gods title is, The Avenger. Psalm. 94.1. So the vulgar and the 70. often in
the Psalms read (...), Protecter, etc.
As elsewhere, The Protector, The Second, or Champion of his people. 2. It Is
his Place, as Judge. Genesis 15.14. 3. It Is his Preregative, as Supreme. A
Regality invested in the Deity, Vengeance is mine. Unless God issue out a
Commission, and give power, none must revenge. 4. It Is his Glory. He Is known
by it. Psalm. 9.16. He shines in it, and is lifted up into the throne. Psalm.
94.1. Here all his Perfections, Wisdom, Power. Justice, Truth, are
Concentrate. That Is from Gods self.
Next, From his People. God is most concerned in all their sufferings.

1. The Cause is his: and he is struck at in it. The thing parsued in a Saint,
is, not sin, nor the Man's self: but God in his Truth and Graces. Hereupon
the Church intitles him to her quarrels, Psalm. 74.22.

2. Next, The Persons be his, his Children. And the Father seeles what the
Child suffers: and whither else should Children fly, but to their Father? Nay,
in a sort, by Acceptance, and Interpretation, they are God himself. He, that
touches them, touches him in his tendrest part. Zach. 2.8.

3. From their Enemies. They have no aim in their hand. They strike at All,
with Haman. Yea they triumph over God himself, when they trample upon his: as
a King is said to be conquered, when his subjects be subdued. Hence in
Scripture, A V^el. learned M^de in 1 Timothy 4 1.
Nation and their God stand and fall together. 2 King. 28.33. Jer. 48.7. and
50.2.

This point (applied) is 1. Of Private concernment, and 2. Of Public use.


In Private, it has a Threefold prospect.

1. It looks backward, and bids us reflect upon our selves. And in case we have
been wrongful to the Name, Person, State of any of Gods, set all to Rights
this day. It Is the work of this day. It Is The Fast, Is. 51. There God shows
What is, What is not a Fast to him.

To hang the head for some hours, that is not The Fast.

The Fast is, To loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens,
and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke. Is it not?
etc. v. 6.7. Lets come home therefore to our business. Is any servant
defeated? Any Tenani by us oppressed? Any Creditor defrauded? Any poor
Christian any way wronged? Let my counsel be accepted. -- Break off your
sins by righteousness, and your iniquities by showing mercy to the poor,
etc. Dan. 4. Pay for the cure; Make satisfaction for the wrong; Compound with
the Plaintiffs; Let them stay the suit, become Mediators for you. This is Gods
way, in the Case of Abraham with Abimelech, Genesis 20. of Job with his Friends,
Job ult.

Give (says God) the man his wife, he is a Prophet, my Prophet: He will pray
for thee: so thou shall live: else thou art a dead man. And for Job; He is my
Servant (says God) you have done him wrong: Right him again: And Let him
sacrifice: Him will I accept: you without him I accept not.

You see the Course; If you tread it, your fast takes, your prayers pass: If
not, The Judge is on the Bench; He will have Eye for Eye: Tooth for Tooth. My
meaning is, He will return you your own Coin; and the more silent the
Patient is, the more shrill the Wrong will be, as in the case of Moses, Numb.
12.2. whilst he is dumb, God speaks; whilst he is deaf, God hears and stirs.
And surely Fast we must from all Injustice, or Fast from nothing. Better eat
bread, then drink blood, and devour man's flesh. I refer you, in this haste,
to Job 31.21. to Exodus 23. v. 23.24. and 27. I must away.

2. This respects the time present. Will God avenge? Hold ye your hands. Let
wickedness proceed from the wicked. Let not your hand be upon him. Yea hold
your Tongues, your Hearts, I Sam 24.13.
and be not so impotent as to return wrath for wrath: much less to band jests
and girds. It Is for children to spit at one another. Be ye so Manlike, so
Kinglike, as to do Best, Regium est, etc.
when ye hear Worst: so Christlike, as to overcome all evil with all goodness.
And in case you be at any time either played upon, with David, or trod upon
with that Great Prince, say, Non tibi, sed christo: say, Barbarossa, Non tibi,
sed Petro. V. 10. Vrsin.
It Is before the Lord. And, if no law will relieve you, know that you shall do
your selves no disservice, in making God your chancellor.

3. For the future; This must fix us on our duty, what ever the case be. The
matter is not what the Work, but what our Warrant is. It Is certain, we shall
meet with opposition in the pursuance and performance of our Callings;
Especially You that are more public persons, and have more earnest
contestation with open delinquents. Lug but one swine, and there will be a
great outcry. But here is the Point; Are ye Gods in the cause? Is the work his?
The design his? your weapons his? your method his? Have you to show a warrant
and commission from him? Fear no colors: Though every brick were a Devil;
go on with Luther. Yor Names, Lives, Posterity, are in his hands. He speaks to
you, as Absalom to his, Fe are not; have not I commanded you? 2 Samuel 13.28. And
when you can justify your proceedings to him, reply upon your own fears, in
Nehemiah's words; Should such a man as I flee? I! who pretend to God! I! a
Public person! Should I fly with a whole corporation, nay county on my back!
Has my Country entrusted me, given me her self? Et Turnum fugientem baec
terra videbit! Far be this from Noble spirits. Assure the Cause, Calling,
Conscience: and that done, Fix your visible eye upon the invisible God, as
Moses and Micaiah did before you: and all the Glory and Majesty in the World
will seem no more to you, then it did to them; or then a poor Candle is to
the brightest Sun. So the first Use.

The second is more Public, and it is Double.

You of Public rank must.

1. Concur with God the Avenger. 2. Confide in him.
For the first. The Lord has taken you into Commission with himself; put his
Name, his Power upon you. What it is I cannot determine, nor do I meddle with
your privileges. What ever it is, it is Gods; it is of him and for him, and must
be managed accordingly. It shall be your safety to frequent your commission.
It Is Derived, It Is Limited, yea and It Is Public too; and must be managed with a
Public spirit. Private revenge is not within your Commission. That leaves a
stain upon a man some ways innocent; witness Iehu: And puts an innocence
upon the greatest offender; witness Abner.

Here then all selfish affections, and private respects must be 1. strained
out, and Justice Justice, as Moses speaks, that is, Pure Justice without mudde,
must run down. Deuteronomy. 16.20. And 2. restrained in all others. And be assured
that you have done, and shall do your selves greatest right, in Disadopting,
and Disavowing all illegal, tumultuary, selfe-revenging, and libellous ways.
Gods cause needs not man's ly, man's froth, spleen malice. And it shall be your
happiness to put a wide distance between Iustum and Just between the
courage of the Son, and the disorder of the Soldier, with that Old General.
Manlius. Plus est in im^erio quam in victoria. Florus l. 1. c. 14.
Your revenge must be public then, yea all public in it. Person, Cause, Rule,
End, All; and then it will be a Sanctuary to the innocent, a Sacrifice to the
Lord.

What Iehoshapbat once said to his Judges, I say to you, Let the fear of God
fall upon you. Take heed; The Judgment is Gods, not man's. 2 Chronicles. 19.

Nothing of man must be seen, heard, felt in this. All must be Gods. God must
be read in your Laws, heard in your Threats, felt and seen in your
Executions: And then things come upon the Conscience with power, when only God
is represented.

Up then, Ye visible Gods, and remember that God avenges by you. 1. In Civil
causes, Say, what God would say; do, what he would do: you are his mouth, his
hand. Avenge the Widow, Relieve the Oppressed. And if your leisure will not
admit of Iohs search: yet do you admit of Iethro's counsel. Dismiss them
timely, when you cannot presently dispatch, Job 29 16. Exodus 18.
lest you tire them, and waste your selves. 2. In matters of higher Alloy:
Avenge God, as he shall avenge you. Make laws to fence his laws. Plead his
right. Vindicate his truths, his name, his day. And that done, in a conformity
to God, then in the next place,


2. Confide in him. Believe your Savior. God will certainly avenge his own;
his own servants, his own delegates, and substitutes. 1. He will vindicate
their name, their cause, their truth. He will be jealous over them, when they
are truly zealous for him. Rest in this. 2. Nay further know, God will avenge,
not Members only, but Whole Churches, and Societies, that are his: His own,
all his own, whether Private, or Public, he will defend. And, if it shall
please him to make us yet more his own, and to draw us nearer to himself in a
Closer Covenant, so that we be his Iesurum, he will be to us, as once to Iaceb,
The shield of our defense, the sword of our excellency: He will bear us in his
everlasting arms, as it is Deuteronomy. 33. more at large.

Yea he will look upon all the Blasphemies, Insolences, Outranges, and
Conspiracies against this our Church, and State, and at once retaliate our
Adversaries, and justify our cause.

The Conclusion is that of the Kings, Deal courageously: the Lord shall be
with the good. When the Cause is good, and the Heart good, and Warrant good;
God will be with you, in his Counsel to Direct, in his Power to Protect, in
his Goodness. to Avenge. So says The Amen, and faithful witness.

3. Nay yet farther, As this must comfort us for our own particular, in this
our Little Moat: So for the public, and the Church in general. The cause of
Religion is, you know, Gods cause. The cry of Blood belongs to his
Recognizance. Psalm. 9.
He makes inquisition for blood. The blood of his cries loud, and has cried
long against That man of Sin, and Man of blood. Under the Fifth Seal the
blood of the Then Saints cried apace, How long! etc. That cry opened a Sixth
Seal; and then the Bloody Dragon cried as fast, O ye bills, and Mountains
cover us! etc. Since that, there is an Inundation of blood, that cries from all
Coasts, and cries more then ever. Even thy blood O Germany, and thine, O
France, and thine, O Ireland. God has said, that He that kills shall be
killed, and that blood shall answer blood, Revel. 13.10. The time draws on,
and Cry on ye bleeding churches: Cry on ye Prophets, and Apostles, in your
Sackcloth, in your blood. And thou, O England, with thy Cranmers, Ridlies,
Bradfords, Cry on, and give the Lord no rest, O ye his Saints, whose blood is
shed, till he That Is holy and true avenge your Blood. And

Ye, Florus lib. 2. c. 15.
O NOBLES, and much honored GENTLEMEN: do ye set your hands to this Carthage,
that busles most; and this Bloody-beast, which bites worst in her last
conflict. And, when ye have done all, Stand by the Glassy Sea, with your harpes
ready, till the Lord shall be pleased to empty the Fifth Vial upon the throne
of the Beast, and cast the great mil stone into that Sea of blood, Amen. Even
so come LORD JESUS; Take to thy self thy great power, and let the blood-sheds
of the Great Whore come in remembrance before thee. Amen.

Follows the Third, which delivers the manner how God delivers his.

1. He Is long ere he begins; 2. He goes through-stitch, when he sets in.
For words; I am loath to entertain time with Criticism's; we have a greater
work in hand. If we follow Chrysostom's sense with the Vulgars, and her
Sworr.-men, and read the words Question-wise, Will he suffer long? we shall 1.
Impute to S. Luke worse language then he speaks, who of the Evangelists is most
Attick: And 2. So Homer uses (...) in Vulcans speech to Juno. I had a etc and
alibi passins.
Cross the maine scope, which drives at perseverance upon delays. If we
follow his follower Theophylact, and modern writers, and render (...), by
(...), sampling it with the Hebrew, we have our warrant. Yet [here's a
difficulty. For,


How sorts this Slownesse, with that [speedily] following?

But this is no hard knor. 1. God may seem to us, but is not in himself Slow.
For to be Slow. is to be too late; and God is never so. 2. Again, he bears at
first, yet smites home at last.

I take no pride in varying from advised translations, and therefore pitch
there.

God gives proof of his patience, before he proceeds to execution. He suffers
long, before the Creature suffers. This is generally true. But I must draw down
the point to the present instance. He suffers long (With Them) With Whom? With
Adversaries, as the woman phrased it; or With them, whom vengeance abides; as
the Hebrews often couch the Object in the Action. Our Point then must run thus.

God bears long with his adversaries; with worst men. He dispenses not his
favors equal to all: yet to al some. All taste of his goodness, but with a
difference: Though he bear not Ever, yet he bears Long with his enemies. His
Everlasting name is (...) opposed to (...) Prove. 14.29. (...) say the LXX.
speaks it roundly, Romans 9. He suffers with much Long suffering the vessels of
wrath.

The truth of this we find in Persons, Cities Kingdoms, and those none of the
best. But we touch only upon these particulars.

1. Look upon the Persons in their distance, 1. The provokers are his own
creatures, who live upon him. 2. The provoked, the Highest Majesty. This were
enough to tempt created patience, as he said; Shall this dead dog rail upon my
Lord the King! 2 Samuel 16.9^
What! A Dog upon a King! This requires infinite patience.


2. Look upon their Actions, in their difference. And there it is hard to say
whether be greater, patience or provocation.

1. The wicked hate His, for His sake, with a Satanicall hatred, (as David's
words is, Psalm. 38.20.) and would destroy Soul and Body all at once, as that
Villain in Bodin attempted upon another. 2. They cannot be satisfied with One
Mordecai's flesh: They wish all but One head, that they might dispatch all at
one stroke. 3. No time is long enough, no help great enough. Mr. Boltons
Sermon on 1 Cor. 1.26.
They call in help; they beg and borrow Curses and Blasphemies, to their last
breath, as I read of one. 4. They never relent, but write all to their merits,
and wish they could do more: Thus they provoke.
Now what is Gods Patience? Though his soul abhor sin infinitely; Though he
cannot go out of hearing, and shus his eyes, as we may, but must see and hear
all; Though his name, Law and Children be more to him then all the world;
Though heaven and earth sweat under these provocations, and Gods own (struck
down at his foot) cry for help: Rom! 2. there is (...)
Yet God Bears and Bears long; Nay does them positive good; Treats with them;
Fees them to be quiet, and his own to be patient; and when he must needs
smite, gives them space, takes time himself, is Long in bending his how, and
drawing forth his weapons. And after all this, if then an Ahab will suba it, he
is ready to reprieve. But this is a Fathomlesse-depth. Were I in another place,
I should hold it needful to say something, by way of explication. But here
it is sufficient to mind you, That Gods patience is no way passive: Nay his
Longest suffering is his Greatest Acting, or enjoying of himself, in all
Serenity and Perfection, and is only grounded upon his most perfect nature.

1. God is Power it self; and therefore can bear long. 2. God is Wisdom it
self; and therefore forbearant. 3. Goodness it self; and therefore so
long-suffering.
And the longer he suffers the more he exercises and evidenceth these his
perfections. That is the maine ground of the point; where to you may add, if
you please, these ensuing Particulars.

1. The Wicked, Cods adversaries are some way his own; and that Ownenesse works
Patience. The Lord is a piece of a Father to them also. For he is A
Common-Father, by office to all; A Speciall-Father, by Adoption to Saints; A
Singular-Father, by Nature to Christ.

A Prince, besides his particular relation to his Children, is Pater-Patriae,
Pater familias, and is good to all; though with a difference: So here.

2. Though Christ has purchased a peculiar people to himself, to the purpose
of salvation: yet others taste of this his goodness. The world, you know, was
lost in merit, and ipso facto forfeited, with all its comforts, and
appurtenances. The Lord Christ has restored it, and does keep it standing; and
in the Interim, the worst enjoy it in common with the best, and so far, fare
the better for Christ.

3. God in his most wise dispensation, sees use of patience toward such: So,
he works out his own praise, and design upon his Church.

In short, At present there may be some use of them; and so he reprieves them,
as we do some notorious Felon: and hereafter there may be some fruit come from
them, and the Ill Mother is a while sorborne for her Fruit, and Venture sake.
This is all I can stay to speak to the point.

Now were I my self, I would commend this to two sorts.

1. The worst must take heed of Two Extremities.

1. Not to Vye with Children, and bear themselves too high upon Gods love,
because he bears himself so patiently, and graciously toward them. No, there
is difference: Isaac is the Son of the Promise, though all the Abramites have
something. Genesis 25.5, 6.
Only Jehoram the firstborne must have the Crown, and Kingdom: Smaller
matters must content the rest. All Joseph's brethren taste of his bounties; but
none to Benjamin. 2 Chronicles 21.3.
As in the things there is a wide difference: (not now to be enlarged) so
specially in the Issue, and event: the wickeds happiness will take end, his
lease will run out, Eccl. 8.13. That end when it comes, comes Swifith, as
Ezekiel in his 7. chap. tells them upon another occasion. -- The End (says he)
is Come, is Come, is Come; and so some ten or twelve times minds them of this.
And when that Time is come, the Lord sets on, How Long, and How Often he has
forborne. Psalm. 95.
-- Forty years long I have horn with this generation. And -- These ten times
have they provoked me. Numb. 14.22 2. Not to charge God to be an hard Master:
But to give him the glory, not only of his Justice, but of his Patience, and
Goodness: For even in his Executions he is still beneath their demerit, beyond
their desert; and that one day they will know, though now they will not
acknowledge it. But the maine is to the Saints.
2. If the worst must say, God is patient; must not the Saint? If Sodom, If
Bab. l, If India, must acknowledge his Long-suffering: must not England? must
not This? must not every Town and City? O survey your lives, compare Gods
patience with our frowardness; Gods forbearence with your stubbornness. Call
to mind your follies, passions, infirmities, presumptions. What answers you
have returned upon reproof; how many calls you have slighted; how many means
you have scorned. In few; how many, how great, how lasting your provocations
have been. And, If Cain, and Judas must yield God patient: Do you say, Who is
a God like unto thee that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression
of the remnant of his heritage? He reretaineth not his anger for ever, because
he delighieth in mercy, Mica. 7.18. And, if the Devils themselves think it
worthy a suit, that their torment may be deferred; must not we think it
thankworthy, that wear thus long forborne? O, let every Town ye look upon,
every Church ye come into, every field you walk in, every Creature you see
living, draw from you thanks. -- Let the house of Aaron say, His mercy endures
for ever; Else had we no Church. -- Let the house of Israel say, His mercy
endures for ever; Else had we no State, -- Let every man breathing say, His
mercy endures for ever; Else our Atheismes, Oaths, Curses, Idols, Murders,
Whoredoms, and other Abominations had long since sunk us, and swallowed us up.

But what are Words, if but Words? Let the Meditation of this point be improved
unto Humiliation, Repentance, Consolation.

1. For the first. Is God so forbearant? 1. What are we, that we should be so
hasty? What? Is he wounded in his Name, in his Law, and in his Sons? And must
not we be touched in our Dog? Who are we, that we cannot bear (As God, (shall I
say?) nay with God himself! He must smite, when we would have him; elsewe
question, sometimes his Truth, most times his care.

Nay farther. Is God so forbearant? What have we done? Or what did we mean to
provoke so Patient a Father? How great is the provocation of his sons and
daughters! It is not, It is not (believe it) a Small thing that will Anger this
Father. It is not a little Cloud, that will hide this Sun. In his anger
therefore read our sins, and in his expressions his wrath. His Face, his Words,
his Actions speak him angry. And patience will not be angry for Triftes. What?
David hide himself from his Absalom? does not so great a wrath argue greatest
provocation?

And is not Our Father, think you, Angry, when he sends a Spirit of division
amongst us? when he Dashes Child against Child? makes a Rod, of a Sword? draws
Blood, and bathes his Sword therein? Turns his Children a begging, and outs
them of all? Is not here wrath? And is it not time now, to fall before him,
with Miriam, whilst he thus spits in our face? To Run with Aaron, when the fire
is began? To cry with David, Number. 12. Number. 16 46.1 Chion. 21.
when the Sword is drawn? O Lord, spore Jerusalem, spare our Cities, our
people: And to lament after our Father; as the Child does after his lost
Mother. My Father, my Father is lost, What shall I do!

2. In the next place, Let us quicken our repentance: Kindness will melt a
Soul; Should it not a Son? The proper issue of patience and kindness should be
to repentance: of long patience speedy repentance.

You are Noble; I report my self to your Judgments. What think you? Are not a
thousand of Oaths, and millions of Lies (to omit other provocations) enough? Is
not forty years provocations? nay sixty? nay eighty sufficient? Has not God
waited long, and long enough? Is it fit think you, to make him wait longer? Is
there any hope that ought else will work, if patience work not? Or is there
any thing left after patience abused? Will not Nineveh rise up in Judgment
against us, and say, We had but forty days patience afforded us: And shall
these abuse Twice forty years? Will not the damned in Hell arise and say, We
were born withal, some but thirty, some but twenty years, and they have
abused a far longer patience? Nay, will not the Devils themselves come in and
say, We had not the patience of one hour afforded us; and shall these ever be
spared? I beseech you by all the mercies of God; by an age of patience; by A
world of blessings; by that your Candor, and Ingennity; and by all the
Endearments, that ever past betwixt Christ and your sonles; pity your selves;
pity your Country; pity your posterity; and be content to be happy. Fall down
in private before the Lord, and say, O Lord, I am ashamed of my
Unmannerliness. Thou have long knocked, and I have made thee stand out of
doors. I can stand out no longer. It is infinite patience, if as yet I may
live. O turn me, and I will now turn. I Come, I Come with all the strength I
have: O draw me! Melt me! receive me!

3. Lastly, Let this give us an hopeful expectation of further grace. True it
is, Our sins are hideous. God was never more put to it by a Nation.
Notwithstanding, could we put our selves into a posture for mercy, There were
yet hope in Israel. For I demand, Is God patient toward Enemies? toward Rebels?
when there is no fasting, no praying, no reforming thought upon? And will he Not
meet us in the way of his judgments? Vid. Mic. 6.3. Hos. 6.4. and 11.8.
What? is he so long-suffering toward sinful Ephraim? so loath to think of a
divorce? How shall I give thee up Ephraim! How shall I entreat thee! And so
ready to receive Ephraim, upon submission? Is Ephraim my dear son? etc. Jer.
31.20.
And will he not be gracious to this Our Ephraim, in case we come in? What!
will he plead for Israel, for Nineveh against his Prophets? and of a Judge
become an Advocate? As we see in the case of Elijah, and Jonah. Why Elijah
(says he) Thou art not alone: There be Thousands with thee, and for me: Why
Jonah, do thou well to be so hasty? would thou have meslay the Child upon
the Mother? so young, so many? Will God, I say, thus plead for a people, when
his Prophets cry against them? And will he not be entreated for us, when of all
Ranks some, and the Prophets chiefly importune him? Bear up, Brethren, and know
with whom ye have to do. You deal with a Father, The Father, and The God of
patience. It Is true, Esa. 54.7.
He can be angry. That Is his justice: That Is his goodness to you: But he
cannot be long angry with his own. It Is but for a Moment. It redounds not to
the Person. It Is not Penal but Medicinal. Sink not under it. Only prize
patience, and abuse it not. Hold this Patient God amongst you, as Moses did.
Chain him up with your prayers and tears, and say, If we have found grace in
thy sight, Go not from us: Abide with us. And then know, There is patience
enough in God for a Thousand Englands. And, if we do miscarry, it is not from
want of Goodness in God, but from want of Grace in us, who have a price in our
hands and dee not know it. But I must away. The last thing follows.

God is swift in his help as well as sure. When his be once read for help,
help is at hand. So Nahum pleads, cap 1.2, 3. God suffers, and God is swift. I
am in haste, and cannot open the words. S. Peter says the same, 2 Pet. 3.9.
where two things are spoken.

1. What God is in our conceit; Slack. 2. What God is indeed; Seasonable, when
we are fitted.
But is not God slow?

It is not slownesse, slacknesse: For that is to Omit an opportunity. He is
ever opportune, and frames his pace, as there is cause. When we be ripe, he is
ready, he is speedy.

Speedy, 1. In opposition to the Judge here, who is too late; and to men's
opinions, who being too short, think God too long.

Speedy, 2. In reference to our fitness, and fitness of time. He is neither
too early, nor too late; but observes the very height, strength, joint, article
of time. We know not how to express Moses his (...) of time. But at present we
are upon his speedy help. Ex. 12 41. and alibi in Genesis
For this; do observe how he represents himself.

1. In his gectures, and postures. He Is said, when he is upon his peoples
deliverance, to stand up, or rise, to run, Vid Hab. 3. and passim apud
Prophetas. In the Canticles, he comes leaping, etc. Es. 31.5. slying, etc.
to fly. 2. In his Expressins. He that comes, will come, and will make haste,
with ut tarriance, Heb. 10.37. 3. In his Performances Ever at, or before his
day, never one hour too late.
The Reason whereof is manifold.

1. If we respect Gods self. 1. He cannot mistake time: For he is Wisdom it
selte, and the just measure of time. That is Esay's reason, He is a God of
Judgment. 2. He cannot fail of his aim, and end; Esa. 30.
For he is power it self. There is nothing in his way; He is in Heaven (says
David) and does whatsoever he will. Others must work what, and when they can:
God works when it pleases him, and can do a great deal in a little space. He
can cause to conceive, and to bring forth the same day, Esa. 66.8. 3. He is
goodness it self. Goodness is his nature: and nature delights in its own
operations: it is it is life. The Sun runs rather then stand still; delights
more inshining, then in being overshadowed. 4. He is Truth, and it is his Word,
He will be found in due time; and his time is the Due time, with respect to our
Fitness. Read Psalm. 46.1, 5.


2. Add in the second place, Gods Relation. He is a Father. Relations, you
know, are very active. Saul would rise early to help his subjects. 1 Samuel 11.
Fathers be rather too hasty, then too slow. They are ready before their Sons.
The child indeed thinks himself fit for Horsmanship, for the University,
Marriage, or the like; and conceives his father too slow. But the truth is, The
Father stays upon his Child, and is ready before he is ready; Especially in
cases of danger. A Father runs without legs, when the Child is hazarded: Nor is
there any Beast, which will not fly upon death, when his young is endangered.
Now the Lord has not put this inclination into Creatures, and deprived
himself thereof, the while; His be His, and He will be Theirs, if it be not
long of them. Let the prodigal creep, and the Father will run. Luke 15.

3. His Children will mind him of the time how it passes. Their Cry is still,
How long, Make haste. Their Remembrancers join with them. Esa. 62. and Christ
with them. Zach. 1. How long, O Lord of Hosts, will thou not have mercy upon
Jerusalem? etc. 12. These, All these sue God upon his Band, and press the
fitness of the time. Dan 9.2. Psalm. 102.13. To make an end.

If mere self-love will force this Judge out of his pace: will not love of
Justice, Mercy, Truth? Love of Christians, of Christ, of Gods-self quicken him?
Does not he know how soon their spirits will faint? how soon they will step
forth of the way? and after halting, turn aside, upon two long delays?

Yea, Gods people long deferred.

It seems long,

There is no more now to be done, Uses.
but to make this point useful to us, and then I have done.

1. Blush we at our boldness, who take upon us

1. To Control. 2. To confine the All wise God.
1. For the first, Who are we, that we should sit upon our Maker? and say, in
effect, Her? God is out. Here he mistakes his time? What is this but to Charge
God foolishly, as Job did not? What is this, but to set the Sun by our dyall?
This Caesar terms sauciness in his Soldiers. This our Savior disliked in
his dearest friends. Ich 2 4. and 7 6 and 11 39.40.
This the Physician blames in his Patient: Parents in their Children: you in
Us, if so be that we, (at so great a distance, who know so little of your
obstructions) shall charge you, here with too much haste, there with too much
slownesse.

2. As great a sauciness it is To confine the Almighty, Now he must help or
never, this way, or no way. By this Parliament, or by no Parliament. Stop, for
shame. And if you will wisely enquire into a reason of Gods proceedings,
reflect upon your selves, and charge the flownesse upon your own souls. It is
a truth, God will be ever himself; and has many ends in One Work. But, in
passages twixt him and us, the fault is ours, not his, if we be not seasonably
helped.

Thence that in Isay 30 18. God waits, that he may have mercy. Gods Heart, Gods
hands are full of mercy: he waits, being A God of Judgment. (i) one that
dispences mercy in Judgment.

Thence his plea Isay 58.1. etc. The people wondered they heard not from God.
Why (say they) have we fasted? etc. And God wonders, that he hears not from
them. And more fully ( Isa. 59.1.) he resolves the Case. Gods hand is not
shortened: His ear is not deafned. He is able, he is willing to do them help.
Where is the hinderance then? He tells them, Your sins keep good things from
you.

Thence also it is, That God so expostulates with Joshua. cap. 7.10. Up, (says
he) Why lieft thou thus, and cryest to me? As if it were long of me that the
war succeeds not. Go, deal with thy people. There is an accursed thing in
Israel.

Thus God points us to our duty, and we must Act accordingly. Judges 20. when
the wars of the Chureh miscarried, the Church enquires of God, with Prayers,
and Tears, and Fastings. In the like case we must do the same thing: We are
here upon Gods work Things stick. Comfort comes on slowly. Let us Cast Lots
with Joshua; and find out The Achan. Let every man lay his hand upon his
heart, and say, Can God certainly help? Will he speedily hear? What is then
the reason of this delay?

This is a fit question for public, for private, for All Persons.

In Public. Your affections ( Honored and Beloved) we question not. Sure your
endeauours are good, your labors great. Yet must we say with the Prophet, The
harvest is past, Summer is ended, and we are not yet saved. Jer. 8.20. Where is
the Let? Let Us put it to the Lot.

1. Lot upon your selves, and let each Parliament Man say. Am I ready? Am I fit
for mercy? for honor? I pretend to hamiliation. I represent such a people, such
a place (in their sins) this day. Do I humble my self? Do I gage my heart,
pray, weep, mournalone? I pretend Reformation. Am I my self reformed? Do not
I, who say others must not swear, swear my self? Do not I give Liberty my
self, where I make Laws for others? If so, God will never accept of a good
motion from a bod mouth: as that State in story would not. 2. Lot upon your
families. I come hither to reform others: But what are my own Children? my
Own Servants? What should Philip do abroad, till he has composed disorders
at home? 3. Lot upon your Company, and Associates. Say, Is there never an Esau
amongst us? Never an Achan in our Tent? Never a Jonah in our Ship who troubles
all? 4. Lot upon your Courses. Ask: Whose work am I upon? Gods? or my Own?
Ask farther. (If the work be Gods, and the Public) in what Order do I
proceed; Vzziah may disturb the whole business, for want of Order. Ask
farther: In what Manner do I go on? If I presume upon the goodness of the
Cause, or greatness of my strength, I may be crossed, as Israel was in that 20.
of Judges.
You are now before the Lord. Weep with Israel upon these delays, and strike
the right Vein: Say, The Lord is not flow to help: but we are slow to search,
slow to reform, slow to put our selves in a hopeful way of mercy.

This is a fit Question for us also in Private. We (my Brethren) run out upon
God, He forgets, He will not be entreated. We fly upon men, They make no Haste,
They Spin out Time, with long orations. Were We in place, Ireland should not be
thus deserted; Execution thus fatur'd. But who is in fault? What disorder! What
disorder! says Nabuchadnezzar, when the Disorder was from him: So we. What
delays! What delays! No help comes! O, but what says God? Up Joshua. Israel
has sinned. There is an Accursed thing among you. There is cursed Pride,
Unbelief, Covetousness, Coldness, Neutrality, in the Camp: What can be done,
till this be removed? There are Unblessed Divisions, preposterous courses. We
Rangle our own work, and are much wanting to the publik, in our prayers, and
amendments. And this is that, that scoat's the business in public. Nay, shall
I tell you? There is that, that hinders all in public and in private: and in
short it is this. We be not this day Humbled for Our Own, and Our-Other-mens
sins; we be not broken; we be not ripe for mercy. And can we think that God
will lay Cordials upon Full and Foul stomachs? That he will skarf our bones,
before they be set? And lap up our sores, before they be searched? O it is in
vain, (as I hope my Brother will anon tell you, now my strength is spent.) It
is in vain, I say, for us to dream of Comfort, til we are better emptied and
broken. Let us, I beseech you, when we have done in Public, goto it in
private, and labor to see The Plague in our own heart. We speak much of A
malignant party. But shall I tell you? Our sins be the Malignant Party: Yours,
and those whom we represent this day. These tie the hands of God, and man.
These stop the ears of God, and the King against us. Clear the Lord, and shame
your selves, saying, I have mistake my self all this while. I have accused
God. I accused men. I have now accuse my self my backwardness' to turn to God
is it that fore-slows my comfort. This done,

3. Be we next entreated to Coast upon a Cure, You are tired with working, We
with waiting. Come we briefly to the Point. Es. 21.12. If you will enquire,
enquire ye; Return, Come. The Prophet speaks as if he were in haste: and two
things are presently expected.

1. We must be humbled. That Is once. Pride stands in Gods way. And, if we will
make David's prayer, we must make his plea. We are poor and needy: make no
tarriance. Psalm. 40. ult And this work of self-humbling is a greater work, then
I can quickly deliver. But I presum you have been already pressed or will be
anon, to this work. 2. We must be Reformed. Sin hangs in our light. That pats
back things that are coming on. Let Aaron and Moses be never so willing. Let
Israel be never so near the Promised land: Sin (coming between) will turn them
round, and put them back. That hinders good from coming on. Let Iehoshaphat be
never so forward in a Reformation, The High places will not drown, if the
Peoples hearts be not prepared, 2 Chr. 20.33. I have cut yon out your Work. Now
upon it.
1 Look Backward, and say with David, O Lord pardon my sin: Psalm 25.
it is very great. Pardon my house, It is I and my house, that have sinned.
Pardon my people, the Town and County, from whom I come, for whom I appear
this day, As Luke 4 23. to cure his Country is to cure himself.
and which is my Secondself. Weep over them as David over Jerusalem. Yea over
the many many sins, that swarm in this Land; and there stand betwixt wrath and
the People: and then

2. Look forward, with respect to all your relations. As Men, Resolve with
Naaman; I will worship none but the God of Israel. As Masters, with Joshua; I
and my house will serve the Lord. As Public Persons, with David; Betimes I
will cut off the evil doers. At least plead with Joshua 22.20. Did not Achan
thus, and God was angry with all Israel? For the Lords sake, Form your selves
into a happy body and order; and having so done, Do but what you can to put us
all into a Posture of mercy and safety. Let me tell you, that the public pulse
beats very ill. Though many particulars give much encouragement: yet the
generality is bad enough. I will not meddle with any thing this day. I leave
your businesses to another day and place. Give me leave to say thus much; 1. In
point of Religion; Credenda.
If we speak of faith: How many be there, who have (as that Father said) Fidem
menstruam? I may add, Neutram, Hilary. Oculus in utra^ partem fluat judicari
non potest, probably Sone. Caes de Bello Gall. l. 1. Alcibiades.
Nullam? 2. If we speak of particulars: Most men move like the river Arar:
backward or forward, who can tell? 3. In point of subjection, in this Iubile,
and Intervall, (as the Vulgar reckon it) no Magistrate, no Minister, no
Officer, no Age is respected. It is with us in the Country, as it was in his
Army, All are Leaders, none Soldiers; All Teachers, none Scholars. 4. And for
Laws. Whilst you make New, we break the Old: and whilst you are in the Mount,
we are Dancing about a Maypole, or Calfe. I may not dwell longer.


Give me leave to deliver my own and the Common suit of the honest minded, to
you: and I will deliver it to you in his words, Mark 9.22. Masler, if thou
can do any thing (says he) have compassion on us, end help us.

My Lords, and Masters, If you can do any thing, Help us with your power (we
will Help you with our prayers.) Help us what you can (and what you can by Law,
Chrysostom. (...) etc. hinc and (...) apud Veteres.
that you Can.) Help us to honest Ministers: help them to Bread, and Books too.
Help them against the Mighty, that they be not forced to Feast at that Dreadful
table, as it was once called, they know not whom themselves. O! If we could be
once formed into a good people by a happy concurrence of Our Sovereign, and
both your Houses, we could not be long in dust and ashes. The Lord would soon
(as he says) subdue our unemies under us, Ps. 81.14. Mal. 4.2.
and come flying with healing under his wings. Only, if welook for speedy
help, we must speed our Repentance, and Reformation; and so meet him, who has
promised to meet us. Now let the Patience of God move you, the distresses of
our Brethren (who have nothing left, Praeter agri solum, if so much) move you.
Let the sad distractions and Icalousies at home move you. And, since God is
ready, why should we defer? Yet we live: Yet he offers himself as a Father
to us. Here he is this day: O let us not lose this day: but to day, whilst it
is to day, before the other half of it be spent, Come in, accept of mercy.
And, for your encouragement, let me conclude with a word of Comfort.

What? Does God wait, to do us a kindness? Means he good to us at last, though
(for ends) he for bears a while? Be not discouraged upon these delays (if
they be delays.) Say with the Church, Micah 7. I will bear the wrach of the
Lord, I will wait, etc.

O,

There is hope, There is hope. Were there not: yet order it, Lam. 3. And then
Hearken what God will speak; Psalm. 85.8.
for his heart and mouth will speak peace to his Broken, people. Provided ever
that you leave him to his own both Times, and Means.

O,

Why then has he called us hither? Representative Kingdom, to appoint this
meeting? Would be have accepted an offering at our hands, and sent us a word of
encouragement, if he had parposed our destruction?

O, But (for the means;

No matter,

O, But we are very weak! low! poor!

I wish we were worse, in our own sense; we are, I fear, too, good, too
strong, too many. God is sometimes troubled with too much help, too little. We
are sometimes too soon; too late.

O, but we are put off still, from day to day.

You are deceived. We are not put off: we put off God. It sticks there. Nay,
God is already Come, we are helped, and do live; and should live more, If we
could live apace to him; and live his life, the life of faith. Now is Faiths
turn and time. Now let The lust live by his faith. Now with Daniel, let us
Cast up times and meet the Sunrising; at least before the day shut in. Grow to
his earnestness: O Lord hear; O Lord forgive; O Lord defer not. And then
expect some flying messenger, or other, with a message of comfort. Only
remember how it stands betwixt mother and child. Whiles the child does but
whimper in the cradle, the mother stirs not: But, when he takes up a note, and
cries every whit of him; hands, feet, face, all cry: then the mother flings by
all; then she flies and outruns, her self. I come, I come, I come my child. I
can say no more. My drist in all, is, To beat you off (not from the Use of Gods
means, but) from Trusting in them. We have too long Idolized Parliaments,
creatures, and created abilities. And the Lord has purposely blockt us up,
because our eyes should be only to him. And in him Alone you have
encouragement enough. He has helped already: He waits still: He is more then a
Judge; He is a Father: He can help, He will help. His word is for us, precept,
promise, parable: His servants are for us: His Son is for us; He is One-of-us,
which is beyond all encouragements yet mentioned: He is termed, in the words
following, The Son of man, Cum patre dator, inter nos petitu. Aug.
a man of Prayer, a man of Grace, the high Favorite, a man amids us, who gives
with the Father, who prays with the Suitor. And shall we yet faint! What I
cannot now do in public, do ye sipply in private. Christ is fresh, his Blood
fresh. Put your petitions into his hand, and this day beg your Lives, your
Land, your King, with your Omnipotent Prayers. August.
If you cannot Speak, Weep. Fletu agitur, non, affain. Tears pray. If you
cannot Weep, Sigh. God hears Sighs. If you cannot Sigh, Breath. God feels
Breath. Lam 3.56. At least, let your Actions pray, your Presence pray, your
Submission pray, your Afflictions pray. God hears Afflictions. Genesis 16.11. He
hears our stretched out hands. Do not we so? Do not we give to many a one,
that faith nothing but only holds out a hand to receive? O think as ill as you
will of your selves: but think well of God. Pray as you can Pray: and he is a
Father, who will make English of broken prayers. Pray, I say. I say again
Pray. And who knows but prayer will lengthen our day, as once it did Ioshuahs?
I can now say but little in public. The Lord enlarge us, ( you, and me) in
private, and my learned Brother in public. Had God vouchsafed me more leisure,
health, enlargements, I had dealt better with and for you, but at present, this
is all that I can do; I shall be short in prayer, and will not abridge my
successor.

FINIS.
TRUE RELIGION IN THE OLD WAY OF Piety and Charity. DELIVERED In a SERMON to
the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen of this City of London, at their
Anniversary Meeting on Monday (commonly called Easter-Munday) at the Spittle,
1645.

By ROBERT HARRIS B D. Pastor of Hanwell, Oxon. and a Member of the Assembly of
Divines.

JAM. 1.26, 27. If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not
his Tongue, -- this man's Religion is vain.

Pure Religion -- is this, to visit the Fatherless and widows in their
afflistion, and to keep himself unspotted from the world.

LONDON, Printed for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the Sign of the Gilt Cup under Saint Austins Gate, 1645.

To the Reader.
UPon the survey of this Epistle to the Right Honorable Thomas Atkins, the now
Lord Major, etc. I conceived it not amiss to add something more by way of
caution; which howsoever it needed not to those that know me, yet being now
cast upon strange men, and strange times, I cannot speak too plainly; be
pleased then to know, that the men of whom I speak, are not such as are truly
(that is, universally, charitably and peaceably) conscionable, nor such as I
therefore distaste, because they be of a different opinion in some things from
my self: No, the Lord keep me from quarrelling men, because their light is
more or less then mine, if that be all their crime, and from judging their
conscience; whilst there is no more in it but conscience, reaching after further
information, these be not the men I mean, but men of another spirit, who
condemn the things they do not understand, and go upon principles, and in
ways that will mar all if they be not timely looked to: What their courses and
tenants be, I am loath to make too public, and therefore rather intimated then
expressed them before, and now do much rather desire their burial then their
life; to that end, I said something to the honorable Governors and godly
Citizens of this place; and do further implore and beseech all others who
desire the peace of the Church, the prosperity of the City, the advancement of
Christ's Kingdom, to bring some Buckets toward the quenching of these wild and
unnatural fires amongst us; yea and above the rest, I humbly pray those of my
Brethren to lend herein their hand and help, who are more (as they conceive)
indulgent toward them, at least (as others think) most prevailing with them.
This is all, and this I hope is enough, being added to that which already has
passed the Press.

Robert Harris.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAJOR and Court of Aldermen, with other
Citizens of the renowned City of LONDON.
THE Account that Imake of my self and service is this: For my self, the
reason of my slownesse in this work grew not from any undervaluing of your so
honorable invitation, but from mine own distemper of body, which at the same
time forced me to deprecate a greater service to a greater Assembly, and to lay
aside this till it was too late to put it off. 2. For the Works self, 1. in my
choice, I had respect to custom and entreaty, and in the pursuance of that
choice I looked upon the season and Auditory: You have now by your motion (that
is) command, Jubet qui iogat, etc. Obligant qui impetrans, etc.
made it public, and it being your own, it is in your power to make it good:
That is a good Sermon which does good, as that is good soil which mends the
ground: that good food or Physic that helps the body: Some worth you have put
upon it in your calling for it, and sending it ready written to my band; if now
you please to translate it into Practice, the work is done. And surely there
lies before you the fairest of opportunities; never was there a sitter
seeds-time for Prayer and Alms; in the one the poorest may concur, in the
other they cannot; that is your happiness that you can give, and will be more
yours if you do the thing. It was some comfort to me to hear (so soon after
my service) of a design for the poor, that news was to me what Jonahs Gourd
was to him; and my prayer is, that this may be more lasting then that: The
poor are exceeding many, and their wants exceeding great, and it is not the
least of our griefs, that many of us in the Ministry can do no more; we meet
them hourly, and part but sadly; they sighing because they cannot receive, and
we because we cannot give; and give we cannot til we receive better answers
then we do from more then enough: We know you not, we cannot, we will not, we may
not support such a -- I am not (I confess) well read in your Charter, I know
not your bounds; this I know, that this famous City has been heretofore much
honored and blessed both by and for their Ministers; this I know, that
Magistrates by calling are Heirs of restraint, Judge. 18.9. Nch. 13.17. Rev
1.20.41. Prove. 29.18. Jumad lieum, and Shindler. Pentag. (...) ( sc. (...), and
quae sequamu. apud Soph.
and that sin uncontrold and unpunished by them, will be set upon their
heads, and beaten upon their backs; Yea, and this I have read, that where
vision (preaching) fails, the people are naked, or (say some) idle and
useless; that where men grow high in sin and scorn, the City is ensnared or
fired, Pro. 29.8. that where any City is divided, it cannot stand, Mat. 12.25.
This I am sure of; and therefore my humble suit unto you is, that as you tender
your selves, your safety, your City, your Posterity, your Religion, your
Christ, your All, do your utmost to restrain all destructive ways of sin,
error, faction, etc. and to establish a settled Government, and sincere
Religion among you: Oh! let it not be free for any men at pleasure to proclaim
their Jubilees, to assert, to preach, to print, what seems good to themselves;
and under color of Christian liberty and free grace, or I know not what new
light, to cry down Magistracy, Ministry, Repentance, Obedience, say I? nay
Scripture it self, Christ himself in his Nature and Offices. My Lord, and
worthy Senators, I Will trouble you no longer, the rest you shall read in
silence; I commend your Persons, your Employments, your honorable City, and
all your public Concernments to the grace of our Lord Jesus, beseeching him
to raise up still amongst you Magistrates of Jethro's mark, (...) Importes all
men of might for wisdom, wealth, courage, men of truth (whether for Theorie
or Practice) but no men for self either ends or turns: So prays

Your humble Suppliant and obliged! Servant in our common Lord, Robert Harris.

A SERMON TOUCHING PRAYER and MERCY.
ACTS 10. 31. And he said, Cornelius, thy Prayer is heard, and thy Alms are in
remembrance before God.


WE have in this Chapter two great doubts resolved: the one a Soldiers, the
other a Preachers; both consult God, and he resolves both. The Soldier was one
Cornelius, and his scruple was about our blessed Savior, not touching his
offices or his nature, (he knew that there was no other name under heaven
whereby he could be saved) but the doubt was touching his person, whether this
particular man, which the Apostles cried up, and the Pharisees cried down,
whether he were that Christ, that Savior, yea or no: This was the doubt, and
this doubt sends him unto God in a way of prayer, and God sends him unto Peter
the Apostle for information: Peter (the second person) is not without his
scruple also; his doubt was, with what warrant he might go to the Gentiles
(such Cornelius was) and preach Christ unto them; he also receives satisfaction
from the same gracious hand, and now these parties met together, for their
further confirmation peruse and read their Commission. First, Cornelius begins
(at Peter's motion) and shows upon what warant he sent for Peter, and gives a
very good account of himself, and does very punctually relate the business,
not by way of ostentation, to boast of himself, but by way of satisfaction to
give content unto Peter; he gives him to know how that he had certain
intelligence from heaven about this whole business of sending for him: for 1.
he did use none but Gods means to be directed, that is, Fasting and Prayer;
and then next, he received a direct answer from God, and there could not
possibly be any place for mistake in the same; he well remembers how long ago
it was that he received his instruction, (four days since) says he, no
longer. 2. Then he remembers where he was (in his house.) 3. he remembers what
he was then doing, he was then (praying.) 4. he remembers what time of the day
it was (the ninth hour of the day.) 5. he remembers the Messenger that was
sent, he came in the shape of a man, though he were an Angel, and (in bright
shining apparel) 6. he remembers the message what it was, and what the
direction: 1. he calls him by name, and next he wishes him to go to such a
place (Joppa) there to enquire for one called (Simon) this Simon lay at another
(Simon's house) that Simon was (a Tanner) he lived by the (Seaside;) all these
circumstances were delivered to Cornelius; so that as certainly as Peter was
Peter, and he Cornelius, so sure it is that there could be no collusion or
mistake in this business, and thereupon he concludes, that Peter had a warrant
to come, and he a warrant to send, and therefore now nothing hindered, but that
they might fall on to their work; this is Cornelius his account of himself; we
will stay at this time in this account of his, and in this verse which we have
propounded to you, where we have these particulars observable.

First, a double Act reported, he prayed, he gave Alms.

And then secondly, this double Act is set forth from a double Argument.

1. From the cause of this, Cornelius. 2. From the consequence of these, his
Prayer was heard, his Alms were observed, both were accepted and (recorded) by
God: these be the parts of the Text.
As for the simple terms, we shall not trouble you with many words, they are
plain enough, we will not stand here to discourse of the several acceptations
of the first word, (...), it is taken sometimes for the service, and sometimes
for the place where the service was performed; Sane. in Act. Apost. Grot. in
Evange. aliosque passim. vise Turneb. l. 1. adversa^. c. 19.
especially in Ecclesiastical Authors, and in after times: we understand what
is meant by Prayer in this place; this Prayer, it is called Cornelius his
Prayer, (thy prayer) says the Text. It is true, that all good things, and
especially prayer is causally Gods, and it is objectively Gods; it begins from
him, it ends in him; but it is subjectively and interpretatively Cornelius'es
too; it is true, it is God that gives us the grace of prayer, as the grace of
faith, of repentance, of every good thing; but then the acting and the
exercising of this, that by interpretation and acceptance is ours, whiles we
do act the same; so that God is not said to believe, or to repent, or to pray,
but man by Gods assistance, as Austen well: De great. and lib: arb. c. 16. and
alibi passim, etc.
This is all we will say for the first word, the rest we will speak of in order
as we shall come to them, if need shall so require: in the mean time we
address our selves to some instructions which the words offer to us; we will
not trouble you with the wild conceits of some men, who talk of certain
preparations to grace before grace it self Contra Aug. de praedest. council.
Arausicanum, aliosque.
instancing Cornelius: nor yet of others, who do speak of heathens and
infidels, their acceptance with God, and their salvation by God, though, they
have no knowledge at all Id quod per somnium viderunt e veteribus, e
scholasticis, e remonstrantibus, familistis, aliisque sectariis non it ae pauci.
of Christ: it is sufficient for us to know, that Cornelius was acquainted with
Christ, and that Cornelius did expect salvation only by Christ; the only
doubt that he sticks at was this; whether this individual person, this man now
in question, that was lately crucified, now was raised up, whether this were
that Christ, that Messiah that he had believed in before: These things thus
premised, we will now proceed. And here it is not my meaning to enter into
those vast common places of Prayer, and of Almsdeeds; we have had occasion
even in this City to speak, diverse years since, in another place to these
heads; we are now to speak another way, and to consider these things as they
lie here in the Relation made by Cornelius, and as they carry with them Gods
answer to the one, Gods respect to the other.

1. We will begin with his Prayer, next we will speak of his Alms, rather of
the success of both; and then in the third place, we will say somewh at of his
person, when we have spoken of his actions, if time and strength will give.

1. We beseech you to take notice of the unspeakable goodness and
gractousnesse of God toward poor suppliants in point of prayer, Do. I.
for that is the thing we must grow to; and for this, consider the grounds in
the Text, consider the person now in question, Cornelius, a poor man, was in a
very great straight, feign he would please God, feign he would save his soul;
neither of these could be done without a Christ, and Christ must now be
believed in, in a higher and closer way then before; it is not enough for him
to believe, Christum, or in Christ, but he must believe that this is the very
Christ, that this is the man and none else. Now here sticks the doubt; the
Doctors were mightily divided about this point; the Pharisees and those happily
that had been means of his conversion from heathenisme to Judaisme, they were
altogether against Christ, and looked upon him, and reported him as a seducer.
On the other side, a few unlearned men they stood for him, and they preached
that there was no other way to salvation but in and through this crucified
person; in this case, what should poor Cornelius do more then what he did?
namely, to betake himself to God in way of prayer, and to desire direction
from him in this his doubt; and thus he does, and you see with what success he
does it, how graciously the Lord does condescend and answer him.

1. The Lord does hear him, nay, he does hear him effectually, for that is
the force of the word here used in the compound in our Text, Heb. 5.7.
(...).

God did hear him to purpose, I say, heard him graciously; and not only so,
2. but he does send him word that he heard him, and sent him word too 3. by an
Angel, and gives him 4. to understand, how that his prayer and all his services
are accepted of God. Oh! what a comfort was this to a poor distressed soul, to
have so punctual, so direct an answer sent him from heaven unto his prayer,
and unto his scruples! but thus deals God with his Childeen, never more kind
unto his, then when they come unto him begging; then when men begin to be shye
and strange, and to stand off, and to hold off at a distance, tken is God most
free, most open, most gracious unto his people; this we see in this Cornelous
here; go (says God) when he had prayed; go, says God unto an Angel, commend
me to Cornelius, tell him from me, that he is more in my books then he is
aware of; I take notice of his name, I take notice of his prayer, I take notice
of every Alms deed that he does bestow upon my people, I observe all these
things, yea, I record them, and they ever live and stand good before me: what
could be said more to the encouragement of a poor suppliant? thus God deals
with Cornelius: And thus, you know, he dealt with Daniel; the case is much what
alike, in the 9. of Dan. 20. and so forward; you shall read Daniels success
upon his prayer, he prayed for the people of God; and how speeds he? very well:
Observe the circumstances in the Text, the time whilst he was praying, says
the Text; nay (says the holy Ghost there) even at the beginning, at the first
setting out of his petition, the answer, the grant was sealed, and his petition
accepted, God did yield unto the same at the very entrance; he could no sooner
begin to speak, but God resolves of a word of comfort and grace to him.
Consider another circumstance, and that is, the Messenger that God sends to
him, he dispatches an Angel Gabriel, that erst had been with him (it seems)
upon other occasions, he comes to him with a Message, and he tells him Daniel,
greatly beloved; O Daniel the great favorite of heaven, understand that the
great God takes notice of thee, and he writes thy petitions, and has sent me
to return his answer unto thy suite; and the answer is very full and very more
then Daniel did put into his petition; so gracious is God unto his people when
they sue unto him in this way of prayer: What should I instance Abraham now?
what should I speak of Jacob, of David, of Hannah, of Jonah, of other
particulars in this case? I Will conclude with one, Paul, and I Will but touch upon
it: in the Chapter before my Text at the 11. verse, you shall read bow God
deals with this same Paul; Paul (alias Saul) was sometime very rough and
boistrous, breathed out nothing but blood and threats; then God deals with him
in a rougher way: but now Paul is on his knees, and mark what follows,
presently the Lord dispatches one Ananias unto him; Ananias (says he) go to
Paul, thou shall find him in such a place, thou shall have him there at his
prayers, go to him, tell him from me, that he is a choice, a precious Vessel
in my eyes, and in my esteem, let him understand so much from me; Ananias, he
begins to startle; Oh Lord! (says he) this man has been a persecutor, and he
came hither for to do mischief, I am afraid to come at him: tush (says God)
be not so shye of him now; be not so shye, deliver to him from me a message,
and a word of grace and comfort; and why? for (says God) he prays, he prays
(says God) that is the reason of it; now Paul is a praying Paul; the case is
altered; it is a time of his praying, and therefore it is a time of my
pitying, and of my mercy; now he prays, I accept of him, do thou accept of
him; and so Ananias does, for he goes to him, and presently salutes him;
Brother Saul (says he;) when he is Gods child, he is his Brother straight, all
quarrels are laid down as soon as ever Saul falls to praying; he prays (says
God,) that is suflicient. Yon see how graciously God deals with his when they
fall a praying once.

Now if you would know a reason of this, why God shows himself so gracious to
us in the time and case of prayer; the reason is not from any worth of our
persons, what could come from this, but a filthy smoke, a filchy srench? but
then there was added thereto wine and oil, and incense of Gods appointment,
and so it was Gods Ordinance, and then there was a savor of rest in it: Think
the same for our prayers too, as they come from us, and are only ours; there is
nothing in them of worth or acceptance: But when Gods Spirit is in it, when
Gods incense, Gods perfume is put to it, with his blessing upon his own way
and Ordinance, then they come to be accepted, not (I say) simply, because they
are ours, but because they are Gods; 2 Affirmation.
God goes upon his own motives, he graces and respects our prayers; but why?
because he loves prayers as his own; and the party praying as his own; and
because he delights in mercy prayed for, and for other reasons that we shall
give you by and by.

First of all, God, he does love prayer, Pro. 15.8. They prayer of the
righteous is his delight; it is Gods music, it is recreation; it is called
incense, in this respect it is pleasing and acceptable unto God, prayer is his
delight, because that it is his own appointment and Ordinance, and that
Ordinance that sets God in the Throne(if I may so speak)I mean that represents
him as God unto his people; for we never give unto God the glory of himself
until such time as we fall a praying; but prayer gives away all from the
creature, it carries all to God; and so sets up God, and therefore God is
pleased with prayer, and delights in the same.

And then again, God loves the party praying (we speak of Gods children that
do pray) I say, he loves the party praying too; and when the person is
accepted, then you know any thing, passes very well; let that Damsel, in
Mark. 6.22. please Herod, though in a toy, you know what Herod says to her
straight, ask what thou will (says he) it shall be given unto thee; let
Esther please Ahasuerus, and then she need not woo him, he will woo her;
speak (says he) O Queen Esther, what is thy petition, and what is thy request?
and it shall be granted unto thee. God delights in the persons of his children,
he loves them dearly; and because they are so precious in his eyes, their
prayers and their entreaties are very welcome to him, John 16.25.

Thirdly, God is a God that delights in merey, as the Scripture tells us; he
delights in meroy, says Jeremy; and, Jer. 9.24. Mieah 7.18.
says Micah, morcy pleases him: God is very well pleased when he has an
opportunity to show his bounty, and to exercise his mercy, and his
graciousnesse toward his people (and when he finds them on their knees, then
they are in a capacity of mercy:) God is pleased with this, even to scatter
mercy, and to snew himself a bountiful God, he delights herein, therefore
does even heap mercy upon his people when they are capable of the same:
Hitherto, says Christ in the 16. of John 24. hitherto you have asked nothing
in my name, ask and you shall receive. Nothing, that is, nothing to speak of,
as if he would say, nothing that I value at any thing, I do not satisfy my
self in that which I have done for you hitherto, you have hitherto asked
nothing to speak of, ask more, I am ready to give you more; so large are his
bowels and his favors toward his people; God stands disposed to his when they
come asking, as Naaman sometimes did, 2 King. 5. toward Gehezi; Gehezi comes to
ask one talent, and one suit of raiment for each Levite (that he suggests and
sues for;) but what says Naaman to him? nay, take two; one is too little, take
two, and the Text tells us that he did press him, and heaps them upon him: So
deals God with his people when they come to him for mercy and for kindness;
nay (says God) take more, or at least, I would you were capable of more, I
could as willingly give it, as you are willing to receive it, if the stay were
not on your own part: God loves mercy, and therefore is ready to entertain
the prayers of his children when they come for mercy. As there are these
reasons taken from Gods gracious and blessed nature, so others may be added
from other occasions.

Fourthly, from the engagements that lie upon God, in regard of his free and
gracious promises; promises very free and very large, both for the matter that
we shall ask; ask whatsoever you will, John 14.13. Psalm. 81.10.
ask in my name (says Christ) you shall receive it: as also for the measure,
open thy mouth wide (says God) and I will fill it: as also for the time when
God will do it, before you speak I will hear, and while you are speaking I
will answer, in the 65. of Isatab. I forbear to name other places, because
they are familiarly known to you, so that God having engaged himself by
promise to do great things, Isa. 30.19.
and (as he says in the Prophet) to be very gracious unto his people in point
of prayer, therefore certainly he will be as good as his word.

And last of all, (which is the maine reason of all in truth) the reason is
from Christ, and from that Covenant and transaction that passes between: breast
and his Father: Christ, he presents our prayers, nay, we present Christ unto
his Father; God looks upon a Christian as a piece and a member of Christ, he
looks upon his prayer, as the fruit of Christ's inrercession and Priestdome; our
prayers (being Saints) are indicted by Christ's Spirit, and are presented by
Christ's hand unto his Father; they are perfumed with his intercession, and with
his incense, Revel. 3.4.
and therefore it is certain they be very pleasing to God: God for Christ's
sake will deny none that come in the name and in the Spirit of the Lord Christ;
nay, God has left the whole dispensation of this business unto the Lord
Christ, and has referred all to him, even to do what he will with the Saints
in the Church, as sometimes Ahasuerus did with Esther, left it to her what she
would have done for her people and against her enemies; and as sometimes
Pharach said to Joseph, Joseph (says he) thy brethren are come into Egypt
unto thee, bid them welcome, take the Land at thy command, place them where
thou think good; so unto the same effect does God say unto the Lord Christ,
here be friends of thine, members of thine, that are bone of thy bone, flesh of
thy flesh, they come to me for some relief and succor in thy name, here they
be, receive them, take them, do for them what thou see good, I will ratifle
it, I will make it good; this is the maine reason: And these are the reasons
which I shall give you of the point, why the Lord is so gracious unto his poor
servants, when they come a begging and a suing unto him. Now give me leave in a
few words to bring home this point, and to apply it, and then we will pass to
another.

First of all, this must instruct us in regard of time past, For time 1. past.
must be matter of humbling and of blushing unto us, that we have not answered
the Lord, and returned according to the kindness that we have received, we do
not give unto God they glory of his goodness and of his graciousnesse in
answering prayer, but come many times with a great deal of fear, appear
before him with many doubts, and return from him with a great deal of
sadness and heaviness: Oh! how does this offend and displease God? The
Emperor was sorry that any man should come to offer a Petition to him,
Flavint. Titus, etc.
as if he were to offer meat to an Elephant (as he said) with a trembling hand:
Another, he was sorry to see any man go sadly out of his presence; and can the
Lord do otherwise,, but take it unkindly (as it were) at his peoples hands,
who are so dear unto him, when as they are so jealous, so doubtful, so
fearful how they shall be accepted, and speed, when they come in point of
prayer to him? Well, that is a thing we are to blame our selves for first.

And then in the second place, 2. Present.
this teaches us for the present to take notice of Gods goodness this way, and
to bless and praise him for this his free grace, in hearing poor sinners, and
poor Petitions put up unto him from time to time: This David took notice of,
he would love the Lord, because God heard his prayer in one Psalm: Psalm.
116.1. Psalm. 6.9.
In another he blesses God, Blessed be God (says he) that thou have not
rejected my prayer, nor turned thy mercy from me, Psalm. 66.3. Blessed be God,
why? that God did not scorn his prayer, that God did not fling it away from
him with indignation; thus David: And truly, if we did truly understand the
infinite distance that is between God and us, and those many, many flawes and
defects that be in our prayers and services; did we understand these things
aright (his Excellency, and our own less then nothingnesse) certainly we
could not but stand in admiration at his goodness) certainly we could not but
stand in admiration at his goodness this way: Let me express my self unto
you in a comparison, thus: Suppose that we must always in all our suits apply
our selves unto the King, and go to him with our Petitions, what a business
would this be? Consider of it I beseech you, 1. What a long journey we must
take; and then, how long we must wait: and then, how uncertain we should be of
any success or gracious answer at all: Weigh these things with your selves,
and then reflect upon Gods goodness, and admire him for the same: I enlarge it
a little further: A man has a suit unto an earthly King or Prince, and what
must he do? First of all he must take a long journey to the Kings Court; and
then when he is there, he must find out some Courtiers, some friends to speak
for him, and to make way for him, that he may have access; when that is done,
he must wait the Kings leisure, early and late he must be ready to wait, and so
stay his leisure, and his pleasure: When this is done, that he has got access
once, and is brought into the Kings presence, how then? he is not permitted to
speak his heart unto the King, and to say at large what his grief and his
affliction is; nay, he must not speak at all, only deliver his Petition, and
that he must have ready drawn, and fairly drawn, there must be no blurre in
it, very brief it must be, and very succinct, he must not speak any thing in
the world that is impertinent, or that would be displeasing, but carry it so,
as that he may give full content: And when all this is done, and his Petition
is received, he has not presently an answer, but he must wait and wait again,
he must follow the Court into this place, and that place; and when answer does
come, it may be it is but half an answer and a grant, perhaps the answer is
none other but a bare denial, at least a man cannot build upon it, because he
has no promise beforehand that he shall be accepted, and that his petition
shall be granted: Thus it is when we deal with an earthly Prince, when we come
but upon one Petition: But now put the case that this Petition be granted, what
is it? it is but for some partial or some particular thing; it is not a grant
that will make me happy, and that will do my soul any good at all, I shall
need more things; and what if I need again, must I to the Court again? must I
wait again? must I run the same round I ran before? Oh how troublesome, how
costly, how tedious would this be unto me? And if this be so (my brethren) as
you know it is, then I beseech you do but consider how infinitely we stand
bound to Almighty God for his goodness and his graciousnesse toward us this
way: Alas! we need him every hour, and when we need him we may go to him when
we will, he is always at lessure; come in the night and welcome, come in the
day and welcome; and when we come, he is ready to receive us: his doors (as the
doors of the Tribanes once in Rome) are never shut, they always stand open for
petitioners that shall come unto him; and thou may there speak thy mind, and
speak they heart; all thy fears, all thy griefs, all thy wants thou may
tell him at large, how the case stands with thee, and speak it in thy own
language, in such English and such terms as thou art able for to utter and to
speak; and if thy Petition be not right, he will correct it and make it good
for thee, he will alter it, he will mend it for thy advantage, and for thy
benefit; and if it be too short, he will supply it, and bid thee put in more;
and when he has laded thee with mercy from his presence, as sometimes Boaz did
Ruth, then he will give in charge that thou should come agame to morrow, and
that thou should not be too long from him; he lays it as a charge upon thee,
that thou should not be a stranger to him, but that thou should make use
from time to time of his kindness, and the oftener the better welcome still:
This, this is the graciousnesse of our God unto his poor people; we need not
go far, but step into our closets, there unbowell our selves, and unbosome
our souls, and acquaint him with our sorrows and griefs, and he is ready to
hear us, and willing to pass by infirmities, and to accept of our weak (very
weak) prayers, when they are put up in truth and in humility: Oh consider of
this, and let the meditation of this now stir you up unto thankfulness to
God; his grace, his goodness is so great: this way, as that I am swallowed up
in the meditation of it, and I have not words to express what his tenderness
and his graciousnesse is unto us in every one petition that we put up unto him;
you do not know what a friend you have of God, and how many, many favors and
kindnesses he shows you in any one Petition that he hearkens unto, and grants
to you at any time.

In the last place, this looks forward too, 3. Future.
and it teaches us a third thing, and then we have done with the first part:
The thing is this: Since God is so gracious toward his people in point of
prayer, therefore we should be invited now, and encouraged to make use of this
his kindness, and to go to him upon this errand of prayer, as need shall
require: Let us, I beseech you, think as meanly of our selves, and of our
services as you will; but let us always have high thoughts of God, and when we
come to him in his own way, then promise great things to our selves: And know,
that he is able and ready to do abundantly above that we can speak or think
(as the Apostle tells us;) thus we should go to God, Ephesians. 3.
and of his goodness herein we have a great deal of experience; if we will
not believe the promises that are very gracious, yet let us believe our own
experience this way to trust in him: has not God been gracious to us in
particular, has not God been gracious to us in common, for the public, when
we have sought unto him in this way of prayer? If so, then let us conclude,
that God is a constant God, his power as great as loves prayer as well as ever
he did; he loves Christ as well as ever he did, who is our Mediator; and he
loves the persons of the Elect as much as ever he did; he delights in mercy as
much as ever; therefore let this encourage us to go to God in all our
afflictions and distresses, whether they are personal, or whether they are
public.

1. For our personal defects, and our personal distresses, let us go to God
as Cornelius, here does; Cornelius, he is in a straight, and it was in a point
of great concernment, he must resolve one way or other, off or on; either be
for this Christ, or against him; Cornelius knew not which way to resolve, he
prays therefore, he desires God that he would enlighten him, that he would
direct him: Oh! let us do the like in these distressed times, when there be
such divisions and distractions in the Church of God, and amongst the people of
God, that a poor simple body knows not what is right, and what is truth, and
what is not; knows not which side to adhere unto: Some call him this way, and
some call him that way; and another says this is right, and you must go this
way if ever you will be saved; and another speaks quite to the contrary: What
now should a poor man do? Do as Cornelius did, go unto God alone, pray,
fast, importune him, desire him that he will teach thee, that he will resolve
thee, desire him that he would send some Peter to thee, some Preacher, some
Divine or other, that may settle thee and confirm thee in the way that thou
should go: Thus if we do, God will be the same to us that he was unto
Cornelius, God heard him, and God will hear us too, though he do not send an
Angel from Heaven as he did to him, yet he will send some Peter, he will send
some direction whereby we shall receive some satisfaction, at least for those
things that are simply necessary and fundamental; he will discover so much
unto us, as shall be accepted, and as shall guide us unto his Heavens: This is
his promise, Psalm. 25. he will guide the meek in his way, and he will teach
sinners the way, and he will show unto them his salvation; and in John 7.17.
says our Savior, He that will do the will of God, he shall know the doctrine
whether it be of God or no: If a man in humility of spirit, and in sincerity
and truth of heart will go to God for direction, as Cornelius did, resolving
with him, I and mine are here before God, and whatsoever God shall speak unto
us in his ministry, we are ready to do it, and to follow it: If any man will
do thus, it is certain that God will give him a resolution and a settlement,
and such a settlement as shall be acceptable (as we said before) and shall give
satisfaction to his soul. What I speak of this particular (because the very
case leads me to it, in my Text) that'we may say of all other things too: Carry
all thy fears to God, and all thy sorrows to God, and all thy scruples to
God, acquaint him with thy case, and beg help and strength from him, he is
able, he is ready to hear. Yea but will he hear (me?) Yea thee, he will hear
thee. Oh! but my prayers are weak, and poor: He is a gracious God, he passes
by infirmities, do what thou art able to do, and he is as ready to help thee
as Cornelius. 2. What we say for private men, that we may say much more now, in
the public Case, when it comes to public prayer, and to matter of a public
concernment, here we should be encouraged to go to God: Is God so ready to
hear prayer? does he so graciously answer and accept of poor and weak prayer?
Then, I beseech you, why should not we go to God in respect of the Kingdom,
in respect of the Church, and in respect of the present condition that we lie
under now? Oh! let us all set a praying; pray home the King, pray down
Antichrist, pray up the Lord Christ into his Throne, pray against the sins of
the Land, that they may be removed, and all those obstructions that do hinder
the success of our prayers from day to day; for certainly there are very
strange and great obstructions that lie in the way, otherwise it were not
possible for our gracious God that is so ready to hear the Petitions of one
poor man, to stand out so long against the suits and petitions of all the
people in a whole Nation; the obstructions are great, pray all these out of the
way. Of these I will instance one or two. I will leave the rest in regard of my
haste.

One maine thing which probably hinders our successes in prayer is the blood
that lies upon the Land, Obstructions in prayer, and its success.
that is a heavy thing, that lies heavy upon the heart of the Land. It Is said,
2 King. 24.4. that God would not pardon the blood that Manasses shed in
Jerusalem; he filled Jerusalem and the Land from corner to corner with innocent
blood; God (says the Text there) would not pardon this sin: Nay, this sin
lived some successions, after that Manasses was dead. Oh! this sin, this
sin threatens this Land of ours! this blood that lies upon the Land, the
blood that was shed heretofore in the days of Queen Mary, that innocent blood
that has been shed since by this unhappy difference that is amongst us: Oh!
the Sea of blood that runs through this Land; who must be responsall, who must
be answerable for this? this is a great sin that obstructs our prayers much.
It behooves us, Beloved, to do as God ordered them in Deuteronomy. 21.8. when there
was innocent blood shed, and the murderer could not be found out, then the
neighboring Towns they must go forth, they must slay a Beast, offer a
Sacrifice, wash their hands, pray to God; Oh Lord! be merciful unto the Land,
and unto our Cities, lay not to our charge this blood: So must we do in this
case; Oh Lord, be merciful unto this poor Land almost drowned in blood, do
not charge upon us this blood, lay not to our charge this innocent blood, but
accept of a Sacrifice, and an atonement: That is one thing we must pray
against, as a maine obstruction.

non-execution of Justice; let David in 2 Samuel 21. let David (I say) wait, and
stay, and pray from year to year for the removal of the stroke that was then
upon the Land, until such time as execution be done upon the bloody house of
Saul, there will be no cessation of that stroke and of the famine that was then
upon them; but as soon as ever that was done, and justice executed, presently
the face of the State was changed, and the Lord showed himself a reconciled
God: Oh! let us pray here again, that God would stir up many a Phinehas in
this age, and that he would give the spirit of Phinehas to those that be in
authority, Psalm. 106.30
that they may do execution, and so the plague may cease: Now it is said of
Phinehas, he did an execution, so the plague ceased: Let us pray, that there
may be found in this City, and in other parts of the Kingdom, such a man as
Jeremy describes, chap. 5.1. A man that does judgment, a man that seeks for
truth (he is a man) a public man that stands in the gap: pray, that we may
have such to stand in the breach.

peace that is amongst us, and an aptness to quarrel and fall out within our
selves; I speak not only of that outward war that is abroad, but I speak of
another business within our selves; if God would put up his sword, it is a
question whether we would put up ours, yea or no: I am afraid of a sacred
war, if the civil war were once ended and determined; many spirits are so
imbittered one against another, men are so enchanted with their own conceits
and opinions, that they will put all into a combustion, rather than they will
lay down any one conceit, or any one quarrel or contention that they have
engaged themselves in; this is a fearful thing; how can we look that God
should put an end to our wars, when we are so willing to be at war one with
another, brother against brother, and friend against friend, without any
difference almost?

But last of all, there is another, and that sums up all; carriage toward
God in the midst of so many means and mercies: He has given us his Word, we
slight that; he has made a Covenant with us, and we have renewed the Seal
thereof, many of us (I doubt not) of late: this Covenant we falsify, we
profane and abuse; the Lord has executed some judgments amongst us, and what
use do we make of them? where is the man (almost) that is one whit reformed,
or much the better for all these miseries and calamities that have come upon
the State, and upon the Land? this, this is the sin, the provoking sin,
that we are tooto incorrigible this way, and tooto backward to improve those
means and those judgments which are amongst us: For this God might justly
have a controversy with the Land; Oh! let us pray, let us pray, that we may be
of one mind, and of one judgment, that so there may be peace in our Land,
peace in our Churches, peace in our worships, that we do not fight against our
selves in our prayers: And let us pray in the next place, that we may make
better use of the Word, and of the ministry thereof; that we may make better
use of former corrections, and former judgments then we have done, that so the
Lord at length may look upon us, and when we are humbled and do accept of his
punishment, may then remember the Land, our distressed Land, our reeling Land,
our dying Land, that God in mercy may then think upon it, and heal it: Thus we
should labor, even to pray unto God for the public, that all hindrances may
be removed, and all furtherances expedited, whereby our happiness may be
recovered and resetled: And why should we not set upon this work now? what
reason have we to be dismayed? will suggest, we see our prayers do not take,
and that we do not succeed as we would; nay, the Lord frowns upon us, Sol.
and hides his face from us. Yea, but hang upon him still, pray still, follow
him still; do as Cornelius did, think of a Reformation; lay not all upon
praying, and all upon fasting, but do more, as he does; Cornelius prays, but
he fears God too; Cornelius prays, but he reformes his Family too, (he had
Servants, yea, Soldiers too, that feared God in his Family;) Cornelius prays,
but he has respect to all Gods Commandments, to both Tables as well as unto
one: Cornelius prays, but he is faithful in the particular place and calling
wherein God had set him; he was a good Soldier, he was a faithful Officer and
Centurion in the place that he did sustain; and when as we are thus
universally good, suitable unto our selves, that we are good Christians, and
that we are good Masters, and that we are good Commanders, and that we are good
Soldiers, (good and faithful in the particular places wherein God has set
us) then our prayers will pass, and then God will be so gracious to us, as he
was unto Cornelius: And so we leave that point with you.

The next thing Cornelius does, is a work of mercy; he gives Alms; he was not
only a just man, but he was a merciful man, and was merciful throughout; he
had a merciful hand, and he had a merciful heart: The word here used (...),
with words of that form and termination, as (...), and the like, is very
comprehensive; it implies and concludes both, affectum and effectum, so that he
does exercise mercy with a very merciful and a gracious heart and affection:
The thing here directly spoken of is the fruits of his mercy, the effects
thereof, as the plural does show us; and these are said for to be before God;
they are before God, as they are acted by Cornelius; he did them in sincerity;
and they are before God, as they are recorded by God too, God sets them upon
record, would keep them in memory, they are remembered of God, as the Text here
tells us. I shall not need to tell you how that memory is too low a thing for to
be properly ascribed unto God, he is one that sees and knows all things at
once, sub uno codemque intuitu, so that he has no use of memory at all, but
the Lord is pleased to apply himself to our capacity, and to condescend to us;
and the plain meaning is this, that God does observe and book (there is a
condescension in that expression too;) God observes, and God does book (I say)
every act, particularities of the same; he observes 1. who it is that does a
work of mercy, Cornelius: he observes 2. what is the thing that he does, he
properly, which has respect unto man's present life and livelihood, that is the
mercy here spoken of: 3. He takes notice how much mercy much Alms, as it is
said in this Chapter; and Dorc as made many Coats for many poor persons: Acts
9.
God takes notice of 4. the Time when a man shows mercy; Obadiah in a hard
time, he hid a hundred Prophets, and showed them mercy then, 1 King. 18.5. God
takes 5. notice how poverty, did show mercy to their power, and beyond their
power: 6. Yea, God takes least degree of mercy that is showed by his Servants
to any of his people, even to a little cake of bread, as he does in the Book of
Kings in the Widow; 1 Kin. 17.30. Matthew. 10.42.
and to one cup of cold water, as he does in the Gospel; verily, if a man give
but a cup of water; (water) that is a cheap thing; cold water, no matter either
of cost or pains; says he, if he gives such a cup of water to the least of
mine, it shall not be forgotten, it shall be rewarded: So that God, you see,
takes particular notice, writes down, Grot. ad locum.
books down every act and work of mercy that is done by his people. I could be
large in proving of this now, but I shall not need to say more to such an
understand^ng auditory; I must hasten, in regard of the time and my own
strength.

What may be the grounds and reasons of this, Negative.
The is not from the worth (as we said before, of prayer:) So here, not from
the worth of our works, and of those Alms that we are able to give; as the
Farmers of merit in another world and in another Church use for to speak, who
are very high in their expressions this way, touching their Mercy, their Alms,
their good Deeds, for which they expect a great deal of thanks, and respect
from God, but without reason; for certainly (as one has well observed) it is
very true that many of those things which they called works of mercy, Carow. on
the Rhem. Test.
were indeed the works of penance, and were but mulcts, fines and amercements,
laid upon them by their Confessors for faults that they had committed; and
certain it is, that many of those that they did so brag and boast of, are
more ours a great deal then theirs: However the Doners were tainted and
sunburnt with some particulars of Popery; yet in the maine, many of them were
more ours, then theirs: So that they have no reason to brag that way. In
truth, what is a man's mercy to God? our goodness reaches not to him; what can
we give him, but what is his own already, and what he has given us first? So
that that cannot be the reason why God respects our mercy, for any worth or
dignity that is in our Alms: But the reason is this; God is pleased in Christ
to look upon our persons, and then next to accept of our services for Christ's
sake; Reasons.
2. Affirmat.
and so in particular of our Alms: God is pleased to respect them, because
they are expressions of Christ's Spirit, and the fruits of his own Spirit, and
because they are Seals of our obedience, and of our thankfulness unto him;
and because that they are means of refreshing the bowels of his poor
Servants. For these causes, and under these names and notions it is, that God
takes notice of our Alms and Works of mercy, and daignes to regard and write
them: Write them, how? not to help his own memory (that needs not) but to help
our Faith, and to help our Love, that we should be encouraged in this way to
do works of mercy. I have spoken as briefly as I can unto the point, and yet,
I think, sufficient for so plain a point as this is. All the business here
lies in the Application and the Use of this.

And the Uses (Honored and Beloved) are these.

If this be so, that God takes particular notice, and writes down every work
of mercy that is done; then this speaks but sad news unto diverse sorts of
people.

The first are such men as are mere strangers unto mercy, Almanacks, that are
full of letters, both red and black and bloody on one side, but on the other
side there is fair paper, a waste empty blank, that is all that is to be found
there: Even so it is with many a man's books, if he be a true recorder of his
works of mercy: On the one side, you shall find, Item, so much spent upon
Pride, and so much spent upon Lust, and so much spent upon Revenge, and so much
spent at Dice, and so much spent in Plays, and so much spent upon sin and
Wickedness; this side is full of what has been laid out touching themselves,
and for themselves in pursusuance of their lusts: But now when it comes to a
work of mercy, what have you done for God? what for Christ? what for the
members of Christ? what for the advancement of Religion? or any pious work or
service? what shall you find there? Even a blank, mere ciphers, nothing else.
Oh miserable men! how will these fare when they shall be called to an account
for their Stewardship? when they have laid out all for themselves, and upon
themselves and their lusts, and laid out nothing at all for God, and for the
love of God. This is one sort.

But then there is another sort worse then these, and they are Opposites,
Enemies, (as it were) to mercy; at loast they walk in a quite opposite way unto
the way of mercy: These, why these do not feed the poor, but they flay them;
they do not cloth them, but they strip them; they make not any provision for
them, but cast how utterly to ruin and to undo them: In stead of healing them
they wound them; in stead of relieving them, they oppress them, and in stead
of being to them any ease and comfort, they lay upon them heavy burdens, heavy
pressures: This is a black crying sin, and will prove so at the last day;
what? if they in Matthew. 25. (as Austin well inferres thence) if they shall be
shut out of Heaven, and seat from the presence of God with a curse, who have
not fed the hungry, nor clothed the naked, nor visited the imprisoned? etc. Oh
then: where shall they appear? and what shall become of them that are so far
from this, that they have done what they could to ssuck out the very blood of
the poor members of Jesus Christ! This is a second sort.

best of us, for certainly we are all short in this business, and have cause
even to blush and hang down our heads, betwixt man and man when it comes to a
contribution, and we see other men underwrite, it may be, so many crowns, or
so many pounds, we are ashamed to appear in the same Roll, and to have our
names listed where farthings and halfpence are set upon our heads; much more
should we blush when we bring our selves into the presence of God, and there
consider that God sees all we do, all that others have done; he writes down
every man's name, every man's work, every man's Alms, and they are bookt, and
this book will be read and produced at the last day: This, this should put us
to the blush, especially when we consider two things yet found upon
backwardness unto works of mercy; and barrenness in works of mercy.

backwardness; how heavily do we come off (for the most part) in works of
this kind? Mercy is by our Savior preferred before kindness: Luke 14.13.
Says he, when thou make a Feast, bid the poor, etc. do not bid the rich;
a man may bid his rich friends in a way of kindness, but (says Christ)
prefer the other before that, mercy before kindness, mercy is better then
kindness. But now (my Brethren) is it so with us? do we set mercy above
kindness? in way of kindness and neighborhood, you know what men will do; a
friend desires you to go a journey with him, you will go; you will say, what
though it cost me five pound? what if it be ten pound? what a matter is that
betwixt friend and friend, neighbor and neighbor? When you meet together
(sometimes) in a Tavern, or at an Inn upon some occasions in way of
kindness, to drink or feast together, then happy is that man that can be rid
of his money first; I Will pay says one; I Will pay says the other; you shall not
pay a penny says the third, I Will bear all, etc. and now happy is the man that
can be rid of his money quickly; it grows sometimes very near to a quarrel,
because we cannot be suffered to spend our money: Thus in works of kindness.
But now come to a work of Mercy, how is it then? is the money then upon the
Table? is every man ready to throw down then, and to lead the way unto other
men in this case? Nay then, alas! I am in debt; then, my purse is not about me;
or else, when it comes to the opening of the purse, every finger is a thumb,
and it is such a while before any thing will be got out, that it is very
tedious and irksome to a man to behold it: Then the question is not, who shall
be first? but, who shall be last? I Will see what my betters do first, there are
such and such, they are a great deal richer and better then my self, I will
see what they do; happy is the man here that can be hindmost: Oh! my Brethren,
is not this a thing, think you, that should humble us, that should shame us?
that we in way of courtesy to man should be thus free, but when it comes to
works of mercy for God, we should be so bound up, that we cannot cheerfully,
almost, part with any thing? this is one of the things we fault in our selves,
this same backwardness to works of this kind.

But secondly, there is another thing, and that is barrenness self, and on
the public; what a vast difference will there appear upon the very first
view? If a man read his books, he shall find, Item so much bestowed upon
Apparel, and so much bestowed upon a Feast, and so much for my self, my self
credit, and my self delight and content, my self I know not what, so much for
self; there it amounts to scores, to hundreds, it may be, to thousands: But
then come on the other side; how much for Gods House? how much for Gods
worship? how much for charitable and for merciful uses? and then there come
two-pences and three-pences, and poor short reckonings, not worthy to be
accounted and summed up almost: Is it not thus (I beseech you) with many of us?
are we not thus barren in works of mercy? and should not this shame us now? I
hope, my Brethren, I hope, that there are none of you but will bear me company
in this work, even this night before you sleep, betwixt God and your selves to
confess this your sin, your nigardize toward God, your pinching when it
comes to a work of mercy and charity; whereas you can be profuse and prodigal
when it is to serve your selves, and your own ends.

But this is not all; sorry for our failing this way, but we must labor to
reforms and amend this now, to put on to this great work of charity and mercy
that is underhand: I beseech you, consider, that we are bound to it as well as
Cornelius; Motives.
and that we are as able many of us to do it, as that poor Captain was:
Consider, how that we have as fair promises as ever he had, and that we have
as fair opportunities: Opportunities, said I? Nay, never more opportunities
then in this day in which we live; I need not tell you; you cannot be strangers
to the miseries of the Land, and of this City; I am but a stranger here my
self, yet notwithstanding, I see and know so much, that if you would be
pleased, you (I mean) of the richer sort, to descend and to go into the
houses of many poor men (hundreds in some several Parishes) and there see how
they fare, and how they lodge, I am persuaded, you would be sorry, that your
horse, that your dog should feed and lie no better then some of them do: And
if you would yet go farther, and look upon many men that labor, and labor
diligently, early up, and late down, that take excessive pains for to get
their bread, you should find that they be not able to afford so much money as
would buy a little fresh water to make their children drink; yea, that they are
so called upon by Wife and Children within, that they cannot endure the house
almost; bread says one, drink, says the other; Father, where shal's have
victuals, oh! I am ready to sink, I am ready to faint: It is the case of many
modest men, laboring men, that toil and take a great deal of pains, and are
not able to maintain themselves and their Families with their labors, you
would find it so upon search made.

Shall I add a third Instance? there are come to the City (certainly it is the
honor of this City, and God will bless the City for it, and you will all
speed the better for your receiving of them;) there are come to the City, I
say, a company of poor people that are driven out of the Country; they lived,
some of them, in good fashion in their Country, able to relieve many poor (some
of them able men that did bear office in the place where they lived;) men that
stand so disposed, that they had rather half starve, then they would be
burthen-some to you; such there are about this Town: Touching these I may say,
that unless God be merciful to them, and the times do mend and settle, and
some course be taken, many of them will be more then half starved. You, my
Brethren, you here sit warm, you here live in plenty, live in abundance, but
my heart bleeds and dies within me, to think of the misery and desolation that
I have in part seen in some parts of the Country: I must tell you, that if so
be the Lord be not pleased to find out some way of relief for many poor
people in the Country, they will be utterly starved and undone; they cannot
expect many more Harvests and crops of Corn: Well may they come up hither and
eat up your plenty, but they will not be able to bring in any supplies to you,
as formerly they have done: Oh! consider, and say not now, men groan without a
cause, and there is not such need as men will pretend: No, certainly, certainly
there is great need; for many men, they have lived as long, and shifted as long
as they know how to live in an honest way; the Lord pity them, and give you
hearts to tender them to your power.

Well, but things so standing, what shall I persuade you to? two things, my
Brethren.

The first is this; that you would labor to make your selves able to do
somewhat: And then secondly, that you will travel with your selves, that you
may be willing to do for those that be necessitous, in misery and want.

For the first; 1. Now able to do works of mercy.
some man will say, Alas, how can we help it now? how (can) we help it? trade
fails us; our burdens, they are heavy, and payments, they are multiplied upon
us more and more; it is not with us as it has been, we are not able to do
what we are willing to do.

Well, I hear your answer, I believe it to be true in some part: But now I
beseech you, good my brethren, let us cast about a little, and see whether we
may not be in some measure enabled to do for those that be in greater want
then our selves. hands, you that are able to labor, labor and take pains,
Ephesians. 4.28.
as Paul would have you, Ephesians. 4. that so you may have somewhat to spare for
those that are not able to labor or to take pains. heads too, set your wits
awork this way, cast about and contrive as well as you can how the necessities
of people may be supplied in some measure: Cast about, I say; is there no way
to prevent these idle vagrants, and these persons that eat up the bread of the
honest poor? Is there no way for to pull down more of these Play Houses, I
mean, Tipling-houses, Alehouses, and the like; and to set up Working-houses
that people may have labor, and that they may be set upon somewhat? is there
no way for us to cast and contrive how people may be kept alive? I beseech you
that are men of wisdom and understanding, that you will employ your thoughts
this way. abatement, abate something, and abridge your selves a little, that
you may be helpful to others: Abate something from your backs, and something
from your bellies, and something from your delights and recreations; be content
a litile to deny your selves, (to deny your selves a little, I say) for the
supply of others. I tell you, I am verily persuaded that there would be enough
saved and spared from needless drinking, I mean, from Wine, and Tobacco, and
Strong Water, and the like; and from trimmings, and laces and dresses, and
such like things as are more then necessary; enough spared, I say, to supply
the necessities of many men that do now stand in great need of very
necessaries: Oh! let your Bread be a little browner, let your Tables be a
little shorter, let your Coats be a little plainer, a little course; a little
condescend to the wants of your poor brethren, and impart something unto them
that are distressed and naked.


You will say happily, honor, the port, and the credit of your places too.

I answer, it is true, you must, Casuists say touching this point in case of
extremity, and of mere necessity, how far forth a man must deny himself
that way; we will not stand upon that now) we will yield you that; and there
will be a competency, I hope, without any such extremity: We do not press you
that you should any way deny your selves any thing that is fit for nature, that
is fit for your places, and for your relations: only I propound and offer
this, whether when these are answered and satisfied competently, whether then
there will not be some overplus? and if so, then I press the point: Will you
not deny your selves in a superfluity? abate a little for Christ? a little
finishnesse, and a little excess and superfluity? What? not abate a little
from a dog, from a bird, from a beast? Will you not do thus much for Christ?
Christ bated of Heaven (as it were) for the time, he was content to lay aside
his glorious Robes in our misery, and in our beggary: Oh! let Christ be so much
beholding to you, that you lay something out of the overplus for him and for
his sake: And when you do what you are able to do, it is accepted; as the
Apostle says, It is accepted according to that that a man has, and not
according to what which he has not, 2 Cor. 8.12. Thus you must labor to be
able to do works of mercy.

But then there is a second thing; and that is, 2. How willing to do them.
when you are able, you must be willing and ready to do it too; you must be
willing to it, I say; and here God bears us down with a world of Arguments.
1. If we look to God, he is our friend, nay our Father; you know, for a friend
you will do somewhat; if a friend come to you, and say, here is such a poor
friend and Kinsman of mine in want, for my sake do somewhat, I Will do as much
for a friend of yours; will you not do it? and will you for a God? Consider
Christ; Christ comes in his flesh to you, when poor Christians come to you; he
presents a pale face, a thin cheek, he presents a bare arm or leg (it may be)
to you; will you not do somewhat for to support Christ, and to cloth Christ
in his members, and in his servants? shall the bones of Christ stare and stand
out? shall the naked flesh and skin of Christ pine away for want of succor?
Christians themselves that come unto you; alas! they are your flesh, as the
Prophet says, Isa. 58. they are your own flesh: What? shall the head do
nothing for the foot? and shall the hand and the eyes do nothing for the legs?
what? not for its own flesh, and for those that be of the same body? your
selves, and have respect to your selves (if you regard none of the former,) and
provide for your selves, labor to place your wealth safely, to secure it
first, and then to improve it next.


For the securing of it, put it into a sure hand; you know, men in these
doubtful and dangerous times cast about where they may safely place their
Treasure and their Goods; some send it to a Garrison, and some (happily) pass
it over the Seas into another Country. But tell me now, I beseech you, is there
any place so safe as Heaven, where no thief comes, where no plunderer comes,
where no rust comes? is there any place like that? or can you put it into a
better and safer hand then into the hand of God himself? labor to lay it
where you may be sure to have it forth-comming, put it into Gods hand.

Nay, improve your estates this way: you are willing to do that, I hope, sow,
that you may reap, so the Apostle calls works of mercy: 2 Cor. 9.
It is a sowing; it good husbandry for a man to sow, it pays him for his
pains to sow; what you give in works of mercy, you shall reap for the same a
greater Crop, and a greater harvest. Nay, what says Solomon? Prove. 19.17. he
that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord, and the Lord will repay him again.
I beseech you, mark that place: You give to a man, but God takes it not as a
gift, he takes it as a debt; it is your gift, it is Gods debt; and he becomes the
debtor and the surety for the poor man; you give to man, but you lend it to
God, and God is at least debtor to himself and his own truth.

Yea, but when shall I have it again? says he there, God will (certainly)
repay it, God will ( fully and abundantly) repay it, (...) In Piel.
no man shall lose by God. My Brethren, take Gods word once, take him for your
surety, and lend to him; he has pawned his Honor and his Credit upon it, that
you shall be repaid, first or last. Labor to improve your estates this way;
yea, labor to settle something upon Posterity, put it into Gods hand: We will
put (sometimes) a Portion into a friends hand for a child; trust God with it,
he never dies, he never breaks, he ever lives; make him your Executor, God will
then provide for yours: The righteous, he gives, and he distributes, and his
seed enjoyes the blessing: Oh! lay up your estates with God, lend unto God,
lend it upon this Public Faith, as it were, upon Gods Faith, and God will not
fail you, he will certainly repay you again. Thus you should labor to be
willing unto this good work of mercy: Many reasons more we might press you
withal: I Will only mind you of that of our blessed Savior, in Acts 20. where
it is said (it was a Proverb of his) that it is a more blessed thing for to
give, then it is to receive: Do not you think so? do not you think your case
better to be able to relieve others, rather then to be relieved by others? is
it not in your eyes better and happier for you to have somewhat to give, then
that you should be beholding to other men? since it is a more blessed thing to
give then to receive, be you more forward to give then modest men will be to
receive gifts: Give cheerfully, blesle God that you have ability to give, and
bless God that you have opportunity to give, and a heart to give, and an
affection to give, and make God a sharer in your wealth, and in your plenty,
and your selves sharers in this blessedness, bless your selves, bless your
houses, bless your estates.

Yea but, himself and his?

The holy Ghost answers this; Eccles. 11. opened, see in Part. Tirin. ad locum.
in Eceles. 11.1. and so forward; where the Wise man does prevent all the
Cavils and Objections that flesh and blood is ready for to make against this
work of mercy. 1. Whereas a man would say, it is but cast away all that is
given, it is lost and drowned (as it were) I shall never see it again. No,
says Solomon, though it may seem to be a throwing down the stream; yet
(says he) cast thy bread upon the waters, and thou shall find it many days
after; first or last it will return, it is gone but a voyage, it will come
back with a great return, thou shall find it again many days after: And
whereas a man would say, many poor that now want, that a man may exhaust
himself sooner then repair and satisfy them: Solomon answers him; seven, and
give a portion also to eight; though they be many, proportion it accordingly;
give to this man a little, and to that a little, that every body may have
something of a little. times may come, Solomon answers him, Give (says he) for
thou know not what evil may be upon the earth, therefore give while thou
have somewhat to give, because thou know not how long thou shall have it;
therefore give, because thou know not what thy self may come unto: Thou
may need mercy, therefore sow mercy, heart, I pity them with my soul, but
I am not able to help them, and to relieve them; I hope, the heart wlil be
accepted: Solomon answers, If the Clouds be full of water they will drop down
rain, it self, it will impart it to the thirsty and hungry ground: So must we
do: thou have mercy and charity in thy heart, and it pitties thy heart to see
men in this misery: Oh! remember, if there be water in the Clouds some of it
will drop down; if there be mercy in thy heart, there will be some in thy hand
too. Yea, but will some men say yet further; trading, and it is not with me as
it is with many others, I cannot give: Solomon answers you; whether the Tree
(says he) stands south, or whether it stands north; in a more fruitful, or in
a more barren place, yet it is the Lord's Tree still, cadit Domino, it falls to
him, and it bears fruit to him, and so it will be with us too: If we be good
Trees, let us live in the north or in the south, in a better place, or in a
worse habitation, if so be we be good, somewhat will be coming, and we will
yield some fruit; so Solomon tells us. Yea, this is true, accepted; I could find
in my heart (indeed) to give, but I know not how it will be taken; poor men
are captious, and they will not take a little; and rich men will take
exceptions; some will say, I do it out of pride and ambition, and raise me (it
may be) higher in the Subsidic book, because I am so forward and free of my
purse, so that I know not what to do: Solomon answers you; objecting, he shall
never go on with any work or service whatsoever. Yea, parties to whom I give;
there are many hypocrites and dissemblers, that pretend a great deal of want
when there is no such matter: if I did know the men, it were another matter:
Solomon answers; know how the child grows in the womb of her that is with
child, but for all that thou must not starve the child; we must labor to do
that which is fit for us to do, to follow our light, and our best wisdom and
discretion, and when we have so done, leave the rest to God, under the ground
for us, as for the child. Yea, but I find in experience that I have been
cheated and abused by fellows heretofore, and that puts me off now, Solomon
answers thee; in the morning sow thy seed (says he) and in the night let not
thy hand slack; thou know not which shall prosper, this or that; or whether
both shall be alike; therefore cast not perils, but venture it (as it were)
venture it sometimes, when thou have nothing to the contrary, thou know not
but it may succeed very well; howsoever, what thou do in uprightness, and
with thy best discretion, that God will accept, and that God will take in good
part: Thus Solomon, you see, does wipe off those Objections that flesh, and
blood, and unbelief is apt to make. I could (if it were needful now) add
more which are answered sufficiently by many, specially by two of the Fathers,
which professedly writ upon this Argument; the one is Cyprian, and the other is
Bafil, and I must refer Scholars unto them: I should now add some rules for
your better working, Rules in giving.
as touching the ground and order of your giving; you must 1. give your selves
to God, as Paul says; 2. for matter, 2 Cor. 8.5.
give your own, whence Alms termed often righteousness by the Hebrews and
the 70.3. for time, do it quickly whilst you live, See their Mazkir,
remembrance of souls, etc.
and men live, and not (as later Jews do) give for the dead, But of these and
other rules I have spoken elsewhere, and you may read every where: and
therefore I here conclude this Point. And now we have done with the two Acts of
Cornelius; we hear what he was in point of Prayer, we hear what he was in
point of Alms too: I perceive the time has deceived me, and therefore I will
but touch upon the third point: I crave your patience so long.

We have spoken of the things selves; here is yet something that would be said
of the Person, that is, Cornelius; he was a Gentile, and (as it should seem)
none of the best of the Gentiles neither, an Italian, his Name, his Band, and
Host speak that way somewhat.

This Cornelius was also a Soldier, and amongst Soldiers an Officer; and yet
notwithstanding, you see, that he was a praying man, a very godly, a very
devout, a very merciful man.

The thing that hence we had thought to have observed, is this: That there is
no outward disadvantages that can excuse us from Gods service, or exempt us
from Gods acceptance; served God, and he is accepted of God, notwithstanding
his Country and his disadvantages; so that let a man's Country be what it will,
let his calling be what it will, let his condition be what it will, if he
serves God, God will accept of him, and of his services. We note this the
rather, because that Peter gives us the note in the 34. verse of this Chapter;
I perceive indeed (says he) that God is no respecter of persons, but in every
Nation he that fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted of God, let
him be what he will: but I dare not stand to prosecute this point.

All that we will now say for the Application of it, serve God, and they would
pray, and they would do much, that they would, but they are not accommodated
accordingly: there be lets and hindrances in the way; the Time serves not, and
the Place serves not, and their Calling serves not; thus many exceptions they
have against the service and the worship of God. All these may be answered with
one Cornelius, besides others, if time would have given leave. We see that Noah
and some others, in the worst times, could find time to serve God: We see that
some in Nere's house, and so in the worst places, have found place for to serve
God: We see that some of those callings that seem to be farthest from Heaven
and God, some of those Callings have served God: Gajus, it seems, was an
Innekeeper, yet a faithful man; Cornelius a Soldier and a Commander, and yet
a godly and a religious man: So that there is no place, no time no calling that
can exempt us this way.

But then secondly, we had thought to have said something accepted: and why not
accepted? Oh! their persons are so mean and poor, and their services are so
weak and so contemptible, and their sins so great and so enormious, that
sure God will not accept of them. It is answered, God is no respecter of
persons, in every Nation he is ready to hear every poor soul that seeks
unto him, and calls upon him.

can in your families, since that there is no man excluded from Gods acceptance,
or Gods service; therefore have respect to your servants, even to the very,
Kichin-boy; have respect to all that are within your compass, and within your
selves, do what you can to reclaim them from sin, to bring them up in the
knowledge and information of God: What know thou (says the Apostle)
believing man, but thou may convert thy unbeleeving wife? So say I to you,
what know you but that God may have pity upon thy poor slave, thy poor
apprentice, as well as upon thy self? Yea, what know you, but if you make a
good choice, and take a good course, and carry a good hand over them, but that
Soldiers and those that lie in Garrisons, and repair to your Ports, may be
godly men, religious men, as Cornelius was?

And for your selves, let me call upon every man this day, to hasten to Gods
service: You have all the advantages that may be; you live in a Land of
uprightness, in a Goshen of light; you are under a Constellation (as it were)
of ablest Magistrates, and of ablest Minssters; who shall serve God, if you
will not, that have all these helps, and these advantages? Therefore, art thou
called to repentance? Never say, I cannot, I have no leisure, and the like;
thou may have leisure and grace, God is able to break the hardest heart, he
is able to melt the frozenest heart, and to subdue the sturdiest spirit; and
therefore say not, thou can not: Are you called to duty and service? Say not,
I would pray, and I would hear, and I would do many duties to God, but I
cannot, I have not leisure, I have no time, my place will not bear it, my
occasions will not suffer it: Thou might if thou had a heart; other men in
the same circumstances, in as great difficulties, have served God, and waited
upon him: Daniel was a man full of State-businesse, yet he finds his time for
praying every day to God more then once or twice: Here is a Soldier in the
Text, he can fear God, he can look after his Family, and he can restrain his
Soldiers from pilsering, and plundering, and drinking, and swearing, he can
do it by Gods blessing upon his endeavors; and if he, why not others too?
therefore do not make any such lazy plea: Much less say, Oh, it will not be
accepted! it will be accepted: Give but what thou can give, God will accept
it; pray but as thou can pray, God will accept it; repent as thou art able to
repent, and call in Gods help and assistance, God will accept it: What shall I
say more to you? I am cut off, I am afraid to be too-to tedious to you: And
therefore I conclude abruptly; only I have propounded unto you one Example and
Pattern of mercy, presented unto you many Objects of mercy, and of compassion;
now let me present unto you some more, and these are known well to your
selves: Here is a true report, etc.

Here, according to the custom, a Catalogue was read of sundry Benefactors to
the several Hospitals, and such like Houses for charitable uses; and that
done, the conclusion was as follows:

Thus you see (Beloved) here is work enough for your charity to be employed
about; here are many Objects of mercy, many Arguments of mercy; here are
Objects of all sorts: Old men and Babes, Widows and Orphans, many poor
persons that want stocks to set them on work, that would feign be employed if
they knew how: Here are also diverse others that cry to you, that call upon you
for mercy, and for relief: The Arguments you have heard; Arguments from God;
Arguments from Christ; Arguments from your selves; Arguments from the times;
Arguments from your Brethren; Let me say all at once, God requires it, God calls
for it, God commands it: God commanded once the Clouds, and they gave bread;
God once commanded the Rocks, and they gave water; God once commanded a Raven
for to carry meat to a Prophet, and the Raven did it: Oh! for Christ's sake, let
us not show our selves more ravenous then the Raven, more rockie then Rocks
themselves; and thus we leave our errand with you; another Theme I confess
would better have liked me, and perhaps more reached you; but I have answered
your desure in my choice, and, I confess, the Subject is not unseasonable; the
Lord go with it.

FINIS.
June 10.1645. Imprimatur JOSEPH CARYL.

Abners Funeral, OR, A SERMON Preached at the Funeral Of that Learned and
Noble Knight, SIR THOMAS LVCIE.

By ROBERT HARRIS, B. D. and Pastor of the Church at HANWELL, OXON.

Graves are for me. JOB 171. Qui pronobis mortem semel vicit, semper vincit in
nobis. Cyprian. Epist. Secundum Pamelium. 9.

LONDON, Printed for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at the sign of the Gilt
Cup by Saint Austins Gate, 1641.

TO THE HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS, The Lady LUCIE OF CHARLCOT, Grace and Peace.
Madam,
STrange not my slownesse. I never penned and printed more unchearefully, more
sadly. Sorrow moves slowly. And what is this your Ladyship has now woone from
me! alas! I cannot print your Lord alive again: nor did I intend any
pourtraiture of him. What I spoke was meant to the Living. The Dead needed not
my attestation. Indeed I loved Him more (as another once said) than to say much
of Him. All that I can wish, is, that all, who pretend to Him, and his
Religion, would express him in these particulars.

1 That they would See with their Own Eyes, and satisfy themselves in their
Own Grounds. 2 That they would be True to their Own Principles; that so a man
might know where to have them, and see, that they did Believe themselves. Cic.
de sinbus lib. 2. Epicurei mihi videntur melius sacore, quan dicere.
3 That they would Say less and Do more, and so difference themselves from
other men, as once some Philosophers did. 4. That they would give leave to
Dissent, where Assent cannot be without Dissembling.
It is confessed, Madam, That Sir Thomas and I were not always of one mind.
Dissent we did, in some things: But this I shall ever honor in Him, That He
was Himself, and his Friends too. Neither prostituting his own, nor ravishing
another man's judgment; Herein we concurred, and for this I honored him, and he
was pleased to own me.

He was as Avistotle says of the magnanimous (...)
The world conceives my loss to be exceeding great. And it is a truth. For I
have lost the Freest Reprover that ever I met withal. But why should wereckon
our friends Gains to our Losses! I have done, Madam, with him.

And now let us (I beseech you) get off from our selves. At least, Let Us
improve our sorrows to spiritual purposes. Mourn for this Kil-friend, Sin.
Mourn for the loss of our time, and our not inhansing opportunities and
societies. And henceforward set our faces Homeward, Heavenward. Study Heaven;
Secure Heaven; Trade and dwell in Heaven. There look our selves; thence expect
our Savior.

Mean while consider, Noble Lady, your great trust. A Great Estate, A great
Family. You have many Servants to order; Children to educate; Neighbors to
relieve. Here seal up your Thankfulness to God; your Faithfulness to your
Dearest Husband. And the God of Heaven help you. Thus at last I return you
your own. What to call these Funeral Dispatches, I wot not. Yours (such as it
is) it is, you will own it withal its imperfections, and stand betwixt blame
and me.

I could not come home to your Desires fully. Some things I forgot in the
Delivery; and some I then abridged for haste, and now make short breathd
enough. But I am come as near to my meaning, and my own Copy, as I can. The
Lord go with it, and ever be with you, and all yours. So will Pray

Your Ladyships constant servant in the Faith, ROBERT HARRIS.

Abners Funeral, OR, A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of that Learned and
Noble Knight, Sir THOMAS LUCY.
2 SAMUEL 3.38, 39. 38. And the King said unto his servants, know you not, that
there is a Prince, and a great man fallen this day in Israel?

39. And I am this day weak, though anointed King, and these men the sons of
Zerviah be too hard for me: the LORD shall reward the doer of evil according
to his wickedness.


It Is an hard thing to Funer all it well. Moses prayed GODS help in the case,
and GOD (in part) helps us here by David. Psalm. 90.12.
He had the art of mourning. His heart was exercised, his hand in. Erst he
mourned for King Saul, Prince Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.17.
and other his Allies; Now for General Abner.

This Abner fell very unseasonably, for Himself, for David, for all Israel. The
King is sensible of it, solemnizes his Funeral, becomes the chief Mourner,
and makes his Panegyricke. And, having passed through his other parts, is now
upon his Peroration, where his Masterpiece is, To wash his hands of Abner's
blood; and his plea (stripped out of its Rhetoric) is this.

He that is truly sorry for the dead, and would (if he could) revenge his
death, cannot reasonably be charged with the murder.

But this (says David) is my case. I am sorry for Abners death; I am sorry for
my self, that I cannot revenge his death.

And therefore no way chargeable with it.

The Conclusion is open; The first Proposition evident; The Assumption is made
good by his practice.

Slain, Slain in Israel. This was known, (if men would own their own
knowledge) and therefore they could not strange at his practice, in Forbearing
Meat, Verse. 35.3.
in Feeding upon Tears.

2 And for the Second; Whereas it might be said, Many like the Treason, though
they cry out of the Traitor; and contrive the slaughter, though they weep over
the slain: If David's heart went not with the murder, why is not his hand upon
the Murderer?

David's Answer is, Sol.
He was willing (but not able) to do Abner right, his estate being yet
unsettled, and the concurrents ( The sons of Zerviah) potent in Court, and.
Camp: and therefore execution is perforce futured.

So then, David here reconciles things (seemingly) incompatible, and gives an
account of himself.

I. Why he did mourn. II. Why he did no more.
Mourn he could, More he could not: and that is the very Truth.

Let us now survey David's practice, and trace his steps.

First, you see him refusing comfort, and inviting sorrow. Next you find him
so imbroild, that he knows not well which way to turn him.

1 In the first we will take notice of his grief, and 2 Of his ground; whence
he infers it.
A man (says he) is slain: A Considerable man of place and worth is slain,
and that in Israel. This is the ground of his sorrow; and these his terms and
expressions are no way inconsistent.

The man may be great, a Great Prince, of great authority, and yet Die: For,
Greatness will not keep from Death: Nay let us give this Proposition its full
extent.

No Greatness will keep from any Death.

1 Not of Strength. There be that Die (says Job Chap. 21.23, 24.) in the
strength of their perfection, or in their most perfect strength, when there is
not the least decay in Nature. 2. Not of Birth. The high (says Job, nay the
Princes, Job 34 19.) fall, and that like others, Psalm. 82.7. (...) as well as
(...) Psalm. 49. Parts, Ver. 10. As dies the fool so the wise. Place, Ver. 12.
Means and Friends, Ver 7: One, Psalm. 89.48.
No Earthly Greatness will deliver. No (...) (let his Strength lie where it
will the word is large) shall deliver himself from the Grave. Death he must
See, that is, Feel, as all senses be a kind of Feeling.
Greatness will free from any Death. No not from any.

Bloody Death. Witness great Saneherib. 2. King. 19. ult. Base Death. Witness
Queen Iezabel. 2. Kings 9. ult. Unnatural Death. Witness that great Statist,
and President of Counselors, Achitophel, 2 Samuel 17.23. Contemptible Death.
Witness King Herod, at his highest. Act. 12.23.
But why do I insist, where every Schoole-boy can enlarge upon the same
Theme? One Abner is an instance of all, being every way great; Great in
Strength, able to lead the bravest Army then in being: Great in Spirit, who
would not give his Head for washing, not take his advantage of Asahel the
Assailant: Great in Place, Captain of the Guard, and that to Three Princes in
succession: To warlike Saul: To Prince Isbosheth: and now consigned by valiant
David: Great in Power and Authority, able to contest with his Master, and able
to sway all Israel at his pleasure. This mighty Abner lies Dead before you, and
falls from Greatest Greatness, into the Lowest Pit suddenly.

Shall I give you one Reason for all?

Greatness will not keep from any one Cause: Kind of Death.

1 The Causes of Death, (if we speak of Death at

1 Moral, or Legal. Sin and Guilt. 2 Natural, or Physical. Dyscrasy,
Disproportion, etc.
Earthly Greatness can free from none of these, (as experience has taught
us.) Indeed if this Greatness could take off Adams Guilt, free from all Sin,
deliver from all Distemper, Moral or Natural: Then might it give a
Supersedeas from Death. But the first is not possible: Therefore the second is
no way feasible.

2 If we speak of this Death, Violent Death; Innate Impotency, and
Deficiency, and Foreign, either Suspension of Influence, Ayds and Supplies:
Iertul. Vide de Anima. cap. 52.53. etc.
or forcible Impressions, and Incursions made beyond all power of Resistance:
Now here Greatness, is also at a stand: Great men be as tender, as passive as
others; Depend as much as others, and Stand by a Manutention; Lie as open, as
others, to Invasions and Assaults. Nay Greatness is sometimes Unwieldy of it
self, Et mole sua ruit: Sometimes it sets a man more in the Eye of Envy, and
face of Danger; and in stead of sheltring him, makes him a fairer mark. At all
times it is Finite, and may be matched. There is an Higher than the Highest, that
will make but Mortar of those under foot, as it is, Esaias 41.25. At least, Esaias
41.25.
what is wanting in Power, may be made up in Number, which is all one. Many
Shoales of small Fish may encounter the greatest Whale. Many Swarms of Flies
and Frogs may invade King Pharaoh, and his Kingdom. Cave multos, si singulos
non times: Maximinus.
said one to that great Tyrant. Leo fortis est and occiditur. Elephas grandis
est, and occiditur, etc. The stoutest Lion, the greatest Elephant, the fiercest
Tygre may be violently slain: a Sword will pierce, a Gun will shoot, Fire will
burn, Water will drown, nay a Raisin-stone, a Fly, an hair will choke the
greatest Monarch living. We have said enough to so ordinary a point. Vide
instances in some Popes and Princes.
Only we are to make our use of it, before I dismiss it; and that I shall
(instantly) do, if first I shall be bold to tell you what you are to trust to.
You see how it fares with Funeral Sermons. They are (mostly) made but matters
of form, and men come to them as to great Feasts. The first Course, wherein
GOD is most concerned, is lightly passed over: The second, wherein Man is
represented, is most expected, and stood upon. For the preventing of this, I
pray you understand, That you are not to expect any Second course at all: But
such provision as I could make, in this my indisposednesse, you shall have
served in altogether. This said, I have now a double address. Uses.


The first to, us little ones. 2 The other, to you of greater mark and place.
First,

1 Great Fears. 2 Great Hopes. 3 Great Desires after great things here.
For Fears, It is the Prophets Inference, Psalm. Why should I fear, when I am
threatened; and another enriched? Nay, it is GODs own use. Esaias 51.12, and 7.8.
verses. Who art thou, that fear a dying man, fading grasie, a little
Wormesmeate, Mothes-meat?

O, but, he is a great man,

Fear him, as Great, with a Fear of Reverence, Almighty GOD, whose is
Greatness, and all great things. As great Cedars are Cedars of God, etc, great
Cities, Mountains, etc. are Gods.


But fear him not with a Fear of Basinesse (fear him not so, as out of
Cowardice to decline station, balk duty, swallow sin, dissemble truth) Why? He
is a dying man, says GOD, and his greatness will be devoured of Mothes. So
basely to fear a dying man begins in weakness, and ends in a snare, Prove.
29.25. Therefore qualify those Fears.

2 For Hopes, Hear Esaias, Chap. 2. last. Cease from Man, whose breath is in his
nostrils: Esaias 2, ult.
wherein is he to be valued? O! he is a Great, a promising man: Yea, But is not
his breath in his nostrils, ready to be let out? If so, Cease from hoping in,
or trusting on him. Psalm. 146.
Hear David, Trust not in the Son of man. What if he be a Prince? Trust not in
Princes. Psalm. 146.3. Oh, but they have noble thoughts. Yea, but those dye
with, or before them. Why should I be infinite? Ver. 4.
Is he a Man, Man at his best, Every man, (every whit of him) is not only
vain, Psalm.36.5. and 62.9.
but vanity. Nor so only, He is upon the Balance and Trial, lighter than
vanity it self. Therefore cast not thy Anchor of Hope there. Hope (if thou
see cause) with an Humane Hope of Charity and possibility: Beware of any
higher Hope of Cerrainty, of Infallibility. No doubt but many Captains, their
Hopes rose and fell with rising and falling Abner.

Desire, is that I most insift upon. Great Desires to earthly things, discover
little Judgment. These are, Founded in Weakness. Fed with Wind. End in Smoke.


Their Rise is weakness, as experience (after Reason) shows. Foundation.
Who so longing as the languishing person? Who so climbing as the veriest
child? So ambitious as the basest Bramble? What so aspiring as Wind and
emptiness? So ravening as the emptiest stomach? A massy man, of true worth
indeed, brings worth to things, borrows none from them.

Food.
What is the food and fuel of these desires? Truly Wind. We may say of all
these Sublunaries, what Solomon says of one particular; They are not. Prove.
23.5.
And shall our desires and eyes fly upon Nothing. They are Nothing in realitie,
and virtue. What they be, they be (as Tertullian somewhere) in Fantasy.
Absolute greatness (out of GOD) is not. There Is no such thing among Creatures.
The most is, Arist.
(as the Philosopher notes) but a Comparative Greatness.

Thus we call somethings great, compared to 1. Little things: As Ten shillings
is a great deal Farthing token, and yet what is ten shillings? 2. To little
persons and Capacities. So to a Rome was once formidable, because the
neighbors were contemptible. Florus.
But lay the comparison right, and bring these poor things to the Standard,
and what are they? Alas! compared to the Great GOD they are less than
Littleness. Isa. 40.15, 17.
All persons and things cast in the Balance bear not proportion with one drop
of the Bucket, bear not the weight of one dust in the Balance. What Is one dust
to the whole Balance? What Is that to the Earth? What Is one drop to the full
Bucket? And what is the Bucket to the Well? The Well to the Sea? And what are
all these laid in one to the Mighty GOD? Nothing, and less than nothing, says
that high Prophet. Nay what is all here below to those vast bodies above? Ver.
17.
And then what is such an Island as this compared to some other Kingdoms and
Continents? What? But a little Moat, and Swans-nest? So true is that, which out
Masters have taught us of old: Nothing is simply great, but in reference to
what is less. End. Prove. 23.5.
they have (as Solomon adds) Wings, but no hands under those wings. Wings to
fly from us: no Hands to do ought for us. Load us they can with great fears,
cares, envies, jealousies, distractions: but help us they cannot in the day of
sicknesle; much less in the hour of death. Ask the greatest, what Death, what
Hell, shall I say? Nay, what sorrow, what sickness, what ach, what pain, can
these, All these great nothings either prevent, or remove, or assuage? Ah
Smoke! mere Smoke! which carry with them some trouble, but little or no warmth
or comfort.


All which being (confessedly) so, let me say to you what our LORD said to his
Disciples: Are these the things you look upon? Mat. 24.2.
And what GOD said to Baruch, Seek thou great things for thy self? seek
them not. ^ 45 ult.
Enjoy them you may, if cast upon you: But earnestly seek them not: Leave
these to that poor fellow in Seneca, who was all for this Poor Greatness,
S^. in. Suasoria. 2. Sencio.
who in all haste must be a Grandee, and thereupon looked big, spoke big, and
bombasted himself out with big clothes, and so became a great Fool. Leave
these to those dark men, who never came where greatness grew, whose highest
ambition was to hear (Great) Alexander the great; Mahomet the great: Pompey
the Great; the great Cham; the Grand, Signior; the great Mogor; the King of
Kings; the Cali Fillus; the Mundi-Dominus, etc. Let us, who have as many Eyes
as the Chinois boast of, learn of Christian men, Vid. Bot. relati. l. 5; of
the Chinois. Salvia. de previd. l. 5. ad calcem.
what greatness is. If thou will be Great, says Salvian, be great in virtue,
outstrip men that way. If thou will outshine others, get goodness, get
Wisdom, says Solomon. If thou will get above all, be most useful, and
servicable, says our Savior. This the way. The greatest greatness, is
goodness: for that sets us nearest to the greatest GOD, and good. Eccl. 8.1.
Zep. 2.3.
Therefore let go those things which will never satisfy, never set us above a
Pagan: and seek high, great things indeed. Seek righteousness, seek
meekness, seek faith; nay, greaten these, abound in these, and other graces:
Psalm. 46.15.
then shall ye be Princes in all the Earth: you shall reign with GOD, and,
Iacob-like, Prince. it with him. This greatness Spiritual is feisable: this
will set you above all these Molehils below, Hos. 11.12. and 12.3.
and will at last free you (though not from the stroke and sense of sickness
and death: yet) from the sting, venom, curse, bondage, and hurt of all. Here
stop: here sit we down.

My second address is to you great Ones. My humble suite to you is this, That
you will be true to your selves; and know, that in despite of all greatness,
Read Ezekiel 32. where 5. or 6. instances are given. ver. 17.18. ad finem
usque.
you must die. The truth is, greatness flatters men, and men flatter it. If
great Ones will not deal truly with themselves, they must not expect it from
others. Herein Poverty has an advantage above Greatness, that it meets with
plain dealing; so does not this. We dare tell a poor man, that he is not like
to last, and bid him Set his house in order: But what servant, what friend,
(nay almost I had said) what Physician, what Esaiah will say so to an Hezekiah?
We dare call a poor man's sin, Sin, and tell him, that his ignorance is
dangerous, his pride damnable, his formalities fopperies; and bid him sit sure.
But for the rich and mighty, Cajetan
we say in the words of the Cardinal in another case -- Si vult decipi,
Decipiatur. If a poor Curre run away with ftolne goods, we pursue him, and
rate him, till he resign: but who dares take the Bear by the tooth? the Lion
by the Beard, and say Restore? Since then few, or none will be faithful to
you, be ye good to your selves: And, if you will hold a distance from your
teachers, and not (with some great ones) admit of other Monitors, be your own,
Memento Mori, Philip. etc.
and tell your selves, that you also are Mortal: else we shall Immortalize
you, as some would Alexander. Call your selves Sinners; Vid. Hist of Jews the
11.
else we, (with that Chartrous Monk in story) Saint all who will fee and supple
us. Consult your own bodies, and senses, and see a decay there. Or, if you
will abroad, improve this double instance. See here a Noble Pair, and
establish your selves in this truth, by the testimony of two mouths, two
bodies; both not long before their ends valiant, both vigorous, both presenting
as well, and promising as much as we can, and now both lie Dead before you.
Nay, seeing Examples known and at hand work best, and the Eye (of senses)
most affects the heart; See here under view a Man accomplished, and made up of
all the Contributions of Art and Nature; Pythagoras.
a Man, in whom concurred all those things, which the Philosopher could think
to beg of his God: to wit, Beauty, D. navec.
Riches, firm Constitution of body and mind: Such a Brain, such an Heart, as
the most learned Physician never saw. And thence infer: that, There is no
Redemption from the Grave. For certainly, if greatness of wit, of learning,
of spirit, of riches, of friends, of allies: if greatnesle of care in servants,
of atendance in Yokefellow, of skill in Physicians, of affection in all, could
have kept off Death; we had not been thus overcast, and clouded this day. Mors
sceptraligonibus aequat. aquo pode pulsat. etc. and que sequmtui pasoim.
But no outward greatness will do it; Death knows no measures, no distances,
no degrees, no differences, but sweepes away all, and either finds, or makes
them Matches.

To you then; O ye sons of the mighty, is my message. Set your houses in
order: for you must dye. You are left behind to make ready: Oh prepare for
death, for any death, nay for sudden death: for why may not you fall in your
strength, in your Journie, as well as Abner? Say then, Are ye ready, now ready?
is your Will made? your Pardon sealed? could you dye this hour? in this place?
If so, happy ye, in case you Stay for death, not death for you. But if as yet
you be not Shot-free, and Death-proofe, what do ye mean? why do ye defer?
What? Do ye think that death fears greatness? or will be answered with
Complements? Or do ye think that greatness of spirit, of means, of
chearfullnesse, of Titles can bear you out? Or that it is all one to die in a
Bravado, and in cold blood? Or that death is the same in the hand of a man, and
of GOD? Or that a: Lord have mercy, or two, an hour or two before you are all
dead, will serve the turn? No, no, it is a work of works to Die. that is,
Actively and Cheerfully to resign life. The best, who have been about it, all
their life, find all provisions little enough. And therefore do not think to
slight and to outlooke that King of Fears, that top-gallant: but fear before
hand, that you need not fear at any hand.

And yet let me advertise you of another extremity, and that is base-feare: for
that will bar up the doors against all thought of death, Vitellius trepidus,
dein'temulentus, Tac.
and set you, either on Drinking with him in the story; or on some other
Diversion, thereby to drown, or to forget your fears.

There is (as elsewhere I have discoursed) A Spiritual Fear of death. There
is, A natural. Neither of which may be dissuaded. The Fear, I give warning
of, is, A Base, Cold, Carnal Fear, which will make a man creep into an
Augre-hole, swallow any sin, admit of any slaverie; which will kill one daily,
because he must once die, Heb. 2.
and keep him a perpetual slave, and prisoner. This the fear I would not
have you Cowed by: and this fear you may competently overcome, if you will set
right the



At present, this is all. Mistake not Death, 1 It is not, in it self, the
greatest of evils. As better things than this poor life; GODS favor, GODS
image, the Life of CHRIST, Eternity, etc. Vid. Animadversions of Bish. of
Sanum on Gods Love to Mankind.
So are there worse things than this death; Hell is worse, Sin is worse, GODS
Curse is worse, Corruption worse; Moral, Sinful Evils worse than this, which
is painful, and evil only to Nature. And reason we have to grieve more for
being in a possibility, and proximitie of sinning, than of dying. 2 This Death
is not so simply, and intrinsecally evil, as that no good can be made of it.
Nay, this may be improved, and death may be the death of all our deaths; of
deadly diseases, corruptions, temptations, of all. Thus simply considered it is
not so formidable, as that we must fling away our weapons, desert our station,
and fly, Excessum dix. Tert. contra Valent. and Cypria. Ep. 3. Luke 2. 29.,
Phil. 1 23. Job 14. 14 Ioh. 11. 11. and Passim. Aliud demutatio, aliud
perditio. Tert. de resur. c. 55. Plin. Not bist. lib. 7 and 55. Hic rogo: non
furor est ne moriare mori. Mart. lib. 2. Epigram.
(as once Israel) at the voice of this Goliath.


But now Death to a Christian becomes another thing. It has lost its name: and
hears a Departure, a Dissolution, a Change, a Sleep, etc. and we should take
up GODS language.

It has lost its Nature and Relation: it is not to such an one Penal, but
Medicinal: destructive, but (fetching its denomination from its term)
perfective. Look upon it under a new Notion; and then you will not be of poor
Plinies mind, That It doubles ones pain, and death, to Forethinke the issues
of it. No, it doubles your strength, and makes your courage redoubted:
therefore view it, and spare not: but view it thus.

1 Look upon it, not as destructive, tending to ruin: but as a mean and way
to life. Look beyond it; See what stands behind it; A Crown of Glory, of
Life, of Bliss. And this end will sweeten and smooth the way: it will dare
amicabilitatem mediis. Rod in GODs hand. This (as other strokes) is moderated
by him, and he can make a Rod a Staff, Psalm. 23. yea turn Moses serpent into
a Rod, and work with that Rod Wonders. Death is a cup in our Fathers hand, as
well as sickness, and works wonders. Person, and will in his Members. See how
unable death was to separate him from the Godhead, and shall be us from GOD,
Romans 8.38. Romans 8.38.
See how he has intercepted and cut off Deaths succors. Whereas death
borrowed its Sting from sin, and Strength from the Law and Curse: 1 Cor.
15.56.
CHRIST has disarmed them all of all their destroying, killing power; and called
us, with S. Paul, to set our foot upon their necks, and to sing: O Death! O
Sin! O Curse! O Hell! where is your power? etc. Yea see him, having killed
Death, and buried the Grave, fetching Honey and sweet out of the strong,
turning Death into a Living Friend, 1 Cor. 3 ult.
and most useful servant, 1 Cor. 3. ult. subdued to us Death, and so made it
Ours.
O view death in the face of CHRIST, make him your Second in this Duel; and
then you are freed from the fear, and so from the bondage of death: then you
are Menindeed, Freemen. A Man is not himself, but a Slave, till he can either
Live, or Die (as this noble Gentleman and I were wont to discourse.) The only
he is free, when (with S. Paul) he can abound and want, be sick and well; can
live, or die. Nay then you shall be brave accomplished men indeed; some of GODs
Rabbis, as Daniel calls them. Vid. cap. 9.27. Vt and Job 32.9
A man is not to be held a man, because he dares meet a man, and can look any
man in the face. (A great matter to look a Worm in the face!) But then you
shall be men; when you can look any pain in the face, any fit in the face,
any danger, any death in the face: when you can look Judgment, and the
unpartiall Judge in the face. This is to be a Man. (...) 1 Cor. 16.13.
Thus Man-it.

And, since your greatness cannot keep you from Dying, let your Goodness
keep you from sinking, perishing, and losing by Death.

Thus for David's ground of sorrow, as that must be Rational, and stand upon
ground.

Now follows his inference and practice.

A man great and considerable falls: Therefore David falls upon mourning, and
pleads for it.

1 A man is slain: and upon grounds of humanity David would mourn. 2 Next, a
public man, now upon a public State, David would appear a Mourner. 3 A man
so useful was slain in Israel; and in Religion, David is to lament, and
seems to Wonder at his Servants Wondering at his practice. Know ye not (says
he, etc.) q. d. If you own your own eyes and knowledge, you cannot but know,
that I have reason to be sensible of this stroke.
Hence our second Inference.

When great men are taken from us, we must be affected with it.

When Abners fall (men great of place, and use both) we must have a sense of
it, and observe it for use. Zach 4.7. Dan. 4.10. Ezck. 31 8.14.
When Mountains are shaken, and Ceders shattered. When pillars are Pulled
down, and Stars of greatest magnitude hide their heads, we must resent this
with David, and improve it unto forrow.

Shall I need to prove these ordinary and confessed truths? Solomon tells us,
that A wise man lays any man's death to heart. Eccl 7.2.
And Isaiah chides us, if we let an useful man (though private) pass out 01
of the world, Esaias 57.1.
without observation. What would he say in case we should bury a man of
public use and spirit, without an Ah his glory! what in this case has been
done, it is needless to report. I will not lead the simplest out of his own
knowledge. Who knows not what lamentations were taken up for Patriarch Jacob,
Genesis 50.10. 2 Chro. 32 33 2 Chro. 35.24 25.
great Hezekiah, good Josiah? who has not heard of Elisha's Epitaph, The
Horsemen, 2 King. 13.14.
and Chariots of Israel: and that from a man not of best note? And lest you
should impute all this to the greatness only of men's place, without respect
had to men's use and worth, the Holy Ghost is pleased to set a mark upon the
Coffin of persons less public, and more obscure when they were use full. Thus
Nurse Deborah a profitable member, leaves a mark upon the place of her
burial, The Oak of Weeping, more famous than the Oak of Reformation, in our
Story: Genesis 35.8.
Thus merciful Dorcas (rather Tabitha) was covered with tears, as she covered
others with clothes, Act. 9.39.

Nor was this solemn mourning only for men and persons eminent for piety: but
for others, who in Moral and Political considerations were, in their way,
useful. Thus holy David weeps over Captain Abner, of whose piety we hear
not much: All that his friend and Countryman says of him; is, That he was a
Prudent man, Josephus.
well qualified for natural parts.

Thus he much bewails the death of Abners master King Saul, and lets not to
tell the State, 2 Samuel 1.17.
that their loss in him is great; not because his forwardnes in Religion was
much: only he was a good Husband for the Public, Verse. 24.
and a brave Commander; no less active and valiant, than he was comely and
proper. Ratio res Dei. Tert.
But Reason is GODs, as well as Scripture: Reasons.


1 If we look upon such men, as they are members of a Body-Politique, the
loss is great. If the Body cannot say of the Foot (nay of one Toe of the foot,
nay of one joint or nail of the toe) I have no need of thee: 1 Cor. 12.27.
much less can it say so of a more noble part. There is a loss, a maime in
the least, and the body is sensible of it: much more when an eye, or hand, or
arm is taken off: And Great Personages are Eyes, Hands, Dan. 11.15.22.31.
nay Arms. 2 If we consider such as Heads over charges, Inferiors? and what
a dependence there is upon them? They? Why they are as Pinnes, whereon many
Vessels hang, Isaiah 22. As great Oaks, which yield life to many Sprigs; shade
and shelter to more. One such a Sun is more than a Thousand Candles: with one
so pregnant and big-bellied, hundreds live and die. 3 If we view them as they
relate to GOD, Ier. 5.1. It Is farther an ill presagement, as Isaiah foretells,
cap. 3. The Pilot lost, the whole Ship is hazarded: The Captain (as the
Seventie here read it) may be more than all his Company, (...).
and weigh down Thousands, as David's Soldiers once said. 2 Samuel 18.3

In short, In one head is Vertually contained the whole body. Judge. 9.53.
Wound Abimeleck there, and where is Abimeleck?

I apply now in some haste, and must divide my self again betwixt Great, Uses.
and Small.

And first, Higher Rank and Mark. And my suite to you is, That you will
answer your places, and be Usefully Great, which only Greatens you. The Great
GOD does not measure men by Inches, Men of Measures in Mose.
as sometimes men do: Nor by an outward Greatness: Heregards not the arms,
or legs of a man: He respects the Rich no more than the poor: Psalm. 147.10.
Job 34.19.
The thing he looks to, is Virtue, Serviceablenesse, that is the thing. Genesis
1.16.
The Moon is a Great Light because of Great Use. A lew at Berea is more
eminent, and Honorable than another elsewhere, Act. 17.11.
because more Conscientious. There is, (you know) a Greatness in Bulk, and in
worth. A Lark may be more than a Kyte, though not in bulk, yet in worth. Molis
and virtutis.
There is (they say) a Greatness Belluine, and Genuine. in that a beast may
and does exceed us: In this we exceed our selves, and others; and in this only.
No man is the better simply for his Greatness, unless it be attended with
goodness. So much we may learn from wiser times: For, sithence men understand
themselves, they let fall those Swelling and empty Titles of Greatness; few
rejoiced in that name, unless great worth and achievements put it upon them;
As it fared with Constantine, and some few others. They were gladly heard,
Wise, Learned, Pious, Philosopher, Philopater, and the like. And, when men
would honor them with attributions of worth, they styled them Nedibims (...),
Optimates, and other like, sounding their true worth, Bountiful Benefactors
etc.
and carrying meat in the mouth. Yea so much we may learn from Highest (that
is Divine) Language. Wisdom it self, when it pleases to bestow honors upon
men, calls them Fathers, Foster-fathers, Saviors; and the like. Which some
also, 1 King. 5.13. Exodus 20. Esaias 49 23. Act. 7.35 H^b 4.8. Selcu^hus Soter.
without the pale of the Church, either affected or enjoyed. As Antiochus
Soter: Antigonus in Suidas. etc.

So then, in true judgment, the style and thing, hat truly honors and enobles
a man is Goodness, therein a man most nearly touches the Best and Highest
Good, Psalm. 119.68.
our Ever-blessed GOD, whose highest title is that in the Psalm. He is good,
and does good.

I cannot enlarge. I will lay before you one only instance, of Father and Son
in the same family, who ran their several ways with different success. The
Father was Josiah;, He was all for Goodness. Good he was, and did Good to
GODs house, and people. The Son was Shallum; (whether so termed in scorn,
and reference to another Shallum, I have not to say) He was all for an earthly
Greatness. Before he was well warm in his Fathers Throne, he had great
thoughts, and would not take it as his Father did: He would build a stately
Palace, much enlarge himself, and (as it seems by one affix in the Text,
Ier. 22.14.) would take in a piece of GODs house too. Thus they steared their
course. My Windows the Hebrew.
Now what was the issue? 1 In Life, the one prospered: the other went backward.
Did not thy father prosper? (says GOD) to the Son. Ier. 22.15. 2 In Death,
the one had a most honorable interment. All Israel mourned for him, mourned
much, mourned long: the other (like the unhappy son of another good father)
lived undesired, Lam. 4.20.
died unlamented, and was buried with the burial of an Ass, 2 Chro. 21.20
Ier. 22.18, 19.
no man weeping over him.


Give me leave to use my ancient freedom. In these read your selves, and your
own Lot. If you (with Shallum, and his Brethren) make none other use of your
Greatness, but to Roh GOD, Pride your selves, and oppress the poor; your
Greatness shall be your Shame, as 'twas Shebna's, and shall end in Baseness
and Contempt. Well may men bless, and flatter you, whiles hoar you magnify
and adore your selves: But when you are Dead, they will trample upon your faces,
and curse you as fast. At your Grave none shall mourn: See some Emporous,
Herod. etc.
unless Fee'd, or Forced (as once it befell others) rather they will rejoice
at your fall (as once at another in Esa. 14. and your names shall be written in
the dust, and buried in oblivion: Or if they remain, they shall Lie as Carrion
above ground, and become a Curse. Prove. 10.7. Esaias 25.25.


On the other side, If you shall improve your Greatness to GODs glory, and to
the Countries good; to the Churches growth, and meas comfort; you shall not
need with Absalom, Otho, Julian, or any other Publicola, to Hunt for applause:
Honor will hunt out you, and you shall not avoid it. Whiles you live you shall
live in the hearts and desires of men, they will pray for yours, and praise GOD
for you: And when you die you shall not need a Trumpet or Herald to sound your
worth: Every man will be a Trumpet; every man will make an Oration; All Israel
will mourn, in heart, and not in face, and form. Oh, Choose rather to be
buried with Prayers and Thanks, than with Curses and Complaints: Set your
Servants, Tenants, Neighbors on weeping, rather than on laughing, at your
Graves. So live, that there may be Use of you, whilst you live, and Miss of
you, when you are dead. That is; Be humble, modest, godly, sober in your
selves. Be helpful, comfortable, profitable unto others. When you are gone,
there is no more remaining of you, but your Goodness. The question will not be,
How Rich, How Great, How Gallant you were. The questions will be, What did he?
Who was the better for him? If none, What made he in the World? An unprofitable
man, whilst living, is dead: A useful member, when dead, yet lives. Live,
Live, Live quickly, Live much, Live long. So you are welcome to the world: else,
you are but Hissed and Kicked off this Stage of the World, Phocas by Heraclius.
as another was. Nay many (as Job. 27.23 and V. 15.) who were buried before
half dead.

2 For us of a Lower form, 1 If as yet we see some Stars, in this great
darkness; lets joyfully entertain them, as Wisemen did once another, Mat. 2.
Do but think what an Army is, without a Captain; a Ship, without a Pilot;
and Head, without a Body; what a misery it is, to live without order; to be
where men Talk all at once, and none can lay his hand upon other, or command
silence. Truly such a Paritie bordersneer upon an Anarchie, and confusion: and
we much forget our selves, if we neglect this mercy of having Useful men.
When Israel had a Solomon, they divided their time, Psalm. 72.15.
between Praying, and Praising GOD for him.


It Is a misery never to see the Face, but the Back only of mercies. It Is a
frowardness to see nothing but faults in men, whilst we have them: and then
nothing but whine, when we lose them.

Take heed that you do not Brawle Moses out of the world; and then Scratch him
out of his Grave again, unless GOD hide him from you.

Crosses sting deeply, when Mercies Pass lightly, See what you have, before
you cease to have it.

Have we lost any Abner from amongst us? David prompts us our lesson. We must
feel our less.

And here, What would become of me, should I let out my self, and pursue my
thoughts! How many brave Scholars, Soldiers, Statesmen have we seen laid in
the Dust! Nay, what Mighty Stars have within our memory, been hidden from
us! What should I be meddling with Crowns? Three mighty Princes and men in
their several ways.
Or speak what a blow England, France, Swedeland; etc. have received upon their
very Head, in this our age.

These be Subjects of a Fairer Pen, and higher discourse. I have my hands and
heart full with our present Instance. Our friend Lazarus sleeps, and we cannot
wake him. In this one Bottom we have all our interests, and suffer a wrecke.

A Noble Lady has lost, not an Husband (as she says) but a Father.

Many Children have lost, not a Father, but a Counselor.

An house-full of Servants have lost, not a Master but a Physician; who made,
(as I am informed) their sickness his, and his physic and cost theirs.

Townes-full of Tenants have lost a land. Lord, that could both protect and
direct them in their own way.

The whole Neighborhood have lost a Light.

The County a Leader.

The Country a Patriot; To whom he was not wanting, till he was wanting to
himself, in his former vigor and health.

What would David say in such a case? Truly, as he said, a Sam. 7.
Weep ye daughters of Jerusalem, for king Saul, etc. And what can I say
less, than Weep ye poor, within doors; ye poor, without: ye poor old
people, whom he kept alive, by studying how to fit you with work: Ye poor,
in the bordering Towns, to whom he sent, with David, A Piece of flesh with
Bread, a Sam. 6.19.
every year: Yea, Mourn, ye Gates, who were kept warm, with weekly
provisions for the neighboring poor. Yea Mourn, all Allies, and Aliens; Rich
and Poor; Old and Young. For a Public loss, let there be a Public
lamentation.

Speak I these things after the manner of men? To Deifie the Dead; To Gratify
the Living? No, I speak of A Man, Iam. 5.
A Man (with Great Elijah) subject to like passions with us: A Man, who cast
himself lower than you, or I dare cast him. For in Saint Paul's words he said,
That he was of sinners the chief: Of such a Man I speak, and will say no more
of him, than what has a fair Prospect to your Profit. We must do him Hine
(...), et Iusta defuncterum.
Right; and it is one of the Rights, and Dues of the dead, To be Lamented at
their Funerals. We owe it, 1 To Him, 2 To Religion, Vid. Goul. in Cyprian. Ep. 3
3 To Humanity, And we should not, 4 Please GOD, If we should let such members
pass, without some sad remembrance.


And yet there is more in it, than you are all aware of.

The Time of Abner's death was almost as much as the thing it self. Isreal's
Abner was now Rightly set, (his Grounds I wave, but) over he was come to
David's side: The Sinews of that disjoynted State were now knitting: The
sparks of that unhappy war now quenching. Abner had a Great Design in hand,
and things were likely to receive a fair end. In the midst of all Abner Dies,
The Business is scoated: Pendent opera interrupta: Hence these tears in part.
It was the case of this our English Abner. He had Noble designs, and thoughts
in his head. But Alas! How soon do our thoughts fall with us! Psalm 146.
Only the thoughts, and Counsels of the only wise-GOD stand good for ever. He
had another Design upon this Our Abner: And, to fit him thereunto, he set him
to the Best School, that ever he was in; where the Two Schoolemasters of
Luther, and Calvin ( Temptations and Afflictions) taught him more in one year,
than all his Books, wherein he was so much verst, could do, in an age. Now
Speculation was translated into Experience. And now I wish, that all of his
Rank (and of mine too) had heard him Decrying the Vanity of all Creatures,
and Abasing sinful flesh before the Great GOD.

You can easily conceive how Full Expressions would be from his own Mouth,
and how well it would become him, to Stain the pride of man.

But that is not all: Would, you had heard his judgment of Practical
Divinity, and unaffected Preaching. His censure of man's slighting the ways of
Wisdom, and Sanctification.

And lastly, (To say nothing of what was said under seal) I wish that all we
(Divines) had but heard his vehement expressions of the base; base, and more
than slavish flatteries of some of us Churchmen, toward the living and dead.

But why do I flatter my self with a conceit of Hearing and Having him,
whilst I speak his words! He is gone from us, and has left us no more of
Himself than a Sad Representation: And it must grieve both you and me, to
have Such a Man, at Such a Time, taken from us; and to see so much reading,
observation, knowledge, wisdom, (I could say, if yet I could speak it, so
much ingenuitie, nobleness, plainheartednesse to his Friend, when upon Try all
he could Trust him: But I only say, before I get off this sad discourse) So
much worth, and Sufficiency, qualifying him for the Service of any State, or
Prince, so Suddenly snatched from us.

But O Sin! Sin! Sin! These be the bitter fruits of our Cursed Sins.

But stay Brethren, Quiet your selves, and hear King David a little further.

Dyed Abner (says he) like a fool? No, not like a fool, nor yet so happily
(All out) as this Abner of ours.

Abner (for ought appears) dyed Intestate; happily Childlesse; certainly he
dyed very suddenly, and had not much time left him to resign himself to GOD by
prayer.

And being dead, He borrowes his Bed in another man's Ground.

Not so this Noble Gentleman. 1 He made his Work of our greatest Strength. 2
He dies not All at once: but has left behind Fair, a Numerous Of spring, 3 He
dies not unexpectedly, nor was his Tonguetyed. 4 And (being fallen asleep) He
is gathered to his Fathers in peace. Here he lies in his own Bed: Here he
lives in his Posterity. Charlcot is Charlcot still, not Hebren


The greatest service we can do him (having mourned over him, and made this
Funeral an (...) of all failings) Is to honor him in his Living pictures, (as
once they did their good Rulers at Rome, in their Dead Statues.)

Be not you, who loved the Tree, wanting to his Fruit. Visit them; Advise
them; Be faithful to them; Pray at least for them, for each of them; (...)
especially for the First Borne of his family: what Hector (shall I say?) in
Homer, did for his Son? 1 King. 1.47.
Nay, what David's servants did for their Young Master. That his worth and
honor may surmount his Fathers. Amen, said Father David. Amen, said his Truest
servants to that prayer then. Amen, say I to the like now.

And so we have done with Abner.

But all this while what becomes of the King? Abner is now quiet. But the King
bemoanes himself. Hear him. I am weak: The sons of Zerviah are too strong
for me. And why, the sons of Zerviah? Why not of Asar? (if that were (as
Josephus tells us) their fathers name.) Iojeph. Antiq. lib. 7. cap. 1.
Was it, because he was dead? Or was the Mother more Masculine and Active? Or
was it, because the honor came in by the Mother, as nearest allied to the now
King? However The Sons of Zerviah they were; and some of them yet lived; and
these were too big for David (as things stood) to buckle withal: and hence the
complaint.

But what! was not David a King? What! Did he Rule in Israel, and yet
complain? Was he Anointed, and yet overmatch't? Why then see how it fares
with us, whilst here

The highest estate may be over-topt.

The Best man, David.

The Greatest man, King David has here his Hands, and Heart, full. We must
draw in. Note but the Particulars in the Text.

All is imperfect. Somewhat still wanting in the fullest estate. Abraham had
Riches: but then he wants an Heir, and after that a Wife. Isaac has Health:
but then he wants Sight. Asa honor: but he wants Health. Vzziah Riches: but he
wants Liberty. In One; David has a Grown; but he wants an Arm. 2 All
somewhat galling and vexing. When we are David, Ahab, Zedekiah, Darius, All
kings: 1 Kings 11. Ier. 38 5. Dan. 6.
and yet all met with their Match, and were held to Hard meat. One son or
other was too hard for them, as well as Zerviahs sons were for David.

3 And in a word, All unsatisfying; and not David cannot have his will in all
things. Somewhat goes against the Hair.
Nay the Worlds Minions ( Ahab and Haman) make their moan. 1 King. 21.6. Esth.
5 13.
But why do I tire you! I Will quickly say all.

1 These earthly things are Lame and unsufficient, 2 We are Needy, and
shiftlesse both. Shreds. 3 We mingle all with Sin; Gall. 4 Briefly; We are
here from Home, Place: And what Quiet, and Comfort, when there is such a
Dis-location?
I apply in three words. Uses.


1 Be not Surety for the world; Neither promise, great matters thence, at
First: (as men who have the world in Reversion usually do) Lest at Last you
cry, O Solon, Solon! or O Seldius! as others have done before you. Craesus in
Herodot. and Carol. 5.
There is (says David) An end of all (Created) perfection: and we either have,
or quickly may see over it. Psalm. 119.96.
Indeed the most of us have already seen the best of this world: And we do
but Dream, if we Dream of better Days. Meliora tempora nolite sperare. Aug.
in Psalm. 96.
Do not hope for that; (says Austin) look not for better times, for better
success, than others have sound. Greater we cannot be than King David: he
wore a Crown: but he found (as another said) Cares under it. Wiser we cannot
be, than that Magazin of knowledge Solomon: yet all his Wit could not keep
sorrow from his heart Great Rodulphus Rufus.
His experience told him, that All was vanity; yea utmost vanity. And worse
than so, Vexation, and that of Spirit too. And believe it; He that will build
his hopes upon these Sands, well may he Die before his time, as Abner did: But
withal he will Die a fool, as Abner did not. Jeremy has said it, and men
shall find it. Ier. 17.11. 2 Have patience, in case your Friends be preferred
hence to Heaven. Cares also: All things be not to their mind: They cannot save
whom they would, as David found in Absalom: Nor can they Execute whom they
would, as David felt in Ioab. Nay suppose them as well as Earth can make them.
What is Earth to Heaven! Gold to Glory! The whole Creation to the Creator!
Earth! Why it will break. Ones Head, to compass it, Ones Back, to keep it,
Ones heart to lose it. It Is a misery to Need any of the Earths Crutches, and
it is a Cumber to have them: But if once they get above us, and be our Masters;
they undo us: and the more we expect from them, the less we shall enjoy
them. Then, of Lean Comforts, they become heavy Crosses. Our Great Conqueror
could not conquer his delights, His Horse: he is hurt thereby. And, if I be
not deceived, This Worthy Gentleman, Polyd. Virgil.
and brave Horseman met with his disease, in the same delight; and so both dyed
Laesis Intestinis, as I conceive. 3 Shake hands with this world, Heaven.
1 There Is a Full estate. Nothing is wanting Reason and Grace can desire. Here Is
a world of wants. The Soul, that wants Faith, Knowledge, all; as Peter
implies. The Body, 2 Pet. 1.5.
that wants, first meat, and then cloth, and then fire, and then sleep, and
then physic, and ever one slabber or other. Yea every sense wants, every
member wants, every joint must be estsoones supplied.

2 There (in Heaven) is a Free Estate. No sin there, no sorrow, no
temptation, no tempter. Bitter-sweets: our nearest friends sometimes our
greatest Griefs; as David found his Cosins here: His Father, his Brethren; his
greatest Familiars, his Sons, his Wife elsewhere.

Here nothing is fully to our minds: we do not please or satisfy our selves.
We must Perforce bear, what we bear Sadly. In Heaven All goes Right. Every
one will please us, and we shall offend none. There all are of a mind, all as
one in Christ, all one Christ, and Christ all in all.

Firm estate. A City that has foundations; Heb. 11.
a dwelling that is indeed a Mansion, a Crown unfading, a Kingdom unshaken.
Here all things totter and tumble: MoVoa etc. Ioh. 14.2.
here is nothing but Drooping, Dropping, Dying Erewhile, David mourning for Saul,
now for Abner, anon for his own, and thus it is here. But in heaven there is no
Sunset, no Night, no Death. We shall never see Grave, but Ever be with the
Lord, and with our faithful brethren. Oh! Assure this Blessed estate, that is
thus Full, Free, Firm. Till you be sure of that you are sure of nothing.

But how may this be done?

I will speak it, but too briefly.

1 Clear your title, that comes in by the Heir, the LORD CHRIST. You must
claim by and under him. 2 Cor. 3.18. Phil. 2.5. 2 Pet. 1.4. Gal. 5 28. 2 Cor.
5.17.
Make it good, that he is yours, you his. That is, Produce his Image, his Mind,
his Nature, his Affections. Prove your selves crucified to the World, and It to
you. Prove that Old things are past, that al in you from top to toe is New. And
the very Title to this estate Intitles you to a present blessing.

2 Get present possesion. That all your Counselors will advise you unto. Now
every Savinggrace is as Turfe and Twig: Ephesians. 1.14. 2 Cor. 5.5, 6
is as the first fruits in Israel: is an earnest of the purchase, and
Inheritance, and gives you entrance, (Liverie and Seisin) 2 Peter 1.11. These
(if well settled) will make you Dye safely, and put you beyond all Danger.

To these Two, if you will be persuaded to add Two things more: you will Die
gladly, and be free, not only from the Hurt, but from the slavish fear of
death, and they are these.

1 Conformity with heaven. 2 Conversation in it.
1 Conform to it; and from that likeness will Love. Whereas in our sinful
estate, the holiness of GOD, and that company is a terror, and torment to
us. Heaven would be an Hell to a sinful man. But fiery things Ascend as
willingly, and naturally, as earthly things descend. And think the same of
heavenly Spirits and affections.

2 Converse in heaven. Lodge your thoughts, Christ, upon heaven; make that your
home. Look upon it as your place, your Center; and then you will make to it,
whatever it cost you. A Stone will through an Element of fire, a Sea of water,
to come to its Center. So will ye, if your dwelling be above.

I have said how you must be qualified. If now you come to learn and mind
these things, and keep the Soul in warmth, and upon the wing, you shall be
able to bear up, in the approaches of death, and to think of Christ's coming
without sin, with comfort. Nay, you will love his appearance, 2 Timothy 4.8. 1
These. 1.10. Phil. 3.20. and 1.23. Heb. 9.28, 2 Pet. 3.12.
wait for it, look for it, long for it, hasten to it, and hasten him, in the
words of the whole Church, and of this her Son, Come, Lord JESUS, come
quickly. So She to the last. Rev. 22.17.
Rev. 22.17. So the Spirit. So this Noble Knight, who most (as I am told) in
his last words breathed out this: Come Lord JEsUs, Come, Come quickly. O my
Lord, quickly, Amen.

Even so Come, Lord JEsUs; Come apace, come once for all, to make an end of all
Sins, Sorrows, Funerals, by ending the Last enemy, death, and by casting death
and hell, and grave, and all that opposes life and glory, into the Fire. Amen.

Even so come Lord JEsUs, Amen.

FINIS.
CONCIO AD CLERVM. 1 Oxoniae jamdudum habita, 2 Dein posthabita, and repudiata,
3 Nune demum in lucem edita.

Authore ROBERTO HARRIS Hanwellensi.

JEREM. 23.15. A Prophetis Jerusalem prodt contaminatio in univer sam terram.

Ambitio and superbia valde suaviter dormit in sina Sacerdotum. CYP. de jejun.
and tentat.

2. TIM. 4.5. cum 17. At tu vigila in omnibus, perfer iniurias, opus perage
Evangelistae, minister tui plenam fiaem facito. Vel (ut al) ministerium tuum aa
plenum probatum redaito.

LONDINI, Excudebat G.M. pro Johanne Bartlet, ad insigne poculi Aurati in
Caemiterio D. Pauli, M. DC. XLI.

ORNATISSIMO DOMINO DOCTORI 01 WILKINSON 10 AVLAE MAGDALANENSIS PRINCIPALI
DIGNISSIMO, Hanc qualem qualem lucubratiunculam observantiae and amoris ergo
ROBERTUS HARRIS EJVSDEM AVLAE OLIM ALUMNUS DAT, DICAT, CONSECRATQUE.

Totius Concionis (...)
Thema ipsum 1. Proponitur.. 1. 2. Exponitur, and tractarur, 2 1 (...) 3, 4, 5.
2. (...) idque. 1. Generatimubi omnium academicorum officium. 1 Astruitur cum
1. Testimonio. 6. 2. Ratione,. 7.
2. Applicatur ad omnes five. 1. Discant.. 8. 2. Doceant.. 9.

2. Speciatim, Theologorum (sive sint tantum candidati,. 10. sive (quos vocant)
Designati). 11. Officium 1. Arguitur 2. Applicatur; est autem ista applicatio,
Partim 1. E'. (...) ubi Pontificioru^ and aliorum (...) de 1. Praedicatione 2.
Personali, and Ventilantur. 3. Vicaria,. 12. Ventilantur.
2. Residentia 1. Loci,. 13. Ventilantur. 2. Officij,. 14. Ventilantur.

2. (...) ad 1 Summos, qui doctoratus titulo gaudent,. 15. 2. Omnes, qui
animarum curam susceperunt,. 16.









Qui omnes ad Pascendi parts revocantur omnes, cum 1. Verbo, ubi obiter de
(...) legere 2. Vita, and exemplo.
Sect. 17. Ubi Exhortationem excipit and concludit Precatiuncula.

CONCIO AD CLERVM.
Johannis vicesimo primo, ad finem versus decimi septimi, and deinceps, ita
scriptum legitur.

Verse.17. -- Pasce oves meas.

Verse. 18. Amen, Amen, dico tibi, quu^m esses junior cingebas te and ibas quo
volebas: quum autem senueris, extendes manus tuas, and alius te cinget, and
transferet quo^ noles.

-- Pasce oves meas


. 1.
QUae accepistis verba (Patres, Fratres dilectissimi) proximum Petri responsum
excipiunt. Tertium rogatus Petrus suum in Christum studium, animumque, Ter
interloquitur, and nihil non amoris spirat, spondetque: Tertio (causa inde
arrepta) suadet ci Christus in pascendis ovibus assiduitatem. Suadet autem
argumento vario: Primum a Persona Petri, alterum vero Christi, Tertium demum
populi petitum legimus.

Petrus Christo plurimum and semper debuit, and saepe Petro Christus quicquid
erat humani remiserat, postliminio restitutum ad Ecclesiae gubernacula Petro,
siqua sui, si Christi, si Ecclesiae ratio fuerit, summum incumbit Pascendi onus
and negotium.

. 2.
Nec pascendi modo, sed and Patiendi. Pastoris enim munus is it is fere partibus
absumitur; id quod Christus Petrum imprimis voluit admonitum, cum a Pascendi
opere, ad Patiendi onus, sine ullis inducijs, revocat. Fuit, ubi Petrus and
sibi vixit, and ad arbitrium suum: Ibat paucis his diebus, redibat, libero
fruebatur Coelo: Ast communen tune temporis colebat vitam. Piscator quidem, sed
non hominum. Alios jam mores, alium animum provectior ista aetas dignitasque
postular. Ad Clavum enim sedet, non Naviculae sed Ecclesiae, magni istius (ut
loquitur Basilius) navigij. Cumque ab omnise removisset negotio, Christo
studeat; ejusque unius vestigia premat oportet, and sequatur, -- Per mare, per
terras. Et sequirur quidem licet passibus minus aequis firmisque sequirur
tamen; and (ut crevit animus) sanguinem suum omnen in ejus unius gratiam
profundere non detrectat. Sed id alias. Nune quod instat. Quae omnia dicta
sunt, eo redeunt, ut Petrus quisque and Pastor Christum Pastorem summum
referat, and ad ejus similem, contendat vitam, qui patiendo Pavir, qui Pascendo
passus est. Quae, enim dico Pastoris munus partesque attingunt proxime, istic
loci praecipit Salvator, and praedicit, and ea quidem duabus absolvuntur
voculis: Pasce: Patere: Istud quid a mundo Petrus; Illud quid a Petro Christus
expectaret, loquitur.

Ac de Praecepto primum. Deinceps erit Praedictio, si unum illud prius
efflagitavero, ut in hac tanta difficultate, me infantissimum, summasque
angustias passum, studio, vultuque vestro sublevetis.

. 3.
Atque in primo Tria sunt, de quibus omnibus litem nobis intendunt Pontificij.
1. Subjectum [Petrus] 2. Objectum [Oves] 3. Officium [Pasce.]

Bellarminus rem omnem Tribus (ut rem non persequar infinitam) complexus est
Propositionibus. De Roma. Pontif.l. 1. c 14. and inde.
Prima, Soli Petro a Christo dictum est, Pasce oves me as. Secunda, Summa
Potestas hisce verbis Petro tribuitur. Tertia, Per Oves intelligitur Ecclesia
universa. Verbo perstringam omnia, ne longius ad istas ineptias abeam.

1. Soli Petro ista dixit Christus. Quid tum postea? Ergo Petri inanis larva
(Pontifex Romanus) in summo rerum fastigio collocabitur: Quam nullo modo istud
sequitur? Soli Jehoschuae dixit Dominus; Te non deseram. Ergo de solo dixit?
Contra quam sentit Apostolus ad Heb. Heb. 13.5.
ult. Soli dixit, sed non de solo. Etenim (ut alia multa non Argumenter) si de
solo Petro intelligantur verba; vel ejus Personam, vel ejus Officium spectant.
Non primum: Quia ita excluduntur omnes. Romanus etiam, De Romans Pont. l. 4. c.
23.
nisi quis Vulcanus in unum ambos conflet and compingat. Si Officium; vel
Pastoratus, vel Apostolatus. Non Apostolatus; quia eo nomine omnes exaequat
(post Christum) Bellarminus. Si Pastoratus dixerit (and certe dixit) In istos
se induit laqueos, quorum ex nullo se unquam expediet. Erit enim Petrus sub
isto sensu, vel Ordinarius, vel extraordinarius pastor. Extraordinarium si
dixerit, nihil sibi, nihil suis consentanee dixerit, nihil non lethale Capiti
Pontificio. Sin Ordinarium; ergo extraordinarium ordinario, Coelum terris, Sol
um bris cedit: ergo capite diminutus (non auctus) est Petrus: ergo suas, habet
certas and definitas oves, contra quam statuerat de Pontif. lib. 1. cap. 16. 1.
Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11.
Ergo erit aliquod in Ecclesia munus Apostolico majus; Contra Paulum contra
Bellarminum, lib. 4. cap. 23.

Sed detur (ut alia obliviscar, and authoritatibus non certem) Christum hoc
ipso in loco, and ad solum Petrum, and de Petro solo verba habuisse, nihil est
quod isti (quam damus) interpretationi vel tantillum incommodet, cum idem sive
honos, sive onus, adijs in locis (Math. 16. Johan. 18. and 20.) alijs accedat
Apostolis: accedit autem (ut infinitam vim Patrum taceam) Bellarmino test, qui
instar multorum esse poterit, si sibi constabit. Si enim omnia, quae hoc capite
in Petrum congessit Christus ornamenta, ex aequo omnibus distribuit, versa
pagina, capite superiore, -- Sicut me misit Pater, etc. Non erit novi (nescio
cujus) honoris accessio, sed veteris potius restitutio and confirmatio. De
Pont. Romans
Distribuit autem si in mentis potestate fuerit Bellarminus. lib. 4. cap. 23.
Sed vincat Antecedens; Quo tandem argumento illud sequetur? Ergo Papa rerum
potietur Christianarum: Ergo Johanne Apostolo, qui Petro supererat, erit
antiquior, sive Clemens, sive Cletus, five Linus, seu quis alius. Quam lubrica
sunthic omnia! Quam omni modo nutant! Si excutere vacaret. Primum fueritne
Petrus Episcopus singularis? Secundum, fueritne Romae Episcopus? Tertium,
habueritne Haeredem? Quartum, sitne Papa iste Haeres, and ex ass Haeres, qui
tam non Petrum, quam nec Christum cognatione attingit? Site Ambrosius, Non
habent hoereditatem Petri, Lib. 1. de paen. c. 6.
qui fidem Petri non habent. Et suavissime, ut plurima, Nazianzenus, Orat. in
Athanas.
(...). Certe non tantam apud veritatem. ejusque alumnos inibat ille gratiam, ut
tanta and tam multa precario referat: Maximecum exsuccessione nullo necessario
argumento astruatur Ecclesia, ut in suis Ecclesiae notis pa am facit. Fuit
prima Propositio, sequitur secunda.

. 4.
To Pascere Summam Potestatem denotat. Dixit, sed quo veteri exemplo? quo firmo
argumento? Ad litem Grammaticalem resredijt. (...) altum crepat. Bellarminus
(silebitur enim de futili isto inter (...), and (...) discrimine, Vide Colloq,
Rayn. ad Har.
quod mentis potius vitio quam animi (quomodo mihi persuadeo) posuit non nemo,
silebitur de ista rasi gregis Helena vulgata editione; cujus mendae vobis non
sunt praestandae, (...) (inquit ille) est summa authoritate regere. Esto. Ergo
aut in vi sola verbi res non vertitur, aut quivis (...) summo suo jure omnia
aget, eritque Papaubique, ita, ut nusquam sit. Sed non sunt omnia subtilius
rimanda. Ista igitur, ne tempus diutius fallam. Pono.

Primum (...) apud Authors idoneos jus subalternum juxta ac summum significar,
quos apud Dux, Pastorque omnium postremus(...) audit.

Secundum in Sacra Pagina, ministerium aeque ac dignitatem loquitur, Luc. 2.
Ephesians. 4.1. Pet. 5. Ubi (...) cum (...) committit: Se ad Presbyterorum numerum
aggregat: Christum vero omnium pastorum principem statuit Apostolus.

Tertium, hoc in loco, rem negotiosam magis quam gratiosam, vult (...): id quod
oculis and manibus tenetur, non tenui aliqua conjectura. Quo enim alio spectant
Christi verba? quorsum adeo obnixe a Petro contenderet, ut regeret, regnaret,
Principatum (nescio quem) susciperet. Cujus semper satis erant studiosi
Discipuli?

Quid? Number eo effrenatam dominandi libidinem non ita retuderit Christus, ut
Semel, Iterum, Tertium jam acueret? Quid? Quod (...) idem quod (...) sonat?

Imo potius Pastorun more, oviu^ curamagere, quam simpliciter regere, a^t
Jansenius in Ps. 2. Vt habet Montanus
Insulse igitur Bellarminus, (...) est quodam more regere: ergo omnis (...) est
omni modo rex: ergo Petrus est Monarcha Ecclesiae, Imperator (Vicatius tamen
Imperator (ut alias habet) Apostolorum.

Turpius vero and in suos, and in Sanctam committit linguam, dum (...) vel
(...) cum (...) confundit.

Pessime vero omnium in Barclaium, dum ad Triaista (...), Tria adjecerit
argumenta; quibus recensendis, (id est refellendis) immorari non licet
brevitatem sectantem.

. 5.
Sequitur Tertia. -- Oves dicuntur universe, aut Determinantur pro modo
enunciationis. Apostoli paverunt omnes (Sermon communiter qua potuerunt, and
Scripto Universe) Ministri definite, Omnes instrumentaliter, Solus Christus
efficaciter. Ita Nostri. Adeo succincte, enucleateque ut nihil supra.

Ast non arrident ista Pontificijs, qui nihil sapiunt praeter mundi strepitum.
Ovium enim nomine illis (siquid ego intelligo) veniunt and Oves, and omne genus
Pastores, Reges, Imperatores omnes, and Angeli, and Lupi, and Diaboli. Istos
enim omnes Petri subjiciunt ferulae, quae hoc pascendi Diplomate ei conceditur.
Et neminem (credo) praeterit, quid in istos omnes potestatis, aut sibi
asseruerit Petrus Redivivus, aut ei affinxerint non parum multi ad rem Romanam
facti: Verum enim vero, habuerit Petrus in Oves nonnihil Authoritatis, in
Pastores (Apostolos dico, nedum Angelos) non habuit. Habuerit Ordinis Primatum,
certe non Iurisdictionis, nec Creandi, nec Exauctorandi, nec Excommunicandi,
nec aliud hujuscemodi quippiam; test non semel Paulo. -- Nulla in re inferior
fui Summis Apostolis; test Bellarmino. Etenim, si habuit; 2. Cor. 12.11. Vid.
Chry. Theophy. Occumen. adlocum.
Ergo vel ut Apostolus, vel ut Apostolo major. Neutro, inquit Bellarminus,
modo. (cum summa sint omnia in Apostolo) ergo (inquam ego) Nullo.

Miras hic cudunt Allegorias, and Monstra distinctionum: -- Petrus
consideratur, Vel per se, Vel per alium: Vel ut Apostolus, vel ut Pastor: Vel
ut Ordinarius, vel ut Extraordinarius: Vel ut Cephas, vel ut Petrus.
Bellarminus veo in omnem se versat partem, tandemque (per summum nefas) ipsum
fontem turbat and incestar, homo omnis memoriae audacissimus. Sed nolo plura;
praesertim ubi omnis potestas Pontificia ejuratur. Vereor enim ne ista nimium
multa videantur, and vestro tanto silentio indigna.

Quid vos imprimis doctos voluit Petrus Succenturiatus accepistis. -- Oves
Pascere, est, Honoribus inhiare: Imperatores in ordinem cogere: Reges solio,
sedibusque avitis exturbare: Omnia denique miscere, and pro libidine agere.

E quibus omnibus, cum tanquam e scrupulosis Cotibus enavigavit oration, sequar
jam, (vobis fretus) morem meum, eoque propero, quo me vestra tacita expectatio
jamdiu vocat.

. 6.
Pasce Oves, etc.] Verba quidem ad Petrum sunt facta: at cum quid commune
habeant, arque propriam magnam quidem partem tam sunt nostri, quam ipsius
Petri: Omnium enim est, aeque ac Petri, ea eniti, quae Commun is salutis maxim
intersint, Spartamque, quam nacti sumus, adornare. Habet enim unusquisque fere
nostrum suas parts, suas curas, quibus par est ut invigilet: Nec minus
universis, quam, uni Petro, dicit Christus. -- Amatis me! Pascite oves meas;
illud agite, satagite, quod ex officio vobis incumbit maxim.

Sumus enim, quamdiu in vivis sumus, tanquam Pueri in ludo, aut in Navi Nautae,
aut in corpore membra. Sumus, ut Domi servi. Bellive milites: Certos
nempehabemus fines, Circumscriptos Cancellos, Designata munera, and officia;
and ad ea omnia tenemur ad unum omnes, quae cum loci and officij nostri ratione
sunt conjunctissima.

Hinc Christus Petro, -- Pasce, Pasce. Pastores; in istud unum Pascendi opus
omnes intend nervos, viresque. Hinc ad Romanos Paulus. Cap. 12. ver. 6, 7. --
Corpus, unum, Membra multa, multa officia. Prophetiam habemus? in Prophetando;
Ministerium? in ministrando; Doctrinam? in docendo seduli versemur. Hinc ad
Judaeos Petrus. -- Vt quisque accepit donum, ita alius in alium subministrate:
Si quis loquitur, loquatur; and quae sequuntur. 1. Petr. 4.10. Hinc Paulus se
in Exemplum dat, tum Thessalonicensibus. -- Non (...) nos gessimus, tanquam
milites inexercitati; tum Corinthijs, -- Non gloriamur ultra mensuram, and
Canonem nostram. Certe suos (quos attendebat) habuerunt Apostoli terminos;
suos, (prout visum fuit Spirirui Sancto;) Canonas. Paulus inter Gentes imprimis
versabatur, ut inter Iudaeos Petrus: (adeoque (ut hoc obiter dicam) Aut magis
Petro fuit Paulus Romanus, Apostolorum precipuae erant parts in verbi
praedicatione. 1. Cor. 1.17.
aut minus Paulo fuit Petrus Canonicus.) Hinc and Paulus and reliqui, (quibus
in vitio fuit. Et nihil, and Aliud agers) in verbi praedicatione potius quam
in, vel mensarum, (Actor. 6.) vel Baptismi ministratione, suis utebantur horis.
Hinc demum lege cavit Petrus, ne quis sit (...): and Praecepto Minas, Minis
Poenas cumlavit IEHOVA, ut in VZ. Zah, and Vzziah est videre. Tanti scilicet
apud Deum est assiduitas, ut nemo vel Socordiam, vel ad multas res Alienas
aggressionem (ut (...) reddit Gellius) multam ferat. Lib. 11. c. 16.


. 7.
Nec immerito. Quae enim supplicia ijs satis digna dixeris, qui nullo, vel Dei,
vel Rei, sive Publicae, sive suae, studio ducuntur? Quae tamen omnia Ignavis,
aliarumque Curiosis usu veniunt. Illisenim, jux a ac istis, in nullam rationem
venit Christi (ut inde exordiar) isto examine suos spectandos censuit, si eauna
meditentur, quae ab officiy sui ratione quam proxime absunt. Quid? 2, Cicer.
Quod vitae societatem (ut loquitur ille) deserunt, qui nihil studij and
facultatum vir enim, qui errat a loco suo, est ut avicula, quae errat a nido
suo, Pro. 27. omni scilicet (qua corporis, qua animae) miserijs opportunus.
Vice autem versa, qui nec sui negligens, nec aliorum satagens, sua officiy
normam exigit, non solum sui in Christum Jesum amoris certa dabit, and
luculenta indicia, and Rem Christianam augebit; verum and suis vel maxim
inserviet commodis. Etenim ad alias plurimas utilitates adjungitur, quod ista
ratione, via tum ad corpor is sanitatem, tum ad animi salutem munietur. Loci
enim, (uti nostis) est conservare; ad istam qui convolarit aram, in tutissimum
se recipit portum, ubi tutus delitescat, tanquam in nido avis; Deuteronomy. 22.6, 7.
Cui protrudenti, publicoque laboranti lege cavebatur. Deinde corpus vegetum,
aut nullo, aut non admodum dubio tentatur morbo.

Labor autem id est quod corpus firmat: Celsus.
ignavia hebetat. Illa (quod dixit ille) maturam senectutem, iste longam
adolescentiam reddit. Denique (ut alia vel periculis praesidia, vel honoribus
adjumenta non memorem) cum necesse habeat, qui aut nihil, aut nihil Suum, agit,
ut male agat, nemini (non Petro uni) erit integrum, vel in sua oscitanter, vel
in aliena petulanter mess versari.

. 8.
Quibus ita constitutis, Vos Primum appello, juvenes, (date enim illud pudori
meo, ut Ventres istos taceam, quibus una cura est Gulae and abdominis; una vita
alienis se immiscere.) Christum amatis vos! Munera vestra, ad quae officio aut
priuato, aut certe communi, tenemini, sedulo obite. Mutuum enim est Relatorum
iter, (quod de Scholae rivulis delibastis) mutuum officium. Qui pastoribus
docendi, is idem discendi parts vobis imposuit. Habetis vos, quos audiatis
(...) literatissimos, quos consulatis viros imprimis nobiles, atque (ut
reliquos taceam) Bibliothecas instructissimas; imo vivas habetis, and
ambulatorias, (ut de Augusto olim Eunapi us) in quorum consuetudinem vosmet
immergatis. Nolite ististam divinis bonis ad licentiam and impietatem abuti:
Nolite committere, ut humaniores istae literae contemptae jaceane. (...) Vah!
quam putidum, quam non dignum liberali ingenio! Excutite potius vobis omnem
socordiam. Ponite ante oculos Pythagoras, Tuscul. q. l 4.
Democritos istos, qui ultimas lustrarunt terras, coque, ubi quicquid esset
quod disci posset, veniendum judicarunt. Ponite Platones, qui vel vitae
dispendio, Homeri alicujus famillaritatem redimerent. Ponite Salvatoris vestri
immensam benignitatem, qui non de privatis tantum Pastoribus vobis prospexit,
verum and Public is. Ad hunc saltem (quoties commune sacrum peragitur)
frequentes adeste locum; adeste animis. Amate, Audite no illum, and illun: sed
illumunum (qui unus pascit in omnibus) Christum.
Indignum enim est, ut Rhetorculus quisque magno stipatus comitatu incedat, and
unus Christi Legatus publico nomine loqueretur, aut nullos, aut non ita multos
habiturus auditores. Long vero indignissimum est, quod tam nullo in Pietatem
flagret juventus studio, ut mera hic plerunque sit solitudo, ad istam numerosam
frequentiam, quae in omnium ore, per forum and scenam, volitar. Ita igitur
adeste, ita audite, ita vosmet in Pastorum discplinam tradite, ut illi vobis
ovibus saluti, vos illis Pastoribus honori aliquando esse possitis.

9.
Ad vos deinde (Fratres) festinat oration, Quibus Parents filios suos (Chara
certe Pignora) efformandos tradiderunt. Christum amatis! Pascite oves vestras,
vestros (quando little suscepistis curam and tutelam) pupillos puerosque;
Aristotelem recognoscit vestrum. Polit. l. 8. cap. 1.
Commune (inquit ille) Bonum reipublicae Adolescentes: Commune quidem vel
bonum, vel malum, prout aut ad disciplinam, aut ad licentiam a vobis
instituuntur. In Bivio enim etiamnum sunt, cum Hercule isto, vitaeque
instituendae ratio penes vos est. Vin' Puros? Puros. -- Sedulos? Sedulos.
Frugi? Frugi, modo tuo non defueris officio dicto audientes habes. -- Et
dubitant homines serere, and impendere curam! Ad severitatem a natura vos facti
estis: non ad ludum, non ad jocum. Ingenijs excolendis vacatis; eo omnes
conferte facultates and cogitationes, ut quos petulantes accepistis, cordatos
cum Xenocrate remittatis. Cumque illud sit pubescentis aetatis ingenium (ficut
post Salomonem, Aristoteles vester) ut voluptatibus veneneus nimis indulgeat,
Al Theodret. l. 2. c. 12.
societatem colat, maximamque partem in excessu peccet: Vestrum erit istis
juventutis malis, primo quoque tempore obviare, amicitiarum, otiorum delectum
habere, Ganeones, Popinas ( addit and Aristoteles, cum Augustino) spectacula ab
ijs removere, adeoque animum pijs imbuere praeceptis, ut libidinum non modo
ramos amputetis, sed fibras etiam radicitus extirpetis. permagna sunt, quae
vestrae fidei commissa sunt. Veftrum implorat fidem Patria, Parents, Academia,
Ecclesia: fidem (per Christum Jesum) liberate, and ne patiamini, ut illud vobis
in os, per summum dedecus, dicatur -- En quibus liberos committ as!

. 10.
Verum ad eos venio (ad quos ijsta, non communi modo, sed omni ratione
spectant) Theologiae Candidatos; quos omnes in Duplici genere constitutos esse
intelligo. Sunt enim qui sacros nondum attigerunt ordines: In istam tamen
collimant metam, and propendent, eoque omnem intendunt animum. Redeat illis in
memoriam quid sit negotij causam publicam sustinere, Omnium simultates
suscipere, emnique periculo caput objicere: atque in eorum animis penitus
insideat illud Pauli, -- Siquis Episcopatum appetat, praeclarum opus desiderat.
1. Tim. 3.1.
Opus (ut habet Chrysostomus) ipsis Angelis formidandum. Opus, cui nemo homo
ferendo par est: Ad quod quisque quanto sanctior, tanto tardior, (ut de
Patribus legimus) accedit. Illud igitur and sibi and Ecclesiae (ne in praeda
and sanguine omni in posterum tempore versentur) consultissimum ducant, si aut
nulli, aut instructissimi huc appulerint.

. 11.
Sunt and alij, qui cum Petro in suam fidem, and tutelam oves Christi
receperunt. Apud hos gravissima debet esse Christi voluntas, and non uno loco
authoritas. Deuteronomy. 33. Sacerdotum munus duabus absolvitur partibus --
Praedicatione, Precatione. Ita enim Moses -- Docent legem tuam Israelem:
Apponunt suffitum ad faciem tuam.

Mosen excipiunt Prophetae, Prophetas Apostoli: Dumque hi in istos, isti vero
in illum commentantur: Illud unum quod uni Petro islic loci Christus, uno ore
clamant, -- Pascite, Pascite. Ita enim Esaias, Ita Ezechieles, and quis non
Prophetarum! Ita Petrus; Ita Paulus passim in suis ad Clerum Concionibus.

. 12.
Quo magis stupenda est Petri Personati importunitas, qui nec Pascit, nec
Patitur: nec aliquid haber Petri simile: In rem tamen suam omnia torquet. --
Episcopi (inquit Bellarminus dum praefatur ad librum de Clericis) veniunt in
Partem Sollicitudinis, non in Plenitudinem Potestatis: Contra (credo) Pontifici
vulgo venit. Vid. Col. Rayn. cap. 7. divis. 6. Lib. de cler. c. 13.
In Plenitudinem Potestatis venit ille, in partem Sollicitudinis non venit.
Hujus tamen sive ignorantiae, sive oscitantiae, pro sua singulari modestia,
lenocinatur Cardinalis. -- Pascit (inquit ille) Papa (mitto enim quam otiandi
copiam (Episcopo tacito) alias facit Presbyteris) licet Praedicando non pascit:
Neq, enim una est Pascendi ratio. Atque illud quidem utrumque faciles damus:
Ita Occum.
Et Pontificum vix Centessimum quemque dari, qui populo verbum faciat: Et Dari
varios Pascendi modos. Pascitur (inquiunt Scholae) Vita exemplari, Subsidio
corporali, Doctrina Salutari, Disciplina Regulari. Pascitur (quod videt
Bernardus) Cibo, Exemplo, Verbo. Pascitur Mente, Opere, Ore. Sed quid inde?
Nondum Elapsus est Crimine Sanctus Pater, qui nec Mente, nec Opere, nec Ore,
nec Doctrina, nec Disciplina, nec ulla utili opera pascit.

Ast quibus in rebus ipsi interesse non possumus, Pro Rosc. Amer.
in his (dixit Orator) operae nostrae vicaria fides amicorum supponitur: alias
in suum substituit locum nutrices, ut Meretricem (juxta illud Damasi) facile
scias Purpuratam. Per alium Pascit. (inquit Bellarminus.) Quin igitur Christum
per Alium amet. Qui enim Ama dixit, and Pasce dixit, eodem quidem spiritu, and
sententia. Accedit quod Pastoris nomen (si Antiquitatem non mentiantur
Jesuitae) Actionem personalem significat, sicut nomen Medici. Aug. Hier. apud
Mald. in summu la q. 10. ^et 3-6.
Itaque sicut nemo potest per alium curare: Ita nemo potest suas oves per alium
pascere. Caetera mitto apud Maldonatum: Nec non illud de Debitis (quae
vocantur.) personalibus.

. 13.
Rem penitus cernentibus duplex occurrit Residentia, Loci and Officij; utramque
mirum, quam nullo Papae, quam omni Patres prosequebantur studio.

Atque ut a prima exaudiar. Quam affixi and pertinaces adhaerebant isti
Palinuri ad gubernacula sua, loquuntur Tria. -- Primum, Consilia vetera. Quibus
sanctiebatur, Nequis uno (ad summum) mense amplius a suis peregre foret.
Secundam, Epistolae, quibus suae ad tempus absentiae infamiam deprecabantur.
Tertium, Sententiae eorum, vel in Pestis, and persecutionis negotio, ubi vix
and ne vix quidem, nisi gregi aliunde prospectum fuit Rem tractat Auguslinus)
absentiae parum indulserunt. Fuerint isti (ut nostrates taceam) duriores. In
cautiorem certe partem peccabant. At (Quae sunt hujus aevi deliciae) sunt non
ita pauci e Papae Satellitio aequo long remissiores. Non jam queror inauditas
illas ab ultima mundi origin nundinationes in foro Romano, tum Animarum (ut
loquitur johannes) tum beneficiorum, ut queruntur Germani, Centum gravam.
non silvam istam in unum Cardinalem congestam benesiciorum: non insignem illam
supra omnem fidem conductitiorum inscitiam; quibus omnibus Nobilitatur gens
ista Romana, prae omnibus ahjs. Ea sola queror, quae humano more ab illis
peccantur. Ur ur enim intercidant nonnunquam peregrinandi causae, and eae sane
gravissimae: Absit tamen, ut quisquam hominum sibi in suo adblandiatur otio,
dum animi tantum causa (nequid dicam durius) libere vagatur, andvix triduum in
loco suo consistit. Ovibus enim, cum publico carent, opus est in quotidiana
vita pastore, cujus non omne munus publicis Ecclesiae adibus continetur. Habet
ille (ad Summi Pastoris instar) quos visat Aegrotos, quos erigat fractos,
praefractos quos increpet, quosque, restitantes portet: atque ita universo
incumbendum est gregi, ut de singulis etiam confulatur. Ezekiel. 34.
Quod non aliud suadent and Apostolorum Praecepta -- Exemplar esto etc. Et
veterum Exempla; et Pastorum, Ducum, Medicorum, Speculatorum, Parentum,
Nutricum nomina. Sed Loci Residentiam satis esto vel verbo attigisse; atque
Papicolas ad suos remisisse, Innocentium, Damasumque, magnos Residentiae
vindices: Cajet anum in Thom. 22. q. 185. Artic. 5. Caranzam in suo de
necessaria Residentia personali tractatu; and Concilium ipsum Tridentinum.

. 14.
Sequitur Officij Residentia. Est autem ea Duplex. Publica, Privata; Utraque
pernecessaria, and Praecepti and Medij ratione; five Pastoris, five Ovium salus
attendatur. Quod Praeceptum, ubi non occurrit loci! Mirus necesse sit in sacra
Pagina hospes, quem lateat istud per omnium ora pervagatum, Pasce. Videatur
Moses de officio maxim Aaronico verba faciens. Videatur Ezechieles, dum and
gregis satagentes incitat and negligentes increpat. -- Non observastis (inquit
JEHOVAH, Cap. 44.8.) observationem meam, sed substituistis observatores vobis.

Nec praecipit modo, sed sub dirissimis supplicijs leges in Sacerdotes tulit:
ut semper pro suorum salute excubarent. -- Fili hominis, te constitui
Speculatorem, ( and quae sequuntur apud Prophetas gravissime.) Quasi scilicet
se in ruinam praecipites darent, gregemque perditum iren^, and intereuntes and
interimentes (ut loquitur Bernardus) qui posthabita ovium ratione, ita agerent,
ut, nullum quaestum sibi turpem esse arbitrarentur. Neque id injuria: si enim
tota de salute periclitetur navis, vix in vado fuerit, qui ad Clavum sederit.
Quod si detur, Pastorem ipsum extra omnem aleam pofitum esse, Pastorne ille
dicendus erit, quem nulla tangit ovilis cura? Pastorne ille, qui ingruente
tempestate, grassante lupo, palante ove, se in fugam, otiumque dederit?
Pastorne ille, qui nec loci longinquitate, nec gregis desiderio commovetur?
Pastorne ille, qui pro nihilo res sanctas omnes prae praeda ducit? Euge Papa
Pater! Pastoris non est oves deglubere. -- Pastorem, Tityre, Pingues pascere
oportet Oves: Si vel istarum saluti, vel Christi voluntati consultum voluerit.

Quorsum enim istud toties repetitum, Pasce, si oves nihil (feriante pastore)
detrimenti caperent, discriminis subirent? Quorsum istud tam importunum, Amas
me, si perinde Christi amicitiam tueantur, qui pasti sunt ovibus, (ut loquitur
quidam) atque qui oves pascunt? 1. Cor. 16.22.
Certe Christi non amantem Anathemate ferit Apostolus. Non amat autem (
Gregorio dicam? Imo) Christo Judice qui non pascit, modo Pastoris nomen
induerit.

Hinc Paulus -- Vae mihi, si non Evangelizavero. Hinc Ezechieles -- Vae
Pastoribus, qui pascunt, sed non gregem. Hinc Bernardus -- Quid ego infoelix?
Ber. in Ser. de advent. Dom. 3. Vid. Roffens. art. 33
quo me vertam, si tantum thesaurum, si preciosum depositum istud, quod sibi
Christus sanguine proprio preciosius judicavit, contigerit negligentius
custodire! Et Sexcenta alia, ad quae minima trepidarent Romanistae, si cordibus
collum non obduxissent. Hinc insomnes illae noctes, improbissimi Patrum
labores. Hinc ingentes illi sermones singulis Dominicis ad populum facti. Hinc
Canones isti. Can. Apo. Can. 58. Vasens. Con.
-- Presbiter, qui negligentius circa populum agit, nec in pietate cos erudit,
a Communione Segregator. Si in socerdia ca perseveraverit, Deponitor. Hinc
demum moris etat, ut sanctorum Patrum Homilioe a Diaconis recitentur, Vid. Dom.
Asoto de Just. and Iur. l. 10. q. 3. art. 1, 2. Caron. Zam ubi supra. Ferum in
Mat. 16. aliosque.
cum Presbyter, quod valetudine minus foelici uteretur, per seipsum (ut
loquitur Concilium) non potuerit praedicare. Hinc denique (cum longum sit ad
omnia iter) Pontificij ipsi, Circeis Meretricis poculis non prersus dementati,
nullo non clamore and minis suorum in omni vita negligentias insequebantur. Sed
eat Filius iste Perditionis, Rex Abaddon, cum ferali sua locustarum turba:
populos catervatim secum ducat ad gehennam, multis plagis aliquando
vapulaturus; licet impraesentiarum a nemine judicandus; uti habet Distinctio
ista Gratiana. Distin 40.


. 15.
Ad vos Academici, venio, atque in vobis terminabitur Oration. Quandoquidem quae
dicta sunt, adeo aperta sunt, Solisque (ut Tertullianus) radijs exarata, ut ad
tantam lucem nemo caecutire posset: Non dabitis mihi, (spero) temeritati, si
duo verba, non amplius, addidero, de caetero quieturus. Atque duo sunt, quae
exorandi vos estis (Gravissimi Patres,) per vestrum in Jesum Christum amorem,
in Ecclesiam Zelum; per Nivem istam capitis, and Canitiem venerandam. Primum,
ut vos, qui omnium optime nostis, quid sit oneris, Ecclesiae tantas, and tam
varias res, voce, sermon, consilio, ingenio sustinere; illis qui solo pretio
apud Patronos idonei sunt, aditum ad Sacerdotium, quantum in vobis est,
intercludatis. Splendour vester facit, ut peccare sine summo Ecclesiae periculo
non possitis. Illud igitur, quod ad famam vestram, salutomque communem
pertinet, prospicite: Alienis peccatis nolite vos communicare: Exuite potius ad
tempus Humanitatem vestram: Vestram in literis commendatitijs fidem potiorem
hebere, quam hominum voluntatem. Durescite (quod dixit iste Faber) Durescite.
Utinam omnes hic Durescant, quum Ovis Lupo, Apud O. l. u^; ll g.
misellove animalculo est committenda. Unique Honorio illud vertatur vitio,
Quod literis vel non antea Lectis (ut accepimus) subscriberet.

Alterum, ut vos, qui non modo Custodias, sed laterum oppositus Christo
Polliciti estis, Opus ejus pro virili vestra urgeatis, and quanto authoritate,
tanto and assiduitate alios omnes superatis. Nolite a me commoneri (Patres)
Quam vobis non dignum fuerit, extremum vitae actum negligere: Quam vestra
nitatur Ecclesia and fide, and praesidio; Divinitus docti, omni studio, fide,
authoritate pugnate: Et Veritatis Propugnatores and erroris Expugnatores,
Laborantem Ecclesiam recreate: Tetrum spirantes halitum, alijsque virus
propinantes eliminate. Proxime jam abest, cum ab omni miseria liberandi sitis,
and Rude Donandi. Quem incepistis cursum, si fieri potest, expedite: Iter
accelerate; Coronam (quae vos propediem manet) avidi arripite: Instate,
increpate, vigilate, Juellus.
(quod que in votis habuit Ille Summus) Inter Concionandum animam exbalate. O
vere sapientem illum, qui animas lucratus fuerit! Prove. 11. Ter Beatos vos,
quos ita facientes Dominus offenderit.

. 16.
Supersunt (Fratres mei) qui animarum curam una susceperunt. Liceat vos
(Charissimi Symmystae) vel Domini affari verbis. -- Christum Amatis vos!
Pascite Oves, Vestras dicam? Imo and Christi, and vestras. A vestro pendent
ore: A vobis optima quaeque sibi pollicentur: Vestrae Oves sunt, agni vestri,
vestri Filioli. Vos quod bono and Pastore and Parente dignum est, facite: Hoc
est, omni modo Pascite. Veniat vobis in mentem Paulinum illud ad Timotheum. 2.
Tim. 4.2. etc.
-- Praedica Sermonem: Jnsta tempestive, intempestive, argue, objurga,
exhortare, cum omni lenitate and doctrina. Quam ponderosa sunt omnia? --
(Praedica.) neque e scriptis modo Recita. (Frigidum enim est istorum commentum,
quibus, ut ita omnem sibi fucum, in suo turpifsimo otio indulgeant) verbum
legere perinde est, atque Praedicare. Quod si; Quid Vociferandi Prophetis
unquam causae fuerit, aut in Mutos Canes invehendi? Ecquis enim, vel in
Ecclesiae rebus afflictissimis, fuit Sacerdos, qui ad Loquendum mutus? Ad
Legendum nullus fuit. Act. 15.
Annon Passim Synagogarum Mosen lectitabant? Lectitabant, dubio procul. Sed non
explicabant. Hinc Muti audiunt Canes, stipites, Fungi. Et quid aliud (istorum
conscientias Convenio) vult illud Pauli (...) Quid ista ibi loci Fulmina? Quid
illa inter verbi Lectionem, and Praedicationem apud Paulum distinctio? Quid
denique causae suberat, cur Patres vel suam ita causarentur ignorantiam, vel
publicum adeo reformidarent judicium, vel tantos exantlarent labores, si inter
Hoc and Illud non ita multum interfuisset? Sed in re minus obscura quid
pluribus? Est quidem Lectio quoddam praedicandi Genus: Sed non omne, sed non
Summum, quod Pastori incumbit, Hinc Pauli -- Praedica. Et (Sermonem) quidem
Praedica: (...) Divinum illum Sermonem, Animae Pabulum, Dei Potentiam, Sanum
illum and salutarem Sermonem quovis gladio ancipiti penetrantiorem: Illum,
Illum Sermonem Praedicate: Ad Illius normam omnia exigite. Ludicra autem ista,
quae in fumos abeunt, arvumque Domini tanquam Salis sementis emaciant mittire,
ne claudicet auditorum cognitio, ut Augustinus. Illudque vobis vertatur vitio,
quod olim Arrianis. -- Reliquerunt Apostolum; Sequuntur Aristotelem. Hinc Pauli
-- Praedica Sermonem Dei and Dei quidem tanquam Dei (ut loquitur Petrus) cum
omni studio, Zelo, Pietate, Puritate: Vid. Amb. in Ps. 118. Sect. 22.
Non ut populi gratiam aucupemur, sed ut plurimos pietatis cultores
contrahamus: -- Ovium Pastum potius, quam hominum Fastum (ut site Bernardus)
attendentes. Hinc Paulus -- Jnsta tempestive, intempestive. Volentibus
Tempestive Nolentibus Intempestive, dic importunus (inquit Augustinus) Tu vis
errare, De Pastor. cap. 7.
Tu vis perire, Ego nolo. Neque enim par est, ut in istis frigide versemur,
Semelve quotannis, cum summo Pontifice in Sanctuarium ingrediamur, ne non sine
sanguine ingrediamur. In specula semper (quoad ejus fieri potest) commorandum
est, ne hostis ad quamlibet opportunitatem paratus gregem ex insidijs adoriatur.

Quod si cum istis res nobis fuerit, quibus nihil mediocre objici poterit;
istorum scelera gloriae nostrae segetem reputemus: quoque est eorum iniquitas
armatior and testatior, eo alacriori animo, zeloque ardentiori vim ejus omnem
impetumque retardemus. Et ut nihil fructus inde imprasentiarum ceperimus, sed
quod pijs saluti, illud ijs irritationi verterit; maneamus tamen nos in
instituto: Arguamus, exhortemur; (ut suadit Paulus) Chrysostomi haud immemores,
Chrysostom. H^de Laz. 1.
Si Decimus quisque, Si Vnus persuas us fuerit, ad consolationem abunde
sufficit. Imo etiamsi nullus fuerit; manent tamen semperaquarum venae,
scaturiant fontes, fluant nihil secius amnes. Quod nostrum est agamus gnaviter:
Et Aethiopem qui lavat, Operam quidem perdit: Mercedem autem non perdit. Veniet
aliquando tempus, Illucescet ille dies, ubi fructum apud Dominum reopsitum
laboris nostri uberrimum feremus. Istius diei nobis in memoriam veniat, atque
ita in omnem parati simus fortunam, ut non modo dolor is stimulos, sed and
fortunae fulmina (ut habet ille) perferamus.

. 17.
Cumque innocentiae leges sibi indicat, qui ab altero vitae rationem reposeit,
meliusque sit (Si Antiquitati fides adhibeatur) tacere, quam non Docere vita
and operibus: Et verbo, and Vita pascamus omnes: exempla (nostra maxim) non
ibi consistunt (ut prudenter ille) ubi caeperunt. Occidunt male vivendo
Pastores mali, (inquit Augustinus) quorum omnis vita ita in (...) consistit,
Nazianz.
ut ubi semel a recto erratum est, in praeceps ruatur. Ita igitur omnes vitae
nostrae rations instituamus, ut nihil non ab omni accusatione remotum, nihil
non ex gravissimi viri disciplina unquam moliamur. Summa sit illud Pauli (ne
sim verbosior in istis.) -- Esto (inquit ille) Exemplar fidelibus, in Sermon,
and in Conversatione, and in Charitate, and in Fide, and in Puritate. Sedulus
esto in Lectione, and in Oratione, and in Doctrina: Hoc est. Et Verbo, and
Exemplo Pasce. Ita suo Timotheo Paulus: Ita Petro Christus: Ita Ego Vobis.
Magna res agitur: Dei Honos; Ecclesiae Salus; Aeternae vitae vel Accessio, vel
Iactura. Quid possetis in Salute gregis potius, quam in exitio, ostendite.
Contemplamini animo, quod non potestis oculis, Ultrices illas Flammas,
Horrendailla Judicia, ad quae desudant Coeli, and contremiscit Terra, quae
omnia istos manent, qui nihil vel de sua, vel de communi salute cogitant.
Cogitate quo tandem miseriae perventurus sit ille, qui multa vi sanguinis
foedatus, se in Dei conspectum sit aliquando daturus. Miserum illum! Ubi
enitetur! Quo confugiet! Quid illo futurum erit! Quod non ille malum leve
(quando sero erit) prae Judicis ira, habebit! Qoem Mutum, exanimatum, and vix
vivum relictura sit Christi vox tremenda -- Read rationem Villicationis tuae:
Supplicij magnitudo a tanto vos scelere summoveat; moveat vestra in Deum
Pietas, in Greges Charitas: moveat ipsius rei aequitas, and necessitas. Subeat
vobis subinde in mentem Singularis Christi Amor, qui omnia vestri causa voluit.
Nihil habuit ille vestra vestrumque salute antiquius, nihil prius. Nihil ille
laboris, sudoris, supplicij recusavit, quo vestram vestrumque salutem
promoveret. Eundem quaeso induite animum: ijsdem insistire vestigijs: eosque
omni colite cura, quos suo dignatus est ille sanguine. Dominum vestrum non
potestis, (Fratres,) vel studio vincere, vel amore antevertere. Gregem Amatis?
Amavit, ille. Sudatis? sudavit ille. Animam ponitis? Posuit ille. Nullam habuit
ille sui rationem, prae vestri studio. Illum si amare pigebat, salt em redamare
non pigeat.

Nimis durus animus, Vid Aug. de Catechis. eudib. nec non in Ps. 8.
qui dilectionem si nolebat impendere, nolit and rependere. Venit ille (quod
idem alias habet Augustinus) Pati; Venit ille Mori; Venit ille sputis liniri;
Venit ille spinis Coronari; venit opprobria audire; venit ligno configi. Omnia
ille pro vobis: vos nihil pro illo; Sed pro vobis: Cogitate qui sitis; quo
loco; quid responsuri aliquando sitis Gregibus vestris, si nihil illis, praeter
ultimam calamitatem, reliaquatis. Quid judici vestro, qui fidos vos duxit, and
in ministerio constituit; quid animabus vestris, quas tantae negligentiae
conscientia olim fodicabit. Et per vestram ipsorum salutem; per omnes and in
Christum, and in Oves, Religiones and amicitias: Si quid vobis salus curae sit,
si pax, si fides, si gloria; Gregi laboranti consulite. Duces estis; Christo
contra Satanam, ejusque Primogenitum Anti-Christum militate, Nutrices estis:
Lac potum date, quaeque sunt ad quotidianum demensum minutatim promite.
Angelorum denique induistis vobis nomen: induite and naturam. Ne sit (quod
dixit non nemo) Ex. 23.4, 5.
-- Nomen inane, Crimen immane. Audite oves vestras. Etiam Phocae praebent
mammas; Etiam Osori debetur eibus; Etiam osoris jumento misericordia: Et nos
solae Oves Rationales, quae Domino tanto stitimus sanguine, dignae sumus
habitae, quae fame pereamus! Veluriam habet Dionysius. Volumnia^ Plutarchus.
Audite Matrem vestram, Christi sponsam, ad vestra genua provolutam, omnique
splendore exutam, tanquamillam Coriolani: (sive Veturiam, sive Volumniam) -- En
inter Belluas quaedam beneficiorum reciprocatio: Et ego unailla matter, quae
nihil apud meos vel Precio, vel Prece, vel Authoritate possim. Eone ego
Primogenitos meos Concepi, conceptos fovi, fotos peperi, partos enutrivi,
enutritos instruxi, and instructos fratribus praefeci, ut mutuis ictibus
aliquando occumberent? Audite Patrem vestrum -- Ego vobis, vestrisque filijs de
victu and vestitu prospexi, corvisque prius pascendi parts mandavi, quam quae
ad victum unquam desiderarentur: Et vos filios meos (Summae mihi curae
cordique) non Pascetis? 1. Reg. 1. Ps.46.
Audite Dominum vestrum -- En ego vobis (aliquando Lupis) sanguinem non potui
non impendere meum: Vos vero ovibus meis vestrisque debitam curam denegabitis?

Quid praestolamur (Fratres?) Clamant Greges nostri -- Si Amatis, Pascite.
Clamat Sponsa Christi, -- Si Amatis, Pascite. Clamat Aeternus Deus, Christusque
noster -- Si amatis Fratres vestros, si nomen meum, si animas vestras, Pascite.
Nolite tantae and Gregis, and Matris, and Patris, and Salvatoris voluntari
deesse: Sed omni fide, officio, misericordia adducti, ita Pascite, ita vivite
(Academici) Ita agite, ut nullo vel malo vel modo contaminetur gaudium vestrum.
Sed eo foelicitatis olim aspiretis, laboribus perfuncti, quae nullis communibus
temporibus sit interpellanda.

Atque haec de Praecepto. Quae in alteram partem meditata and dicenda habui non
ita pauca, perpetuo potius involvam silentio, quam vobis molestiam ulterius
creavero.

Faxit Deus, ut ita cum Petro Pascamus Patiamurque ut ita in nostra omnes
incumbamus officia, ut cum Coelo terras aliquando commutemus, and tanquam
stellae fulgeamus, per Christum Jesum Dominum nostrum; Cui cum Patre
benignissimo, Spiritu sanctissimo, Deo beatissimo sit omnis Honor, and Gloria
in Secula. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 2. lin. 30 lege duo. p. 5. l. 18. nobis, in mar. l 7 cum. P. 6. l. 19.
sectanti. p 8. l. 2 proprium l. 17. Pastor es.l. 28. nostrum. l. 29.
attendebant. p. 9. l. 12. inultam. p. 12. l. 11. venereis. l. 19. vestram. p.
14. l. 9. pascat. p. 19. l. 7. habete. l. 10. super^is. p 22. l. 3. suadet. l.
11.1 epositum. in Epist. lege. ORNATISSIMO VIRO.


