THE PVRITANES IMPVRITIE: OR THE ANATOMY Of a PURITAN or SEPERATIST, by Name
and Profession, Wherein is declared the differences betwixt a true PROTESTANT
and a PVRITANE, made manifest by the Sinceritv of the one and hypocrisy of the
other.

Likewise the comeliness and necessity of Reverence used in the performing of
the Service of GOD, especially at the receiving of the SACRAMENT.

By JOHN HARRIS Gent.

1 Corinthians. 11. verse. 27. For whosoever shall eat this Bread and drink this
Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

LONDON.

Printed by T. FAUCET. MDCXLI.

The PURITAN 's Impuritie.
IN these preposterous times many vices are predominant but amongst all the
whole brood of vices, there is none so great, there is none grown to that
height, there is none so seprous as this of Puritanisme, the errors of which
Sect by the grace of God, I will plainly Anatomize and lay open to the view of
all men, but first it is requisite that we should examine who is pure.
Secondly, what creatures they are that count themselves pure. Thirdly, the
effects of their purity, Fourthly, their opinions and Hypocritical lives.
Fifthly, whether the fruit of purity be Hypocrisy. Sixthly and lastly, the
difference betwixt a true Protestant and a dissembling Puritan, all which
points in their order by Gods assistance I shall lay open and plainly decipher,
with as much brevity as possible I can, desiring all judicious and true
Protestants, to read it with as much care, and as free from envy, as I shall
express in the writing, for God witness with me, although I hate their
opinions, I love the men, and it shall be mine (and ought to be the prayer of
every true Christian) to God that he would be pleased to illuminate their
darkened judgments, to open their eyes and guide their wandering feet into the
way of peace, as touching the first point or question who is pure, I hope it is
needless to tell any believer, yet I will give you one testimony which shall
serve as a prop, unto that man, if there be such a one which shall stagger in
his belief, and doubt of Gods purity, you may read in the 19. Psalm the 82.
ver. These words, The Statutes of the Lord are right and rejoice the heart, the
Commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives light unto the eyes, Likewise
Psalm. 25. at the 7. ver. Gracious and Righteous is the Lord, for he will teach
sinners in the way. So in the 33. Psalm. at the 34 verse, Sing unto the Lord a
song, sing praises unto him with a good courage, for the word of the Lord is
true, and all his works are faithful, thus much shall serve as touching this
point, which I trust is apparently manifest in every one of our hearts, namely
that God is pure, nevertheless it will ask some labor, to make it apparent,
that there is none pure but God, for in these latter times since, has got so
great a predomination in some men's hearts, and so fair a pretense withal,
that they presume to cover all their vicious opinions with the pure mantle of
Religion, now to prove that there is none pure but God, I might quote many
places in Scripture, but it were a needless labor bestowed on so worthless a
subject, only these 3. shall serve, the first of which, you shall find in the
7. of Eccles. at the 20. ver. There is not a just man upon Earth that does good
and sins not, the second proof you shall find in the 14. Psalm. 2. ver.
there is none that does good, no not one. Likewise Romans 30. 23. all have sinned
and come short of the glory of God. As touching the third point what sort of
Creatures they are that count themselves pure, namely sinful men, sons and
daughters of Adam, we are all heirs of Original sin from our first Father,
now if we be borne in sin, if we be spotted with leprosy, we cannot be pure,
but per-adventure they will plead that the power of original sin and the
strength of the law was abolisht by Christ's death, to this I answer, that to
all believers it was, for Christ's obedience made full satisfaction for our
first Parents disobedience, but then how can they clear themselves from their
actual transgressions, their sins of omission, their sins of Commission, their
wilful sins, their sins of ignorance, are those men pure, that produce naught
but the effects of impurity, are those men worshippers of God, which worship
their own erroneous opinions, are they lovers of Christ which they never saw,
yet hate their brothers whom they see daily, are these men pleasers of God,
which prefer their own wills before Gods pleasure, non est optima quae placet,
sed quae decet, that is not best which pleases, but that which becomes thee,
now whether it is most becoming to please God or thy self, I leave it to thy
consideration; God commands thee to love thy brother, will thou hate him, then
surely thou preferst thy own pleasure before Gods command, but of this anon,
moreover Christ while he was conversant on Earth labored to convert sinners, I
came not to call the Righteous but sinners to Repentance, says that Physician
of our Souls Christ Jesus, he spent his time in curing the diseased, in
feeding the poor, in performing good and pious works, now if these men be
Imitators of Christ, we shall suddenly discern, by their actions, a good tree
brings not forth corrupt fruit, Luke 6. 43. Now let us examine the actions of
these Seperatists alias Puritanes, the fruit of a true Christian must be faith
in Christ Jesus, Secondly, the fruit of that faith must be springing, it must
not be a dead faith, now the greatest expression of a lively faith is good
works, as you may read in the 2. of St. James, at the 26. ver. As the body
without the spirit is dead, so faith without good works is dead, Is it so then
that charitable works are the lively fruits of faith, is it so then that faith
without good works is dead, what just cause have we then to fear that those
men which term themselves Seperatists, what cause have we J say to fear that
their faith is a dead faith, for they are so far from good works themselves,
that they will persuade others from the exercise of that pious duty, Thirdly,
the badge of a lively faith is humility, and a reverend zeal in the performing
Gods service, as we may read a perfect example in Christ Jesus, who when he
prayed humbled himself before his Father, as you may see in the 22. chap.
Luke, ver. 21. And when he was withdrawn from them about a stones cast he
kneeled down and prayed. Likewise you may read how Humility and reverence was
accepted in the Publican, when boasting Arrogance was rejected in the proud
Pharisee, Luke the 18. ver. 13. Now that these sort of men are proud, may
easily be expressed, for they are so far from humility, that at the receiving
of the Sacrament which is the greatest and surest means of our Salvation, they
will not vouchsafe to kneel but sit on their Cushions or places of ease, they
are so lazy, or as we may term them so extreme proud, that they will not
vouchsafe to go to meet Christ, but he must come to the^, the people of
Jerusalem when they heard Christ was coming to ye City, they ran to meet him,
they strewn the way, they met him with a Song of praise and thankesgiving,
Hosana, Hosana in the highest, blessed is the King of Israel which comes in
the name of the Lord, Joh. 12. ver. 13. Beloved, did these people so extol the
Lord? Did they reverence him, did they run to meet him, because they had
received temporal Blessings of him, because he had cured their lame and given
sight unto the blind, and shall not we reverence him, shall not we earnestly
run to meet him that heald our leprous souls, that gave eyes of understanding
to our blind judgments, that dyed to redeem us from eternal death, surely
beloved if we shall neglect this grateful duty, these Jews, these people of
Jerusalem shall rise up in judgment against us, but to my former discourse,
our Precisians think it to much labor, it savors of superstition to come up
to the Communion Table, therefore if the bread and wine which is ye sign of
our substantial Savior be not brought to them, they will rather choose to
disturb the whole Congregation to make a mutenie in the presence of God then
be persuaded from their diabolical opinions, the next point we are to examine
is what sort of men they be that are of this opinion, to wit Mechanic persons,
for the most part unlectured grooms, Coachmen, Feltmakers, Cobblers, Weavers,
Glovers, hauking Ironmongers walking after the imaginations of their own
hearts, whose consciences are in a consumption, and wits as rusty as a piece of
old Iron which has been broken and thrown on the dunghill, these rusty
companions are known well enough, in every street their abominations break
forth, and like to spreading Ulcers infect poor innocent souls, this beguiler
sells his pills very cheap, you may buy one for a penny, but take heed, taste it
not for if you do, it will spoil your Common prayer; but to proceed, that
they are ignorant souls, may appear in this, that they prefer the
Discipline of ignorant men of their own Society, before the Discipline of
learned men, they prefer the dross before the treasure, they prefer a dunce
that will flatter and wrest his text according to the fancies of his Auditors,
before a learned Divine, that teaches Orthodox Doctrine, that will open with
the Key of knowledge, the Cabinet of the Scriptures, alas, Orthodox Doctrine is
to cold of disgestion for their queazy stomachs, it is to deep for them, oh
no, it is the language of the beast, and they will not hear it, they will
rather forsake the Church, and get under a hedge then endure to be told of
their iniquities, so much concerning what sorts of people, they are that think
themselves pure, next I come to the effects of their purity, they are proud,
they are envious, they are enemies to the Church, they are enemies to learning,
they are selfe-wild, selfe-conceited, they are hearers but not doers, they are
covetous, they are liars, they are persecutors of the poor, oppressors of the
needy. In fine, J may say with David, there is not one good, no not one, now if
this be the fruit of Purity, let all true Christians judge, next for their
opinions, namely, that it is lawful to separate themselves from the wicked,
but what availes it to separate themselves from the performers or actors of
iniquity, when they retain and keep the same iniquity in their hearts, what is
it for a man to leave the Society of a public whore, and keep a private one,
what is it to hate swearing and love lying, what is it for me to hate a vice in
another, and love it in my self, could they separate themselves from their
sins, as easily as they separate themselves from the Society of the wicked
(as they term us) I would be one of their conventicle, but so long as J see so
much deceit, so much Poison in a golden pill, so much baseness covered under
a Religions mantle, i will rather choose to be a dorekeeper in the house of the
Lord, then a bauling Pastor in their Synagogue, Fifthly, for their lives and
conversations, they are men which respect their profits above their
consciences, for let a man be of what condition soever, if they think they can
profit by him, then they will express a great deal of formality, a great
deal of love and kindness, but make trial of their love, and then in verity
you shall find them inwardly Jews, though outwardly Saints, they are all for
profit, nothing for love, their Zeal has forgot what St. Paul says in the 2
chap. 1 Epistle of St. John about the 9, 10, and 11. verses. He that says he
is in the light and hates his brother is in darkness, Likewise chap. 3. ver.
15, whosoever hates his brother is a Murderer, and you know that no Murderer
has eternal life abiding in him, but they will say that they do not hate
their brethren but the wicked, to this I answer, so long as they continue in
sin they are brothers unto the most wicked man, and in hating him they hate
their brother, for we are all Sons of one Father, or will you say that all they
that are not of your opinion are ye wicked, it does appear so, for you have
separated your selves from us, and what greater symptom of hate can there be
then separation, but yet take heed, judge not lost you be judged, again, has
the wickedness of the people made the Church wicked, why should you hate that,
is a Surplice, a bug-beare, or is the Common Prayer of force to blister your
precise ears, if you should vouchsafe to hear it, you may read in Matthew.
chap. 24. ver. 28. these words, Wheresoever the carcass is, there will the
Eagles be gathered together, this carcass may be termed the word of God, and
the Eagles all true Christians, now if the word of God be taught in the Church,
let all true Christians resort thither, as for them that think to go to
Heaven blindfold, let them go on, let them spend their days according to the
imaginations of their own hearts; let them live securely, yet let them
remember that secura vita est mare mortuum, a secure life is a dead Sea, let
them separate, let them rail, let them reign in vice; yet let them at last
remember, that for all these things they must come to judgment, Lastly, the
differences betwixt a true Protestant and a Puritan, are declared in these
four things, a Protestant will deal uprightly, a Puritan will cozen his
Father, a true Protestant will love his enemy, a Puritan will hate every man,
a true Protestant will serve God devoutly* and express it in his life and
conversation, a Puritan will make a zealous show of serving God, but express
the contrary in his life and conversation, a Protestant will relieve the poor
and fatherless, a Puritan will oppress the fatherless and Widow, as it is
apparent in too many of your zealous Professors, but let them take heed that
Christ pronounce not that judgment against them, which is mentioned in the 25.
chap. Matthew. 45. ver. Verily I say unto you, forasmuch as you have not relieved
the poorest of my Brethren, you did it not to me, therefore these shall go
into eternal torments but the Righteous into life eternal, is it so then that
the poorest Creature is Christ's brother, is it so that those that have
neglected to feed the poor, shall receive that heavy sentence, How much more
then are they liable to this bitter doom that have oppressed the Fatherless and
widow, that have sufferd their poor brethren to starve for want of food, that
have fed on dilicious, carres themselves, yet not afforded the crumbs to their
brother Lazarus, God knows this duty of charity is cold in all men, especially
in this Sect, who instead of relieving a poor creature will send him going
with, God help thee, or it may be they will bestow the title of lazy knave, or
counterfeit rascal, but not a farthing, although begged for Christ's sake, I
beseech God of his abundant mercy open their hearts, send down the heavenly
dew of thy mercy upon us and them. that we may no longer be dead in sin, but
spring and flourish and bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life, o shall we
love one another, so shall we glorify thee our God, on Earth, and when we dye
be pertakens of thy glory in Heaven.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.
FINIS.

