The Christians best Garment.

JOHN HEART, D.D.


THE CHRISTIANS Best Garment: OR, The putting on of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Wherein the absolute necessity, excellency, and usefulness of Christ, as a
Garment, to believing Souls, is briefly opened and applied.

Secondly, The naked, miserable, lost, and undone condition of all Unbelievers,
who have not put on this Garment, discovered.

Thirdly and lastly, Some few brief, but powerful Motives to persuade us to the
putting on of this Garment, with directions how to live to the glory of Christ
here, that so we may live with Christ hereafter in glory.

The third Edition.

By a godly, able, and faithful Servant of Jesus Christ. John Heart.

Romans 13.14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ.

Col. 3.4. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear
with him in glory.

London, Printed for E. Andrews, at the White Lion near Pye-Corner, 1664.

THE Christians best Garment. OR THE Putting on of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Romans 13.12, 13, 14. The night is far spent, the day is at hand, let us
therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light.

Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying:

But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts thereof.


IN these Words, beloved, which I have now read unto you, we have these two
parts.

In the first place, we have some things which the Apostle endeavors to
persuade Christians from.

In the second place, we have some things which the Apostle endeavors to
persuade Christians to.

The things persuaded from, are the works of darkness; the things persuaded to
are these.

1. That we put on the armor of light, and that we walk honestly. 2. The
Apostle having exhorted us to this twofold duty.
1. The casting off the works of darkness, and the putting on the armor of
light, here sets down expressly some Christian directions how this is to be
done; and that two ways.

1. Negatively, and then, 2. Affirmatively.
1. Negatively, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and
wantonness, not in strife and envy.

2. Affirmatively, by putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, and denying of the
works of the slesh; and the motives here laid down, whereupon the Apostle
enjoins this duty, are these in the 12. verse, The night is far spent, the day
is at hand, therefore (says he) let us cast off the works of darkness, and let
us put on the armor of light.

Where by the way, we may observe, that works of darkness are very unsuitable
and unseasonable to the times of the Gospel, light and darkness are contrary.

In the words then you see, 1. Here is a duty exhorted unto, and that is laid
down in the 12. verse.

And then 2. you have here also the Apostles amplification and illustration of
this duty here exhorted unto, and that is set down particularly in the 13. and
14.verses.

The duty exhorted unto you see here is twofold.

1. Here is something to be cast off.

And then 2. Here is something to be put on.

1. The things to be cast off, are the works of darkness.

2. The things to be put on, are the armor of light: Let us cast off the works
darkness, and let us put on the armor of light.

And as the exhortation is twofold, so likewise are the reasons whereupon the
Apostle grounds his exhortation also.

1. The night is far spent.

And 2. the day is at hand.

Before I proceed to the observation, give me leave a little to open the words
unto you; and first, I shall endeavor to show what is here meant by the night,
and then secondly, what is here meant by the day: by the night here may be
meant the times of darkness and ignorance, in which the Gentiles lived in
before the breaking forth of the Gospel of Christ, and those times may very
well be compared to the night for these three reasons.

First, In the night men cannot so well see their way, and therefore may the
more easily wander out of their way, for it is only the want of light that
makes men to err.

2. In the night no thing is visible or discernable but darkness, all light is
then extinguished; the blind man is not able to value or judge what a mercy it
is to have the fruition and enjoyment of the light of the Sun.

3. The night is the most suitablest time and season for the doing of evil, in
Job 24.14, 15, 16. The murderer (says Job) rising with the light kills the
poor and needy, and in the night is as a thief. The eye also of the adulterer
waits for the twilight, saying, No eye shall see me, and disguiseth his face.
In the dark they dig through houses, they know not the light. They that are
drunk (says the Apostle) are drunk in the night, 1 These. 5.7. In Psalm. 25.20.
The dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty.

And then secondly, by the day here is meant the times of the Gospel, it is
night in the soul, till such time as the day light of the Gospel breaks forth
and shines into it, Matthew. 4 16. The people which sat in darkness saw a great
light, and to them that sat in the region and shadow of death, light is sprung
up.

In John 13.19. Light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather then
light; and why so, the reason is (says he) because their deeds were evil. For
every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest
his deeds should be reproved. Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were sometimes darkness, (says
the Apostle) but now are ye light in the Lord: walk as children of light.

In 1 Pet. 2.9. God has called us out of darkness into his mavelous light.
Luke 1.78, 79. The dayspring from on high has visited us: To give light to
them that sit in darkness.

In Acts 26.17, 18. The Apostle was sent to the Gentiles, to turn them from
darkness unto light.

In 1 John 2.8. The darkness is past, and the true light (says the Apostle)
now shines.

In Acts 17.30. The times of Heathenisme are there called the times of
ignorance, and it must needs be night in such souls wherein Christ the Sun of
righteousness never did arise; as it is never day in the worid until the Sun
arises, so it is never day in the soul till Christ the Sun of righteousness
arises with healing in his wings.

Now there are several useful and profitable points of doctrine, which
naturally from hence for our instruction and edification, I shall only name
them, and so proceed to that which I chiefly intend.

The first point of doctrine is this, that works of darkness are works of the
night, night works.

Secondly, that the times of the Gospel are times of light.

Thirdly, that in the day of the Gopel all these works of darkness are to be
cast off: when the Sun shines, it dispels and scatters all those mists and fogs
of darkness that lie upon the earth; so when Christ the Sun of Righteousness
arises in the soul, he dispels and scatters all those mists and fogs of sin and
wickedness which naturally arises in the soul.

Fourthly, in Gospel times, or times of light, men should live Gospel lives, or
walk in the light of the Gospel: while ye have light walk as children of the
light. Walk (says our Savior, John 5.35, 36) while ye have light, lest
darkness come upon you: for he that walks in darkness knows not whither he
goes. While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children
of light.

Fifthly, that rioting and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, strife and
envy, are not works of the day, but of the night.

Sixthly, they that would live as becomes the Gospel of Christ, should cast off
all those unfruitful works of darkness.

Seventhly, that Jesus Christ is a Christians garment.

Eighthly, that Jesus Christ is a garment to be put on.

Ninthly, that all of Christ, whole Christ is to be put on; put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ as a King to rule you, as a Priest to offer up himself a sacrifice
for you, and as a Prophet to teach and and instruct you.

Tenthly and lastly, that the putting on of the Lord Jesus Christ is
accompanied with the casting off all sinful and fleshly works.

Now the point of doctrine that I shall chiefly insist upon shall be this,
namely, that the Lord Jesus Christ is a garment; in handling whereof I shall
briefly touch upon, and speak something to all the rest by way of use and
application.

The Doctrine then to be insisted upon is this, That the Lord Jesus Christ is a
Christians garment; in handling whereof, I shall endeavor by the assistance of
God to show you the natural agreement and resemblance that is between the Lord
Jesus Christ and our natural garments.

First, wherein they do agree, and secondly, wherein they do not agree.

And having done this, in the next place, God willing, I shall endeavor to
show you what kind of garment Christ is, and how this garment is to be worn.

Thirdly and lastly, to whom and for what he is a garment; and then having done
this, I shall briefly endeavor to give you some directions by way of motives
to persuade you to the putting on of this garment, and so conclude all by the
assistance of God in a word or two of use and application.

I begin with the first of these, wherein the Lord Jesus Christ is or may be
said to be a garment, and this this will appear briefly in these two things.

1. Considering what we are; and 2. Considering what Christ does.
1. Christ may be said to be a garment, considering what we are by nature, the
best of us are but, as St. John says; Rev. 3.17. empty, naked, miserable
sinners: the best garments we have by nature are nothing else but rags, yea
filthy rotten rags, as the Prophet Isaiah expresses it in Isa. 64.6. We are all
of us by nature poor and blind, miserable and naked, till Christ appears in
us, thereupon the Apostle Paul, in Phil. 3.8, 9. desires so earnestly that he
might be found in Christ, not having on his own righteousness, which he
accounted dross and dung in comparison of Christ and his righteousness.

2. Christ is a garment in regard of what he does to us; he covers our
nakedness by casting over us the skirts of his love, as in Ezekiel. 16 8.

And to illustrate this a little, I shall here take occasion to show you
wherein Christ may be said to be a garment, by giving you the resemblances that
are between the Lord Jesus Christ and our natural garments; and what our
garments are to our bodies, the same, and much more is Christ to our souls.

Now the natural use of our natural garments are chiefly these three.

1. Our natural garments are for necessity. 2. For distinction. 3. For
ornament.
First, for necessity; our natural garments are necessary, yea, they are of
necessity, we cannot be well without them: they are needful for us to cover and
shelter us, to cherish and preserve our weak, frail, naked bodies, from all the
dangers and encumbrances which would irresistably fall upon us, without the use
of them.

Our garments are useful to cover and preserve us from the cold blustering
storms of the world, how unable would our frail weak mortal bodies be to
subsist and live without the natural use of our natural garments, to cherish
and preserve us; and this, and more then this does Christ to our souls.

As our bodies are not able to subsist without clothes, no more are our souls
able to subsist without Christ, who is the life and garment of our souls.

As our natural garments serve to defend us from the cold blustering storms of
the weather, so Christ the garment of our souls preserves and shelters us from
all those raging assaults of Satan, which in the world we are often, yea,
always liable unto.

Secondly, as our natural garments serve to defend us from the cold storms of
wind and weather, so likewise they serve to defend us from the violent and
scorching heat of the Dun.

As in the blustering storms of rain and cold, our garments preserves us from
perishing under them; so in the violent searching heat of the Sun, our garments
serve to keep us from being melted and devoured by its violent and scorching
heat.

Of the like use is Christ to our souls; as it is only Christ that can preserve
us from the cold blustering storms of the world, so it is only Christ that can
preserve us from the violent and scorching heat of persecutions and fiery
trials in the world.

A second use of our natural garments is for distinction, to distinguish
between sex and ser, noble and ignoble, high and low, rich and poor,
magistrates and people; so likewise Christ is a garment for distinction, yea,
he is the only distinguishing garment in the world.

Christ distinguishes the saint from the sinner; the holy from the unholy, the
sheep from the wolves; yea, the true sheep from the wolves in sheeps clothing;
the sincere and upright souls from formal falsehood, hypocritical Professors:
and as it distinguishes the saints from sinners here, so if will also
distinguish them hereafter; they that have not on this garment at the last day,
shall be set on the left hand of Christ in judgment; its this wedding garment
that distinguishes who are the guests for the marriage feast, there is no
coming to heaven without it.

Thirdly, the natural use of our natural garments are for ornament, our
uncomely parts being clothed become abundant more comely; our bodies being
decked and adorned by clothing, although in themselves uncomely, do thereby
become beautiful and lovely: of the like use is Christ to our souls; there is
nothing in the world, beloved, that will so adorn your souls as this garment of
Christ; yea, it is the only becoming garment, it will make your souls amiable
and lovely, yea, altogether lovely, our souls being clothed upon with this
garment of Christ and his righteousness, will appear lovely and beautiful in
the eyes of God himself, and by it we are made to be acceptable in the Lord: as
we are in our selves, we are vile, wretched, sinful, deformed creatures,
altogether unlovely, but in Christ we are made to be amiable and beautiful,
yea, altogether lovely.

Having thus given you the resemblances between Christ and our natural
garments, and having showed you briefly wherein they do agree, I shall now in a
word or two, show you wherein they disagree, or rather wherein this spiritual
and heavenly garment of Christ super exceeds and excells all the garments in
the world, be they never so rich and costly; and herein lies the disagreement.

First, our natural garments are not durable, they will last us but a little
while before they be quite worn out; but Jesus Christ is a durable and lasting
garment, yea, an everlasting garment that will never be worn out while thou
live, though thou live never so long, it will last thee for ever and ever,
both here and hereafter.

Secondly, our natural garments they are the worse for wearing, yea, the longer
we wear them the worse they grow; and at the last, by being over-worn, they
come to be worth nothing? I, but it is not thus with Christ, this heavenly
garment of Christ is the better for wearing, and the longer we wear it, the
better it is, and the better we are, it does not only grow better it self, but
it also makes us grow better. I, but it is not thus with our natural garments,
they if they be worn often, or by often wearing, they grow worse and worse, and
at last they decay.

Thirdly, our natural garments as we put them on in the morning, so we put them
off at night; but where ever Jesus Christ is put on as a garment, he is not,
nay, he cannot be put off again; Christ is a garment as well for the night as
for the day: the soul that has once given up it self to Christ, by a true and
saving faith, can never be taken away, I mean not finally from Christ, by all
the craft and policy of the Devil; they that are chosen by God in Christ, shall
be preserved by God in Christ.

Fourthly, our natural garments grow out of fashion very often and suddenly,
but Jesus Christ is a garment that will never be out of fashion; a better then
which can never be imagined nor invented.

Jesus Christ is a garment as well for Summer as for Winter, for all weathers;
in the Summer heat of persecutions and trials, Christ is a garment, either to
keep them off, or else to sustain us under them: and in the Winter of adversity
Jesus Christ is a garment to defend and cherish us from all evils; let the
storms be never so great, let the fire be never so hot, Christ can sustain and
uphold his people; witness Daniel in the Lions Den, and the Children in the
fiery Furnace, etc.

Fifthly, our natural garments they are fitted to our bodies, but to this
garment of Christ out souls are made fit; Christ is a garment made fit for all
souls, natural garments if they fit one, they are either too big or too little
for another; but Jesus Christ is a garment fit, or made fit for all souls, for
souls of all sorts; a garment for men, and a garment for women: a garment for
parents, and a garment for children: a garment for poor, and a garment for
rich: a garment for Magistrates, and a garment for Ministers, and a garment for
people: a garment for Jews, and a garment for Gentiles. Christ is and will be
to all his people, an ornament of grace here, and of glory hereafter.

I come now in the next place to show you what kind of garment Jesus Christ
is, and how he is to be worn; and I shall briefly give it you in these
following considerations.

And first of all, he is a precious garment: to you therefore which believe he
is precious, 1 Pet. 2.7. precious in regard of his nature, God and man;
precious in regard of his worth and excellency, the chiefest and the choicest
of ten thousands. But I must not insist upon these things.

Secondly, Christ is a costly garment, a garment that is said to be of great
price, a garment of Gods own making, a garment that cost a dear price, the
precious life and blood of a Savior.

In a word, for I must be brief, he is a garment of more worth then all the
world.

Thirdly, Christ is a cheap garment, the cheapest garment that ever thou worest
in all thy life; thou may have this garment, as we use to say for God a
mercy, he is freely offered to thee: Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to
the waters, and he that has no money: come ye, buy and eat, come buy wine and
milk without money, and without price.

Thou may have this garment for asking for; it is true, this garment cost
the dearest price that ever any garment did, the Blood of God, one drop whereof
is of more worth then ten thousand Worlds; but Christians, remember, this
garment is paid for already, its purchased by God the Father for thee; should
thou go about to buy it, thou could never be able to purchase it; all thou
have, nay, all that all the men in the world have, would never have been able
to have bought this garment: it was only the rich God, that God who has all,
and is all, that was only able to purchase this precious, this costly, this
excellent, and this glorious garment; and yet not withstanding all this, thou
may have him for nothing, he is freely tendered and offered to thee in the
Gospel of life: though it be a costly garment to God yet it will be a cheap
garment to thee; God has paid all, and there is nothing at all left for thee
to pay, or to do, but to take him and put him on.

Fourthly, Jesus Christ is a seamless garment, as Christ coat was seamless, so
is his person seamless, there is no rent nor divisions in this precious
garment; and as there is no rents nor divisions in Christ, so there ought to be
none in Christians: if there be no rents nor divisions in the head, certainly
there ought to be none in the Church, which is the body.

And here beloved, we might take up a sad and a bitter lamentation in in
consideration of the sad rents and divisions that are now in the Church of
Christ: whereas one says, He is of Paul, and another of Apollos, are we not
therefore carnal? 1 Cor. 1. Certainly beloved, these things ought not so to be,
all the Saints or God, they shall all have one head (...), so they must all be
saved by one faith: and therefore surely they should all be of one heart, if
not of one mind; and therefore by the way, those who go about to make rents
and divisions in the Church of God, does not do Gods work, but the Devils: the
spirit of God is not a spirit of division, but of love, of peace, and a pure
mind; and as the Apostle Jude calls seducers and false teachers, ungodly men;
and separates from the Church, are said by Jude in his 19. verse, to be
sensual, and not to have the spirit.

And before I pass this point, I hope it will not be amiss to show you the
wickedness and sin of those who go about to make divisions in the Church of
Christ.

And first of all, sowers of divisions are renters of Christ; it is a horrible
violence offered to the Body of Christ, a dividing of Christ, as St. Paul calls
it, in 1 Cor. 1.13. it would make Christ seem to be the head of two bodies, a
most monstrous conceit indeed.

Secondly, it resists the commands of Christ, which is love, and opposes the
very end of Christ in dying for sinners, which was, that all his Saints should
be one.

Thirdly, division in the Church is very dishonorable and injurious to the
Church; for how can a body be rent and torn without prejudice: it hinders also
the peace of the Church, Schismatics, says one, more opposes the peace of the
Church then heathens do; if the body be rent and torn, it is surely with much
pain and smart; and tearing and renting in the church will surely cut the very
heart of one that is a true Member of the Church. It makes the Saints mourn, and
to be sure, it makes the Devil laugh; therefore let us labor to be rentless
and seamless, as Christ is.

To this end, in the first place labor after holiness, division and separation
is a badge and mark of unholiness; children in unholiness are ever men in
malice.

Secondly, be not overtaken with new fancies and novelties; those new lights
which has set the Church of God so much on fire in these our days, have all
been taken out of the dark Lanthorns of old Heretics and Jesuits: all those
lights which receive not their light from the word of God, are all false lights
and vapors that only appear on purpose to draw men out of the way. Truth
should always be embraced, though it be never in so old a dress, they are
itching ears that are most taken with novelties.

Lastly, divisions beger sensuality, sensuality usual follows separation even
at the heels, separating themselves, says Jude, sensual, not having the
Spirit: not to speak any more of this, our own sad experience has too
manifestly witnessed this for a truth. What horrid impiety, desperate villainies
have been committed by wicked and ungodly seducers in our days, my heart
trembles with the very thought thereof.

Fifthly, Christ is a spotless garment, there is not so much as a spark or spot
in this garment; and therefore it is, that the Saints are said in Scripture to
be clothed in white robes, Rev. 6.11. and that he offered himself without spot
to God, Heb 9.14. and the Saints are said to be clothed in fine linen, white
and clean, Rev. 19.14.

And as Christ is spotless himself, so he takes away all spots and defilements
from his people, they are washed in his blood, and therefore are said to be
clean by Chritst himself, John 13.10. John 15.3. and therefore he is called the
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, John 1.29. It was only a
sinless Savior that could satisfy for, and take away the sins of sinful men.

If Christ had not been without spots himself, he could never have taken away
our spots: he that was manifest, says St. John, to take away our sin, in him
was no sin, 1 John 3.5 Christ has suffered for us, says St. Peter, 1 Pet.
2.21, 22. who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; it is only
the blood of Christ that washes, and needs no washing: if he had not been
without sin, he could not have saved us from our sins; nay, he himself then had
stood in need of a Savior: and although he took upon him our nature, and was
made slesh, yet the nature of Christ was a pure nature in it self; and
therefore that of the Apostle does most sweetly express this, where he says of
Christ, that he in the likeness of sinful flesh, condemned sin in the flesh,
Romans 8.3. and though he was in all things like unto us, yet says the Apostle,
Heb. 4.13. he was without sin.

Christ was not born in sin, as we are, he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and
borne of a pure Virgin; its true, Christ was a sinner, yea, the greatest of
sinners by imputation, he having all the sins of all the Clect of God laid upon
him.

But first, had not Jesus Christ been sinless in himself, he had never been
able to have unvergone so heavy a burden: Christ suffered not for

But first, had not Jesus Christ been sinless in himself, he had never been
able to have undergone so heavy a burden: Christ suffered not for his own
sins, but for our sins; He his own self (says the Apostle) bore our sins on
the Cross. We indeed) says the converted thief on the Cross) do suffer justly,
but this man has done nothing amiss, Luke 23.41. He has made him to be sin
for us, who knew no sin, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.21. He did no violence,
neither was there any guile found in his mouth, Isa. 53.9.

Sixthly, Christ is a comely garment, a garment that will never be out of
fashion; He is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever: there is nothing
so lovely and amiable in the eyes of Christians as Christ is. Christians I
beseech you consider, you are never well dressed till you have put on this
garment, nor you shall never be blessed without it.

Seventhly, Christ is a lasting, yea, an everlasting garment, a garment that
will last thee as long as thou live, and will never be the worse for wearing,
but will always be the better for wearing; the more thou wearest this garment
the more glorious it will be: and as this garment will last thee as long as
thou live, so thou may carry it along with thee when thou dyest; thou
can not carry any thing out of the world with thee; for naked came thou
into the world, and naked shall thou go out of the world; but if thou have put
on Christ as a garment in thy life, thou can not leave him behind thee when
thou dyest, thou shall carry this garment with thee into the next world.

I should come now to show you how this garment is to be worn, but I shall
speak of that by way of Use and Application.

Now the Uses that I shall make of this useful point, shall be these.

Is it so that Jesus Christ is a Christians garment, then in the first place I
beseech you observe the miserable and wretched condition of wicked and ungodly
men; men out of Christ they are naked, and have not (as we use to say of some
poor people) a rag to cover their nakedness withal. Ah! sinners, for the Lords
sake, for your precious and immortal souls sake, I beseech you consider, and
lay to heart a little your own most miserable and sad condition, how will you
be able to stand in the day of the Lords wrath, and how will thou be able to
contend with the Almighty, when once he is angry, thou have nothing to shelter
thee against the storms and fury of the Lords indignation. I beseech you then
as you love your own souls, that you would now put on the Lord Jesus Christ, O
put him on, he is freely offered to thee, O then do not be so foolish, and
Bedlam mad, as to refuse him, it thou do thou art undone for ever: art thou
naked, and wilt not thou take this garment of Christ to cover thy nakedness
withal; consider a little I beseech thee thy own sad condition as thou art in
thy self out of Christ,

In the first place thou art liable to all dangers, every sinner out of Christ
lies open to every danger; every mercy thou enjoyest out of Christ is in wrath,
thy preservation is but by common providence, and its cursed as well as common,
as one says sweetly, Thy preservation is but a reservation of thee to the day
of wrath, thou art kept, but remember, thou art kept but as a malefactor to the
day of execution, thou have nothing to guard thee from the wrath of God: it is
possible thou may be secure in thy sin, but remember thy security is not
from want of danger, but from the want of dicovery of that danger which is
every day and hour hanging over thy head, and ready to fall upon thee; were
thou but once seriously sensible of that danger which every day thou art in. I
am confident thou could no more rest in thy sins out of Christ, then thou
could go to bed when thy house is on fire about thy ears.

Secondly, thou art, if out of Christ, in the power of every Devil and every
lust; thou art the devils for egress and regress, when he pleases thou art
taken captive by him at his will, as the apostle expresses it, 2 Timothy 2.26.
Thou art like a Common without a hedge, a prey to every beast of prey; thou will not take Christ as a garment thou will not let God be a hedge to keep thee
from straying into sin, and God will not be an hedge to preserve thee from
being destroyed in and for thy sin.

O sinner, thy condition is very sad and very dreadful, thou lie at the mercy
of the devil every moment, at the cruel courtesic of every temptation; thou
have a hole it may be to keep thy Swine in, but if thou have not a Christ to
lodge thy soul in, thou art liable to all the curses in the book of God; how
dreadful is it to want the benefit of every street promise in the word of God,
to want a Jesus to deliver us from the wrath to come. Do thou think thou
can the able to endure the wrath of God to all eternity; if thy foundation be
not laid upon the rock of Christ, thy whole building will soon be destroyed,
and thou will be found to be the veriest fool in the world; it thou art out of
Christ thou can never be safe, thou art a mad man, and thou delightest in thy
own destruction.

Secondly, by way of motive, consider I besecch you, Christ will not only
cover thy nakedness, and shelter thee from the wrath of God, but will be an
ornament of grace and glory to thee for ever.

But how shall we get this garment of Christ, may some say? I see my own
nakedness, but how shall I do to get this garment? I answer, in the first
place, thou must beg it of God, thou may have it for asking for; ask and
thou shall have, it is freely offered unto thee.

Secondly throw away all thy own rotten rags of sin, thou must strip thy self
even naked of all selfe-righteousness; Christ will not be a garment to any but
to such as shall first put off their own rags, throw away then all thy old
rotten rags, and put on the Lord Jesus Christ; put him on, he is freely offered
to thee, do not despise thy own mercy; get Christ for thy garment here, if ever
thou expectest to have Christ for thy comfort hereafter. Remember without
Christ there is no happiness to be had hereafter, thou art miserable here, and
thou shall be miserable to all eternity hereafter. O consider this, all ye that
forget God, left he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you, Psalm
50.22.

In the next place, is it so, is Christ a garment, then here is matter of great
joy and comfort to those that are Christ's: O happy Christian, God has made a
blessed exchange with thee, he has taken away from thee thy own rotten filthy
stinking rags, and he has in the room thereof put thee on his own most
glorious white Robes! O happy soul! O blessed exchange.

But before I proceed any further, I shall a little endeavor to give you some
few, but brief directions for your better instruction and edification.

And first of all, have thou put on the Lord Jesus Christ as a garment, O then
for the Lords sake do not put him off again, keep him on while thou have him
on; children you know when they have gotten a new garment they do not love to
put if off again, they would wear it always if they might.

Secondly, have thou put on the Lord Jesus Christ as a garment, then wear him
cleanlily, have a care that thou do not soil this precious garment; O do not
dirty it, nor sully it. Men when they have gotten on their best garments, or
any thing that is rare and choice, how curious, how careful, how circumspect are
they, they will have a care where they go, and what they do so long as they
have those garments on. Men will not go about to rake dunghills in silken
garments, a little spot of oust is soon seen in a clean garment; do not do the
Devil drudgery with the garment of Christ: O do not rake in the filthy stinking
dunghills of sin, with the silken clothes of Christianity upon thy back;
remember such base things are too low, for such noble souls as Christians are;
to be employed in.

Thirdly, is Christ a garment, then wear him as a garment, put him not on as a
cloak, but put him on as a garment; remember, as one says sweetly, as Christ
is the best garment, so is he the worst cloak: for to make Christ and
Christianity a cloak for thy sin, is the horre^st thing in all the world. Those
woldes who are in sheeps clothing are the most dangerous woldes of all; to be
Saints in appearance outwardly, and Devils in substance inwardly, O horrid
impiety! Will you swear and lie, cousen and cheat, and do all manner of evil,
and yet profess Christianity; O take heed of this, they that make Christ a
Cloak for their sin, do manifestly show that they never yet tasted of the love
of God in Christ, in the pardoning of their sins; Christ is not a cloak to hide
sin, but Christ is a garment to preserve us from sin; they that put on Christ
as a cloak, never yet put on Christ as a garment.

Fourthly, is Christ a garment, and have thou put him on, then wear him
constantly, never put him off, he will last thee as long as thou live, I and
longer too; thou can not carry a rag of thine own clothes with thee out of
this world? I but thou may carry this garment with thee into the next world;
thou may go to heaven with this garment upon thee, nay, thou shall never get
to heaven without it; put him on then, and never put him off, wear him every
day, day by (...), even to thy dying day, he will last thee as long as thou
live, and will be a comfort, yea, an exceeding great comfort to thee when
thou dyest, and will be a glory, an everlasting glory to thee for ever in the
world to come.

Fifthly, is it so, is Christ a garment? then here is matter of comfort to all
that are Christ's in times of danger and trouble; let we tell thee Christian,
thou that have put on the Lord Jesus Christ as a garment, thou art armed as
well as clothed, thou have armor of proof upon thy back, such armor as never
yet could be pierced, such armor as will keep off all the gun-hots of the
Devil, and the world, be they never so great, be they never so furious, be they
never so many: thy garment Christian will keep out a shower, I, and a storm
too, nothing can pierce it, nothing shall be able to hurt thee if thou have put
on Christ, neither sin nor Satan: If God be for us, who can be against us, Romans
8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is Christ that
has dyed.

First, thou have put on Christ as a garment, he will defend thee I Will warrant
thee, let come what will come: see what the Lord says to such as are clothed
with his Son, in Isa. 47.1, 2. Fear not, for I have redeeemed thee, I have
called thee by thy name, thou art mine. When thou passest through the waters, I
will be with thee, and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when
thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt; neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee.

And this was it which so ravished the hearts of the blessed Martyrs, and
carried them through all their torments with so much joy and comfort; and so
likewise the three Children in the fiery furnace, all the violent and scorching
heats of those burning fiery furnaces, could not, nay did not hurt so much as
the least hair of their heads; and the reason was, because they were the
Children of the most high God, and were clothed with the Lord Jesus Christ, as
with a garment. So likewise Daniel in the Lions Den, he was defended from the
fury of those raging beasts, by his being clothed with this garment of Christ.

In a word, let come what will come, let the Devil and all his instruments rage
never so much, let the storms of persecution be never so hot, let the waves
beat never so fiercely, thy house shall stand, and thou shall be carried
through all, because thy house, thy faith is built upon a Rock, even upon the
reck of Ages, the Lord Jesus Christ. Men out of Christ are naked, they have
nothing at all to defend them, all those rich and costly garments of the
gallants of the world, be they never so rich and gaudy, are not half so costly
as this garment is; for believe it Christian, it cost Christ's precious Life and
Blood to purchase it for thee.

Sixthly, is Christ a garment, then let us not be proud of our own garments:
alas, what are they, nothing but rags in comparison of this garment of Christ,
bodies of sin; sin was the first founder and inventer of theme if Adam had not
sinned, he had never stood in nerd of a garment. A thief (says on very
swertly) may as well be proud of his halter, as a man or woman may be proud of
their garments; and set me tell thee, thou that art proud, thou art proud of
that which is another, it is none of thy own, thou have nothing of thy own to
be proud with: what thou have is but lent thee, and thou know not how soon
the owner may take them away, and leave thee as naked as he found thee: and
then if thou art found out of Christ thou art undone for ever I Woe, woe be
unto thee, and that for evermore.

Seventhly, is Christ a garment, then I note from hence, that abundance of
outward enjoyments do nothing at all adorn a man, its only the garment of
Christ that will make a Christian lovely; earthly things they do not adorn us
in the sight of God; it matters not whether we be rich or poor, naked or
clothed, in rags or in robes: I, but it matters whether thou be: in Christ
or no; God will look upon thee only as thou art clothed with his Son: if thou
art not found in Christ, clothed upon with the glorious white robes of his
righteousness, at the last day God will never own thee for his child, he will
then say unto thee, Depart from me, I know you not.

Eighthly, I note from hence, that they that live in sin are none of Christ's,
they are not clothed upon with this garment; Let every one (says the Apostle)
that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. Put on the Lord Jesus
Christ, says the Lert) and make no provision for the flesh. Christianity and
sin are no kin one to another, sin is a work of the night; and if ever thou
would put on the Lord Jesus Christ, thou must cast off and forsake all thy
sins; but if thou will needs keep thy sorry rags of sin still upon thy back,
let me tell thee, Christ will never be a Savior unto thee, thou shall have
nothing to defend thee in the evil day of the Lords wrath.

In the last place, by way of motive, O that I could persivade you this day to
embrace Jesus Christ, as he is tendered and offered unto you in the Gospel;
would thou put on the Lord Jesus Christ as a garment? then in the words of
the Apostle, I beseech you, Cast off the works of darkness, and put on the
armor of light: Walk honestly, as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness,
and do not commit works of darkness at noonday; even the light of nature
should make men blush to commit sin in the very face of the Sun it self.

Remember, I beseech you, how unsuitable and unseasonable rioting and
drunkenness is to the profession of the Gospel of Christ: Let every one (says
the Apostle) that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity: Christ will
never be a garment to thee if thou delightest in sin, its impossible to serve
God and Mammon, thou can never wear the livery of Christ, add the livery of
Satan together: as holiness is the badge and livery of Christ, so sin and
wickedness is the badge and Livery of the Devil: in this the Children of God
are manifest, says the Apostle, and the children of the Devil: Whosoever does
not righteousness is not of God, John 1.3, 10. and in the 6, 7, 8. verses of
the same Chapter, Whosoever abides in him sins not, and whosoever sins
has not seen him, nor known him: He that commits sin, is of the Devil: Ye
are of your Father the Devil, says our Savior to the unbelieving Jews, John
8.44. and the works of your father ye will do: wicked men will do the Devils
work, although they are sure to dye for it; The work of your father ye will do.

And let me tell you, beloved, they that will do the Devils work, must look for
nothing but the Devils pay, and the Devil will be sure to give them their due
at the last: And I beseech you remember what the wages of sin is; in Romans.
6.23. The wages of sin is death, death eternal; the wicked in hell they are
always dying, and yet never dead; the torments of the damned in hell, as they
are easeless, so they are endless. O consider this you that forget God, lest he
tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

Would thou put on the Lord Jesus Christ as a garment? then in the last
place, and so I have done, Do not make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the
lusts thereof; spend not thy time in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering
and wantonness, but casting off and abhorting all these unfruitful works of
darkness: Labor to live up to that God who has so dearly loved us, and bought
us with his own most precious blood; that so living here to all the intents and
purposes of his Grace, and walking daily before the Lord in all manner of
holiness and righteousness all thy days, thou may in the end of thy days
here live and reign for ever with Christ in glory hereafter.

Now blessed are all those, and for ever blessed shall they be, who so live,
and so walk, as that they may be truly said to have put on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and do so give up themselves to be ruled and guided by him in Grace
here, that so when they come to dye, they shall be found in Christ, clothed
upon with the glorious white Robes of Christ his righteousness, and shall for
ever live and reign with Christ in Glory hereafter; to whom be Glory and
Honor, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader.
These godly Books are printed for Eliz. Andrews, at the white Lion near Pie
Corner: and are but three pence apiece.

1. The Christians Blessed Choice. 2. Christ's first Sermon. 3. Christ's last
Sermon. 4. Heavens Glory and Hells Horror. 5. The School of Grace. 6. A warning
piece to the Sloathful, Idle, Careless, Drunken, and Secure Ones of these last
and worst of times.
Likewise, 1. Englands Faithful Physician. 2. The dreadful character of a
drunkard. 3. Doomsday at hand. 4. The Fathers last Blessing to his children.
5. The sin of Pride arraigned and condemned. 6. The Black Book of Conscience.
7. Peter's Sermon of Repentance. 8. The Charitable Christian. 9. The Plain Man's
Plain Pathway to Heaven. 10. Death Triumphant.


These ten last are two pence apiece.


