THE IRISH OCCVRRENCES, OR, A TRVE RELATION OF the Proceedings in IRELAND.
Being a Copy of a Letter written by a worthy Gentleman to a member of the
House of Commons from Dublyn. Dated the tenth of January 1642. Published to
prevent false Copies.

printer's device or decoration featuring a head and head-dress(not in
McKerrow)

LONDON, Printed by A. N: for H. T. 1642.

THe certain news we have, That last week on Thursday Captain Barkley entered
with his Pinace and three more into the river of Tredagh, and found it half
bard with Boats, and a great Chain, which he suddenly burst, and made that
work useless; The town is relieved with good store of meal and other
provision, and Captain Barkley came to Dublyn on Wednesday last, but I must
tell you, on his way homewards he burnt the town called Skeris, and got there
some Plate and other good stuff.

At the time of the relief one Captain Fox entered the town by permission of
Sir Henry Titchburne, with two hundred men, and came as far as the high
Cross, and there proclaimed the town was his, but in an instant Sir Henry
Titchburne gave him the salutation of a Soldier, for he and all his men were
laid dead on the place, and the rest of the Rebels durst not venture any
further; It is said by those that left Dublyn on Wednesday last, That Sir Henry
on Saturday last sallied out and killed three hundred. It may be so. Since
this, some troops of house went to Donboyne, seven miles from Dublin, in
Mead, and burnt it, The mighty General Fingalle not daring to venture his
person in the relief; The Soldiers brought from thence four hundred Cowes,
much other Cattle, and much goods. Horses are dear in Dublyn, yet two
shillings will set hard to get a good Nagg, plate for 2 shillings six pence the
ounce, a merry world at Dublyn:

We have a Letter from Sir Maurice Eustace, That a great party of Wickloe,
Kildare, and Carlogh lie at Ratchcoole, but those that came forth on Wednesday
last hear no such thing. Sir Charles Coote has been that way since, and has
burnt Clandarkan near Bellamount, a great town, and some other towns.

From Munster the Intelligence is the Lord Dungarvan is landed with Arms and
Munition, and is gone toward the Fort of Duncannon, in hope to relieve it,
wherein the Lord Esmund is, which if it be given up, will be a fault in him,
his son Sir Thomas Esmund is turned Papist, and out certainly in rebellion.

The Lord Viscount Mountgarret, and the Lord of Ikerryn, and the rest of the
Lords except Muscrey and Roch, are out in Munster.

Kilkenny has taken it self, where my Lord Mountgarret is Governor for the
Rebels.

The Earl of Cork is at Yoghall with six hundred foot, and some horse, to
preserve that place for the English landing.

As for Watersord it has taken it self also.

From Munster, the English have sent to Scotland to buy 2500 pounds Arms which
are now with them. We have no more news from thence. If we had some Ships
from the coast of Munster, they might prevent Inconveniences, and burn towns
that are in rebellion. I know it will terrify them much, and put despair in
their minds, that succors cannot well come, but be taken.

FINIS.

