Clavis Apocalyptica: OR, A Prophetical KEY: BY WHICH The great Mysteries in
the Revelation of St John, and the Prophet Daniel are opened; It being made
apparent That the Prophetical Numbers com to an end with the year of our Lord,
1655.

Written by a Germane D. and now translated out of High Dutch.

In two TREATISES.

1. Showing what in these our times has been fulfilled. 2. At this present is
effectually brought to pass. 3. And henceforth is to be exspected in the years
near at hand.
With an introductorie PREFACE.

LONDON, Printed by William Du-Gard for Thomas Matthewes, and are to be sold
by Giles Calvert, at the Black-Spread-Eagle at the West End of St Paul's, 1651.

TO THE Right Honorable OLIVER St-JOHN Lord Chief Justice of the Court of
Common Pleas.
My most Honored Lord!
WHen I reflect (as often times I have cause to do upon the Providence, which has
been over me since I have offered my self unto the Public; and upon the hand
by which that Providence has supported and directed me in my way; I find
that it has made use of none to carry me on to become serviceable; so much as
of your Lordship's favor and affection. For as you were the first that took
notice of my inclination, to be encouraged in the ways which I have followed;
so your eye has been all along upon me therein. In my straights, whereinto my
forwardness has from time to time brought me; I have found the tenderness of
your sens, and bowels to be like unto that of a Father. You have in private
put to your hand, and set your heart to free me from them; and in public you
have owned me toward the Parliament, and procured an aspect from that High and
Honorable Court toward me, to set me apart as an Agent for the Advancement
of Universal Learning and the Public Good, which I confess is an Emploiment,
whereunto from my youth God God has naturalized my affections. And since this
Public designment of my Emploiment, it has been your influence upon, and
concurrence with other noble and worthy Instruments, whom you have quickened,
which has made that settlement, which does promise so much enlargement to my
steps, in my future courses effectual. All this I am bound to observe and
acknowledge with most hearty thankfulness unto God, not only by reason of the
refreshments, which the Lord has thereby conveyed unto me from your hand,
but by reason of the Principle, which moved you hereunto, and the Aim which you
have had therein, which I know to have been none other but the Public; and
therein the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; so that the hope which
we have to partake of the Salvation of Israel, which shall com out of Sion by
a Gospel-Reformation of this Age and Common wealth, has been the Center
wherein our Aims have always met. For I am persuaded that the ground of all
the good will, of the Bounty and of the Care, which abundantly has been
bestowed upon me, has been none other, but the freeness of your spirit in the
love of the things, which are most excellent, wherein you found me conversant,
and which you are delighted to set forward. Whence it is that I conceiv it my
duty, to present unto your Lordship in a more direct and eminent way then
unto others, the fruits of my Negotiation, chiefly such as relate immediately
unto the great Object of our Hope; of which kind this present Treatise is a
special and signal Discovery. Therefore give me leav to make of it a public
offer unto your Patronage, not only as a Testimony of the forementioned
Obligations, by which my Spirit in the sight of Christ is entirely engaged
toward his Grace in You; but as a Subject of my Agencie to solicit, that by
the countenance of your Authority it may be recommended to such, as know what
the Communion of Saints does mean in the Kingdom of Heaven, that there may be
a reciprocation of love in the gifts of the Spirit, between us and others the
Members of Jesus Christ abroad; and that the things mentioned in the Preface,
as means to accomplish our hopes, which yet lie under deck, by the building up
of the walls of Jerusalem in the minds of Believers, may be drawn forth; and
the faithful and indefatigable Co-Agent therein, being put in a capacity to
prepare his seed to be sown by the working out of his proper tasks; may find
opportunities which will oblige him seasonably to sow it, by speaking out that
which at present can be but hinted, and intimated in reference to the opening
of the Principles, upon which the building of the Temple in Heaven is raised,
and by which it will com down from the New Heaven upon the New Earth, to be
the Tabernacle of God with men. Thus beseeching the Father of Lights to reveal
more and more these glorious approaching Truths: and the Righteous Judge to give
a Crown to all the labors of Love, which you have, or shall undergo for his
name's sake, I subscribe my self

My most Honored Lord Your truly devoted Orator and faithful Servant Samuel
Hartlib.

ERRATA.
In the Preface.
Page 3. line 26. for Batemans, read Bohemians. p. 5. l. 2. f. 22. r. 2. p. 38.
l. penult. f. promised. r. premised. p. 40. l. 1. f. of any, r. any. ibid. l.
40. f. transaction, r. transition. ibid. l. ult. f. transl^^ed, r. transacted.
ibid. f. leav, r. have. p. 47. l. 6. f. partly, r. party.

In the Book.
Page 1. line 12. deliver them. p. 6. 1, 2, 3. 360. days are 1. year or time
720. days are 2. years or times 180. days are year 1260. days
12. Mon. 24. Mon. 6. Mon. 42. Mon.
42 Months. at the rate of 30. days 1260. days.


p. 9. l. 22* f. sixty, r. ninety. ibid. l. 25. f. sixty, r. ninety. p. 10.
l. 4. f. sixty, r. ninety. p. 24. l. 11. f. Anglia, r. Mysia. p. 31. l. 10.
f. chap. 2. r. chapter 10. ibid. l. 11. f. verse 3. r. verse 2. p. 33. l. 1. f.
Ezekiah, r. Zedekiah. ibid. l. 13. Zedekiah for Ezekiah. p. 34. l. 8. and 9. f.
according to the supputation of, r. when we shall reckon. p. 35. l. 15. f.
Burse, r. Busse. p. 45. l. 16. f. Church, r. Christ. p. 48. l. ^. f. fifteen,
r. is. p. 75. l. 9* f. lib. and, r. lib. 21. and ibid. l. 11. f. cata, r. casa.
p. 76. l. ult: f. Truth, r. Turk. p. 112. f. demutation, r. deputation. p. 115.
l. 7. f. usual, r. which. p. 112. l. 8. f. chap. verse, r. chap. 20. verse. p.
138. l. 8. f. was Musa, r. was by Musa.

AN Epistolical Discourse, from Mr John Durie to Mr Sam: Hartlib, concerning
this EXPOSITION of the Revelation. BY Way of Preface thereunto.
WHen I do reflect (loving friend!) upon the passages of Mr Comeniu'ss Letter,
which he write's unto you, when he sent you this little Treatise upon the
Revelation; and consider withal what God's way is at present in the earth,
both toward us, and other Nations, and what the Contents of this book do
intend to make out, unto those that read it with attention: I am much inclined
to believ, that God does intend some special advantage to his Church by the
publication thereof; and that it is an effect of his good Providence toward
us, to have it put at this time into our hand. Therefore let me discourse a
little with you about it; The occasion of this discourse and the end thereof.
that not only the desire of our common friend, who does engage us to this
publication of the Treatise, and the declaration of our Judgment concerning the
same, may receiv some satisfaction, when we shall have occasion to write unto
him; but that others to whom this shall be imparted, may have also occasion to
lay the matter thereof more seriously to heart, then otherwise perhaps they
would intend to do.

As for Mr Comeniu's Letter which does give me this opportunity to discourse
with you upon this Subject, the words thereof concerning this matter are t^ese.

My Son in Law has been away these two weeks, Gener meus per duas Hebdomadas
abfuit Wratislaviam missus and Brigam, nihil affert praeter terrores, per
Pacem, quae derelictis, and a Pace exclusis nihil praeter novas Conscientiae
carnificinas allatura metuitur; and prodromi non absunt. Tractatus Germanicos
(de Periodicis Apocalypticis ad finem decurrentibus) en communico tibi: faxit
Deus ut haec ne pereant; neque in alienas veniant manus. Sed ea lege ut
Judicium de his expromas. hujus enim eliciendi causa nobis ista communicari
voluit author, ut quisquis legeret, judicet simul, and censuram addat. Audivi de
isto libello jam nuper veram esse Apocalypse^n Apocalypsin: and quod maxim
solabitur (si rem acu tetigerit) quod a termino tam prope absimus. Communica
quaeso vestris; si quos Josephos Medes habetis; sed erit in vestratem linguam
transferendum.
being sent to Warsaw, and to Brieg, he bring's no news but terrors, by
reason of the Peace, which is to be feared will afford nothing but new
tortures to the consciences of those that are deserted by it, and excluded from
it. Nor are the forerunners hereof wanting. Behold, here I impart unto you
these Germane Treatises, concerning the Periods of the Revelation-times,
drawing to an end (Godgrant they may not be lost, nor fall into other hands)
but upon this condition, that you shall let us know your Judgment thereof; for
to this effect, he that is the author of them caused them to be communicated
unto us, that whoever should read, should also judge and censure. I have heard a
little while ago of this book, that it is the true Revelation of the
Revelations; and that which will be most comfortable (if he has hit right)
is, that we are so near the term prefixed. I pray you communicate this to
your men, if yet you have any Joseph Medes amongst you; but it must first be
translated into English.

Thus much he from Lissa in Poland, where most of the exiled Bateman's have
had their residence, since the time of their banishment. And in these words I
take notice, not only of the opinion which some among them have of this book in
approving of it; and of the Autor's Modesty, and Ingenuitie who sent it to
him; in concealing his own name, and submitting it to the censure of others,
that by the communion of Saints the measure of light, which God has given to
every one may become serviceable unto all; but chiefly of the good hand of
Providence, reaching forth this Treatise unto them at this time: Observation of
the Providence of God to cause this book to be published at this time.
for it is a manifest demonstration of the Fatherly care of God over them, to
support their hearts in their approaching trials, that they may not faint under
the burden thereof. It is a true saying of the Apostle, whereunto the
experience of all Saints, in all ages does bear witness; 1 Cor. 10. 13.
That God is faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are
able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape; that we may be
able to bear it. And as this is a truth in God's way toward particular
Saints, in their several occasions; so we may conclude, that in the universal
dispensation of trials, toward the whole Body of his Church, his course will
not be different, but altogether consonant unto this promise, 2 Cor. 1. 5.
that as the sufferings of Christ abound in the Church which is his Body; so
the consolations of the church shall also abound in Christ who is her head. So
that if the trials whereunto particular Saints are put, shall be found unto
prais, 1 Pet. 1. 7.
and honor, and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ: far more shall this
be verified of the whole Congregation, and general assembly of the Holy
ones, whose names are written in Heaven.

I look then upon this book which does open to the Bohemian exiled, For the
support of the Bohemian Exiles with comfort.
and Germane Churches, the counsel of God foretold so long ago in the
Revelation, and now shortly to be accomplished; as a special cordial sent unto
them from heaven, in their present affliction, and to support their hearts
against the approaching visitation, wherewith God's Providence will farther
visit those parts, before he make an end of his work amongst them. And that it
is now also at this juncture of time sent from thence unto us, to me it does
signify, that which is very considerable in several respects, which I shall
briefly point at before I com to speak of the Treatise it self.

First then we may observe from hence, For several uses to us also.
that the same spirit who does raise the exspectation of the Saints in these
parts, does also work the like thoughts elsewhere: as it is observable, that
about the time of Christ's coming in the flesh, there was much waiting for the
consolation of Israel, and looking for the Redemption of Jerusalem, as Luke
does intimate, chapter 22. verse 25. 38. So it is now worth our consideration,
that there is more then an ordinary looking out for the accomplishment of the
promises, wherein the Revelation of 1. To confirm us in the exspectation of the
fulfilling of the Apocalyptical promises.
Jesus Christ has caused us to hope. You know that some months ago, one came
of purpose (as he said) out of Germany, through the Low Countries into this
City, to make inquiry, whether any were here, who did look after the
fulfilling of the Revelation; his design by this inquiry was, that some ground
of communication, and good intelligence might be enterteined amongst us, for
the better understanding of God's ways, and the observation of his footsteps,
in working out his great work for the Churches; and to this effect he left some
books here with him whom you know, and since his return into the Low Countries,
he has by Letters promised a further communication with us, upon that
Subject, in the name of his Colleague. Thus we have had a call both from
Germany, and Poland, to entertein these thoughts; as for the Low Countries,
you know that there are many there, whose eyes are opened to look this way;
and in France I know some (though not so many as elsewhere,) whose heads are
lifted up, because their deliverance is at hand. Nor do we Christians only
exspect shortly some great change of affairs, but even the Jews, almost every
where, are also made sensible of the approaching change of their condition. So
that seeing there is an universal concurrence of thoughts toward this object,
we may rationally conclude, that the Lord is hastening to finish his work in
righteousness: and because it is apparent, that on all sides the enemy is about
to lift himself up like a flood, we may also see it herein manifest,, that the
Spirit of the Lord according to his promise, Isa. 59. 19.
is preparing to lift up a Standard against him.

Secondly, this Call which is given to us from so far, does signify unto me
two things; First, somewhat of God's way to accomplish his design: Secondly,
somewhat of our duty in subordination thereunto. 2. To put us in mind of God's
way, by which he will finish his work.
God's way to accomplish his design, according to the Scriptures, is, and will
be the communion of Saints in the mystery of Godliness, when every member
acted by the same Spirit toward God, and each to other; shall draw from him,
and supply one to another; that which he will give to every one, for the
edifying of the whole in love: and although they have not such an exact
contrivance of correspondencie settled one with another, as the politic Jesuits
have in their way; yet the Spirit by which they are led, acting the same thing
in them all, will make the effect of their counsels, and actings to correspond,
without any special contrivance of their own; that the work in the issue may
appear to be of God, and not of men: for Sion asso^^ as she travelleth, nay,
before she travelleth, and her pain come's: she shall be delivered, and
bring forth a Nation at once. Isa. 66. 7, 8. God by the Communion of Saints in
one and the same spirit, shall do this, by his contrivance of his own way
amongst them; Nor shall any gathering together of enemies (which shall not be
wanting) nor any violent attempts, or destructive weapons and endevors (which
will be set afoot) be able to obstruct the effect of this communion which
will bring the Body of Christ to to the stature of a perfect man. Isa. 54. 15,
16, 17.


Our duty in subordination to this way of God is clearly this; 3. To put us
in mind of our duty, in order to God's work.
that we should with all readiness of mind* apply our selves to entertein all
spiritual motions, tending to mutual and universal edification: not only by
prayers, to strive for all the Saints; and with them to stand steadfast in the
fight against all spiritual adversaries; but by counsel and endevors, as the
occasion is offered to reciprocate with those that provoke us to love, and to
good works, and to react with mutual zeal toward them by imparting unto them
the Manifestations of the Spirit, and the fruits of all the grace which God
has bestowed upon us; we know not how much an occasional and small
concurrence may do in God's way, when he is pleased to make it seasonable,
and bless it; one single act of correspondence at an adventure, will do more to
make his design effectual, then a whole years contrived and settled
intelligence, and agencie of many Statesmen for politic designments.

The third thing, which the sending of this book from Poland hither to be
translated, and the calling upon us to communicate our thoughts to them
concerning it, does signify unto me; is a warning unto us, 4. To warn us not
to be secure, but exspect a trial.
as from the Spirit of God, to waken us from security; and to move us to
exspect, as those of Poland say they do, both a further trial of our faith and
patience, and also a gracious deliverance to follow thereupon, whereof we
shall partake, if we hold fast the beginning and confidence of our hope, firm
unto the end with joie. We know that no man shall be crowned, but he that
first strive's lawfully; and that none shall reign with Christ, but he that
suffer's with him: as for me, I cannot see that our warfare is yet, as some
would have it (and to their own particular Station think it to be) at an end;
those upon that account having embraced the pleasures of brutishness, and
sensuality in this present world, have also made it a part of their happiness,
to dethrone God and Christ in their ranting, and blasphemous Imagination: and
so are justly given over unto a Reprobate mind; but as I have cause to griev at
the dishonor which they do to God, and to the Holy profession, and at the
certainty of their endless misery under the notion of a present perfection
and felicity; so I am awakened thereby to wait for the overflowing scourge,
and the storm of Hail, which shall sweep away the refuge of such lies, and the
flood of waters which shall drown the hiding places thereof. I am therefore
inclined to exspect still before the times of refreshmentt (which shall com
from the presence of the Lord) the last assault of the power of darkness, and
of this world against the Saints; which shall be of all other the heaviest and
fiercest; and this I am induced to believ from the Analogy, which is to be
between the sufferings of Christ in the flesh; and the sufferings of his
members, under the power of Antichrist, before he com's to his end. Christ's
last sufferings, immediately before his unchangeable state of glory, were the
greatest which befell unto him in all his life; nor was he raised by the power
of God, to sit at his right hand till he was first laid in the grave: so must
it also fare with his Body the Church, it must be conformable to him in his
death, as it shall be in his resurrection; therefore the last conflict which
it shall have with the Beast, shall be the most grievous, and before it can
be raised to sit in glory, it must in some sort be triumphed over, and
trampled upon by the world. Let us therefore not deceiv our selves with carnal
fancies, as the humor of those is, who feed greedily upon present enjoyment,
and make themselves drunk therewith; but being watchful and sober, let us take
this call from our brethren, as a warning, to prepare to suffer with them, the
last encounter of our and their enemies; and readily to communicate unto them,
at their desire, the graces of the spirit, which are given to us to profit
withal, that we may be all fitted for the coming of the bridegroom, and the
wedding of the Lamb.

These observations upon the passages of Comenius's letter in reference to this
book, are uppermost in my thoughts, and obviously incident to the contemplation
of our present condition; and of God's counsel manifested unto us in the
Revelation.

Now to speak somewhat of this Exposition of the Apocalyptical Prophecy,
Concerning the Treatise expounding the Revelation, what esteem is to be had of
it.
I shall confess that it come's nearer to my sens, then any which I remember,
I have read upon that part of God's word: And to us I conceiv it ought to be
the more commendable, and of better acceptance, by how much it come's nearer to
that which God has heretofore made known to our own men before others: for in
effect I find that it is an abridgment of our friend Mr Mede (now with God)
his interpretation of the Revelation, with some additions confirming the truth
thereof, and applying the same to the present State of affairs in Europe and in
Asia, more closely, and circumstantially then he did, to show the distinct
events which are shortly to be fulfilled; he has grounded all upon the
Synchronisms which God directed Mr Mede to observe, which certainly are
demonstrable, and a true keie to the opening of the Mystery; and he has
taken from him all along the chief heads of interpretations, concerning the
opening of the Seals, and the sounding of the Trumpets: but withal, he has
something of his own, which is considerable, as a more special keie, which I
have not found in others with so much perspicuitie, applyable to our present
times: that which he has concurrent with Mr Mede ought to be looked upon as
the fruit of God's grace sprung up elsewhere, from the seed which was sown here,
whereat we should rejoice, as at a seal of approbation set unto the truth,
which formerly was attested, and that which he has peculiar of his own, as
raised upon these grounds, and applied circumstantially, to show the time when
Antichrist's prevailing power shall com to an end, should be looked upon (as
the Author modestly desire's us to do) with judgment and discretion; to examine
that which he says without prejudice and partiality; for he does not
arrogate unto himself any infallibility: but only has offered that which
seems most likely to him to be the mind of God in the Prophecy: whereof
the truth will soon be known, whether his conjecture be right or no, because
he bring's the matter within the compass of five years to be tried by the
event; which is no long time of exspectation, and whether he has hit right in
this or no, it can be no prejudice to us, to take warning to be ready
always; for we are sure the time is not far: Let this be to us, a cry made
at midnight, Mat. 25. 6.
behold the Bridgroom comes, go ye out to meet him.

As for the Mysteries themselves, Concerning the interpetation of Apocalyptical
Mysteries.
which are contained in the Apocalyptical visions; I have always thought them
to have a deeper sens then what most Interpreters have endeavored to make out:
nor have I ever been able to find satisfaction in the attempts, which some (as
Doctor Alabaster, and others of that strain) have made to lay open these
Mysteries: I confess Mr Mede, and upon his grounds, this unknown author,, has
made the visions in reference to the outward events, in their several times, so
plain, that I think no rational man can find cause to contradict what they
say; but because the truth of this kind of Interpretation does depend upon an
exact knowledge of the History of the times, and the Chronology of events,
since the days of Christ and his Apostles; and upon the knowledge of the
Prophetical style, which does express harmonically the form and constitution of
the societies of mankind, in the civil and Ecclesiastical parts thereof;
together with the Changes incident thereunto, In respect of outward events,
that to show their fulfilling is not all which is intended by the Spirit.
by the similitude of the parts, properties, and Changes which in their visions
to them appeared to fall out, in the outward Heavens and Earth, and Sea, and
things contemed therein: therefore the certainty of that interpretation is not
obvious to every one; and although it might be so fully made out, to be an
undoubted truth, that it should become demonstrable to every ordinary
capacity; yet to my understanding, that would not exhaust the Mystery, which
the Spirit of God does recommend unto us in the matter of the vision; for
although a man should fully believ, and be able demonstratively to prove the
truth of the Accomplishment of all the events, as this author does make them to
me very probable; yet he might fall short of that spiritual understanding
whereunto this promise is made, Chapter 1. verse 3. Blessed is he that reads,
and they that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things which are
written therein. I shall therefore say, that there must be a certain reading,
and hearing of this Prophecy, which bring's a blessedness with it, so that he
who read's and hear's in that kind, is enabled to keep the things which are
written therein: and as there is such a reading and hearing, so there must be
a sens, and an interpretation of that sens, which is able to fit a man for the
keeping of the things which are written therein: and if there must be such an
interpretation for that kind of hearing, then there must also be a keie and
Rule of interpretation answerable to that sens, which is immediately
subordinate unto the promise of blessedness; for that this bare Historical sens
of the Accomplishment of the visions, is not that whereupon properly the
promise of blessedness is intailed is clear, because a man may be fully
convicted of the truth of this, and believ it, and demonstrate it unto others;
and yet himself not keep the things which are written in this Prophecy:
moreover, that reading and hearing whereunto the promise of a blessing is
annexed, must needs be proportionate to the capacity of all men, that make
sincerely profession of Christianity; but this reading and hearing, which is
thus grounded upon the Historical and Chronological interpretation of the
visions is not proportionate to the capacity of all sincere professors; and
therefore it cannot be taken for that reading and hearing whereunto the
promise of a blessing is annexed; and consequently there must be some other
interpretation found, which is immediately subordinate unto this effect.

That which I am now intimating is this; that the Prophetical visions of the
Revelation have a main matter of Mystery in them, beyond what is here, or any
where that I know by any Interpreter directly insisted upon; for I conceiv,
this which is here delivered to be indeed a true opening of the Mystical
vision, as to one part of it, which is the prediction of the Historical events
and Changes of things, which should befall unto the Government of the worldly
Empire, and to the visible State of the Church therein: but besides this part
of the Mystical vision, which I call the Historical presignification of events;
there is in the matter presignified, But that there is a manifestation of the
Mystery of the Kingdom of Christ intended thereby, above the Historical events.
a deeper Mystery wrapped up, which require's another keie to open it, then that
which shows the bare accomplishment of events; and this is the Mystery of the
Kingdom of Christ, in opposition to the Mystery of Iniquity; for this is
mainly to be taken notice of in the events which are foretold, and do fall
out: now he that read's, and hear's, and keep's the things written in this
Prophecy concerning this Mystery, he is truly blessed indeed; but except we
can read and hear the sens of this Mystery in it, I know not what advantage
the knowledge of the Historical Mystery can bring to us further* then to
convict us, that the penman thereof was truly inspired by God when he wrote
it, because he did truly foretell things to com, and that the warnings,
threatenings, promises, precepts, and doctrines contained therein, deserv to be
heeded more, then the words of a bare man. And truly, although I have much
valued the gift and study of those that have set themselves, to unfold by the
observation of Histories the Mystical presignification of events; yet I could
never bring my spirit much to apply it self to any such search; because I
found, that both in the beginning of this book, (in the place forementioned,
chapter 1. verse 3.) and in the end thereof (chapter 22. verse 7. 14.) the
promise of blessedness is made, to another kind of study then this; and the
name and scope of the whole Prophecy, which is the Revelation of Jesus Christ,
and a record of the testimony of Jesus Christ (chap. 1. verse 1, 2.) does
import to me something more, then what is in the outward visible events; which
every rational man, who can read Histories, and understand Symbolical
speeches, is able to take notice of, and discern to be fulfilled as they were
foretold: therefore although, to manifest the Truth of God, the events are very
useful, if not necessary, to be looked after; yet I am clear, that they are
neither useful to us, nor necessary to be known, but as they are subordinate
unto this Mystery of the Kingdom, and Testimony of Christ; the knowledge and
keeping of which does give us a right unto the tree of life, and an entry
through the Gates into the City. This then is the Mystery which I look after;
viz. to find the Manifestation of the spiritual Kingdom of Christ in the
Nature of man, and in humane societies so advanced, that the works of the Devil
are destroyed therein; and that the salvation of Israel does thereby
effectually com out of Sion, to bring back the captivity of the people of the
Lord; and to make the whole Creation partaker of the glorious liberty of the
Sons of God; for to show unto the eye of our Faith, by what means and ways
this is to be brought to pass in the Regenerate souls of men; and by the state
of Regeneration in the outward societies and professions of believers; I
conceiv the visions were mainly sent unto the Prophet; and that it was his
principal aim, by describing of them, to declare this unto us; if then by the
representation of bare outward events, we are not made capable of partaking
this Mystery, whereby Christ being apprehended in his testimony, does become
in us the hope of glory; Colos. 1. 26, 27.
all our discoveries will be of no great advantage unto our happiness, nor
shall we reach the aim, which the Holy Ghost had in sending this Prophecy
unto us: we must therefore consider what the keie is, whereby the secret of
that dispensation, which bring's with it felicity does stand, is opened. I
shall now briefly (till God grant a fitter opportunity to be larger) touch
this matter only, And what the keie of that Mystery is in general.
to let you know, that as the keie of the Historical Mystery of the visions is
the discovery of Parallel events by Syncronisms, and the understanding of the
Symbolical speeches of the Scripture, wherein the harmony between the great
and little world is expressed: So the keie of the spiritual Mystery of the
visions must be the discovery of the parallel perfections, which are found to
be between Christ as the head, and the Church as the Body, which is the
fullness of him that fills all in all; Ephesians. 1. 23.
and the understanding of the harmonical properties of things visible, and
invisible, wherein the correspondencie between the outward and inward man; the
temporary and eternal natures of things; and the state of true life, as it is
present in the first fruits, and as it is to com in the full harvest, are
expressed.

Now to find these keys, as they are properly fitted to open the locks of
this Prophecy, as it should be our study; so when we have found them, our
care must be to use them discreetly. This Prophecy is not shut in respect of
the matter; but yet that matter is not obvious to the capacity of every one,
in respect of the manner of the dispensation; for it is certain, that all the
counsel of God, whereby we are made partakers of the Divine nature; if weelook
upon the substance of the Truth, it is made manifest by the Gospel, without
vail, and with much plainness of speech, as the Apostle says, And the
prospective which may be had thereof in the Apocalyptical dispensation.
2 Cor. 3. verse 6. till the end of the chapter; but here the wonderful way,
and manner of dispensing of that nature to the Church; and working out the
counsel of God in all the world; as this world is to be made subordinate to
Christ and his Saints; is laid open in the Apocalyptical visions, which,
although they are not covered with any vail, which does hide the glory of
God's work, as Moses's face was: yet they represent it only to us as in a
glass with Images, wherein the face of Christ does appear by way of reflection,
and through a medium, till we com to behold directly his glory, face to face,
without a medium, and to apprehend him in it, so as we are apprehended by him;
we may not then call those visions dark Mysteries, without injury to the
Spirit of Christ; but they are livelie figures of the truth of God's presence
in his Saints, and over the world, to represent it to those that have eyes to
see it; and to help our weak eie-sight, which may be dazzled at the
resplendencie of the glory thereof; we should make use of the prospective
ways which are offered unto us in the word elsewhere; which are applyable to
these visions, either as keys to unlock the dispensation of the Mystery,
contained therein; or rather as directing and multiplying glasses, through
which our understanding may be led, and enlarged to reflect upon the spiritual
objects, properly so called, which concern the state of the Kingdom, which is
inwardly everlasting in it self, and to the Reasonings of men, invisible, and
incomprehensible.

Now the prospective ways to be made use of, for the discovery of this
Mystery are of two sorts; some relate unto the Matter it self, Which is of two
sorts.
contained in the visions; some to the dispensation of that matter by way of
vision; the ways relating to the matter it self are the clear, and universal
Rules of Scriptural and Prophetical interpretation; and the ways relating to
the dispensation of the Mystery by way of vision, are the special rules of
Interpretation leading us to take notice of the peculiar characters and
circumstances of each vision; as they are subordinate unto the Mystery of the
Kingdom, which is administered by Jesus Christ unto the end, and in the end of
this world.

If I should enter upon these Subjects at large, you may perceiv that I would
be obliged to write, not a brief epistolical discourse, as now my purpose is,
but a whole Treatise: therefore I shall only give you the summarie heads of
that which might (and sometime must) be more largely spoken to: that by the
hints which shall (God willing) be suggested, you may exercise your thoughts,
to dive into the Mystery by your self, as the Lord shall guide you: for none of
us can profit in these things any further then God's Spirit does lead us forth,
to meditate through faith upon Christ; and to improve practically our talents
about the work of the Mystery of our union with him.

Thus then in reference to the matter, The Rules of Interpretation, relating to
the Matter, as it is a scriptural Prophecy.
the universal Rules of Prophetical Interpretation are generally known to be
these.

The first, that we must prophecy according to the Analogy of Faith. Romans
12. v. 6.

The second, that we must keep the form of sound words delivered in the
Scriptures, 2. Tim. 1. 13.

The third, that we must analyze, that is, resolv and divide the text aright,
2 Timothy 2. 15. and to the effect that we may be able to do this, according to
the mind of the Holy Ghost, the Apostle Peter tel's us: 2 Petr. 1. 20. that
we must not make the Scriptures speak in a private sens; that is, we must not
analyze and interpret them so, as if the Prophesies thereof did relate only to
the particular occasions, and circumstances of times, of places, and of
persons, in, by, and to whom they were at first uttered: and the ground why
they may not be so taken; but must be understood in a more public, common,
and general sens, is given by the Apostle* verse 21. because says he, the
Prophecy came not by the will of man; that is, it was not any particular
chois, or inclination of humane reasoning which brought forth the prophetical
(that is the scriptural) word, but they were moved by the Holy Ghost, that is,
the universal Spirit (whose wisdom is above all private concernments; and does
penetrate through all being from the center to the circumference) did put
words in their mouth which they did utter, and therefore these words must be
understood as universally, and abstractedly from particular concernments, as
they were meant by the Spirit, who delivered them unto the Prophets, as for
instance; when a Law was given for oxen that did tread out the Corn, that they
should not be muzzeled; the Apostle tel's us, 1 Cor. 9. 9. 10. that the
meaning of the Lawgiver was not to take care for Oxen, but that this was said
for man's sake: So the Apostle, Gal. 4. verse 21. till the end, does according
to this Rule, interpret the History of the Son of the bondwoman, who was to
be cast out with her Son, who could not be heir with the son of the free
woman: and by this Rule, the dark speeches; Mat. 2. 15. 23.
I have called my son out of Egypt, and he shall be called a Nazareth, etc.
will become plain.

These Rules in their use are complicated, The right use of these Rules.
and become one prospective of the sens, although their Notions be thus
distinguished; therefore in their applications to the Scriptures, if they do
not go hand in hand together, we shall never reach the sens thereof, nor be
able to divide the word, according to the spiritual rationalitie thereof, nor
to show the division thereof demonstrably, either to our own, or other's just
satisfaction; and truly the want of humility, and ingenuitie, to seek after
the full knowledge of these Rules; and the neglect of the right use of them, in
the knowledge which we have thereof: together with the presumptuous rashness
and confidence, by which we are hurried to determine all things, according to
our own self-conceited notions and knowledge; which we ambitiously strive with
tooth and nail to maintein, The evils attending the non-observing of them.
is the cause of all our darkness and confusion in matters of Divinity.

Here again, if I should enter upon this Subject, to show how a demonstrative
scriptural Anaysis, by the spiritual use of right reason, is atteinable, and
will be the only way, (next to the gracious and immediate illumination of
the spirit, writing the Law in the hearts) to compose our controversies, to end
our needless and sinful ways of disputing, and to banish out of Christ's
Church, the high conceit of our Doctoral school-Divinitie; if (I say) I should
enter upon these thoughts, you see that not a Treatise only, but a volume
should be written thereof to do it satisfactorily; but I am resolved not to
ingulf my self beyond the scope of this present discourse, which tend's only to
point at matters, that you may be stirred up, to think upon them by your self:
therefore thus much shall suffice for the finding of the universal keie of all
prophetical Mysteries, as they are rationally discoverable in the Scriptures;
yet above this, though not without it, there is a nearer prospect to be had of
the Mystery in the Spirit, That there is a nearer prospect of the Mystery of
the Kingdom to be had, then by these Rules. Colos. 2. 3.
which without such a disquirie does lead us thereinto. This nearer prospect is
the inward Testimony of Jesus, in whom as in the fountain are hidden all the
treasures of wisdom and of knowledge, and who is to all that believ in him the
immediate wisdom and the power of God. 1 Cor. 1. 24.
Therefore the Angel who brought the great vision of the Marriage of the Lamb
unto John (who thereat was so Revel. 19. 10.
ravished that he intended to have worshipped the Angel) put's him in mind
(to take him off from giving him any divine worship) that he was no more but
one of his equals, who had the Testimony of Jesus; for (says he) the
Testimony of Jesus is the spirit of Prophecy. Such then as have this
Testimony dwelling in them, have this Spirit; and by this Spirit they may be
led (if God be pleased so to carry them) a nearer way then this is, to see
in Jesus himself the whole Mystery, and to partake of it as from him, in the
wisdom and power of God; yet this must be noted, that although they should be
admitted to this nearer way for some special fits; nevertheless they shall
still be led so, as that their Testimony must be liable (in case of doubt
proposed by others, or incident to themselves) to be examined by the Testimony
of the Apostles; Yet not so as not to be liable to be tried by these Rules.
and their Spirit must be subject to be tried not only by the Spirit which
was in the Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists. 1 John 1. 3. and chap. 4. 6. and
John 17. 20 but by the spirit which is in their brethren the Prophets of these
times, who have the testimony of Jesus no less then they. 1 Cor. 14. 29, 30,
31, 32.

Here then to com nearer by the address of these Rules, to the prospect of the
Mystery of the Kingdom, as it is represented in the Revelation, let us make
use of the keie which the Angel has given us, which is that we should observe
in the peculiar circumstances of the matter, and scope thereof, and in all the
characters of each manifestation; the special relation which they have to
Jesus, to bear witness of him; for so much as each dispensation by it is
peculiar Characters, shall be found to speak of this testimony, so much it
does reveal unto us of the Mystery of godliness. If then we ought not to
proceed without an eye to our forementioned Rules (for although, as I have
already hinted, the testimony of Jesus in our Spirit, is the Spirit of
Prophecy, which may sometime in the enlightened frame of a believing soul
swallow up all the rational Acts of contemplation by a direct intuitive
representation of the light of life in Christ; yet that Testimony is neither
in it self inconsistent with, nor in the orderly way of declaring it unto
others, to be separated from the prospective of the Mystery, which is
atteinable by the Rules of scriptural Interpretation) if then (I say) we
ought not to put these Rules out of our eye; then let us take up, and carry
along with us, as the ground of our faith, the Rule unto which, in our
apprehension, all these Prophetical visions in their Mystical circumstances are
to be made proportionate, What the grand principle of our Faith is, concerning
Christ, to which all the Interpretation of these visions must be made
proportionate.
which is that Apostolical Testimony of the Mystery of Godliness, which he
cal's great and without all Controversy in 1 Timothy 3. 16. That God was manifest
in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the
Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory: to these heads
then of the knowledge of Christ, which in plain, proper, and significant words
express the sum of all, that is to be known of him; our sens of this whole
Prophecy, and of all the parts thereof must be proportionate; so that when
we look upon the visions, we must cast our eye at the same time, to observe,
how both in the whole, and parts that which is offered therein, is all along
relative hereunto.

If therefore you will first look upon the whole in the bulk of the matter,
What to be looked upon in the Prophecy, to find the proportion it has to
that principle.
and scope of the Prophecy; and in the general contexture, and tenor of the
visions thereof; you shall find nothing else mentioned therein; but what is
directly tending to make out the heads of this mystery of God in Christ, that
he may be known more and more fully unto the world; till he be so fully
revealed that all the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of his name,
even as the waters that cover the Sea. For by the contexture of the
Apocalyptical visions it is not only demonstrable, that this promise shall be
accomplished; but moreover, the way how it shall be brought about is plainly
discoverable.

Now the Bulk of the matter and scope of every book rationally written, may
be gathered ordinarily from the Title, How the matter and scope of every
rational discourse is to be observed, and found out.
the Preface, the Conclusion, and the main heads of matters hand led therein,
if their contexture and coherence be observed with a respect unto their main
scope. Let us then look briefly upon these things, in this book, to see what
light they will afford us.

The Title tell's us, verse 1. that the book contein's a Revelation of Jesus
Christ. Jesus Christ then is the subject matter whereof it speak's; and to make
him manifest is the scope of the book; for it is called a Revealing of him, and
that this matter and scope may be the more heeded; to this title of the book,
three things are further added, Concerning the Title of the book, showing the
matter and scope thereof.
who the Author of this Revelation of Christ is: to what use it is given him:
and by what means it is put forth to this use.

The author of it is God, which God gave him, which add's to the matter and
scope an obligation of belief, upon a discovery of divine properties to be
seen therein.

The use for which God gave it to Christ is; to show unto his servants the
things which must shortly com to pass, which is a nearer scope relating to us,
as we are obliged to respect the knowledge of the glory of Christ.

The means by which the manifestation of Christ is put forth to this use are,
that he sent and signified it by his Angel unto his Servant John, by all which
we see, that here nothing is aimed at, but the Mystery of godliness spoken of
by Paul, and our Salvation in partaking of the knowledge thereof.

Next to the Title the Preface is observable it extend's from verse 2. till 8.
Concerning the Preface showing the same.
and does address the book, either generally to all, or particularly to the
seven Churches. The general preface tell's us.

First, what John did in declaring this Revelation, viz. he bare record of the
word of God, and of the Testimony of Jesus, and of the things which he saw.
verse 2. for the word of God brought with it to the ears of his mind, the
Testimony of Jesus; and that Testimony was clothed, and represented to his
eyes by the things which he saw: and of these as an ear and eie-witness of the
Manifestation of Christ, he did bear record.

Secondly, it tell's us of what use and Importance this record of John is, to
all that read and hear, and keep the things declared therein; viz. it will make
them blessed. v. 3. all which is again fully relative to the forementioned
Mystery of Godliness, and our Salvation thereby.

The particular Preface to the seven Churches, tell's us: that this book was
peculiarly inscribed and sent unto them by John; in the name of the Father, of
his seven Spirits, verse 4. and of Jesus Christ, who is described.

First, by the properties and effects of his coming into the flesh, which were
to be, First, the faithful VVitness (viz. of the Father's wisdom, Truth,
Power, and love.) Secondly, the first begotten of the dead, and Prince of the
Kings of the earth (viz. by suffering and rising again; and receiving the
Kingdom in that nature which suffered and ^ose again.) Thirdly, to show his
love to us, who loved us, by redeeming us, and washed us from our sins in his
own blood, v. 5. and by exalting us to a glorious estate; and has made us
Kings and Priests unto God, and his Father: for which we are bound to give him
glory and prais; to him be glory and honor for ever and ever. Amen. verse 6.

Secondly, he is described by the properties and effects of his coming again
from heaven to judgment, wherein he shall manifest himself as man to all men,
even to those who have pierced him. verse 7. and as God blessed for ever and
almighty. Verse 8.

Upon this Preface and address of the book (wherein we see nothing but what is
most fully consonant to the forenamed Mystery) does follow the Narrative of
the visions from verse 9. of chap. 1. till verse 6. of chap. 22. 8. and thereupon
the conclusion of the book does shut up the visions, declaring in chap. 22.

First, Concerning the Conclusion which does speak still the same matter and
scope.
the certainty of the things contained therein, verse 6. with the importance
and use thereof, verse 7.

Secondly, the effect which the manifestation thereof wrought upon John, viz.
that it moved him to such admiration, that he was inclined to worship the
Angel, verse 8. but that the Angel forbad him to do so, because he acknowledged
himself to be nothing more then they who should keep the sayings of this book.
v. 9.

Thirdly, the command which he received, not to seal the Prophesies of this
book, and the reasons wherefore, v. 10. till 16.

Fourthly, the Authority of this Prophecy is held forth in the conclusion.

1. By the Author thereof who is Christ. verse 16.

2. By the Approbation of the intent thereof, which it has from the Spirit,
from the Bride, from all believers, and from all that desire the good things
promised therein. v. 17.

3. By the perfection thereof which is such, that nothing may be added to it,
nor taken from it. verse 18, 19, 20, 21.

By all which we see that the matter and scope of this Prophecy, as to the
Bulk thereof, is none other, but to set forth the glory of Christ, as
manifested in the flesh, and justified in the Spirit; as seen of Angels, and
preached unto the Gentiles, as believed on in the world, and exalted by the
perfection of his Church, (which he fills with his glory) unto the fullness
of glory, both in himself, and in all his members. We conclude therefore,
that the whole Mystery of Godliness is intended here to be manifested in
respect of the way, by which it is to be carried on unto the end of the
world, and fully accomplished at the end thereof, by the destruction of the
enemies of that Kingdom, which he erected in the nature of man, over the whole
Creation, by the renewing of all things for the elect's sake, to put them in
full possession thereof, as is promised, Revel* 21. 5, 6, 7. and by uniting
them to God for ever, Revelations 22. 4. 5.

This being the full intent and purpose of the Prophecy; Concerning the par^s
of the matter, as they reach the main Scope.
let us now briefly look upon the heads of matters handled therein, to see how
suitable the particulars are to reach this main aim, and bow this design is
thereby made known to be carried on.

The things handled in the Prophecy are of three kinds, as they are in the
first vision by Christ himself commanded to be written, The division of the
book.
chap. 1. verse 19. Write (says he) the things which thou have seen; and the
things which are; and the things which shall be hereafter.

The things which he had seen are written, Ch^p. 1.

The things which then were, are written in chap. 2. and 3.

And the things which should be afterward are from chap. 4. till chap. 22.
verse 6.

The things which John saw in chap. 1. are Christ's presence with his Churches,
revealed in the first vision, whereof the properties show him to be.

First the Mediator and High Priest of the Churches, The substance of the first
vision.
administering the affairs thereof in things perteining to God, by his walking
in the midst of the golden Candlesticks.

Secondly, the King who has all power to support the Rulers thereof; as
holding the seven Stars of the Churches in his right hand.

Thirdly, the Prophet of the Churches, who dispenses the word of God unto
them, which as a two-edged sword com's out of his mouth. chap. 1. verse. 12.
till 17.

These are the chief properties of his presence relating to the Churches, which
are heightened with other circumstantial perfections of his head, eyes, feet,
and whole countenance, etc. and withal, there are other properties of glory
expressed, which relate to his person in himself considered; by which he is
manifested to be the first and the last, he that was dead and is alive, and
living for evermore, and having all power of hell and death. verse 11. 17, 18.

This vision then tend's clearly, to set him forth in his Mediatorie office by
the properties of his inherent and relative glory.

The things which then were, are the seven Churches under Christ's What
Christ's intent in the seven Epistles written to the Churches is, and how it is
gathered from the matter and words of them. care and administration, which are
set forth in the seven Epistles, which by Christ's appointment and indictment
are written unto them, in Chap. 2. and 3. wherein I conceiv, that under the
Characters of perfection, and imperfection given to the Churches, and under the
threatenings and promises, together with the admonitions, reproofs,
exhortations, and commandments annexed thereunto; all the degrees, both of the
defection from Grace, and of the progress in Grace, which our nature is capable
of; together with the changeable conditions, under which the Churches should
be, till the Marriage of the Lamb com to pass, are set forth. For if we
should call to mind the Rule of scriptural interpretation, heretofore
mentioned; that no Prophecy is of private interpretation; it will appear from
the words of the text, that these Epistles are by Christ intended, not only to
those particular Churches, or to the Angels thereof alone, which are named; but
to all the Churches, which then were elsewhere in the world, and which should
be in all ages till his second coming; and to all the men of any spiritual
understanding that should hear thereof till the end of the world. Because it is
not only certain that Christ still hold's the seven Stars in his right hand,
and walk's between the seven Candlesticks, and speak's unto them; but it is
evident by the matter of the promises, that they are universally appliable unto
all the professors, in all ages, who shall overcom, and be faithful unto the
end and the peculiar admonitions at the close of every Epistle do intimate no
less; for to my understanding these words, He that has an ear, let him hear
what the Spirit says unto the Churches; does speak this much; that others,
even all who ever should hear the tenor of these Epistles, ought to think
themselves spoken to, and concerned therein; although they should be no visible
members of these particular Churches. For what else can be the meaning of that
expression, he that has an ear; but that every one should take that to
himself which is said of and to these? And then if we observe the expression to
run in the plural number; what the Spirit says unto the Churches, this will
make it yet more manifest; that these seven are here put in stead of all: for
no doubt the Spirit then spoke effectually, and does still speak to more
Churches then to these: and therefore we may conclude, that the things spoken
off to them are taken as relative unto all, both men and Churches, not at that
time only, but at all times, so long as the seven Candlesticks should be on
earth, and the Spirit has a voice to speak unto them; for to day if you will
hear his voice, out of Psalm. 95. was not only meant for that day, but for
this also, as the Apostle make's it plain, Heb. 3. If then the narrow limits of
this discourse would give me leav; it might be made out, that in the cases of
these seven Stars and Churches as here they are described; all the varieties of
the conditions of Professors, and all the fundamental defects of
Church-societies, in all the Churches which have been since the Apostle's
times, are set forth; and that in the promises made unto them, all the degrees
of perfection atteinable in this life by single believers, or Societies, are
expressed; but this would be a matter of enlargement beyond my present
purpose: I shall therefore leav it till another season; only this may be
further observed as a translation from this first to the second vision: The
difference of the first and second vision.
that in the first, John saw the Administration of Christ's Kingdom, as then it
was on earth: but in the following vision which begin's chapter 4th, he is
taken up from earth into Heaven, to see the administration of the Kingdom there
also, and from thence how it should be managed over the whole world for the
Church's sake in time to com: So that we ought to take notice that the
Manifestation of Christ, and in him the Mystery of Godliness does fill not
only the Churches on Earth, but the Church also in Heaven; and that God by
him, as he is in the Church, both in heaven and earth, does govern the world
for Christ's interest, toward the fulfilling of his own counsel; which tend's
mainly to reveal the glory of Christ over all, and the felicity of those that
partake with him in his glory; as also by what means the world is subdued
under him, and conquered by him for the good of his Church; for this is the
issue of all, as in the close of this Prophecy does appear by the coming down
of the New Jerusalem from Heaven, and the making of all things new, to give
unto the Saints their inheritance.

The second vision then does show distinctly four things.

First, The substance of the second vision.
what the frame and constitution of the Church in Heaven is; How it is ordered
round about the throne of God, and set in his presence that it should take
notice of the passages of his glory, to acknowledge and declare the same. chap.
4.

Secondly, what the administration of affairs in heaven, and Government of the
Church is over the world; how the decrees and counsels of God, and by whom they
are brought to an issue? Here it is showed unto the Prophet; that the whole
administration of the government is put into the hand, and upon the shoulder of
Jesus Christ alone; who by the Sacrifice of himself, as of a lamb without spot,
did meritoously purchase to himself this honor; and by his seven eyes of
wisdom, and seven horns of almighty power, is alone able to discharge so great
a Trust, as to open all the Seals of God's decrees in their due times and
seasons, concerning the government of the whole world for the good of his
Church. chap. 5.

Thirdly, what changes are brought forth in the affairs of the world, and what
the condition of the Church and Saints is therein; by the opening of six of the
Seals, where is showed, how after the preaching of the Gospel through the
world; great troubles and terrible wars arise in the earth amongst men: in
which the witnesses of Christ are slain, and lie as sacrifices at his Altar;
but they are comforted with the hope of just vengeance to be executed upon the
earth for their sakes, after a season; and the enemies of Christianity are
terrified at the beginning of the execution of Christ's wrath against them
chap. 6. And lest the Judgments which were to be executed against the enemies,
should take hold of the friends of Christ; there is a careful Provision made
for the preservation of these from danger, and the Hopes of future glory are
assured unto them by the first fruits thereof. chap. 7.

Fourthly, what the destruction is which at the opening of the seventh Seal is
brought upon the world; and what the glory and settlement is, which is brought
unto the Church of Saints therein: for the seventh Seal does contein, and
produce all what ever does follow till the end of the Revelation. Here then
seven Angels with seven Trumpets, are appointed to sound and declare the
Judgments of God over the Earth, which accordingly are executed, where the four
first trumpets are remarkably distinguished from the three last; because to the
last three, a warning of great woe is promised by an Angel over the inhabitants
of the Earth. As for the four first; they all tend to deprive the world of the
third part of the Creatures, which are great comforts to the life of mankind;
as of trees the third part, and of all green grass, which in proportion may be
the third part of lesser plants; the third part of the Sea, and of Creatures
living therein, and of the ships that sail thereon; the third part of the
Rivers and fountains of waters; and the third part of the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
and of the light of the day and night: where we may take notice of a gradual
progress from the lesser to the greater judgments, from earth rising up to
heaven: and from the effects to the causes. Chap. 8. As for the woes, the first
of them by Locusts is a tormenting judgment; not putting men to death, but
vexing them: so that they should seek death and not find it: and the second of
them by horsemen is a destroying judgment, by which the third part of men on
earth are cut off. Chap. 9.

Thus then by the second vision is showed what in heaven is sealed in the hand
of God, and what from thence is published to all the world; by the progress of
the Gospel; by the sufferings of the Saints and their comforts; and by the
Judgments befalling to the world for their hatred to the Gospel: for their
Idolatry, and for their other sins of Murder, witchcraft, fornication and
theft: of which they repented not: and therefore the third woe is to be brought
upon them, when the seventh Angel shall sound: for at the time of his sounding,
there shall be to time of forbearance of any more; but the full mystery,
both of wrath against the wicked, and of Mercy to the godly, shall be
fulfilled toward the world, and toward the Church, both in heaven and earth.

Here then to show this, Concerning the third vision.
the third and last vision is given to the Prophet; which he again receives
on earth by the hand of the mighty Angel, which come's from heaven with the
open book; and stands both upon the Sea, and upon the earth where I observe*

First for a Translation from the two former to this last vision; that as there
are but three substantial differences of things revealed to the Prophet: And
wherefore the whole Book is to be reduced to three visions.
so there are but three substantial diversities of places mentioned, where they
are revealed, and three main changes in the frame of his Spirit in receiving
them. The first substantial matter of vision is Christ's administration of his
offices on earth amongst his Churches. The second is his administration of his
offices in Heaven, over all the world, to propagate and preserv his Church: And
the third is his administration both in Heaven and earth, to make an end of all
wickedness in the world, and to perfect the glory and happiness of his Church;
each of these matters are showed to the Prophet, in the places where they were
chiefly to be translated; for to leav the sight of the first he was on earth,
as amongst men: at the sight of the second, he was in Heaven, as in the
presence of God, and of the Saints perfected, and of Angels. At the sight of
the third he is on earth again; but so, as communicating still with Heaven,
and looking into it back again, as one com down from thence, and having still a
relation to it. The frames of his spirit appear to me diversified sutably unto
these matters and places. For in the first vision he is merely passive, as a
dead man to be quickened. In the second he is Actively passive (as I may so
say) that is, as one concerned in the businesses, which are transacted: he is
an inquisitive observer of the passages thereof. And in the third he is
effectually employed as a coagent, to help to fulfill the Mystery of God by the
spirit of Prophecy: and in each of these Manifestations Christ is represented
to him, sutably to the administration which is revealed. In the first as a Man*
in dealing with men; in the second, as a Lamb offered up to God in dealing with
God; and in the third, as a mighty Angel, in dealing with Satan and his
Angels, and with the powers of darkness in the world.

Secondly, for the opening of the matter of this vision, And what the sum of
the third vision is.
I observe, that the sum of all is, to show when and how the Mystery of God,
which he has spoken by the Prophets should be finished; and to show this.
First two means are used to lead John to the knowledge thereof: then secondly,
the thing it self is summarily related, by word of mouth unto him, and
afterward thirdly it is represented in several visions. The means leading to
the knowledge of the finishing of the Mystery, are two. First, an open little
Book inable's him to prophecy. Chap. 10. Secondly, a Reed given him like unto
a Rod, to measure the Temple, the Altar and those that worship therein.

The summarie relation of the whole business by word of mouth, does concern the
time of the treading of the utter court under foot, the power of prophesiing
given to the two Witnesses during that time; the war which the Beast shall make
with them while's they prophecy, and the issue of that war set forth in the
circumstances of their death and resurrection; and that which immediately does
follow thereupon, both in earth and in Heaven. In earth, there was an
earthquake which made the tenth part of the City to fall, and killed seven
thousand men, and frighted the rest. The second woe does pass; and the seventh
Angel does sound his Trumpet. In Heaven there is great joie and and
thanksgiving offered unto God, because he has taken the Kingdom to himself,
and does reign over the Kingdoms of the world, to give rewards unto his
servants. chap. 11.

Hitherto the whole Series of matters concerning the Mystery of God, has been
related in plain terms; to show the things by which it should be accomplished:
now follows the description of the visions; by which the particulars of the
things summarily mentioned in this Narrative are more at large reveled: whereby
the Prophet is made to understand concerning the Mystery of God (which is,
Christ in the Church. Ephesians. 5. 32. or which is all one, Christ in us the hope
of glory. Colos. 1. 27.) what the state of the Church was in Heaven at that
time; The visions showing the fulfilling of the Mystery of God have a respect
to four times.
and what it should afterward be on earth, during the time of the Church's
abode in the Wilderness; during the time of her coming out of the wilderness;
and during the time of her Reign over the earth, as the Spous of the Lamb with
her bridegroom.

At that time the temple of God in Heaven being opened, 1. Before she Church
fli^'s into the Wilderness.
and the Ark of the Testament therein being seen; the Church as she was
constituted by the Apostles appeared, and brought forth a Man-child, against
whom the Dragon did set himself to devour it; but the child was to be caught
up to Heaven; and the Dragon to be cast out of Heaven upon the earth; where
he set's himself to persecute the woman which fled into the Wilderness, and to
make war with the remnant of her seed. chap. 12.

During the time of the Church's abode in the Wilderness the mystery of
iniquity is set up, 2. Whiles she is in the wilderness.
and come's to it is perfection in the earth, and God send's his judgments upon
it when it is com to it is height. c. 13 till 19*

This Mystery of Iniquity has two parts; the Mystery of the Beast, The
Mystery of iniquity appears, which has two parts.
and the Mystery of the Woman riding upon the Beast. The Mystery of the Beast
ruling over the earth, One of the Beast, another of the Whore.
is seen in one Beast coming out of the Sea with ten horns; and another coming
out of the earth with two horns. Chap. 13. during the time of the rising and
reigning of these Beasts over the earth, the state of the Church upon Mount
Sion, and God's administrations for the knowledge of his will thereby unto the
world; And the State of the Church, though in the Wilderness, yet also upon
Sion, appears in like manner.
concerning the everlasting Gospel concerning the future fall of Babylon; and
concerning the punishment of those that adhere unto the Beast; and for the way
of gathering up the harvest and vintage of the earth; The Judgments of God in
his last wrath is poured out upon the Beast.
are revealed. chap. 14.

God's Judgments upon the Beast are poured out in the Phials of his last wrath,
whereunto seven Angels are appointed, and prepared. Chap. 15. and commanded to
put the Judgments in execution. Chap. 16.

The Mystery of the Whore of Babylon riding upon the Beast, And the Mystery
of the Whore and her judgment appears also.
is showed to the Prophet. chap. 17. and the Judgment which befalls unto her,
for her destruction is described* chap. 18.

The state of the Church in her coming out of the Wilderness, is described in
the congratulatorie acclamations, 3. Whiles she is coming out of the
Wilderness.
given to God in Heaven at the destruction of Babylon, and at the preparations
of the wife of the Lamb for the Marriage-Supper, and in the war which the
Armies of Heaven under Christ's conduct do make against the Beast, the false
Prophet, and the Kings of the Earth. For by this means the power of all her
adversaries being destroyed, she is fitted to appear visibly upon the stage
of the world. Chap. 19.

The state of the Church during her Reign with Christ on earth, 4. After that
she is com out of the Wilderness, during the time of her Reign with Christ.
is before the last Judgment a thousand years; and after the universal
Resurrection, both in Heaven and earth, for ever and ever. Chap. 20. 21. and
22. till verse 6.

Thus we see the contexture and coherence of the matter and parts of the whole
Book: if then we should consider how these particulars relate unto the main
scope of the Prophecy, which is to reveal Jesus Christ unto us, in the
Mystery of his Kingdom, we see that every thing is most directly subordinate
thereunto, and that the whole does most completely reach a full discovery of
the accomplishment of the Mystery, whereof the brief sum is this.

That the professors of the name of Jesus Christ; The brief sum of the whole
Mystery of God, as set forth in the two last visions of the Revel^tion.
by their sufferings for his sake; by their testimony of him in opposition to
the Dragon, to the Beasts, and to the Whore; by the Judgments of God against
all these, to destroy their power, by the war of the Saints against them, by
the settling of the Kingdom of Christ in the hands of his Saints; and by the
Manifestation of the Glory of the heavenly Jerusalem, coming unto them from
Heaven to earth* whereinto the Kings of the earth shall bring their glory;
shall get the full victory over the world, and with the purchase of the
Inheritance of all things in the New Heavens, and the New earth; they shall
have the enjoiment of the presence of God for ever. In all which at this time,
as to our present condition the opposition which the Beast has to the Lamb;
the false Prophet to the two Witnesses, and the Whore to the Bride; And the
things which at present are most considerable therein, which are*
and the manner of their warfare is most considerable: for in the opposite
properties of their Natures and ways, the Mysteries of Iniquity and of
Godliness are most completely revealed; and by the manner of the war which is
between them, and the issue thereof; the state and relation wherein our inward
man does stand, as to either of the Mysteries, will be seen: that we may not
only know what partly to choose in this quarrel, but also what to judge of the
advancement of the party wherein we are found, toward the atteinment of the
Hope which is set before us in the Kingdom of Christ.

These things are worth a larger discourse and discovery; then my design is at
this time to bestow upon them: but in reference to what has been said already;
and to that which is the scope of the following Treatise something is fit to be
added, though but very briefly, to give you matter of further thoughts.

If it be expedient then for us to take notice of the Mystery of Iniquity,
and of Godliness as they are now working; and have been long ago wresling
against one another in the public transactions of this present world; we must
look out for the Beast to find him by the Properties of his Nature, and by the
effects of the Government which he has exercised, and does exercise upon the
Earth; and for the Lamb to find him by the same Characters.

The Beastly nature of the life of man, The discovery of the Beast.
is that which the Dragon does exalt, and empower with all his might, as his
vicegerent, to have Dominion over the Inhabitants of the Earth; for by this
nature he can only have access now to us, and power over us: seeing he is
cast out of our heavenly places, and overcom there in our nature, by the blood
of the Lamb. The general properties of this brutish nature are these. First to
be led without reason by mere sens. Secondly, to satisfy the sensual
imaginations and lusts of the flesh; and thirdly, to do all things by a Brutish
and bodily violence and force, rather then in a friendly and amiable way;
And fourthly, in case of opposition, to destroy without mercy all that
stand's in the way of his will. Hence it is that in the 13th of the
Revelation, this beastly nature is said, to be like a Leopard full of spots,
swift and cruel; to have the feet of a Bear; which grasp's both with the
hindermost and foremost legs and claws, and to have the mouth of a Lion, to tear
and devour. The Government which this nature does affect is absolute, to have
all in subjection to it is will, without any other Rule or Law. So that it
rules over others, as men use to rule over beasts, guiding them by mere
sensual and imaginary inducements which relate nothing to the will of God at
all.

If then the Governors of a people make use of their power, to satisfy the
inclinations of flesh and blood, in fulfilling their lusts and sensual
affections, without any due respect unto the end of their place: but seek by
mere force to make their will a Law to their Subjects, by bringing them to an
absolute Subjection, that they may suffer themselves to be ruled, as beasts use
to be ruled by men; who being ignorant of the designs of men, are led only
by sensual objects of pleasure and of terror: if (I say) any Governors have
this aim, and follow the ways, by which this kind of greatness over others
may be established; they ought to take notice of themselves, and others may
observe it also of them, that they are none other but the Dragon's Vicegerents
on earth, and that they rule in his name, and in his way over the sons of men.
Now how many Potentates have hitherto in all the Nations of the Earth,
intended to rule over their Subjects in another way, I confess I am not able
to relate. But how many have apparently studied to be absolute over their
Subjects, as over beasts, and in cases of opposition have showed themselves as
Leopards, Bears, and Lions against them; and have made these properties of
their way, their glory; is so apparent, that I shall need to say no more of
it; but shall leav it unto your thoughts.

But the Lamb-like nature of the life of man; The discovery of the Lamb.
and the way of the Government which is suitable thereunto, is that which
Christ as a spiritual man does exalt in the societies of mankind. The
properties of a Lamb may be seen in the relation which it has to other
beasts, to the creatures of it is own kind, and chiefly to mankind. In respect
of other Creatures it is most meek, and most harmless; the horns which they
have are not for offense but for defense, in respect of their own kind, they
are most fit to live in a society. For if they be alone, they are lost, and
become a prey to other beasts. In respect of man, the Lamb or sheep is the most
useful, and most serviceable creature of any other; for they both feed him and
cloth him; and that without much trouble unto him. As for the way of
Government which is suitable to the nature of the Lamb; we see that it is none
other, when they are without a Shepherd; but the Imitation of example; that
when one goes before, then all the rest do follow: and if they have a
Shepherd, they follow him, and take notice of his voice, to distinguish it from
the voice of a stranger. If then the Governors who are over the Flock of Christ
have not these properties, in the way of ruling the Commonwealth of Israel;
that is, if they are not eminent for meekness, and harmlesness toward all men,
making use of their horns, and power only for defense and not for offense; if
they are not sociable, and by condescension of spirit humbly equal to those
that belong to their society; but seek to keep themselves high, and at a
distance, and solitary from others; and if they are not willing to give
themselves up, both their wool and their substance for the service of mankind;
they are not Christian Magistrates, nor they rule over their Subjects, as
Christ's Vicegerents, or in his name and way. For he as the first Lamb of
the Flock, in his precedencie did never carry himself otherwise, then thus
before the Flock, to oblige all to follow him, but chiefly they who professing
his name, are in the foremost rank before others to lead them, ought to follow
him closest.

If now we should compare these two Mysteries together in their opposition to
each other, we may observe that as Leopards, Bears, and Lions live not in
Flocks and societies, as Lambs do, but alone by themselves; so it is with
Potentates and Monarchs. Imperium non patitur duos. Caesarve priorem, The
comparison of the Government of ^he and of the Lamb.
Pompeiusve parem far nequit. Leopards, Bears, and Lions live by preying and
devouring other weaker Creatures, wherein they are the emblem of the Tyranny
of Monarchs, and we see that most of them were these Creatures as the glory
of their scutcheons: but Lambs and sheep living in flocks to strengthen each
other, represent the equality of a Commonwealth, and the way of it is
strength. Leopards, Bears, and Lions need no protection, nor can they be ruled
but by a prison; because they make themselves formidable unto all other
Creatures; but sheep and Lambs are a prey to all other Creatures, except they
be protected by a Shepherd, and kept in folds, which does represent that
Christian Commonwealths, except they be protected by an higher power then
their own, which is as far above the nature of man, as man's nature is above
sheep and Lambs; they cannot be in safety. The dependencie then of sheep upon
their Shepherd is an emblem of the life of Faith; but the absoluteness of
power, in wild Beasts, to trust to their own strength, is the emblem of the
greatness of Potentates, and such as betake themselves to stand by their own
sufficiency, in reference to Man, these wild beasts can never be brought to
do him any service; but prey upon him, and devour his substance; but sheep and
Lambs are the support of his life, and are without resistance slaughtered and
sacrificed for his good, which is the emblem of self-denial, wherein Jesus
Christ the chief Shepherd of the flock is gone before all the Governors of the
Commonwealth of Israel; to show them that they ought to give up themselves as a
sacrifice for the public good of their Flocks. Lastly, it is the beast's way
of Government to enforce obedience by violence; but it is said of the Lamb upon
Mount Sion that his Flock of 144000. Lambs did follow him whether soever he
went; to show that the Vicegerents of Christ, which are appointed to rule his
people in his name; go before their brethren in the way of Righteousness, and
such as are true Christians indeed, follow them out of a loving inclination;
and this is the best way of Government that can be settled amongst men;
namely to bring all to imitate Christ Jesus on all sides, both they that bear
rule, and they that are ruled. Now how far our Rulers are bent this way, I
shall refer it to their own conscience to consider; and how far their Subjects
set themselves through love, to follow that wherein they go before them in
righteousness: I shall not need to mention; but I may take up a woeful
lamentation; that some who ought most to encourage their Fellow Subjects to this
duty; are most avers from it themselves, and disaffect others from it. But I
shall not insist further upon this mystery of Iniquity, this shall briefly
suffice for the opening thereof at this time.

The second thing which I proposed to touch, was the mystery of the false
Prophet, and of the two Witnesses, and hereof briefly thus.

The false Prophet his work is to uphold and to advance the interest of the
power, The discovery of the false Prophet.
and the absoluteness of the beastly Government, and to bring all men to be
in subjection thereunto, the means which he uses to effect this is twofold;
the one is a deceitfulness of persuasion, and bewitching of the Imaginations of
ignorant men by lying miracles, to make them believ, that in the beast there is
a Divinity, and that his image ought to be worshipped; the other is a
coercive power of punishment to be inflicted by the false Prophet's procurement
upon all those who do not subject themselves unto the beast; either by way of
Adoration, to fall down before this Image; or by way of receiving as a token
of subjection the mark, the name, or the number of the name of the beast:
namely, that such as should not worship his Image should be killed; and such
as should neither take his mark, nor his name, nor the number of his name upon
them, should have no liberty of commerce; and to prosecute these designs, is
the whole emploiment of the false Prophet; which that we may the better
understand, let us consider the particulars.

The Image of the Beast which is to be worshipped, I take it to be that
absolute greatness which the second Beast does attribute unto himself, and does
exercise over the Subjects of the first Beast in his presence; for the text
says, that he exercises all the power of the first beast before him, chapter
13. verse 12. that is, he does set up a way of Government, as absolute, as
that of the first Beasts, is in conformity thereunto, to establish it, and he
had power to give life unto the Image of the Beast, as the text says, verse 15.
which I understand thus; that the second Beast had power given him, by the
first Beast's permission; to give life to the Image of his absoluteness, and to
the exercising of his power in the hand of the second Beast; and to make it
both speak, and cause all to be killed that should not worship his Image, to
make the Image speak, is to make his power give sentence of death; and to cause
all to be killed, is to see that sentence executed against all such as should
not acknowledge the Authority, form of Government, and Laws and Canons of his
making to be divine sanctions. For the Canon-Laws are made in imitation of the
civil Jurisdiction, and in their kind of a like power, or the same with that
of the first Beast, the one relating to the Civil, the other to the
Ecclesiastical State. By the mark of the Beast, I understand the Irrationalitie
of obedience, and brutalitie of those that subject themselves blindfold in all
things, without respect to Conscience, or the knowledge of any rule in order to
God's will; such then who by a blind submission through worldly and sensual
motives subject themselves as Beasts use to do, to those that ride upon them;
and are led wheresoever their riders will drive them, have the mark of the
Beast upon their spirits: and if they make open profession of this kind of
blind obedience to be their duty, they take the mark of the Beast in their
forehead; but if they practice it as hirelings for a reward, they take the mark
of the beast in their hand.

By the name of the Beast I understand, the names which for distinction's sake,
the false Prophets every where take unto themselves, that they may thereby set
up themselves to be followed, and owned by their Disciples; which how this is
practiced, no man can be ignorant of.

And by the number of the beast's name, I understand the partiality of
reckoning, and inequality of account, which the false Prophets oblige their
followers to make of men, in orto their parties; for according to the relation
which men are thought to have to this, or that faction and pattie; so they are
esteemed of, more or less, for that name's sake whereby they are characterized,
and under which they are numbered; nay, in these our unchristian fractions, by
the zelots of parties it is reckoned upon, as a Duty; not to account of any
man (let his worth be otherwise what it will) further then as he does own
them, and the name of their party; and this I suppose amongst many other
things, included in the number 666. may be represented therein, in respect
that this number is nothing else, but a threefold repetition of it self in
units, in tenths, and in hundreds: and cannot be multiplied by any square
root without a fraction; and in it self six is but the half of twelv, which is
the number of the Tribes of Israel; but upon these numerical Mysteries I love
not to stand. I shall therefore conclude with this one word; that all, who
pretend to have a mission from the Lamb, and think themselves his true Prophets;
should do well to examine by these characters the ground whereupon they stand,
and the ways wherein they walk, lest they mistake themselves in their account
of themselves and be found in the end the Prophets of the Beast, and not of
Christ.

As for the two Witnesses, The discovery of the two witnesses.
they are set forth as opposites unto the Beast, for it is said, that the Beast
does make war with them. Chap. 11. 7. their Character is, that they prophecy
in Sackcloth as mourners, that their design is nothing else, but to bear witness
unto Christ, by the manifestation of the Truth without humane Interests; and
consequently, that they study not by outward means, to set up themselves, or
gain followers who should be in subjection to them, and under their spiritual
jurisdiction; nor do they apply themselves to the fancies of their hearers, to
work some strange impressions upon them, by raising them to the admiration of
their Notions, of their Eloquence or parts; but speaking the plain truth in
love; a word of fire to melt the Conscience of sinners does go out of their
mouth, which does slaie the wicked spirits, who set themselves against them, and
according to their word, the Heavens are shut up in the days of their
Prophecy from sending any shewers of blessings upon men's souls; and the
earthly and outward estate of men is smitten with all manner of plagues, for
not receiving the word of their testimony, as Egypt was by Moses and Aaron.
These two Witnesses are said to be the two Olive trees, and anointed ones, who
stand before the God of all the Earth, Chapter 11. verse 4. which being
compared with Zach. chap. 3. and 4. tel's us, who are meant by these two
Witnesses: for there Jehoshua and Zerubbabel are anointed, and established to
bring back the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem out of Babylon, which they
were to do not by the might and power of men, but by the Spirit of the Lord,
and the efficacy of his grace.

The difference then of these two Witnesses from the false Prophet is in this.
The comparison of the false Prophet, and of the two Witnesses.
First, that he is but one who does exercise a twofold power; that of the
Beast, and that of his own devising, which is a pretended one of Miracles;
these are two whose testimony is one and the same, and the effect thereof
toward men, but one from them both. Secondly, that he takes upon him a
Coercive power; and to bring people under his yoke, he set's up differential
tokens, viz. the Beast's Image, his mark and name; but these make use of none
other power, but of that which is properly prophetical; nor do they press any
distinct and particular notes of subjection to themselves upon any coercively;
but have power only to plague such as receiv not the Testimony of Jesus.
Thirdly, he does work upon the ignorant imaginations of silly people, strange
impressions of admiration concerning the Divinity of his own way; by
deceitful persuasions which are a kind of witchcraft, whereby people are made
to cleav unto his worldly interest, as a slave unto the same; but these labor
not to gain to themselves, the affections and fancies of people; but to gain
their understandings to the knowledge of the Truth, and their consciences to the
Subjection which is due to Christ Jesus without partiality. So then fourthly,
the false Prophet in a word, exalt's and seek's to set up himself in the spirits
of men; but the two Witnesses humble and deny themselves, that the Cross of
Christ may be exalted over their spirits, and he only set up in the hearts
of men. Fifthly and lastly, the false Prophet meddling with State-matters, take's
both the Ministry and Magistracy upon him, making the one subordinately to
serve the other's turns, in reference to men; but the two Witnesses who are
faithful Magistrates and Ministers, join their Testimonies in their places
coordinately; to make out one way of righteousness and truth, to the
consciences of men, in reference to God in Christ. And this much concerning
these.

The third thing to be spoken of; is the Mystery of the Whore, and of the
Bride.

The Angel tells John plainly, The discovery of the Whore.
chap. 17. verse 18. that the woman which he had seen rideing upon the
scarlet-colored Beast, with a name written on her forehead, Verse 5.
Mystery Babylon the Great; the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the
earth, was that great City which reigns over the Kings of the earth. Now it
is evident that Rome alone as Papal, has reigned in a Mystery over the Kings
of the Earth; ever since heathenish Rome determined, which reigned not in a
Mystery, but with outward force over these Kings, and in that respect was the
fourth Beast seen by Daniel: therefore if we can observe what the Properties of
her whorish nature and practice has been; and how she has brought forth
Harlots and all abominations in the earth, we shall discern this Mystery, and
discover those that partake therein with her. The text says, Chapter 17. verse
4. that she was arraied in purple and Scarlet; and decked with Gold, with
precious stones and pearls; and that she had in her hand a Cup full of
abominations and filthiness of her forninications; and chapter 14. verse 8* It
is said she made the Nations drink of the wine of these fornications* and
Chapter 18. verse 3. that the Kings of the Earth have committed fornication with
her.

By the woman is understood the Roman Hierarchy, which has born Rule over
all the world, and rid in triumph upon the minds of all men, as upon Beasts.

Her decking and raiment of purple, of Scarlet, of Gold, of precious stones,
and of Pearls, is the outward visible magnificence of that worship which she
set's up, which has none other beauty, but such ornaments to amuse the
Imaginations of foolish people, and bewitch them with the formalities of
Ceremonies.

Her Fornications are the love of this present world, whereunto she does
allure men to commit Whoredom with her: by the enjoiment of power, of profit,
and of pleasures, which she studieth to furnish her lovers withal, and to
deprive other men off.

Her abominations are all manner of sinful, and unconscionable practices which
she does allow of in all who serve her ends thereby, whereof she make's a
trade, although they be never so abhorrent from the light of Christianity,
and of Nature; these abominations are the Idolatries which she has set up;
and the dispensations which she has given to all unnatural sins, and unjust
practices, as Sodomie, Incest, Murder, Breach of Covenant, and oath in all
manner of Contracts. Rebellion of Children to Parents, and of Subjects to
Magistrates, all manner of fraudulent circumventions, and oppressions of the
innocent, and such like.

The Cup which is in her hand, whereby she causes all Nations to drink, and
swallow down these abominations; is her pretended Authority, as the unerring
Church having power to bind and loose all things in Heaven, and on Earth, in
order to men's Consciences; and to manage all the reasons of State, and public
affairs of the world; with supreme Jurisdiction, in ordine ad spiritualia. And
the Fornication which the Kings of the Earth have committed with her, has been
their compliance and correspondence with her, to make use of her power and
influence, toward their neighbors and Subjects, to gain credit thereby unto
themselves; together with the study of her Policies, to learn from her the
maxims of deceit, which are the reasons of State-advantages, to get power, by
which means she has intelligence of all the Counsels of Princes, because they
are brought to drink them out of her Cup, and make use of her embraces and
favors to bring them to pass: and her whorish study is only to keep them all
at variance one with another, and to make them severally depend on her Love,
that she may always arbitrate their affairs, and their interests may be
subject only to her favor, and so far as any Hierarchy on Earth, or
Church-constitution does make it self by these ways considerable in a State,
or by ways like unto these seek's to be respected by the meaner or higher
sort of people, they all drink of the same Cup of her fornications. Let not
therefore any form of outward worship recommend it self to the followers of
the Lamb by any interests of State; nor let any sort of men, who pretend to
Religious administrations, apply themselves to the practices of this natrue,
nor any true Christian Magistrates intend the compliances and correspondencies
of this kind, and for such ends; with any Masters of formalities, who go a
whoring after the appearances of outward things in matters of worship and of
State, which take either only, or most with sensual imaginations, who may be
rid upon like beasts.

As for the Bride, The discovery of the Bride.
we exspect her from Heaven, for it is apparent, that as yet we have no
permanent City here on Earth, such as the Apostle has described the Lamb's
wife to be in Revelation Chap. 22. verse 10. till the end. we therefore seek
this City which has foundations; and if we walk by faith to get an entrance
into her, Let us wait through the Spirit for the Hope of Righteousness, which
is promised to the Saints, and walking after the Spirit and not after the
flesh, so far as we are advanced in the new Creature, so far are we fitted
and prepared for the Bridegroom's coming, to enter with him into his
wedding-Chamber. How far any Societies of Churches, or single
Church-Congregations have received the favor to be arraied in fine linen,
Revel. 19. verse 8.
clean and white, which is the righteousness of Saints; is to me, as yet not
apparent; for I must confess that I have not seen any perfection in any of
them; and I know that I have made it a good part of my work to visit them all,
and to consider them in their ways, as well abroad as at home, in respect of
their several associations: and truly the Laodicean temper is over us all; and
if we repent not and become zealous in the way of Righteousness; and of holy
Communion without partiality and without Hypocrisy; no-doubt Christ will spue
us all out of his mouth, and call unto him another people, which shall be made
ready for the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb; and although this seems to be a
sad sentence over the Churches which are now counted wise Virgins; yet there is
neither want of Charity in it toward them, as if I did not wish them well;
nor want of Hope for them, as if I did not exspect their Reformation; but in
both these respects I do bear witness, that none of them all are the Bride
whose coming out of the wilderness is exspected; but that all their visible
estates are the outward Court, which is given to the Gentiles, wherein to this
day, they tread the Holy City under foot; and are in the wilderness of
spiritual desolation and confusion; but that out of their invisible state,
which is the inner Court and Temple, wherein they have Communion with God, and
one with another; a City at last will rise up and appear, is my confident
exspectation, and that this may com to pass speedily, it shall be my constant
prayer; but to bring this to pass, I find by the Revelation, that not only
Babylon is to be destroyed with mighty Judgments from Heaven, and that the
Beast is to be plagued and punished, but that the armies of Saints under
Christ's conduct shall from Heaven com, in Battel-array, and war against the
Beast, and falls Prophet, and the Kings of the earth; now how far this battle is
carried on in these our days, and to what parties we are engaged, and in what
way we put forth our strength to fight, and what interest we fight for,
whether for Christ's purely, or for our own also, as it is mixed with that of
the King's of the earth, and in them with the beast's, will be our wisdom
seriously to consider; and I wish that my Countrie-men in Scotland, who have
fixed so strong an interest upon the terms of the Covenant, and are counted a
wise Nation in the world, might be made so spiritually wise as to discern
their own station, and what help they give unto the Beast; by their present
proceedings, and it is my hearty desire that the Brethren here, who for the
sake of Scotland in reference to the Covenant, keep themselves at a distance
from the main work; and obstruct by their non-concurrence in things good and
lawful, the progress of our Reformation, might be wakened to see the posture
wherein they stand, in this their warfare, and if this plain discovery of the
state of the Quarrel between the Beast and the Lamb; between the false Prophet
and the two Witnesses, and between the Whore and the Bride that is now coming
out of the Wilderness, may be a means to open the eyes, and undeceiv any of
them; I should rejoice at it: however I have herein discharged my Conscience,
and born witness without partiality to the Truth, so far as it is reveled unto
me, which I hope I shall never refuse to seal with my death, if need be, and
this I conceiv is the only way of our warfare, The manner of the warfare.
who pretend to be followers of the Lamb, in the work of the Ministry, that
was should have none other weapons of our warfare, but one Sword amongst us
all, which is that, which proceeds out of his mouth; and that our way to
fight with this weapon, against our adversaries should be none other; but to
follow Christ in our lawful Calling (which is our white horse) and with an holy
blameless personal conversation toward all men, (which is our fine linen
white and clean) for herein does lie our whole strength, and what application
soever we make to other weapons, which the powers of darkness can make use of
as well as we; they will but weaken us, and in the encountering with the
Inhabitants of the earth, we shall find them stronger at those weapons them
we can be: so that by such means, I exspect not that they shall fall before
us, although our victories be never so great; therefore as for mine own part,
till I can perceiv, that we who pretend to be in the first rank of the Lamb's
followers; can make better use of these spiritual weapons then hitherto we
have don; and can in the Communion of Saints join our forces together,
otherwise then now we do, to imitate the Captain of our Salvation; I shall be
a man of no great exspectation; yet because I believ that these things shall com
to pass; and that by the armor of light the Children of light will at last
prevail; therefore I do speak, and because I both believ and speak, therefore I
am not inclined to make haste; as some (who take the shadows of their own
conceits; for the substance of Christ's Kingdom) are inclined to do; for this
cause, although I will not contradict the appearances of Hopes, which the author
of this Treatise does give unto the Protestant Cause, to rife within a few years
in a considerable Posture against Popery; yet I must take leav to confess,
that although the splendour of the Whore, and her influence upon the Kings of
the Earth, and the power of the Papal Sea as it is Hierarchical, were utterly
consumed and abolished; by the brightness of Christ's appearing in the Spirit
on the one hand, and by the hatred of the whore's Lovers, and the turning of
their hearts against her on the other hand; yet that the war with the beast,
and with the false Prophet; and with the Kings of the Earth shall continue; and
that the beast and the false Prophet, with the Kings of the earth will be found
to have their friends not only amongst those who are called Papists; but even
amongst those that are most fierce enemies to Popery, and count themselves the
best of Christians and reformed Protestants. It is one thing to be no friend
to the State, and predominant power and craftiness of the Whore, as she
appears from without, and in another place at a distance from us: and another
thing it is to renounce the beastly nature, and the deceitfulness by which we
are led to embrace the Image, the mark, the name, and the number of the name of
the Beast within our selves, that is for our own interest, and the concernments
of flesh and blood. I do not find in the last battle the Whore named at all; I
find only as leaders of the party opposite to Christ; the Beast and the
Kings of the earth; which I take to be the Beast, with his horns; for the
Horns which are in the heads of the Beast, are the Kings of the Earth, Chap.
19. 12, 13.
which make use of the Body of the Beast, and of her strength, and are made
use of, by the heads of the Beast to war against the Lamb, and I find, that
these horns, although they fight against the Lamb; yet that they are not
always friends with the Whore; and for their own interest's sake, not only
rob her of her ornaments; but feed upon her flesh, although for a season,
whiles it was their supposed advantage, they suffered her to ride upon them,
and govern them with the bridle of her authority: but when she is cast off
from the beast's back, the Beast and his horns are as strong as ever; and more
fit to fight in their brutal way against the Lamb then before; I believ
therefore, that the Whore as she is already little considerable in comparison
of what she has been; may vanish and be made desolate by her own beastly
accomplices before the last battle; but I believ not, that we shall have any
great earthly Potentates at all, ever to appear for the Lamb in this battle;
but that they shall all join always with the beastly nature of men, against
the Lamb-like holy nature of the Saints; to discountenance, to oppose and to
destroy it; but we have a promise, that although the two Witnesses of the
Lamb shall be killed by the Beast, when they have finished their prophesying
in Sackcloth; yet that the Lamb, when he shall com in his own appearance, with
more witnesses then two or three; even with a whole army of witnesses; not in
Sackcloth upon earth, but in their fine linen, white and clean; and upon their
white horses, in their spiritual emploiments, as Citizens of the Kingdom of
Heaven, following their leader against the powers of the earth; when (I say)
the Lamb shall com thus attended, the promise is, that the Beast, and all his
horns shall be overcom by him: for there is no power in the world able to
resist the united strength of the holy ones, and the dints of the sword which
has two edges, Heb. 4. 4.
which being able to divide between the soul and the Spirit, and to discern
the subtilest thoughts, and the deceitfullest intents of the beastly heart of
man it shall undoubted slaie them; therefore although I find not the false
Prophet here mentioned as active in leading on the war (whereunto certainly for
the contrivance of it on the Beast's part, he cannot be wanting) yet he is
found to be taken prisoner with the Beast; and with him cast into the Lake
which burns with fire and Brimstone. Revel. 19. 20.
The Whore and the false Prophet are clearly distinct Mysteries, and have their
several ways of Acting, though with a concurrence; for so long as the Mystery
of the Whore does last, which the false Prophet (who is the intellectual
subtlety of the Serpent's nature in man; as the Beast is his brutish
sensuality and strength) fed with prosperity, and delicacies did beget, and
set upon the beast's back, the said falls Prophet does make use of her, that by
her baits and allurements he may draw the Inhabitants of the earth to drink
out of the cup of her fornications; but when prosperity and delicacies ceas,
by reason of the Phials of God's wrath upon the Beast, and the distress of
Nations, then she is not of use any more; but the false Prophet which begat
her, will to serve the Beast's interest destroy her also, and will be active
in another way against the Lamb without her. And thus I conceiv the battle
will be, or is already formed, on the side of the beastly party, which
fight's only to maintein the interest of flesh and blood, which is
self-greatness, and the conveniences of pleasure; with all outward force and
deceit, against the interest of the Spirit; which is self-denial, and the
conveniences of serving others in the Kingdom of Christ through love: and by
the other side the battle is formed in the spirits of the Saints, to maintein
the interest of the Lamb of God, who having taken away the sins of the world,
will now appear to destroy the works of the Devil, by setting up the power of
his life amongst men; till therefore I shall see either the Characters of this
life apparent in the beauty of Love and Holiness amongst us; or the ways
fully opened and prepared, by which the power of the life of Christ by his word
will become prevalent, to lead all men's thoughts and affections captive to the
obedience of his will; I shall not much rejoice, nor greatly triumph at any of
our outward Conquests. I remember that the Whore was long ago cast out from
amongst us (for our Hierarchy by the King and Queen's consent was abolished)
before the Beast begun to rage and fight; so then as amongst us; so also in all
Europe, the Papal Hierarchy may be cast off, and yet the Beast's rage be
greater then ever for the interest of a tyrannical power; as well over the
Consciences, as over the bodies and estates of men, and that two manner of
ways, either by the absoluteness of a governing power, through the necessities
of war, enforcing all men to concur with the interests which it settles, for
common safety, to preserv us in freedom from a foreign power; or by a total
dissolution of all government, wherein every man who has more might then his
neighbor, may take a liberty to tyrannize over him, and oppress him without
control: by both these ways the Beast may rage over all Europe, against the
Lamb-like state of Christianity, a long while after the destruction of the
Pope; and Protestants may, by the means of the false Prophet be entangled
amongst themselves, and embroiled into quarrels, and beastly animosities, for
the designs of flesh and blood as much as ever; for if God send not forth
another Spirit, then as yet is apparent in the greatest part of our Professors,
to unite us in his way, and to guide us in this warfare, we shall be found as
much as any to favor the Beast. Till therefore I can perceiv, that the banner
of this Spirit is lifted up amongst us; and that those who are upright in heart
rank themselves under it; and make use of the weapons of Righteousness, and the
armor of Salvation; for the end for which Christ has put them in their hands;
I shall not conceiv much of any sudden enjoiment of the glorious liberty of
the Sons of God; nor of any full deliverance from the bondage, whereinto Satan
by the power of darkness, and the spiritualitie of malice, has brought our
beastly nature. I watch therefore, and look out more after the appearances,
and discoveries of these things, then after other outward events and changes. I
know that the shakings and Changes of States tend to make way for this object
of my Hope; but I know also, that before I can partake of it there shall be a
greater change brought upon the Spirits of men, then now is upon their outward
Estates. God has hitherto been shaking the earth to some purpose; but he has
said that he will also shake Heaven; this he has begun to do, and will do
more fully; becau^ his aim is, as the Apostle says, not only to shake these
things, Hebr. 12. 26.
but also to remove the things which are shaken, that the things which cannot
be shaken may remain. I therefore look out to see the footsteps of his
proceedings toward the accomplishment of this promise; for till the things
which are shaken in the Spirits of Professors, be removed out of them, I
cannot exspect a clear manifestation in, and settlement of their spirit about
the things which must remain; and till this appear, and break forth amongst us,
I cannot also say, that the Bride is com out of the Wilderness, or that we
have gotten the conquest over the Beast, and over the false Prophet.

When therefore the banner of the Spirit of love without partiality, shall be
lifted up in the beauty of Holiness, as the Ensign of the unity of Faith, and
the badg of the common profession of Christianity amongst Professors, and when
the Magistrates and Ministers shall understand their true conjunction in the
way of their Testimony; when by this means the Lord shall have washed the
visible filth of the daughters of Sion, and shall have purged the blood of
Jerusalem from the midst thereof, and shall also create upon every dwelling
place of Mount Zion, and upon the assemblies and glory thereof, a defense;
also the Prophets shall not study to make themselves any more considerable by
a peculiar interest upon believers; but shall know how to propose in common the
ways of edification, so demonstrably, that every one who shall sincerely
affect the knowledge of Truth shall find no difficulty to com by it: when the
names of the Idols, which every party for distinction's sake have made unto
themselves, shall be cut off: when the mercinarie way of serving the
Commonwealth of Israel, chiefly in things belonging unto God shall ceas, when
the just measures and dimensions of the City of God shall be known to the
Master Builders, and the way discerned how to open the doors thereof unto
those that have a right unto the tree of life: when the Temple in Heaven shall
be opened, and the ark of the Covenant seen therein, when the Children of
Israel shall com, they and the children of Judah together, going and weeping
and seeking the Lord their God, and asking the way to Zion with their faces
thitherward, then and not till then, shall I exspect that the Bride will be
suddenly prepared, and com out of the Wilderness to celebrate the marriage with
the Lamb. And when together with these preparations of her coming, and of the
Supper of the Lamb; the sword of the Spirit, the word of God according to the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testimony; shall be drawn out of the sheath
thereof by that evidence of the Rules of Interpretation, which none shall be
able to contradict: and by that exactness of order of the way of Prophetical
exercitation: so that none shall be able to complain of the want of just
freedom, to propose Truths or Scruples; and yet be restrained from the
licentiousness of passionate railing, proud disputing, and vain jangling; and
by that meekness of love, power of zeal, and prudence with discretion in the
application, to correct the particular errors of men's ways, so that there
shall be no cause of offense offered to the single-hearted, although the wicked
one shall be discovered and slain in them: when (I say) the sword of the
Spirit shall be thus unsheathed, then I shall exspect, that Judgment shall be
laid to the line, and Righteousness to the plummet, against the unrighteous
self-seekings of the Beast, and that the hail shall sweep away the refuge of
lies, and the waters overflow the hiding places, which the false Prophets have
made unto themselves: for then the foundation which is laid in Sion will be
seen; and by the conformity which every thing in the Spirit of man shall be
obliged to have to Christ, it shall be tried (whether it be matter of
theorie, or of affection, or of Practice) that the all-sufficiencie of the
anointing of Christ in his Saints; may appear, and be found alone effectual
(without the tricks of Humane Philosophy, of Policy, and of power) to slaie
the wicked, and to direct the Spirit of man to all the secrets of Divine and
Humane wisdom: which shall be found nothing but mere fallacies, further then
it has a direct relation, and subordination to manifest the life and glory of
Christ Jesus: when I say this Sword shall be thus made use of, and applied,
then, and not till then, shall I exspect that the Beast and the false Prophet
shall be taken alive, and destroyed* and till this be don, Satan cannot be
bound up from seducing the Nations of the Earth. Thus you see the grounds of
the Hopes of

Your friend in Christ John Durie.
At my Chamber November. 28. 1650.
Clavis Apocalyptica, OR A Prophetical KEY, BY WHICH The Great Mysteries in the
Revelation of St John, and in the Prophet Daniel are opened; It being made
apparent That the Prophetical Numbers com to an end With the year of our Lord
1655.

Judicious Reader!
I Doubt not, but there be many, especially those, who have any Interest in
the condition of Commonwealths, that are desirous to know what at length may
be the end, and issue of this present Combustion and Continuance of Wars, that
are spread over the face of Europe. Whereof the Revelation of St John does give
information. But in respect it is commonly held and reputed a Mysterious and
dark book, I offer here a Key. Whosoever does well apply the same, and
observes the Method and Harmony of the Revelation, and also diligently
pondereth and considers the second and seventh chapter of the Prophet Daniel,
he will find his desire satisfied, and easily discover the Event of these
wars. Farewell, (Welmeaning Reader!) and be patient for a short time, thou
shall see the end of these distractions in great Revolutions both in Church and
State, within and without Europe.

Clavis Apocalyptica.
THe eternal and true God, to manifest his Fatherly and faithful Providence,
which he, without intermission, dispenses to his People, has severally, in
the Old Testament, for the comfort of the godly, and warning of the wicked,
set and prefixed certain times, how long he would connive at the distresses
and persecutions of his own, and when he would deliver and punish the wicked.

1. Before the Flood, he gave to them, who would not any more hearken to the
reproof of his Spirit, a hundred and twenty years respite. Genes. 6. v. 3.
When this time was exspired, God came with the punishment of the Flood, and
destroyed all that was living upon the face of the Earth, except Noah, and what
was with him under God's protection in the Ark. Genesis 7. v. 23.

2. God did declare to the Patriark Abraham, that his seed should be a
stranger in a Land that was not theirs, and should serve them, and they should
afflict them for four hundred years. But that Nation, whom they should serve,
he would judge, and afterward they should com out with great substance. Genes.
15. ver. 13, 14.

Which promise God did faithfully perform: and after the time was exspired, he
brought forth his people by a strong and mighty hand out of the Egyptian
bondage, and drowned Pharach with his Host in the Red Sea. Exodus 12. v. 13, 14.

3. To the Captivity of Babylon was set a period of seventie years. Ierem. 29.
10. When the time was accomplished, the Lord stirred up the Spirit of Cyrus
King of Persia, to the end that he might let his people go up again to
Jerusalem. 2 Chronic. 36. v. 22, 23.

4. To Daniel showed God that seventie weeks, (which are annual or yearlie
weeks, or four hundred nintie years) were determined upon the Jewish people, in
which time the Messiah should com, and be cut off, and at length the City of
Jerusalem be destroyed. Daniel c. 9. v. 24, 25, 26, 27. How truly all these
things were accomplished, is sufficiently evident.

In like manner there is a certain time set, and determined upon the Church of
God in the New Testament, how long she shall be subject and exposed to
persecution, and when she shall be delivered from it, as it does appear by
the Prophet Daniel, and by the Revelation of St John. Whereof these Positions
or Aphorisms may be collected.

1. This determined time is expressed in these following places of the Holy
Scripture.

Daniel 7. v. 25. They, (the Saints) shall be given into his (the fourth
beast's) hand, until a time, and times and the dividing of time. And in the 12.
Chapt. v. 7. An Angel does ask the question. How long shall it be to the end
of these wonders? Another returns this answer: That it shall be for a time,
times, and a half.

Revelat. 12. v. 14. The Woman (which is the Church of God) shall be in the
wilderness for a time, times, and half a time; which is to say, as it is
expressed in the sixth verse of the same Chapter, a thousand two hundred and
threescore days.

Chapter 11. v. 3. The two witnesses shall be clothed with Sackcloth one
thousand two hundred sixty days.

Chapter 11. v. 2. The Gentiles shall tread under foot the holy City forty
two months.

Chap. 13. verse. 5. The blasphemies of the beast shall continue forty two
months.

2. These three sorts of numbers and times, as a time, times, and half a time,
one thousand two hundred sixty days, and forty two months, are of one and
the same kind, and correspondent one to another. None would be able to
understand what a time, times, and half a time is, which are determined for the
fourth beast, Dan. 7. verse 15. For the wonders. Dan. 12. verse 7. And for the
woman in the wilderness. Revelat. 12. verse 14. unless it had been said also of
the Woman; that she shall be nourished there one thousand two hundred sixty
days, which does explain the other. So that the Woman's 3 times are equivalent
to one thousand two hundred sixty days. Likewise, because the 3 times of the
Beast mentioned in the Prophet Daniel, are declared by forty two months, in
the Revelation of St John. 13. verse 15. it does of necessity follow, that the
forty two months are equivalent to one thousand two hundred sixty days,
which makes up the account, thirty days being computed for a month, as is
usual amongst the Hebrews.

360 days are 1. year or time 12 months. 42 months. at the rate of 30.
days. 1260. days.
720 2. years. 24. 180 year. 6. 1260 days 42. months


3. These one thousand two hundred sixty days do signify one thousand two
hundred sixty years.

Many are of this opinion, that here are meant natural days, and consequently
but 3 years. But experience does contradict the same, in regard the Holy City
has been trodden under foot, the two witnesses clothed with sackcloth, the
woman continued in the wilderness, and the Beast with ten horns spoken
blasphemies and great things long ago. Besides, it is impossible to accomplish
in so short a time, what else is said, that it shall com to pass in these 3
years. So that hereby Prophetical days, or so many years are meant.

We find examples in the holy Scriptures, that by the days expressed, years
are to be understood, as Daniel 9. verse 24. in the seventie weeks every day
signifies a year, and the seventie weeks make up four hundred ninety years
according to the Chronologer's Computation.

Numbers 14. verse 33. 34. Your Children shall wander in the wilderness forty
years after the number of the days, in which ye searched the Land, even
forty days, (each day for an year.)

Ezekiel 4. verse 6. Thou shall bear their iniquity forty days, and I have
appointed thee each day for an year. Read upon this subject the first and
sixteenth Proposition of John Napier upon the Revelation.

Nature furnishes such like example. As in the Astrological direction, by a
degree, which the Sun by his course does finish in one day, is meant a year in
operation; and a whole circle, which consists of three hundred sixty
degrees, and is run over by the Sun in one year, signifies three hundred
sixty years, or a full time, as is sufficiently known to the Astrologers.

4. These 3 times, forty two Months, one thousand two hundred sixty days,
as they do comprehend times and years of one sort; so they begin together, and
end together.

1. These 3 times of the Beast, and of the woman in the wilderness do begin
together.

For when the red Dragon Revel. 12. verse 9. 13. was cast down to the earth by
the ruin of the Heathenish Idolatry, he persecuted the Woman by the Beast,
having ten horns, to which he gave his power; and his seat and great
Authority. Revel. 13. verse 2. The Woman fled into the wilderness, that she
might be nourished there for one thousand two hundred sixty days. Revel. 12.
verse 14. And to the Beast it was given to remain with him forty two months.

2. The time of the Beast and of the two witnesses does exspire with the sixth
Trumpet, wherefore of necessity they began together.

For when the spirit of life from God entered into the two witnesses, and being
no more clothed with sackcloth, ascended up to heaven in a cloud; in the same
hour was there a great earthquake and fierce war, wherein the tenth part of the
City fell, and also the second woe passed. Revel. 11. verse 11, 12, 13, and 14.

3. That the time of the Gentiles which tread under foot the holy City, and
the time of the witnesses clothed with Sackcloth, do begin together, it
appears by the 11. Chapter of the Revelations, verse 2, 3. as a thing
undoubted.

5. To the Prophet Daniel the Angel spoke of 3 times. Chap. 7. verse 25. and
Chapter 12. verse 6. but afterward he spoke also of one thousand two hundred
sixty days. Wherefore it is called into Question, whether 3 times and one
thousand two hundred sixty days are one and the same times?

Answ. The Teachers do expound it generally to that effect; as if by the 3
times, and one thousand two hundred sixty days one and the same time is
understood. But the Text does make no mention of it. For the words are these.
Chapter 7. verse 25. The Saints shall be given into his hand, until a time and
times, and the dividing of time, which is one thousand two hundred sixty years.

Chap. 12. v. 6. and 7. That it shall be for a time, times and an half, which
is one thousand two hundred sixty years. So that these two places speak of the
duration, how long the Beast with ten horns shall speak great words against the
most High, and shall wear out the Saints.

But in the Chap. 12. verse 11. is given a terminus a quo, a certain character
and token, from which begin the Computation until one thousand two hundred
nintie years, with which the 3 times or one thousand two hundred sixty years
do exspire together.

6. The one thousand two hundred ninety days, Dan. 12. verse 11. do begin with
the year of our Lord three hundred ninety three, or three hundred ninety
five, when the terrible devastation and destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem,
under the Roman Emperor, Julian the Apostate happened.

The words of the the text, chapter 12. verse 11. are these: from the time that
the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination that makes
desolate, set up, there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days.

By the daily Sacrifice is understood the Jewish worship, which although by
the destruction of the City of Jerusalem: and of the Temple was taken away,
yet it was not quite abolished, seeing the Jews under the Emperor Constantine
the Great did yet celebrate their Passover, as you may read in the tenth book
twelf and twenty fourth chapter of Nicephorus; and were still in a continued
hope to build up the Temple again.

By the abomination of desolation, or by the abominable desolation is
understood the final and last destruction of the Temple, whereof Christ Math.
24. verse 2. said, that there shall not be left one stone upon another that
shall not be thrown down.

The Abomination of desolation does point out Caussam efficientem, the
efficient cause, which in Dan. 9. verse 27. out of the Hebrew Schikkuzim
Meschomem, is there well rendered, by the wings shall stand abominations of
desolation, namely such abominations, whereby the holy place shall be
destroyed. But in the chap. 12. verse 11. we read Schikkuz Schomem, which does
intimate a fullness and perfection, and must be rendered the abominable
desolation.

Vide Conradum Graserum in cap. 9. Dan. Exerc. 5. page 405. Ubi it a disserit:
Schomem rationem nominis videtur habere, ut magis rem operatam quam ipsam
operationem, id est, magis effectum quam effectus caussam significet: Cum
contra per alterum meschomem causa efficiens profanandi sanctuarii indicetur.

Wherefore the true meaning and sens of these words is this: From the time that
the daily Sacrifice at Jerusalem is taken away, and the abominable desolation
of the Temple, wherein the worship and service of God only could be
performed, shall be fully and thoroughly accomplished, there be one thousand
two hundred ninety years.

This total desolation and destruction of the Temple happened under the Emperor
Julian, the Apostate, in the year of our Lord, three hundred sixty three, or
three hundred sixty five, according to some Chronologer's computation.

For, when Julian in despite of the Christians had recalled the Jews, that
were dispersed to and fro, to return into their land, and furnished them with
money, handie-craftsmen, workmen, materials, and other helps, and commanded
them, to build up the Temple again, and re-establish the Levitical service; And
the Jews had embraced such offers of assistance, laid the foundation; and begun
the building thereof: God himself did destroy their work by thunder and
lightning from Heaven, with terrible earthquakes and fire-bals, and totally
overthrew the foundation of the Temple; insomuch that Cyrillus, then Bishop at
Jerusalem, was forced to confess and to acknowledge, that now the words of
Christ, which he spoke of the Temple unto his disciples, Matthew 24. verse 2.
were fulfilled: That there shall not be left one stone upon another, that
shall not be thrown down.

Hereof may be further read Ammianus Marcellinus lib. 23. Socrates lib. 3. c.
17. Theodoretus: lib. 3. c. 17. at the end. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 21. Tripart.
lib. 6. cap. 44. and others more.

7. The one thousand two hundred sixty years must for the space of thirty
years be protracted, and begin later, and at lest with the year of our Lord
three hundred ninety five, because they expire together with the one thousand
two hundred ninety years.

Here we must observe and look whether the Characters and Tokens, which are set
upon the beginning of the one thousand two hundred sixty years, may be
applied to the three hundred ninety fifth year.

We have three several Characters.
1. The Division of the Roman Empire into two parts. Revel. chapter 12. verse
14. 2. The beginning of the treading under foot of the holy City. Chap. 11.
verse 2. 3. The rising of the Beast out of the Sea. chapter 13. verse 2.
The first Character is described in the Revel. 12. verse 14. in these words:
And to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might flee
into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished.

By the great Eagle is understood the Roman Empire; by the two Wings is meant
the division of the same into two parts. Constantine the great, though he
removed the Imperial Seat from Rome to Byzance, or Constantinople; yet he
retained to himself the Government over the whole Empire, during his life;
after his death, it was divided among his three Sons, into three parts. But
this Division did not last long, but did soon determine, for Constantius did
reign after his Brother's death over the whole Roman Empire himself alone, as
also after him Julian, and other Emperors following.

But after the death of Theodose the Great, who died the 17. of January 395,
the Roman Empire was divided between his two sons, Arcadius and and Honorius,
so that Arcadius reigned in the East, and Honorius in the West. And thus this
Character may be well applied to the three hundred ninety fifth years.

1. Because of the division of the Roman Empire into two parts, whereby the
wings of the Eagle are spread.

2. Because the Barbarous Nations did invade, and overrun the Roman Empire on
all sides in the very same year, whereby the holy City was horribly trodden
under foot, and the Woman put to flight in the wilderness.

The second Character is expressed in the Revelations 11. verse 2. in these
words: It is given unto the Gentiles that they shall tread the holy City
under foot.

By the Conversion of Constantine the Great, was the Child, which the Woman
(the christian Church) had brought forth, established upon the seat of God, and
by that means the Christian Emperors came to the Government, and the Heathenish
service of the Dragon got thereby a huge great downfall.

But in the days of Theodosius the Great, the great Dragon in the Roman
Empire was quite overthrown, and cast to the ground. At that time the Church of
God did triumph, and was gloriously built and propagated. But after Theodosius
in the year of our Lord three hundred ninety five in January, was dead, and
his two sons Arcadius and Honorius had entered into the Government, the treading
under foot of the holy City did soon begin; when the Goths, Huns, Alans, with
other barbarous Nations, under the Command of their King Alaricus, invaded
first the Oriental, other made an irruption into the Occidental Empire, and
took the City of Rome in the year four hundred ten.

Now by these desolations how the Christian Churches were destroyed, the
Countries spoiled, the Christians persecuted and reduced to a most pitiful
condition may be gathered from the lamentation of the old Father Jerome;
whereof you may read in his first Tom. the Epist. 3d page 18. and Epist. 11.
page 44. Likewise Augustine in his books of the City of God, does give a
further information hereof, and especially Ludovicus Vives in his Preface upon
the same.

3. The third Character is set down in the Revelation chap. 13. verse 2. in
these words; And a beast rose up out of the Sea, having seven heads, and ten
horns, and upon his horns, ten Crowns.

The Old Heathenish Empire is compared to the red Dragon which has seven
heads, (seven Mountains in the City of Rome) and ten horns (Provinces) and
upon his heads (in the City of Rome) seven Crowns (seven sorts of Government)
namely: Reges, Consules, Dictatores, Decemviros, Tribunos militum, Caesares.
10. Reges.

Here the new Roman Empire under the Christian Emperors, and Kings is brought
in, which has not seven Crowns upon the seven heads (upon the Mountains in the
City of Rome,) but has ten Crowns upon the ten horns; that is in the
Kingdoms, into which the Roman Empire is divided.

But we must not seek the beginning of this beast in the time, when it had
already fully his horns (Kingdoms) but but when it rose up out of the Sea; that
is, when it invaded the Roman Empire by force of Arms, and made such a
progress in it, that it subdued the City of Rome.

And although the Barbarous Septentrional Nations have many times invaded the
Roman Empire with great power, yet they could never so far prevail, that they
could take Rome. Alaricus was the first, who, as was mentioned already in the
second Character, in the year of our Lord three hundred ninety five, made an
irruption into the Roman Empire, with two hundred thousand Goths, Huns, Alans,
prevailed against the Romans, and at length took Rome in the year four hundred
ten. About the same time some other Nations invaded the Roman Empire, which
they tore into so many pieces, that in the year of our Lord four hundred
fifty five, and also sixty years after the first Invasion ten Kings, each by
himself, reigned in the Roman Empire.

Wherefore the beginning of the Beast with ten horns, or the rising of the same
out of the Sea, is referred to that year, when Alaricus with his Nations
invaded the Roman Empire, namely to the three hundred ninety fifth year since
the birth of Christ.

We see also, that all the three Characters are incident into the three
hundred ninety fifth year, as,

1. The spreading of the two wings of the great Eagle, by the division of the
Roman Empire into two parts, whereby the Woman, (the Christian Church) does
flee into the wilderness.

2. The rising of the Beast with ten horns out of the Sea, by the Invasion of
Alaricus with his Nations.

3. The beginning of treading under foot the holy City, the Christian Church.

The Historians also make a singular observation of that time, which followed
the death of Theodosius the Great, and refer unto the changes of the Roman
Empire.

Carrion in his Treatise of the four Monarchies, printed in the year one
thousand five hundred thirty one, does prefix before the description of
Arcadius and Honorius this title: the Destruction of the fourth Monarchy.
Philippus Peucerus writes in his reviewed Chronicles of Carrion under
Theodosius, p. 302. Theodosius has been the last Emperor, who possessed and
maintained the whole Roman Empire, both in the East and West. For immediately
after his death, under the reign of his son Honorius, the Franconians entered
into France, took the same, and their Duke Warmundus named himself King of
France, and reigned as King without any hinderance. In like manner was Rome
taken of Alaricus King of the Goths.

And page 306. After him (Theodosius the great) was the Empire pitifully torn
and divided by the Goths and Vandals into Hungary, Italy and Spain, but
France was possessed partly by the Franconians, partly by the Burgundians.

Under Honorius page 313. The beginning of the Kingdom of France is derived
from the taking of the City of Trier, in the year of our Lord four hundred
three. This has been the beginning, and occasion of the division of the Roman
Empire toward France.

The second breach or diminution, of the Roman Empire, from the Hungarians
toward Italy, happened by the Goths.

And hereunto agrees Munsterus in in his Cosmographie, printed in the year one
thousand six hundred fourteen, page 381. and of the Edition of one thousand six
hundred twenty eight, page 356. sub quaestione, How and when the City of Rome
was taken again? where he writes thus: When the Goths had rebelled against
the Roman Empire, and set up Alaricus for their King; they subdued and reduced
not only the Provinces of Thracia and Anglia, under their power, and plucked
two strong Feathers out of the High-flying Eagle's wings; but attempted also to
cut off his head quite.

Daniel Pareus writes thus in Medulla Hist. Eccles. universalis, page 195.
Fuit mors Theodosii vere fatalis ad ruinam and interitum Imperii Occidentalis,
ut secum abstulisse pacem Ecclesiae and Reip. pene omnem videatur.

Seeing now the Characters of the beginning of the Apocalyptical one thousand
two hundred sixty years, are applied to the three hundred ninety fifth year,
since the birth of Christ: As also the Character of the beginning of the one
thousand two hundred ninety years of Daniel, applied unto the three hundred
sixty fifth year; And the difference of thirty years betwixt the one thousand
two hundred sixty, and one thousand two hundred ninety years are punctually
found out; And contrariwise, it does not appear by the histories, where such
two times may be found, which have thirty years with such accidents following
one to another, whereunto the aforesaid Characters can be more suitably
applied; We have reason to stand firm to this opinion, so long as we are not
convinced of a better, and conclude*

That the one thousand two hundred ninety years of the Prophet Daniel, 12.
verse 11. begun with the last abominable desolation of the Temple at Jerusalem,
in the year of our Lord three hundred sixty fifth, and the Apocalyptical one
thousand two hundred sixty years, with the Invasion of the Roman Empire by the
Goths, in the year three hundred ninteie five, and that both together do
exspire with the one thousand six hundred fifty fifth year, which is now
shortly at hand.

2. With the one thousand six hundred fifty fifth year, since the birth of
Christ, do exspire the six thousand years since the Creation of the world.

The Chronologer's supputation in general is this, that this present one
thousand six hundred fiftieth year, since the birth of Christ, is the five
thousand five hundred ninety ninth year since the Creation of the world. But
if we do well consider the Chronological numbers expressed in the Scripture,
it will evidently appear, that in this present one thousand six hundred
fiftieth year of our Lord, the five thousand nine hundred ninety fifth year
since the Creation of the world, does exspire, and the six thousand year of the
world will end with the one thousand six hundred fifty fifth year of our Lord.

According to the vulgar Supputation of years, the one thousand six hundred
fifty fifth year of our Lord will be the five thousand six hundred fourth
year since the Creation of the world.

Unto these add the years, which either by the Chronologers have been omitted,
or made too few, and left out.

1. One year, whilst the Flood lasted* Genes. c. 7. verse 11. and chapter 8.
verse. 14. after the supputation of Funccius, Reusnerus, Partiltius, and others.

2. Sixty years until the birth of Abraham; who was not born in the
seventieth, but in the one hundred thirtieth year of Terah. For Terah died in
Haran, Genesis 11. verse 32. when he was old two hundred five years.

Immediately after the death of Terah Abraham departed out of Haran, Genesis 12.
verse. 4. Acts 7. 4. being old seventie five years.

From thence it does follow, that Abraham was born, when Terah was old one
hundred thirty years.

3. Two hundred fifteen years of the sojourning of the Children of Israel in
Egypt.

In Exodus 12. verse 40, 41. we read these words: The sojourning of the
Children of Israel who dwelt in Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years.
Which the era vulgaris, or the common supputation does derive from the time of
Abraham's calling, when he was seventie five years old, Genes. 12. verse 4. in
this manner as follows.

Until the birth of Isaac Genesis 21. verse 5. twenty five years.

Until the birth of Jacob, Genesis 35. verse 26. sixty years.

Jacob was old when he went into Egypt, Genesis 47. verse 9. one hundred thirty
years.

Which make up two hundred fifteen years.

The Children of Israel dwelt in Egypt two hundred fifteen years.
Which is against the clear text, which does not speak of the times of the
Fathers, but of the children of Israel; not of the pilgrimage, but of the
sojourning and bondage, not without and in Egypt, but only in Egypt.

Abraham indeed went down into Egypt, Genesis 12. verse 10. but sojourned there not
long, and was not in any bondage: Isaac came not at all into Egypt being
forbidden. Genesis 29. verse 2.

Jacob was one hundred thirty years old before we went down into Egypt.

So that the four hundred thirty years, of the sojourning of the Children of
Israel who dwelt in Egypt, Exodus 12. verse. 40. and when the seed of Abraham was
a stranger in a Land that was not their's, and served them, and was afflicted
there, Genesis 15. verse. 13. are to begin their supputation, from the one
hundred thirtieth year of Jacob, and his entrance into Egypt, unto which must
be added here two hundred fifteen years.

4. One hundred years from going forth out of Egypt, until the building of the
Temple of Solomon.

Era vulgaris does reckon in this period of time four hundred eighty years,
as they are plainly set down, 1 Kings 6. verse 1. But by the book of Judges, and
other places of the Scripture, it does appear that they were five hundred
eighty years. As:

Forty years in the Wilderness. Deuteronomy. 1. verse 3. Acts 13. 18.

Seven years of Joshua in the taking of possession, and division of the Land of
Canaan. Joshua 14. verse 10.

Four hundred fifty years until Samuel. Acts 13. verse 2.

As namely, Eight under King Chushan Rishatha* im. Judges 3. verse 8.

Forty under Othniel. verse 11.

Eighteen under Eglon. verse 14.

Eighty under Ehud. verse 30.

Twenty under Iabin. chap. 4. verse 3.

Forty under Deborah and Barak. Chapter 5. verse 31.

Seven under the Midianites. chap. 6. verse 1.

Forty under Gideon. chap. 8. verse 28.

Three under Abimeleck the Tyrant. chap. 9. verse 22.

Twenty three under Tola. chap. 2. verse 3.

Twenty two under Iair. verse 3.

Sa. Three hundred one, as Iephthah says. Three hundred, chap. 11. verse 26.

Eighteen under the Philistines. chapter 10. verse 8.

Six under Iephthah. chap. 12. v. 7.

Seven under Ibzan. verse 10.

Ten under Elon. verse 11.

Eight under Abdon. verse 14.

Forty under the Philistines, chap. 13. verse 1.

Twenty under Sampson. c. 16. v. 31.

Forty under Eli. 1 Samuel chap. 4. verse 18.

Sa. Four hundred fifty, as above, Acts Chap. 13. verse 20.

Forty years under Samuel and Saul. Acts 13. verse 21.

Forty under David. first of Kings, chap. 2. verse 11.

Three under Solomon, first of Kings, chap. 6. verse 1.

Sa. Five hundred eighty years from the going out of Egypt until the building
of the Temple of Solomon.

Here do concur two Characters, as in the three hundred years, whereof Iephthah
speaks, Judges 11. verse 26.

Four hundred fifty years of the Judges until the Prophet Samuel, whereof St
Paul. Acts 13. verse 2.

Which in the vulgar supputation, whereby are numbered but four hundred eighty
years, are not found.

5. Eleven years of Ezekiah the last King of Judah.

In the vulgar supputation indeed are reckoned up from the building of the
Temple, until the destruction of of the same, four hundred seventeen years; But
there must be eleven years taken off again, in respect the beginning of the
Captivity of Babylon is counted the eleventh year of Iechoniah, that was King
immediately before, instead it should be upon good ground, referred to the
eleventh year of Ezekiah, at which time the Temple was destroyed; As you may
read hereof Michael Mestlinum quaest. 7. Chronolog. page 67. and seqq. Etiam
Reusnerum de supput. annorum mundi, page 28. and Iohannem Piscatorem in suo
Chronol. Indice page 15. with some others more.

6. Seven years in the times of the Kings of Persia, as of Cyrus six years, and
of Xerxes the second one year.

2. Whereof Mestlinus Quaest. Chronol. page 3. 5. 38.

7. Two years, which Scaliger, Calvisius, and Helvicus do refer to the
supputation of years since the birth of Christ.

Now these mentioned years, which together amount to three hundred ninety six
years, being added to the five thousand six hundred four years, since the
Creation of the world, according to the supputation of one thousand six hundred
fifty five years of our Lord; it will be manifest that the six thousand years
since the Creation of the world, do exspire with the one thousand six hundred
fifty fifth year, since the Birth of Christ.

3. In the one thousand six hundred fifty fifth year since the Birth of
Christ, does also exspire the period and time, from the beginning of the world
until the Flood.

The Flood came, when the one thousand six hundred fifty sixth year from the
Creation of the world was exspired.

The end of the one thousand six hundred fifty sixth year since the birth of
Christ, is, according to the vulgar supputation, incident into the end of one
thousand six hundred fifty fourth, or beginning of one thousand six hundred
fifty fifth year.

Now the conjectures of some famous learned men have been these; that at the end
of these years, great revolutions and changes may be looked for; as especially
do mention hereof.

Leonard Krentheim in suis conject. p. 53.

Euchstadius in discursu de conjunct. M. page H. 3.

Wencestaus Budowez in circulo Horol. etc. page 15.

Paulus Crellius in Prompt. Biblico, under the word Burse, or title of
repentance, page 119.

Seeing the mystical numbers, which are expressed in the Prophet Daniel, and in
the Revelation of St John: the six thousand years, since the Creation of the
world, and also the period since the beginning of the world until the Flood do
meet with the ending of the one thousand six hundred fifty fifth year of our
Lord, which draws near: It is very likely that for certain, some great things
are at the door, and that we may look for fearful and terrible revolutions.

For now it is the time, wherein the Son of God does call upon us, Watch,
pray, look up, and lift up your heads; because your redemption is at hand. But
the result of it, is this, which he declares, Luke 18^ verse 8. When the Son
of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? namely, that Faith which the
widow had and used against the unjust Judge; by her importunity, prayers, and
supplications, until she was avenged of her adversaries. Surely this faith is
not found among them that dwell on the earth. The poor Woman put to flight, and
wandering in the Wilderness, Revel. 12. verse 14. only makes use of this weapon
against her Adversary, and continues in the same with crying, without
intermission to God the righteous Judge. And shall he not avenge her? Shall he
not avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear
long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. But those that
live in security, and persist in their malice, and wickedness when they shall
say: Peace and safety; then sudden destruction shall com upon them, as
travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape. 1 These. 5. verse 2,
3.

For the day of the Lord shall com as a thief in the night.

Wherefore watch and pray.

Apocalypsis Reserata: OR, THE REVELATION OF St JOHN OPENED: Wherein the
distribution of the times of the New Testament being made Into The Kingdom of
the Dragon, The Lievtenantship of Antichrist, The quiet state of the Church in
the Kingdom of Christ,
By the EXPOSITION of the XI, and XVI, Chapters, is showed What in these our
present times 1. Hitherto has been fulfilled, 2. At this present is
effectually brought to pass, 3. And henceforth is to be exspected in the years
near at hand.


REVEL. Chap. 22. v. 12. Behold I com quickly, and my reward is with me, to
give every man according as his work shall be. LONDON, Printed in the year
1650.

THE REVELATION OF St JOHN
Describes the State of the Christian Church in the New Testament, and also
the things which shall com to pass in the Roman Empire, or in the fourth
Monarchy, under which the Church of God does subsist.

This description comprehends three periods, or three sorts of times.

The first Period contains Regnum Draconis Ethnicum, the time of the Dragon,
until the three hundred nintie fifth year of our Lord.

This is the time, in which the seven Crowns stood upon the seven heads of the
Dragon: Revelations 12. verse 3. and the Dragon himself under the Heathenish
Emperors was publicly adored and worshipped; but the Christians persecuted,
banished, and put to death; till at last Constantine the Great came to the
Imperial seat, whereby the reign of the Dragon came to an end, the Dragon was
cast out of the Church, Heaven, the Church prevailed, and triumphed, until the
death of the Emperor Theodosius, at which time the Devil left his shape of a
Dragon, and resigned his Host, his residence and seat, with his great authority
unto the Beast with ten horns, when it rose up out of the sea. Revel. 13. verse
2.

The second Period comprehends vicariatum Draconis Antichristianum: or the
time from the three hundred ninety fifth, until the one thousand six hundred
fifty fifth year of our Lord, in which the Pope at Rome, as the Antichrist,
and installed Lieutenant of the Dragon, blasphemeth God, and his name, and
persecuteth his Saints for the space of one thousand two hundred sixty years.
Revel. 13. verse 2. when the Dragon was overcom, and cast out of the
Church-Heaven; he did cast out of his mouth water, as a flood after the woman,
Revel. 12. verse 15. that is, he stirred up the Septentrional Nations, to
invade the Roman Empire; intending thereby to root out and destroy the
Church; But the Earth swallowed up the flood; in regard these Nations embraced
the Christian Faith, remained in the Roman Empire, and erected several
Kingdoms in it.

Seeing then the Dragon saw, that he could not maintain the Heathenism,
wherein he openly was worshipped and served, he resigneth to the Beast,
(which rises up out of the sea, Revelations 13. verse 1. and is ridden and
governed by the great Whore of Babylon, 17. verse 3. etc.) that is, to the
Antichrist, who in the time of these wars does creep out in the Roman Empire,
his power and his seat, and great authority, chapter 13. verse 2. and so make's
him his Vicar and Lieutenant, by giving over to him his seat and residence, the
City of Rome, and the whole Roman Empire. Whence it came to pass that about
this time the Bishops of Rome begun to oppose the marriage of Priests, and to
seek to have the Primacie and preeminencie both in Church and State.

The Dragon does resign to his Lieutenant (...) his whole Host, (for in this
sens the LXX Interpreters do use this word (...) as Exodus 14. verse 14. and 15.
verse 4. and in other places, as Matthew 24. verse 29, 30. etc.) The host of the
Dragon are his Angels or Devils, and the Idols, in which the Dragon and the
Devils are worshipped and served by the Heathen.

These (viz. Idols) the Antichristian Popedom has received and worshipped,
under the name and shape of Saints, the Dragon, and his Vicegerent; as hereof
the text in the words following, verse 3. and 4. does speak: The whole Earth did
wonder at the Beast, and they worshipped the Dragon, which gave power unto the
Beast, and they worshipped the Beast, etc.

The Dragon does give also unto him great Authority, and make's him a Head over
great Countries; whereof David did prophecy in the Psalm. 110. verse 6. The time
of this Lievtenantship shall continue forty two months, that is, one thousand
two hundred sixty years, since then it did begin in the three hundred ninety
fifth year of our Lord, therefore it does end in the one thousand six hundred
fifty fifth year, shortly to com.

Upon this follows the third Period, which brings Statum Ecclesiae
tranquillum; the true peace and quiet condition of the Church here on earth.

Seeing at the sound of the trumpet of the seventh Angel, the seventh plague,
or the third woe does com upon the Roman Empire, and at the same time the
seventh Vial of God's wrath is poured out, wherewith the Enemies of the Church
are wholly cut off and destroyed, yea, even the Devil himself shut up in the
bottomless pit, Revel. 20. verse 1, 2, 3. therefore now nothing but a true and
constant peace can ensue.

Whence it is that the Church of God rejoiceth with a great voice, Revel. 11.
verse 15. saying: The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord,
and of his Church, and he shall reign for ever and ever. And in the v. 17.
She gives also thanks to the Lord God Almighty, because he has taken to
himself his great power, and reigns.

Unto these three times, all the three parts of the Revelation of St John are
directed.

For the Son of God describes in this Revelation the state of the Christian
Church, and the things befalling to the Roman Empire, in a threefold manner;
as, 1. By seven Epistles, chap. 2. and 3. 2. By a book sealed. chap. 4, 5, 6,
7. 3. By a little book open. chap. 10.


And following.

He does appear also to John every time in an other shape. As

1. In the likeness of a son of man, chapter 1. who suffers in the first
period.

2. As a Beast in the shape of a Lamb, having seven horns and seven eyes, chapter
5. which does fight in the second period.

3. As a mighty strong Angel clothed with a cloud, chapter 10. who in the
third period has all things put under his feet, and reigns.

1. In the likeness of a Son of man in the midst of the seven Candlesticks,
etc. chapter 1. verse 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. He declares the condition of the
Church in general, by seven Epistles, whereof the first and second belong to
the first period; the third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh to the second;
and the promises, chap. 2. and 3. to the third.

2. As a beast, in the shape of a Lamb, with seven horns, and seven eyes, he
opens the book sealed (the secret and hidden Decree of God,) and intimates
thereby the things befalling to the Roman Empire, under which the Church is
built up and preserved, chap. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. and distinctly how things shall
be carried.

In the Political State.
In the first Period until the three hundred ninety fifth year of our Lord,
which by opening of the first six seals is performed, chapter 6. where in the
first five seals, the condition under the heathenish Emperors; but in the
sixth, the fall of Heathenism under the Christian Emperors, from Constantine
the Great until the death of Theodosius, who died the 17. of January Anno
three hundred ninety five, fifteen prefigured.

In the second Period from the three hundred ninety fifth, until the one
thousand six hundred fifty fifth year of our Lord, where the seventh seal is
opened, and seven Angels with seven Trumpets declare to the Roman Empire by
seven judgments it is ruin, chap. 8. which plagues have been fulfilled.

The first: by the Invasions of barbarous Nations. Anno three hundred ninety
five verse 7.

The second by the destruction of the City of Rome, which first happened by
Alaricus. Anno four hundred ten, ver. 8.

The third by taking away Imperial dignity in Augustulus* Anno four hundred
seventie six, verse 10.

The fourth, by the Abolition of all eminent public charges at Rome. Anno five
hundred fifty two, verse 12.

The fifth, by the Saracens, as the first woe. Chap. 9. verse 1. until the
twelfth.

The sixth, by the Turks, chap. 9. verse 13. until the nineteenth, and the
abominable Idolatry, murders, sorceries, fornications and thefts, verse 20,
21. of the Papists, as the second woe.

In the third Period when the one thousand six hundred fifty fifth year does
begin, the seventh Angel does sound, and withal the seventh judgment is
executed upon the Enemies of the Church, with the third woe, whereby the
Mystery of God is fulfilled, Revel. 10. verse 7.

3. Appears the Son of God to John, as a mighty strong Angel from Heaven
clothed with a cloud, having a little book open, which John swallowed down, and
thereupon prophesies, how things shall come to pass, especially,

In the Ecclesiastical State.
In the first Period until the three hundred ninety fifth year.

1. The Church is built up under great persecution, chap. 11. verse 1.

2. The Church is gloriously beautified, and clothed with the Son (of
righteousness) has the Moon under her feet (despises all worldly and
earthly things, and reigns over the works of darkness;) and upon her head a
Crown of twelv stars, the Apostles and the wholesome Doctrine of the same. Chap.
12. verse 1, 2.

3 The red Dragon, the Devil stirs up many heresies, persecuteth the
Church, Constantine the great comes to the Imperial Seat, the Dragon is
overcom, and Heathenism exstirpated, verse 4. and following.

In the second Period from the three hundred ninety fifth, until the one
thousand six hundred fifty fifth year, these seven Synchronisms or concurrent
times are described.

1. The Holy City is trodden under foot by the Gentiles, chap. 11. verse 2. 2.
The two Witnesses clothed with sackcloth, verse third until the tenth. 3. The
Woman fled into the wilderness, and is fed there, chap. 12. verse 6. until the
fourteenth. 4. The Beast with ten horns blasphemeth God, and makes war with
the Saints. chap. 13. verse 5, 6, 7. 5. The Beast with two horns at the same
time drive's a trade with his pedling wares, verse 11. until the eighteenth. 6.
The one hundred forty four thousand sing a new song, and live without blame,
chap. 14. verse 1. until the sixth. 7. The Whore of Babylon, the Popish
Hierarchy ride's, and rule's the beast with ten horns, the Princes and
Potentates, which adhere unto the Papacy at their own choosing and liking,
chapter 17.
Herewith God causes Babylon to be forewarned. Chap. 14. verse 6. with
following.

Declares and denounces unto her the punishments and plagues. Chapter 15. and
16.

And when no Reformation does follow, he passes the sentence upon her, and
destroieth her. Chap. 17. and 18.

Whereupon in the third Period follows the description of the great joie and
Triumph of the Church, over the total ruin and destruction of her enemies.
chapter 19. and the desired tranquillity and peace of the Christian Church.

These things we may see and learn in general out of the Revelation of St
John. But seeing there be many particular and important things contained
therein, which do relate unto our present times, and are set down for the
comfort of the Church, which is now afflicted; we think good and expedient to
make a collection of the same.

Now of these our times does speak exactly and particularly the eleventh
chapter in the History of the two Witnesses.

And the sixteenth chapter in the description of the seven vials of the wrath
of God.

The eleventh chapter describes the beginning of the third part of the
Prophecy, out of the little open book, and and goe's through all the three
Periods of the times of the New Testament, and because it is as it were an
abridgment of the whole Revelation, and describes the whole time of the New
Testament; we will take the whole into our thought, and consider the contents
thereof.

Now it consists of two parts, wherein is described

1. What is declared unto St John by word of mouth, how things shall com to
pass.

1. in the first period, at the building up of the Christian Church.

2. In the second period, under the Antichristian Vicar in two Synchronisms or
concurrencies of times.

Where,

1. The Gentiles tread the holy City under foot, for the space of forty two
months. verse 2.

2. The two Witnesses are clothed with sackcloth, one thousand two hundred
sixty days, verse 3. And following.

2. What in the beginning of the third Period is represented to John by a
sudden change in a vision.

In the first period under the Empire of the Dragon, the Son of God causes his
Temple and Church to be built up. The place of the Sacrifices to be measured,
and does faithfully protect his persecuted Christians.

For thus writes John. Verse 1. And there was given me a reed like unto a rod,
and the Angel stood saying: Rise and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar,
and them that worship therein.

Mow seeing the building and gathering of the Christian Church is here
commended to John, under the measuring of the Jewish Temple at Jerusalem;
therefore we must consider the condition and form of the Temple, that we may
attain unto the true proper meaning of this text.

1. The Temple stood in the City of Jerusalem upon the Mountain Moria, the
length thereof was threescore Cubits, the breadth twenty cubits, and the
height an hundred and twenty cubits. 2 Chronic. 3. verse 3. and 4. Iosep.
antiq. lib. 8. cap. 3.

It was divided into two parts. 1. The hinder part toward the West was twenty
cubits long, and twenty cubits broad; and called Sanctum Sanctorum, the most
holy place, into which the High Priest alone entered but once a year in his
Highpriests attire, first of Kings 6. verse 16. and 8. verse 6. 2 Chronicles. 5. verse
7.

2. The Forepart toward the East was forty cubits long, and twenty cubits
broad, and was called Sanctum, the holy place into which only the Priests
entered. 1. Reg. 6. verse 17. 2 Chronicles. 5 v. 11. and this is called here in the
text, The Temple of God.

(Nota. Numerus cubicus dimensionum Templi Judaici exhibet Templi Mystici
numerum Novi Testamenti. 144000. Longitudo. 60. cubitorum. Latitudo. 20. facit
1200. Altitudo. 120. facit 144000. numerum signatorum. cap. 7. and 14.)

2. Before this house and Temple of God, were two Courts; whereof you may read
in the second of Kings 21. verse 5. 2 Chronicles. 4. verse 9.

1. The Inner Court, first of Kings 6. verse 36. which was called the Court of
the Priests. 2 Chronicles. 4. verse 6. into which none was permitted to enter, but
the Cohanim and Priests, according to the appointed order, there they served
God with sacrifices and prayers.

In the middle of this Inner Court stood the Altar for the Burnt-Offerings,
which was twenty cubits long and broad; and ten cubits high.

This whole place of the Inner Court is called here Thysiasterium.

2. Without this was the great Court. 2 Chronicles. 4. verse 9. Josephus. lib. 8. c.
3. compassed with a wall of white Marble; The Outward Court, Ezekiel 40. verse
17. called the Court (in the Temple) of the people, or of the Israelites.

This place did contein in it is circumference four furlongs, and none durst
enter into it, but the Israelites, which were purified according to the Law.
The unclean Jews, and Gentiles durst not com into it. It is called in the Greek
text, (...), the Outward Court.

3. About this Court Herod caussed yet another great place to be enclosed with
a wall, for the Gentiles and unclean, which was called the Court of the
Gentiles; whereof here no mention is made.

By this Jewish Temple does the Angel represent unto John the condition of the
Church, and Congregation of God in the New Testament, giving him a reed, and
commands him to measure.

By the measuring is signified the building and propagating of the Church.
(Ezech. 40. and following, Zach. 2. verse 1, 2. Revelations 22.) God's Fatherly
providence, and faithful care; and how exactly and narrowly he does observe the
actions and sufferings of his believing people.

John should measure 1. The Temple of God; that is, the Christian Congregation,
the true, invisible, hidden Church, which God will build up in the hearts of
Believers. 1 Cor. 3. verse 16, 17. and 16. verse 9. 2 Cor. 6. verse 16. 1 Peter 2.
5. Ephesians. 3. 17. John 14. verse 23.

2. The Altar (...) the place, where the Sacrifices were offered, the place of
oblations, which was the inner Court, where the Altar of burnt-offerings stood,
where the Priests did sacrifice, and performed their service, and prayers, That
is:

Because the Christian Church will be exposed to afflictions, and
persecucutions, and is to suffer many grievous torments and tribulations, in
regard the true Professors and servants of God, shall be delivered up and
killed like sheep appointed for the slaughter, therefore he causes the
sufferings, and miseries which they should undergo, to be measured out unto
them, whereby he sets certain bounds to the Tyrants, beyond which they
cannot go; and when they are com so far, then must vengeance overtake them.
Hence it is, that the sacrificed souls of the Martyrs, who were slain for the
word of God, and lie under the altar, (as slaughtered sacrifices) cry with a
loud voice to the Lord, holy and true, for vengeance. Revel. 6. verse 9, 10.

3. And them that worship therein. Them therein, not in the Altar, but in the
inner Court, in the Court of the Priests; as Kings and Priests, Revel. 1. verse
9. and 5. verse 10. as the Roial Priesthood, 1 Petr. 2. 9. in the beauties of
his holiness, Psalm. 110. pure and undefiled.

Worship, serve God, with perseverance until the end, and stick close to him, in
all sorts of persecutions, even to the yielding up, and sacrificing of their
bodies and lives.

Now follows the Description of the condition of the Church in the second
Period, in the time of Popery from the three hundred ninety fifth until the
one thousand six hundred fifty fifth year, in two Synchronisms, or
concurrences of times.

1. The first of the treading under foot the holy City, verse 2.

But the Court, which is without the Temple, leav out, and measure it not, for
it is given unto the Gentiles.

(...); we read in the old greek versions: which does agree with the
abovementioned description of the Courts of the Temple. For the Inner Court is
in the first verse intimated by the world Thysiasterium.

But by the Outward Court, here is understood the Outward worship, or service
of God, which consists but in the Outward appearance and Ceremonies, whereof
God will take no notice, and therefore rejects it.

Leav it out, and measure it not says the Angel.

For it given unto the Gentiles, and the holy City they shall tread under
foot.

Here we must reflect and look,

First, upon the invasion of the Heathenish Barbarous Nations. For from the
three hundred twelfth year of our Lord; when Constantine the great was
converted unto the Christian Faith, until the three hundred ninety fifth year;
when Theodosius the great died, the Church of God did triumph over the
Gentiles, and destroyed the worship of the Dragon, and their idolatrous
Temples. But immediately after the death of Theodosius the Great, the Goths,
Huns, Alans, with other Barbarous Nations, invaded the Roman Empire, ruined
and destroyed the same on all sides, whereby the Church, as the holy City
begun to be trodden under foot, and the Antichrist had an occasion given to
break forth, and show himself. vid. Hieron. Epist. 3. and 11.

2. Upon the Heathenish Idolatry, which in Popery has been brought in again.
The Heathen worshipped Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Apollo, Hercules, Juno, Venus,
etc. In the Popish Religion, Marie, Peter, Paul, George, etc. are set up
instead of those, and called upon in time of distress, so that there is but
little difference between them.

3. Upon the horrible Sodomie, and other abominable sins, which in time past
have been committed by the Heathen, and then afterward practiced, and in
public books defended, and are as yet commended, and permitted in the Popish
Church by the Clergy and others, without any shame, or restraint.

This treading under foot shall continue forty two months, that is, one
thousand two hundred sixty years, as does appear in clavi Apocalypt.

2. The second Synchronismus, or concurrencie of times, of the two Witnesses
clothed with sackcloth, etc. while's the Holy City is trodden under foot, God
will not forget his own people, but will faithfully care for them, wherefore
he says:

V. 3. And I will give power unto my two Witnesses, and they shall prophecy a
thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed with sackcloth.

By the two Witnesses are understood faithful Teachers, and Governors of the
Church, both Ecclesiastical and Political. To such he will give, that they may
edify, and propagate the Church of God, and preserv the same against all
Heresies, and hostile attempts. The number of the witnesses is small, being
but two of them; which is the least number, yet sufficient for the testimony
of the truth. For at the mouth of two or three witnesses shall the matter be
established. Deuter. 19. verse 15. Matthew. 18. verse 16. John 8. verse 17. 2 Cor.
13. verse 15.

The Angel says, Unto my two Witnesses: whereby it does appear, that he that
speaks here unto John, is the Son of God himself.

They shall prophecy clothed with sackcloth.

The whore of Babylon is araied in purple, and scarlet color, and decked with
gold, and precious stones and pearls, Revelations 17. verse 4. But the witnesses
of Christ are clothed with sackcloth; that is, their cloths are but poor and
despicable, as those were of the Prophets of God in times of old, who wore also
sackcloth, Isaiah 20. v. 2. a rough garment, Zechar. 13. verse 4. Elijah was
girt with a girdle of leather, 2 Kings 1. verse 8. preaching repentance, and the
suffering of the Cross, and persecutions, and were exposed to all manner of
tribulations and persecutions.

A thousand two hundred and threescore days; that is, as many years from the
three hundred ninety fifth year of our Lord, until the one thousand six
hundred fifty fifth year, as it does appear in Clavi Apocalypt:

Verse 4. These are the two Olive Trees, and the two Candlesticks standing
before the God of the earth.

Thus are the High Priest Joshua and the Prince Zerubbabel described, Zach. 4.
verse 14.

Verse 5. And if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth,
and devoureth their enemies, and if any man will hurt them, he must in this
manner be killed.

This is taken out of the history of the Prophet Elijah, when at his request
fire came down from Heaven and consumed the Captain, with his fifty men. 2
King. 1. verse 10. 12.

Which likewise the Disciples of Christ would have don, when the Samaritans
would not receiv Christ and them, Luke 9. verse 54.

Verse 6. These have power to shut Heaven, that it rain not in the days of
their Prophecy, which is also taken out of the history of Elijah, 1 Kings 1^.

V. 1. And have power over the waters, to turn them to blood, and to smite the
earth with all plagues as often as they will, which is out of Moses's and
Aaron's expedition in Egypt, applied and referred hereto, whereof we read in
Exodus 7. verse 20. and in the 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. chapters.

By this description of the two Witnesses, God does declare that, what mercies
in times of old he has showed unto his people, the Children of Israel, the
same he will also show in the New Testament unto them that believ.

He will give them Ioshuas and Zerubbabels; faithful Teachers, and religious
Rulers, and Governors, who shall fit and edify them unto the Temple of God,
and as Candlesticks give light unto them with their pure doctrine, and as
Olive Trees assist them with powerful consolation.

He will give them zealous Elijahs, and Elishahs, who shall fight against the
whore Jezabel, the Priests of Baal, and other persecutors.

He will also at length send them his Moses's and Aarons, who shall deliver
them, and bring them forth out of the Antichristian bondage.

Verse 7. And when they have or shall have finished their Testimony: cum
finierint vel peregerint.

Thus the versions do render it, either in the perfect, or future perfect tens,
whereby the Teachers and Expositors have been mistaken, to think that this last
war should not begin till then; when the determined one thousand two hundred
sixty years of the two Witnesses should be exspired.

But because by this means the two Witnesses should remain in sackcloth, and the
Woman in the wilderness, beyond the time appointed, and also the fourth beast
should continue to blaspheme longer then 3 times, or forty two months. To all
which, not only the plain text, but also the swearing of the Angel, Daniel 12.
verse 7. and the great Oath of the Son of God, Revelations 10. verse 6. are
contradictorie; therefore we must look upon the property of the text in the
original tongue; (...) is the indefinitum primum, which indeed may be rendered
in the perfect tens, when they have finished, or in the future, perfect tens,
when they shall have finished. But this exposition being also repugnant and
contrary to this, and other texts in the Revelation; we must reject it, and
render the words in futuro simplici cum finituri sunt; When they shall finish:
namely, when the one thousand two hundred sixty years shall draw to an end, as
Ioannes Cloverius in primo diluculo Apocalyptico prop. 14. p. 124. and in
Comment. posthumo Tom. 3. page 28. does observe. Likewise Josephus Medeus in
Comment. in Apocalypsin.

In the one thousand two hundred sixty years, first the one thousand years do
expire in the year one thousand three hundred ninety five. Then the two
hundred years expire in the year one thousand five hundred ninety five,
whereupon do follow the sixty years, as the end: So that these words; when
they shall finish their testimony, are to have this sens; when in the one
thousand five hundred ninety fith year of our Lord, the sixty years shall
begin.

Then the Beaest that ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall make war
against them, and shall overcom them and kill them.

By the Beast here is meant, the Beast with ten horns, which Chapter 13. verse
1. rises up out of the Sea; whereof the Angel in the 17. Chapter verse 8. says
to John, The Beast that thou saw, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of
the bottomless pit. And verse 11. The Beast that was, and is not, even he is
the eighth, and is of the seven, etc. That is: the Empire or Government, has
been under the Heathenish Roman Emperors, where the Dragon did reign, and was
openly worshipped in Paganism.

And is not. The Dragon was thrown from his seat, and is not any more
worshipped openly, because Christian Emperors and Governors are com to the
Imperial dignity, who have destroyed heathenism.

And ascends again out of the bottomless pit. When the Dragon's government
was destroyed, and the Heathenish Idolatry abolished, the Dragon creep's in
again by the means of the Beast with ten horns (when the Roman Empire is
divided into many Kingdoms) give's him his power, and his seat, and great
authority; and bring's it to this that a new and more holy form of Idolatry
is established, and that he, the Dragon, together with the Beast is worshipped
again, Revelations 13. verse 2, 3, 4. This Beast is the eighth, and is of the
seven; that is, the Rider (the woman sitting upon the Beast) which John sees
in a vision, Chapter 13. verse 3. does govern the civil State in the divided
Roman Empire, as the Beast with ten horns (and this is the seventh sort of
Government) and withal the Ecclesiastical, Popish Government also, which is the
eighth sort. But because the Woman sit's up on the Beast, and both does make one
Complexum, or a Rider; And the Woman does after her pleasure, ride and govern
the Beast; therefore both the last forms of the Roman Commonwealth, the
Ecclesiastical and Political Government in Popery are counted for One,
wherefore the Angel says, The eighth is of the seven. Whence we conclude,
that by the Beast, which ascended out of the bottomless pit, is understood the
Popish Ecclesiastical Government, which uses the Temporal sword, and the power
of worldly Potentates, as a Rider makes use of the power and and strength of
his horse.

Of this Beast is said here, that it shall make war against the two witnesses,
and shall overcom them, and kill them: That is, there shall be in the Roman
Empire, a persecution set a foot against the Evangelical Protestants, by the
instigation of the Pope and the Prelates, toward the end of the appointed time,
in the last sixty years, from the one thousand five hundred ninety fifth,
until the one thousand six hundred fifty fifth year.

The two Witnesses shall be overcom and killed: That is, they shall be
removed, and thrust out of all Ecclesiastical and Political Offices and
imploiments.

(Verse 8. And their dead bodies shall lie) in the street of the great City,
which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.

Here is the place described, where the persecution shall happen. It is not an
universal persecution, which goe's throughout the whole Roman Empire, but a
particular Act, because the dead bodies of the two Witnesses do not lie in all
the streets, but only in One; in the street of the great City.

By the great City is understood the City of Rome, of which the Angel says,
in the 17. chapter, verse 18. The Woman which thou saw is that great City,
which reigns over the Kings of the Earth; Which is called in the 14. chapter
verse 8. Babylon the great City.

And that by Babylon is meant the City of Rome, is granted by the Jesuits
themselves, as Blasius Viegas in cap. 17. Apoc. sect. 3. Remacius de Vaulx in
Harpocrate divino part 1. fol. 235. Bellarm. lib. 2. Pontif. Romans c. 2. and
lib. 3. c. 5.

But by the City with the streets, is the whole Roman Popish Empire set
forth; as it is elsewhere compared unto a Beast with ten horns, chap. 13. and
17. and unto the Sea with rivers and fountains, Chapter 16. Compare also Luc.
14. verse 21. 23.

The City of Rome is called spiritually, that is, the City of Rome, or the
Roman Papacy. Is among the Hebrews, especially the Prophets to be called;
signifies as much as to be; and that in a singular high manner and way, as
appears by Isaiah chapter 1. verse 26. chapter 7. verse 14 chapter 9. verse 6.
chapter 56. verse 7. chapter 60. verse 14. chap. 26. verse 4. Ierem. 3. verse 17.
chap. 23. verse 6. Ezech. 48. verse 35. Zach. 6. verse 12. chap. 8. verse 3.
Finkius. Can. 49. Cent. 11.)

Spiritually, that is Mystically, in a mysterious sens and resemblance.

Another Sodom, because of their Paederastia, and other horrible Sodomitical
Abominations and sins, which not only are committed, but commended there. As
Sleidan lib. and Balaeus in Catalogo, do write concerning Ioannes de la Cata
Archbishop of Benevent, that he published in print a Treatise to commend
Sodomie: so that this is fully agreeable to that which the Prophet Isaiah
says, chap. 3. verse 9. The show of their countenance does witness against
them, and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not.

She is another Egypt, because of the great blindness and hardness of heart, as
also because of the Tyranny and grievous bondage, wherewith she does afflict
the people of God, driving and compelling them to a slavish servitude of
Popery.

She is also a true likeness of Jerusalem, because she, like the Jews, does
despise God and his word, kills the Prophets, nay, refuses to hear, and to
receiv the Son of God himself, blaspheming, calumniating, persecuting, and
crucifying him in his members, as by experience is clearly seen. And their dead
bodies (shall lie) in the street.

These words are spoken, as it were with some amazement, abruptly, and without
the concluding word to make up the sens. The dead bodies of the Witnesses in
this street? But which street? A City has many streets; and so has the
papal State, which is here called the great City, having under it many
streets and Kingdoms in subjection, those we must reflect upon to discover,
where such wars and persecutions in these years from the one thousand five
hundred ninety fifth of our Lord are happened.

Three principal streets or Kingdoms has the Oriental Antichrist, the Truth in
his subjection, he has not used any such persecution against the Christians
in his Dominions.

Seven are under the Occidental Antichrist.

In Italy, France, Spain, and the British Kingdoms, no such remarkable
persecution did happen within this time, nor also in Poland: The attempt, which
was made in Prussia in the one thousand five hundred ninety fifth year of our
Lord, was of no long continuance. What came to pass in Hungary and
Transylvania in the year one thousand six hundred two, and some following was
quieted by the Putshkeyish insurrection; and cannot be referred to this.

The tenth Horn yet remain's; Germany, or the Germane Empire, which in the
whole Beast or Empire cannot be counted otherwise, but one horn, and a Kingdom
by it self in the whole body of the fourth Monarchy.

This is the principal street in the great City, the principal horn of the
Beast, the principal Kingdom in the fourth Monarchy, whose head is represented
by the City of Rome. This Germane Empire is here called the street, per
excellentiam, because it is the principal street in the Empire, which does
appear hence.

1. By reason it is called the Roman Empire.

2. By reason it is, as it were a figure and Image of the old Roman Empire,
having seven heads, in regard of the seven Princes Electors, and ten Provinces,
in respect of the ten Circles, into which it is distributed.

3. By reason that the head of the Germane Empire has still the name of a
Roman Emperor, and has the the preeminencie above all other Kings adhering to
the Papal State.

Now in this street we must seek the war; and we shall also find it, if we
consider what is passed from the one thousand five hundred ninety fifth year,
until this present hour, against the true Professors of the Gospel.

The Pope indeed has from the beginning of the Reformation, which happened by
Doctor Luther, always aimed at this, how he might wholly root out and
destroy the Professors of the Gospel, and to this effect, the Counsel of Trent
was called in a special manner.

But this would not take place in Germany, until the Jesuitical Sect
prevailed, and brought things to that pass, that the peaceable and meek hearts
of Potentates have given too too much credit, and yielded to their flatterings,
calumnies, and deceits. Whereupon, in the year one thousand five hundred
ninety eighth begun the persecution, against the Evangelical Protestants in
Styria, Carniola, and Krain: and what success it had, and what thereupon
followed in other parts of the Empire, especially in the Kingdom of Bohemia,
and in all the hereditarie Lands of the mighty and eminent house of Austria; is
manifest to the world, and there is in all these proceedings, which are here
described, nothing else wanting but the last Act, which shall yet be put in
execution in Silesia. When this Act shall be finished, then shall this war,
victory, and execution be at an end, and therewith shall the 3 years begin,
at which time the dead bodies of the two Witnesses shall lie in the street,
whereof the text speaks.

V. 9. And some of the people and kindreds, (the two Witnesses.)
and tongues and Nations shall see their dead bodies three days and a half.

Strange people, foreign Nations, and people of strange tongues did meet in
this Germane war for Religion. And at Munster and Osnabruck were in like manner
such kind of people at the Treaties of Peace, of which is said: Some (of the
people) shall see the dead bodies of the two Witnesses. When the Treaty of
Peace shall be fully executed, then shall the foreign Nations, which have
maintained the Evangelical cause, clearly discover what they have neglected in
that Treaty and conclusion of Peace, how many dead bodies they have made, and
how many they have in the hereditarie Provinces, shut up and excluded by this
Pacification, from the Exercise of Religion, from Liberty of Conscience, from
their Privileges, etc. and how they have wholly cut them off, and deprived them
of all hope, which before this Pacification they yet had, and which by their
victorious arms was at last held forth unto them.

What are the Evangelical Professors in the hereditarie Provinces at this time,
else then dead bodies or corpse, which civilly have neither breath, nor life in
them; nay, how many thousand souls shall yet be killed, by the execution of
this Pacification?

This they shall see three days and an half.

That is, three years and an half, from the time that the execution of the
Pacification shall be fully accomplished, the last Act of the persecution
finished, and the Evangelical Ministers expelled, and deposed out of the
hereditarie Principalities of Silesia.

Thus far, namely till the 3 years before the end of the appointed one thousand
two hundred sixty years, should this last persecution reach: whereby it
appears, that there is none other intimated in this text, but this, whereof
mention has been made in Germany.

But they shall not only see the dead bodies of the two Witnesses, but they
shall also have some consideration over them. Which the word (...) does import,
which as Budeus does prove out of Aristotle, does signify rationem habere, to
look to a thing, and to have some care for it, as it does appear by the text
following:

And shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves.

Here the question is, whether these words are to be understood of the
friends, or of the enemies of the Professors of the true Religion? Commonly
these words use to be referred to the enemies of the Evangelical Professors,
and are expounded; That in this last persecution there shall be such cruelty
used, that the dead bodies shall not have so much as earth given them to be
buried in. But we must take notice, that these words are not proprie* and
according to the meaning of the Letter to be understood. For as in the
eleventh and twelfth verses, there quickening and rising must be taken in a
civil sens, so likewise their killing a lying in the street must be civilly
understood. Moreover the tenth verse following does describe also the enemies by
the name of them that dwell upon the earth: wherefore we do infer, That the
foreign Nations will not wholly lay down the sword, but will have at all
times a watchful eye upon the designs of Papists in Germany, and will not give
way, that the Evangelical Protestants shall be totally destroyed, and buried
under ground.

Vide Josephum Medum, and M. Gottlicb. Heyland super hunc locum. philipp.
Nicolai de R. Christi. p. 6. 4. Read also Wisd. chap. 3. verse 1. 9.

Verse 10. And they that dwell upon the earth. That is,

The Papists in general, who have their heaven here upon earth.

Finckius-Can. Theol. Cent. 11. can. 90. In scriptura S. peccatores appellantur
habitatores Terrae, non autem justi. Hi enim passim appellantur Advenae,
peregrini, incolae. Ex Hieron. Epist. 129. ad Dardanum.

Shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another.

These words are taken out of the book of Esther, chap. 9. verse 19. 22. and
they have their peculiar sens, the effect whereof is found in that which does
actually appear.

Because these two Prophets tormented them that dwelt on the earth verse 5. is
said of the two Witnesses, that they are hurt unjustly; here is attributed unto
them, that they torment their enemies, by sifting and searching out their
Doctrine and conversation, by examining and trying all things in them,
according to the Divine Scriptures, by contradicting their falls Doctrine, and
abominable Idolatry, and by laying their shameful, abominable, Sodomitical
life before them.

Thus did Eliah and Micah torment the King Ahab. 1 King. 18. v. 17, 18.
Jeremiah, the Priests and the Prophets, Jeremiah 27. verse 11. the Prophet Amos
the people of Israel, Amos 7. verse 10. The Son of God the Devils. Mattthew 8.
verse 29. Which must now be called, to do injury, to raise sedition, and to
oppose the Magistrates; The fault is in thine own people said the Officers of
the Children of Israel, Exodus 5. verse 16. For this is found most true: Mali
cum injuriam facere non sinuntur injuriam se accipere existimant. As Grotius in
his Annotation upon Mat. chap, 8. ver. 29. writes.

Hitherto has John written what the Son of God has declared unto him by word
of mouth.

Hereupon follows a sudden change in the vision, and thereby is represented a
sudden change in the Roman Empire. In respect that the Son of God does end his
Prophecy and speech; and John tronsported in a vision, sees before his eyes,
what after the issue of of 3 years befell to the Witnesses, and what terrible,
unexspected events, and alterations suddenly and unawares com to pass.

Here begins now the third Period in the year one thousand six hundred
fifty fifth of our Lord.

Where the enemies of the Gospel are quelled, and therewith does break forth
the true peace and tranquillity of the Church.

Verse 11. And after three days and an half the Spirit of life from God entered
into them, etc,

When these 3 days, or years com to an end, with the one thousand six hundred
fifty fifth year; then also together therewith do exspire the forty two
months of treading the holy City under foot, chap. 11. verse. 2.

The one thousand two hundred sixty days of the two Witnesses clothed with
sackcloth, verse 3.

The one thousand two hundred sixty days of the Woman in the wilderness,
chap. 12. verse 6.

The forty two months of the Beast, and of his blasphemies, chap. 13. verse 5.

The time of the Image of King Nebuchadnezzar. Dan. chap. 2.

The determined time of the four Monarchies. Dan. chapter 17. verse 12. 25.

The one thousand two hundred ninety days of Dan. chap. 12. verse 11. etc.

The spirit of life from God entered into them.

In the chapter 37. verse 14. of Ezekiel, God in the behalf of the Jews in the
Captivity of Babylon, does use such an expression, saying: I will put my
spirit in you, and ye shall live, and I shall place you in your own Land, etc.

The same will befall to the exiled, and oppressed Evangelical Professors, God
will send them an unexspected help by such means, which never entered into any
man's thoughts. God will revive them again, bring them into their own Land,
re-establish them in their dignities, and public functions, and give them
greater and higher Privileges, and Liberties, then they ever had before.

And they stood upon their feet.

The Exiled Evangelical Professors do appear again, and take possession of
their Land and places. The oppressed also com forth again, and are delivered
from their heavy yoke.

And great fear fell upon them, which saw them.

As now there is great joie and exsultation, amongst the Papists, about the
issue of this war: so there will be great terror, when they shall see the
Exiled return into the hereditarie Provinces again, and the Oppressed take
possession of their former dignities, and honorable functions. Then will be a
livelie example set before us, of that which is written in the book of Wisdom,
chap. 5.

Verse 12. And they heard a great voice from Heaven saying unto them: Com up
hither, etc.

By the Heaven the Church is understood.

By the great voice is signified, that after the end of three years and an
half, a great and chief Instrument, an high Potentate amongst the Evangelical
Professors, shall rise and be exalted, who to the great fear, and terror of
Papists, shall open again a free course to the Gospel, and Call with a great
voice upon the exiled and oppressed; reestablish them into their public
employments, and possessions, and say unto them: Com up hither.

This is the Divine Diploma, or Letters Patents, the vocation, or calling which
is published by that High Potentate.

The exiled do obeie; They ascend up to Heaven, that is, they enter into their
charges again, and perform that in the Church, which is committed to their
trust.

In a Cloud; that is, with great authority, respect, power and glory. Isa. 14.
verse 13. 14.

And their enemies beheld them: namely, those that formerly did rejoice at
their afflictions and miseries.

(...), does signify contemplari, ludos spectare vel celebrare, to see a
Comedy, or play. The Papists had hitherto acted as it were a Comedy, with
the Euangelical Professors, and tormented them with all sorts of plagues; Now
they see the event and issue thereof, wherein does befall unto them, what is
threatened, Jer. 50. verse 10, 11, 12, 13.

Verse 13. And the same hour was there a great Earthquake.

All the Peace which the Papists do imagine to themselves, is now at an end. For
immediately the reformation of this Evangelical Potentate causes an exceeding
great insurrection, and combustion in the Roman Empire.

And the tenth part of the City fell.

By the City is here meant

1. Either the whole Papacy, and thus one of the ten streets has its fall.
Namely, the Germane Empire, which is the street where the dead bodies of the
two Witnesses had lien, who are now standing again upon their feet.

2. Or the City of Rome it self, which in regard of the old City of Rome,
when she was in her flourishing condition, is counted this day but the tenth
part. As the same is proved by Lipsius lib. 3. admirand.

And there were slain. That is, cut off and destroid.

In the Earthquake. That is, in this war.

Seven thousand. That is, a great number, or multitude.

Of men. That is, high and great persons, chief heads and noble families.

And the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of Heaven.

The rest of the Papists stand amazed, and do acknowledge the just judgments of
God, which he poured out over them.

Verse 14. The second woe is past.

These words do not import, that by the destruction of the City of Rome, and
the other things, which have been set down in the aforegoing words; the second
woe is brought to an end: but the overthrow of the Turkish Empire is thereby
especially intimated.

Revelations 8. verse 13. St John beheld and heard an Angel flying thorough the
midst of Heaven, saying with a loud voice: Woe, woe, woe to the inhabitants of the
Earth, by reason of the other voices of the Trumpet of the three Angels, which
are yet to sound.

The first Woe happened by the Saracens, and Arabians; whereof in Revel. 9. verse
first till the twelfth.

The second Woe happened by the Turks. Revelations 9 verse 13. till the 19.

Hereunto do agree almost all the Expositors, and refer this second Woe
unanimously to the Turkish Empire.

And do infer from thence: because it is said here, the second Woe is past, that
immediately after the destruction of the City of Rome, and these Revolutions
in the Germane Empire, the Turkish Empire shall have it is fall.

Verse 14. Behold the third Woe comes quickly.

All the three Woes are poured over the Popish Roman Empire.

But the third Woe is the last, and begins at the sound of the seventh
Trumpet. Wherefore, these words do immediately follow.

Verse 15. And the seventh Angel sounded.

Wherewith begins the seventh and last plague poured out over Babel.

And withal is briefly described

1. The great joie, which arises in the Evangelical Church.

1. Because they have gotten an Evangelical head. Verse 11. 2. Because the City
of Rome is destroyed, and Germany is fallen away from the Papal State. verse
13. 3. Because the Turkish Empire is com to an end. Verse 14. 4. Because the Son
of God has taken possession of the Kingdoms of this world, and uses his great
power, and reigns. verse 15, 16, 17.
This joie is also described in the 19. chapter, verse 17.

And upon this joie did David in the spirit reflect.

In the 93. Psalm. The Lord reigns, and is clothed with Majesty, etc.

In the 97. Psalm. The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice.

And in the 99. Psalm. The Lord reigns, be the people never so impatient.

2. The wrath of the Heathen: That is, the fury and rage of the Papists;
against these the Lord rises, because the day of his wrath is com; utterly
cutting them off, and destroying them, verse 18.

This Act is with a double sign confirmed.

1. The Temple of God is opened, and there was seen in his Temple, the ark of
his Testament.

2. There were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an Earthquake, and
great hail. verse 19.

The contents of these words are described more at large in the ninteenth and
twentieth chapters; where the Son of God, and with him the whole Armies which
were in heaven do appear, sitting upon white horses, chap. 19. v. 11. 14. Where
also the Beast and the Kings of the earth, and their Armies are gathered
together to make war, verse 19. And are overcom and utterly destroyed, verse 20,
21.

3. The time of the dead to be judged, and to give reward unto the Prophets
and Saints, etc.

This also is rehearsed in the twentieth chapter, verse 4, 5, 6. But because it is
there (according to the common opinion, as darkly set down as here, and the Son
of God himself speaking of this time in the tenth chapter does call it verse 7.
the Mystery of God; And also what the seven thunders have spoken of this
Kingdom, cannot be written; we will herein acquiesce, and proceed herein to
the sixteenth chapter.

CHAP. XVI.
LIke as in the second part of the Revelation of St John, by the seven
Trumpeting Angels, seven Judgments are described, which should com upon the
Roman Empire in the second period; So also here in the third part are set down
seven plagues, which by the seven vials should be poured out over the same.

Where the seventh Judgment, and the seventh Vial, at the end of the one
thousand two hundred sixty years, do concur in the one thousand six hundred
fifty fifth year of our Lord, and fill up the wrath of God. Revelations chap.
11. verse 18. and chap. 15. verse 1.

The seven judgments com upon the Political State, and show forth the fall
thereof; but the seven Vials are poured out, over both the Political and
Ecclesiastical State, and describe their punishments. Those begin in the year
three hundred ninety five. But these begin under the sixth Judgment, a little
before the total ruin.

But the seven plagues proceed from the Lord, who has a cup in his hand, full
mixed with red wine, who hitherto to has poured out of the same upon his little
flock; But now the ungodlie shall drink the dregs thereof, and suck them out.
Psalm. 75. verse 9, 10.

The seven Angels having the seven plagues, com out of the Temple of the
Tabernacle of the Testimony of Heaven, Revelations chap. 15. verse 5, 6. that
is, from the seat and habitation of God.

And one of the four Beasts (that is, the first Beast, the Lion of the tribe of
Judah) gave unto the seven Angels, seven golden Vials full of the wrath of God.
verse 7.

The Angels receiv commandment from God, to pour out the seven Vials of the
wrath of God, chapter 16. verse 1.

Upon the Earth* that is, upon the inhabitants of the earth, who rejoice over
the victory of the Beast, chapter 11. verse 10. To whom the Devil is com down.
Chapter 12. verse 12. Nay upon the whole world, which wandered after the Beast,
and worshipped the Dragon with the Beast, chapter 13. v. 4. So that by the word
Earth is understood the whole extent, and latitude of the Roman Popish Empire.

The Angels obeie God's Commandment, and pour out their Vials.

First Upon the Earth. Secondly, upon the Sea. Thirdly, upon the rivers and
fountains. Fourthly, upon the Sun. Fifthly, upon the seat of the Beast. Sixthly
upon Euphrates. Seventhly, upon the Aer.

Verse 1. The first Angel went, and poured out his Vial upon the Earth, and
there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the Mark of the
Beast, and upon them, which worshipped his Image.

By the Earth here is understood the whole extent, and latitude of the Roman
Empire, as in the first verse. But there is reflection made upon Statum
tranquillum, the peaceable condition in the Roman Empire, and upon the Beast
coming up out of the Earth, Revel. 13. verse 11.

This Beast is the Pope, and his Clergy, the Ecclesiastical State and
Government in the Papacy, which did not break out by wars, or outward power
and might, like unto the Beast with ten horns, but crept in by little and
little, softly and quietly, even as the grass and the trees use to grow up of
the ground.

Upon this earthly Beast was the first Vial of the wrath of God, in a time of
Peace, poured out by the Reformation of Popery. Now since those who are true
Professors of the Gospel, do vehemently oppose, and contradict the Papists, and
reprove them for their shameful conversation, falls doctrine, and abominable
Idolatry; thence does arise in those that adhere and stand firm to Popery

A noisome and grievous sore, that is, a fierce anger, hatred, wrath, and
enmity against the Evangelical Professors, especially, seeing they are not
able to overcom, and destroy them by force and might, nor to persuade and
seduce them to Popery again, by fair and sweet words.

Verse 3. The second Angel poured out his Vial upon the Sea, and it became as
the blood of a dead man, and every living soul died in the Sea.

By the Sea, the Beast with ten horns is here pointed at, which rises up out
of the Sea, chapter 13. verse 1. And upon Statum in Imperio Romano turbatum.
Whereby is signified, that the second Vial shall beee poured out, over the
Political State in the Roman Empire, and the Government, and formae rerum
publicarum tam in universali quam particulari, shall be disturbed, and
overthrown. How by these wars in Germany the wrath of God has been poured
out, and that this has been accomplished, is sufficiently known to the world,
and every rational man can make the application. The Status Ratio, or reason
of State which has been set up, and the shameful abuse of it has no small
share therein, whereof a State's-man writes thus: Justitia cum esse desiit in
mundo, successit Status ratio calamitatum mare.

The blood of a dead man intimates the horrible effusions of blood, and how
every living soul died in the Sea, is evident in the eyes of all men.

Every living soul: that is, all sorts of Nations, people, and tongues, that
in this raging Sea, and floods of water, during this war were engaged; as also
all sorts of people in all the Provinces of the Roman Empire, which are
emptied of men and cattle. In this signification the word all is used, Exodus
9. verse 6. where it is rendered all the Cattle of the Egyptians.

Verse 4. And the third Angel poured out his Vial upon the rivers and fountains
of water, and they became blood.

Frequens est sacris Literis per flumina significare Imperia, quod and Graeci
Latinique faciunt. Hugo Grotius, in Annotatis, ad V. Testam. Esaiae. c. 11. v.
15.

The Roman Empire is elsewhere compared to a Beast with ten horns, to a City
with its streets: So likewise here to a Sea with it is rivers.

The rivers are the Kingdoms, which although they are not at this present
members of the Political State in the Roman Empire, yet they have their tie
and dependence upon the Popish Roman Empire: as Spain, France, England,
Poland, Hungary, etc. For the greatest Whore sit's upon many waters, Revel
chap. 17. verse 1. and reigns over the Kings of the earth, verse 18.

The fountains of water are the Kings, their Roial Council is Parlaments, and
other great and prime Lords in those Kingdoms, who are interessed in the
Government: How this Vial of the wrath of God has been poured out over great
Brittanie and the well thereof, and how the river and the head-Spring there
became blood, and does yet sprout out, is alas evident to all the world. And
although those who are the Fax and Clamor sive Tub^ in these proceedings, we
know not how to excuse; yet we must by virtue of this clear text, say with
the Angel: Lord thou art righteous, because thou have judged thus. How France
does feel the pouring out of the wrath of God out of this third Vial, and how
much more it will be sensible of it in time to com, time will discover.

The cause which the Angel makes mention of here, in the sixth verse, saying:
For they have shed the blood of the Saints and Prophets, and thou have given
them blood to drink, for they are worthy; concerns France more particularly,
because there was so much innocent Christian blood shed therein, in these
hundred years last past.

How the other Kingdoms in this Classis shall fare, time will show; chiefly
that whose head-spring did flow out the eighth of April, Anno one thousand six
hundred five. The Ecclips of the Sun, which on the seventh of April one
thousand six hundred fifty two, will darken the locum Hylegialem thereof
whereupon, within a short time it may stop happily the flowing out of the same,
and change it is river into blood.

Verse 7. And I heard another Angel out of the altar say, etc.

A voice is heard out of the Thysiasterion, or place of Sacrifices, where the
souls of them that were slain did lie, whereof we may read in the sixth
chapter, verse 9, 10. that they cry to the Lord for vengeance. The sens and
meaning of which words is this, that the Martyrs prais God for the hearing of
their prayers, and the execution of vengeance, applauding the Angel saying:
Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy Judgments.

Hence also may be concluded, that this vengeance shall then begin, when the
last war against the two Witnesses shall be finished, whereof has been spoken
in the 11. chap.

Verse 8. And the fourth Angel poured out his Vial upon the Sun, etc.

By the Sun all the Expositors commonly understand the Sun of righteousness.
Mal. 4. verse 2. Jesus Christ, wherewith the Woman is clothed, Revel. chap. 12.
verse 1. But this is repugnant to the scope and intention of these plagues,
which are poured all over the earth, that is upon the Systema mundi Papistici,
over the Popish world, which is opposed to the Church-Heaven of the faithful
Children of God, wherein the Lord Jesus is the Head. Therefore we must seek
this Sun in the popish Heaven, and search, what in the Revelation of John is
represented by the Sun in other places.

The Sun became black, as a sackcloth of hair, Revelations 6. verse 12. whereby
the ruin of the Imperial dignity in the Heathenish Church-heaven, which
happened in the time of Constantine the great, is intimated.

The third part of the Sun was smitten, according to the prophecy of the
fourth Trumpet. Chapter 8. verse 12. That is: The small remainder of the
greatness, and brightness of the old Roman Empire shall wholly be abolished,
and pass away.

An Angel did stand in the Sun. Revelations 19. verse 17. That is, a great
Potentate, an Evangelical valiant Prince gathered together a great Army
against the Papists.

The City has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it, chap.
21. verse 23. That is: has no need of any Temporal Potentate to govern it.

If we compare these texts with the Sun, upon which the Angel pours out the
fourth Vial; we find that thereby a great and high head of the State is
signified, who in Systemate Mundi Papistici does uphold all, and by his
splendour and government gives strength unto all; like as the Sun Systemate
Mundi Physico by it is light and motion, does guide and move the forces of
nature.

And power was given unto him to scorch men with fire; And men were scorched
with great heat, etc.

When the Head, which has been a mighty support hitherto to the Papal State,
shall lie down and rest; then the fire of God's wrath will extremely scorch the
Papists. The Lord will make them like a fiery oven, Psalm. 21. verse 9. But for
all this they will not amend, nor repent, and give God the glory, but rather
continue in blaspheming the name of God, and grow more and more obstinate.

Verse 10. And the fifth Angel poured out his Vial upon the seat of the Beast,
and his Kingdom was full of darkness.

As Soon as the Beast with ten horns was risen up out of the Sea, Revelations
13. verse 1. the Dragon immediately gave him his power, and his seat, and City
of residence, the City of Rome.

Which the Beast has possessed hitherto, without being disturbed from thence,
and reigned over the Kings of the earth, chapter 17. verse 18. Now the Angel
pours out the fifth Vial of the wrath of God upon this seat, the City of
Rome, as mention has been made hereof above, in the 11th. chap. verse 13. that
after the two Witnesses were ascended up, there was a great Earthquake, and
the tenth part of the City fell, and was destroyed.

And the Kingdom was full of darkness, etc.

By the destruction of the City of Rome, shall the Government and power of the
Pope, which hitherto he has used, be made extremely void, and all his
dispatches, or commissions suspended. But the Papacy shall not yet by this
means be utterly dissolved, and taken away. For this does follow afterward,
at the pouring out of the seventh Vial, in the last war, in a place called in
the Hebrew tongue Armageddon. verse 16. Whereof i^ spoken more at large in the
19. chapter verse 17. until the 21. by this plague the Papists are yet more
embittered, and more and more hardened.

Verse 12. And the sixth Angel poured out his Vial upon the great river
Euphrates, and the water thereof was dried up. etc.

By Euphrates are understood the Nations which border thereupon, that is, the
Turks. But by the drying up of the water is meant, the ruin and overthrow of
those Nations, as it is evident out of the Prophets, as Isaiah chapter 19. verse
5. chap. 44 verse 27. Jeremiah chap. 48. verse 34. chap. 50. verse 38. chap. 51.
verse 36. Ezekiel chap. 30. verse 12. chap. 31. verse 4.

The Application of this text to the ruin of the Turkish Empire, does agree
with the eleventh chap. of Isa. verse 13. 14. whereupon soon follows the
destruction of the City of Rome.

The second Woe; that is, the Turkish Empire is past:

Moreover, the drying up of Euphrates is a preparation for the great work,
which shall be performed at the pouring out of the seventh Vial.

For as in times of old the red Sea was divided, to make a dry way for the
Children of Israel, when at their going out of Egypt they were pursued by
Pharaoh; to the end that they might pass thorough safe, and Pharaoh should be
drowned. Exodus 14. verse 12. until the twenty ninth. And as God did dry up
the river of Jordan, and made a way thorough it, so that Israel could go
through it on dry Land, and enter into the promised Land; so is here Euphrates
spiritually dried up, and the Turkish Empire ruined.

That the way of the Kings of the East might be prepared.

By this the conversion of the Jews is intimated; which immediately after the
destruction of the City of Rome shall be advanced; as also may be seen by
the 19. chapter, verse 6, 7. whereunto may be referred what Isaiah writes:
chapter 14. verse 10. until the sixteenth. Zach. chap. 10. verse 11. 4. Esr.
chap. 13. verse 47.

Hereupon follows the pouring out of the seventh and last Vial of the wrath
of God, wherewith also the seventh Angel sounds, and the seventh plague, and
the third and last Woe over the Papacy of Rome, and the fourth Monarchy does
take effect, bringing with it the total ruin and destruction thereof.

The preparations of this are described before hand thus:

Verse 13. And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs, com out of the mouth of
the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false
Prophet.

The Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet are three companions, and
fellow-Commoners, who, from the beginning of the demutation (as it appears by
the thirteenth chapter) have stuck close one to another, and have been equally
honored and worshipped by those that were under their power: Now at the end of
their reign they also agree, and need requiring it, they send their Ambassadors
and Agents abroad, unclean talkative Spirits, Spirits of Devils, working
Miracles, etc.

That is, when the City of Rome shall be destroyed, and the Papal seat
overthrown, the Turkish Empire ruined, and the Jews converted unto Christ; The
Devil, the Roman Papacy, and the whole Clergy shall not be able to conclude
any thing else, but that their end is now at hand, and that they will be
utterly destroyed: Therefore they try their utmost endevors, and call together
the best men of their orders, and such as are most fit for this work, chiefly
those that have made profession in the eleventh Classis; these they send to the
Courts of all Catholic Potentates throughout the whole Roman Popish Empire,
persuading them, and the Professors of their Religion, to stir up the utmost of
their power, and to join and offer themselves together with others to the war,
against the Professors of the Gospel.

In that great day of God Almighty (at the pouring out of the seventh Vial.)

The time when Constantine the great destroyed the Empire of the Dragon, and
overthrew the Dragon with the heathenish worship of the same, is called, the
great day of his wrath, Rev. c. 6. v. 17.

But the time here, when the Beast and the false Prophet shall be cast into the
lake of fire and brimstone, and the Dragon shall be shut up in the bottomless
pit, is called: That great day of God Almighty: Above in the 11. chapter v. 18.
at the sound of the Trumpet of the seventh Angel, it is called the time of the
dead, that they should be judged, and to give a reward, etc. By the Prophets
in the Old Testament, and by Christ and the Apostles in the New Testament, it
is frequently called, that day.

But to show what properly is meant, and understood by this great day of God,
would require a large and particuliar exposition.

And because the Holy Scripture, especially the Revelation of St John, and the
Prophets do not agree with the common opinion, usual to prove, and to make out
at large at this time, is contrary to the scope and intention of this present
Treatise; Therefore it is is thought expedient to defer it till another time.

Verse 15. Behold, I com as a thief, Blessed is he that watches, and keeps
his garments, lest he walk naked and see his shame.

Here is declared the sudden and unexspected pouring out of the seventh Vial
and plague, which unawares, and suddenly shall light upon the Papal State.
Therefore the Son of God himself does exhort all men to watch, and to stand
continually in readiness by serious repentance, and a godly conversation.

And he gathered them together into a place, called in the Hebrew tongue,
Armageddon.

In these words is described the place, in which the Papists shall have the
Rendez vous of their Armies, which they shall have gathered against the
Professors of the Gospel: The place is called Harmageddon, Mountain of
Lamentations; whereby is intimated the place, where King Josiah fought a battle
unhappily, where he was slain. 2 Chronicles. chapter 35. verse 24, 25. For which the
Jews made many and great lamentations, and at last it became a custom, that
when they would mourn for some extraordinary sad accident, they used to make
mention of this defeat given at Megiddo.

Upon this lamentation of the Jews, and Custom does St John here point, showing
thereby, that the Papists will lament and mourn over the issue of this war, as
the Jews did mourn for the death of King Josiah, and the great overthrow they
received at Megiddo.

Verse 17. And the seventh Angel poured out his Vial into the Aer.

The aforegoing Vials have been poured out upon particular places.

The first upon the Ecclesiastical State and Popish Religion in common.

The second upon the Political State, by the means of this Germane war.

The third upon the particular Popish Kingdoms, and their Heads.

The fourth upon an High-head, a strong pillar of the Papacy.

The fifth upon the City of Rome.

The sixth upon the Turkish Empire, which keep's a great part of the old Roman
Empire in subjection, and as an open Antichrist, sit's in the seat of the
Dragon.

Now follows the seventh Vial, which is poured out upon the Aer: And as the
Aer does contein all things, so likewise this pouring out is universal, and
does reach the whole Papacy; nay, it does take hold also of the Dragon and his
Spirits, because the said Dragon (as heretofore has been said) has given up to
the Beast his seat, his Army, and great power, and has cooperated in this
second Period, and together with the Beast caused himself to be worshipped.

The Dragon is the Devil, and the Prince of the power of the Aer, Ephesians 2.
verse 2. with the wicked spirits under the heaven. Ephesians. chapter 6. verse 12. In
the eighth chapter of Matthew verse 29. these spirits do expostulate with the
Lord Jesus, saying: What have we to do with thee? art thou com hither to
torment us before the time? At the pouring out of this Vial upon the Aer no
expostulation will serve tnrn, for the time is at hand, and shall be
accomplished, what the Son of God says, Matthew 24. verse 29. (...). The
mighty Host of Devils, which dwell under the Heaven in the Aer, shall be
moved with a terrible nois and tumult. Then their torments shall begin, when
they shall be cast down from the aer, and their Head the Dragon shall be shut
up in the bottomless pit, as beneath in Revelations chapter 20. verse 1, 2, 3.
at the issue of this war may be seen.

And there came a great voice out of the Temple of Heaven from the throne,
saying: It is don.

Here sit's the Ancient of days upon the fiery flaming seat, Daniel chap. 7.
v. 9. and pronounces the sentence against the fourth Beast, and because the
measure is full, and the determined time over him is run to an end, he break's
the rod, and denounces the irrevocable judgment, saying:

It is don: The Beast shall be slain, and be cast into the burning flame, as
in the said place follows, Dan. 7. ver. 11.

Verse 18. And there were voices and thunders, and lightnings, and there was a
great Earthquake, such as was not, since men were upon the earth, so mighty
an Earth quake and so great.

Now begins the Execution:

Upon the Devil and his whole Army:

Upon his Vicar and what depends on him.

Upon the whole Roman Papacy, and it is Kingdoms.

Now Heaven and earth are shaken for the second time, and the mighty Kingdoms
of the Heathen are destroyed, Hagg. chapter 2. verse 22, 23.

In the Aer are heard dreadful thunders, and lightnings, terrible voices,
lamenting and crying of the Devils.

Upon the earth will be nothing but war, and rumor of wars; In all parts shall
be heard tumults, seditions, insurrections, terrible distractions, and
grievous bloodsheds; such as never were since the beginning of the world to
this time, nor ever were heard of, Daniel chapter 12. verse 1. Matthew 24. v. 21.

Verse 19. And the great City was divided into three parts.

By the great City is understood, either the City of Rome, as the seat and
City of residence for the Beast and his rider:

Or the whole Papal State, the City together with the streets.

The City of Rome was already by the fifth Vial darkened, and ruined. Wherefore
it is spoken here of the whole Papacy, which is divided into three parts:

By the accomplishment of these words it will appear, that the Pope does not
wear his triple Crown in vain, for under the same do sit and reign: 1. The
Dragon. 2. The Beast. 3. The false Prophet.


Under the Command of these three Generals, shall on the Popish side the battle
be set in arraie* and led forth. For these three, ea^h of them have raised
their men severally. ver. 13. 14.

They stand all three in battel-arraie, and are ready to fall on.

But what success have they? The Beast is taken, and with him the false Prophet,
and both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone,
Revelations chapter 19. verse 20, 21. But the Generalissimus, the Dragon is laid
hold on, and cast into the bottomless pit, and shut up. Chap. verse 1, 2, 3.

And the Cities of the Nations fell.

The Heathenish life and conversation, the Heathenish Idolatry, Sodomie, and
other Heathenish sins, and abominations, which hitherto have been practiced in
the Popish State are at once altogether abolished and utterly removed, as that
nothing more is heard thereof.

And great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of
the wine of the fierceness of his wrath.

God sat still hitherto, and seemed, as if he knew nothing of the Beast's
blaspheming and persecution. But when the determined time of the forty two
months were exspired, he remember's Babylon, fill's unto her the cup of the
wine of the fierceness of his wrath, and punishing her, he does reward her
according to her deserving.

Verse 20. And every Island fled away, and the Mountains were not found:

All whatsoever had any relation or dependence on the Papacy, even the
remotest pleces, and all whatsoever was highly exalted therein, is not seen any
more, whereby the total ruin and destruction of the Papacy is signified.

Verse 21. And there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone
about the weight of a talent, and men blasphemed God, because of the plague of
the hail; for the plague thereof was exceeding great.

By the great hailstones are understood the great punishments of God's wrath,
and by the words (about the weight of a talent) are meant the heaviest and most
dreadful Judgments; the weight of a talent being the heaviest and greatest
weight; yet all this notwithstanding men will not know the righteous judgment
of God, but by their blasphemies of the name of God are cast into everlasting
perdition.

Hitherto the sixteenth Chapter.

AGainst this plain and clear exposition, many will have different
apprehensions, and esteem these things impertinent, and incredible Paradoxes.

To these is opposed

1. That the clear text not being forced, but as it is literally, or
figuratively referred to the times, so it has been explained.

2. That the figures and Images, which make this work difficult and dark, are
cleared out of other places of the Revelation, or out of the Old Testament,
especially the Prophets, from whom the whole Revelation of St John is taken;
and are applied to the civil and Ecclesiastical State, as the text and the time
does require.

3. That what is past, or is now in full action, cannot be overthrown by a
bare contradiction, or doubt; but search should be made in the Acts of the
Roman Empire, to see what things may be more sutably applied another way.
Yet so, that the Method and Harmony may not be disturbed, or rather that a
better way may be showed and offered.

4. That the Text and Method does show what is shortly to be exspected,
especially, the end of the determined time by God over the fourth Monarchy,
wherein the Roman Papacy shall blaspheme God, and make war against the
Saints, for the space of forty two months, that is, one thousand two hundred
sixty years.

Hereupon arises the greatest and principal scruple or doubt.

Whether the Epoch, or the beginning of the Apocalyptical one thousand two
hundred sixty years be rightly referred to the three hundred ninety fifth
year of our Lord?

In the Prophetical keie, certain characters and marks have been set down and
applied, whereby the certainty does appear, which we shall here repeat, and
confirm with more proofs.

As,

1. First, because the Epoch of the one thousand two hundred ninety years of
the Prophet Daniel, chapter 12. verse 11. is exactly incident into the three
hundred sixty fifth year, it follows that the one thousand two hundred
sixty years must com thirty years later, and so begin Anno three hundred
ninety five, because they end together.

2. Secondly, because by the division of the old Roman Empire into two parts,
in the three hundred ninety fifth year, the Roman Eagle got two wings, and
because in the very same year the Septentrional Barbarous Nations invaded the
Roman Empire; whereby the Woman (the Christian Church) fled into the
Wilderness, wherein she should be preserved and nourished, during the space
of one thousand two hundred sixty years, or 3 times, chap. 12. verse 6. till
the 14.

3. Thirdly, Because with the beginning of the invasion of these Barbarous
Nations in the three hundred ninety fifth year, the treading under foot of the
holy City begun, which should continue forty and two months. Revelations
11. verse 2.

4. Fourthly, because by this invasion, the Beast with ten horns rose up out of
the Sea: That is: because by this war, which began in the three hundred ninety
fifth year, the Roman Empire was by little and little so divided, that in the
four hundred third year already some horns, and in the four hundred fifty
fifth year fully ten horns, or Kingdoms appeared in it.

5. All the Historians generally do agree, that the ruin of the Roman Empire
did begin in the three hundred ninety fifth year, as some of them were quoted
in Clavi Apocalypt. Now both the ancient and later Teachers of the Church, do
conclude by the words of the Apostle Paul, 2 Thessalonians 2. verse 6, 7, 8.
That the Antichrist should then com, when the Roman Empire should begin to
fall. As we read in Tertulliano in Apologetico c. 32. Item de resurrect.
carnis. Irenaeo lib. 5. adversus Haereses. Hieronymo quaest. 2. ad Algasiam.
Chrysostom. Homil. 4. in These. 2. Hence it is, that Joannes Cluverius in
Comentario posthumo in Apol. Tom. 111. writes thus: Totius Negotii cardo
versatur in inveniendo exordio Antichristi; quod in ruinam Imperii Romani
incidere, ostendimus.

6. The Beast with two horns, the Antichristian Pope of Rome came out of the
Earth quietly, about the time of the three hundred ninety fifth year,
Revelations 13. verse 11. when he arrogated unto himself the Primacie and
preeminencie, over the Ecclesiastical and civil State. Before the Nicene Synod
which was held in three hundred twenty fifth year of our Lord, the
preeminencie of the Bishop of Rome over other Churches was not known. Wherefore
Aeneas Sylvius in Epistola 288. writes. Ante Nicaenum Concilium quisque sibi
vivebat, and ad Romanam sedem parvus habebatur respectus. Besides, the
succeeding Popes, Liberius I. Felix II. and Damasus did not seek any such
matter.

Nay, in the three hundred ninetieth year, in the third Council of Carthage,
Can. 26. this Canon was made: Ut primae sedis Episcopus non appelletur Princeps
Sacerdotum aut summus Sacerdos, aut aliquid hujusmodi, sed tantum primae sedis
Episcopus. Tom. Council. p. 544.

Innocent the first, who in the four hundred second year of our Lord, succeeded
Anastasius at Rome, was the first, that made an Act, that the Heretics should
be compelled to embrace the Catholic faith: And has also attributed unto
himself Authority and power, not only over the common people; but also over
the Highest Civil Authority in Christendom, in that he excommunicated Arcadius
the Emperor at Constantinople, when he removed Chrysostom from his function.

In like manner he did vehemently bestir himself to obtain the Primacie for
the Roman Church, and especially he endeavored to get the Government of the
Bishops, and Churches in Africa. The like was practiced also by Zosimus.
Bonifacius 1. Celestine 1. whereof Daniel Paraeus in Medulla Hist. Eccles.
universali page 200. Whence it is that Socrates lib. 7. Hist. Eccles. cap. 3.
where relating, how in the time of Celistine the 1. it fared with the
Novatians, he adds these words: Episcopatus Romanus non aliter atque
Alexandrinus, quasi extra Sacerdotii fines egressus, ad secularem Principatum
jam ante delapsus erat.

In like manner Sericius, who after Damasus from the three hundred eighty
fifth, until the three hundred ninety eighth year was Bishop of Rome, was the
first, who held the Priests, who companied with their married wives, incapable
of the Ministry.

As we read hereof in his first Epistle, chap. 7. and Epist. 4. c. 6. Tom. 1.
Council. page 530. 534. In Jure Canonico Distin. 82. And in concilio
Taurinatensi in the three hundred ninety seventh year of our Lord was
determined. chap. 7. qui in Ministerio genuerunt filios, ne ad majores gradus
ordinum permittantur, Synodi decrevit autoritas.

In Concilio Carthaginensi in the three hundred ninety eighth year sub
Anastasio was concluded on. Cap. 3.

Placuit Episcopos, and Presbyteros, and Diaconos, secundum propria priora vel
prima statuta etiam ab uxoribus continere. Quod nisi fecerint, ab Ecclesiastico
removeantur officio. Tom. 1. Council. p. 517. Vid. Distinct. 84. cap. 3, 4, 5.

7. In the eleventh chapter we have seen, that the two Witnesses at the end of
the one thousand two hundred sixty years shall be fought against, overcom and
killed: which as has been proved above; is hitherto com to pass.

The last Act is now shortly to be exspected in the Province of Silesia.
Whether now this be performed in this, or in the next following year,
thereupon their raising again will follow, after 3 years.

And because the seventh Trumpet shall sound in the one thousand six hundred
fifty fifth year, and between it and the raising again of the two Witnesses,
two accidents happen, as

1. The destruction of the City of Rome.

2. And the ending of the second Woe: therefore the two Witnesses may well be
raised again, before the one thousand six hundred fifty fifth year shall begin.

For Modicum nec Praetor curat nec Propheta.

Unto this may also be added these following reasons as secondarie Arguments.

1. The Prophecy of the Apostle Peter, whereof Augustine. lib. 18. c. 53. and
54. de Civit. Dei. writes:

That the Gentiles in his time did report, that the Apostle Peter had thought
that the Christian Religion should continue but three hundred sixty five
years: Which Augustine holds to be a Fiction, wherewith the Heathen would
cast a reproach upon the Christian Religion. But if this be well considered, it
may well prove so indeed, that Peter did declare, that the Christian Religion,
should, for three hundred sixty five years without interruption, be
propagated until the three hundred ninety fifth year of our Lord, in which
the Antichrist should com, who should suppress the same.

For in the thirtieth year of his age was the Son of God baptized, whereon he
entered into the Ministry, and began to preach: These thirty years being
added unto the three hundred sixty five years, make up the three hundred
ninety fifth year, in which the Antichrist came forth, the holy City was
trodden under foot, the two Witnesses were clothed with sackcloth, and the
woman (the Church) fled into the Wilderness.

2. That the six thousand years from the Creation of the world do exspire with
the one thousand six hundred fifty fifth year, as was made apparent in Clavi
Apocalypt.

3. That also the number of years, which were from the beginning of the world
until the deluge: and in the time of the New Testament since the Birth of our
Lord, reckoned thus far do end alike. So as there the wicked world was
punished, and cut off by the Deluge, so here the enemies of the Church shall
be destroyed with fire and brimstone, Revelations 19. verse 20. Dan. 7. verse 11.

4. The Roman Monarchy began at that time, when the Eccentricitas Solis was
the greatest; and whereby some Astrologers conclude cum Georgio Joachimo
Rhetico, that the same shall decaie and end, when the said Eccentricitas shall
be least. And because some Astronomers do refer that to the one thousand six
hundred fifty third year, which com's very nigh to our term, I thought good
to make here mention of it, leaving vim probandi to the trial of the Reader.
Dolingius conclude's in suo Antichristo Tymbogeronte very well out of the
Prophet Daniel: chapter 6. verse 27. that by this revolution the Saints of the
most High shall possess the Kingdom.

5. Two Prophesies of the Turks, concerning the Turkish Empire, according to
which this present young Turkish Emperor is the last, and so he under whom the
Turkish Empire shall have it is final period.

Of the first Prophecy does Franciscus Sansoninus make mention in a little
book, which he Anno 1570. published in Print, wherein he made a collection of
some Prophesies, among which also this is set down, as Joannes Wolsius. Tom. 2.
lect. memor. p. 803. writes: That under the fifteenth Turkish Emperor, the
Turkish Empire shall have an end.

Antonius Torquatus Medec. D. Professor. Ferrariensis, and Astrologus insignis
makes also mention hereof among his Prophesies, which he adscribed to
Matthias, King of Hungaria, in the one thousand four hundred eightieth year,
when he writes thus:

The Ottoman house shall in 13. 14. or 15. heads (Wolfius Tom. 2. page 896.
calls it, ramum, that is, branch or bough:) diminish and decaie, and shall
not go beyond that number; For after this shall he by a terrible chance be
defeated and cut off: After this Turkish Emperor's death there shall arise
among their Princes, and those that relate to the Ottoman Family such a
dissension, and combustion, that they shall pitifully cut one another's
throats, and afterward be horribly spoiled, and destroyed by foreign
Nations, etc.

This number of 15 heads must be computed from the first Ottoman, not
according to the heads of the Turkish Emperors, who have reigned, for there are
a great many more of them, but according to the members, or branches of the
Ottoman Family. Ottomannus, or Ozman Gazi is the root and Origin of this
house, and so stipes communis. He was by the King of Persia established in the
possession of Carmania, and dignified with the roial title.

From this did spring

1. Urchan Gasi, who died in the one thousand three hundred fiftieth year.

2. Murat, who took Adrianople, in the one thousand three hundred sixtieth
year: and died Anno 1390.

3. Bajaze^ 1. whom Tamerlan carried away prisoner.

4. Solomon 1. otherwise called Calepinus: After him reigned his two brothers,
namely Musa who was killed by Mahomet. Mahomet 1. died Anno 1422. These three
Brothers belong to one Member, or branch, nay, some do not compute Solomon and
Musa at all, because Solomon was Musa, and Musa by Mahomet suddenly dispossessed
of the Imperial Government.

5. Murat 2d died Anno 1450.

6. Mahomet 2d who took Constantinople Anno 1453, and died 1481.

7. Bajazet 2d was poisoned by his son Selim, in the one thousand five hundred
twelfth year.

8. Selim 1. died Anno 1520.

9. Solomon 2d died at Ziget, in Hungaria, in the one thousand five hundred
sixty six year.

10. Selim 2d died Anno 1575.

11. Murat. 3d born of a Jewish woman Solomon Swiccard in his Itinerarie
relates, died Anno 1595.

12. Mahomet 3d died Anno 1603.

13. Achmet 1. died Anno 1617.

Whereupon was Mustaff, brother of this Achmet, chosen Anno 1617. And because
he was found to be of so soft a disposition, that he was unfit to govern,
the Mufties and the principal Bassas partly by fair means, and partly by
threatenings, wrought so far with him, that he resigned the Empire.

14. These set up Osman or Ottoman. 2d the Son of Achmet. This same caused not
Mustaff to be strangled, as it is usual; but only restrained him. Wherefore,
when Anno 1622. this Osman was in a tumult thrust out of the Imperial Seat, and
strangled; and the Janissaries found this Mustaff under restraint, it happened
that they exalted him the second time unto the Imperial Crown. But because he
liked not the the emploiment, he resigned it to Osman his brother. So that
Murath the second Son of Achmet came to the Imperial dignity Anno 1622, and
died in the beginning of the one thousand six hundred fortieth year.

To him succeeded Ibrahim the third son of Achmet, the 20th of February 1640.
He and his brother Osman had the same misfortune, they were both strangled
with three of his Sultanaes in Sept. Anno 1648. by the rebellious Janissaries.

These three brothers, Sons of Achmet belong to one branch.

15. Achmet second Son of Ibrahim, an uncircumcised child of six years of age,
was set upon the Imperial Seat, in Sept: 1648. and made the Head over many
barbarous Nations, and will be (if this Prophecy hold's) the last Emperor of
the Ottoman Government.

The second Prophecy is described by Bartholomew Georgieviez in his Epitome,
and after him by Philippus Lonicerus in his Turkish Chronicl. lib. 3. in the
beginning, page 204. As also by Adam Nachen Moser in Prognostico Theolog. lib.
3. page 65. seqq. Wolfius Tom. 2. lect. mem. page 293. Christoph. Besoldus in
consider. legis Sectae Sarac. page 47. which is to this effect.

Our (Turkish) Emperor shall com, and take from a Heathenish (so they call the
Christians) Emperor, King, or Prince, his Kingdom, he will bring under his
power, and conquer a red Apple.

In case the Christians in the seventh year shall not draw their swords, he
shall reign over them twelv years, build houses, plant Vineyards, hedge in
gardens, beget children. But after twelv years, when he has had the red apple
under his power, the Christians shall draw their swords, and put themselves into
a posture of defense, and put the Turk to flight.

By the red Apple is understood the Oriental, or Constantinopolitan Empire,
because the occidental was long before exspired. By the twelv years are
signified twelv times under twelv Turkish heads, who should reign after the
taking of Constantinople. Now Constantinople was taken in the one thousand four
hundred fifty third year by Mahomet the second: so that the twelv years, or
times are computed in manner following:

The first under Mahomet the second until 1483.

The second under Bajazet the second until 1512.

The third under Selim the first until 1520.

The fourth under Solomon the second until 1566.

The fifth under Selim the second nntil 1575.

The sixth under Murat the third until 1595.

The seventh under Mahomet the third until 1603.

The eighth under Achmet the first, until 1617.

The ninth under Osman the second, until Zomaii 1622.

The tenth under Murat the fourth, until 1640.

The eleventh under Ibrahim, until 1648.

The twelfth under Achmet the second the present Emperor until the end.

By the words in case the Christians in the seventh year shall not draw their
swords, etc. is signified, that under the seventh Emperor, namely Mahomet the
third, who Anno 1595. came to the Imperial Crown, the Turks shall be in
danger. And in case the Christians should not then take their opportunity, to
emploie their strength; the Turkish Empire should attein unto the twelfth time.
But what good success the Christians had during the reign of this Mahomet the
third, may be seen in the Hungarian Chronicles of Jerome Ortelius; where it
appears that Anno 1595 Sigismund Bathori Prince of Transylvania, did defeat
Ferrat Bassa in the Months of March, and May, twice one after another, as
also Sinan Bassa in the month of September, whom, when in the Month of
October he returned with great power, he put to flight, and pursued most
fiercely, and took several strong holds from him.

The 26th of October, 1596. the Christians also obtained at first the victory
near Erla; where the Turkish Emperor, and Ibrahim Bassa were put to flight, and
if the Christians had not neglected their opportunity, by plundering and
dividing the spoil, in the Turkish Camp; then this Prophecy might have been
accomplished. Wherefore it shall com to pass under this child, as being the
twelfth, whereof we shall know the certainty by the event.

Now seeing these two Prophesies may be very well applied to this purpose, I
could not but relate them here, especially, because the Turks do remember the
same very often, with great trouble and lamentations, and men of note do put
much weight upon them, as things of great moment. But we shall leav them for
what they are, because none can see upon what grounds, these and such like
Prophesies are built.

These are the motives and reasons, which lead to a conjecture, that the time
which God has determined, and indulged to the rage and fury of the enemies of
the Church, is now running to an end with the one thousand six hundred fifty
fifth year of our Lord.

Whereby it does evidently appear:

1. That the application of the Characters, at the beginning of the two numbers
of years (one thousand two hundred ninety and one thousand two hundred sixty,
is punctually and without any force incident to the three hundred sixty
fifth, and three hundred ninety fifth year of our Lord.

2. That the beginning of the one thousand two hundred ninety years cannot be
applied to any other year, neither before nor after, then the three hundred
sixty fifth year of our Lord, in which the foundation of the Temple at
Jerusalem was destroyed by God himself: As it appears in Clavi Apocalypt.

3. That when the Epoch of the one thousand two hundred ninety years is
referred to the three hundred sixty fifth year of our Lord, the one thousand
two hundred sixty years must of necessity begin from the one thousand three
hundred ninety fifth year, because both numbers must together run to an end, as
may be read in Daniel chap. 12. v. 7. and 11.

4. That the Characters and Arguments formerly alleged do sufficiently prove,
that the one thousand two hundred sixty years must begin in the three hundred
ninety fifth year.

5. That the Beast with ten horns is risen up from the three hundred ninety
fifth until the four hundred fifty fifth year. Because Anno 395. the first
division of the Roman Empire happened, whereby the Beast got two horns, and in
the year four hundred fifty five all the ten horns in the Beast appeared.

6. That in the Roman Histories, not any year betwixt the three hundred
ninety fifth, and four hundred fifty fifth year of our Lord can be found
out, where the Characters may be so punctually and suitably applied, as to the
three hundred ninety fifth year.

Wherefore we have good reason to stand to the three hundred ninety fifth
year, and to exspect the issue with the one thousand six hundred fifty fifth
year of our Lord; especially, because the killing of the two Witnesses, besides
all this, does eventually prove the thing.

The first Objection.
BUt if perhaps some body should still conceiv, notwithstanding the
forementioned grounds, whereby it is made out, that the numbers have their
accomplishment in the year one thousand six hundred fifty fifth, yet that we
ought not so precisely to set all our exspectation upon that year, him I shall
leav to his opinion. But wish him to consider withal

1. That the Angel Daniel, chap. 12. verse 7. held up his right hand, and his
left hand unto Heaven, and swore by him that lives for ever, that it shall be
for a time, times and a half, that is, one thousand two hundred sixty years.
And that from the abominable desolation of the Temple, till that time, there
shall be one thousand two hundred ninety years.

2. That the Son of God himself Revel. chap. 10. verse 5, 6. lifted up his hand
to Heaven, and swore by him that lives for ever and ever, who created Heaven
and the things that therein are, and the earth, and the things that therein
are, and the sea, and the things which are therein, that there shall be time
no longer. That is, there shall be no delaie, Luke 12. 45. Hebrews 10. 37. or
that any other time should com between but in the days of the voice of the
seventh Angel, when he shall sound the Trumpet, the Mystery of God should be
accomplished, as he has declared unto his Servants and Prophets.

These things says the Son of God, who has his eyes like unto a flame of
fire, Revel. chap. 2. verse 18. These things says he that is holy, he that
is true, chap. 3. verse 7. These things says the Amen, the faithful and true
witness, chap. 3. verse 14. Who would not then believ him? Seeing then,
according to God's eternal decree Antichrist shall rage no longer then 3 times,
or one thousand two hundred sixty years, and when these are exspired, that the
Mystery of God shall immediately be fulfilled, as the Angel and the Son of
God do testify with a great Oath: We have no reason to doubt of the event,
but good reason to look up, and lift up our heads, for our Redemption draws
nigh. Luke 21. verse 28.

The second Objection.
IT may be also objected, that such things ought not to be dived and searched
into, because they are mere Mysteries and hidden things, wherein a great many
by their extravagancies have lost themselves, insomuch, that even the greatest
Divines, and scholars are very wary and cautious how to meddle with the
Revelation, therefore that it is and should remain a Book sealed, till such
time that the accomplishment of things does reveal it; But especially it is to
be observed, what answer Christ returned to his Disciples upon their curious
question concerning the restoration of the Kingdom of Israel, Acts 1. verse 7.
when he said: It is not for you to know the times or seasons, which the Father
has put in his own power.

Whereupon we answer: that the Revelation of St John is indeed full of
Mysteries, which will remain Mysteries and hidden things, till the
accomplishment does discover, and reveal them to us, and till we by the
application of Histories, and events, see before our eyes the effect, and what
by this and that thing has been meant. But it does not follow therefore, that
the Revelation ought to be laid aside, and that we ought not at all to search
what has been already fulfilled, or is shortly to be exspected, chiefly
concerning the fulfilling of the determined time, when the Enemies of the
Church shall be destroyed, and the Church be brought to a quiet and peaceable
condition. Whereas Daniel did the like, and did observe by Books the number of
the years whereof the Lord spoke etc. Daniel 9. verse 2. And St John writes
concerning his Revelation, chapter 1. verse 3. Blessed is he that reads, and
they that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things, which are
written therein.

For the Revelation is a book of Memorable Acts. Wherein is foretold, how, and
what things shall befall to the Church of God, and to the Roman Empire, under
which the Church does subsist; Now many things have been already fulfilled in
the one thousand five hundred fifty years bypast; and if we compare the
Histories, and the things happened in the Roman Empire, with the Revelation; we
shall discover clearly, how far the accomplishment reaches, and what we may
exspect, ere long; so that the things represented are no more Mysteries, and
hidden things, but clear and accomplished Acts unto us. But he that forbeareth
to read this Revelation, and is not versed in the Old and New Roman Histories,
and knows not how to distinguish the times of the Revolutions and changes,
but confounds the Apocalyptical numbers, and does make many Epoches,
(whereas they comprehend nothing but relata and Correlata) or carelessly passes
by the application of the numbers as an hidden Mystery (which indeed is the
main keie of the Revelation:) To him must the Revelation needs be full of
Mysteries and obscurities, and remain a sealed and unopened Revelation.

But why many learned men of note (we do not speak of all) have been much
mistaken in their expositions; The causes amongst others have been these.

1. That the ancient Interpreters in the primitive times have applied to their
times, many things, which yet as then had no relation to them. The Modern
Interpreters do follow their steps, (not minding so much the History, as the
Authority of the Interpreters, whereby they lead themselves and others out of
the way.

2. Secondly, the Method and Harmony is not observed. In the Revelation all
things are set down in good order, what from time to time should com to pass,
the Synchronismes or concurrencies of times are set down, one after another,
and the Revolutions and changes in the Ecclesiastical and civil States, are
exactly and punctually distinguished; even as an excellent and well-versed
Historian is wont to do in the description of humane actions; but contrary to
all this the Interpreters do pervert, overturn, and disturb the Method, seek
and find out by-waies of error the things as relata belong to one and the same
time, they set down as following one another. What shall com to pass after the
fall of Babylon, they do place before it, oftentimes not knowing themselves,
where they stick, or how they shall wind themselves out.

3. Besides they mistake and confound the States one with another, not
observing where mention is made of the Ecclesiastical, or civil State; so that
many times they apply Monastical matters, and the actions of Antichrist, to
that which in the Revelation is spoken of the civil State. And hence it is,
that the more one does read Expositors, the more one is confounded.

But that therefore the Revelation should be a book shut up, is contrary to
the letter of the clear text; for, 1. The seven Epistles were never sealed. 2.
The Lamb opened the book sealed, Revel. chap. 6. and 8. 3. The third was a
little open book, chap. 10. verse 2. 8. 4. And in the end of the Revelation the
Son of God says to John: Seal not the sayings of the Prophecy of this book,
for the time is at hand. chap. 22. ver. 10.


And although the Prophet Daniel was commanded to close up, and seal the book
of his Prophecy, chap. 12. verse 4. 9. yet no longer till the time of the end;
for afterward the said Prophecy was unsealed by the Revelation of St John.
Therefore it is added: Man shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be
increased.

The answer our Savior Christ gave, Acts 1. verse 7. is very impertinently
applied, and objected to this purpose. For he speaks there of times and
seasons, that is, de tempore occasionato sive tempestivo, as Ausonius declares
it, when a good opportunity is presented, to go on in a business, as in the
Gospel of St John, chapter 2. verse 4. when Christ says, Mine hour is not yet
com; and yet nevertheless within a little while he does supply Wine, But here
we consider the time in general, which is determined upon the Blasphemies and
persecution of the Antichrist, and in what year it should begin or end, but we
do not compute the day or hour, wherein he shall be overthrown. Besides
Christ does speak of the times and seasons, which the Father has put in his
own power, and has not revealed: Here we consider the years which the Father
has not reserved as a secret to his own power, but revealed to us by his Son.

The third objection.
THe strongest and chiefest objection is: That in general all the Divines and
Statesmen write, and hold, that the fourth Monarchy, and Roman Papacy shall
continue until the end of the world, and shall be removed, and come to an end,
with the coming of Christ to the last Judgment.

Answer. The Revelation of St John does intimate no such thing, but
contradicts it plainly. For after the destruction of the City of Rome,
chapter 18. There was heard a great joie in heaven, chapter 19. verse first till
the ninth. The heaven is opened, and the Son of God, who chapter 6. verse 2. at
the opening of the first seal went forth conquering and to conquer upon a white
horse, presents himself here again upon a white horse as a Conqueror, etc. verse
11, 12, 15, 16. Whom the Armies which are in heaven follow upon white-horses,
clothed in fine linen, white and clean. verse 14. These are the Martyrs, to
every one of whom are given white robes, chapter 6. verse 11. Nay, These are
they which came out of the great tribulation, and have washed their robes,
chap. 7. verse 14. These are they that are called and chosen and faithful. Chap.
17. verse 14. Against these are gathered the Beast, and the Kings of the earth,
and their armies to make war against them.

The end and issue of this war is, that the Beast, and with him the false
Prophet (that is, the Roman Empire and Popedom) shall be taken, and both cast
alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone. chapter 19. verse 19, 20. But
the Dragon, as their General has quarters given him in this war, he is laid
hold on, and cast into the bottomless pit, and shut up, wherein he remain's
bound a thousand years, that he should deceiv the Nations no more, nor be
able to stir them up against the Church. Chapter 20. verse 1, 2, 3. In the mean
while the faithful Children of God have their rest. Hebr. 4. verse 1. like as
God did rest the seventh day from all his works, verse 4. But the last Judgment
and the end of the world is afterward described, chap. 20. verse 11. till the
15th.

Hereunto agrees the Prophecy of Daniel, chap. 2. verse 34, 35. where the
Image, which represents the four Monarchies is seen, so long, till the stone
smite's the Image upon his feet, (not at the beginning of the fourth Monarchy;
for then the feet and toes were not as yet, but at the end thereof) and break's
it to pieces. But the stone, that smite's the Image, becom's a great mountain
(after the breaking and grinding of the four Monarchies to dust; that is, a
Kingdom that shall break to pieces, and grind to dust all these Kingdoms,
which are represented by the great Image, verse 44, 45.

And in the 7th chapter verse 1. till the 8th, by the four Beasts are described
the four Monarchies, which Daniel beheld, verse 9. till the thrones were cast
down, as the words are in the Original.

For the ancient of days did sit, verse 9. not for the universal and last
judgment which has been committed unto the Son, John Chap. 5. v. 22. but for
the particular judgment over the enemies of the Church in the fourth Monarchy,
over the fourth Beast of the Roman Popedom, which Daniel beheld even till the
Beast was slain, and his body destroyed and given to the burning flame; and
the power of the other beasts came to an end, verse 11, 12. For a set time was
determined over them, how long each of them should last; The Saints shall be
given into the hands of the fourth Beast (so long as the Woman rides on the
Beast) until a time, and times and the dividing of time, verse 25. And when
these 3 times, Anno 1655* shall com to an end, the Judgment of the judgment of
the Ancient shall sit, and then his power is taken away, so that it wholly is
abolished, and come's to an end. Verse 26. But the world therewith is not
destroyed, but the Kingdom and dominion, and the greatness under the whole
Heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High, whose
Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obeie him.
Verse 27. compare verse 13, 14.

The words of St Paul, 2 These. chap. 2. verse 8. where he writes: And the Lord
shall destroy him with the brightness of his coming; are expounded in the
Revelations chap. 19. verse 11. till 21. But what may be the true meaning and
sens of these words, (...); I leav to the consideration of judicious Divines.
It seems, they do not speak of the universal and last Judgment, which St John
describes in his Revelation. chap. 20. verse 11, 12, 13, 14. Nay, the text does
not bear, that the two Acts in the said 19. chapter, verse 11. till 21. and
chapter 20. verse 11. till 15. shall be counted for one, or reduced together to
one and the same time; Because it appears that one thousand years are
interposed.

For the two great Guests, the Beast, and the false Prophet are one thousand
years before lodged in the Inn; in the Lake of fire burning with brimstone,
then the Host, the Devil come's, who after the one thousand years is
associated to them, at the end of the world. chapter 20. verse 4. Whereupon
immediately verse 11. the last Judgment is held.

We are here led into the Mysteries of God, into which we will not too much
presume, to penetrate, nor search too far into them; but we turn and address
our selves, both with ears and hearts to the Son of God, who stands at the
door, knocks and calls; If any man hear my voice and open the door, I will
com into him, and will sup with him, and he with me. To him that overcomes,
will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set
down with my Father in his throne. Revelations c. 3. verse 20, 21.

Blessed is now he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
Prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein, for the time is at
hand. Chap. 1. verse. 3.

Elessed is he that keeps the sayings of of the Poophesie of this book. c.
22. v. 7.

Nay, blessed are they, that do his Commandments, that they may have right to
the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the City. v. 14.

To him, which is, and which was, and which is to com, the Almighty be glory
and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. Revel. chap. 1. v. 6. 8.

A List of the things which are shortly to com to pass, collected out of the
XI. and XVI. Chapters of the REVELATION.
1. THe last Actus reformationis sive evacuationis of the Evangelical
Protestant Churches, which will appear in Silesia. chap. 11. v. 7. 2. The 3
years following thereon, when the dead bodies of the two Witnesses lie in the
street. v. 9. till 11. 3. The continuance of wars in those Kingdoms, wherein
the innocent blood of the Martyrs is avenged. chap. 16. v. 4. 4. The sudden
fall of the strong pillar of the Papacy. verse 8. 5. The exaltation of an
Evangelical Protestant head. chap. 11. v. 12. 6. A Reformation in Germany. v.
11. 12. 7. The destruction of the City of Rome. chap. 11. v. 13. c. 16. verse
10. 8. The end of the Turkish Empire. chap. 11. v. 14. c. 16. v. 12. 9. The
controversy of the Jews. c. 16. v. 12. 10. The great endevors of the Papists,
and gathering of all their utmost power. c. 16. verse 13. c. 19. v. 16. 11. The
ruin of the whole Papacy. chap. 16. verse 18. till the 21. c. 19. v. 20. 21.
12. The accomplishment of the Mystery of God. c. 10. v. 7. By which means 1.
The Devil is cast and shut up in the bottomless pit. chap. 20. v. 1, 2, 3. 2.
The Son of God takes the possession of the Kingdom, and reigns. chap. 11. v.
15. c. 11. v. 6. etc.

And the Church lives in peace and tranquillity.

FINIS.

