DIVINE CONTEMPLATIONS, NECESSARY FOR THESE TIMES.

BY H.I.

PSALM. 60. Ver. 1, 2. O Lord thou have cast us off, thou have broken us, thou
have been displeased, O turn thy self to us again.

Thou have made the land to tremble, thou have broken it: heal the breaches
thereof for it shakes.

LONDON, Printed for RICHARD THRALE, and are to be sold at the Cross-Keyes at
Pauls-gate. 1648.

DIVINE Contemplations necessary for these times.
IT is the general complaint of this kingdom, that the land lies under many
and grievous pressures. And certainly, they are so great, so heavy, that men
complain not without cause. Look upon the kingdom already wasted and rent with
civil war, and at this time in a new combustion in diverse parts thereof; it
will easily appear (that if God of his mercy prevent it not) total and
inevitable ruin and destruction must of necessity follow.

In the mean time we cannot but with grief of heart foresee, that which by
woeful experience we have already seen, felt, and heard what sad effects an
unnatural war will produce: as secking and plundring of cities and towns,
firing of houses, profaning of sacred places and things, deflouring of virgins,
defiling of wives, widows, and matrons; killing of people of all sorts,
Nobility, Gentry and Commons, young and old, in a word, committing of all kind
of wickedness, inhumanity and cruelty. Insomuch as this land which formerly has
been accounted a Paradise, is now like to become a rufull spectacle to all
other Nations.

And may we not justly take up a further complaint, Lev. 26.19.
when we see God threatens us (as he did his own people of old) to break our
staff of bread (under which is comprehended all necessary provisions for the
sustentation of man) and to make the heaven to be to us as iron, Eze. 5.17.26
and the earth as brass: to send the evil arrows of famine for our
destruction, and to increase it upon us: Jer. 16.4.24.10.
to consume us with famine and the sword (the Prophet joyneth them together
twenty times at the least in several places, as inseparable companions.)
Terrible was that which the Prophet by Gods command denounced of old, and which
we may truly say is fallen upon us, 1. Cor. 10.11.
on whom the ends of the world are come. That God would call for a sword, and
every man's sword should be against his brother, and that he would rain (upon
his enemies) an overflowing rain. Its to be feared, Isa. 17.11.
that our harvest (as the Prophet has it) will be a heap in the day of grief
and desperate sorrow: and that they (a strange Nation) shall eat up our
harvest, and our bread, which our sons and daughters should eat, and eat up our
flocks and our herds, our vines and our fig trees, and impoverish our fenced
cities (wherein we trust) with the sword. Jer. 5.17.
That the field is wasted, Joel 1.10.11.
the land mourns, for the corn is wasted, the harvest of the field is
perished. It were to be wished, that this may not be our case.

But many there are that mingle their complaints with admiration, they wonder
why there should be such judgments upon us, why they should live in such
unhappy times; and among these quaeres, they would seem to answer themselves,
and give reasons for these calamities. Some ascribe them to fortune, some to
the ambition of great ones, others to other causes and men, none to themselves.
But certainly all our miseries come from this spring, the neglect of Gods
worship, nay the contempt of it, and the exorbitancies of men, which carry them
headlong into all mischief, as presumptiously to sin against the glorious
Majesty of God, desperately to offend his omnipotent power, and to deal most
unthankefully with a most sovereigne bounty: offering unheard of indignity to
the law of his justice, the awe of his Majesty, the reverend regard of his
presence, the terror of his power, and the long-suffering of his love. Sin, and
nothing but sin, is the true cause of all punishments, and miseries; and the
judgments which have befallen in all former ages. This is plainly to be seen in
the most sacred Scriptures.

Ezra in his time acknowledged so much. Ezra 9.13.
All this (says he, meaning the punishments the people had suffered) is come
upon us for our evil deeds, thou O Lord have punished us less then our
iniquities have deserved. So says Esaias. There shall be desolation, Esaias.
17.9.10.
because thou have forgotten the God of thy salvation, and have not been
mindful of the rock of thy strength. Jer. 29.17.19.
So Jeremiah. Behold I will send upon them the sword, the famine, and the
pestilence, etc. Because they have not hearkened unto my words. So Ezekiel.
Ezekiel. 14.13
When the land sins against me by trespassing grievously, then will I strech
my hand upon it, and will break the staff of the bread thereof, and will send
famine upon it, and will cut off man and beast from it, Hos 99.
So Hosea. They have deeply corrupted themselves, therefore he will remember
their iniquity, he will visit their sins. Hos. 14.1
And (exhorting the people to repentance and prayer) he says, O Israel return
unto the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by thine iniquity.

We must therefore of necessity conclude, that nothing has brought these heavy
judgments of God upon us, but the crying sins of this Nation: for if ever, 1 John 5.19
in any foregoing age Saint John's words might justly be taken up. Totus mundus
in maligno positus est (never so many malignants) the whole world lies in
wickedness; now is the time, and the Scene may most fitly be laid in this
Land, where all sins are acted; and to us the words of the Prophet may fitly
be applied. By swearing, lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing
adultery, they break out, and blood touches blood. And concerning the
seamlesse coat of Christ, how is it rent in this Nation. What dangerous sects,
errors and heresies are publicly broached and professed, to the great
dishonor of God, the disunion of affections, and breaking the bond of love and
charity? So that it is no merveile, if the land mourn, and the earth yield not
her increase: Lam 3 22.
Nay, we must needs confess with the Prophet. It is of the Lords mercies that
we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not.

The bowels of his compassions (if our hearts be not hardened) we may take
notice of, not only in his long patience to us, and forbearance of us, and the
free use of his Word and Sacraments, but by his extraordinary admonitions and
warnings even from heaven it self. How many portents and prodigies of his
future anger have we of late seen? as Comets, apparitions in the air, raining
of corn, monstrous births of mankind, and other his creatures, which wise men
in all ages have held as Messengers, and forerunners of misery, and Gods
judgments, unless diverted by repentance and humiliation? Yet these
predictions of his wrath, we have either neglected, or misinterpreted: not
unlike the Jews, of whom Josephus relates; Who, when a star or Comet (in the
shape of a sword) hung over the city of Jerusalem by the space of a year,
before the destruction of it; and that when at the feast of Unleavened bread
there shone a light at nine of the clock in the night as bright, as if it had
bin the clearest day in the year; De bell. Jud l. 7. c 12.
yet (says he) some of the Jews interpreted them according to their several
fancies, others wholly contemned and slighted them, till (at last) too late,
they found their own folly, to their utter destruction.

But more observant of things of this nature was Lewis the gentle, son to
Charlemain; for when some of his Courtiers (perceiving he was troubled at the
apparition of a Comet) showed him that place in the prophet [Be not dismayed at
the signs of heaven, Jer. 10.2.
for the heathen are dismayed at them] he answered: We ought not indeed to fear
any thing but him, who is the Creator both of us and that Comet: Aimon. de
gest. Fran. l. 5. c. 17.
yet we cannot but sufficiently admire, and acknowledge his goodness. that
vouchsafes to admonish us impenitent sinners, and to stir us up to
repentance by such signs as these.

Now though we wave these things as not to be regarded, yet we should not be so
senseless and stupid as to slight the judgments under which we lie: but be
sollicitous to remove the cause of them, that the effects may be removed also.
Sin and transgression we find to be the cause, an humble confession, with
contrite hearts for that which we have formerly committed, and amendment of
life for the future, with earnest prayer to God to take off his heavy hand,
must be the cure. We must say with them in the Lamentations, Lam 3.40.
Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord. 41.
Let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto God in the heavens, and say, we
have transgressed and rebelled. 42.


But we are far stom taking the right course to remove these judgments, only
we look back to former times, and comparing ours with those, we conclude them
to be happy, and ours most miserable; we complain and murmr, that's all we do.
It cannot be denied, but that ours at this present may parallel, (if not exceed)
the worst of times, if we consider the dearth and scarcity of all manner of
food, and necessaries: the unseasonablenesse of weather, destroying the fruits
of the earth, a plain prognostique of famine to ensue: the land almost
destroyed with distractions, and divisions, yea, with murders and rapine; trade
utterly decayed, and many thousands of people undone, many poor widows and
orphans succourlesse, and harbourlesse, ready to perish; all these being the
sad effects of a civil (but a bloody) war: yet these are not the worst of our
miseries, our condition is yet more wretched: For all that have been yet
enumerated, are without us, nor do they detract from our eternal happiness,
but rather add to it. Afflictio dat intellectum, these temporal judgments do
or should bring us to the consideration of the cause, (namely Sin) and
consequently to a detestation of it: but the distractions which are within us,
make us much more miserable, then these which are without us. Our understanding
is blind, our will perverse, and prompt to all evil, the flesh lusts against
the spirit, and our affections are so inordinate, that no kingdom, no not our
own, is at such discord, as we are within our selves: which is the chief cause
that God is so offended with us: this, and only this makes us miserable indeed.

It were therefore to be wished, that as we look back to the condition of our
predecessors, so we would balance our lives with theirs: and then we should be
forced to confess, that they were not so great sinners as we are, and
therefore their punishments ought to be less then ours, by the rule of
proportion of Gods justice: and (considering this) we would soon lay down these
complaints, and betake our selves to some expedient, to appease the wrath of
God. Besides, if we would but take notice of the course they took, when either
they felt, or feared the heavy hand of God; we should confess, that they
deserved more favor from God then we do: and we lessepity from him, then they.
To leave other things, and to pass by their sanctity and piety of life, (which
the greater it was, the harder it is for our imitation) They had, and applied
not only a cure for their afflictions when they befell them, but an Antidote
too. And this was Prayer: In all their difficulties, they had recourse to
prayer, as a special sanctuary to flee too, hoping (nay being assured) to
obtain any thing at Gods hands by it. Were they at any time in danger of
enemies, they had recourse to God by prayer. And how prevalent it was, ever
with God, appears by that notable place in Exodus; when Joshua fought against
the Amalekites, Exodus 17.11.
Moses lift up his hands to God, and Israel prevailed, and when he let down his
hands, Amalek prevailed. So that it was not Joshuahs sword, but Moses prayer,
that overcame the Amalekites.

The Children of Ruben and Gad fight against the Hagarites, 1. Chapter 5 20.21
and one hundred thousand of them were delivered into their hands; for they
cried to God in the battle (says the text) and he was entreated of them,
because they put their trust in him. The Moabites and Ammonites came in great
multitudes to fight against Jehosaphat. He being in fear of them, made his
address to God, by prayer, and said. 2. Chapter 5 20.22.
O our God, we have no might against this great company that comes against us,
neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. And the Lord turned the
forces of his enemies one upon another, and they destroyed themselves.

Hezekiah prayed against Senacherib king of Assyria, 2. Kin. 19.15.35.
that invaded his kingdom with a mighty army, and the Lord sent an Angel by
night into the camp, and destroyed 185000. of them.

Zera the Ethiopian came against king Asa with an host of a thousand thousand.
2. Chr 14.8.
Asa having 580000. to oppose him. He cried to the Lord and said, 2. Chr. 14.8.
etc.
It is nothing with thee to help, whither with many, (...) with them that have
no power. Help us O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, etc. and the Ethiopians
were utterly routed and slain.

King David found the force of prayer effectual in this kind, Psalm. 56.9.
for he says, When I cry to thee, then shall mine enemies turn back. There are
diverse other examples of this nature in holy writ.

In the case of famine, Jam. 5.17.18.
we may see what Saint James writes of Elias, that he prayed earnestly, that it
might not rain, and it rained not on the earth by the space of three years and
six months. And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth
brought forth her fruit.

Samuel having terrified the people for their ingratitude, 1. King. 17. and 18.
by thunder and rain in harvest, ^ Sa. 12.18.
was entreated by the people to pray to God on their behalf to withdraw that
judgment from them which he did.

Yet a little nearer to our selves.

The people in the absence of Moses, cause Aaron to make a golden Calf; God is
highly displeased with them, and says to Moses, Ex. 32.10.11.14.
Let me alone, that I may consume them. Moses besought the Lord for them, and
he was appeased.

In the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, Gen 19.19
and the country round about, Let by prayer preserved Zoar. Jonah (being sent
by God) denounces destruction to the great city Ninive. The king, and the
people betake themselves to prayer and repentance, Jon 3.4 10
and God repented of the evil that he had said, that he would do unto them, and
he did it not.

In particular cases we find. Genesis 32 9.
Jacob prayed for deliverance from the wrath of his brother Esau, and had it.
1. Sam. 1.11
Hannah from barrenness of womb, and the Lord heard her. By prayer, Jer. 40.
Jeremiah was comforted in the dungeon, and released. Dan. 6.22.
Daniel saved from the violence of the lions. Job was preserved upon the
dunghill. Luke 23 42.
The Thief found Paradise upon the Cross. Act. 12.5.
And Peter was delivered from prison by the prayers of the Church.

If any wanted necessaries, they prayed to God for them. As Jacob for bread,
Genesis 28.20
and raiment. If for wisdom to manage their calling, as Solomon, he begged, 1.
Kin. 3 9.
and had it in large measure. If they lay sick and desired health, as Hezekiah:
2. Kin. 20.6
upon his prayer to God, he had not only the sentence of death revoked, but
fifteen years added to his life.

In the new Testament we find the duty in great estimation. Our Savi^^ (to
encourage us, not that he had ne^^ himself) often times used to pray, and gave us
a rule, Luc 21 36
Pray always. So did the Apostle Paul, 1. These. 5.17.
Pray without ceasing. And the Fathers and Doctors in the Primitive church
gave prayer many encomioms, stiling it the key of heaven, and practiced it
oftener then any other religious duty. Nay in those times, (as the best things
may in time be corrupted) some there were (the Psalliam or Euchite) that prayed
so much, that they which should hear of it (says Augustine) would think it
incredible; and were therefore numbered among the Heretics of that age. Their
error grew, upon the misunderstanding of those words of our Savior, and of
the Apostle, of praying always, and without ceasing, which (as the Fathers
expound them) was, that men should allot some time daily, for performing the
duty of prayer.

But we wretched creatures (a thing much to be lamented) in these very times of
heavy and bitter afflictions, when heaven it self, the elements, and all
creatures else seem to be sensible of them; we (I say) do not so much as think
of amendment of life, nor seek we to God by prayer, but in these extremities
have recourse to the arm of flesh, and rely upon our own strength and wisdoms,
them which ( God being neglected) nothing is more vain, and helpless. Nay,
being (already) stricken, Jer 5 3.
we have not grieved, being (almost) consumed, we have refused to receive
correction. We have made our faces harder then a rock, we have refused to
return, And as it was in the prophet Esays time; Isa. 22.12.
In that day (a day like ours) did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping, and
mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth. And behold joy and
gladness, 13.
slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine. Let us eat
and drink, for to morrow we shall die. Insomuch as God may again take up that
complaint which he did long since; Jer. 2.30.
In vain have I smitten your children, they received no correction. And it is no
marveile (we coming so short in this duty of prayer, of those which have gone
before us) that all the elements conspire against us; nor is it wonder, if we
feel daily the revenging hand of God (which prayer only (as it were) ties up)
in greater measure, then they felt it.

Therefore are we much to be blamed, for though we conceive, that God^
judgments lie heavier upon us then upon any Nation of former ages, yet we
procrastinate, and put off from us this wholesome remedy of prayer. Our
necessities are present, why seek we not for present help? Do we know whither
we shall have time to pray while too morrow? how dare we then promise so much
to our selves? The Parable of the foolish Virgins should teach us to take the
present time: for none ever escaped unpunished that neglected and let slip the
time and opportunity of Gods mercy. The Prophets counsel was, Seek the Lord
while he may be found, Isa. 35 6.
call upon him while he is near.

We are daily frighted with many fears, and those not causeless; one plague,
one judgment suceeeds another, nor are we free either within or without us
from divine vengeance. In these extremities what more present remedy or help
can we find, then by calling upon God, and casting our cares upon him? Is any
afflicted (says the Apostle) Let him pray. Jam. 5 13.
If crosses, dangers, sickness, war, famine, pestilence, tempestuous
weather, want, or other calamity hang over our heads or befall us, what is to
be done? Let us pray. If the sense of our sins trouble us (as well they may)
if the fear of eternal death, (the wages of sin) afflict us, Let us pray: for
prayer is the life, and soul of the soul, and so profitable a duty, so
necessary that the soul, health, life it self, and all we have depend upon it.

Then why do we so much neglect it, so little regard it? why have we not
recourse to God by daily and fervent prayers? especially in these times, when
we have more need of his help and succor then ever before. The Church is rent
and torn, the Kingdom distracted, and even at the brink of ruin and
destruction. Can we behold these desolations with dry eyes, without bleeding
hearts? shall we not deprecate Gods anger, and imprecate his favor, and become
humble suppliants to him, to pardon our great and manifold sins, and to avert
these his heavy judgments from us? shall the heavens seem to mourn and shall
not we, shall we not?

If a man have lost all that he possessed, and become blind, lame, and
infirm, this man must either beg or starve and perish. Certainly we have lost
by our transgressions all the good we had and therewith all the gifts and
graces of grace and nature; what then remains but that like beggars we cry at
the gate of Gods mercy? when all other remedies fail us, prayer is only left
us. If then we neglect the lifting up of our eyes, our hearts, our hands to
God, no marveile if he let loose the reins of all calamities, miseries, and
afflictions to rush in upon us.

For the neglect of this duty of prayer, the kingdom mourns; for neglect of
prayer the true worship of God is lost; for neglect of prayer we are become a
scorn to our neighbors: for neglect of prayer the wisdom of our wisemen does
perish, Isa, 19.14.
and the understanding of prudent men is hid: for neglect of prayer all virtue
and goodness has forsaken the land, and an inundation of wickedness has
overflowen it, and brought these heavy judgments into it.

But some may say, Object.
what need these motives and exhortations to prayer? have we not prayed these
seven years past? have we not spent whole days together in this duty, and yet
we find no ease of our troubles, no comfort in our afflictions, but rather
daily additions to them It Is true, Answ.
that in these great distractions of Church and commonwealth, God has ^in
pleased (as it were) to hide himself from us, and to neglect our prayers. But
this has often times befaln other states and Churches before us. How often did
David complain of this in his time, as we may read in many of his Psalms? How
long Lord will thou hide thy self for ever, shall thy wrath burn like fire?
Psalm. 89.46
So Psalm 13.1.44.24 88.14. and diverse other places God by the prophets and
other his Saints used this metaphore many times, in their own cases, as Job.
Job 13.24. Isa. 57.17.54.8. Jer. 33 ^. Eze. 39 23. Isa. 64.7.
Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine enemy. So God by the
Prophet, as I hid me and was wroth. And In a little wrath I hid my face from
thee. And in Jeremiah, I have hid my face from this city. And in the Prophet
Ezekiel, I hid my face from them. And lastly, Esaias on the behalf of the people,
Thou have hid thy face from, us, and have consumed us. For it is the nature and
condition of affliction, to persuade those that are under it to think, that God
is absent from them.

But the reasons why God seems to be so, and not to answer our prayers are
these, among others.

1. It is for sin committed, and impenitency following that God seems to
leave us.

2. Because the prayers we make, in the time when Gods judgments are upon us,
are not framed aright.

3. Lastly, God seems to the absent, and not to hear and answer our prayers
according to our expectation, for our own good, and for causes best known to
himself.

1. The whole current of Scriptures may inform us, that God never absents
himself, or hides his face from any person, or nation, but for sin, and
impenitence. Moses in his song (setting forth the rebellions, idolatry, and
other sins of the Jews) says: Deu 32 19.20.
When the Lord saw this, he abhorred them, etc. And said, I will hide my face
from them, etc. So the prophet Zechariah to king Jeash, 2. Chr. 24.20
and the people, Why transgress ye the commandments of the Lord that ye cannot
prosper: because ye have forsaken the Lord he has also forsaken you. God (by
the wise man) tells the wicked; Because I have called and ye have refused, Pro.
1.24.25
I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded: But ye have set at naught
all my counsels, and would none of my reproof, Pro. 1.27.
etc. When your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a
whirlwinde: when distress and anguish comes upon you. 28.
Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer: they shall seek me early.
but they shall not find me. Isa. 1.15.
And God (by Esaias) complaining of the the rebellion of Judah, says, When you
spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when you make
many prayers, I will not hear, you hands are blood. So it is in Jeremiah, When
they fast, Jer. 14.12
I will not hear their cry, but I will consume them by the sword, and by the
famine, and by the pestilence. God hides not his face from his friends. It is
sin, and impenitence that is the cause of his absence. Esa 64 7.59 2.
Thou have hid thy face from us, and have consumed us, because of our
iniquities, says Esaias. And your iniquities have separated between you and your
God, Eze. 39.23.
and your sins have hid his face from you. And God (by the prophet Ezekiel) says,
Pro. 28.9.
They trespassed against me, therefore I hid my face from them.

He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be
abomination. Jer. 7.16.
We may read, that God forbad Jeremiah to pray for the impenitent Jews, Pray
not thou for this people (says he) neither lift up cries or prayer for them
(...) neither make intercession to me, Jer. 7.16.
for I wi^^ not hear thee. The man that was cured of his blindness, could
thell the Jews. We know that God hears not sinners, Joh. 9.31.
meaning the unrepentant.

But if any man be so plunged in the security of sin, that he feel in himself
no provocations to true repentance, his best way to cure this evil is, to
consider and weigh with himself, that he (miserable creature) has to do with
an eternal and immortal God, that sees, and hears all things, before whom,
the Angels nor the heavens are clean: Job. 4 18.15.15.
and that there is no way to avoid his judgment, unless he seriously repent:
and enquire carefully into his forepassed life: and if he find himself
polluted with many sins, he may conclude, that there are infinite more in him
which he cannot see, but Gods alsearching eye does discover, and detest. And
therefore, may reason thus with himself. If the whole world should applaud my
actions, and veil my sins with the name of virtue, yet can I not escape the
just censure, and judgment of God. I must sooner or latter, appear before that
alseeing, and hearing judge, and render an account of all my evil words and
works; Why then blush I not? why abstain I not from sin? why do I not
endeavor with all care, and diligence, to amend my life? Certainly, if thus we
would do, unfeignedly, without hypocrisy, and call upon the holy Spirit to put
us upon and assist us, in that good work; we should not fear, but that our
prayers would be heard, so that we should never have cause to repent us of this
repentance.

Another cause that God answers not our prayers, II.
is; We pray not aright. Saint James is plain for this, Ye ask, and receive
not, because ye ask amiss. And we may err, and ask amiss, both in the
matter, and the manner.

For the matter, I.
we may ask things not only unprofitable, and hurtful to us, but such as
neither stand with the glory of God, nor the good of our own souls. And in
these cases, no marvel if God answer not our petitions. We ought therefore to
beg such things, as are fit for God to give, and for us to receive: and these
are, first, Spiritual, and heavenly. And secondly, Corporal, and temporal.

1. The best of Spiritual good things, is the Summum bonum, the chief good:
Eternal blessedness, which indeed is the Epitomee of all good things; and
consists in the fruition of the beatificall vision of God, in his glory and
kingdom, Psalm. 16.11
There are other spiritualls too, that we may lawfully pray for; as the
knowledge of God, of which our Savior said, This is life eternal, Jo. 17.3.
that they may know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have
sent. As also Faith, Hope, Charity, and all other graces of the Holy Spirit.
These good things we may, nay we ought to pray earnestly for.

2. Corporal and temporal blessings are health of body, deliverance from
dangers; for food, and sustenance, peaceable times, and many other of this
nature. and these may be lawfully prayed for, yet not without condition. For,
whereas many times they do more harm (being obtained) then good, they must
therefore be prayed for with this limitation, as far as they shall conduce to
Gods glory, and our own salvation. But surely, we many times ask those things,
which stand in opposition to both these, whereby it falls out, that God will
not hear us according to our will, though he hear us for our good. We are like
little children many times, that will even with tears beg of their fathers,
things which may do them harm, as knives, and the like; yet their fathers in
discretion will not grant them. So God (who loves us with greater affection
then any father loves his children, nay more then we love our selves) in his
divine wisdom consults, what is best for our good, and denies us those things,
which we foolishly ask, to our own detriment, and in his fatherly affection,
and mercy, grants those things, which he knows needful, and profitable for us.

See what Saint Bernard excellently said upon this subject. Detriplici modo
orois sermon. 5. in quadrages.
I believe (says he) that the Petitions of the heart, consists in three
things, nor do I see, what a child of God ought to pray for besides. Two of
them are temporal; the good things of body and soul: the third, is the
blessedness of life eternal. Marveile not neither, that I said, corporal
good things are to be prayed for of God, because all corporal are his, as well
as spiritual. Therefore they are to be expected from him by prayer, whereby we
may be strengthened in his service. Yet we are to pray oftener, and more
fervently for the wants of the soul: that is, to obtain Gods grace, and the
virtues of the soul: no less are we to do for eternal life, where both soul
and body will be in perfect bliss. Therefore in these three, as they are
petitions of the heart, we are to beware of these things. Superfluity in the
first: Impurity in the second, and Pride in the third. For many times Temporal
things are desired for pleasure: virtues and graces for ostentation: and some
(perhaps) seek not Eternal life in humility, but in confidence of their
merits. Nor do I speak this, but that when a man has received grace, it gives
him confidence to pray: but yet it becomes him not to place confidence in or by
that grace, to obtain that he prays for. These graces are so given, only to
confer this upon him, to hope for greater things from that hand, that
bestowed the other. Let therefore our prayer for Temporalls, be restrained to
necessaries: Let that prayer which is made for the good of the soul, be free
from all inpurity, and intent only to the good pleasure of God: and let that
prayer which is made for Eternal life, be in all humility, presuming (as is
said) only upon Gods mercy.

2. We may err also, in the manner of Praying, many ways, which cause our
prayers to become fruitless.

1. We pray many times coldly, and perfunctorily, without attending to what we
pray for. Surely considering that all our safety, happiness, and good depends
only upon God, and that we are to seek for it no where else; and that were it
not for Gods mercy and goodness, we should perish for ever. We should
therefore as (as often as we make our address to him by prayer) cast our
selves (as it were) out of our selves, and lay aside all terrene cares, and
encumbrances, which otherwise may hinder, and trouble us, in performance of
that duty. But, if when we set our selves to Prayer, or other Spiritual
exercises, we become Carnal, and suffer evil and foolish thoughts to possess
our minds, suffering our selves to be carried away, and our thoughts to wander
up and down; these prayers are in the sight of God, but hypocrisy, and
abomintion, nor can they receive any gracious answer from him, for how can we
conceive, that God will hear us, when we hear not our selves? Would we have God
mindful of us, when we are not mindful of our selves, nor mind that we
Pray for? And if we Pray thus carelessely, is it not expedient, that God should
shake of this frigidity and extravancie from us, by withholding his assistance?
Qui timide rogat, docet senegari. A cold and perfunctory Prayer, deserves a
negative answer.

2. What if we Pray without Faith, and confidence to be heard, doubting of the
divine promises so frequently made in Scripture? Psalm. 50.15. Isa. 58.9.
as Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, And Thou shall
call, and the Lord shall answer, thou shall cry, and he shall say, here I am.
Mar. 11.24.
And What things soever you desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them,
and ye shall have them. When our Savior was importuned by the father of the
deaf and dumb child, whom the disciples could not cure; Christ told him
(hearing him say, If thou can do any thing) If thou can believe all things
are possible to him that believes. 9.22.23.
That is, there is nothing, but Christ can, and will do for them that believe.
If (I say) we doubt of these and the like promises, we deprive him of his
glory, and do (what in us lies) to detract from his mercy and truth, and make
God our enemy, instead of hearing and granting our petitions. Certainly, if we
believe men, so often falsifying their words, why believe we not, but distrust
God, that cannot lie? whose promises in Christ are Yea and Amen; Heb. 6.18. 2.
Cor. 1.10
especially considering, that his incomprehensible Power and mercy are joined
with his truth. It Is the custom among men, to confide in those, that are
willing, and able to help us; with what sace then can we distrust God, so true
in his promises, so indulgent in his favors, of whose mercy and loving
kindness we have had so often experience, and of whose omnipotence it were
blasphemy to doubt? Again, we are to know, that Prayers are a testimony of our
faith: If then we in our Prayers doubt of the truth of Gods promises, and
question whither he hear them or not, what mark or print of Faith appears in
us? who can persuade himself that such prayers are heard?

3. Again, we err in the manner of our prayers, if we do not so temper and
conform our own will, that it may become wholly subject to the will of God:
observing what is agreeable to his will, in what we ought to pray for, and in
what not, in what he has promised to hear us, and in what he has not
promised: not murmuring at any cross is laid upon us by him, but bearing it
with thanksgiving, and blessing his holy Name for it. And God will have us (and
of right he may exact it from us) so obsequious and observant to him, as that
we make enquiry in his Word, with all modesty, and reverence, concerning those
things which he has promised, and to wait with patience, and assured hope for
his performance, in his own time; leaving to him as well what, as when seems him
good, not prescribing to his wisdom and omnipotency either time or, manner. For
it were an intolerable arrogance, if wretched and mortal men, should assume
such power over their Creator, as to subject him to their appetite, and not to
submit wholly to his good will and pleasure; who knows what is better for
them, then they themselves. This Saint John knew well, when he said, This is
the confidence which we have in him, 1. Jo. ^.14.
that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. And God himself
(by the Prophet) intimates as much. Isa. 49.8.
In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I
helped thee; that is, at that time, which I have determined in my wisdom, and
providence. Therefore in praying for terrene, and temporary things, (such as we
beg under the title of daily bread,) we are to subject our selves to Gods
fatherly will; and to desire them if it stand with his good pleasure: if not,
we must yield to him in a filial obedience, and patiently endure what he shall
lay upon us, as long as he pleases. King David (in his exile,) did so: as
appears by his speech to Zadok the Priest; 2. Sam. 15.21.25.26
Carry back the Ark of the Lord (says he) into the city. If I shall find
favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it,
and his habitation: But if he thus say, I have no delight in him, behold, here
am I, let him do to me, as it seems good to him. So the Leper in his petition
for his cure, Mat. 8.2.
Lord if thou will, thou can make me clean. The like request did our Savior
make before his death. Mat. 22.42.
Father if thou be willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless, not my
will, but thine be done.

4. Another error in our Prayers, and which may obstruct the passage of them,
is an overweening of our own worth, if we ascribe any thing to our own merits,
and expect to be heard the rather for them. Therefore it were better for us,
Ber. sermon. 4. inadvent.
to follow Bernards rule, rather to hide, then to brag of our good works, if we
have any: as poor people when they beg an alms, put not on fine clothes, but
rags, and discover their sores, and nakedness, to make men inclineable to
pity. And indeed, what have we to boast of? Whatsoever good we do, is merely of
the grace of God, not of the merit of the doer, but of the good pleasure of his
will, to the glory of his grace. 1. Cor. 1.31
So that he that glories, is is not to glory in himself, but in the Lord who
gives, to whom he pleases. Meritum meum miseratio domini, says Aust. My
merit, is the mercy and goodness of the Lord. The same Aust. In Psa. 138.
upon the words [forsake not the woek of thy hands] says, I commend not the
work of my hands, for I fear, if thou look upon that, thou shall find more
sins, then merits. This I only pray, speak, and desire: Forsake not the work
of thy hands. Look upon thy work in me, not my work: for if thou look upon
mine, thou will condemn it, if upon thine own, thou will crown it. If then we
acknowledge not our own misery, and our manifold frailties and imperfections,
with all submission, and reverence, and that we are nothing, or less then
nothing: or if we be any thing, that we are but dust, and corruption, and a
mass, infected with the poison of sin, and (for that) liable and subject
every moment to death here, and eternal condemnation hereafter. If (I say) we
acknowledge not this, but Pharisaically presume upon our own righteousness, and
good works, and think that God is bound to hear us for them; we may seek him
early, but we shall not find him. Pro. 1.28
But, if (with the Publican) we shall confess our unworthines, and say with
Jacob, Lord I am not worthy, (or I am less then) the least of all thy mercies,
Genesis 32.1
etc. and with Esaias, Isa. 57.15
I am a man of unclean lips. To this man will God look, Isa. 57.15.
even to him, that is poor and of a contrite spirit: for the more we humble our
selves, the fitter we are to seek and find God, and to receive a gracious
answer from him.

5. As the conceit (for it is but a mere conceit) of the merits of our good
works; so the opinion of the merit of our own prayers, makes an obstruction,
that God hears them not. It Is true, that they are our defensive arms against
Satan's designs, and the means by which God has appointed us to have recourse
to him, in any difficulty or danger: yet they must not be offered to God as
though they were able of themselves (without a further supply) to merit
access, and acceptance with him. For this were to make a man lay his
foundation upon himself (which indeed he is apt enough to do) but our prayers
deserve not any honor of themselves, but as God honors them, by commanding
us to use them, as the means to obtain his promises by them. If therefore we
shall offer up our prayers for theirs, and not our Saviors merits, and in his
Name, or that we shall decline Christ, and betake us to Saints or Angels, they
cannot but procure an ill savor in the nostrils of God. We must direct them
then to God, by his son Jesus Christ only, Heb. 4.16.15.
by whom we have access to the throne of grace with boldness. He is our High
Priest, and cannot but be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, and was
tempted in all points like as we are, yet without sin. And in that he himself
has suffered being tempted, Heb 2.18.
he is able to succor them that are tempted. 1. Jo. 2.1. Jo. 17.5.
And therefore having Christ to be our Advocate, and that he tells us, that he
prays for his, why should we decline so easy a way, and take a harder and
more deceitful tract, either by the merits of our own prayers, or the
mediation of Saints or Angels.

If there be occasion to pray for the members of Christ, laboring under
difficulties on earth, let the prayers ascend to the Head (says Aug.) who is
gone before into heaven, by whom there is propitiation for our sins. 1. Jo.
2.2.
For if Paul be a Mediator, the other Apostles should be so too: and if there
be many Mediators, there is no reason why Saint Paul should say, 1. Tim. 2.5.
There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus.
In whom we are one, if we keep the unity of the spirit, Ephe. 4 3.
in the bond of peace. Therefore if we desire that our prayers should be as
incense, Psalm 141.2.
or a morning sacrifice to God, and receive a gracious answer from him; we must
tender them to him only, in the Name, and for the merits of Jesus Christ, Mat.
3.17.
In whom alone he is well pleased.

6. Lastly, our prayers receive not that audience, or acceptance that we
expect, because we offer them not with that due respect we ought: our outward
behavior is not suitable with that of Petitioners. If a man petition for any
thing, it is fit he should compose himself, as becomes a Petitioner: that is, by
uncovering his head, bending himself, and the like. We usually call him that
begs an alms with his hat on, a sturdy beggar, and give him relief accordingly.
Jer. 6.16.
Ask and enquire of the old paths, and see, whither in former ages, there were
ever such bold unreverend Petitioners as now: God may well take up to us the
speech which he used in the Prophet, to the uncivil Jews; If I be a Father,
where is mine honor, if I be a Master, where is my fear? Search the
Scriptures, and you shall find, how reverently the Saints of God made their
addresses to him. Abraham in his conference with God, fell on his face. So did
Mary, Genesis 17.3.
the sister of Lazarus, Jo. 11.32.
to our Savior Christ. And the Samaritan Leper (one of the ten Lepers which
were cured) Fell down on his face at Christ's feet, Lu. 17.16.
giving him thanks, for the great benefit he had received from him: a gesture
certainly of much submission.

King Solomon, 1. Kin. 8.15
as soon as he had built the Temple, powered out his Prayers to God for a
blessing; Nor is that set down, that he prayed, only, but (for our
instruction) with what gesture he did it. 54.
He arose from the Altar of the Lord, from kneeling on his knees, with his
hands spread up to heaven. Ezra in his Prayer for the people, that had sinned
grievously, Ezra. 9.5.
Fell upon his knees, and spread out his hands to the Lord his God. Saint Paul's
precept is, 1. Tim. 2.8.
I will that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath or
doubting.

Our Savior himself kneeled when he prayed. Lu. 22.41. Act. 9.40.20.36.
Saint Peter ( praying for Tabithas restoring from death to life) kneeled down
and prayed. The like di^ Saint Paul, upon the shore at Ephesus, with all that
were with him.

We may read also in sacred Scripture, that many Penitents joined with their
prarers smiting their breasts, and casting ashes upon their heads, renting their
garments, and putting on of sackcloth; these, and the other before mentioned,
being tokens that their prayers were fervent, and their confession of sins,
and their repentance for them, serious and humble. For while we cast up our
eyes, and stretch our hands to heaven, we declare and signify our ardent
expectation of all aid and good from God alone, and from none other: When I
kneel, I express my humility, when I smite my breast, I show mine indignation
against my self, for offending so gracious a God, and the like.

I deny not, but that the true worship of God consists chiefly in inward not
outward behavior: yet outward gestures are not only (as I said) signs of the
sincerity of our prayers, but prevalent also, to stir up our attentions, and
to cast off all dullness, and frigidity in praying. Besides, these humble
gestures are (as it were) a means to incite others (that are spectators of our
devotion) to the like reverentiall performance. And indeed, since God is the
Creator, not only of the soul, but of the body also, which is (as it were) the
temple of the Soul; and that the Body one day must receive good, or ill with
the Soul, why should not God be honored by both? I confess (as I said before)
that the inward affections of the Soul, justly chalength the first place in our
Prayers: nor is it to be thought, that God despises the prayers of him that
sits, stands, or lies, if his affections go along with them, yet since
God has given man a Body with a Soul, for his own glory, 1. Cor. 6.20
Therefore (as the Apostle directs) glorify God in your body, and in your
spirit, which are Gods.

In all these forenamed gestures, it is certain, that the heart must be lift up
before the hands, the heart must kneel before the body, (for the heart has
knees as well as the body, Ephesians. 3.14
witness Saint Paul) the heart must weep before the eyes: and the heart must
speak, before the tongue: for it is not the voice, or bare sound of words which
God gives ear to, but the affection of the heart. (Though true vocal prayer is
necessary to stir up our fainting spirits, and to incite others to the like
duty) for God (by the Prophet) complained of such as were only wording
petitioners, Isa. 29.13.
and our Savior quotes the same text, Mat. 15.8
against the Scribes and Pharisees, This people draw near me with their mouths,
and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart far from me.

Therefore (as Augustine does) we may conclude, that Oration non est in
multiloquio. True prayer consists not in many words. And (with him) Differunt
multum loqui, and multum precari. Hoc negotium plus gemitibus, quam sermonibus
agitur, plus fletu quam affatu. There Is great difference between much speaking,
and much praying: this work is better effected by groans, then words, by
weeping, then by speaking.

There are diverse presidents in Gods word, to inform us, that God hears mental
prayers, E^. 14.15.
as well as vocal. Wherefore cryest thou unto me (says God to Moses) when we
read not of a word that he spoke. So, when God was offended at the Israelites
for making a golden calf, Moses stood sad, and silent, yet as it seems he
prayed secretly, and his prayer ascended up to God; for God said, Let me alone,
E^. 32.10.
that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them: and I
will make of thee a great nation. Hannah likewise, prayed to the Lord in heart,
only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard; that is, 1. Sam. 1.13
by those that were near, but by God it was. And the woman in the Gospel,
spoke not to our Savior to cure her, but only said within her self, If I may
but touch his garment, Mat 9.11.
I shall be whole: yet she was heard, and cured. Therefore it was, that Saint
Paul said, 1. Cor. 14.15.
I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with understanding. Prayer if it
be true and fervent, and proceed from faith, if it be uttered by inward
groans, and sighs from the heart, prevail as much with God, as that which
comes with the greatest expressions by and from the lips: For God needs no
information from us concerning our wants and necessities. He knows what
things we have need of before we ask: Mat. 6.8.
and our infirmities and pressures are better known to him then to our selves.
The Prophet knew this when he said, Psalm. 38.9.
Lord all my desire is before thee, and my groanings are not hid from thee.

If God know what we pray for, Object.
may some say, and know what we need, and what dangers hang over our heads,
before we petition to him; to what purpose is it, or wherefore do we pray* do
we not pray in vain? and may not our prayers be spared? No, we must pray to him
though. Saint Jerome satisfies all men in this point. In Mat. 6.
We are not Informers, but Petitioners (says he) and it is one thing to tell
and instruct a man that is ignorant, and another, to make a request to him that
knows what we want. It is not therefore in respect of God, that needs no
information, but in regard of our selves that want his protection, that we pray
unto him.

In the last place, the reasons why God seems to absent himself from us, III.
and not to grant our requests, are many.

1. It may be the fit time, best known to God to answer our desires is not yet
come; for as there is a time when God may more especially be found; so there is
a time, Psalm. 32.6.
which God has reserved to himself, and seems to hide his face from us. If he
come not at our time to us, what are we to do? The Prophet David tells us,
27.14.
Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart,
wait I say on the Lord. Observe how slowly a tree yields it is fruit: First it is
planted, then it takes root, afterward it shoots forth, and bears leaves, and
dilates it self into arms and boughs: then it blows, and buds, the fruit knots
and ripens, they are gathered, and served at the table, lastly eaten and
digested. The like time does God take oft-times, and deals with his petitioners
by degrees, yet says at last, Isa. 49.8.
In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I
helped thee. Wait on the Lord (says Solomon) and he will save thee. Pro. 20
22. Lam. 3.25. Hab. 2.3.
And the Prophet, The Lord is good unto them that wait for him. Though it
tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry. Heb 10.37
Isa. 30.18.
Blessed are all they that wait for him.

God prolongs the time, and deferres to grant our requests for diverse causes.

1. To kindle our zeal and constancy in prayer, and to exercise our faith, and
patience: and when things seem to be in the most deplorable condition, then to
deliver us out of all our trouble.

The Israelites being under the pressure of a hard servitude, Ex. 2.23.
pray for deliverance, God protracts it for many years, to try and exercise
their faith and patience, in the mean time their slavery increases: they sigh
and are grieved, perhaps they conceived their complaints to be spent in vain,
13.17.
but the event in their deliverance, at last answered them fully.

So Christ delayed the woman of Canaan, Mat. 15.22.
first, by making as though he had not heard her, then by giving her a hard
repulse, 26.28.
even as if she had been a dog, yet upon her faith and constancy, which
appeared so great, he granted her desire.

2. To declare and manifest his omnipotency, and to gain the greater glory to
himself.

When God had freed the Israelites out of the Egyptian bondage, he brought
them again into great fears, for Pharaoh pursued them with a dreadful army,
and the sea was before them, so that they were encompassed, and no hope
appeared to them to avoid destruction: insomuch as they began to murmr, and
say to Moses, Because there were no graves in Egypt, Ex. 14.11.
have thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? They thought themselves all
lost men. Then (contrary to all outward appearance of help) the sea by Gods
command, divided it self, 22.
and the waters were (...) wall unto them on the right hand, and on the left:
and they passed through the midst of the sea upon the dry ground; 17.
and this deliverance returned to the honor of God.

Many the like deliverances we may find in Scriptures, as of Asa. Jehosaphat.
Hezekiah, and others, whom when God had suffered to be brought even to the pits
brink of destruction, he by his omnipotent power, upon their humble petitions
(when the help of man was but vain) delivered them by the overthrow of their
enemies.

3. To make us the more truly humble and penitent. For seeing we are not drawn
to him by threats, no^ allured by benefits, nor invited by promises, he will
keep us under miseries and pressures; and until we draw near to him by an
unfeigned repentance, Isa 5.25.
he will give us no gracious answer. His anger will not be turned away, but his
hand is stretched out still. 2. Sa. 14.32.
He deals with us as Absalom did with Joab: I sent to thee to come to me, and
because thou came not, I set thy field of corn on fire, I see that has
brought thee to me. I drew thee (O England) says God with cords of silk,
prayed and invited thee to come to me, but thou have broken those bonds, and
would not come: I have therefore stronger bands, the sword, and famine, which
thou shall lie under a while, to bring thee to me. When we once loosen the
bands of wickedness, and repent us of the evil we have committed; Isa. 58.6.9.
Then shall we call, and the Lord shall answer.

4. Many times God deferres the granting of our petitions in distress and
want, to make the deliverance and his gift the more welcome to us by how much
the longer they have been deferred: which (if they had been sooner granted,)
would have either bin less esteemed, or that perhaps accounted as a due, which
comes from God as a mere gift. Diu desiderata dulcius obtinentur, citius data
vilescunt. Things long desired, are most acceptable being obtained, whereas
things soon granted, grow contemptible and little worth. Grata superveniet quae
non sperabitur hora. A thing so long looked for, as that we were out of hope of
obtaining it, is most welcome, though it come late. We see that Abraham prayed
long to God for a son, and so long, that he even dispaired of obtaining one,
desiring only of God, Ge. 17.18.
O that Ishmael (his son by Hagar the bondwoman) might live before him. No
doubt but when God had performed his promise to him in Isaac, it was far more
acceptable to him, then if he had received him sooner. Hannah (having her womb
shut up by the Lord) went up year by year to the house of the Lord, 1. Sam
1.^.7.
and prayed for a child; God granted her requests at last, which she received
so joyfully, and esteemed so highly of that blessing, that she dedicated that
son Samuel to the Lord, 1. Sa. 1.28.2.1.
and framed a song of thanksgiving for it. Vult crebrius rogari Dominus, ut
tanto gratius sit concedentis Donum. God will be often prayed to, before he
hears, that his gift may be received the more thankfully.

5. God denies us that we pray for many times, because he intends to give us
better things then those we ask. Bernard says, It comes to pass often times,
that God hears not when we would have him, according to our will; yet soon
after, hears us in those things which are for our good and salvation. That is,
though he gives us not the things we ask, yet things far better for us. We
have an example in the Prophet Elias, 1. Kin. 19 4.
who (to rid himself of Jezabells tyranny) prayed God to take him out of this
life by death: God heard him not presently, in that he prayed for, but soon
after he translated him alive into his celestial glory. 2. Kin 2.11
Saint Paul besought the Lord thrice that the thorn in his flesh might depart
from him. ^. Cor. 12 8
Gods answer to him was, 9.
My grace is sufficient for thee. A better thing God could not give him. One
prays for plenty of food and sustenance, God gives him a little competency and
health with it: Another craves wealth, God denies that, but gives him wisdom
and learning. What cause has any man then to quarrel with God? but rather to
give him humble and hearty thanks, for such his affection and love to him.
Inasmuch as he has so much care of him, that he hears him not in those
unprofitable things he asks out of ignorance, but changes them into better
gifts. Multos non audit, (says Aug) ad voluntatem, ut exaudiat ad solutem, God
hears not many according to their desires, but hears them in that which does
them good. And therefore concludes, Non habeatis pro magno, etc. Account it not
a great matter if thou be not heard according to thine own will: but esteem
it as a great favor from God, if he hear thee for thy benefit. The same father
gives the reason fully, why God grants not some things we pray for; Quando non
dat, ideo non dat, ne obsint quae dat. when he gives us not the things we ask,
it is because if he should grant them they would be prejudicial to us. And in
this case, Exorari in perniciem rogantis, bonitas est; It Is his goodness not
to hear us, when we petition for those things that would be our destruction.
And frustrari in noxijs, exaudire est. To fail of our expectation for hurtful
things, is better for us, then if we were heard.

6. Again, as some men pray, and are not heard, because is is for their good
and salvation. So others pray and are heard, even to their hurt and damnation.
Aust. says, Apostolus rogat, etc. The Apostle prayed and received not: In Ps.
144.
The Devil prayed and had his request granted. The Apostle received not, but it
was for his perfection; the devil received to his damnation. God heard him whom
he intended to damn, and heard not him whom he meant to save. Job prayed in
his afflictions, God put him off to prove him: he sat long in the dust, and
God answered him not: but he heard the devil and gave him leave to tempt him:
yet the one was but to be proved, the other to be tormented. Therefore (says
he) Let no man be discouraged or dejected, Ps. 145.151
or faint, when he makes any just request to God, and thinks he is not heard,
but let his eyes wait upon God, Psa. 145.15
who gives meat in due season: When he gives not, it is because it should not
hurt him. And he that prays for any unjust thing, and is heard, he is heard
to his own punishment and detriment. It Is fabled of the Bull and the Camel,
that they petitioned Jupiter for horns. The Camel obtained not his request but
instead of horns, Jupiter caused his ears to be cut off. The Bull had horns
given him, but he repented soon after that he had made that petition: for
whereas (being without horns) he was at liberty, and could not easily be
taken, by having them he was soon caught, and put to the cart, and the plough,
and at last brought to the shambles. I leave the application.

7. Sometimes we pray for that which God hears, yet will not grant, because he
has otherwise decreed, for his decrees and judgments are not only past
finding out, To. 11.33.
but irrevocable. There are many devices in man's heart (says the wise man) but
the Lords counsel shall stand. Pro 19.21.
So says God by the Prophet, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my
pleasure. Heb. 6.17.
Therefore the Apostle calls it the immutability of his counsel, it cannot be
changed. We may see this in the destruction of Sodom. Genesis 19.
Abraham earnestly prayed to God to spare it, he was heard, yet his suit was
not granted. David prayed for the life of the young child, which he begot of
Bathsheba in adultery, 2. Sam. 12.16 19
he was heard, but his request was not granted, for the child died. Luke 22.42
Our Savior prayed to remove the cap, God heard him, but he drunk of the
bitter cup of death. Act. 2.23.
Saint Peter gives the reason; It was the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, that he should suffer d^a^h for the redemption of
mankind. The Jews (in Jeremies time) had grievously and impenitently sinned
against God, he decreed utterly to cast them o^t of his favor, Jer. 15.1.
and said, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be
toward this people.

And have not we in this land committed as great sins as they? Let us
examine our selves impartially, and there is no question but we shall find our
selves as guilty of offending the Majesty of God, as rebellious to his
commands, as unthankful for his mercies, as impenitent for all our offenses as
the Jews, or any Nation under heaven: and therefore are deservedly, under as
great judgments as they were.

What course is then to be taken by us, to appease the wrath of an angry God
justly conceived against us? Certainly none other but the means which has been
ever applied in the like case, which is Prayer. We being in the same condition,
why should we not apply the same remedy. Who can tell if God will turn and
repent, Jon. 3 9.
and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? God is the same that
he ever was and proclaimed himself. The Lord, The Lord God, merciful and
gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth. If we turn to
him by serious repentance and by Prayer, qualified with zeal, faith, confidence
and perseverance, conforming our wills unto his only, waving all worth and
merits in our selves, and our prayers, and acknowledging our own unworthiness,
and trusting in the merits of our blessed Savior Christ Jesus only, with full
resolution to amend our lives for the future, he will say to us, as he has
done before, Je^. 18 7.
At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, 8
to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it. If that Nation against whom
I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I
thought to do unto them.

Let us therefore humble our selves, and that speedily. Zep. 2.1.
(It was the Prophets counsel to Judah) Gather your selves together, yea gather
together O nation not desired. 2.
Before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chafe, before the
fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lords anger come
upon you. Pacify the Lords wrath before it break out. It Is kindled already, we
know; but if it once break out into flame, and that a fierce one, ^am. 4 11.
who can quench it? The Lord (says the Prophet) has powered out his fierce
anger, and has kindled a fire in Zion, and it has devoured the foundations
thereof. If the foundations be destroyed, the superstructure must needs fail,
that is an universal destruction must needs follow.

That we may in time prevent this, let us pray to God in the first place to
give us grace to pray aright, and then to give a blessing even that we pray
for; his favor and the light of his countenance: and then we shall enjoy our
hearts desire: Let us pray and say, Da pacem domine in diebus nostris, peace
here, and hereafter: peace of conscience, peace with God and man: let the
judgment of war cease in this land, and Da nobis domine panem quotidianum
our daily bread, food and sustenance; remove the judgments of famine and
pestilence Lord from us: and continue us in health; give such things as will
stand with thy good pleasure to give us. Give us the Bread of life, Jo. 6.35
even Christ Jesus, that so we may serve thee joyfully here in the Kingdom of
grace, and reign with thee eternally in the Kingdom of glory.

Ne deficias in oratione, August.
Deus quod concessurus est, si differt, uon aufert: Nemo gratis orat. Omnis
oration modo seria sit, semper fructuosa erit.

Faint not in Prayer. God does only defer, not deprive us of that he intends
to give us. No man prays in vain. Every Prayer always returns with fruit. so
it be serious.

PRAYERS FOR THE TIMES.
For Peace.
O Almighty God and most merciful Father, who by thy Son Jesus Christ have
valued Peace at so high a rate, that thou have styled the lovers and procurers
thereof the Children of thee O God: the last Legacy of thy Son to his
disciples being Peace: and thou thy self being also pleased to be entitled the
God of Peace; it being one of the fruits of God the holy Spirit: behold we
beseech thee thy poor and wretched people, deprived of this unvaluable
blessing, and miserably afflicted with a raging intestine War. We confess O
Lord that this judgment is justly befalne us, for our manifold and grievous
sins; among which our unthankfulnes for, and not making true use of so happy a
peace which we so long enjoyed, is not the least.

And now O Lord, in that neither thy promises could allure us, nor thy threats
and menaces terrify us, nor thy judgments upon our neighboring and other
Nations, forewarne us of what might come upon us, but that our rebellions
transcend all former presidents; thou have suffered thy whole displeasure to
arise against us, and caused us as instruments of thy wrath to execute thy
vengeance upon our selves, according to that in the Prophet, Isa. 19.^.
They shall fight every one against his brother, and every one against his
neighbor, and city against city. And we have felt the curses threatened in thy
law, against rebellious sinners, to have taken hold upon us. Deuteronomy. 28.31.
Thine oxa shall be slain before thine eyes, and thou shall not eat thereof:
Thine ass shall be violently taken from before thy face, and shall not be
restored to thee. Thou shall beget sons and daughters. 41.
but thou shall not enjoy them; all these curset shall come upon thee, (with
many more there threatened) till thou be destroyed, 45.
because thou have not hearkened to the voice of the Lord thy God.

O Lord we cannot but confess, that thou art just and thy judgments upright;
yet we humby beseech thee, not to look upon us as sinners, but as thy Children.
Correct us as a merciful Father to amend us, not as a severe judge utterly to
consume us but stop we pray thee this issue of blood in the land, before all
the veins of it be empty, and the whole Nation faint and perish. Thou art our
only refuge, therefore we flee to thee to releeve us. And Lord we pray with
thy servant David, that (if thou have determined yet further to humble us for
our rebellions and backslidings thou would chastise us thy self. 2. Sa. 24.14.
Let us fall into thy hands (for thy mercies are great) and let us not fall
into the hand of man: for the mercies of the wicked are cruel. Pro. 10.12.


Lord we are ready to sink under this heavy judgment: If therefore it may
stand with thy good pleasure, remove it from us. Psalm. 68.30.
Suppress those that are instrument in it. Scatter the people that delight in
war. Psalm 35.5.
Dissipate and frustrare their counsels: Let them be as chafe before the
wind, and let the Angel of the Lord chase them that are implacable enemies to
peace.

Unite O Lord the minds and affections of the Nation, and let them be all as
one Man. Suffer not the hearts of those that are brethren, 1 Cor. 6.15.
and members of one body whereof Christ Jesus is the head; to be any longer
hardened against each other (a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand) but
give us all the spirit of meekness, Mar. 3.23.
patience, and brotherly love. Take from us all self ends, and private
interests, that we may all unanimously seek thy glory, and this Kingdoms
welfare.

Give the King thy judgments O Lord, Psalm. 72.1.
and thy righteousness to the Kings Son: bless them, the Queen and the rest
of the Royal stem with all the graces of thy holy Spirit: bless the Fathers
and Ministers of thy Word and Sacraments, with zeal and piety. Restore
incorrupt Doctrine and holy discipline to the Church, and in thy good time, a
settled and religious Peace to this dying, perishing Kingdom. Bless all our
Magistrates and Counselors with wisdom, knowledge and integrity: bless all
thy people with true faith and obedience, and grant us all, high and low, the
spirit of unity and charity, that we may agree in a blessed and acceptable
harmony to praise thy holy Name, for all thy mercies to us in Christ Jesus.
Amen.

Another.
O Lord Father of mercies, the God of peace, unity, and love. Psalm. 80.4.
How long we beseech thee will thou be angry against the prayer of thy
people? How long will it be ere thou thou remove this unnatural and execrable
war? Look upon the afflictions of thy people, give ear to the sighs, tears,
and groans of the poor, and let the effusion of so much Christian blood move
thee to pity.

Alas O Lord we acknowledge, that this and other thy judgments are just
punishments for our sins! we have sinned, we have committed iniquity, we have
despised and forsaken thee, the fountain of life, and our own happiness, and
have waged war against thee and thy commandments, by our daily offenses. We
have kept none of thy statutes, (which according to thy word by the Prophet)
has brought the sword into our land to devour us. Isa. 1.20.


Yet thou O Lord in the midst of thy wrath remember mercy. Hab. 3.2.
Which that we may be capable of, give us grace to call to our remembrance, to
confess, bewail and forsake our transgressions. Send into our hearts the
spirit of grace and supplication, that we may humbly deprecate thy just
displeasure, and cry unto thee and say Lord pity, Lord save thy people whom
thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for
ever.

Lord sheath this bloody and devouring sword, and let us not fall (as Saul did)
upon our own swords. Command all those that minister occasions of war, to
return to their own places, that so by thy grace and favor, through the merits
of our alone Savior, we may again recover (if it stand with thy good will and
pleasure) our lost happy and most desired peace, and agree again (as becomes
Christians) in unity of hearts and minds to praise and glorify thy holy Name
for ever. Amen.

In this time of unseasonable weather, dearth and scarcity.
ALmighty Lord God, which give food to every living thing, that coverest the
heaven with clouds, and preparest rain for the earth, that command the
clouds to send forth rain, and again do stop the floodgates of heaven: who
at the prayer of thy Prophet Elias, did shut the cataracts thereof, so that
it rained not in three years space. and did again open them, and the clouds
did yield plentiful showers, one for the peoples good, the other for their
punishment. We confidently believe, that thou do what thou please in
heaven, in earth, in the sea, and all places.

We thy poor distressed and miserable Creatures humbly acknowledge and
confess, that we have departed from thee, and have not hearkened to thy word,
to walk in thy commandments. We have spent the days appointed for thy service
in idleness and excess, and neglected thy worship, letting loose the reins
of the flesh to all uncleanness. Therefore that curse denounced in thy law for
such rebellion has befalne us. Deuteronomy. 28.16. etc.
That we should be cursed in the city, and cursed on the field, in our store,
in the fruit of our body, and of our land, in the increase of our kine, and the
fl^cks of our sheep. And that the heaven over our head should be br^sse, and
the earth under us ir^n. And that the rain should come down till we be
destroyed.

O Lord we have seen with joy and comfort that in the former parts and seaons
of the year the earth was plentifully clothed with fruits in abundance, which
filled us with hopes and expectation of a plentiful harvest, and a numerous
increase of all things for the sustentation of man and beast. But O Lord
(thankful hearts not accompaneing our joyful minds) thou have broken up the
springs of the earth, thou have opened the windows of heaven, and immoderate
rains have fallen, whereby the land has been overmoistned, the corn has been
depressed and laid flat to the ground, and for want of the comfort and heat of
the Sun, has not attained to its due ripening; and the waters have
overflowed the earth so much, that our cattle are like to want necessary food
and sustentation; so that all our former hopes seem to be frustrate: and
unless thou of thy special providence be merciful to us, the labors of our
hands will prove altogether vain, and our hopes will be as thistle-down, Sap.
5.14.
which is carried away with the wind, and as the froth, which is driven away
with a storm, and as the smoke, which is dispersed here and there with a
temptest, and we may justly fear a famine to ensue.

When O Lord we see, and feel these extraordinary tempests and rains, we
cannot but acknowledge thy just hand upon us for our ingratitude, in not giving
thee due praise for former plentiful years, and seasonable times, and for our
sleighting and undervaluing so great blessings: as also, that thou art enforced
to draw us to thee by more severe means: and to learn by those thy plagues,
that man's labor avails nothing without thy blessing, and that if thou withdraw
thy hand of providence, all our endeavors prove invalid and uneffectuall, and
therefore we should not undertake any thing, without address to thee by
prayer; and when thy heavy hand is upon us, in this, or any other kind, to
betake our selves to no other means, then calling upon thy holy Name to relieve
us.

At this time therefore, lying under this scourge of thine, we flee unto thee O
merciful Father, we tender our humble supplications to thee: and earnestly in
thy Sons Name, and for his Merits, beseech thee, (if it stand with thy
blessed will) to keep back the bitter judgment of dearth and famine, which we
have just cause to fear. O deal not with us in thy fury, but be pleased, that
we may enjoy those fruits of the earth, which thou did put us in hope to
receive. Supply O Lord what we shall want, by some way or means, which thou in
thy providence do better know to give, then we to expect. Isa. ^9.1.
Thy hand is not shortened, that it cannot help. And it is all one to thee, to
releeve us, either with, or without means.

Lord abate in us all immoderate desires to the creatures, which (with other
our transgressions) has caused this judgment of famine to begin to take
hold upon us. Divert these intemperate showers into our eyes, and extract
showers of tears from them, which may testify, that we unfeignedly bewail
our sins, and deplore our manifold offenses. These showers will prove far
better, and more wholesome and profitable for us, and be a means (by the
intercession of our Savior) to stay and cease those storms which seem to
foretell our destruction and ruin. Lord hear us, and answer us, for thy son
Christ Jesus sake, in whom thou are alone well pleased. Amen.

FINIS.

