A FAITHFVLL and seasonable Advice, OR, The necessity of a Correspondencie for
the advancement of the Protestant Cause.

Humbly suggested to the great Council of England assembled in Parliament.



Printed by John Hammond 1643.

The necessity of a Correspondencie for the advancement of the Protestant Cause.
THE troubles of Europe proceed originally from two causes: the one is the
affectation of a Spiritual, the other of a Temporal Monarchy. That is the
Papal, this is, or has been, the Spanish, and may be from henceforth, the
French ambition. The Pope does labor to uphold his tottering Hierarchy, and to
regaine the power which he had over the consciences of all Men, before it was
cried down as Antichristian by Protestancie. The House of Spain did labor to
erect a new State in Europe, under the pretense of upholding and propagating
the Catholic Religion against Protestants, till the French and Bavarians have
pulled down his old one. These two, and their pretensions have divided the
affections of all men, either in respect of conscience, or of civil interests.
Each has his own way; but that of the Pope is most considerable, because it
is without resistance, and has assistance of both the others, whereas each of
the other pretenders to the Monarchy of State, does oppose his Fellow. The
Popes way to preserve himself, and to regaine the power which he had lost, is
to work the overthrow of the Protestant Religion, and to trouble the States
wherein that Religion is planted. To do this, he makes use of two advantages
which he has above protestants; the one is Civil, the other Ecclesiastical.
The Civil is, that he is able to set all the Popists (...)ces, and their
chief Counselors aworke, to intend jointly the same thing against
Protestants, as well in general to oppose them, as in particular to weaken
them in their esteem and power. As for example, he has moved them all to
contribute to a league against them, to divest them every where of all
dignities; and particularly to weaken their voices in the Electorall College.
And to effect these and such like things, he can infuse into their counsels all
the Maxims of state, which are opposite to the faith and fundamental grounds
of the liberties of Protestants in the public profession of their Religion,
and to persuade the use of these Maxims, he finds out means to make every
one apprehend hopes of advantage for himself by the ruin of Protestants. For
he knows, that it is not so much zeal for Religion, as interests, which
moves States. The Ecclesiastical advantage is the power which he has to
breed and send forth Emissaries toward the common sort of Protestants, and to
set treaties on foot toward the more learned, such as are most for his own
advantage. The Emissaries are bred in his Colleges, of several Nations, but
espcioally in his College de propaganda fide, which is founded to undermine
the states of Protestants, by sowing or fomenting the seeds of division amongst
them. And to this effect also, the more learned of his Clergy are employed to
treat with the learned Protestants for an agreement, which may be patched up
with some, or with all Protestants, by mere authority of Superiors, upon
general terms, and in outward superficial rites, salvo iure Primatus
Pontificii, that is, with an acknowledgement of his Primacie for orders sake
amongst the ^^^^gie^ which i^ Protestants upon any terms will but grant, he for
a time will leave them to their liberties, but afterward by degrees bring them
in subjection to his usurped power in all things both of Faith and Pra ctise.
Now his great advantage to work out all his plots irresistably is this, that
amongst the several Bodies of Protestants, there is none that takes the
matter of their common interest and preservation to heart, to labor to
disa^point his plots by means opposite to his designs, therefore it is
certain, that so long as Protestants have no such aim to maintain jointly
the common interest of Religion and Liberties, but are divided in their
counsels, that in humane appearance their states must be weakened and in the end
overthrown; but if a joint purpose could be wrought amongst them for their
common safety, and a good Correspondencie settled in their Churches and States,
to prosecute the means thereof, toward all those whom it does concern, there
is no doubt but he would lose his labor, and the Consent of protestants to
maintain the light of the truth, and the liberty of the Gospel, would fully
accomplish his overthrow. Now to set this Correspondencie in a joint intention
a foot amongst Protestants, none have so great cause as the state of great
Britain, and the present Parliaement of England, against which all the Popish
Power of Europe is bent to hinder by all possible means, the Reformation now
begun in that Island, therefore it will be altogether necessary, for the said
Parliament to move all other Protestants to join with them for the maintenance
of the Protestant Cause against Popery. This cannot be done otherwise, but by
the means of a good Correspondencie, which may be first begun with the State
and Church of Scotland, and then jointly with them prosecuted toward foreign
Protestants: And to this effect fit instruments should be chosen, and made use
of these should be joined in a Committee or standing Counsel at home to
attend the work of a public Correspondency with forrainners, and to unite them
in the prosecuting of their true interests and common quarrel against Papists.
And to this end they should ta^e the Palatine cause in hand, to make that House
(whose interest and right is greatest among foreign Protestants)
considerable; and to assist it in recovering the right thereof, which it has
lost in defense of the Protestant liberties in Germany.

Now the way to make that House considerable and by it to uphold amongst
forrainners the Protestant cause, is to assist the Prince Elector first with
Counsel and then with Strength. To assist him with Counsel, they should join
to him some of their own Counselors, to help him to manage the work of a
public Correspondencie with Protestants in their name; and they should furnish
him with means of support requisite to maintain other Counselors and Agents
fit to negotiate in his own name, his own cause* and to keep afoot the
public interest with the Protestants of Germany, and neighboring States.

To assist him with Strength, by (...)secuting of this Correspondencie with
foreign States, they should make a League for him, and when their troubles
should be set led, join with others their forces to re-establish him in his
lands and dignities, to uphold in the same the Common Cause.

If this groundwork of Counsel whereof in respect of forrainers chiefly in
Germany, the Prince Elector could be made the head, be not first laid, it is
sure that no Army nor treaty with Austria will ever prevail to settle matters.
But if such a Negotiation be (as it easily can be, even in the midst of these
troubles in England) set afoot, and thereby all those that have a real
interest in the welfare of Protestants, made to concur Counsels with great
Britain, and the Palatiue House in Germany then it is not to be doubted but
that with the supply of small forces from England and Scotland, the Cause and
Rights of all Protestants in the inerest of that House, may be gained; and the
whole Papal and Spanish power as well in the Empire, as elsewhere,
irresisistably overthrown. Perhaps the Austrian power in Germany may be moved
to bend their Counsels for the true? Palatine Eleitor against the Bavarian and
French Design, to keep up a Protestant party, that in ballancing the one by
the other, it may stand. But as for the French, it is certain, that they in all
things, and chifly in zeal for the Papal interests, does emulate the Spanish
power, and is no less active; and as now matters are brought about, more
powerful to advance the same, then Spain is: and therefore in the aim of a
Common Correspondencie amongst Protestants, must be as much looked into, or
more, then any other State.

FINIS.

