Mr. HARTCLIFFE's SERMON Before the House of Commons, January 30. 1694/5.

Jovis 31. die Januarii, 1694. Ordered,
THat the Thanks of this House be given to Mr. HARTCLIFFE for the SERMON by him
Preached yesterday, at St. Margaret, Westminster; And that he be desired to
Print the same, and that Mr. Hunt, and Mr. Hungerford do acquaint him therewith.

Paul Jodrell, Cler. Dom. Com.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, AT St. MARGARET
WESTMINSTER, ON The Thirtieth of January, 1694/5.

By John Hartcliffe, B. D. CANON of Windsor.

LONDON: Printed for Charles Harper, at the Flower-de-luce over against S.
Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1695.

A SERMON ON PSALM 90. Verse XV.
Make us glad, according to the days, wherein thou have afflicted us, and the
years, wherein we have seen evil.
THIS Psalm is made up of a complaint for the afflictions, as well as the
shortness of human Life, together with an earnest prayer to God for a speedy
return of his Mercy: it does particularly reflect on those times, in which
Moses lived, when the Children of Israel suffered great hardships in the
Wilderness, and numbers of them were cut off for their provocations.

So that the Author hereof does in the most passionate manner cry out, our
Troubles have been very heavy, and have lasted very long; let us have, O Lord!
some proportion of Joy to so large a share of Sorrow; and make us glad,
according to the days, wherein thou have afflicted us, and the years, wherein
we have seen evil.

By the Words we are directed; First, To consider what we have seen of Evil in
passed years, chiefly that which this day reminds us of.

Secondly, To fly to the God of all consolation for comfort and joy; that he
would make us glad, according to the days, wherein he has afflicted us.

To look back upon days of adversity and trouble is an unpleasant and
melancholy sight; however some good use may be made of it; for thereby we
shall see, that a long Sunshine of God's Mercy has ripened the Sins of a
Nation, so that it shall be ready for the strokes of his Justice. Thereby also
we shall perceive, with what subtlety the Seeds of Sedition have been sown, and
how mischievously they have been spread abroad in Libels. To what a degree of
heat and madness, the lust and ambition of some Men has been raised; so that
nothing could allay them, till they had sull scope to take their revenge, and
wreak (...) their malice, both upon Church and State.

In order to this End, we our selves have seen, and our Fathers have told us,
what strange and monstrous Things have been done; it being very much so, for
Subjects to Murder their King without shame, and in the face of the Sun; for
the feet, thus unnaturally, to trample upon and throw off their Head. The
meanest indeed of the People must be the most proper and fit Instruments for
such a work, because low Descent and poor Education do, by a natural Power,
incline the thoughts to an imperious Humor, to cruelty and disobedience.

Now the more effectually to recommend this black Design, and to give it a fair
Face, it was named the Cause of God; and the principal Actors therein were
styled God's own Israel. Whereupon every Street was filled with their Cries,
that all People would come out of Egypt, and they had indeed provided them a
Red Sea of Blood for their passage. So that in this day of our affliction, all
the Evil was acted under the vizard of Religion; which did much aggravate the
guilt of the chief Agents, whose hearts were engaged in the contrivance of the
most unwarrantable Deed, when their hands and eyes were offering up prayers and
tears to Gods Throne; nay they seemed to labor under strong Impulses of
Spirit, till they had brought forth the evil thing, they had conceived; which
they could not have done so easily, had they not united Men of different
Interests by a Covenant. What a Device was this to help forward the birth of
the most amazing Wickedness, by such an engagement as was never heard of in
ancient Times, any otherwise than as at the making of their Leagues they were
wont to kill Beasts and divide them; so this also was solemnized with division
and slaughter.

These were the years, in which peaceable and upright Walking before God, and
Obedience to lawful Authority, were exchanged for an unusual Mode of Speech
only, and a formality of Looks. The worst actions Men could be guilty of, were
attributed to the dictates of God's Holy Spirit; and they were more busied in
finding out some marks of Conversion, than about the practice of real
Godliness; till at length the whole State was overthrown by fictions and lying
Words: For by these they did blacken and misrepresent the King himself, that he
might the more plausibly be Sacrificed to the will of his Enemies.

The horridness of which Fact may be here briefly considered in the fatal
Consequences of it; for as one absurdity begets many,, so did this Evil spread
itself into many pernicious Evils; which may be reduced to these two sorts: 1.
Such as were of Civil, 2. Such as were of a Religious Concern.


We have felt the Death of the King to be a sore Judgment, by the terrible
Effects of it, which did spead themselves over the Face, and through the Veins,
and into the Bowels of the three Kingdoms: Many Noble and Ancient Families were
not only undone, but there immediately followed a Change of that Government,
whose Praise had been proclaimed on the Earth for many Centuries: For as soon
as the King was gone, our Fellow Subjects took upon them to be our Princes, and
to govern us at their pleasure, in order to satisfy their Avarice, or their
Ambition: and first they called themselves a Council of State; but after that,
and the Nobility was excluded, came in the Rule of the Common People by their
Representatives only; this increased the Number of our Rulers, consequently the
Burden of our Slavery, by being forced to serve so many Masters: After these
were deprived of the Power they had usurped and abused, began the Dominion of
the Sword; then we had as many Princes as there were Major-Generals; who
perhaps, if they had out lived their Captain, would have cantoned the Kingdom
into so many several Principalities; as when it was shred into Democracy, the
Streams of Government ran thin and shallow, being cut into many Channels. Thus
it was when their Leader, after the Pattern of Jeroboam, who made Priests of
the basest of the People, set up his Creatures too in the House of Lords, and
would have all the Tribes come up, and worship them. After this manner, when
the King was gone, a kind of Giddiness seized those who would be uppermost and
usurp his Place; insomuch that the state of things was continually tossed from
hand to hand, rolling like a Ship in the midst of a tempestuous Sea, with all
her Rigging, Masts, and Rudder-Bands broken down, and without a Pilot, to stee
her into a safe Harbor.

The Second sort of ill Consequences were of a Religious Concern; for upon the
King's Murder, a boundless License, in Matters of Religion, broke in upon the
Nation; all ways of Worshipping God being allowed, but that which ought to be,
and was his most reasonable Service; all Persons being admitted to the sacred
Function, but those, who were lawfully called, and duly qualified by their
Knowledge and Virtue: The Bank being in this manner broke down, the whole Body
of the People began to crumble into Sects, and every Sect had its Head, and
every one that was Head of a Sect, was Prince of that Party: and how many poor
Souls have miscarried by following these false Lights, who have led them into
the grossest and most abominable Trangsgressions; as it must needs be, when the
very Instruments of their Salvation, Preaching, Praying, Fasting, Vowing, were
made use of to color over the vilest Actions; insomuch that nothing at last
was accounted so bad, or so unworthy their notice, as Obedience to Superiors;
nothing so ridiculous as Restitution of what was unjustly gotten: So that the
very Savior of the World, who taught Patience and Humility, Justice and Mercy
through his whole Life, is now again most notoriously mocked with Soldiers, and
vouched the Patron of all that hideous Bloodshed, which he has plainly
condemned in his Word, and will hereafter as severely sentence in his own
Person.

These were sad and mournful days indeed, when our distressed Country felt
such violent Convulsions within her own Bowels; such deadly Blows from her own
disobedient Children: When both its Civil and Religious Concerns were almost
destroyed; for that Men made use of both the Name, Word, and Ordinances of God,
to palliate the most unrighteous Purposes.

Now a just Reflection on these passed Times of Adversity should arm us, that
we may escape the like Troubles,

1st. With a resolution never to meddle with those that are given to change.

2ly. Never to entertain any Principles of Sedition.

For to be involved in Factions against the Government, is a foolish and a
dangerous thing; it is foolish, because a Man that engages therein, does at the
same time expose himself to all the Delusions imaginable, and to the Cheats of
every plotting Knave. Besides, what an unaccountable thing is it, for every
pert and ignorant Fellow to sit in Judgment on his Governors, and arraign
their Administration of Affairs. Then in Matters of Religion, we shall hear
every thing to be branded for Popery; and in Matters of State, every thing to
be called Tyranny, which does not exactly agree with their Model. It is also
dangerous to be in with Factions, because they make Men so bold and rash, that
at one time or other they will split themselves to pieces against the Law; for
their Lives and Fortunes are at pawn in the hands of their Confederates, who in
all probability will betray them; or if they do not, their most clandestine
Councils may be overheard, or their own guilty Looks and unavoidable Suspicions
may discover all, and so hang up their mighty Hopes upon a Gibbet.

Now these Factions are generally laid at first, as they were in the late
Times, in some little Disputes about Matters of Religion; and when once the
People are whetted by this kind of Zeal to disturb the established Religion,
the next thing they do is to muster against the established Government. Thus
they grow nice about an indifferent Rite of Worship, and can take in
treasonable Principles without remorse.

Poor deluded People! who are Tools only in the hands of the more crafty, and
are led by exterior Appearances, without penetrating into the Cause and Nature
of things; they list themselves in Parties and see where they begin, but God
knows where they will end; they commence the Quarrel for some Loan, and are
trained on from one Evil to another, into the Spilling of Royal Blood; for when
they are entered into illegal Actions, soon despairing of a safe Retreat, they
think to shelter themselves from the Punishment of one Crime by committing a
worse; for I make no doubt that many of those wretched Men, who murdered King
CHARLES the First, would have trembled at the imagination of it, when first
they were concerned in the Attempt, but being once drawn in, they had no other
way to escape, but by Rebellion, and being Rebels, they had no other Sanctuary,
but Regicide.

Wherefore it behooves us, as we regard our own or the public Safety, to shun
all Correspondence with such, as would readvance the old Methods of Sedition;
let us look back a while on the passed Years of our Calamity, and we must be
astonished at the Misfortunes that have been brought about by the feigned
Alarms sometimes of Superstition, and sometimes of Arbitrary Power, according
as either the one or the other might best serve the Turns of ill-minded Men:
When therefore we find any among us laboring and concerned to raise these
Jealousies again, be sure they aim at sinking the whole Frame of things into
Confusion; and whenever we discover any sort of Men struggling for Reformation
in a tumultuous manner; we must have nothing to do with them; for they will
assuredly be found Deceivers, who make a show of Religion to undermine the
State; and whenever some undutiful Persons speak ill of their Rulers in common
Converse, and whisper Stories to magnify their Faults, be sure they do this to
stir up the Passions and Arms of the People against them.

Whereas if we would maintain the Character of good Christians and good
Subjects, and desire to walk uprightly in a safe Course of Life, we must follow
the honest and peaceable Rules of living through all Events whatsoever; so
shall we live consistently with our selves, be always the same, immoveably
confirmed in our Obedience both to God and the King.

But then 2ly. We must never entertain any Principles of Sedition; for if we
do, we shall always be prepared to break the public Peace, and to turn the
World upside down: We have heard indeed from ill-principled Politicians, that
to be a zealous and sthro-paced Christian, is to be dangerous to the State:
Whereas our Savior's Gospel contains nothing in it prejudicial to the Power of
just and lawful Magistrates; but on the other side, has stated the Rights of
Civil Government upon the firmest Principles, has secured them by the most
powerful Obligations, and has urged them upon us by the most effectual Motives
of Rewards and Punishments.

Now if at any time the Professors of our Religion have acted contrary to the
Spirit of Christ, who was a gentle Lord, and a Peacemaker, they must be
esteemed his Enemies, and not his Disciples; if in the Rule of our Faith there
can be found any Warrant to justify their privy Conspiracies, or open
Rebellion; then may Kings cease to be our nursing Fathers, and Queens to be our
nursing Mothers; then our preaching is vain, and your Faith is vain. But the
truth of the Case is quite otherwise; the Foundation of Government is deeply
rooted in the Foundation of our Religion: Insomuch that what human Laws could
never effect, that the Christian, in the true Spirit of it, performs to the
utmost degree: For our Savior carried himself with Submission to the Powers,
that then were, even to the Sanhedrim and their Delegates; and in his Doctrine
he has commanded us, to render unto Caesar the things, that are Cesars; and the
Apostles likewise press earnestly for Obedience to them, who have the rule over
us; that we may do all things without murmuring, and pray for all that are in
authority.

But if any object to this, that both Christ and his Followers too submitted,
because they had not Strength nor Force enough to resist; we may reply, that he
could only have spoke the Word, and his Father would have sent him Twelve
Legions of Angels for his Relief; but to this Objection the Behavior of the
Primitive Christians will give a full Answer; for Tertullian tells the Emperor
in his Apology, that his Cities, Islands, Castles, and Armies; his Palace,
Senate, and Courts of Judicature, were filled with Christians, who would make
no Stirs, tho they were oppressed by the severest Edicts: And it is very
remarkable, that our Savior did never look into the original Power of the
Sanhedrim, or what was left them by the Romans, but because they sat in Moses
his Chair, whatsoever they bid you do, be charges them to do it; and in the
Writings of his Apostles not a Word occurs of any enquiry into the Titles or
Rights of the Roman Governors, but their Pains are spent in fixing all things
that relate to the just Measures of Obedience: For it had been a very weak
Argument for Rulers to become Christians, if by yielding to our Faith, they
must thereby be exposed to the shakings of War, upon every breaking out of
Religious Melancholy; whose untoward Influences were in the late Times of
trouble so very powerful, as to persuade some overzealous Persons, that they
were exempt from the Laws of Men, when they were confident enough to call
themselves the only Friends of the Kingdom of Christ.

How far this false Opinion did prevail, and how near it came to the digging
the Grave of this Kingdom, we cannot remember without Consternation; but this
beneficial Truth we have learnt by it, that there is no Cruelty so great, as
Laxeness of Government, nor Tyranny, like the Rage of Subjects let loose and
unrestrained: Hence proceeded such a Deed, as was hardly ever seen or heard of
before, and that will cause the Ears of all future Ages to tingle, when the
King fell by the Rage of his own mistaken People.

However it may be, God suffered this barbarous Wickedness to succeed, that he
might show forth his Wonders in our days, and comfort us under the present
Reign for all the afflictions that we have smarted under: It may be, this was
done, that we might say, the Lord lives, who has delivered us from the Teeth
of unnatural Zealots, blood thirsty and deceitful Men.

Surely all these things have been permitted, that the Faith and Patience of
good Men might be made bright and shining, by the flames they have undergone of
Persecution; and that in the day when God shall have given the King either the
hearts, or the necks of his Enemies, it may not repent him of the deliverance
he has wrought, under God, for the State, out of the snares of wicked Men, or
of raising up the afflicted Head of the Church out of the dust; of whose Faith
his Grandfather lived the most pious Defender, and for which he died a Glorious
Martyr.

Which brings me to the second and more delightful part of my Text, to consider
the comforts we may now hope for, when God has made us glad, according to the
days, wherein we have been afflicted: And he has made us so, in that we live,

First, Under a Monarchy, not under a multitude of Rulers.

Secondly, Under the Directions of the true Religion, not under erroneous
Doctrine.

Thirdly, Under the Blessings of Peace, not under the Miseries of Civil War.

The late Troubles were the more heavy and intolerable, in that we had many
Masters to serve, many Taskmasters I mean, who did often require brick without
affording straw: And Solomon observes, Prove. 28.2. That for the transgression
of a Land many are the Princes thereof, but by a man of understanding shall the
state of it be prolonged; especially where the King Governs his Subjects, as a
Father does his Children, by equal and just Laws, made with their own consent
to them: And at present we have a particular reason for a more than ordinary
joy, if we reflect upon the wonderful change from what we were of late, to what
we are now; as S. Paul says of the calling of the Jews, it is like the
Resurrection of the dead: And we may believe, that if the Spirits of just men
made perfect know any thing of what is done here below, that King CHARLES the
First, was never so much grieved with the Injuries that were done unto himself,
as now he may be well pleased with these days of Happiness to his Realms, in
having a Monarch of his own Blood, endowed with all the Heroical Virtues, which
may shed a suitable influence upon his Government: For he appears to be sent by
God himself, to build up the Walls of our Jerusalem, and to make up the
breaches in Sion, by restoring whatever we want to complete our good Condition,
to cure all our Jealousies, to banish all our Fears, to confirm all our hopes,
and to remove all our Distractions.

Now these Blessings can be no more expected from a Multitude of Rulers, than
order can be kept up in the Universe by a multitude of Gods, who will be ever
crossing one another. But they may be had under a single Person, especially
from one, whom we must own to be designed by Divine Providence, to be preserved
by Divine Power, to be qualified by Divine Wisdom, to scatter that cloud which
began to gather and look black upon Church and State; to establish and prolong
our peace, plenty, wealth, strength, security, reputation, and whatsoever other
Ingredients there are to render a Nation happy; which was so near perishing
under the Conduct of many, it shall by one man of knowledge and virtue, not only
be recovered from its former Distempers, but be steadfastly settled, and the
State thereof continued, if it be not our own fault, for the future: whereas
the whole Constitution of the Land must needs sink, if it should be ever
Cantoned into parts, or the Sovereignty of the whole be shared among many or
among all, if it should be divided by Swordmen, or by setting up two Chiefs
over the same Subjects, one in Civil, the other in Ecclesiastical Matters,
whether the conclave, or the consistory be the cause of it.

For, Secondly, The Confusions of the late Times were the more grievous for the
variety of Teachers that sprung up, and filled the Heads of their Disciples
with wrong Notions of things, particularly that they might avoid the Power of
the Magistrate, by pleading sometimes their Christian Liberty, and sometimes by
pretending a tenderness of Conscience. Now if our Christian Liberty should
extend so far, as to cancel all Bonds of Subjection to Princes, it must be the
perpetual occasion of Wars and Commotions; which made it necessary for the
Apostles, almost in all their Writings, to press Obedience to Superiors, least
the Christians should once think themselves free from these ties; which would
render Civil Government very uncertain, and the Condition of Rulers very
precarious. But our most pure and inoffensive Religion has found out an
admirable temper for these things, and does positively command all Persons, to
conform also to every thing lawful, which Public Authority shall prescribe:
The Contents of the great Charter brought in by our Lord Jesus being these;
that besides the delivering us from the Dominion of Sin, and the burdensome
Rites of Judaism, our minds might enjoy a freedom to follow their Reason, and
to obey any Laws of Men, that do not interfere with, or contradict the express
Laws of the Gospel: From which Obedience no pretenses to a tender mind can by
any means excuse us; notwithstanding some Men by the softness hereof, have
endeavored to limit Magistrates, null their Laws, and to justify any
extravagant Action in the Person who pretends to it; so that if the King
himself shall meddle with such a one to stop the current of his zeal, he shall
be named a fighter against God. Thus by the same Persons Divine Honor has
been given to a Passion, and the Prince at the same time has been Dethroned:
Hence also it is probable, that dangerous Principle arose; That it is Lawful
for any Man of what quality soever, to set up for a Reformer.

I need not put you in mind of the Disorders, such as were never hammered out
by the wit and wickedness of Man before, which have hereby been brought upon
the Kingdom: It is our present comfort and security, that we live under the
peaceable directions of that Religion, which is of another Spirit, and will not
suffer us to dishonor our Profession by a false Notion of Liberty, or to
commit any sin under the disguise of a tender Conscience: Upon this account it
is, that we may hope to live

Thirdly, Under the blessings of Peace; not that we are rid of Enemies, but we
may maintain our ground against their attacks, so long as the wheels of
Government are set right, and move with an entire harmony. For if we view the
posture we stand in in at this day, if ever any people were obliged to live in
good agreement with one another, we undoubtedly are that People; especially if
we look back upon the days of our Calamity, and the miseries our Country lay
under from the outrages of War. And it was observed of old, that the Conquest
of this Island by the Romans was effected with ease, by reason of the
differences that were among the Inhabitants; whereas had they made a joint
Defense, they had certainly either preserved their Liberty, or at least sold it
at a dearer rate. At this instant we have too great cause to fear, that while
the several Parties contend, a common Enemy should rush in upon us, who cannot
swallow us whole, as he may do, when we are cut into small pieces: And then, as
my Lord Bacon says well, we must take it to be a desperate case, when those,
who seem to be in with the Proceedings of the State, are full of Discord, and
those that are against it, are entire and united.

However I cannot but believe, that the Providence of God has yet continued
Peace among us, for this End, that we may be the more vigilant against the
approach of Enemies from abroad, chiefly those of Rome, who cannot set their
foot here without bringing an Inundation of Ruin upon all orders of Men: For if
we should be so good natured, as to cherish this Serpent in our bosoms, which
now we imagine to have neither power nor will to hurt us, I question not, but
we should feel it to resume its former malice and poison, together with its
warmth and strength: And give me leave to tell you, that if, now the house is
well swept, the old unclean Spirit should come back again, he would take unto
him seven other Spirits, worse than himself, and dwell there, and so make our
latter end worse than our beginning.

Which must be so, without the return of Popery, unless we forsake every evil
way; because every sin is vertually a Treason against the Government, and
threatens the alteration of it: And it is too notorious, how long an angry no
less, than a sinful Spirit, has reigned among us; with what a bare fare, and
brazen forehead does he walk about the Nation! With what Traders for Hell has
the Land of late years abounded! Men who are Adversaries to God and Virtue; and
consequently must be so to the Established Government. In their Cabals they are
so impudent and base, as to revile the King, backbite his Ministers, carry
about false Stories, give odious Characters, and raise imaginary Fears; as it
has been in times past; so this is done now, to let loose the Rabble upon
their Governors, which Beggars do ever impatiently long for.

Now would we be willing to see the Tragical Scene of Forty One acted over
again, by a crew of Malcontents? Would we see that restless, ploting humor,
which boyls and ferments in many Men's breasts, display itself in the dismal
Effects of War and Desolation? Would it please us to see men of broken
Fortunes, and the most profligate Lives, in Troops and Tumults beleaguering the
Government? Would we have an Army of Irish Papists, the standing Instruments of
our perpetual Slavery? Would we rejoice to have that spiteful saying verified,
Delenda est Carthago, that is, would we have our Friends destroyed, and our
greatest Foe advanced to an Universal Monarchy? Would we hear the Priests
absolving their Congregations from the Oath of Allegiance to their Sovereign?
Would we be contented to have an insolent, overturning Army in the Bowels of
the Nation, to tear every body to pieces? Would it delight us to behold the
Husbandman undone, the Gentry starved, the Nobility harrass'd, and the Crown
trampled on with the vilest Circumstances of Malice and Cruetly, with all good
Men dying at the feet of merciless and blody Cutthroats?

Now if we would stop this Deluge of Evils from breaking in, and would prevent
a Relapse into our old Diseases; if we dread these Furies to be let loose again
upon us; let us fear a return of our former Iniquities; if we would keep off
the Axe from the Root of our Country, let us lay it to the Root of our Sins; if
we would preserve the Lives of our Posterity, let us amend our own; for when we
hear of Conspiracies, or seditious Combinations, they need not so much move or
affright us, as when we behold Treachery and Falseness the predominant
Principle of Men's Actions; as when we see the same or more open Profaneness,
the same or more lewd Debaucheries of all kinds, calling aloud for Vengeance
from Heaven: This is the Cause, that, if we look back but a few Years, we shall
find God's Judgments have all along followed us, still corroding into our very
Bones. This would more plainly appear, if I might be suffered to rehearse the
Evils that have befaln this Nation, and might trace them backward to that great
one, which was the Spring of many others, and the unhappy Cause of this Day's
Observation.

Blessed be God, that after so many Afflictions, he has caused Light to spring
out of Darkness, and Order out of Confusion; who has reduced all things into
that firm State, out of which they have been distorted; has wrung our
Religion, and our Liberties out of the very Clutches of the Roman Wolf; has
fixed the Throne and the Church upon a sure bottom; both which are fenced about
with the most excellent and useful Laws.

But then what Requital have we made to God for all these Benefits? How have we
demeaned our selves under this happy Constitution of Affairs? What Fruits do we
yield answerable to these great Advantages? One might rationally expect to see
Religion in quite another Face among us, than is has in other parts of the
World; and having had sufficient experience of the manifold Woes arising from
Discord, there should no such thing as Division be heard of; and living under
the most merciful and indulgent Prince, all the Strife methinks should be how
to serve faithfully so good and so great a Master.

But alas! the Behavior of many is contrary to all this; who quarrel still
without any Ground, and without any Measure; who do not yet give over to
reproach and Nickname one another: What the issue of these unreasonable
Differences may be, we know not; I pray God they do not end in our Fall, for
these were the Sins, if it be lawful to guess at the reason of God's Judgments
from outward Appearances, that brought the sorest Evils upon our Forefathers.

Wherefore if these uneasy and quarrelsom Persons have not the Grace of
Christians, have they not the Hearts of Men? Have they no Compassion nor Love
for the Good of their Country? Will they not at least pity their own Progeny?
Will they commit Sins, and breed up Children to inherit the Curse? Shall the
Infants now unborn have cause to say hereafter in the Bitterness of their
Souls, our Fathers have by their Falsehood and Rebellion forfeited those
Liberties, and Lost that Religion, which should have been our just Inheritance!

Thanks be to God, that at present we are made whole; he has by a Miracle of
Goodness healed our Breaches, applied a proper Remedy to our Maladies, and has
poured Balsam into the Wounds of a distempered Nation: What remains then, but
that we take the Counsel that was given upon a like miraculous Cure; Go, and
sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto you; Go and raise no more intestine
Feuds, lest you make your selves weak, little, and indefensible.

But since our Sufferings have been so great, as none to be acknowledged worse;
since our Calamities have reached the very top; I must say, Go and sin no more,
lest the same Evils befall you; if my Advice will not be received, let that in
1 Samuel 12.24, 25. prevail; Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth; for
consider, how great things he has done for you; But if ye still do wickedly,
ye shall all perish, both ye, and your King.

For there is no such mighty difference in the Wits and Contrivances of Men; no
such great Advantages in Military Power and Conduct; no such wonderful
Disproportion in the Courage or Wisdom of Mankind: But when God has been
pleased to send his Locusts or his Grasshoppers, the meanest and very
contemptible Creatures; the most flourishing Kingdoms, the best disciplined
Armies, and the most fortified Cities have been overturned: But a due Regard to
our most holy and peaceable Religion, as it will prevent private Animosities by
Justice and Honesty, Truth and Plain-dealing; so it will keep off public
Disturbances, by casting out all bad Principles, which are the fatal Nurseries
of Rebellion; by teaching us Patience, a due Government of our selves, and
Obedience, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake.

Whereas a vicious Course of Life, all loose and extravagant Desires, do
naturally dispose Men to endeavor After-changes in hopes of bettering their
Condition; and this Expectation prompts them on to unhinge the Government by
Fraud, or to cut the Sinews of it by Force.

But if Men were wise, they would consider in this their Day, the things which
do belong to their Peace; for whose sake, if they were wise, they would abandon
their most beloved Sins, and for whose sake, if they were wise, they would lay
aside their most beloved Scruples: For how can they answer it to their own
Consciences, if at such a critical time, when all things valuable to us lie at
Stake, they shall then labor to support the Interests of distinct Parties, and
refuse to do those things, which they may do lawfully toward a Union with the
whole Nation: They would not act thus, if they had any Veneration for the
Memory of King CHARLES the First, or did from their Souls abhor those black
Counsels and accursed Practices, which finished the last part of his Tragedy.

May all of us therefore be most industriously watchful, that the same Spirit
of Peevishness and Division, which, in the Years of our trouble, inspired so
many ill Men, mis-guided some credulous Persons, and cost the King so dear, may
not once more revive and insinuate it self again, under the same, or craftier
Disguises, and find an Opportunity to attempt the like Mischiefs.

May all dissatisfied Persons be brought to a better Temper, by reflecting
seriously on those great things, which God has done for the saving their
Country, and not be so debased in their Spirits, as to court Bondage and
Destruction: May they at length cease to be turbulent, or to justle their
Brethren; when we are all standing upon the brink, as it were of a steep
Precipice; we are at present held up by a strong hand, but as by one single
Thread; Can we then think our selves secure from so great Danger?

We are bound therefore to humble our selves before God; to bewail, with a
broken and a contrite Heart, those crying Sins, which may justly provoke him to
punish us with the utmost Severity; earnestly imploring his Mercy, that he
would protect our Church and Nation from the Designs of their Enemies, and
deliver us all from unreasonable and wicked Men: That in the midst of Judgment
he would remember Mercy, and make us glad in giving Health, long Life, and
Prosperity to the King, after the Time in which we have been so forely
afflicted for the late Loss of our most Gracious Queen, who was truly the
Breath of our Nostrils, the Delight of our Eyes, and the Joy of all our Hearts:
Which Mercy we importunately pray, that God would grant us, for the Sake of
Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be ascribed, as is most due, all Honor, Praise,
and Dominion now and for ever.

FINIS.

