A DISCOVERY For Division or Setting out of Land, as to the best Form.
Published by Samuel Hartlib Esquire, for Direction and more Advantage and
Profit of the Adventurers and Planters in the FENS and other Waste and
undisposed Places in England and IRELAND. Whereunto are added some other Choice
Secrets or Experiments of Husbandry. With a Philosophical Quere concerning the
Cause of Fruitfulness. AND An Essay to show How all Lands may be improved in a
New Way to become the ground of the increase of Trading and Revenue to this
Commonwealth.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Wodenothe in Leaden- hall-street, 1653.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THE hopes which we have of a more speedy Reformation in time to come, and of
a readier dispatch of Public Designs then formerly, does encourage me to
offer to the view of the Public these Motions, which happily may find
acceptance; if not so far as to be set up by Authority; yet to be understood
by private Persons, that they may find their Conveniencie therein.

They concern, as thou may see, chiefly the Advantages of Husbandry, to
remedy some Defects and Disorders, which are found therein; and to lay the
foundations of Trade and Commerce to increase the same; and all this by some
Orderly Contrivances, which may produce incredible Effects, if rightly
undertaken and attended. If I should intend to lay open the Mischievousnesse of
Disorderlinesse and Confusion, I might fill a Volume; it is either the root or
the effect of all the evils of this World; whether they afflict our Soul or our
Body, and concern our private or our public Relations; and to bring our selves
and our affairs into a righteous Order, is the great Work which every one
should attend within himself; and the greatest good which can be procured at
any time unto others; and at this time unto the Public: it is therefore
incumbent to all, equally to serve one another herein, according to their
utmost ability; and except all concur to order themselves aright both within
themselves, and toward each other, we cannot be thoroughly happy nor settled in
any course succesfully, because it is in Humane Societies almost as in a Watch;
except all the Wheels be not only sound and well settled upon their own
axle-trees; but fitly ordered to correspond with each other, there can be no
Universal Motion, because the disorderliness of one will disturb many from
acting in their Spheres; so it falls out in most matters of Humane Society
chiefly in Trade, and in some points also of Husbandry, as by this following
Discourse will appear. Therefore, that which one says is to be heeded; Quod
omnes tangit ab omnibus curari debet. That which is the concernment of all,
ought to be the care of all; but no man can make this to be so; except the
spirits of men be raised to a pitch answerable to the worth of things offered
unto them. For as Seneca says, Magno animo de rebus magnis judicandum est;
alias illarum vitium esse videbitur quod nostrum est. Great Matters are to be
weighed with a raised mind, otherwise the fault will seem to be in them, which
is in our selves. And although these things may perhaps seem to some, of no
great moment, yet if they be looked into duly, they will be found such, as have
an influence, upon the Fundamentalls of the Settlement of Commonwealths. For
if Husbandry, and Trade at home and abroad be well regulated; all hands may be
Employed, and where all hands are at work, there the whole strength of a
Nation, does put forth its endeavors, for its own advantage, which if it can
be directed to do in an Orderly Way; and with a joint Concurrence of all parts
to one and the same effect; it is not to be imagined how succesful such an
Undertaking may be; As for myself, I have in my station bin faithful to offer
Objects of this and some other kind unto the Public, to provoke every one to
mind the best things for their own and the Public Good; and although in this
endeavor, wherein for many years I have continued in the midst of some
difficulties, and all our Changes, and have spent my self thereupon as upon a
necessary duty; yet I have found no great Encouragement thereunto from abroad,
more then what mine own resolution (to persevere faithful unto the end in well
doing) did suggest unto me; nevertheless I hope I shall not faint. For I hope
the Lord will continue me in the Apostles mind, that I may say from my heart,
2 Cor. 12. 15, 16. That I will very gladly spend and be spent for the good of
others, although for the most part it proves a thankless office, and the more
abundantly one is found to love the Public; the less he is loved: Yet let it
be so with me; I shall not at any time seek to burden any man, but rather set
my self in doing things freely by this kind of Craft to catch men by their own
advantages, to mind the Public, and do good one to another as servants of
each other through love; for herein is the Law of Jesus Christ fulfilled, and
his Kingdom advanced amongst us, when upon such a ground trusting unto him, we
do all our Affairs heartily for his sake, and not as serving Men only or Our
selves. And that thou may Christian Reader be enabled to walk in all thy
Ways by this Rule, is the Upright desire of him, who shall always profess
himself,

Thy faithful Servant in Christ, Samuel Hartlib.

This Chart is the Plot or description of one entire Lordship, or Mannor-house,
with its proper Demains: or it may serve for a considerable Farm of 100, 200,
or 300 Acres.

A the Manor house, or dwelling house. B the Kitchen Garden. C the Orchyard. D
the Garden for choice fruits or flowers. E the Garden for Physical plants, or
what you will. F F the Dary and Landry. G G the Sheep coats. H H the two
greatest of the home Closes to milk the Cows in, or to put a saddle Nag in. I I
the Bake house and Brew house. K the standing racks for Oxen, etc. and the
great Corn Barn. L L Other Barns, Stables, Cow or Oxhouses, Swines styes. M M
the little houses for all sorts of Poultry. N N More standing Racks. O O
Coney-berries. Q Q little Closes for a stoned Horse, a Mare, or Fool, etc. R R
Little Closes for like purposes. S two little Pastures for fat Sheep. T two
Closes for Pasture for Ewes, Lambs, or weaker Sheep. V two little Pastures for
a fat Beef or two. W two little Pastures for infected Cattle. X two little
Pastures for your own, or your friends Saddle-horse, that is for present
service. Y two little Pastures for weaning Calves.




This Chart conteins 2000 Acres, consisting of or divided into 16 great Farms,
containing 100 Acres apiece, and 16 lesser Farms, consisting of 25 Acres
apiece: And that so as each thousand Acres may be considered apart, as being
divided in the middle by the great Bank or high way, with the two great Drains
on each side of the same.

A the Bank B the 2 great Drains on each side. C the four lesser Drains. D the
great Ditches or Cuts to each Farm. E the like Cuts to the little Farms. F the
main River. G the Cut from the four best Farms to that River. H the Farmhouses
and home-stalls of the great Farms. I the lesser Farm Houses K the marks ^f
division to the Farms. L the mark of the ring hedge Ditch or wall M the four
first great Farms. N the 12 other great Farms.


This may serve as the plot of another greater Manor of 2000 Acres, wherein
the four middle Tenements may be made into a grand Farm, or the Lords Demains.
And then there remains twelve great Farms of 100 Acres apiece, and 16 lesser
Farms of 25 Acres apice, whose in^abitants (being supposed laborers) lie
co^veniently to serve either the Lord or the greater Farms. All which may be
cast into either form Round or Square, though for my part I judge the round in
the square the best and most convenient.



A DISCOVERY For New DIVISIONS, OR, Setting out of LANDS, as to the best Form:
Imparted in a Letter to Samuel Hartlib, Esquire.
HONORED SIR,
I Here present you with a plain Discovery of that prudentiall Contrivance for
the more advantageous setting out of Lands, which I have formerly acquainted
you with, and as you know offered in vain to some of the Company of Drayners of
the great Fen, as I had opportunity; That so I may not only gratify your
Publique-heartednesse and great Zeal for the Common good, and testific my
willingness to be doing some good in my generation, as God shall enable me,
but that I may in some sort be blameless to all Posterity, though those Lands
be not well divided or sub-divided, since I have not only offered my
assistance, such as it is in private, but do here (and suppose not altogether
too late) freely offer it to the consideration of all men that are, or may be
concerned in the same, or the like nature, of what better use Lands divided, or
subdivided, according to the Plats here intended to every man's view may be
found or esteemed. And lest any mistake should be in the not rightly
understanding my meaning, or the nature of the thing, give me leave to trouble
the World with a few of my Reasons for, or apprehensions of that Advantage or
Convenience, which may be more had and obtained by following this Example.

I have been even called to a more then ordinary use of, and love to all sorts
of Husbandry, and particularly to Agriculture, wherein God has been graciously
pleased to recompense my Zeal, and endeavor with an increase of knowledge and
experience in the ways of managing Agriculture and Husbandry; in all its
parts; and that not only according to what is commonly known and practiced,
but by some Additionals, which if well accepted, and rightly pursued, would
tend exceedingly to the prosperity, honor and plenty of this whole Nation; but
of this, as I have formerly acquainted you more largely (for you have thought
fit to hint it to the World in your Reformed Husbandman) I shall therefore
proceed and say, that that dear and even natural affection which I have to
Husbandry, above all other employments among men, may (perhaps) have occasioned
my further enquiry into these affairs; and by those observations to which I
have given my self more then every man, I may have attained to farther insight
then every man has troubled himself to take, which I freely present to my
Native Country, at least so much as concerns the matter here in Question;
namely, The setting out of Land, as to the best Form.

I have observed that all or most part of the Lands, Lordships, Manors,
Parishes, Farms, and particular Grounds, or Closes in England are not (or
rather were not at that time past, when they were first) set out in any good
Form; too much of England being left as waste ground in Commons, Mores,
Heaths, Fens, Marshes, and the like, which are all Waste Ground; but some
more, some less; some being made a little better use of then others; but all
capable of very great Improvement, as not now yielding (not one of forty of
them through England) the one fourth part of that profit either to private or
public, which they are respectively capable of.

I have observed in all places in England the great inconveniences that come by
the Want of Enclosure, both to private and public, the irregularity of these
Lands that are enclosed, the frequent, and (as things now stand in relation to
time past, and Land already set out) unremediable intanglements or intermixture
of Interest of several persons in the same Common, in the same Field, in the
same Close, nay sometimes in the same Acre. The inconvenient passages made or
allowed between diverse grounds, and that not only, when they belong to
several men, but even when one man is owner of diverse grounds; and the truth
is, either he that is possessed of Lands, is a Lord or Tenant; if Lord, he
seldom alters that Form he found his Lands in, whether he received them by
Inheritance, or purchase; and if but Tenant, he would count it (for the most
part) lost labor, although he did indeed understand both the inconvenience and
the right remedy: but I fear neither Lord nor Tenant do so, or at least so, as
to lay to heart the Crosses or Losses they or their neighbors do too
frequently sustain merely upon this account, or are too careless or desperate
of the remedy.

I have observed the carelessenesse and wickedness of Servants and bad
neighbors both; which a man shall be sure to meet, let him remove as often,
and to what place he will.

I have observed the proneness most of Cattle and Poultry to break into
forbidden places, but above all others, commonly kept in England (not to speak
of Deer and Goats, or of wild fowl, or the like) Swine, Coneys, and Pigeons,
(and some sorts of Poultry, at some seasons) are most inclined to and frequent
actors of mischief, and that so great, that men dare hardly consider it
seriously, but let it pass to avoid vexation.

Who is it that lives a Countrey-life, but knows, or may know, and upon
enquiry find, that one pair of old Pigeons eats of one sort or another of
Corn, and grain in the year at least 6 bushels, and that there are almost (if
not altogether) as many such pairs of Pigeons, as there are men, women and
children in England, and it is plain, they can get none, but either of what you
have sown, or of what you should reap, or of the sheadings in the field, which
were better bestowed on your Swine or Poultry, or out of your barn, or rick,
or threshing-floor, from whence I suppose you cannot well spare it, or from the
manger, standing racks, or dunghill, all which your pigs and hens must want so
much. I conclude as to this Creature, that there is no such enemy to the
prosperity of England, of his bigness so little taken notice of, or that yields
so little return; nay I dare affirm, that all the beasts and fouls in England,
(wild fowl, which we cannot so easily prevent, and Swine, and Coneys, which
yet return abundantly more profit excepted) do not equalize the loss and
damage suffered by this one sort of small birds; but let this serve by way of
digression, for the truth is, the Contrivance here principally intended is for
the better casting out of Lordships or Farms in point of Form, and does no
other way remedy this, but as it contracts your business into a close order,
making it as easy to discover, and chase away this enemy in one ground, as in
another, which is not commonly to be done in other places.

The next destructive Cattle are Coneys, they will eat down the Corn at the
first coming up, sometimes to its destruction, they will eat it down all along
till Harvest, and if it yet prosper in part, they will stand on their hinder
legs, and crop off the ear just at the bottom, and leave the straw standing, I
have seen several fields in a confiderable part so served, they will destory
young Woods, by eating the bark away round about a foot high, and in good
meadow and pasture make a thousand cross paths, and in all grounds dig holes
under the roots of trees, corn, etc. to a very great prejudice; and this evil
is something the worse, in that there is no Fence in the common way against
them, but the dog or gun, which is not always allowed, yet to do this little
beast right, it is not his fault but his Masters, or those that keeps him in no
better order, for I do affirm, that few Creatures under heaven, (as they may be
managed) turn to greater profit to the Owners, and yet may they be kept (all
things considered) cheaper, and (in a manner) free from doing any hurt to his
Owners, or their Neighbors; and so become a most pleasant, profitable,
harmless creature. And thus to manage this Creature is most properly to be
done by such, whose Lands are divided, or sub-divided into some such Form as
these Charts express, and in such a Farm it is not uneasy to make these
Creatures to do some especial services even in his lifetime.

The third most harmfull beast is the Swine, a Creature so ravenous, that
children are scarce safe from a lean sow that has pigs, and for her to eat her
own pigs is no very strange thing; and to eat your Turkeys or Goslings a thing
often seen. And as Swine are ordered, there is hardly any thing safe from them;
how will they break through almost any hedge, not only eat, but root up and
destroy the Corn abundantly, as likewise any grass, trees, plants, or whatever
corn is in their way, or they can come at? what and how great and frequent are
the losses abroad, and the nasty inconveniences at home occasioned by this
Creature? And herein they differ, and are worse then all other Cattle, that
when they are in the corn they are not easily seen, and (if their owners or
keepers miss them not) as too many of those that are called poor people, will
not only willingly not miss them, but (I have seen it, and suffered by it)
will on set purpose drive them thither by which means they will sometimes get a
haunt of a piece of corn, and go into it so cunningly, that a man can scarce
find where, but being a good way in, they will destroy wholly great spots of a
rod or two together, and when a man shall discover them, he had almost as good
let them alone, for without a dog they will but play bo-peep, and be running
from place to place, but trample down and spoil more, and so they will do a
good while also, though you have a dog. Seriously, Sir, I suppose, that though
the Hog being fat, and dead is excellent meat, and of so large a body, and good
price that he may be worth some pounds, yet there is not one Hog of ten, but
(besides the corn given him, after put up to fat) has one way or other lost,
spoiled, destroyed, or devoured twice his price. Most of which inconveniences,
as well the nastinesse as the damage is almost totally prevented by the right
Use of this Contrivance, which if, I may truly say, that with some additions
to the Common, or for the better management of this Cattle, they are of
exceeding Use and Profit equal to Cowes, Sheep, or any other, if not much
beyond; but indeed all Cattle almost depend so necessarily on one another
fellowship, that he that keeps one has good reason to keep all; (but if any
alone, Sheep.)

The fourth necessary sort of Creature fit to be about a Farm, is Poultry of
all sorts; whether Waterfowl, as Geese, Ducks, etc. or Land-fowl, as Turkeys,
Hens, etc. The first sort are of special Use, and require more care then
charge in the keeping, which care is eased very much by this Contrivance, and
those many ill turns, not unusually done by Geese, prevented with an
opportunity given to breed or keep many more without charge. The second sort
are exceeding profitable, if bred and fed according to a safe and orderly Rule
in a place convenient, allowing a large walk, yet preventing the harm they are
apt to do. I am assured both by reason and experience, that very great profit
above all charge may be had without much trouble by them that keep great store
of these sorts safe and well, which I conceive will be much facilitated by this
Contrivance.

All other greater Cattle, as Horses and Mares, etc. Bulls, Cowes and Oxen, etc.
and all sorts of Sheep, as they are apt to run into every Meadow, better
pasture, or corn-grounds they can come at: so are they easier seen or
prevented; and besides, it troubles a man less to make satisfaction to his
Neighbor, or to bear his own loss patiently, when he considers, that such
Cattle many times (though not always) are the better for what they have eaten,
and may shortly one way or other make him some amends, either by their fat, or
Fleece, or milk, or labor, or the like, whereas all the Pigeon, the lean Hog,
or the Coney gets irregularly is merely lost.

And the evil Contrivance and Inter-mixture of ways and Interests in most
places of England is a special reason, which many, even of the more Ingenious
sort of men, that would fain yet do not attempt or endeavor those many, great,
and visible ways of better improvement that are in nature, and in view, and
that because they have no place secure enough, but may every day one before the
other expect, that the carelessness or wickedness of their Neighbors, or
their own children, or servants (yea, and by mistake sometimes themselves) may
let in all or any sorts of these beasts or fowls, (worst of all Hogs or Coneys,
which in the common way have most liberty and opportunity) to destroy all their
labors and charges in an instant; therefore say they (not very wisely nor
industriously though) it is better sit still then rise up and fall.

Whereas if English men would be resolutely and ingeniously industrious by
this, or some other, or better Contrivance, Way, or Means (which I shall gladly
subscribe to, when I see it) those dangers may be avoided, and this Nation
become in an age or two, as much (almost) beyond what it now is, as it now is
beyond Scotland for fertility, or Ireland for good Husbandry. And we need
hardly be beholden to any Nation under heaven for any of their Commodities,
except Spanish-Wines and Spices, or some such things, of which we have no
simple necessity.

I have observed, that in most parts of England, especially in Champion
Countries, the Pastures lie near home, and the Woods, Meads, and Corn-land lie
at a great distance. And something like it in enclosed grounds also, and that
it is common to go through one Close into another, whereas it is plain, that
the corn or grass in the first Close is liable to be eaten and trodden down by
the Cattle that pass to and again to the Close beyond it. It is also very
plain, that all Cattle that are well, lusty, and not of immediate Use, are able
to carry themselves to a greater distance, but that Wood, Corn, Hey, or the
like, require much time, charge and pains to remove them; I appeal therefore,
whether it be not fitter to send such Cattle further off, and have your Corn
and Hey, (and Wood too, if need be) nearer home. And for your young, sick or
weak, or infected Cattle in this Contrivance, there is provision made for such;
as also for your Milch-Cowes at Milking-time, so well, that till I see some
better I rest contented with this.

I have observed, that when the foul or home-sted is too near the dwelling
house (as it is in most places) it makes the Inhabitants liable to many
inconveniences, and offensive sights and smells, as well within doors, as
without; but here I refer my self whether that evil is not remedied, and yet
the Barns, Stables, etc. near enough for inspection, which is all the reason
for their being near; for as you have it in this Contrivance, you may at all
time swith case view and take account of your business, and yet be as neat and
sweet as in a Burgemasters house in Holland.

Finally, here your house stands in the middle of all your little world (which
you may build as your purse and fancy directs, though I could say something as
to that in particular, which I take to be as effectual if need were) enclosed
with the Gardens and Orchards, refreshed with the beauty and odor of the
blossoms, fruits and flowers, and the sweet melody of the chirping birds, that
again encompast with little Closes, that all young, weak, or sick Cattle may be
fostered under your own eye without loss or inconvenience, and all bound
together as with a girdle, (and surely never had the old proverb, ungirt,
unblest, a fitter or fuller sense or application) and all that covered again,
as with a fair large cloak of Meadow and Tillage, to which you may commit the
corner pasturage, the Cape if you please, or the Sleeves to the Coat (for a
Coat as well as a Cloak will serve to cover either knavery or foolery) of old
customs or negligence. Here you have your Bake-house Brew House, Darie, or the
like; your Barns, Stables, and Outhouses in such apt places as may serve
indifferently for all your occasions. And no one ground to pass through into
another, no probability of being trespassed upon by others, or by your own, but
the most perfect right and ample Use of every foot of ground enclosed entire,
by all which (I doubt not) will make good what I have sometimes affirmed; that
besides all other ways of Improvement that may be farther added, this alone in
mere point of Contrivance is enough to improve the value of your Estate one
half part; viz. that if it were really worth 100 li. per annum before, it will
thus become as really worth 150 li. per annum, and the charge in casting it
into this form, (especially where no fences are already) little more, in some
cases not so much, though I must tell you, you cannot spare in any case more
unhappily then here. And besides profit, the case and pleasure will be better
felt then expressed in words.

Very much more might be said in order to this, but it would too far exceed
the bounds of a Letter, and it is also not amiss to see how the World will
accept or reject this first: From the hands of him, who subscribes himself ever

SIR, Your most faithful, thankful Friend, and humble Servant, Cressey Dymock.

An Experiment for the multiplying of Corn, practiced near Paris in France, by
some of that new order of Friars, who are there called Peers de la doctrine
Chrestienne.
INto two French pintes of rainwater, they did put a certain quantity of
Cow Dung well rotted, and as much Sheeps-dung and pigeons dung. This water they
boiled, till but half a pint was left, then they strained it through a linen
cloth, and in it dissolved 3 small handfuls of common salt, and as much Salt
Peter. This brine they set in some vessel upon hot ashes, and in it they
steeped their Seed-corn; which being so ordered, and at the usual seed-time,
being put into barren ground* produced unusual increase, I my self have seen
one hundred and fourteen ears upon one root, which, they told me, came from
one single corn so prepared. This way of theirs differs not much from that
which I found in an old Manuscript, and cannot dislike. Take, says he,
rainwater that has stood in some pool or pond till it putrify. Put into it
good store of dung of horses, kine, sheep, goats, pigeons, hens, and any other
beast or bird that feeds upon grass or seeds. An quia herbarum, and seminum
Vita media vegetativa in stercoribus illis restiterit exaltanda? Set this
mixture eight days in the Sun, (or if you be in haste, boil it over the fire
half an hour, stirring it all the while,) afterward strain it, and then make it
stronger by putting into it more of the foresaid sorts of dung the second time.
This having stood as before, strain out, and put into it some common salt, and
a little Ox-gall. Into this liquor put your seed-corn; float or scum off all
the light corns that swim; let the rest lie in the liquor 24 hours. Then take
out your seed-corn, and spread it thin upon a linen cloth, and dry it in the
shadow. Put this seed into barren ground (for in such it will thrive better
then in a rich soil) you shall reap at least an hundredfold.

Another Secret worthy to be tried by all such as are lovers of the Advancement
of Husbandry.
IN the choice of seed-corn, prefer that wheat which is most weighty, as being
more masculine and fitter for generation then the lighter grains. In the
production of plants, the earth is considered as a female, whose sterility may
be much helped by the extraordinary melioration of the seed; As if you take
water, which has bin made fat with horsdung well rotted, and afterward
dissolve in it as many pounds of Sal terrae as you intend to sow acres. In
this water steep the aforesaid weighty seed for 24 hours. So shall you have a
better crop then usual, though you sow but half the usual quantity of seed,
and though your ground be not so often ploughed, nor be at all dunged; nay
though it were barren of it self. Your harvest will be ripe sooner by a
month, and by reason of the Saltpeter, this corn will be fitter for
storehouses; for there it will lie ten years uncorrupted.

Observations and Animadversions upon the foregoing secrets or experiments:
Written by the Author of the large Letter in the Legacy of Husbandry.
COncerning the Experiment from Paris about steeping of Corn, I have told you
heretofore that steeping of Barley is used in (...) away all soil, (except
Drake) and also all light corn, further to accelerate growth, if it be sown
late; and further, if pigeons dung be added, it may be as good as half a
dunging; and I think I speak high enough, for that little strength that Corn
draws by this steeping cannot do wonders: and if all that Salt, Niter,
Cow Dung, Sheeps, Pigeons dung, of this brine were cast upon the earth, it
would not dung a quarter of it, how then can the Extract do so much? I cannot
as yet see any great reason for it, unless perchance there be some occult
vivification of the spirits of the Seed, which as yet I am ignorant o, As for
an 114 ears of Corn from one, it is nothing: I have had from Oats 140 without
any steeping, or such doings; yet I have used some Art, which I may call a
Secret; for I am persuaded very few can do it: but I Will tell it you, and I
would all the World did know, for it is a trifle: viz. when the Corn begins
to spread, to lay either clods or Tileshards, or any broad thing upon it to
cause it to spread, and further, let not any corn grow within a foot and a half
of it; and this is the great business which every one may try (the lands also
ought to be excellently good.) Further, I have had above 2000 grains for one,
or of one cut in the midst, and above 100 in one car without steeping.

As to the second Experiment of Brine, I think of it as of the former; only I
think it convenient to add, that first they are to blame, who think to
medicine the earth as Physicians do the Body, and therefore add such varieties
of Dungs, as Cows, Pigeons, Horse, Sheep, etc. as so many Radices, Folia,
Fructus, Semina, etc. and then add Salt and Niter as Phycsiians do Ginger and
Mace, then a little Salt and Oxe-gall, as they do Musk and Amber-greese; then
boil and strain them Cape colaturam, and dissolve ut prius. I for my part think
that our old Grandame the Earth ought not thus to be nursed, and suppose there
is more vanity in these then in the Apothecaries Bills. Secondly, Niter is
costly: I fear the Crop will not pay the charges; for that I suppose the
Countryman will consider, though our projecting Husbandman do not. Thirdly,
that it is a vanity to overcharge any liquor with too great a quantity of
materials. For we know that the power of every thing is finite, and if you put
Salt into water, such a proportion it will dissolve, if you put above that
proportion, it sinketh to the bottom, and there lies undissolved. Fourthly,
that the cause of Fruitfulness is not only the vita media in dung; for when
it is totally corrupted, and the vita media gone, it is very fruitful:
further, Chalk, Marle, Nitre, which are exceeding fruitful, have no vita
media. But concerning Fruitfulness I have sent you a short Discourse which is
only to show you the difficulty of the Question, and to stir up some other to
attempt it.

As for the Conclusion of the process (or Experiment) viz. you shall reap an
100 fold: let me but dig Land, if it be not extremely barren, I Will wager to
have the same increase without all these slibber slops.

As to the last Process which I like best, having the greatest probabilities;
I answer, that to get this Sal Terrae to supply every man's occasion, is more
then I know how to obtain, and the trouble great; and I suppose he that has
that Salt needs not horse-dung; for rainwater I suppose will do better: and
further, I desire to know how he would extract it, and how it differs from
Niter: This process pleases me, and I suppose the grains will be excellent
and long lasting.

A great Question concerning Fruitfulness. Offered to all ingenious Searchers
of Nature.
It is a main deficiencie in Husbandry, that though we by experience find that
all the foresaid materials, and diverse others, as oft-tilling, Husbandry,
seasons, etc. change of seed and Land, resting of Lands, fencing etc. do cause
Fertility: yet we are very ignorant of the true causes of Fertility, and know
not what Chalk, Ashes, Dung, Marle, Water, Air, Earth Sun, etc. do contribute:
whether something Essential, or Accidental; Material or Immaterial; Corporal or
Spiritual; Principal or Instrumental; Visible or Invisible? whether Saline,
Sulphurous or Mercurial; or Watery, Earthy, Fiery, Aereal? or whether all
things are nourished by Vapors, Fumes, Atoms, Effluvia? or by Salt, as Urine,
Embrionate or non-specificate? or by Ferments, Odours Acidities? or from a
Chaos, or inconfused, indigested, and unspecificated lump? or from a
Spermatick, dampish vapor which ascends from the Center of the Earth? or
from the Influence of Heaven? or from Water only impregnated, corrupted or
fermented? or whether the Earth, by reason of the Divine Benediction has an
Infinite, multiplicative Virtue, as Fire, and the Seeds of all things have? or
whether the multiplicity of Opinions of learned Philosophers (as Aristotle,
Rupesc. Sendivog. Norton, Helmont, Des Carts, Digby, White, Plat. Glaubre)
concerning this Subject shows the great difficulty of this Question, which
they at leisure may peruse. I for my part dare not venture on this vast Ocean
in my small bark, lest I be swallowed up; yet if an opportunity presents, shall
venture to give some hints, that some more able Pen may engage in this
difficult Question which strikes at the Root of Nature, and may unlock some of
her choicest treasures. The Lord Bacon has gathered stubble (as he ingenuously
and truly affirms) for the bricks of this foundation; but as yet I have not
seen so much as a solid foundation plainly laid by any, on which an ingenious
Man might venture to raise a noble Fabric: I acknowledge the burden too heavy
for my shoulders.

FINIS.
A further Explanation on the foregoing Letter and Cards concerning Division,
or setting out of Land, as to the best form. With an Exposition of the words
Sal Terrae, what is to be understood by them in the forementioned Experiment
of Husbandry.
SIR,
IN obedience to your Commands, I shall thus proceed to give you further hints
of the Advantages that may be had by casting Lands into some such Form, as the
Plot or Card Presented you with formerly, does more fully show. If you set your
house in the Center of your Lordship, or great Farm, then are you equally
distant (in a manner) to all the parts thereof, which I take to be no small
conveniencie. Against this I know it may be objected, that (especially in such
a place as the great Fenne) it will then be too far from the great Dreynes,
near unto which it has been thought fit to set the Houses, that Boats may come
to the door, which they may as well do, being with small charge let into your
house, which charge or trouble being set against those other inconveniences of
such as are made or continued by setting the house at the end of the Land for
the Dreynes sake, will be found: inconsiderable. For Example. The common way of
casting out their Levels or Proportions for Tenements are into pieces of 100
acres; (this is taken from the level in the Isle of Axholm, the casting out of
the hundred in the great Fen being worse then that;) this runs backwards from
the great Dreyn, where your House stands, at least 2200 yards, and all the
passage you have to any of your grounds is through all that is between that
part and the House, so that part of your work or Harvest lies a long mile from
home. Now the same proportion of 100 Acres being cast in a square Form, the
equal sides will be about 127 rods; the half of which is about 64 Rods from
the Drayne to the House or Center of your Land, to which to cast a ditch from
the main Dreyne of 15 foot wide, and as deep as the Dreyn, may cost, say 5
shil. per Rod, which is too much, it amounts but to 16 li. and you have as good
advantage by boat, as if your House had stood on the grand Dreyn and better.
It Is true, every House that stands behind you, which are two in number more,
upon the same length, will cost just as much more either of them, but with that
charge once for all, they are fitted with boatage for ever, and the whole land
laid so much more dry. Now put in the other scale the Conveniences and
Profits, or prevention of loss or charge (thus:) whereas before all your
ground sowed with corn, or lying for meadow, saving that next your House, must
have cost you double, treble, quadruple, I, five times, six times in some
cases, as far carriage as the same will do now, as often in the day, week,
month, year, or all years to come, as you shall have occasion; which well
considered, is a most casie purchase. Secondly, as often as your self or your
servants have occasion to go to any of the farther Closes, much time must be
lost in going and coming, which might have been much better spent. Thirdly,
you cannot drive any Cattle to the farthest Closes, if they should lie for
grass, for which they are fittest, but through those nearer, which then may be
sowed with Corn; and it is not easy to foresee the loss you may sustain by
the carelessenesse of servants by so doing. Lastly, (for there are many other
Inconveniences and Ways to loss, which for brevities sake I omit) if your own
Cattle be gotten into your own Corn, or your bad neighbors into either Corn,
Meadow, or Pastures, they are not altogether so soon discovered at so great
distances, as that form allows, and to put them out will prove half a days
work almost; all which put together, will so abundantly repay that small
Charge, that I suppose I need enforce this no farther; and I believe, that the
Landlord need not be at all the charge; for the Tenants conveniencie will
invite him to bear a great part of it; for here as you see by the Card striking
a Circle from your House, at the Center as wide as your Square will admit, all
your land (except the Corners, which are destined for pasture for your stronger
Cattle, and of least present use) will be at one and the same distance from
you, and the farthest (if there were any farthest) but the Semidiameter of your
Circle, which is but 350 yards, or seventeen score and ten to the farthest end
thereof, and but 130 yards, or six score and ten to the nearest end; the
carriage alike easy and short, the inspection and use or drift alike easy and
of quick dispatch, and no going through any one into the other, but having all
in so close an order, and so ready at your Command for all purposes, that you
will be encouraged to make more or better then common Uses of some parts of
your Land, which may turn to your profit exceedingly, if you be but a little
vigilant. If your ground being either sand (or any thing but boggy, morish, or
peat Land) then may you plant Hedges, Orchards, Gardens, etc. your House stands
in the midst, (which also I would build round, which Form I suppose to be of
most beauty, use, and least cost to him that will give his mind to consider it
rightly) I would allow for the situation of my House, and some Gardens next it,
of the delicater sort half an Acre of Land, and next without that for Orchards
and Kitchin-Gardens, at least one Acre, and one half, or two Acres more, both
cast into a round form, one encompassing the other (for which and all that
follow, I refer, to the sight of the Card it self, which sets it forth more
fully to the eye) without that again, I would allow 9 Acres to be divided into
several little Closes for the Uses in the Card mentioned; some bigger, some
lesser, as I should see cause; and to bind all this together, I would again
encompasse all those with one undivided ring, which should contain about four
Acres (deducting out of all these proportions respectively so much as was taken
up with or in hedges, ditches, walls, etc.) double fenced, inwards from the
little Closes round about, and outward from the last Circle of great Closes,
out of every of which great Closes (all of them at their nearer or smaller
ends, butting upon this ring) I would have a bridge or gate strong and stanch,
that I might let in what I would; but that nothing might get in without my
leave. I would have from my House four equally quartered out-passages to this
Middle ring, and from that again straight forwards to the Outside of my Lands
well ditched, gated, fenced; I would set my Bake-house, Brewhouse, Wash-house,
Darie, or the like, without the second Circle, viz. just without my
Kitchin-Garden and Orchards, and within or at the nearer end to the House of
the little Closes, and for the side of the House, as whether to set this on the
North, or that on the South, etc. of the Dwelling House, I leave to every man's
discretion. As for my Barnes, Stables, or Houses, if any Swine-coates,
Hen-houses, Malt-Kilnes, and all that usually is called, or belongs to a
Foldstead, as rackes to feed Cattle without doors, etc. I would place at such
quarters as I thought fit, some at one quarter, some at another, but all on the
girdle or middle ring, in or on which I would also make so many Coney-berries
(where the ground will any way bear it) as I can foresee, can there live, and
be well maintained; where note; that they are not only to be maintained by the
grass growing on the ring it self; but at discretion to be let into all or
any the other great or small Closes, at such times, and for such purposes, as I
shall find convenient and safe, and when they shall do me good service and no
hurt, and not otherwise; upon which terms also I will let in my sheep, hogs,
poultry, etc. having them all always at command to be driven out again at
pleasure, when they can do no more good, or are like to do hurt there; thus
will my dung be bred in such places, from whence with ease I can distribute it
either inwards to my Orchards and Gardens, or outward to my tillage, etc. with
wonderful ease.

Thus shall my Houses not be in such eminent danger all at once, in case of any
unfortunate fire; thus will those kinds of nastinesse, which is in many places
too frequent, be avoided, and yet the uttermost part of my Foldstead for
inspection not above fivescore, or a good stones throw from my dwelling house,
to which I can go at any time in a pair of minutes, and to the other Offices in
less then one; the cornerpieces that the grand Circle within the Square
leaves, being farthest off, yet are within less then twice twelvescore, which
being (in general, for upon particular cause you may at pleasure plough them
for a time, and lay them down again) allotted to be pasture for your
Milch-cowes, and all such stronger Cattle as you have not present use for, as I
said before, they may be driven, as occasion serves, with much case: for this
is highly worth consideration in Husbandry (for the thing is better known then
considered) that a little difference in distance (though it be but one Acres
length, which is but 220 yards) occasions a trouble or charge, not a little
more when sown with Corn, or let lie for Meadow, then when grazed with strong
Cattle. For admit that piece to be square, then it contains 10 Acres, which may
well yield at least 20 wain-loads, or Cart-loads of corn, every of which is
worth six pence or four pence at least to carry an Acres length, and so for
every Acres length that shall be added; whereas to drive an hundred
Milch-cowes, a flock of sheep or the like, will require but a man or a boy, and
his dog. And of what advantage dispatch is, (or may sometimes happen to be
especially) is not easy to be valued. Now as it is apparent to me; so I think
it is or may be to all men, that the Position is true, and that this Way merely
in the Contrivance, without or besides any other Improvement shall make 100
Acres, to all intents and purposes as useful and profitable, as 150 Acres can
be (that being also without any other Improvement then the mere common Form of
casting out and the uses that Form is capable of) in the common Form. But that
the common Form is capable of good improvement, I deny not, but I affirm this
to be much more; for this is apt for many Uses which are altogether unfit for,
and not used, nor possibly to be used upon the common Forms of Farm, and to
those Uses, to which common Farms are, or may be put, these may be put also,
but with more ease, safety, profit and pleasure abundantly. And If my new
Invention for Setting of Corn, and all its Parts, were put in Execution
(together with some other Inventions or Contrivances for, in, or concerning
other the parts of Universal Husbandry, which God has given into my hands (and
for which I praise ^is great Name for ever) upon a parcel of good Land in this
Form, I fear it would be, or give but too much of profit and delight for men
to enjoy in this life. I shall therefore, as to my own Interest, or action, in
these things, and its extension or increase, wholly refer my self to God, and
to his righteous will and wise dispensation how, how far, what friends or means
he will raise for me, or with me to advance these works in themselves great and
good, and doubtless to him acceptable, while not abused; but then like all
other blessings becoming curses. And, Sir, ever rest

Your most obliged, thankful, and affectionate Friend and Servant, C. D.

An Exposition of the Words, What is meant by Sal-Terrae, inthe forementioned
Experiment of Husbandry.
SAl-Terrae is nothing but such Niter as we commonly use, and which is drawn
out of fat earths, and boiled, etc.

If you cannot get fat earth for that purpose, take common salt, and purify
it, for by so doing you shall strengthen its attractive virtue. By which when
it is in the earth, it will as it were magnetically attract to it self all the
saltness that is near it, and so make it self more strong.

Another.
Sal-Terrae is not Saltpeter, but a salt of such earth, as owes not its
fatness to dung, but was only impregnated from heaven: therefore it is best
seeking it upon such high Lands, where it is not likely that ever any man
carried up any dung or compost to lay upon it. This Earth must be handled like
Salt-Peter-Earth; but when you boil the liquor, it will not shoot like
Saltpeter, but must be boiled up like other common-salt, etc.

Another.
Sal-Terrae is no otherwise to be Englished, but word for word, Salt-of-Earth:
and the manner of extracting of it is to calcine the earth, and to make a Lie
of the ashes evaporating afterward the same, in the same manner as the Salt of
all other Ashes is made. For to separate any salt from crude Earth (except what
has been converted into Saltpeter, or comes forth in the company of
Saltpeter) that is, absolutely impossible. As for the difference of that Salt
from Niter, that consists herein, that Niter is a Salt extremely spirituous
and unctuous; of which two qualities the other Salt still subsisting in its own
gross, and as it were terrestrial nature, is very little participant.

An Advertisement to the Reader concerning the foregoing Expositions of Sal
Terrae.
Gentle Reader,
BE pleased to take notice that to perfect the knowledge of the Experiment, I
consulted with some Friends about the meaning of Sal Terrae, what it is, and
received from them the three several Answers, which I have here imparted unto
thee: but because they are not yet clear and satisfactory to my self, as
somewhat varying from each other, I hope to procure for the Public Good a more
full discovery of this Subject, which one who is a great searcher into the
mysteries of Nature has an inclination to write of, and to show that Fecundity
and Nutriment as well in Vegetables, as in Animals, does wholly depend on
Nitre, the Nature whereof he conceives to be known to very few, if to any at
all. And as for Sal-peter, whereof hitherto the use has chiefly been known in
the making of Gunpowder, there are some endeavors a foot, whereby the
usefulness thereof in husbandry also will be made known, which in due time may
be imparted unto this Commonwealth; for I find some of my noble and worthy
Friends of the same opinion with my self, who are persuaded (to use the words
of one of them in his Letter to me.) That the Matter, by which men are killed
and fed, is but one and the same, and differs only in the mind and hand that
uses it; and that God will go beyond the Devil in his own Materials of
destruction, by changing the use of them into a Blessing; For that is most
agreeable to his Power and Goodness, to raise best out of worse, by changing
only the Use:

In whom I rest always,

Thy most willing and assured Servant, Samuel Hartlib.

AN ESSAY UPON Master W. POTTERS Design: Concerning a Bank of Lands to be
erected throughout this COMMONWEALTH. Whereby Lands may be improved in a New
Way to become the ground for increase of Trading, and of Public and Private
Revenues, and Accommodations. Represented thus briefly, by a Person of singular
Zeal and Integrity to all PUBLIC INTEREST: To the end, that the Author's own
Conceptions may be taken notice of by others, and he draw'n forth to make out
this Great Business more fully in due time.

London, Printed for Richard Wodenothe in Leaden-hall-street.

AN Essay upon Mr. W. Potters Design concerning a Bank of Lands to be erected
throughout this Commonwealth.
THere is no man, but must live by the fruits, either of his own labors or of
what his friends have left him. And because no one person is fitted for all
Vocations, nor any one Vocation fitted to produce all kind of necessaries for
man's use, from hence there arose (from the beginning) a necessity of some such
Medium of Commerce, which we ordinarily call Money, to be current, between such
as have, either no reciprocal want, of each others commodities, or no liking of
each others conditions or price.

This Universal credit or Medium of Commerce, has been (through all former
ages) placed in the metals of Gold and Silver; other metals (by being made
current money, (by the Authority of some States) beyond their intrinsic value)
having approved themselves, to be very subject, either to the inconvenience of
being counterfeited, by dishonest persons, or Neighbor Nations, or to be (by
the injustice of the Prince) sometimes altered to a higher or lower value, a
cheat too ordinarily made use of, by the Kings of Spain.

The Inconveniences that have bin found (by the latter ages) in, these two
metals of Gold Silver, are, First, that there has not bin (at least not yet) a
sufficient quantity of either of them, to supply all Nations toward that
increase of Trade, which a greater quantity of money (if it could be had) would
produce; It being an infallible Rule, that money being that, which every man
(his petty occasions supplied) seeks to employ in Land, Trade, at Interest, or
some such other way, as may make him a yearly return of gain) the more there is
of money in any Nation, the quicker also must all those ways be, wherein money
is ordinarily employed.

The second Inconvenience is, that all those Countries, that have inconsiderate
Mines of Gold and Silver, or (perhaps) none at all, must (for the obteining of
a thing, so necessary to the upholding of ordinary Commerce among themselves
and with other Nations) part with so much of their best Staple-Commodities, as
will purchase the Gold and Silver they want, from that great Merchant of Gold
and Silver, the King of Spain; whereas, (could there be some such other Medium
of Commerce found out, as this Commonwealth might (without paying or being
liable, or beholding, to any other Prince) raise, to, and within it self) there
would be many Millions worth of our Staple-Commodities (now) saved, which must
otherwise be parted with, to supply our present want of money.

The third Inconvenience, which has been found, especially in Silver (the most
common metal of the two) is; that the keeping of it in a private Cash is
dangerous; the continual carrying of it from place to place, is both dangerous
and troublesome; and the delivery and telling of it, from hand to hand, is none
of the least businesses in a Commonwealth, especially if versed in Trade.

Toward the obviating of these last Inconveniences, arose that admirable
Invention of a Bank; which (in short) is no other thing, then a transmitting of
the Ownership of money, (deposited in a Public Treasury, and secured (there)
by Public Authority) from hand to hand, by assignation only; without the
danger and trouble of keeping, carrying, or telling it.

This way of assignation of the Ownership of money, or credit in Bank, has,
(among Merchants) approved it self, to be of excellent use, for the dispatch of
all their business of payment.

But the Inconveniences, which this kind of payment, (by way of assignation)
has not remedied, are

1 That it has been (hitherto) applied, to the dispatch of business of
payments, among Merchants only, and not (ordinarily) to the concernments of
the rest of the people, of the Nation, where the Bank is kept-

2 That it is a better way only, of the use of Gold and Silver, toward the
dispatch of the business of Payment; and not at all any new Medium of
Commerce; money being still, that necessary requisite to a Bank, without or
beyond which, a Bank can neither be raised nor extended; since the having of
more Credit, to be current in a Bank, then there is money to answer it, is no
better then a public Cheat; and to be accounted, so much worse, then in any
private person, in that Rulers have (by their Office) a more immediate Image of
God, and have been (in some places of Scripture) honored with that name, and
shall not the Judge of all the earth or of all Nations do right?

3 That money (deposited (as above mentioned) in any one place) proves, not
only a temptation to the sword (as lately in Holland) but (if once surpised)
becomes a certain loss to all the Owners, and an invincible opportunity, (in
the hand of the possessor) against the State or Commonwealth in which such
Banks are kept.

Having thus hinted; first, the absolute necessity (from the beginning) of some
Medium of Commerce; Secondly, the Inconveniences of those metals (Gold and
Silver) in which this Medium of Commerce or Universal Credit, has formerly
been placed. And thirdly, the imperfection of Banks, (thoug an excellent
invention) because they are but a lame and short remedy to those
Inconveniences. That which remains, is, (from a due consideration, of every
part of the premises) to hold forth (if it may be) some such New Medium of
Commerce (in the place of Gold and Silver) as,

1 Shall be (at least) of as true intrinsic value, as Gold and Silver.

2 May be raised by this Common wealth, within it self, without any parting
with our Staple-Commodities for it, and without supplying the ^ing of Spain,
(who in the judgment of wise men) is likeliest to be our final and greatest
enemy.

3 May be extended, to ten times more, then ever this Nation was owner of in
money; to the incredible increase of inland Commerce, and (consequently) of
exportation and foreign Trade.

4 May be managed, without any least danger, either (of loss) to the Owners, or
(of conquest) to the Commonwealth.

5 May be transmitted, between person and person, and between place and place,
with as much ease and security, as is to be found in foreign Banks.

6 Will leave all the money (which either is yet remaining, or shall hereafter
(by a wise ordering of our Trade) increase within this Nation) free for the
Peoples use, without burying of it, (as if the Rulers be just and true) is done
in Foreign Banks.

7 If to the premises there can be added; first, how the private person may
(readily without any trouble or charge) obtein money, at three pound per Cent.
Secondly, how such a Revenue, may be raised to the Public, as may (in a great
part, if not altogether) take away the necessity, of any future Taxes
whatsoever from the people, the Proposi^ions may (perhaps) deserve acceptance.

Now since the Proposition to be made, toward so great a scope, is no other,
then a complication of several things, already practiced in the World, and
arises chiefly from the ground of reason, upon which Foreign Banks consist; I
shall (therefore) by way of enlargement of what has been above hinted,
concerning Foreign Banks, say;

1 That the manner of the Banks beyond the Sea, is that one species of money
(such as Authority appoints) is brought into a Bank, or Public Treasury.

2 That the money thus deposited, is (instead of being taken out, carried and
delivered) passed (from person to person) by assignation only of the Ownership
of so much money; which (in the language of the place) is called credit in Bank
or Bank-credit.

3 That (because all payments of Bills of Exchange must (by a Law established)
be made at the Bank, it (from thence) comes to pass, that the Owners of the
money in Bank (though they may) do yet seldom or never take out their money,
but make their payments by assignation only of their credit in Bank, which
goes (in a continual suit) from hand to hand, with seldom or never taking the
money out of the Bank.

Toward the raising of those Banks at the first, two Laws were necessary from
Authority, and established (accordingly) by them; first, that all payments of
Bills (above twenty or thirty pounds) should be made at one place or Bank.

Secondly, that all Payments to be made at that one place, should be made
(also) in one species of Coin. After the example of public Authorities, and
of the Banks in Foreign parts, it is (toward a far more valuable end)
proposed.

1 That there be (by Authority) a hundred several places (or more if occasion
require) appointed in this Commonwealth, where all payments whatsoever (above
ten or twenty pounds) shall be made and recorded, and this for avoiding of
difference in all such payments.

2 That all payments (above ten or twenty pounds) be enjoined by authority, to
be made in Bank-credit.

3 That there be no way, to raise this credit in Bank, but by morgage of Land,
for the security of those who (from time to time) shall be Owners of the Credit
in Bank; And the condition of the morgage to be, either to pay so much money
with interest at six pounds per Centum, within a twelve month from the day,
that Bank-credit should (any way) fail to be current, or (in default of such
payment) the Land to be forfeited without redemption, and to be divided, among
the Owners of the Credit in Bank.

From the premises these consequences will follow;

1 The making of all payments, at the several places abovementioned, will
raise so many Banks.

2 The injoyning of all payments above ten or twenty pounds) to be made in
Bank-Credit, will make money (in payments above ten or twenty pounds) to be a
seeker, to be turned into Bank-Credit, being (it self) not current, in ten or
twenty pound payments, till so converted.

3 The raising of Bank-Credit, only by or upon Land, will avoid; all
counterfeiting; (as in case of Copper-money) all danger of surprise (as lately
in Holland) there being (by the Law of the Bank) no money to rest there; all
hazard to them, that shall be (from time to time) Owners of all the credit in
the Bank, because there is no credit in the Bank, but what is sufficiently
secured in the same manners as money, that is now borrowed upon Land.

4 It will multiply Money, (or that which will supply the place of Money) in
the Land to two thirds, three fourths, four fifths, (or (perhaps) more) of the
value of the Lands of the Nation, which can amount to little less then a
hundred millions Sterling.

5 It will furnish the Landed man with Bank-credit (current in payment) at two
per Cent.

6 By two per Cent. payable (yearly) to the public, for one thousand, six
hundred, sixty six pounds, thirteen shillings and four pence of Banke-credit,
upon every hundred pound per Annum; the public will receive (yearly) 33
pounds, 13 shillings, 4 pence out of every hundred pound, per Annum, that is,
one third of the Rents of all the Lands, that are morgaged; which is almost or
altogether double to what is now raised upon Lands, and which (the whole
revenue of Lands being rated but at six Millions per Annum) comes to two
Millions per Annum to the Public, for the defraying of all public charges,
without any necessiy of other Taxes.

Memorandum, that all Lands, not morgaged to the Bank, are left to pay the
present taxes; and so there will be no least disturbance to the present
public Revenue.

FINIS.

