Samuel Hartlib HIS LEGACY OF HUSBANDRY.

Wherein are bequeathed to the Commonwealth of ENGLAND, not only Braband, and
Flanders, but also many more Outlandish and Domestic Experiments and Secrets
(of Gabriel Plats and others) never heretofore divulged in reference to
Universal Husbandry.

With a Table showing the general Contents or Sections of the several
Augmentations and enriching Enlargements in this Third Edition.

Psalm. 144. v. 13, 14 15. That our Garners may be full, affording all manner of
store, that our sheep may bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our
streets.

That our Oxen may be strong to labor, that there be no complaining in our
streets.

Happy is that people that is in such a case; yea happy is that people whose
God is the Lord.

London, Printed by J. M. for Richard Wodnothe, in Leaden Hall Street next to
the Golden-Hart. 1655.

A Table showing the General Contents or Sections of the Legacy of Husbandry.
AN Introduction to the Legacy of Husbandry, extracted out of the Surveyors
Dialogue. A large Letter concerning the Defects and Remedies of English
Husbandry, page 1. The 1. deficiencie concerning Ploughs and Carriages, page 4,
5, 6. The 2. deficiencie about digging of Land, setting and howing in of Corn,
page 6, 7, 8. The 3. deficiencie concerning Gardening, page 8, 9, 10. The 4.
deficiencie in Smut and Mildew, page 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. The 5. deficiencie
concerning planting of Apples, Pears, Cherries, and Plums, page 14, 15.16, 17,
18, 19. The 6. deficiencie concerning not improving our Fruits, page 19, 20,
21.22. The 7. deficiencie concerning Vines, p. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.
The 8. deficiencie concerning Hemp and Flax, p. 30.31, 32, 33. The 9.
deficiencie concerning Dunging and Manuring lands, p. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38.
The 10. deficiency concerning the Non-improvement of our Meadows, p. 39, 40,
41. The 11. deficiencie concerning Wast lands, p. 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46. The
12. deficiencie in Woods, p. 46, 47, 48, 49, 50. The 13. deficiencie of Bees,
p. 50, 51, 52, 53. The 14. deficiencie concerning Silkworms, p. 53, 54, 55,
56, 57, 58. A Copy of King James Letter to the Lords Lieutenants of the several
Shires of England for the increasing of Mulberry-trees, and the breeding of
Silkworms, for the making of Silk in England, p. 59, 60, 61, 62. Instructions
for the increase and planting of Mulberry trees. What ground is fit for the
Mulberry-seeds, how the same is to be ordered, and in what sort the seeds are
to be sowed therein, p. 63, 64. When the Plants that are sprung up of the seeds
are to be removed, and how they are to be planted the first time, p. 64. When
and how the Plants are to be removed the second time, and in what manner they
are to be planted where they shall remain, p. 64, 65. When and how the Eggs of
the Silkworms are to be hatched, and how to order the Worms that shall come of
them, p. 65, 66, 67. When and how to make fit rooms for the Worms to work their
bottoms of Silk in, and in what sort the said bottoms are to be used, p. 67,
68. The 15. deficiencie, of the ignorance of the Husbandry of other places, p.
68, 69, 70, 71, 72. The 16. deficiencie, of the ignorance of things taken from
the earth, and waters of this Island, p. 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77. The 17.
deficiencie, of the vegetables of this Island, and their virtues and uses, p.
77, 78, 79, 80, 81. The 18. deficiencie, concrning Animals, p. 82, 83, 84, 85.
The 19. deficiencie, concerning diverse things necessary for the good of Cattle,
p. 85, 86, 87, 88, 89. The 20. deficiencie, of the want of diverse things which
are necessary for the accomplishment of Agriculture, p. 89, 90, 91, 92. The 21.
deficiencie, that because of our sins we have not the blessing of God upon our
labors, p. 92, 93. The last deficiencie, that we do not magazine or store up
Corn, when the Lord sends us plenty, p. 93, 94, 95. Copies and Extracts of
more Letters, tending very much to the great improvement not only of
Agriculture, but true and real Learning and natural Philosophy, p. 96, 97, 98.
Queres sent into France, about the seed called La Lucern, with the Answers to
them, p. 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104. A Copy of a Letter relating a proof
or experiment of an strange English Husbandry, p. 104, 105. A conjectural Essay
upon the foregoing Secret or Experiment of an English Husbandry, p. 105, 106,
107. An Extract of a Letter from Amsterdam, with another Experiment of a French
Husbandry, and the Answers to them, p. 108, 109. Another Letter from Paris,
discovering the secret of the forenamed French Husbandry, p. 110. Another
Extract of a Letter from the Low Countries, upon the Parisian experiment of
Husbandry, p. 110, 111. Another Letter expressing the reasons why the
experimenter of the Barley-corn, thinks it not fit or expedient to part with
his secret as yet, for a common use, page 111, 112, 113. A secret practiced
with very good success in England, concerning sowing of Wheat to prevent it
from being smutty, p. 113. Another secret practiced in Germany for the
enriching of Meadows, p. 113. How to make Rushy ground to bear Grass, p. 114.
For planting or sowing Walnuts, p. 114. Mr. Lanyon's description of the usual
manner of planting and transplanting (according to that of Flanders) of those
trees called Abeales, imparted for public Good, p. 115, 116. Another direction
for the planting (understand the second planting) of the Abel-trees, p. 116.
New Observations concerning Abel-trees, p. 117. Dr. Arnold Boats Annotations
upon the Legacy of Husbandry: from p. 118. to p. 132. An Answer to the
Animadversor on the large Letter of Husbandry; from page 132 to page 172. An
Observation concerning a Fish-calender, p. 172. The Profitable Mercurius, or
Mercurius Laetificans; from page 173. to page 182. A Treatise of Gabriel Plats,
containing certain Notes, Observations, Experiences, and Improvements of
Husbandry, with the judgment upon them of an experienced Husbandman, who has
also brought the Invention of Setting of Corn to greater perfection. A
Comparison between Ploughing and Sowing of three Acres of Land after the old
fashion, and Ploughing and Setting of one Acre after the manner declared in the
book printed Anno Dom. 1601. by Mr. Maxey, Gentleman, a great practizer in
those days in the Art of setting of Corn, p. 185, 186, 187, 188. Experiments
and Improvements for enriching of land by Mr. Plats New Invention or Engine,
which disperceth the Compost in such manner, that it falls all within the
reach of the attractive virtue of the Corn. The first Experiment or
Improvement, p. 188, 189.190. The second Experiment or Improvement, wherein is
showed how a rich Compost may be made in form of earth fit to fill up the holes
when the Corn is set, p. 190. The third Experiment or Improvement, where is
showed how a rich Compost may be made in form of earth near to the Sea, which
may be carried many miles, p. 191, 192. The fourth Experiment or Improvement,
wherein is showed how a rich Compost may be made in form of earth for the
purpose aforesaid, which may also be converted into Saltpeter, p. 192, 193,
194. The fifth Experiment or Improvement, wherein is showed how the difference
of the nature of land may be found out, thereby to fit it with an apt Compost,
p. 194, 195, 196. The sixth Experiment or Improvement, wherein is showed how
Farm-houses, Manors or Towns may be builded upon high grounds, and plentifully
furnished with water, p. 196, 197. The seventh Experiment, wherein is showed
how Sellars that are annoyed with Water-springs may be remedied, p. 197, 198.
The eighth Experiment, wherein is showed how the rot in Sheep may be cured, p.
198, 199, 200. The ninth Experiment, wherein is showed how Corn may be
preserved in cheap years without corruption, so that it may supply the dearth
when it comes, p. 200, 201, 202. The tenth Experiment, wherein is showed the
natural cause why the changing of Seed-corn produces an improvement; also
certain ways for the melioration of Seeds and Fruits, p. 202, 203, 204. The
eleventh Experiment, wherein is showed how rich Compost may be made in great
Cities of things formerly cast away, p. 204, 205. The twelfth Experiment,
wherein is showed how any Kingdom may live in great prosperity with half the
trouble and charge which now they sustain, and yet live in adversity, p. 205,
206, 207, 208. The thirteenth Experiment, wherein is showed how Timber for
Buildings, and Wood for Household Stuff may be provided in short space, p. 208,
209. The fourteenth Experiment, wherein is showed diverse ways concerning
Fruit Trees, p. 209, 210. The fifteenth Observation and Experiment, showing how
it may be ordered that Corn shall never be exceeding cheap to the great
prejudice of the Farmer, nor exceeding dear to the grievance of the buyer, p.
210, 211, 212, 213. The sixteenth Experiment, showing how all sublunary
substances may be changed one into another, 213, 214. The first Experiment,
showing how Minerals may be turned into Vegetables, p. 214. The second
Experiment, showing how this Corn may be turned into Animals, p. 214, 215. The
third Experiment, showing how thie Animal may be turned into Vegetable again,
p. 215. The fourth Experiment, showing how this Vegetable may be turned back
into Minerals, p. 215, 216. The last Experiment, showing how weeping land may
be drained where there is no level, p. 216. Thus far Mr. Plat's new Treatise. A
Philosophical Letter concerning Vegetation, or the causes of Fruitfulness, p.
217, 218, 219. An extract out of another Philosophical Letter, p. 220. Another
Letter on the same subject, p. 220, 221. How the Controversy about Helmont's
Assertions, mentioned in the fourth Deficiency of the Legacy of Husbandry may
be reconciled, p. 221, 222, 223. An observation touching planting of Trees in
the Fens, p. 223. More observations concerning Fruit Trees, and the great
benefit of Furzes for keeping Rats and Mice out of Barn-floors (or other
rooms) as likewise Reeks of Corn, and Cheese-racks 224, 225. An Estimate of
the great quantity of Corn that Pigeons do eat, spoil, and destroy in the
County of Cambridge, and pro rata for every shire of England the one with the
other, as by due enquiry may be made appear, p. 225, 226, 227. Another Estimate
by way of confirmation of destructive Pidgeon-houses, p. 227, 228. A kind of
universal Medicine, or the virtues of chewed bread, p. 228, 229, 230, 231. The
Scotchway of brewing their strongest and best Ale, p. 231. How to make Wine out
of Corn, p. 232. Another process to make Wine of Corn, p. 232, 233. Some
Animadversions upon the foregoing process of making Wine of Corn, p. 233.
Glauberus's promise or undertaking for making Wine out of Corn, p. 234, 235. An
Advertisement concerning the Mystery of making Wine according to Glaubers
undertaking, p. 235. How a Meadow about the end of May or beginning of June,
before the seeds of Grass are ripe may be used, p. 235. How much ground in
England may be cured, that through the predomination of some quality in excess
will not sward again, or gather a good head of grass for the first 3, 4, 5, 6,
or 7 years, when laid down after ploughing, p. 236. A Letter of a very
ingenuous Gentleman Mr. R.H. concerning the Husbandry of Clover-grass, p. 236,
237. Another Letter showing the great benefit arising by Clover-grass to the
Commonwealth in general, p. 238, 239. Mr. Crutendens Letter and Certificate,
p. 239, 240. A Letter from Upton 11. Aprilis 1653. Concerning the Husbandry of
Clover-seed, 240, 241. Sir Rich. Westons more special directions for the best
ordering of Clover-grass, p. 242, 243. Some doubts and queres concerning the
aforesaid directions, propounded in a Letter from Dublin, p. 244. The Doubts
and Queres in the Letter from Dublin resolved, p. 245, 246. An Answer to more
Queres concerning the Husbandry of Clover-grass, p. 246, 247. Concerning the
Threshing of Clover-seed, p. 247. An exact Letter written from Dublin,
concerning the Husbandry of Clover in Ireland, p. 248. An Answer to the
foregoing Extract concerning the miscarriage of the Husbandry of Clover in
Ireland, p. 248, 249. An Extract of another Letter in reference to the
foregoing Answer, p. 250. More Extracts of Letters concerning French Seeds, of
St. Foin and Lucern, p. 250, 251. More Queres about Lucern, and the seed called
Esparcet, with the Answers of them, p. 252, 253. The difference between
Esparcet, and the other French seeds, p. 253, 254, The last advertisement
concerning Esparcet, and the other French seeds, p. 254, 255. A Letter of Dr.
J. S. relating the husbandry of the French Tares or Fetches, p. 255, 256, 257.
An observation upon the Husbandry of the French Tares or Fetches, p. 257.
Another Letter relating the Braband Husbandry of Spurry-seed, p. 257, 258. The
description of the Hop-clover, or Trefoil, in English, Three-leaved Grass, p.
259, 260. Of the long English grass in Wiltshire, p. 260. Some Physical uses of
Milk, and of curing the black Jaundies, etc. p. 261. Observations concerning
Oils, p. 262, 263. How to make better Butter than ordinary, without setting the
Milk for Cream, p. 263. Of Chedder Cheeses where they are made, p. 263.
Objections answered against propositions of Improvement by Agriculture, and
other the branches of good Husbandry, p. 264, 265, 266, 267. An approved
Experiment for the cure of the Fashions in Horses, and the Rot in Sheep, p.
267. Another approved Experiment for fatting of Hogs, and preserving or curing
of them from Measels, or other diseases, p, 268. Another excellent remedy
against the Rot, and other diseases in Sheep, and Horses, p. 268. Whether a
good Lime may be made of Pibble and other stones, whereby land may be dunged
and enriched, p. 268, 269. The manner of planting Timber Trees in Cornwel, p.
269, 270. How to hasten the growth of Timber Trees, p. 270. Of Turky-beans to
be more frequently planted, p. 271. A friendly advice how a hundred and fifty
pound may be improved by Husbandry to yield a far greater increase than if the
said sum were employed in a way of Usury upon Usury, p. 271, 272. Another
friendly, and more particular advice, how by a good husbandry of Rape-seed to
raise an estate, or provide portions for children, p. 272, 273, 274. A Scale of
the charges of the Table formerly presented, with the Scale of some other
Tables, to demonstrate, that advantageous proposition, p. 275, 276, 277* 278. A
Proposition concerning Rape-seed, wherein the charge is set down with the most,
the return with the least, but both in the common way, p. 279, 280. A
Proposition for sowing of Hemp, whereby also a way is shown to set most of the
present poor to work, without prejudice or oppression, or altering any Law
already established, p. 280, 281, 282. An Answer to five Queres or Objections
against the proposition for setting the poor to work upon hemp growing or to be
growing in England, p. 282, 283, 284, 285. A new Husbandry or Improvement of
Rape-seed, p. 285, 286. A passage taken out of a Tract against the high rate of
Usury, presented to the high Court of Parliament, Anno Dom. 1623. In which the
Use for Money was brought down from ten to eight in the hundred; and now humbly
recommended to further public consideration, as a special means for
advancement of the National Husbandry of this Commonwealth, p. 286, 287, 288,
289. A Bank of Lands, or an Improvement of Lands never thought on in former
Ages. Begun to be presented upon most rational and demonstrable grounds by Mr.
William Potter (a Gentleman of great deserts, and of a most public spirit)
which being more fully cleared in all its particulars, and established by
public Authority may become a standing and settled means to enrich the whole
Nation, and also to remove Taxes, and other public Burdens* from p. 289. etc.
The Conclusion of the Legacy of Husbandry, taken out of Sir Richard Weston,
late of Sutton in the County of Surrey, his Legacy to his Sons, with a little
alteration of his words.
AN INTRODUCTION TO THE LEGACY of HVSBANDRY Extracted out of the Surveyors
Dialogue, page 223.
HE that will have profit must use the Means, they must not sit, and give aim,
and wish, and repine at other increase: There must be Observation to mark how
others thrive, Inclination and Imitation to do the like by endeavor and
charge; and if one Experiment fail, try a second, a third, and many: Look into
Places and persons, note the Qualities of the Lands of other men, and compare
it with your own, and where there is a resemblance; mark what the best Husband
does upon his land, like unto thine, if it prosper, practice it, and follow the
example of him that is commonly reputed a thrifty understanding Husbandman. And
by this means will Experience grow, and of one Principle of Reason, many
Conclusions will proceed.

And again.

We have indeed a kind of plodding and common course of Husbandry, and a kind
of peevish imitation of the most, who (as Wise men note) are the worst
Husbands, who only try what the earth will do of its self, and seek not to help
it with such means as Nature has provided, whereas if men were careful and
industrious, they should find that the Earth would yield in recompense for a
good Husbands travail and charge centuplum, without corrupt Usury an hundred
for one.

To his worthy and very much Honored Friend, the Author of the large Letter of
Husbandry.
SIR,
YOu may perceive by these Additionals to your large Letter, which you vvrote
to gratify my desires, that the Public has been benefited by your
Communications, which was all that I intended, by setting you upon that
work: nor will you repent of the pains I hope which you have taken this way.
For you see that your Open-hartedness in this kind has provoked another Friend
of mine of very public desert in the Commonwealth of Learning, to impart
unto me his Observations of the same nature. And although his Annotations now
and then, are Animadversions rather then Enlargements, yet it is not
unprofitable to the Public, nor disadvantageous to us; that our errors and
mistakes (for who can pretend to be without them:) be laid open and rectified.
I suppose you would be as loath as I, that any by your means or mine, should
be led into a by-way, and instead of gaining become a loser, in making trial
of what we offer for his advantage. I could wish that my worthy Friend who has
imparted these his thoughts unto me in the following extemporary Letters, had
spared some expressions; and bin less censorious against the Persons of some,
of whom others have a high and honorable opinion, as Helmont and Glauber* but
he is to be born with all in this, as we would be borne with all by him and
others; in the freedom which we might take of giving our opinions concerning
his failings. Also I am confident, that that learned Gentleman is not
interessed by any prejudice of passion, or personal disaffection against any
of them; but that as a man of a free spirit he does give his judgment through
his zeal and love to every truth as it lies in his apprehension; let every one
have his freedom in things which are well meant for the Public; and the best
way to rectify one another mistakes, will be to strive to set each other a
Copy, of better and more moderate expressions in the like Cases, wherein there
may be a mistake or failing: If we were skillful to provoke one another, only
to the affections of love and of good works; and by our own useful
experiments discreetly dispensed toward the Public, could draw forth the
profitable (but buried) skill of others, unto common use to be imparted unto
all; what could not be done for ease of the poor, and the relief of common
calamities? Truly, although neither God by his directions how to make use of
all his gifts; nor Nature his handmaid by her supplies of things necessary and
comfortable for our livelihood are wanting to us. Yet we by the untowardnesse
of our spirits, and the shutting up of our bowels, and the enviousnesse of our
dispositions, bring a scarcity upon our selves, and upon others, whilst we are
not faithful and liberal stewards of our talents, for the benefit of those,
for whose sake God has bestowed them upon us: therefore I shall desire you, as
you have begun, to continue in well doing, for you know the promise, that in
due time you shall reap the fruit of all your labors, if you faint not. And
least you should imagine, that you are at this distance forgotten by us, give
me leave to present you with another task proper for your thoughts in the
place where now you are, that the advantages of Nature, which God has bestowed
upon Ireland, may not lie undiscovered, and without improvement, at this season
wherein the Replanting of the vvast and desolate places of that Country, is
seriously laid to heart by many: I shall therefore desire you to look upon this
Alphabet of Interrogatories, and consider what Answers your Observations
will afford unto them; or what you can learn from the Observations of others
to clear them; and as you have opportunity, do, as my Friend from Paris has
done; furnish me with what Gods providence shall send unto your hands, that
as I have begun, I may put it out to use: and requite you more plentifully, as
I hope I shall be able to do, with the increase, which it shall yield, by
this way of Trading, which I have taken up freely to bestovv my pains and
cost upon others, that all may see the goodness of God in the works of his
hands, and have cause to be thankful unto him for the same, and that so many
eminent talents which God has put into your hands, may not (seeing he has
given you a heart to use them) lie idle for want of Objects, and sit
Commodities vvherevvithall to be trading with him, who subscribes himself
always, SIR,

Your very much obliged and assured friend to serve you, Samuel Hartlib.

A large Letter concerning the Defects and Remedies of English Husbandry,
written to Mr. Samuel Hartlib.
SIR,
ACcording to your desires, I have sent you what I have observed in France,
about the sowing of a Seed called commonly, Saint Foine, which in English is as
much to say as Holy-Hay, by reason, as I suppose, of the excellency of it. It Is
called by Parkinson in his Herball, where you may see a perfect description of
it, Cnobrychis Vulgaris, or Cocks head; because of its flower, or Medick
Fetchling: By some it is called Polygala; because it causes cattle to give
abundance of milk. The plant most like unto it, and commonly known, being
frequently sown in Gardens, is that which is called French Honeysuckle, and is
a kind of it, though not the same. France although it be supposed, to want the
fewest things of any Province in Europe: yet it has no small want of Hay,
especially about Paris; which has necessitated them to sow their dry and
barren lands with this seed. Their manner of sowing it, is done most commonly
thus: When they intend to let their Corn-lands lie, because they be out of
heart, and not situate in a place convenient for manuring, then they sow that
land with Oats, and these Seeds together about equal parts: the first year they
only mow off their Oats, leaving the Saint Foine to take root and strength
that year: Yet they may if they please, when the year is seasonable, mow it
the same year it is sown, but it is not the best way to do so: the year
following they mow it, and so do seven years together; the ordinary burden is
about a load, or a load and a half in good years, upon an Arpent, (which is 100
square Poles or Rods, every Pole or Rod being 20 foot) wuich quantity of ground
being nigh a 4th part less then an English Acre; within a league of Paris, is
usually Rented at 6 or 7 s. After the land has rested 7 years; then they
usually break it up, and sow it with corn till it be out of heart, and then
sow it with Saint Foine as formerly: for it does not impoverish land, as
Annual Plants do; but after seven years, the roots of this plant being great
and sweet, as the roots of locorish, do rot, being turned up by the Plough, and
enrich the land. I have seen it sown in diverse places here in England
especially in Cobham-Park in Kent, about 4 miles from Gravesend; where it has
thriven extraordinary well upon dry Chalky Banks, where nothing else would
grow: and indeed such dry barren land is most proper for it (as moist rich land
for the great Trefoile) or great Clover-Grass (although it will grow
indifferently well on all lands) and when the other Grasses and Plants are
destroyed by the parching heat of the Sun; because their roots are small and
shallow; this flourishes very much, having a very great root, and deep in the
ground, and therefore not easily to be exsiccated; As we have observed Ononis
or Rest-Harrow commonly to do on dry lands; but if you sow this on wet land,
the water soon corrupts the root of it. This Plant without question would much
improve many of our barren lands, so that they might be mowen every year once,
at least seven years together, and yield excellent fodder for cattle, if so be
that it be rightly managed: otherwise it comes to nothing, as I have seen by
experience. I therefore council those who sow this, or the great Trefoile, or
Clover-Grass, or any other sort of grasses, that they observe these Rules.

1. That they do make their ground fine, and kill all sorts of other grasses
and plants; otherwise they being Native English will by no means give way to
the French ones; especially in this moist climate: and therefore they are to be
blamed, who with one ploughing sow this or other seeds; for the grass
presently grows up and choaketh them, and so their negligence, and ill
Husbandry discourageth themselves and others.

2. Let them not be too sparing of their seeds; for the more they sow, the
closer and thicker they will grow, and presently fully stock the ground, that
nothing else can grow. And further the seeds which come from beyond the Seas,
are oftentimes old, and much decayed, and therefore the more seed is required.

3. Not to expect above 7 years profit by it; for in that time it will decay,
and the natural grass will prevail over it; for every plant has its period:
some in one year, some in 2. As Would, Cole, Rape, Wade, etc. Others in 3. as
the common Thistle, etc. and therefore after 7 years let them either plough the
Land up, and sow it with that same seed again, or with other Grain as they do
in France.

4. Let not sheep or other cattle bite them the first year, that they may be
well rooted; for these grasses are far sweeter then the ordinary grasses; and
cattle will eat them down, leaving the other; and consequently discourage their
growth.

5. The best way, if men will be at the charge, is to make their ground very
fine, as they do when they are to sow Barley, and harrow it even, and then to
how these seeds in alone without any other grain, as the Gardiners do Pease;
yet not at so great a distance; but let them make the ranges about a foots
breadth one from another, and they shall see their grasses flourish as if they
were green Pease, especially if they draw the how through them once or twice
that summer to destroy all the weeds and grasses: And if they do thus, the
great Clover and other seeds may be mowen even twice the first year, as I have
experimented in diverse small plots of ground.

There is at Paris likewise another sort of fodder, which they call La Lucern,
which is not inferior, but rather preferred before this Saint Foine, for dry
and barren grounds; which has bin lately brought thither, and is managed as
the former; and truly every day produces some new things, not only in other
Countries, but also in our own. And though I cannot but very much commend these
plants unto my Countrymen, knowing that they may be beneficial to this Nation;
yet I especially recommend unto them a famous kind of grass growing in
Wiltshire, 9 miles from Salisbury, at Maddington, which may better be called
one of the wonders of this land, then the Hawthorntree at Glassenbury, which
superstition made so famous: for diverse of the same kind are found elsewhere.
You may find this grass briefly described in a Book called Phytologia
Britannica, (which lately came forth, and sets down even all the plants which
have been found naturally growing in England) Gramen Caninum Supinum
Longissimum, which grows 9 miles from Salisbury, at Mr. Tuckers at Madington:
wherewith they fat hogs: and which is 24 foot long, a thing almost incredible;
yet commonly known to all that shire. Now without question, if the seed of this
grass, be sown in other rich Meadows, it will yield extraordinarily: though
perchance not so much, as in its proper place. I wonder that those that live
thereabouts, have not tried to fertilize their other Meadows with it: for it is
a peculiar species of grass: and though some ingenious men have sound about 90
species of grasses in this Island: yet there is none like to this, that can by
any means be brought to such an height and sweetness. And truly I suppose, that
the through examination of this grass, is a thing of very great importance, for
the improvement of Meadows and Pastures; and it may excel the Great Trefoile,
Saint Foine, La-Lucern, or any exotic plant whatsoever. And though I am very
unwilling to exceed the bounds of an Epistle; yet I cannot but certify you,
wherein the Husbandry of this Nation in other particulars (as I suppose) is
greatly deficient, which I will do as briefly as may be: and likewise, how
ingenious men may find Remedies for these deficiencies.

1. Deficieiency concerning Ploughs and Carriages.
First, He would do the honest and painful Husbandman a very great pleasure,
and bring great profit to this Nation, who could facilitate the going of the
plough, and lighten our ordinary Carriages. I wonder that so many excellent
Mechanics, who have beaten their brains about the perpetual Motion and other
curiosities, that they might find the best ways to ease all Motions, should
never so much as honor the Plough (which is the most necessary Instrument in
the world) by their labor and studies. I suppose all know, that it would be an
extraordinary benefit to this Country, if that 1 or 2 horses could plough and
draw as much as 4 or 6, and further also, that there is no small difference in
ploughs, and wagons, when there is scarce any sure rule for the making of
them; and every Country, yea almost every County, differs not only in the
ploughs; but even in every part. Some with wheels, others without; some turning
the Rest (as they call it) as in Kent, Picardy, and Normandy, others not: some
having Coulters of one fashion, others of another; others as the Dutch, having
an iron wheel or circle for that purpose; some having their shears broad at
point, some not; some being round, as in Kent, others flat: some tying their
horses by the tail, as in Ireland. So, likewise Wagons and Carts differ: some
using 4 wheels, others 2 only; some carrying timber on 2 wheels in a Cart,
others with 4 wheels, and a long pole only between, which is the best way: some
plough with 2 horses only, as in Norfolk, and beyond Seas, in France, Italy,
where I never saw above 3 horses in a plough, and one only to hold and drive:
But in Kent I have seen 4, 6, yea 12 horses and oxen; which variety shows,
that the Husbandman, who is ordinarily ignorant in Mechanics, is even at his
wits end in this Instrument, which he must necessarily use continually. Surely
he should deserve very well of this Nation, and be much honored by all, that
would set down exact Rules for the making of this most necessary, yet contemned
Instrument, and for every part thereof: for without question there are as exact
Rules to be laid down for this, as for Shipping and other things. And yet in
Shipping, how have we within these 6 years out-stripped our selves, and gone
beyond all Nations? for which Art some deserve Eternal honor. And why may we
not in this? I know a Gentleman, who now is beyond Seas, where he excels even
the Hollanders, in their own business of draining; who promises much in this
kind, and I think he is able to perform it; I could wish, he were called on to
make good his promise. In China, it is ordinary to have wagons to pass up and
down without horses or oxen, with Sails as Ships do: and lately in Holland a
wagon was framed, which with ordinary Sails carried 30 people 60 English miles
in 4 hours. I know some excellent Scholars, who promise much by the means of
Horizontal sails (viz) to have 3 or 4 Ploughs together, which shall likewise
both sow and harrow without horses or oxen.

I dare not being ignorant in these high speculations, engage my self to do
much thereby; but wish these Gentlemen, whom I know to be extremely ingenious,
would attempt something, both for the satisfying of themselves and others.
There is an ingenious Yeoman of Kent, who has two ploughs fastened together
very finely, by the which he plougheth two furrows at once, one under another;
and so stirs up the land 12 or 14 inches deep, which in deep land is good.
Near Greenwich there lives an Honorable Gentleman, Col. Blunt.
who has excellent Corn, and yet plougheth his land with one horse, when as
usually through Kent they use 4 and 6. These things show that much may be done
in this kind; and I hope some in these active times, will undertake and
accomplish this work of so great importance.

2 Deficiency, about diging of land, Setting and Howing in of corn.
There is a Book long since printed, made by Sir Hugh Plattes, (the most curious
man of his time) called Adams Art revived, wherein is showed the great benefit
which would accrue to this Nation, if all land which were sit to be dug,
were so ordered, and their corn set. Mr. Gab. Plattes likewise has written
much of this kind, and promises that men shall reap 100 for one; all charges
born which are very great. That this may be true, he brings some probable
Reasons, supposing that less then a peck of Wheat, will set an Acre, I dare not
promise so much as these Gentlemen do, neither can I commend Mr. Gab. Plattes
setting Instrument: For I know there are many difficulties in it, which he
himself could never wade through; but concerning digging, and setting, and
howing in of corn, these things I dare maintain.

1. That it is a deficiency in Husbandry, that it is used no more.

2. That one good digging, because it goes deeper then the Plough, and buryeth
all weeds, kills the grasses; is as good as three Ploughings, and if the land
be mellow, not much more chargeable.

3. That it would employ many thousand of people, that a third part of the seed
might be saved. As I have found by experience, that all the weeds and grasses,
might be more easily destroyed thereby, and the ground better accommodated for
other crops; and to conclude, the crop considerably greater. Yet thus much I
must further say, concerning setting of Grain, That great Beans are even of
necessity to be set, and that small Beans in Surrey, and other places, are
likewise set with profit, for the reasons above mentioned; that to set Pease
(unless Hastevers, and Roncivals) Oats, Barley, is a thing even ridiculous:
that Wheat although in diverse grounds it may be set with profit: yet to how it
in (as the Hardiners speak) as they do Pease, though not at the same distance,
but about a foot the ranges one from another, is better then setting for these
Reasons.

1. Because to set Corn is an infinite trouble and charge; and if it be not
very exactly done, which children neither can nor will do, and these must be
the chief setters; will be very prejudicious.

2. If worms, frost, ill weather, or fowls, destroy any part of your seed,
which they will do; your crop is much impared.

3. The ground cannot be so well weeded, and the mould raised about the roots
by the how. Which 3 inconveniences are remedied by the other way.

Further, I dare affirm, that after the ground is dug or ploughed and
harrowed: even it is better to how Wheat in, then to sow it after the common
way; because that the weeds may be easily destroyed by running the how through
it in the Spring, and the mould raised about the roots of the Corn, as the
Gardiners do with Pease, it would save much Corn in dear years, and for other
Reasons before mentioned. Yea, it is not more chargeable; for a Gardener will
how in an Acre for 5 s. and after in the Spring for less money run it over
with a how, and cut up all the weeds, and raise the mould: which charges are
not great, and you shall save above a bushel of seed, which in dear years is
more worth then all your charges.

Further, 1 s. 6 d. or 2 s. an Acre for the sowing and harrowing of an Acre in
Kent, is accounted a reasonable price, and may be saved; but if any fear
charges, let him use a Dril-Plough, with one horse, which is commonly known at
Fulham, and about London. I therefore cannot but commend the howing in of
wheat, as an excellent piece of good Husbandry, whether the ground be dug or
ploughed; not only because it saves much Corn, imployeth much people, and it
is not chargeable; but it also destroys all weeds, fitteth grounds for after
crops and causes a greater increase, and in my apprehension is a good Remedy
against Smut and Mildew. There is an Ingenious Italian, who wondreth how it
comes to pass, that if one sets a Grain of Corn, as Wheat, Barley, etc. it
usually produces 300 or 400. yea, 1000, 2000, as I have tried: yet if you sow
Wheat after the ordinary way, 6 or 8 for one is accounted a good crop: what
becomes of all the Corn that is sown, when as the 50th part, if it do grow,
would be sufficient? For answer to this.

1. I say much Corn is sown which nature has destinated for the Hens and
Chickens, being without any considerable vegetative faculty.

2. Worms, Frosts, Floods, Crows and Larks, (which every one does not consider)
do devour not a little.

3. Weeds, as Poppy, May-weed, and the grasses growing with the Corn do destroy
much.

Lastly, When Corn is so sown after the ordinary manner, much is buried in the
furrows; especially if the ground be grazy: much is thrown on heaps in holes,
and consequently starve and choke one another. Most of these Inconveniences,
are to be remedyed by this way of setting and howing in of Corn.

3. Deficiency, concerning Gardening.
Gardening, though it be a wonderful improver of lands, as it plainly appears
by this, that they give extraordinary rates for land, ( viz.) from 40 s, per
Acre to 9 pound, and dig and how, and dung their lands, which costeth very
much; Yet I know diverse, which by 2 or 3 Acres of land maintain themselves and
family, and employ other about their ground; and therefore their ground must
yield a wonderful increase, or else it could not pay charges; yet I suppose
there are many Deficiencies in this calling.

1. Because it is but of few years standing in England, and therefore not
deeply rooted, nor well understood. About 50 years ago, about which time
Ingenuities first began to flourish in England; This Art of Gardening, began to
creep into England, into Sandwich, and Surrey, Fulham, and other places.

Some old men in Surrey, where it flourishes very much at present; report,
That they knew the first Gardiners that came into those parts, to plant
Cabages, Colleflowers, and to sow Turnips, Carrets, and Parsnips, to sow Raith,
(or early ripe) Pease, Rape, all which at that time were great rarities, we
having few, or none in England, but what came from Holland, and Flanders. These
Gardiners with much ado procured a plot of good ground, and gave no less then 8
pound per Acre; yet the Gentleman was not content, fearing they would spoil
his ground, because they did use to dig it. So ignorant were we of Gardening in
those days.

2. Many parts of England are as yet wholly ignorant. Gravesend.
Within these 20 years, a famous Town within less then 20 miles off London, had
not so much as a Mess of Pease, but what came from London, where at present
Gardening flourishes much, I could instance diverse other places, both in the
North and West of England, where the name of Gardening, and Howing is scarcely
known, in which places a few Gardiners might have saved the lives of many poor
people, who have starved these dear years.

3. We have not Gardening-ware in that plenty and cheapness (unless perhaps
about London) as in Holland, and other places, where they not only feed
themselves with Gardiner's ware, but also fat their Hogs and Cows.

4. We have as yet diverse things from beyond Seas, which the Gardiners may
easily raise at home, though nothing nigh so much as formerly; for in Queen
Elizabeth's time, we had not only our Gardiners ware from Holland, but also
Cherries from Flaunders; Apples from France; Saffron, Licorish from Spain; Hops
from the Low Countries: And the Frenchman who writes the Treasure Politic
says, That it is one of the great Deficiencies of England, that Hops will not
grow, whereas now it is known, that Licorish, Saffron, Cherries, Apples, Pears,
Hops, Cabages of England, are the best in the world. Notwithstanding we as yet
want many things: as for example: We want Onnions, very many coming to England
from Flaunders, Spain, etc. Madder for dying comes from Zurick-Sea by Zealand;
we have Red Roses from France, Annice-seeds, Fennel-seeds, Cumine, Caraway,
Rice from Italy, which without question would grow very well in diverse moist
lands in England; yea Sweet-Marjoram, Barley, and further, Gromwell-seed, and
Virga Aurea, and Would, from the Western Isles, though they grow in our hedges
in England.

Lastly, Gardening is deficient in this particular: that we have not Nurceries
sufficient in this land of Apples, Pears, Cherries, Vines, Chestnuts, Almonds,
etc. but Gentlemen are necessitated to send to London some hundred miles for
them.

Briefly, for the advancement of this ingenuous calling, I only desire, that
Industrious Gentlemen would be pleased to encourage some expert workmen into
the places where they live, and to let them land at a reasonable rate, and if
they be poor and honest, to lend a little stock: they will soon see the benefit
that will redound, not only to themselves, but also to all their Neighbors
especially the poor, who are not a little sustained by the Gardiners labors
and ingenuities.

4. Deficiency in Smut and Mildew.
4. Our Husbandry is deficient in this, that we know not how to remedy the
infirmities of our growing Corn; especially Smut and Mildew, to instance in
these two only, which oftentimes bring great calamities to these Nations: Smut
in wet years, Mildews in dry. These distempers in Corn, are not only in our
Country; Helmont.
but also in other places. A learned Author says, that Smuttiness of Corn,
which makes it smell like a Red Herring, was not known in France, till about
1530. at which time the great foul disease began to break forth in those parts
very hotly, which he conceives from hence to have some original; as also the
camp-disease. Mildews are very great in the Kingdom of Naples, which often stick
to the sithes of those that mow grass and corn: and (God be thanked) we are not
troubled with Locusts, which is a great flying Grass-hopper, nor Palmer-worms,
which is a kind of great black Cater-piller, (which I have seen destroying much
in New England) nor with great hail in Summer, nor with great drought, which
stifleth the ear in the stalk; which Calamities in hot Countries, do very often
totally destroy the honest and patient Husbandman's labors: neither are we
troubled with extreme colds, which in New England and other cold Countries, do
often destroy the Corn. But to return to our purpose.

And first, briefly to show you my opinion concerning the Causes of
Smuttinesse. I desire not to fetch Causes afar off, and to tell you of the sad
Conjunctions of Mars and Saturn, (for I think Quae suprae nos, belong not to
us) when as we have enough at home: This is certain, that there are many
evident causes of this corruption of Corn.

1. A moist season about Kerning-time: which moisture either corrupts the
roots of the Plant, or the nourishment of it, or the seed in its Embrio: or
perhaps in some measure all these.

2. Low, moist, foggy ground, for the reasons above mentioned.

3. Dung'd land. In Vineyards it is observed, that dung causes more increase in
quantity, but less in goodness, so that the ill-taste of the dung may easily be
discerned; because wine has an high taste, without question the same happens
to other Plants, although it be not so easily discerned; for the ferment or ill
odor of the dung, cannot be over-mastered by the Plants, as we see also in
Animals, that corrupt diet causes unsavory tastes in the flesh: so hogs in
New Foundland, where they are nourished by fish, may by their tastes be called
rather Sea-porpusses, then Land-swine.

4. The sowing of Smutty Corn often produces Smuttyness; the son like unto the
father: I account Smutty Corn an imperfect or sick Grain, and suppose that by a
Microscope the imperfection may be discerned.

Lastly, The sowing of the same seed often on the same field, causes Smuttyness;
because that nitrous juice, which is convenient for the nourishment of the
Grain, has been exhausted in the precedent years; and therefore it is
excellent Husbandry every year to change the species of Grain, and also to buy
your Seed-Corn, from places far distant. I am informed of a Gentleman, who did
sow some Wheat which came from Spain, where the Grain is usually very hard and
flinty, and as it were transparent, and far weightier then ours (as it
appears by a measure at Amsterdam, which holds about 3 bushels, and in our
Wheat of the Northern parts weighs 160, whereas the Southern Corn weighs
sometimes 180, 200, 220.) and had a crop beyond expectation.

The usual Cures of Smuttyness, besides those mentioned before, are these

1. To lime your ground, which warmeth and dries the Land.

2. To lime your Corn, which is done thus. First, Slack your lime, and then
moisten your Corn or lime, and stir them together, till your Grain be as big as
a small Pease. This liming preserves Corn likewise from birds and worms, and
is found a very good Remedy against this disease: others make a strong lie with
common salt, and steep their Corn in it all night, and then draw away their lie
for further use; which seldom fails of its desired effect. Whether this
strong lie does by its corrosiveness, mortify the weak and imperfect Corn, so
that it will not grow; Or whether it be a Remedy, to cure the imperfections
thereof, is worth the enquiry? I suppose this lie does exsicoate the
superfluous humidity, which is the cause of this corruption. If Corn be brought
into the Barn very Smutty, in Kent they usually thresh it on dry floors,
planked with boards; by which means, the Smuttyness is beaten away, and
sticks not to the Grain, only a little blackness appears about the eye,
but if it be threshed on a moist floor, the blackness sticks to the Grain,
which therefore appears dark, and is sold at a lower rate to the Bakers.

Mildew is without question an unctuous dew, which descends from above about
Midsomer; it abounds in dry years, as Smuttynesse in moist. I cannot think
that there is ordinarily any Malgnity in this dew, but it produces its effect
by manifest causes, viz. from an oily viscuous quality, which stops the
pores of the husk wherein the Wheat lies, and depriveth it from the Air, and
consequently from nourishment: for the Air is the life of all things. I have
heard, and do believe, that if you streak any ear of Wheat with oil, it will
produce the same effect. I am sorry that I never tried, that I might better
understand the nature of this sad calamity which often undoeth the Industrious
Husbandman: and causes great scarcity in this Isle. It is to be observed
further, that Wheat only suffers considerable damage by Mildew; because it
lies in a chaffy husk, which other Grains do not. The Grounds most subject to
Mildew, are these.

1. Those that are enclosed with Trees and high Hedges. And truly this is the
only great Inconveniency I find by enclosures.

2. Low Valleys: I have seen very often in the same field, the banks fine bright
Corn; and all the lower parts, though greater in straw; yet little worth by
reason of the Mildew.

3. Dung made of straw, I have observed to dispose much to Mildew, and Sheeps
dung to be a kind of Antidote against it: as also Pigeons-dung; because, as I
conceive, these 2 last sorts abound much in Niter, which produces a firm,
hard, bright Corn, not easily to be putrefied; but the other being more oily
and Sulphurous, causes a dark Spungy Corn, soon corruptible. And 2. because
straw and dung is a part of the same kind corrupted, which is always in some
measure hurtful to the same species, both in Animals, and all Vegetables, and
therefore rotten sticks, or the earth proceeding from them, is found hurtful to
the roots of trees; and trees will hardly grow, where Roots of other trees have
formerly been corrupted.

The Remedies for this Accident, briefly are these. (Not to speak of Bees, who
questionless make most of their Honey from these Honeys or Mildews: for they
gather very little, in comparison of that which falls.)

1. The best way is to cut down the trees about your ground, and your hedges
low, that the wind may ventilate your Corn.

2. To sow early; that your Corn may be full Kerned, Sir Cheney Culp.
before these Mildews fall. I am informed, that an Ingenious Knight in Kent,
did for curiosity sow Wheat in all months of the year, and that the Corn sown
in July, did produce such an increase, that it is almost incredible; and truly
I think it a great fault in many places that they sow late, for many reasons: I
am sure in France, they usually sow before Michaelmas.

3. Some use (and with good profit) to draw a line over their Corn, and to
strike off the Mildew, before it be inspissated by the Sun; This ought
especially to be done before Sunrising: two men in an hour will easily run over
an Acre; the Mildews usually fall like a thick fog, or a Misty rain; if you go
to your Bees, you will soon perceive it by their extraordinary labor, very
early in the morning.

4. The use of a kind of bearded Wheat, is an excellent Remedy: for the beard
shoots off the dew, that it does not so easily insinuate it self into the
ear, and likewise causes the ear to shake by the least wind. There is a kind
of Wheat in Buckinghamshire called Red-straw-Wheat, which is much commended:
it is a strong-stalked Wheat, and does not soon lodge, and therefore excellent
for Rank Land where Corn is apt to lodge, and consequently to Mildew; but I
question whether it has any property against Mildew. This I am very confident
of, that if this Wheat, or any other, were without the Chaffy husks exposed
bare to the Air; as Barley and Rye are, Wheat would not be afflicted with
Mildew. Perhaps such Grain may be found by diligent enquiry. I have casually
picked out of a Wheat-field some stalks, which had two ears on them: and though
Barley usually has but 2 ranges in the South of England, yet I have seen some
sorts with 4, 6, and there are many great varieties in grains not yet
discovered. Truly if any knows better ways then these, how to cure this
Malady of Mildew, 5. Deficiency concerning the planting of Apples, Pears,
Cherries, and Plums.
he is much to blame, if he do not publish it for the good of his Contrymen.

I will not here set down the diverse manners of Graftings and Inoculations,
which nevertheless is an Art absolutely necessary in Planting; for every Book
of Husbandry does show it, and every Gardener can teach it those who are
desirous to learn it: Neither will I set down all the sorts of Apples, Pears,
Cherries, Plums, etc. For it would be too tedious a discourse; and Mr.
Parkinson has already very excellently done it, in his Book called Paradisus
Terrestis, where at leisure you may read it. I will only point briefly at the
Deficiencies, which I find in this part of Husbandry, and the best ways to
Remedy them.

1. I say, that it is a great Deficiency in England, that we have not more
Orchards planted. It Is true, that in Kent, and about London, and also in
Glocestershire, Hereford, and Worcester, there are many gallant Orchards, but
in other Countries, they are very rare and thin: but if there were as many
more, even in any Country, they would be very profitable. I know in Kent, that
some advance their ground even from 5 s. per Acre, to 5 pound by this means,
and so proportionally; and if I should relate what I have heard by diverse
concerning the profit of a Cherry-Orchard, about Sittenburn in Kent, you would
hardly believe me; yet I have heard it by so many, that I believe it to be
true: Namely, that an Orchard of 30 Acres of Cherries, produced in one year
above 1000 pound, but now the Trees are almost all dead; it was one of the
first Orchards planted in Kent. Mr. Cambden reports, that King Henry the
Eighth's Gardener, first began to plant Flemish Cherries in those parts, which
in his time did spread into 32 other Parishes, and were at that time sold at
greater rates then now; yet I know that 10, or 15 pound an Acre has been given
for Cherries; more for Pears, and Apples.

2. There is a great Deficiency in the ordering of Orchards, in that they are
not well pruned, but full of Moss, Misletoe, and Suckers, and oftentimes the
ground is packed too thick of Trees; for they should stand at least 20 foot
asunder; neither will ill husbands bestow dunging, digging, or any other cost
on Orchards, which if they did, might pay half their Rents in some places. One
told me for a Secret, a Composition for to make Trees bear much and excellent
fruit, which was this: First, in an old Tree, to split his root; then to apply
a Compost made of Pigeons dung, Lees of wine, or stale Urine, and a little
Brimstone, (to destroy the worms) it has some probability of truth: for by
experience I know that a bushel of Pigeons dung has caused a Tree to grow and
bear, which for diverse years before stood at a stand; but concerning the
splitting the roots, I know not what to say. Some old Authors affirm this
ought to be done; because that the roots may as well be hide-bound, as other
parts of the Tree, and not able to attract his nourishment, and when the Root
is split, it will speedily send forth diverse small fibrous roots; which are the
principal Attractors. It were good that some would give us an account exact of
this Experiment. But some will object against Orchards, that they spoil much
ground, and therefore ought to be planted only in Hedges. To this I answer.

1. That Plumtrees and Damsius may very well be planted in hedges, being
ordinarily thorny Plants; this is used very much in Surrey and Kent, where the
Plums usually pay no small part of their Rent; yet I never saw in these
Southern parts of England, any Apples or Pears thrive in an Hedge, unless a
Crab, or a Wilden, or some Sweeting of little worth. How they thrive in
Herefordshire, and those places, I know not.

2. The Inconveniences of Orchards planted at 20 or 30 foot distance, is not
worth speaking of: for this is the usual course in Kent, when they plant any
ground, they exactly place them in rank and file, and then plough their Lands
many years, and sow them with Corn, till the Orchard begins to bear fruit;
then they lay them down for pasture, which pasture is not considerably sour;
but has this advantage above other Pastures.

1. That it is sooner grown by 14 days in the Spring than the Medows, and
therefore very serviceable.

2. In Parching Summers here is plenty, when other places have scarcity.

3. There are great shelters for Cattle, especially sheep, who will in those
places, in great Snows scrape up meat, which in other places they cannot do:
and if the pasture were sour, yet the loss is not great; for it will be a
convenient place for the Hogs to run in, who must have a place for that
purpose, where there are no Commons.

4. I say, that the Benefits are so many by Orchards, that you ought not like
an ungrateful man to thrust them up to the hedge: for they afford curious
walks for pleasure, food for cattle, both in the Spring early, and also in the
parching Summer, and nipping snowy Winter: They afford fuel for the fire, and
also shades for the heat, physic from the sick, refreshment for the sound,
plenty of food for man, and that not of the worst, and dink also even of the
best, and all this without much labor, care or cost, who therefore can justly
open his mouth against them.

3. Deficiency is, that we do not improve many excellent Fruits, which grow
amongst very well, and that we have as yet many fruits from beyond Seas, which
will grow very well with us. I pass by the general and great Ignorance, that
is amongst us, of the variety of Apples, of which there are many sorts which
have some good and peculiar uses; most men contenting themselves with the
knowledge of half a score of the best, thinking the virtues of all the rest are
comprehended in them: as also of the variety of Pears, which are incredibly
many. A Friend of mine near Gravesend, has lately collected about 200 species.
I know another in Essex, (Mr. Ward) who has nigh the same number. I hear of
another in Worcestershire, not inferior to these. In Northamtonshire, I know
one, who has likewise collected very many. So that I dare boldly say, there
are no less in this Island then 500 species; some commended for their early
ripeness; some for excellent tastes; some for beauty; others for greatness;
some for great bearers; others for good Bakers; some for long lasters, others
for to make Perry, etc. But to our purpose: I say many rare fruits are
neglected: To instance.

1. In the Small-nut or Filberd, which is not much inferior to the best and
sweetest Almonds.

2. The great Damsin or Pruin-plum, which grows well, and bears full in
England.

3. Almonds, which grows well and bears good fruit, as I have seen diverse
bushels on one Treee in my Brothers Orchard.

4. Walnuts, which is not a fruit to be despised.

5. Vines and Mulberies, but of these presently in another place. I might
likewise add Currants, Raspeses, of which excellent drinks may be made.

6. Quinces, Of the which I cannot but tell you that a Gentleman at Prichenel
in Essex, who had a Tree from beyond Sea, has the best in England, and has
made above 30 pound of a small piece of ground planted with them, as I have
heard from his own Wifes mouth. And therefore it is by reason of our ill
Husbandry, that we have Quinces from Flaunders, Small-nuts from Spain, Pruins
from France, and also Walnuts; and Almonds from Italy, and Chestnuts (which I
had almost forgot) from Portugal. And now I cannot but digress a little, to
tell you a strange and true story, with my opinion of it. In diverse places of
Kent, as at and about Gravesend, in the Country and elsewhere, very many of
the prime Timbers of their old Barns and Houses are of Chestnut-wood, and yet
there is scarce a Chestnut-Tree within 20 miles of that place, and the people
altogether ignorant of such Trees. This shows that in former times those
places did abound with such timber; for people were not so foolish surely in
former times, to run up and down the World, to procure such huge massey Timbers
for Barns and such Buildings when as there was plenty of Oaks and Elmes, at
their doors: And further, it shows, that these Trees will grow again with us
to a great bigness. This puts into my mind the Story of the Moorlogs, which
are found in diverse places of the North of England in Moors many foot deep;
which logs are long and black, and appear to be a kind of Fir or Pine; and yet
in those places, people are altogether ignorant of these Trees, the Country
not producing any of these species. The first Story of Kent, which I know to be
true, causes me to wonder the less at the latter: for I see that a species of
wood, may be destroyed, even totally in a place. And

2. I know, that in Virginia and New England, that Pines, and Firs and Cedars,
do grow wonderfully thick in such Moors or Swamps, and being light wood, and
easily wrought, they are continually used, while they last, for buildings.
Further, I suppose these Moors are Commons, to the which the poor have used to
resort for siring, and how soon great woods will be consumed by them, every one
making what havoc he pleases, all men know. As concerning their being so deep
in the ground, and their blackness; I suppose that when wood was abundant in
those places, every one did cut what they pleased, and left what was not for
their turns, which being in moist places, was soon glutted with moisture, and
made ponderous; by which means it soon buried it self, as Ships do, on
Quicksand, or perhaps the Turf (which has a peculiar faculty vegetative, for
where it is exhausted, it soon grows again) in time has grown over them; the
people permitting it, because that wood, once sobbed in wet, is of little use,
as we see by Piles on the Marshes-side, scarce any man vouchsafing to carry
them home. The blackness of this wood proceeds, as I suppose, from the sooty
fume, or evaporation of the black turf, (which endeavoreth, as all earths do)
to reduce all things into its own nature; which though it be not able fully to
accomplish; yet it introduces diverse dispositions, and qualities, as blackness
in the Wood. Some suppose, that these Moor-logs have lain there ever since the
flood, with whom I will not contend; seeing that any wood, if it be kept from
the Air continually moist or dry, will endure even thousands of years without
putrefaction.

6. Deficiency, The 6 deficiency concerning not improving our Fruits.
is the Not-improving of our Fruits for the best ends and purposes. Normandy,
which produces but little wine, makes abundance of Cider, Perry, which they
estimate equally to wine, if it be made of good fruit. The ordinary Perry is
made of Choaky Pears, very juicy, which grow along by the high-way-sides, which
are not to be eaten raw. In Biseay in Spain, where wine is scarce, they make
Cider of a certain sweet Apple, which has a little bitterness in it, and is
like to our snouting, and the Cider is very good. And truly here in England, if
we would make Cider and Perry of the best sorts of Fruits, which is rarely
done, (for we think any fruit good enough for that purpose) we might make
drinks, no ways inferior to the French-wines, which are usually spoiled
before they come over the Seas to us, their Spirits soon evapourating. There
are two ways of making Cider and Perry: one, by bruising and beating them, and
then presently to put them into a vessel to ferment or work (as it is usually
called) of themselves: The other way is to boil the juice with some good
Spices, by which the rawnesse is taken away, and then to ferment it with some
yest, if it work not of it self, this is the best way: and I have tasted Cider
thus made of an excellent delicate taste. Neither let any complain of the
windiness; for it is only want of use: When I had for two or three years
continually drunk wine beyond Sea, the strongest Beer for two or three weeks
was as windy to me, as Cider will be to any; and afterward when I went to
Paris, the wine of that place was as troublesome as English beer for a little
time: how much wine might be saved, and also Malt if Englishmen did take these
good courses, which other Nations do, and consequently how much advantage would
this Island reap thereby? If I were an housekeeper in the Country, I would
make excellent Beer, Ale, Cider, Perry, Metheglin, and Wine, of our own grapes,
and if my Friends would not drink these, they should drink water, or go away a
thirst: I would scorn to honor France so much as men do usually; and the
Spaniard and Italian should not laugh at us, and say that we can as well be
without Bread, as their Wines, Currants, etc. Thus may many more excellent
Drinks be made out of our Fruits: not to speak of those which are made of our
Grain, as Barley, Wheat, etc. yet I must tell you, that I know an Ingenious
man, who can without malting Barley, make a Drink not inferior to Wine, and a
greater quantity of Aqua-vitae out of them, and with less cost, then by the
ordinary way, by a peculiar Fermentation of his own; which time will discover.
There is another Ingenious man, who out of Damsins and other fat and sweet
Plums, can make a Drink not inferior to the best Wines, and abundance of
Aqua-vitae. Many Ladies know how to make Cherry, Raspes-wines; and Sir Hugh
Plattes in his Closet for Ladies, discloseth many Secrets of this kind; as also
for Conserves, Marmalades, which are things both delightful and profitable. I
have a kinsman, who can even out of Black-berries, make a very pleasant Drink,
which curiosity he is unwilling to publish. Glauber an excellent Chemist has
diverse secrets of this kind, even to the advancing of Haws, Heps, or
Canker-berries, Slows, to excellent Aqua-vitae's, Drinks, Vinegers, which he
himself first invented. In Russia in the springtime, it is an usual custom to
pierce the Bark of the Birch-trees, Helmont.
which at that time will weep much liquour, and yet like children be little the
worse, this the poor ordinarily drink for necessity, it is a pleasant healthful
drink; and also the rich men, because it is an excellent Presevative against the
stone.

The Means to advance this profitable and pleasant Work are these.

1. To advance Nurceries of all sorts of Apples, Pears, Plums, Cherries, which
Gentlemen may do for a small matter, and then plant out these Trees, when they
are grown great enough. The best and cheapest ways to raise all Nurcery Wares,
is done thus. Plums may be raised either of stones, which when you have eaten
the plums, may be presently pricked into the ground, or by slips, which you
will find about the old Trees: Apples may be raised from Kernels, (Crab-Kernels
are the best) which ought to be preserved in dry sand, till the spring, least
they grow moldy: or Crab-stalke may be fetched out of the woods, and grafted.
Some Trees, as Sweetings, Codlings, Quinces, will grow very well of slips.
Cherries are very well raised by stones, (the Black-Cherries are the best)
which so soon as you have eated them, are to be howen into Beds made very fine,
the ranges a foot distant; beware lest you let them heat, and take heed of the
Mouse. I have seen Cherry-stones and Apple-kernels grow two foot and a half in
one year; and consequently in few years they would be fit to be transplanted.
The Art of Grafting, Inoculating a Gentleman will learn in two hours.

2. For the advancing of Ingenuities in this kind, as that making of
Vinous-Drinks out of Apples, Plums, etc. I counsel all Ingenious Gentlemen to
try diverse experiments in these kinds; with these Cautions.

1. That he attempt not great quantities at first, which perchance will be
chargeable and troublesome; for by a Gallon he may have as much certainty, as
by a Hogshead.

2. Not to be discouraged, if they succeed not well at first dash: for
certainly there are many Ingenuities in these fruits which time will discover.

3. Proceed by Fermentation: for every liquour which will ferment, has a
vinous spirit in it, and without Fermentation, even the best fruits will have
none.

Lastly, Fermentation is done either in liquido, or humido; and herein consists
some Mystery. I have forgot to speak of Apricoks, Peaches, Melicotons, which
are fine pleasant fruits, yet very dangerous; and therefore called by the
Italians, Mazz-francese, that is, Kill-Frenchman; and wish Ladies, and others
to take heed of surfeiting by these.

I cannot without much tediousness, relate the diverse sorts of Vines, The 7
deficiency concerning Vines.
which are even infinite; Rome baving in it usually, 40 or 50 sorts of Vines;
and all very good: Other places of Italy, Spain, France, have also great
varieties; I therefore pass them by, as also the manner of managing them,
because it is described in the Countrey-Farm, and also by Bonovil a Frenchman,
who at the Command of King James, wrote a short Treatise of Vines and
Silkworms, for the instruction of the Plantations of Virginia. I shall only
according to my Method show you the Deficiencies amongst us in this particular
Plant, and the best Remedies for it.

And first, although I think that the Vine is the great blessing of God, which
Hot Countries especially enjoy, as temperate Countries do Milk, Butter,
Cheese, in abundance, and the coldest and Barrenest Fowl, and Fish, in an
incredible number; God of his goodness distributing some peculiar blessings to
every Country: Notwithstanding I dare say, it is probable, that Vineyards have
formerly flourished in England, and that we are to blame, that so little is
attempted to revive them again. There are many places in Kent called by the
names of Vineyards, and the grounds of such a Nature, that it seems probable
they have been such. I hear further by diverse people of credit, that by Records
it appears, that the Tithes of wine in Glocestershire, was in diverse Parishes
considerably great; and remaining about 300 years in their possession and Mr.
Cambden writes so much; as also William of Malmesbury who lived 600 years
since. But at length Gascony coming into the hands of the English, from whence
comes the most of the strong French Wine, called Highc-Country-wine, and
customs being small, wine was imported into England from thence, better and
cheaper then we could make it, and it was thought convenient to discourage
Vineyards here, that the greater trade might be driven with Gascoine, and many
ships might find employment thereby.

Some Astrologers have conceited, that the Earth being grown older, and
therefore colder has caused the Sun to descend many thousand miles lower to
warm and cherish it, and one Argument which they bring for this opinion is,
that Vines and Silkworms are found in those Countries, wherein former times
they were unknown: But if these fond men had considered the good Husbandry in
these times, with the blessing of God on it, they had not run into such foolish
imaginations. This is true indeed, that the Roman Soldiers, who had Alsatia
given them to live in, which is one of the best and most Southern places of
Germany, mutined, because they thought it so cold, that Vines would not grow
there, and that therefore they should be deprived of that delectable liquour;
whereas we find at this present day Vines flourishing many hundred miles more
toward the North, both in France, Lorain, etc. and Germany; and that they are
crept down even to the Latitude of England for the Rhenish-wines grew within a
degree of the West-Southern places of this Isle, and Paris is not two degrees
South of us, yet Vines grow threescore miles on this side Paris, as by
Beaumont, Beauvats, etc. by the way of Picardy near 20 leagues; as also by the
way of Pontoyse through Normandy, at Arts, 35 leagues from Paris, and 5 from
Diep; yea the Vines of these places are the most delicate; for what wine is
preferred before the Neat Rhenish for Ladies, and at Table; and truly in my
opinion, though I have traveled twice through France; yet no wine pleased me
like Vin D'ache, and of Paris especially about Rueill, which is a very fine
brisk wine, and not fuming up to the head, and Inebriating as other wines: I
say therefore that it is very probable, that if Vines have stepped out of Italy
into Alsatia, from them to these places, which are even as far North as
England, and yet the Wines there are the most delicate, that they are not
limited and bound there. For an hundred miles more or less causes little
alteration in heat or cold, and some advantages which we have will supply that
defect. But not to insist too long on probabilities, I say, that here in
England some Ingenious Gentlemen usually make wine very good, long lasting,
without extraordinary labor and costs. To instance in one, who in Great Chart,
in the Wild of Kent, a place very moist and cold, Sir Peter Ricard.
yearly makes 6 or 8 Hogsheads, which is very much commended by diverse who
have tasted it, and he has kept some of it two years, as he himself told me,
Captain Tucker.
and has been very good: Others likewise in Kent do the same: and lately in
Surrey a Gentlewoman told me, that they having many Grapes, which they could
not well tell how to dispose of, she, to play the good House-wife, stamped them
to make verjuice; but two months after drawing it forth, they found it very
fine brisk-wine, clear like Rock-water, and in many other places such
experiments have been made. I therefore desire Ingenious men to endeavor the
raising of so necessary and pleasant a commodity: especially when French-Wine
is so dear here, and I suppose is likely to be dearer; I question not, but they
shall find good profit and pleasure in so doing, and that the State will give
all encouragements to them: and if the French Wine pay Excize and Customs, and
the Wines here be toll-free, they will be able to afford them far cheaper, then
the French can theirs, and supply the whole Isle, if they proceed according to
these Rules.

1. To choose the best sorts of Grapes, which are most proper for this Isle,
and though there are many sorts of Grapes amongst Gardiners, yet I commend four
sorts especially to them; and I desire that they be very careful in this
particular: for it is the foundation of the work; if you fail in this, you fail
in all; for I know that Burdeaux-Vines, which bear very great Grapes, make
verjuice only at Paris, and that the tender Orleans-Vine does not thrive there.

The first sort is the Parsely Vine, or Canada-grape; because it first came
from those parts, where it grows naturally; and though the Country be
intolerably cold; yet even in the woods without manuring, it so far ripeneth
his fruits, that the Jesuits make wine of it for their Mass; and Racinee (which
is the Juice of the Grape newly expressed, and boiled to a Syrup, and is very
sweet and pleasant) for their Lent-provision, as you may read in their
Relations: and this Vine seems to be made for these Northern Countries,
because it has its leaves very small and jagged, as if it were on purpose to
let in the Sun, and it ripeneth sooner then other Grapes, as I have observed in
Oxford-Graden.

2. Sort of Vine is the Rhenish-Grape; for it grows in a temperate Country,
not much hotter in the Summer then England; and the wine is excellent as all
know.

3. Sort is the Paris-grape; which is much like the temper of England, only a
little hotter in Summer: this Grape bears a small bunch close set together,
very hardly to endure frosts, and other inconveniences, and is soon ripe; so
that the Vintage of Paris, is sooner ended then that of Orleans or Bordeaux;
and though it be not so delicate to the taste, as some other Grapes: yet it
makes an excellent brisk wine.

4. Sort is the small Muskadell; which is a very fine pleasant Grape, both to
eat, and to make wine. In Italy it usually grows against their houses walls,
and of this they make a small pleasant wine, a Month or two before the ordinary
Vintage. It is a tender plant in respect of the other Vines in the fields:
these Vines I know are the most convenient for this Isle; because they bear
small bunches, and Grapes soon ripen, and are hardy to endure frosts and ill
weather.

2. To choose convenient places. For this end, I counsel them, First, to plant
Vines on the South Side of their dwelling Houses, Barns, Stables, and
Outhouses. The Gentleman of Kent, whom I mentioned before, uses this course:
and to keep the Vines from hurting his tiles, and that the wind may not wrong
his Vines, he has a frame made of poles, or any kind of wood, about a foot
from the tiles, to the which he tyeth the Vines; by this means his Vines having
the reflection of the yard, sides of the houses, and tiles do ripen very well,
and bear much; so that one old Vine, has produced nigh a Hogshead of wine in
one year: and I wish all to take this course; which is neither chargeable, nor
troublesome, but very pleasant; and if all in this Island would do thus, it is
incredible, what abundance of wine might be made, even by this petty way.

2. If that any Gentleman will be at the charge of making a Vineyard, let him
choose a fine sandy warm hill, open to the South-East, rather then to the
South-West: for though the South-West seems to be hotter; yet the South-East
ripeneth better, as I have seen in Oxford Garden; because the South-East is
sooner warmed by the Sun in the morning; and the South-West winds, are the
winds which blow most frequently, and bring rain, which refrigerate the
plants: and such a place is very requisite; for in other places Vines do not
thrive, even in France: for if you travel betwixt Paris and Orleans, which is
above 30 leagues, yet you shall scarcely see a Vineyard, because it is a plain
Champion-Countrey. So likewise betwixt Fontarabia to Bordeaux, in the Southern
parts of France, for an hundred miles together; because the Land is generally a
barren sandy Plain, where only Heath abounds, and Pine-trees, out of which they
make Turpentine and Rozen, by wounding of them; and Tar and Pitch, by the
burning of them: and if any find such a fine warm hill, and do dung and fence
it well, he has a greater advantage of most of the Vineyards of France by this
convenience, than they have of our Isle, by being an hundred miles more South;
for most of their Vineyards are in large fields not enclosed, on land that is
stony, and but indifferently warm. But some will say, that wet weather
destroys us. It Is true, that the wet will destroy all things; Sheep, Corn,
etc. yet no man will say, that therefore England will not produce and nourish
these Creatures; and if extraordinary wet years come, they spoil even the Vines
in France: but take ordinary years and our moisture is not so great, (though
some abuse us, and call England Matula Coeli) but the Vines, especially those I
have mentioned before, will come to such perfection as to make good wine: and
if extraordinary rains fall: yet we may help the immaturity by Ingenuity, as I
shall tell you anon: or at worst make vinegar or verjuice, which will pay costs.

Further these advantages we have of France.

1. This Isle is not subject to nipping frosts in May, as France is; because we
are in an Isle, where the Air is more gross then in the Continent; and
therefore not so piercing and sharp, as it plainly appears by our winters,
which are not so sharp as in Padua in Italy: neither are we subject to such
storms of hail in Summer, which are very frequent in hot Countries, and for
many miles together do spoil their Vines, so that they cannot make wine of the
Grapes; for those Grapes which are touched by the hail, have a Sulphurous and
a very unpleasant taste, and only fit to make Aqua-vitae. Further, Sometimes
in France, cask for their wines is so dear, that a tun of wine may be had for a
tun of cask: and the custom and excize which is laid on wines here, is as much
again as the poor Vigueron in France expects for his wine. Not to speak of the
ill managing of their Vines, especially about Paris, where poor men usually
hire an Acre or 2 of Vines, which they manage at their spare hours, and most
commonly pack in so many plants of Vines on their ground, for to have the
greater increase, that the ground and Vines are so shaded by one another, that
I have wondered, that the Sun could dart in his beams to mature them; and
therefore I cannot but affirm again, that we may make abundance of wine here
with profit, the charges of an Acre of Vineyard not being so great as of Hops:
an hundred sets well rooted, at Paris cost usually but 4 or 6 Sous or pence,
where I have bought many: 2000 will plant an Acre very well: 50 s. a year is
the ordinary rate for the three diggings with their crooked Instrument called
Hoyau, and the increase usually four tuns for an Acre, which will be profit
enough: and though I refer all to Bonovil, and others, who have written of the
managing of Vines; yet I counsel to get a Vigneron from France, where there are
plenty, and at cheaper rates than ordinary servants here, and who will be
serviceable also for Gardening.

2. I will briefly tell what I have seen. In Italy through all Lombardy, which
is for the most part plain and Champian, their Vines grow in their Hedges on
Walnut-trees, for the most part: in which fields, they speak of three Harvests
yearly, viz.

1. Winter-Corn, which is reaped in June, etc.

2. Vines and Walnuts, which are gathered in September.

3. Their Summer-Grains as Millet, Panicle, Chiches, Vetches, etc. Buck-wheat,
Frumentone, or that which we call Virginia-Wheat, Turnips, which they sow in
July, when their Winter-Corn is cut and reaped, they reap in October. In
France, their Vines grow three manner of ways; In Prove^^e they cut the Vine
about two foot high, and make it strong and stubbed, like as we do our Osiers;
which stock bears up the branches without a prop.

2. About Orleans, and where they are more curious, they make frames for them
to run along.

3. About Paris they tie them to short poles, as we do hops to long ones. In
France they usually make trenches, or small ditches, about three or four foot
from one another, and therein plant their Vines, about one foot and an half
deep, which is a good way, and very much to be commended; but if we here in
England, plant Vines as we do hops, 4 or 5 foot distant, it will do very well,
but let them not be packt together too thick, as they do in France in many
places, lest they too much shade the ground, and one another. In Italy when
they tread their grapes with their feet in a Cart, they pour the juice into a
great Vessel or Fat, and put to it all their husks and stones which they call
Graspe, and let them ferment, or (as we say) work together 12 or 14 days, and
usually they put one third of water to it, this makes a wine less furious,
Garbo or rough, and therefore a good stomach wine; but it spoileth the color,
and takes away the pleasant brisk taste. In France so soon as they have
pressed out their liquour with their feet, they put it in hogsheads, and after
in their Press squeeze out what they can, out of the Graspe; which seems to
fill up their Hogsheads while they work, which is usually three or four days,
and then stop them close: this is also the way used in Germany, and is the
best, for it makes a fine Gentile wine with a curious color. In Germany, when
their Grapes are green, they make fire in their Sellars in Stoves, by the which
means, their wines work extraordinarily, and do digest themselves the better:
This course we must also take here in England some years; for it helps the
rawnesse of all liquours very much. There is an Ingenious Dutchman, who has a
Secret, which as yet he will not reveal, how to help Maturation by a Compost
applied to the roots: The Compost which I have spoken of before, made of
Brimstone: Pigeons-dung is very excellent for that purpose, Glauber.
as also L^es of wine, blood, lime used with moderation. He also knows how to
make sour Grapes produce good wine; I suppose his way to be this. First, all
juice of Grapes newly expressed is sweet, and which may by it self alone be
made into a sweet syrup, by boiling, which the French call Racinee. Further in
the Evaporation of liquors, which have not fermented or wrought, the watery
part goes away first.

3. Fermentation gives a vinous taste, and makes a liquour full of spirits.

You may then easily guess at the way, and perhaps he may add also sugar and
spices, as the Vintuers do when they make Hippocras. I know a Gentleman, who
has made excellent wine of Raisins well boiled in water, and afterward
fermented by it self, or with Barm, it is called usually Meade. I likewise know,
that all sweet and fatty Juices will make sine vinous liquours, as Damsins, if
they be wrought or fermented ingeniously: but whosoever goes about such
experiments, let him not think that any thing is good enough for these
purposes; but let him use the best he can get: for of naughty corrupt things,
who can expect that which is excellent and delicate.

The eight Deficiency concerning Hemp and Flax.
The Deficiency of us in this kind is so obvious, that all the world takes
notice of it, and it is (next the neglect of fishing) the greatest shame to
this Nation: for all know that we have as good land for these seeds, as any can
be found in Europe; and that the sowing of them requires neither more labor,
cost, or skill, then other seeds. And further that the Materials made from
these are extremely necessary: for how miserable should we be without Linen,
Canvases, Cordage, Nets? How can we put our ships to Sea, which are the
bulwarks of this Isle? And yet we are necessitated to have these Commodities
from those who would destroy (I will not say the Nation, but I may boldly say)
our Shipping, and Trade. I hope that this will more seriously be considered by
those at the Helm of our State. I will freely and plainly relate, how this
Deficiency may easily be remedied according to my judgment.

1. To compel by a Law, that all Farmers, who plough and sow 50 or 100 Acres of
Land, should sow half an Acre, or an Acre of Hemp or Flax. or to pay 5 s. or 10
s. to the poor of the Parish where they live, or some Law to this purpose; for
there is no man but has land fit for one of these; Hemp desiring a stiff,
deep, rich land, Flax that which is light.

For there is so much irrationality in some professions, that they must be
forced even like Bruits to understand their own good^ In King Edward the sixth
days something was enacted to this purpose, as I am informed. In Henry the
eighth days, there was a Law enacted that every man should sow his lands, and
that no man should enclose his lands, lest he should turn it to Pasture; for we
have had great dearth in England through the neglect of Tillage; which Laws
even as yet stand in force; yet there is not, nor needs there be any force to
compel men to till and sow their lands; for they have at length found the
sweetness, and willingly go about it for their own profits sake, and now we
suppose (and not without cause) that Enclosing is an Improvement: and so
concerning Hemp and Flax; I say, if they were once accustomed to sow them, they
would never leave it, as I see Farmers do in East-Kent; scarce a man but he
will have a considerable plot of ground for Hemp, and about London far greater
quantities of Flax is sown then formerly.

2. It were convenient, that every Parish through the Nation should have a
stock to set their poor to work, that the young children and women might not
run up and down idle, and begging or stealing (as they do in the Country) of
Apples, Pease, Wood, Hedges, and so by little and little, are trained up for
the Gallows.

3. That a severe Law should be enacted against those who run up and down and
will not work: for if all know, that they may have work at home, and earn more
within doors honestly, then by running roguing up and down, why should they not
compel them to it? And though some may think the Parishes will lose much by
this way; because that the stock wrought will not be put off, but with loss,
as perhaps 10 l. will be brought to 8 l. yet let them consider how much they
shall save at their doors, how many inconveniences they are freed from; their
hedges in the Country shall not be pulled, their fruits stolen, nor their Corn
purloined; and further, that the poor will be trained up to work, and therefore
fit for any service: yea and in their youth, learn a calling by the which they
may get an honest livelihood; and I dare say, their Assessements for the poor,
would not be so frequent, nor the poor so numerous: and the benefit which
redounds to the Nation, would be very great.

4. The charitable deeds of our forefathers, ought to be enquired after, that
they be not misplaced, as usually they are, but be really bestowed for the good
of the poor, that are laborious, (as in London is begun) and if there be any
that will not work, take Saint Paul's rule, who best knew what was best for
them. I dare not advise to take it in part of Commons, Fens, etc. and to
improve them for this use, lest I should too much provoke the rude merciless
multitude. But to return to my discourse. I say, that sowing Hemp and Flax,
will be very beneficial.

1. To the Owners of Land: for men usually give in diverse places 3 l. per Acre,
to sow Hemp and Flax (as I have seen at Maidstone in Kent, which is the only
place, I know in England where thread is made: and though nigh an hundred bands
are employed about it; yet they make not enough for this Nation) and yet get
good profit. How advantageous will this be to those who have drained the Fens,
where questionless Hemp will flourish, and exsiccate the ground: for Hemp
desires stiff moist land, as Flax light and dry) and likewise to those in the
North of England, where land is very cheap? I hope in a little time Ireland
will furnish us with these commodities, if we be idle; for there land is very
cheap, and those seeds need no ininclosure; for Cattle will not touch them,
except Dear, neither does it fear the plunderer, either in the field or barn.

2. It Is profitable to the sower. I know that they usually value an Acre at 10
or 12 l. which costeth them usually but half the money. Whether there be Flax
that will yield 30 or 40 l. per Acre as some report, I know not.

3. To the place where it is sown; because it sets many poor to work. I wish it
were encouraged more in the North than it is; because there are many poor, who
could willingly take pains, and though spinning of linen be but a poor work;
yet it is light, and may be called Women's recreation, (and in France and Spain,
the best Citizens Wives think it no disgrace to go about spinning with their
Rocks) and though in some part the poor think it nothing to earn 4 or 6 d per
day, and will as soon stand with their hands in their pockets, as work cheap;
yet in the North they account it well to earn 3 d. or 4 d. by spinning, which
they may do.

Lastly, It would be very beneficial to this Nation, and save many thousand
pounds, I may say 100 thousands, which are expected either in cash, or good
commodities; and we should not be beholding to Holland for fine linen and
Cordage, nor to France for Poldavices, Locrams, Canvases, Nets, nor to Flanders
for thread: but might be supplied abundantly with these necessary commodities
even at our own doors.

There is no small Deficiency in dunging and manuring lands, both because all
that manner of manuring and amending lands, is not known to every one, 9.
Deficiency, concerning dunging and manuring Lands.
and also that they do not employ all they know to the best use. I will
therefore set down most of the ways I have seen here in England and beyond
Seas, by which Land is improved, and the best ways to use the same.

1. To begin with Chalk, which is as old a way as Julius Casars time, as he
himself reports in his Commentaries. Chalk is of two sort.

1. A hard, strong, dry Chalk, with which in Kent they make walls, burn lime,
and make whiting for houses.

2. Kind is a small unctuous Chalk: this is the Chalk for land, the other
helps little; only it makes the Plough go easier in stiff lands: broomy
land is accounted the best land for Chalk and Lime, but it helps other lands
also; especially if you Chalk your ground, and let it lie a year or two, which
is the way used in Kent; that it may be matured and shattered by the Sun and
rain, otherwise if it be turned in presently, it is apt to lie in great clods,
as I have seen it twenty years after. Chalk also sweetneth pasture, but does
not much increase it, and kills rushes and broom.

2. Lime, which is made of diverse forts of stones, is an excellent thing for
most Lands, and produces a most pure grain: 160 bushels is usually laid on an
Acre, but I suppose that if men did lay but half the dung on the ground, as
they usually do, as also Lime and Chalk, and Dung and Lime it oftener, it
would be better Husbandry: for much dung causes much weeds, and causes Corn
to lodge; and too much Chalk does too much force the land, so that after some
good crops, it lies barren many years. It Is good Husbandry likewise to lay
down lands before they be too much out of heart; for they will sooner recover:
otherwise not.

3. Ordinary Dung, which every one knows; but let it not be exposed to the
Sun too much, nor let it lie in an high place: for the rain will waste away
it is fatness. It Is observable, that earth the more it is exposed to the Sun,
it is the better; as we see that land is much bettered by often ploughings: for
the Sun and dew engender a nitrous fatness, which is the cause of fertility;
but dung is exhausted by the Sun, as it appears by the folding of sheep,
which profit little, if it be not presently turned in; therefore a Shepherd, if
his time would permit, should turn up the ground with an How for to sow
Turnips, as Gardiners do for to sow. I have seen Ordinary Dung on dry lands in
dry years to do hurt, and it often causes weeds and trumpery to grow.

4. Marle, It Is of diverse kinds: some stony, some soft, some white, some
yellowish, but most commonly blew. It Is in most places in England, but not
known by all: the best marks to know it, is to expose it to the Air, and to
see if the Sun or Rain cause it to shatter, and break in square pieces like
dice, and if it be unctuous, or rather to take a load or two, and lay it on the
midst of your fields, and to try how it mendeth your lands. It Is excellent for
Corn and Pasture, especially on dry lands. In Essex the scouring of their
ditches they call Marle, because it looks blew like it, it helps their
lands well.

5. Snaggreet: which is a kind of earth taken out of the Rivers, full of small
shells. It helps the barren lands in diverse parts of Surrey. I believe it is
found in all Rivers; It were well, if in other parts of England, they did take
notice of it.

6. Owse out of Marsh ditches, has been found very good for white Chalky land:
as also Sea-mud and Sea-Owse is used in diverse parts of Kent and Sussex.

7. Sea-weeds of all sorts rotted.

8. Mr. Carew in his Survey of Cornwall relates, that they use a fat Sea-sand,
which they carry up many mises in sacks, and by this they have very much
improved their barren lands. It were worth the while to try all manner of
Sea-sands: for I suppose, that in other places they have a like fertilizing
fatness.

9. Folding of Sheep, especially after the Flaunders manner, (viz.) under a
covert, in which earth is strawed about 6 inches thick, on which they set
diverse nights: then more earth must be brought and strawed 6 inches thick, and
the Sheep folded on it, and thus they do continually Winter and Summer. I
suppose a shepherd, with one horse, will do it at his spare hours, and indeed
sooner then remove his fold; and this folding is to be continued, especially in
Winter, and does the sheep good; because they lie warm and dry: and truly if I
am not mistaken, by this means we may make our sheep to enrich all the barren
dry lands of England.

10. Ashes of any kind, Sea-cole-ashes with Horse-dung, the Gardiners of London
much commend for diverse uses. It Is great pity, that so many thousand loads are
thrown into wast places, and do no good.

11. Soot is also very good, being sprinkled on ground, but it is too dear, if
it be of wood: for it is worth 16 d or 2 s a bushel.

12. Pigeons or Hens-dung is incomparable: one load is worth 10 loads of other
dung, and therefore it is usually sown on Wheat, that lies afar off, and not
easy to be helped: it is extraordinary likewise on a Hop-Garden.

13. Mault-dust is exceedingly good in Corn-land: blood for trees; also
shavings of horns, which are carried many miles from London for this purpose,
as also the dust of malt.

14. Some commend very much the sweeping of a ship of salt, or drossy salt and
brine: it is very probable; because it kills the worms, and all fertility
proceeds from salt. At Nantwich, they use the dross or refuse of salt for
their Meadows with very good success.

15. I have seen in France, poor men cut up Heath, and the Turf of the ground,
and lay them on an heap, to make mould for their barren lands. Brakes laid in a
moist place, and rotted, are used much for Hop-Grounds, and generally all
things that will rot, if they were stones, would make dung.

16. In New England they fish their ground, which is done thus: In the spring
about April, there comes up a fish to the fresh Rivers, called an Alewife;
because of its great belly: and is a kind of Shade, full of bones; these are
caught in wiers, and sold very cheap to the Planters, who usually put one or
two cut in pieces into the hill where their Corn is planted, called
Virginia-Wheat, for they plant it in hills, 5 Grains in an hill, almost as we
plant Hops, (in May, or June: for it will not endure Frosts) and at that
distance; it causes fertility extraordinary for two years, especially the
first: for they have had fifty or sixty bushels on an Acre, and yet plough not
their Land, and in the same Hills do plant the same Corn for many years
together, and have good Crops: besides abundance of Pompions, and French or
Kidney beans. In the North parts of New England, where the fisher men live,
they usually fish their Ground with Cods-heads; which if they were in England
would be better employed I suppose that when sprats be cheap, men might mend
their Hop-grounds with them, and it would quit cost: but the dogs will be apt
to scrape them up, as they do in New England, unless one of their legs be tied
up.

17. Urine. In Holland they as carefully preserve the Cowes Urine, as the Dung
to enrich their land: old Urine is excellent for the Roots of Trees. Columella
in his Book of Husbandry, says, that he is an ill Husband that does not make
ten loads of dung for every great beast in his yard, and as much for every one
in his house, and one load for small Beasts as Hogs. This is strange Husbandry
to us: and I believe there are many ill Husbands by this account. I know a
woman who lives five miles South of Canterbury, who saves in a paile all the
droppings of the Houses, I mean the Urine, and when the paile is full,
sprinkleth it on her Meadow, which causes the grass at first to look yellow,
but after a little time it grows wonderfully, that many of her Neighbors
wondered at it, and were like to accuse her of Witchcraft.

18. Woollen-rags, which Hartfort-shire men use much, and Oxfordshire, and
many other places: they do very well in thin Chalky Land in Kent for two or
three years. It Is a fault in many places, that they neglect these, as also
Linen rags, or Ropes-ends, of the which white and brown paper is made; for
it is strange that we have not Linnen-rags enough for paper, as other Nations
have; but must have it from Italy, France, and Holland.

19. Denshyring (so called in Kent, Mr. Ca^bden.
where I only have seen it used, though by the word it should come from
Denbighshire,) is the cutting up of all the Turffe of a Meadow, with an
instrument sharp on both sides, which a man with violence thrusts before him,
and then lay the Turff on heaps, and when it is dry they burn it, and spread it
on the ground The Charge is usually four Nobles, which the goodness of a Crop
or two repayeth.

20. Mixture of Lands. Columella an old Writer says, that his Grandfather used
to carry sand on clay, and on the contrary to bring clay on sandy grounds, and
with good success, Natural History,
the Lord Bacon thinking much good may be done thereby; for if Chalk be good
for loamy land, why should not loam be good for Chalky banks?

21. I may add Enclosure as an Improvement of land: not only because that
men, when their grounds are enclosed, may employ them as they please; but
because it gives warmth, and consequently fertility. There is one in London,
who promised to mend lands much by warmth only, and we see that if some few
sticks lie together, and give a place warmth, how speedily that grass will
grow.

22. Steeping of Grains. The Ancients used to steep Beans in salt water: and in
Kent it is usual to steep Barley, when they sow late, that it may grow the
faster; and also to take away the soil: for wild Oats, Cockle, and all save
Drake will swim: as also much of the light Corn, which to take away is very
good. If you put Pigeons-dung into the water, and let it steep all night, it
may be as it were half a dunging: take heed of steeping Pease too long; for I
have seen them sprout in three or four hours.

23. Is the sowing of Course and cheap Grain, and when they are grown to plough
them in. For this purpose the Ancients did use LVPINES, a Plant well known to
our Gardiners: and in Kent sometimes Tares are sown, which when the Cattle
have eaten a little of the tops, they turn them in, with very good Improvement
for their ground.

Lastly, To conclude, I may add as a main Deficiency, that though we by
experience find that all the foresaid Materials, and diverse others, as
oft-tilling, Husbandry, seasons, etc. change of Seed and Land, resting of
Lands, fencing, etc. do cause Fertility: yet we are very ignorant of the true
causes of Fertility, and know not what Chalk, Ashes, Dung, Marle, Water, Air,
Earth, Sun, etc. do contribute: whether something Essential, or Accidental;
Material, or Immaterial; Corporal, or Spiritual; Principal, or Instrumental;
Visible, or Invisible? whether Saline, Sulphurous, or Mercurial; or Watery,
Earthy, Fiery, Acreal? or whether all things are nourished by Vapors, Fumes,
Atoms, Effluvia? or by Salt, as Urine, Embrionate, or Non specificate? or by
Ferments, Odours, Acidities? or from a Chaos, or inconfused, indigested, and
unspecificated lump? or from a Spermatick, dampish Vapor, which ascends from
the Center of the Earth, or from the Influence of Heaven? or from Water only
impregnated, corrupted, or fermented? or whether the Earth, by reason of the
Divine Benediction has an Infinite, multiplicative Virtue, as Fire, and the
Seeds of all things have? or whether the multiplicity of Opinions of learned
Philosophers, (as Aristotle, Rupesc. Sendivog. Norton, Helmont, Des Carts,
Digby, White, Plat, Gla uber,) concerning this Subject shows the great
difficulty of this Question, which they at leisure may peruse. I for my part
pare not venture on this vast Ocean in my small Bark, lest I be swallowed up;
yet if an opportunity presents, shall venture to give some hints, that some
more able Pen may engage in this difficult Question, which strikes at the Root
of Nature and may unlock some of her choycest treasures. The Lord Bacon has
gathered stubble (as he ingeniously and truly affirms) for the bricks of this
foundation; but as yet I have not seen so much as a solid foundation; plainly
laid by any, on which an ingenious man might venture to raise a noble Fabric:
I acknowledge the burden too heavy for my shoulders.

I will not deny, but that we have good Husbands, 10. Deficiency concerning the
Non-Improvement of our Meadows.
who dung and Marle their Meadows, and Pasture-land, and throw down all Mole
and Ant-hills, and with their Spud-staffe, cut up all thistles and weeds; and
that they likewise straw ashes on their Grounds to kill the Moss; and salt for
the Worms, and they do very well, but yet there are many who are negligent in
these particulars, for the which they are blameworthy, but the Deficiencies,
of which I intend to speak of, are these following. Cato, one of the wisest of
the Romans, says, that Pratum est, quasi paratum; always ready, and prepared;
and prefers Meadows before the Olive-Gardens, (although the Spaniards
bequeath Olive Trees to their children, as we do cottages) or Vines or Corn;
because Meadows bring in a certain profit, without labor and pains. But the
other requires much cost and pains, and are subject to Frosts, Mildew, Hail,
Locusts: to the which for the honor of Meadows. I may add that the stock of
Meadows, is of greater value, and the Commodities which arise from them, are
diverse; and of greater value, then Corn, as Butter, Cheese, Tollow, Hides,
Beef, Wool: and therefore I may conclude, that England abounding in Pastures
more then other Countries is therefore richer; and I know (what others think I
care not) that France, Acre for Acre, is not comparable to it; Fortescue
Chancelour of England, says, that we get more in England by standing still,
then the French by working: but to speak of the Deficiencies amongst us.

1. We are to blame, that we have neglected the great Clover-grass, Saint
Foine, Lucerne.

2. That we do not float our lands, as they do in Lumbard, where they mow
their Lands three or four times yearly, which consist of the great
Clover-grass. Here are the excellent Parmisane Cheeses made, and indeed these
Pastures far exceed any other places in Italy, yea in Europe. We here in
England have great opportunities by Brooks and Rivers in all places to do so,
but we are negligent; yet we might hereby double, if not treble our profits,
kill all rushes, etc. But he that desires to know the manner how to do this,
and that profit, that will arise thereby, let him read Mr. Blithes Book of
Husbandry lately printed.

3. That when we lay down Land for Meadow or Pasture, we do not sow them
with the Seeds of fine sweet grass, Trefoils, and other excellent herbs.
Concerning this you may read a large Treatise of the Countrey-Farmer; for if
the Land be rich, it will put forth weeds and trumpery, and perhaps a kind of
sour grass little worth, if it be poor, ye shall have thistles, May-weed, and
little or no grass, for a year or two. I know a Gentleman, who at my entreaty,
sowed with his Oats the bottom of his Hay-mow, and though his Land were worn
out of heart, and naturally poor; yet he had that year not only a Crop of
Oats; but he might if it had pleased him, have mowen his grass also, but he
spared it, which was well done, till the next year, that it might make a
Turffe, and grow stronger. By this Husbandry Lands might be well improved,
especially if men did consider the diversity of grasses, which are ninety
sorts, and three and twenty of Trefoil: I know a place in Kent, which is a
white Chalky Down, which ground is sometimes sown with Corn a year or two, and
then it rests as long or longer: when it is laid down, it maintains many
great Sheep and very lusty, so that they are even fit for the Butcher; and yet
there does scarce appear any thing that they can eat, which has caused diverse
to wonder, as if they had lived on Chalk-stones: but I more seriously
considering the matter, thoroughly viewed the ground, and perceived that the
ground naturally produces a small Trefoil which it seems is very sweet and
pleasant; it is commonly called Trifolium luteum, or Lupilinum, that is, yellow,
or Hop-Trefoil: and I am persuaded, if that the Seed of this Trefoil were
preserved, and sown with Oats, when they intend to lay it down, it would very
much advance the Pasture of that place; therefore I desire all Ingenious men,
seriously to consider the nature of the Trefoils, which are the sweetest of
grasses, and to observe on what grounds they naturally grow: and also the
nature of other grasses, which (as I have said before) are no less then ninety
sorts, naturally growing in this Isle; some on watery places, some on dry, some
on clay, others on sand, chalk, etc. Some on fruitful places, others in barren;
by the which means, I suppose a solid foundation might be laid, for the
advancing of Pasture-lands of all sorts, through this Island? for I know some
plants, as the Orchis called Bee-flower, etc. which will thrive better on the
Chalky barren banks, then in any Garden, though the Mould be never so rich and
delicate, and the Gardener very diligent in cherishing of it: and why may not
the same propriety be in grasses? for we see diverse beuty grasses to thrive,
espcially on barren places, where scarce any thing else will grow. I must again
and again desire all men to take notice of the wonderful grass which grows
near Salisbury, and desire them to try it on their rich Meadows.

It Is a common saying, that there are more waste lands in England, in many
particulars, then in all Europe besides, 11. Deficiency concerning waste Lands.
considering the quantity of land. I dare not say this is true; but hope if it
be so, that it will be mended. For of late much has been done for the
advancement of these kinds of land; yet there are as yer great Deficiencies. In
the times of Papistry, all in this Island were either Soldiers or Scholars:
Scholars by reason of the great honors, privileges, and profits, (the third
part of the Kingdom belonging to them) and Soldiers, because of the many and
great Wars with France, Scotland, Ireland, Wales. And in those times Gentlemen
thought it an honor to be careless, and to have Houses, Furniture, Diet,
Exercises, Apparel, etc. yea all things at home and abroad, Souldier-like:
Music, Pictures, Perfumes, Sawces, (unless good stomachs) were counted,
perhaps unjustly, too effeminate. In Queen Elizabeth's days, Ingenuities,
Curiosities, and Good Husbandry, began to take place, and then Salt-Marshes
began to be fenced from the Seas; and yet many were neglected, even to our
days, as Holhaven in Essex, Axtel-holme Isle, nigh Yorkshire: many 1000 of
Acres have lately been gained from the Sea in Lincolne-shire, and as yet more
are to be taken in there, and in other places. Rumseymarsh in Kent, consisting
of 45000 Acres and upwards, (as Cambden relates) is of some antiquity where
the Land is usually set 30 s. per Acre, and yet 1 d. per week constantly is
paid, through the whole levil, for the maintenance of the wall, and now and
then twopence, whereas ordinary salts are accounted dear at five shillings or
six shillings per Acre; so that the improvement is very considerable: the same
I may say of Fens, especially that great Fen of Lincolnshire, Cambridg,
Huntingdon, consisting as I am informed of 380000 Acres, which is now almost
recovered; and a friend of mine told me very lately, that he had proffered a
Mark per Acre, for 900 Acres together, to sow Rape on, which formerly was
scarcely valued at twelve pence per Acre; very great therefore is the
improvement by draining of lands, and our negligence very great, that they have
been wast so long, and as yet so continue in diverse places: for the improving
of a Kingdom is better than the conquering of a new one.

2. I see likewise no small faults in this land, by having so many Chases and
Forests, where Brambl^s, Brakes, Furzes do grow, when as these trumperies
might be cut up, and potashes made of them; and the ground employed profitably
for Corn or Pasture. I know a Forest by Brill in Buckinghamshire taken in, and
the land is usually let being now well enclosed, for 4 or 5 Nobles per Acre. In
Lancashire also, as about Lerpoole, and elsewhere I have seen Commons little
worth, advanced to a great price by Marling, etc.

3. Sort of waste-land, is dry hea^hy Commons, I know that poor people will cry
out against me, because I call these wastelands; but it is no matter: I desire
Ingenious Gentlemen seriously to consider, whether or no these lands might not
be improved very much by the Husbandry of Flaunders, (viz.) by sowing Flax,
Turnips, great Clover-grass, if that Manure be made by folding Sheep after the
Flaunders way to keep it in heart?

2. Whether the Rottenness and Scabbinesse of Sheep, Murrein of Cattle,
Diseases of Horses, and in general all diseases of Cattle do not especially
proceed from Commons?

3. If the rich men, who are able to keep great stocks, are not great Gainers
by them?

4. Whether Commons do not rather make poor, by causing idleness, than
maintain them; and such poor, who are trained up rather for the Gallows or
beggary, then for the Commonwealths service?

5. How it comes to pass, that there are fewest poor, where there fewest
Commons, as in Kent, where there is scarce six Commons in the County of a
considerable greatness?

6. How many do they see enriched by the Commons; and if their Cattle be not
usualy swept away by the Rot, or starved in some hard Winters?

7. If that poor men might not employ two Acres enclosed to more advantage;
then twice as much in a Common?

And Lastly, If that all Commons were enclosed, and part given to the
Inhabitants, and part rented out, for a stock to set all the poor on work in
every County; I determine nothing in this kind: but leave the determination for
wiser heads.

4. Parks. Although I cannot but reckon Parks amongst Lands, which are not
improved to the full; but perceive considerable waste by them, by brak^s,
bushes, brambles, etc. growing in diverse places, and therefore wish there were
fewer in this Island; yet I am not so great an enemy to them, as most are for
there are very great Uses of them. As,

1. For the bringing up of young Cattle.

2. For the maintaining of Timber, so that if any have occasion to use a good
piece of Timber either for a Mil-port, or a Keel of a Ship, or other specil
uses, whither can they go but to a Park?

3. The Skins of the Deer are very useful, and their flesh excellent Fo^d. Not
to speak of the Medicinal Uses, nor of Acorns for Hogs, etc. But some will
object that the Plough never goes there. To the which I answer, It Is no
matter: For I cannot but say as Fortescue Chancellor to Henry 6. does, That God
has given us such a fruitful land, that without labor we have plenty:
Pre-eminence of English Laws.
whereas France must dig and delve for what they have. And I suppose, that I
could maintain two things which are thought great Paradoxes, (viz.) that it
were no loss to this Island, if that we should not plough at all, if so be
that we could certainly have Corn at a reasonable rate, and likewise vent for
all our Manufactures of Wool.

1. Because that the Commodities from Cattle are far more stable then Corn: for
Cloths, Stuffs, Stockins, Butter, Cheese, Hides, Leather, Skins, Wool, Tallow,
are certain even every where: Corn scarcely in any place, constantly in none.

2. Pasture imployeth more hands, which is the second Paradox: and therefore
Pasture does not depopulate, as it is commonly said: for Normandy and Picardy
in France, where there are Pastures in a good measure, are as populous as any
part of France; and I am certain, that Holland, Friezeland, Zealand,
Flaunders, and Lombardy, which rely altogether on Pastures, are the most
populous places in Europe. But some will object and say, that a shepherd and a
dog formerly has destroyed diverse Villages. To this I answer, that we well
know what a shepherd and a dog can do, (viz) look to two or three hundred sheep
at the most, and that two or three hundred Acres will maintain them, or the
land is extremely barren; and that these two or three hundred Acres being
barren, will scarcely maintain a Plough, (which is but one man and two boys,)
with the horses: and that the mowing, reaping, and threshing of this Corn, and
other Work about, will scarcely maintain three more with work through the
whole year. But how many people may be employed by the Wool of two or three
hundred Sheep, in Picking, Sorting, Carding, Spinning, Weaving, Dying, Fulling,
Knitting, I leave to others to calculate. And further if the Pastures be rich
Meadows, and go on dai^ing, I suppose all know, that an hundred Acres of such
land imployeth more hands then 100 Acres of the best Corr-Land in England, and
produces likewise better exportable Commodities. And further, if I should
grant, that formerly the shepherd and his dog did depopulate, that I may not
condemn the wisdom of former Ages; yet I will deny, that it does so now: for
formerly we were so unwise, as to send over our Wool to Antwerp, and other
places, where they were Manufactured; by which means one pound often brought ten
unwrought to them; but we set now our own poor to work, and so save the
depopulation. Yet I say, it is convenient to encourage the Plough; because that
we cannot have a certainty of Corn, and carriage is dear both by sea and land,
especially into the Inland-Countreys, and our Commodities by Wool do cloy the
Merchants.

5. Rushy-lands. Blithe tells us good Remedies for these Inconveniences,
(viz.) making deep trenches, oft-mowings, Chalking, Liming, Dunging and
Ploughing. I know where hungry guests Horses soon make an end of them.

6. Furze, Broom, Heath, these can hardly be so destroyed, but at length they
will up again; for God has given a peculiar propriety to every kind of earth,
to produce some peculiar kinds of Plants, which it will observe even to the
Worlds end, unless by Dung, Marle, Chalk, you alter even the very nature of
the earth. In Gallitia in Spain, where such barren lands do very much abound,
they do thus: first, they grub them up as clean as they can; of the greater
Roots and Branches they make firewood; the smaller sticks are either employed
in fencing, or else are burnt on the ground; afterward the Land being ploughed
twice at least, they sow Wheat, and usually the Crop is great, which the
Landlord and Tenant divide according to a compact; then the ground rests,
and in three or four years, the Furze or Brooms will recover their former
growth, which the painful Husbandman grubbeth, and does with it as formerly.
I set this down, that you may see how laborious the Spaniard is in some places,
the poverty of the Country compelling him to it.

7. There are other Inconveniences in the Land, besides weeds and trumpery (
viz.) Ill Tenures, as Copyhold, Knight Service, etc. so that the Possessour
cannot cut any Timber down, without consent of the Lord; and when he dies must
pay one or two years rent, perhaps more; because there is no certain Fine, but
is at the Landlords mercy. But these are not in the power of the poor
Husbandman to remedy; I therefore pass them by: yet hope that in little time
we shall see these Inconveniences remedied: because they much discourage
Improvements, and are (as I suppose) Badges of our Norman slavery.

To conclude, It seems to me very reasonable, and it will be a great
encouragement to laborious men, to improve their barren lands, if that they
should have recompense for what they have done, according as indifferent men
should judge, when they leave it, as is the custom in Flaunders.

12. Deficiency, in Woods.
I have likewise observed some Defici^ncies in Woods, which I shall briefly
declare, with the best way to remedy the same.

1. It Is a great fault, that generally through the Island the Woods are
destroyed; so that we are in many places very much necessitated both for fuel,
and also for timber for building, and other uses; so that if we had Coals from
Newcastle, and Boards from Norwey, Clap-boards, Barrel-staves, Wainscot, and
Pipe-staves, from Prussia, we should be brought to great extremity: and many
Mechanics would be necessitated to leave their callings.

2. Deficiency, is that our Woods are not ordered as they should be; but though
Woods should be especially preserved for timber, for building and shipping; yet
at this time it is very rare to see a good Timber-tree in a Wood.

3. That many of our Woods are very thin, and not replenished with such sorts
of Woods, as are convenient for the place.

4. That we sell continually, and never plant or take care for posterity.

These Deficiencies may be thus Remedyed.

1. To put in execution the Statutes against grubbing of Woods, which are
sufficiently severe. It Is well known, we have good Laws; but it is better known,
they are not executed. In the Wild of Kent, and Sussex, which lies far from
the Rivers and Sea, and formerly have been nothing but Woods, liberty is
granted for men to grub what they please; for they cannot want firing for
themselves, and they are so seated, that neither firewood, nor timber can be
transported elsewhere. I know a Gentleman who proffered there good Oak-timber
at 6 s. 8 d. per tun* and the Land in those parts in general is very good.
About Tunbridge there is Land which formerly was Wood, is now let for 30 s. par
Acre; so that to keep such lands for Wood, would be both loss to the owner,
and to the Island: But in other parts of the Island it is otherwise, and men
are much to be blamed for destroying both timber and fuel. I have seen at
Shooters-hill near London, some Woods stubbed up which were good ground for
Wood, but now are nothing but furze, which is a great loss both to the owner,
and to tbe Country. For the Land is made worse then it was formerly. I
conceive there are Lands, which are as naturally ordained for Woods, viz.
Mountainous, Craggy, uneven-land, as small hills for ^he Vines and Olives;
plain lands for Corn; and low moist lands for Pasture: which lands if they be
stubbed, do much prejudice the Commonwealth.

2. That all Woods should have such a Number of Timber Trees per Acre,
according to the Statute. There is a good Law for that purpose, but men delude
both themselves and the law, that they every Felling cut down the standers,
which they left the felling before, lest perchance they should grow to be
Timber, and leave twelve small Standers, that they might seem to fulfill in some
measure the Statute; but it is a mere falacy; and causes the Statute to fail of
it is principal end, which is to preserve Timber.

3. The best Remedy against thinness of Woods, is to plash them and spread
them abroad, and cover them partly in the ground, as every Countryman can
direct; by this means the Wood will soon grow rough and thick. It Is good
Husbandry likewise to fill your Woods with swift growers, as Ashes, Sallow,
Willow, Aspe, which are also good for Hoppoles, Hoops. Sycamore is also a swift
grower. In Flaunders they have a kind of Poplar, called by them Abell-tree,
which speedily grows to be timber.

4. That some Law be made, that they which fell, should also plant or sow. In
Bis^ay there is a Law, if that any cut down a Timber-tree, he must plant three
for it, which law is put into execution with severity, otherwise they would
soon be undone; for the Country is very mountainous and barren, and depends
wholly on Iron Mines, and on Shipping: their Woods are not copsed there, but
only Pollards, which they lop when occasion serves. I know one, who was bound
by his Landlord to plant so many Trees yearly, which according he did, but
always in such places that they might not grow. In France, near to the Borders
of Spain, they sow Ashkey, which when they grow to such a greatness, that
they may be slit into four quarters, and big enough to make Pikes, then they
cut them down; and I have seen diverse Acres together thus planted: hence come
the excellent Pikes, called Spanish-Pikes. Some Gentlemen have sown Ac^rus, and
it is a good way to increase Woods. Though the time is long, I doubt not but
every one knows, that it is excellent to plant Willows along the waters side;
and Ashes nigh their houses for firing: for they are good pieces of Husbandry;
and it is pity that it is not more put in practice. There is a Gentleman in
Essex, who has planted so many Willows, that he may lop 2000 every year: if
others were as Ingenious, we should not want firewood; Osiers planted in low
Morish grounds, do advance land from 5 s. per Acre, to 40 s. 50 s. 3 l. and
upward; it is much used Westward of London: these Osiers are of great use to
Basket-makers. There is a sort of small Osier or Willow at Saint Omars in
Flaunders, which grows on Islands which float up and down; it is far less
than that which the Western men call, Eights, with this they make their curious
fine Baskets: this plant is worth the procuring, being so nigh: John Tredeseat
has some plants of it. There is a Flant likewise in England called the sweet
Willows; it is not only good for shade and firing; but as I am informed, the
leaves do not sour the grass, but that the Cattle will eat them sooner then
Hay: if this be so, it may be of singular use for Meadows.

5. That those things which mightily destroy Woods, may be restrained, as
Iron-works are; therefore the State has very well done to pull down diverse
Iron-works in the Forest of De^n, that the Timber might be preserved for
Shipping, which is accounted the toughest in England: and when it is dry as
hard as Iron, the Common People did use to say, that in Queen Elizabeth's days
the Spaniard sent an Ambassador purposely to get this wood destroyed: how true
this is I know not; but without question it is admirable Wood for Shipping, and
generally our English Oak is the best in the World for Shipping; because it is
of a great Grain, and therefore strong: but the Oaks of other Countries have a
finer grain, and more fit for Wainscot; and in this kind our Forefathers have
been very provident; for we have an Act of long standing, prohibiting
Iron-works within twenty miles of London, and within three miles of the River
of Thames: thou you may find Iron-stone in diverse places, as in the great
gravel-pit at Woolwhich. There are some Ingenious men, who lately have got a
Patent for making Iron with Sea-ceal^e. I hope they will accomplish their
desires, for it would wonderfully advance this Island, and save Wood. There are
two faults in Sea-coal, in respect of melting Iron-oare.

1. That it is apt to bake together, or cake.

2. It has a sulphurous fume in it, which is an enemy to Metal, and consumes
it as we see by our Iron-Bars in Windows at London; so that the Metallaine
Nature of the Iron-stone is much wasted by it, and that which remains is very
brittle, and will be Could-shire. I know that by the mixture of Coal beaten
with loam, and thoroughly dried, one (if not both of these Inconveni^nces) may
be taken away. In the Duke of Cleveland's Country, they use half Turffe, half
Charcoal. There is a way by making a kind of Barter with Loam, Urine, etc.
which will cause Charcoal to last very long, as I am informed: but these
discourses belong to another place.

13. Deficiency of Bees.
It Is a great Deficiency here in England without question, that we have no more
Bees, considering that they are neither chargeable, requiring only a few straws
for an house, nor troublesome: and this Island may maintain ten times as many:
for though a place may be overstocked with these Animals, as with the greater;
yet I know no part of this Land, that is so: and I know diverse places which
would maintain many hundred Hives, yet scarce one to be seen.

2. Our Honey is the best in the World, and Wax a stable Commodity. Further we
know, that cold Countries, not comparable to ours, as Muscovia, have far
greater quantity then we have; so that it is incredible what quantity is found
in the Woods, if the story of tho man be true, who fell up even to the ears in
Honey, and had there perished, had not a Bear, on which he caught hold, pulled
him out. Now I have enquired, how it comes to pass that there is so great
store of Honey in Muscovia, considering the Winters are extreme cold, and also
very long: and I am credibly informed that first, the Spring when it begins,
comes extraordinary fast, that the days are very long, and the Summers far
dryer then ours here in England, so that the Bees are not hindered by continual
showers; as they are some years here in this Isle: And lastly, that the
Country abounds much with Firs, and Pine-trees: which the Inhabitants
usually cut, that the Gum, Rosinous, or Turpentine substance may sweat forth,
to which places the Bees do come, and presently fill themselves, and return
laden: and perhaps for these very reasons, Bees thrive very much in New England.

2. We are Deficient in the ordering of them. Not to speak of the negligence of
particular men, which is very frequent: nor to write a general story of the
ordering of them, because it requires much paper: and Mr. Leveret, and Butler;
especially the latter, has written so exactly, and upon his own experience
that little can be added to it: only in a point or two I differ from him; of
the which I will speak briefly.

1. That we must take and destroy all the Bees for their Honey, and not drive
them, as they do in Italy once or twice yearly.

2. That if a Swarm be poor with little Honey, that that Swarm ought to be
taken, because it is poor; so that the rich stocks are destroyed, because they
be rich, and the poor Swarms, because they be poor: so that be they rich or be
they poor, they must be destroyed. An Italian reports, that in the City of
Askaly, there was a Law made, that none should destroy a Swarm of Bees,
unless he had a just cause; accounting it a part of extreme injustice and
cruelty, to take away without cause, both the goods and lives of such good and
faithful servants. I am credibly informed, that an English Gentleman beyond
the Seas, gets many an hundred pound yearly, by keeping Bees after a new and
Ingenious Manner, which is thus. He has a room made very warm and close; yet
with Glasse-windows, which he can open at his pleasure, to let the Bees fly
abroad when he pleases, where he keeps his Bees, and feeds them all
Winter; with a sweet Composition made of Molossoes, Flowers, sweet Wine, Milk,
Raisins, etc. (for with such things as these, they usually feed Bees in Italy)
and often times in Summer, when the weather is rainy, windy, or so disposed,
that the Bees cannot conveniently go abroad, he feeds them at home with
diverse sweet things, and gathers diverse flowers, and lays them amongst
them, and sticks up many fresh boughs in diverse places of his Rooms, that in
swarming-time, they may settle on them; by these means he preserves all his
Swarms, and gathers an incredible quantity of Honey and wax; and truly this
way seems to be very profitable: for,

1. We know the Bees, (even as we say of the Aunts) will work continually, even
night and day, Winter and Summer, if that they were not hindered by darkness,
cold, and moisture.

2. That Bees do not only make Honey, (for I suppose, that they have a peculiar
propriety of making Honey, as the Silkworms Silk) out of Mildews or Honey, but
also out of all sweet things, as Sugar, Molossoes, etc.

3. That many sweet things may be had far cheaper then Honey; which (I suppose)
the Bees will transmute into perfect Honey. This way, I conceive, would be very
advantageous to us in England, for the preserving of late swarms, and also for
the enriching of old stocks, so that we need not destroy them, but might drive
them from hive to hive, and set them to work again; and truly I think there is
no place in the World so convenient for this purpose as England; because that
though our Winters be long, yet they are not very cold; but Bees would be
stirring in them: and further our Summers are so subject to winds and rains,
that many times there is scarce a fine day in a whole Week: and further
Molossoes, Refuse-Sugar, Sweet-Woort, Milk, etc. may be had at reasonable rates.

I hope ere long to give an exact account of this experiment, and desire those
who have any Ingenuities in this kind, freely to communicate them. I have not
observed many things more of importance concerning Bees in my travels; only in
Italy they make their Hives of thin boards, square in two ar three partitions,
standing either above one another, or very close side to side, by the which
means, they can the better borrow part of their honey when they please. In
Germany their hives are made of straw, to the which they have a summer-door, as
they call it, which is nigh the top of the Hive, that the Bees when they are
laden, may the more easily enter and discharge themselves of their burdens.

3. We are to blame, that we do not employ our Honeys in making Metheglin: It Is
true, that in Herefordshire and Wales, there is some quantity of this liquor
made; but for want of good cookery it is of little worth; but usually of a
brown color, of an unpleasant taste: and as I suppose commonly made of the
refuse honey, wax, dead Bees, and such stuff, as they ordinarily make it
elsewhere: for the good house-wife thinks any thing good enough for this
purpose; and that it is pity to spoil good Honey by making Mead: but I know
that if one take pure neat Honey, and ingeniously clarify and scum and boil
it, a liquour may be made not inferior to the best Sack, Muskadine, etc. in
color like to Rock-water, without ill odor or savor; so that some curious
Pallats have called it Vin-Greco, rich and racy Canary, not knowing what name
to give it for it is excellency. This would bring very great Profit, not only
to the Public, by saving many a thousand pound disbursed for Wines through
all the world; but would be very advantageous to private families, who use to
entertain their friends very nobly, Wines being at present intolerably dear and
naught; I hope therefore ere long to see it put in execution. An excellent
drink not much unlike this may be made of Sugar, Molossoes, Raisins, etc. of
the which I have already spoken, yet think it fit to put you in mind of it
again.

It Is a great Deficiency here in England, 14. Deficiency, concerning Silkworms.
that we do not keep Silk-wormes (which in Italy are called Cavalieri) for to
make Silk. I know that is a great Paradox to many, but I hope by this short
discourse to make this truth to appear plainly: The first original of
Silk-wormes by what I read in Histories is from Persia, where in infinite
numbers they are still maintained; and the greatest profits of that great
Monarch do arise from hence: China also abounds very much with Silk. In
Virginia also the Silkworms are found wild amongst the Mulberry-woods, and
perhaps might be managed with great profit in those Plantations, if hands were
not so scarce and dear. I suppose this Silk-worme of Virginia is produced by
the corruption of the Mulberry-tree, as Cochinneal, from Ficus Indica, or
Indian-figtree: for some ingenious and curious men who have strictly observed
the generation of Insects, do find that every Plant has an Insect which
grows out of its corruption, (as diverse sorts of lice from Animals) and that
these Insects do usually feed on that Plant, out of which they were made, as
Lice on the same Animals from whence they were engendered. I know a Gentleman
here in London, who has three or four hundred Insects, and can give a very
good account of their original feedings. Master Marshal.
And also Mr. Moriney in Paris, has a large Book of the same subject. But to
return to our purpose: I say that we had Silkworms first from Persia. In
Justinian's time about 1000 or 1100 years ago, some Monks presented a few to
him at Constantinople; where in his time they began to plant Mulberies: from
thence it came to Italy, about three or four hundred years since: for the
Ancient Writers of Husbandry, as Cato, Pallad, Columell, do not so much as
mention these creatures: and at length these have passed over the Mountains
into France within an hundred years; where they flourish so much, that if we
will believe our own Authors, they bring greater profit then the Wine and Corn
of that large Country. But be it so or no, I know that France has Silk enough
to maintain their excess of apparel, and to export Plushes, Velvets, etc. Now
then if that these worms can thrive, not only in the parched Persia, but also
in Greece, Italy, yea in France; which differs not much from the temper of
England; why should we think, that they are confined to that place, and must
move no further Northward? for they have come many an hundred miles toward the
North, why not one hundred or two more? And further we see that Mulberries,
which is their food, thrive here as well as in any place. But some will object,
that our Air is too cold and moist. To which I answer.

1. That those who write of Silkworms, say, that you must take heed, that you
make not the place too hot: for too much heat may destroy; and therefore that
you must set the windows open to let in the cold Air.

2. We know, that Moistness of Air rather increases Insects, and nourishes
them. Indeed if Moisture hurts, it is because that it too much corrupts
their food, and causes a flux amongst them: but this is easily prevented, as I
shall show you anon. But to be short, it is not only my opinion that Silkworms
will thrive here, but the solid judgment of King James, and his Council,
confirms the same: as you may see by his letter to the Deputy-Lievtenants of
every County; wherein also many weighty reasons are contained to convince men
of the same, which Letter follows anon, with the Instructions for the
increase and planting of Mulberry-Trees. Printed by Eliaz. Edgar, in the year
1609.

Lastly, We find by experience, that Silkworms will thrive here, and therefore
the matter is out of question: for diverse Ladies, Gentlewomen, Scholars,
Citizens, etc. have nursed up diverse worms to perfection, though they have had
little skill in the managing of them; and likewise not such accommodations as
are necessary for them; and more would they have done, if they could have had
Mulberry-leaves. I am informed that one near Charing-Crosse makes a good
living by them: as also another by Ratliff-Crosse; yea, even in Cheshire at
Duckenfield they thrive and prosper. And therefore if we can bring up 100, why
not 1000, yea, 100000, if we had food for them? Truly, I know no reason to the
contrary, neither could I ever find one that could speak any thing to the
purpose against the business. And further I must tell you, that the ordering
of this worm is very easy, none need to be bound Prentise to the trade; the
special business is to be careful in feeding them, and keeping them sweet;
which things children use to do. He that would learn this Art exactly, let him
read Boneil^* but because that the Book is in French, I will give you a few
Rules.

First, Endeavor to get store of Mulberry-trees, which are of two sorts, the
white and the black. The white grows greatest, and has a fine leaf, and
sweetest, and therefore fittest for the young worms. This is easily propagated
by Slips, as Quinces, Codlings. The Black-Mulberry is difficultly propagated by
Slips; but must be raised from Seeds, sown either at Michaelmas, when the
Mulberries are eaten: or kept in dry sand till the Spring; and then sow or
how them in, as other seeds and stones, and must be diligently weeded. This
grows not to be so great a Tree as the former: the leaves are rougher and
harsher, and fittest for the greater worms. When they are strong and ready to
spin, when your Trees are grown to a good bigness, you may plant them forth,
as is usually done for Walks or Orchards, or in waste places, as they do in
Italy, (for the Fruit is little worth, only the Leaves are useful,) where I
have seen the Trees as bare of leaves at Mid-summer as at Mid-winter. There are
two sorts of Silkworms, the Spanish and Calabrian. The Spanish is the smaller
and more tender, and makes a finer silk. The Calabrian is greater and more
hardy, and makes more Silk, but coarser. This sort seems to be the best for
this Country. When the Mulberry-trees begin to bud, take the eggs of your
Silk-wormes, and lay them on a piece of stuff or Say, (some use to Bathe them
first in warm Malmsy, and say that it makes them stronger,) and carry them
about you in the day in a Box, in the night lay them under your Bed, or in a
warm Oven, till the worms begin to come forth, then lay a piece of paper of
the wideness of the Pox, cut full of holes on them, and on the paper lay
Mulberry-leaves, and as fast as they hatch they will crawle forth, and stick to
the Mulberry-leaves; which remove into other Boxes, till all be hatched: then
when they past their second sickness, feed them on shelves two foot broad, and
eighteen inches one from another: the Room where you keep your Worms, must
neither be a low place, nor nigh the tiles; but a middle Room, warm and dry,
yet sometimes a little cold Air is good.

Take heed of Rats and Mice, as also of Hens, Robinred-brests, Sparrows, and
other birds; for they will eat them.

They have four Sicknesses, the first twelve days after they are hatched; and
from that time at the end of every eight days: their sickness lasts two or
three days, and then they are to be fed but very little.

The whole time that the worms do feed, is about nine weeks: feed them twice
daily at least: at the first when they are small, give them a few leaves; and
as they grow greater, more, and feed them oftener. Let your leaves be dry and
well aired upon a Table or Cloth before you give them; and gather not your
leaves, till the dew be off; and in dry seasons, if you can possibly, you may
keep your leaves gathered three or four days, or longer.

Keep your shelves and boxes very clean: but take heed you touch not your
worms with your hands, when you remove them; but move them not when they are
sick.

In cold moist weather, set a Pan of Coals in the Room, and burn a little
Benjamin, Juniper, etc. especially when they are young, (viz.) the first five
weeks; but afterward, unless it be extraordinary cold, give them Air, and
keep them not too hot, and let the Room be well sented with Herbs.

Let not your Worms be too thick on the shelves: if any dye or be sick,
speedily remove them, lest they infect the rest.

As soon as by the clear Ambour-colour of your worms, you perceive that they
would spin; make Arches betwixt your shelves, with heath made clean, branches
of Rosemary, Lavender, etc. where the Worms will fasten themselves, and make
their bottoms in two or three days, and about twelve or fourteen days after
will come forth; before which time, you must take away the bottom which you
will use for Silk, and kill the worm within, by laying the bottoms in the sun
two or three days, or in an hot Oven.

The Bottom which you will keep for seed, lay in a warm place, till the worms
come forth; which put on some pieces of old Say, Grogran, Velvet, made fast to
some wall: there they will engender, and the Male having spent himself falls
down and dies; so the Female, when she has laid her eggs, which eggs when they
are gray, you may gently take them off with a knife, and keep them in a piece
of Say in a dry place, till hatching time come.

The winding of the Silk off the bottom requires a peculiar wheel, which an
Artificer must make: one pound and two ounces of the bottom yields from one
ounce to three of Silk.

An ounce of Spanish seed yields ordinarily six, eight, or ten pound of Silk,
and the worms will eat 250. li. of leaves: the Calabrian-worms being greater,
do eat nigh 300. weight, and yield eleven or twelve pound of Silk.

To conclude, I desire all men seriously to consider, what advantage this
business will bring to this Island, if it be brought to perfection. Truly I
know nothing does hinder the want of Mulberry-trees, which will in little space
come to a considerable greatness. And though I commend those who endeavor to
advance this work in Plantations, and prefer it before Tobacco; yet I know that
it cannot be for want of hands; whereas in England we have plenty of women,
children, old folks, lame, decrepit, etc. who are fit to be overseers of this
work. And I wonder Gentlemen do not go about a thing so pleasant and
profitable, (for three, four, or five at most, will attend as many worms as
will make forty or fifty pound worth of Silk in two or three months) and the
worms eat only leaves, which are of no value: neither is there any considerable
trouble about the worms, unless it be the 12 or 15 last days. I hope if that
particular men will not endeavor to advance this work for their private
profit, yet the States will for the Public Good, it being the best way I know
to set all the poor Children, Widows, old and same people on work, and likewise
will save this Nation many an hundred thousand pounds per annum. And further,
the way to accomplish this work may be done without grievance to the Subject,
(viz.) to command every one to plant or sow so many Mulberry-seeds, which may
easily he procured from beyond Seas, etc. But I leave States-matters to
Statesmen, I am none.

A Copy of King James's Letter to the Lords Lieutetenants of the several Shires
of England, for the increasing of Mulberry-Trees, and the breeding of
Silkworms, for the making of Silk in England.
JAMES REX.
Right-Trusty and Wel-beloved, we greet you well.
IT is a principal part of that Christian care, which appertains to
Sovereignty, to endeavor by all means possible, as well to beget, as to
increase among their people the knowledge and practice of all Arts and Trades,
whereby they may be both weaned from idleness, and the enormities thereof,
which are infinite, and exercised in such industries and labors as are
accompanied with evident hopes, not only of preserving people from the shame
and grief of penury; but also raising and increasing them in wealth and
abundance, the Scope which every freeborn spirit aims at, not in regard of
himself only, and the ease which a plentiful estate brings to every one in
his particular, but also in regard of the honor of their Native Country,
whose commendations is no way more set forth then in the peoples Activenesse
and Industry. The consideration whereof, having of late occupied our mind, who
always esteem our peoples good, our necessary contemplations: We have
conceived as well by the discourse of our own reason, as by information
gathered from others, that the making of Silk, might as well be effected here,
as it is in the Kingdom of France, where the same has of late years been put
in practice. For neither is the climate of this Isle so far distinct or
different in condition from that Country; especially from the hither parts
thereto, but that it is to be hoped, that those things which by industry
prosper there, may by like industry used here, have like success, and many
private persons who for their pleasure have bred of those worms, have found no
experience to the contrary, but that they may be nourished and maintained here,
if provision were made for planting of Mulberry-trees, whose leaves are the
food of the worms. And therefore we have thought good thereby to let you
understand, that although in suffering this invention to take place, we do show
our selves somewhat an adversary to our profit, which is the matter of our
customs for silk brought from beyond the Seas, will receive some dimunition:
Nevertheless, when there is question of so great and public utility, to come
to our Kingdom and Subjects in general; and whereby (besides multitudes of
people of both Sexes and all Ages) such as in regard of impotency are unfit for
other labor, may be set on work, comforted, and relieved; we are content that
our private benefit shall give way to the public; and therefore being
persuaded that no well-affected Subject will refuse to put his helping hand to
such a work as can have no other private end in us, but the desire of the
welfare of our people, we have thought good in this Form only to require you
(as a Person of greatest Authority in that County, and from whom the generality
may receive notice of our pleasure with more convenience then otherwise) to
take occasion either at the Quarter Sessions, or at some other public place of
meeting, to persuade and require such as are of ability, (without descending to
trouble the poor, for whom we seek to provide) to buy and distribute in that
County, the number of ten thousand Mulberry-plants, which shall be delivered
unto them at our City of, etc. at the rate of three farthings the plant; or at
6 s. the hundred, containing five score plants. And because the buying of the
said plants at this rate may at the first seem chargeable to our said Subjects,
(whom we would be loath to burden) we have taken order that in March or April
next, there shall be delivered at the said place a good quantity of
Mulberry-seeds, there to be sold to such as will buy them; by means whereof the
said plants will be delivered at a smaller rate then they can be afforded being
carried from hence: having resolved also in the mean time, that there shall be
published in print a plain Instruction and Direction, both for the increasing
of the said Mulberry-trees, the breeding of the Silkworms, and all other
things needful to be understood, for the perfecting of a work every way so
commendable and profitable, as well to the planter, as to those that shall use
the trade. Having now made known unto you the Motives as they stand with the
public good wherein every man is interested; because we know how much the
example of our own Deputy Lieutenants and Justices will further this cause; if
you and other your neighbors will be content to take some good quantities
hereof, to distribute upon your own lands, we are content to acknowledge thus
much more in this direction of ours; that all things of this nature tending to
Plantation, increase of science, and works of industry, are things so naturally
pleasing to our own disposition, as we shall take it for an argument of
extraordinary affection toward our person; besides, the judgment we shall
make of the good dispositions in all those that shall express in any kind
their ready minds to further the same; and shall esteem that in furthering the
same, they seek to further our honor and contentment (having seen in few years
past, that our Brother the French King, has since his coming to the Crown,
both begun and brought to perfection the making of Silks in his Country, where
he has won to himself honor, and to his Subjects a mavelous increase of
wealth) would account it no little happiness to us, if the same work which we
begun among our people, with no less zeal to their good, (then any Prince can
have to the good of theirs) might in our time produce the fruits which there it
has done: whereof we nothing doubt, if ours will be found as tractable and apt
to further their own good, now the way is showed them by us their Sovereign, as
those of France have been to conform themselves to the direction of their King.
Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster, the sixteenth of
November, in the sixth year of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland
the two and fortieth.

Instructions for the increase and planting of Mulberry-trees. What ground is
fit for the Mulberry-seeds, how the same is to be ordered, and in what sort the
seeds are to be sowed therein.
THe ground which ought to be appointed for this purpose, besides the natural
goodness of it, must be reasonably well dunged, and withal so situated, as
that the heat of the Sun may cherish it, and the nipping blasts of either the
North wind or the East, may not annoy it: the choice thereof thus made; that
the seeds may the better prosper, and come up after they be sown, you shall dig
it two foot deep, breaking the clods as small as may be, and afterward you
shall divide the same into several Beds of not above five foot in breadth, so
that you shall not need to endanger the plants by treading upon them, when
either you water or weed them.

The Mulberry-seeds you shall lay in water for the space of 22 hours, and after
that you shall dry them again half dry, or somewhat more, that when you sow
them they may not cleave together: Thus done, you must cast them upon the
foresaid Beds, not altogether so thick as you use to do other Garden-seeds, and
then cover them with some fine earth (past through a Sive) about half an inch
thick. In dry weather you shall water them every two days at the furthest, as
likewise the plants that shall come of them: and keep them as clean from weeds
as possibly you can.

The time in which you ought to sow them for your best advantage, is either in
March, April, or May, when frosts are either altogether past, or at the least
not so sharp, or of so long continuance, as to endanger their up-spring.

There is yet another way to sow them, and that is as follows: you shall
(being directed by a straight line) make certain furrows in the Beds above
mentioned of some four fingers deep, and about a foot in distance the one from
the other: After this, you shall open the earth with your hands, on either side
of the aforesaid furrows, some two fingers from the bottom, and where you have
so opened it, shall you sow your seeds; and then cover them half a finger
thick with the earth which you opened.

When the Plants that are sprung up of the Seeds, are to be removed, and how
they are to be planted the first time.
IN the months of September, October, November, December, March, or April, the
next year after the Seeds are sown, you may remove their plants, (or in the
month of January, if it be not in frosty weather) and set them in the like Beds
as before, and about one foot the one from the other, but first you must cut
off their roots, about eight inches in length, and their tops about half a foot
above the roots, more or less, according to the strength of the said plants;
for the weaker they be the less tops you shall leave them. In this sort you may
suffer them to remain (weeding and watering them as need shall require) till
they be grown 6 foot in length above their roots, whereunto when once they have
attained, you may cut their tops, and suffer them to spread, always having a
care to take away the many branches or succors, that may any way hinder their
growth, until they be come to their full length of 6 foot, as aforesaid.

When, and how the Plants are to be removed the second time, and in what manner
they are to be planted where they shall remain.
IN the months aforesaid, (according as your plants are waxen strong,) you may
remove them either into the hedges of your fields, or into any other grounds.
If in hedges, you must set them sixteen foot the one from the other, if in
other ground, intending to make a Wood of them eighteen foot at the the least.
But a month before you do remove them, you must make the holes (wherein you
purpose to set them) about four foot in breadth, and so deep as that their
roots may be well covered, and some half a foot of loose earth left under
them, having always a special care so to place them, that they may receive the
benefit of the Sun, and not to be shadowed or overspread by any neighboring
trees.

When, and how the Eggs of the Silkworms are to be hatched, and how to order
the Worms that shall come of them.
WHen the leaves of Mulberry-trees begin a little to bud forth, take the Eggs
of your Silkworms, and lay them in a piece of Say, or such like stuff, and in
the day time carry them in some warm place about you, in a little safe box, but
in the night either lay them in your bed, or between two warm pillows, until
such time as the Worms begin to come forth: then take a piece of paper of the
wideness of the said box, and having cut it full of small holes, lay it within
the same upon the eggs, and upon that again some few Mulberry-leaves, to which
the Worms as they are hatched, will continually come. These leaves with the
Worms upon them, you must still remove into other boxes, laying fresh leaves as
well on those that are removed as on the paper where the eggs are; and this is
the course which must be duly kept and observed, until such times as all the
Worms be come forth of their shells, still keeping their boxes warm, as
aforesaid; but no longer about you, but until the Worms begin to come forth,
out of which boxes you may safely take them, when once they have past their
second sickness, and feed them upon shelves of two two foot in breadth, and
eighteen inches one above the other.

The said shelves are not to be placed in any ground-room, nor yet next unto
the tiles, but in some middle room of your house which opens upon the North
and South, that you may the more conveniently give them either heat or air,
according as the time and season shall require. Besides, you must not make them
close unto the Walls, but so as you may pass about them the better to look unto
the Worms, and keep them from Rats and Mice, which otherwise might devour them.
You must observe the times of their coming forth, and keep every one or two
days hatching by themselves, that you may the better understand their several
sicknesses or sleepings, which are four in the time of their feeding. The first
commonly some twelve days after they are hatched, and from that time at the end
of every eight days, according to the weather, and their good or ill usage,
during which time of every sickness, which lasts two or three days, you
must feed them but very little, as only to relieve such of them, as shall have
past their sickness before the rest, and those that shall not fall into their
sickness so soon.

The whole time that the Worms do feed, is about nine weeks, whereof until they
come unto their first sickness, give them young Mulberry-leaves twice every
day, but few at a time, from thence until their second sickness, twice every
day in greater quantity; and so from their second to their third sickness,
increasing the quantity of the leaves, according as you perceive the Worms to
grow in strength, and clear of sickness: from the third until their fourth
sickness, you may give them leaves thrice every day, and the fourth being
past, you may let them have so many as they will eat, always having a care
that you give them none* but such as are dry, and well aired upon a Table or
Cloth, before they be laid upon them, and withal gathered so near as may be; at
such times as either the Sun or Wind has cleared them of the dew that falls
upon them.

For the feeding of Worms you need observe no other order then this, lay the
Mulberry-leaves upon them, and every two or three days remove them, and make
clean their boxes, or shelves, unless in times of their sickness, for then
they are not to be touched: the leaves which you take from them when you give
them fresh to feed upon, you must lay in some convenient place, and upon them a
few new leaves, to which the Worms that lay hidden in the cold, will come, and
then you may pass them with the said new leaves to the rest of the Worms: And
now lest any thing should be omitted, which serves to perfect the discovery of
so excellent a benefit, I will advise you to be very diligent in keeping clean
their Boxes, or shelves, as being a special means whereby to preserve them;
wherefore when you intend to do it, you shall remove them together with the
uppermost leaves whereon they lie, unto other boxes or shelves, for with your
hands you may not touch them, till they have thoroughly undergone their third
sickness, and then may you pass them gently with clean hands, without doing
them any harm: provided that the party that comes near them smell not of
Garlic, Onions, or the like. The first five weeks of their age you must be
very careful to keep them warm, and in time of rain or cold weather, to set in
the room where they remain, a pan with coals burning in it, now and then some
Juniper, Benjamin, and such like, that yeildeth sweet smells. But afterward
unless in time of extraordinary cold, give them air, and take heed of keeping
them too hot, being always mindful to store the room with herbs and flowers
which are delightful and pleasing to the smell. As the worms increase in
bigness, you shall disperse them abroad upon more boards or shelves, and not
suffer them to lie too thick together, and if you find any of them broken, or
of a yellow glistering color inclining to sickness, cast them away, lest they
infect the rest, and sort such as are not sick, the greatest and strongest by
themselves, for so the lesser will prosper the better.

When and how to make fit rooms for the worms to work their bottoms of silk in,
and in what sort the said bottoms are to be used.
AS soon as by the clear amber-coloured bodies of your worms, you shall
perceive them ready to give their silk, you must (with Heath made very clean,
or with the branches of Rosemary, the stalks of Lavender, or such like) make
Arches between the foresaid shelves.

Upon the branches and sprigs whereof, the worms will fasten themselves, and
make their bottoms, which in fourteen days after the worm begins to work
them, you may take away; and those which you are minded to use for the best
silk, you must either presently wind, or kill the worms which are within them,
by laying the said bottoms two or three days in the Sun, or in some Oven after
the bread baked therein is taken out, and the fierceness of the heat is alaid.
The other bottoms which you intend to keep for seed, you must lay in some
convenient warm place, until the Worms come forth, which is commonly some
sixteen or twenty days from the beginning of their work: and as they do come
forth you must put them together upon some piece of old Say; Grogeran, the
backside of old Velvet, or the like, made fast against some wall, or hangings
in your house.

There they will engender, and the Male having spent himself, falls down, and
in short time after dies, as also does the Female when she has laid her eggs,
which eggs, when you perceive them upon the Say, or Grogeran, etc. to be of a
grayish color, you may take them off gently with a knife, and baving put them
in a piece of Say, or such like, keep them in a covered box amongst your
woollen clothes, or the like, till the year following: But not in any moist
room, for it is hurtful for them, neither where there is too much heat, lest
the worms should be hatched before you can have any food for them.

The making of a Wheel, as likewise the way to wind the said silk from the
bottoms, can hardly be set down so plainly, as to be rightly understood:
Wherefore when time shall serve, there shall be sent into every County of this
Kingdom, a wheel ready made, and a man that shall instruct all such as are
desirous to learn the use thereof: 15. Deficiency, concerning the Husbandry of
other places.
Till when, I shill commend these brief instructions to be carefully considered
of all such as are willing either to benefit themselves, or their Country,
that being skilful in the Contemplation, they may the readier, and with less
error apply themselves to Action, which painful industry, with Gods
assistance, will quickly perfect.

15. Deficiency is the ignorance of the Husbandry of other places, (viz.) what
seeds, what fruits, what grasses they use, what Ploughs, Harrows,
Gardening-tools they have; how still they manage and improve their lands; what
cattle they have, how they feed and fatten them, and how they improve their
commodities, etc.

For there is no Country where they are such ill Husbandmen, but in some
particular or other they excel: as we see even in the several Counties of this
Island, every County has something or other wherein they outstrip their
Neighbors. And that much profit may arise from hence in this Nation, is
manifested by that excellent Treatise, which is published by you concerning the
Husbandry of Flanders; wherein are briefly set down diverse particulars very
useful for us here in England, and formerly unknown. And without question,
Franco, Spain, Italy, Holland, Poland, Germany, etc. have many excellent things
both for Husbandry, Physic, Mechanics, worth the manifesting and very
beneficial to us: so likewise there are diverse things in our Plantations worth
the taking notice of in Husbandry. To pass by the Southern Plantations, as
Barbados, Antego, Saint Croix, Christopher, Mevis, Monforate, where the
commodities are only Cotten-wools, Sugars, Gingers, Indicoes, which our cold
climate will not produce; and also Tobacco which grows also with us, about
Norwich, and elsewhere: We will only fall upon our Northern Plantations,
Virginia, New England, and instance in a few things. Why may not the Silk-grass
of Virginia, the Salsaperilla, Sassarfas, Rattl^snake-weed (which is an
excellent cordial) be beneficial to us, as also their Cedars, Pines, Plumtrees,
Cherries, great Strawberries, and their Locusts, (which is a prickly plant, a
swift grower, and therefore excellent for hedges) be useful to us? So for
New England, why should we think that the Indian corn, the March wheat, that
excellent Rye, the Pease (which never are eaten with magots,) the French, or
Kidney-Beans, the Pumpions, Squashnes, Water-mellons, Musk-mellons,
Hurtleberries, wild Hemp, Fir, etc. of those parts are altogether useless for
us? as also the Cra^berries, (which are so called by the Indians, but by the
English, Bearberries, because it is thought the Bears eat them in winter; or
Barberries, by reason of their fine acid taste like Barberries,) which is a
fruit as big and as red as a Cherry, ripe only in the Winter, and growing close
to the ground in bogs, where nothing else will grow? They are accounted very
good against the Scurvy, and very pleasant in Tarts. I know not a more
excellent and healthfuller fruit.

But some will object, that they will not grow here with us, our forefathers
never used them. To these I reply, and ask them how they know? have they tried?
Idleness never wants an excuse; and why might not our forefathers upon the
same ground, have held their hands in their pockets, and have said, that Wheat
and Barley would not have grown amongst us? and why should not they have been
discouraged from planting Cherries, Hops, Liquorice, Potatoes, Apricocks,
Peaches, Melicotones, and from sowing Rape-seeds, Colliflowers, Great Clover,
Canary-seeds, etc. and many more of this kind? and yet we know, that most of
these have been brought to perfection, even in our days: for there is a
vicissitude in all things, and as many things are lost which were known to our
forefathers, as the Purple color, etc. as you may read in Pancirol: so many
things are found out by us, altogether unknown to them, and some things will be
left for our posterities. For example, not to speak of Gunpowder and Printing,
nor of the New-world and the wonders there, which notwithstanding are but of a
few hundred years standing: I say twenty Ingenuities have been found even in
our days, as Watches, Clocks, Way-wisers, Chains for Fleas, diverse Mathematical
Instruments, Short-writing, Microscopes, by the which even the smallest things
may be discerned, as the eggs, eyes, legs, and hair of a Mite in a Cheese:
Likewise the Selenoscope, which discovers mountains in the Moon, diverse
Stars, and new Planets, never seen till our days. But to return to our purpose,
I say that in Husbandry it is even so; for the Ancients used diverse plants
which we know not; as the Cytisus-tree, so much commended for Cattle; as also
their Medick-fodder, which Colum says endures ten years, and may be mowen the
four first years, seven times in a year, and one Acre he esteems enough for
three horses. This fodder likewise is accounted very sweet and healthful,
whereas the plants which are usually called Medicats with us, are annual
plants, and have no such rare proprieties. So we are ignorant what their Far or
fine Bread Corn was, what their Lupine, Spury, and an hundred of this kind, as
you may read in Mathiol. on Dioscorides: so on the contrary, infinite are the
Plants which we have, and they knew not, as well appears by their small and
our large Herbals: and daily new Plants are discovered, useful for Husbandry,
Mechanics and Physic; and therefore let no man be discouraged from
prosecuting new and laudable ingenuities. And I desire Ingenious Gentlemen and
Merchants, who travel beyond Sea, to take notice of the Husbandry of those
parts (viz) what grains they sow? at what times and seasons? on what lands? how
they plough their lands? how they dung and improve them? what Cattle they use?
and the commodities thereby? also what books are written of Husbandry, and such
like? and I entreat them earnestly, not to think these things too low for them,
and out of their callings; nay, I desire them to count nothing trivial in this
kind, which may be profitable to their Country, and advance knowledge. And
truly, I should thank any Merchant that could inform me in some trivial and
ordinary things done beyond Sea, (viz.) how they make Caviare out of Sturgeons
Rows? in Muscovia, how they boil and pickle their Sturgeon, (which we English
in New England cannot as yet do handsomely?) how the Bolog^ia Sausages are made?
how they ferment their Bread without Yest? of what materials diverse sorts of
Baskets, Brooms, Frails are made? what seed Grout or Grutze is made of? and
also how to make the Parmisane Cheeses of Italy, which are usually sold here
for 2 s. or 2 s. 6 d. per pound; or the Angelots of France, which are accounted
better Cheeses then any made in England; as also the Holland Cheeses, which are
far better then our ordinary Cheeses, and yet these sorts of Cheeses are made
not of Mares milk, as some think, but from the Cows, and our Pastures are not
inferior to theirs, etc.

2. I desire ingenious men to send home whatsoever they have rare of all sorts;
as first, Animals, the fine-woolled sheep of Spain, Barbary Horses, Spanish
Jennets, etc. and so likewise all sorts of Vegetables, not growing with us, as
Pannick, Millet, Rice, which grows in the Fenny places of Millan, and France;
and why may it not grow in our Fens, and the best sorts of Grains or Fruits in
use amongst them? perhaps there is Wheat that is not subject to Smut or Mildew;
perhaps other seeds will give double increase, as Flax, Oats, Pease; and diverse
other things of importance there are beyond Sea, which may be useful to us; as
the Askeys, the Cork, Acorns, the Scarlet-Oak, sweet-Annise, which grows
abundantly in Millan, Fennel, etc. Tilia or Linder-tree for bast Ropes, etc.
Spruce Pines for Masts and Boards, seeing that they are swift growers, and many
will stand in a small piece of ground: they have formerly grown here, and some
few do flourish in our Gardens, and in Scotland. I suppose that this ought
seriously to be considered: for although we have plenty of Oaks, yet what will
it profit for Shipping without Masts? and how difficult it is to get great
Masts above 22 inches diameter, is very well known. Many things I might add of
this kind, but for brevities sake I refer you to Master John Tredescan, who
has taken great pains herein, and daily raises new and curious things.

3. Consider that these new Ingenuities may be profitable, no only to the
Public, but also to Private men: as we see by those who first planted
Cherries, Hops, Liquorice, Saffron, and first sowed Rape-seeds, Colliflowers,
Woad, Would, Early Pease, Assparagus, Melons, Tulips, Gilliflowers, etc. and
why may we not find some things beneficial to us also? 16. Deficiency, of the
ignorance of things taken from the earth and waters of this Island.


16. Deficiency is the ignorance of those things which are taken from the Earth
and Waters of this Island.

Although it may seem to many that these things do little concern the
Husbandman, who usually is not a Naturalist, but only endeavors to know his
own grounds and the seeds proper for it, and seldom pierces into the bowels
of the earth: yet if we consider that out of the earth he has Marle, Lime,
Stone, Chalk, for the enriching his lands; and also Loam and Sand for his
buildings: often times fuel for fire, etc. it will plainly appear, that it is
necessary for him to know all subterrany things, and to be a Petty-Phylosopher,
and that the knowledge of these things will be very beneficial for him. And
here I cannot but take notice of a great deficiency amongst us, (viz.) that we
have not the natural history of all the Sands, Earth, Stones, Mines, Minerals,
etc. which are found in this Island: it would not only advance Husbandry, but
also many other Mechanic Arts, and bring great profit to the public. I hope
some ingenious man will at length undertake this task; for the Lord has
blessed this Island with as great variety as any place that is known, as shall
in part appear anon; and it may be proved by that great variety which is found
near the Spaw-waters in Knaresborough, as Doctor Dean relates in his Book
called the English Spaw: Or the glory of Knaresborough springing from several
famous Fountains there adjacent, (called the Vitriol, sulphurous and dropping
Wells) and also other Mineral waters, whose words are these: Here is found not
only white and yellow Marle, Plaster, Oker, Rudd, Rubric, Freestone, an hard
Greet-stone, a soft Reddish-stone, Iron-stone, Brimstone, Vitriol, Niter,
Alum, Lead, and Copper: (and without doubt diverse mixtures of these) but also
many other Minerals might (perhaps) be found out by the diligent search and
industry of those who would take pains to labor a little herein.

Printed at York by Thomas Broad, being to be sold in his shop at the lower end
of Stone-gate, near to Common Hall Gates, 1649.

This Letter will not permit me to make a complete Natural History of the
things of this Isle; yet I shall relate diverse things which may be as hints to
set some others to work, which I have found in Mr. Cambden and others: and
shall briefly instruct the Husbandman what he ought to take notice of, for his
own and others good. And first, if he live nigh the Sea, let him take notice of
those things the Sea casts up; for it has even with us, and also in Ireland,
cast up Ambergris, which is worth so much Gold; with the which not long
since a Fisherman of Plymouth greased his boots, not knowing what it was:
sometimes it casts up Jet and Amber, as at Whitbey often times. In former
times we had Oysters which had very fair great Pearls in them of good worth;
and at this time some of them are found in Denbighshire; Coperas-stone likewise
is found along by the Seacoasts of Kent, Essex, Sussex, Hampshire, out of the
which Corporas is made, a thing very useful for Dyers, Curriers etc. Further
Sea-weeds are not to be slighted; for in Jersey they have no other fuel amongst
them; and here in England it is burnt to make Kelp for Glassemen, and is also
very good manure for diverse Lands; also Sea-owse is not only good to lay on
Land, but at Dover, and other places, the Inhabitants make Brick thereof,
called Flanders-Bricks, etc. Sea-sands in Cornwall do very much enrich their
Lands; and in Lancashire out of a certain kind of Sand they extract Salt, etc.

2. Let him take notice of all sorts of Waters, which issue forth of the earth,
differing from the ordinary, in Color, Odor, Taste: for it is well known how
advantageous these waters are, oftentimes, not only to particular men, but
also to the Country about; yea to the whole Island, as appears by the waters
of Tunbridge in Kent, and of Epsham in Surrey, Knaresborough, etc. Spaw in
Yorkshire, and by the Allum-waters in Newenham in Warwickshire, like Milk in
taste and color, and are excellent for the Stone and wounds; and also it
appears by the salt Fountains in Worcestershire and Cheshire, which furnish
all those parts with an excellent fine white salt: by the hot Bathes in
Summersetshire, and the lukewarm waters by Bristol, etc. At Pitchford in
Shropshire is a Fountain which casts forth liquid Bitumen, which the people
use for Pitch, etc.

3. Let him not despise the sorts of Sands which he finds: for some Sands are
for buildings, as the rough sorts; others for scowring others for casting fine
metals, as Highgate-sand; others for the Glasse-men, as a sand lately found in
Sussex. In Scotland there is a sand, which contains a considerable quantity
of Gold: and in diverse Countries fine Gold abounds very much in sands; and if
we may believe an excellent Dutch Chemist, there is scarce any sand without it.

4. Let him take notice of the Earth, Loams, Clayes, etc. which have diverse and
necessary uses: as first, the stiffest Clays, as Newcastle and Nonsuch, are for
the Glassemens Pots, for Crucibles, melting-pots: the less stiff for ordinary
Earthen wares, Brewers, Tiles, Bricks, etc. white Clay is for Tobacco-pipes:
Marle of diverse colors and stiffness is excellent for Husbandmen:
Fullers-Earth is found in Kent, Surrey, and lately in diverse other places, for
the great benefit of the Clothier: Rub and Rubric in Yorkshire, as also
diverse other in Oxford and Glocestershire, excellent for Painters, etc. Turffe
for firing may be found in most parts of this Isle, if people were industrious:
necessity now and then compels them to be inquisitive, as it did lately at
Oxford and Kent, where it is found in good quantity. In Holland they have
little fuel, save what is taken out of their ditches; and therefore it is
truly said, that their firing is as it were fished out of the water, and it is
indifferent good fuel: Coals are found in very many places, yet diverse places
are in great want of them.

5. Let him take notice of the several stones found in this Isle; as of
Freestones for building, Cobbels and rough hard stones for paving, Tomb-stones;
soft sandy stones commonly called fire-stones, because they will endure strong
fires, and therefore fit for Iron furnaces; and this propriety these soft
stones have, that when they are white hot, a steel instrument will scarce
touch them to hurt them. Alabaster is found at Burton on the Trent, and in
Staffordshire, and at Titbury Castle: excellent Marble at Snothil in
Herefordshire: a course Marble near Oxford; in Kent, also at Purbrick in
Dorsetshire, Milstones in Auglesey, in Flintshire, Darbyshire, Lime-stones:
Chalk in very many places for diverse uses: Allum-stone is found in Anglesey,
but especially at Gisborrow in Yorkshire, where the Alum works are, which
serve this Island: Lapu Cslaminaris is lately found in Somersetshire, by the
which Copper is made brass: Manganese for those that make white glass, lately
found in the North: the best Emery for polishing Iron in Jersey: Plaster at
Knaresborough: Black-lead in Cumberland: and no where else in Europe: There is
a stone in Durham out of which they make salt; Diamonds are found about Bristol
and Cornwall very large, but soft: There is a stone near Beaver Castle like a
Star. In Yorkshire another like a Serpent petrefied: and also other stones
round like bullets, which being broken have as it were a Serpent in them
without an head, etc.

6. Of all Minerals and Metals, Iron-stone is found almost in every County, and
is profitable where Wood is plentiful: the best is found in Laneashire, one
load and an half making a Tun of Iron: it has been transported into Ireland,
to mix with poor Mine. In Richard the seconds time a Copper-Mine was found in
Wenlock in Shrepshire, but exhausted: in Queen Elizabeth's days one was found
at Keswick in Cumberland: and ately in Staffordshire, Yorkshire, and near
Barstable in Devonshire: on which some Gentlemen intend speedily to work: Lead
is found in Durham, Wales, and Devonshire; Brimstone in Yorkshire and Wales,
Antimony in Staffordshire: a silver Mine in Cardiganshire: a gold Mine was
discovered in Scotland in King James his time: and many rich Mines might be
discovered in England, if that the Kings Prerogative (which was to take all
Royal Mines to himself, (viz.) Silver, Gold, and Copper,) were so cerainly
abolished, that they which should find these Metals in their own Lands, might
safely dig them. But some will object and say, that many things are of little
worth and profit. To these I answer, that God has made nothing in vain, every
thing has his peculiar use, and though some things seem to be of little worth
and contemptible, as Sand, Loam, Chalk; yet it has pleased the wise Creator
to make these things very necessary for man's comfortable subsistence, which
they that want these things can testify. As for example, in New England, where
there is no Chalk nor Limestone, they are compelled to burn Oyster-shels,
Cockles, to make Lime; or else they could hardly build any houses. The like I
may say of Sand and Loam in diverse places, where they are wanting.

2. I say that most of those things I have spoken of, are very profitable in
one place or other. To instance in some of the meaner sort, at London Brickmen
give 50 li. per Acre, only for Loam to make Bricks, and pay 3 li. per Acre, of
yearly Rent, and are to leave the Land worth the same yearly Rent; likewise I
know a Chalk-cliff in Kent not two Acres of ground, valued at many an hundred
pound, and that one Colum of Chalk which is ten foot square, is valued at forty
or fifty pound at 8 d. per load. The Oker Mines of Oxford and Glocestershire
are of great value, and so would others of that kind, if they could be found;
so is the Black-lead Mine. Also the pits of Clay, Marle, Coal, Turffe, etc.
And therefore I desire all Country men to endeavor to know all sorts of
Stones, Clays, Earths, Oars, and to teach their Children the use of them, that
they may know that this sand is for building, this Loam is for Bricks, this
Clay for Pots, this Marle for Corn-land: and if that they shall find any
Stones, Earths, which they know not, that they would lay them up, till that
they meet with some ingenious man, that can inform them. The richest Mines of
the world have been found out by these means, if we will believe Histories. And
this I am sure of, that by this means they may much advance their knowledge,
and be more profitable to the Public, their Neighbors, and also to
themselves.

17. Deficiency, is the ignorance of the Vegetables of this Island, 17.
Deficiency, of the Vegetables of this Island and their Virtues and Uses.
and their Virtues and Uses.

And the first Deficiency that I take notice of, is the ignorance of the
ordinary seeds which are commonly sown amongst us: for usually the Countryman
contenteth himself with one or two sorts, and knows no more, when as there
are very great varieties; some of which agree with one sort of ground, some
with another: As for example, there are very many sorts of Wheats, some called
White Wheat, some Red Wheat, some Bearded; (which, as I have said before, is
not so subject to Mildews as others) others not: some sorts with two rows,
others with four, and six: some with one ear on a stalk, others with double
ears, or two on the same stalk; Red-stalk Wheat of Buckinghamshire, Winter
Wheat, Summer Wheat, which is sown abundantly in New England, in April and May,
and reaped ordinarily in three months; and many sorts more. Not to trouble my
discourse with Spelt, Zea, Tiphine-Wheat, or Olew, Far, Sil^go, Alica, which
were used amongst the Ancients; but now unknown not only to the Countryman,
but even to the learnedest Botanicks: so I may say that the ordinary Yeoman is
ignorant of the diversities of Barley's, for there is not only the ordinary
Barley, but big sprat-Barley, which has lately been sown in Kent with good
profit; also Winter-Barley sown in Winter, Barley with four, six rows, naked
Barley, which require diverse dispositions in Land: some delighting in finer,
others in stiffer grounds. So there is also Winter and Summer-Rie, and twenty
sorts of Pease, the ordinary Schew, the Raith or Early-ripe Pease, the
Roncivals, Hastivers, Hotarses, Gray-Pease, Green-Pease, Pease without skins,
Sugar-Pease, whose shells are sweeter then the Pease it self, and have been
within these ten years plentifully sown in Lincolnshire with profit; also
Fulham, Sandwich-Pease, etc. which require diverse sorts of lands and seasons:
so also there are diverse sorts of Oats, white, black, naked, which in
New England serves well for Oatmel without grinding, being beaten as they come
out of the Barn; Scotch, Poland, etc. Also Buck-wheat, Lentiles; diverse sorts
of Tares, of Hemp and Flax, altogether unknown to most Contrymen, but I hope
that hereafter they will be more inquisitive after them: for diverse of them may
be of good use on their lands.

2. Deficiency in this kind is, that they are ignorant of the Plants and
Grasses which naturally grow amongst us, and their Uses, which likewise were
made for to be food for Cattle, and also for the service of man. This ignorance
causes them to admire, and to esteem even as miraculous, ordinary and trivial
things; as for example, how it comes to pass, that in one Meadow an Horse
thriveth very much and speedily, and yet a Bullock will not in that place; and
contrariwise in a Meadow close by the former, the Bullock will thrive, and the
Horse not: so also how it comes to pass that Conies and Sheep will thrive
well, where there is scarcely any pasture, and yet come to nothing on Commons,
where there is a greater quantity of pasture; which proceeds from this cause,
that some kind of Plants are more agreeing and sweeter to one sort of Cattle
then to another, and every Beast almost has some Plant or other which they
love exceedingly. I suppose, that the observances of this kind, might be very
useful in Husbandry. These Deficienci^s I will draw to three Heads.

1. I say, that diverse Plants (not to speak of Fruits, because we have already
spoken of them) that grow naturally in our Island, may be very serviceable to
the Husbandman, both for his Pastures and Corn-lands. To instance in some few:
we see that diverse sorts of wild Vetches, Chiches, Tares, etc. grow wild in
diverse places which though they bear not so great and large crops, as some
others already used; yet who knows what they would do, if they were manured
as other grains, and in land proper for them: for we see that the transplanting
of plants into gardens, does very much meliorate or better them; and without
doubt all those grains, which are in use with us, were at first picked out of
the fields and woods; and by ingenious men found useful for man and beast, and
of late diverse have been found not known to our forefathers, as Saint Foin,
Lucern; and why may not we find diverse Grasses, Vetches, Medicaes, Wild Pease,
etc. which as yet are scarce taken notice of.

2. There grow diverse sorts of wild Pease, but to speak of two only.

1. Sort which grows on the stony Beaches of the Sea, where there is little
or no earth, the roots are many foot deep in the ground. In Queen Mary's days
in a dearth, the poor people gathered diverse sacks full of them, and they were
no small relief to them, who has tried whether they would thrive better on
better land?

2. Sort grows on dry barren land, and is commonly called the everlasting
Pease; which continually grows out of the same root. In Gardens I have seen
it grow ten years together, and larger at the ten years end, then at the first.
I have also seen it flourish on barren grounds, where Oats were burned away:
who knows but these and other Plants may be serviceable, if not for man, at
least for beasts or pigeons: for in New England the great flights of Pigeons
are much maintained by these, I am sure it were good to make experiments of
these and diverse others.

2. Head, is the Ignorance of the Mechanical uses of Herbs and Trees; for even
for these uses most Plants have some peculiar propriety. To instance in a few,
We know that Elm is for Wheels; and the best wood to make Herrings red, Oak is
for Shipwright, Joyner, Tanner; Horn-Beams, Beech, for Milwright; Line-tree for
Bass-ropes; old Elder without pitch is very tough and fit for Cogs of Wheels,
Tooth-Pickers; Pear Tree for Mathematical instruments and ingravers, etc.
Osiers for baskets; Walnut for Gunstocks; Asp for Hoops, Box, Ash for an
hundred uses; and much more might be spoken of this kind, if time would permit.
So likewise diverse Plants are for Painters, as you may see in Battees
experiments: some for the Dyers, but as yet we know but four, ( viz. Woad,
Would, Green-wood, and Madder) amongst 1200 Plants and upward; which grow wild
with us. I could wish some ingenious man would take the pains to search out
the Mechanical uses of Plants; surely it were a good way to advance Mechanics,
who in their callings usually go round; as horses in a mill, and endeavor very
little to advance or know the causes of their operations. I know a Gentleman,
who promises some things in this kind, and I hope will be as good as his word.

3. Head, is the ignorance of the Physical uses of the Plants for though many
hundred Plants do grow amongst us: yet but few of them are used Physically:
whereas there is scarce any one but may be useful in this kind. And truly in
my opinion it is a great fault that we so much admire those things, that are
far fetched, and dear bought; when as oftentimes they are gathered in
unseasonable times, and corrupted by long voyages by Sea, counterfeited by
Merchants; yea we have very often quid pro quo, and rank poisons, and neglect
those medicines which God has given us here at home. I am credibly informed
that in former times, Virga aurea was in great use with us, and usually sold
for eight pence per ounce, and brought from France: but so soon as it was found
growing plentifully in our hedges, it was cast forth of the Apothecaries shops,
as of little virtue. And though some will object that our Plants have little
virtue: I say it is false; for God has tempered them for our complections: and
we see very often that one simple medicine does more good then the great
compositions of the Ancients, which are rather ad pompam, then for health, and
seem to savor somewhat of the Mountebank, because Opium is always an
ingredient. And further we see that where any Endemical or National disease
reigns, there God has also planted a specifique for it: As the Cochleare, or
the Scurvy-grasse for the Scurvy; in the Baltic Sea, where it is very
frequent, and also in Holland, England. So in the West Indies, (from whence the
great Pox first came, and where it reigns very much, that not only man but
other Creatures are infected with it, so that even Dogs die of that disease in
our Northern Plantations, perhaps catching this infection, by mingling with
Indian Dogs) there grow the specifiques for this Disease, as Gujacum,
Salsaperilla, Sassafras, and the Salvages, do easily cure these distempers.
Further we see, that even the irrational creatures can find not only meat, but
also medicines for themselves; as the Dog, Couch-grass for a vomit: the Dove,
Vervein; the Weasel, Rue; the Swallow, Celandine, the Toad Plantine; and where
is our reason that we cannot?

I therefore desire all Country people, to endeavor to know these Plants which
grow at their doors: (for God has not planted them there for no purpose; for
he does nothing in vain) and to collect together the plain simple Medicaments
of their Grandame; by this means they may save many a forty pence: I mean
preserve themselves and Families, and Neighbors, in good health with little
charge. Some small Treatises have of late been written, to show the use of our
Plants in Physic; and I hope ingenious men will daily more and more
communicate the secrets of this kind, which they have in their hands for the
Public good.

They that write of four-footed beasts, do reckon about an hundred and twenty
species of them half of them are scarcely known amongst us. 18. Deficiency,
concerning Animals.
I do suppose therefore, that diverse species are wanting, which may be useful.
To instance in some: And

1. To begin with the Elephant, the greatest, wisest, and longest lived of all
Beasts: which abound very much in the Eastern parts of the world; as China,
India, and are accounted very serviceable, both for the Wars, and for
carriage, (fifteen men usually riding on his back together) they are not
chargeable to keep; why may they not be of use even here, when I am credibly
informed, an Elephant lived diverse years here in a a Park? so that they can
endure the coldness of this Climate.

2. The Buffle, which is as big as an Ox, and serviceable both for the Plough,
and for their Milk: their skins make the best buffe, they will fare very hard
and live in Fens and Bogs, where nothing else can. In the Duke of Fl^rences
Country near Pisa, are many of them.

3. The honest and patient Ass, which was very much used in the old time for
carriage, (as the Horse for War, and the Ox for the Plough,) and in many
Countries at this time; they will eat Thistles, and live even with nothing.
They may save poor men (who are not able to keep an Horse, because he is a
great feeder,) much labor.

4. Mules, which is a very strong and proud beast, and will carry far more then
an Horse, and are more sure footed. I suppose, that they might be serviceable
to the Carriers here, as they are beyond the Seas. In Ireland before the War, a
Gentleman G. R. had diverse, even in the North, and found them serviceable. Five
Camels, which will carry great burdens: their hair is the ground of Mo-hair.
Six Dromedaries, which go swiftly, etc. Seven Black Foxes, may be profitable;
whose skins have been sold from 20 l. per skin, to 90 l. I might add diverse
more of this kind: as Musk-Cats, Sables, Martines, Minkes, Musk-Squash,
Guiney-Pigs, and a sort of Cony, which some few have in Hampshire, whose Fur is
worth 2 s. 6 d. or 3 s. per skin, being little inferior to Beave^, etc. but
for brevities sake I pass them over: as also diverse sorts of Fowls, of good
use; as a kind of Duck with a crooked bill, which lays constantly as Hens do,
as also Hawks of diverse sorts of good value, which perhaps the Countryman
loves not; because they are enemies to his Poultry.

2. Deficiency is, That we do not endeavor to advance the best kinds of the
Cattle, which are amongst us. And

1. To begin with Horses. The Frenchman that writes a Book called, the
Treasure-Polick, says, that in England in Queen Elizabeth's days, we had not
above three or four thousand Horse worth any thing for the War, and those only
in Noble-mens stables, which thing perhaps did the more encourage the Spaniard
to invade us; but at this time we are known to have very many thousand of Horse
not inferior to the best in the world: yet I suppose, that we might much
meliorate our breed by Spanish Jenneti, Barbary, etc. And we are not so careful
to increase good horses as we should be.

2. We are too negligent in our Kine, that we advance not the best species: for
some sorts give abundance of milk, and better then others: some sorts are
larger, more hardy, and will sooner fat, etc. Lancashire, and some few Northern
Counties, are the only places where they are a little careful in these
particulars.

3. We are not curious in procuring the best sorts of sheep, for greatness,
soundness, and fine wool. I wonder that some Sheep-masters have not procured
of those exceeding fine-wooled sheep of Spain; whose wool costeth the Merchant
nigh 10 s. per pound, before it is exported: I suppose that it would for a time
mend our wool, if not continue so for ever: for these sheep were first carried
forth out of England, if we may believe stories, Spain not affording such sheep
before. Dutch-sheep are reported to have two or three Lambs ordinarily.
Turky-sheep are very great, with great tails; but their wool is very course,
not only because of their course feeding; but also because in hot Countries,
they ordinarily mingle with Goats, and therefore in Venice ordinary Porters
will scarce eat any Mutton. And here I cannot but relate, that all strangers
very much wonder at two things in our sheep, (not to speak of the fineness of
wool.) And

1. That our sheep if they be sound, seldom or never drink, even in Summer;
though they go on the driest Chalky lands: as it plainly appears in Kent,
where there is scarce water for the great Cattle, which proceeds from the
moisture of our air, and abundance of rain and dews.

2. That our sheep do not follow their shepherds as they do in all other
Countries: for the shepherd goes before, and the sheep follow like to a pack
of dogs, this disobedience of our sheep does not happen to us, as Papists
Priests tell their simple flocks; because we have left their great shepherd
the Pope; but because we let our sheep range night and day in our fields
without a shepherd; which other Countries dare not for fear of Wolves, and
other ravenous beasts, but are compelled to guard them all day with great dogs,
and to bring them home at night, or to watch them in their folds.

3. Deficiency in this kind, is the neglect of Fish Ponds, which are very
profitable: for Fish usually live by such worms and flies as are engendered in
the ponds, and require no charge. Concerning the ordering of them, and profit
of them, read Master Dubravin's Book of Fish Ponds translated out of Latin into
English. And another short Treatise called, Certain experiments concerning
Fish, practiced by John Taverner Gentleman, and by him published for the
benefit of others. And surely it would be a great benefit to this Island if we
had Fish at reasonable rates. I cannot therefore pass by two extreme abuses,
which exceedingly destroy Fish, and are in no wise to be permitted.

1. That diverse poor men keep many Swine, and in nets, or otherwise catch many
bushels of the young fry of Fish, and feed their Swine with them.

2. That the Fishermen in the River have the Meashes of their nets so
straight, that they take many sorts of Fish, when they are too small, and so
destroy the young fry. I hope these abuses will be reformed with all severity.
To this Head I may add Decoys, which are very frequent in Holland, and
profitable, but very rare with us in England: yet it may be very profitable and
delightful.

4. Deficiency, is the ignorance of the Insects of this Island. And though it
may seem ridiculous to many, to affirm that Magots, Butterflies, should be of
any importance; yet I desire them to consider, that we have our Honey, the
sweetest of foods from Bees, which are Cattle of this kind: also our Silks,
Sattins, Plushes, and bravery from the poor Silkworm, which may be called a
Magot, Caterpillar, or Butter-fly, etc. the richest of our colors from the
Cocheneile, which is one of this sort Gumlac is made by Ants, some are used for
food, as Locusts, etc. as you may read in Musset's Book de Insectis. Many of
these likewise are used in Physic, as Cantharides, Wood-sowes, Lice, etc. Some
think, that Medicines transcending even in the Chemists, may be had out of
these; for every Plant, which has a Medicinal virtue, is also sublimed up into
this living Quintessence: and therefore I commend diverse ingenious men, as Mr.
Marshal and others, who have collected many hundred sorts of these; and I hope
they will communicate ere long their experiments to the world.

19. Deficiency concerning diverse things necessary for the good of Cattle. 19.
Deficiency, concerning diverse things necessary for the good of Cattle.


1. That we are ignorant of diverse Diseases of Cattle and their Cures. Not to
run over all the diseases of Cattle and their Cures, which would be too long,
and you may read them in Master Markam's works, the Countrey-Farmer, and
others. I will instance only in two, which some years sweep away Cattle, as the
Plague does men, (viz.) the Murrein amongst great Cattle, and the Rot amongst
Sheep. And though diverse have wrote concerning the Cures of these Diseases; yet
we do not find that effect which we desire: and therefore I hope some will
attempt to supply this Deficiency, and write a good Treatise about the Diseases
of Cattle. Of these two Diseases, I shall briefly declare my mind: And

1. Of the Murrein, which proceeds from an inflammation of the blood, and
causes a swelling in the throat, which in little time suffocateth the Cattle.
The especial Causes of this Disease, are a hot and dry season of the year;
which dries up the waters, or at least does so putrify them, that they are
unwholesome; and also the letting of Carrion lie unburied. This Disease is
thought to be infectious; but perhaps it may proceed from one common cause, as
the rottenness of sheep. The best way to keep your Cattle from this Disease,
is to let them stand in cool places in Summer, and to have abundance of good
water, and speedily to bury all Carrion: and if any of your Cattle be infected,
speedily to let them blood, and to give them a good Drench, etc. By these means
diverse have preserved their Cattle, when their Neighbors have perished.

2. Concerning the Rot of Sheep, not to speak of the Peltrot, or sheep that are
starved; but of the ordinary rot, called by some the white rot, and is a kind
of dropsy, their bellies are full of water, and their liver discolored. I
have seen out of the livers of sheep tending to rottenness, living Creatures,
leaping like small Flounders; which without question in little tune will
destroy the liver, and consequently produce an indisposition not unlike to the
Rot. The common people say, that these worms are caused by the over-heatings of
sheep, and that Rottenness proceeds from a Plant called Cotyledon, or
Marsh-Penny-wort, which is of a very sharp taste, and therefore not likely that
sheep will eat it; but it may be a sign of wet rotten land, as broom is of
sound and dry land. This is certain that in wet moist years, sheep dye very
much of the Rot; and in dry years on the same ground, they hold sound: and yet
I have heard that in Ireland, which is far moisture then England, rottenness
of sheep is not known so much. It were therefore well worth the labor of an
ingenious man to inquire into the causes of these indispositions in sheep.

The means, which have been found very effectual for the curing of these
Diseases, are these: first, to drive your sheep up to dry Lands, or to keep
them in the fold, till the dew be off the grass, or to feed them some days with
fine dry hay, especially of salt Meadow, or to put them into salt Marshes: for
in those places sheep never rot, or to drive them to some salt River, and there
to wash them, and make them drink of the water, this will kill the scab, and
also the ticks, and fasten the wool: but if you have not the conveniences
before said, then rub their teeth with salt, or rather make a strong pickle
with salt and water, and force them to drink thereof. Some dry pitch in an
Oven, and add to the pickle, and have found very good success: for these
Medicines do exsiccate the superfluous humidities, open obstructions, and kill
worms. Some commend the Antimonial Cup, as a Catholic Medicine against all
diseases of cattle.

3. We are ignorant of diverse ingenuities, concerning feeding and fatting of
cattle and other creatures. To instance in some; And

1. Of the Horse, who is a great feeder. In Kent and Hartsortshire they usually
cut all their Oats and Pease small, and give them with their ^haff; by this
means the Horses sooner fill themselves, and eat all the straw up: some put the
Horse-meat into a bag, and so order it that a little only lies in the Manger;
which when that is eaten up, more falls down, and not before; by this way
Horses do not blow their meat, nor throw it out of the manger with their Noses.
A further good piece of Husbandry they use, which is this, when their Horses
are well fed at night, they fill the Rack with Wheat or Barley-straw, and so
leave them; the Horse perceiving that that which is in the Rack is not very
pleasant, lies down and takes his rest, which is as good to him as his meat:
if he rise in the night, and fall to the rack and manger, as he usually does,
and finds nothing but straw, he sleeps till the morning; but if it be Hay,
Tares, or Pease, the Jade will pull it all down, and spoil it, and and likewise
will be hindered from his rest; by the which double damage does ensue. Currying
and dressing of horses ought not to be forgot, it is half as good as their
meat. Brimstone and Elecampane roots are the especial ingredients for this
Physic. For Worms and Surfeit are the two commonest Diseases.

2. Of the feeding and fatting of Cows. We usual feed cattle with straw in
racks in the yard, or turn them to the fields, and there let them feed as much
and how they please; which has many inconveniences: as first, Cattle spoil as
much with their heels as they eat, especially if the ground be moist, or if the
fliebe very troublesome and they blow and stench, and tumble much, and if the
fly be busy, they run up and down, and over-heat themselves, and fat very
little, so that oftentimes in June or July they fatten as little as at
Christmas, and most of their dung is lost by these means, etc. But in Holland
they do thus: They keep their Cattle housed Winter and Summer; for the Winter
provision, they lay in not only hay, but also grains, (which they buy in
Summer, and bury in the ground:) and also Rape-seed, and Lin-seed cakes, and
sow Turnips, not only for themselves, but their Cows also; with the which
Turnips being sliced, and their tops, and Rape-seed cakes, and Grains, etc.
they make Meshes for their Cows, and give it them warm; which the Cows will
slop up like Hogs, and by this means they give very much milk. In the Summer
time they mow the great Clover-grasse, and give it them in racks; so that their
Cattle are not troubled with the pinching frosts, nor rains, nor with the
parching Sun in Summer, neither with the Fly, nor do they over-heat themselves
or spoil half so much meat; and are always as fat as their Masters, or
Bacon-hogs. The Dung and Urine they charily preserve, and thereby keep their
Meadows of Clover-grass, (which are constantly mowen twice or thrice yearly) in
good heart: and indeed cattle ought not to go amongst Clover-grass, because it
usually grows with long Haum (as they call it) like Pease, which if it be
broken will not thrive. In Bermudas they have a peculiar way of fattening their
cattle, not used any where else that I know, which is with Green-Fennel, that
grows in that Island plentifully.

There is a Plant in Essex called Myrchis or Cow-pursley; which grows fast
and early in the Spring, which they give their cattle at the beginning of the
year, and they eat it well.

It is an ill custom that is used almost every where, to let hogs lie in their
dirt and dung, when they are fattening; for all creatures generally do hate and
abhor their own dung: and an hog i^ cleanliest of all creatures, and will never
dung nor stale in his stie, if he can get forth, which other creatures will:
and though he tumble in the dirt in Summer; yet that is partly to cool himself,
and partly to kill his lice, for when the dirt is dry, he rubbeth it off, and
destroys the lice thereby.

Sir Hugh Platts in his writings sets down diverse ingenious ways of
fattening Poultry, etc. and more may be found out daily. The Jews have a
peculiar way of fattening Geese, with Milk, Figs, Raisins, and other sweet
things, by which they make the liver of an extraordinary greatness, and is a
dish much valued by them, as it was also among the old Romans.

In Moor-fields, there is one that keeps many hundreds of Conies with grains
and bran: and some others who keep the great laying Ducks, with these things
and blood, to their great advantage. I have seen a Book translated out of
French, which teaches how to gain diverse hundred pounds per annum, by fifty
pound stock in Hens. I suppose about London where Eggs are so dear, great
profit might be made by them. Turkeys might be kept with good profit, where
there are many Meadows as in Suffolk. In Barkshire many keep tame Pheasants,
and have gained well thereby.

3. We do not know how to improve the Commodities proceeding from Cattle to the
highest: as for example our ordinary butter might be better sented and tasted:
some Ladies have fine ingenuities in this kind. We cannot make Cheese
comparable to the Parmisan, nor so good as the Angelots of France, our ordinary
Cheese is not comparable to the Holland Cheeses, where also diverse sorts of
Cheeses are made of diverse colors: but I cannot much commend their green
Cheeses, which are made of that color by Sheeps-dung, etc. 20. Deficiency, Of
the want of diverse things which are necessary for the accomplishment of
Agriculture.
but I hope in short time our good Hous-wifes will scorn that any shall excel
them.

20. D^ficiency, Is the want of diverse things, which are necessary for the
accomplishment of Agriculture -- As

1. That we have not a Systema, or complete Book of all the parts of
Agriculture. Till the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's days, I suppose that there
was scarce a book wrote of this subject; I never saw or heard of any. About
that time: Tusser made his verses, and Scot wrote about an Hop-garden, Gouge
translated some things. Lately diverse small Treatises have been made by diverse,
as Sir Hugh Platts, Gab, Platts, Mark^am, Blithe, and Butler, who do well in
diverse things; but their books cannot be called complete books, as you may
perceive by diverse particular things; not so much as mentioned by them. The
Countrey-Farmer translated out of French is enough, if not more then enough;
but it is no ways framed, or squared for us here in England: and I fear the
first Authors went on probabilities and hear-says, rather then experience. I
hope some ingenious man will be encouraged to undertake a work so necessary and
commendable.

2. Deficiency, is, That Gentlemen try so few experiments, for the advance of
this honest and laborious calling; when as many experiments might be made for a
small matter; for half a Pole square, will give as certain a demonstration, as
an Acre; and a Pottle, as an Hogshead. I hope in time there will be erected a
College of Experiments, not only for this, but also other Mechanical Arts.

3. Deficiency, is, That Gentlemen and Farmers do not meet and communicate
secrets in this kind, but keep what they have experimented themselves, or known
from others; as Sybils leaves: I mean as rare secrets, not to be communicated.
I hope that we shall see a more co^municative spirit amongst us ere long. And
Sir, I cannot but desire you, if you have any things more in your hands of
Gabriel Platts, or any men's else, that you would with speed publish them.

4. Deficiency, is, That we want a place to the which men may resort for to
find such ingenious men, as may be serviceable for their ends and purposes; and
also know where to find such seeds and plants as they desire, as the great
Clove-grass, Saint Foi^, La. Lucern, etc.

5. Deficiency, is, That men do usually covet great quantities of land, yet
cannot manage a little well. There were amongst the ancient Romans some
appointed to see that men did till their lands as they should do; and if they
did not, to punish them as enemies to the Public; perhaps such a law might
not be amiss with us: for without question the Public suffers much, by
private men's negligences; I therefore wish men to take Columel's Counsel; which
is, Laudato in gentia Rura, Exiguum Colito. For Melior est ^ulta exiguitas,
etc. as another says, or as we say in English, A little Farm well tilled is to
be preferred: for then we should not see so much wast land, but more industry,
greater crops, and more people employed, then are at this present, to the great
profit of the Commonwealth. I know a Gentleman, who yearly letting more and
more of that land he used to keep in his hands, yet confesses his Barns are
fuller, because he more diligently manageth what remains. 6. I will add that
either through the negligence or ignorance of most men, the enemies of the
laborious Husbandmen are not destroyed: viz. Crows, Rooks, which pluck up in
light land presently after the Corn speareth, much Corn, and also devour much
Corn when ripe: these are destroyed either by shooting, or by breaking their
eggs in the Spring, or at least may be scared with a little smoke, or with a
few feathers. Larks also do much hurt, which may be taken in snares, or by
day-nets, Low-belling, etc.

What Corn is in the barn, and also in the field, Mice and Rats oft-times
destroy much, which are easily destroyed either by Weasils, which are far
better then Cats (though somewhat mischievous to eggs and poultry) for two of
them will speedily clear a Ship, though troubled with many hundreds; and
therefore I know diverse Masters of Ships very inquisitive for them, proffering
five shillings for one with many thanks, so that it would be very beneficial
both to Ships, and also to those, who would take the pains to breed them tame,
as many do in Ireland for their pleasure; Rats also may well be destroyed by
Rats-bane, which is white Arsenick, or with Sublimate and Butter. But these
things will hardly be procured from the Apothecaries, because they are somewhat
dangerous: therefore Gardiners do use very much Nux vomica, which may be had
every where, with a little butter, but take heed of the Dogs. Moals likewise do
much hurt both to Corn and Pasture, and are too much neglected, though they may
easily be destroyed, either with a Moal-spade, or by finding their Nests in
March, which usually are in some extraordinary hills, or else by putting a deep
pot (...) the earth where they run a clicketting in the Spring, or by a
Moal-trap which the Gardiners frequently use about London, etc. Also it were
good to destroy the Birds, called Tom-tits, which are great enemies to Bees and
fruit, Sparrows, Finches, Snayl, Warms, etc.

7. I cannot but add to this place the failings in diverse particulars in
respect of some particular places, viz. the planting of Saffron, which is very
well performed in some parts of Essex, Cambridge, etc. yet altogether unknown
in Kent, though there are Lands both white and red, (as they call them) with
plenty of dung very proper for that purpose, and yet this commodity is
excellent; and further I can add as a Deficiency that I have never seen nor
heard of any thing written on this Subject to any purpose.

2. The planting of Hops, (concerning which Scot in Queen Elizabeth's days wrote
an excellent Treatise, to the which little or nothing has been added, though
the best part of an hundred years are since past, and much experienced in this
kind amongst us,) for though many fine Gardens have been planted in the
Southern parts, yet the Northern are deficient, so that oftentimes we are
necessitated to have great quantities from Flaunders.

3. Liquorice is much planted about Pomfract in Yorkshire, and about London,
but little that I hear of elsewhere, so that we are sometimes beholding to
Spain for it.

4. Would is sown in diverse parts of Kent, not much in other places, therefore
we are often beholding to the Western Isles for it.

21. Deficiency, that because of our sins we have not the blessing of God upon
our labors.
5. Wade, which is abundantly sown about Coventry, and yet in Kent thought to be
a foreign Commodity, this is of excellent use, and deserves to be sown every
where. I might here also add Madder, which is very necessary, and scarcely
sown any where; as also Canary-seeds, Carnways, which are abundantly sown about
Sandwich and Deal, in Kent, also Rape, Cole-seeds, etc. whose oil is of great
use, also of Fruit Trees, Gardening, Hemp, Flax: but of these I have largely
discoursed before.

21. Deficiency, is, by reason of our sins we have not the blessing of the Lord
upon our labors.

And this the reason, that although the Husbandman has been laborious and
diligent in his calling these last years; yet our Crops have been thin, his
Cattle swept away, and scarcity and famine has siezed on all parts of this
Land; and if we had not been supplied from abroad, we had quite devoured all
the creatures of this Island for our sustenance, and yet we could not be
satisfied, but must have devoured one another. And therefore to conclude,
though I desire the Husbandman to be diligent and laborious in his calling, yet
I counsel him to break off his sins by Repentance, to have his eye toward him
who is the Giver of every good thing, and to pray daily to him for his
blessings, who gives freely to them that ask, and upbraideth not. And although
all callings ought to look up to him that is on high, yet the Countryman
especially; for he has a more immediate dependence on him then any other: for
if the Lord withold his fat dew from Heaven, or the former or latter Rain, it
is in vain that the Husbandman rise up early, and go to bed late, and eat the
bread of carefulness: for we know, that it is the Lord that makes barren
places fruitful, and he likewise that turns fruitful Lands into barrenness,
(as the Land of Canaan, which was very fru^tful even in the time of the
Canaanites, but now a barren desert) and therefore, I again desire the
Countryman to walk as it becomes a Christian, in all Sobriety, Righteousness
and Godliness: not to trust, or put his confidence in his own labors, and good
Husbandry; but on the Lord that has made all things: for though even Paul
himself does plant, and Apollo does water; yet it is only the Lord that gives
increase and plenty, which he will not deny to those that fear him; for they
shall want nothing that is good.

Lastly, for a Corollary, I will add, (though it does not so much concern the
Husbandman, as those of greater Power and Authority) That it is a great
Deficiency in England, that we do not magazine or store up Corn, when the Lord
sends us plenty, and therefore at cheap rates (as Joseph did in Egypt against
dear years) for then the Grain is purest and the perfectest, without Smut,
Mildew, Shrankness, or other imperfections, and is the best for long
preservation: this is much used in Poland, Dantrigk, Italy, Holland, etc. and
is found of wonderful importance. By this means Holland which sows little or
no Corn, seldom or never feels a famine, though it be incredibly populous:
and for want of this good policy, England which many years abounds with Corn,
is sore bitten therewith, as is manifest in these last years, in which had not
our Neighbors wisely and politickly provided for us, we should have famished
and devoured one another.

Further, This storing of Corn will save vast Sums of money which in dear years
are exported for bread: and also well balance the price of Corn, so that the
honest Husbandman needs not murmr and be discouraged, because that the price
is low, and Markets scant in plentiful years, (because then the Magazins are to
be restored) nor the Artizans be famished by the excessive rate of bread in
dear years, for then the Magazines are to be exhausted. The best way for the
wise carrying on of this business, the Politicians must lay forth, but that
belongs not to our calling. Yet I shall here as I have done in former things,
g^ some general hints, and leave the rest to those who are wiser.

And first, The City of London, (which is the mouth of the Island, and as I am
credibly informed by Meal-men, spends about 5000 Quarters of Wheat weekly,
and I suppose it cannot do less, considering there cannot be less then 600000
people therein, and about, viz. at least an hundred thousand in the 97 Parishes
within the Walls, and four times as many without the Walls as appears by the
Bills of Mortality, and at least an hundred thousand strangers of all sorts
which proportion is less then four l. of bread the week for one) this place
ought (I say) to have a considerable Magazine for three or six months,
something has been done in this kind by our forefathers, as appears by the
particular storehouses of the private Companies, which storehouses ought to
be augmented in number, as the Companies yearly are, and also the Quantity of
Grain, because the City daily grows more populous.

2. I would have the Inhabitants of other great Cities and Corporations, as
York, Bristol, Norwich, etc. to be numbered, and a like proportion of Corn to be
stored up for them, as in London perhaps in diverse places, men considering the
low value of money, may be entreated to lend a considerable Sum for this good
business, if not, I know it is easy to command them.

3. I would have all Market Towns, and all Hundreds likewise, to have their
proportion stored up, and faithfully guarded. Neither let any be terrified, as
if it would be extremely chargeable. For first, Now money is low, trade little,
and also the Corn which in cheap years is often sold for 2 s. 6 d. 3 s. or 3 s. 6
d. will commonly, in less then seven years, be sold for 5, 6, 7 s. per bushel,
which will abundantly satisfy for Loan, Storage, and other charges and losses;
but if that it shall be somewhat chargeable, yet consider the profits that will
redound to the Farmer, that he be not discouraged, and also to the Artificer,
and poor Labourer, that he be not starved; yea, to the whole people, that we
may not be necessitated to devour one another, especially seeing War begin to
threaten on every side. And the Magazines of Corn beyond Seas, viz. France and
Poland are like to be locked up from us: yea, though peace should be ratified
with all Nations, yet even those Nations themselves may want, and if not, yet
vast Sums of Gold and Silver must be exhausted for bread, etc. But the further
Consideration of these things I leave to them at the Helm of the State.

And thus Sir, I have written to you very largely my thoughts concerning the
Husbandry of this Island, and partly what I have seen in many travels. Good
Sir, be not offended at my long and impertinent stories, my rude language, and
unmethodical discourse. It was, if not to satisfy; yet somewhat to gratify
the universal goodness of your spirit, and care of the public, which God has
enriched you withal. And these are only my first thoughts, which in have I have
hudled up together. I hope (if the Lord will send me life and health) my second
thoughts shall be better: But whatsoever I have done, pray look on it, as
coming from one who is desirous to serve you, and to advance the Public Good,
according to the Talent the Lord has given him. Thus I commit you to the
Protection of the Almighty: And rest

SIR, Your faithful Friend, and Servant ROB. CHILD.
Anno, 1651.
Copies and Extrancts of more Letters written to Mr. Samuel Hartlib: They all
tending very much to the great improvement not only of Agriculture, but of true
and real Learning, and Natural Philosophy.
SIR.
The several things observed and set down during my stay in the Country, are
these.

1. I Learned the whole Way and Art of making and ordering of Woad, viz. the
time when they sow it, when first they weed it, and cut it. I saw the manner of
their gathering it, grinding, balling, drying it, and after sweating, and
curing it. Informing my self of the whole charge and profit of it: have made
diverse Annotations on it, and taken order for some seed to be sent to me, for
other more compendious and profitable trials, answerable to the Nature and
Philosophy of it.

2. This and some other things, gave me occasion to make the best inquiry I
could of Housewives and of Fowlers, for all sorts of dying weeds and lierbs,
used in the dying of wool; or of nets, which I have carefully collected to
improve to a more then ordinary use; some being very remarkable.

3. Among other general inquiries and adventures, I heard of one at Ware that
carried Sea-coal; procured an errand and commendations thither; went, was
civilly used, and satisfied in the truth and manner of the thing, and found the
Gentleman who was the first Author of it to be one Airs, now dead, an
ingenious man, a great Malster, made much profit of it: it drying Malt as sweet
as if the Sun it self did it; it is cheaper then either wood or straw; and may
be many other ways applied.

4. I went into the Isle of Ely, to see one of the Holland-mills for dreyning;
though set up there and kept by certain Frenchmen. The Invention seemed to me
but mean and rude, and Mr. Whe^lers way much more ingenious.

5. I saw at Wickleson the manner of your Holland-Sluces. The ruins also of a
Gochlea, for the emptying drayning of water, of which Vbaldus has writ a whole
Treatise. Likewise a pretty kind of Pinnace with Ordnance, somewhat like a
close Liter, but flat bottommed; which rowed with Wheels instead of Oars,
employed it seems formerly with admirable success, for the taking in of
Crowland, and which gave me a proof of what I for many years have thought
possible, and of very great use and service, and still think it of unknown
value, if it were skilfully indeed framed, and applied as it might be.

6. The Lord F. W. assured me of a Gentleman in Norfolk, that made above 10000
l. sterling. of a piece of ground, not forty yards square, and yet there was
neither Mineral nor Metal in it. He after told me, it was only a sort of fine
Clay, for the making a choice sort of earthen ware; which some that knew it see
him dig up, discovered the value of it, and sending it into Holland, received
so much money for it: it is a story not to be despised!

7. His Lordship told me the way of making of Spunk, or Touch-wood.

8. Mr. H. his Lordship's Bailiff. showed me a small plat of ground, scarce an
Acre and half, wherein he assured me, he had in one year 21. hundred of Hops;
and falling out then to be scarce in other places, he made of that small parcel
of ground fourscore pound.

9. At Milton I saw a Spring, that might have been made big enough to serve a
large Town; which my friend Wheeler had newly discovered, and broke up; every
man opposing him in it, and ^eriding his confidence, till he made it appear,
and shamed them. Hereupon he gave me several marks of knowing and finding out
Springs under ground.

10. From Springs we converted our discourse to Pipes, for the carrying along
of Water under ground to any House or ^own; wherein he imparted some Secrets to
me, both of the fittest Wood and Trees for Pipes, and preserving them whole
Ages from corruption, by ways extremely rational, and not hitherto observed, or
found out by any.

11. This drew on some discourse of Woods, their differences and several
applications: in which he told me many singular observations.

12. After this, I saw at Melton an excellent Model of a Garden, Orchard, and
Walks, and being further curious, my friend related a witty invention he once
put in practice, to plant an Orchard in a Moorish place, where never grew a
Tree.

13. I casually met with one Boughton, a most singular rare man, in carving or
cutting out Figures in small or in great Stone; and for that reason Servant in
ordininary to the late King; who acquainted me of many excellent ingenious men,
and promised to seek me at my lodging.

14. Being in Cambridgeshire, I examined more particularly the Husbandry,
planting, ordering, and curing of Saffron.

Some other things came in my way not without notice: but these are the chief.
My own improvements and comments, upon all which, I shall more at large give
you, when we meet together being always,

SIR, Yours affectionately to serve you.

Queries sent into France; about the Seed called La Lucern.
WHen one N.N. was last in France, (being in discourse with Doctor D.
concerning Saint F^in, he was then told by Doctor D. that for the improvement
of barren grounds (there was in those parts of France about Paris) another Seed
that did far excel that of Saint F^in, and that the name of that more excellent
seed was La Lucern. I am desired by a friend of mine to whom N. N. related this
passage of Doctor D.) that by your kindness, he may be spoken to of this La
Lucern, and his directions desired, where the said seed in to be had? for what
price? how much is usually sowed upon an English Acre? what time of the year it
is sown? whether it be sown alone? or any other ordinary Corn? and with what
Corn? and with what kind of land it best agrees? and finally, what other
particulars he can direct more then is here set down.

The Answer to the Queries from Paris.
J Have been with Doctor D. about Lucern, who tells me that it grows best in
wettish grounds, that the best time of sowing it in England, will be in
February, at the same time that Oats are sown, with the which also it may be
sown, but best alone; that to the sowing of an Arpent, (which is much-what the
same with an English-Acre) there will go twelve or fifteen pound of the seed,
the which uses to be sold here at eight or nine Sols the pound.

More Queries concerning Lucern.
J Desire further to know what kind of wet grounds are best for it? whether
Moorish or Clay? whether poor or rich? whether it will continue over a year in
the ground? and if more then a year, then how many years it will continue
without being new sown? whether it be only good for Meadows, or for Pasture?
and if for Pasture, then whether the sheep or Cattle be suffered to go upon it?
or whether it be carried off green as the Clover-grasse is in Flaunders.

Lastly, For what Cattle it is most proper?

Another Answer from Paris.
J Thought to have sent you nine pound of the seed of Lucern for the sowing of
three Acres, Doctor D. having told me, as heretofore I told you, that three
pound would sow an Arpent or Acre; But as I was going about it, I met with a
Gentleman an acquaintance of mine, who some years since (but unknown to me
hitherto) has had some Acres of Meadow of Lucern upon his ground, to whom
having casually spoke of my business, and told him all that Doctor D. had told
me about the Lucern; he answered me, that Doctor D. was most grossly mistaken
in the quantity of the seed required for the sowing of an Acre; and that it
would not take up three pound, but two whole Sacks, each Sack containing the
full load of a strong Porter; after which rate the quantity of seed for the
sowing of three Acres would fill a great dry-fat, the sending whereof by land
would come to excessive great charges, and therefore necessarily to be sent by
Sea in my opinion. You will be pleased to impart these things to your friend,
and to let me know his final resolution upon them, the which shall be
faithfully accomplished by me; and in the mean while, I will get him a perfect
and full assurance upon all his Queries, not from Doctor D. (whom I dare trust
no more in this business, having found him guilty of such gross mistakes
about it) but from that other Gentleman, who told me he could himself resolve
most of these Questions; but that for to be the surer, he thought it best to
confer first with his Farmer about it. You make Apologies for putting me upon
these Inquiries; but I pray you to believe, that at any time I shall most
readily and cheerfully perform any service that shall lie in my power, for you
or any of your friends, for your sake. And I were very unreasonable, to think
troublesome any thing that you require of me, when as continually I put you to
so much trouble my self.

The last Answer concerning Lucern.
THe Information about the Lucern that I have got from my Friend, being a very
particular one, and containing a very full answer to all the Questions
propounded by your Friend; is such as follows: It requires a rich ground,
but somewhat loose and light, so as a stiff Clay, and such other rough grounds,
are no ways fit for it; The ground must not be over-dry nor over-moist, but in
a mean; yet somewhat more inclining to moisture, then to the contrary. It must
be ploughed three times, the first time in October, and the second and third,
toward the Spring. Naturally it does not love Dung, and comes much better in
a ground that is sufficiently rich of it self, then that which has been
enriched by dunging; and where Dung is made use of, it must be very stale, and
well rotten, and long before the sowing time. It cannot endure the cold, and
therefore must not be sown till the cold weather and all the danger of it be
quite past, viz. about the beginning or midst of April. The Quantity of the
seed, is the sixth part of Corn, that the same ground will require: so as only
one Bushel of Lucern is to be sown on that space of ground, which would require
six Bushels of Corn. It must be carefully weeded, especially in the beginning.
And to the end, that it may take the more firm root, some Oats must be mixed
with it, but in a very small proportion. It is to be cut as soon as it
begins to flower, which in the hot Countries ( Provence, Languedock, and
Spain,) it does five or six times, and some years seven or eight times in a
Summer; but in this Climate it uses to be cut twice a year, about the end of
June, and about the end of September. Being cut, it must be turned very often,
that it may dry the sooner, and be carried off the ground the soonest that may
be; and it must be kept in close Barns, being too tender for to be kept in
Reeks, open to the Air as other Hay. It is good for all kind of Cattle, as
Kine, Sheep, Goats, and as well for the young ones (Calves, Lambs, Kids,) as
for the others; but above all it agrees best with Horses. It is much more
feeding then any other Hay; insomuch, as any lean beasts will soon grow fat
with it; and to the Milch-beasts, it procures abundance of milk: but it must
never be given alone, especially to beasts that have not been long used to it:
but must ever be mixed with straw, or with some other Hay; for otherwise it
over-heateth them, and fills them too much with blood; and that so suddenly,
as it greatly indangereth their health, and their life too; which it does
principally to Kine: to whom it is more dangerous, if too plentifully given,
then to any other Cattle. After the last cutting, you may let your Cattle graze
on your Luc^rn-fields, and that all Winter long, until the beginning or middle
of March. Of once sowing you will have your Meadow continue good for ten or
twelve years, and until fifteen, and afterward too, it will still continue to
bear; but the Herb will then notably decay in goodness. Wherefore it is best
then to turn it to some other use. Kine must never eat of this Herb green; but
only dried, and that moderately too, as has been said. But Horses eating
their fill of it green in the Spring, are purged thereby, and grow fat by it in
eight or ten days time: If one desire to have of the Grain, one may let such a
proportion of the Meadow as one will, grow up to seed, after the second
cutting, any year, except the first only: and when the seed is ripe, the tops
of the Herb, with the Cods wherein the seed is enclosed, must be cut in a dewy
morning, and put into sheets, for fear of losing the seed, and must be beat out
with Flails upon the same: when that it is well dried: and afterward the
remaining part of the Herb must be mown close to the ground; after which it
continues to sprout out again after the usual manner. The Hay thereof will
keep good two or three years; and on Acre is sufficient to keep three Horses
all the year long.

A Postscript to the last Answer concerning the Lucern.
SIR,
THe Gentleman, who had given me the Note about the Lucern, has told me since
two particulars more, which he had forgot to put into it: The one, that not
only to other Cattle, but even to the Horses with whom that Hay agrees best of
all other beasts; it is not to be given but in Winter, because that in the
Summer it will too much heat their blood: And the other, that this hay must be
perfectly well dried, before it be carried off the ground; and to that end
turned very often: because that being put up with any the least moisture, it
will quite spoil much more then any other Hay. Now these and all the other
particulars, which I have had from the Gentleman, have been confirmed to me by
many others. And yet within these two or three days, I met with a Physician of
Rochel, who assuring me that the Lucern was very common in his Country, made
me a relation of it agreeing with the former, only in these three points, viz.
That of once sowing it will continue ten or twelve years; That it is cut twice
a year, serving afterward for Pasture all Winter, And that it wonderfully
fatteneth all kind of Cattle, but very much different from it in all the
others, and in some of them point blank contrary to it. For he says, that it
is to be sown in the beginning of March; that it desires a temperate ground,
but rather dry then wet, and no ways fat nor clayish, but stony and gravelly;
that it need not be mixed with any other Hay, but may be given alone, and all
the year long; in Summer as well as Winter, not only to Horses, but to Cows
and other Cattle. He added, that the proportion of the seed, is the charge of a
porter for four Arp^nts or French Acres. Which particulars I thought good to
impart unto you, that your friend comparing them with the others, might make
his best profit of them; and this Rochellois; (or Rosheller) who has lived
three or four years in England, thinks that Lucern will come admirably well in
that Country.

NOTE.
THe meaning of these words -- The quantity of the Seed is the sixth part of
Corn that the same ground would require, -- is this, That whatever quantity of
Wheat or Barley an Acre of ground would require of the seed of Lucern; you must
take but the sixth part of that quantity of the seed of Lucern; so as that
ground which for its sowing requires six bushels of Corn, does require bu^ one
bushel of Lucern-seed.

And A^pent de ^err^ (which how much it is in English measure Co^grave's
Dictionary will perfectly tell you) requires ^en pound of that seed, as
several Grain-sellers (of whom I went to inquire for it) have unanimously told
me: the seed being exceeding small, and to be sown wonderfully thin. As for
Saint Foin or Holy Hay, I have seen it grow here about Paris in several places,
in rich fat grounds, and those both high and dry, and others low and Marshy. It
is cut but once a year, much what about the same time of other Hay, and a great
deal of the seed of it is required for sowing the ground with it. But being
once sown, it lasts ten or twelve years, as well as Medica or Lucern,
wherewith also it correspondeth altogether in its Virtues and Uses.

A Copy of a Letter, relating a Proof or Experiment of an English Husbandry.
Honored Sir,
I Desire your acceptance of this small present, may be according to the real
worth of the thing; not as at first sight it may appear to be (viz.) straw or
stubble. This is I assure you no other then the true and real Experiment of
what by the blessing of God, the native fertility of our English ground,
rightly husbanded will bring forth: Nay I can upon most probable grounds
affirm, that had I used all the Art and Care which I could and might have done
(had I not been otherwise taken off) it could hardly have failed to have been
double, treble, or quadruble to what it is. And it is also most true, that any
good ground well managed, may yield one, ten, an hundred, etc. Acres, in which
there shall be very many superior to the biggest root of these, and hardly one
inferior to the best but one; by which account it will easily appear, how much
beyond the old way, this is the increase, there being between two and five
quarters on; the Acre; and the produce of this way will be rarely under ten
quarters, not rarely sixteen, or twenty, and the same for most Grains; yet will
this dull Age as to goodness not believe it without some testimony, and
perhaps scarce suffer themselves to be convinced by this so eminent an
experiment; wherein it plainly appears, That out of one single Barley- Corn is
sprung about 80 Ears, of which near 60 had some 36, 34, 32, 30. and hardly any
less then 38. which in all is above 2000 for one: And truly the charges to be
bestowed on an Acre of this sort is no ways double to the common way. Accept
it therefore, and reserve it as a real rarity, and a jewel only fit for a
Public and Pious Spirit, as yours is: till I shall by Gods assistance be able
next year to produce you more abundant examples of Gods wonderful power and
bounty that offers, and man's ingratitude that neglects, or refuses such honest
means, of the truest and most justly gotten humane wealth, honor, and
happiness.

Your most faithful and obli-Friend, and Servant. C. D.
September, 26. 1650.
A Conjectural Essay upon the foregoing Secret of Experiment of an English
Husbandry.
My Dear Friend,
BEing the other day among a knot of great Husbands, and telling stories of
such like Experiments and Improvements, I remembered something that seemed very
remarkable concerning a very fortunate attempt in Husbandry, made heretofore by
Sir John Culpepper, who they commended at least for a man very sagacious in
things of this nature. He it seems sowed a round parcel of Wheat, about the
Month of July: and turned in sheep afterward to eat it, until about
All-ha^ontide, keeping it very low till the cold and winter began to come: And
without doing any thing else to it, he gained so goodly and admirable a Crop of
Wheat the next year, that Kent scarce ever saw the like, it growing in those
parts almost to a Proverb. As great a Crop as Sir John Culpepper had.

Sir, This Story gave me an occasion by my self to meditate on your Friends.
Mr. Dymock's great Experiment of his Pease and Barley, and remembering he did
nothing to the seed, nor to the ground, but somewhat after it was come forth of
the ground; I began to consider Analytically what it was possible for man to do
to Plants after they were come out of the ground; And I satisfied my self, that
a man could but either dung them, water them, weed them, remove them, succor
them, keep them low by eating, pruning, or cutting them, or lastly spread their
Roots by rolling them. And though there be some other managements by Glasses
multiplying of light, etc. Yet I imagined they were too subtle and costly to
take place here.

1. For dunging and watering them, they were clearly things done to the Ground
it self, as well as to the Plant.

2. For weeding them, though this often proved a great improvement, and bettering
of Plants, yet I saw not how it could make so great an increase or
multiplication of the Grain, as was in Mr. Dymocks Experiment.

3. For removing them, and taking off the suckers, though this be a very
necessary management in taller Plants, and serves to make them much more vegete
and lusty, yet I saw not how this could take more place in Barley, and such
small grain, then grafting.

These Considerations made me pitch upon the two last, and of the two rather
upon Rolling, or the like Art, for the spreading the Roots of it, then upon the
other, of eating, feeding, or cropping it.

1. First, Because the former Experiment of Sir John Culpeppers seemed to me an
improvement of the Plant, only by the giving it opportunity, the better to
fasten and spread its root. Which the length of time of its being in the
ground, the cold of the season, and trampling and lying down of the sheep,
seemed all to confer unto. All which Rolling I thought might in some measure
perhaps supply.

2. It is an Observation among some bigger Plants, that their Roots are
answerable to their Heads, intimating that a small root could not have a large
and bushy head, no more then a strong and fairly spread root could have a small
and spindly head. And truly this Rule in greater Plants, seems more necessary
in smaller: for how should we think there should be many ears or stalks from
one Grain upon a small and single root; for where could there be a place for
them? And how should we think a Root to be strong, spreading, and succulent,
and yet not endeavor Germination in the several parts and joints of it;
especially in hasty, growing, Annual Plants?

I therefore conclude such a super-fortation of ears must necessarily proceed
from an improvement by the Root, where nothing was done either to prepare the
Ground, or the Seed. And that this spreading of the Root is probable to be best
effected by a Roll, or some such like thing.

3. I might add to this Conjecture, the common Experiment of Camomil, and some
other low creeping Plants, being rolled in dry weather. As also an Experiment
that I once heard of a Gardener, who raised a great Estate by his Husbandry of
Turnips, which was by keeping them low for a certain time, by which they grew
the sooner big and sweeter: The like is used in some Countries to Potatoes. To
all which I might add the plain defect of this Rolling in Husbandry to any
sort of Grain, which also may give the greater occasion of finding a remarkable
benefit and improvement upon the use of it.

However Sir, Being so much satisfied as I was of the thing, I could not but
give you this my Essay upon it, and Conjecture, the rather because in the more
dry or stiff Grounds, as also in seasons indifferent for moisture and dryness.
If this have not been yet tried, Me thinks it were sit to be used.

To your inquiry, after which I shall therefore leave it, and shall be,

SIR. Your very true Friend. B. W.

An Extract of a Letter from Amsterdam, dated the 28. of November, 1650. with
another Experiment of a French Husbandry
SIR,
I Am much obliged unto you for sending me the Discourse of the Braband
Husbandry, which I have perused. Not long ago! was told of certain men which
would fain have morgaged some thousand Acres of Heathy Grounds, which lay here
and there as Commons. But the late Prince of Orange by the advice of his
Council, durst not entertain any such Propositions, the lands belonging to the
Commonalty. On the other hand the undertakers would not be contented with less
for imparting of their Secret. It appears unto me by all circumstances, that it
was the same design of Husbandry with yours, the parties, if I remember well,
being English men. From Paris I am advertised (for certain) of one, who did
last year, 1649. ferment one Grain of Wheat, which this year has produced him
114 Ears, and within them 6000 Grains, which is more then 80 Ears, and 600
Grains of your English friends. This year, 1650. he has a great many fermented
and sown.

An Answer to the foregoing Extract of a Letter from Amsterdam.
SIR,
I Have received from you a Relation of a very great and wonderful production
or increase, which your Friend at Amsterdam relates to be done in France. I am
far from lessening the admirable greatness of that persons skill and success.
Only since I find my self taken notice of by the same party, and the Experiment
I made the last year of Barley, weighed in the scales with this, and found too
light; I shall take leave to say, that (besides all difference that is or may
conceived to be betwixt the soyles; that of France has a manifest advantage in
the Elevation and powerful Operation of the Sun,) That it is probable he did
use all possible means both to the Ground and Seed, to make them both fruitful,
which I did not at all; but quite contrarily I chose the worst seed I could
procure; and my ground was as barren as any whatsoever in the parts adjacent. I
added nothing to either; all I did was after the blade was sprung up. And
whereas your friend mentions 600. out of 80. ears, those ears contained one
with the other at the least thirty single Corns, which 2400. That besides that,
Wheat is no whit inferior to Barley, but rather more inclined to its proper
nature to branch and spread: it is also allowed as long time again to grow, and
therefore may better spread to many ^ars then Barley. That my ears of Barley
rated at thirty, one with the other, (which they were at least, some having 38
a thing I suppose rarely (if ever) seen in England before) are full as high as
his Wheat ears rated at 52. And the seeming great difference between 2400 and
6000. when looked into, will prove not to be in the number of ears, which
differ no more then as fourteen to ten, but in the nature of the Grains, there
being universally as many more in an ear of Wheat as in an ear of Barley. That
if (as it is most like) he in France did only try conclusions, to what height
Nature might possibly be scrued by Art, and that what is here related, was the
effect of that trial; that holds not comparison with mine, which is generally
practicable, without any considerable expense of time or stock more then in the
common-way. Lastly, I affirm, in all possible humble reverence and submission
to Gods good pleasure, power and providence; that when I shall make use of good
Seed rightly prepared, good Land in right condition, and all other helps which
I know and can use; I shall not doubt for smaller numbers of the same Grain,
(viz.) Wheat, to produce 200 or 300 ears, and in them 10000. 12000. or 15000.
Corns, (and somewhat like that, for whole fields together, and that here in
England,) howsoever let us always remember to give all possible praise to God,
whose blessing only makes rich.

SIR, I am your faithful Friend and Servant. C. D.

Another Letter from Paris, discovering the Secret of the forenamed French
Husbandry.
SIR,
I Do with much impatience desire the Treatise or Discourse published by you
about the Braband-Husbandry, and do very much admire the industry of that
English Gentleman your Friend, who has found out the ways of making Corn
multiply so prodigiously. The Parisian Experimenter of Corns multiplication I
know not: but a friend of mine very well acquainted with him, assures me to
have had the following description of his secret from himself; and to have
seen the experience of it very fully in the year 1649. not in any great
quantity, but in a Garden, only for trials sake.

Pour into quick o^ unslack't Lime, as much water as suffices to make it swim
four inches above the water; and unto 10 l. of the said water poured off, mix
one pound of Aqua vitae, and in that liquour steep or soak Wheat (or Corn) 24.
hours which being dried in the Sun, or in the Air, steep again in the said
liquour 24 hours more, and do it likewise the third time; Afterward sow them at
great distances the one from the other, about the distance of a foot between
each grain. So one Grain will produce 30.36.38.42.52. ears, and those very
fruitful, with a tall stalk, equalling the stature of a man in height.

Another Extract of a Letter from the Low Countries.
SIR,
THese are to give you special thanks for communication of the Parisian
Experimentors Secret. Water (if he means cold water) poured into quick and
unslackt Lime, cannot work much in one hour upon the Lime; but if it be boiled
with it, and that the water be poured always a fresh upon the Lime, then it
will come to be strong at last, that an Egg may swim in it, as I learned by
tradition from Doctor Hartmannus, but could never make any trial of it, for
want of unslackt Lime in the place where I live. This perhaps may be yet
better; but experience goes beyond reason in those cases. The often macerating
or steeping, and drying of Grains I like very well. I have only according to
Master Gab. Platts direction steeped them 24. hours ^n turned or tainted
Rainwater, and Cow Dung, and afterward sown them thus wet, which on sandy
grounds has produced such goodly Corn, as if it had been very good Land. Some
here use Saltpeter, which also does much good; but is found likewise in
Sheeps-Dung, as may appear by its fertility. I have lost the Book of Husbandry
of Mr. Plats, which was called, A Discovery of infinite Treasure hidden since
the Worlds beginning. Whereunto all men of what degree soever, are friendly
invited to be sharers with the Discoverer. For having lent the same to a
friend, that it might be translated into High Dutch, I could never see it
again. I am told it is out of Print. But if you could help me to another, you
would do me a pleasure. I have nothing to add for the present, but that the
G^nius of this Age is very much bent to advance Husbandry; and that in all
Countries I hear there are found Gentlemen, that study professedly these
improvements more then in former time. I rest always

SIR, Yours, etc.

Another Letter expressing the reasons why the Experiment of the Barley-Corn,
thinks it not fit or expedient to part with his secret as yet, for a more
common use.
SIR,
J Find daily more and more, that it is too true, that most men love money,
that they even worship it in their hearts, as the only Summum Bon^m. I need not
go far for proof, since they have brought one to my hand. That (having so fair
and just offers made in order to the Corn-business; as I have presented to them
by your hands,) will by no means (though so very much to their own profit and
the Public Good) part with their moneys; and yet stick not to demand (in
effect) the discovery from me of that talent of knowledge, which God has made
mine by his free-gift; as the reward of my industry, and faithful love to my
Native Country; An estate (if I mistake not) better gotten them by any of the
common means; by which men grow rich daily. Surely the commodities cannot be
less then equal. The most wise and virtuous men that ever lived, have
preferred Art, Industry, and Ingenuity far before money. Money (especially the
abuse of it) is become the very poison of the world, against which Art and
Industry is an Antidote or Cordial. Money is counted and enjoyed by a thousand
thousands, Art and Industry but a few. And things of excellent use are
accounted Jewels, especially when rare and scarce. The Professors of Art and
Industry, besides their private aim also at a Public Good: these prefer their
private gain (too often) before the being and well being of the whole world;
nay of their own souls. These are ever ready to part with invaluable treasures
upon easy conditions: Those will not upon any conditions whatsoever (but such
as please themselves, or are full of oppression) part with their moneys, (no
not to save a Brothers, or hardly a Fathers, or a Child's life.) And finally if
they judge it improvidence to part with a little of their estates only of a
time, to return again to them shortly, like Noah's Dove with an Olive branch, a
double branch of Peace and Prosperity: I desired to be excused, if I upon
better grounds hold it profane, to sell a better right then a birthright for
less then a Mess of pottage; even for just nothing, and for ever. I can never
forget the exceeding great ingenuity to the world, showed and given by Mr. Gab.
Platts, as will more fully appear, when you shall have printed those writings
of his which he left to your trust and custody, and the World's base
ingratitute that let such a man fall down dead in the street for want of food,
without a shirt to his back; none (but your self that want not an enlarged
heart, but a fuller hand to supply the words defects) being found with some few
others, to administer any relief to a man of so great merit. In a word, that
God that has forbid to muzzle Ox that treads out the fodder, has appointed
every man to use his blessings next to his glory for the providing for and
preservation of his family, which he that can do, and does not, is worse then
an Infidel. I dare not give away this means of obtaining outward blessings to
my self and family, till I have found? way to make it instrumental to that end;
and that end once effectually attained to, I dare not deny Gods mercy and
bounty to me, nor longer restrain the public use of his universal good: I
remain

SIR, Yours, C. D.

A Secret practiced with very good success in England, concerning sowing of
Wheat, to prevent it from being Smutty.
FIrst take your Wheat, pour the same into a tub of water, and stir it about,
take off all the Corn that swimmeth upon the water, and pour the rest upon a
floor, letting the water run off. Then make a strong brine of Bay Salt, and
pour some of the brine on the Corn upon the floor; and take to half a quarter
of Corn, half a peck of Salt, and strew it on the Corn, and stir and mix it
continually; as you pour thereon the brine, and strew the salt thereon, until
the Corn be all wet and overstrowed with Salt.

Then take to a half quarter of Corn, half a bushel of unslack'd lime, and
strew that likewise over the Corn, mingling it well together; which done you
may sow the same the next day. The brine must be cold when you pour it on the
Corn, and you must prepare no more Wheat then you intend to sow next day.

Another Secret practiced in Germany for the enriching of Meadows.
A Meadow yields six times more Hay, when it is turned up with a plough, and
sown thick with ashes burnt out of the substance thereof, but the rain must
fall first. Afterward sow your Meadow with the seed of Tresoil, and plough and
harrow them in. The first grass which grows thereon, let it be very ripe,
that the seed may fall off it self; then let some go over it, and with rakes
stir it, that it fall out. Afterward let it be mown off, and carried to a
certain place where it may be dried, so the Grass will grow presently again,
and may be mown again in three weeks.

How to make Rushy Ground to bear Grass.
BReak the Rushy Ground, and rake roots and the rushes together, and burn them
or carry them away, then spread upon that ground, Turffe-Ashes, or
Pigeons-Dung, Chalk or Lime, according to your ground. Try of every one of
these upon a little plot of your ground: you may use other Ashes, Marle, or
Dung, for experiments: and that which you find does kill the Rushes and other
Weeds best, use it: you are to make Gutters or Drains to carry away the water
from the ground: you may destroy Rushes or Fern, if you will; but cut or mow
them down in the beginning of June, and so use to do it two or three years
together at that time.

For planting or sowing Walnuts.
IN the season when they are full ripe on the trees, a few days before they
would fall, as near as can be guessed, let them be gathered or beaten off; and
in the green husk, or without it, put them into good ordinary earth in a barrel
or basket: So let them continue until the beginning of March following: as soon
as that month begins, get as much warm Milk from the Cows as will steep them 24
hours: after they are steeped, set them in ground well dug, and judged
natural for such fruit, with their little end, or their prickled sharp end
upwards, about three or four inches deep in the earth, and not one of 28. will
fail, as has appeared by experience. This may make dry Walnuts also prove
trees, the Nuts used as abovesaid, as far as may be, set them near one foot
asunder, and in a right line to weed them. The Walnut breeds good Timber, good
shadow, good smell, good fruit. At four years growth transplant them.

Mr Lanyon's Description of the usual manner of planting and transplanting
(according to that of Flaunders) of those Trees called Abeales, imparted for
Public Good.
THey are first planted from any, even the least part of the Root of the same
Tree: you must devide the root, by slipping each part from the other, and not
by cutting it in sunder: you may take those parts from those trees whilst they
grow, and without danger to them, rob them of all the small sprigs of the root,
and leave only the Master-Roots; but the most usual way is to multiply them,
when they are transplanted; which time is at their growth of five years: their
season is in March. They are first planted in the way of a Nursery, in loose
earth, moist and sandy, or inclining to it: their distance is ten inches one
from another (the earth being first prepared as for a Gard^n:) you are to make
holes with a stick, the depth of the length of the part you have to set,
setting him so that you may only see a part of it above ground, the earth
being closed about them; they are to be kept weeded as any other plants. The
second year in February you are to prune off all from the Master or
Middle-shoot, and so to the third and fourth year: the fifth you may transplant
them, so as they like the ground of their Nursery. Their usual distance one
from another is ten foot: you may drive a stake with them when you transplant
them, to secure them stift against the wind; for that they will grow very tall
in those years, and so be much exposed to the winds. They may without much
prejudice (to Corn) be planted in the furrows where it grows; so as the ground
be moist, and you keep them well pruned, and leave only a bush at the top of
the tree. No stiff Clay grounds will admit them to thrive, they will grow in
moist Clay ground, but only in height, and will not burnish for want of room
to extend their roo^s. This tree if he likes his ground; will be at full growth
in twenty years. He is valued in Flaunders after seven years growth, worth
every year 12 d. until his time be up. He grows very straight without boughs,
only a bush on the top, and so exceedingly well becomes a Walk. This Timber is
also uncomparable for all sorts of wooden vessels, especially Traies;
Butchers-traies cannot well be made without it, it being so exceeding light and
tough. Some years ago there were ten thousand at once sent over into England,
and transplanted into many Counties. Mr. Walker at Saint James can give the
best account of them to all such as desire further to be instructed in this
particular.

Another Direction for the planting (understand the second Planting) of the
Abele-Trees.
LEt your Plants be one year old, ere you remove them to the plat where they
must stand in the earth, till they be transplantable.

Cut away their roots in such a manner, that the cuts may fall flat against the
earth: but spare the little roots, and the small sprigs or beards that hang
about the root.

Cut off the upper part so short, that they be but little more then half a foot
long. Upon which remainder, you shall ordinarily have five or six buds;
sometimes more, sometimes fewer; but what ever their number be, it is best to
leave your plants all of one length.

The Land in which you mean to plant them, must first be well labored, and
then opened so deep, that the Plants may stick up but three inches above the
earth, if it be dry; but if your land be moist, you must not set your plants so
deep.

Plant them apiece, so that every Tree may stand one foot and three
quarters (that is, 21 inches) from every one of his four next neighbors, Thus,

In the first year, take away or cut off no shoots from them, but those that
grow out half a foot from above the earth.

The time of planting is when the violence of frosts is ceased.

New Observations concerning Abel-Trees.
The least Spawners from the root will grow. Any twigs cut from the body will
grow. They will grow (in two, or at most in three years) above the reach of the
tallest man.

A Set planted by Master Walker, Gardener of Saint James, not above twelve, or
at most thirteen years since, is now as big as his middle.

Item,
Two Rows of Setters, three inches about planted (the rows) twenty four foot
asunder in 47. did by the end of the year 50 meet with their boughs cross the
walk.

Item,
An Abele-Tree at Sion, lopped in February 51. by the end of October, 52 put
forth branches as big as a man's wrist, seven, ten foot long.

Dr. Arnold Boati's, Annotations upon the Legacy of HUSBANDRY.
Paris the first of July, 1651.
I Give you most hearty thanks for your Work of Husbandry, the which having
perused instantly, a capite ad calcem. I find it a most excellent piece both
for the improvement of Husbandry, and of the other Commodities of the Country,
as likewise for the Natural History of England, and have learned many
particulars by it, which before were unknown to me. But I remember to have
heard of a Dutch Merchant in Dublin, that the Dutch used to fetch their
Black-lead out of Wales; whereas you say it is found in Cumberland, and no
where else in Christendom. I pray you to let me understand, whether you have
any particular knowledge of that Mine, of the nature and properties of that
Material, whether it serves for any other uses, then to make pens of, and to
neale earthen vessels withal, and how for this use Potters do prepare and
apply it*

Paris, the 12 of July, 1651.
J was hugely taken with the large Epistle in your Legacy upon the first
reading of it, and am more now upon the second, which makes me sorry, that the
Author should give any advantage to carping wits; as he does here and there in
some of the Parerga; upon which I shall freely give you my sense, that being
communicated to him, he may mend them in the next Edition, if so he see it
fitting: What he says out of Helmont. page 13. The smuttinesse of Corn, and
the soul disease to have begun in France, together about 1530. and the latter
to have had some original from the former. To say nothing of the small credit
of that Author, even in things subject to his own knowledge and experience, I
being able to convince him of most palpable lies out of his own writings, a
more credible Author then he should not be alleged, much less heeded; if
opposite to so notorious a truth; as that of the foul disease, it is original in
France, as well as in Italy and Spain; full 36 years sooner then Helmont says,
viz. in the year 1494. and nothing could be advanced more absurd or ridiculous
in the judgment of all sound Physicians, then to attribute the original of that
disease in any wise to smutty Corn, as he does. The imperfection of smutty
corn, consists altogether in a similar distemper, and that of the more
spirituous part, consequently not at all subject to the eyes and so not to be
found out by Microscope, to the contrary of what our Author supposes, page.
15. The corn sown in July, produced such an increase, page 18. I cannot
imagine, how Corn sown in Summer can come to good, or what humane wit or skill
can hinder it from running up; and spending it self, before the coming in of
Winter. His Philosophy of the blackness of the Moor-loghs, as communicated by
the blackness of the earth or turff, page 25. is no ways receivable. I find
him too credulous, page 27. to Glaub^r, and others, about those Mountebank
boastings of brewing without malt, and of drawing great store of Aqua-vitae out
of the imaginary Beer; and other unfit materials. The opinion of the Suns
descending lower, page 30. although justly, as I hold it rejected by
Moestlinus, Longomontanus, Keplerus, Morinus, Bullialdus, quibus omnibus praeit
Ptolomaeus, ought not to be spoke of so contemptuously, seeing that one of the
greatest Astronomers that ever was (viz.) Copernicus did first advance it, and
Reinholdus, another most famous Artist approve of it, and he having made the
lowest descent of the Sun but of 35 minutes, which is but a little more then
half a degree; I know no^ what makes our Author speak of the Suns descending
many degrees lower. It is true, that those 35 minutes amount to many thousands
of miles, which expression therefore would be both more pertinent, and more
suitable to the vulgar capacity of most Readers, then that of minutes or
degrees; This is what I have observed till page 30. further then which I am not
yet come: And forasmuch as I have never an English Dictionary here, I would be
glad of the Exposition of some English words not so well understood by me, as
howing (so often spoke of) and the How; Wheats-lodging, page 18. Cankerberries,
page 27. and the difference betwixt Haws and Hips; page eadem, I having ever
taken them to signify the same thing. I do not know neither, what are the
piles on Marshes sides, page 25. and am ignorant of the History of
Glassenburies Hauthorne, mentioned page 4. about which I would willingly
receive some light.

Paris, the 19 of August.
AN English Gentleman, who many years has lived, and been a Housekeeper in
Devonshire, as he was yesterdy reading your Legacy at my house, having lighted
on that passage, page. 26. about the making of Cider, told me, that the second
way there mentioned is not a making of Cider, but a certain preparation of it
already made, usual also in wines and other liquors, especially those that are
to be transferred a great way by Sea; and as for the first, that he never saw
it practiced in Devonshire, where Cider is very common; and where himself
usually made forty Hogsheads every year; but that the way of making Cider in
that Country used by all men is this; Having reduced their Apples into Mash,
by turning upon them a kind of a Millstone set edge-wayes in a wooden trough,
they presently carry them to a wooden press of that bigness: as in one hour
they will press out two Hogsheads of Juice: the which having let stand a day
or two, and having taken off the black scum that arises in that time, they tun
it, and in the Barrels it continues to work some days longer, just as Beer
uses to do. He told me diverse other particulars about Cider, partly of his
own, and partly of that Countries common observations, the which I forbear to
relate, because I believe that Markham has spoke of them.

Paris the 16 of September 1651.
Seeing by your last, you desire the continuation of my Annotations upon your
Legacy, I must tell you that I believe your friend has not been well informed,
page 23. about the Countries there named by him; for the sending of Walnuts,
Quinces, and Chestnuts into England, and that it will be found upon better
enquiry, that these commodities do come into England, if not solely, yet
abundantly: the first from Holland, the second from Zealand, and the third from
France; and as for small nuts, except he speak of some exquisite kind of them,
I know not why one should run so far as Spain for them, seeing that Ireland
abounds in them above all Countries in the world, page 27. I know an
ingenious man, who can without malting, etc. If you and your friend will be
ruled by me, you shall not take this upon Glaubers bare word, nor any of those
other magnificent promises; which he makes in that boasting Catalogue* till he
have made them good by the effect, lest the similitude of the Prophet Esaias
29.8. be verified in us, page 28. Grafting, Inoculating, etc. a Gentleman will
learn in two h^urs, to learn it to some purpose will require more then so many
days, if not weeks, expertus loquor: page 30. We find Vines flourishing many
hundred mil^s more toward the North [than Alsace] both in France, Loram, and
Germany: If for many hundreds, he had said one hundred miles, he might perhaps
have made that good, and yet not that neither in all the three Countries here
named, I am sure not near it in Lorain, and very hardly in France: page 31.
Vines grow sixty miles on this side Paris at Beaumont; Beaumont is but eight
leagues, or sixteen English miles North from Paris and Beauvais, (which and
Beaumont is the most Northern part of France, where any Vines grow) is but
twice as far, being distant sixteen leagues from Paris. Ibid. These places
which are even as far North as England, nothing near none of them; page 36.
linea 3. pack in so many plants, etc. I have seen most of the Vineyards about
Paris for many miles round, and never saw any such thing, very few having any
thing in them but Vines, and where any thing else was, I saw only a few
Peach-trees here and there, too far asunder to do any great harm to the Vines
or Ground; 37. To short poles, as we do hops, out of one Hop-pole you may make
three Vine-poles. As for length; wherefore they should not be so yoked
together: ibid. In France, so soon as they have pressed out their liquor with
their feet [pressing with feet is not used in all parts of France, and utterly
unknown in these Northern parts of it,] they put it into Hogsheads not at all
till it have wrought first in Keeves: 39. from these who would destroy, etc. I
could wish that bitter and exasperating expression in the behalf of my
Contrymen might be spared. If I would make Observations upon those passages,
which have something of good and excellent in them, as well as upon them, where
I conceive something is to be mended, I should never have done, the Book being
full of them from one end to another; yet I cannot let pass with silence those
words, page 44. The Sun and Dew engender a nitrons fatness, they pointing at
the unfolding of one of the greatest Mysteries in Nature, unknown to most of
them if not to all; who professedly do deal in the inquiries of that noble
Science; but to speak of this to the full were not the work of a Scholion, but
of a whole Treatise, concerning the Improvement of Land by Sea sand; of which
page 45. you will find a confirmation of that in Irelands Natural History, and
it is very much used in Devonshire, with admirable success, not only equal
to, but even beyond Lime it self, as I have been told by that Gentleman, whose
Observations concerning Cider I gave you formerly; page 46. All fertility
proceeds from salt, addendum. Made unctuous or oily, and spirituous, id est
uno verbo nitrous, nam sale mero nihil magis inimicum faecuudirati; 47. In
Holland they are carefully preserve the Cows urine, as their Dung to enrich
their land, they preserve it no otherwise then is done in all other Countries;
viz. mixed with the Dung, and jointly with it carried out to the Dunghill,
ibid. we must have it, [paper] from Italy, France, and Holland; I believe Italy
sends out little paper, either to England, or to any other Country, and as
for Holland; it has none to send, but what it self gets from abroad, there
being none at all made there, (viz.) In Holland properly so called, nor in any
of the other Provinces that I know of, but only some in the Velaw, a part of
Gelderlant, and in England there is good store made, both toward Oxford, and
in some other places, though not enough for to serve the Nation.

Paris, the 2^. of October, 1651.
HAving continued to read on in your Legacy from page 48. where I left with my
last Annotations, I find nothing that needs any Animadversions, but these few
following things, page 60. a kind of Salix called by them Abel-tree, the Tree
called an Abel in Dutch is no way a kind of Salix, but is I'opulus alba;
Ibidem, If we believe their own Authors, etc. I know not who those Authors
are, but I am sure that who ever has said so, has said most untrue; for the
profit that arises to France by Silk, cannot in the least part come in
competition with that of Corn and Wine. Ibid. In France, which differs not
much from the temper of England; Silk is a stranger to those parts of France
that agree with Englands temper; 69. I could wish those words, linea 3 and 4.
we know nourishes them, to be left out, as devoid of all truth, if applied to
the ^nsect in question: page 70. linea 2. Let him read Boneil, add Andream
Libavium, qui peculiari Tractatu inserto parti secundae Singularium: fuse ac
diligenter admodum omnia ad Bombyces spectantia pertractavit: militerque
Olivier de Serres libro 50 Theatri Agriculturae. Among the things which page
70. he thinks might be transplanted profitably into England, I could wish the
omission of the three first, (viz.) Sassafras, Sarsaparilla, and Snake-weed,
the which I greatly doubt would hardly be made to grow there at all with any
industry, but sure I am, never to any purpose: and the same I believe about
their Cedars and Pines. Medica veterum is without all peradventure the Plant
now known under the name of Lucerna; wherefore it ought not to be ranked as it
is, page 80. amongst the Plants now unknown; Quid esset lupinus veterum, nemo
unquam Herbariorum quod sciam dubitavit quare omittenda ejus mentio inter
herbas controversas, page 80. Page 81. What seed, grout, or grutz, is made of
the same seed, and in the same manner, as that which in English is called
Groats, (viz.) of Oats and of Barley; of those three sorts of Cheeses which he
reckons up, page 81. only the second and third are made of Cows milk, and
therefore his expression is too general, and what he says there, which are far
better then our ordinary Cheeses, is true indeed; but as true it is, that they
are far better then their ordinary Cheeses: and as true likewise, that the best
of those Cheeses are no better, nor so good by far as some English Cheeses.
Verbi gratia Chedder-Cheeses. He is much mistaken, if he believes that all
those things reckoned up. page 82. will grow in England, at least to any
purpose, especially Rice, Cork, Scarlet-Oak, and that Sentence of Virgil; Vt
quid quaque ferat regio, quid quaeque recuset. Justly termed an Oracle by
Pliny, does not depend wholly (as our Author seems to take for granted) on
the Climate, and the latitude of Regions, for were it so, Dictamnus, Laser,
Cinamonum, Balsamum, Myrrha, Camphora, Stirax, Mastick, Beujovin, Caryophylli,
Nux-Muschata; and an infinite number of other Plants would not be, and from all
time have been confined to such Territories as they are; all the Industry of
man, and the power and wealth of greatest Princes never having been able to
make them grow; at least not to make them fructify out of their native Soils:
wonder also to find Linder-trees named in the Catalogue of Plants, which he
would have denizon'd in England, seeing tha^ great store of them and very good
by ones have been growing in several parts of the Land, many years since even
in and about London, as at Exeter-house, Wimbleton-house, etc. and there
besides Sherewood-Forrest in Nottinghamshire, abounds in them naturally.

Paris, the 18. of November, 1651.
I Come now to your Legacy, whereon these words, page 84. It casts up Jet and
Amber, I must tell you that as it is most certain, that of Jet, good store is
found on some part of the shore of Yorkshire, so I dare say that upon inquiry
it will appear, that never any Amber or Succinum was cast up there by the Sea;
that being a commodity so peculiar to Spruce or Prussia, as the Sea was never
known to render it in any other Country of the world whatsoever, page 85. At
Dover they make brick of Sea-owse, a thing very incredible to me. In
Cumberland, out of a certain kind of sand they extract salt; It were worth the
while to tell in a few words at least, how they proceed in the doing thereof;
Not only notice should be taken by the Husbandman, or Countrey-Gentleman of
the different color, odor and taste of waters, as our Author wishes them to
do, ^adem, page 85. but also and much more (as a thing of a much greater and
more particular concernment to them) of the wonderful and vast difference of
waters (in which none of those three qualities is notably to be discerned) for
the several uses of ordinary housekeeping of Husbandry, and of several
Manufactures, page 86. If we may believe Glauber, there is scarce any sand
without gold; I am very sure that whosoever believes him herein, as in many
other things, will find himself very foully deceived; Ibidem, save what is taken
out of their Ditches. For the word Ditches no ways proper here, should be
substituted Bogs, Fens, or Moors; It is indifferent good fuel, yea, many sorts
of them are most excellent fuel. An Englishman speaking of turffe, should not
name Holland only, but Scotland and Ireland, in which two Countries turff^ is
of very great and general use, page 87. There is a stone in Durham, out of
which they make salt. I would we were told the manner hereof; Ibidem, Lead is
found in Durham-wall: I would fain know what Durham-wall is, whether a Town or
Country, and in what part of England, and why Derb^shi^e, where those famous
Lead Mines are, is not at all named here, page 94. Opium is always an
ingredient, this is too generally spoken, page 95. I am not well satisfied with
what he says of transplanting Elephants into England, and making them of
common use there, for many reasons; and I believe it would prove as hard a task
to people in England, with any considerable store of Black Foxes, Musk-Cats,
and some other of those Animals named, page 96. in these words.

Paris, the second of December, 1651.
THe conceit I find in your Legacy, page 99. Of the medicinal virtues of the
plants being sublimed into the Insects bred out of them, is altogether
destitute of truth, as very easily and practically may be demonstrated, page
101. That in Ireland rottenness of sheep is not known; It is too well known
there, and even in my time, I have seen great mortalities of sheep caused
thereby. Page 103. In Holland they keep their Cattle housed winter and summer:
I never knew any Cattle housed in Summer in my Country, but all about Paris
that is very ordinary: Ibidem, they bury the grains in the ground; they keep
them indeed in the ground; but in that manner as cannot well be called burying;
for they dig holes a man's length deep and square, cemented not only in the
bottom, but on all the four sides, with a wooden shut at the top, and there
they keep their Grains, not lying loosly; but rammed as close as may be;
Rapefeed-Cakes, Ibidem, he should have added Linseed-Cakes: Ibidem, Turnips; I
never knew them given to Cows in Holland, but at R^ven, it is an usual thing to
feed Cows therewith, and they do thrive wonderfully therewith, as I am told by
an English Lady of my acquaintance, an excellent Housewife, who has lived a
great while in that City, eadem pagina, 103. which are constantly mowed twice
or thrice yearly. I never in Holland saw or heard of any Meadows mowen more
then once a year: The Paradox held forth. Initio pagine, 104. of the
cleanliness of Hogs, and their not loving Dirt: I believe not at all to be
consonant to truth; especially in the second particular. Ibidem, (the Jews have
a peculiar way) after those words, I could wish to be inserted; (which also
anciently was most common among the Romans) For the liver of the Goose
augmented to an excessive bigness by a peculiar kind of cramming, was one of
the greatest dainties of the Romans, as may be seen in Pliny, lib. 10. cap. 22.
and the Authors there alleged by the Scholiast.

Paris, the 16 of December, 1651.
JNstead of going on for to make an end of my Annotations upon your Legacy, to
the end whereof I am well near come; I shall at this time step back for to tell
you that one of Purcha^ his Pilgrims having given us most amply and distinctly
the whole manner of making the Caveare, as may be seen in his second T^me, page
1420. your friend will do well to leave that out of the Catalogue of those
things, which page 81. he desires to be informed of, by the travels of any
Merchant of Gentleman: as likewise give you at large a Relation made to me
within these few days by a brave English Lady, and an excellent House-wife,
greatly confirming and illustrating the practice of feeding Cows with Turnips;
of which page 103. she tells me, that at Roven (where she has lived a good
while) and in all the Country round about it, they seed their Cattle usually
in this manner. Of Turnips (not of the best, but refuse ones, such as being
worm-eaten, or otherwise faulty, are not good for man's meat) they boil a great
many in a great Kettle, whole as they are, with their leaves on their tops;
till they be tender, adding thereto good store of bran; (of Wheat only, because
that, that of Rye, is scowring, and so not proper for them) and afterward of
the Cakes of Rape-seed, or Linseed; which cakes having a singular faculty of
fatting Cattle, they put much less of them into the Mesh for Mich-Cowes, (for
fear of spoiling their Milk) then for other kind: of this they give them twice
a day, so as it makes the greatest part of their feeding, much more then the
hay, which they give them betwixt whiles: and thus they feed them only in
Wintertime, because that all the Summer long they keep them abroad at Grass:
Whether this be used in Holland, as your friend says, I cannot tell of my own
knowledge; having never there seen it, nor heard of it: but in France it is of
very old standing, as appears by these words of Columella, lib. 2. cap. 10.
Rapa non homines solum, verum etiam boves pascunt, praecipue in Gallia, ubi
Hyberna cibaria praedictis pecudibus, id olus praebet. De-serres does also
speak of it, but very shortly, and only mentioning it in a word or two. lib.
4. cap. 9.

Paris, the 6. of January, 1652.
IN the 104th. page of your Legacy, where I left with my last Annotations, I
find these words: In Barkshire many keep tam^ Pheasants, and have gained well
thereby: The which having communicated to a brave English Lady here, a great
friend of mine, who has been a great Housekeeper in England, and is a most
excellent House-wife; she tells me that at a Countrey-house of hers, not far
from Chelsey, she had always great store of them; insomuch as she has hatched
to the number of 200 in one Spring: whereof though many died, yet far and far
the greatest part would come to perfection. That of people of quality, she
never knew any but here self who kept any; but that there is abundance in the
parts near London, who keep them for to make profit of them, and sell them to
the Poulterers, that there is nothing more easy to bring up, and to keep, then
Pheasants; when they are once past the first Month: for till then, they must be
kept only with Aunts eggs, and feed on nothing else; of which one would think
it a hard matter to get so many, but there are fellows in England, who for a
little money will get one as many as one can desire: the first month being
past, they are kept afterward with Oats only, requiring nothing else: but as
they love to be kept in Grassie fields: so one must change them somewhat ost to
fresh grounds, because they taint the grass and the ground in the same manner,
as Geese do, and for to keep them in, my Lady used to have some parcels of
ground, where they were kept enclosed with lats.

Paris the 13. of January 1652.
YOu shall have now the Conclusion of my Annotations upon your Legacy according
to your desire.

In the bottom of page 104. your friend speaks, as if the excellency of
Butter and Cheese depended only on the handling of it, and that Cheese like to
Parmesan and Holland Cheese, might be made in England, if the same industry
were used there, as in those Countries which is nothing so: For though Art and
Industry can do very much in this particular, as in most others, whereof I have
seen most remarkable examples both in England and Ireland, yet there is
something in the particular nature of different waters and different Soils, and
of the food for Cattle thereon growing: and consequently in that Cattels milk,
and in the Butter and Cheese made thereof, which no Art nor humane skill can
supply or imitate, no more then the same kind of Beer can be brewed in all
places, or the same kind of Wine be made to grow on all grounds. And this is
most manifest hereby, that in Holland it self there are made several sorts of
Cheeses hugely different among themselves; which difference is most remarkable
in those two excellent sorts, ( viz) the Edam-Cheese (being that kind which is
so much transported into foreign Countries, and every where known by the
general Name of Holland-Cheese) and the Stolk-cheese. And if it should be
thought, that that diversity proceeds from the different makings of cheese,
used in the several parts of that country; I can assure you, that if you make
Edam and Stolk Boors exchange their habi^atlons, and keep all their own
fashions, each of them shall make Cheeses, not such as they were wont to make
at home, but as used to be made in the places to which they are come. The like
may be said of the green cheeses, made in Holland Sheeps milk, especially those
of Gravesand, Tessel, and Grind; all three most excellent ones; and yet
extremely differing among themselves. And not to go for examples of this,
further then England it self; It were against all reason and experience to
think that, that notable difference betwixt Suffolk and Cheshire-Cheeses,
comes only from the different way of making it. Another thing which I find
fault withal in the same Discourse, is, that the Author names the French
Angolots among the excellent sorts of Cheese; whereas they are nothing so,
neither in their qualities, nor in their price, they being sold for two Sols a
piece, whereas they use to weigh half a pound. I do likewise mislike, that he
for to instance in the best kinds of Cheese; he fetches Parmesans and
Holland-Cheeses from abroad, without taking notice; that at home in several
parts of the Land, and particularly in Mountgomeryshire, Cheese is made equal
to the best of these kinds; and at Chedder in Wiltshire, that which in my
judgment is far to he preferred before them, and to any other Cheese in the
world. Page 105. I cannot brook that he complains England has but a Systema,
or a complete Book of all the parts of Agriculture; and reckons Markham among
them, who have writ only diverse small Treatises of it: whereas Markham has
comprehended in his works whatever belongs to any part of Husbandry, and
Housewifery too; with very few and small omissions; such as in no wise can rob
him of the name of a general writers; his works also having that excellency,
that they are altogether squared for England, and go on experience, rather then
on probabilities, and hear-says; to the contrary of what our Author seemed to
tax in him, as well as in other writers of that kind; which makes me suspect,
that either he has not at all been conversant in Mankham's writings; or that
in reading of him he has been strangely forejudged, he being in my opinion,
one of the most excellent of his kind; and in many particulars to be preferred
before the most excellent of them all. It is true what is said page 106. There
were among the Ancient Romans some appointed to see that men did tell their
Land as they should; but that which follows: And if they did not, to punish
them as Enemies to the Public; is too hyperbolically spoken, there being a
vast difference betwixt punishing one as an enemy to the Public, and a simple
fining of him, which was all the punishment inflicted for that fault, as you
may see in the twelfth Chapter of Aulus Gellius his fourth Book. In these
words, page 107. He that turns fruitful lands into barrenness, as the Land
of Canaan, very fruitful heretofore, but now a barren Desert. Our Author says
nothing, but what is common in the mouth and pens almost of every body, and yet
the truth thereof is very questionable, as an observant Reader will easily find
by the exactest and latest writers of that Country, among whom Eng. Royer is
to be placed in the very first rank. By the way of addition to what heretofore
I have told you upon that passage of your Legacy, which speaks of tame
Pheasants, be pleased to take notice what I was told this week by an English
Gentleman, viz. that many years since he has known tame Pheasants kept in
several parts of Buckinghamshire, especially in a Village a little beyond
Wickham, where the people keep abundance; for to sell them off to the
Poulterers of London. And at the same time an English Merchant told me, that
above 25 years ago, he knew some kept at Middleberg in Zealand, and that Mr.
William Courtine, the Brother of Sir William Courtine, had above a dozen pair
of them. The same person also assured me from his own experience, that the
Inhabitants of the Island. Chios keep huge numbers of tame Partridges, the
which flying abroad most part of the day, do not fail to return every night
each one to his own home, and likewise as often as they are called by their
Keepers, if they be any where within hearing of them. And he assured me, that
they do this not only in the places they are used to, but any where, insomuch
that if any man carry his Partridges twenty or thirty miles from his dwelling,
and then letting them out of the basket, in which he has brought them, throw
stones among them, expressly for to scatter them, so as all of them do run or
fly several ways, they will all come to him, as soon as he calls them, and
let themselves be taken up by him, the one after the other. And thus I make an
end, having nothing to say to any thing contained in the following pages of
your Legacy; the re-printing whereof with those alterations and amendments I
have hinted to you, I do most earnestly wish for, it being indeed a most
excellent piece; and from the beginning to the end fraught with most excellent
observations and experiments.

An Answer to the Animadversor on the Letter to Mr. Samuel Hartlib of Husbandry.
TO begin with the first, which is about Blacklead, and so to take them in
order.

First, I affirm, and truly that Blacklead is found in Cumberland, and not in
any other place of England, yea not in Europe that I can hear of, though I have
diligently enquired concerning it. To prove this, you may read Master Cambden
in his description of Cumberland, where he is much troubled to find what name
the Ancients gave it, vtr. Pignitica, and diverse other names hardly understood.

And 2. I know that out of England it is exported to Holland, Germany, France,
Spain, and other parts of Europe, and and sold at a considerable rate per tun.

And 3. Little mention is there of this among the late writers, as Agricola,
Kent-man, Boot de Boot, or Cysalpinus, unless it be what he calls Creta nigra,
but because the Animadversor desires further knowledge of this material, I
shall briefly relate what I know of it.

This Mine of Blacklead in Cumberland (as I am well informed) is in the hand of
some few men, as Master Bolton and Master Bret, who live in Cornhil nigh the
Exchange, and sell Colors, who once in seven years dig as much as they think
convenient to serve, not to glut the Market, and then close the Mine up again:
I suppose the Dutch Merchant, and consequently the Animadversor were mistaken,
either through the similitude it has to some kind of Slate, which colors the
hands blackish, as the black Irish Slate, used much for bruises, and of which
kinds I have observed, also diverse sorts in New England, as in Prudence-Isle,
and elsewhere, but the blackness of the Slate has not that glittering as the
black-lead, or else from the Ambiguity of the word Black-lead, which is not
only taken for this material, (which whether it be to be referred to Terra,
Creta, Lapides, etc. I will not here dispute) but also for that sort of Lead,
over which the Dutch call glack or glittering (as the Black-lead) much used by
the Potters for nealing (as the Animadversor call it) or rather for leading
their pots, which is abundantly found in some parts of Wales, and is fusible in
the Potters fire, which the other black-lead is not, neither does it naturally
contain any fusible Metal or Mineral, as I have proved: I think it likewise
not amiss to certify that in New England this Material is found in diverse
places; as at Nashaway about forty miles from Boston, as also on Pequat River
about eighty miles from Boston: this last was given from the Court of Boston to
a friend of yours and mine, viz. Mr. John Winthrop, this Gentleman sent diverse
pieces thereof to me, that I might enquire of some Dutch Merchants what price
it bare in Holland, and how much might be vendible, which accordingly I did,
and also showed it to the two Gentlemen above named, who were very inquisitive
where I had it, and how much might be procured thereof, and desired that I
would leave one of the greater pieces with them, that they might try it which I
did; and the next morning enquiring again what they said to my black lead; they
told me it was nothing worth, because it would not endure the Saw, they hoping,
as I after found to have had enough for to have furnished Europe with black
Combs, which are very rare and dear, a small one usually sold at twenty or
thirty shillings: My friend Mr. W. hoped that this material had been Plumbago
Cisalpini, which he also calls Matter Argenti. But I suppose in this
particular he was mistaken* yet upon Examination we found pure silver amongst
it, which by calculation might amount to 15 l. per tun, though the black lead
sent me, was found only on the surface of the earth: I am the longer on this
discourse, because this material has been little considered as yet by learned
men that I can find, and also because my friend would be glad to have some
ingenious men to join with him in a Work, which has very great probabilities
of very great profit to the undertakers.

The common uses of black-lead, are first to make black-lead pens for
Mathematicians, etc. 2. For Painters and Limners. 3. For those that work in
Copper to make their hammer go glib. And lastly, if any great pieces be found,
which is rare in Cumberland Mine, to make Combs of them, because they
discolor gray hairs, and make black hair of a Ravenlike, or glittering
blackness, much desired in Italy, Spain, etc. But I cannot believe that the
Potters use it for nealing their pots (as the Animadversor says) because it is
altogether infusible.

To the second Letter of the Animadversor.
FIrst, I see the Animadversor is offended, though I hope without just cause,
that I quote Glauber and Helmont, as men of learning and credit. I know that
learned Writers scorn to quote Neotericks, but I hope without offense I may,
because I only meddle with the plough, a rude and poor instrument, and
Agriculture is commonly thought to require little learning or judgment, and
being unlearned my self will not follow the Customs of those whom the World
count profound and judicious.

2. The Authors above mentioned are in good repute with diverse whom I suppose
learned.

3. They have labored and experimented much, as all men know, to find out the
truth, and to advance the Commonwealth of learning: Some imperfections I impute
to humane frailties, old age, etc. And I should be glad to see a solid answer
to Helmont, who has thrown down both Aristotle's Philosophy, and Galen^
Physic; and as yet I have not seen any man who has in any measure vindicated
their old Masters. Further, I should rejoice to see an experimental Philosopher
confute Glaubers Experiments by experience; till this be done, I cannot but
account them ingenious men, and well deserving of the Commonwealth of Learning;
and I cannot but account it robbery, or at least great ingratitude, to take any
thing out of a learned Author, and not to acknowledge it, but to the
particular Exceptions.

The Army disease (says Helmont) came into France, as also smutting of Corn,
1530. And the first seems to have proceeded from the latter; also at this
time the Pox raged, which might also have some augmentation from this
corruption of Corn. Although it never was my intention to defend other men's
paradoxes, yet I cannot but so far defend him, as to show that what is here
spoken, has considerable probabilities for truth.

And first, That the Smuttiness of Corn, and the Army disease came both
together in France; I am much mistaken, if the French History do not report the
same, and the Animadversor seems to grant it. As for the Pox it broke forth
violently at Naples, 1594. in the French Army, as Helmont and Historians
affirm; and was even then in some measure dispersed in Franse, but after this
smuttiness of Corn, it might exceedingly more abound. As the Plague in London
oftentimes lurks in diverse corners many years, but breaks not forth violently
usually, but after scarcity; by the which the humors of the body are more
corrupted by ill diet: But be it this or no, I will not further dispute; but
will affirm thus much, that it is not an absurd and foolish conjecture, to say
that the Army my disease might proceed from smuttiness of Corn, they both
invading France at the same time; but the most probable I have yet seen,
especially if that other part be added, viz. The body corrupted with the pox;
for I have often seen in Italy an ordinary ^eaver in such bodies to be at length
not much unlike the forementioned disease, (and this is that Helmont
especially drives at in his Book de peste, where he mentions only the Pox by
the by:) and who knows not that the corruptions of the aliments sometimes
produce even the plague, and I think that the corruption of the best aliments,
as bread, and which are in most use with us, causes the worst Epidemical
diseases; to the which Hippocrates seems to allude, where he says, Corruption
panis pessima; and it is also too well known, that we who have within these few
score of years, altered very much our diet and customs, as by bringing in of
hops into our drink.

2. Using abundance of Sack, which in Queen Elizabeth's days was sold in the
Apothecaries shops.

3. By using of Sugar, Currants, and other sweet things abundantly.

4. By taking Tobacco in smoke.

5. By using Sea-coals abundantly in London, and through the Country.

6. By using frequently Dyet-drinks, Purgations, Vomits, Blood-letting, Issues,
which were scarcely known to our forefathers.

7. I may add the living altogether on flesh, which in the times of Popery, we
did not: I say have caused not only great alterations in our wills and
dispositions, but also in respect of health and sickness. Some sickness not
being known now, which formerly did much annoy, as the sweating sickness in
Hen. 7. and before, as also the leprosy which Mr. Cambden thinks came from
Egypt, where it abounds very much, Christians getting something for their holy
voyaging; but Physicians say it came from eating of fish; for where most fish
was eaten, there it most abounded; and eating of fish being left; that noisome
disease (God be thanked) is even totally unknown, and all Hospitals for them
dissolved: and on the contrary, many diseases assaulting us, some totally
unknown, as the Rickets; others not so much known, as the Stone, Gout,
Consumptions, Ptysick, Fluores Muliebres: and here I will briefly according to
my Countrey-Philosophy tell you how these new diseases are caused: and first
from the Hop, Sack, Spices, I suppose the Gravel, Stone, Gout; from Sugar and
Currants, and sweet things, which spoil the stomach, and make the body tender,
soft, custard-like, easily melted into fluxes, proceed Fluores Muliebres,
abortion, and a foundation for the Rickets, and other indisposition in
children, ex part matris. From Tobacco (which is a kind of poison contrary to
our natures, as it appears by the first taking, causing Vomits, Faintings, cold
sweats, though use afterward mitigates these Symptonies, as the Turks by use
take abundance of Opium, as much I may say, in one day, as will kill twenty
English men: likewise it takes away the appetite, not by real satiating, but
by its Narcotickness deluding nature) since follows the abating of the
strength, and vigor of the body, the dulling and minishing of the Spirit, and
consequently the dullness and paucity of spirits in children, which as the
learned Physicians hold, is the special cause of the Rickets, ex part viri:
Sea-coal causes consumption, Ptysicks, and the indisposition of the lungs, not
only by the suffocating by abundance of smoke, but also by virulency: for all
subterrany fuel has a kind of virulent or arsenical smoke, which as it
speedily destroys those that dig in Mines, so does it by little and little
those who use them here above: therefore these diseases most afflict about
London, where the iron Casements, and all iron things are soon consumed by the
smoke thereof, and less in pure clear air, where this fire is not used. The
great and frequent use of purgations (which are smaller poisons, for they
extract the good humors as well as the bad, as most Physicians confess) and
Bloodletting do cause that infirm, weak, and feminine disposition in many
natures. And to these causes abovementioned, add Idleness, Gluttony,
Drunkenness, not much known till Queen Elizabeth: for then the first Statute
was made against Drunkenness, the Pest of Whoring, and the consequences
thereof, as general causes of all indisposition abovesaid, and of hundreds
more, and to conclude of shortness of life.

In Friar Bacon's time, which was above 400 years ago, Countrymen lived strong
and lusty, even to seven score, eight score, as he reports in his Book De Pet.
Artis, and Naturae: Now how rare is an old man of an hundred years, not because
the World decays, as Master Hakewell learnedly shows, but we by reason of our
folly, live not our half our days. But I desire pardon for this long
digression, it being only to show that the alteration of diet causes many
diseases, and the corruption thereof many Epidemical indispositions, and that
to say Smuttinesse of Corn produced the Army Disease, is not so absurd as the
Animadversor would have it. As for the Pox, which Helmont does but lightly
touch, I will not long discourse, whether it proceeded from eating man's flesh
at Naples, (as Lord Bacon and others seem to affirm) or from the Indyes, which
is most likely; but how it first came amongst them, is very difficult to know,
its most probable from their base corrupt diet, eating man's flesh, not using
salt, or any thing of high taste, as I have observed amongst the India^s of New
England, where i^ abounds, or perhaps from Bestialitys: But I may before I am
aware engage my self in that hard Question concerning Contagion, which I
acknowledge is too hard for me, as also the cause of the extreme multiplication
of poisons. He that can tell me how Ferments operate, or how water contracts a
mustiness, of wounderful extension, and like fire infinitely multiplyable; Erit
mihi Magnus Apollo.

Animadversor. Smutty Corn is a similar distemper, and therefore not visible by
the Microscope, etc.
IF by Similar Distemper, the Animadversor mean, as I suppose he does, total
corruption, then he is mistaken in the English word. For the total corruption
of Wheat into Smuttinesse, which being broken, flies into black dust, we call
smutty bags, and these have lost their specifique and vegetative virtue, so
that they will not grow, as I have tried diverse times: but what we may call
smutty wheat, is only a partial corruption, and may partly be seen by the eye,
the wheat being dark and black, especially about the eye; its also spungy,
soft, hollow, light: I say that perhaps the imperfection of this grain, whether
it be external, as some erosion Canker, or some more inward indisposition may
by the Microscope be perceived, for by it (as I have seen) strange
inequalities, roughness, and as it were veins dissemmated throw the body of
the seeds are plainly discerned, which the eye cannot: and further by
experience I know, that the vegetative virtue of the seed lies in that part
which we call the eyes. For I have cut diverse grains in the midst, and sown
them, and that half which had the eye with it unhurt, grew as well as if it
had been a whole Corn, the other part not; so that I had above two thousand
increase for one half of a grain, and very excellent Corn, in some ears an
hundred grains, in many ninety: This causes me to question that which I have
often heard amongst Country men that Pease eaten by Magots will grow, but
produce Magots: for if the eye be whole, the difference will be found nothing
betwixt these and others.

Animadversor. Corn sown in Summer, viz. July, will not come to good.
NOt only my friends experience, but also mine own does manifest the contrary:
and I question not, but his own experience, if he please to try, will show the
contrary. For Corn sown in July will not run to an ear till the next year,
though it be warm Land, and if it should begin to spindle, (as the Husbandmen
call it) it is very easy by mowing or feeding it down with Cattle to prevent
it: and here I think it not amiss to relate what Alex. Guagnini reports of
Poland in this kind. They begin to sow Rye the fifth of August, (which I
suppose is twenty days before ours) and end about the latter end of the same
month, or else they have no crop to speak of, also there is a new way used in
Lands newly burnt thus: With two parts of Barley they sow one part of Rye; the
Barley is reaped the same year, the Rye or Wheat grows little till the Barley
is off, then it will grow thick like grass all the winter, and next year it is
reaped: it grows so thick that an horse ^an scarce get through it, out of one
grain come thirty or forty ears a man on horseback can scarce look over it, and
the Farmer reapeth an hundred for one: by this you may see that what I say is
not only true, but also much practiced, and that with incredible profit, and
to me the reasons are manifest: for the advantages of early sowing are these.

First, The lesser quantity of Seed is necessary.

Secondly, The Corn is well grown, and strong before the Winter, and therefore
more able to endure the nipping frosts, which often kills Corn newly come up.

Thirdly, It gets advantage in the Spring of weeds, grass, wild oats, etc.
which choke much Corn, the ground being stocked with Corn so that there is no
room for them to grow. I know one who having his ground overrun with weeds and
wild-oats, by sowing Rye early, had very good and clear corn. But some will
object, that the strength of the Corn and Ground is exhausted thereby.

To these I answer, First, They do not consider the even infinite power of
living creatures, who will infinitely increase, if nourishment fail not, as
fire will, if wood be laid to it, and that without wearisomnesse, by virtue (as
I suppose) of the divine Benediction in them.

2. They are ignorant of the Causes of fertility; for I suppose that straw or
blade exhausteth ground no more then the boughs and leaves of Trees do, which
we see is little or nothing in wood continually lopt: but to know the true
cause of fertility, I account difficult, yet shall briefly declare some
thoughts of mine concerning it in another place.

Animadversor. His Philosophy concerning Moor-logs no ways receivable.
JN Moorish places two sorts of wood are found, One very black like Ebony, and
it is a kind of Oak: Another sort less black or dusky, and is a kind of Pine
or Fir. In the North of England I have seen it sold publicly, being slit in
small pieces to light Tobacco: it is not unlike the wood which in New England is
called Candle-wood or Pitch-pine. Concerning the blackness of these woods I
say, that it proceeds from the turfy earth, wherein these Trees lie; which
earths, and all other earths (as I suppose) and subterrany things in their
proper places has an innate power to transmute other extraneous things into
their own nature: many examples of this hind we see in nature: to instance
only in putrefying spirits or juces which transmute not only wood, but also
shells, bones, metals, into their strong nature without destroying the external
form: so ( I say) this earth endeavors to alter or change these Trees into
it is turfy nature; and I suppose it has already changed, as I suppose, the
smaller boughs into it is nature, and introduced some indispositions into the
greater wood: for this earth has a peculiar and more manifest faculty of
multiplying, then other earths have: for when it is exhausted it grows again,
as I have heard of diverse worthy of credit, if so be the water be kept on it
all winter, and permitted to run forth in the Spring, which good Husbandry I
have seen practiced in diverse places; and further every one observes, that it
presently stops the Channels and Ditches which are cut through this kind of
earth: and therefore from the Vapors, Fumes, or Effluvia, call them what you
will; for I think all multiplicative Acts to proceed from such spiritual
things, and not from bodies; and of this earth, does this alteration or
blackness of the wood proceed, as in putrification is seen, and not as in
putrefaction: for the wood is strong, firm, and often used for boards and
building: as to explain my self, Smoke will discolor any thing that is long
hung up in it, but in this there is a vital, active, multiplicative Energy,
which works not by putrefaction, which in smoke is wanting: that the Pine is
not so soon changed as the Oak, it is because it is of a more resinous or oil
nature, Pitch, Rosin, and Turpentine, being made out of such Trees, and
therefore it is not so easily penetrated: This is in brief my Philosophy
concerning Moonlog, if I am in an error, I will thank him that shall show me
the truth.

Animadversor. Too credulous to Glauber, who will make Beer without malting,
etc. Aqua-vitae, etc. out of Haws, Cankerberries, etc.
TO which I answer, That Beer may be made of Wheat, Barley, Pease, etc.
unmalted, I question not; for it is ordinay to add Wheat ground, or Beans with
Malt to make the Beer stronger, and with good success. Also Cromer in his
Description of Poland says, that they often make Beer of Wheat ground, etc. yea
I know that Potatoes makes excellent drink in Barbados; also in New England
the stalks of Virginian wheat, as it is usually called. Squashes or Gourds,
Pumpions boiled make considerable drink; Parsnips make that which is accounted
rare; therefore much more the Grains above mentioned: But the great question
is, Whether Wheat, Barley, etc. malted or unmalted will make most and best
Beer, or Aqua-vitae. Glauber affirms he knows how to make more of Corn unmalted
then malted, which though I will not positively maintain; yet I suppose that I
can make it appear, that it is not only possible, but probable it is so by
diverse Arguments, besides Glaubers testimony: for,

First, An ingenious Chemist of my acquaintance, altogether unacquainted with
Glauber and his writings, has affirmed to me, that he has often experimented
it, and has proffered wagers even to Brewers concerning this. De La. Nature de
Plants. 593.
Also De La Brosse Physician to the King of France, and Keeper of the Royal
Garden at Paris, affirms, that out of twenty of Wheat fermented his way, he
can draw forth no less then three pints, and a Chopin of excellent Aqua-vitae,
which is above three English pottles; more by far then any will undertake to
draw out of the like quantity of Wheat maulted: and further it is without
question, that some of the virtue of the Barley is drawn away by steeping in
water, for often the water at the bottom is very red: and also by the sprouting,
for that usually is dried up, and goes away into dust, only used for the
enriching of Corn Lands, and further the difference between the weight of
Barley and Malt is very considerable, Malt being lighter then Barley, as I
have tried by a fourth part, or thereabout, which is certainly a diminution of
the flower or strength, for the husk is the same in both. Further, what good
this fermenting or maulting does further then to soften the Grain, and make it
spungy, so that the liquor may more easily penetrate, and liquefie the flower
or nutritive part thereof into a sweet juice, which juice after by fermentation
or working does more separate it self from the grosser parts, and so at length
pleasant drinks, and Aqua-vitae is made thereof, which things I suppose may as
well, if not better be accomplished by other ways of fermentation, and all the
virtue of the Grain preserved: But enough of this Paradox.

2. I suppose that all who have the least skill in distillations now, that if
any liquour will ferment, it will produce an Aqua-vitae, yea and that Spirits
or Aqua-vites may be drawn in some measure even out of Roses, Violets, Cold
Plants; why then is it so observed to say that Aqua-vitae may be drawn from
Hawks and Hips, etc. For though they are fruits of unpleasant tastes, yet we
know that even the roughest and harshest Pears will make Perry not inferior to
the best, and in Normandy such a kind of Pear is in greatest use: and further
(though I will not affirm, that the Aqua-vitae of any thing may be made as good
as that of Wine, etc. as a late French Writer does) yet I say that ingenuity
will advance much in this kind, and cannot but once again exhort men to try
what may be had out of such common and trivial things as Haws, Hips,
Black-berries, etc.

Animadversor. Fond opinion of Astrologers.
FIrst, I name none in particular. 2. The worst word I use is fond, which is
not always taken in the worst sense, and then at worst it is but a diminution
of folly, and may only be applied to that particular wherein they err, but
because it offends, I desire that hereafter it may be expunged, as also [
degrees] to be changed into a thousand miles.

How, is an instrument well known about London, and in all Plantations, with
which they cut off weeds. I suppose it comes from the French word Hoyan, which
instrument is used about their Vines.

Wheat is said to lodge when through rankness it falls, and lies on the
ground. Hips are not Haws, but rather what grows or Eglantine, Rosa Canina,
Piles are pieces of Timber driven into the ground to break the violence of the
Seas and Rivers.

Glassenbury thorn is called of Parkinson, Spina acuta bistora Britanica,
because it usually blassometh at Christmas, (as also Walnut-tree in New-Forrest
in Wiltshire) and after in May, as other thorns. Simple people call it Joseph
of Arimathea's staff, and repute it among the wonders of England, but it is
found growing elsewhere.

To the third Letter of Animadversions concerning Cider.
I say in my former discourse, and truly, that there are two ways of making
Cider.

First, After the juice of the fruit is expressed, presently to put it into
Barrels, and there to let it work as Beer usually does, and that there is not
any necessity to put it first into Caves or great Tubs to work in, and thus I
have often seen it made in Kent, and very good.

The second way, which I especially commend, is to boil the juice sometime
over the fire gently either by it self alone, or with some good spices, and
then to make it work with some barm or yest, as Beer does, and afterward to
barrel it, and bottle it up; and this truly I conceive to be the best way for
many reasons; and I suppose the West-Countrey Gentleman, whom the Animadversor
quoteth, consents to this way; for he acknowledges that by boiling it may be
kept longer, and that is fitter for long Sea-voyages, and consequently better;
for boiling purifieth, disgesteth, and takes away windiness, and crudities,
as we daily see in boiling of Beer, and Ale especially if it be with spices:
Now this boiling ought to be before the working or fermenting; for then the
watery part flies away first, and there is not any considerable decay of the
Spirits: but if Cider be boiled after it has wrought (as we call it) then the
Spirit. Aqua-vitae, or life of the liquour first flies away, as it is well
known even to all Aquavitae Distillers and nothing remains but a dead, flat,
unpleasant liquour, nauseous to the stomach, and also narcotick and very
in-ebriating, as I have found by experience: for on a time distilling a strong
red wine, called Tont, that I might have a fine spirit for a peculiar use; I
received what remained in glass bottles well stopped for some other occasions.
But a servant-maid of my brothers, supposing it had been that good wine she saw
me bring into my Chamber, was so bold as to drink two or three spoonfuls, which
caused her to be extremely sottishly drunk: her Mistress seeing her in that
case, examined her what she ailed, she truly told her, that she had only
tasted a little (and truly it was but a little) of that wine I had in my
Chamber; her Mistress presently came to me with open mouth, fearing her maid
had been poisoned; but when I had told them the whole truth, the fear was
turned into laughter and amazement; and then I remembered what formerly I had
read in De la Brosse, his History natural, concerning the in-ebriating virtue
of the slegm of wime, which Doctor French likewise has published in English in
his Book of Chemistry.

To the fourth Letter of the Animadversor.
FIrst, I answer, that I am not mistaken; for I certainly know, that we have
Quinces from Flaunders, Chestnuts from Portugal, Walnuts from France in
considerable quantities. I deny not but that they may also come from other
parts; but if Walnuts come from Holland, as the Animadversor says, I am sure
that they grow not there, etc. Further I affirm, and truly, that small nuts
are often brought of Spain in abundance, and it is well known to all, which nut
is very small, but it has a very thin shel, and a fine taste a filbert: I
grant also that some years Ireland in the woody parts thereof has plenty of
small nuts, but these nuts have thicker shells, and have not that sweet taste
that the Spanish have, yet in Vlster, where woods do abound, I never knew them
cheaper then in Kent. Neither can Ireland supply the World, nay, not England
with these nuts; for the greater part thereof is extremely destitute of woods.

Concerning brewing without multing Corn, I have already spoken, and I hope
shown probabilities, that it is not only feasible, but also to be done with
profit.

Animadversor. Grafting, Inoculating, etc. cannot be learned in two hours.
I answer, That the Rules for grafting and inoculating are so easy, the
instruments so few and common, that I suppose a less time may suffice; and I
know diverse who can both graft, and inoculate excellently, and yet have
obtained this Art, only by beholding a Gardener grafting and inoculating, and
that but a little while: but I confess that to be excellent in this Art, as in
all other handy-crafts, there is required a convenient time, continual use, and
a promp and ready hand, which every man has not.

Animadversor. Vines flourish not many hundred miles North of Alsatia, in
France, Lorayn, Germany.
Answer, That it is so in Germany, (when Vines flourish not only in Silesia
and the Palatinate, but also in Brandenb^^g, and also in Prussia, as Cromer
reports) will plainly appear, as also in France, where Vines grow very far
North in Picardy, and Champeigne: so likewise in Lorayn, and in those places
betwixt France and Germany, (not to speak of the excellent wine in Arbois in
the free County) Vines flourish even in Liegh, also about Lovayn, which are
very far North many hundred miles from Alsatia.

Animadversor. Vines grow not sixty miles North of Paris.
Answer, That by the way of Beaumont and Beauvois, I I have seen them flourish
nigh twenty leagues from Paris, and that they may flourish more North, diverse
think, and blame either the negligence or ignorance of the Inhabitants.
Moreover by the way of Pontois, through Normandy, Vines do flourish even so far
North as Arles, 35 leagues from Paris, and within five leagues of Diepe; and I
think if the Soil of Normandy were warm land, they might flourish further
North, but Normandy is a stiff, chalky land, very improper. Rhemes also is
above twenty leagues, N. E. of Paris has abundance of vines and is accounted
the staple of wines in those parts: Therefore it will plainly appear vines to
flourish sixty miles North of Paris, and consequently little from the latitude
of some parts of England, viz the South-West part of England; and therefore I
cannot but again desire ingenious Gentlemen to endeavor the planting of vines
with us, especially those four sorts I have formerly mentioned, (according to
that way that Captain Tuck an ingenious Gentleman of great Chart in Kent does)
and that Vines will prosper, is not only probable for the reasons aforesaid,
but also because the vines flourish also naturally in Canada a very cold place,
and also Mr. page 71.
Cambden reports that many hundred years since, that vines did very much
flourish in Brit^ain, and of latter years at Ely in Cambridgshire, at Ley in
Ess^x, as it appears in Dooms Book were six. Arpens of Vines, and it yielded
twenty Modes of wine; also he accuses us of negligence and sloth, that there
are not Vineyards in England at present; Also William of Malmsbury, who lived
before William the Conqueror, speaks of the Wine of England, Ca^. 35^7
and says it is little inferior to the French, not having such an unpleasant
tartness, but not long after William, and his Sons reign, Gascony fell to the
English, and so remained three hundred years, which might be the true cause of
the ruin of vineyard^. Yet at this day I know diverse Gentlemen in Kent, who
make some Hogsheads of good wine most years, and every year plant more. I hope
this business will be prosecuted more generally through this Land, seeing it
will conduce very much to the profit, pleasure, and honor of this fortunate
Isle.

Animadversor. Pack in so many Plants about Paris, etc.
I mean not of different Species, but of the Plants of vines, as many well
appear by the following words; viz. That they may have greater increase, etc.
And I question not, but that the Animadversor has observed the same fault; for
the vineyards about Paris have usually twice the number of vine-plants on their
ground as are necessary; and farther it is certain, that if the Vines were
thinner, the Wine would be better, because the Vines do shade one another.

Animadversor. To short Poles as we do Hops, etc.
It is well known that we tie not Hops to short poles, but to long ones; and
therefore I compare the Vine and Hop together in this respect only, that both
want poles to uphold them; but because that the sense is not clear to all, in
the next Impression a word or two should be added: viz. Hops to long ones.

Animadversor. Pressing with the feet not frown in the Northern parts of
France, etc.
I lived in Charanton two leagus from Paris, a whole Vintage, purposely to see
how wine was made in France, and never saw any other way used there; only the
husks at the conclusion use to be brought to the great Press, out of which
they express some small quantity of wine, and therewith usually fill their
Hogsheads, which usually waste in the working: and further in Italy, I never
saw any other way used. Moreover, to tread out wine with the feet, is, as I
suppose, an old custom, and no disparagement to the wine; for we know that
most of the Bakers bread in England is kneaded with the feet, and yet none are
offended at it: Neither did I ever see it work in Caves or great Vessels
(unless for 24 hours) as is ordinarily in Lombardy, in Italy, by eight, ten,
or twelve days, but presently in France they put it into Hogsheads, and there
let it work, keeping them always full, that the scum of froath may go forth.
Neither do I see any considerable inconvenience by doing thus, only a greater
quantity of gross lees will be at the bottom of the wine; but if wine shall
any time work in great tubs with the husks of the Grapes, it will lose its
color, grow Garbo, or rough, flattish, etc.

Animadversor. That would destroy.] A bitter word against my Contrymen, etc.
I particularize no Nation, and we have the aforesaid Commodities from diverse
Countries. viz. Poland, France, Germany, Holland, Flanders. I am sorry that the
Animadversor did so unhappily apply it to his own Country, and that against my
will I am a true Prophet. But whatsoever is bitter I disallow, and wish it
expunged; for I protest against it, and really did wonder to see it in my
discourse, hating tartness in writings. I hope my pen shall slip so no more,
yet I should be glad if the State would seriously consider what extreme
inconveniences may fall on this Nation through want of Hemp and Flax, and how
easy it is to have sufficient for our selves; as I have showed in my former
discourse.

Animadversor. Nothing more hurtful to fruitfulness, then common salt, etc.
Niter the only fructifying salt, etc.
Though I consent with the Animadversor, that to speak plainly, so as the
Countryman may understand me; I say that Niter is the specal cause of
fruitfulness, yet I cannot deny Salt to be the greatest enemy to it. For first
about Nantwich, where much salt is made by boiling salt water, the refuse salt
does very much improve their Meadows; and Palissy a French Author does likewise
affirm, that salt does cause diverse places about Rochel to be very fruitful;
also Sea-sand, as I suppose, has its fruitfulness from the salt in it:
Likewise the salt of ashes, etc. seems to me to have as much, if not more
affinity to common salt as to Niter, as appears by its Cubick form; yet they do
much fertilize both Corn and Pasture: Further, the Lord Bacon, whose authority
is of good credit with us, attributes fertility to salt. As also Markham, whom
the Animadversor approves of as an experienced Husbandman, who prescribes
common salt always to be mixed with his Grain for the obtaining of incredible
Crops. Indeed, I grant, that if too great a quantity be used through the
corrosivenesse thereof, it causes barrenness; but the like we may say of Lime,
Soot, Ashes, etc. yea of Niter it self; for I know by experience, that under
great Pigeon-houses, Walnut-trees, as Vines, Peaches, etc. will not prosper;
and I know no other cause then this, That too great a quantity of Pigeons dung
does fall down from the Roof of the house, and so the Trees are destroyed.

Animadversor. They in Holland preserve their Dung and Urine, no otherwise then
elsewhere, etc.
They are far more careful then we are in England: so that the Sun may not
exhaust the virtue, nor the rain wash away the strength thereof, which I note
as a good kind of Husbandry, both to be commended and imitated.

Animadversor. Italy sends forth little paper, as also Holland, etc.
The finest paper we have in England, comes from Genoa and Venice, yet not so
much from the latter place as formerly, since the plague there 1630. Much of
this paper is gilded with Gold on the edges. Holland ships not only furnish us
with a thick strong white paper, which is commonly called Dutch paper, but also
abundantly with a strong brown paper much desired by the Grocers. (Although at
present, less is imported because we have many Paper-mils lately erected) but
whither this be made in Holland, Friezland, in Germany, or elsewhere, I dispute
not.

The fifth Letter of the Animadversor.
The Abel Tree is a Popular, not a Salix.
I Thank the Animadversor for reforming my error; for I was informed that it
was a kind of Sallow, but it seems it is a kind of Popular or Aspe; and so at
length by enquiry I have found it named by Parkinson in his Herbal.

Animadversor. The profit of Silk is not so great as of Corn and Wine to France.
I do not positively affirm it, but only report it upon the credit of a late
French Writer, whose name I at present remember not, and I am also far from my
Library, that I cannot turn to him: It indeed seems to me likewise very
probable, for I know that Corn and Wine are heavy, bulky commodities, of low
rate, Wine sometimes being not much more worth then the Barrel, and Corn scarce
a Merchandable commodity in any place, yea France it self sometimes wants it:
so that a little Silk will balance these two, and France as it is well known
has not only sufficient for it self, but many Plushes, Velvets, and other
Manufactures of Silk, were in a considerable quantity exported for England till
the late prohibition; and why may not Silk do that in France, it does in Italy.
Yea that which all will grant Flax does for Linen, Canvases, etc. and are of
greater value.

Animadversor. Silk is a stranger to the parts that are nigh Englands Temper.
King James, and his learned Council in their Letter to the Deputy Lieutenants
affirm the contrary, and bring this as an Argument to encourage the people to
set upon this work.

Secondly, Much Silk is made at Tours, (yea I am informed that that populous
Town does even totally subsist by it) which place is not very much different
from Englands temper, being not much above two degrees from the South of
England: and I say again, if Silkworms are come even out of Persia, China, and
those very hot Countries, as far as the heart of France, which is very
temperate* and yet these Worms thrive very well there; why may they not come a
little farther, and why do we not strive to advance them here as well as
France? yea we find by experience, that some few Gentlewomen have bred diverse
up for their pleasure, even as far North as Duckenfield in Cheshire, where some
quantity of Silk has been made, yet this place is nigh as far North of some
places of England. As they of Tours. Moreover, a Lady (Virginia F.) as I have
lately seen in print, has hatched worms in England, and then turned them forth
to the Mulberry-trees, exposed to the cold and moisture of the Air, and yet
they have done well, yea better then those within doors. These and other
reasons do so far convince me, that I cannot but again and again desire
ingenious men to proceed in this rich and pleasant work.

Animadversor. Moisture is no way nourishing to these Worms,
First, I say in general, that heat and moisture are the two great Causes of
Insects; where these abound, Insects abound, where one of these are wanting
there are but few engendered, And why should we exempt these from the common
generation of Insects? and consequently if ingendered by these, nourished by
these according to the old Axiom, Ex iis nutrimur, ex quibus constamus.

And 2. We know that the damp, moist Woods of Virginia do breed Silkworms of
an incredible bigness, surpassing the Spanish and Italian. And likewise that a
Lady in England (as I have it from a friend whom I dare believe) turning the
Silkworms not long after they were hatched into the Mulberry-trees, by
experience found, that they prospered better then those that were kept dry
within door: Sir Ja. Craig.
yea in Ireland in the County of Cavan in Vlster [the moistest of all places] a
Gentleman kept diverse Silkworms, which prospered very well, and therefore I
cannot think moisture, as moisture, any considerable enemy to them; for of it
self it has little activity, and if these worms shall not thrive in any place,
I will rather attribute it to cold which is known to be an active quality, and
the great destroyer of all Insects; for we see in England that moist Summers do
increase Flies, Gnats, Butter-flies, etc. and it is the cold winds and frosts
that destroy them; yet I will grant that moisture accidentally hurts, viz. as
it introduces too much frigidity, or if it be too much in their meat, it may
cause fluxes, rottings, etc. as it does to Conies, Guiny-pigs, etc. As for
Bonveil who has writ of Silkworms, I have both read him, and commend him;
Libavius also I have, and even all his many Volums: but in my opinion he has
written Multa, sed non Multum.

Animadversor. Sassafras, Sarsaparilla, and Snake-weed, I am sure will not grow
to purpose.
First, why not? I am sure that Sassafras grows in the Northern Plantations
of New England, even as far North as Sacho* where the Snow usually lies five
months, and the Winter extreme bitter in respect of England: and further this
Sassafras is not a small plant or shrub easily nipt with the frost, but a great
Tree, so that boards of ten inches Diameter have been made thereof; and
further, where it once grows, hardly to be destroyed: so that it much
annoyeth the Corn by its young shoots, and the Mower in Harvest more then any
other Tree that I heard of in that Country. I was informed that the Native
Indians of the place, when they lose themselves in the Woods, presently run to
these small shoots, and thereby know which is North and South. Indeed I have
observed that one side is more speckled then another, and perhaps other small
shoots of plants are so, but not as yet observed (for ought I know) of any.
This Plant is not sufficiently described by Gerrard, Johnson, Parkinson, or any
that yet I have seen.

For first, They speak not of any flowers, and yet it has fair, white, large
flowers, almost as big as Rosa Canina, but I perceived little smell in them,
though all other parts of this Plant, as leaves, bark, wood, and root
especially, are very odorifero^s.

Secondly, They mention not the seeds which are about the bigness of
Bay Berries, many of which I sent out of New England, some of which grew in
York-Garden at London, but through mishap perished.

Thirdly, This tree is not always green, as Parkinson, Johnson. says, but in
New England casts its leaves. Perhaps in Florida it may perpetually be green;
for I know that in New England the wild-Bays (which is like our common bays in
smell and leaves) casts its leaf in Winter, as also a kind of ^ir about
Casho-bay, (out of which is extracted a very odoriferous gum) and others in
like manner, etc. In New England diverse in the beginning of their plantations,
used this Plant in their Beer, hoping that it would have served both for malt
and spice, but it deceived their expectations. For in my apprehension it gives
a taste not pleasant, and also they that accustomed themselves to this drink,
especially in the Summer found themselves faint and weak, not able to endure
labor.

Animadversor 2. Sarsaperilla will not thrive in England, etc.
First, Smilax (to which this is referred) is twofold.

1. Aspera, which is not found as yet with us.

2. Levis, or Convolvulus, this grows naturally wild with us, whose leaves
though they differ much from the former, yet the root is very like, as I have
seen them compared together; and further the virtues also; as I have been
credibly informed by diverse ingenious Apothecaries.

2. This Smilax aspera is found not only in Peru, etc. But also in Virginia (as
I am informed by diverse) which is a Country whose Winters are far more
piercing then in England.

3. In New England I have seen a Plant with good success used for Sarsaperilla,
which is a plant about one foot and an half high with an upright stalk, with
some few leaves at the top; I at first sight, thought it the plant called Herba
Gerardi, but the root is very like the Sarsaparil, commonly used with the
pithyness, which makes me to think that there are diverse species of these
Smilaxes; some of which may well thrive and prosper in England, especially
those that grow in New England and Virginia, but concerning this plant and
diverse others, which grow in New England, I cannot give you that account I
desire, because my seeds and papers unhappily miscarried.

Animadversor 3. Rattle-snake Grass will not thrive, etc.
Parkinson, an able Botanick, says it flourishes with us in June and July,
and therefore what should hinder it from thriving to the purpose?

2. Virginia (as I said before) has sharper Winters then England, and yet
there it grows abundantly in the Woods without cultivation, why not with us
therefore by good managing and art? When I was in New England I was acquainted
with an ancient Gentleman, who also was a Scholar, and had lived ten years in
Virginia, who certified me that there were two sorts of Rattle-snake-weeds, the
greater, and the less. That which he called the greater I casually had in my
hand, it was a bulbous plant, about the bigness of a Pigeons egg, and ^ilky
in the root, it grew in the water, and the leaves like Pistolochia: he told me
that this was accounted the best; the second is called the less; and according
to Parkinsons description the leaves are like the former, but the root is
fibrous, and this is that which is commonly brought for England; and for my
part I suppose, and upon good grounds, that not only the former, but also the
latter will thrive with us. I have often desired many of my friends and
acquaintance to send me this plant, and diverse others which grow even at their
doors, but could never prevail so far with them, and have far greater hope of
the flourishing of this wild plant, that of Tobacco, (either of that which in
New England is called Poak, much differing from the Virginian, or of that other
commonly used and sown in Virginia) for they grow not naturally in these
places, and yet Tobacco so flourishes in England, that it pleases the State
to take notice of it, and by an Act to prohibit it. And though I cannot deny
but God has given his peculiar blessings to every Country: yet it does not
hence follow, that nothing which grows in an hot Country will thrive in
these more Northern Climates; for most of our curious plants, as Apricocks,
Peaches, etc. Flac. Pernvianus, Juca, etc. came at first from hot Countries,
yet thrive well with us: yea true, Rhenbarb: (if we will believe Parkinson)
which formerly has only grown in the East-Indyes, grows abundantly with us.
This I am sure, if it be not the same, it is very like in virtue: and daily we
find that things brought out of a hot Country do flourish with us, as lately
the great Spanish Cane (much used by Weavers and Vintners.) Master John
Tradeskin brought from the Western-Isle, and it flourishes well in his Garden,
and grows great and tall.

Animadversor. So of Pines and Cedars, etc.
I wonder that the Animadversor should question the growth of Pines in England,
seeing they grow commonly in the Plain of Poland, as Cromer says, and the
Pitch-tree is a kind of Pine growing even in the coldest places. In New England
I have seen Pines above four foot Diameter, and the length accordingly, even in
the most Northern places. Further, these commonly grow in the Gardens about
London: so concerning Cedars, they grow of a very great height and bigness in
the Northern parts of New England, where show lies five or six months, and
therefore I do not any ways question their growing with us: and do again note
that the neglect of these as also of the Fir Tree, is a great deficiency in
England; and to what a straight our State might now be driven for Masts, did
not New England furnish us? as also for Pitch and Tar, is well known. And yet
these Trees will grow in very barren land, and are sweet growers. Yea, as it
appears by our Mosses they have formerly grown in, England. Further, many will
stand in a little ground, so that I dare boldly aver, that one thousand Acres
planted with these Trees would in forty years serve this Isle with Masts for
ever, and help us to great quantities of Pitch and Tar; for where these Trees
once take, they are very hardly destroyed, as I have observed in New England,
where on an Isle every year in Summer, the Planters spent a day or two to cut
them down, that the place might pasture the better for their young Cattle, but
these Trees did presently grow again, so that they gave over their intentions,
seeing their labor fruitless: but whether or no these Cedars (which are both
white and red) of New England and Barmudaes* be the same with those of Libanus,
which are Coniferae, I will not dispute, or whether they be a kind of Juniper,
as Parkinson says; so far as I have observed the leaves of the smaller shrubs
are rough and prickly, and the berries not only the Junipers.

Animadversor. Lucerna is without doubt Medica veterum, and well known.
I much question it, for first Johnson, and Gerrard, and Parkinson, our best
Herbalists do rather think Medica veterum to be Saint Foin.

2. Though I have had above twelve sorts of Medicaies, yet they are all Annual,
and our Herbalists do not mention any other Medicaies; But be it so, as the
Animadversor says, yet neither the Plant Lucerna, not so much as the name was
known to us, til I mentioned it in my Letters to M. Hartlib, neither did ever
any sow it in their fields, as the Ancient have done.

Animadversor. Lupines known to all, etc.
I grant that amongst our Gardiners are diverse sorts of Lupines, great and
small with blew and yellow flowers; which as I suppose may differ as our Pease
and Tares, and therefore require diverse sorts of land; but I say that these
Lupines are totally unknown to the Husbandman, and never used for that end, the
ancient Romans used them, viz. to fertilize their land, as in Kent some use
tares. In New England I found the small blew Lupine growing naturally on a dry
white sandy Plain, and therefore think that that sort is more natural for the
end above mentioned, then the great Lupine, I hope in little time to experiment
something in this kind.

Animadversor. Grout is made of Barley or Oats, etc.
I know that we have a great kind of Oatmeal, which we call Grots, but this
Grout which I mean, is a small round thing, it comes over to us in Holland
ships, and I suppose it a kind of Millet or Panick, but wonder how it comes to
Holland, because those Grains grow not there; but if it be made of Oats or
Barley, the way to make it so round and small is unknown to us: I read in
Parkinson of a kind of Rice sown in Germany, perhaps it may be of that kind;
for I have found, as I suppose, some of the grains unhusked, which to me seemed
to be like very small rice, I would willingly know the truth of this, whether I
be mistaken or not.

Animadversor. The two last sorts made only of Cows milk.
I suppose he means Angelots and Holland Cheeses, and that Parmisans are made
of other milk then Cowes milk. If so, that Animadversor, I dare say, is
mistaken; for I have enquired concerning Parmisans, even to Lodi in Millan,
where the best are supposed to be made, and yet never heard any affirm that any
milk besides Cows milk was an Ingredient to them: and further all the Lands in
those parts are very improper for sheep, the Country being a low flat
Country, which they float three or four times every year, and by that means do
mow as often; neither did I see any considerable flocks of sheep. As for Mares
milk that is improper for cheese, though many good House-wives in England
think, that the strength and strong savor of Holland Cheese proceeds from
hence, but as I have formerly touched, falsely: perhaps there are some in other
places, who to excuse either their negligence or ignorance, report the same of
Parmisans, but they are deceived: As concerning Angelots and Parmisans, I must
say (though I am unwilling to disparage our English Houswifery, further then is
right) that to my apprehension the Angelots of France, which are made in great
abundance, are better far then our Chester Cheeses, and also our Banbury; as
for our Chedder Cheeses which are made only in two or three parishes in their
number so small that they are seldom seen, but at some Noble-mans table, or
rich Vintners Sellars, that they are even nothing considering the great
quantity of Cheese which is made in this Isle. Neither do I think they
transcend the Parmisan or some Angelots, but I leave this Controversy to every
ones palate; that being very excellent to one, which is very little worth to
another: and I can truly affirm, that it is a great deficiency even through the
whole Isle, if these Cheddar Cheeses be so good that there are so few made, the
Pastures in that Country not exceeding other Counties in England; nor breed of
Cattle better. Neither is the price of Angelots at two Sous for half a pound, a
vile price (as the Animadversor says) considering the Cheeses are usually sold
green; further I have seen some few Angelots made in England after the French
manner by some curious Ladies of transcendent goodness, according to mine and
diverse other palats; and I suppose, that other ordinary Housewives might make
the same, if they knew the Art.

Animad. The Animadversor seems to tax me, that I account the difference of
Climates and of Soils the only causes, why some places produce such and such
plants abundantly, other places not, (if I mistake him not) concerning which I
shall briefly and plainly declare my mind: and do affirm that,I think, where the
Climate is the same, and the temper of the Soil equal, in such places all
plants will equally thrive, but if the Climates vary either in heat or cold
moisture or dryness; or the Soil in fruitfulness, barrenness, or in moisture,
dryness, or in stifness, lightness, sandyness, clayishness, or in such
circumstantials, then is there also a variation in the well or ill thriving of
plants: and further I suppose that whatsoever plants thrive in one hot
Country, they will also thrive in another, if there concur the like moisture
and soil (the same cultivation being supposed) this plainly appears in Oranges,
Lemmons, (which the Spaniards have planted through all the West-In^lyes)
Olives, Vines, etc. And on the other side, what thriveth in one cold Country,
( caeteris paribus) thrives in all others, as it appears in Norway, Poland,
New England, Russia, New-found-l^nd, where Firres, Pines, Pitch trees, etc.
grow abundantly, and so what thrives in our temperate clime, thrives in all, as
is manifestly seen in Apples, Pears, Cherries, Wheat, Barley, and almost in
all Grains and Seeds in Botanick Gardens. And I can see no other cause worth
the speaking of, but the aforementioned. Yet I grant that hot Countries have
their peculiar plants, which will very hardly thrive in cold Countries, because
of the nipping frost, yet the frost being rebated they will thrive well; and by
this means I have seen six miles from London in Surrey Orange trees flourishing
and growing even to the greatness of Trees in that kind in Italy, with ripe
fruit continually on them, also with blossoms, etc. Likewise cold Countries
have their peculiar fruits and plants, which cannot endure the scorching heat
of the Sun, and therefore the Herb called Lanchitis, and others which grow
abundantly in cold Countries, and in the Royal Garden at Paris, as difficulty
preserved in Mompelier Garden, as Oranges, Olives, etc. are preserved in the
cold Countries. De la Brosse.
As for occult proprieties of the earth, for Sympathyes and Antipathies, secret
influences of Planets benign aspect, etc. I understand them not, but dare
boldly affirm, if I have a convenient Clime, and a Soil correspondent to the
nature of the Plant, to cause any plant to thrive and prosper; and this we see
by experience, that if Rye, etc. be sown in a dry sandy ground, whether in
Poland, England, New England, which are many thousand miles distant, yet it
will thrive and prosper, and sic de ceteris. -- As for Astrology, to the which
all in these days are too prone, even Gardiners and Husbandmen, will be
talking of the dark of the Moon, and of the increase and decrease of the Solar
and Lunar Ecclipses; and accordingly dispose of their seasons, of times to
their great damage; for I my self even by experience have found folly in these
things, for things sown in the great Ecclipses both of the Sun and Moon, have
thriven as well as other things: in the decrease as well as in the increase,
and therefore wish all men to sow their seeds when the season appointed is
come, without such vain observations: For this Art for what I can perceive, is
no way demonstrable a priori; for who can prove 12 Signs, Fiery, Watery, Domus
Planetarum, Dignitates, etc. which are the main pillars of this Art: and a
posteriori, by calculations it is made more uncertain, for though much is
undertaken by diverse, yet little is effected, many untruths for one truth, and
little prognosticated, but what a prudent man without advising with the Stars
may foresee. In brief, I will declare my rude thoughts, which perhaps will at
length be found truths, for light breaks forth a pace: In the beginning the
wise Creator made two great Lights for the use of this Sphere of the World, the
Sun, and Moon; the Sun to enlighten and to warm, and refresh all things, and to
rule the day; the Moon to rule the night, and to be for the distinguishing of
times and seasons; the Sun being the Center imparts his light to the Earth and
Moon, also to Venus and Mercury, (for they are found by the Selnescope to
increase and decrease as the Moon does) and also it is probable to Mars, and
Jupiter, and Saturn, and scarce further; for the power of all created things
are finite, as the Moon being nighest reflects its light on us, so its probable
that the Earth illuminates the Moon. Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, have their Lunars
or small Stars moving about them, which have lately been discovered (the
Ancient knew not thereof) which its probable are for the distinguishing of
times and seasons for the Inhabitants of those parts. Those which we call the
fixed Stars are very great, many of which because of their great distance cannot
be discovered but by the Glass called the Telescope, and therefore surely have
little operation upon us who are in another Sphere, so far distant from them,
and amongst these its probable some are Solar bodies, because of their
twinkling, others terrestrial, which are replenished with creatures endued
with life, by the fountain of life, which creatures do, as the creatures in
this earth continually set forth the infinite Greatness, Glory, Mercy, and
Goodness of the Creator; Cusan Hill. Brum.
and these words are even infinite, for the infinite Creator has made an
infinite Work worthy of so great a Workman, transcending the narrow capacity of
frail man's intellect, and if things be thus, Astrology is vain, etc. but I
wonder some will say, toto Coelo, but its no matter: ad propositum.

Animadversor. He is much mistaken if he think that those things reckoned up
page 82. will prosper in England, especially Ryce, Cork, Scarlet, Oak.
I answer, Perhaps not much mistaken; things far improbable have succeeded; and
again I aver that I believe they will, and shall believe so, till experience
prove the contrary. And first for Rice, which first came from Babylon, and the
East-Indyes, and is in those places their usual bread, where they have usually
two or three Crops every year, yet we see it can condescend now to grow in the
North parts of Italy in Lombardy; yea it has stepped over the Mountains, and is
come even as far as Tours, which is in the midst of France, where it growth and
especially delights in moist morish grounds; also if may believe Parkinson a
good and painful Botanick, either Rice, or some thing so like Rice, that he
puts it in the same Chapter with it, grows in Germany, and therefore I question
not but we in England might have one good Crop of this Grain in our Morish Land
yearly; for the reasons that this will thrive with us, to me are more strong
then that Coriander, Sweet-fennel, Caraway, Canary-grass, the Great-Cane,etc.
will thrive, and yet these of late begin to flourish with us very well.

Cork-tree. I very little question the growth of this. For first these trees
grow abundantly in Biscay, a Country far colder then England, where the
Summers also scarcely mature the grapes: Likewise they grow in the North of
New England at Parcato-way. Further that Tree is a great hardy bearing Acorns,
and leaves like to an Oak, that one may easily be deceived by it, and mistake
it for the common Oak.

Scarlet Oak, I hope, I shall make it very probable, that even this also may
flourish in our Isle: In Latin it is called Ilex, of which there are diverse
sorts. Some greater, some less, some more, some less beautiful: the greater
sort which indeed bears little of the Chermes grows very well in England to
a great Tree, and bears Acorns, one of which I have seen at Whitehall-Gate.

2. Master Parkinson reports that in New England and Virginia, etc. The
smaller Ilex (which is fruitful of Chermes, if it be cultivated) grows
naturally.

3. This Scarlet Oak grows not only in Languedock, and the hotter parts of
France, but I have seen it also in Paris royal Garden grow without much art or
industry.

4. Diverse Plants though at first they difficultly thrive, yet when they are
habituated to the Country, and to cast their seed there, thrive well: Thus I
have observed that Virginia Wheat at first difficultly thrived in New England,
but the seed that matured there the next year, flourished very well: the same I
observed of Wheat brought from England, of water Melon seed brought from the
Western Islands: the like I observe in Ireland of Oats and Barley sown before
December, the Winter kills much, but what endures and ripeneth, is hardened
for the next Winter, and flourishes, etc.

5. There may perhaps other Species be found of this Scarlet Oak, more proper
for our Climate, and I remember that on the barren plains in New England I have
seen growing even every where a small Oak, seldom above two foot high, yet
laden with small Acorns, which are indifferent good to be eaten, and are the
special food for the wild Turkeys in Winter, the leaves differ little from the
common Oak but are smaller: some of these small Oaks being cut up nigh to a
Damme made to turn a small river for the iron works, I perceived that out of
the young twigs (which I never before perceived in the old branches) many
excrescences did break forth, sticking close to the bark, flattish, reddish,
set in order like buttons on a Dublet, the lower-most biggest, and so by little
and little less and less, the bigger sort bigger then Vetches. These
excrescences likewise grew on every twig double, one range opposite to another:
I, in September when the leaves where fallen, for sooner I did not perceive
them, gathered about a pint, hoping that this Oak might be of the same nature
with the Scarlet Oak, though much differing in leaves: but my mishap. I lost my
berries, and never since could obtain more: For these reason; therefore I
believe, and I hope others will so far, as to endeavor by experience to find
out whether the Scarlet Oak which is a considerable Plant, will thrive amongst
us.

Animadversor. I wonder Linden-trees, etc.
Linden-trees are not mentioned as not growing in England, for I know that they
grow in many places, and in Cobham Park in Kent they make the statelyest Walk I
ever beheld, but Gentlemen only plant them for pleasure. Whereas in other
places they make Basse Roap of the Bark, etc. which is no where done in England
that I can hear of.

6 Letter. Amber only found in Prussia.
THis will upon strict enquiry be found otherwise, for many report Amber to be
found also in considerable quantity in Pomerland. Cromer also in his
description of Poland says it is found in diverse Lakes with them, especially
at Piscia; also that in other places they usually dig it up; also Master
Cambden an approved Author for England says in his description of Norfolk; and
also Jet and Amber, which (says he) I willingly omit, seeing that there is
great store of these things elsewhere along the Coast. Also that Jet or black
Amber is cast up at Whitbey in Yorkshire: Further I have seen long pices of a
yellow transparent Stone, or Amber found in a Fountain nigh Lake Neagh, about
six miles from Antrims which the Irish say (though vainly) that it is found
only there on May Day, and do use it superstitiously about diverse things.

Animadversor. Sea-Owse will not make Brick, etc.
I have seen Sea-Owse or Mud do it at Dover; also in New England, and it it a
common practice, and if I am not misinformed that sort of Brick, which in
London is called Flandersbrick much used, for scowring brass, etc. is made of
the same Material.

Animadversor. Salt out of a Sand, etc.
Master Cambden reports it to be at Wyre-water in Lancashire, page 753. where
you may read it more at large, and also the same Author reports that at
Butterley in Durham, there are saltish stones which serve the people for their
use, page 734.

Animadversor. Not only the Odor, Taste, and Color of Waters to be regarded,
but other things of greater importance.
I for my part know not how Contrymen should discern such transcendent
virtues in waters, otherwise then by, these ways. I know ingeninus men may
make separations by putrifactions, distillations, etc. And further I suppose
that water is of it self most Homogeneus, (Let Faber speak what he please in
his Flydrographo) and that all the differences betwixt waters is accidental:
viz. by the mixture of some vapors, Fumes or Saline nature, which it receives
by its long course throw diverse Earths, Clays, Sands, Salts, Minerals, Metals,
Stones, etc. and further that this mixture is most commonly perceived by our
senses, viz. by Color, Taste, Odor, and would be much more perceived by us,
if we did drink water continually. For the use of things of high taste, causes
us that we cannot distinguish things of lower gusts. For I have known some who
could strangely distinguish waters by their taste; and further in England I know
no water of any considerable virtue, but an ordinary palate may distinguish it
from the common waters, and usually they are discolored, and have some
peculiar odor: As for the Mechanical uses of waters, why some are fit for
Brewing, Washing, others not. I suppose the reason is plain enough, but that
Flatters cannot make good Hats, because the water is not good enough for them:
or the Dary-maid make good Butter or Cheese, etc. I think these are but excuses
by the which they usually cloak their ignorance or knavery.

Animadversor. I am sure that whosoever shall believe Glanberus, viz that in
all sand almost Gold is found, etc.
The Animadversor may think what he please, but I for my part (as I have
formerly said) think Glanberus very ingenious, and a man of excellent
experimental knowledge, and a man of excellent experimental knowledge, and
therefore am easily induced to believe it, considering that Gold is not only
found in the parched sands of Africa, India, etc. but it has been also found
in many Rivers of Europe, as Tagus, Po, etc. yea in Scotland, Gold is found
amongst their sands in diverse places, some of which I have seen, and know two
ingenious men who intended to have set up a Mercury Mill (as they called it)
for the separation thereof, had not the troubles of these times prevented:
Golden sands are also found in Ireland in Vlster, if the Author of the Natural
History of Ireland speak truth.

Animadversor. Little fuel, save out of Ditches. Ditches an improper word.
I suppose it not much improper, for I never saw either in England, Ireland, or
elsewhere; fire as it were fisht out of the water, I mean that any place is so
saving of their Land, and so industrious in sowing their Graffs and Ditches to
get fuel as in that Country, which I note rather as a point of good husbandry
to be mistated then to be discommended, yet I cannot call Turf more then
indifferent good fuel, and really must say, it is inferior both to Coal and
Wood.

Animadversor. Durham-Wall, etc.
It is misprinted for Durham-Walls, etc. These places being sufficient for my
purpose, I know twenty places more may be added. The expression concerning
Opium and Opiates; I suppose very little too large.

Animadversor. Elephants cannot be of use.
Master Cambden says in his Description of Essex that the Romans brought over
Elephants to England, whose bones being found, have astonished many (perhaps
the bone at Aldermanbury is one of them) also in our days an Elephant lived
many years in England, therefore to me its probable they may be as serviceable
to us, as to other places.

Animadversor. An hard task to people with black Fox, etc.
I suppose the Animadversor means to cause them to increase with us, but I
think the contrary: for black Foxes are found in Ireland, New England, Russia,
and indeed in all cold Countries, therefore I see not why they should not
multiply. Musk-Cats likewise diverse have kept in London, and with good profit,
etc.

7 Letter. All Plants sublimed into Insects are not medicinable, etc.
J Do not positively affirm it, yet I know it is the opinion of sonie not to be
despised; further that some have very considerable medicinable virtues, it is
well known, and I have instanced in diverse, and I suppose that as yet it is
altogether unknown whether others have or not.

Animadversor. Rottenness of Sheep known in Ireland, etc.
Rottenness of Sheep is some times in Spain, but not so much known as in
England, though the Country be moister; the reasons now I well know, for they
have not so many base wet Commons as in England, and the great Sheep-Masters
usually choose their Sheeps-Walks, or Pastures, on high dry Lands, etc.

Animadv. In Holland Cattle not housed in Summer, etc.
Holland with us is usually taken for the 17 Provinces, or at least for the
united ones, and that Cattle are housed there as well as at Paris, you may read
at large in Flanders husbandry, as also how they give their Cattle Turnips, and
that they mow their Medows twice or thrice yearly, which the Animadversor
denies. How the Hollanders do hoard up or bury grains, for that word is proper
enough for any thing that is covered in the ground, the Animadversor largely
describes, and I hope it will be practiced about London, where in the Summer
time they are little worth.

Animadversor. Hogs are not cleanly but love dort, etc.
If Hogs love dirt, then why do they not wallow it in Winter as well as in
Summer, but it is well known that in Winter hogs must lie warm and dry in clean
straw, or they will not thrive, and why is it a greater disparagement to hogs
in the Summer to lie in mire, that thereby they may cool themselves, take away
their sweat, and destroy their lice by rubbing when the dirt is dry, then for
other cattle to stand and wallow in muddy waters, or for Poultry to dust
themselves? And further an Hog much abominateth his own dung, and therefore
will never dung nor piss in his Sty, if the door be open, in which particular
he excels even all creatures, and therefore the Paradox of the Hogs
cleanliness may be found true.

As concerning the extraordinary bigness of Goose livers, it is in Italy
amongst the Jews, where I have eaten of them, highly esteemed, but at present
not much in credit amongst the Italians, and to my Palate it is not so
excellent a dainty.

8. Letter. Animad. Purchase in his second Tome, sets down the making of
Caveare, etc.
I Am certain that Purchase himself, never saw the making of Caveare, nor the
Merchant perhaps that wrote it, and therefore I must question the Process, and
know that in New England where there are abundance of Sturgeon, whose rows are
ordinarily accounted the Material of it, yet never any ever so much as
attempted to make it, though diverse Fishmongers were there, and attempted to
pickle Sturgeon, though with ill success; for in the ship in which I returned
from New England, many Scores of Cags of Sturgeon were sent to London, which
were all naught, and cried about the Strees, under the notion of Holy Sturgeon:
perhaps if Purchases way were known, it might encourage some to attempt the
making of it. If I had Purchase by me, I would write it forth and publish it:
at present his Works are rare and dear.

The Animadversor does very well describe the manner of feeding Cows with
Turnips, p. 113. I hope our Gardiners will take notice of it, and practice it,
for it may be much for their profit, and for the advantage of many poor people.

9. Letter.
J Wish also that the breeding of Pheasants, as the Animadversor sets down were
better known, for many poor might get good living thereby, as diverse do in
Bark-shire, and about London: I know also other Noble men, who keep many of
these fowls; as also a poor man in Ireland, who has a Pheasant, Cock, and Hen,
which run amongst his Poultry, his Cocks tail of a very great length, which
live very well, and lay eggs as other fowls without further trouble, and I
question not, but others might be made tame also in England.

10. Letter.
COncerning Cheese I have already declared my mind: viz. that Parmisans and
Angelots which are commonly made in France and Italy, are far beyond our
Chester, or what we commonly make in England.

2. Our Cheddar Cheeses are seldom seen, unless at some Nobles man's table,
etc. and yet I do not think they excel Parmisans; but whither my Palate be a
true judge or not; I am sure it may be noted as a great deficiency that so
little excellent Cheese is made with us, seeing so much is made elwhere. The
cause of this deficiency the Animadversor refers to the Water as appears
by his examples. But I, and I suppose more truly to the good skill and clean
handling of the Dairy Maid, and also to the difference of pastures; for that
good or bad Houswifery makes or marreth Cheese is very well known, as also
that difference of pastures in respect of sweetness and sowrnesse, much or
little, fresh or stale, etc. causes also great difference, not only in the
quantity, but also in the quality of Butter and Cheese. But that the difference
of water does cause those alterations. I very much question, for I know that in
Kent, whether the Cows drink puddle or pond-water, or clean spring, or fresh or
brackish, (which in some place they often do) yet the butter and Cheese are the
same, if the Pastures be alike. But if Pastures vary, these vary, and so
likewise I may say of the Housewife* I know a Farm within a mile of Gravesend,
where the Cattle always drink at one common pond in the Yard, if they graze on
one side of the house, the Butter is yellow, sweet, and good, and Cheese also;
but if on the other, the Butter is white, sowrish, and Cheese naught, and yet
there is little difference in the pastures to a vulgar eye, which has caused
the good. Wife to report it as a wounderful strange thing, whereas the cause is
manifest, for the one side has much Trefoil, and lies on the Chalk; the other
side is a gravel, and produces usually Gramen, Caninum, or Couch-grass: so we
find in sheep which drink not, yet both their wool and flesh vary very much in
respect of pastures. And I suppose that if the pastures mentioned in Holland by
the Animadversor, were well viewd by a judicious man, the like difference might
be found, for as I suppose the Waters in Holland differ little, the Country
lying for the most part in one even flatness without Minerals or Metals, the
Country in Winter over-flown with rainwater, in the Summer time most of their
waters brackish: But if it be otherwise, I should be very glad to have some
further light, and desire ingenious men not to build upon vulgar report, for I
know they are apt to make Molchils Mountames, etc. in the Interim I shall
acquiesce in my own opinion.

Animadversor. England has a perfect Systeme of Husbandry, viz. Markham.
He speaks more of Markham than ever I heard before, or as yet have seen. In
general he is accounted little more than a Translator, unless about Cattle; and
yet I cannot but in that question his skill: Considering how grossly he
mistaketh the names of Plants: The works which I have seen of his are, first,
the great book translated out of French, which whether well or ill done, I will
not declare; but I am sure our Husbandmen in England profit little by it.
Secondly, I have seen five several books bound up together, two or three of
which he acknowledges to be another, as The Improvement of the Wild of Kent,
also his Houswifery he acknowledges to have had from a Countess, also part of
his Farewell is borrowed, and what he owneth, if I have seen all, are very
short in many particulars, as it will easily appear by my former discourse, and
Blithes book of Husbandry lately augmented and printed: Yea, if I understand
any thing, he sets down many gross untruths, which every Countryman will
contradict, viz. That Flax is ripe after Hemp; That Corn sleept in Brine
increases fivefold more than ordinarily; That Lupin must be steeped, when they
were never sown in England: Farewell to Husb.
He wishes Husbandmen to let long Grass grow amongst their Corn; for (says
he) it keeps it warm: Fullers earth as profitable as Marle: A sack, or a sack
and a half of Rags for an Acre: Corn reapt in the wane naught: Hops not to be
planted in too rich a ground: One Teame in one day to plough in stiff land two
Acres and a half, in light, four: Also one to man to mow two Acres of Grass in
a day; to reap and bind five rood of Wheat; of Fetches and Pease two Acres:
Also one man to dig rake and level one rood the day, etc. And such like which
cannot be done: But I have said, and do confirm it again, that he has done
well in diverse things, and is to be commanded for his industry.

Animadversor. The Roman Law was only for sining, etc.
My expression does not necessarily conclude that ill husbandry is Crimen Les^
Majestatis, or Treason, but that the punishment was inflicted on them because
the public received damage by their ill husbandry, being averse or contrary to
the common good.

Animadversor. Holy Land not barren, Royer.
Our Sands reports it such, and so it is commonly voted; but whether through
a peculiar curse of God, or for want of Cultivation, for we know that many hills
would be very excellent for Vines and Olives, which notwithstanding are little
worth for Corn or Pasture, etc. I will not here dispute.

Concerning Fish Ponds, Angling, etc. I could wish we had a good Treatise in
English: Vaughan was commended to me for them, but I have not read him, and
therefore will not speak much for him, etc.

Thus at length I have run over all, if any thing be impertinent, as I fear
diverse things are, I desire you to expunge it.

An Observation concerning a Fish-Calender imparted from Zurich 11. Nov. 1654.
There is an exact Fish-Calender printed in the Low Country, but whether it be
reprinted every year I cannot tell. I was enquiring here whether they had no
such curiosity: One told me that there is a Catalogue extant of all the sorts
of Fish ever taken in their Lake, or Sea, as they call it. When I asked whether
their seasons were not added, he could not tell: But said, that in their
Stat-house they have the twelve Months painted, and that under every Month are
expressed in picture, without any names set by them, the several sorts of Fish
fit to be then eaten. I have not since had leisure to go see those pictures. If
any think this a needless, or an Epicurean Curiosity, let them read Doctor
B^ates Natural History of Ireland; where he imputes the Irish Leprosy to their
brutish eating of Salmons, when the very eye would have made them know they
were unwholsom. But, says he, the English having discovered it, did under a
penalty forbid the selling or taking of Salmons at that time of the year:
whereupon in a few years after, it was as rare to find a Leper in Ireland as
in any other Country.

A Copy of the Letter wherein the following Discourse entitled Mercurius
Laetisicans was sent enclosed to Mr. Samuel Hartlib.
SIR,
YOur cordial love to the kingdoms good being so clearly expressed to the
world, not only by your pen, but also by your constant practice in promoting
of all good designs which tend to the general good of the Commonwealth, has
emboldened me to send you this enclosed Copy, desiring that you will be pleased
to take care that it may be forthwith printed and published, together with this
Letter: Neither need you fear any dishonor by promoting of this laudable
design: for I have showed the Copy to the Learned as well as the unlearned, to
the rich as well as the poor, and all approve of it, and desire to have it as
soon as it shall be published: They think it is a fine experiment to make good
bread of an old shoe: And though they differ in opinion concerning other
affairs, yet they all love to eat bread with one consent; and if they shall
agree to practice according to their profession, which is to do their best
endeavors to further the good of the public, then certainly the cards will
turn, and we shall win our money again by concord, which we have lost by
discord, yea and twice as much more. And though many of these things which I
would have to be put to the best uses, seem to be trivial, that is for want of
understanding in the Readers; for in Genoa as I have been credibly informed, it
is an usual practice to buy barren land for little or nothing, and to carry
good earth to it, and cover it so deep, as a spade or a plough may work upon
it; but this practice would never counter vail the first charge, unless they
did usually practice another strange work, which is so common there, that if an
horse or a beast do dung in any street, or highway, it is a marvel if some
boy or girl do not take it up, before it he cold, so careful are they that
the fertility of the Kingdom should not be diminished: And though these boys
and girls get nothing but sins and points, or some other trifles, yet in the
general the whole Country is made rich and plentiful: Even as we see in a
Bee-hive, though every Be bring but a drop of honey at a time, yet it makes
up a weighty mass, and many of those masses put together do make up the great
mass, which I have seen at Sturbridge Fair, which is able to amaz a man that
beholds it.

When this Book is published, then I desire you to think of the best way you
can possibly imagine, that all the Inhabitants of the whole kingdom may have
knowledge of it generally; for knowledge that concerns the public good,
ought not to be concealed in the breasts of a few. As for the large Book to
which this little one has relation, there is no thinking of publishing of it,
till we have obtained a Committee to examine witnesses, and to print their
Depositions in it; for Projectors have cast so many bitter things into the
public Fountain, whereof all have drunk, and their minds are so poisoned, that
that there is no other way to unpoyson them, but to win their belief and
willingness to practice, but such depositions of Gentlemen of quality, which
know, the same as well as I my self, and some of them have taught me, and I
have taught others several Secrets, and some few I know my self still, and no
man else in the Kingdom, for ought that can be proved; all which reserved
Knowledge in particular breasts, is against the Wealth of the Public, and
therefore ought to be made common to all, or else this Design cannot prosper,
nor the Kingdom flourish according to my desire. As for your particular
Encouragement I need say no more, but that by furthering of this friendly
Advertisement, and the perfecting of the Books to which it belongs, you shall
become a Further of the most Charitable Design that is now on foot in England,
besides the great and manifold Benefit that shall redound thereby to the
Commonwealth: For I dare undertake that by the right Improvement of the several
Directions and Experiments that shall be discovered, you shall undoubtedly
cause more naked to be clothed, more hungry to be fed, more poor Virgins to be
preferred in marriage, than Suttons hospital, the Savoy, or all the Hospitals,
or Liberal Gifts in England have ever performed. So I rest,

Westminster this 14, of May. 1644. Your Bounden Servant, Gabriel Plattes.

Mercurius Laetisicans.
WHen I perused the several Mercuries which go abroad, to wit, Mercurius
Civicus, Merc. Aulicus, Merc. Britanicus, Merc. Coelicus, Merc. Veridicus,
Merc. Vapulans, etc. I was sorry that so much Wit, Labor, and Study should be
so slighted, and produce no better effect; for I have seen them before they
were a week old to be carelessly hurled up and down, and sometimes torn in
pieces to light Tobacco, and other uses not sit to be named. Whereupon I
resolved to try a Conclusion, to write a Mercury that no man should so abuse,
but he that is an enemy to himself and to the Commonwealth. And therefore I
have ordered the matter so, that no man in the Kingdom, which has so much
learning as to read it, or so much understanding as to hear it read with
attention, but he may learn to gain a thousand times the price of it to
himself, besides the general good to the Public. But before I tell my Readers
what lasting and particular Benefit they are to expect, if they will follow
those Directions which shall be given them by the following Discourse: Let all
men that love themselves, or ^he Commonwealth, and Posterity, take special
notice of a certain Book of Husbandry, entitled, The Treasure Horse of Nature
unlocked, and s^t wide open to the world, etc. where they may plainly see, that
as God is infinite, and men are infinite by propagation, so the fruits of the
Earth for their food, and clothing are infinite, if men will consent to put to
their helping hands to this commendable Design.

The sum of the Book consists in showing how this Kingdom may maintain
double the number of people which it does now, and in far greater plenty:
Containing many rare Secrets for the Wealth of Men, and such as will seem so
strange, and incredible to most men, that they will be likely to slight it, to
the great prejudice of the Commonwealth.

Whereupon I am resolved to wait the Lord of Heaven and Earths leisure, till
such time as he shall be graciously pleased to afford so much leisure to the
high and honorable Court of Parliament to hear such Witnesses as I shall
produce, to the end that the Depositions being printed in the same Book, every
Subject in the Kingdom, as well in great Cities and Towns Corporate, as in the
Country may be satisfied concerning the truth thereof, and so be more apt to
yield unanimous consent, which is all that is wanting for the full
accomplishment of this laudable work.

And I wish no man to think that this is a device to exhaust his purse; for the
truth is, I wrote the same for no other cause, but because I saw that all those
Books which were formerly written upon this subject, were written by men which
had not attained to any considerable Perfection in the Knowledge of Nature, and
such as had but a glimmering light of such great Secrets, as Nature has
heretofore locked up in her Storehouse, and so were ignorant in the fundamental
points and causes of Vegetation and Multiplication. Whereupon I concluded that
the Teachers and the Teached were nothing else but the blind leading of the
blind, by which we all fell into the ditch: I mean, we lived in want and
misery, when we might might more easily have lived in plenty and prosperity.

As for the particular way whereby this wonderful Improvement may be brought to
pass, here is no room in these few leaves: therefore I will only show how
every one in the Kingdom, as well in great Cities as in the Country Towns may
be an helper in this happy work, and raise some considerable gain to himself,
and that great Cities which in former times devoured the fatness of the whole
Kingdom, may yield a considerable retribution yearly without any man's
prejudice, so that tht fertility of the Country needs not be so much
diminished as in former times.

And therefore every one is desired to take this one thing into consideration,
that as any parcel of good land, being kept in Pasture, and having the dung
which it breeds spent upon it, does continue fertile for ever, without any
other addition, so the excrements and materials which any family produces
being well contrived, will produce yearly as much bread and drink as that family
spends for ever.

But the better to stir up all poor maidservants to put their helping hand,
let them be pleased to understand, that I taught a poor woman to get three
pounds a year, which she has continued many years without any considerable
labor, or neglecting her other occasions, and thus she practiced.

When she washed, and swept rooms at her neighbors houses, instead of casting
many materials to the common dunghill, she took them home with her at night, and
laid them in a corner, and once a year she sold them for above three pound.
Besides she laid aside every year as many linen rags as yielded her forty
shillings, and her labor, in receiving her five pounds from the Bargeman, or
thereabout every year, was a most as much as all her other labor, I mean
extraordinary labor.

If young poor Maidservants will imitate her industry, I will tell them the
whole Secret, to the intent that besides the benefit to the public, every one
may get her self a considerable portion; and to the end that many may be
industrious in this laudable way, and that many thousands may remember me in
their good wishes, I will first speak a good word for them to all generations
to come, to wit, that such an one, which by her wit, industry, and providence
gets her self a portion of twenty or forty pounds (which she may easily do
in a certain number of years, not very many) deserves as good a marriage as
one that has an hundred pounds given her by her parents and friends.

And to the end that this may not seem to be a ridiculous relation, I will show
the reasons of it, and also the experience, and lastly declare the several
materials which I taught her to reserve.

As for the reasons, they are thus discovered, viz. the vegetable spirit of the
world, by which all things do increase and multiply, is sometimes clothed with
a gross and earthly foeculencie, as in dung, and more in some dung than in
other: sometimes it is more purified from its earthly foeculency, and then it is
far more effectual, as we see by experience in London, that a load of shavings
of horn is sold for shillings, or three pound a load, woollen rags is sold for
thirty or forty shillings, when as a load of common dung is sold for a penny,
and many times for nothing but carriage away.

Now I proceed to declare the several materials which I taught her to reserve:
As for the linen rags, she reserved those before I knew her, and sold them
yearly to the Paper-Mils; and I seeing her industry, thought it a good deed to
advise her to reserve all the shreads and rags of woollen cloth as well old as
new, all the shreads and pieces of leather of all kinds as well old as new; all
the horns and hoofs of beasts of beasts of all kinds, whether shaven or not,
that came in her way; all the hair either in Barbers shops or Tanners yards, or
at the houses of Butchers and Cooks, where they scalde many hogs and pigs, and
fondly cast away the hair; and to take up all the old shoes and pieces of
leather which happened in her way, as she went about her ordinary occasions,
and to work as often as she could, at the houses of Tailors, Shoomakers,
Sadlers, etc.

For I have found by experience, that a load of the best common dung will not
produce corn worth above twenty shillings at three crops, unless corn be very
dear, and if it be far carried, then the labor, rent, and seed, will consume
the gains, whereas a load of any of these materials formerly mentioned, will
produce Wheat and other corn worth above ten pound, though the price be
reasonable.

These things being well considered, there is a great reason why these
materials should not be fondly cast away to the common dunghill in great
Cities, or other places, whereas the greatest part thereof is utterly lost; and
though some of them go to the dunghill, yet they serve only to enrich land
which lies near to great Cities, where there is no need of them, whereas being
reserved by themselves, they will quit the cost to be carried twenty or thirty
miles, and so make land fertile, which bears not half the quantity for want
of dung.

And whereas I have found by experience, that a load of any manner of seeds
whatsoever, does contain as much of the vegetable spirit of the world, as ten
loads of common dung, I could wish, that all such young menservants, as have
no Stocks nor Trades, should get them services in great Innes, or to be
Bailiffs of Husbandry to great men, and to reserve all the hay seeds that come
within their reach, and all the soot that is swept down out of the chimneys,
that they can get, and once in a year to get so much blood at any Butchers, or
Poulterers houses as will make them into a paste, and then to add so much
Cow Dung dried to them, as being tempered with urine, will be sufficient to
make the whole mass apt to be formed into the form of bricks, loaves, or
cheeses, and then they are to be laid up in a dry place till they be thoroughly
rotten, and that a small quantity thereof being made into powder will not
produce any thing suddenly, being spread in a garden or other open place where
the rain may fall upon it, without the help of new seed, and then though their
common dung will yield no price at all in that place, but rather they are
forced to pay money to have it carried away, yet this will give them a large
price, after that the virtue thereof is known.

And if any such menservants have means to farm certain Acres of barren land,
which lies so remote from dung, that the annual rent thereof is little, then
by setting of Wheat, or other Grain, by my directions in my book formerly
mentioned, they may make one quarter, or one pounds worth of corn, to yield
forty quarters, or forty pounds worth of corn in less time than one year, and
as much over and above as shall pay all charges and workmen nobly, and also as
much rent as any ordinary Farmer can afford to give yearly for it, by which
means he may in a few years get a considerable Stock, and be as likely to
thrive as he that has twice so much given him by his parents or friends. And I
could wish all such men to marry with such women as by their wit, industry, and
providence have gotten themselves portions by my directions in this l^ttle
Book; and let others which have portions given do the like, and try conclusions
whether of them thriveth better.

If any one should be seen to cast away good bread, when so many poor people
want it, then all the world would cry shame upon him; but why should not the
casting away of any of these materials fondly be reputed a more heinous sin,
when as they will produce diverse times their weight of as good bread as any
Prince eats.

I have seen by experience that Saltpeter is the most rich compost in the
world to multiply Corn, and I have seen fifty pounds worth of Saltpeter
extracted out of a vault at Dowgate, not very spacious, which was formerly an
house of office, and not emptied till the matter was thoroughly rotten, why may
not the same thing be done by Art which was formerly done by Nature and
Accident? I have been credibly informed, that such a work is ordinarily done in
the Kingdom of China, and also at the City of Paris in France, and I see no
reason why English men should not have as much wit they.

If any man has convenient room to build two houses of office, and to close up
the one whilst he uses the other, then there can be no question, but that
instead of the charge of emptying, and noysomness of the smell, he may have it
emptied for nothing, and feel the sweet smell of money very grateful to most
men, and that in as great quantity, or greater than he receives for his
ordinary Edifices: besides that he will show himself to be a good member of the
body politic or Commonwealth wherein he lives; but he must beware, that the
matter do lie dry, and that no adventitious moisture come to it either from
beneath or above, which will be somewhat more chargeable in moist grounds, then
where the earth is very dry by its own nature.

And whereas it is as clear as the Sun, that the flesh and blood of a beast is
five times as good as the dung of a beast, and that the skin, hair, wool,
horns, and hoofs are ten times as good as the dung; and that these things are
at the least the third part of the fertility and wealth of the Kingdom, and
that these things are for the most part lost and cast away for want of general
knowledge: I could wish that every Householder in the Kingdom would make use of
this Book, and let it be common for all his family to read, or hear it read, to
the end that some considerable quantity thereof might be preserved, the soot in
every ones chimney will pay him again; for a Bushel of soot will produce two
Bushels of wheat, if it be well ordered, because it abounds much with the
vegetable spirit of the world, by which all sublunary things do increase and
multiply.

And whereas there is much food of all kind spoiled for want of looking as
musty Corn, moldy Cheese, stinking Flesh and Fish; also if any man have any
Horses or beasts that dye by accident, let all men be pleased to receive
instructions in the said book formerly mentioned, how to recover some
considerable share of their losses; and if any one cannot find out some way or
other to benefit himself more or less by the reading of the said book, besides
the good to the public, let him lay the blame no where else but upon the
weakness of his own understanding; for it will be proved against him that some
have advanced their revenues above a thousand pounds per annum, by some small
part of the skill contained in the said book. And if every poor servant cannot
get themselves portions of considerable value, by reason that their Masters
houses afford not store of such materials, nor spare room to lay them in, then
let them get five shillings a year, that they may do in the poorest house in
the kingdom, yea the poorest beggars that go from door to door, may get more
than that, so shall they get themselves every year a suit of clothes, if they
buy them at the second hand, and show their love to the Commonwealth; and
perhaps some good minded man, seeing their industry, may disburse money for the
accomplishing of one crop, and take it again with interest, or without
interest, out of the first part that is sold, and so will the remainder afford
them a considerable portion. And though that waste paper of all sorts, either
white or brown, written or printed be not very good to make barren land
fertile, yet it will make good Passeboard, the white is worth three farthings a
pound, and the other an half penny a pound to make brown Passeboard, good to
cover Books, and all other things where the color is hidden in the work, and
therefore worthy to be reserved, for in some houses it is of very considerable
value.

And let all men be pleased to take into serious consideration, that as in
every century of years there do more people dye than are in the World at any
one time, so in every century of years there is more Wealth lost fondly for
want of knowledge in England, in the complete Art of Agriculture, then is in
the Kingdom at any one time, yea though an Inventory were taken and valued at
Michaelmass, when the whole years fruits are engrossed together, which sum
will double throughout the whole Kingdom (especially in the Country) to the
like Inventory taken at May day, when the years fruit are almost wasted, and
little remaining but hopes, which are not usually put into Inventories.

Whereas it will plainly appear to all rational men, that I wish well to all in
general, let them be pleased to accept of one friendly advertisement more:
Christ says, He that is not with me, is against me, admitting of no
neutrality, and I say, that whosoever does not according to his ability, and
opportunity, further this blessed work, more or less, lives in a destructive
way to the Commonwealth, or body politic, whereof he is a member, though an
unworthy one.

A Letter of an experienced Husbandman, who has also brought the Invention of
setting of Corn to greater perfection, expressing his judgment upon the
following Notes, Observations, Experiences and Improvements.
SIR,
YOu have often favored and honored me with the like favor of allowing we
the perusal of many choice pieces, and that particularly of Mr. Gabriel Plat's,
some printed, and some (as this) in Manuscript: All which I profess to have
liked me very well, and none (that related to any the parts of Husbandry) so
well as Mr. Plat's, but I must also conf^sse, that if this little piece I
herewith return you (and with it abundance of hearty thanks for the reading of
it) be not the best clearly of all I have seen of his yet, it at least comes
nothing short of the best, some mistakes in the computations in the beginning
bated. Certainly that man had as excellent a genius that way as any that ever
lived in this Nation before him; and was a most faithful seeker of his most
ungrateful Countries good. I never think of the great judgment, pure zeal,
and faithful intention of that man, and withal of his strange sufferings, and
manner of death, but I am struck with amazement that such a man should be
suffered to fall down dead in the streets for want of food, whose studies
tended to no less than the providing and preserving food for whole Nations, and
that too as with much Skill and Industry, so without Pride or Arrogancy
toward God or man.

Sir, I can give you no other or better account, but constant praises: Only
this I say, that whereas I suppose Mr. Plat's invention for Setting was far
better than any thing that preceded; yet since it is lost, and was not so very
perfect neither, as you: know has been since invented, the world may be
supplied, by this, that is, as to action, being satisfied by Mr. Plat's
Reasons, why it is necessary to have such an expeditious way, which as it is
really invented, so will it be (in due time) divulged. In the mean time, and
ever, I rest

The humblest of your obliged Servants, C.D.

Certain Notes, and Observations concerning Setting of Corn, and the great
benefit thereof.
Together with several Experiments and Improvements, imparted by Gabriel Plats
to Mr. Hartlib.
FOur hundred grains of chosen Wheat, do weigh three quarters of an ounce,
which is three ounces for a perch; and so a hundred and sixty perches must have
four hundred and eighty ounces, which is in weight thirty pound, and in measure
half a bushel and two pints.

If this half bushel being set upon an Acre shall enrease but an hundred for
one, which is the least increase of set Corn that ever was known, then there
will be about 11 quarters upon that Acre.

And that several sorts of Wheat do differ at least 11. pound in a bushel in
weight, and also in the number of grains, so that it is impossible to make this
account absolutely, and exactly perfect.

But yet it appears clear, that there is above forescore pounds in the two
hundred pounds saved in the seed Corn in setting, more than by sowing the
common way; and also that there is above forescore pounds in the hundred pound
saved in workmens wages, by this new device of setting: and also it shall
appear, that there is above forescore pounds in the hundred pound saved in the
Compost, by dispersing it by my new Invention, in such manner that it shall all
lie within the attractive virtue of the seed Corn.

Also it shall appear, that the Corn upon every Acre, being set by my
direction, shall yield a full third part increase more than if it were sown the
common way; which said third part shall bear all the charges whatsoever, both
rent and other expenses; so that by this new way of Husbandry, there will be as
much Corn gained clear upon every Acre of ground in England, as formerly the
said land did yield one year with another.

The seed wheat for the setting of an acre is worth half a crown, at five
shillings a bushel; the workmens wages for seting is six shillings; the compost
costeth little more than the ordinary charges of spreading the dung by the
ordinary way of ploughing, etc.

Also it appears clear, that the gains of one Acre will do a great deal more
than to pay for the several Engines; which notwithstanding being well trimmed
will endure, and be serviceable for the space of an hundred years.

And if any man doubt of it, let him cast up the charges of my work more
punctually; and also the charges of the common way, and he shall find that
there is more clear gains by my way by ten Acres, then by thirty done the
common way, in which account I will not be my own carver, but will refer my
self to the account in a little book which I met withal lately though it was
printed Anno Dom. 1601. when setting of Wheat was in great practice; but
afterward when the price of Wheat grew cheap, and Laborers wages grew dear,
the practice ceased, for want of an expeditious way.

A comparison between Ploughing and Sowing of three Acrees of Land after the
old fashion, and Ploughing and Setting of one Acre after the manner declared in
the book printed Anno Dom. 1601. by Mr. Maxey, Gentleman, a great practizer in
those days in the art of setting of Corn.
And first for the charge.
The Rent of three Acrees in most places is worth some five shillings an acre;
the land according to the use of the Common fields, does lie fumer fallow the
first year, and bears Corn the other, so the Farmer pays the years rent
before he has his crop, which rent comes to thirty shillings.

The ploughing of these, if it be well done, and as most grounds require, every
Acre four times, which is twelve plowings; at two shillings every time comes
to four and twenty shillings; the dunging of these three acres with some twelve
or fourteen loads upon every Acre, and is for three acres some forty loads at
six pence a load spread upon the land, amounts to twenty shillings.

The seed that will sow it is usually two bushels and an half of Wheat or Rye
for every acre, which is a eleven bushels and an half, at four shillings the
bushel, comes to thirty shillings.

The Weeding and Reaping, and other charges in two years, though uncertain, yet
for example, ten shillings; thus two years rent and charges comes to five
pound fourteen shillings.

The usual increase in the common fields, barren lands, have so little help
with dung, is but two quarters upon an acre, but allow twenty bushels to stop a
wranglers mouth, which is for three acres seven quarters and a half, rated at
four shillings a bushel, thirty two shillings the quarter comes to twelve
pound, out of which if you take the charge aforesaid, there remains to the
Farmer for his stock six pound six shillings; and so for every one of those
acres allowing so good increase, and so good a price, the profit two and forty
shillings.

And you shall understand, that notwithstanding their accounts and mine own, of
seven or eight quarters upon an Acre, and also of Sir Hugh Plats account of
fifteen, twenty, five and twenty, or thirty quarters upon an acre, yet all
these accounts may be true; for you may learn by my book so to fertilize your
land, that it may bring thirty quarters upon an acre, in such years when the
Months of May, June, and July prove exceeding hot and dry, which I would advise
no man to trust to, in regard that these three Months scarce prove so once in
a eleven years, in these Insulary Countries which are subject greatly to the
change of weather; and if these Months prove moist and rainy, then all ground
that is so mightily enriched, will be spoiled with rankness, and therefore the
safest way is to order your Compost so that an Acre may bear 11. quarters one
year with another.

And though I have known that an Acre of Barley has ^orr by accident thirty
quarters, and that the same thirty quarters were worth the same year threescore
pounds, yet the adventure was so dangerous, that I would advise no man to
attempt the like.

And thus a friend of mine proceeded, viz. he ploughed up at Michaelmass twenty
Acres of very fertile and rank green sword ground, and afterward cross ploughed
it, and harrowed it three or four times to kill the grass, and also to mingle
the fat earth with the lean, then he sowed it about the beginning of March with
Barley before the vehement drought came had covered the ground so full, that it
was as if it were even turfed with the Corn, so that afterward the violent
heat and drought which spoiled the thin and barren Corn in the Common fields
did cause this Corn to have but a short straw, yet the rich earth put forth a
large ear, and very exceeding thick, and also the corn was plump and round,
which had the weather happened to be moist and rainy, then there would have
been almost nothing but straw, but so it came to pass that he had thirty
quarters upon every Acre, which was upon the twenty Acres six hundred quarters,
and by reason of the failing of Corn in the Common fields he sold it for forty
shillings a quarter, which came to twelve hundred pounds with the rent and all,
so that he gained above a thousand pound clear by his twenty Acres of Barley:
Yet I would wish no man to take in hand so hazardous a work again, but rather
to 2aim at a mean in fertilizing of his land, which is the surest way one year
with another; for if he make his land too extreme fertile, then it is ten to
one he shall have nothing but straw, and some light corn, which is good for
little use, but only for Poultry; and if on the other side he take so much are
able land, that he is not able to enrich it so that every Acre may bear in a
reasonable year five quarters by sowing the common way, or thereabouts, and a
eleven quarters and a half, or thereabouts, by setting, then let him cast up
his accounts justly, and he shall find himself to be no good friend to himself,
nor yet to the Commonwealth, for he might have gained more by laying his
Compost upon half so much land, and by setting it orderly, than by the whole,
so that he himself and the Commonwealth is deprived of that benefit of the
herbage of that land which he did unadvisedly and above his ability to enrich,
keep in tillage to his own loss and great damage.

Certain Experiments and Improvements for the enriching of Land, by my new
Invention or Engine, which disperseth the Compost in such manner, that it
falls all within the reach of the attractive virtue of the Corn.
The first Experiment or Improvement.
It is found by experience, that where dung has been laid upon heaps upon
fallowed land, and has layen unspread for a month or six weeks, and withal
some store of rain has fallen to carry down the Chilus or juice of the dung into
the earth there, though the dung was all removed in the spreading from the
place where the heap lay, yet there grew more corn in a yard square of that
ground so fatned with the chilus or juice of the dung than in three yards
square, where the dung was dispersed in the rest of the land.

By this we may observe that Dung does not enrich ground till it be putrified
and turned into chilus, or aqua pinguis, or aqua viscosa, and also that Compost
of land whatsoever is to be turned into such a nature and property before it
can produce great increase in the present crop.

Wherefore the best Husbandry is to prepare Earth and Compost in such manner,
that the nutritive virtue thereof may assimilated into the corn and fruits in
the first year, or else the Husbandman lays out his stock and charges long
before hand, and is deprived of great part of the benefit thereof, by reason
that the rain and land-flouds do carry away a great share of the chilus or
juice of such dung as falls out of the reach of the attractive virtue of the
seed or plant; and if any man doubt of it, let him fill all the holes (when he
has set an Acre of Corn) with such fat earth, and he shall find his increase
doubled upon common barren field land; and contrariwise, let him fill the holes
with common dung, and he shall find no such success.

But some will say that this is a pedling business, and an endless work; to
which I answer, That so it is indeed, to those which know not the use of my new
Invention, or Engine, but that being known, is the most profitablest work in
the world, for a man may fill 400. holes in the twinkling of an eye, and may
order a whole Acre in like manner, with a very little charges more than the
spreading of the dung does usually cost. Therefore now I will proceed to show
how diverse fertile earths may be prepared wherewith the holes may be filled,
and so consequently the increase may be doubled, and this practice will be
excellent in such places where the charge of carriage costeth much, by reason
of the great distance of the place from the Compost; for I find, that though
diverse imbibitions of the seed with apt liquors do produce a good improvement,
yet it is not a practice comparable to this; for if a Farmer have twenty acres
of Arable land, and have dung but for fifteen Acres, and shall yet have a good
crop, by means of a good imbbiition, yet is not this knowledge sufficient for a
Husbandman, upon whose skill the happiness of himself, and the whole
Commonwealth depends: For by this way he may enrich his Arable land at
pleasure, be it never so barren, nor never so much remote from his Compost; for
on the one side, if the filling of the holes be not sufficient, he may heap
them, as hops are usually heaped, with fertile earth and dung; and on the other
side, if the earth be too rich, so that it will make the Corn too rank, then he
may half fill the holes, or less and then fill them up with a Rake with their
own proper earth, or he may make his earth so rich, that he may mingle with it
twice the quantity of the field earth before he disperse it; by which means he
may save a great deal in the charge of the carriage of his Compost where the
fields are far distant.

The second Experiment or Improvement, wherein is showed how a rich Compost may
be made in form of earth fit to fill up the holes when the Corn is set.
Let an Acre, or more, or less of good Areable earth, neither clay nor sand,
but indifferently well mixed, be chosen in some apt place, where dung is
plentiful and cheap, then cover it with dung a foot thick, or thereabouts, and
then you may be at choice whether you will at six Months end shovel off all
the dung, and carry the fat earth to be used as in the former Experiment, or
else to plough it four or five times, all together in a years space, and then
carry all to be used as in the former Experiment; either of these ways will
serve; for one Acre of earth thus made fertile, will make an hundred Acres
fertile, and to yield a good crop, yea even as you desire: so you may fertilize
by the means prescribed in the first Experiment; and this same work may be done
in a little garden plot, in Cities, Corporations, or Villages, where a bed of
good earth may be enriched at pleasure, with all liquors thrown upon it, which
contain any fatness or saltness, as urine, beef-broth, soapsuds, blood, brine
of powdering tubs, kitchin-wash, fish-water, lees of all wine, bear, perrey,
cider, or whatsoever is good for hogs, the same will yield an excellent virtue
to this earth, and if a cover were set over it to keep it dry for a years
space, you might enrich it so, that you might carry it twenty miles, and yet
find more gains by it than by a common dung that lies but a mile off, and any
Husbandman that dwells within a few miles of any City, make a rich benefit by
bringing certain loads of Areable earth yearly into Cities, and by giving a
bushel or two of wheat to certain Householders of his acquaintance, for the
enriching of it as aforesaid.

The third Experiment, or Improvement, where is showed how a rich Compost may
be made in form of earth, near to the Sea, which may be carried many miles.
You must understand that this Compost is profitable only for such ground
where bay salt is apt to cause fructification, or sea-sand, as in diverse places
in Cornwall, where they carry it on horse back diverse miles, and find that it
makes a very excellent Improvement: Well, thus may you work, and make as rich
a Compost as any can be in the world for ground of that nature, Let a place be
chosen where there is an Acre of kindly earth, where it may be floated at every
springtide, and afterward the water dried away by the heat of the Sun, and
then ploughed and served so many times, till it be as fertile as you please.

The like may be done by watering the earth with seawater, and by ploughing it
with scoopes all summer, or till it be as fertile as you please; and in some
parts of England the sea water may be let into the land many miles, for the
purpose aforesaid.

The like may be done by mingling earth with Malt dust, Pigeons dung, or any
other Compost, which is found to do much good with a small quantity, as Malt
and other Corn spoiled by any accident, may be ground into Meal, and mingled
with earth, or putrified with the earth, a whole year unground, till it be
turned into earth. Also Lime and dung, or combustible earth mixed together, or
all three ploughed diverse times, for a year, till they be turned into earth, is
a rich Compost.

If you can find out the true adaptation of this, and of all my other Composts,
then you may save forescore pounds in the hundred pounds in the fertilizing of
any Arable land in England, and also you may afford to carry your Compost to
places and barren grounds far distant, which now admit of no improvement within
charge, by reason of their great distance of place.

And if the distance be very far, then you may try with Bay Salt, Saltpeter,
Soap dissolved in hot water, or any other substance which enricheth Arable land
exceedingly; and when you have hit the mark, then you may bring these
substances twenty, thirty, or forty miles, and yet you fertilize your Arable
land by my new Invention cheaper than with common dung, though it were to be
had within a mile of the place, if you enrich the earth with these Liquors or
Salts dissolved, and so make use of my Engine for the filling of the holes when
the Corn is set.

The fourth Experimene or Improvement, wherein is showed how a rich Compost may
be made in form of earth for the purpose aforesaid, which may also be converted
into Saltpeter.
It is found by experience, that where the Saltpeter men do find an old house
of Office in a dry vault, where no moisture does annoy it, there they get their
best Liquors. Also it is found by experience, that Horse-dung, being putrified,
and turned into earth in a dry place, does likewise yield much Saltpeter: Also
it is found by good experience, that Clay walls, made of some kind of Clay, do
yield great store of Saltpeter, which may be seen in Oxfordshire and diverse
other places, where Pigeons resort to the clay walls, and thereby give
intelligence to the Saltpeter men to steep the same, who many times find the
liquors so rich, that they will steep many pearches in length of such walls,
though they make up the walls again at their own charges, according to the Law.

By all these Experiments joined together, it seems that a rich Compost
either for Land, or for Saltpeter may be made as follows.

First let an little frame of an house about four foot high be framed in every
man's backside, as well in Cities as Country Towns, and let there be nothing
but studs, and those very thin, and let it be length and bigness of a S^wpit,
or grave, or greater, or lesser at pleasure.

Then build a little house of Office over it, which be broader than it, to keep
it from rain and moisture. Then make up the walls about a foot thick, with this
composition of earth following, and in less than a eleven years, all the walls
and ordure will yield either good store of Saltpeter, or a rich earth for
Compost worth twenty shillings a load at the least for the fertilizing of land:
If every household have two of these houses, he shall never have more trouble
but to make use of one while the other does ripen.

The walls must be made of horse dung, and so much clay as will temper it, and
the less the better, so that it will hold together. The Clay must not be of
the nature of Brewers clay, I mean such as will stop water, of the Mawmy clay
in Oxfordshire, and many other places, which is partly of the nature of Marle,
and will break it self, which lying abroad in winter like unto Marle, or Lime,
whereby it is discovered to contain much salt in its composition, which if it
be well chosen: will wonderfully add to the richness of the earth, when it is
putrified fox both uses, to wit, for Compost or Saltpeter at pleasure.

If this work were well put into practice, the very ordure of every family
might be so improved by my new invention, that it would produce as much Corn
again as was spent in the said house in the former years; besides that barren
land, and far distant from other Compost, might this way be made fertile.

And for the poorer sort, whom the charge may be made considerable for the
building of the houses, they may lay a load or two of good earth, like a bed in
a garden, and cover it from rain, and with a moveable stool or seat make this
earth as rich as the other.

But in all works where Saltpeter is expected, you must make a little ditch
about the earth which shall produce it, or else the least moisture will draw
away the Saltpeter, even as the Saltpeter men do with their Tubs. And if any
man would take in hand to build such houses of Office, in, or near to any
Marketplace, School College, or other place where there is a great confluence
of people, he might gain soundly by it, and also do a pleasure to the
Commonwealth. And let no man doubt of this relation, for if the Compost be apt
for the land and seed, it is mavelous to see the increase thereof: I had the
last summer 18. for one upon a trial, which I made with Beer Barley, which do
call Barley, which some do call Barley big; it has four square ears, and I did
nothing to it, but steeped in blood for one night, and then set it at a eleven
inches depth, and six inches distance, and it yielded more than twice as much
as other Corn of the same kind, being not steeped at all in any thing, and
being set at the same depth and distance, and in the same ground, on purpose to
see the difference.

The fifth Experiment or Improvement, wherein is showed how the difference of
the nature of land may be found out, thereby to fit it with an apt Compost.
It is found by experience, that where vegetables dumb, as Fern, Whinnes,
Broom, and the like, have long grown, and dyed upon the ground, and have
continued in this course of husbandry, or rather ill husbandry for many years,
there the earth does abound with the vegetable salt or juice, for the cure
whereof it is likewise found by experience, that Lime, Bay Salt, and Ashes, and
Pigeons dung, and such like things of hot and binding nature do poison it,
and decrease the fertility. It is likewise found by experience, that in such
grounds which have been long occupied in good Husbandry, there dung is the best
Compost in the world; the cause is, for that by long continuance in such
husbandry, the nature of the land is quite changed by the yearly carving of the
Corn, Hay, or other crops, whereby the vegetable salt or juice is diminished,
and contrariwise the hot and binding nature does predominate, which require for
cure saltpeter, dung, blood, and such things wherein the vegetable salt or
juice predominateth: The middle of these natures of ground require Sheeps dung,
as of all other most temperate, being neither so hot and dry as Lime, Bay Salt,
Ashes, or Pigeons dung, nor so cold and moist as the dung of beasts, in the
room whereof Lime putrified with dung or more earth, as aforesaid, may supply
the want thereof very exceedingly.

The use of these Observations and Experiences may teach us, that all books
heretofore written for this purpose, are frivolous; for they prescribe such a
Compost for such an earth, of such a color, or of such a mixture, as sand
clay, hasel earth, white clay, red clay, white sand, red sand, black sand, etc.
whereas it is found by good experience, that where Lime was the most excellent
Compost in the world about a hundred years ago, there about fifty years ago
they were forced to change their Compost, and to lay upon the same ground half
Lime, and half Dung, and now the same ground requires the Dung only, or else
it will yield no Corn, for Lime poysoneth it: yet is not the color, or quality
of the same ground in outward visibility to the eyes corporal, but by the
intellectual eyes beholden of all men of good understanding. Therefore that all
men may obtain their desire in this work, my counsel is, that the more skilful
men, if they take in hand to improve twenty Acres, or more, or less of such
land, which they have not formerly tried fully, that they go the best known
way with nineteen Acres the first year or two, and make diverse several trials
in the odd Acres, till they have hit the mark punctually: And as for the more
unskilful, my counsel is, that they do make diverse several trials in the odd
Acre the first year, and let the other be used as aforetime, till by experience
they have learned to improve all the best way: By this means many notable
Improvements may be found out of inestimable benefit both to the Farmer,
Parson, and Landlord, and also to the whole Commonwealth plenty, without any
sensible, or considerable loss to the undertaker.

And for the better instruction then is contained in any book formerly printed
or written of this subject, for the Adaptation of Compost, let this suffice for
brevitie, viz. where the earth is subject in the heat of summer to chap much,
if it be clay, or to burn much if it be sand, there if you apply Lime, Salt,
Ashes, or Pigeons dung, or any thing of like hot, and dry nature, there you
poison it: Also where the earth is not apt to chap or burn in the heat of
summer, there it you apply any other thing except Lime, Salt, Ashes, or Pidgeon
dung, or other things of hot and dry nature, there you poison that also; for as
it is a foolish thing for a Cook to put more salt into the pot, when the
pottage were too salt before, so is it as fond a trick in Husbandry to add a
Compost to land wherein that quality predominateth which does also predominate
in the land; for Corn and Seeds are as nice in their diet and nutriment as any
Lady in the world, and will not prosper nor draw the nourishment if it be never
so little distastful, and this is the cause, why so many times so little a
quantity of Compost does work such wonderful effects by the exquisite
adaptation to the land or seed.

Men might easily find out an apt Compost for such land as has been
Devonshired, and has spent its fertility, which it will do in three years, and
then it is reputed nothing worth: I assure my self that Lime and combustible
earth putrified together will do the feat, yea and that with a small quantity,
if it be dispersed by my Invention.

The sixth Experiment or Improvement wherein is showed how Farm-houses,
Manors, or Towns may be builded upon high grounds, and plentifully furnished
with water.
It is found by experience that in some places Towns are builded upon high
grounds, where Springs or Wels are easily had, and there a thousand Acres of
land near to the Town are made worth a thousand pounds in the year, and that a
mile off a thousand Acres of the same land for want of Improvement are not
worth above a thousand shillings so that there is lost to the Owners and to the
Commonwealth nine hundred and fifty pounds yearly.

For the prevention of which loss, let every Farmer have a Court paved like a
Tennis-court* and let the Barns, Stables, and other Edifices be so builded*
that all the Rainwater that they yield may run into the said Court, and from
thence into a vault, or well, out of which it may be pumped up, or run into
your kitchins, or other houses of Office, which rain water will keep sweet in
the close vault; and will serve for all uses whatsoever.

This is commonly practiced in Spain, where they have no other water throughout
the whole year for all uses, and their Gentlemen do choose to build upon high
grounds for the benefit of the goodness of the air, which is more wholesome in
all Countries in the Mountains than in the Valleys.

Also in Venice and Amsterdam, and in other places where other waters are
usually brackish, they keep rain water in Sellars for all uses.

Also it is found by experience in Rumney Marshes that they use to gather rain
water from Churches, and other Edifices, and never have so good and wholesome
drink as when they brew with such water.

And where Tarris is wanting, there you may make use of good clay which is of
the nature of Brewers clay, and will stop water by laying a good thick leere
thereof under your bricks, or other pavement in the bottom of your vault or
well, and also running in a course of the same clay, betwixt the wall of the
vault and the earth.

And as for water for your cattle, it is a common practice in the West Country,
to make ponds to hold water for all the year by bottoming of them with clay in
this manner, viz. First choose a place where some higher ground will yield
water always, when there is any store of rain, then make your pond as great as
you please, then ram the bottom a foot thick with clay, or thereabouts, then
make another such leere of clay, and lastly another pavement; this being well
done, it will endure for ever, and will hold water every year better than
other, by reason of some fat Missage, which the water will let sink.

The seventh Experimene, wherein is showed how Sellers, that are annoyed with
Water-springs way be remedied.
I have seen a Sellar made with Sheet-lead, and a floor of baords laid upon
Treasens or Joysts of Timber, to keep the Lead from injuries in the floor,
which will endure for many Ages; but this is too costly for Farmers; as for
their help therein, I have seen a Sellar that sometimes would be filled with
water a yard deep, thus cured, viz. First to make two little vaults with bricks
laid without mortar, to each corner of the sellar, and to vent the water into
four pits, or little wels made without the sellar, then make some few lesser
vaults from all places of the sellar into those first vaults; then ram down a
good thick leere of good clay upon the top of the bricks, and then to pave the
sellar, and the weight of this clay and bricks, and pavement will press down
the water, and make it vent it self into the four pits, or wells, which must be
laid with bricks without mortar, and then the pits will never be fuller than
the top of the Spring, but will vent away the superfluous water continually,
and keep the sellar always dry; but if the clay and pavement be not heavy
enough to press the water up into the pit, then the floor of the sellar will
rise up, and tetter and swim like a bog-mire; and if it be heavy enough, then
the cure is substantially performed for ever: If any moisture come in at the
sides of the sellar, let them be rammed with clay, as in the former Experiment
for vaults. By this Experiment sellars may be made in any low grounds
whatsoever, and every one knows that drink kept cool in summer is twice as
good to quench thirst as warm drink, therefore I need not use more persuasions
to men, to make use of this so cheap, so easy, and so certain an Experiment.

The eighth Experiment, wherein is showed how the rot in Sheep may be cured.
Although I have showed in the Chapter of the Sheep how this disease may be
infallibly prevented, yet in regard that sometimes through negligence of
Servants, and sometimes through want of sound grounds to remove them to, at
such times as I have prescribed, this disease will happen in your flocks, I
will show a certain cure, although somewhat costly, and when I have done I will
show you the charge how it may be regained with great advantage: Well then, a
little after Midsummer, if the Months of May and June have proved very moist
and rainy (for else you need not to trouble your selves at all) then take a
view of your sheep somewhat seriously; if you find by the color of their eyes,
that they have caught that disease, then thus you must proceed. You must have a
large barn or sheep-coat, set about with wooden troughs, and therein feed them
with Oats a day or two, then steal in some Bay Salt small stamped, and after
that some greater quantity, till such time as they begin to distaste it: then
give them clean Oats another day or two, and afterward serve them with salt as
before, and this course being followed until their eyes have recovered their
natural color, then is the cure performed. This may be done in a Corrt-yard,
or in another place, where an house cannot be had; but then you cannot so well
recover your charges again, which must be done after this manner, viz you must
lay in the house all over good Arable earth for Wheat, and once in three or
four days le^ it be turned with a Spade or with a Plough, if both the ends of
the house can be opened; and this earth when the sheep are cured must be laid
upon a heap for a year or thereabout, where it may be dry until the dung be
thoroughly rotten, and turned into earth: this earth may be dispersed by my
Engine to fill up the holes where the Wheat is new set, and so it will produce
an increase of four times as much Wheat as you spent in Oats, which will pay
for all your Salt and other charges.

There is a cause why Sheep that are folded do rot more violently than those
which are not folded, though they feed upon the same grounds, for that they are
more hungry many times by being restrained of their free liberty to feed at
pleasure, they do devour the rawish, sowrish, and hurtful grass with more
greediness, and are less prone to be nice in their diet, and to refuse that
sort which is most pleasing to their nature, therefore it seems to be a good
way to let them go at liberty in the Months of May and June in such years as
those Months of May and June prove very moist and rainy; for it is less
trouble and charge to prevent a disease than to cure it afterward.

I have known diverse men that have drenched their Sheep every year diverse
times, and thereby have saved them very well, but those men not knowing what
years were dangerous, were more troubled than they needed; for sometimes three
or four years come together, where there is no need at all to make use either
of cure or prevention.

The ninth Experiment, wherein is showed how Corn may be preserved in cheap
years without corruption, so that it may supply the dearth when it comes.
It is sound by experience, that when three or four years comes together
wherein Corn prospers well, then it becomes so cheap that the poor Farmer is
undone: Again, if the unreasonableness of the weather cross it a year or two,
then it becomes so dear that the poor people are half starved. To remedy this
inconvenience I know no better way than to instruct Corn-hoarders, who though
they usually be none of the best Commonwealths men, yet they do sometimes
prevent the Dearth, that it is not so violent as else it would be.

Well then, thus may we do, make a boarded floor about a yard or two high, and
as broad and as long as ye please; then set ledges about it, so that no Mice
nor Rats can climb up: then in Harvest make a Rick of Corn upon it, which may
be kept three or four years without loss or trouble. If when Winter is past
Corn be very cheap, then would I have all the richest Farmers, who are able to
forbear their money, to thrash up the most part of their other Corn, and to
take down the foresaid Rick, and to make it up again with a leere of thrashed
Corn, with chafe and all together, by which means he may lay up a wonderful
great quantity in a little room, and have his Straw for his present use, and
withal the poorer sort of Farmers may have a better sale for their Corn to pay
their rents withal.

And as for Cities and Corporate Towns, I would have all Householders of good
ability to keep a years provision of Corn before hand, and not to spend it
till time of dearth, by which means the dearth will not be so grievous when it
comes, and also the cheapnesse in time of plenty will not so much ^rejudice
the poor Farmer.

And for the preservation of this Bread-corn, he may lay it up in a Garner four
or five foot thick, and it will keep sweet a long time without stirring: If he
mingle therewith some Flint stones, Pibbles, old Iron: pieces of Iron taken out
of the Kiln, which never took rain since their burning, one bushel of any of
these mingled with twenty bushels of Wheat, Rye, Mastline, or any other
Bread-corn, will keep it from heating, and if it heat not it cannot corrupt: As
for Malt, it will keep two or three years upon a great heap without stirring or
trouble if it be well dried at the first: And if the price expected come not
soon enough, it is good to change this old store sometimes, and to lay up new
in the room, and never to diminish the stock till it will yield double price at
least.

I have known Barley at six pence the bushel in Northampton Market, and at five
shillings a bushel in the same place within a year also: I have known Wheat at
three shillings and six pence in London, and at fifteen shillings the bushel
within a year following; and Histories of good credit declare greater changes
than these in former Ages; so that methinks that it were well if Rich men when
they dye were strongly exhorted and persuaded to give some number of quarters
of Corn to be preserved for the public store against such miserable times of
dearth and famine.

A friend of mine propounded to the City of London to show them a way how they
might keep a thousand quarters of Corn in such a floor where now they can keep
a hundred, by mingling Corn with great Beans, exceeding hard dried on a kiln,
which may be separated easily with a wire Try, and are as profitable as the
Wheat, and that they should be eased of the charges of turning Corn in the
storehouses.

This Gentleman had learned the experience by long traveling into far
Countries, who when the City were not forward to gratify him for his pains
and good will, told me how it was to be done, which here I will divulge for the
benefit of posterity.

In hot Countries the use is in some places to put Corn in^ Vaults to keep it
cool from putrefaction: but this is not found to be a good experiment for these
cold Countries. In Egypt I have credibly heard, that the Storehouses which
Joseph erected had no covers; but how it was so long preserved I cannot learn
nor conceive, unless those Countries being hot and dry, having no rain at all,
do ripen the Corn so well, and free it from moisture, that it is not apt to
putrify, though it lie sub dio, which seemed to be possible, for that Malt
well dried will keep two or three years without stirring; and also Corn in
Russia (where for want of maturation, they are 2forced to dry it in stoves)
which will keep a long time: but howsoever it is certain, that these former
directions being observed in England, the extreme cheapnesse in time of plenty
may be remedyed whereby poor Farmers may not be so greatly damnified, and also
the extreme dearnesse in time of scarcity may be mitigated, whereby the poor
buyers of Corn supply the rest, which I wish may be practiced with all possible
diligence, especially in time of dearth, which will save such a wonderful
quantity of Corn for present relief, as (...) he Storehouses in any Kingdom
could never preserve the ^^e in all Ages heretofore.

It is found by experience, that when there is but a little Corn too much to
sell in a Market, there the price falls too extremely: Also if there be never
so little a quantity too small to serve, then the price is enhansed too much in
all conscience: For the remedy of which two inconveniences, being so great, all
courses seem to be taken, which may possibly be devised.

The tenth Experiment, wherein is showed the natural cause why the changing of
Seed corn produces an improvement; also certain ways for the melioration of
Seeds and Fruits.
It is found by experience, that if Seed-wheat be brought from barren, and
stony land, and sown upon rich clay ground, it prospers wonderfully, the
cause is double: First the Corn that grows upon a barren land, is more plump
and full than that which grows upon very rich land, and therefore has more
force to increase. Secondly, the Corn that growth upon stony land has
attracted plentifully the Juter, or petrifying saltish nature, which falling
into another earth, where that substance is wanting, stands in stead not
only of seed, but also of compost.

The like might be showed in many other works of this kind, but I wish that
this may serve to give light to the rest: As for the meliorating of Seeds and
Fruits, the former experience shows the way; for there is in every compounded
substance in the world a double kind of fatness or sulphur, the one ^s apt to
putrify the other, not so apt, but endures longer without putrefaction: this
may be seen in Cabbages, and other Garden fruits, growing near great Cities
where dung is plentiful, which if they be boiled in water, and the water kept a
little time, it will stink sooner than that wherein the like stuff has been
boiled which growed in grounds more barren.

Whereby it appears that the extreme fatting of ground with dung does in some
sort adulterate the seeds and fruits, and pisorate their quality, and
contrariwise the sowing the same in more barren earth, does meliorate the
quality of the same.

Therefore the best way is to sow, set, or plant seeds in barren land, for
seeds only; for by that means they will get a greater melioration in their
quality when they are intended for seed than the posoration can be in the
sowing them in earth much enriched with dung; for in all rich dunged earth the
attractive virtue of the seed draws much of the fatness, which is not much
putrified, whereby it declineth from its former virtue and goodness. The one
of these fatnesses is grateful to humane nature, the other is offensive for
the avoiding of which inconvenience I know none better than to let the dung be
fully putrified, and turned into earth without stnking, before it be mingled
with the Corn or Seeds.

And this may be done by my former Inventions, in such sort that there may be
above forescore pounds in the hundred saved in the Compost of all the Arable
land in England. There are three causes why people in the Country live longer,
and have better health than those that live in great Cities: The first is, the
air is more pure and wholesome: The second is their food does not abound so
much with the fatness and sulphur, which is apt to putrefaction, and to
contaminate the blood: The third is their much exercise does evacuate that part
of their nutriment which is ungrateful to humane nature.

The contrary to all these is in great Cities, where the air, diet, and
exercise are so much different, the effect does show the cause very clear, so
that there need no other or further philosophation concerning the same.

If any man doubt whether vegetables draw the corruptible or stinking sulphur,
or fatness which lies within the reach of their attractive virtue, let him
behold the places, where beasts have lately dunged in Pastures, and he shall
find that there the grass is more sour and gistastfull to the Beasts and
Cattle.

The eleventh^ Experiment, wherein is showed how rich Compost may be made in
great Cities of things formerly cast away.
The water wherein Fishmongers water their Fish, being made as salt as it will
bear with the foul salt in the sweeping of ships, salt Lime, great Larders, and
other such places, being boiled in Butchers slaughter-houses when their beasts
are to be killed, and the blood let run warm unto it, being likewise hot, it
will not clodder, but will be admirable good liquor to imbibe good Wheat earth,
whereby it may be made the richest Compost in the world to fill the holes where
Wheat or Barley is set, for that one bushel of this earth is sufficient to be
mingled with three or four bushels of the earth of the land it self, by which
means great charge is saved in the carriage it self, by reason that a little
quantity will work a great effect. Saltpeter for some grounds is more apt and
cheaper, though the price be greater; for a little quantity will work a great
effect, especially where the land is hot and dry by nature.

Saw-dust is excellent to mingle with earth to fill the holes where Corn is set
in strong binding clay ground. Also shavings of horn, hoofs of all beasts, hair
of beasts, woollen rags chapped small are admirable. Shavings of horn are now
usually sold in London for three shillings and six pence a sack for the same
purpose: also woollen rags for two shillings a sack: As for hoofs of beasts,
hair, and Tanners horns, may be putrified in good Arable wheat earth, being
kept dry from rain, and then the earth, and all together is the richest Compost
in the world to be used for the filling of the holes where Wheat is set: Also
all other composts whatsoever mentioned in this book are the most wholsomest
for man's body, and most effectual for producing of great increase if they be
thus ordered.

The twelfth Experiment, wherein is showed how any Kingdom may live in great
prosperity with half the trouble and charge which now they sustain, and yet
live in adversity.
It is found by experience, that where there is a good Council of War, there
the kingdom is well defended; and where there is good regularity in Divinity,
there the soul is preserved from sickness: Why should it not be so for the
state temporal, if a council of Husbandry was erected whereupon the happiness
of all kingdoms does depend? Surely if a certain number of the best experienced
men were deputed for this purpose, who might regulate the rest, it would
produce a great perfection in that knowledge, which as it is the most ancient
of all Sciences, so it is the most excellent and honorable, for that by it all
Princes live, and no Inferior person can possibly live without it.

The Plebeans are like those in Ireland who will not lay aside their old
custom, to draw their horses by the tayls, though an Act be made against it,
nor lay aside the burning their Corn in the straw to save the labor of
thrashing, though their houses lie unthatched. I have known some Parsons in
Parishes which have been skilful in Agriculture, and have been excellent
Improvers of land, and some that were good physicians, and have done much good
in their Country that way. I have also known some Landlords qualified with the
same skils, and certainly if all were so, it would conduce greatly to the
prosperity of a Kingdom, for the greatest profit would redound to those two
sorts of men, yet may the marter be easily ordered so that the rest might live
in twice as much prosperity as now they do, and though they were doubled in
number: for I have known many men to live better with 30. acres of land than
others have done with an hundred of acres; and if need require I can show where
one acre of land has been worth two hundred pound per an* by being planted
with Mellons, and a whole family have lived well upon it, and gathered riches.
If the course of Husbandry were regulated in this manner, viz. That no man
should occupy any land in Pasture whose fertility may perpetually be increased
by the means of water, though the hay growing thereupon were totally spent, to
produce dung for the fertilizing of high grounds: Also that no man should
occupy any land in Tillage, whose fertility may be perpetually increased in
Pasture by having the same dung spent upon them which they yield naturally:
Also that no man should Till any other land but such high and barren land as is
not able to fertilize it self, and should make use of my several Inventions
for the enriching of the same. Then would there be left but little barren land
in England in a short space, whereby all the premises in this twelfth
Experiment might be easily performed.

A friend of mine did search diverse Register books in several Parishes in
England, he also searched the Parsons books of Tithes, and found that where
Arable land as turned into Pasture there were fewer Christnings, and many more
tyth Lambs and tyth Calves, whereby he discovered a kind of Witchcraft, which
is to turn men into beasts. To dissolve this Witchcraft there is no other way,
but to go the contrary way; and whereas the Landlord found more gain in the
increasing of sheep and beasts than formerly he found in the increasing of
people, to show a way how more gain may accrue to the Landlord by the increase
of people than formerly he found in the increase of beasts; and surely this is
no hard task; for if the peoples employments be well regulated, there will come
more profit a great deal than by beasts. And if there be any doubt whether
people may be had to improve the land, and to produce greater profit than
beasts can do, let but things be so ordered that the Plebeans may have such
good employments whereby they may maintain a married estate plentifully, and it
will be found by a short experience, there will be no want of servants. By this
means the Parsons may double their tyths, the Landlord may double his rents,
and the common people, though doubled in number, may live twice as well as they
did before, and Princes and Statesmen shall not have half the trouble which
they had before; for want and necessity is found to produce grudgings and
discontentments: These have produced Rebellions and Insurrections, all which
have caused Princes for to lose their kingdoms many times, and turned the state
of Countries topsey turvey. Besides that the lives of men would be lengthened,
as in former Ages by their good and wholesome diet; for there can be no other
cause in nature, why men should be now of lesser stature, and enjoy worse
health, and dye sooner than in former Ages; but these few, viz. First men are
much employed with worldly cares and difficulty for living in populous
Countries, which might easily be remedied by the means aforesaid. Secondly, the
Corn (which should be the preserver of other meats from too sudden corruption
in the bodies of men, before the chilus has performed all his several offices)
is now adultera^ed and contaminated much by mixing the dung with the corn
before the corruptible part thereof be consumed, and so the corn helped to
contaminate the blood which should preserve it, and would do it powerfully, if
my new Invention were generally put into practice. Thirdly, in populous
Countries where there is difficulty of living, the pure law of nature is not
observed in Marriages and married estates, but other respects does sway
overmuch, which causes defects in many generations. But to return to my main
subject, I am now about a way to experiment, to meliorate any Corn, Pulse,
Seed, Kernel, Fruit, etc. and doubt not but to bring it to pass in such sort
that the pleasantness of the taste, the wholsomness of the smell, and the ability
to keep other meats from sudden corruption in man's body, will invite great men
in general to make use of the same, and to give good prices, so that a Farmer
may maintain his family well, and grow rich too by the planting of 1 Acre of
land yearly: For upon my certain knowledge, there are fondly cast away in every
family in England, as well in great Cities, as Country-towns, so many things as
being used according to my direction, would produce such an increase of corn
yearly as would serve for the maintenance of the said family, and would be more
wholesome for the body of man than the greater part of corn which now usually
grows in England, yea though this Compost should be used in the more barren
sort of land: So that now the question is not whether this Land, and so
consequently other Kingdoms may live in worldly happiness and prosperity for
ever hereafter, but whether they will do so or not; for if they be willing,
they will show the same by their actions, and then I am sure there is no doubt
to be made of the possibility thereof: Whereby an Vtopia may be had really,
without any fiction at all.

If order were given that every Over-seer of the poor in their Parishes, only
one day in the year in the practice of some of these new Inventions, as setting
of Wheat, of compounding of Composts in great Cities, fit to be carried many
miles, then they would be expert against a year of dearth and famine, so that
they might be employed in that work, whereby a wonderful quantity of corn
might be saved for the present relief of the Land, which else must needs be
imported from other Kingdoms, for which the wealth of this Land must needs be
exhausted.

The thirteenth Experiment, wherein is showed how timber for buildings, and
wood for household stuff may be provided in short space.
It is found by experience, that a Chestnut will grow in ten or twelve years
into a fair tree, able to be the Master-post of a fair building, and then there
is no question but that it may be provided into lesser parts, for studds and
spars. It is also found that a Walnut will grow in the like time into a tree
able to make little tables, boxes, stools and chests, very beautiful and sit
for use to adorn the house.

Whereby any younger brother that will show so much frugality and providence as
to obtain leave of his father to plant a certain number of such trees in some
convenient place in his fathers lands in his minority while he is a Schoolboy,
he may not only have wood to build him an house, and to furnish it against his
occasion, but also he may win so much credit by his industry and diligence,
that as for my part, if I had a daughter to marry, I would sooner match her
with him, though I purchase him land to set his house upon, than with his elder
brother if he wanted those gifts and qualities, though he were able to make a
good Jointure.

For I have seen by experience, that a present estate, either real or personal,
is not to be compared to the quality of thriving, which any man else may
likewise see by experience, that sometimes, yea many times, a Farmer being
industrious, intelligent, and provident, though he pay a good round rent,
lives better than a Freeholder which is owner of much freeland.

The fourteenth Experiment, wherein is showed diverse ways concerning
Fruit Trees.
It is found by experience, that if the kernel of a Pear or Apple be set and
not grafted, but be let grow to a great tree, then it will not bear fruit till
forty or fifty years, as a great number of other trees of the same kind.

It is likewise found by experience, that a Siens taken from a tree that is
fruitful, and also from the most fruitful bough of that tree, and being
grafted into a young stock of the same kind, as that before mentioned, will
bear fruit in a quarter of the time which the other did, the cause can be no
other but that nature has ordained a certain time for propagation in all
things, but yet the said time was accelerated in the grassed tree, by Art
helping Nature, but in the other tree time was left to natures free
determination.

So that every one may make choice of these two ways at pleasure; and if he
aim at his present profit, then graffing is his present way and best; but if he
aim at the profit of his posterity, then it is best not to graft at all.

And by this means he may change the tastes of fruits at pleasure, which by
graffing he cannot do; for it is found by experience, that if three kernels of
several sorts be put into the cave of a Bean-stalk cut half an inch long above
a knot, and so set it will bear a fruit contrary in color, taste, and form,
contrary to any one of them: Also by this means he may exalt the nature and
excellency thereof at pleasure, if about the root thereof he make three or
four little holes in the earth, and now and then with a little Fennel and a
spoon he put into the holes a little of the best new wort, wherein has been
boiled a little Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, Sugar, or any other substance of
excellent taste and odor.

For as it is found by experience, that any evil neutriment does spoil, yea and
sometimes poison the thing nourished, so any excellent nutriment does
wonderfully advance the goodness and excellency thereof. And after that these
trees are come to age of maturity to be fruitful; then the Siens taken thence
will be perpetual, and able to fill the whole Country with fruits of the same
kind, and by such means as these there is no question but all these varieties
of excellent fruits were obtained in former times; for it cannot be thought but
that at the first, when there was none but wild fruits, there could neither be
such varieties, nor yet fruits of such excellency.

I have now some trials in hand with some pulse, fruits, and garden stuff to
meliorate them in this manner, and do not doubt of the success.

The fifteenth Observation and Experiment, showing how it may be ordered that
Corn shall never be exceeding cheap to the great prejudice of the Farmer, nor
exceeding dear to the grievance of the buyer.
It is found by experience that when Barley is at two shillings the bushel, or
under, then an Acre, and so twenty Acres of land may be manured with Malt more
cheap than with dung, if it he worth six pence a load, and to be carried half a
mile, and this is true if after the common manner the Malt be sowed amongst the
Wheat, as they use to do with Pigeons dung: Malt dust, rags, shavings of
horn, saltpeter, bay salt, or any other thing which is potent and effectual
for multiplication. Now let every man judge of how great consequence this
Experiment will be, if by my new Invention the Malt be dispersed into the holes
where the Wheat is set, so that it all lie within the attractive virtue of the
Corn, for then none will be lost, and by this means an acre of land may be
manured with so much Corn as is usually cast away by the accustomed manner of
sowing more than by setting.

And the reason why Malt is so much better than Corn, is because that by drying
upon the kiln the vegetative spirit is killed, and by the Malting the nutritive
virtue is opened and advanced, and it mattereth not of what Corn the Malt is
made, as of Barley, Pease, Beans, Oats, Fetches, or Buck-wheat, or whatsoever is
cheapest; for by this means it is converted into the substance of the Wheat
together with the benefit of the multiplication, neither is it material whether
the Mast be ground or not, especially for Wheat, or any Corn sown before
winter, for that in due time it will be dissolved and putrified, so that by
little and little it may be assimilated.

I have found by experience, that when I have taken the great piked Wheat, my
increase has been doubled more than with the smaller sort, the reason can be
no other, but that such Wheat is both Seed and Compost. I have also put into
every hole with the Wheat seven or eight Malt-cornes, and then increase was
four or five, yea six times more increased than before, and this seven or
eight Malt-corns being so dispersed by my Engine into every hole is quickly
done, and amounts to no more Corn than is usually cast away in sowing more
than is needful in setting.

Now the use to be made of this Experience for the prevention of cheapnesse, is
to make a great use thereof in time of exceeding plenty, and to keep much dung
in store for another year; this with the practice of engrossing and hoarding up
of Corn, taught before, will prevent immoderate cheapness, and preserve many an
honest poor Farmer from poverty.

And howsoever I shall not be free from the aspersion of the ignorant Plebeans
for this my attempt, yet I regard them not, being devoted to the universal
benefit of all, and let them be pleased to understand that every cheap year is
but a forerunner of a dear one, unless that this course be taken, by reason
that much Corn ground is usually upon such occasions turned into Pasture, when
as the Farmers find more gain in converting the fruits of the earth into Beef,
Mutton, Butter, Cheese, etc. then by turning them into Corn.

And let them be pleased also to take notice of the Statute made in the reign
of King James of happy memory, which allows Engrossers to hoard up Corn for
no other purpose but this, which Statute I wish all men, that can spare their
money, to take notice, and to maste use of the same for their own advantage, as
well as for the public benefit, and let them not doubt of their gain, which
must needs prove certain howsoever, yea though nature should diverse years
together prove a loving Nurse, and not play the Stepmother by administering too
much rain or too much drought, or too little of either, which is sometimes seen
three or four years together, though very seldom, and if it happen so, yet by
turning the Arable land into Grass, it has always come to pass, as I have
diligently observed for many years, that the price of Corn has been doubled at
the least.

Now that I have done with the preventions of cheapnesse, I will proceed to the
preventions of dearth, which may be partly done by the storing of Corn, and
partly by my new Invention for the expeditious setting of Corn, which is so
easy and quick for dispatch, that he that has an ordinary plowland, viz.
sixty acres in Tillage may set it all in due time, and pay his charges with the
fourth part of the money, which he may sell his corn for presently, besides the
increase of the succeeding crop, which will be a third part more at least, and
will come in a good time; for it is never seen, that corn is very cheap, the
next year after a dear.

And by this means a good Farmer may sow twenty quarters in his seed corn,
which is worth twice as much money as it is other years, and how much corn will
be thus sowed in the whole kingdom, I lean to the estimation of all men, and
suppose that they will confess that if every Farmer keep these Engine; ready
for such times, howsoever they make not so great use thereof in time of
exceeding cheapness, that it may well be called store-corn, and is more
effectual, and preserves greater abundance of Corn for the prevention of
dearth, then all the storehouses that ever were in the world.

I have taken the more pains and diligence in the penning of this discourse,
because I beheld the merciless dealing of men one with another upon all
advantages; for if corn prosper well, then the buyers will cause the price to
fall twice as much as much as the plenty requires in equity; and on the other
side of Corn do fail never so little extraordinary, then the sellers will
inhaunce the price double at the least to that which a good conscience
requires.

The sixteenth Experiment, showing how all sublunary substances may be changed
one into any another.
This Experiment may serve as well for pleasure to a man, that delights in
the knowledge of the secrets of nature, as for profit to him that delights in
the gaining of riches, and if any man that delights in both, shall take
advantage by these my demonstrations to obtain his desires, it shall not
displease me. When I first entered into these speculations, I conceived that
surely the God of Nature had endued her with a great desire of changes, even as
he endued the inferior creatures with a desire of propagation; for else
certainly in some age or other there would have been more stability in
sublunary things than has ever been found; for what changes has their been in
Monanchies, Lierchies, Kingdoms, Commonwealths, great Families, Honors,
Governments, Religions, etc., surely a man cannot but think that Nature takes
great delectation to ring changes upon the bells of Fortune, and also in the
change of one creature into another, so to make varieties a^ pleasure.

To proceed according to my accustomed brevity, because I will not increase my
book to a greater volume, then I intended: I will tefer the Reader to the
perusal of my former Experiments, which do in a manner contain all together
such changes, and here I will only handle some few of the most difficult, and
such as are by most men deemed unpossible. And my first demonstration shall be
to show how Minerals may be turned into vegetables; the second, how vegetables
may be turned into Minerals; the third, how animals may be turned into
vegetables back again; the fourth, how those vegetables may be turned into
Minerals.

And in these transmutations, I mean not that the whole substance is changed,
but that a share thereof: so much as is apt for the next body, into which it is
to be turned, is really changed, even as a man should take a great viol, or
instrument of Music, and make a little Fiddle thereof, no man can deny, but
that the substance of the Viol is converted into the Fiddle, notwithstanding
that there is a great number of chips which entered not into the Fiddle

Well then I will proceed, and devide this sixteenth Experiment into several
Experiments for more easy apprehension.

The first Experiment, showing how Minerals may be turned into vegetables.
First choose a parcel of Arable land that is somewhat barren, and divide it
into two equal parts, water often the one half thereof, with water wherein the
oar of Copper has been long steeped therein, and putrified till it be greenish
and fattish; the like may be done with water wherein English Coperas has been
dissolved, which is made of iron; then water the other half with common water
as often; then sow all the land with the same seed, and look how much more
comes of the one than of the other, the same was produced by the vegetative
part of the Minerals.

The second Exp^riment, showing how this Corn may be turned into Animals.
Take a couple of tame of Pigeons, and let them have no other Corn but this,
and let them breed and multiply in number, and then the increase must needs
come from the vegetables which had their increase from the Minerals.

And if you will proceed further, you may work these two Experiments in such
great quantity, that there may be Corn and Pigeons, and other foul enough to
serve a man and a woman without any other food till they have increased their
number, and then you have part of the said substance converted into reasonable
creatures, which are the most excellent amongst all Animals.

The third Experiment, showing how this Animal may be turned into Vegetable
again.
Take a parcel of barren ground, as before, and bury an Animal in it, then take
two trees both of one growth, and greatness, and plant one upon the grave, the
other in the same barren ground, and you shall see that the tree growing upon
the grave will be greater than the other, for that it is nourished with the
putrified Animal, and so the substance of the Animal is turned into the
Vegetable.

The fourth Experiment, showing how this Vegetable may be turned back into
Minerals.
This wood being put into some particular waters will be turned into stone; the
like may be done in some Mines and Quarries, I have seen both Wood and Fishes
turned into Stones, and no man can deny but that stones are Minerals, and if
this be done in very fit water, Mine or Quarrie, then the Stones may be melted
into Iron or other fusible substances, and if Iron you may turn part thereof
into good Gold by the way prescribed in my book of Minerals.

And thus you see how this wonder is nothing, the secret being discovered, and
that I do as it were carry Owls to Athens in the publishing thereof: the like
may be done by turning Grains into Malt again when they have been brewed, by
dispersing them into holes where Barley is set, so that they will produce as
much Barley, which being turned into Malt, will make as much drink as before.

And so may any barren land be turned into fertile land, and if any man doubt
it, he may see a fruitful garden made upon the top of a Turret or Rock though
more pleasant than profitable, and therefore the Impossibility being taken
away, let every one trouble himself no further but to find out where it may be
done with the greatest facility, for it will quit the charge the better to
improve grounds near London, where hay is at thirty shillings a load in a cheap
year than in the Country, where it is at six shillings and eight pence a load,
though the labor and charge be alike.

There is an old saying, that it is better to buy good land than make good
land, which is true with this distinction, viz. It is better for him that is
ignorant in Husbandry to buy good land, but for him that is skilful, it is
better to buy barren land, so that it lie apt for Improvement, for that by this
means he may gain as good a revenue for a thousand pound charge and purchase as
another shall gain for two thousand pound; and I fear not that this discovery
will leave no means for men of skill to thrive more than others; for I am
assured there would needs to be but little barren land in England but through
the barrenness of men's wits.

The last Experiment, showing how weeping land may be drained where there is no
level.
Make a ditch about it, then ram the ditch full of tough clay to keep out
rainwater, then make a pond in the nether part of it, into which make drains
under the ground, as is taught in the Experiment; then raise the water by an
engine or water-work of the most fit sort for that place and purpose. This work
will quit the charge very well near London, or in any place where hay and
grass is at a good price.

A Philosophical Letter concerning Vegetation or the Causes of Fruitfulness.
I Shall a little tell you what my thoughts are about Vegetation; and what I
have within my self instituted.

First, I have framed a pretty large Induction upon common and familiar
Experiments, to demonstrate that without controversy Salt is the seat of life
and vegetation, and so the subject of nutrition. And this being assented to, it
is in the next place to be considered whether Salt as Salt be this subject, or
whether all Salts equally nourish? Here comes in an examination of Salt by
their Tribes, as 1. Nitrous Salt, 2 Urinous Salt, in which are comprehended, 3.
all Dungs, Horns, Shreads and the like; 4. Common Salt, and Sea sand; 5. Kaly
Salt, as Ashes, Kelpes, Mineral Salts, as of Stones or Lime, of Marl, Chalk,
Fullers-earth, Vitriol.

And because some Salts do kill, as that of Vitriol, also that of Stones and
Lime, if applied in quantity and to the plant it self immediately. Hence comes
the examination of Salts further, viz. Whether any Salt does universally
nourish all Plants, and make them thrive, or whether some do best agree with
one, others with another, and upon the clear determination of this, and this
solely does the great secret of Imbi^ition depend, if we speak of things
rationally, and not like Mountebanks. But here two knots offer themselves, and
will do so whether we will or no.

First seeing you cannot sow, set, or plant any Vegetable or Seed in salt
alone, but must require two other Media, viz. Water to dissolve and make sluyd
the particles of Salt, whereby the pores of the Plant or Seed may be capable of
it, and admit it. 2. Earth as a fit uterus or matrix to keep the thing planted
steady. Hence a scruple arises, what is earth abstractedly considered, for
either it is and or salt, or water, or some other body. If Sand, whence comes
its clamminess and aptness to sod together? If Salt, whether is that a peculiar
salt, and whether can it be separated or not from it? If Water, how comes it to
be unable to nourish without addition still of moisture. If earth be none of all
these, what is it, and what is its property, and whether has it any Energy?
And indeed this is a very necessary enquiry; for my Imbibitions signify
nothing if my earth be beforehand impregnated with another salt of perhaps a
much different nature than what my plant imbibed does require: And how shall I
know this, when all Inquiries about the natures of earth, their several salts,
dispositions, their uses, and necessity for Germination, and their several
ways of composition and correction is wholly lame and unsought after.

5. It is to be considered, that Water, especially Rainwater, has life in it
self without any addition of Salt or Earth, as is most apparent as by many
Experiments, so by that famous and commonly known one in Africks, That
Rainwater in four and twenty hours will ba full of Insects, that it will
putrify. Now if even Rainwater it self be sufficient for life, and do contain
manifestly a vital salt in it, what is the need of those other Salts which seem
more remote from a life or vitality of disposition.

6. As no possibility of nourishment, nor any approach to Vegetation without
moisture, so no possibility of life without an excitation and production of it
by an actual warmth, and this is as well seen in vegetables as in Animals: For
the earth is there, the salt is there, and the water is there, yet in sharp and
cold weather vegetation is not to be effected. Hence on the other side
produces nothing simply, unless in a soil first sited, and cold it self,
though not a fit season for Germination, yet permits of nutrition to many
plants, who have even their luster then, as the Cypress, the Fur, the Bay,
with several other. He therefore that will enter upon this great subject of
promoting Vegetation, must first know what things are prin^ipalia, what minus
principalia, tamen necessaria, and what part to attribute to each, viz. the
Earth, the Salt, the Water, or Dew the warmth and the spirit of the Plant it
self.

Secondly, he must seriously weigh, whether the subject of Fermentation and
things that serve to excite and entertain heat be not of one kind, subject of
nutrition of another.

Thirdly, whether Fermentation being no other than a species of Motion, there
may not be diverse sorts of it arising from the nature and diversity of the
Salts or other subjects which cause it: And whether according to this diverse
motion the subject of Nutrition, having in it also a vital principle, may not
be disposed more or less, to take this or that figure?

Lastly, he must resolve the several Casualties, as I may call them, of
Vegetation, as why the earth puts forth some Plants sponte, not other? why it
very seldom puts forth some, unless it be in producing of others, as Botanists
can tell you, that many Plants are rarely, or never found unless in ploughed
fields, either under Corn and Tillage, or under Fallow, why water should put
forth Plants that will not at all grow in the earth? Why on the other side some
plants destroy even the Vegetative virtue, as it were in the soil where they
are, as to many Plants, as is manifest in Hemp and in Oade. These, Sir, are the
Institutes I set my self to in the point of Husbandry. In the ignorance of any
of which, I think a man knows satisfactorily very little. They are rudely set
down, but may afford ground of larger discourses. If you shall please either to
cheerish or excite this humor in me, by laying or propounding of something
further for promoting of vegetation upon these comprehensive grounds, I shall
not refuse to deal very freely with you, if you will afford me an occasion by
letting me have the thoughts of some better wits than mine own upon them.

An Extract out of another Philosophical Letter.
Jf I were to answer the question concerning fertility, I would in one word
say, that the chief cause of the opening of the of Seed, and its becoming
fruitful, is the Anima or Sal Natura, and that which is its Deputy or
Lodestone: and I think that this saying will comprehend all those causes which
the Proposer of this Question does very learnedly reckon up. For hence (though
it be more then the Husbandmen know) comes all the ploughing and turning of the
clods upside down, that so fresh earth like an hungry Loadstone, may be exposed
to the light, by which it may draw in that Sal Natura, which does make it
fruitful. All dungings are the Deputies and Loadstones of this Sal Natura, and
by them, ground may be recovered, amended and imreproved.

Another Letter on the same Subject.
J Have read the Book of Husbandry through, being very much delighted with the
many profitable ingenious and promising Inventions specified therein, I wishing
that I were a Farmer in the Country, to play the practical Philosopher. I
remember in Cambridge, being a youth, I was wont to maintain that he was no
Natural Philosopher, that could not advance his Tillage, order his cattle,
fishing, fowling affairs with more dexterity, and to greater profit then
another man that pretends no skill in Physic. This I speak from what I have
read somewhere in Ramus, who referred all Arts to profitable use in man's life,
abhoring the vain ostentations of the sophisticated Universities. The mention
which is made of Experiments of fructification by Salt, confirms me in an
opinion, that the Sea is as the heart of the World, whence the waters run by
low and secret ways into the earth, as by Arteries carrying the vitality of
Salt into the body of the whole earth, wherewith it has lost its metal and
vigor, and is become fresh, it returns again by the Rivers as by veins into
the Sea, to receive a new fructifying and quickening tincture, by the way
serving to allay the indispositions that Animals find in themselves by the
over-activity of Salt, which we call quenching of thirst, etc. I have long
thought of this, being moved thereunto at first by considering the like motion
of blood in the Microcosine* as here the heart resembles the Sea, the motion of
the blood the ebbing and flowing and circular motion of the Sea waters: for the
blood being salted in the heart, and spirited with subtle Nitre or Gunpowder,
it by the Arteries in a more secret passage (like that of the Sea waters into
the earth) is distributed through the body, where having spent its vigor and
metal, it by the high and visible way of the veins, lying on the surface of our
earth, is returned to the heart again to be fresh pickled, I doubted of the
truth of this, till I read your book, because I remembered that I had read of
sowing the ground with salt in the Israelitish wars, which I had heard
interpreted to make it barren, and because I have heard the old women say, it
will make herbs dye to have urine to fall upon them.

How the Controversy about Helmont's Assertions, mentioned in the fourth
Deficiencie of the Legacy of Husbandry may be reconciled.
IN your Legacy (Deficiencie 4.) I find these words, A learned Author (Helmot)
says that smuttiness of Corn, which makes it smell like a red herring, was
not known in France till about 1530. At which time the great foul disease began
to break forth, which he conceives from hence to have some original, as also
the Camp-disease.

To this your friend at Paris, in his letter dated July* 22. 1651. replies thus.

The foul disease had its original full 36 years sooner than Helmot says
(viz.) in the year 1494. and nothing could be advanced more absurd or
ridiculous in the judgment of all sound Physicians than to attribute the
original of that disease in any wise to smutty Corn, as he does.

This difference had been prevented, if both your friends had not written
without book. The place in Helmonts writings, is not quoted by the former man,
nor does the latter seem to have looked for it. You shall find the passage in
Helmonts book called Tumulus pestis, in the fourth chapter, whose title is,
Peregrina lues nova, there you may find these words, Notatur autem annus 1424
and Parth noplicobsidio, aetas luis, ejusque prima nativitas. Here the Printer
was negligent, as appears by that which follows a great way after in the same
chapter. Lues (says he) ista primum visa legitur in obsidione Neapolis, Anno
1494. Then follows a long discourse wherein he seems to approve the opinion of
one that suspected that it was bred by some villain that at the siege of Naples
buggered a Mare (for that Helmont means by jume^tum, imitating the French word
jument) infested with the farcin, or, as our Farriers call it, the fashions.
And, says he, Non credam facile unquam [antea] ejusmodi peccatum in talibus
terminis ab origin mundi commissum; estque morbus [ille, Farcin] lui venereae
similis and equinae naturae affinis ac familiaris. -- After this He mout
proceeds in the order of time.

Anno 1540. sub Paulo III. circa Autumnum in Apulia pro^e Tarentum, prima
apparuit Tarantula -- Araneae simile, etc.

Anno 1550. in Augusto, Galli primum viderunt Triticum, quod vocant roratum,
sive mellitum: in aristae adhuc viridi halecem fumatam odore referens: in
matura vero, nihil nisi faesidum pulverem atrum: popularium utinam non morborum
plurium causam.

Anno 1556. nostris oris maritimis (he means Flanders, Zealand, Holland) primum
apparuit scorbutum, veteribus ignotum. --

By all which, it is manifest, that Helmont has written nothing contrary to
your latter friends assertions; and that your former friend in writing that
passage, trusted more to his memory, than it deserved.

An Observation touching planting of Trees in the Fenns.
J Received your Legacy of Husbandry, (though do not yet suppose you dead) but
rather your own Executor distributing your good things in your life time,
whilst others are like Swine, good for nothing until dead. I have perused the
book, and cannot but wonder, that in your constant residence in London, you can
see so far into the Country. One part I have pitched on, and that is the
Plantation of a Mulberry Garden, for the feeding of Silkworms, and having some
already, I shall endeavor their increase as much as may be. I hope S. R.
Weston, will comply with your desires, and also all others whose abilities
shall be accompanied with good affections, and a will for to promote all
useful arts and sciences. Touching Planting of Trees being lately in the Fens
about Whittelsey, I observed a kind of Husbandry, of planting of Willows by
sets upon ridges, which in those vast and vacant grounds being always very
moist does soon produce an incredible profit, and increase of firewood and
Timber for many Country uses, and does improve as fast as your Lime-trees. As I
meet with other things, I shall acquaint you with them.

More Observations concerning Fruit Trees, and the great benefit of Furzes, for
keeping Mice and Rats out of Barn-floors (or other rooms) as likewise Reeks of
Corn, and Cheese-racks.
J Had not until now, convenience to give you a further account of the Sussex
Gentleman improving of his fruit trees, my friend will repair unto him, and
take as he promises the particulars from himself, and I may then impart it
more satisfyingly: yet at the present he relates that he gathers all the
Sult that remains in the Channel that conveigheth water to his Meadows, and
lays it on heaps in or near his Orchard, and then taking all earth he may
conveniently from his fruit trees root, he puts this Sult unto them, and
this every two years, and that he has thus recovered old decaying Trees, and
such as had scarce bark or any life left in them, and that his other Trees have
shot forth and fructified double and treble to what they did before. For the
Devonshire Gent. I am hopeless of seeing him again, but his relation
concerning Furzes, was to this effect. That they valued them much in Devon, and
sowed their seed for hedges to shelter their Cattle, and for Fuel and that they
found them very profitable for fruit trees being young, to hang about their
bodies near the ground to defend them from Hares (which usually bawk young
Trees) sheep and winds; and that the (dressis) as he called the dust of them,
does marvellously hearten the earth in which they grow if laid upon the ground
only round about them, and that they value that dust for that use above any
horse dung. They are of excellent use to keep Mice out of Barn-floors, for
being laid under the Corn, Mice and Rats avoid touching the floors. So Reeks
of Corn, that stand from the ground upon piles of Wood and Cheese-racks that
have Furzes bound in the way where the vermin might creep, are sufficiently
secured. The Lady D. told me that at Islington being annoied with Rats, she was
advised to take Furzes, and place them in the passages and holes where Rats
entered her rooms, and that she was fully cleared of them by that means. Thus
contemp^ible things are of precious use, by the order of him, that made nothing
in vain.

An Estimate made some years ago, of the great destruction of Corn by the
multitude of Pidgeon-houses.
An Estimate of the great quantity of Corn that Pigeons do eat spoil and
destroy in the County of Cambridg, and probata for every shire of England the
one with the other, as by due inquiry may be made appear as follows, viz.
1. THat there are in the County of Cambridge 163 Parishes, and in every Parish
one with another 3 Dove-houses, every house has in it at least one with
another 200 holes, which are bred in, and in every hole a pair of Pigeons,
which breed, besides those that have no mates, which breed not, of whose number
no notice is taken, which devour, eat, and spoil much Corn also.

2. That it has and may be proved that a Pidgeon has had at one time in her
Crop, 1000 Wheat Corns, which is about a pint, a Pidgeon does feed thrice a
day, then conceive what every Pidgeon does spoil, eat, and devour in a year,
but to come to a far less scantling, that a Pidgeon does eat but half a pint a
day, besides that he spoileth, by the space of six weeks in the harvest time
only, besides that he beats much down and spoil, in beating down the
standing Corn that amounts unto at least at the rates aforesaid, for every
Pidgeon house the one with the other 39 Combs, and 6 pecks one sort of Corn and
grain with another, the which the other at 10 s. the Comb, comes unto 19 l. 13 s.
9 d. but let it be granted (as true it is) that every Pidgeon house eats,
besides that he otherwise spoileth, to the value of 20 l. worth by the space of
six weeks as aforesaid, and the number of Parishes in the whole Nation, being
9533. as Whites Almanac said, besides Londen, and so rate every shire with the
County of Cambridge, at 3 Dove-houses for every Parish, the one with the other;
for in some Parishes there be far more, at which rate the whole Kingdom
amounts unto 28599. devouring Dove-houses, the which at the several rates
aforesaid comes unto 571980 l. damage to the whole Kingdom, in six weeks
space only, but it is conceived they have nine weeks in the harvest to eat and
spoil, in which it may amount to half as much more; besides that they devour at
seeds, and other times in their several ways.

3. That the multitude of Dove-houses are winked at, and are suffered to stand
in many places for the ingendring of Peter, where some of the Owners thereof
not sowing any Corn at all, and some other having but a little Land with Corn
of their own inheritance. And moreover, the profit of any Dove house, is not
worth to the Owner thereof, the 40. part of that which the Pigeons devour
only in six weeks space, besides what they beat out and spoil.

4. That the damage then in what the Pigeons eat, devour, and spoil in the
whole Kingdom in six weeks space, at the rates aforesaid, amounts unto One
Million, seven hundred, and seventeen thousand nine hundred and forty pound at
the least.

5. But if it may be proved, that they eat and devour by the space of nine
weeks as aforesaid, then it will amount to the sum of Two Millions, five
hundred, seventy three thousand, nine hundred and ten pounds damage to the
Kingdom in that space, which is more than all the Pigeons and Peter made in
the Kingdom is forty times worth.

6. That if it may be computed how many poor people of six persons in a Family
at a bushel a week for every family, that which the Pigeons do eat and
destroy in the space aforesaid will maintain so many thousand families for nine
weeks space, which is a thing worthy to be thought upon and reformed by the
Parliament.

7. That in some Towns where there are not above fifty or sixty Families, there
are ten or twelve Dove-houses, and the best owners thereof except Lords of the
Manors, have not above forty or threescore acres of ploughed land in the Town;
besides that, it will be proved, that in some Parishes there are two or three
Dove-houses, where is not one Acre of ploughed land in these Parishes.

8. That Judge Crook at an Assize time was of opinion, that it was neither
fitting nor lawful for any man to have a Dove-house when so many poor people
and their families may be maintained with the Corn that the Doves do eat,
spoil, and devour.

Another Estimate by way of confirmation of destructive Pidgeon-houses.
Pigeons can fly far for the filling of their crops and return the same
night, so long as Pigeons can get Corn they will eat little less

They begin to eat Corn about the end of J^ly, at which time the Corn (which is
before hand sprung up in the ear, and that ear pretty well filled) begins to
ripen or turn color, and they hardly want Corn till the end of Barley seeding,
which is about May day, which in all amounts to two hundred and eighty days or
thereabouts, the rest of the time they live on benting, etc.

There are in England and Wales at least 24000 Dove-houses, and there cannot be
less than 500 pair of old Pigeons in each house one with the other, which
amounts to 2000000 of pairs.

(To speak very modestly) each pair of old Pigeons (with what they carry home
to their young in their seasons) do eat one pint a day, which is in a year for
every pair above four bushels, and for all above 6000000 of Quarters of all
sorts, worth one with the other twenty shillings a Quarter. Thus much they
devour certain, out of what we have and know; but if we should go about to
reckon what might have come of those corns they eat at seed time (being
doubtless the best and largest grains of all, and more like to come to good
than those they leave) which cannot be accounted less than 4000000, since seed
time is twice as long as harvest, and should we suppose but one ear to have
come of one grain, and that ear one grain with another to have yielded but
sixteen single corns, it would seem strange to hear talk of 64000000 of
Quarters (and consequently of pounds as aforesaid) to be prevented thus yearly,
that it may seem we might have, but have not, by our own wilful preserving and
multiplying so great an enemy in our very bosoms; besides the incredible hurt
they do yearly in unthatching, and so spoiling of whole ricks, and beating out
and down many thousand acres at harvest.

A kind of Universal Medicine, or the virtues of Chewed Bread.
GOD is very often pleased to manifest his great power by such means as are in
themselves, or at least we esteem them for such, the most common, weak,
unlikely, or contemptible. And of this sort is that kind of Medecin I told you
of, which I have very often experimented for curing my self and others of
diverse and several wounds, aches, bruised ulcers, and other hurt and sorances,
for confirmation of this truth give me leave to report unto you some particular
experiments which I my self have made from my own self.

I was once (passing the Irish Seas in a vessel that was ballast with coal,
and by a violent storm, and a great leak almost suffering shipwreck, my body
being made much more liable to receive the malignant quality of a damp, or
infectious vapor arising from the wet coal by being first much sea-sick, and
immediately fasting about four days and five nights) taken with a great
swelling, and that fallen, and nothing to be seen, there followed the greatest
torment by way of ach, that (I thank God) I ever felt to this day; which pain
(notwithstanding many salves and medicines, prescribed by some that pretended
much skill, lasted, nay increased for at least three weeks space. At last I
resolved, and did lay to this easy Poultesse (viz.) White Bread Chewed in my
own mouth to a kind of pap or soft paste: I chewed so much as bound both my
feet about of all sides; I went to bed, and fell fast asleep for two or three
hours (which I had not done in all the time before.) The next morning when I
waked, my pain was gone: And (I thank God) I was never troubled with it since.

Another time being struck with a (new shod) stoned horse, just on the
shin-bone, my leg swelled so that my boot was fain to be cut off: I laid this
to it when I went to bed, and next day the pain was gone, yet to this day there
is the mark.

Diverse green wounds I have cured with it.

My hand was bitten through by a mad dog, I said this only to it, and healed it
in three or four days.

I have by applying this six times so mollified a Corn upon my toe, that I
after took it out core and root and all, and never any more grew in the place.

I took once a very great cold, which swelled all my throat on both sides under
the chin, and broke into a foul sorance like the Kings Evil. I applied this,
and took it away in two or three days.

For many years together I was troubled with an old pain in my shoulder, caused
by some strein the pain was not always but only when I did suddenly and
violently lift up my arm as to strike or through a stone or the like, by
applying this I took it away.

And lastly since you commanded me to give you this account, as I was with a
great hook pruning a tree in my Orchard, I struck the point of it by mischance
into the nail of my Thumb, above a quarter of an inch almost through, and in
two or three renuings of this salve (God be praised) it is very well.

And least it should be said or conceived that this Medicine would cure none
but my self, I have also experimented it upon diverse others; for example, Once
I applied it to a man's leg that was so swelled and putrified, that he had
diverse great and deep holes therein, and all over nothing but most filthy
rottenness, it was conceived to be a Gangrean howsoever under God this cured
it.

Once I applied it to my servant, that was run into the very joint of the knee
with a rusty Rapier, and for want of looking to it, did fester exceedingly;
insomuch that the Chyrurgians spoke of cutting it off, howsoever under God it
did cure him, although he did come at his wife in the time of the cure.

Once a Maid of my Sisters received a very violent blow with the handle of a
double draw well, it was black and blew (as they call it) from the Elbow to the
Shoulder, for it hit her upon the Brawn of the Arm, yet under God, I cured her
in a day or two with this only.

My wife had the end of her Thumb sorely bruised or broken, between the Wheel
and the Nut of my Engine, as it was in swift and strong motion, and applying
nothing but this, she was well in a small time (God be praised.)

Cum multis alijs. The quality of it is (slowly but certainly) to stench blood,
to ease pain, to draw out any poison or a thorn, and to heal up and make sound
the place grieved.

But some men by intemperance, or evil constitution of body, are harder to heal
then others.

If you lay it to any sound place it works nothing. This I testify for truth
upon my own knowledge.

C. D.

The Scotch way of Brewing their strongest and best ALE.
1. THey first boil the water, and scum it till it be very clear, and then

2. They put that water to the Malt, allowing eight gallons of water to every
bushel of Malt, which done:

3. They stir it very well for the space of one whole hour together, at the end
of which:

4. They cover it very close with clothes, and let it stand so for two hours;
and then:

5. They let the Wort run out from the Malt.

6. When the Wort is all run out, they boil it for two whole hours together,
and take of the scum very clean; which being done:

7. They put it into Coolers, and when it is well cooled it will rope like oil,
and then:

8. They put it into a Tub, and put their yest to it, but if they want yest
they take a green Birchen rod, and wreath it, and so put it into the Wort, and
it will make it work as well as yest will; having done so:

9. They let it work very well before they Tun it, and afterward when it has
done working in the vessel, they stop it very close with salt and clay, and so
ordered it will last seven years; but because with long standing it does wast,
they in the heat of Summer, do fill it up with new ale, which will both make it
work, and quicken it.

How to make Wine out of Corn.
TAke your Alewort as it is fit to barrel up, put it into a vessel that will
contain about twice as much, and into it put of good Honey despumed to every
Gallon of Ale a pound and a half and of good Yest as much as will serve to set
it on work. Cover then the bung (not close) and the vessel lay over with
clothes, and once a day for about a quarter of an hour stir it well, and be
sure you stir all the Honey and Yest well, when you put it in, so it will work
well for several days together; and when it has done working almost, renew
the working with new Yest, quickened with a small quantity of fine ( i. e.) the
fine flour that is in grinding Malt) Malt dust, this do three times, and at
last before the working be quite over stop the bung, leaving only a quill hole
for about two days, then stop it close, and let it stand cool in a cellar; in
two Months, it takes the natural taste and smell of Wine, and will keep
accordingly.

Another Process to make Wine of Corn.
TAke good Malt ground, as it is to be brewed, put to it as much water as the
vessel will hold, when it is full of Malt; add Yest to it equally in every
part, and let it work what it will in a barrel the bung open. Then take to each
Gallon of the matter half a pound of good Honey, dissolve it in warm water, and
put it in warm, and more Yest: Let it the second time work with not a fourth of
the vent it had at first; and when the working is almost abated, take half as
much Honey more, and dissolve it and warm it, and let it work by putting in
Yest the third time, only a peg-hole open; and when this third Fermentation
cease, let it stand open about six hours, to let out the wild spirit, then
stop it up close, and in four Months it will be clear and fine, which then may
be racked from the Lees, for all but the husk of the grain will be liquor, and
this Wine is not inferior in taste and goodness to the richest Canaries.

Because it is hard to hit right upon the knack at first, and few processes of
this nature perfectly understood without a few trials, it is advised, that these
Experiments be made in many and little vessels (for that is much the safer way)
till we are Masters of the Mechanic of them.

Some Animadversions upon the foregoing Process of making Wine of Corn.
J See no defect in this Process, if by thrice fermenting the taste of the honey
will be taken away. It is no matter what quantities of Water and Yest you use,
provided there be Yest enough to make it work, which every Brewer knows, and
experience will easily show it: And for your Water, you may take as much as
will make it either strong or small, as you desire it; for the quantity of
water will no way spoil the business. But I am not of their mind who think it
may best be brewed in small vessels, for they are not fit for the purpose. For
my part I would never try it in a less vessel than a barrel, for experience
shows that drink will work best in great vessels. Glanber knows how to
precipitate Raisins and Honey so as to take away the taste of them, and to make
the liquor taste like Wine, but I could never get it from him; yet I guess he
does it with Tartar, or Lees of Wine.

Glauberus's Promise or Undertaking for making Wine out of Corn.
OUr friend Glauber is desirous once again to draw unto us, he is at present
with his family at Franckfort, being minded to come down again into Holland,
desiring my advice herein, and to hold some discourse with me, being also to
come with the first opportunity in his own person to the Elector of Colen. He
does fully apprehend, that it can no longer fail him, but that he shall obtain
in a short space of time a good sum of money for the support of his family,
in regard he has a great and weighty piece of business in hand, which
proceeds out of Corn, and is affirmed to have such a property, that it will
be acceptable to the whole world, so as thereby a quarter of Corn shall be
advanced to a great value. He is intended shortly to put forth a small
Treatise, being an Explication upon his Miraculum mundi, wherein he will
endeavor to reveal some of the chiefest matters therein contained to those
that desire it, and to demonstrate it to their sight. And he doubts not but
that many great Lords and Princes will strive accordingly to bring profit and
advantage to their co^ntries as being a work of great importance. Now the
reason why he will communicate is this, because that it is endeavored after
already by false pretenders, and that much mischief may easily be effected by
it, neither can it much longer be kept secret, together with the Communication
of the Corn and Wine Traffic.

He will make Wine out of Corn, which in all respects shall be answerable unto
the natural wine. He has likewise such a compendious way of melting the Sun
and Moon, Earth or Mines, which will be necessary and acceptable unto the whole
world, whereby he is in hope not only to raise a good sum of money, but also
to procure an immortal fame to his posterity, for they are unheard of things,
profitable and necessary for the whole world to know. These are all his own
formalia dated the 6 th. of October at Franck-fort. The aforesaid Treatise
shall speedily be translated into Latin, whereby it may be transported into
foreign parts.

An Advertisement concerning the Mystery of making Wine according to Glaubers
undertaking.
ALL ingenious and industrious experiments that desire further satisfaction in
this matter, till Glauber shall have performed his promises, relating to his
Corn-wine undertakings, are faithfully advised to study and practice the
several hints and directions, which are given in a Treatise, called The
Reformed Commonwealth of Bees. Printed in the year 1655. and is to be sold by
Giles Calvert at the Black Spread-Eagle at the West end of Paul's.

How a Meadow about the end of May or beginning of June, before the Seeds of
Grass are ripe, may be used.
Ll^t Weeders (hired by the day) cut of the heads of all sorts of Grass, but
such as of which the seed is desired. This being done, the Meadow will be ready
to cut before the grass that has lost its head can put forth new, and by this
means the hay of this Meadow, being threshed at time of the year, before it be
foddered out, will both be sweeter to the Cattle, and yield only the seed that
is desired.

How much Ground in England may be cured, that through the predomination of
some quality in excess, will not sward again, or gather a good head of grass,
for the first, 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7 years, when laid down after Ploughing.
THe exact cure is too tedious here to set down since it may be occasioned by
the sterility, and that must first be helped by soil or the like; but for one
general cure you shall only procure hay-seeds, which did grow on ground of the
like kind but riclier, as upland to upland, lowland to lowland, etc. and
therewith sow your ground, hot furrough and in a wet season in the full moon in
January or February, the same Winter you lay it down, and suffer nothing to
bite there till about the end of August after, and in the mean time roll it
often and seasonably, and then mow it, and your cost shall be near repayd, and
the ground restored.

A Letter of a very ingenious Gentleman, Mr. R. H. concerning the Husbandry of
Clover-grass.
SIR,
I Have not been insensible of the obligation which a former promise laid upon
me, which was to give you an account of the proceed and profit which I made of
a small quantity of ground by Clover grass, which I could not complete much
sooner, in regard that it is not long since I sold the last of my seed, so that
unless I should have set a suppository value, upon part of it, I could not
draw the account to a perfect head till then; for every thing -- tantum valet
quantum vendi potest, -- and prizes of all commodities ebb and flow. I will
not injure this Husbandry so much, as to have you think that it can receive a
true character from my experiment, for I must not be ashamed to own many errors
committed therein, which were the effects of my general unskilfulnesse in
Georgick, and was not easy to be prevented where there were no practical
guides extant, nor any vestigia's thereof to be found, but what were tracked
and discovered by the book thereof, first published by you, and you well know
the difficulty of putting Theory well in practice. I have heard of some in
England that have made almost an incredible profit of it, much more then I have
been sensible of, but yet I find the improvement so considerable, that I am
much encouraged to proceed in it; the particulars are as follows. The ground
I planted contained little above two acres, I sowed 15 pound of seed upon an
acre, the charge I was at all manner of ways was five pound, which was more
then repaid by that Summers crop of Barley. The next year the 28. of May, I
mowed the Clover, there was two loads upon it, for which I refused five pounds.
The next crop I let stand for seed, which was ripe in August following when I
cut it, and had three very great loads, which I reckon at nine pound, as that
year went, I had 300 l. of seed some of which I sold for 16 d. the pound, some
more, the whole profit of that year I cast to be 30 l. besides the after
pasture. This last year in regard of the great and unusual unseasonablenesse of
it, does not equal the former profit, but take it at the worst as far as I have
gone it is a great improvement, and though you were not the parent of this
husbandry, yet you were the hand that did obstetricate and gave it birth which
else had been strangled in a private hand, and the public never known this
benefit, for which it is your debtor, and as a limb thereof,

Your Friend and Servant, R. H.

Another Letter showing the great benefit arising by Clover-grass to the
Commonwealth in general.
Worthy Sir,
UPon Mr. Crutendens narrative to me of the wonderful success God gave him in
the Clover-grass which he sowed, I desired him for your encouragement in such
public endeavors to give me under his hand, a grateful testimony thereof
unto you, from whose love and pains he took his directions, which he as readily
did, as I do here willingly tender it unto you. The Gentleman's eminent piety
and good husbandry are so well known in Kent near Tunbridge, that they command
belief; and I think there are none that observe him in both or either, but they
become his imitators or enviers. For mine own part from what he affirms and
also many others in the family agreeing therein with him, and from what I saw
with my own eyes, I am persuaded that the extraordinary improvement of Land by
the use of the said Seed, is so very encouraging to the general use of it that
through Gods blessing within a few years, the land or ground belonging to this
Commonwealth will maintain double the number of Cattle then now it does, to
your great profit in particular, if the Nation were thankful, and to the
enriching of the Commonwealth in general, by the transportation of quick ware
into foreign parts though now prohibited. The which blessing of God upon your
unwearied labors in this kind, and upon the industry of the Husbandman
especially, upon the labors of the spiritual Vinedressers the Godly Ministers
of England that so the inhabitants thereof may have plenty here and glory
hereafter, he most heartily prays, who is

Sir, Your very loving friend and humble Servant, T. U.
June 2, 1652.
Mr. Crutendens Letter and Certificate.
Noble Sir,
UNderstanding by Mr. Underhill, that you were desirous to speak with me (I was
much taken with it) that Providence should so much favor my wished desires: I
have received direction from you concerning your own Observations, for this
Husbandry in Brabant, and the adjacent parts, for which I have as truly as I
could, ingeniously observed, and past by the practice of the Dutchmen, (which
are in the County of Kent) wherein they differ very much from you, yet with
much thankfulness, I am able (by the mercies of God) to give you as profitable
an account as any Dutchman in England (that has varied from your rule) that as
yet, I ever heard of. The particulars I will give you an account of, whenever
you please to command me to wait on you, which is cordially desired by him,
which has trod some steps of your instructions, and gratefully rests your
servant to be commanded.

The Certificate, June, 2. 1652.
I sowed 4 acres, on which I sowed 40 l. of seed according to your directions,
the Lord did send me from it 20 Bushels of Seed, and 12 loads of hay at twice
mowing; the first crop I mowed was the 19 day of May last, and do find that one
load of Clover hay, is worth two loads of the best of our other hay, and for
the after pasture it was three times better then any ground I had; I am sure to
speak within compass, my four Acres did yield me in one year, which was the
last year fourscore pound.

Hen. Cruttenden.

A Letter from Upton 11 April, 1653. Concerning the Husbandry of clover-seed.
SIR,
Until now I could not be so thoroughly informed (by the party that writes the
enclosed) what he has found (in his several ways of practice) to be the best
way and time for sowing this Clover-grass seed, and how, and where I might be
furnished with the best and best cheap, which has retarded this my thankful
answer to your kind Letter, Mr. W. showed me some that he sowed last year thin,
amongst other good English hay dust, upon bare rubbish earth (in North-hampton,
where he had demolished some of the Bulwarks:) Which now is thoroughly covered
and has a full fresh bite of very rich green sward thus early; but I find the
Clover-grasse seed would have Corn thicker, but that the other English ordinary
hay-dust (being as he thinks more natural for our climate) does choke the
other, wherein I differ in opinion with him; for it is apparently higher and
ranker, and over-spreads the other much. This Clover-seed was of his own
growing, in a little piece of ground in his Orchard very good, which he mowed
twice the last year, viz. about Midsummer, and about a fortnight after St.
James that being sowed on the 6 th. of April last before, and yet he did not
cut it until it afforded seed both cuttings, and he believes the last cutting
afforded rather more and better then the first, and that little (sowed of it
self) is long enough (but that it is not ripe enough) to be mowed now. He
believes the seed that is of his own, that comes of the Dutch seed, is
altogether as good if not better then the Dutch seed, Mr. R. sowed some Dutch
seed last year there, some in his garden, and about an acre or two with barley,
upon a red sandy ground in his close by his garden, that was worn out of heart
with bearing too many crops of Corn, and I viewed them both last week, and I
found that sowed in his Garden to be thoroughly swarded, and was (as they told
me) mowed the last year, and is now again in as forward a condition as Mr. W.
sowed in his Garden: But that sowed with Barley is scarce so forward, as Mr. W.
sowed with ordinary hay seed as aforesaid, and it comes not much thicker, and
is in greater danger to be eaten out with Scutch grass, that such kind of
ground (worn out of heart:) is apt to breed, so that upon consideration of the
whole matter, I think the best way for me would be to sow it alone without
Barley, in the beginning of this month, which cannot now be done this year,
unless I had been provided of seed earlier; besides Mr. W. says it will be
hard to get good seed so late, especially new seed which is best to be had at
Candlemas, and much cheaper then now, for he says (when he was at London,
which was a little before I was with you) new seed was risen from 8 d. the
pound to 1 s. and before he came out of Town dearer; but when new was at 1 s.
they offered him old seed for 6 d. and he is confident it may be had at half
the price of new at any time. I send you in Mr. W's. Letter, some of the best
kind of new seed, by which sample (if you be not skild) you may know old from
new.

Sir Richard Westons more special directions for the best ordering of
Clover-grasse.
CLover-grass Seed thrives best when you sow it in the worst and barrennest
ground. Such as our worst heath ground is in England.

The ground is thus to be prepared for the Seed.

First pare off the heath; then make the paring into little hills; you may put
to one hill as much paring as comes off from a Rod or Pole of ground, which is
the square of sixteen feet and a half.

The hills being sufficiently made and prepared (as they do in Devonshiring as
we call it) are to be fired and burnt into ashes. And unto the ashes of every
hill you must put a peck of unslaked Lime; the Lime is to be covered over with
the ashes, and so to stand till rain comes and slakes the Lime. After that
mingle your ashes and lime together, and so spread it over your land.

This done; either against, or shortly after rain, plough and sow; ploughing
not above four inches deep and not in furrows, but as plain as you can, and to
make yet plainer, harrow afterward, and with bushes under your harrows.

The ground being thus prepared you may sow your seeds. An Acre of ground will
take about ten pounds of your Clover grasse-seed, which is in measure somewhat
more than half a peck. The chief seasons of sowing it are April or the latter
end of March.

About the first of June it will be ready to be cut. It yields most excellent
hay. The time of cutting it will be more exactly known, by observing when it
begins to knot: For that is the time: And ere the year be done, it will yield
you three of those crops, all of them very good hay; and after you have thus
cut it the third time, you may then feed the ground with Cattle, all the Winter
as you do other ground.

But if you intend to preserve Seed, then must you expect but two crops that
year, and you must cut the first according to the foresaid directions. But the
second growth must be let stand, till the Seed of it be come to a full and dead
ripeness, and then must you cut it, and thresh the tops, and so preserve the
Seed, you shall have at the least five bushels of Seed from every Acre.

This Seed thus threshed off, there will be left long stalks, these your Cattle
will eat; but when they grow old and hard you are to boil those stalks, and
make a mash of them, and it will be very nourishing, either for hogs or any
thing that will eat thereof.

After the second cutting for seed, you must cut it that year no more; but as
it springs again, feed it with Cattle. One Acre of it will feed you as many
Cows, as six ordinary Acres, and you will find your Milk much richer; which
induces some not to cut it at all, but only to graze it for their Dayry.

Being once sowed, it will last five years, and then being ploughed, it will
yield three or four years together, rich crops of Wheat, and after that a crop
of Oats.

And as the Oats begin to come up, then sow it with the Clover-seed (which is
in it self excellent Manure) for that you need not bestow any new dressing upon
the ground, and by that time you have cut your Oats, you will find a delicate
grass grown up underneath, upon which if you please, you may graze with Cattle
or horse all that year after, and the next year take your crops as before at
pleasure.

Some Doubts and Queres concerning the aforesaid directions propounded in a
Letter from Dublin.
I Have dispersed that Paper (of Sir Ri. Westons Directions) you did me the
favor to send me about the Husbandry of Clover, and I am to return you humble
thanks for it, though there does remain a very matterial scruple about it,
which is:

That if they sow it with the Barley or Oats, it must needs spring up and be
ripe before the Barley, and consequently at the mowing of the Barley will
either be mixed with it, so as not well to be separated, or must be trodden down
and spoiled by it.

This I being not able to answer must entreat you to take a little pains to
satisfy me, and to communicate what you have experimentally been informed
concerning it.

I am to solicit you also in the name of some young Husbandmen and other
Improvers here, to procure them a parcel of choice, good, new and excellent
Clover-seed, who are resolved according as this takes, so to follow that
Husbandry. As therefore the good success of this, will much encourage our
young Undertakers, so if this Seed should prove bad and not thrive, it would as
much discountenance all our new Projectors.

The Doubts and Queres in the Letter from Dublin resolved.
IN Answer to the Questions you^ make concerning the sowing of Clover with
other Corn, I can say that only, which my experience has taught me, viz. That
Polish Oats are the best Corn to be sown with Clover about the middle of April,
two bushels and a half, or three bushels of Oats will be enough, which yielding
a middle crop of Oats at harvest will shadow the Clover from the heat of the
Sun, and leave the Clover (at the time of mowing) 2 or 3 inches high and no
more, which will be a notable pasture in September or October following, and
will (according to my experience) Winter 2 or 3 Sheep of an Acre. For the
profit of the second Summer, and so forward. A Kentish-man (by name Sir Thomas
Payton) gave me this relation of his own experience, viz. That (by cutting of
it and feeding of Cattle in racks under a toll of trees) six Acres did
maintain between the middle of April, and the middle of October, that is half a
year) 13 Cows, 10 Oxen, 3 Horses, and 26 Hogs, which a^ 12 d. a week for the
Bullock or Horse, and 2 d. for a Hog, comes to above 30 s. a week, which is 40
l. for the 26 weeks, which is not less then 20 Nobles for the Summer profit of
an acre, besides what it yields in the Winter, which is also considerable.

Sir Rich. Weston, applies this Husbandry to the improvement of barren ground,
but my experience and judgment are, that the best improvement is upon the best
ground, nor is 10 s. or 15 s. an acre considerable to the certainty which rich
land gives to an improvement that is so great in it self. The common practice
also imploies this Husbandry by way of mowing of the Land; but my opinion is,
and practice shall be to pasture it, which (instead of impoverishing the
ground, as mowing by experience does) will much better the ground by the
abundance of stock which is continually kept upon it, upon the same reason, as
foddering of land does.

Note also that the Clovergrasse is most excellent food for Bees.

An Answer to more Queres concerning the Husbandry of Clover-grasse.
Q. THe quality of the ground Clover-grasse delights in?

A. Any light sandy or hazel-mould-land, is best to bear Clover, and though
barren land will bear it, yet fresh and rich ground does by experience return
best profit.

Q. The manner of preparing the ground?

A. There cannot be too much cost in preparing the ground, and making it free
from all manner of other grass.

Q. The season and manner of sowing the seed?

A. Clover is usually sown with Barley, Polish Oats, sometimes with Flax, or
with any seeds that are sown in April. The best manner of sowing that I have
been able to learn, is to mix it by quarters of pounds or less quantities,
with such proportions of sand, as when all the parcels are put together, they
may make two bushels and a half or tbree bushels, or any such proportion as
fits an ordinary sowers hand, and thus it may be sown (like any other Corn)
with a full hand, some (at the first) did use to sow 4 or 5 pounds upon an
Acre, others have used to sow 10 pounds, and I shall (next Spring) sow more. It
is usually about the springtime, sold in London, for 12 or 14 d. the pound,
but by the help of some Belgic Merchant, it may be had, thence for 6 d. the
pound, or perhaps for less.

Q. The best use of it for Cattle?

A. The best way (that I can learn) of feeding Cattle with it, is to cut it and
to give it them in the Racks, within some little grown or shady places, and a
proportion of swine will grow very fat with what falls from the Racks. In this
manner (as I am credibly informed) 6 acres did feed all this summer time, more
Oxen, Milch-cows, Horses, and Hogs then (not being my own experience) I am
willing to name.

Q. The way of saving or getting it out?

A. To this my experience reaches not, but in this I am fully satisfied; that
our own seed is best and freest from cousenage. It lasts three or four, or more
years in the ground, according as the ground is good, and (at first) well
peopled with it: This is all that my experiences reaches unto concerning
Clover.

Concerning the Threshing of Clover-seed.
THe Clover-Seed, is a Seed very difficult to thrash; They Must be good
Thrashers that can Thrash six Gallons in a day. The way used by a great
Husbandman of Clover in Kent, is, first to Thrash off the heads which easily
part, which being separated from the Straw, he used to Thrash over again until
it seem all as chass or dust, which after he winnowed with a Fan as long as the
dust flies out. Amongst the dust there will remain some small heads unbroken,
which he separated or Thrasht over again as before. I hope it will be no
offense to give this public notice that one Mr. Stoughton, a Gentleman that
lives in Norfolk, has for many years since used the Husbandry of Clover-Grass,
and has an easy way by the help of a kind of Mil, to Shell the Husk from the
Seed, whereby his Seed will not stand him in 2d. per Pound.

An Extract of a Letter written from Dublin, May 16. 1654. concerning the
Husbandry of Clover in Ireland.
I Was at the charge for sending for a hundred weight of Clover-grasse seed, on
purpose to encourage the chief of our friends here, to undertake the Husbandry
of it, and when it came I sowed some in my own ground, some I sent to Col. J.
some to Col. H. some to Capt. V. and to other Colonels and Officers of the
Army. Lately I furnished some of it to two Gentlemen in the Country, that were
excellent Husbandmen. And thus I dispersed it, giving away some parcels, and
selling some other, and sowing the most part of it with others in Partnership.
But though I used that care, I did it to procure good seed, and though I am as
confident of Mr. M. my friends care, who had it where you directed him, and
staid for it, while the Merchant told him he had new come over. Yet none of all
these parcels I speak of, so much as came up, save one handful of it which
sowed in my garden. And my friends here have sufficiently abused me for it.
Pray Sir present my humble service to honest Sir C. Culpepper, when you write
to him, and my thanks for his so free communications of his Clover-grasses
husbandry.

An Answer to the foregoing extract concerning the miscarriage of the Husbandry
of Clover in Ireland.
I Am sorry the Hushandry of Clover, has received such a blast in Ireland, in
its first essay, having observed how much more men are (ordinarily) ready, to
judge of things, by the success of some one trial ill made, then to take the
pains to weigh, and consider in which of the particulars which belong (more or
fewer) to every action, there may have been some failing.

One of the most ordinary ways of failing, which I have observed in this
Husbandry is in the Seed, which comes to us sometimes two years old, old, and
very seldom other then what is mixed, and this I know by dear experience of my
own heretofore, and of a very near friends this last Spring.

A second consideration, is the ground, which (for a general Rule) ought to be
light and tending rather to the sand then clay.

A third but very considerable Observation is, that the season be very clear
and free of all other grass, or roots, and as fi^e worked, as if it were for a
garden, which is a circumstance not more necessary, then it is little observed.

A fourth Consideration (though not so general) if the drought of the Fumer,
which has (as I hear) spoiled much Clover this spring, and not less (I fear)
then 20. acres of mine, if the ground have not helped me by its being proper
and good. But if these particulars be well observed, I can (from my own and
others experience) assure you, that it will (upon an easy account) double and
treble the profit or rent of the Land; and that an acre (if managed by the
Owner) will yield as much (to all intents) as 5 l. worth of other pasture. The
greatest fault which I find in this Husbandry is, that if the ground be still
cut or mowed, it will like Corn, impoverish the ground; for no man can eat his
cake, and yet still have it; to prevent this great inconvenience, and to turn
it to an advantage, my self intends to try how it will thrive, and what return
it will make, being pastured. I have known already the experience of some who
have this spring, (before there was any pasture elsewhere) kept 8 Sheep of an
acre, which is double the proportion, which the best land in Rumney Marsh will
bear; if this, upon trial, prove well, I cannot but think, that this way of
pasturing of Clover, will be a kind of foddering of the land, and ^ather
improve then impair it.

An Extract of another Letter in reference to the foregoing Answer.
PRay thank Sir C. C. heartily, for his accurate Animadversions upon
Clovergrasse; upon consideration of which I am pretty well satisfied. We failed
in the point of Husbandry and ordering the Land, sowing it somewhat rudely as
is done with other grain. But though this was the failer, the discredit falls
upon the Climate, so quickly are men's patiences tired, and so easily are their
judgments abused, as Sir Chapter very well observes, being ready to suspect and
accuse any thing, rather then our own error.

More Extracts of Letters concerning French Seeds, of St. Foine, and Lucerne,
Paris 23. November. 1652.
THe name of St. Foine is in some parts of France communicated to Lucern,
although the generality thereof have appropriated the same to another kind of
fodder, extremely differing from it all manner of ways, viz. the Onobrychis
Antiquorum, wherewith Medica, (that is the true Latin name of Lucern) has
nothing common. When I find an opportunity, I shall send you some of the seed
of each, according to their usual denominations here, the sight whereof and
much more its planting, will soon convince all contradictors.

Paris, December. 21. 165^.
I have delaied the sending of the seeds of St-Foin and Lucern, because I
thought they were desired for sowing, to see what herbs they would produce, for
which end they would have come time enough two or three months hence. But
seeing that the sight of themselves is desired, you shall have them out of hand.

More of Lucern, Paris, March 22. 1653.
DR. H. told me, that a Merchant who deals much in Oranges, Lemmons, and
other Provence Wares, had told him, that within a few days he expected 10 or
12. mules laden with those commodities, among which there would be good store
of Lucern seed, and that of 3 several sorts, for so many there is, which I
never knew before, and Dr. H. showed me Paterns of every one of them, having
got them of the said Merchant. Therefore I wished him to send unto Sir C. not
25 l. of any one of them, we not knowing, nor able to learn here, which is the
best sort, but 5 or 6 lib. of every sort, the which Sir C. having sown all, and
seen them grow, he may consider which he likes best, and have of that as much
as he pleases the next year.

The Answer.
Of the 3 sorts of Lucern, mentioned in Dr. B. Letter of March 22. 1653. my
desire is, to have of each sort, as much as will plentifully sow an English
Acre, and rather more than less. I shall under correction of better
experience, write my own apprehensions, concerning the quantity that serves for
an Acre, viz. That of that Lucern seed, of which I received formerly a sample,
15 lib. if good, will sow an acre of the other 2. sorts of seeds, if bigger
there must be so much more, if they be lesser seeds, there must be so much
less or fewer pounds of each Kind. This still supposed, that the seeds be
naked, and not, like St-Foin, closed in a cod; for in that case, there ought
another consideration to be had of it.

More Queries about Lucerne, and the Seed called Esparcet.
I Am well acquainted with the Saint-Foyne Seed, which you received from Paris;
but as for the Lucerne seed, I do upon sight of it conceive it to be no other
than the Clover seed, that is commonly procured here from Flanders, being
meliorated in France only by growing nearer the Sun. And therefore I heartily
wish, that you friend could certify you of his certain knowledge of the
Flanders Clover-seed, and of the different natures (if any) of those two seeds.
But howsoever it prove, I should be very glad if by your friends kindness I
might by the first of April, or before, receive twenty pound weight of the
Lucerne seed, such as is good, and of the last years growth.

There is another French seed called Esparcet, and mentioned (by the Author of
Theater d' Agriculture) to grow usually about Die in Da^lphine. I cannot
conceive but that a seed of that excellency cannot, but (since that Authors
writing) have spread it self the nearer to Paris.

If by your Friends favor I could have his knowledge of that seed, a pattern
of it, and (if it be to be had) ten or fifteen pound weight of it by, or before
April, you would much oblige me.

The Answer.
AS to the Qu. of Sir Chapter C. I know not the Flanders Clover, nor the seed of
it, and so can tell nothing of its agreement or disagreement with Lucerne,
whereof I will send the desired quantity, if it may be had, whereof I make some
doubt; for some weeks since, to my knowledge, there was but one shop in Town
that had any, which was the cause that the price was doubled, and from eight
sols come to sixteen; and I doubt not but it has been enhaunced since, if any
one be left.

As for the Esparced, I could never yet meet with any here who could tell me
what it was, it being long since that I have enquired after it for mine own
curiosity, finding it spoke of in the Theater d' Agriculture. But if I be not
hugely mistaken, it is the self-same with that which in these parts is known
under the name of Saint-Foin, and whereof I sent you the seed lately with that
of Luc^rne.

P. S.

What I told you out of my conjecture, that Esparced is the same with
Saint-Foin, that I can now give you for a certain truth, Dr. H. having found it
so by his Enquiries.



The differences between Esparcet, and the other French Seeds.
SErres in his Theater d' Agriculture, has a Chapter by it self concerning
Saint-Foine, which (by the tenor of that Chapter) he seems to me to intimate to
be the same with Lucerne. In the very next Chapter to that of Saint-Foine, he
treats of this Esparcet in question, and by comparing of both Chapters there
will be found these differences: Saint-Foine requires the best sort of ground,
and is tender; but Esparcet is a very hearty herb, and grows very well in
barren ground. Saint-Foine, by Serres, is mowable five or six times a year; but
for Esparcet it will be mowed but thrice a year. Saint-Foine endures in the
ground (upon once sowing) twelve or fifteen years; but Esparcet (by the next
Chap.) endures but four years. Saint-Foin grows ordinarily in Languedoc,
Provence, Dauphine, the Principality of Aurange, and in the region about those
Provinces; but Esparcet is reported to grow only about Die in Dauphine.

These several differences mentioned by Serres make me conceive that the seeds
are not the same, and that if Esparcet, upon enquiry cannot be found at Die, it
is lost either in deed, or at least in name since the time that Serres lived,
which yet, of a thing so profitable, and once in practice, is hard to apprehend.

The last Advertisements concerning Esparcet, and the other French Seeds.
I Have sent to Calis by the Chassemarais a sack of Saint-Foine, containing two
English bushels; and in the sack I have put three small canvas bags of three
sorts of Lucorne, of Holland, of Flanders, and of Paris, but two pounds only
of each sort, because I fear they are too old, and will not grow, and therefore
I send them rather out of curiosity than otherwise, the price being not great.
The new Lucerne seeds of Provence and Dauphine are not yet arrived, but daily
expected, and so have been these three weeks. If they come time enough to be
sent so as that they may be in England by the time your friend appoints, I will
not fail to send what he demands. As for Esparcet, whereof Serres makes
mention, and which Dalechamp says is called Sparsse at Die in Dauphine, who
puts both the description and the figure of it in the words Polygala and
Onobrychis, I have enquired particularly of it, and they write to us from Die,
that they have such a grass, but that it is mixed with diverse other sorts of
grass in their Saint-Foine, and that there be no particular seeds to be had of
it alone. And I perceive by Renard the famous Gardener of the Kings Garden of
Simples, that of those sorts of grass specified in Dalechamp, under several
names and figures, as Lucerne, Hedisaron, Polygala, Onobrychis, are all but
several parts of Medica or Saint-Foine, and that their seeds are not to be
found distinctly separate one from another. If any man would be so curious, he
might sow them all together, as they are to be had under the titles of Lucerne
or Tresle, and gather the seeds of them distinctly according as he shall find
their diverse shapes correspondent to their several figures in Dalechamps or
Clusius.

A Letter of Dr. J. S. relating the Husbandry of the French Tares or Fetches.
SIR,
IN my voyage from Paris to Roan, I observed diverse fields, as I thought, of
the herb called Aphaca vicia, or Tares and Fetches, and in them horses
feeding, but not at random, being by the means of a rope allotted only a
certain space some four yards about; and this space was thought sufficient for
one horse in one day. But being in the Coach in company with a Gentleman of the
Country, who understood something in Husbandry, I made these following
Enquiries.

1. What it was called?

A. Was, La Romagne.

2. If every year sown?

A. It was, but if it was not, it would not cease to come* though not in such
abundance.

3. How often mowen?

A. Not but once, not that it might not be oftener moven, but because being
green, and so eaten off the field, the cattle fatned on it, they were willing
it should be so to spare their hay. He said likewise, that it was of so quick
growth, that one furrow but of a competent length, was sufficient, and more for
one horse all grass time over, which he accounted from April to the latter end
of August, and then being spared for a time, it might be mown and kept dry, and
given in the Winter to Horse, Oxen, and Sheep, either alone or mixed with other
fodder. I asked how that a horse eating on one furrow always could be ever a
fresh supplied. He said, that every day he was to be carefully changed, and
that beginning at one end of the furrow, and so going on to its middle; then he
was to be shifted to the other end of the furrow, and in like manner to proceed
till he come where he had left before, and by that time the first end, where he
first begun, would be sufficiently grown, and so as he had eaten it before
gradatim, so he found it again growing gradatim, and so good pasture again.
Moreover I inquired, what difference he made of the profit the Lucerne brought
(for he knew it well) and that of La Romagna? He answered, that the Lucerne
certainly went beyond this, but that they used the one and the other, according
to the nature of their ground, besides that that ground, which was allotted to
the Lucerne, should be for many years; for once having got root, it was not so
easily eradicate, and so not fit for any other use, but that the field of La
Romagna might be changed, according to pleasure, besides the ground which was
fit or La Lucerne, was not for La Romayne, and e contra* For Lucern required
more humide places, and La Romagne more dry.

This is the substance of what I remember passed betwixt that Gentleman and me,
which how true it is I dare not promise because having it, but from one hand,
and that a stranger to me; but thus much I remember, that some Yorkshire men
in the Army in England, were more glad to find a field of Fetches to feed their
horses on, then if they had found both Hay and Oats, and that they have often
to my seeing left excellent grass to seek after these Fetches.

Sir, I think it will not be amiss in the further inquiry of this, to see the
affinity between the Vicia or Aphaca, the Lens, and the Ervum, for all of them
according to Dioscor. have that fatning quality, and truly I cannot well tell,
which of these certainly is La Romayn, though I incline to think that it is the
Vicia or Aphaca; for being in a Coach, I was too negligent to go out and remark
it more narrowly, but may be easily known of any whom you may inquire of. Thus
I pray God to bless you in all your noble endeavors, and so I shall continue
to pray,

Sir, Your most devoted to serve you.

An Observation upon the Husbandry of the French Tares or Fetches.
THe Forther herb, about which you have communicated unto me, Dr. S. notable
observation, is certainly the Vicia or Fetches, the which I have seen
cultivated in diverse parts of France and of Holland. But it was never my luck
yet, to learn any particulars about the properties and use thereof. If I do at
any time hereafter, you shall be sure to hear of it. Having written thus far, I
am told by diverse, that the Vicia or fetches are sown for to give the dried
grain of it to horses, in the same manner as Beans, but that they never knew
the green herbs to be used for them, or any other cattle in the nature of
fodder.

Another Letter relating the Braband Husbandry of Spurry-seed.
SIR,
THe Spurry-seed which you have gotten out of the Low Countries, grew no doubt
in light ground. And accordingly, if it were mine, it should again be sown in
the lightest ground I had. Though for trials sake I might perhaps bestow a
handful or two upon every sort of ground near me.

The times of sowing it are twice in a Summer. The first time is not very
early. I should not adventure to sow Dutch seed in England before the middle of
May; least, being a stranger, it should take it unkindly to meet with cold May
mornings, and discourage me. In June and July it will be in flower; and in
August the seed is usually ripe.

The second time of sowing is after Rie-harvest; when the Brabant-husbandman
presently ploughs up his ground and sows it with Spurry-seed, that it may grow
up and serve his Kine, after all late-grasse, and Rowens be eaten up, even till
New Years day. So that this latter sowing yields no seed, but is eaten up
green; and the provision for seed is made by the former sowing.

It will be good in this first trial, to sow it in several parts of the same
ground in different proportions, and to mark which thrives best: As also in the
same ground, and with the same proportion of seed, to try what difference of
increase there is, between the seed newly thresht out and thrown into new
ploughed ground, and that seed which is at the same time a year old.

It is ordinary in Brabant to sell away their May-butter, and to make their
Winter-provision for themselves, and their more knowing customers, in the end
of the year. For many of them prefer Spurry-seed before May-butter. I suppose
the principal reason is, because it is not so apt to grow rank with that Summer
heat, which May-butter must endure in June, July and August.

I have known some Brabant Husbandmen sow Tolls, that is, small round Turnips
among their Spurry, in the latter seed-time, as being also good to increase the
milk in their Kine.

Some Brabant women give Spurry to their Hens, that will catch it from one
another, as they do Chick-weed. They believe that it makes them lay the more
Eggs.

Spurry is by some esteemed a sure remedy for a cut or green wound, if it be
bruised green and laid to the cut, etc. In Latin its called Spergula.

The Description of the Hop Clover, or Trefoil, in English Three Leaved Grass.
THis Three Leaved Grass will grow half a yard in length or more, and at every
two Inches, it has a knot with Leaves and a Bunch of Seed, which is black,
almost like Onion Seed; both the Grass and the Hay made thereof, is finer and
sweeter then the great Clover. It will grow in any Ground, and being once
planted, it will shed so much Seed, that it need never be planted again. It may
be sown with Corn, or without, as they do the great Clover; or being sprinkled
in Meadows, it will exceedingly mend the Hay, both in burden and goodness.

Such as are desirous to buy any of this Three Leaved Grass, or Lucern,
Spurry, Clover-grasse and Sinkfoile Seeds, what quantity they please may have
them at Thomas Brown 's Shop at the Red Lion in Soper-lane, where they may
likewise see some of the Hay made of this three Leaved Grass.

Of the long English grass in Wiltshire.
THe long grass in Wiltshire mentioned in the Legacy, is occasioned by reason
of a spacious Sheep-Common adjoining. For that every hasty shower washes off
the Soil of the Common, and brings it into a little Meadow beneath, which
makes it incredibly fruitful.

Some Physical uses of Milk, and of curing the Black Jaundies, etc.
I Thought to have imparted unto you the Secret how to preserve Milk from
sowring, but I must refer it to a person of singular Honor, Piety, and
Experimental learning, who had made some trial of it, but has not yet fully
satisfied his mind about it. When that is done, I know you will have it before
any other, the Gentleman being wholly devoted not only by this, but many other
very Noble and useful Experiments, to promote the good of Mankind.

As for Doctor Ziegler's Germane Book, written purposely on the subject of
Milk, when I visited him at Zurich he showed it me, not fair written for the
Press. It will not be great, unless he resolve to an much of his own
experience. For he tells me, that being miserably infected with the
Black-Jaundies in Prussia, and having been purged by the Physicians of that
Country, with above 30 several sorts of purgations, even the most viblent that
they could think of, he found himself never the better. Whereupon he resolved
to take no more of their counsel, but to try some conclusions of his own. And
with the sole use of Milk he was perfectly cured. Besides he tells me that he
has several times, finding himself in some indisposition, prevented the
returning of some hereditary diseases in himself, by abstaining from all manner
of meat and drink, and living upon mere Milk, sometime; for fourteen days
together. And I remember heretofore I have heard him say, that Milk is hurtful
with other meats, but alone it is of unknown virtue. How much of this and the
like, he will say in his Book, I know not. Some other things he said at the
same time, which I meant to have added here, but I must defer them at present.

Observations concerning Oils.
I Gave Dr. Zeigler occasion to show me Balsamum Samaritanum, as he called it.
He seemed to say, that Paeracelsus first gave it that name, in memory of the
Samaritan in the Parable, Luke 10.33. For this Balsam, he said, was made of
mere Oil and Wine boiled together, without any other ingredient. But, said he,
whosoever shall go about to boil them together shall find it troublesome, if he
never saw any practice of that kind before. I told him, that some Atheistical
heads say, that Luke might be a good Physician, but he was but a bad
Surgeon, if he knew not that Oil must not be put into wounds. The Doctor
answered, that the Objectors were no great Chirurgions, if they did not know,
that Oil was hurtful only in those wounds that reached to some bone; for then
the Oil would make the bones cariosa. But said he, if such a thing happen,
caries ossium may be cured by Chemical salts.

From this I gave him occasion to speak further concerning Oil. He told me,
that when he was in Italy, he understood that some families there were wont to
preserve Oil from Generation to Geneaation, and to divide it equally amongst
the children, or nearest kinsmen of the deceased. He had spoken with one
Italian Gentleman, that said he had about two ounces of Oil that was three
hundred years old.

I asked him, what serious use there was of such old Oil, besides the vanity of
boasting of such Antiquities? He said, that new Oil has a saltness in it,
which makes it unsit for many uses; but time destroys that saltness, and
makes it able to perform such offects as some of the Ancients have reported of
it. They say, that diverse who were esteemed dead, have been anointed with old
Oil in the five principal pulse-places, and revived. And, said he, I am apt to
think that the Extreme Unction, now adays applied to men at the last gasp, had
its first rise from that Experiment; for I would thank any man that could tell
me what kind of Oil it was that is mentioned James 5.14. An Apothechary of
Padua proffered to sell me Oil, which he said was fifty years old: but I bought
none of him, partly for the greatness of the price that he demanded, and
partly for the uncertainty whether it were indeed so old as he pretended.

How to make better Butter than ordinary without setting the Milk for Cream.
THe Milk so soon as it is come from the Cow must be strained, then churned as
usually Cream is done. Also the Cheese made of the Buttor-milk will be better
than the best two meal Cheeses that you ever did eat. And one pound of this
Butter shall be worth a pound and a half of your best Butter which is made of
Cream. Probatum by a Gentlewoman, a great Huswise, dwelling in the Isle of Ely.

Of Chedder Cheeses where they are made?
THe Legacy of Husbandry mentions the best Cheese to be made at Chedder* in
Wiltshire; I suppose it may be a mistake, except there be two Chedders. For
Chedder is a place in Sommertshire, between Mendip hills and Axbridge. I suppose
it is bet one Parish, or not much more, and that a great part of it is a Moor
called Chedder Moor. I have been at Mendip Hills and seen this Chedder lying
much lower, and was told that the best Cheese in Engl. was made there, and that
it was sold there at six pence a pound, that usually they made great Cheeses,
from twenty pound to a hunnred and twenty pound in weight, and that it was
usual when one made a Cheese to borrow all the Milk of his neighbors about
him, and that some did borrow as much milk in one day as they were a month in
paying back again.

Objections answered against Propositions of Improvement by Agriculture, and
other the Branches of good Husbandry.
THat if this Art, Trade, or Profession of Husbandry were indeed so beneficial,
so profitable as many pretend, why then are there not more Rich men of that
sort? And why do so many Farmers or Tenants in this Nation live so poorly and
beggarly that they seem rather the Landlords slaves or servants then tenants,
since all they get, saving their own very mean subsistence, goes to the paying
of their rent?

To this it is answered: First, that that the position is in its self a mistake,
there being more that manage these rural affairs Rich, than of any sort of
people or profession in the Nation besides by far.

Secondly: It Is affirmed, that the most noble Families in the Nation have been
either raised or upheld by the Plough, etc. For it is observable, that nothing
more enables a Person or Nation than Hospitality; this, for all that, becomes
the bain, the destruction of many great Families, when the bountiful hand is
alone, but when the one is as industrious by these very ways of good
Husbandry, to provide or bring in as the other is to give or let out, that man
only is the good Houskeeper, that man only is the constant Friend to the poor
and his neighbors, that man only is the wise. Be, that knows how to gather,
and give the honey without defacing the fair flower of his estate, which he
always leaves to his posterity well increased, whereas the other seldom dies
undestroyed.

Thirdly: It Is affirmed, that there are at this time very many Grasiers,
Sheep-masters, and Corn-masters in this Na^ion of very vast estates, and those
accrued in their own times by their own endeavors in these ways of good
husbandry.

Fourthly: Suppose it were not so, as it is granted in the more common and
general account it is not, yet the fault is not in the Profession but in the
Practice and Persons? for the more common, mean, and vulgar sort of Tenants or
Husbandmen improperly so called, have only some general, rude, imperfect, and
(in many cases) much irrational Rules, or Customs rather, which their as
ignorant Forefathers left them, from which they can no more be weaned than a
dull sturdy Ass can be gotten to mend his pace. And they are generally so
averse to all new practices, that it is found merely impossible to infuse any
such thing into their heads or hands by any other means more than one manifest
example, and that under their noses too.

Amongst their irrational Customs, I reckon that of bandying with the Lord,
though never so just and ingenuous, about enclosing their Commons (the
Freeholder and Coppyholder I mean) choosing rather to keep three starved Sheep
than one good Milch-cow, which the same land enclosed would in all probability
do.

Also their opening their fields at Lammas, or some other certain time, which
as some years proceed, causes the loss of much Corn; not to them only but to
the Commonwealth, since if any man have (by an un-foreseen, or not to be
remedied cause) his Corn out later a little, he is forced to fetch it in ripe
or unripe, wet, or dry, lest the known greediness of the neighborhood put in
their Cattle, and eat it up before his face.

Also their old P^overb (in in it self wise and good, but as they understand
and use it, most prejudicial) A little land well tilled. For though it be an
undoubted truth that one Acre worth twenty pound, all charges defrayed, is
better than three or four worth five pound all charges defrayed; yet it is as
true, that if my necessary expenses require threescore pounds per annum, and I
hold threescore Acres, worth twenty pound each clear, I have gained no more but
my bare subsistence, and have nothing to lay up for posterity, no nor to stop a
gap with (which yet often happens) and being not stopped, makes others stoop to
beggary, whereas had I ventured (as they will needs call it) upon an hundred
and twenty Acres, I had had threescore pounds to stop gaps, and lay up for
posterity; and farther if this should be rightly cast up by a rule of
Progression, it would easily appear, that threescore pound driven on again, and
each year augmented, would in a man's life rise to a plentiful fortune for his
posterity, and after a while afford him some better way, or rate of subsistence
also. What should a man say but conclude with the Proverb, He that is born
under a three penny Planet shall never be worth a groat.

If it be answered, that much Land is barren, or uncertain; and the more one
deals with, if the year proceeds evil, the greater his loss, the more certain
and desperate his undoing. It Is answered, That to a good Husband this so rarely
happens, and he by the means aforesaid, and other good ways, is so prepared,
that it perhaps may hinder his going forward for that year, but shall not pluck
him back at all.

And here also is the stubbornness of these men's natures discovered, that when
most rational approved good Inventions or Ways to make their barren or
uncertain land bear good crops to prevent or cure the Rot amongst their Sheep,
or Murrain amongst their cattle, they utterly refuse the motion, deride the
Movers and Inventers, and (as much as in them lies) endeavor to retard or
poison the practice, lest their fordid ignorance and wicked envy should be
theteby discovered or prevented.

Certainly he that (having any considerable stock to begin with) does first
carefully inform himself, and consider what, where and how to proceed; and
shall do so cheerfully, and throw himself upon Gods abundant power, wisdom,
mercy, and providence for the success, cannot fail to be as rich as a good man
will desire to be; and he that withstands or refuses so to do, I can liken him
to nothing more properly than to the dog in the manger, that eats not hay
himself, nor lets the horse that would.

I am sure that the most rich men the Scripture tells us of, were of this sort
(that were instrumental to their own greatness, and not born so) witness the
histories of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Lot, Job good men, or of Nabal, or the Rich
man in the Gospel, that has his barns full, and goods laid up for many years.

And profane story tell the same, that Jupiter for his invention and practice
in husbandry, was honored as a God; that Cyrus and Tamberlane were Sheepherds,
etc.

An approved Experiment for the cure of the Fashions in Horses, and the Rot in
Sheep.
A Gentleman of note an Englishman had a strange felicity in curing of Horses
of the most desperate diseases, as also Sheep strangely, suddenly and
perfectly, by which he was much enriched and admired.

And it was with no other thing, but the use of the Antimony-cup steeped in Ale
with a little spice they call Grains, and a little Sugar, of which he would
give them only such a quantity as would not much weaken them, and so give it
two or three times, with perhaps a day or two days intermission. To horses he
would administer half a pint at a time; to Sheep not above two or three, or at
most four Ounces; by which he has in a short time cured the Fashions in
horses and the rot in sheep. Indeed Antimony is so great a restorer of the
Liver, or so great a purifier or refiner of the mass of blood, that I my self
have known many recovered of the Dropsy, and other desperate diseases by the
use of it. The same Gentleman used also the same infusion to wash all sores
that were broken out upon them, which also conduced much to the healing them.
He used it also to Swine.

Note. The Antimony-cup is no other than a pure ordinary Regulus Antimonii,
cast into the form of a Cup has no other virtues nor effects, then the
foresaid Regulus: For this Regulus lying in any liquor does the same which the
Cupholding liquor in all respects. So much of this Regulus as may serve your
turn may be bought for two shillings, or half a crown.

Another approved Experiment for fatting of Hogs, and preserving or curing of
them from Meazeals or other Diseases.
IF a Hog that is to be fatted, have half a dram of crude Antimony given him in
his meat three days before he be put up to fat, it will make him have a good
stomach to his meat, and therefore he will soon be fat, and it will likewise
cure him of all foulness of his Liver, and of the Meazels, which are very
frequent in Hogs. The same is as sovereign for any other beasts.

Another excellent Remedy against the Rot, and other diseases in Sheep and
Horses.
TAke Serpents, or (which is better) Vipers, cut their heads and tayls off, and
dry the rest to powder. Mingle this powder with salt, and give a few grains of
it so mingled now and then to your Horses and Sheep; it is good against most
diseases in them, and chiefly against the fat Rot.

Whether a good Lime may be made of Pibble and other Stones, whereby Land may
be dunged and enriched.
YOu say your great friend the Doctor in Chemical Physic has a way not only
to turn the ordinary Limestones into Lime whereby Land may be dunged and
enriched, but also Peble and all other stones into Lime at an easy charge, and
so every Country that has not the natural Limestone may have it now out of
other stone, and so save carriage.

To this I answer.

A. 1. What Glauber has written in his first Part Operis Mineralis of Peble or
Flint-stones is to show how to extract out of them not quick or unslackt Lime
but Gold, and that by the mediation of spirit of Salt, which must be made first
good cheap, and in abundance. What your Doctor undertakes must be left to trial
whether it will succeed or not.

A. 2. I believe the Doctor, who pretends to make Lime of Peble may make his
undertaking good, seeing that in Holland, in Italy, and in many parts of the
East Indies, they make it of the shells of Oysters, and of all kinds of
Shel-fish, and that ex silice ipso (out of Peble it self) Lime has been made
many Ages since, as Pliny and Agricola tell us. But I know not whether the
Doctor be aware of the inconvenients which the Flint-Lime is subject unto, viz.
that it is nothing so good as other Lime, and that in the burning of it, great
part of the Flint, instead of being converted into Lime, turns into a kind of
glassie slack.

The manner of Planting Timber Trees in Cornwel.
I Have observed a sort of Husbandry in Cornwall, which I like exceedingly.
Namely, that upon their Mounds or Fences (which are high and thick banks almost
like Fortifications) they do set or sow Oak, or some other wood, which
thriveth so well, that I have seen the Wood growing upon one fence, that parted
two Closes to be worth four or five pound. This kind of Fence does much
preserve the Land from Malignant Aires, and is withal more than three times
profitable beyond what that same Land the bank stands on would yield, if the
banks were taken away. The best reason to be given for the well growing of this
wood, is the mixture of earth and great stones, whereof the bank is made,
amongst which the Roots take so firm hold, that no violence of weather can hurt
them, and by the same reason the roots are safe from the prejudice which other
Trees receive by the sudden and unnatural suffering by heat, cold, moisture,
or drought.

How to hasten the growth of Timber Trees.
WHen any young Trees, as Oak, Birch, Elm, Ash, etc. (but Ash especially) are
in their bodies about two inches diameter, which they (oftimes) be at three or
four years growth, then if you take a piece of an old coat of Male, or some
like Net of small wyre, and holding it in your palm, rub it pretty hard (so as
you tear not the bark) up and down the body of the Tree, twice every year, you
shall find that Tree far to outstrip his fellows of the same age and kind. If
you ask the reason, let the example of friction or seasonable rubbing or
dressing in a horse or other cattle be considered, which sooner be fat and
fair, and that with less provender than the like horse ill kept.

Note. That one man may well look to three thousand, and do much other
business, which is not above an half penny a year a piece, but the Tree shall
be bettered in its growth at least rwo pence a year.

As for those kind of Trees called Flanders Ashes, whereof some young ones were
sent for, and planted in the drained Fens of Lincolnshire by Dutchmen, I have
it only by relation, but from able men, that the charge was three shillings a
Tree, and that they grew so fast, that at three years growth they were worth
twenty shillings a piece for Timber. Doctor H. spoke of an Apple called the
Gennet-moyle, that makes the best Cider, that every slip of the Tree will grow;
that the Trees are great bearers, and the slips will grow to bear fruit in
three years.

Of Turky-Beans to be more frequently planted.
THere is a sort of Beans (which grows in many parts of England, namely in the
Isle of Exholm in Lincolnshire) that are called Turky-beans, very large and
yielding a great increase, to be eaten with a little butter and vineager (after
they are boiled) shells and all, they are ripe about July, or later if you
please, and will come seasonably to succeed our Hasting-pease, and if more
frequently planted might be afforded cheap.

A Friendly Advice how a hundred and and fifty pound may be improved by
Husbandry to yield a far greater increase than if the said sum were
employed in a way of Usury upon Usury.
IN answer to your Question ( viz.) how a Friend of yours might dispose of a
hundred and fifty pound (or any other sum) to the best advantage, I humbly
tender you my opinion (thus) that sum may be turned and returned continually
to no small advantage very many ways, I will only instance four ( viz.) by
Sowing or Ploughing of Corn, Flax, Rape, or by breeding or feeding of cattle,
any of these will (almost) double the sum every year. For example, a hundred
and fifty pound will plant (I mean in the most excellent way, and consider also
the dearnesse of the present time) about forty Acres with Wheat, which (by the
ordinary blessing of God) cannot be less worth than eight pound one Acre with
another, which in all amounts to three hundred and twenty pound; which again
the next year according to the like account will advance it self to six hundred
and forty pounds, that is to say, it will plant eighty Acres worth eight pound
a piece at Harvest. And from thence forward, if you deduct one hundred pounds
yearly, for an increase of present maintenance. Yet your stock will increase
far more than by Interest upon Interest, which is also nothing so just or
ingenious a way of getting. And if you say your friend is not a man addicted
to, or experienced in these ways of Husbandry, or of such employments
otherwise, as will not allow him to act in this way himself, give me leave to
say he may do it, by the assistance of some faithful friend (which is not
impossible for you to find, or make by those abundant obligations you use to
lay upon all men) such a friend as is skilful and active in these most pleasant
and honest ways. To turn the same stock in Cattle will amount to near the same
profit, but either of the other ( viz.) to sow Flax or Rape, will be yet much
more profitable, and increase your present Revenue and Stock also faster.

Sir, I humbly advise your Friend to take some one of these ways by the help
of such a Friend, which shall never want the best furtherance I can give it,
which is my earnest prayers for an extraordinary blessing upon such honest
endeavors, which will in a few years (and that in a way most pleasing to God,
and approved of good men) make a very competent provision for himself, and his
living, and leave a considerable estate to those that succeed.

Another friendly and more particular Advice how by a good husbandry of
Rape-seed to raise an Estate, or provide Portions for Children.
A Last of Rape-seed is ten Quarters or eighty Bushels, and three shillings is
the ordinary price of a bushel.

One Acre is sowed with half a peck sufficiently, and will yield replanted,
according to the goodness of the ground and seasonablenesse of the year The
season when to begin this work is presently after Midsummer.
, 40 l. 30 l. 20 l. and at the least 10 l. per acre.

The whole charge to sow an Acre, and all things thereto belonging first and
last will stand in three pound Rent and all (for the Rot amongst the Sheep, and
Murrain amongst Cattle, must needs make Land cheaper.)

If therefore there were found a hundred men of indifferent quality, that would
disburse each man tea pound sterling, If 100 men be not found that will
undertake or engage, fewer will serve, so they either engage 20 l. or 30 l. for
2 or 3 children, or at least for the first or second year allow the Steward
more than is here accounted.
and commit all their stocks into one hand to be managed by that person (as one
that is known to be skilful, and so able to undertake and pass through the
work) for the raising of a portion for their child, or children respectively,
they would find this advantage thereby (viz.) They should only spare the said
ten pound for the two first years and no more, at the end whereof it should be
returned, and so they have given that child no other portion point blank more
than the use of ten pound for two years, which is but two and thirty shillings.

2. They should be at no charge to keep or maintain the same child save only
the first two years, for at the end of the third year they should receive
competent maintenance for the same year, and so continue, or increase the same
so long as the grand stock is suffered to lie in the Stewards hands, which is
to be understood that during the first seven years the Steward cannot give it
up but by consent of the owner, but after that he may ease himself of the
burden when it grows too heavy, as he shall see cause.

3. He will have a most plentiful provision for his child, without any
trouble to himself, or at all diverting his intentions, by only allowing the
Steward one tenth part from time to time, as the reward of his care, skill,
pains, and expense of his time, which must be chiefly dedicated to this
service.

And here I present it more lively to your view in the following Table.

Years. Acres. Charge. Increase. 1 3 9 30 2 6 18 60 3 9 27 90 4 18 54 180 5 42
126 420 6 102 306 1020 7 291 582 2910 For all 29100 58200 291000 Deductions for
the Poor. Maintenance of your child. Return of your first sum. Remains. 3 7
0 20 6 14 10 30 9 21 00 60 18 22 00 140 42 38 00 340 102 48 00 970 291 59 00
2560 29100 5900 00 256000

By this time you may perceive that the Steward did the last year manage 29100
Acres, which is full enough, and therefore he cannot well go further this way.

By this time you may perceive, that every Engager has benefited the poor 471
l. and by all together, the poor are relieved with 47100 l. A blessed deed it
is, and your reward follows it close at the heels, for all your children are
made richer by 256000 l. and every particular child has a portion raised of
2560 l. and all parties are well contented, since your Steward also must
acknowledge himself well paid: Insomuch that if any his good Masters shall
desire to have all, o^ part of the said stocks longer to remain in his hands
for a farther improvement; he will surely be willing to advance them in other
ways to the best advantage: And by this means also some thousands of working
poor are provided for.

A Scale of the Charges of the Table formerly presented, with the Scale of some
other Tables to demonstrate that advantageous Proposition.
SIR,
WHereas in the paper I presented to you yesterday, I have in a Table been bold
to set down what I know to be very true, and as certain as most ordinary humane
affairs, yet in regard I know also that the spirits of too many men (in this
Age especially) are not only backward to attempt or encourage good actions, but
are even ready to catch hold of any critical argument whereby they suppose they
can blast an honest, rational, and advantageous Proposition, I thought it
necessary to prevent all disputes of that nature by adding the following Table,
and the Scales of Charge, by which either that or this is to be measured: And
first the Scale of the Table formerly presented.

Rent for one Acre 00.13.04 Seed half a peck 00.00.06 First ploughing 00.02.06
Burning 00.05.00 Seed ploughing 00.03.04 Replanting and taking up 00.16.00
Re-ploughing 00.03.04 Cutting and thrashing 00.13.00 Fencing 00.07.00 03.00.00
The Scale of the second table, the charge of one Acre.
Rent 00.13.04 Seed half a peck 00.00.06 First ploughing 00.02.06 Burning
00.05.00 Seed ploughing 00.03.04 Cutting and Thrashing 00.12.04 Fencing
00.03.00 02.00.00
The second table now presented, accompting but five pound per Acre the Crop.
Years. Acres. Increase. 1 4 and a half 22 l. 10 s. 2 10 50 3 18 60 4 36 210 5
81 405 6 155 775 7 304 1220 Deducted for the Poor. Maintenance Remainder. 00
00 22 l. 10 s. 00 00 40 and the 10 l. paid 09 10 80 21 19 180 40 20 345 77 23
675 122 28 1070 26000 10000 347000

By this it appears that (valuing the Crop but at 5 l. per Acre, which no man
can except against) each man will have his 10 l. repayed at the end of the
second year, and will out of only 16 s. stock raise for his child a portion of
1000 l. and upwards, and for the relief of the Poor about 260 l and for the
present maintenance of his child (after the two first, and until the end of
the seventh, 100 l.

And if men would but be sensible how certain (or at least probable) it is that
the first scale of charge will produce the return of 10 l. per acre, per annum,
then men need venture their 10 l. but till the end of the first year only,
when it should be returned, and yet their stock run up to the proportion
discovered in the next Table, and also both the poor and their children receive
good maintenance the second Year.

The Third Table, valuing the crop at 10 l. per Acre.
Years. Acres. Increase. 1 3 30 2 6 26 3 12 100 4 27 270 5 43 430 6 111 1110 7
294 2940 Deducted for the Poor. For the Child. Remains. 0 00 20. And the 10 l.
Returned. 6 14 40 12 18 90 27 13 240 43 17 370 111 19 980 294 26 2620 49300
10700

By this it appears, that by only sparing 10 l. and that but for one year, you
have purchased or provided for your Child as his Portion or Estate 2620 l. and
for his present maintenance (after the first year, that is to say, for the
other six by unequal proportions) 107 l. and the Poor are bettered by all this
in the seven years by 493 l. from every particular Interest, and by the whole
Stewardship, or hundred persons or stocks by 49300 l. And all this is done in
seven years, which any man may reasonably hope (by the blessing of God) that he
may live to see it effected.

If any man ask why this great advance here held forth is not followed hardly
by any one man living? The answer is not far off ( viz.) Few men do understand
these ways, fewer will give themselves leave to cast up their accounts for the
future, or take care to put their endeavors for gain into so honest a method:
For indeed (in a manner) all men are from their youth brought up either in
idleness and vanity, and by that means are utterly careless of all ways to
thrive, and of the honestest most; or if they be brought up to business, they
are so sixth before they come to a ripe understanding (such as is able to
distinguish and choose) that they neither will, nor well can wind themselves
out of their present Employment or former Engagements. And indeed men are too
generally possessed with a too sturdy dislike of any thing how excellent soever,
that is out of their common path, and by so much their dislike thereto also
increased by how much those courses propounded incline more to virtue.

But if all such dispersed spoaks and valleys were fixed in one Center ( viz.)
a faithful, careful, skillful Steward) it might make such a wheel as would
be ever turning round in the right achievement of an (even almost) infinite
and endless prosperity.

Farewell.

A Proposition concerning Rape-seed, wherein the charge is set down with the
most, the return with the least, but both in the common way.
ONe Acre of Marsh land fit for Rape l. s. d. may be taken for 00.13.04. May be
ploughed the first time for 00.03.04. May be burned for 00.06.08 Will be sowed
with half a peck of seed worth 00.00.09 May be ploughed the second time for
feeding for 00.04.08 May be fenced for 00.04.03 May be reaped for 00.10.00 May
be thrashed for 00.07.00 The whole charge of an Acre is 02.10.00
If God please to send but the ordinary blessing upon this, there cannot be
less than five Quarters; but it is not unusual to have six, seven, eight,
nine, or sometimes ten Quarters upon one Acre.

One Quarter of good Rape seed is worth always, and at least four and twenty
shillings, and so the least return of one Acre, five Quarters is worth l. s. d.
06.00.00 The Straw may be worth, though it be but to burn, 00.03.04 The whole
profit is 06.03.04 From this deduct the charge 02.10.00 There remains as
clearly gained 03.13.04
Whosoever engages twelve pound, gains 14.13.04 Whosoever engages four and
twenty, gains 29.06.08 Whosoever engages thirty, gains 36.13.04 Whosoever
engages threescore, gains 73.06.08 Whosoever engages a hundred, gains 124.13.04
It appears that he that engages deepest has the advantage, and that all men's
moneys is more than doubled, and all this in the common way, which I shall
endeavor to make much better by the blessing of God.

If any ask why an Engagement of twelve pound in stead of ten is desired, it is
for the reward or subsistence of the Steward of the work, who after the first
year, and when engagements are become deeper will accept one tenth part in the
beginning of each year, of the stock for his charges and pains, and at the end
of the year one tenth part of the Increase for the reward of his care and
skill, or come to a certainty of profit to the Engager, and himself have no
other reward but the over plus when they are satisfied, be it more or less, as
God shall bless his endeavors. If any man doubt of the truth of this, let him
resolve himself by a free and ingenious enquiry of such as have dealt in this
commodity.

A Proposition for sowing of Hemp, whereby also a way is shown to set most of
the present Poor to work without prejudice or oppression, or altering any Law
already established.
FOr the more general sorts of Poor, I humbly conceive that what follows may
be a good way, and open to them a door of subsistence, without wrong or loss
either of wealth or freedom to any subject of England, since in it all things
are to be done in love and order; the Rich invited by the Profit, and the poor
coming in as to a safe harbor, where he may rest secure under the Lee of this
opportunity from the dangerous working of those many and strong tentations
their poverty is accompanied with, and from the danger of the severe
prosecution of the known Laws against Idleness, which will become altogether
good, if all pretense or excuse be thus taken away, and the person once taken
notice of, be incapable of any second forbearance.

I say then that sowing Hemp is the most certain way, how with gains to all
parts many hands may be set to work, but if any man think Flax better, he may
use it; yet I must tell you that Flax (as sometimes it turns to greater profit
than Hemp, so it) is not so certain; and after Flax the ground is not so right
for Corn as after Hemp, which indeed prepares land excellently for Corn; but
the chief reason is, that the persons to be employed are more likely to do good
(at first especially) on Hemp than Flax, the other being the more choice and
difficult work, in all points requiring more care and skill, and the vent for
Flax also is nothing so ready as that of Hemp, the uses being not so many, nor
so great, and we may equal the works of other Nations in Hemp, not presently in
Flax.

If there will appear a hundred honest, able, worthy Englishmen, that will
engage each man six thousand pound to set forward this good work (or if not
just so, yet more men and less stocks amounting to that proportion ( viz.) of
stock engaged in all six hundred thousand pound; I shall only hold forth the
private and public Advantages, and may boldly promise them, besides Gods
blessing, and their Countries love, together with the convenience of taking the
most safe course (one of them at least) that can be imagined in these times.

The six hundred thousand pound, will sow about threescore thousand Acres, and
defray all charges first and last till the Hemp he converted into Cordage,
Cloth, andc. and fit for sale. That is, ten pound for an Acre, and each Acre
will set above two hundred persons to work for one day; the whole will set
above forty thousand to work all the year. Every Acre well managed will yield
at least twenty bushels of seed, which at two shillings the bushel, is forty
shillings the Acre, or a hundred and twenty thousand pound for the whole, and
each Acre so managed may yield at least five hundred and sixty pound of Cloth
or Cordage, worth one with another five pence the pound, in all for one Acre
sixteen pound sterling, and in all for the grand stock nine hundred and sixty
thousand pound sterling; by which, three hundred and sixty thousand pound is
gained, that is, about fourteen shillings in the pound gained yearly. And for
two years after, the same ground will bear most excellent Wheat, Rye, or
Barley, all charges paid to the value of four Quarters of Barley on an Acre,
worth one time with another twenty shillings a Quarter, al a hundred and twenty
thousand Quarters, and so also a hundred and twenty thousand pound yearly.

Thus shall forty thousand Poor be kept constantly at work all the year, and
the Commonwealth eased of that burden, and advantaged besides a hundred and
fifty thousand Quarters of Hemp Seed, a hundred and fity thousand tun of Cloth
and Cordage, and above a hundred and twenty thousand Quarters of good Corn; and
the Undertakers amongst them shall gain clearly three hundred and sixty
thousand pound sterling yearly. This is set down purposely, the Charge with the
most, and the Return with the least. And if the number of so many Rich men
cannot be found to engage for any of these sums, more persons, and less
engagements may begin the work.

An Answer to five Queres or Objections against the Proposition for setting the
Poor to work upon Hemp growing, or to be growing in England.
Qu. 1. WHether those in France, etc. practicing this way, do make the Gains
here supposed, all Casualties considered?

Answ. Whether they in France, etc. do make so great, or greater profit, I
cannot tell, as having never been there to see, but it is probable they do
equal this, if their ground be equal, (as some will have it) superior to ours
in fertility, and fitness for this weed.

Qu. 2. Whether we can spare the land here in England? or whether it is not
already employed to more benefit?

Answ. To this I can better answer, as the thing I pretty well know, that the
Land may not only be spared, but will otherwise very much enrich us, and
advance our plenty of Corn, and this is declared in the Proposition, and the
Question therefore not so pertinent: Yet for a farther Answer, I affi^m, that
there is demonstratively in England and Wales above 4000000 of Acres for
Tillage, and you find but forty thousand Acres to be used yearly for the
sowing of Hemp, which is but the hundereth part, and it is there promised, that
in the two or three succeeding years wherein the same land shall be sowed with
Corn, amends shall be fully made for the missing of that years crop, and more
by the goodness of those that follow.

The last part of this Quere is soon answered; for it is generally known, that
an Acre of Corn (taking one time, place, grain with another throughout) is
hardly worth forty shillings, whereas a reasonable Acre of Hemp is worth
(standing four pound, some five pound, some six pound, and very many more. And
then the Acre of Corn is worth no more than it shows for, whereas the Hemp (to
the Commonwealth as well as the particular owner) is of far greater value, if
we consider that one Acre of Hemp well wrought up may be worth above a hundred
pound, but then the charge may amount to the better half indeed.

Qu. 3. Whether by the inexperience of the people of this Land, other Nations
will not very much under-sell us?

Answ. I could as well have propounded Flax as Hemp, since in many cases and
places it is more useful and profitable, but ^ only name it in the
Proposition, and if you observe the reason there given for so doing, you will
find much of this Question answered or prevented. But how far other Nations may
under-sell us, or we them, I leave to the judgment of those that are more
Merchant-like, to which I lay no claim, but (at most) to be one that would fain
be a good Inland Husband, a Lover of my Country, and a faithful seeker of her
Peace and Prosperity by all just and lawful means. Yet thus much I can say to
the point, that to my knowledge many hundreds (I think I may say thousands) of
Acres are with great advantage to the possessors employed in this way, namely
in the Isle of Axholm, and other the parts of Lincolush. etc. which place is
more populous than any part of England that I know, and yet few or no Beggars.
And I have a little looked into the prizes, yet I find not English hemp differ
much in price from that which is imported; it seems to me that necessity rather
(as not having enough at home) causes such importing. I have seen a Hull
Merchant stand upon three pence a pound for raw Hemp, when the same day English
Hemp, that was adjudged every whit as good, was sold for two pence half penny.
I have also known Hemp fetched by Wagon from Bourn in Lincolnshire, to
Gloucester upon the River of Severn. And our Experience, certainly we may blush
to say we have not sufficient skill to make Cordage, or such kinds of coarse
cloth as the Proposition intends; namely, such as is commonly used to make
Sheets, Table-cloathes, Towels, Napkins, and the coarser sorts of Shirting, or
the like: As for the finer sorts, we may work our selves into the kill and
practice of making such by degrees, and at more leisure.

Qu. 4. Whether when we make so much Linen Cordage as here, we shall have so
good vent for our Native commodities for which Cordage, Hemp, etc. is returned?

Answ. As I said, I pretend not to judge of Merchants affairs, yet I have not
heard of any of our native commodities which are vented for Hemp, or Cordage or
the like, which will not be acceptable to the same or other Countries for the
return of as good commodities. Once I am sure that those commodities are only
(or at least most) fit to import which we cannot so well make native to us, as
Spices, Wines, Drugs Medicinal, Silks, etc. And I suppose it cannot be
unhappy, or unfit for us to make as many our own as by good means we can,
especially, Hemp, Cordare, etc. since we cannot be without them, and are not
sure always to hold fair correspondence with those Nations from whom we have
them, the chief strength of England principally consisting in Shipping, it is
but a coarse policy to have our Cordage, etc. to keep.

Qu. 5. Who will advance so great a sum in unsettled times upon a New Trade,
having in it the aforementioned (and perhaps more) difficulties?

Answ. If you please to observe my Proposition, you will find, I say only if
such men may be found, I promise not to find them, but if they will find
themselves I hold forth to them the sweet invitation of a greater advantage
than, I believe they can otherwise obtain by direct and good means: And then
add to that the double and treble service or good they shall (all under one)
do tax for their Christian Brethren and native Country. And if this will not
this will not invite, cannot persuade them, yet methinks we should rather take
occasion to bewail our own, theirs, and the Commonwealths misery and
averseness from all goodness. As for the troublesomnesse of the times, I can
but put you in mind of that part of the Proposition that assures this to be one
of the most safe and likely ways to save a man's estate, where if it be not
fully enough explained, I refer you to your own better judgment to find and
propound what you think best.

And now whosoever raised these Objections, did well, if he did it for the
right end ( viz.) to illustrate the Proposition, that so it might be made more
clear and acceptable. But its too common to object as an enemy, not to
demonstrate, but destroy designs in themselves not evil, at least well
intended.

A new Husbandry, or Improvement of Rape-seed.
IN the way of a Merchant I do not certainly know, but can guess how to
dispose of great quantities of Rape-seed, but for Hemp seed I confess I am
ignorant how to vent any such great quantities; but if I may be showed a way to
vent either, particularly the last, I may possibly propound a way to produce a
much greater encerease than is usually had of either, as namely, whereas it is
now the usual custom to sow Rape-seed in low lands, and Fenny, Moorish
Countries, where it is liable to the breakings in of the Sea, or overflow of
Land-floods, I can as well, and with as much hope of a plentiful return and
increase, sow it in any good upland not liable to such casualties, and for the
profit more certain, which at present is in the aforesaid Lowlands when it
scapes those floods, valued at five pound per Acre. I say I can propound a way
how each Acre of such rich Upland shall yield at least a Last or ten Quarters,
or eighty Bushels, which at but three shillings a Bushel, the cheapest rate, is
twelve pound sterling, and for extraordinary charge I will deduct forty
shillings more than the common way requires per Acre, so that one Acre shall be
as good as two now and fixed, that is, the profit much more certain.

And for Hemp, I say, that whereas an Acre of good Hemp may now be sold
standing for about six pound, and the very best under ten, seed and all. I can
propound a way, by taking of which, each Acre shall be worth, all charges
defrayed, at least six pound, thirteen shillings, four pence for the tew only,
and at least six p^^nd, thirteen shillings and four pence more for the seed;
and both these productions are made by the careful and skillful replanting of
the herbs, and choice and manage of the grounds.

A Passage taken out of a tract against the high rate of Usury; presented to
the high Court of Parliament, Anno Domini 1623. In which the Use for Money was
brought down from ten to eight in the Hundred. And now humbly recommended to a
further Public Consideration, as a special Means for Advancement of the
National Husbandry of this Commonwealth.
IT has been the wisdom and care of former Parliament to provide for the
preservation of Wood and Timber; for which there is nothing more available than
the calling down of the high rate of Usury; for as the rate of Money now goes,
no man can let his Timber stand, nor his Wood grow to such years growth as is
best for the Commonwealth, but it will be very losse-full to him. The stock of
the Woods after they are worth forty or fifty the shillings the Acre, growing
faster at ten in the hundred than the Woods themselves do. And for Shipping
which is the strength and safety of this land, I have heard diverse Merchants of
good credit say, that if they would build a Ship, and let it to any other to
employ, they cannot make of their Money that way, counting all charges, tear and
wear, above ten or twelve in the hundred, which can be no gainful Trade without
hazard, Money it self going at ten in the hundred. But in the Low Countries
where Money goes at six, the building of Ships, and hiring them to others, is a
gainful Trade, and so the stock of Rich men, and the industry of beginners are
well joined for the public.

And yet that which is above all the rest, the greatest sin against the Land
is, that it makes the Land it self of small value, nearer the rate of new found
Lands than of any other Country, where Laws, Government, and Peace have so
long flourished: For the high rate of Usury makes Land sell so cheap, and the
cheap sale of Land is the cause why men seek no more by industry and cost to
improve them; and this is plain both by example and demonstration; for we see
in other Countries, where the use of Money is of a low rate, Lands are
generally sold for 30, 40, in some for 50 years purchase. And we know by the
rule of bargaining, that if the rate of use were not greater here than in other
Countries, Lands were then as good a pennyworth, at twenty years purchase as
they are now at sixteen: For Lands being the best assurance, and securest
inheritance, will bear a rate above Money. Now if Lands were at thirty years
purchase, or near it, there were no so cheap purchase, as the amendment of ou^
own Lands; for it would be much cheaper to make one Acre of Land, now worth
five shillings by the year, to be worth ten shillings, or being worth ten, to
be worth twenty shillings; and so in proportion, then to purchase another acre
worth five or ten shillings. And in every acre thus purchased to the owner by
the amendment of his own, there were another purchased to the Commonwealth. And
it is the blessing of God to this Land, that there are few places of it to
which he has not given means by reasonable cost and industry, greatly to amend
it, in many to double the value, so as in time, if for their own good, men's
industry were compelled that way, the riches and commodities of this Land would
near be doubled: Then would all the wet-lands in this Kingdom soon be drained,
the barren lands mended by Matle, Sleech, Lime, Chalk, Sea-sand, and other
means, which for their profit men's industry would find out. We see with how
great industry and charge our neighbors the Dutch do drain and maintain their
Lands against the Sea which flows higher above them than it does above the
lowest parts of our drowned lands. I will admit a great deal to their industry,
but I should very unwillingly grant that they are so much more ingenious and
industrious than we, as that all the odds were therein. Certainly the main
cause of it is, that with us money is dear and land cheap; with them lands dear
and money cheap; and consequently the improvement of their lands at so great a
charge with them, is gainful to the owners, which with us would be losse-full;
for Usuring going at ten in the hundred, if a man borrow five pounds, and
bestow it on an Acre of ground, the amendment stands him in ten shillings a
year, and being amended the Land is not worth above fifteen years purchase: But
if the use of money went at no more than at other places, then five pound
bestowed upon an Acre of ground, would stand a man in but five or six shillings
a year, and the acre of land so amended would be worth, as has been showed,
six and twenty or thirty years purchase. Whereby it appears, that as the
rate of Use now goes no man (but where the land lies extraordinarily happy
for it) can amend his Land but to his own loss; whereas if money were let as
it is in other Countries, he might bestow more than double as much as now he
may, and yet be a great gainer thereby; and consequently, as was before
remembered, should to his own benefit purchase land to the Commonwealth.

Neither would such purchase of Land to the Commonwealth be the benefit to the
landed men only, the benefit would be as much to the poor Laborers of the
Land: For now when Corn and other fruits of the land which grow by labor are
cheap, the Plough and Mattock are cast into the hedge, there is little work for
poor men, and that at a low rate, whereas if the mendment of their own lands
were the cheapest purchase to the owner; if there were many more people than
there are, they should be readily set a work at better rates than now they are,
and none that had their health and limbs could be poor, but by their extremest
laziness.

A Bank of Lands; or, an Improvement of Lands, never thought on in former Ages:
Begun to be presented upon most rationable and demonstrable grounds by Mr.
William Potter (a Gentleman of great deserts, and of a most Public Spirit)
which being more fully cleared in all its Particulars, and established by
public Authority, may become a standing and settled Means to enrich the whole
Nation, and also to remove Taxes, and other public Burdens.
THrough the long continuance of the Wars, Trade has been interrupted, great
losses sustained at sea, the people constrained to live upon the main stock,
men's credits ruined, many debts (otherwise good) lost, both friends and enemies
plundered or sequestered, and Taxes, etc. unavoydably continued, whereby the
Nation is now in a very low condition.

There is a great necessity that this Epidemical disease of ruin in men's
estates should be cured; for hereby,

1. The Rich, that should support others, are diminished in number, and weakened
in means, and the Poor that should be upheld, are increased both in number and
necessities.

2. If the removing of Burdens be necessary, the removing of Poverty (without
which the rest are, in effect, no burdens) is more necessary.

3. The Trade, Manufacture, Shipping, Strength, Repute and flourishing estate
of the Nation, depends as the means upon the Riches thereof.

4. The servility of a low condition, deprives men of much leisure and freedom
in attending higher things.

This burden may be removed by encouraging such employments and undertakings as
tend to increase the estates of some without impoverishing others; for
whatsoever takes from one man's estate as much as it adds to another, does not
enrich the Nation.

The capacity of enriching this Nation, is in a sort infinite.

1. By making it the Scale of Trade to other people, which consists in buying
the commodities of other Countries, working them here, and selling them again
in foreign parts: Whereby if England were a City upon a Rock (and held no land
of their own) they might be maintained comfortably. Witness Holland.

2. By Plantations throughout the world, which tends to lessen our charge, and
increase our means, by the returns of commodities out of the industry of those
that otherwise must be maintained for nothing.

3. By the Fishing-trade, wherein the Sea affords a vast Treasure, without
demanding any rent for it, all which three last particulars would yield a kind
of infinite of increase, if there were no want of stock to employ therein.

4. By improving our present Possessions: For,

1. Almost all the Land in England might be made to yield much more increase,
if men had money to employ in manuring the same.

2. Diverse Husbandmen want wherewith to stock their ground, whereby (perhaps)
the Nation suffers more than many times by much unseasonable weather.

3. A great part of Ireland lies at present waste, which (without great stock
to plant) is like so to continue.

4. There are great quantities of oazie grounds about the Seacoast and other
Fens and waste grounds; besides Forests and Commons, which drained and
improved might equalize in value some two or three Counties in England.

5. There are many Mines in England, Ireland, and Scotland, which being wrought
would much increase our Exportation and employment for poor men.

To set all these Wheels a going, two things are necessary, viz. that the
people may know where to be furnished with stock at low interest, and that a
sufficient quantity of current money be disperced amongst them.

And indeed the great Remora is, that the people are generally void of stock,
whereby it is impossible they should deal either in the Foreign Trade,
Fishing, Plantations, or Improving their own possessions, by reason whereof
both poor and rich are deprived of employment, and forced to live chiefly upon
the Principal, to the greater increase of their poverty and ruin.

Whereas if they knew where to obtain such stock at low Interest, it would both
enable them to prosecute the aforesaid ends, and also make way for the more
speedy vent of commodities in other Nations; for greatness of stock at low
Interest, would enable the English Merchants to deal for much, and thereby to
buy cheap, work cheap, and sell for less profit in the pound (and also to
procure their commodities at the best hand, viz. at the places of their growth
in their proper season) whereby out-trading and underselling other Nations,
they obtain the pre-emption of sale, and so cannot fail of vent abroad.

Also great stock at low Interest would enable Merchants to raise the price of
our own native commodities in Foreign parts, by keeping them for a good
Market, which helps much toward the enriching of a Nation.

Again if there were great quantity of money disperced amongst the people of
this land, there would not wantvent of commodities amongst themselves.

For in this case every man to improve his stock would be laying out that money
in commodities, and those that receive it would be laying it out again upon
others, and those upon others, and so on, which would beget a constant return,
or quick vent for commodities proportionable to the quantity of money so
perpetually revolving amongst them.

Now if (through plenty of money amongst the people) there were as much vent for
commodity as the earth could by industry be made to afford, men would not spare
either the Sea or the Land, but the one by the Fishing Trade, the other by
Husbandry and all ingenious ways of Improvement here in England; by planting
in Ireland, and other new Plantations throughout the whole Globe, would bestow
all their skill and diligence to multiply commodity and livelihood to the
employment of innumerable poor, and all other men whatsoever, and the abundant
increase of our Shipping and Dominion on the Sea, and thereby the strength,
renown, and flourishing estate of the Nation.

And not only so, but if there were such vent here in England, even Foreign
Nations would dispatch their commodities hither as to the quickest Market, and
by meeting here (as in a center) might furnish each other with returns, so as
England would become as it were a general Market or Fair to other Nations, to
the great enriching thereof; whereby the Frontier Towns upon the Seacoast, by
reason of Trade would grow populous and strong for the defense of the Nation.

Also quickness of returns here in England would expedite returns abroad; for
quick returns makes a small stock equivalent to a great stock with slow
returns, and therefore if the Merchants of England could vent all sorts of
commodities here as fast as they could possibly procure them, it would enable
them to deal for much, and consequently to buy much cheap, work cheap, and sell
for less profit in the pound as before. So as in this case there would not
want vent for commodities, either at home, by reason of the plenty of money
here, or abroad by reason of our own out-trading other Nations, through the
greatness of our stock, and quickness of returns.

Also if men (through plenty of Coin revolving amongst them) could meet with
ready money for all commodities as fast as they could be made fit for sale, no
man for the future would deal for time, the rather for that the forbearance of
Debts in a time of quick trade would be great loss.

This would remove all those Inconveniences which are incident to the ordinary
way of Trading upon credit, viz. 1. The imprisonment of men's persons for debt.
2. Innumerable suits of Law about such debts. 3. Much trouble in keeping
Accounts. 4. Great losses by men's trusting those that fail. 5. Cousenage in
those who (concealing their estates) compound with their Creditors. 6.
Underselling the Market for procuring money to pay debts. 7. Hard bargains by
taking up ware upon trust. 8. Disabling men from managing their Trade, and
taking the advantage of the Market, their stock being in other men's hands.


This necessity of plenty of Coin amongst a people, is the reason why States
makes Laws against the Exportation thereof, and many times pitch upon some
Staple commodities which they will not exchange with other Nations but for
returns in Bullion.

So much money in specie as were necessary to furnish the people with the
aforesaid stock at low Interest, and such plenty of Coin as is already
mentioned, is impossible to be had, and if it could be obtained by returns
from other Nations, yet we must part with our own commodities for it, which we
cannot spare in such great quantities. Whereas upon serious consideration it
will be found, that Credit grounded upon the best security is the same thing
with Money, and may be had in very great abundance, without parting with any
commodity for it.

That such Credit is as good as Money will appear if it be observed that Money
it self is nothing else but a kind of security which men receive upon parting
with their commodities, as a ground of hope or assurance that they shall be
repayed in some other commodity: since no man would sell any commodity for
the best money, but in hopes thereby to procure some other commodity or
necessary.

True it is that Coin which has no intrinsical value, as they call it ( viz.
Money of Brass, Copper, etc.) though whilst it runs current the owner may
obtain commodity for it, yet when the use of it is prohibited (no man being
engaged to make it good) he suffers loss. Which if he had security in Lands of
sufficient value would be prevented, whereby it appears, that security answers
to the intrinsic value of Coin.

That such Credit is as good as Money, is also evident upon this ground, That
Money if it were a better security than it is, yet it serves only to supply
the interval of time between the selling of one commodity, and the buying of
another: Now the best assurances in Land are a security sufficient for the
supplying of that intervall: Especially considering that men's estates are
generally either in land or commodities. And in land (though more certain than
commodity) yet if absolutely purchased there may be loss by its decrease in
value, but if accepted only as in Morgage, that hazard is prevented, and so
becomes the most certain security on earth, and therefore must needs be
sufficient to supply the short interval betwixt the selling of land or
commodity and the buying thereof.

Upon this ground that Security is in effect the same thing with Money, it is,
that in diverse places of the world it runs current in stead of Money.

Thus Bills in Flanders obliging the Debtor to pay money at a certain time, are
acccepted by those who esteem of the man as able and sufficient, whereby such
Bills do usually pass from one hand to another, until they become payable.

Thus in Venice, Leighorn, and Amsterdam, the security (commonly called Credit,
grounded upon the depositions of money in bank, runs current, and though the
owners may have money if they please, yet they choose rather to deal by credit;
whereby it appears that it is neither unpossible, strange, nor unpracticeable,
for security to be made to supply the place of money.

This is best effected by the way of Banks.

Banks, as they are now practiced, are nothing else in effect but places where
men pawn or deposite their moneys for obtaining current credit, as that which
they may keep with less danger, and assign to another with less trouble.

If any man who has credit in Bank demands the money, it is paid him; but as
some men demand money out of the Bank, so others when they are to receive
money, do cause it to be paid into the Bank, whereby to ease themselves of the
trouble of receiving, keeping, and paying it.

Hence it is that the Bankers are always receiving money of some, as well as
paying it to others; so as those who from time to time demand any money, are
usually paid by those who bring it in, and the rest of the money lies dead in
bank, or else that Bank has no credit; for look how much credit runs current,
so much mon^y does or should lie dead in bank, as a pawn for mak^ng good theeof.

Now seeing such money lies dead in bank, and serves for no other purpose, but
as a pawn or ground of security; for making good the credit that runs current
in stead thereof, there is no doubt to be made but that lands being morgaged to
a Bank, would serve as well and better for such a pawn, which cannot be removed
or made away by force or fraud, as great sums of money lying long in one
place may; neither is any temptation to an enemy, as Banks of money are;
witness the late attempt of the Prince of Orange.

If any should here expect a more full opening of the nature of such Banks of
security, and other circumstances relating to the practice thereof, it is not
my scope to insist thereon at present, least the discourse might become too
large for men of business: It may suffice in the mean time that the thing it
self plainly appears to be practiceable, there being nothing in it but what is
daily acted amongst men: For,

1. The raising of Credit upon the security of Lands, is no new thing.

2. The making use of Credit in Bank, instead of money, and transferring of such
credit from one man to another in books kept for that purpose, is also
practiced in the aforesaid Banks. Now put those two together, and you have the
whole of what is here propounded.

I shall therefore in the general put a case.

Suppose any company of men should proffer to lend this State two or three
hundred millions of money gra^is, let us consider what they would do therewith.

They could not employ it with safety any otherwise, th^^ by sending it forth
to the people upon sufficient security at a reasonable Interest, because it is
but lent to them, and therefore must be restored.

2. It may be they would resolve also to raise Banks therewith, whereby the
credit grounded upon such money, might run current amongst the people, rather
than the money it self, which is not so fit for daily use, in great sums, in
respect of the trouble of telling and re-telling, the loss in clipped and
counterfeit money, the hazard which men sustain in keeping much money by them,
the trouble of carrying great sums from house to house, and the danger from
conveighing it in specie from one Town to another, whereas dealing in such
credit (as to all great sums) would prevent Highway-theeves, who if they have
nothing but goods to seize upon in the road, cannot go long undiscovered, nor
can advance any thing thereupon worth their attendance, which would totally
discourage them from following that lewd kind of life, and thereby free the
Highwayes of such Vermin.

Credit also is better amongst the people than money, in these two respects:
First it cannot be transported to other Nations. Secondly, it will not be
hoarded up, as money many times is to the great hinderance of Trade: for that
money which is of least esteem amongst the people, if it be of real value in it
self, is most for their good, because every man striving to post it off from
himself, does thereby quicken returns of Trade.

Now suppose that (upon these manifold considerations) such Banks should be
erected, and it should thereupon come to pass, that this money thus lent to the
Commonwealth, should lie dead in Bank, and the people should make use of their
Credit in stead thereof (as they do I say in other places) I demand then to
what purpose this money serves?

If it be said it lies for a pawn to secure the Credit that runs current in
stead thereof:

I answer, the Land which was taken for security, when the money was lent to
the people, is a sufficient pawn to make good such credit: If not, then the
money which was lent upon that security, which fails, is lost; but if the
security hold good it is the same with money: And therefore if the State might
venture to lend the money it self upon the best security, the people may even
as well venture to take such security it self for money.

Hereupon there is no doubt but the State (in order to their own security)
would restore this money to the owners, and proceed without it, as being,
first, altogether superfluous; secondly, a great temptation to an Enemy;
thirdly, subject in process of time to the fraud of Officers, and sudden
commotions of several parties and factio^s if it lie dead in Bank: And if it
go abroad, then not so sit for daily use of Credit in the manifold respects
already mentioned: And if they thus proceed without the said money they do the
same thing which is here proposed.

The premises considered, to dispute against the aforesaid Banks grounded upon
security, is the same thing, as to oppose the accepting of the aforesaid money
in specie, if it were to be lent this Nation gratis.

This being so, if any should ask whether the State would refuse the free loan
of so much ready money? I answer (confidently) No.

1. Because by the lending thereof to the people upon Interest, a Revenue may
be raised to free them from public taxes and burdens.

2. Interest might be brought to a low rate for the encouragement of Trade, and
without any compulsive Law.

3. The filling of the land with so exceeding great a quantity of money, would
by the revolution thereof quicken Trade in the highest degree.

4. It would be a means to furnish the people with abundance of stock to employ
in the Foreign Trade, Fishing, Plantations, improving their own Lands, drowned
and wasted grounds, Mines, etc. in all the three Nations.

5. By such fall of Interest, Land would rise much in price, which (besides the
help of sufficient stock and quick vent) would much encourage the improvement
thereof.

6. Many public Grievances and Burdens would be prevented thereby (as is
already for the most part observed) viz. oppression amongst Broakers and
Extortioners; the trouble, charge, and hazard in returns of moneys,
Highway-theeves, imprisonment for debt, innumerable lawsuits, losses by
failers, underselling the Market, enhancing foreign commodities, and debasing
the value of our own: And in brief, that great Burden of all Burdens, namely,
extreme Poverty, with diverse other particulars, which I shall not further
repeat.

Now considering our present great extremities for want of stock and money, who
that loves his Country, would be against the accepting of such an immense
Treasure of good and current Coin, if it were proffered this Nation gratis; and
yet it plainly appears by the premises, that all this Treasure lies within our
own reach, in that kind of Bullion, which is better than money in specie, and
wants nothing but the mere stamp of Authority to make it current; and has this
further advantage in it, that it may be made use of to the worlds end, without
fearing it should ever be demanded, which so much money ^ent; gratis, cannot.

To conclude therefore, it plainly appears that the way to remove Poverty,
Taxes, and most public Grievances, and to make this Nation abound in Wealth,
Trade, Cities, Shipping, People, and Renown, is (according to means) neither
unpracticeable, nor difficult, except we renounce all humane prudence; and with
the Sluggard in the Proverbs, create difficulties to our selves, where God has
made none.

If therefore the Proposition in general be thought worthy of regard, it is
humbly desired that Commissioners might be appointed to hear and debate such
considerations as relate thereunto, with that seriousness as a thing of this
moment will require; for upon the mere reading of things, men start many
scruples (through misapprehension) which have no ground but their own mistakes;
whereby many good Proposals suffer great prejudice, which upon solemn debates
would easily detected and prevented.

By this means these Propositions have been already clogged by diverse that have
heard thereof, at the second and third hand, with several false Imputations and
groundless Jealousies; all which if those that are concerned, will please to
make it their business to be satisfied, will, I hope, be fully be cleared.

Thus far of the Bank of Lands at the present.

The Conclusion of the Legacy of Husbandry, taken out of Sir R. Weston late of
Sutton in the County of Surrey, his Legacy to his Sons, with a little
alteration of his words.
BY the means of good Husbandry you may nobly augment your estates, and will
receive so much the more profit and praise, by how much more industry and
diligence you govern your affairs; and will not only be imitated, but also
honored by our Neighbors, when they shall see your labors prosper so far, as
to convert barren ground left unhusbanded for many Ages into commodious Arable
land, with Pastures and Meadows. And certainly that man is worthy of praise and
honor, who being possessed of a large and barren Demeasne, constrains it by
his labor and industry to produce extraordinary fruits; which redounds not
only to his own particular profit, but also to the public benefit. Cato
says, It is a great shame to a man not to leave his Inheritance greater to his
Successors than he received it from his Predecessors, and that he despises the
liberality of God who by his slothfulness loses that which his land may bring
forth, as not seeming willing to reap the fruits which God has offered him.
Nay he threatens the crime of high Treason to those that do not augment their
Patrimony so much as the Increase surmounts the Principal. It is a thing much
celebrated by Antiquity, and thought the noblest way to gather Wealth for to
employ ones Wit and Money upon his Land, and by that means to augment his
estate. If you observe the common course of things, you will find that
Husbandry is the End which men of all estates in the world do point at. For to
what purpose do Soldiers, Scholars, Lawyers, Merchants, and men of all
occupations and trades toil and labor with great affection, but to get money?
and with that money, when they have gotten it but to purchase Land? and to what
end do they buy that land but to receive the fruits of it to live? and how
shall one receive the fruits of it but by his own Husbandry or a Farmers? So
that it appears by degrees; that what course soever a man takes in this world,
at last he comes to Husbandry which is the most common occupation amongst
men, the most natural and holy being commanded by the mouth of God to our First
Fathers. There is care and dillgence requisite in Husbandry, as there is in all
the Actions of the world; and therefore as a Captain has a Lieutenant to
command his Soldiers in his absence, or for his ease: So must you provide some
able honest man to whom you will commit the execution of such things, as you
your selves cannot do without too much labor; whereof you must often take an
account, and confer with him (as occasion shall require) about your business,
that nothing may be left undone for want of providence. To such a man you must
give good wages, with intent to advance your own gain, and take the more ease
by reason of his honesty and knowledge.

You will find the Improvement by Husbandry (after you have once had experience
of it to be very pleasing to you, and so exceeding profitable, that it will
make you dilidiligent; for no man of any Art or Science (except an Alchymist)
ever pretended so much gain any other way, as you shall see discovered and
demonstrated in this Treatise. The Usurer doubles but his principal, with
Interest upon Interest in seven years, but by this Legacy of Husbandry you
shall learn now to do more than treble your principal in one years compass. I
will say no more of this subject, only it remains to tell you, that you must
not expect either Eloquence or Method in these miscellanies; but true relations
and directions, plainly set forth, which must be carefully followed and
observed: but before all things to be sure you lay the foundation of your
Husbandry, upon the blessing of Almighty God, continually imploring his divine
aid and assistance in all your labors: for it is God that gives the Increase;
and believing this as the Quintessence, and soul of Husbandry. But seek ye
first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be
added unto you.

An Animadvertisement to the City and Country.
THese are to give public notice to City and Country, that there is lately
invented a new and very useful Engine, both for quencing of fire, and improving
of Husbandry, it may be managed with one man to quench fire, and may be used 24
hours without danger of choking, taking, up not above five or six foot (the
whole Engine forcers and all) whereas the ordinary Engine cannot be played in
less than twenty foot. It is of so small a bulk, that it may be carried
through any narrow entry with two men, and is to be applied to any fire that is
broken out backwardly* whereas in the ordinary Engines, they are fain to pull
down the forepart of the house before they can come at the fire, by which
means the fire increases much, which is prevented by this invention. It is
also very commodious for Watring of whole Fields or Gardens, as likewise
beating of Caterpillars off Trees* besides several other profitable Uses. If
any shall desire to have further informations or directions, concerning the
foresaid Engine, he may please to resort to the Inventor himself, Mr. Thomas
Owefield, dwelling in the Strand, near the Savoy, next door to the Sign of the
Sun; who stands engaged to the Author of the Legacy of Husbandry to make good
all his Undertakings.

FINIS.

