A further Discovery OF THE OFFICE OF PVBLICK ADDRESS FOR ACCOMMODATIONS.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1648.

L. Montagne's Essays the fourth Book the XXIV Chapter, of a Defect in our
POLICIES.
MY whilesome Father who had no help but from experience and his own nature,
yet of an unspotted judgment has heretofore told me, that he much desired to
bring in this custom, which is, that in all Cities there should be a certain
Appointed Place, to which whosoever should have need of any thing might come,
and cause his business to be Registered by some Officer appointed for that
purpose. As for example, if one have Pearls to sell, he should say, I seek to
sell some Pearls; another I seek to buy some Pearls: such a man would fain have
Company to travel to Paris: Such a one enquireth for a Servant of this or that
quality: Such a one seeks for a Master, another a workman, some this some
that every one as he needed. And it seems that this means of enterwarning one
another: would bring no small Commodity unto Common Commerce and Society. For
there are ever conditions that enter-seek one another, and because they
understand not one another, they leave men in great necessity. I understand to
the infamous reproach of our Age, that even in out sight two most excellent men
in knowledge have miserably perished for want of food and other necessaries,
Lilius Gregorius Giraldus in Italy, and Sebastianus Castalio in Germany. And I
verily believe there are many thousands, who had they known or understood their
wants, would either have sent for them, and with large stipends have
entertained them, or would have conveyed them succor where ever they had
been. The world is not so generally corrupted, but I know some that would
earnestly wish, and with hearty affections desire the goods which their
forefathers have left them, might so long as it shall please God they may
enjoy them, be employed for the relief of rare, and supply of excellent men's
necessities, and such as for any kind of worth and virtue are remarkable, many
of which are daily seen to be pursued by poverty even to the utmost extremity,
and that would take such order for them as had they not their ease and content
it might only be imputed to their want of reason, or lack of discretion.

A further Discovery OF THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC ADDRESS FOR ACCOMMODATIONS.
BEfore we fell into these last fears and troubles, a Brief Discourse was
presented unto the High and Honorable Houses of Parliament; concerning the
Means to accomplish the Work of our Reformation: tending to show that by an
Office of Public Address in Spiritual and Temporal concernments, the Glory
of God, and the Happiness of this Nation may be highly advanced.

This Discourse has fully approved it self unto the Judgment of all those
that have seen it hitherto, and hopefully it would have wrought some effect
upon those that manage the Affairs of this State, if the Danger of this last
Commotion, had not employed all their strength and Attention, to save us from
sudden Shipwreck. Nor is the Sea yet quieted after so great a storm: but the
fears and expectations of what will follow do keep the minds of most men in
suspense, till they see a safe Harbor, that is, what the way of our future
settlement will be.

And truly this Consideration might also suspend our thoughts and solicitations
in this matter; if we would look only to the outward Appearance of Affairs,
and make Our selves as many do by their Conjectures fearful. Ecel. 11. 1^2, 4.
For He that observes the wind shall not sow; and he that regards the
Clouds shall not reap: But we have learned to cast our bread upon the waters,
in hope that we may find it after many days: and we are willing to give a
portion unto seven, and also to eight, because we know not what evil shall be
upon the Earth. So then, even that which makes others less careful of the
Public, does increase our care for it. For most men will not intend any
Public Aim till they can secure their own Interests, and see a way to get
advantage by that which they call the Public: but we shall never aim at this;
our delight shall be, that all may be advantaged, and the Public Interest of
the Commonwealth settled, although it should be to our cost and disadvantage:
For we know the promise, that if we faint not, and become not weary in
well-doing, we shall reap in due time the fruit of righteousness.

Therefore upon the grounds laid in the former Discourse, we shall endeavor
now to proceed to offer some Particulars; which perhaps will take more with
those men, then that which we aim at principally. For our aim is mainly to
lay the grounds of that Reformation in this change of our Affairs, which may
reach the spirits of Men to affect them with a Gospel-frame: But if we therein
cannot come near them immediately; yet we shall endeavor to come as near as we
may by the things whereof they are capable; because we are resolved rather to
venture the loosing of our Labor, then to sit still; and not give our selves
this satisfaction that we have discharged a good Conscience in performing our
Duty.

We shall declare then with that simplicity, which becomes a good conscience
in the presence of God, that our desire is to serve all men freely in the
Public Interest so far as God does enable us; and that by this Design we
Aim at a special Advantage to the Gospel of Christ rather then at any thing
else; and if we can but awake those, that are in Places of Power and
Authority; to take notice of the Means, whereby all Men's talents may become
useful to each other, in this Commonwealth; that for their own Temporal
Ends, they would countenance, and promote the same; we shall have our End at
this time in this undertaking.

Therefore now we make our application as to all indifferently, that love the
prosperity of Sion, and the welfare of this State; so more particularly to
those whom God has appointed to be our Leaders in every good work, and
Encouragers of those that apply themselves thereunto, that whether they lay the
matter to heart or no, they may not be without a witness before God and the
world, that this is a duty belonging to their charge; which without any charge,
trouble or difficulty may be most easily brought to pass, by a few words in
the way of Order, to Authorize the undertaking of such an Office, for the
unspeakable Benefit of all, and without the least imaginable Inconveniencie
unto any.

And that the thing it self, may manifest the truth of this, We shall come to a
more particular Discovery of the Office in the matters of Temporal
Accommodation; which unto the men of this world are sensible Inducements
toward all Enterprises.

Let us then consider, What it is that makes a Commonwealth, and all those
that are in it, happy, as to the Life of Nature. The chief End of
Commonwealths is Society, the End of Society is Mutual Help, and the End and
Use of Help is to enjoy from one another Comforts, that is, every thing
lawfully desirable or wanting to our contentation. Wheresoever then, in a
Commonwealth such a Constitution may be had; whereby the Members thereof may
be enabled to enjoy from each other all the Helps which Nature does afford unto
them for their Mutual Contentation, there the State and all those that are in
it may be said to be as happy as this world can make them.

For no man can be more happy in Nature, then to have all his lawful desires
supplied so far as they are attainable: But in this Commonwealth such a
Constitution may be had, and that easily, which will do this: Therefore this
Commonwealth and all the Members thereof may be as happy as this world can
make them; if their Rulers will either assist them, or at least suffer them to
become so.

Now this Constitution whereof we speak is nothing else, but the Designation of
a certain place, whereunto it shall be free for every one to make his Address
upon all Occasions, as well to offer unto others, as to receive from them, the
commodities which are desirable, and the Informations of things profitable to
be taken notice of in a private or public way.

In this Place an Officer is to be appointed, who should have power to direct
and order the work of the Constitution. He should have certain men under him,
so many as he should think fit to keep Registers, and make extracts thereof, to
give to such as should desire the same for their Information.

These Registers should be of all things which either may be any way offered by
one man to any or to all, and desired by another from Any or from All; or which
otherwise may be of public use, though not at all taken notice of by any to
that End.

And the E^d wherefore these Registers are thus to be kept, is only, that
therein may be settled a Center of Encounters to give Information to All of All
useful matters. For one of the great Causes of our Misery in this present
life is this, that we are not only in the dark, not knowing what good things
are exstant in private, or publicly attainable for Use: But we are in disorder
and confusion, because when we know what things are attainable, yet we have no
way contrived how to encounter readily and certainly with them our selves, when
we have need of them, or when we have them, to impart them to such as want them.

Now to remedy both these evils, this Office may be an Instrument, by being
made a Common Intelligencer for All, not only of things actually offered or
desired by some to be communicated, but also of things by himself and others
observable, which may be an occasion to raise matter of Communication for the
Information to All.

The multitude of affairs in populous Places does naturally run into a
confusion, except some orderly way be found out to settle Times and Places
wherein those that are to attend them, may meet together for the transaction
thereof. If there were no Exchanges, nor set hours thereof, for Merchants to
meet and transact matters; What a disorder and obstruction would there be in
all trading? And if a man that has to do in the Exchange with five or six men;
does come to it when it is thronging full, and knows not the ordinary walks
of those several men; nor any body that can tell him where their walks are;
he may run up and down, here and there, and weary himself out of breath, and
not meet with any of them, except by great chance he light upon them at an
instant: So it is with all other men in respect of all other conveniences in
great and populous Cities or Kingdoms; They run up and down at random to seek
for their Accomodations; and when they have wearied themselves a long time in
vain, they sit down often times unsatisfied: But if there were but a place of
common resort appointed, like unto the Exchange, where they should be sure to
receive Information of all that which they would desire to know, they might
without any loss of time come instantly to the enjoyment of their desires, so
far as they are attainable.

This Place then is that, which we call the Office of Address. Here sufficient
Registers should be kept of all desirable Matters of Humane Accommodation,
showing where, with whom, and upon what conditions they may be had. And this
would be as it were a National Exchange for all desirable Commodities, to know
the ready way of encountering with them and transacting for them.

This then is the proper End and Use of this Office, to set every body in a way
by some direction and Address, how to come speedily to have his lawful
desires accomplished, of what kind soever they may be.

This Constitution will be a Means mightily to increase all Trade and Commerce
amongst Merchants and all sort of People, but especially to relieve the
necessities of the Poor, for whose sake alone it does deserve to be
entertained, although there were none other conveniencie in it. But to show
that by the advantage of such an Address, as is intended by this Office to be
set a foot, all Trade will be mainly advanced: Consider how for the want of it,
occasions of Trading and Transacting of businesses are hindered between man and
man, to their mutual disadvantage, and the detriment of the Commonwealth. As
for example: I am desirous to let out a parcel of ground and an house upon it
to be rented; another is desirous to have some ground with an House upon it to
farm, we for want of knowing each others desires do not meet to treat upon the
business, and cannot find our accommodations perhaps in a year or two, to our
content: Here then the Commerce which we might have with each other is stopped;
the public Notarie is not employed between us; the Counselor, whose advice
is to be used in drawing the Leases, is not employed; I want Money which I
might trade withal another way to my great profit and the public benefit; the
Farms is idle, the House not inhabited, and out of repair; the ground either
not at all, or not so well cultivated, as otherwise it would be; the
Inheritance does go to decay; less fruit is reaped of the ground; less
employment for laboring men; less works and Manufactures of Tradesmen and
Shopkeepers used, fewer Customs and duties paid to the public: and
consequently in every respect both to my self and others to whom I am
associated a disadvantage does befall; because I cannot encounter with the
conveniencie whereof I stand in need; nor the Farmer with his Accommodation:
But if we could have met with each other, and transacted our business to our
mutual content, all these Inconveniences would have been prevented both to us
and the Public: It is undeniably true, that the multitude of People does beget
Affairs; and the ready transaction of Affairs in a State, is the only Means
to make it flourish in the felicity of the Inhabitants; and that nothing can
advance such a ready transaction so much, as a Common-center of Intelligence
for all such Matters; is quite out of doubt.

As for the Benefit of the Poor, and the Relief of their Necessities (which
alone might move us to the prosecuting of this business) there is nothing
imaginable, that can be more beneficial unto them. For consider, amongst all
the Causes of Humane Poverty (which are many) this maine one; namely, that
most men are poor for want of employment is, either because they cannot find
Masters to employ them; or because their abilities and fitness to do service
are not known to such as might employ them: or lastly, because there is perhaps
little work sti^ring in the Commonwealth for them. All these causes will be
clearly remedied by this Constitution; for here not only the Master shall be
able to encounter with a Servant, or a Servant with a Master, fit for each
other, when both have given up their names, and the tenor of their desires,
with the places of their abode; to the Registe^s of the Office: but by the
collection and observation of all things profitable to be improved for the
Public use; much matter of employment, will be produced and found out, which
now is not at all thought upon. When poor Workmen or Tradesmen come to a
great City, such as London is, in hope of getting employment; if they fail of
their expectation, or meet not with the Friends upon whom they did rely; they
betake themselves to begging; or sometimes to far worser courses; which
brings them to a miserable end: but in stead of their particular expectation
and Friend, they can betake themselves to one, that can give them address to
the emploiment which in the Commonwealth can be found for them; they not only
may be preserved from beggerie and misery, but become useful unto their
Neighbor.

H^herto we have spoken of the Office, and the usefulnes thereof in respect of
the End. Now we shall come to the matters whereof Registers should be kept in
the Office for Information and address, to satisfy all men's desires.

The desires of men are infinite in respect of the circumstances; and therefore
it is not to be expected, that a particular enumeration thereof should be made:
We must reflect upon the principal heads whereunto all may be referred, that
when particulars are offered they may be brought unto their proper places in the
Registers, where they may be found in due time for Information and addresses of
one toward another.

There be two kinds of Registers or Inventaries of address; Some are of
things which are perpetually the same, and always existent in the Society of
Mankind in general, and in a distinct Commonwealth, Kingdom, Province and
City in particular, and others are not perpetual but changeable Registers
containing all matters of daily Occurrence between man and man to be imparted.

The Matters whereof the perpetual and unchangeable Registers should give
Information to such as may enquire after the same, are chiefly these.

1. For such as would know concerning any thing exstant in the world, what has
been said or written of it, the standing Register should contain a Catalogue
of all Catalogues of Books; whereunto the Enquisitor may be referred to seek
out whether or no be can find any thing written of the Matter; whereof he does
make inquiry in any of those Catalogues, and the Office should have one or
more Copies of each of those Catalogues to which the Register of Catalogues
should refer them to make their search.

2. For such as should make inquiry concerning this Kingdom to know the
situation of any of the Provinces, Shires, Counties, Cities, Towns, Villages,
Castles, Ports; and such like places; the Office should have Speeds Description
of this Kingdom, and Mercator, or others, to refer them thereunto.

3. For such as would desire to know, what public Officers, and Employments,
and what particular Trades are of use in this State; the Office should show a
Register thereof.

4. For such as would know what Families and Persons of eminent note and
quality are in the Kingdom for Birth, or for Place and Emploiment, or for
Abilities and singular personal Virtues, the Office should show who they are,
and what their property is, and where to be met withal.

5. For such as desire to know the standing Commodities of the Kingdom; what
they are in the whole, and what peculiar to every place? How they are
transported from place to place? Where and when the Markets thereof are kept?
And how to get intelligence of the particular prices thereof? The Office should
have Registers for Information of all this.

6. For such as desire to know what Commodities are imported from foreign
parts constantly into this Kingdom? Where and at what times to be found? With
Information concerning the prices thereof; the Office should be able to give
notice hereof.

As for the Matters of daily Occurrence, which by reason of circumstances are
changeably to be taken notice of, and differently to be proposed, as offered
from one man to another, or desired by one from another, for mutual
Accommodation; the Registers thereof must be divided into several Books, and
the Books into chapters, to whose heads all matters of that kind should be
referred

The Titles of these Books should be at least these four. 1. One for the
Accommodation of the Poor. 2. Another for the Accommodation of Trade, Commerce
and Bargains for profit. 3. A third for the Accommodation of all Actions which
proceed from all relations of persons to each other in all Estates and
conditions of Life. 4. A fourth for Ingenuities and matters of delight unto the
mind in all Ve^^ues and rare Objects.

These four Registers may be distinguished and entitled from the properties
of their Subjects thus. The first should be called the Register of Necessities,
or of Charity: The second of Usefulnes or of Profit: The third of Perfo^mance
or of Duties: And the fourth of Delights or of Honor. And to these Heads all
humane Occurrences, wherein one man may be helpful unto another may be
referred, if not very directly, yet in some way, which will be without
difficulty understood, and fit to avoid confusion in the matters of the
Registers.

Now we shall come to each of these Books in particular, to show the matters of
Accommodation contained therein, for public and private Service.

I.
The Register for the Poor.
THe Heads of Chapters unto which all Matters of Accommodation for the Poor
may be referred are these.

1. Counsels and Advices to be given concerning the Means, whereby the Poor
may be relieved, by being set a work, and employed if they be strong, or in
cases of sickness and want of employment, how to facilitate the Provision of
Lodging, Clothing, Food, and Entertainment for them: Here with the particular
Expedients which shall be suggested, a Note of the Names of those that do
suggest them shall be Registered, and if they desire it, a Certificate given
unto them to attest what they have suggested.

2. The List of Names of the Poor, viz: the Number of those that are
entertained, and how they are provided for already in several places. 2. The
Names of such as have no provision made for them, shall be enrolled in the List
of the Poor to be entertained, when they come with a Certificate of their
Condition to the Commissioners for the Poor, and have made their Case known
unto them: where a special respect is to be had to the Poor that are
shamefast, and want confidence to put forth themselves to be an object of
Public or Private charity.

3. The List of Names of Benefactors to the Poor, whether in public or in
private, that the Poor who are enrolled may receive address, and go unto them
for relief (or Employment, as the way of their charity shall fall out) to be
bestowed by themselves, or those whom they shall appoint to distribute it; for
the Office of Address shall not meddle with the Receipts or Distribution of any
Money in this kind; but only with the Names of the givers and receivers
thereof, to notify the one to the other.

4. The Names of Physicians, Apothecaries, and Surgeons, who shall offer
themselves to visit the Poor in their sickness, to bring them some Remedies,
or give them Advice what to do in point of diet, or otherwise for their health.

5. A List of Experiments and easy Remedies of diseases, which any shall be
willing to impart for the good of the Public, and speedy relief of the
diseased and poor, chiefly by the discovery of the admirable effects of
simples; shall be enrolled with the Names of those that impart the same unto
the Physicians, Surgeons, and Apothecaries, who shall offer themselves to
give attendance upon the Poor in their sickness.

6. Because all persons, though otherwise never so rich in possessions, if they
be under any grievous sickness or affliction, and can find no re^ief for it,
are to be counted poor, and are objects of Charity, if they will not be known
by name, to be in such a case; the Factum or circumstantiall Description of
their Case may be sent unto the Office; and a Memorial adjoined of some place
or body, who is to receive the Answer of Advice to be procured upon it; and
the Officer of the Office of Address, shall have an Advice to be given by the
Physicians, who shall offer themselves for the assistance of the poor, and it
shall be written at the bottom of the Factum, or the Description of the Case.

7. In case any would have in matters of difficulty in Law-businesses, the
impartial Advice of eminent Counselors upon the case which by word of mouth
they themselves are unwilling to declare; they may take the like course: or if
they would know the judgment of their Advocates and Counselors not formerly
interessed in the matter, whether it does agree, with that which has been
given to them, by those whom they have made use of; they may without expressing
of their own, or others names, make use of the Address, which the Office shall
be able to give them in like manner.

8. And in case either for want of judgment or experience they know not how to
set down their Cases and Factums circumstantially; the Office will be able to
give them Address to such as shall do it for them, with all secrecy and
faithfulness.

9. In case there be any who by reason of poverty or other necessities and
unavoid^ble hinderance, cannot pursue their Rights and just Interests in Law;
the Office will be able to Address them unto some; that shall undertake the
pursuit of the business for them by right; or else make an amiable composition
and transaction of the matter for their best advantage, with their Adversary on
their behalf.

10. The List of poor Scholars, who have made some beginning in learning, and
with a little matter of assistance might be enabled to perfect their course,
and become useful in their way to the Public, shall be kept by it self; that
when the names of such as shall offer to be helpful unto such shall be
notified, they may be addressed unto them.

11. The List of strangers, who are going to their Country and are objects of
Charity Here; as also of our own Country men who being strangers in distress
elsewhere, or Captives under the Turks, are objects of Charity, and may by their
friends here seek for help upon good Certificates of their condition, and of
the means of sending the relief which shall be procured unto them.

12. Because the Public State and society of a Commonwealth is often times in a
course of Poverty, and want of many things, and is an Object of great Charity
in several respects, a List shall be kept of all the memorialls or Offers,
which may be made by any for the ease of inconveniences befalling thereunto,
or for the advantage and benefit, which may be procured thereunto in a public
way; and the Authors names and places of abode being known, they shall by the
means of the offieer of address be directed to such as will be most able to
promote the Execution thereof; and if they be absent a great way from London, or
from the place of Supreme Government, where all proposals of that kind are to
be considered, without putting themselves to the charges of a great journey at
adventure, the matter may be prosecuted in their name by some in whose hands
the Officer of address may put it; and a deserved recompense may be by him
procured unto the Author of the Advice and Proposal, out of the benefit, which
thence may accrue unto the Public.

II
The Register of Commerce and Bargains.
THe Heads of Chapters whereunto matters of Commerce may be referred in the way
of Trading, are distinguished into the kinds of Commodities whereof Bargains
are made, and into the Cases and Ways of making Bargains about these
Commodities.

The Chapters of Commodities.
1. THe Chiefest of all Commodities, because it does give a Common valuation to
all other things, is Money; the Office then shall give Information and Address.

1. What the Species and Sorts of Coin extant here and elsewhere are in Silver
and Gold? What their weight and valuation is?

2. What the Course of Exchange is amongst Merchants for all places of Trade,
and how it does change from time to time, toward Holland, France, Spain,
Germany, etc.

2ly, The most necessary of all Commodities is Food; to this Head the Office
does refer for Information and address all particulars of Meat and Drink.

1. Of Meats the List does contain all Vegetables serving for that use; as
Wheat, Barley, Rye, Oats, Pease, Beans, Rice, and all Corn and Grains, and
Pulse, and every thing of that kind, and all Fruits and Roots fit for food, to
show what the rates thereof are, and where they are to be had.

2. All living Creatures in the Earth, Air, and Waters, Beasts, Fowls and
Fishes; the Office shall give the address to the place, where they are to be
bought, and show the ordinary Rates thereof in the several parts of the
Kingdom.

3. Of Drinks, as Wine, Beer, Ale, Cider, Perrie, Mede, strong Waters, and
what else is of this kind, the Office will let you know where to have your
choice, and at the best rates.

4. I^em, the List of the Places and Rates, at which men may diet themselves,
either wholly, or by meals, as an Ordinary.

3ly, Next to Food is Physic, and all Drugs and Wares which are used as
Ingredients thereunto, as Spices and Herbs, and all Apothecaries Wares,
whether Simples or Compounds, and all Grossers Commodities, serving either for
Food or Physic, the Office shall let you know, where, and at what Rates they
are to be had.

Fourthly, Unto the preservation of Life and Health, does belong also clothing
of all sorts of Cloth and Stuff; Silks, and Woollen, Linen, and Cotton of
each kind, the Lists of ordinary rates, and the place where they are to be
found, is to be showed.

Fifthly, Houses in the City or Country to be let or sold, and lodging
Chambers furnished or unfurnished, with their rates are to be showed also.

Sixthly, The Commodities of Lands and Inheritances, and Leases of Farms and
Mannours, which are to be Bargained for in any kind, are to be brought to
their proper place for information to such as would enquire after them.

Seventhly, All manner of movables and Housholdstuffe for the ease and
convenience of life, are to be Listed with the rates at which they are to be
sold, for such as shall desire present Accommodation.

Eighthly, Whole shops of Goods or such Commodities as are not to be found in
sh^ps, as Coaches, Litters, Carts, with all their furniture, Ships, Boats,
Woods, and such like, which the owners would not put to sale, should be found
in their proper places for the Information of Buyers.

Ninthly, Libraries, and Book-sellars Shops, according to their several kinds:
Item Shops of Paper and Parchment, and all Wares of this kind, with their
Rates, are to be found under this Head.

The Chapters of the Cases and Ways of making Bargains.
1 IF any desire to let out Money upon Interest with Security, or desire to
receive it upon Interest in giving Security, the Office shall be able to give
address thereunto.

2 If any will deposite Moneys for Annuities or Estate in Reversion, the Office
shall address to such as will receive it.

3 If any will Borrow or Lend Money upon any other Conditions whatsoever as
upon Lands, Houses, Leases, Rents, etc. the Office shall give Information and
Address thereunto.

4 If Travelers desire to change Money from one species to another; or to be
furnished in all places where they shall come, the Office shall be able to
address them to their Accommodation.

5 If any desire to transport himself or his Commodities by Land or Water, from
one place to another; the Office shall show him where Horses, Coaches, Carts,
Wagons, Boats, Ships, and Barks are to be had for all places, and what their
hire is, or what the Hundred weight, or the Tun, and Last does come to for
transportation.

6 The Rates of all Customs, Taxes, Impositions, and duties to be paid for all
Commodities should be found in the Office for Information of such as desire to
know the same.

7 If any desire to know upon what Terms Prentices are to be admitted in all
Trades and Manufactures, the Office shall give them Information.

8 If any should be willing to transplant himself or others from these parts
into any of the Western or Southern Islands; or desire any thing from thence to
be brought hither, or carried from hence thither, the Office should be able to
show him upon what terms his desire may be accomplished.

9 The Proportion and disproportion of the several Weights and Measures
throughout the Kingdom, the Office should show.

10 The Rates of Insurances of all manner of Commodities; and

11 The Weekly Course of Negotiation to be made as the Custom is at Amsterdam
for all Commodities shall be known by the means of the Office.

12 If any desire an Association for Trading, or a Factory, the Office shall
address him unto it.

III.
The Register of Persons, and Actions, in all Offices and Relations.
IF any should desire to know Men out of Employment, who would gladly be set a
Work in their Faculty; the Office shall be able to make them known; therefore
unto this Head of Persons, the Register shall refer in their proper places
all such as shall offer themselves to be listed for any employment whatsoever,
that when enquiry is made after them, they may be found out. Here then a place
must be. For

1 Ministers that want employment, for Lecturers and Professors of all
Sciences, for such as offer themselves to be Tutors to Children: All sorts of
Schoolmasters in all Languages, and all Schoolmistresses, All masters of Bodily
Exercises, as Fencing, Vaulting, Dancing, etc.

2 Physicians and Chyrurgeons, and such as depend upon them to do any service
in that kind.

3 Secretaries, Advocates, Counselors at Law, Clerks, Copiers of Writings,
Scriveners, Solicitours of businesses, and all such as depend upon the Courts
of Justice, as the Chancery, Common Pleas, the Kings Bench, etc.

4 Here also all such as are Officers or Servants in the Families of the King,
Queen, Prince or Great Noblemen to know where they are to be found, or such as
may be fit to do Noblemen service, as Stewards, Riders of the great Horse, and
all such as may do service in the Stables or the Kitchen, Comptrollers, Clarks
of the Kitchen, Cooks, Butlers, Confectioners, etc. Waiting Gentlemen; Grooms
of the Chambers, or of the Stables, Porters, Gardiners, Coachmen, Faulconers,
Footmen.

5 Messengers for all places, who serve the Public as Foot or Horse-posts, to
carry Letters or other Packets of small burden.

6 Here also such as are Masters of any Trades or Manufactures, or Journeymen
and Apprentises, that seek Masters are to be registered to give them the
address fit for their Convenience, when any is to be had.

7 Husbandmen and Seamen, Pilots, and all that belong to the Employments by
Water.

8 Soldiers of all degrees; Drummers, Trumpeters, Pipers, etc.

2 As for the Female Kind, their Memorials are to be brought into the Office
by some Men whom they should employ to that Effect; and the Office shall have
some Grave and Pious Matrons to be employed about the Direction of all
Addresses in that Nature; to whom the Cases of Women (as well as the Inspection
of the Affairs of the Poor, as the Accommodation of others in their lawful
desires and offers) may be referred.

3 Matters of Marriage, and all Memorials for Information in that kind are to
be brought to this Head; Whether of Children, to be disposed of, or of free
Persons who have power to dispose of themselves.

4 If any be toward any journey and want Company to travel withal and seek
Society, their Memorials are to be Registered under this Head. And if any want
Instruction and Intelligence of the distances of places, or of the ways and of
the Conveniences to be had in several places, of Coaches, Horses, Wagons,
etc. the Office shall be able to furnish them with their Information of all
this; and how to be accommodated so far as the places do afford every kind of
Convenience. And by this means Travelers also will be more secured in their
ways and better provided for.

5 Suites in Law to commence or end them without trouble, to which Effect such
address shall be showed, as may ease those that cannot attend their Suites
themselves (by reason of their distance from the places where the Courts are
kept) by the Means of faithful Agents and impartial Transactors.

6 In case Rents are to be received by any in places far distant from their
Residence; the Office shall be able by the Correspondency which it shall keep
in all places, to procure the payment thereof nearer at hand unto them; or in
the place of their Residence it self without trouble.

7 Such as shall desire the Common-Intelligence of public State Affairs, or
Occurrences of matters of more special concernment at home, or abroad, shall
find address how to come by it to their content.

8 Such as expect Rewards for Services done to the King or State, and know not
where to pitch and what to desire, answerable to what is due unto them, a
discovery of degrees may be found by the Office to accommodate their just
desires.

9 In case Sentences or Obligations be to be executed, the Office shall be able
to show in all places of the Kingdom some Body, that may be employed to that
Effect.

10 Persons expert to attend the Sick: also the places where Sick persons may
be accommodated for all manner of diseases better then at their own homes, with
Baths, and places to sweat in, or for good air and healthful walks, etc.

11 In case any matter is to be notified to a Friend, whose abode is uncertain;
as the Marriage of any to be contracted, or the Birth and Death of any, or the
arrival of any to the City, or the change of his own abode: or suppose a
Paper, or Writ, or Obligation be lost by any which another has found; which
to him that has lost it, is of great importance, and is not safe to be
published by a Crier for fear of giving notice thereof to an adverse party, in
all such Cases the Office should serve as a Common-Center of Advertisement and
Intelligence.

12 The Hours and Times of all Carriers and Messengers departures to all
places; and in Case strangers should desire to address any thing by them,
chiefly Letters or small Packet, a Trunk or Box should be in the Office kept
for every one of them, wherein it should be found at their return, to be
carried with them.

13 Such as would quite any Office or Charge of Benefit for some present
profit, or other Consideration may here find address how to compass their
desires, by giving the Memorial thereof to the Office, that it may be notified
to all, that may incline to entertain any such motion.

14 Such as would inform the State of any thing to be taken notice of; whether
they will have their names taken notice of or not, they may be sure by the
means of this Office to have it made known over all the Kingdom; by the
Correspondency of one Office to another in every Principal City, for the
design is to have a Commissary of Address placed in every great and eminent
City, who shall correspond with him of London, and with whom the London-Officer
shall correspond in all cases to receive and give notice of Matters, and to
address Persons and Things from one to another, and to commit the procurement
of Affairs to their trust and to such as they may employ able to effect the
same in their several Quarters; so that from any place in all the Kingdom a
business may be dispatched to any place or person by the procuration of the
Correspondent-Officers of Address in several places.

15 Strangers who desire to visit a Country, and have no acquaintance in any
places may be addressed from one Commissary of Address unto another,
throughout the whole Kingdom, and in every place provided for at the easiest
Rates, and by the way directed unto the safest abodes and Lodgings without
hazard of being robbed or killed, when they shall not need to carry any sums
of Money about with them, but only certain Bills or Tickets from the Officer of
Address to his Correspondents, where he shall receive his Accommodation
according to his desire. By which means also they shall come to the
acquaintance of all Persons of note in all Trades and Employments, with whom
they may have converse instantly without loss of time and needless expenses.

16 If any has a House to build, and would know the best Master Builders, and
where all the Materials necessary thereunto are to be had, the Office shall be
able to give him Information and Address thereunto with the prices, etc.

IV.
The Register of Ingenuities, and Matters commendable for Wit, Worth, and
Rarity.
TO the Chapters of this Register are to be referred the Memorials of all
things wherein men put some Excellency, Whether it be settled in the soul, or
body, or subordinate to the Manifestation or purchase of that wherein men study
to be beneficial unto or to appear before others in any thing whatsoever.

1 Here then, if any has a feat in any Science which is extraordinary. Either
a new discovery of a Truth, or an Experiment in Physic, Mathematics, or
Mechanics; or a Method of delivering Sciences or Languages, not ordinarily
known, and very profitable; or some intricate Question and difficulty which he
would have resolved by the most experienced in any or all Arts: In any such
case, if the matter be notified to the Office with the tenor of his desire
concerning it; by the means of the Office, he shall be able to receive
satisfaction therein so far as it is attainable.

2 If any is desirous to know the ways by which all degrees of Honor are
obtained or conferred in all states and conditions of men, with all the
Ceremonies and Ritualities belonging thereunto, and the privileges for which
in all States they are sought after, the Office should be able to give
information thereof.

3 If any would purchase rare Books out of print or Manuscripts of any kind,
or would impart that which he has purchased unto others, freely or upon
equitable terms, by the means of the Office, it may be speedily notified unto
all what his desire is, and what the things are, which he either has to be
imparted to others, or would have imparted by others to himself.

4 The rarities of Cabinets, as Medalls, Statues, Pictures, Coins, Grains,
Flowers, Shells, Roots, Plants, and all things that come from far, which Nature
or Art has produced in imitation of Nature: If any that has desires to be rid
of them, or to gather some of them together that has none; the Office will be
either way serviceable to compass men's ends in them.

5 Mathematical and Astronomicall Instruments, and new Inventions to discover
the secrets and hidden things of Nature if they are to be notified to others
the Office will do it.

6 The Anatomies of Creatures, or the living or dead strange Creatures, Dogs,
Cats, Apes, Fowls of rare qualities, and such like, if they be offered to be
seen or sold, by the Office this may be notified.

7 Memorials of all things left by any for public use, and for Posterity; with
the places where, and the persons to whom they are left.

8 Rare Goldsmiths-works, with all manner of Jewels and precious rare Stones,
where to be found, seen, or purchased at equitable rates, or otherwise to be
made use of for the satisfaction of curiosity, and observation of Art, by the
means of this Office it may be known, etc.

Hitherto we have with as much brevity as could be (for if we would have been
large; a Volnme might have been filled with them) ranked these Heads of Matters
in some Order, to show, how by the means of an Office (wherein all things may
be registered, which by any are either offered or desired for their
accommodation) the society of mankind in a well-ordered Commonwealth, may be
made flourishing, and as happy in the life of Nature, as the satisfaction of
their lawful desires can make them. For therein, as in one Magazin or
Marketplace, all things Necessary, Profitable, Rare, and Commendable, which
are extant in several places, and scattered here and there, are brought
together; and exposed to the view of every one that shall be willing to see
them, that according to his reach and capacity they may be made serviceable
unto him, and he thereby in his degree and station more useful unto the
public a hundred fold then otherwise he can be without the help of such an
address. For it is very apparent to any that will take it into consideration;
that besides the private satisfaction of any one in his particular desires,
which may be had by this means, so far as it is attainable in an orderly way,
the public aims also of those that are over the affairs of State, to reform
and direct them toward the good of all may be infinitely improved, if they
know but how to make use of such an Engine. He that can look upon the frame of
a whole State, and see the constitution of all the parts thereof, and does know
what strength is in every part, or what the weakness thereof is, and whence it
does proceed; and can, as in a perfect model of a Celestial Globe, observe
all the Motions of the Spheres thereof; or as in a Watch, see how all the
wheels turn and work one upon another for such and such an ends, he only can
fundamentally know what may and ought to be designed; or can be effected in
that State for the increase of the Glory, and the settlement of the Felicity
thereof with Power according to Righteousness.

And it is very credible that the great Statesman of our neighbor Nation, who
raised himself from the condition of an ordinary Gentleman, to become the
Ruler of Princes; and who by the management of the strength of that State
wherein he lived, has broken the whole design of the House of Austria, in the
affectation of the Monarchy of Europe, and did make himself, and the Kingdom
which he did rule, the only considerable power of Christendom, whilst he
lived in it. (We say) it is very credible that this man was enabled from so
mean beginnings, to bring so great designs to pass, chiefly by the dexterity
of his prudencie in making use of this Engine, which never before was set a
work in any Commonwealth, to reflect upon a whole State, till he did set it a
foot to that effect.

He that is not blind may easily perceive this, that it was not possible that
his intelligence could be so universal in all things as it was, and his
designs so effectually carried on in all places as they were, without an exact
insight of all circumstances, and a speedy and secret correspondencie with all
parts, and that to have such an insight in all things and maintain such a
correspondencie with all parts, nothing is so fit as such a way of Address,
erected in all the chief Cities of every Province of a Kingdom, is altogether
undeniable: therefore it may be lawfully concluded that by this means chiefly
he was enabled both to contrive and execute all his undertakings.

Hence also must be observed, that to have such an Office in one place, is not
enough, but that there should be one in every principal place of resort, where
there is the greatest concurrence of men for mutual Society and Negotiation in
every Province, that all the Commodities or Conveniences which are offered or
desired in any place, may be conveyed or made known unto all places unto
which they are by any means communicable.

Now that such Registers in those places and chiefly in London, may be kept for
all these both Private and Public Advantages; nothing is wanting, but the
Countenance of Authority, that the Matter may be Regularly and Orderly carried
on, because it is not enough to intend a good Work, but the way of carrying it
on must be good also; therefore the business is to be ordered by those that
are in place of Supreme Command, that as the Motion does aim at the Public
Good of all by the Benefit and Profit of every one in Particular: so all
respect may be showed toward those that are over the whole Body, that nothing
may seem to be attempted to their prejudice. As for that which remains to be
certified further in this business, it is not much, only this may be added,
that these Registers must be again and again subdivided, and especially that
some must be kept secret, and some exposed to the Common View of all. In the
secret Registers the Particularities of the Memorials are to be kept;
specifying things Circumstantially, by the Names and Places of abode of them,
that do offer or desire the same, with all the Conditions upon which they are
offered or desired. And in the Open or Common-Register the same Memorial is to
be kept under a General Intimation of the Matter only; with a Reference unto
the Particular and Secret Register, that such as shall see the general
Intimation, and shall desire the particular information thereof; may be
accommodated, therein by an Extract thereof for their Address where to find
their Convenience: and for this Extract some small and very inconsiderable
duty, as a penny or at the most two pence may be paid.

As for those that are to bring Memorialls unto the Office some patterns or
forms are to be made, and showed unto them hung up in the Office; to teach such
as are not acquainted with the way. How to draw up their Memorandums, which
they would bring in. Those then that will make use of the Office shall be
directed to come, with an Exact Memorial, of that whereof they desire either
to give or receive Advice, and upon what Conditions. When therefore they shall
come with their Memorial, if they be poor, it shall be registered, or an
Extract shall be given them out of the Register-book for nothing; but if they
are not poor, the duty is to be paid for the Registring, or for the Extract,
which may be taken out of a Memorial, and when they have found the Persons to
whom the Extract shall give them Address, if the Bargain whereof the Memorial
does give Information be concluded; or the Effect of the Memorial be otherwise
made void; the Register is to be discharged of it within four and twenty
hours, and for this discharge of the Register nothing shall be paid: Now the
Register should be discharged of the Memorialls which are made void; lest
fruitless Addresses be made to any concerning a Matter already dispatched; and
lest those that have received the satisfaction, which they desired by their
Memorialls be troubled with new Visitors which the Office may send unto them,
if this be not done.

Lastly, by all that has been said, this is very evident, that this Way of
Address will be the most Useful and Advantageous Constitution, for the supply
of all men's wants, and the dispatch of all Businesses, that can be thought upon
in this or any other Commonwealth. And that this way may easily be set afoot,
is apparent from this, that to settle it nothing is wanting, but the Designment
of a Place, in which the Office should be kept, and an Act of Authority to be
given to the Solicitour of Public Designs, Whereby he should be ordered to
prosecnte this matter. This Act then might run in such terms as these, or the
like.

Seeing the Provision for the Poor to supply their Necessities, and give them
and others address unto some Employments, is not only a work of Christian
Charity, but of great Usefulness to a wel-Ordered Commonwealth: It is
therefore Ordered and Ordained by both Houses of Parliament, that N. N. shall
be a Superintendent General for the Good of the Poor of this Kingdom; to
find out and propose the Ways of their Relief, ahd give to them and all
others, such Addresses, as shall be most expedient to supply their wants, and
to procure to every one their satisfaction in the Accommodation of all their
Commendable or Lawful Desires, to which Effect the said N. N. is Authorized
hereby to appoint, first in London, and then in all other places, of this
Kingdom, wheresoever he shall think it expedient, an Office of Encounter or
Address in such Place or Places, as by Authority shall be designed to that
Use. In which places he shall have power to put Underofficers, etc. who shall
according to his Direction be bound to keep Books and Registers, wherein it
shall be free for every one to cause to be Written and Registered, by several
and distinct Chapters, every thing whereof address may be given, concerning
the said Necessities and Accommodations, and likewise it shall be free for
every one to come to the said Offices, to receive Addresses by Extracts out of
the Registers* Upon Condition that the Rich shall pay for such an Extract or
the Registring of a Memorial but two pence; or three pence at the most, and
that the Poor shall have this done on their behalf for nothing, nor shall any
be bound or obliged to make Use of this Office by giving or taking out
Memorials further, then of their own accord they shall be willing.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 2. line 25. those r. most (p. 5. l. 9. to All r. of All, l. 22. after the
words light upon them r. but if he does know their constant walks and hours,
when they come upon the Exchange, he may be able to meet with them. p. 6. l.
22. r. cannot) p. 7. l. 18. after the words of employment r. and the cause why
they want employment, p. 8. l. 1. r. but if l. 3. that, p. 10. l. 18. which
shall be contained, p. 12. l. 6. r. shall cause l. 15. r. of other, p. 13. l.
8. r. here l. 15. r. in a case, p. 15. l. 8. r. as at an, l. 19. the List. l.
19. the places, p. 16. l. 6. would put, p. 20. l. 22. as well the, p. 21. l.
21, 22. r. designs l. 32. r. to be celebrated p. 25. l. 9. r. fully.

An Advertisement, To the favorable READER.
IN the foregoing Discourse we have discovered the things, which concern the
Addresses for Outward Accommodation, which is but a momentary part of humane
felicity. The Main and Principal thing whereat in this Office we do aim at,
and which we intend, if God enable us to prosecute; is, the Work of
Communication for all Spiritual and Intellectual advantages, toward the
Advancement of Piety, Virtue, and Learning in all things Divine and Humane, as
they are subordinate unto the Glory of God; for whose sake alone we cast our
selves upon these endeavors, and from whom we shall expect our encouragements.


