Englands faithful Physician.



ENGLANDS FAITHFUL PHYSICIAN, OR Precious Soul-saving and Soul-searching
Remedies through Grace faithfully applied for the healing and preserving this
sinful sin sick Nation from ruin and Destruction.

Whereby this heavy Judgment of God in visiting us with the Plague and
Pestilence, which we have lain under may upon our hearty, and unfeined
repentance be prevented for the future among us.

Together with a speedy way to Grace and Salvation through Jesus Christ.

Jer. 8 22 Is there no balm in Gilead is there no Physician there? Why then is
not the health of the daughter of my people recovered

Hos. 6.1. Come and let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn and he will
heal us he has smitten, and he will bind us up.

Printed by P. L. for William Thackeray at the Angel in Duck-lane. 1674.

ENGLANDS Faithful Physician,
Isaiah 1.16, 17, 18, 19, 26. Wash you make you clean, put away the evil of
your doings from before (...) eyes, cease to do evil.

Learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless,
plead for the Widow.

Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord: though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, though they be red as crimson, they
shall be as wool.

If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the Land.

But if ye refuse and rebel ye shall be devoured with the sword: For the mouth
of the Lord has spoken it.


IN the beginning of the Chapter, beloved we find the Prophet Isaiah bitterly
bewailing and lamenting the sinful estate and condition of the children of
Israel and I think now if ever there is a great cause to bewait and lament the
(...) sick estate and condition of this Nation as the Prophet Jeremiah once
said of the Jews, in Jerem. 9 1. so say I of this sinful Nation, O that my
head were water and mine eyes were a fountain of tears that I might weep day
and night for the slain of the daughter of my people.

In the words now read unto you, he comes like a faithful Physician to show
them the means of their recovery, and like a wise Physician he first endeavors
to search out the cause and depth of their wound, that so having found out the
nature of their disease, he might the better know how to prescribe remedies for
their cure.

And the more to aggravate the hainousness of their sins in the second verse he
calls Heaven and Earth to witness against them. Hear, O heavens, and give ear,
O earth, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken. I do not speak after the
fancies and the immaginations of my own heart, as too too many do in these our
days No, but the mouth of the Lord has spoken it I have nourished and brought
up children and they have rebelled against me.

O horrid iniquity*What sinful men to stand it out and rebel against the Lord
their maker. Why says the Prophet for the very Ox and the Ass shall rise up in
judgment against such rebellous sinners as these.

In the third verse says he. The Ox knows his owner and the Ass his Masters
crib but Israel does not know, my people does not consider.

And is not England at this very day as insensible and forgetful of God as they
were, and this their sinful stupidity provokes the Prophets in the next words
bitterly to lament and bewall the sinful estate and condition of those people.
Ah sinful Nation says he in the third verse, a people laden with iniquity, a
seed of evil dooers, children that are corrupters they have forsaken the Lord,
they have provoked the Holy one of Israel unto anger they are gone away
backward gone away I, and so far gone that God even as it were gives them up
for lost, for the more God punished them for their sin, the more they did
persevere in there sin.

Why should ye be stricken any more, says God in the first verse. The more I
bett you the worse you are (...) ye will revolt more and more ye are
univer^ally tainted and infected with the poison of sin, even to your very
hearts; the whole head is sick* the whole heart is faint, from the sole of the
foot even to the head, there is no soundness in it but wounds and bruises, and
putrefying sores they have not been closed neither bound up neither mollified
with ointment.

They were so far gone in sin and misery that had it not been for the sake of
some few righteous persons that were among them they had been destroyed even as
Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed by fire from heaven; a fearful example for
sinners to take warning by, verse 6. Except the Lord of hosts had left us a
very small remnant, we should have been a Sodom, and like unto Gomorrah yet
notwithstanding they returned not and thereupon the Lord abhorred them and
their Sacrifices as loathsome in his sight: To what purpose is the multitude of
your sacrifices unto me says the Lord? your new moons and your appointed
feasts my soul hates, they are a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them: When
you spread forth your hands I will hide mine eyes; yea when you make many
prayers I will not hear.

Why what is the reason of all this? Why, says he in verse 15. Your hands are
full of blood, From whence; beseech you take this note, that bloudguiltiness is
a damning sin in the sight of God, Bloody and deceitful men, says David in
the 25. Psalm and the 23 verse, Shall not live out half their days. He that
sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, says the Lord bloudthirsty
men are an abomination to the Lord.

Having as it were ripped up and laid open the horridness of their sins, he comes
now like a merciful God to proclaim pardon to blood guilty sinners, if they
will but return and wa^h themselves: yet there is mercy to be had, even for the
greatest of sinners upon repentance, Isa. 55 11. Let the wicked forsake his
way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts and let him return unto the Lord and
he will have mercy upon him, and to our God for he will abundantly pardon. Your
hands are full of blood ye are altogether all over defiled and polluted with
sin, yet says he verse 16. Wash you make you clean put away the evil of your
doing from before mine eyes, cease to do evil learn to do well, seek judgment,
relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow and then see
what I will do unto you Come now, and let us reason together says the Lord
though your sins be as scarlet they shall be as white as snow, though they be
red like crimson they shall be as wool. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall
eat the good of the Land, but if you refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured
with the sword. For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Thus having briefly opened the words unto you, I shall as briefly as I can
proceed to Application.

1 Jerusalem ye know was called the holy City of God, and unto the people of
Israel above all other Nations in the world did God manifest his love and I
pray you what nation or people is there at this day to whom God has so
manifestly appeared, ^s unto us May not the people of England as well as of
Judah be called the people of God the joy of the whole earth.

What Nation or people is there at this day in the world that has statutes and
judgments like unto us is their any nation under the sun that has such plenty
of the means of grace as we have: Have we not line upon line, precept upon
precept, Sermon upon Sermon Mercy upon Mercy one mercy upon the neck of
another, mercy for our bodies peace and plenty in abundance: mercy for our
souls, the glorious light and liberty of the Gospel, and yet notwithstanding we
remain as sinful as ever* Are not we with Capernaum lifted up to heaven in
Gospel mercies: I pray God we be not for our unbelief and unfaithfulness under
all the means of grace thrown down ere long to hell in Gospel vengeance.

Did the Lord by fire from heaven utterly destroy Sodom and Gomorrah, with the
Cities about them, for their sins who never had the Gospel preached amongst them
assuredly then if we, who have the Gospel so abundantly, repent not we also
shall likewise perish: For let me tell you in the words of the Apostle Heb.
10.26. If we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of
judgment, and fiery indignation. For as Jude says, Behold the Lord comes
with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all; and to convince
all that are ungodly.

O sinners consider I beseech you it is time to look about you: O consider what
will everlastingly become of thy precious and immortal Soul: is life and
Salvation worth nothing? Christ offers life and salvation to every one of you
and will not ye come to him that ye may have life, life everlasting O for the
Lords sake sinners do not delay the time any longer now is the day of
salvation, get life and salvation when it may be had, do not leave the undone,
which will be the utter undoing of thy own soul: if the work of grace and
turning to God be repentance be left undone, thy soul will be undone; had you
rather lose your souls then leave your sins? O what fools and madmen are ye
sinners to neglect an inheritance with the Saints in light, an everlasting
kingdom and Crown of Glory, for a few base sinful pleasures, whose latter end
will be bitterness.

O sinners I beseech you, for the Lords sake I beseech you, let the time past
of your lives suffice you to have lived in sin and now even now while it is
called to day, that ye would consider the things which concern your everlasting
peace: You do not know whether ever ye shall have another call or no: this may
be for ought you know the last hour of the day to you: death is at hand, the
bell must toll, thy soul and body must part, and if it part in sin, it shall
meet again in sorrow.

Is there any thing of greater concernment to you then the salvation of your
souls? I am sure there is not. The redemption of the soul is precious nothing
but the blood of Christ is able to save a soul: and will ye despise and trample
upon that blood by which you may be saved*

Consider that of our Savior. What shall it profit a man to gain the whole
world and lose his own soul* Ten thousand worlds will never be able to
countervai^ the loss of one soul. I beseech you then in the words of the
Prophet Wash you make you clean the blood of Christ is as a fountain opened for
you to wash you from your sins put a way then the evil of your doings cease to
do e^^ll learn to do well, and then who knows whether the Lord will turn and
have mercy upon us.

See what the Lord says, Jer. 16 17. Amend your ways and your doings end obey
the voice of the Lord your God, and the Lord will repent him of the evil he
has pronounced against you. If you will unfei^^dly repent you of your sins,
God will certainly repent him of his punishments as he did unto the Ninevites,
Yet forty days says the Lord and Nineve shall be destroyed, and yet you see
upon their speedy and unfeined repentance the Lord was appeased.

Now surely Englands sins cry a loud in the ears of God for judgments upon us,
may not God say unto us as the Prophet Isaiah says Isa, 5. O England what
could I have done more then I have done unto thee? How has the Lord as it were
dug about us with a wall of defense, in preserving us from those judgments
which other nations have so severely tasted of: how has God kept us from the
hands of bloody persecutors: how has the Lord appeared to us in preserving us
from the devouring sword, that we have not as other Nations been swept away in
a moment by the raging of cruel enemies.

What heavenly and blessed influences of the Gospel we have long enjoyed: Ah,
but how little fruit have we brought forth: We have not lived Gospel lives,
neither have our conversations been suitable to it. Instead of grapes we have
brought forth wild grapes: this many years has God waited upon us expecting
fruits of repentance, and emendment of life, and may we not fear if we do not
suddenly repent us that God may as he said of that fruitless fig tree, cut us
down and destroy us: for hitherto we have brought forth nothing but leaves, the
leaves of profession: we have protest much of the knowledge of God, but how
little of the power and practice of Religion and Holiness has appeared in our
lives and conversations.

Does not envy and wrath, and malice, and all manner of wickedness and
cruelties abound at this day? Has God given us our lives for a prey, and shall
we thus wickedly require the Lord? Ah sinful Nation and unthankful people,
laden with iniquity: shall the mercy of God in sparing us thus long, and giving
us so long a time of repentance encourage and imbolden us in our sins God
forbid. The grace of God, says the Apostle, Tit 2. that brings salvation,
teaches us, that denying ungodlyness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world. There is no getting to heaven in
the broad way of sin: for broad is the way says our Savior, that leads unto
death? heaven would no more become an impenitent wicked sinner, then the most
lovely and costly Palace of the greatest Emperor, would become a swine that has
been wolowing in the mire.

Heaven is a City of happiness, everlasting happiness, and there is no coming
thither but through the gates of holiness, without holiness no man shall see
God, Heb. 22 14 The good Lord awaken every sinful soul out of their security:
that so the judgments we now feel in this our visitation may be removed, and
the judgments of God we fear, may by our true and timely repentance be
prevented for it is greatly to be feared that the Lord has a controversy,
even a very great controversy with this sinful Land and Nation.

How justly might ruin and destruction come upon us by the sword, or by the
Plague and that lately swept away may thousands of our neighbors round about
us; or by famine or by some other extraordinary judgment, or by all these
together, because we have been so unholy and so unthankful for our Peace, and
so forgetful of God in preserving of us ^^us long from those sore and heavy
judgments that now are justly false upon us See (...) sad Scripture for this
in Hos. 4.1.2 3. Hear the word of the Lord ye children of Israel, for the Lord
has a controversy with the inhabitants of the Land, because there is no truth
nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land, by swearing and killing and
stealing, and comitting Adultery, they break out and blood ^outcheth blood;
therefore shall the Land mourn, and every one that dwells therein shall
languish with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, yea the
fishes of the Sea also shall be taken away.

If men will not mourn for their sins, God will make them, yea, the very land,
and all that is therein mourns for your sins; if the mercy of God cannot work a
godly sorrow for your sins, if mercy cannot melt your hearts by repentance, God
has judgments to lay upon you: if he cannot by entreaties persuade sinners to
forsake their sins, he will by compulsion, and that irresistably cast sinners
even into Hell fire for their sins.

The wicked says the Psalmist shall be turned into Hell. O consider this ye
that forget God* least he tear you in pieces; How fully does the Prophet here
picture out Englands sins: was there ever less mercy and truth amongst us then
is at this day; and though knowledge seems to abound, yet how little is there
of the true knowledge of Jesus Christ? we do all profess to know God with our
mouths ah but how greatly do we deny him in our lives: never was there more
swearing: and lying, and profanness, and stealing and all manner of wickness
then is now amongst us.

How does our Land even begin to mourn for our abominations? how sadly is the
Lord departed from us of late, because we by our iniquity have departed from
him? Is not the Lords hand now stretched out against us in all parts and places
of this Nation? how sorely is both the City and Country assisted by infectious
diseases? How many thousands are there suddenly swept away from us by this
heavy judgment of God* the noisome Plague and Pestilence? And unless we that
are lest do speedily repent us of our manifold sins and wickednesses; we may
justly fear to be taken our of the land of the living for our blessed Savior
says, Luke 13.3. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish. Consider how
death has ridden a horseback for some years by past, whereby the dumb
creatures have smarted for our sins: and shall not we mourn for these things:
shall the beasts of the Land mourn, and shall not we mourn for our sins, which
have caused these Judgments: Shall the judgments of God be abroad in our
Land, and shall not we the inhabitants thereof learn righteousness: God smites
us now as it were with small rods, but surely if we repent not, he will
certainly scourge us even with Scorpions, for if that smaller judgments will
not affrighten us from our evil ways* God has greater judgments then all
these yet to bring upon us God does yet but let us see the rod of his anger but
if we repent not we shall surely feel the weight of his sore displeasure ere
long poured down upon us.

The good Lord awaken us unto repentance, that we may all of us from the
highest to the lowest turn from our evil ways, that so the anger of the Lord
may be turned away from us that so our sins may be blotted out of his
remembrance and the Lords hand now stretched out against us in wrath, may be
turned to us again in love: Then shall the Lord greatly delight in us, and
cause us to dwell in our land: but if we will refuse and rebel, we shall
certainly be destroyed; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

And because the Lord has now given a commission to his destroying Angel to
cut us off by a sudden stroke, and that the King of Terrors, as holy Job calls
Death is reigning in all our streets taking away whole families in a small
space of time: and that many of our neighbors and loving friends, and familiar
acquaintance are shut up and imprisoned in their own houses by reason of this
sad judgment that is now amongst us, and that they may justly call upon us,
and say unto us as the inhabitants of Jerusal^m did in another case, as you may
read, Lament 1.12. Is it nothing to you, all ye that pas's by? behold and see
if there is ^ay sorrow like unto our sorrow which is done unto us, wherewith
the Lord has afflicted us in the day of his fierce anger.

This should cause every one of us, even now in this our day, seriously to
consider and to lay it to our hearts, and to pray unto God day and night that
he would remove this heavy judgment from us: for the Lord has promised, Ezekiel
18.27. When the wicked turn away from their wickedness that they have
committed, and does that which is lawful and right they shall save their souls
alive. And likewise the Lord has showed us in 2 Chronicles. 7 13 14. How we may
remove his judgments from us: at the 13. ver. he says: If I sh^t up heaven
that there be no rain, or if I command the locusts to devour the land: or if I
send the Pestilence among my people, (as we of the City of London, any many
other places of this kingdom do now sadly feel) If my people which are called
by my nature, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn
from their wicked ways: then will I hear from heaven, and will for give them
their sin, and will heal their Land. And if the Lord be our Physician, we shall
not need to fear any relapse.

Now the Lord help every one of us seriously to consider of these things O that
every one of us would turn from all our evil ways, and seek unto, the Lord by
prayer and fasting: For who knows whether God will turn and rep^nt and turn
away his fierce anger that we perish not.

I shall conclude with the words of the the Prophet Joel, Chap. 2 12 13.14.
Therefore also now says the Lord, Turn ye even to me, with all your hearts,
and with fasting, and with Weeping, and with mourning and rent your hearts,
and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God for he is gracious and
merciful, slow to anger and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil:
who knovveth if the with return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him.
For the Lord our God is gracious and merciful, and desires not the death of a
sinner, but that he would turn from his evil way and live: which that we may
all do, that so we may be all for ever happy* The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ and the love of God the Father, and the comfortable felliwship of God
the holy Spirit be with us, and dwell in all our hearts and consciences, from
this time forth and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for William Thackeray at the Angel in Duck-lane.
THe School of Grace, or a Book of good Nature. Christ's first Sermon. Christ's
last Sermon, Christians best Garment. Christians blessed choice. Heavens glory,
and Hells horror, A warning piece to the sloathful, Idle, and careless drunken
and secure ones of these times. Mr. Fenners Sermons of Repentance. A Sermon on
Dives and Lazarus. The Christians comfort. These are all very good Books, and
are but, three pence a piece. The plain man's path way to Heaven. The sin of
pride arrained and condemned. The black Book of Conscience. The dreadful
character of a drunkard, The Fathers last bles^ing to his Children.
Read them over carefully and practice them constantly: and rest assuredly thou will find much comfort in them to thy own Soul: And are but two pence a piece.

FINIS.

