THE REFORMED COMMONWEALTH OF BEES.

Presented in several LETTERS and Observations to Sammuel Hartlib Esquire.

WITH The Reformed VIRGINIAN SILKWORM.

CONTAINING Many Excellent and Choice Secrets, Experiments, and Discoveries for
attaining of National and Private Profits and Riches.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-Spread-Eagle at the West End of
Paul's, 1655.

The summary of the Sections in the following Epistolary Treatise of Bees.
1. THe Testimony of an Ancient writer of Husbandry, of an incredible Revenue,,
which has been raised from keeping of Bees. Page 1.2. 2. An Extract of a
Letter, containing several Observations upon the fore-alledged Testimony. Page
2. 3. An Experiment of the generation of Bees, practiced by that great
husbandman of Cornwall M. Carew of Anthony. p. 2.3. 4. Dr. Arnold Boats
Observations upon the Experiment of the generation of Bees. Page 3. 5. The New
Bee-hive, Or a Discourse for the right making of Bee-hives, showing their
Materials, Proportion, Ordering, and Placing: and lastly, their Use and
Benefit. Left for a farwell to his Native Country, by that zealous,
publick-hearted and learned Gentleman, Thomas Brown Dr. in Divinity, and of the
Civil Laws. 3.4.5.6.7.8. 6. A Quere upon the Description of Dr. Brown's
New-invented Bee-hive. Page 11. 7. A Letter Discovering a New kind of excellent
Food for Bees. Page 11, 8. An Extract of a Letter concerning this New kind of
food for Bees, Page, 10.11. 9. An other Extract of a Letter upon the same
subject. Page 11. 10. How Anis may be got to grow in England. Page 11. 11. A
Translate of a Letter written in High Dutch, communicating, a Secret for the
better ordering and prserving of Bees, practiced beyond the Seas. Page
11.12.13.14. 12. Another Description of the said Secret. Page 14. 13. A
Philosophical Letter, treating of many other Secreets, and Experiments for
general Riches and Profits, besides these arising from Bees. Page 15. 14. An
Enlargment of the Philosophical-Letter, explaining more fully diverse of those
more desirable passages for general Riches and Profits, with the Reasons why no
more is discovered at this time. Page 32. 15. A very cheap way, how to keep a
stock of Bees all Winter long. Page 40. 16. A notable and approved Experiment
for improving of Bees. p. 40.41. 17. A Copy of a Letter written by Mr. William
Mew, Minister at Eastlington in Glocestershire to Mr. Nathaniel Angelo Fellow
of Eaton College Page 41. 42. 18. A Copy of Mr. Hartlibs Letter to that worthy
Minister at Eastlington Mr. William Mew. Page 43.44.45.46. 19. An extract of
Mr. Mew's Answer to Mr. Hartlib's Letter, Page 46.47.48.49. 20. A Letter
concerning that pleasant and profitable invention of a transparent Bee-hive,
written by that much accomplished and very ingenious Gentleman, Mr. Christ.
Wren Fellow of All Souls College in Oxford. With the Figure and Description of
the Transparant Bee-hive. Page 50. 51. 21. Considerations upon the Letter from
Oxford. Page 53. 54. 22. Some remarkable observations, concerning the swarming
of Bees together, with a short Description of a Bee-hive made of Glass. page
54.55.56. 23. A singular Observation. concerning Bee-hives, and Buckwheat, made
by Mr. Thomas Babington in his travels into Germany. Pap. 56.57. 24. How to
make good Greek or other Wines out of Honey. p. 57.58. 25. A Receipt to make a
pure Mead that shall taste like Wine. p. 58. 26. An other way to make a most
pleasant and Wine-like Mead. Page 58. 27. The Commonwealth of Bees,
Represented by Mr. Gerrard Malynes, by way of a Digression in his great Book
called, Lex Mercatoria, or, the ancient-Law Merchant. P. 59.60.61.62. 28. A
Catalogue of some writers of Bees extant in English. page 63.
Some of the grosser Errata.
Page.11.r.9. lin. 22. for etner r. enter, p. 17.l. 31.f. Bees r.beef
p.18.l.34.r. sprout and corn, p. 19.l.11.f. infused r. misused. l. 23.f. excise
r.excess, p.21.l.5.r.ly both open, l.18.f. forty r.four p.22.l.19.f. sceptile
r.reptile, p. 24.l.22. f. in the fire r. in the a^re, p.24.l.32.f. diccretick
r. diuretic, p.25.l.7. and 11.r. Cochineel. p.27.l.34.r. empyreuma,
p.28.l.6.r. amazed, l.27.f. macarates r. macerated. p.29.l.23.r. make its
combs, p.31.l.25. r. to ergon, l.27.r. parerga. p.38.l.18.f. woods r.weeds, l.
37.f. woods r.weeds, p.42.l.21.f. dury r.durus.

Some VVriters of Bees extant in English.
THe Feminine Monarchy, or the History of Bees.
Showing Their admirable Nature and Properties; Their Generation and Colonies;
Their Government, Loyalty, Art, Industry; Enemies, Wars, Magnanimity, etc.


Together with the right ordering of them from time to time, and the sweet
profit arising thereof.

Written out of Experience by Charles Butler, Magd.

Plat. in Trucul. Act. 2. Sc. 6.

Pluris est oculatus testis unus, quam auriti december. Oxford, Printed by William
Turner, for the Author. 1634.

A Book promised by Henry Gurnay, Gentleman.
Wherein is showed what great loss comes to the Commonwealth, by the
neglect, carelessness and ignorance in the keeping of more store of Bees, and
the right ordering them to most profit, partly showed in, that some Man having
a score of Shepes, and his next neighbor not any, or happily, not three in
that Town of an hundred Households as many more: and that some Country is very
plentiful thereof, and the next every way as apt for that commodity, yet very
scarce thereof; and yet the air and the year equally indifferent to all alike,
the common error being to ascribe a greater luck in these kinds to some men
more than to others, which is only through an unskilfulness therein.

The Ordering of Bees.
Or the true. History of Managing them from time to time, with their Honey and
Wax, showing their Nature and Breed.

As also what Trees, Plants and Herbs are good for them, and namely what are
hurtful: together with the extraordinary profit arising from them, etc.

Set forth in a Dialogue, resolving all doubts whatsoever. By the late
unparalleled experience, of JOHN LEVETS, Gent. London, Printed by Thom.
Harper, for John Harison, 1634.

A Treatise concerning the right use and ordering of Bees.
Newly made and set forth, according to the Authors own experience: (which by
any heretofore has not been done)

By Edmund Southern Gent.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin, for Thomas Woodcock, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the black Bear. 1593.

A Discourse or History of Bees.
Showing their Nature and Usage, and the great profit of them.

Written by Richard Remnant.

London, Printed by Robert Young, for Thomas Slater, dwelling in Duck-lane at
the white Swan. 1637.

FINIS.
The Reformed COMMONWEALTH of BEES, Presented in several Letters to Samuel
Hartlib Esquire.
The Testimony of an Ancient Writer of Husbandry, of an incredible Revenue,
which has been raised from keeping of Bees.
Varro de Re Rustica, Lib. 3. c. 16.
DE fructu; Authorem habeo non soluno qui Alvearia sua locata habet quotannis
quinis millibus pondo mellis, sed etiam h^nc Varronem nostrum quem audivi dice
item, duos milites se habuisse in Hispania fratres Vejamos, ex agro Falisco
locupletes, quibus cum a Patre relicta esset parva villa, and agellus non sa^e
major jug^ro uno, h^s circum villam totam Alvearium facisse, and hortum
habuisse ac reliquum Thymo, and cythiso obsevisse and apiastro; hos nunquam
minus, ut peroeque d^cerent, dena millia Sextertia ex melle recipere esse
Solitos

In English thus.
Concerning the profit of Bees, I have not only a Witness, who says, that he
lets out his Bees for five thousand pounds of Honey by the year, but also our
friend Varro here, whom I have heard say, that he had with him in Spain two
Soldiers, brethren, and rich, to whom their Father left a small country house,
and a little field, in truth, not greater than one acre, and that round about
the house they made a place to keep Bees, and a garden, and planted the rest
with thyme, cytisus and bawme, and were w^nt to receive yearly for Honey,
reckoning one year with another, never less than ten thousand Sesterces, which
being in the time of the Consuls (before the Caesar's) makes of our money eighty
three pound six shillings eight pence.

An Extract of a Letter containing new Observations upon the fore-alledged
Testimony.
THe distinction introduced by the Gr^mmarians betwixt Sestertii and S^stertia,
is not always observed by Classical Authors: and so in Varro's words -- denae
millia Sestertia -- signifies no more than -- de^i^s milla num^^i Sest^rtii --
that is in English money, reckoning the Sestert^us at two pence sterling, ( id
quod praeter prop^er ^st verum ^jus preti^m) about four-score and three pound
sterling, a very fair yearly Revenue to be got out of one Acre of ground, and
therefore well worth the while, to be alleged by Varro, for to encourage men
by this example to the keeping of Bees. If I were sure to get so much by it, I
would soon turn a Bee-keeper, which I have a great mind to do however before I
dye; and therefore pray as many Secrets concerning these pretty Creatures, as
possible you can attain unto; and for your reward, I promise you a good
proportion of Honey and Wax out of my first Crop.

An Experiment of the Generation of Bees, practiced by that great Husbandman of
Cornwell, Old Mr. Carew of Anthony.
TAke a Calf, or rather a Sturk (or Steer) of a year old, about the latter end
of April, bury it eight or ten days, till it begin to putrify and corrupt;
then take it forth of the earth, and opening it, lay it under some hedge, or
wall, where it may ^e most subject to the Sun, by the heat whereof it will (a
great part of it) turn into Maggets, which (without any other care) will live
upon the remainder of the corruption. After a while, when they begin to have
wings, the whole putrified carcass would be carried to a place prepared, where
the Hives stand ready, to which, being perfumed with Honey and sweet herbs,
the Maggets (after they have received their wings) will resort. The Gentleman
in Cornwell, that practiced this Experiment, used Hogsheads, or bigger Wine
Casks, instead of Hives, and the practice of the Be being to spend the first
part of the Summer in filling the upper part of the Cask, and so still to work
downwards: the Gentleman's usual custom was (through a door in the upper part
of the Cask) to take out what Honey he wanted, without any disturbance to the
Bees, whose work and abode then was in the lower part of the Cask.

Dr. Arnold Boate's Observations upon the Experiment of the Generation of Bees.
I Did ever think that the Generation of Bees out of the carcass of a dead
Calf, given us by diverse of the Ancients, but most amply and elegantly by
Virgil in the fourth Book of his Georgicks, had been a fiction, but am glad to
find the contrary by your Letter, which confirmed the same out of Modern and
English Experience. And I would as little have thought, that Bees would have
wrought in such vast Hives as hogsheads, whereas some of the Ancients give us a
Caveat, even of the ordinary Hives, not to make them too large -- ne Apes anima
despondeante ex desperatione implendi, -- least Bees should be discouraged out
of a despair to fill them.

The New Bee-Hive: Or a Discourse for the right making of Bee-Hives, showing
their materials, proportion, ordering, and placing; and lastly their use and
benefit. Left for a Farewell to his Native Country, by that zealous
publick-hearted and learned Gentleman Thomas Brown Dr. in Divinity, and of the
Civil Law.
IT is clear from many good Authors, that the Ancients made a constant Revenue
of their Bees without killing them at any time, and that this so profitable
Government of Bees is now utterly lost, is too much apparent from the common
practice of all Nations at this day, who generally kill the Bees to take the
Honey. If by any conjecture or comparing one thing with another, we may be able
to find out a means to preserve Bees, and yet receive a constant and liberal
benefit by them, is the subject of this following Discourse.

Although the History of Bees has been largely handled, even to curiosity, yet
the principal part of it, concerning their Preservation, so as to raise a
constant Revenue by them, has not been so clearly set down, as the importance
thereof deserves, seeing that hereupon depends the whole business of a
Bee-master; f^r from the multitude of Bees comes the great increase of Honey,
and the plenty of Honey is the chief Means to increase your Bees, which we
shall easily and certainly do, if we rightly understand and practice the
natural way of ordering them. This task at your entreaty I have adventured
upon, whether I have performed it so fully and clearly as I seem to my self to
understand it, the success will judge.

For the preserving of Bees then, it is of absolute necessity, that they be
abundantly provided of food, which in Summer your Garden and the neighboring
Fields must afford, for the Winter they will furnish themselves; also that they
be largely, conveniently, and cleanly housed, which two things rightly
practiced will perform what we desire.

I take it for a certain truth, that Bees do never forsake the place of their
breeding, so long as it is cleanly and large enough for them, and that
accordingly in greatest company they prosper best, as frequent experience
proves, in such places, where they have chosen themselves dwellings in the
bodies of great hollow trees, in which have been found combs full of Honey
wrought down six or eight foot long, as also between the beams and floonings
of houses with the like increase, which in all probability could not be done by
the labor of any one swarm, though of the greatest numbers, so that of
necessity there must have been the increase of some years Bees, to bring
together so great a mass of Honey, and it is truly observed, that the old and
young Bees do live quietly in the same Hive, as did the families in the old
world, renewing themselves from year to year. If I shall show you the way to
accomplish this, I have done what I undertook; upon these two Maxims lies the
foundation of all I have to say, that Bees will not leave their place of
breeding, but for want of room, or some annoiance by noise or ill smells: that
in all their workings they move downwards, if the place hinder them not.
According to these two Rules, your only care is, to make your Hives of such a
fashion, as does naturally and necessarily agree with, and help forward this
design, and this can be no other than flat, as well at the top, as at the
bottom, both ends of an equal breadth to a hair, in all the Hives you make,
so that they may be easily set one upon another, as many as you shall see
necessary for your purpose, though in some places they make them square of four
boards, yet because the round Figure is the most perfect. I rather choose it.
For the right making of your Hives, I shall show you their materials,
proportion, ordering and placing; and lastly their use and benefit. You may
make them, and that will be the best, of such empty Cask, as has had in it
Honey, Muskadine, Canarie, or Malaga wine, according as you have opportunity,
because these vessels, being already so well seasoned, will not easily loose
their savor, and will the better invite the Bees, both to come, and to remain
in them.

For their Proportion I would have A. B. every Hive to contain a just bushel
within the work, the breadth of it to be a third part more than the height,
that so it may stand the surer headed, but at one end, which must be C. the
upper part of it, in the midst of that head, a round hole D. three or four
inches wide, made very smooth, the Hives A. B. must be all of a wideness from
the top to the bottom, otherwise the Combs will not come out without breaking;
six E. broad hoops will be sufficient, two in the midst, and two at each end,
the lowest hoop must be set a large inch from the end of the vessel, leaving
so much of it bare, which part must be exceeding smooth and strong, which bare
place F. should be covered with a very thin hoop of Iron or brass for its
greater strength, and on the fore side of it, three in the midst for the great
Bees, and six smaller on each side for the lesser, for there, and there only
it may receive offense, the uppermost hoop must be somewhat stronger and
broader than the rest by a full inch, and so set on that it may stand out a
full inch further than the end of the vessel, thereby leaving sufficient and
fit space to set the lower part F. of another vessel fast into it as into a
box, so close, that no air can come in, that it may not be moved.

And because Bees cannot conveniently work in such a void space without some
support for their combs, the fittest that I can think on, may be made in
imitation of such frames, as Gardiners use for their Gillifloures, composed of
three or four very small hoops, and as many side posts of Fir, with some cross
bars at the top, and in the middle to stay the Combs, and that these may not
be shaken nor moved, in the bare space at the bottom of the vessel, bore two
holes, one opposite to the other, through the vessel and the frame, and so
fasten them together.

And for the more easy and safe removing of your Hives, either to see in what
estate they be, or to take away such as be full of Honey and empty of Bees, you
must set upon every Hive two G. such iron handles as are usually upon bushels,
and so you may command them at your pleasure. And for the great hole D. in the
top of the Hive, you must make a cover H. with a shoulder and a handle, to stop
it so close, that no air may come in. Your Hives A. B. being thus I. C. D. E.
K. G. H. made, you must order them as follows. I will suppose you have at
least A. one Hive of old Bees, at the beginning of the year, take B. one of
your new Hives, and sweeten both it and the frame very curiously, and fasten
them together, set this Hive B. where you mean your Bees shall stand, leaving
the hole D. at the top open, then take A. your old Hive of Bees, and cut away
the skirts of it, as much as conveniently you may, to the very Combs, the
nearer the better, and make a new door to it, and set it upon B. the new Hive,
within the compass of E. the hoop. And because in the Bees working down into
the lower Hive, it is probable that the Combs of the two Hives will hang
together, and so be troublesome to part them, to prevent this inconvenience,
lay a false bottom, with a hole in it, upon the top of the lower Hive, close to
the top of the lower Hive, and make it fast.

Your Hives being thus placed, your Bees, either for the sweetness in the new
Hive B. or for want of room in the old, will make all haste to work down into
B. the new, and so in a short time leave A. the old full of Honey and empty of
Bees, both the old stock, and their increase, going down, working and abiding
in B. the new Hive, whereby you shall have opportunity, when you see it most
convenient, to take away the upper Hive full of Honey, without the least
trouble to the Bees, or to your self.

When you have taken away A. the upper Hive, set on the cover H. upon the hole
in the lower Hive B. so close that no air may come in, and then set another new
empty Hive, and a false bottom upon it, as before, sweetened and prepared under
it, expecting a fit time when the upper Hive shall be full^ and the Bees gone
down into this B. B. lower Hive, to take it away as you did the former, and so
from time to time as long as the gathering season lasts, but not toward
winter. If your Bees increase plentifully, it will be necessary to have three
Hives one upon another, that so the Bees may have room enough for themselves
and their swarms, if you see cause, you may adventure to four, but never
higher, which number when you have happily attained, you shall set a new Hive
well prepared and sweetened, as near I. the mouth of the lowest Hive, as you can
conveniently, putting into it some Honeycomb, or other sweet things, and
raising it on the side half an inch or more, that the Bees walking up and down
may find a new dwelling ready for them, and at their next swa^ming go into
that Hive, and so make it the beginning of a new store.

The use and Benefit of all that has been said is, that your Bees shall
always be provided of a sweet dwelling, large enough for themselves and their
increase, and whereby they shall easily be kept together, also of such plenty
of food, that when others starve they shall be always strong, both Summer and
Winter, whereby in all probability, by Gods blessing, and your own moderate
care, you shall have multitudes of Bees, and consequently abundance of Honey.

A The first upper Hive. B The second, or the first lower Hive. B B The third,
or the second lower Hive. C The upper bottom. E The hoops. F The lower end of
the Hive. G The handler on the Hives. H The cover for the great hole in the
upper Hive. I The mouths of the Hives. D The great hole in the upper bottom.


A Querie upon the description of Dr. Brown's new invented Bee-Hive.
Whether the square Figure may not prove the best, in that there may better be
placed a bill or drawer in the bottom of the Hive, into which (being drawn
forth) there may from time to time be food laid for any particular Hive,
without any disturbance to or from the rest of the Hives, where every
particular Hive may (if occasion require) shut up and feed by it self, which in
the ordering of Bees may prove many times of good concernment.

A Letter discovering a new kind of excellent food for Bees.
SIR, Being much indebted to you for the gift of your Legacy, and other choice
pieces, and understanding that you are about another of the like nature, which
you intend to publish. I thought good in the mean time (till occasion prompt
some other means to serve you) to impart unto you this notable Secret, which I
had from an old Germane Captain concerning Bees, that by long experience the
Planting of Anise near them proved the best means for multiplying and keeping
of them, as also for their breeding of great store of Honey. That the Herb
being taken, and the inside of the Hives rubbed therewith, causes great
multitudes of Bees to etner, and become close retainers to those Hives, which
ought to be placed directly against the Sun, so that the Sun beams fall just
into the Orifices of them. That the feeding upon this plant will cause each
Stock to engender and thrust out three young ones in one year, within which
space they do else not nse to do so above once. That against the time of
their thrusting forth, other Hives ought to be placed next to those from whence
they thrust forth, which, as also the way leading to the Orifices, are to be
rubbed with the Anise in such sort, that the juice of the Herb may come forth
and stick thereunto, and the young Stocks that come forth from the old, will
certainly enter into those, and not repair any where else. But in case that
upon the neglect any be swarved forth, and settled unto some tree, the fault
may be amended by rubbing the inside of the new Hive with Anise, and holding it
on the top of a long perch unto the Bees, who will enter thereinto of
themselves as soon as they scent the sweetness of the Anise.

The abovesaid Captain related, that a Baron in Austria so thrived by this
secret, that he furnished many Countries with Honey and Wax, and thereby
abundantly increases his wealth and revenue. This I thought to hand unto the
public by your means, resting

Sir, your most affectionate to serve you F. H.
SIR,
I pray pardon the rudeness of my language, and to surrogate that which may
better abide the touchstone of public view. For my being continually called
upon will not give me leave to do it better.



An Extract of a Letter concerning this New kind of food for Bees.
ABout the Secret concerning Bees, on which you desire my judgment, I can say
nothing else, but that it must be referred to Experience, whereby if it be
confirmed (as indeed I do think that very likely) I shall be extremely
beholding to you for it, and I may chance to make great use of it one day,
beseeching you heartily, that when ever any of the like shall come to your
hands, you would be pleased to impart the same unto me.

Another Extract of a Letter upon the same Subject.
MOst of those Authors that write of the nature and government of Bees, of whom
I have the matter of a dozen here, name sundry Herbs, to which the Bees have a
particular liking, and diverse others, that are good in sundry respects to be
near the Hives, but not one of them all does name Anise, in either of those two
Classes, as my inquiry (for which I had no time when I wrote to you about that
matter first) has taught me; so as that Secret which you imparted unto me
concerning the same (a most excellent one indeed if confirmed by sure
experience) is altogether new, and not borrowed from ancient Writers, as you
may see hereby.

How Anise may be got to grow in England, is taught in that excellent Book,
called, The Garden of Eden, as follows.
Sow English Annise-seeds, when the Moon is at the full, in February, or any
time between the full and the change: if frosts will not suffer you to take the
full Moon, hatch them into the ground with a rake stricken thick upon them;
then strew new horse-dung thinly upon the ground, to defend the seeds from the
frost. -- These will ripen about Bartholemew-tide; then respecting the Moon, as
before, sow again, and these seeds will be ripe sooner than those which were
sown in February. These seeds will also come up well, being self sown, only
break up the ground about them when they begin to ripen. That ground which you
would sow in February, break up about Michaelmas; let it lie and crumble all
the winter, then when you mean to sow, stir it up again, that it may be
mellow, for the mellower the better. A black rich mellow ground is best, and
they like well in a rich dunged ground. Proved by S.

A Translate of a Letter written in High Dutch, communicating a Secret for the
better ordering and preserving of Bees, practiced beyond the Seas.
SIR, I give you many thanks for that direction about Bees, but I cannot
perceive, how by that way we may prevent their swarming, or the trouble of
hiving them. Nor does that way avoid the vulgar error of destroying the best
Bees for their Honey.

To remedy all these and many other inconveniences, I have formerly sought an
unusual way, and in practice have found it good and profitable.

I caused Hives of glass to be made, and covered them with wood; in which
Covers I made windows to be opened when I list, which served me for the better
considering of their nature, but afforded me no help in the foresaid
inconvenience, for such I account them, though I see your man be of a contrary
opinion, speaking of often swarming, as a thing very advantageous. It is true,
the more swarms you have, the greater is the number of Hives in your
Bee-garden, but the stocks are so much the weaker, especially every
metropolitan stock, out of which his three or four Swarms issued: which
consideration gave occasion to that precept, given heretofore by experienced
Bee-masters, not to suffer any stock to swarm above twice in a year, but rather
to prevent it, by giving the Bees more room, which is done by setting the
Bee-hive some inches higher from the bench or stool upon which they stand.

That swarming weakeneth the first stocks, is manifest to any one that
considers, that for the production and breeding of the young Bees, there is
in every Hive a great number of attendants, somewhat larger than the Bees (we
call them Drones) which are fed by the labors of the Bees, as long as they
prepare for swarming; but as soon as the Bees resolve to send-out no more
Colonies, they fall upon the Drones and kill them. The young Bees are also kept
idle till their General be ready, and the whole Army be fit to march out all
together for a new plantation. The oftener that such swarms issue out of a
stock of Bees, the more is the damage and charge that it suffers from these
Drones and young Bees: All which cost and charges are spared in my way, so that
my Bees never intending to swarm, had so much the more provision for bad
weather and winter, and did so much the sooner set their young ones to work for
themselves, and to earn their own meat, as having no pretense to be kept idle,

Secondly, In the common way it is so hard to keep Bees from flying away in
swarming time, that the most diligent watchers of them do now and then lose a
Swarm: But in my way of ordering them such watching is unnecessary; for my Bees
never fly away, because I prevent all occasions of swarming: By which means
they are also kept from breeding of Drones, and new Master-Bees, or Generals;
and their young Bees, as soon as they can fly, are set to work among their
Elders.

Thirdly, I never needed to kill any of my Bees, and yet I could share with
them in the Honey. It was not unusual with me to make a whole barrel of Honey
and Wax out of one Stock or Hive. And besides all these conveniences, my Bees
were far better secured and defended from excessive heat and cold, from
vermin, thieves, and all other their troublers and enemies. They had also this
accommodation, that when they were laden they went downward, but clambered
upward when they were unladen, whereas the contrary is necessary in the
common-way.

I make no question, but that by this time you long to hear what course I took
with them; nor shall I be nice in communicating it, though it cost me above two
hundred Rix dollers. But if you were here, I could far more easily show it,
than I can now find words to express it well in writing especially thus in a
Letter.

My Bee-hives did not stand upright after the usual manner, but lay upon two
long poles or railes within my house, in a Garret, close under the Roof, where
the Bees could creep in and out under the tiles. The close end of the Hive
touched the tiles of the roof. In the upper part of each Hive I did cut a hole
for the Bees to go in and out. The wide end of the Hive commonly stands clapped
down upon some plank, but in mine it was shut up with a bottom made of straw,
pinned to it on every side with wooden skewets. And by the like means I could
adjoyn straw-hoops of what breadth I pleased, and so lengthen any of my Hives
as often as need was, so that they never swarmed, though their number increased
so much, that by several additions a Hive became two or three yards long.

The way of taking their Honey from them was thus; I unpinned the wide end of a
Hive, and by burning linen rags I smoaked up the Bees thence toward the close
end of the Hive; and then I might freely take away the prolongers or additional
hoops one after another, till I thought the Bees could not well spare any more
Honey.

This slight description may make it seem a small matter to those that consider
not, that all the aforesaid conveniences will undoubtedly follow it.

Hereafter I may perhaps express it more fully, when I have more leisure to
write; especially if my affairs would permit me to come to you to confer at
large of this, etc.

Another Authors description of the said Secret.


A A common Bee-hive. B A Prolonger to lengthen or eeke out the Hive withal. C
A hole cut in the upper end of the Hive A. D A bottom or door to shut up the
Hive, whether it be single as A, or lengthened as A B B. E The wooden pins in B
and D for the joining of them to the ends of A or B.
SIR, I here send you the description of my long Bee-hives expressed in
picture: Wherein (A) is a common Bee-hive, not standing, as the usual manner
is, but laid along upon one side. In the upper part of the Hive I cut a round
or four cornerd hole, through which the Bees may pass in and out, here marked
with C. In the placing of the Hive you may turn that hole downward if you will,
but I turn it always upward, that the Bees, when they are laden, may rather
go downward than upward. Besides, if I turn it not upwards I cannot well set
it close to any hole, left for the Bees entrance, under the tiles in the roof
of a Garret, which is a far surer way than after the usual manner, to leave
them in a Garden, exposed to thieves, vermin, and distempers of weather. Where
the roof is inconvenient, I use to make a hole in the upright wall of a Garret,
and set the Hive close up against the wall, with a hole in its head precisely
answering to that hole in the wall.

The open end I shut up with a bottom made of straw, as you see represented at
D, which may be opened easily, and yet shuts close and firm by the help of
those wooden pins here marked with E.

When I perceive that my Bees have near filled their Hive, I take off that
Shutter D, and set on a Prolonger, like the Hive, but that it has no head,
such as are here marked with B, and then shut it up, as before, with that straw
door D. Thus I may add as many Continuators as I please, shutting close up to
one another, always closing the last with D

Whenever I intend to take some Honey from the Bees, I provide linen rags,
wherewith I make a smoke, and let it into the Hive, by pulling away the door D,
from whence the Bees are driven by the smoke toward their small entrance C, so
that I may safely take away as many prolongers as I think good, and put a fresh
one in the place, shutting it up with the door D.

A Phylosophicall Letter, treating of many other Secrets and Experiments for
general Riches and Profits, be sides those arising from Bees.
IN pursuance of your request, and performance of my promise, I shall,
according to what I may, endeavor to answer your desire, knowing your sincere
Zeal for, and care of the Public. Truly Sir, I should very hardly have entered
the stage, had it not been out of that inclination I have to serve you, who
neglecting all private interests, do wholly spend your self in laboring to
profit others, who how f^r they may take notice of your pious and sincere
endeavors herein I know not, but confidently persuade my self, that your
labor will not be lost as to future Ages, who will assuredly take notice of
your pains and care, and will esteem your labor accordingly.

I have read several Pieces, by your self published, both lately and formerly,
and those discovering, not only Divine and Spiritual, but also Humane and
Temporal Mysteries. As to the first sort of your Discoveries, I hope there is
none so unprincipled in Christianity, but must and will confess, that by such
Talent improving Servants much will redound to the advantage of the Lord the
Creditor, and for the edification of many in the ways of Righteousness. But
as to the later, perhaps the ignorance or perverseness of the times may impute
that to folly, which the ripest of the Imputers could hardly equal with solid
and real wisdom, yet you may resolve, that the time will be, when your
undertakings herein will more earnestly be prized, for I persuade my self, and
that not without good ground, That it is not now long before the time shall
come, when Ingenuities of all kind shall more and more flourish, when the envy
of Artists shall cease, who shall not then be jealous, least others with a dry
finger should attain to such things by bare reading, which they in finding out
have tried so many wearisome Experiments, which in mine opinion is (though I
confess God by this means does keep obscured, that which he in his justice
judges the ungrateful world at present unworthy of) but a mere humane conceit,
and full of fleshly fragility, for considering the many ripe wits which are in
the world, If a man, who has attained to any measure of real discovery,
should as freely impart the same to such, of whose sincerity he is assured, and
withal such, who with himself are daily searchers into the secrets of Nature,
I am confident, that by this joint improvement of their utmost ability, more in
some few years would be found out, then by any one single man could be
attained, though he should live to a very great age.

Therefore Sir, I cannot but judicially honor your desires of vindicating what
ever excellent you can meet with, from the dark cloud of obscurity, that so the
Public may by this means reap the fruit of that se^d, being thus scattered,
which, if stifled under a clod, would have been for ever unuseful. Besides many
other useful Pieces, those which more nearly concern us here in England, are
your two Books of Husbandry, the one showing us our Defects here in England,
the other the Braband Husbandry, which with Gods blessing I hope will redound
to the filling of our Pastures with Cattle, our Gardens with all sorts of Roots
and Herbs, our Garners with store of Grain, to the wonderful good of this
place. Next your Design for Plenty, in the universal planting of fruit trees,
to which two I hear you are adding a third Treatise concerning Bees. These
three Treatises concern our good and welfare so nearly, that I can but wish
them as happily embraced, as ominously offered. For indeed if they were put in
practice, the Advantage which the Commonwealth would reap therein, is beyond
estimation: for first of all the plenty of food would soon cheer the mind of
those, who through the scarcity thereof, and other necessities, are now likely
to ^amish, of which the overplus would not only provide Cloths, the other
staff of life, which necessity craveth, but also produce several staple
Commodities, by the which Convenience, yea, superfluity it self would be
maintained among tho^^w^^ for prese^^ are destitute of Necessaries.

^or to give you a taste herein, i^ Lands were improved for Hay and Root^, as
the Brabant Husbandry does chiefly insinu^te, that which at p^esent is want,
and of little value, would yield both Roots for man's nourishment, and Hay for
fodder for Cattel^ by which a double benefit would arise: First, the increase
of Cattel^ and with them of Butter, Cheese, Bees, etc. Secondly, Land by this
improvement would be brought to be of far gr^ater value for the like, or any
other employment for future. To these add the Oil, which the Seeds of Roots
would produce, if in qu^ntity sown. And then the Roots themselves, with
Gra^^es, Turnip-tops, and the like method, as in the l^rge Epistle is taught,
with the Hay, would be enough (if not to spare) to feed Cattle that are to be
fatted, Milch-Cowes, and laboring beasts, so would the Pastures be the less
burdened, only with Sheep and other dry Kine; nor should we be so driven in
cold weather for the keeping of Cattle, which by this means would not only be
in good plight, but even fat in the midst of Winter: Then the abundance of all
sort of Grain, which would be in these Nations with the Fruits and Honey, would
be cast upon us as a superfluous enriching, as if the Bounty of the most High
were not content to make us happy, but of all other Nations most wealthy: For
besides the making of Bread and Beer out of Grain, upon which account it is a
thing prized of most Nations that are civilized, and the ordinary and known use
of Fruits, I know, and that upon most infallible grounds, that by the abundance
of these we might better our Being, beyond what at first thoughts can be
apprehended.

Leaving then all known Mechanical Uses of these Commodities, with the value of
them on that account, as they are ( in specie) I shall hint some other
Applications of them, without considerable charge or trouble, by which means a
most incredible advantage may redound to him, who has opportunity, leisure,
and list to experiment. And first as to the making of Wines: And secondly of
Strong Waters, or Spirits; of which how much is imported into this Nation
annua^ly, it is beyond my reach to compute.

Whereas, if instead of having these brought into ^^ we were able, besides our
own store, to export the like, or far greater quantity, none will deny, but
that this Art would indeed b^ (as to the benefit from it redounding)
inv^l^^^le. I say then, and can demonstrate, that out of all Grains which are
of a mealy substance, as also out of all Seeds of the like nature (not oily)
may be made excellent Strong Waters, or Aqua vitae; as also out of all Fruits,
Plums, Berries, or Roots; that out of Berries, Fruits and Roots is more mild,
but by Grain mal^ed and Honey it may be quickened. There are of inferior sort of
Grains, as Rye, Oats, Pease, and the like, which handled as Barley, until it
sprout Corn, need not then for this work be dried, but beaten and moisted with
its own liquor, and soundly fermented, and will so yield a monstrous increase.
Out of one bushel of good Pease, I know, will come of Spirit, at the least two
gallons or more, which will be as strong as the strongest Annise-seed-water
usually sold in London: This I know is the least, and is done without malting.

Now to these add your drossie Honey, that, to wit, which comes not forth
without squeezing the Combs, and you shall increase your quantity abundantly;
so then by the means of Honey, Grains and Fruits, we shall not need so much
to fetch Canary or Malago Wines from the Spanish Territories, nor White or
Rhenish Wines from the French and Germane Coast, so to enrich them with our
Commodities, for which we receive but a pallate-pleasing Juice, which nature
craves not for necessity, nay the greatest part thereof is infused in sinful
superfluity, bearing the greater price, because far fetched; whereas the
Nations, with whom Wine is made, use far less of it than we who buy it at
Rack rates, so that it is a Prov^^b Hispa^us raro ebrius, The Spaniard is
seldom (...). The more is (...) both our sin and shame, who often abuse (...) to
drunkenness; whereas if it were once (...) (as its easily so to be made) a
domestic Commodity, no man then would want it for his necessary use, and by
the reason of its commonnesse, the price of it would be brought far lower,
and by c^nsequence the request it finds among the sipping Gallants of our time
would abate; so that this benefit at least would redound, that besides the
moderation which would ensue of that Excise in drinking (which now alas to our
shame is in use among us) we should be able to send forth in considerable
quantity that very Commodity, the Import whereof does stand this Nation, now
yearly, in an incomputable sum of money, besides the support of several
families by the use of them in Specie, which alone were enough to make the
abundance thereof to us, not only acceptable, but also desirable,

As for the use of Spirits I need not to mention them, since utterance, I
suppose, presents it self yearly to this Nation of as much as it can spare, and
more, I suppose, could be vended, if it might be had. Yet one thing I may speak
as to that particular: It is known, that Fish is no small part of the traffic
of this Nation, besides that which is used among our selves for our own
spending; of which (especially Cod-fish the principal Merchantable Fish that is
sold) is taken at the banks of Newfound Land, and New England. Now what
quantities of Spirits are spent among the Fishing Companies in New and Old
England? I suppose many know better than I can Inform them, who for the most
part are supplied with Dutch or French Brandy, those Nations eating, as it
were, the Bread out of our mouths, by which means the wages of the painful
Fisherman is, for the most part, at the winding up pocketted by Strangers,
whereas if we were able to furnish the same Commodity at like or lower price,
it would be to us no small annual profit, since, in such like Trade, the
Fisherman consumes, for the most part, one half of his yearly earnings.

But I shall leave the managing of Commodities to those who are conversant in
such Employments, at present bounding my self with this, Ne suitor ul^ra
Crepida^n: It is enough for me to show how Commodities may be raised, and those
domestic, with inconsiderable pains and trouble, but for the improvement of
them, it is good I should leave that task to such, who professedly take upon
them the charge of such matters.

But while I thus swerve from my professed theme, which is to give you
(according to that Observation that I have taken) an account of Bees; give me
leave to hint one thing, which (in my opinion) is the Masterpiece of
whatsoever you have waded in. I cannot say that you are the Author of it, since
I have read many Overtures made of and concerning that Subject, by others, yet
I know that your self are none of the least drivers on of that design, namely,
the Advancing of Credit, so as to make Bills Current in payment, to the
wonderful increase of Trading, to which I may also add your Office of Public
Address, both which Enterprises (if not unseasonable mercies at present) I
hope the Lord will give this Nation to enjoy,

But as concerning our present matter, which at this time I chiefly intend,
namely, concerning Bees, I understand from you, that your chief desire to be
informed concerning them, is first, How they may be engendered? Secondly, How
increased? and thirdly, How enriched with Wax and Honey?

For the first, The truth is, I have read in some Authors of their engendering
out of dead Kine, fermented with the falling dew. Some think, that out of any
kind of beast Bees may be produced, and do conclude, that the Bees which
bestowed their Honey on the carcass of the Lion, slain by Samson, were of this
nature, and bred out of that savage Creature; yet must I confess, that I never
yet saw the Experiment of Bees engendered in or from any dead Carcass, though I
have known several sorts of dead Creatures both open, and covered with leaves,
lightly exposed to the continual dewes, yet never could I take notice of any
such procreation. And that out of Kine, either strangled, or otherwise dying,
and so lying abroad, exposed to the influence of the Heavens, Bees naturally
will not spring, I am induced: For that in the Summer Islands, where I was
born, I never yet saw one Be, except those of a kind called Humble Bees, where
notwithstanding, to my knowledge, diverse Cattle both younger and older, have
(perishing by mischance, as it often falls out there, that the very heat of the
noon. Sun in Summer kills Cattle if not removed into the shade) lain in the
open fields till they have rotted, and have not a night scarce wanted the dew,
in which Maggots and Worms have bred, but no Bees, which if they were so to be
bred, I suppose would in less than forty years have been seen in those
Islands, in which I never saw any, though I was naturally a great Observer of
Insects there, where I noted Waspes, but no Honey making Bees. Nor is it to be
thought, that the Climate is averse to the Generation of Insects, which it
there produces of other kinds as plentifully, if not more than many other
places, in which Bees are,

Also my engendered Curiosity was so great, that I took the pain to observe and
collect the Generation of several Insects, with their various mutations from
kind to kind, sparing no diligent travel that might benefit me herein. For so
soon as I began to read a little in Philosophy, I took great content in these
Contemplations, which after in New England I as carefully noted. In the Summer
Islands I found, that in Rainwater kept in wooden Troughs (especially where
the Sun at some time of the day shines on it) there would in time gather a
sedimen of muddy matter to the bottom, black and slimy, out of which would
breed at the bottom, crawling long ill-favored Worms, with many feet: these
Worms growing bigger and bigger would swim and play together, and engender
sexually, till at last growing more slow, they would at length lose almost all
motion, at last coming to the top of the water, would by the legs hang near the
superficies, where in few days, opening the back, out of them proceeds a Fly,
which crawling out of the water, is for a day or two tender, after able to fly,
which Fly, after a time casting its skin, becomes another creeping Insect, with
out wings, and of it proceeds another Fly, far different from the former. So
in the ground, I have often under stones or tufts of grass found tender
Worms, which are naturally in time of their own accord incrusted, and so lying
a space, at length break, out of which comes a great Butter-fly, which lays
her Eggs on the Orange tender leaves, where the dew hatcheth them into Worms,
which live on the leaves, and if touched send forth long red horns; these at
length, hanging to the n^^^r part of a bough, are incrusted, and after a long
death turning the same kind of Butterfly, which before came out of the Earth.

Another sort of Worms, engendered by the (...) ences in the Earth, being
incrusted, proves a singing (...) after its season, cleaving to a Tree, casts
its skin, and of a ^ly becomes a creeping sceptile, and so lives a long time,
till about the season of the year when that Fly comes again. This creeping
thing on some tree or other for a time is almost without motion, at last
bursting insunder in the back, out of it comes the like singing Fly as came
before out of the first Worm, which was bred in the earth.

Many such like Generations of Worms in the Earth, and of crawling Creatures
in the Waters, which after turn into Flies, and so again into other husky
Worms without motion, and from them to other flying Insects. I might speak
largely, were it not besides my proposed intent and scope at present.

A third very anomalous Generation, which I have noted, is of a sort of
stinging Flies out of rotten Trees: these, in the Summer Islands, I have
observed out of the rotting Palmeto, and in New England I have seen the same in
rotten Poplar and Birch: In which a man may at one time see some, like to a
tender Spermatical milk, enclosed in a most tender skin, others like to a white
Maggot, with a little motion, others now almost shaped like a Fly, others full
formed, and able to crawle, others ready to come forth, and in a short time
after to fly.

The Generations of Beetles, Dorres, etc. I have also diligently enquired into,
and find, that under stone hedges, where dunghils are usually made of Rubbish,
they do chiefly proceed, which some sort of Sea shellfish, buried in the
Earth, do also produce the same in kind and fashion with the former. Yet, as I
said, I never yet could experimentally find any rise of Bees from putrefaction,
though by me, for curiosity sake, often attempted, and that with the blood, also
with the flesh of Kine, such as by accident perishing, I could procure part of
them for trial sake; this I have kept, some openly exposed to the dew, others
covered with Rubbish (as for the Generation of other Insects) other while
defended with green leaves and straw, and so buried in the Earth, others
covered with earth immediately without any defense from the same, in which
variety of operations, as I had variety of success, at various seasons of the
year, so never did the event answer the end, for which I employed this
industriou^ ^nquiry. If any Gentleman, that has on his own experien^e tried
this manner of production of Bees, please to impa^t ^is (...), ^ shall be unto
him really thankful, and requi^e (...) perhaps with as acceptable a discovery

(...) my opinion, is, as it were, Natures recreation, (...) the f^acid ferment
of putrefying Bodies does (...) there is singular and rare variety, so they are
int^eded (...) blessings or scourges to Man. The Be, the Silkwor^, the
Cochmeel, how greatly profitable to Mankind they have been I need not repeat,
nay most Insects of a shelly or scaly nature, being very excellent in medicinal
qualities. I think then, that our sloth is very great, in that we neglect the
inquiry into this particular. I shall a little touch, and perhaps not
impertinently here. In the Summer Islands there is a sort of Spider, that is
very large, and of admirable gay colors, yellowish, blackish, greenish, and
reddish, so intermixed, that it makes the Creature very delectable to look on;
these in great multitudes are there, who live abroad in the open fields,
spinning their webbs from tree to tree of a vast bigness, to catch Flies in,
on the which they prey: their webbs are yellow, and most pure Silk, of which
one Maid for trial knit a pair of Gloves, which prove in wearing no whit
inferior to the best Silk of the Silkworm. Now if these Spiders were so kept,
as an ingenions man might easily invent, they by feeding kept in good plight,
might be made to spin quantity enough, for as much as in few hours they will
spin a large web, if their old one be taken away, else they mind only their
prey. But the trial of what may be done in this, I leave to others who may
have opportunity; this I only insert here to show, that not the Silkworm
only yields Silk, which is common to this Spider with them, and that of the
Spider nothing in^eriour to the Silk, which the Worm spinneth.

Again the Cochmeel, which is so rich a Commodity, comes out of a fruit called
the Indian Fig or prickled Pear, which as yet none of our Nation have attempted
to make, which is the cause that die is so scarce, although in all the Summer
Islands the Tree bearing that fruit is most plentiful, and the generation of
that Ins^ct as easy as may be, if but attempted with ingenuity The leaf is of
a thick slimy nature, the fruit full of seeds and ^loudred, very wholesome, and
has this property, that it passes strait to the urine retaining it^ color,
and is rejected by urine is red well nigh as it was taken in. This same fruit
is not of the like tincture with the Insects proceeding from it, but give a
color almost like to Brasil^tto wood, which in the fire in a few days
perishes. But the Insect ^ngendred of this fruit is of a most permanent
Tincture, I for curiosity examined other Vegetables which were of Tincture, and
found them all to yield Insects of the like tincture, with that out of which
they were procreated.

In particular, and with much Curiosity, I examined Shoomake Berries, which
have a red outside, like to the furre of V^lvet, in small red grains, but the
inner kernel not answering the outside in color, I found the Insects not
considerably tincted red, yet in Medicinal Operations by far surpassing the
virtue of the Bare Berries, for they had a peculiar diccretick quality.

There is a Berry also grows in great quantity, both in the Summer Islands
and in New England, which makes me to con^eive, that it would also grow here:
It is with them of the Summer Islands commonly called Redweed, the virtue of it
is purgative upwards and downwards strongly, the Berry is as red as the
prickled Pear, and gives much the like tincture. This Berry I intended to
prepare for Medicinal uses^ but by occasion my Design in that being frustrated,
I assayed to see what manner of Insects it would yield, and there came forth
first Worms, which growing husky, with small bumps where the head or upper
part lay (which is easily distinguished in such Insects) I perceived thereby it
would produce a Fly, which accordingly it did, which was of the bigness of the
Cochmeel fly, but a little longer, which grew by the same matter, out of which
they were engendered, to a considerable bigness, when I taking them out, in a
gentle heat in a close gl^sse, killed them, and dried them, and though I have
often assayed the Cochmeel for curiosity sake, yet I could not find this, as to
the point of tincture, any whit inferior to that Insect, and as to Medicinal
virtue aequi valent, if not exceeding the other.

And I am co^fi^^nt (though that I have not tried) that out of Brasil^^to like
Insects of the same excellent tincture may be produced, knowing experimentally,
that out of any Wood-berry may, by an anin anta (...) f^rmentation (if I may so
speak) be produced^ first a small Wor^, (...) growing hig^er grows husky, and
at last becomes a (...) suffered to grow till it have waxed a little, (...) the
tincture of the Concrete whence it ^a^ produced, which then being graduated
beyond its own nature, leav^^h its d^e in grain.

I have been the longer upon these kind of Insects, desiring, at least, with as
much brevity as I can, to give hints of what rare Secrets are in Nature
attainable: So that if any desire the way to fix a faling Color, consider if
that C^lour will hold until the Compound may receive a ferment (f^r
fermentation opens the Body) after which thou shall cause it to engender
Insects, which is an easy Art: These Insects will give thee the tincture of
its Original Concrete, which will hold in grain.

Now as to Medicinal Virtues of Insects I might be very large, but I shall
willingly pass them over; only this I shall say, being desirous to try what
might be done upon this account, I took Blood, and pouring the Water from the
Clodds of them, by putrefaction I had great Maggots, with moisture, which
consuming the moisture grew in quantity, and were in a manner dry, these I
washed clean, killed them, and bruised them, and of them had in a second
putrefaction other less Maggots, somewhat differing from the other, and with a
tolerable smell to the other; these being grown to their greatest, I washed
again, killed, and so putrified them, and this a third and a fourth time I
repeated, then I took them, and having first washed them, digested them (being
bruised) for six weeks, and distilling them, had a Water and a yellow colored
Oil, of the most exquisite penetrating resolving virtue that ever I knew,
which I yet call Oleum Lumbricorum Verum, Attempting the same with livers of
Beasts it succeeded in like manner.

But now to return to the History of Bees, to wit, their propagation; It is
known, that if they have good Hives, with convenient shelter, and sufficient
store of meat, they will increase sufficiently. So then the main matter is to
know how Bees may best be stored with Honey.

First of all, if your Design of planting of Fruit trees take effect, that
alone would mightily increase Bees, it is not to be credited what one Orchard
will afford to that purpose. But because the time of the blossoming of Fruit
trees lasts not long, there would be found out some fit means for to nourish
them in the later months of the year; it being a Proverb, that a Swarm of Bees
in May is worth a Cow and a Bottle o^ Hay, whereas a Swarm in July is not worth
a Fly. For it is evident, that the dew which falls on the flowers is that which
Bees suck; though July, August, September, and part of October, are for the
heat of weather, as seasonable for Bees to work in as May, yet in them they
enrich themselves but little, because of the scarcity of Flours, Blossoms,
Honeysuckles, and the like, which at that season of the year are rare.

Your Letter to me (in which is the transcript of part of an Epistle) to this
end, commending the planting of Anise, does seem very rational; first in that
Anise yields an innumerable company of small flowers (as also sweet Fennel)
which if gathered in a morning, the dew on the flowers is very pleasant. The
like also is on Parsley, Carroots, in their flouring, but not so pleasant or
grateful to the Bees as Anise or Fennel, in regard of the sweet scent which
they carry, which alone is very alluring to them. For in dew it self is a sweet
Sacharine salt, which yet Bees do not so much desire, unless it have a
^ermentall Odor, which it acquires within the Concavity of sweet flowers, as
of Thime, Rosemary, Anise, or Fennel, etc. Yea, Experience it self shows, that
by the ferment of these the dew is transmuted, and obtaines a sweetness many
degrees passing bare dew, yea, and a Consistence also, as appears in Manna,
The reniabin, and the like, the falling of which I have often and diligently
noted, and find it to be materially nothing but dew, which falling on some
things becomes inspissated: Yet cannot I but respect the making of Honey, as a
thing peculiar to Bees, and although according to the Proverb ( and mel sibi
parant vespae) yet in my opinion there is worthily a great difference to be
acknowledged between Honey and other inspissated sweetnesses, so that neither
Manna, nor any such falling congealed sweetness, has the like nature as
Honey, which in its Analysis more easily is apparent. I often have with a clean
linen gathered the sweetness of the tops of Fennel, and wringing it out of
the linen, have tried if or no it had the parts of Honey, but found in them a
great difference, by which I learned, that Bees out of the falling dew, by a
peculiar fermenting virtue, do really transmute what they suck into Honey.
Also that Flowers within them contain a ^erment, by which the dew that falls in
them is ^nverted into a thicker su^stance, and sweet, yet f^rmally
disting^ished from Honey, which the Bees allured, both by the smell and taste,
do greedily resort to and suck, and of it load themselves, out of which they
do separate a more fat substance, which they also transmute into Wax, with a
formal transmutation.

For as much as Wax formally differs from all fatness in the World, so then
the dew, which being collected from any Flowers, will scarce yield a twentieth
part of Caput mortuum, being by the Bees sucked and d^gested into Honey, then
(if distilled) will yield near a third part in a Coal, and the liquor that
di^tils will be part colored, with an exquisite sharp taste, and a faetor of
Empyreum, which in the other is not so to be found. By which it appears, that
the Be finds not his Honey made beforehand, but transmutes that which was not
Honey into Honey, by a peculiar gift of the Creator. So by this it may be
gathered, that Anise in all probability will perform what is promised of it in
regard of its fragrant scent, which is so acceptable to that working Insect.
For I remember, when once upon an Experiment, I was digesting a thing with Oil
of An^se seeds in the Sun, near an Orchard, in which were many Hives, the Bees
did swarm exceedingly to the scent, but that which was digesting being of an
intoxicating nature, the Bees were with it amuzed, and so by the hot Sun killed
outright, and I am confident, had I continued my digestions any considerable
time, I had soon unstock nigh a dozen of Hives, so allu^ing is the ^ragancy of
that scent to that Creature. Yea I have observed, that it is common to them
with Waspes, to be exceedingly drawn with any eminent sweet Odor. Add to the
fragrancy of smell the excellent swee^ning ^erment, which from Anise or Fennel
flowers is communicated to the dew, so that to suck such clusters of Flowers in
a morning is almost as pleasant as to suck a Honey-combe for taste.

But the third and main excellency in Anise, is the long duration of the
flouring time, which may be continued four or five months, sowing Anise at
several times, for it is the flower only of it, which the Bees suck on. Yea,
and though sown at once, yet of Anise, Fennel, and the like, the nature is not
as Apples, to flower at a peculiar time, for as much as at one time a man shall
sind both the flower tender, and the seed near to its full growth, so that this
herb will afford a durable supply to the painful Be, the seed it self being
also a very good commodity.

But yet there is another way by which Bees may be stored most plentifully, and
that is by Molossoes of Sugar, Raisins, Macarates, with water, and the like.
There was a Gentleman, who having a late Swarm of Bees giv^n him, which was so
(...) could not be thought possible for to live out the Wi^ter, did (...) my
^irection make a mixture of a pint of Molossoes with three parts of Rainwater,
to which he put in a little meal, and sprinkled in^^ some few flowers: The
mixture being set near unto the Bees, they flockt to it, and carried it into
their Hives, and so would in less than a day empty a shallow broad dish, By
which means they, before full three weeks were out, were so over glutted with
Hon^y, that by the next Spring they were drowned with it, and in that Hive was
found no less than thirty pound weight of the Honey and Wax. The Molossoes was
not that which the Sugar-refiners leave, for I know not what an enemy the lime
Alcali that is in it may be to Bees, but the first Molossoes. Now I should for
my part rather rake the refuse Honey which is got by squeezing the Combs, and
also the Combs washings, which I would sprinkle with a little meal and Anise
seeds small beaten, the one to keep them from drowning in it, the other for
scent, and this, I am assured, will feed Bees excellently, and for one pound
they will return four: This I know; The water best for this purpose is that of
Rain, which has in it a sweet Salt. And that no man may wonder at this,
consider how that Honey originally is but dew, which is but little different
from Rain: For as a milch Cow drinking soundly of water, does actually give the
more Milk, which Milk is far different from water, yet multiplied by it even
to sense, so naturally does the Be transmute what it sucks into Honey,
insom^ch that if the Be be but allured with the fragancie of the scent, and
never so small taste of sweetness to suck up material water, yet that it will
as well make into Honey, as if it were a substance thicker of consistence.

And as for the Wax, of which the Combs is made, I cannot persuade my self
that it is the Gum of the stalks of flou^es and tender leaves (in a Microscope
to be discerned) which the Be gathering together, does of it make Combs: For
it is evident, that Bees do suck out o^ several things, nay, almost out of
innumerable Simples of all which they make (as but one Honey) so but one Wax.
In Russia and M^s^o^y (I am informed, that) the Bees gather out of the weepings
of Pine, Fur, Spruce and Deal Trees (which are only Therebinth) abundance,
both of Honey and Wax, which yet is the same in kind with ours in England,
whence I conclude, that Bees do make (as their Honey, so) their Wax, out of
that which before was not Wax, otherwise it would be a very Heterogeneal body;
since the weeping Gum of each thing is variated, and follows the property of
that Vegetable to which it belongs. Besides, there is a vast difference between
Gummes (of which some are wholly liquable in Water, others partly) and Wax, as
also betwixt it and Rosin of any sort, likewise its peculiar Specific Odor is
not common to any other thing with it self.

No marvel then, if Bees may be sed with their own Honey, mixed with three
times its quantity of rain water, and out of it they should again make Wax and
new Honey, since like to this is a Cows making out of simple water blood, milk,
and urine, of which blood and milk come but little (if ought) short of the
proportionate ^o^dus of Honey.

Nor is the smalnesse of the Creature to be accused as if in consistent for so
great a task, since God has made each thing sufficient to its destinated end;
yea, and the same Creature with a contemptible stroke of its revenging sting
(which is not much thicker than one of the pores of the Cutis is wide) can
swell and inflame our Body so beyond its own dimensions, that a prick in the
face (to my knowledge) has made one to be for more than a day blind, his eyes
being swelled up, and his face twice as big as before.

Now to resume, what in the beginning I touched, of the excellency of Honey,
it is good to eat, both pleasant and wholesome, in Surgery and Medicine of
excellent force, and enriched with a rare Quintessence. But besides, by help of
it and grain, may be made most excellent Wine, nothing i^feriour to the rich^st
Canary or Greek wines, and by the mixture of it with the Juice of fruits, the
best Fr^nch or Rhenish Wines may be paralelled, if not surpass^d. Nor will any
of the Specific Odor, either of the H^ney, or of the Corn, after a threefold
fermentation remain. It also will yield a most excellent Aqua vitae, yea it
will help such things, which (by reason of their too much propensity to
souring, and slownesse to a working fermentation) would yield spirits but
sparingly, to ferment exceedingly, and so to yield their spirit copiously, as,
to wit, many Berries, Roots: etc. It also will by its addition make as
excellent Vinegar out of Cider, as any France yields, without exception.
Lastly, any Wine which is near pricking may by its h^lp be recovered, brought
to a new fermentation, enriched with a new Body, which before, being almost
worn out, was hungry and l^an, and so made as Rasie, pleasant and durable as
ever, provided it be not already sour. If these qualities be not sufficient to
commend it, I shall add no more.

Thus Sir, I have briefly, and yet in a large Epistolical discourse,
endeavored to satisfy you what I can, as to this Subject. I confess my self
to have been not very free in this thing, not for that I would not be ready in
a greater matter to be serviceable to you and the Public for good; but truly,
I am one of those, who are far more willing to learn than to ^ssay to teach:
The World is now full of Books, of which if a good choice were made, one tenth
part of the chief being culled out, I should willingly pass my suffrage, that
the other nine patts should be corrected by the fire, among which this Epistle
of mine should, by my vote, pass for company. For verily Sir, sithence nothing
is to a man more pretions than time, it is requisite, that those things which
consume that most precious and irrecovocable Jewel (when once lost) should be
(...); yet I do assure you, these things (though perhaps comparatively, many
of them but trivial) I speak not opini^bly, but what I know, and that
experimentally; yet must I confess, that the Subject, lying not altogether in
the Sphere of my most serious Contemplations, perhaps has not been handled as
it might have been, by another more conversant therein, since mellification,
respects the work and labor of this Insect, not its Physical virtues; I then,
whose chief station is among natural things, to examine their Analytical
Philosophy, and to discover their Qualities, as applicable to the Art of
Medicine, together with their parts in Composition, their graduations in
virtue, their Extraction of the Craseis in them contained, their various
transmutations, alterities and applications. This, I say, being my (...) and
other speculations (among which this of Bees, most applicable to a rural life,
from which my profession is in a manner alienated) coming in but as (...),
serving for recreation and pleasure, no marvel if sleightnesse in its handling
by me should be found; Yet as it is I hope you will accept it, as proceeding
from a mind devoted to serve you; I wish therefore, that it were more worthy
your acceptance; yet as it is I humbly offer it to you, as an acknowledgement
of what I desire to perform, and an Earnest of what I may hereafter, and that
shortly, send forth after this, in case these my first fruits be acceptable.

There are herein couched many hints of diverse useful Experiments, which are
not altogether ungroundedly intruded into this Epistle, as having dependence
some way or other on the proposed Subject, which I inserted the rather, that by
such touches, which concern things within my own Sphere, I might qualify the
slight texture which is spun concerning the propounded theme, which is, as I
said, an enquiry rather of my spare hours for recreation, then any part of my
task. I pray a^cept what ever it is, as coming from him, who would have bestow
it as freely, if of far greater value: I shall now no further trouble you,
but pray the Lord, who is the fountain of all blessing, so to order all your
ways and endeavors, that they may be a blessing to all those, to whom you
devote your self, to serve by all your pious public achievements; this is,
and shall be the Prayer of him, who is most affectionately

Your unfeigned Servan^ G. S.

An Enlargement of the sore-going Philosophical Letter, explaining more fully
diverse of those desirable Passages for general Riches and Prosits: With the
Reasons why no more is discovered at this time.
I Received yours of Admonitory Annotations from my last Letter touching Bees,
in which my scope and intent being to speak concerning Mellification, in
reference to yours sent to me, concerning the use of Anise in the keeping of
Bees; many other things fell in accidentally, in which if I were the more
brief, it is the more venial, since it was not directly, but only collaterally
agreeing with the propounded scope of that Discourse. I shall therefore, having
perused those Annotations, return you a larger account of the things therein
contained, which I hope will be sufficiently satisfactory to any ingenious
Spirit.

The first Answer (so it is called) does seem to desire in that Epistle an open
candidness, and a candid openness: in that I conceive I was not only open, but
also plain, and I do not know what I should have added, as to the matter
proposed, and not have exceeded the bounds of an Epistle, and therefore I
really intended what I said, and did conceive my apertnesse a candid Testimony
o^ my intentions.

Now as to the second Answer, to my confident Assertion of the fec^b^l^ty of
Aqua vitae out of grain unmalted, etc. and the producing of Wine out of fruit
and also grain, equal to Spanish and French Wines, by the means of Honey, I
conceive, that what was written is sufficiently full and plain. For to write a
Receipt is a thing both ^^^^^sh, and not so convenient.

For first, a man who does try many Experiments, does not observe so nicely all
the Circumstances, as if he were to improve the same for profit, only takes
notice what is the effect of his Experiments in general. Now it is certa^n,
that the quantity of matter, and the quality of operation on the matter, may
differ but little as to ap^arency, and yet work a plain distinct effect.
Besides there is not any one Mechanic, which has its Basis on Phyloso^hy, in
which there are not many errors, into which an Artist, that has been long
versed in the Practique, may hap to fall, and he may thank gray headed
Experience for teaching him to amend his errors, and for some casu^^ disasters
no remedy yet has be^n ^ound, either totally and infall^bly to p^event, or to
amend the same, as i^ Malting, Brewing, Tanning. Sope-boyling, etc. which ^
might instance in, is need required, and time would permit.

So then, though I know that out of such Materials such a product man be, yet I
knew withal, that my sel^ have in my Experiments o^^ been frustrated, even in
those things which before I had done, which (...) could not on so few trials
know to what cause direc^ly to asc^^be.

Now (...) things b^^me found by casualty, I can hardly hit the same thing
^gai^, ^^en ^ assay it ( d^^industria) without sometimes various errors, it
would be not an edifying, but rather a stumbling course, to la^ down a Receipt,
and in so many words to relate my own Enchei^^a in its particularities, would
be tedious, and not so us^ful, for I know, that he who tries many fortuitous
Experiments, not to seek for any pa^ticular thing, before proposed to himself,
but rather to see what will proceed from such and such things so ordered, it is
to be conceived, that what he attaines to is by the farthest way about, which
to him, in those accidental trials, proves the nearest way home.

But if this were to be further proved upon the account of profit, another
course must be taken, of doing in greater quantity, and the easiest and
shortest Method is desired. Therefore I, like a Traveller, did intend only a
relation of things fecible, which I have my self again proved, and on my
reputation affirm, both possibly and easy in nature; and this I did to show
the Good which might accrue to the Public by the prosecution of your Design,
both in storing the Land with Corn, Fruits and Honey. I added the Means or
Key, both for the one and other, namely, by reiterated fermentation, and so
writing, I wrote to such, who in some measure understood Philosophy, who
weighing the effect with its causes, might not straight condemn my Candor, in
case he for once or twice should prove unsuccessful, whereas a Receipt is every
man's meat, and to such who less understand Nature, what Receipt can be full
enough. For he who writes, measures other men's understanding partly by his own,
and what he understands fully and scientifically, he presupposes another will
understand sufficiently, and therefore leaves out many Circumstances which are
not so necessary, or may be otherwise, or such which he presupposes (
praecognita) or what a small insight into practique Philosophy may dictate. My
meaning is, that in as much as those Experiments were not so reiterated, as a
Tanners making his liquor, I could not possibly throw the Receipts into the
mouth of every one that could but gape. For what I try in a gallon, if I should
prescribe in that quantity, my Receipt would be contemptible, if I should
analogize by proportion, my Doctrine might be uncertain, in the particular
which is most certain in the general. My Work is to hint to the Ingenuous what
may be done, and let it be sufficient that ( fide bona) I deliver what is
really true in Nature, and add the only Means, which is by reiterate
fermentation. But yet to add what light I can to him, who would attempt this,
I shall, so far as in me is, discover things more punctually

First as to Aqua vitae, let Pease be taken and steeped in as much water as
will cover them, till they swell and Corn, and be so ordered as Barley is for
the Malting, only with this difference, that for this work if they sprout
twice as much as Barley does in making Malt it is the better: these Pease thus
sprouted if beaten small, which is easily done they being so tender, put into a
vessel, and stopped with a Bung and a R^g as usually, these will ferment, and
after two, or three, or four months, if distilled, will really perform what I
promised.

The Water that soaked them, it is good to save, either for the soaking of
fresh, or for putting on them, being beaten, which else require some quantity
of water to be added to them, but not much, and the like may be done in all
other Grain, which the addition of refuse Honey will advance (as to quantity of
Spirit) exceedingly. Thus may a Spirit of Aqua vitae be made out of any green
growing thing, of which the leaves being fermented, will yield a small quantity
of such a Spirit. So Roots, Berries and Seeds, which are not oily, yea and
those which are oily, whose fatness is essential, that is, which may be
distilled over in an Alembick with water, will afford some more, some less of
Aqua vitae. Let me add, that the Spirit which is made out of Grain not dried
into Malt, is more pleasant than the other.

Now give me leave to add my opinion, and what I would try further in this
case. I would often stir the matter in fermentation, that is, once a day,
during the first twenty days, and for the first week, when it begins to work,
give it a small vent, which to me seems a wa^ of bettering the fermentation,
and by consequent of augmenting and meliorating the Spirit. But in this I leave
every man to his own ^ngeny, and should be glad to have these my Experiments
ripened for the good of many.

Now as to Vinification, let me for a ground lay this down for a Position, that
the vegetable Spirit in all Herbs, Trees, Plants, and Fruits, Berries, and
also Seeds, (not of a gross oily nature) is vinous, but in Grain and fruit
more especially of the later, of which the Grape is but one Species. Now in
both, the Rule to distinguish the copiousnesse of this virtue is the
sweetness; for by how much the more of that, by so much the more of the Vinous
Spirit.

Now Honey is a Vegetable Magistery, in part perfected by the Specific virtue
of the flour, etc. on which the dew falling, is made sweeter than of it self it
was, (yet formally distinguished from Honey, which I have often proved by
disti^l^tion) but is completed by the peerlesse virtue of the Be, which does
transmute that sweetness into a new Creature, which is Honey. This therefore,
by reason of its eminent sweetness, is rich of that vinous Spirit
forementioned, and may therefore be preferred to either Grain or Fruit; for
example; Let the trial be made with about a gallon of Honey, despume it, and
add to it about an equal part of Water, or three parts of Water to two of
Honey^ ferment it with a treble fermentation; and after six months this will
be far richer, both in taste and smell, than any Wine that comes from any of
the Spanish Territories, and that by far. But as the price of good Honey goes
now, to have a quart of Wine in its materials to cost a shilling or sixteen
pence, which is the price of good Honey, would be a dear rate; by which it may
appear, what the benefit of your present Design of enriching us with store of
Honey may be; for I say, what I have tried, that Wine made of Honey alone
without any other thing, thrice fermented as it ought to be, gives a drink more
like a celestial Nectar then a Terrestrial Wine, both for Taste and Odor.

But Grains gives a more Austere Wine, and alone much resembled a fyall Wine,
which is done thus. Take as much Malt as a Cask will hold fill it with scalding
hot water, that the water be no more than the Cask will hold after it is full
of Malt; let it soak so for a day and night, then press it out exquisitely, as
Wines are pressed, then put it into a vessel, and with Yest bring it to work,
which by every day moving with a rod, and covering it with cloths, and not
giving it much vent, will be continued at least six or seven days, so much the
better if the vessel be so big beyond what it contains, as that it work not
over, and the vent that is left be small^ but the bung so closed, as that it
may be opened and shut daily for to stir the matter soundly, and when the
ferment is ceased, with new Yest bring it to a second, and so to a third
fermentation, observing the same method as in the first, then close it well,
and set it in a cool Cellar for about four months, in which time it acquires
the natural properties of Wine, and may be accordingly handled.

Now by this that has so plainly been set down, any ingenious man may, by the
addition of Honey in a various proportion, make what distinction of Wine he
pleases, and the same with the juice of Fruits, with this di^^erence, that
Fruits do yield a Wine nearer to Rhenish and French then to Spanish Wines.

Now as to the Spider which I mentioned, I was not then so principled in
P^ylosophy, when I lived in those Islands, as to observe every observeable
thing, but since have hea^d of a Maid, who of that Silk has (for trial sake)
spun and knit a pair of gloves, which prove no whit inferior or less durable
than the best Silk, whether then they may be transported hither or no, I know
not, but if not, yet in the P^antation, where they are naturally (being under
this Government) I presume they might with ingenuity be made p^ofi^able; first,
since they multiply so abundantly: Secondly, live in the open fields, not
annoyed with weather: Thirdly, give Silk so copiously, for out of one large
Spider, in a day, one may draw at the least two drachins of Silk, if they have
an entire Web they s^end little after it is made, but if fed fat, they may be
taken in ones hand, without danger to ones self, or damage to the Creature,
and one may out of its body wind a good ball of yellow Silk daily, which being
washed is white enough. Fourthly, they will feed on Flies, or any blood of
beast cloddered exceedingly, and all their nourishment may be forced out in
Silk, which they as naturally make in their tail (which is a great bag, like a
Pigeons Egg in bigness) as Bees do Honey.

Now if the Silkworm that is so tender, may be so improved, being so hard to
feed, and must be kept in houses, much more these Spiders, which are so hardy;
and will feed on any trumpery (and who knows what they may ^e brought to eat,
I my self have fed them with pieces of Figs) may, in my opinion, be brought to
singular profit, which if kept in an open wicker Cage in the open air, may be
fed at pleasure, and robbed of their Silk at least every day, and that not a
small quantity at a time. I persuade my self, that one large Spider of this
sort, would yield more Silk in a Summer than six Silk-wormes, and that may
render them worth the keeping, their Silk being full as good as any. Yet they
may do as well here as the Silkworm, for ought I know, being by ten fold more
hardy than any Silkworm, and Flies are a sufficient food for them, which how
easily taken I need not mention.

As to the India Fig, the usual name of it is the Prickled Pear, so known in
that place, and as to the transportation of it hither, here to grow, it is
enough it grows there, being an English Plantation, or the fruit it self may,
without the tree, be yearly brought over at rates reasonable enough, if first
any ingenious man (whom it may concern) should, for trial sake, send for a
small parcel, and upon trial find it advantageous. I for my part procured of
the fruit for my Experiment, and found the generation of that Infect out of it,
which way I recommend to any that desires further resolution in that Point.

Now as to the Generation of ^nsects, I shall give my usual Encheiria, though
I need not, having particularly set down the same work, how it is performed out
of the blood and livers of beasts, which were enough to any, who by the length
of Hercules foot, could calculate the proportion of his whole body.

Vegetables of tincture are either Herbs, Woods, or Fruits, as Berries, etc.
as for Herbs, I dry them (^^ dry they yield the best tincture) otherwise stamp
them, and let them dry, till they will suffer no juice to run from them, (this
in the Sun or in a proportionable heat) or if dried, I infuse them with water
in a heat about twenty four hours, then vapor away the water, till the
dissolution be as thick a^ sirrup (but for this use strain them not from the
feces) this mass I take and put it into an earthen or wooden Vessel, with some
straw or something, and bottom (that it lie not too close) and so I proportion
the quantity to the pot, that the air may come about, and into the mass, (yet
not too much) then I set this Vessel in a ditch or pit made in the earth in a
shady place, and put about it some wet leaves, or such putrefying rubbish, and
over it a board, and on that some straw or the like, and so it produces, first
a shelly husky Worm, and then a Fly of the tincture of the Concrete, but
durable, and somewhat more advanced.

Berries I stamp and boil them, or evaporate them to the consistence of a Rob:
and then use them as the other.

Woods I infuse in water, being pulverised, and boil out their tincture, and
then evaporate the water to such a consistence as the other, and use them in
the like way. The Flies will play about the sides of the vessel and surface of
the matter, which taken, are killed in a warm pan or stove, and dried, and so
kept.

Thus out of a red Berry, of which I spoke in my former Letter, I made an
Insect no whit inferior to the best Cochmeel, and I suppose I have added
sufficient to the Information of the weakest capacity.

As for my History of one who did so feed Bees, as I spoke of in my first
Letter, the Gentleman is at present both out of London, England, and this Life,
being lately dead.

Now what concerns the Doctrine of Fermentations, on which depends the
unfolding of the Mystery of Mellification, and making Wax, I have reserved that
for another place and time, since being prolixe and Phylosophical, it does
require a peculiar Treatise, and I falling on it here, found it too abstruse to
be briefly handled, lest brief Instances, which I should be forced to bring,
should beget a thousand scruples and new questions. As for the practique of it,
this dilemma answers all: Either it will, or it will not; if it will, then
far more Bees may be kept, if out of (Not Honey) they make Honey, and out of
(Not Wax) they make Wax, by an actual transmutation, which I experimentally
affirm: if not, then fewer can be kept, if they must seek their Wax out of the
Gummosity of some flowers, as some fondly imagine, since Wax formally differs
from any fatness under Heaven. One half hours attendance in a day on a late
Swarm of Bees in July or August, will put all out of question to any other that
shall try it, as it has been experimentally put out of controversy to me. But
to lay down the Philosophy of the thing will maime a large Treatise, which I
have in Latin composed ( de fermentis) which I shall be unwilling to
dismember, and send part of it out lamely in an English dress.

Lastly, as to the meeting of Wines, it is done the same way as new are made.
viz by dissolving Honey in some quantity of it self, and warming it so as it
lose not the Spirit (which is to be therefore done in a close Vessel) then put
to the Vessel of Wine, and by Yest (or otherwise) let it be brought to a
thorough working (as at its first making) s^^t recovers both life, taste, body
and goodness, and may then be preserved as if it never had inclined to p^cking.

Sir, ^ hope this will be a full illustration of my former Letter, so as that
no man shall be able to ^^s^re greater candidnesse. I commit you, in these your
pious En^^^vours of the Public good, to his protection^ who will undoubtedly
at present bless you in this your Enterprise, and hereafter requite the
ungratefulness of men to you, on this account, with a ple^teous reward.

I am, Sir, your most affectionately devoted to serve you G. S.

A very cheap way to keep a Stock of Bees all Winterlong.
TOstes of bread sopped in strong Ale, and put into a Beehive, is very good and
cheap food for Bees, of which they will not leave one crum remaining.

It will be fit sometime to lay some dry Meal or flo^er of beane^, which dry
Meal is given them sometimes as ^ey or Corn is to Conies, or upland pasture to
Sheep in times of great rain, to prevent the rott, and such diseases, as will
necessarily follow from continual moist food.

By this means you may feed a whole Hive of Bees for eighteen pence or two
shillings all the Winterlong.

Q. Whether any other Flower or Meal will not serve? And whether it would not
be the sweeter, and therefore the better, if the Corn (whether Beans or any
other) were well maulted?

Another notable and approved Experiment for improving of Bees.
TAke an handful of Melissa (that is an herb which we commonly call Baume.)

One dram of Camphire.

Half a dram of Musk dissolved in Rose Water.

As much yellow Beeswax as is sufficient.

Oil of Roses as much.

Stamp the Baume and the Camphire very well, and put them into the Waz, melted
with the Oil of Roses, and so make it up into a mass; let it cool before you
put in the Musk, for otherwise the heat will fume away most of the scent of it.

Take of this mass as much as an haselnut, and cleave it within your Bee-hive.
It will much increase the number of your Bees, not only by provoking them to
multiplication, but also by enticing many strange Bees to come thither, and
abide there. You shall also find, both in Honey and Wax, three times more
profit than otherwise you should have had.

A Copy of a Letter, written by Mr. William Mewe Minister at Easlington in
Gloucestershire, to Mr. Nathaniel Angelo Fellow of Eaton College.
SIR,
BEing made known to you, I could wish it had been by a better Character than a
Bee-Master. It Is true, since I left the hot service of the City, I have an
Apiary in the Country, wherein I found profit enough: But I considered, that
Wax and Honey was not all the benefit which God afforded from that Creature; he
that sends us to the Ant, gives us leave to observe the same and better
qualities in the Be; I observed many rarities in their work and government, by
mine own experience upon Buttlers Observations: But when he told me of a
Gentleman, in Plinies time, that endeavored to make their works transparent
(but, as he thought, improbable) I tried, and finished that Essay, to the
satisfaction of my self and others.

The Invention is a fancy that suits with the nature of that Creature, they
are much taken with their Grandeiur, and double their tasks with delight; I
took fourteen quarts out of one of the transparent Hives, double their quantity
of others, they quickly paid me the charges, with their profit, and doubled it
with pleasure; I can take a strict account of their work, and thereby guess
how the rest prosper. Every time I view them (whilst their work lasts) I have
aliquid novi (something new) which must needs be more pleasing than the sight
of a Fountain, which affords but water, running in the same manner. This Honey
diversely placed with diversity of Combs, whereof I have observed six filled in
six days, of so many quarts, but it was in the time of a Mill-dew.

If you desire the Model or Description, I shall give the same to you that I
did to Dr. Wilkins, Warden of Waddham, who has, with great curiosity, set up
one in his Garden, and, as I hear, is setting up another with augmentations: I
intended it at first for an Hyerogliphick of labor, upon which a Gentleman
bestowed a Statue of that form to crown it, which in three years standing
yielded to the injuries of the Wind, Weather and Sun, which being repaird now
leaves at the bottom of the Pedestal, with this Inscription, Non amissus sed
submissus (the Emblem of our Calling) instead thereof are erected at the top
three Trygonal Dyals, over them three Weather-Glasses, with a Clepsydra to show
the hour when the Sun shines not, over that a Cock, that will speak the Winds
seat at Midnight, upon which is bestowed a Saphigue to satisfy the Latin or
English Reader, thus; Has Apes Dury Labor hic Coronans
Occidit, Sole, and B^rea Maligno
Quos Vigil Gallus Capit and superstes,
Clepsidra Monstrat.
Labor held this, till stormed (alas)
By Weather, Wind, and Sun he was;
All which are wacht, as here they pass,
By Dial, Weathercock and Glass.


Thus far have I denied my self to gratify your friendship, which I hope
will give the grains of allowance, and concealment to a sudden paper, which I
could not deny to the Bearer of a Letter from you; but if you please to take a
sheet and napkin with me for some time, we shall discourse of this, and better
Matters.

Mr. Hartlib is a Gentleman, whom I know not, but by your worthy Report, I
never saw his Works, but shall get them as soon as I can, if in the mean time
he shall visit me in person, or by letter, with Questions within my sphere, I
am a Flint that give fire at the first stroke; I like them well that veiw
Magnalia Dei in Minimis, if every man of my ability, through the Land,
cherished so many Hives as I do, it would be in our Commonwealths way 300000
per annum, which is lost by negligence or ignorance of the use of that
Creature. When I see you, I shall offer more to your consideration than is
fitting to be written; the Lord furnish you and me with ability, and fidelity,
in our Calling, For it is no great honor (says Plutarch) to be excellent out
of that.

Easlington this 19th of September. 1653. True Friend, Your Faithful Servant,
WILL. MEVVE.

A Copy Mr. Hartlib's Letter to that worthy Minister, at Easlington, Mr. Will.
Mewe.
SIR,
I Am willing to confess my fault (if it be a fault) that my worthy Friend Mr.
Angelo took notice of you, as an excellent Bee-Master: for knowing you by your
other better Characters, which are so public, that none can be ignorant
thereof, who has heard of your name, I gave him notice of your rare industry
(a thing not so publicly known as it deserves) in discovering the
industriousnesse of that pretty Creature, and my design was to get him to write
to you, so as to make some overture for me, to use freedom afterward with you
about that Subject, which he having done, and you having entertained with so
much alacrity, and hearty expressions, I am bound to thank you for it, and
desirous to express my thankfulness with such Communications, as are within
the sphere of my activity of this kind, or of any other better matters of a
public nature; and in testimony hereof, be pleased to accept of the adjoined
Packet with several Treatises and Books, wherein also you will happily find
something, which may give occasion to your ingenious spirit, to try some other
Conclusions of Husbandry with delight and profit: For God's Way's to such as
find them out are full of both; and I am apt to believe, that when God set Adam
in the Garden Eden to keep it and dress it, He meant to exercise his Industry,
as well about the discovery of the fruitfulness of perfect nature, which could
not be without much delight to his understanding, as about the pleasantness of
the place, which he could have by dressing increased, and made completely
answerable to the perfection of his own imagination. For although there was
nothing imperfect in Nature before the Curse, yet all the imaginable
perfections, which the seminal properties of the Earth contained, were not
actually existent at the first instant; the kinds were each distinct by
themselves, without any defect, but what Marriages and Combinations there might
be made between them, and what the effects thereof would be, when the proper
Agents and Patients should meet, I suppose was left to his industry to try: and
although we now come far short of that knowledge, which he had in Nature, and
the Womb, thereof, by reason of that Curse is shut up unto us: Yet we find by
Experience, that to such as are her faithful and laborious Servants, and find
out the Seat of Gods Virtue in her, to trace the Way of his Operation, She
rewards always their pains both with profit and pleasure, which in your
Answer to my forenamed worthy Friend you bear witness unto, when you tell
him, that in your Apiary in the Country, you not only found profit enough (and
what you mean by enough is left to our conjecture) but that besides the benefit
of Wax and Honey, you gained more delightful Observations of their Working, and
Government, then happily the Ant can afford us; which because I do very fully
believe, therefore I am an humble Suitor unto you, that at some spare time you
would renew to your own memory your delightful contemplation of the rare
qualities of that Creature, and putting them to paper, show forth the Wisdom
of the Creator therein, for such things should not be concealed, because they
are real Demonstrations of his Power, and I am persuaded, you will take it in
good part, that such as love Him for Himself are curious to know the
Workmanship o^ his hands, and the Ways by which the best discovery thereof is
made.

If then upon this account you would let some of your sparks fly abroad
amongst us, you may perhaps kindle some light more than we have, which in due
time may reflect with some heat upon your self back again. For you tell us,
that Dr. Wilkins, Warden of Wadham, is setting up a Glasse-Hive in his Garden,
with augmentations to that Model which he received from you, which no doubt he
is obliged to impart unto you, as to the Father of the Invention; and if I may
be so happy, as to be your Scholar, both in that which is your own, and what
is super-added by him, perhaps my Friends and I will not be altogether
unfruitful, at least we shall not be unmindful of you, but give some return of
what our Experiments may produce. But to do this we must be set in the way by
you; therefore give me leave to beg a full Description of your transparent
Hive, in the Parts and Dimensions thereof, and if you have any to spare (now
the season is past) and would send one up by the Carrier which comes from your
parts, I shall undertake to see it sent back again unto you without your cost.
If you have many Glasse-Hives, you will be the better able to gratify me
herein, but if you have none to spare, I shall rest satisfied with that, which
you shall be pleased to afford me with your convenience.

The Reason wherefore in the Glasse-Hives the Bees should double their Work,
and delight in their Grandeiur, I conceive, by what you write, is discernable,
but as yet I cannot reach it, till by your Experience and Sagacity the hint be
given me, that I may in due time by my self, or some Friends, make also a
trial thereof.

But have you yet been able to make any estimate of the quantity of Wax and
Honey, which they are able to give one year with another, seeing you speak a
very big word of 300000 lt. a year, which might accrue to the Nation from this
little Creature? I make no doubt, but you are able to make thy, out, although
it does, I confess, go beyond my reach, and to raise the Industry which may
be used toward the Commonwealth of Bees in this Nation, it would be a thing
worth your public disposition to give a Demonstration thereof; for I suppose
it will be grounded more upon the plenty, which your new Invention does yield,
then upon the ordinary way.

But happily your Experience to something also extraordinary concerning the
feeding as well as the Hiving of that industrious Creature, will give some
further addition. For no doubt there are certain Herbs which make them thrive
better than others, of all which, if at your convenient time you will be as
good as you^ lord, a good Flint to give fire at the first stroke, you will give
some of us cause here to rejoice in your light, and I dare promise by the grace
of God, your sparks will not fall in vain, but will find good tinder, at which
many candles may be lighted in due time.

You see how large and free I am, but your Ingenuity has provoked me, and I
aim at nothing, but what may be an advantage to the Public, and a matter of
credit and due respect to be yielded to your self, by,

From my house near Charing Cross over against Angel- Court, the 17. November,
1653. SIR, Your ever faithful, and most willing Friend to serve you, SAMUEL
HARTLIB.

An Extract of Mr. Mewe's Answer to Mr. Hartlib's Letter.
Worthy Sir,
THe knocks and calls of two such unknown Friends, as your self and Mr. Angelo,
coming with such choice Books, and so much candor, expressed in too many, and two
friendly Letters, were enough to make the sourest Hermit look out of his Cell,
especially if he spies the coasts clear without Swords and Pistols. The truth
is, I am but one of many my fellow Shepherds, that have taken Sanctuary in our
Cotts, ever since the Alarm was given us by the Anti-Pastoral Party, and being
likely to be stripped to the Bag and Bottle, you cannot blame us, if we whistle
away some of our sad and spare hours (whilst Shepherds are smitten, and Sheep
scattered) to observe Magnalia Dei in Minimis. Melancholy loosers will rather
play at small games than give over.

When I saw God make good his Threat ( Solvam Cingulae Regum) and break the
Reins of Government, I observed, that this pretty Bird (whereof you write) was
true to that Government, wherein God and Nature had set it to serve. Hereupon
my pleasure began to vie with my profit, and I was willing, for once, to yield
the stakes to my pleasure.

Briefly Sir, being sent for up amongst others of my Profession, to serve the
State, I left a Model of this innocent Phancie in past-board, which at my
return (by the care of my virtuous Wife, now with God) I found set up in the
midst of my Garden in plain Freestone; In this I placed an upper and lower
Hive, over them a Trygonal Dial, over that three Weather Glasses, over that a
Water-watch topt with a Weathercock: This placed in the stead of the Statue of
labor, which the Wind and Weather had brought from top to bottom, so that it
was obvious to my Fantasy, to conceit this to be the Hyerogliphick of their
Hyerarchy, whose labor was lost in their Grandeiur, and brought to that low
price, that any of their meanest quality might come up to it, and be taken at
his word, though he bid never so meanly.

I considered, that God gives us leave to make the most and best we can of
those Relics of his goodness, whereof we have baffled away the better part; as
those Travelers, that have benighted themselves by their frolic baitings,
make much of their diversified reflections of the Sun set in the Clouds, and
when they have almost lost his light, make pass-time with his colors.

This will excuse me (in case I fall short of that profit which you suspect I
make) that I begin and stand so long upon the pleasure, and shall now take
leave to surfeit you with my Honeysops, before ^light you out with my
Wax-tapers, and then as you like this, you may call again at my Hermitage.

Now what concerns the profit, you tell me of a big word I should let fall, of
300000 lib. per annum, which our Nation might make of them, if all of my
ability would undertake to keep as many as my self; one cipher mistaken may
much alter the sum; but grant it so as you have set it, cast it thus, I never
kept twenty Stalls, and usually take but half, yet do I value my Wax and Honey
worth twenty Nobles at the least; Now if he that is valued but as the tenth
part of a Parish, at most, can make so much, what may the rest? what may the
County? what the Nation?

Whereas you say, a place may be over stockt (granting Milldewes) I deny it.
Had we an hundred Hives for one, where there are store of Oaks and Maples, the
place cannot be over stored with Bees. So that if there were a Statute for
Parish Bees, as well as Parish Butts, and Parochial Appiaries designed for
those places, where observed best to thrive, I know not why a Parish may not
make as much Honey (as one Gentleman of Norfolk) viz. 300 li. de claro, as I
heard per annum.

As for your design of feeding them (as that Gentleman in Italy) I conceive it
here unfeaseable, or if it were it would not quit cost; I care not to feed
them, except to save them in spring time, and strengthen them for work: Herbs
and Flowers are but from hand to mouth, serve for Bee-bread: If Mill-dewes fall
not, Bees thrive not, for they are, with Gods blessing, the Antidote to that
Curse: As for your honest pity to that poor Creature (I shall try a Conclusion
this Summer which may save some few Stalls, but in saving (poor Stalls) we
damage them, and (in saving the rich) our selves; the middle sort are best for
store, and enough for those that are not covetous, with whom they seldom
thrive, because they over act their part in sparing, as careless persons in
their neglect of keeping them. I can and shall afford you what satisfaction you
please, in any useful question, that concerns the welfare of their
Commonwealth.

As for my transparent Hives, I have but two, which are not moveable, else you
should willingly have them, whither you returned them or not; they serve only
to give me an account of the daily income, and a diary of their Negotiations,
whereby if I spend half an hour after dinner or supper, I know what has been
done that day; can show my Friends the Queens Cells, and sometimes her person,
with her Retinue; she afforded me 14. quarts, or near upon, in one year, and if
the rest afford ten a piece I think it a fair gain: there is not an Hive to be
seen about my house, nor a child stung in a year: My Appiary consists of a row
of little houses, two stories high, two foot apart, which I find as cheap at
seven years end as straw hacles, and far more handsome: (where I have bay
windows I have a set of unseen Stalls) whose room is handcomly spared, and
their company very harmonious, especially for those that ^edge in their
Chambers, whether they would wake or sleep, in so much as I have heard some say
(that have there lodged) they would give twenty pound to have and here the like
at home; the pleasure takes some, the profit others. But if either take off
(and not take up) our hearts in minding the main, you and I may spare any
farther enquiry about them.

Thus have I stepped out of my way, to gratify you in the exchange of Ink and
Paper, and shall be ready so to do in things of weightier concernment than B
Bs. if you shall give the stroke, it is hard if my flint yield not some sparks:
all your Subjects are marvellously well pleasing to me, but above all, your
most Ingenious and Public Spirit makes me love and honor you; only I fear
your sweetness may be abused by some undertakers, that are apt to promise much
upon the score of hopes and fancies.

But you will say, I have done enough for once to weary you, and if I find I
have, I shall do so no more, but rest,

Easlington in Gloucestershire 20 th of December, 1653. Sir, your endeared
Friend, to serve you, WILL MEVVE.

A Letter, concerning that pleasant and profitable Invention of a Transparent
Bee-hive, written by that much accomplished, and very ingenious Gentleman,
Fellow of All-Soules College in Oxford, Mr. Christ. Wren, with the Figure and
Description of the said Transparent Bee-hive.
HONORED SIR,
YOu have by several hands intimated your Desires to me, of having a particular
Description of our three-storied-Bee-hive. I confess I was not over forward to
execute this command of yours; and my reason was, because the Devise not fully
answering our own expectation, I thought it would be much more unsatisfactory
to you: but since you please to persist in your desires, (as Mr. Rawlinson told
me the other day) I can be no longer shameless to persist in my incivility,
especially prompted by mine own Ambition, to find any way to show my self a
Servant to a Person so eminent amongst the Ingeniosi as your self.

The Description, I think, is evident enough in the Paper; I shall only tell
you what effects we find. Last May (as I remember) we put in two Swarms
together, leaving the places to go in, open only in the lowermost, but all
the passage holes open from Box to Box: in the middlemost they first began
their Combs, then in the lowermost, before they had filled the middlemost, and
so continued till they had filled both, which before they had quite finished,
they began to make two little Combs in the upper Box, (all this while
deserted) and continued besides, a part of a Comb of the middle story an inch
or two up into the upper box, filling almost the passage hole quite up, leaving
themselves only a little hole, as big as two fingers might go in, for their
passage up and down: I am not very certain, whether this was not done at first
when they wrought in the middle Box, and whether this was not the reason, why
they wrought so little in the upper Box, because they stopped themselves up
from an easy passage to it. The Combs in the lower stories were well
replenished with Honey, and suddenly, but these little Combs in the upper
they quite defert, contrary to our expectation, which was, that they would have
wrought most in the upper story, and the middlemost, in which, when they had
wrought enough for their own spending, that then we might take away the
uppermost from them, and so have continued still: but if we find another year,
that they fill not again the uppermost, it will be all one still to take away
the lowermost from them, but if that be so, then two Hives will be sufficient.
We must rather desire of you farther light in this business, which I presume
you can afford us, from other men's Observations, that have tried the like
Experiment, for as yet you see ours is imperfect, and we know not what to make
of it.

All-Soules Coll. Febr. 26. 1654. Sir, I am Your most obedient humble Servant,
CHRIST. WREN.

ab. ab. ab, 3 Octogonall Boxes exactly in all par,+ticulars of one shape and
size, c. a hole in the top, w.ch is the same in every Box. d. a Cover (the same
to every hole) turning upon a pin. e. f. a Wiar, w.ch pulls the Cover to close
it upon occasion, ggg. holes throug which the ends of the wiars ap,+pear, hhh.
the Doors, every one to be opened or shut by little sliders the lower doors are
open, the others shut, RK.K. the upper edges of every box, sloped away
convexedly, the bottomes are likewise sloped away concauely, that any one Box
may fit to any of the other two, m. A little Rey made to screw on the ends of
the wiars yt appear in the holes, by that means to close any of the holes,
In the sides behind oppo,+site to the sides hhh, are doors that open with
hinges and locks about 4 Inches one way and 6 the other^ and within each a
piece of clear glass clo,+^se semented to the inside of the Box, to look in
upon occasion,

Each box is lined with Rush matt,

It stands in a Case of stone that serves both as a Stock and a Covering to it.

Scale of (...) and Inchar.


Considerations upon the Letter from Oxford.
SIR,

Upon speech with Mr. Greatrix (according to your desires) I find, that the
substance of what he intimated to you the other day, upon the sight of your
Letter from Oxford, was no other than what truly my thoughts from my own
reason, and the sight of Dr. Brown's Essay upon the same subject, confirmed me
in: viz. that Bees, as they do naturally begin in the top of the Hive and work
downwards, so do they not like that that top should be more than one, or at
most two stories high. For as by the judgments of all that write of Bees, a
valley is counted the best kind of seat for them, to the intent, that when they
come heavy laden home (as they do often in a day) their journey may be a
descent, and consequently easy, so from the same reason ought the work within
the Hive to be so ordered, as to be upon as little ascent as may be, or rather
upon a descent. I mean, that it be so ordered, as that the Bees may go rather
down than upwards within their Hive. Upon this ground my opinion is, that one
Box is (at the beginning) sufficient, or but two at the most. When this one (if
but one be used at first) shall be filled, it would (the entrance into it being
first stopped, and the lower middle hole of it be left open) be set upon
another lower Box, and when this second Box shall be also filled, a third would
be set under the two first, and when the whole Body of the Bees is fully gone
down into the third or lowest Box, then (and not before) may the first or upper
Box be taken away; and after this manner may the upper Box still be taken away
from time to time, as often as the lower shall be filled, and a new empty one
put under. This I have gathered from such Books as I have met with, but that
which from my own private judgment I offer as a futher Addition is, that I
could wish that the lowest Box should be still so placed, as to hang down
through and below the planke or seat upon which Hives are ordinarily placed, so
as that the Bees, when they come heavy laden home, may go downwards into it.
When this lowest Hive is almost full (which might be discovered through windows
left for that purpose) than would another empty one be put into its place, and
the Box that is almost full so to be placed upon the empty one, as that the
Bees may enter by a hole in the lower part of it, and (when it is absolutely
full) go down into the lowest Box. And by this means the heavy laden Bees
(instead of carrying their loads three stories high, according to the Oxford
practice) do still work either downwards, or very little upwards. I will
conclude this Subject with an Observation concerning these little Creatures,
viz. that their King wears no sword, I mean, has no sting of their own, nor
any Ianizaries, nor other means of safety to themselves, than the loyalty of
their Subjects.

Some remarkable Observations, concerning the swarming of Bees; together with a
short Description of a Bee-hive made of Glass.
ALthough Experience tells us, that Bees do naturally love to hive in woods and
other places out of men's sight, and that chiefly at the time, when they send
forth their numerous Swarms like so many new Colonies; yet notwithstanding,
they may be brought so to part with that kind of wildness, as to give men leave
to observe them, and to admire Nature, whose pleasure it is, in this
contemptible sort of Insects, to make show of the great riches of her Treasury.
This is not hard to prove.

For it is known, that Bees, when they begin to swarm, and that the heat of the
Sun has drawn them out of their Hive, do fly about till their King (whom
Nature has wisely unarmed) does by his sitting down determine the place of
their Rendezvous, which they immediately take notice of, and all those huge
numbers of them (being from that time forwards to make their own fortunes, and
to be their own Purveyors) do pitch their Camp round about their King.
Presently after which, a certain kind of Bees, which are commonly called
Scouts, are sent out to discover places for them to hive; and till these Scouts
return, the whole Swarm sits still to refresh themselves, being weary with
flying at their first swarming. These Scouts at their return rush violently in
upon the Swarm, and carry away to the place which they have found, some part of
the Swarm, together with the King, on whom depends the unity, good fortune and
safety of them all.

In the Northern Countries, as Poland, Lithvania and Muscovie, men use to make
Hives for them on purpose in the Woods and where such are the Bees choose them,
but if they can find none such, then they hive in old, hollow and rotten trees,
and that for many years together, till the hollow place being filled with that
excellent liquor of Honey, they are forced to go to some other place. So that
many times those that fell wood do, when they little think of it, find in
hollow trees great store of Honey.

It is remarkable, that most Swarms, as soon as they come out, do rest
themselves in some place near to their old Hives, for two or three hours
together, in which time, unless they have Hives provided them, they forsake
their former Master, and betake themselves to the Woods and solitary places.
But if they have Hives provided for them, they submit themselves to the Owners
of those Hives, especially if their King (which is observeable) be shut into a
little den made on purpose, and be kept there for three or four days together.
In which time chiefly you may perceive a wonderful diligence in the Bees, and
that it may be the better seen by such as are curious, and admirers of Nature,
Industry has showed how to make Hives of Glass, which may be placed in
Gardens, and other convenient places, and even in Windows.

The manner whereof is this following.
Let great care be taken in the choice of the place; for Experience will show,
there lies much in that. It will be best for this purpose to choose a window
toward the Sunrising, for by this means, the Bees will have their industry
quickened, which from the very Sunrising will set them to work, they being
Creatures so intent upon their business: and besides, it will free the poor
weak things from many inconveniences. It will be otherwise, if you choose for
this purpose a place toward the West or North, for the light of the
rising-Sun, coming but late upon a place that is toward the West, will make
the Bees go late to work, and the North with its natural sharpness will weaken
and shrink up the tender bodies of those little Creatures, they delighting in
heat: so that the East and the South are for this purpose far better than the
other two quarters of the world.

Having so chosen the place, let there be made an Hive of about a yard high or
a little more, after this fashion. Fasten four little pillars of wood in two
boards, one on the top and the other at the bottom, and let the pillars be
answerable to the height of your window, and let that side of the Hive, which
is to be toward the air, be half a yard broad, and the other side, which is to
be toward your chamber, a quarter of a yard broad. In that side which is
toward the air, you are to leave a slit of about two fingers breadth, for the
Bees to fly in and out at, and in the middle of that slit you must put a cross
piece of wood, which must be very well fastened, that it slip not up and down,
and so crush the Honey-combes, but that it may the better bear the weight of
them. In the inner side of the Hive, you are to make doors about a quarter of a
yard broad, and well and strongly bolted, that the Bees may be kept from flying
into your chamber. Through these doors you are to put in your Swarm, and take
out your Honey. And for the space between the aforesaid pillars, you may have
it closed either with whole glass, or with smaller pieces leaded; or if you
will have the whole Hive of glass, the Glass-makers can make it for you, but
you must observe the Conditions before expressed.

Having thus prepared all things, you may place the Swarms where you intend to
have them in the Hive, and with delight behold their work, and in a kind of
rapture cry out, That the world is the great book of God, containing three
leaves, viz. Heaven, Earth and Sea, wherein there are so many characters of the
wisdom of God as there are Creatures.

A singular Observation concerning Bee-Hives and Buck-Wheat, in reference to
Bees, made by Mr. Thomas Babington in his Travels into Germany.
IN K^mpen-Land in Germany I have seen about forty great Bee-Hives, which
contain, when they are full, about seventy pound weight in Honey, placed near a
great field sown with Buck-Wheat, and it was related to me of a truth by the
Inhabitants, that the Bees did suck such ^lenty of Honey out of it, that in a
fortnights time the said Hives were all filled there with.

The said Buck-Wheat is a three square grain, which when it is ripe is made use
of for Pan-cakes, and to brew Beer, and excellent good to fatten Hogs with, and
in blowing time of singular use for Bees.

How to make good Greek, or other Wines out of Honey.
AS concerning the passage in my Letters concerning Honey, I cannot exactly
give you an account of it, till I see all the Discourse: Thus much I remember
and know by experience, that if pure Honey be gently boiled in pure water, and
well scummed, and afterward cooled, and then with barm or yest set to working,
as we usually do Beer or Ale, and then put into a larger vessel for a time, and
afterward drawn into pottles, that a liquor has, and may be made like
fountain water, yet of such a fine excellent taste, and so strong, that some,
who have thought themselves of very good pallats, have mistaken it for Greek
Wine.

And I question not, but Sugar will do the like, but whether I seem to speak of
any more ingenious clarifications, as with white of Eggs, with falt of Tartar,
or with other things, that Vintners use for their Wines, or whither I refer
them to Glauber, who in his Appendix speaks of some ingenious fermentations
and clarifications, I cannot certainly tell. But this I dare boldly say, that
if any Gentleman would try Experiments upon Honey, Sugar, yea, or any sweet
things, if the sweetness be not too flashy and watery, he shall find diverse
things both delightful and profitable.

I hope Glauber, who has promised diverse things in these kinds, and I suppose
is most able to accomplish them, will more clearly manifest them for the good
and comfort of our Northern Countries.

I desire to hear what other ingenious things are written of late. I think
these times very fruitful, and that the great Secrets, which have a long time
been hid, will shortly be manifested.

A Receipt to make a pure Mead that shall taste like Wine.
TAke one part of clarified Honey, and eight parts of rain Water, or other
clear Water, and boil them well together in a copper vessel, till half the
liquor be boiled away, but while it boiles, you must take off the scum very
clean, and when it has done boiling, and begins to cool, tun it up, and it
will work of it self. As soon as it has done working, you must stop the vessel
very close, and bury it under ground for three months, which will make it loose
both the smell and taste of the Honey and Wax, and will make it taste very like
Wine.

Another way to make a most pleasant and Wine-like Mead.
TAke of clarified Honey twenty pound, and of clear Water thirty two gallons,
mingle them well together, and boil that liquor half away, and take off the
scum very clean, when it has done boiling, and begins to cool, put it into a
vessel, where has been Rhenish wine before, and put to it four gallons of
Rhenish wine Must, and let it work; then stop the vessel very close, and bury
it under ground for two months together, at the end of which draw it off the
lees, and put it into another clean sweet vessel by it self, and it will be
very like Wine; and if you would have it of an aromatic taste, you may put
these following ingredients into the vessel at first, and let them work with
the liquor, viz. of flowers of Elder, Rosemary and Majoram, each one handful,
of Cinnamon two ounces, of Cloves six ounces, of Ginger, Pepper and Cardamome,
each two scruples, these will give the Mead a most pleasant taste.

The Commonwealth of Bees. Represented by Mr. Gerard Malynes, by way of a
digression in his great Book called Lex Mercatoria, or the Ancient Law-Merchant.
LEt us somewhat digress from Manufacture to Apifacture, and (with Solomon the
wise) send the ^luggard to imitate the painful and laborious Bees, for the
increase of Honey and Wax in England, Scotland and Ireland, and other of his
Majesty's Dominions: and let man's help succor this Apifacture, if it may be so
called, as follows.

The means to increase Honey and Wax, does properly consist in the
preservation of Bees, and the making of convenient Skepes or Bee-hives after a
new invention: Namely, you may make your Skepes either with Straw or Wicker of
Two sorts, and to be of two pieces, to take off at the crown, or near the midst
of the Hive; that when they have gathered and filled up their house, and that
the room is scant within, then take away the upper half, and clap on a board,
or the bottom, or head of a pitch Barrel, or tar barrel, or the like, having
pitch on it, casting Malt meal, or Bean meal upon the same; and then daube it
well with clay about the skirts, and setting on with your clay mixed with some
salt; and when you have thus done, then raise it up below with so many
wreythes, as you took above for the gelding of your Hives before, which is very
needful to make the greater plenty and increase: For making your Skepes in this
manner, the Honey may be taken at all times; but especially, when you do
perceive by the lifting up of your Skepes, that your Bees are well provided for
the Winters provision, and that there be plenty of food yet to gather, then cap
them. Take a strong wire, make it flat, and cut your combs in two, and then
have a parchment in readiness to follow the wire, to keep asunder the wax from
cleaving, laying on your board with pitch and meal, as aforesaid. This to be
done in Summer.

Preservation of Bees for the Climate of Great Britain, etc.
1. IN March your Bees do begin to breed, and then they begin to sit, let them
at that time be served twice every week, because:

2. In April your Bees begin to hatch, serve them in hard and rugged weather,
whereby they are hindered to be abroad.

3. In May your Be coming forth, look to serve them until Mid- May.

4. In June are your Bees in their strength for casting, and then there is
great plenty of Flowers and Dews to feed upon.

5. In July they are full of Honey, therefore cap your first swarms, and take
up the rest for Honey that you mean to take up for that year, and cap as
follows.

6. In August is the most breed of Bees past, and you may cap likewise those
you mean to keep over the year; I mean your old Stocks, for then they may
forbear it.

7. In September the gathering of Bees is past; stop close, and if there be any
that is not capable, leave them and stop close with clay and salt, and daube
below with Cow Dung, as the manner is.

8. In October begin to look whether robbers have spoiled any or not; if it be
so that they have, take away your Bees as in Honey time, and set up your Skepes
with the combs whole, to be used as hereafter follows.

9. In November stop up all holes, let none pass in or out; but if they prove
weak, then take away your Bees from the combs, and keep them for the second and
third swarms after.

10. In December house your Bees, if they stand cold: and in the North house
all.

11. In January turn up your Bees, and throw in Wort, and Water, and Honey
twice or thrice, but let your water be warm.

12. In February set forth and serve all them that stand in need, with wort and
honey, or honey and water, so it be warm; and then in March look for their
breeding, as is before declared

No corrupt combs to be left, but the bad are to be taken forth in the Spring
time (being in feeding) and when you have thrown in one pint of warm wort, and
that they are struggling with the clamminess of the wort; then may you very
well take from them any thing that does annoy them; which manner of dressing
you may observe for many years during your Skepe, so long as they stand to
work new again.

Necessary observations concerning the Premises.
FRom the middle of April, until the midst of May, look diligently to thy
Bees; for then are they near beginning to hatch, and do stand in need of most
help, especially if the Spring be cold, and the wind holding any part of the
North or East; whereby the tender buds or blossoms do perish, and the Bees are
driven to the blossoms of Apple Trees, which is their utter overthrow and
decay.

Helps for weak Bees at all times.
TAke Water and Honey mixed together made luke warm, and throw it amongst the
combs, to the quantity of a pint at a time: or strong wort new run; or
unboiled wort also lukewarm, and the same two or three times at the most; and
this for the first Swarm.

For the second and third Swarm must be given in their Hives, to preserve that
which they have gathered: Take Mulce, which is eight times so much water as
honey, boiled to a quart or three pints; set the same with dishes in their
shepes, laying a few straws in the dish to keep them from drowning. Wort and
Figs boiled will serve also.

The Smoke (as it were the Tobacco of Bees) wherein they delight, is Cows or
Oxen dung, sophisticated with sweet wort; and the marrow of the Ox or Cow,
being well dried: take the Sheep (which is diseased) and set it in a meal
skiffe or riddle, and then kindle a little fire with your Cows dung, and set
them over the smoke of the fire, and so smoke them by fits, scarce so long at
every time as you can tell ten, and beware not to use this smoking too often,
but as necessity requires, and in gentle manner.

The necessary use of Honey and Wax, made me to observe the premises, wishing,
That in all Parishes of Great Britain and Ireland, all the Parsons and Vicars
in Country Towns and Villages, were enjoined to keep Bees for their own
benefit, and the general good, which they may do conveniently in the
Churchyards, and other places of their Gardens, and some of their children or
scholars may attend the same.

The multiplying of Bees is easy without destroying them, and creation of them
is known to many, proceeding of the corruption of a Heyfar, the flesh whereof
is fit to engender Bees, as the flesh of Horses for Wasps, or that of Man for
Lice. And to abbreviate, I do refer the desirous Reader hereof to Mr. Hill his
book of Husbandry, where he speaks of Bees, with the commodity of Honey and
Wax, and of their uses and several profits, collected out of the best learned
Writers, as Plinius, Albertus, Varro, Columella, Palladius, Aristotle,
Theophrastus, Cardanus, Guilielmus de Conchis, Agrippa, and others.

THE REFORMED VIRGINIAN SILKWORM, Or, a Rare and New DISCOVERY OF A speedy
way, and easy means, found out by a young Lady in England she having made full
proof thereof in May, Anno 1652.

For the feeding of Silkworms in the Woods, on the Mulberry-Tree-leaves in
Virginia: Who after forty days time, present their most rich golden-coloured
silken Fleece, to the instant wonderful enriching of all the Planters there,
requiring from them neither cost, labor, or hindrance in any of their other
emploiments whatsoever.

And also to the good hopes, that the Indians, seeing and finding that there is
neither Art, Skill, or Pains in the thing: they will readily set upon it, being
by the benefit thereof enabled to buy of the English (in way of Truck for their
Silk-bottoms) all those things that they most desire.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, for Giles Calvert at the Black-Spread-Eagle
at the West end of Paul's, 1655.

TO THE Reader.
Ingenious Reader,
I Have in my Legacy of Husbandry bequeathed something unto thee concerning
Silkworms, which has wakened many to search after the means to advance that
part of Husbandry. But because the Letter of King James to the Lords
Lievtenants of the several Shires of England, for the increasing of Mulberry
Trees, and the breeding of Silkworms, for the making of Silk in this Nation,
had not annexed unto them in that Treatise the Instructions tending to that
purpose, and being but few, wholly out of print, and very much desired: I
thought good upon the occasion of the printing of this Letter to those of
Virginia, to publish it also for the benefit of those who shall be willing to
employ themselves in this way of industry, which seems to be brought unto a
more perfect and speedy accomplishment than heretofore has been known either
here or in France, as by the contents of this adjoined Letter (wherein the
Experiment of a virtuous Lady of this Nation for the breeding of Silkworms, is
addressed unto the Planters of Virginia) is set forth to encourage both them
and others to set upon this work, to benefit themselves and the Nation thereby.
And truly the Gentleman who does address this Letter to the Planters of the
Virginian Colonie is much to be commended for his affection to the public,
because he does not conceal (as some Muck-worms do for private ends) the
Advantages which may be reaped by singular industrious Attempts or experiments
of profit; but desires the benefit of others, even of all, to be increased. And
it were to be wished, that every one to whom God (from whom comes every good
and perfect gift) does impart any rare and profitable Secret of Industry, would
open himself toward his Brethren, as this publick-hearted Gentleman does;
then would all hands be set a work, and every one would become isntrumental to
serve himself and his Neighbors in Love, and overcome the burden of
poverty, which for want of employment and decay of Trade, does lie so heavy
upon very many, whose burdens might be either born, or made easy, if all the
gifts of God were made use of, for the end for which he does bestow them,
namely, to profit withal toward others, as it becomes the Members of the
same Christian, and Human, and National Society; for the same rule holds in
all these respects among such as understand what it is to be a good
Commonwealths-man in the State, as well as in the Communion of Saints: And to
this good and generous inclination, which I wish may more and more abound in
them with the grace of God, I shall leave thee and rest,

Thy most assured and faithful servant, SAMUEL HARTLIB.

Instructions for the increase and Planting of Mulberry-trees.
What ground is fit for the Mulberry-seeds, how the same is to be ordered, and
in what sort the seeds are to be sowed therein.
THe ground which ought to be appointed for this purpose, besides the natural
goodness of it, must be reasonably well dunged, and withal so situated, as
that the heat of the Sun may cherish it, and the nipping blasts of either the
North wind or the East, may not annoy it: The choice thereof thus made; that
the seeds may the better prosper, and come up after they be sown, you shall dig
it two foot deep, breaking the clods as small as may be, and afterward you
shall divide the same into several Beds of not above five foot in breadth, so
that you shall not need to endanger the Plants by treading upon them, when
either you water or weed them.

The Mulberry seeds you shall lay in water for the space of 22 hours, and after
that you shall dry them again half dry, or some what more, that when you sow
them they may not cleave together: Thus done, you must cast them upon the
foresaid Beds, not altogether so thick as you use to do other garden Seed, and
then cover them with some fine earth (past through a Si^e) about half an inch
thick. In dry weather you shall water them every two days at the farthest, as
likewise the plants that shall come of them; and keep them as clean from weeds
as possibly you can.

The time in which you ought to sow them for your best advantage, is either in
March, April, or May, when frosts are either altogether past, or at the least
not so sharp, or of so long continuance, as to endanger their upspring.

There is yet another way to sow them, and that is as follows: you shall
(being directed by a strait line) make certain furrows in the Beds above
mentioned, of some four fingers deep, and about a foot in distance the one from
the other: After this, you shall open the earth with your hands, on either side
of the aforesaid furrows, some two fingers from the bottom, and where you have
so opened it, shall you sow your seeds; and then cover them half a finger thick
with the earth which before you opened.

When the Plants that are sprung up of the Seeds, are to be removed, and how
they are to be planted the first time.
IN the months of September, October, November, December, March, or April the
next year after the Seeds are sown, you may remove their plants, (or in the
month of January, if it be not in frosty weather) and set them in the like
Beds as before, and about one foot the one from the other, but first you must
cut off their roots about eight inches in length, and their tops about half a
foot above their roots, more or less, according to the strength of the said
plaints, for the weaker they be the less tops you shall leave them. In this
sort you may suffer them to remain weeding and watering them (as need shall
require) till they be grown six foot in length above their roots, whereunto
when once they have attained, you may cut their tops, and suffer them to
spread, always having a care to take away the many branches or succors, that
may any way hinder their growth until they be come to their full length of six
foot, as aforesaid.

When, and how the Plants are to be removed the second time, and in what manner
they are to be planted where they shall remain.
IN the months aforesaid, (according as your plants are waxen strong) you may
remove them either into the hedges of your fields, or into any other grounds.
If in hedges, you must set them 16 foot the one from the other: if in other
ground, intending to make a Wood of them 18 foot at the least. But a month
before you do remove them, you must make the holes (wherein you purpose to set
them) about four foot in breadth, and so deep as that their roots may be well
covered, and some half a foot of loose earth left under them, having always a
special care so to place them, that they may receive the benefit of the Sun,
and not to be shadowed or overspread by any neighboring trees.

When and how the Eggs of the Silk-wormes are to be hatched, and how to order
the Worms that shall come of them.
WHen the leaves of Mulberry-trees begin a little to bud forth, take the eggs of
your Silkworms, and lay them in a piece of Say, or such like stuff, and in the
day time carry them in some warm place about you, in a little safe box, but in
the night either lay them in your bed or between two warm pillows, until such
time as the Worms begin to come forth: then take a piece of paper of the
wideness of the said box, and having cut it full of small holes, lay it within
the same upon the eggs, and upon that again some few Mulbery-leaves, to which
the Worms as they are hatched, will continually come. These leaves with the
Worms upon them, you must still remove into other boxes, laying fresh leaves
as well on those that are removed as on the paper where the eggs are; and this
is the course which must be duly kept and observed, until such times as all
the Worms be come forth of their shells, still keeping their boxes warm, as
aforesaid; but no longer about you, but until the Worms begin to come forth,
out of which boxes you may safely take them, when once they have past their
second sickness, and feed them upon shelves of two foot in breadth, and 18
inches one above the other.

The said shelves are not to be placed in any ground-room, nor yet next unto
the tiles, but in some middle room of your house which opens upon the North
and South, that you may the more conveniently give them either heat or air,
according as the time and season shall require. Besides you must not make them
close unto the Walls, but so as you may pass about them the better to look unto
the Worms, and keep them from Rats and Mice, which otherwise might devour
them. You must observe the times of their coming forth, and keep every one,
one or two days hatching by themselves, that you may the better understand
their several sicknesses or sleepings, which are four in the time of their
feeding. The first commonly some twelve days after they are hatched, and from
that time at the end of every eight days, according to the weather, and their
good or ill usage, during which time of every sickness, which lasts two or
three days, you must feed them but very little, as only to relieve such of
them, as shall have past their sickness before the rest, and those that shall
not fall into their sickness so soon.

The whole time that the Worms do feed, is about nine Weeks, whereof until
they come unto their first sickness, give them young Mu^bery-leaves twice
every day, but few at a time; from thence until their second sickness, twice
every day in greater quantity; and so from their second to their third
sickness, increasing the quantity of the leaves, according as you perceive the
Worms to grow in strength, and clear of sickness: from the third until their
fourth sickness, you may give them leaves thrice every day, and the fourth
being past, you may let them have so many as they will eat, always having a
care that you give them none, but such as are dry, and well aired upon a Table
or cloth, before they be laid upon them, and withal gathered so near as may
be; at such times as either the Sun or Wind has cleared them of the dew that
falls upon them.

For the feeding of Worms you need observe no other order then this, lay the
Mulberry-leaves upon them, and every two or three days remove them, and make
clean their boxes, or shelves, unless in times of their sickness, for then
they are not to be touched; the leaves which you take from them when you give
them fresh to feed upon, you must lay in some convenient place, and upon them a
few new leaves, to which the Worms that lay hidden in the old, will come, and
then you may pass them with the said new lea^es to the rest of the worms: And
now lest any thing should be omitted, which serves to perfect the discovery of
so excellent a benefit, I will advise you to be very diligent in keeping clean
their Boxes, or shelves, as being a special means whereby to preserve them;
wherefore when you intend to do it, you shall remove them together with the
uppermost leaves whereon they lie, unto other boxes or shelves, for with your
hands you may not touch them, till they have thoroughly undergone their third
sickness, and then may you pass them gently with clean hands, without doing
them any harm: provided that the party that comes near them smell not of
Garlic, Onions, or the like. The first five weeks of their age you must be
very careful to keep them warm, and in time of rain or cold weather, to set in
the room where they remain, a pan with coals, burning in it now and then some
Juniper, Benjamin, and such like, that yields sweet smells. But afterward
unless in time of extraordinary cold, give them air, and take heed of keeping
them too hot, being always mindful to store the room with herbs and flowers
which are delightful and pleasing to the smell. As the worms increase in
bigness, you shall disperse them abroad upon more boards, or shelvs, and not
suffer them to lie too thick together: and if you find any of them broken, or
of a yellow glistering color inclining to sickness, cast them away, lest they
infect the rest, and sort such as are not sick, the greatest and strongest by
themselves, for so the lesser will prosper the better.

When and how to make fit rooms for the worms to work their bottoms of silk in,
and in what sort the said bottoms are to be used.
AS soon as by the clear amber-coloured bodies of your worms, you shall
perceive them ready to give their silk, you must (with heath made very clean,
or with the branches of Rosmary, the stalks of Lavender, or such lik) make
Arches between the foresaid shelves.

Upon the branches and sprigs whereof, the worms will fasten themselves, and
make their bottoms, which in fourteen days after the worm begins to work
them, you may take away; and those which you are minded to use, for the best
silk, you must either presently wind, or kill the worms which are within them,
by laying the said bottoms two or three days in the Sun or in some Oven after
the bread baked therein is taken out, and the fierceness of the heat is alaid.
The other bottomes which you intend to keep for seed, you must lay in some
convenient warm place, until the worms come forth, which is commonly some
sixteen or twenty days from the beginning of their work: and as they do come
forth you must put them together upon some piece of old Say, Grogeran, the
backsid^ of old Velvet, or the like, made fast against some Wall, or Hangings
in your house.

There they will engender, and the Male having spent himself, falls down,
and in short time after dies, as also does the Female when she has laid her
eggs, which eggs, when you perceive them upon the Say or Grogran, etc. to be
of a grayish color, you may take them off gently with a knife, and having put
them into a piece of Say or such like, keep them in a covered box amongst your
woollen clothes, or the like till the year following: But not in any moist
room, for it is hurtful for them, neither where there is too much heat, least
the worms should be hatched before you can have any food for them.

The making of a Wheel, as likewise the way to wind the said silk from the
bottoms, can hardly be set down so plainly, as to be rightly understood:
Wherefore when time shall serve, there shall be sent into every County of this
Kingdom, a Wheel ready made, and a man that shall instruct all such as are
desirous to learn the use thereof: Till when, I will commend these brief
instructions to be carefully considered of all such as are willing to benefit
either themselves or their Country, that being skillful in the Contemplation,
they may the readier, and with less error apply themselves to Action, which
painful industry, with Gods assistance, will quickly perfect.

An Extract of a Letter from Germany, concerning Silkworms, written to S.H,
Esquire.
AS for keeping of Silkworms I must confess I have spent likewise some time in
the ordering and observing of them inasmuch as this very year (1653) I have
had from them so much good Silk (and equal to that which is brought either out
of Persia or Italy) as have made me two pair of Stockings. And I have found
by experience that they may be kept as well in Germany as in other Countries,
and that Mulberry-trees will grow in abundance upon our Lands; wherefore I have
often wished that the Emperor (of Germany) would follow the most laudable
example of the K. of France, who having forbidden the importation of foraigne
Silk into his Kingdom has thereby so much obliged the industry of the People
of France, that they are come to a great perfection in this Silken Manufacture.
But concerning the Experiments of making Silk out of Nettles or out of Flax, I
never have tried either of them. Only I remember that I have seen once a very
fine and delicate yarne or thread, which was made purely out of Nettels. I do
not believe that those Artist of Hamburg and Wolfenbuttel which you have named
unto me in your Letter, will communicate their Skill for a public good, as
long as they can get their own comfortable subsistence by it.

A Letter written by Mr. Ra. Austen, from Oxford, Febr. 18. 1654. Imparting his
Experiments about Silkworms and how to wind off the Silk from the Bottoms,
when the Worms have done spinning?
COncerning my experiences about Silkworms, I only say thus much. That I am
fully satisfied upon good and sure grounds that the keeping of them (store of
them) in these parts would be of very great profit, could we but get Mulbery
leaves sufficient to feed them. For upon my own knowledge and experience (last
year) upon some thousands of them, I see what might be by more. For my great
doubt and question was satisfied about the winding of the Si^ke from the
Bottoms, when the Worms have done spinning. I plainly see it is very easy,
Children of 6. or 7. years old can apprehend it, and do it. For the Worms
having done spinning, which is within 4. or 5. days of their beginning,
through out-most silk is ravelled off, and the end is found immediately, which
runs on (5. or 10. or 16. or more bottoms together) in a basin of water, a
little gum drag mixed. Some Bottoms (if the Worms were strong and well fed) run
without breaking, scarce once or twice till all be off, and such as break, are
quickly found again. The truth is, if the Worms are scanted of leaves, their
silk is so small, that it holds not so well as that of lusty Worms. I saw many
brave Skains of Silk wound off the last year, and helped to do part of it my
self. Now the great matter is, How to propagate Mulberry-trees enough. As for
the ordinary way, by boughs, we can have but few that way. I am from time to
time experimenting other ways by Seed, Inoculating, Grafting, etc: what will
be the result, as yet I know not: I doubt not, but God will in his good time
bring to light and set on foot many good and worthy designs, more then are in
these Nations. We had need to labor to be of the like Principles of that
worthy person, whose Paper you enclosed, patiently and humbly to wait the
Lords season, and to design for God in all we go about, which will crown our
endeavors with comfort and success.

A Rare and new-discovered speedy way, and easy means of keeping of
Silkworms, being thus made known to the Colony in VIRGINIA.
HEarken well you beloved Planters, to what in these few lines I shall declare
unto you; and is thus sent you in Print, that all of you may communicate the
great and superlative good and benefit will be unto every one of you: who so is
wise, will ponder these things, and give the prai^e and glory to God, the
Author of all good Inventions, how Providence having brought this to pass for
^ll your exceeding great happine^s and increase of store of wealth, with so
much ea^e, so little labor, no cost unto you; and in so short a time as forty
days, this wealth flows in upon you.

You know I conceive desire to know it, and I am as wil^ing to impart it unto
you: thus then in brief, in a plain manner, that all may understand it,

The same Lady, who last year sent you her Books of Health and Wealth, The way
to speedy wealth was by some hundreds ^ you to remov^ some 60 mile^ miles South
by land, an^ to attempt the discovery of the Westerly Sea, on the border of
Vir^gin^a, and both two ve^^ easily a^chie^ved, etc.
(who has the happiness to bear the honorable name of your incomparable
Country) continuing her sincere affections to the advancing of your welfares
in all kinds; and amongst the rest in this rich work of Silk, knowing Virginia
to be in all respects most proper for it, (as by a late Book en^ you^ published
by Mr. Williams,) not only in regard of the Climate being the same with China,
from whence the infinite quantity of silk comes, but abounding (as it does)
with Mulberry-trees naturally growing there, and exceeding it by the
Silkworm-bottoms found in her Woods. She has I say this Spring found out (by
the special blessing of God upon her intentions) so rare, so speedy, and so
costless a way and means for the feeding of Silkwormes; The lady hat^ of these
Sil^ bottoms in h^^ Cabinet as Jewels to co^^vince the i^^credulous, they are
ten times bigg^ then any in Europe to a^^miration, a^^ of infinite
i^^couragemen^ to the work.
by the trial and experiment she so luckily made, to the admiration of all
that have seen or heard of it, as a thing scarce credible; because not
heretofore thought of, nay, as it were, held impossible by such Authors as
have written of the ordering and feeding of Silkworms: that this her invention
being thus made known unto you, her beloved friends in Virginia, she is most
confident, and assures herself you will all there instantly without further
delay (which will be the joy of her heart) become great and rich Masters of
this noble^ Silk-work to all your unspeakable wealth.

Do but as she has done; follow but with good courage your cheerful leader,
and doubtless you shall find (what she desires you may,) namely, Great profit
and pleasure in an honest employment. This Silken-Mine will be to you of more
benefit then a Mine of silver.

In the beginning of May last 1652, Contrary ^^ Book Rule.
when her young Mulberry-tree in her Garden began to put out its buds, then her
Silkworm-eggs began to hatch, as the nature of this wise creature is, These
eggs were purposely e^posed to ^^re, cold, w^nds, and ^ost, being aid and
spaw^ed on a wall ^^ a chamber, and there re^ained all ^^nter long to ^^y the
virtue ^f the Eggs, ^c. And twice before they ^^me out of ^^eir bottoms, ^^x
times in ^^^.
when her food begins once to appear, she comes forth of her shell: she
presently laying a Mulberry-leafe upon these little crawling creatures, they
came all upon it instantly; then she carried the leaf and them upon it to the
tree, upon whose leaves they made have to be; and there they day and night fed
themselves, creeping from leaf to leaf, and branch to branch at their own
liberties most pleasing to themselves; they grew and thrived wonderfully, and
surpassed in largness of body those other worms she kept in her chamber (she
having been many a year a Mistress of Silkworms, and kept them by the
Book-rules) this good and prosperous beginning heightened her hopes. The
worms, as their nature is, cast off or slipped out of their skins four
several times, still growing greater and greater to the singular delight and
content of their Mistress. About 45 days thus feeding upon the leaves, they
began that rare and glorious work of spinning their Silk-bottomes upon the
leaves and branches of the tree; such a gallant sight to behold, ^he seventh,
^^ey appear, ^hen come ^^t, a gallant ^^ken white^^nged Fly,
it ravished the Spectators, and their Mistress joy was crowned with excess of
happiness herein and hereby, apparently finding the incomparable felicity this
would prove to her dearly beloved Virginia, (for so you must give her leave to
call it,) for she concluded, and so must all you, that this being thus effected
in England, ^ weather it ^ms hurts ^m there; in heat and as they ^lter them^es
under great ^^es as with ^^eld, but ^ther do ^m them, ^ easy is a ^asse cove^^
reared o^ the trees ^ave them ^ either of ^.
how much more with assured confidence will the worms live, feed, and spin in
Virginia? she upon serious and due consideration of this thing, gave God hearty
and humble thanks.

And what can any of you now wish, for more encouragement? the full proof is
made, the work (or rather let me call it) the pleasure is effected with so much
ease, so little cost, hazard or pains, as all may admire it.

It Is not the hundredth part of your care, labor, or toil you take about your
Tobacco, and an hundred times (as I may say) all things put together more gain
and profit to you then you make by Tobacco, which in truth is but smoke and
vapor, but this a reall-royall-solid-rich-staple Commodity.

And yet if you will have still smoke, so this neither will nor can hinder your
labor in that, or take from you any other employment you have a mind unto.

Consider, consider I pray you (beloved friends) your incomparable happiness in
this thing, and bless God for it. Surely I should much wrong your judgments
and patience if I should spend any more arguments to persuade you to this so
great benefit to you, and should be like to him that to manifest the clear
Sunshine at noonday, brought in a candle.

In a word, there is nothing is or can be wanting but your true thankfulness to
God for completing this happy invention, and your present speedy putting it in
practice.

Yet give me leave; before I bid you adien, to add the incomparable joy this
Lady has, who is confidently persuaded (her daily prayers are to God for it)
that this new invented way of thus keeping Silkworms on the Trees; it requiring
neither skill nor pains, (this last being the only Remora, in the Savages
nature, which witholds them from attempting any thing of labor) that when the
Indians shall behold and see you begin the business, they will with all
alacrity set upon it likewise, and imitate you. And that you to encourage them
(as well you may) do agree with them, that for every pound-weight of
Silk-bottoms they bring unto you, you give them (as well it deserves) 5 shil.
worth in any Commodities they desire.

And thus by the blessing of Almighty God, there may be good hope of their
civilizing and conversion; so that they may be likewise great gainers both in
body and soul by this thing. And if this prove so, (Gods mercies and works
being far beyond our capacities) how much then indeed will Virginia's happiness
be every way raised to the height of Bliss. The promise being made, That they
that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn
many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever; which the God of
wisdom and power grant to you all in Virginia, and so, Lord, prosper this work
in their hands, Lord, prosper their handiwork; good luck I wish you all in the
name of the Lord, Amen, Amen, Amen.

Memorandum; that you take notice, that the Birds will eat up the Silkworms on
the trees, so that care must be had (and it is easily prevented by several
ways and means, as you will devi^e) to scare away the birds; if all fail, a
boy may be set that may affright them them al away with some noise, or by nets
encompa^sing the trees, and the birds will also carry the Silk-bottoms off the
trees, if they be let there remain; but that's soon pre^ented, by taking them
speedily away. And this of the birds is the chief reason, that Virginia abounds
not with plenty of the natural wild Silkworms, they devouring most of them:
and it is a wonder how any at all escape them, but that God preser^es some few
of the race, that his power and wisdom may be seen, and the aptness of the
Country to invite you to the work.

For their Bot^om being ten ^imes bigger ^hen ours, that mighty ^reat Worms
^ust they be, and what in^ouragement ^^ this to the ^usinesse, and ^ow much
^ore silk they ^ake then ^^rs, etc.
It will be good for you to encourage the Savages, when they find any bottoms
in the woods, to bring them to you, that you may get of the race, and seed to
increase it. Some say, the original Silkworm is produced by the corruption of
the old Mu^berry-tree and leaves, by the Sun and moisture. But that none of
you may want a stock to begin your Silk-work, the Lady aforesaid has sent you
store of Silkworm-eggs to be distributed amongst you: and if you begin but with
an 100 eggs this year, they will next year be above 1000; for one female
Silk-fly will lay 3, 4, 500 at a time, all things more and more concurring to
your encouragement.

Now the two Propositions that tend to infinite welfare, benefit, and
wonderful advantage both to England and the Colony jointly, are those that
follow, they which upon no terms are to be omitted to be published and effected.

First, that with all speed some kind of Coin be sent to Virginia, Till you
can ^et and gain ^^e Egg and ^^ed of your ^^turall gal^nt large Silk ^orm:
which ^ chiefly that ^^u must en^^vout to store ^ur selves ^^th, no Eggs
^mparable to ^. etc.
that may be authorized to pass there for their Commerce and better trading.
But whether all silver somewhat valued above its worth, or part silver and part
copper, is left to the wi^e judgments in that case. But of this confidently be
assured, that without some kind of coin or other, that Colony can no way
prosper or thrive, nor any staple-commodities be set up, or Artificers in any
kind follow their professions: for Tobacco being now their money, and that
with which all Commerce is driven^, and paiments made in, and passes from man
to man; all men are set upon that thing with the neglect of all other rich and
solid innumerable Commodities that are in that land to be had: and till this
remedy of Coin be applied, there can be no prosperity in that Colony. Were not
the thing as apparent to all men's understandings as light is from darkness; I
should allege many reasons for it, but it is so needless to spend time about
it, as it might well be thought a great absurdity. What then remains? but that
some public spirited Patriot that would immortalize his name and honor in
the procuring of this so necessary a thing to be speedily effected, wherein
also as the general good he shall do, so the benefit will be ever great to
those that shall undertake the carrying over this Coin; be it what it will be,
all men know it so well what the gain will be, as there is no need to name it in
particular manner, they cannot wish for more profit then that will be to the
undertakers, and the Colony will with all their hearts be content with it, and
esteem them happy and thrice happy Benefactours.

The second thing is, that a Publication be procured and sent to the Colony in
Virginia, declaring unto them, that there shall be liberty for all men to bring
from thence for the space of ten years to come, any commodity that they shall
there raise, into England, Custom and Excize free, (Tobacco only excepted,
which may pay double Custom, if so thought fit:) and further that to what
value of money such commodities shall be sold for here in England, (being rated
at the Custom House at their entry;) it shall be lawful to carry out to
Virginia any Commodities again to the same proportion and worth, Custom and
Excize free.

These two reasonable things granted; as they shall infinitily with all speed
advance the Plantation, so shall they (all things duly weighed in the scale of
prudence) be no less beneficial to England, as all men that have their eyes
in their heads, and English hearts in their bodies, see and apparently know,
nothing more sure and certain; and all stable and needful Commodities brought
out of all-liberall- Virginia into England at a very reasonable rate and price,
much cheaper then now we have them, and are fain to fetch them with great
hazard from doubtful friends, or Heathen Nations, to their great enriching and
our own impoverishing, as to all knowing men is most apparent; we shall be free
from the usurpation of foreign Princes and States in our Estates, Lives,
Liberties and shipping^ and we may conclude boldly and rejoycingly, that
Providence has provided this all-sufficient Country of Virginia against these
times, Sir Francis Drake was An. 1577 in a Westerly Sea one the back of
Virginia, in 37 degrees in opposite to the head of James Town in Virginia and
he sailed from that Country which he called Nova Albion, in an open Sea to the
Molocos and China, and so that also this way a trade may be made to those
places to the back of Virginia, etc.
and to these intents, that hence we may have all we want from our own
brethren, our Navy there increased to what number we please; for this
incomparable^ land affords naturally all whate^^e belongs to the building and
rigging of a Navy in all complete manner from top to toe, as may be said; and
by a safe, a sure, certain, ease, near at hand westerly disco^ery, (part by
land, and part by Rivers and Seas) contract all the riches of the South Sea,
the Molocos, Philipines, China, etc. by 3000 leagues nearer to us, without
molestation by any Prince or Pirat, and shall not need at all to be troubled,
if Rushia, Poland, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Germany, yea France^ Spain, Italy,
Constantinople were removed 5000 times more distant from us: for in one word,
what ever these Countries afford, either necessary or superfluous,
all-sufficient Virginia within its limits will produce unto us. And shall there
not I say then now be found a zealous Patriot, that will stand up for his
Country, and procure these things to be done out of hand? Now God forbid; I
commit the business to God, having done what I conceive my part is, who only
have good wishes, and daily prayers to attend this enterprise, which God
prosper, Amen.

POSTSCRIPT.
At a friends importunity, (the former part sent to the Press) I am thus
enforced to make this Addition, and upon the great hopes that upon trial it
will be found, that you may have two Silk-harvests in one six months time; of
the eggs a second brood may be hatched in June, and so fed by Mulberry-leaves,
though then it may be it must be in an house, that then for the promoting of
such a good design nothing of encouragement may be wanting, not any
obstructions in the business, under pretense of wanting needful housing for
to feed the worms in. Thus much I will assure you,

That the slightest and simplest kind of housing or coverture (though the
books are too superstitions and ceremonious in the rules which are many that
they give concerning the ordering of the worm, which are not so necessary as
they pretend;) I assure you, you will abundantly content and satisfy this,
though noble; yet most humble creature, even with any habitation to do her work
in. And to this intent I now declare unto you, (that all excuse may be taken
from you) that the poor simple people in Italy, Spain, Languedo^k^ Pr^vence,
etc. do keep and feed their Silkworms in the same low earthen-floored Rooms,
wherein themselves lodge and do all their houshould-affairs, feeding them on
shelves and on tables, giving them leaves without any more curiosity, and they
thrive and prosper with them as well as in the greatest Cities and stately
chambers of the greatest rich men's Palaces.

And that in Sicilie and Calabria, Sicily.
the common Silk-Masters there do at time of year in the Spring, set up only
slight boarded houses in the fields round about the Mulberry groves, and
placing shelves in the inside of them, two foot one above the other to the
roof, and a table all a long the mid of the room, they strowing their leaves on
these shelves and table, there feed their worms, and there they spin in the
room their Master lies for the space of five or six weeks time; The great ga^
of the Silkworks in a house, how much more i^ the trees, will it be to you. The
simplest and slightest houses or cove^tures will be sufficient for the Wor^ to
feed in, a^ live and sp^n let no man doubt it, etc
and they have abundance of silk without more ^do; and a man and a boy will
tend all the worms that come of six ounces of eggs, and those worms will spin
60 pound-weight of silk, and that but at 20 shil. the pound, is worth 60 ls. in
ready money, a sufficient gain to allure a man to the work I tro; but the gain
by the natural worm multiplying will far exceed it. And I may not forget
yet more all at the Persian manner is to pitch up only tents of Canvas, and
Booths round their Mulberry-woods, and there-under they strew the Mulberry-tree
leaves on the ground^ there their worms feed and live and spin, and do well in
all kinds, the Persians living also the time of fi^e weeks in the tents. Thus
all these examples do manifestly prove unto you, that very simple and slight
housing and (...) will content the Silkworms, and they will (...) well in
them. And thus you see that very poor and slight houses in Virginia will do the
deed. Nay rest assured that the very Savages houses built but with Poles
Arbor-wi^e, and covered top and sides with mats, will be abundantly
satisfactory to the worms, and they will thrive in them as you shall find
upon trial. And let me tell you, being desirous that you may do all things
with the least cost and ^abour to you, and to invite also the Savages to the
work for their own gain; do but take your Reeds and small Canes in Virginia,
and run but a strong need and thread through the Reeds which will hold them
together, and so you may presently make shelves and tables with them as narrow
and as broad as you please; and in truth you shall find this kind of shelf
and tab^ing to feed your worms on much better in many respects then boards:
Concerning the winding off your Silk, this Lady has lent you one of the
wheels, so that by it all of you may make ^he like to do that work, so ^ou
shall want nothing to ^peed the work
but you may make trial of the Persian way also by strowing your leaves on the
ground in these houses, and so feed them, and so your second brood of
Silkworms may also be thus kept and nourished in this kind of housing and
coverture; Experience is the Mistress of fools, says the Proverb: and it is not
an unwise man's part often to make trials, though to some men they may seem
impossibilities, yet rare and strange things have upon trial often been found
out; and if you would but show the Savages samples of all kind of things, you
should soon by them know more in a month what is in that Country to be had
then you have done these 40 years; and for reward they would bring in of all
kinds unto you, what they have and you desire to know, so a sudden discovery
may be made of all things in that land to your infinite gain.

To conclude with this Memento, that there are nine things that appear, are of
no or small difficulty to you and the Savages to enterprise, and get gain and
wealth to be produced from these Commodities; I will but name them and leave
them to your better judgments and thoughts.

1 This Silk, so easy, speedy, and profitable a thing. 2 The Silk-grasse
naturally there growing, which to the Indians the only labor is of putting it
up, and bringing it to you at such a price; a rich Commodity if known. 3 The
planting Vines, small labor, little cost, long enduring. 4 The multiplying of
Cunny-warrens, so easy a thing, the wool of a skin now worth 8 pence, which is
more then the body, yet the flesh is considerable meat; the wool is and will
be very vendible for this new In^ention, not only of these fine light hats now
sold at 15 and 20 shil. but the spining of the wool, and making stockings of it
as fine as those of silk. 5 The increasing of abundance of Bees for wax and
honey, their food so plentiful in Virginia, as in no Land more, and if with an
hatchet you do but slash your Pine-trees, Firre-trees, Locus, and other trees,
there will store of liquor come out of them, on which the Be will gather
infinite store of honey and wax, as in Russia and other Countries they do. 6
The planting of Sugarcanes, that being no more laborious then the Indian
wheat, setting it, and once set in good Land they grow eight or ten years, and
the Indians pains will only be to cut them yearly down, and sell them to you.
7 That of the Cotton-tree is the like for many years, gathering of the cods of
woll from them, as we do Roses from the Rose-bushes. 8 That of Ginger soon
done, the planting and the gathering of it. 9 That of grafting your Crab-trees
with Apples and Pears for Sider and Perry, you knowing that a man in one day
will graft an 100 stocks, and they will grow night and day, while you eat,
sleep, and play, and last 100 years to your great gain and profit.
I may not further enlarge my self for the present, these are but tastes and
hints for your better wits to work on: so with a thousand good wishes, I bid
you adieu.

Floreat VIRGINIA.

The fashion of the Botome.
The Silk Bottom of the natural Worm in Virginia, found there in the Woods,
is ten Inches about, and six Inches in length to admiration: and whereas ours
in Europe have their Sleave and loose Silk on the outside; and then in a more
closer covering they intombe themselves. These rare Worms, before they enclose
themselves up, fill with Silk the great emptiness, and afterward enclose
themselves in the middle of it, so they have a double Bottom.

The loose Sleave Silk is all on the outside of this compass, for if that were
reckoned in, the compass of the Bottom would far exceed this proportion: But
this is sufficient to be the Wonder of the whole World: to the Glory of the
Creator, and Exaltation of VIRGINIA.

A Loving Advertisement to all the Ingenious Gentlemen-Planters in Virginia now
upon the Design of Silk. By V. F.
Gentlemen,

SVch has bin the singular favor of Providence to you and the Lady, that
singe the publishing of this Book; it has so happily lighted into the hands of
diverse worthy persons, being not only Gentlemen-Travellers of credit, and
Merchants of reputation; but likewise wonderfully taken with the love of
Virginia, and no less zealously affected to the advancement of the Silk-trade
in that Land, which they judge (not of their experience and knowledge of what
they have and observed in the Easterly parts of the World, where abundance of
Silk is made) that no part of the World is more proper for Silk then
All-sufficient- Virginia: In regard of the excellency of the temper of the
Climate, which naturally produces not only Mulberries for food; but the
Silk-worme it self, in that wonderful greatness of the wild Silk-bottom:
which as they say, The whole Universe affords not, nor brings forth the like to
their own small admiration. And that there is no greater quantities of them
found or seen they conclude, it is in regard of the birds who are their natural
enemies, and devour most of them. And these Gentlemen are confident, that you
did not know and practice those ways and means, for the feeding and
preservation of them, as in some far remote Regions is practiced by those
Nations, that are expert Masters of Silk-wormes, Virginia would instantly
abound with great store of Silk, and surpass all those Countries in that rich
commodity, and you all become with great speed and small cost, or little labor
one of the happiest, wealthiest people that the World affords. And to the
intent that such a blessing may not be longer wanting to you, they have out of
their superlative benign affections, and public spirit, imparted to the Lady
these ensuing Relations, with their earnest desires and advises, that you all
in Virginia may out of hand be made partakers of them. And then knowing them,
you may no longer live in gross darkness and ignorance of so great a treasure
that you are possessors of, and may now have and enjoy the full use and benefit
of, which hitherunto has most straingely been hidden from the eyes of body and
mind; They conceiving that the chief cause thereof has been the pernicious
smoke of Tobacco, that thus has dimmed and obscured your better intellectuals;
but when you begin to put these ways and means in practice, they say you will
bl^sse your selves (as they do) that you have not in this long time discovered
the infinite wealth and happiness that will arise unto you out of Silk. But not
longer to detain from you this most precious eye salve, for the speedy curing
of your infirmity, and making you all rich (which is your main aim in that new
world).

Hearken well to these Informations, which the Lady earnestly desires may thus
be with all speed made known to you all.
THe one Traveller declared, That he passed a Country where he saw those
people had their Silkworms feeding on their Mulberry-trees in the fields and
there they live and spun their Bottoms on the trees, And to protect this noble
profitable creature and to defend it from the birds, they used a most slight,
simple, plain invention speedily effected and of no cost or labor to them,
which was certain great sheets of Reeds or Canes, that they hung over and about
their trees, tied to certain poles that encompassed them. And in this easy
manner they obtained great abundant quantities of silk, to their wonderful
enriching. The sheets of Reeds were joined together by a need and thread,
running through each Reed at several equal distances, and so drew them close
and firm together. This for you to imitate, is in every respect to your
wonderful happiness.

Another of these Travelers says, That he passed a Country where the
inhabitants did make large Tents or Boothes all of Reeds and Canes, and in them
placed shelves and tables made likewise of Reeds, on which they fed their
Worms, strewing leaves on them. These tents they set up round about their
Mulberry-Groves, and with much celerity, and no cost.

A third Gentleman and Merchant, that lived long in the farthest parts of
Turkey, affirms, That there the inhabitants begin every Spring, March, to
feed their Worms, and continue it till October, six months time: their Worms
hatching and re-hatching, one generation or brood succeeding the other: so that
they have three harvests of silk-bottoms, in that space of time, every five or
six weeks one: they feed their Worms in great long Barns made of Reeds or
Canes, the walls and roofs of them, and shelves as aforesaid, and the Worms
when they have done feeding, spin their bottoms upon the reedy walls and roofs;
and that they have two crops of leaves from their trees: for those trees that
have their leaves pulled off in March, April, and May, do re-leave again, and
have new and fresh leaves in June, July and August, wherewith they feed their
latter generation or brood of Worms very profitably.

And in confirmation of this, you shall know, the same has been found true in
England, that the Mulberry-tree will leave twice in a Summer, the Lady had the
experience of it, and therefore much more will it do with you, which will be a
most singular advantage to you.

I must not omit to add what these Gentlemen farther advise, that you can never
sufficiently augment the store of food for this Noble Creature: for store of
food is the main foundation, upon whose speeding the Silk-trade is to be
erected: for if that be not wanting, no obstruction can be in it. For the
glorious Worm is so infinite in multiplication, with that celerity as is
incredible, so that she will never be defective unto you: they therefore
counsel, that you graft your Mulberries with all care and speed upon these
several trees, upon which they will exceedingly thrive, viz. the Popler, the
Elm, the Chestnut, Beech, Quince, Medler, Fig, Pear, Apple, and Cornell-trees.
And also upon any other trees, of which upon a trial you find the Worm will
taste or eat their leaves. Likewise that you set of your Mulberry-slips as big
as your thumb, about two foot long: and put them into good wel-digg'd ground in
September, setting them a foot in the ground, bruising the ends of them, and
watering them the next Summer well, if need be: in the same manner as in Kent,
they set the Codling-slips. That you also cause the Indians to bring unto your
habitations all the young Mulberry-trees that are within an hundred miles of
your Colony. But let me acquaint you that they admire what some Gentlemen
Planters of credit tell them; that your brave Worms do not only live, feed,
and spin upon the Mulberry-trees in the Woods, but do the same upon the
Poplar-trees, Plum-trees, and Apple Trees:^ such an encouragement to the
Silk-trade, the World (say they) never yet heard of before, which must needs
lift you up to a most speedy and incomparable height of wealth and riches, in a
moment of time.

And by your gentle patience and generosity, give me leave to propound unto
you, the earnest request the Lady has to all of you; that you please to inform
her (being also the desire of many others) how it comes to pass that your
Worms get to your several trees, not only to the Mulberry, but to others: For
in no other Countries the Silk-worme-flie does use her wings to fly with: so
that yours must either do it (and so at time of year couple and fly to sundry
trees; and there lay their eggs which remain till Spring again) or that your
trees do naturally engender and produce the Worms (as it is conceived, the
original of them so happened at first) but which way soever it be, it is rare and
remarkable; and proves Virginia to be one of the most superlative Countries in
all the Universe for the Silk-trade; and none comparable unto the excellency of
its natural temper for Silk.

Then that you also inform her all you can of the nature, actions, qualities
and dispositions in all kinds of this most wonderful Creature, every way so
admirable, what by any English or Savage has bin any way observed in her: when
her eggs first hatch, then how long time she is feeding before she spins, upon
what part of the trees she fastens her Bottom; How long she continues in her
Bottom before she comes out a Fly, then when they couple, where they lay their
eggs, upon what part of the trees? How long they live after that time? For
these in the old World never eat after they once begin to spin: how large in
bigness and compass are commonly their bottoms? if all of one color, or
diverse? In what part of the Country are most of them seen and found? what do
the Savages call them, or know any use of them; what birds are they that most
devour them? (for did they not, they would swarm all the Land over in a very
few years); if any thing besides birds be hurtful to them? Their greatness and
doubleness of their Bottoms are wonder^ul, none ever known to be so, which
argues the strength and richness of this noble Worm, her vigor and hardness
exceeds, that can endure all wethers and seasons both alive and in her eggs. A
great encouragement to you all that she is not a nice curious kind of
Silkworme; but stout and robustous, that will require little care or
attendance, of small cost unto you. But her food and protection is all she
requires, and pays you ten thousand-fold for what you bestow on her. That you
please to send of her Bottoms to satisfy all men, who are like the Queen of
Sheba, much better trust their eyes than ears; some of their eggs likewise
upon that which they lay them, and the Fly (though dead) which will many a year
retain her perfect form in a box: do not the worms hatch and spin twice or
thrice in a Summer?

Let me add one Petition more, and I have done. viz. That some of your precious
Silk-grass may be sent the Lady, who is confident upon the trial she will make
of it, she will give you so pleasing an account and so profitable unto you, in
making known unto you what an unknown wealth you have: she prays you (and all
is for your own gain) to bore and cut all your trees (a most easy thing) and
thereby you shall discover presently, what rich Gums, what Balsoms, what Oils,
and precious healthful Liquours they will yield you for profit and necessity:
For all men know that many kinds of trees do yield most pleasant and
healthsome Wines (as I may call them) for man to drink; so also you will find
out all sorts of Dies and Colors (instantly done): cut and bruise all kinds
of your Woods, Barks, and Leaves of Trees, Roots, Berries, Nuts, Fruits,
Plants, Weeds; and but boil them in a Skillet, and then put in a little piece
of white Woollen or Linen cloth with some Allom, and you shall instantly find
and see what rich Colors they will make. What is Indico but a Weed, so Woad
and Madder? What is Brasil, Fustick, Logwood, and many more kind of Dies, but
Woods? what Coucheneal the rich Scarlet die, but a Fly, or the excrements of
the Indian Fig Tree? what is the newfound rich dying stuff of 25. l. a Tun;
but of a tree that is brought from the Island of Liberty, near Cape Florida
where Captain Sails plants? And shall Virginia not yield a drop of good
Liquour or Color? It cannot be; if but a trial thus easy were made.

By burning of all kind of Woods and Gums, you will soon find by your nose what
sweet Perfumes they yield. And by the ponderousness or weight of earths, you
may know if Minerals or not? Let it be known also, if you have not Waters of
more than ordinary qualities; for taste, colors, smell, weight, hotness, or
coldness? there is much depends upon them. And you shall know if they proceed
out of any Minerals, by taking a glass full, and putting into it a Gall beaten
to powder, which will turn the water into a reddish color: and send samples of
all kind of strange earths, and of all other kind of things without fail. And
lastly, (if it be not too much presumption to beg the favor to receive that
honor from you) which she no ways deserves nor can hope to requite: To inform
her what be the things, the ways, the means to advance Virginia's Prosperity,
if they may be procured and effected. If any error be committed in telling you
all this: there is hope your pardon may be obtained, seeing your only good and
benefit has caused all this that has been said: and the zeal of your wealth
and happiness has drawn all to this length:

Sirs, you have the faithful testimonies of those aforesaid worthy Gentlemen,
and nothing can be now wanting unto you but putting all in practice, what they
have declared; and for your good are such invitations and encouragements unto
you, that more cannot be wished for. There remains nothing but humble thanks to
God, and to these Gentlemen your due respects, whom God has made such
Instruments for your happiness, hoping their noble courteous examples will
allure all other Gentlemen Travelers to cast into this good work some mites of
their further knowledges, and every man to contribute his prayers and help to
this or any other hopeful design: seeing the consequence of them may be so
good and great, not only to the English Nation at home and abroad; but to the
poor Savages their welfare of souls and bodies, which God grant.

An Other Advertisement.
THe Silk-Trade, (unless we will be deaf to Reason and Experience) cannot be
denied the precedence of all Trades that are at this day a foot, in either
World: And that in regard of its great and certain gain in so small a time; A
man and a Boy being able to tend as many Silkworms in two Months space, as
will yield you sixty pounds: According to that is made Sicille by a Man and Bo
which done, they leave you ten Months free for any other employment. In
regard of its small skill, less pains, care and labor, no hazard, no cost or
charge, (more then a twelve-penny Reel) no troublesome tools or Implements: in
regard of its incredible ease and pleasure, as not requiring strength of Body,
of Wit, of Pur^e, any stock to begin with, only hands and eyes to gather leaves
and feed the Worms with, or protect them from the Birds: if kept on the Trees
(their natural Mansion:) Admitting of all Ages, (for a Child can do all that
belongs to it) all Sexes, all Qualities, (a most fit recreation for Ladies,
especially being begun and ended in the two pleasantest Months of the year,
March and April.) And all Callings too; for if Saint Paul made Tents, who can
plead exemption from tending Silkworms? A most prop. employment the lasi^
Indans.
Again, Silk is less chargeable in Warehouse, Freight, etc. then any other
Commodity, and yet none more durable, lasting, neat, vendible, nor more easily
tran^portable: for Fi^e hundred pounds worth of Silk, fraights less, and takes
up less room then ten pounds worth of Tobacco.

Now where Worms and Food abound naturally, and the Inhabitants are born with
Brains, the advancement of the Silk Trade must needs be proportionable: upon
which double score Virginia has the advantage of any place in the yet
discovered World; I mean for Worms and Food, which may be thus severally
demonstrated. Their Worms (partly annually produced by heat and moisture as our
Caterpillars and other Insects each Spring, partly by Eggs which have escaped
the Birds who are the greatest cause of their scarsity (which otherwise would
swarm over all the Land) devouring them when they are Worms, Eggs and Bottoms)
exceed ours not only in strength, hardiness and greatness, (being when Flies
as big as men's Thumbs) but also in the largeness of their Bottoms, which are
as big as Limons; (for Mr. William Wright of Nansamond found of them above
seven inches round) and one of them weighs more then a score of ours; insomuch
that whereas a Thousand of our Worms made but one pound of Silk, worth at most
here 30s. a pound, a thousand of their natural Worms will make ten pounds of
Silk, worth here twenty shillings the pound. And certainly they need not object
or be troubled at the somewhat more coursnesse of their Silk, since they from
the same number of Worms receive ten pounds in money for our thirty shillings.

As for their Food, the Virginia Worms feed not only on the Mulberry (their
sole food in all other parts of the World) but also on the Crab, Plum, Poplar;
Oak, Apple, Cherry and Pohickerry-tree leaves, with sundry other shrubs and
bushe^s. For proof whereof, Mistress Mary Ward sent over to her Cousen ten
bottoms taken from Apple trees. Esquire Ferrar her Kinsman likewise sent her
ten more, pulled off from Oaks and diverse shrubs. Mr Laurence Ward some taken
from the Pohickerry tree, Mr Wright from the Cherry tree. So Dr. Russel and
others.

The Objection, or rather groundless surmise of the Worms being hurt by
Thunder in Virginia, is sufficiently cleared, not only by the Natural Worms
living so well, and thriving there so admirably on the trees; but also by trial
made there this Spring of our Worms. That ever to be honored Noble Squire
Diggs having (at his very great charge) sent for two Armenians out of Turkey
skilful men, and made ten pound of Silk, which had not want of Eggs hindered
him, would have been so many Thousand pounds.

Nothing then wants to make Virginia rival Peru for wealth, more then to
persuade the Planters to provide themselves this Winter (to lose no more time)
of as many of the Natural Worms bottoms as possibly they can. They will now be
found in the Woods on the dis-leaved trees, though most of them are spun by the
Worms on the tree leaves, which falling to the ground, they perish with them;
and this is another great cause that so few bottoms are to be found. The
Bottoms thus gotten must be carefully kept in some long boxes till the Flies
come forth, happily in February or March. For they remain in their bottoms 300.
days, ours but 20. so that their Eggs (whereof one female will lay a
spoonful, suppose 500.) lie unhatched but about nine days, ours nine months.

When your Worms are hatched, you may keep them either on the trees (being
assured that they will live on that kind of Tree whatsoever it be from whence
you took your Bottoms) and then you shall need only to protect them from the
Birds; or else in some slight kind of housing, Reedy arbors, Indian mansions,
or what else you can devise there cheapest and speediest, and then your only
labor and care is to give them leaves, which you may either strip off, or clip
from off your Trees, or if you will, lop off little branches (which may perhaps
prove a good way for you: for thereby the leaves will remain the longer fresh)
and give them to your Worms, who for the labor of every Man and Boy thus
inployed only in two months time, will repay you with three^core pounds worth
of Silk.

Your own Experience (Gentlemen) will I hope ere this time twelv-moneth
certify you of the truth that is here set down, unless you shall rather choose
to hugg your own poverty, and make much of that slavery and drudgery you wear
out your selves with, in toyling about that contemptible, beggarly Indian Weed,

TOBACCO.

The Copy of Esquire Diggs his Letter, to his much honored friend, John
Ferrar, Esquire at his house at little Gidding, in Huntingtonshire. From
Virginia, June 21. 1654.
Sir,
I Have received your many and several Letters, printed papers, and Quaeries;
and, would my occasions have permitted, I should ere this, have given you that
due thanks you deserve, and punctually have answered all your judicious and
pleasing Quaeries: But I was so taken up in sending daily for Mulberry-leaves,
as they are now so far scattered from my present Plantation, that I could not
possibly answer you expectations; That only difficulty made me to make but
400. pound weight of Silk-bottomes, which I caused to be wound of 7. or 8. l.
of Silk in a day: Sir, I do very well approve of your last well printed
Paper, sent the Colony for making trial of the Natural Silk-worme, but such
was my ill hap, that I could not this spring meet with any of those Bottoms,
but shall this next Winter procure of them, all I can; Sir, I am now confident,
I have conquered all the great feared difficulty of this rich commodity, and
made its sweet easy and speedy Profitt so evident to all the Virginians (and
that it does not at all hinder their too much beloved Tobacco, but that they
may proceed with both together) that now I doubt not (nor they) but that in a
short time here will be great quantities made of Silk; you in England will
reap much advantage, and gain many ways by it, (more then most men can pet
see) and I by Gods blessing the comfort and joy, in setting up so noble, so
beneficial, a staple vendible commodity. My people differ very little from the
rules set down in your, Mr. Williams his Book, and as Esquire Samuel Hartlib
has also directed in his advertizement of Silkworms unto us; only in the
hatching of the Worms-Eggs, they are more curious, of which I shall, when I
have more time, give you a more particular account: I made 10. l. of seed or
Eggs this spring to give away to diverse Planters, that are very earnest,
(seeing so great a benefit before their eyes) to become also Silk-masters, you
need not fear it but that this next spring there will be diverse trials made
of the hopeful Natural Worms, that you so highly prize (and not without good
cause) and which is more, perhaps they may fall one after another and be
re-hatched that we may have a double Silk harvest ^n one summer (as you have
formerly hinted to us). Pray Sir will you be pleased at this time to excuse my
too much brevity in this great business of so much concernment, of so much
happiness to this Country, and attribute it to my great have, and much business
upon the ships sudden departure, having many more dispatches to make to
Friends; But in my next, I shall make you double amends; I pray present my
service to the virtuous Lady Virginia: Sir I daily pray for your long life, and
welfare, and now rest.

Sir your most humble Servant, Edward Diggs.

A Way Experimented by Mr. Farrar, to make the Gummy-hard Natural Virginia
Bottoms (which hitherto by no art could be be prepared to unwind by reason of
the Gummy hardness) to unwinde with ease, to the great advantage of the
Planters of the Silk-trade in Virginia.
YOu must take Sope-boylers lie or liquor, which is very sharp and strong, and
set that in a vessel over the fire till it be warm, then put in as many of
your hard gummy Bottoms as you please, and let them rest in that liquor, till
it be scalding-hot, and so remain half a quarter of an hour more or less, till
they be so dissolved that you may take out one and find it fit to unwind; which
you must thus do.

First put the Bottoms into scalding clean water, and having layen a while
therein, then take them out and proceed to unwind them as the custom is.

In case Sope-boylers lie or liquor be not to be had, you may make a strong
liquor of the Ashes of any Wood, with boiling water, the stronger the better,
and this may and will also perform the work. And this is just as you make a lie
to buck clothes withal. Only note it must be very strong made.

An Extract out of a very Ingenious Gentleman's Letter from Dublin, Concerning
the Reformed Virginian Silkworm.
I Thank you for your Virginian Paper. Me thinks the Experiment is most
Natnral to my apprehensions, that the Worms should feed and thrive best upon
the leaves growing on the Trees, rather then in the Houses, and that they, like
other Caterpillars (of whom these are a sort) did at first breed so, and that
Houses were rather an Invention for expediency,

But their Proposition about Money to be carried to Virginia. I utterly
dislike; even so much as if it were possible, I would banish Money from Ireland.

An Animadversion upon the Letter from Dublin.
I like not the Gentleman's Reason why he likes the Proposition concerning
feeding of Silkworms upon the Trees.

For almost all Plants, even the most rare now in use were Originally (namely
since the deluge) wild and past muster amongst Weeds, and are improved to such
a degree of excellency to the eye, nose or palate, by industry and home-helps
and contrivances: So John Tradeskin by Lambeth, by the advantage of putting his
Trees, and other Plants into a warm house in winter or a stow, nurses up those
things fair and fragrant, which would without that help either dye or be
dwarft. This is the reason why tame Pigeons or Conies are larger, and breed
better, and oftener then wild. Yet I conclude not against the thing it self; for
questionles, that the leaves have more heart, fresh and green, then half
withered, if the cause of their withering were known or considered, But I can
say little to this, as having no experience,

A new observation, concerning the feeding of Silkworms with Lettice, imparted
from Dublin.
I Have only to present you with some observations I made concerning the
feeding of Silkworms (meeting here accidentally with a kinswoman of mine that
keeps great store o^ them) whieh geuerally is believed only to be don, with
Mulberry leaves: the contrary of which is here by some praectised. viz. to
feed them with Lettice; which the worms eat very readily, grow as those big as
that are fed with Mulberry leaves and spin as much Silk: They will also eat the
herb called Dantedelyon, but whether that will so well agree with them as
Lettice, I have not tried, but with Lettice they will thrive very well, eating
nothing else all the year.

More Observations concerning the feeding of Silkworms with Lettice,
SIR,
MY good Cosen Mr. W. sent me the letter, you wrote to him; and the note sent
you out of Ireland, that intimated the happy success the Gentlewoman had then
in keeping Silkworms, not only on the Mulberry-tree-leaves, but with Lettice
leaves, the thing you much desired that my Daughter should have made known unto
her. Truly Sir your singular humanity and goodness in all things more and more
extends it self for the public benefit of all, and I see to the particular
satisfaction of your Friends, though Strangers to you yet those that have daly
cause more and more to honor you, as we justly do. Sir, this your favor is
both by my-self and Daughter so much resented as it requires from us, very
hearty and particular thanks to be tendered to your worth. She is a lover of
Rarities in these kinds, and to try conclusions upon her Silkworms, and no way
envious, but much rejoices to hear that any have had that good success with
Lettis as you write of, and shall her-self again make a third trial in that
kind, for she has 2. years last past tried her-self to have kept some with
Lettice leaves and so did and they thrivd as well as they kept with Mulberrys,
but still when the time of spinning came they would not spin, but then dyed and
this put her out of heart to try further, yet I may tell you, she persuaded a
Gentleman near her to keep some with Lettice 25. days and then fed them with
Mulberrys at last, and these did very well and spun as good Bottoms as those
wholly kept with Mulberry leaves. But now she resolves upon your intimation of
the experiment made in Ireland to try a third time, and to give you an account
of her success in June next, if God permit.

And now Sir she presents this printed enclosed paper to your worthy judgment,
if you find not it matter of consideration and reason for her to send it as a
second new years gift to Virginia, hoping that it may do good there to the
Planters and inform them of much truth; and invite them to the business of
Silk, which God grant; Amen.

This other paper of Ryming lines (for Verses they deserve not the name) yet
being that what her Brother a young Scholar has collected out of Letters, that
were sent her from Virginia and given her, she also sends you to further
inform you of things done, last spring.

Thus worthy, Sir, with the due respects of both our kindest salutes, wishing
you all happiness in this and the better world, I rest ever.

Yours in all love and service JOHN FERRAR.
Littell Gidding Hunting shire this 28. November. 1653. SIR,
She makes bold to present you with a sample of Virginia Silk-grass sent her by
a friend. It Is a rarity, and she hopes will delight you who have such a
public Spirit to rejoice, and further a Common good; as she has great hopes
this will prove a commodity next to the Silk there, as skillful men and Artists
do assure her of it, and thousands of poor people will be set a work with it,
if it prove there to be in quantity.



Upon the most Noble, Virginian natural Silkworm her wonderful, various,
plentiful food; The infinite, speedy, great wealth she will produce to her
protector; (in 45. days the time of her feeding) with small labor, cost, or
skill, (learnt in an hours space by any child.) The singular aptness of that
rare Superlative Climate, in Breeding them on so many several kinds of Trees in
her Woods where they live^ Feed and Spin, their mighty large, strange,
double-bottoms of Silk: To the admiration of this our Old World; but to the
exaltation and glory of incomparable Virginia, in the New.
WHere Worms and Food do naturally abound,
A Gallant Silken Trade must there be found:
Virginia excells the World in both,
Envy nor Malice can gain say this troth.
Many a man the causes feign would hear,
How these rare Worms came first or still come there.
Insects produced are by heat and moisture
Who in strange shapes and forms do often appear.
In Spring our trees the Caterpillars rear;
Their trees likewise these noble creatures bear.
And some proceed from eggs that escaped are
From their enemies sight, which thing is rare.
They feed not only on the Mulberry
Which in our World sole food is held to be
For all such precious Worms of that degree:
But Popler, Plum, Crab, Oak, and Apple tree,
Yea Cherry, and tree called Pohickery:
So on the Shrubs and Bushes feed full many
Her Worms are huge whose bottoms dare
With Lemmons of the largest size compare.
And twenty one of ours will sure poize less
Then one of theirs for weight and ponderousness.
Master William Wright of Nansamound
Found Bottoms above seven Inches round.
And though the Silk prove not all out so fine
As Persian, that is no let to the design.
For since a thousand of our Bottoms make
But one pound of fine Silk, you will ten pounds take
From theirs. If we at Thirty shillings sell
Our pound, for twenty they will afford theirs well.
The pains that is taken is alike in either
But the gains by theirs eight times greater:
Then, we confined are to the Mulberry
For food, their Worms have great Variety.
Her dainty colored flies and large Worms
In length and bigness do surpass men's Thumbs.
Whereas ours short of little fingers come.
Our flies come out in twenty days and lay
Eggs, theirs not still three hundred as they say
O wondrous thing! a Worm to fast so long
And then come out a painted Fly so strong.
Nine mouths full out our eggs unhatch't remain
Nine days in Spring makes theirs revive again
A Planter (I wish they had him named)
A spoonful eggs from one fly he gained
Which to five hundred at least amounted
Lo shortly endless they must be counted.
In March they first begin to live and feed
In April they have done the Silken deed
The sweetest, pleasantst time in all the year.
You to this Wealth the chanting Birds will cheer
And ten months time they leave you with great ease
To spend it in what profit you shall please.
Rare Worms who feeding five and forty days
On leaves of sundry Plants and shrubs repaies
Their keepers with fine Silk which wants no strength
And yet extends it self some miles in lenght
And for the labor of a Man and Boy
They gain you Sixty pounds which is no toy.
If you from Birds protect them on the trees
(Their natural mansions) it will them best please
Your pains is spared in giving them the leaves
By which alone you gain their Silken sleaves
For non-parrel Virginia in her Woods,
Brings forth as all men know these precious goods:
Where thousand fleeces fit for Princes Robes
On Virgin-trees shall hang in Silken Globes.
The noble Worm so hardy, strong and stout
No weather ill is able them to rout.
The reasons why the numbers are so small
Less Cruel Birds devour most of them all
When they are Worms yea Eggs or Silken ball.
Most bottoms likewise on the leaves are spun
Both falling to the ground do perish soon
Those only found that spun are on the branch
Not by their care but providentiall chance
Which only show themselves when all is bare
To Find in Summer any'tis most rare.
If to prevent both dangers you intend
A Reedy-Arbourwell will do it, you will find
Or slightest coverture in any kind
The skill and pains to all each Child can do:
As you shall find on trial it is most true.
And may in Wealth compare with rich Peru.
And sor all Tools that appertain thereto
A Twelve-peny Reele is all it will cost you,
No wit, no strength, no purse, no stock will need
But Eyes and hands, the Worms to guard and feed.
And thus you see done is the Silken deed:
Which brings you so great wealth with so much speed.
Five hundred pounds worth of rich Silk, all know
Fraights less then ten pounds in poor Tobacco
Silks are no trash, no toy, nor Pedlars ware;
Staple, good, and ready chinke every where.
Twenty shillings a pound it will yield you clear
And Ships to fetch it will come flying there.
Queens of the best edition need not scorn
In her own Livery to serve this Worm:
Only to give her leaves is all she craves
And in reward with Silk she will make you brave.
Out of her rich belly by her mouth spun
Weaves it into a most curious bottom
Which by a Reele turning with hand of man
Is wholly wound off most neatly again.
To feed Silkworms no Caling can disdain
Seeing they yield you so much honest gain
No employment in the World so likely
To make so soon your lasie Savage Wealthy.
For his Silk bottoms in exchange shall have
From English, what he so needs, begs, and craves
Red coats, hose, shoes, knives, they highly deem
Iewes-Trumps, Bells, Beads, all toys, no less esteem.
If all be thus the cause you now demand
Why has this knowledge been thus long detained
And but now by the Ladies Books inflamed
Ignorance of Planters so strange has been
Till now never knew nor dreamt of this rich thing
Confessed it is, that often some they have seen
Regardlesly, but never did them esteem.
Which loss of Wealth and Honor they will regaine
And Virgins Counsel follow will amain.
The happy onset they this Spring have made
Assures them all a stately precious trade.
Sir Henry Chichly that Heroic Knight
Affirms there is not an ingenuous Wight
In Virginia but makes all speed he can
To be e're long a Silken noble man.
And say, Colonel Ludlow certifies
That thence from Silk great profit will arise;
Yea worthy Bernard that stout Colonel
Informs the Lady the work most facile
And of rich Silken stuffs, made shortly there
He hopes that he and others shall soon wear.
So major John Westrope says, Silk will be
A gallant design for their brave Country.
Thunder was that, that some men only doubt
But trial made this Spring puts that fear out.
In all Lands where Worms are kept it is wonder
To hear that any were harmed by thunder.
Their natural Worm proves this more truer.
Mr. Gorge Lobs that prudent old Planter
Tel^s her that Worms never spun Silk daintier.
Lets give those Gentlewomen their full dues
Mistress Garret and Burbage for Silk clues
That Colonells Wife needs not far to rove
Her Court affords a pleasant Mulberry Grove:
But noble Diggs carries the Bell away
(Lass! want of eggs made so small the essay)
His two Armenians from Turkey sent
Are now most busy on his brave attempt
And had he stock sufficient for next year
Ten thousand pound of Silk would then appear
And to the skies his worthy deeds upreare.
Lo here what mistress Mary Ward has sent
And to her Lady Cousin she presents
Ten rare Bottoms took from her Apple tree
That all England may it believe and see.
Her honored Kins-man Esquire F^rrar,
To confirm and make the wonder greater
Ten more likewise has sent her, which he found
On stately Oaks and Shrubs that kiss the ground
And Doctor Russell that learned Physician
Has with his, made a full addition.
For things more slowly do affect the mind
Which ears do hear then those that eyes do find.
Now from smoke Virginia shall be raised
And throughout the World be duly praised.
Ah Blessed be God that now in his due time
This Silken light apparently does shine
Then come, O come with sacred Lays
Let us sound the Almightys praise
I. F.
To the most Noble deserving Esquire Diggs: upon the Arrival of his two
Armenians out of Turkey into Virginia.
Courage, brave Sir: since Aid from God is sent
Proceed, go on, drive forth thy great intent.
A Comparison between the gain and labor of TOBACCO and SILK.
TObacco requires 9 months time, much care and labor, both without and within
doors, and a man's Crop is commonly 15 hundred weight of Tobacco, and this at
two pence a pound is 14 pound gain.

Silk requires six weeks time, if done in a house, and by the labor of a man
and boy, in gathering leaves, and tending the worms that come of six ounces
seed, there is by so many worms spun as much Silk as will weigh sixty pound
weight, and this but at 20 shil. a pound, yields 60 l. in ready money.

Tobacco, leaves a man but 3 months in the year for other business.

Silk, leaves a man ten months time in the year, for any other employments.

14 pounds a man gains by his Crop of Tobacco.

60 pounds a man and boy gains by his Crop of Silk.

Then let all men judge which is the more gainful.

But what will be the gain and profit, by the worms feeding and spinning on the
Trees is more considerable, and also the natural Virginia-worms bottom
exeeding ours in Europe 20 times in bigness, and in weight: what a Treasure
then will this be, and no labor, cost, hazard, expense of time at all, a Boy
only to keep away the Birds from eating the Silkworms on the Trees, etc.

Thus learned Bartas upon this noble and admirable Creature.
YEt may I not this Wondrous Worm pass by,
Of fly ^r^'d Worm, and of a Worm a Fly.
Two Births, two Deaths, here Nature has assigned her,
Leaving a Posthum^, dead-live Seed behind her;
Which soon transforms the fresh and tender leaves
Of Thisbes pale tree, to those tender sleaves
(On Ovall Clues) of soft smooth silken Flax,
which more for us then for her self she makes.
O precious fleece! which only did adorn
The sacred loins of Princes heretofore:
But our proud age, with prodigal abuse
Has so profaned the old honorable use:
That Shift^rs now, that scarce have bread to eat
Disdain plain Silk, unless it be beset
With one of those brave Metals, whose desire
Burns greedy souls with an impartial fire.
Had Du Bartas fully known all the virtues and rarities in this incomparable
Creature, even a miracle in Nature, he would have enlarged his Poems in a more
ample manner in the praise of it, to the great honor of the Creator. Cui
Gloria, Amen.

Homo Vermis.
We all are creeping Worms of the earth,
Some are Silkworms great by birth,
Glowworms some that shine by night,
Slow-Worms others, apt to bite,
Some are muck-Worms slaves to wealth,
Maw-Worms some that wrong the health,
Some to the public no good willers,
Cancker-Worms and Cater-pillers;
Found about the earth wee'r crawling,
For a sorry life wee'r sprawling,
Putrid stuff we suck, ^t fills us,
Death then sets his foot and kills us.
FINIS.

